Source note (Tower of Babel staging): John Hanning Speke, Journal of the Discovery of the Source of the Nile (Edinburgh/London: William Blackwood & Sons, 1863). Text from Internet Archive item journalofdiscove0000john_t9g0 (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

‘i: 


y Seder 
St 
sat 


SRY 


S04, 
Ngdeh, 
PN 
Rests 


a 


Fr 


a 


This be 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2026 


httos://archive.org/details/journalofdiscoveO00Ojohn_t9g0 


dhwelh Brothe 


by Sow 


he 


rtograpp) 


h 


ver. from aE 


Hole 


raved? 


ICT. Lpeke 


JOURNAL 


OF 


THE DISCOVERY 


OF 


THE SOURCE OF THE NILE 


BY 


JOHN HANNING SPEKE 


CAPTAIN H. M. INDIAN ARMY 


FELLOW AND GOLD-MEDALLIST OF THE ROYAL GEOGRAPHIOAL SOCIETY 
HON. CORR, MEMBER AND GOLD-MEDALLIST OF THE 
FRENCH GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY, ETC, 


WITH MAP AND PORTRAITS, AND NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS 


CHIEFLY FROM DRAWINGS BY CAPTAIN GRANT 


WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS 
EDINBURGH, CNT Ts NDON 

ee nupcoonsnit © 

(- 2 ma PICS \ he 

5 S, 

% i o> 

Moe LON AU) Set 


FEO 


THOSE KIND FRIENDS 


WHO THOUGHT OF US, AND RAISED 


AN EXPEDITION TO SUCCOUR US, WHEN WE WERE 


SUPPOSED TO BE IN GREAT DANGER IN 


THE CENTRE OF AFRICA, 


THIS WORK 


IS GRATEFULLY DEDICATED. 


J. H. SPEKE. 


JORDANS, December 1863. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER I. 
LONDON TO ZANZIBAR, 1859. 


The design—The preparations—Departure—The Cape—The Zulu. Kafirs— 
Turtle-turning—Capture of a slaver—Arrive at Zanzibar—Local politics 
and news since last visit—Organisation of the expedition, : 


CHAPTER II. 
UZARAMO, 


The nature of the country—The order of march—The beginning of our 
taxation—Sultan Lion’s Claw, and Sultan Monkey’s Tail—The Kingani 
—Jealousies and difficulties in the camp—The murderer of M. Maizan, . 


CHAPTER III. 
USAGARA. 


Nature of the country—Resumption of the march—A hunt—Bombay and 
Baraka—The slave-hunters—The ivory-merchants—Collection of natural- 
history specimens—A frightened village—Tracking a mule, 


CHAPTER IV. 
UGOGO, AND THE WILDERNESS OF MGUNDA MKHALI. 


The lie of the country — Rhinoceros-stalking — Scuffle of villagers over a 
careass—Chief ‘‘Short-legs” and his successor—Buffalo-shooting—Get- 
ting lost — A troublesome sultan — Desertions from the camp— Getting 
plundered — Wilderness march — Diplomatic relations with the local 
powers—Manita Séra’s story—Christmas—The relief from Kazé, . 


CHV Age AD Ban Va 
UNYAMUEZI. 


The country and people of U-n-ya-mttézi—Kazé, the capital—Old Misa 
—The naked Wakidi— The N’yanza, and the question of the river 
running in or out—The contest between Mohinna and “ Short-legs””— 
Famine — The Arabs and local wars— The siltana of agg ee 


Ungiiritié ‘‘the Pig”—Pillage, 


PAGE 


16 


33 


84. 


v1 CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER VI. 


UZINZA. , 
PAGE 
The politics of Uzinza—The Wahttma—‘‘ The Pig’s” trick—First taste 
of Ustti taxation—Pillaged by Minmbi-—Pillaged by Makaka—Pillaged 
by Ltimérési—Grant stripped by M’yonga—Stripped again by Rthé— 
Terrors and defections in the camp — Driven back to Kazé with new 
tribulations and impediments, .. : é é : on Lt 


CHAPTER VII. 
USUI. 


Taxation recommenced—A great doctor—Stitwarora pillaging—The Arabs 
— Conference with an ambassador from Uganda— Disputes In camp 
—Rivalry of ae and ial Yaar aee from the ss as 
districts, . 2 : : 174 


CHAPTER VIII. 
KARAGUE. 


Relief from protectors and pillagers—The scenery and geology— Meeting 
with the friendly king Rimanika — His hospitalities and attention — 
His services to the expedition—Philosophical and theological inquiries 
—The royal family of Karagié—The M-fumbiro mountain—Navigation 
of ‘‘the Little Windermere” — The new-moon levee—Rhinoceros and 
hippopotamus hunting — Measurement of a fattened queen — Political 
polygamy — Christmas— Rumours of Petherick’s BONAR ais Fae 
ments to meet it—-March to Uganda, . : a 195 


CHAPTER IX. 
HISTORY OF THE WAHUMA. 


The Abyssinians and Gallas—Theory of conquest of inferior by superior 
races—The Wahtima and the kingdom of Kittara—Legendary history 


of the kingdom of Uganda—Its constitution, and the ceremonials of the 
court, : ; 2 . - : : 5 - 246 


CHAPTER X. 
KARAGUE AND UGANDA. 


Escape from protectors—Cross the Kitangiillé, the first affluent of the Nile 
—Enter Uddii—Uganda—A rich country—Driving away the devil—A 
conflict in the camp—A pretending prince—Three pages with a diplo- 
matic message from the king of Uganda—Crime in Uganda, : 5 4a] 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER XI. 
PALACE, UGANDA. 


Preparations for the reception at the court of Mtésa, king of Uganda — 
The ceremonial—African diplomacy and dignity—Feats with the rifle— 
Cruelty, and wastefulness of life—The pages—The queen-dowager of 
Uganda—Her court reception—I negotiate for a palace—Conversations 
with the king and queen—The queen’s grand entertainment—Royal dis- 
sipation, < : 3 : : 5 : 2 


CHAPTER XII. 
PALACE, UGANDA—Continued. 


Continued diplomatic difficulties—Negro chaffing—The king in a new cos- 
tume—Adjutant and heron shooting at court—My residence changed— 
Scenes at court—The Kamraviona, or commander-in-chief — Quarrels— 
Confidential communications with the king—Court executions and execu- 
tioners—Another day with the queen, 


CHAPTER XIII. 
PALACE, UGANDA—Continued. 


A visit to a distinguished statesman—A visit from the king—Royal sport— 
The queen’s present of wives—The court beauties and their reverses— 
Judicial procedure in Uganda—Buffalo-hunting—A musical party—My 
medical practice — A royal excursion on the N’yanza— The canoes of 
Uganda—A regatta—Rifle practice—Domestic difficulties—Interference 

» of a magician—The king’s brothers, 


CHAPTER XIV. 
PALACE, UGANDA—Continued. 


Reception of a victorious army at court—Royal sport—A review of the 
troops —Negotiations for the opening of the road along the Nile—Grant’s 
return—Pillagings—Court marriages—The king’s brothers—Divinations 
and sacrifices—The road granted at last—The preparations for continuing 
the expedition—The departure, 


CHAPTER XV. 
MARCH DOWN THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. 


Kari— Tragic incident there—Renewal of troubles — Quarrels with the 
natives—Reach the Nile—Description of the scene there—Sport—Church 
Estate—Ascend the river to the junction with the lake—Ripon Falls— 
General account of the source of the Nile—Descend again to Urondogani 


—The truculent Sakibobo, 


vil 


PAGE 


323 


453 


Vill CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


BAHR BL ABIAD. 


First voyage on the Nile—The starting—Description of the river and the 
country—Meet a hostile vessel—A naval engagement—Difficulties and 
dangers—Judicial procedure--Messages from the king of Uganda—His 
efforts to get us back— Desertion—The Wanyoro troops—Kamrasi— 
Elephant-stalking—Diabolical possessions, 


CHAPTER XVII. 
UNYORO, 


Invitation to the palace at last—Journey to it—Bombay’s visit to king 
Kamrasi—Our reputation as cannibals—Reception at court—Acting the 
physician again—Royal mendicancy, 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
UNYORO—Continued. 


The ceremonies of the new moon— Kamrasi’s rule and discipline — An 
embassy from. Uganda, and its results— The rebellious brothers—An 
African sorcerer and his incantations—The Kamraviona of Unyoro— 
Burial customs—Ethiopian legends—Complicated diplomacy for our de- 
tention—Proposal to send princes to England—We get away, 


CHAPTER XIX. 
THE MARCH TO MADI. 


Sail down the Kafti—The navigable Nile—Fishing and sporting population 
—The scenery on the river—An inhospitable governor—Kariima Falls 


—wNative superstitions—Thieveries—Hospitable reception at Koki by 
Chongi, 


CHAPTER XX. 
MADI, 


Junction of the two hemispheres — The first contact with persons ac- 
quainted with European habits—Interruptions and plots—The mysteri- 
ous Mahamed — Native revelries—The plundering and tyranny of the 
Turks—The rascalities of the ivory trade—Feeling for the Nile—Taken 
to see a mark left by a European— Buffalo, eland, and rhinoceros 
stalking—Meet Baker—Petherick’s arrival at Gondokoro, 


CoNCLUSION, . 


APPENDIX, 


PAGE 


475 


498 


523 


559 


578 


609 


613 


PAGE 


102. 


115. 
. UKULIMA’S VILLAGE, . ; : ‘ : : : : do. 
125. 


FLELUSTPRATLONS. 


PoRTRAIT OF CapTaIN SpEKE in Dress worn in Africa, 
(Frontispiece), . from Photograph by Southwell Brothers 


. Portrait or CapraIn Grant in Dress worn in Africa, 


trom Photograph by U: sige a: Dingwall 


. ZoLu Karir, Detagoa Bay, ; Grant 
. BANYAN CONTEMPLATING HIS nbsdeHn- Khor, ‘ Beatie Suther 
. Samp Masry, Suptan or Zanzipar, from Photo. 5S Col. Playfair 
. MzARaMO, OR NaTIvE or UzaRaMo, .  .. . Grant 
. WAZARAMO, PEOPLE OF UzZARAMO, no 3 ' do. 
. Msacara, oR Native or Usa@ara, . : : ; : do. 
. MxamBaku Hib, VIEWED FROM ZUNGOMERO,  . : . Speke 
. Hin View From Eastern Mpuiea, . ; ‘ ; i do. 
. Bueu, CALABASH, OR GOUTY-LIMBED TREES, : ‘ i do. 
. Maogo, or Native or Ucoco, . ; . . Grant 
. Virw or East Coast RANGE FROM Weehenie: Mente . Speke 
. OuR Camp In Uqgoao, . : : : Grant 
. New AnTELOPE—UGoGo,. . , fob Bodoni Wolf 


. THREE BUFFALO-CHARGES IN ONE Reeve MKHALI, 


Zwecker, from Sketch by Speke 


. Tae TreMBE, OR Mup VinLaGE, at JIwaA LA Mxoa, . . Speke 
. Vinw In EASTERN UNYANYEMBE, F ; ; , 4 do. 
. MyaMuEzI, oR Native ofr UNYAMUEZI, . : j . Grant 
. WANYAMUEZI FASHIONS, ; ‘ : P : , : do. 
Do. IMPLEMENTS, . : d : F A do. 
. Front View or Musa’s TEMBE AT AGe, j F : do. 


SrrpoKo’s SLAVES CARRYING FUEL AND CUTTING Brot 
Zwecker, from Sketch by do. 


Unyamurzi HaRvEst, . : F ‘ a ; : . Grant 


Mzinza, on Native oF UZINZA,. . . «es do. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


. DANCE IN UNYAMUEZI, ; : ; : : “ . Grant 
. Lumeresi’s ResIDENCE, el i ; er eee oS do. 
. BLACKSMITHS SHOP, . : : 5 é é : : do. 
. Urauneu VALLEY, é ‘ : ; do. 
. OUR CAMP IN THE cena Ve ae WASUI BRING- 
ING PROVISIONS FOR SALE, . Zwecker oad Sketch by do. 
. ONE OF THE WAHUMA,. . . ; : . Grant 
. Our Camp OUTSIDE THE PALACE, Kattoun’ 
- Zwecker, from Sketch by do. 
. Musictans, KarRacuE, . : . Lwecker, from Sketch by do. 
. View or Mount Mrumptro, AND DRAINAGE SYSTEM OF 
tHE Lun& Montss, ; : - +. « Speke 
. Nzon ANTELOPES—LITTLE Win pecan KARAGUE, 
Wolf, from Sketch by do. 
. THe Krne’s New Moon Levees, . , : : . Grant 


. PRESENTING My HuntTInG SPOILS TO Beet 


Zwecker, from Sketches by Speke & Grant 


. ARMS AND FasHions or UGANDA, : : : . Grant 
. FERRY ON THE KiTaANGULE RIVER, . F ‘ E : do. 
. BARAZA IN WHICH I sLEPT—NGAMBEZI, . 3 : ; do. 
. PoMBE-BREWING, . : : : ‘ ‘ do. 
. Vinrw or King Mrnsa’s PALACE FROM MY Must Wels do. 
. Meanpa, on Native or UGANDA, , : : ‘ c do. 
. Kine or Ucanpa ReEtIRINnG, : ; : ‘ : : do. 
. Kampari FisH, . . ; : : ‘ ‘ : . Speke 
. A QUEEN DRAGGED To ExEcuTIoN—UGANDA, . : . Grant 
. VIEW oF THE MuRcHISON CREEK, 2 é : ; c do. 
. Uaganpa Boat, . : : é ; : ; . Speke 
. CapTaIn GRANT LEAVING inanens : ; ; : - Grant 


. Kine or Uaanpa Reviewine Troops, 


Zwecker, from Sketch by Speke 


. SPEKE AND Grant at Kina Mrssa’s Leven, 


Zwecker, from Sketch by Grant 


. SPEKE INTRODUCES GRANT TO THE QuUEEN-DoWAGER OF 
UGANDA, 2 : ; i Grant 

. PALAcE GUARDS AT Divi Ue : : : : do. 

2, WAGANDA OFFICERS DRINKING PoMBE, : do. 

. GOATSUCKER (Cosmetornis Spekii), : ; oa ee Wolf 

. Tae Rreon Fatns—the Nile flowing out of Victoria N’yanza, Speke 

. NsammMa ANTELOPE—Uganpa, 5 . Wolff, from Sketch by do. 

. Tan Everwants’ Cuarer, . . Zwecker, from Sketch by do. 


. Kina Kamrasrs Panace, FROM MY HUT, Unyoro, . . Grant 


ILLUSTRATIONS. Xl 
PAGE 


533. KamRas’s MAGICIAN IN SEARCH OF THE RaIN- (Gavan. 
Zwecker, from Sketch by Grant 


546, Kamrasr’s First Lesson IN THE BIBLE, . ; : . Grant 
550. Kimenya THE Dwarr, . : : : : do. 
566. Group or Kipt Men on a Tee TO Kuve ‘Kasnast, : do. 
568. THe Karuma Fatits—Kip1, F : : P i : do. 
574. Grove or Gant Men, . ‘ : , : ; : ; do. 
581. Turks’ WIVES AND CHILDREN, . : : : : . do. 
588. Removine A VintaGE—Manp1, . : : 5 : : do. 
589. Tyrine up Ivorims FoR THE MARCH, . ; : : : do. 
590. ManaMED’s Party oN THE MARCH, . : , 3 é do. 
592. Tue Nine anp JpL Kuk, . ; : ; : ; : do. 
602. Misston-Housn, GonpoKoro, ; , : : do. 
609. THe NILE BELOW JUNCTION OF THE ae. Rerun : do. 
611. Speke’s “ FarvHFULs,” . . from Photograph by Howe of Cairo 
612. WoMEN OF THE ExpEpDITIon, from Photograph by do. 


Map or Eastern EquaroriaL Arrica (in Pocket at end of the 


Volume), . : , : ; ‘ . Speke 
Map or THE NILE FROM ITS Kes, ne to the ancient 


Hindu Books. 


AS, = - = 
* PEN RNG Wt wee ie teas 
—_— hate Pa ee es 4 a 
ee P Fe , see al *; meat i 
‘ve ; 4 ee ~ >. Oa ierd Me ee 
X sna HY eel | a 6 Me a ye 
| ae : — ee as un 
Pa en : ext Boalt? tea 
> 4 ae eo suteee! urielenrW ‘ayah ta, 
ea ey ae : 
Bore  o- 7 i pad que he ap langet 
— Pei es naw 


re 


ig the ae in Me Pam, oak oA at a 
’ ce ; ~ epee % at 
— d . = 5 pre : > 
. . We. - Pa a) A ath Ton | * 1 a an ae ate 
Wy ; ¥ sugeGek bse i ee ie ee iat x. 
. ; 
ois ~ 
‘FG ‘ ; : 
bn : 
> ‘ P 


i — 
me 
? 
> e 
» ~~, 
’ = 
7 vy — 
~ ed 
a 
7 y ES 
4, : 
~ 
? a 
- 
hy 
' ‘ ‘ 
‘ 
ny * 


5 > 
re) of Bios —~ 
. a 
- fa 
~ af —- 
. ’ » . « : 
* 


INTRODUCTION. 


Le 


In the following pages I have endeavoured to describe 
all that appeared to me most important and interesting 
among the events and the scenes that came under my 
notice during my sojourn in the interior of Africa. If my 
account should not entirely harmonise with preconceived 
notions as to primitive races, I cannot help it. I profess 
accurately to describe naked Africa— Africa in those 
places where it has not received the slightest impulse, 
whether for good or for evil, from EKuropean civilisation. 
If the picture be a dark one, we should, when contemplat- 
ing these sons of Noah, try and carry our mind back to 
that time when our poor elder brother Ham was cursed 
by his father, and condemned to be the slave of both Shem 
and Japheth ; for as they were then, so they appear to be 
now—a strikingly existing proof of the Holy Scriptures. 
But one thing must be remembered: Whilst the people 
of Europe and Asia were blessed by communion with 
God through the medium of His prophets, and obtained 
divine laws to regulate their ways and keep them in 
mind of Him who made them, the Africans were ex- 
cluded from this dispensation, and consequently have 
no idea of an overruling Providence or a future state ; 
they therefore trust to luck and to charms, and think 
only of self-preservation in this world, Whatever, then, 


X1V INTRODUCTION. 


may be said against them for being too avaricious or too 
destitute of fellow-feeling, should rather reflect on our- 
selves, who have been so much better favoured, yet have 
neglected to teach them, than on those who, whilst they 
are sinning, know not what they are doing. To say a 
negro is incapable of instruction, is a mere absurdity ; 
for those few boys who have been educated in our schools 
have proved themselves even quicker than our own at 
learning; whilst, amongst themselves, the deepness of their 
cunning and their power of repartee are quite surprising, _ 
and are especially shown in their proficiency for telling 
lies most appropriately in preference to truth, and with 
an off-handed manner that makes them most amusing. 
With these remarks, I now give, as an appropriate 
introduction to my narrative—(1.) An account of the 
general geographical features of the countries we are 
about to travel in, leaving the details to be treated under 
each as we successively pass through them; (2.) A 
general view of the atmospheric agents which wear down 
and so continually help to reduce the continent, yet at 
the same time assist to clothe it with vegetation ; (3.) 
A general view of the Flora ; and, lastly, that which con- 
sumes it, (4.) Its Fauna; ending with a few special re- 
marks on the Wangtiana, or men freed from slavery. 


GEOGRAPHY. 


The continent of Africa is something like a dish turned 
upside down, having a high and flat central plateau, with 
a higher rim of hills surrounding it; from below which, 
exterially, it suddenly slopes down to the flat strip of 
land bordering on the sea. A dish, however, is generally 
uniform in shape—Africa is not. For instance, we find 
in its centre a high group of hills surrounding the head 
of the Tanganyika Lake, composed chiefly of argillaceous 


INTRODUCTION, XV 


sandstones, which I suppose to be the Lune Montes of 
Ptolemy, or the Soma Giri of the ancient Hindts, Fur- 
ther, instead of a rim at the northern end, the country 
shelves down from the equator to the Mediterranean Sea ; 
and on the general surface of the interior plateau there are 
basins full of water (lakes), from which, when rains over- 
flow them, rivers are formed, that, cutting through the 
flanking rim of hills, find their way to the sea. 


ATMOSPHERIC AGENTS. 


On the east coast, near Zanzibar, we find the rains fol- 
lowing the track of the sun, and lasting not more than 
forty days on any part that the sun crosses; whilst the 
winds blow from south-west or north-east, towards the 
regions heated by its vertical position. But in the centre 
of the continent, within 5° of the equator, we find the 
rains much more lasting. For instance, at 5° south lati- 
tude, for the whole six months that the sun is in the 
south, rain continues to fall, and I have heard that the 
same takes place at 5°north; whilst on the equator, or 
rather a trifle to northward of it, it rains more or less the 
whole year round, but most at the equinoxes, as shown in 
the table on the following page. The winds, though some- 
what less steady, are still very determinable. With an 
easterly tending, they deflect north and south, following 
the sun. In the drier season they blow so cold that 
the sun’s heat is not distressing ; and in consequence of 
this, and the average altitude of the plateau, which is 
3000 feet, the general temperature of the atmosphere is 
very pleasant, as I found from experience ; for I walked 
every inch of the journey dressed in thick woollen 
clothes, and slept every night between blankets.* 


* See climate for one year bordering on the Victoria N’yanza, deduced 
from the observations of Captain Grant by Francis Galton, F.R.S., in 
Appendix. 


XV1 INTRODUCTION. 


Tun Numeer or Days on wutcu RAIN FELL (more or less) during the March 
of the East African Expedition from Zanzibar to Gondokoro. 


| Days on 
is60, | eles" || -1s61, | ‘weicn || 1862. ee 
rain fell. rain fell. rain fell. 
January 19 January 14 
February 21 | February* 12 
March 17 March 21 
April 17 Apmil 27 
May 3 May 26 
June 0) June 20 
July 1 July 22 
August 1 August 20 
aot September 9 September 18 
October 2 October iil October Q7 
November 0 November ily November 20 
December 20 December 16 || December 6 


* The equator was crossed on the 8th February 1862. 


FLORA. 


From what has been said regarding the condition of 
the atmosphere, it may readily be imagined that Africa, 
in those parts, after all, is not so bad as people sup- 
posed it was; for, when so much moisture falls under 
a vertical sun, all vegetable life must grow up almost 
spontaneously. It does so on the equator in the most 
profuse manner ; but down at 5° south, where there are 
six months’ drought, the case is somewhat different ; and 
the people would be subject to famines if they did not 
take advantage of their rainy season to lay in sufficient 
stores for the fine: and here we touch on the misfortune of 
the country ; for the negro is too lazy to do so effectively, 
owing chiefly, as we shall see presently, to want of a strong 
protecting government. One substantial fact has been 
established, owing to our having crossed over ten degrees 
of latitude in the centre of the continent, or from 5° south 
to 5° north latitude, which is this: There exists a regular 
gradation of fertility, surprisingly rich on the equator, 
but decreasing systematically from it; and the reason 


INTRODUCTION. xvil 


why this great fertile zone is confined to the equatorial 
regions, is the same as that which has constituted it the 
great focus of water or lake supply, whence issue the 
principal rivers of Africa. On the equator lie the rain- 
bearing influences of the Mountains of the Moon. The 
equatorial line is, in fact, the centre of atmospheric 
motion.* 


FAUNA. 


In treating of this branch of natural history, we will 
first take man—the true curly-head, flab-nosed, pouch- 
mouthed negro—not the Wahtima.t They are well dis- 
tributed all over these latitudes, but are not found 
anywhere in dense communities. Their system of gov- 
ernment is mostly of the patriarchal character. Some are 
pastorals, but most are agriculturists ; and this difference, 
I believe, originates solely from want of a stable govern- 
ment, to enable them to reap what they produce ; for 
where the negro can save his cattle, which is his wealth, 
by eating grain, he will do it. In the same way, as all 
animals, whether wild or tame, require a guide to lead 
their flocks, so do the negroes find it necessary to have 
chiefs over their villages and little communities, who 
are their referees on all domestic or political questions. 
They have both their district and their village chiefs, but, 
in the countries we are about to travel over, no kings 
such as we shall find that the Wahtima have. The dis- 
trict chief is absolute, though guided in great measure by 
his “ grey-beards,” who constantly attend his residence, 
and talk over their affairs of state. These commonly con- 
cern petty internal matters ; for they are too selfish and 
too narrow-minded to care for anything but their own 


* Captain Grant’s collection of the flora of Africa will be found in 


Appendix. 
+ The Wahiima are treated of in Chapter IX. 


b 


XVlll INTRODUCTION. 


private concerns. The grey-beards circulate the orders 
of the chief amongst the village chiefs, who are fined 
when they do not comply with them; and hence all 
orders are pretty well obeyed. 

One thing only tends to disorganise the country, and 
that is war, caused, in the first instance, by polygamy, 
producing a family of half-brothers, who, all aspiring to 
succeed their father, fight continually with one another, 
and make their chief aim slaves and cattle ; whilst, in the 
second instance, slavery keeps them ever fighting and 
reducing their numbers. The government revenues are 
levied, on a very small scale, exclusively for the benefit of 
the chief and his grey-beards. For instance, as a sort of 
land-tax, the chief has a: right to drink free from the 
village brews of pombé (a kind of beer made by fer- 
mentation), which are made in turn by all the villagers 
successively. In case of an elephant being killed, he also 
takes a share of the meat, and claims one of its tusks as 
his right ; further, all leopard, lion, or zebra skins are his 
by night. On merchandise brought into the country by 
traders, he has a general right to make any exactions he 
thinks he has the power of enforcing, without any regard 
to justice or a regulated tariff. This right is called Hongo, 
in the plural Mahongo. Another source of revenue is 
in the effects of all people condemned for sorcery, who 
are either burnt, or speared and cast into the jungles, 
and their property seized by the grey-beards for their 
chief. 

As to punishments, all irreclaimable thieves or murderers 
are killed and disposed of in the same manner as these 
sorcerers ; whilst on minor thieves a penalty equivalent to 
the extent of the depredation is levied. Illicit intercourse 
being treated as petty larceny, a value is fixed according 
to the value of the woman—for it must be remembered 
all women are property. Indeed, marriages are considered 
a very profitable speculation, the girl’s hand being in the 


INTRODUCTION, XIX 


father’s gift, who marries her to any one who will pay her 
price. This arrangement, however, is not considered a 
simple matter of buying and selling, but delights in the 
high-sounding title of “dowry.” Slaves, cows, goats, fowls, 
rds wire, or beads, are the usual things given for this 
species of dowry. The marriage-knot, haweves is never 
irretrievably tied; for if the wife finds a defect in her 
husband, she can return to her father by refunding the 
dowry ; whilst the husband, if he objects to his wife, can 
claim half-price on sending her home again, which is con- 
sidered fair, because as a second-hand article her future 
value would be diminished by half. By this system, it 
must be observed, polygamy is a source of wealth, since a 
man’s means are measured by the number of his progeny; 
but it has other advantages besides the dowry, for the 
women work more than the men do, both in and out of 
doors ; and, in addition to the females, the sons work for 
the household until they marry, and in after life take care 
of their parents in the same way as in the first instance 
the parents took care of them. 

Twins are usually hailed with delight, because they 
swell the power of the family, though in some in- 
stances they are put to death. Albinos are valued, 
though their colour is not admired. If death occurs 
in a natural manner, the body is usually either buried 
in the village or outside. A large portion of the 
negro races affect nudity, despising clothing as effem- 
inate; but these are chiefly the more boisterous, roving 
pastorals, who are too lazy either to grow cotton or 
strip the trees of their bark. Their young women go 
naked; but the mothers suspend a little tail both be- 
fore and behind. As the hair of the negro will not grow 
long, a barber might be dispensed with, were it not that 
they delight in odd fashions, and are therefore con- 
tinually either shaving it off altogether, or else fashion- 
ing it after the most whimsical designs. No people in 


:0:¢ INTRODUCTION. 


the world are so proud and headstrong as the negroes, 
whether they be pastoral or agriculturists. With them, 
as with the rest of the world, “familiarity breeds con- 
tempt ;” hospitality lives only one day; for though 
proud of a rich or white visitor—and they implore him 
to stop, that they may keep feeding their eyes on his 
curiosities—they seldom give more than a cow or a goat, 
though professing to- supply a whole camp with provi- 
sions. 

Taking the negroes as a whole, one does not find very 
marked or much difference in them. Lach tribe has its 
characteristics, it is true. For instance, one cuts his teeth 
or tattoos his face in a different manner from the others ; 
but by the constant intermarriage with slaves, much of 
this effect is lost, and it is further lost sight of owing to 
the preyalence of migrations caused by wars and the 
division of governments. As with the tribal marks so 
with their weapons; those most commonly in use are the 
spear, assagé, shield, bow and arrow. It is true some 
affect one, some the other; but in no way do we see that 
the courage of tribes can be determined by the use of any 
particular weapon: for the bravest use the arrow, which 
is the more dreaded; whilst the weakest confine them- 
selves to the spear. Lines of traffic are the worst tracks 
(there are no roads in the districts here referred to) for a 
traveller to go upon, not only because the hospitality of 
the people has been damped by frequent communication 
with travellers, but, by intercourse with the semi-civilised 
merchant, their natural honour and honesty are corrupted, 
their cupidity is increased, and the show of firearms ceases 
to frighten them. 

Of paramount consideration is the power held by the 
magician (Mganga), who rules the minds of the kings as 
did the old popes of Europe. They, indeed, are a curse to 
the traveller ; for if it suits their inclinations to keep him 
out of the country, they have merely to prognosticate all 


INTRODUCTION, XX1 


sorts of calamities—as droughts, famines, or wars—in the 
event of his setting eyes on the soil, and the chiefs, people, 
and all, would believe them; for, as may be imagined, 
with men unenlightened, supernatural and imaginary pre- 
dictions work with more force than substantial reasons. 
Their implement of divination, simple as it-may appear, 
is a cow's or antelope’s horn (Uganga), which they stuff 
with magic powder, also called Uganga. Stuck into-the 
ground in front of the village, it is supposed to have 
sufficient power to ward off the attacks of an enemy. 

By simply holding it in the hand, the magician pretends 
he can discover anything that has been stolen or lost ; 
and instances have been told. of its dragging four men 
after it with irresistible impetus up to a thief, when it be- 
laboured the culprit and drove him out of his senses, So 
imbued are the natives’ minds with belief in the power 
of charms, that they pay the magician for sticks, stones, 
or mud, which he has doctored for them. They believe 
certain flowers held in the hand will conduct them to 
anything lost; as also that the voice of certain wild 
animals, birds, or beasts, will insure them good-luck, or 
warn them of danger. With the utmost complacency our 
sable brother builds a dwarf hut in his fields, and places 
some grain on it to propitiate the evil spirit, and suffer 
him to reap the fruits of his labour, and this too they call 
their Uganga or church. 

‘These are a few of the more innocent alternatives the 
poor negroes resort to in place of a “Saviour.” They have 
als many other and more horrible devices. For instance, 
in times of tribulation, the magician, if he ascertains a 
war ‘is projected by inspecting the blood and bones of a 
~ fowl }which he has flayed for that purpose, flays a young 
child, and, having laid it lengthwise on a path, directs all 
the ‘warriors, on proceeding to battle, to step over his 
sacrifice and insure themselves victory. Another of these 
extri: barbarous devices takes place when a chief wishes 

: 


XXil INTRODUCTION. 


to make war on his neighbour, by his calling in a magician 
to discover a propitious time for commencing. The doctor 
places a large earthen vessel, half full of water, over a 
fire, and over its mouth a grating of sticks, whereon he 
lays a small child and a fowl side by side, and covers 
them over with a second large earthen vessel, just like the 
first, only inverted, to keep the steam in, when he sets fire 
below, cooks for a certain period of time, and then looks 
to see if his victims are still living or dead—when, should 
they be dead, the war must be deferred, but, otherwise, 
commenced at once. 

These extremes, however, are not often resorted to, for 
the natives are usually content with simpler means, such 
as flaying a goat, instead of a child, to be walked over ; 
while, to prevent any evil approaching their dwellings, a 
squashed frog, or any other such absurdity, when placed 
on the track, is considered a specific. 

How the negro has lived so many ages without advanc- 
ing, seems marvellous, when all the countries surrounding 
Africa are so forward in comparison; and judging from 
the progressive state of the world, one is led to suppose 
that the African must soon either step out from his dark- 
ness, or be superseded by a being superior to himself. 
Could a government be formed for them like ours in 
India; they would be saved ; but without it, I fear there is 
very little chance; for at present the African neither can 
help himself nor will he be helped by others, because his 
country is in such a constant state of turmoil he has ‘too 
much anxiety on hand looking out for his food to th ink 
of anything else. As his filen ever did, so does, he. 
He works his wife, sells his children, enslaves all he can 
lay hands upon, and, unless when fighting for the property 
of others, contents himself with drinking, singing, and 
dancing like a baboon, to drive dull care away. A few 
only make cotton cloth, or work in wood, iron, copper, or 
salt; their rule being to~do as little as possible, and to 


INTRODUCTION, XXili 


store up nothing beyond the necessities of the next 
season, lest their chiefs or neighbours should covet and 
take it from them. 

Slavery, I may add, is one great cause of laziness, for 
the masters become too proud to work, lest they should 
be thought slaves themselves. In consequence of this, 
the women look after the household work—such as brew- 
ing, cooking, grinding corn, making pottery and baskets, 
and taking care of the house and the children, besides 
helping the slaves whilst cultivating, or even tending the 
cattle sometimes. 

Now, descending to the inferior order of creation, I shall 
commence with the domestic animals first, to show what 
the traveller may expect to find for his usual support. 
Cows, after leaving the low lands near the coast, are 
found to be plentiful everywhere, and to produce milk in 
small quantities, from which butter is made. Goats are 
common all over Africa; but sheep are not so plentiful, 
nor do they show such good breeding—being generally 
lanky, with long fat tails. Fowls, much like those in In- 
dia, are abundant everywhere. A few Muscovy ducks 
are imported, also pigeons and cats. Dogs, like the In- 
dian pariah, are very plentiful, only much smaller; and a 
few donkeys are found in certain localities. Now, con- 
sidering this goodly supply of meat, whilst all tropical 
plants will grow just as well in central equatorial Africa 
as they do in India, it surprises the traveller there should 
be any famines; yet such is too often the case, and the » 
negro, with these bounties within his reach, is sometimes 
found eating dogs, cats, rats, poreupines, snakes, lizards, 
tortoises, locusts, and white ants, or is forced to seek the 
seeds of wild grasses, or to pluck wild herbs, fruits, and 
roots; whilst at the proper seasons they hunt the wild 
elephant, buffalo, giraffe, zebra, pigs, and antelopes ; or, 
going out with their arrows, have battues against the 
guinea-fowls and small birds. 


XX1V INTRODUCTION. 


The frequency with which collections of villages are 
found all over the countries we are alluding to, leaves but 
very little scope for the runs of wild animals, which are 
found only in dense jungles, open forests, or prairies, gen- 
erally speaking, where hills can protect them, and near 
rivers whose marshes produce a thick growth of vegeta- 
tion to conceal them from their most dreaded enemy— 
man. The prowling, restless elephant, for instance, though 
rarely seen, leaves indications of his nocturnal excursions 
in every wilderness, by wantonly knocking down the 
forest-trees. The morose rhinoceros, though less numer- 
ous, are found in every thick jungle. So is the savage 
buffalo, especially delighting in dark places, where he can 
wallow in the mud and slake his thirst without much 
trouble ; and here also we find the wild pig. 

The gruff hippopotamus is as widespread as any, being 
found wherever there is water to float him; whilst the 
shy giraffe and zebra affect all open forests and plains 
where the grass is not too long; and antelopes, of great 
variety in species and habits, are found wherever man will 
let them alone and they can find water. The lion is, 
however, rarely heard—much more seldom seen. Hyenas 
are numerous, and thievishly inclined. Leopards, less 
common, are the terror of the villagers. Foxes are not 
numerous, but frighten the black traveller by their ill- 
omened bark. Hares, about half the size of English ones 
—there are no rabbits—are widely spread, but not numer- 
ous ; porcupines the same. Wild cats, and animals of 
the ferret kind, destroy game. Monkeys of various kinds 
and squirrels harbour in the trees, but are rarely seen. 
Tortoises and snakes, in great variety, crawl over the 
ground, mostly after the rains. Rats and lizards—there 
are but few mice—are very abundant, and feed both in 
the fields and on the stores of the men. 

The wily ostrich, bustard, and florikan affect all open 
places. The guinea-fowl is the most numerous of. all 


INTRODUCTION, XXV 


game-birds. Partridges come next, but do not afford 
good sport; and quails are rare. Ducks and snipe ap- 
pear to love Africa less than any other country ; and geese 
and storks are only found where water most abounds. 
Vultures are uncommon ; hawks and crows much abound, 
as in all other countries ; but little birds, of every colour 
and note, are discoverable in great quantities near water 
and by the villages. Huge snails and small ones, as well 
as fresh-water shells, are very abundant, though the con- 
chologist would find but little variety to repay his la- 
bours ; and insects, though innumerable, are best sought 
for after the rains have set in.* 


THE WANGUANA OR FREED 'MEN. 


The Wa-n-gtiana, as their name implies, are men freed 
from slavery ; and as it is to these singular negroes act- 
ing as hired servants that I have been chiefly indebted for 
opening this large section of Africa, a few general remarks 
on their character cannot be out of place here. 

Of course, having been born in Africa, and associated in 
childhood with the untainted negroes, they retain all the 
superstitious notions of the true aborigines, though some- 
what modified, and even corrupted, by that acquaintance 
with the outer world which sharpens their wits. 

Most of these men were doubtless caught in wars, as 
may be seen every day in Africa, made slaves of, and sold 
to the Arabs for a few yards of common cloth, brass wire, 
or beads. They would then be taken to the Zanzibar 
market, resold like horses to the highest bidder, and then 
kept in bondage by their new masters, more like children 
of his family than anything else. In this new position 
they were circumcised to make Mussulmans of them, that 
their hands might be “clean” to slaughter their master’s 


* The list of my fauna collection will be found in an early Number of the 
‘ Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London.’ 


XXV1 INTRODUCTION. 


cattle, and extend his creed; for the Arabs believe the 
day must come when the tenets of Mohammed will be 
accepted by all men. 

The slave in this new position finds himself much better 
off than he ever was in his life before, with this exception, 
that as a slave he feels himself much degraded in the social 
scale of society, and his family ties are all cut off from 
him—probably his relations have all been killed in the 
war in which he was captured. Still, after the first qualms 
have worn off, we find him much attached to his master, 
who feeds him and finds him in clothes in return for the 
menial services which he performs. In a few years after 
capture, or when confidence has been gained by the attach- 
ment shown by the slave, if the master is a trader in ivory, 
he will intrust him with the charge of his stores, and send 
him all over the interior of the continent to purchase for 
him both slaves and ivory; but should the master die, 
according to the Mohammedan creed the slaves ought to 
be freed. In Arabia this would be the case; but at Zan- 
zibar it more generally happens that the slave is willed to 
his successor. 

The whole system of slaveholding by the Arabs in 
Africa, or rather on the coast or at Zanzibar, is exceed- 
ingly strange ; for the slaves, both in individual physical 
strength and in numbers, are so superior to the Arab 
foreigners, that if they chose to rebel, they might send 
the Arabs flying out of the land. It happens, however, 
that they are spellbound, not knowing their strength any 
more than domestic animals, and they even seem to con- 
sider that they would be dishonest if they ran away after 
being purchased, and so brought pecuniary loss on their 
owners. 

There are many positions into which the slave may get 
by the course of events, and I shall give here, as a speci- 
men, the ordinary case of one who has been freed by the 
death of his master, that master having been a trader in 


INTRODUCTION, XXV11 


ivory and slaves in the interior. In such a case, the slave 
so freed in all probability would commence life afresh by 
taking service as a porter with other merchants, and in 
the end would raise sufficient capital to commence trading 
himself—first in slaves, because they are the most: easily 
got, and then in ivory. All his accumulations would then 
go to the Zanzibar market, or else to slavers looking out off 
the coast. Slavery begets slavery. To catch slaves is the 
first thought of every chief in the interior; hence fights 
and slavery impoverish the land, and that is the reason 
both why Africa does not improve, and why we find men 
of all tribes and tongues on the coast. The ethnologist 
need only go to Zanzibar to become acquainted with all 
the different tribes to the centre of the continent on that 
side, or to Congo to find the other half south of the 
equator there. 

Some few freed slaves take service in vessels, of which 
they are especially fond; but most return to Africa to trade 
in slaves and ivory. All slaves learn the coast language, 
called at Zanzibar Kistiahili; and therefore the traveller, if 
judicious in his selections, could find there interpreters to 
carry him throughout the eastern half of South Africa. 
To the north of the equator the system of language 
entirely changes. 

Laziness is inherent in these men, for which reason, 
although extremely powerful, they will not work unless 
compelled to do so. Having no God, in the Christian 
sense of the term, to fear or worship, they have no love 
for truth, honour, or honesty. Controlled by no govern- 
ment, nor yet by home ties, they have no reason to think 
of or look to the future. Any venture attracts them when 
hard-up for food; and the more roving it is, the better 
they like it. The life of the sailor is most particularly 
attractive to the freed slave ; for he thinks, in his conceit, 
that he is on an equality with all men when once on the 
muster-rolls, and then he calls all his fellow-Africans 


XXV1ll INTRODUCTION. 


“savages.” Still the African’s peculiarity sticks to him : 
he has gained no permanent good. The association of 
white men and the glitter of money merely dazzle him. 
He apes like a monkey the jolly Jack Tar, and spends his 
wages accordingly. If chance brings him back again to 
Zanzibar, he calls his old Arab master his father, and goes 
into slavery with as much zest as ever. 

I have spoken of thése freed men as if they had no reli- _ 
gion. This is practically true, though theoretically not so ; 
for the Arabs, on circumcising them, teach them to repeat the 
words Allah and Mohammed, and perhaps a few others; but 
not one in ten knows what a soul means, nor do they ex- 
pect to meet with either reward or punishment in the next 
world, though they are taught to regard animals as clean 
and unclean, and some go through the form of a pilgrim- 
age to Mecca. Indeed the whole of their spiritual educa- 
tion goes into oaths and ejaculations—Allah and Moham- 
med being as common in their mouths as damn and blast 
are with our soldiers and sailors. The long and short of 
this story is, that the freed men generally turn out a loose, 
roving, reckless set of beings, quick-witted as the Yankee, 
from the simple fact that they imagine all political matters 
affect them, and therefore they must have a word in every 
debate. Nevertheless they are seldom wise; and lying 
being more familiar to their constitution than truth-say- 
ing, they are for ever concocting dodges with the view, 
which they glory in, of successfully cheating people. 
Sometimes they will show great kindness, even bravery 
amounting to heroism, and proportionate affection; at 
another time, without any cause, they will desert and be 
treacherous to their sworn friends in the most dastardly 
manner. Whatever the freak of the moment is, that they 
adopt in the most thoughtless manner, even though they 
may have calculated on advantages beforehand in the 
opposite direction. In fact, no one can rely upon them 
even for a moment. Dog wit, or any silly remarks, will 


INTRODUCTION. XX1X 


set them giggling. Any toy will amuse them. Highly 
conceited of their personal appearance, they are for ever 
cutting their hair in different fashions, to surprise a friend; 
or if a rag be thrown away, they will all in turn fight for 
it to bind on their heads, then on their loins or spears, 
peacocking about with it before their admiring comrades. 
Even strange feathers or skins are treated by them in 
the same way. 

Should one happen to have anything specially to com- 
municate to his master in camp, he will enter giggling, 
sidle up to the pole of a hut, commence scratching his 
back with it, then stretch and yawn, and gradually, in 
bursts of loud laughter, slip down to the ground on his 
stern, when he drums with his hands on the top of a box 
until summoned to know what he has at heart, when he 
delivers himself in a peculiar manner, laughs and yawns 
again, and, saying it is time to go, walks off in the same 
way as he came. At other times when he is called, he 
will come sucking away at the spout of a tea-pot, or, 
scratching his naked arm-pits with’ a table-knife, or, 
perhaps, polishing the plates for dinner with his dirty 
loin-cloth. If sent to market to purchase a fowl, he 
comes back with a cock tied by the legs to the end of a 
stick, swinging and squalling in the most piteous manner. 
Then, arrived at the cook-shop, he throws the bird down 
on the ground, holds its head between his toes, plucks 
the feathers to bare its throat, and then, raising a prayer, 
cuts its head off. 

But enough of the freed man in camp; on the march 
he is no better. If you give him a gun and some ammu- 
nition to protect him in case of emergencies, he will pro- 
mise to save it, but forthwith expends it by firing it off 
in the air, and demands more, else he will fear to venture 
amongst the “savages.” Suppose you give him a box 
of bottles to carry, or a desk, or anything else that re- 
quires great care, and you caution him of its contents, 


XXX INTRODUCTION. 


the first thing he does is to commence swinging it round 
and round, or putting it topsy-turvy on the top of his 
head, when he will run off at a jog-trot, singing and 
laughing in the most provoking manner, and thinking no 
more about it than if it were an old stone; even if rain 
were falling, he would put it in the best- place to get wet 
through. Economy, care, or forethought never enters his 
head ; the first thing to hand is the right thing for him ; 
and rather than take the trouble even to look for his own 
rope to tie up his bundle, he would cut off his master’s 
tent-ropes or steal his comrade’s. His greatest delight is 
in the fair sex, and when he can’t get them, next comes 
beer, song, and a dance. 

Now, this is a mild specimen of the “rowdy” negro, 
who has contributed more to open Africa to enterprise 
and civilisation than any one else. Possessed of a won- 
derful amount of loquacity, great risibility, but no stabil- 
ity—a creature of impulse—a grown child, in short—at 
first sight it seems wonderful how he can be trained to 
work; for there is no law, no home to bind him—he 
could run away at any moment; and, presuming on this, 
he sins, expecting to be forgiven. Great forbearance, 
occasionally tinctured with a little fatherly severity, is, 
I believe, the best dose for him; for he says to his master, 
in the most childish manner, after sinning, “ You ought 
to forgive and to forget; for are you not a big man who 
should be above harbouring spite, though for a moment 
you may be angry? Flog me if you like, but don’t-keep 
count against me, else I shall run away; and what will 
you do then ?” 

The language of this people is just as strange as they 
are themselves. It is based on euphony, from which cause 
it is very complex, the more especially so as it requires 
one to be possessed of a negro’s turn of mind to appreciate 
the system, and unravel the secret of its euphonie con- 


cord, A Kistiahili grammar, written by Dr Krapf, will 


INTRODUCTION. XXX1 


exemplify what I mean. There is one peculiarity, how- 
ever, to which I would direct the attention of the reader 
most particularly, which is, that Wa prefixed to the 
essential word of a country, means men or people; 
M prefixed, means man or individual; U, in the same 
way, means place or locality ; and A7 prefixed, indicates 
the language. Example:—Wagogo, is the people of Gogo ; 
Mgogo, is a Gogo man; Ugogo, is the country of Gogo ; 
and Kigogo, the language of Gogo. 

The only direction here necessary as regards pronuncia- 
tion of native words refers to the #, which represents a 
sound corresponding to that of the 00 in woo. 


—f, 


— 


as ar, aS I hake 
SE ge ek a 
has Thr) : ? 7 
| rr oe og ott UF 
SE aeart dk Ast pe oP To 
Se ee ee ees 
‘ os eee eee RSA et EL oe if at 
ow eh MiP age ins diel ae Pe? ‘sei 
: paki a: deen FAs hes ae jah 
{ oe eal avy hi oe. ‘i 
MRE 2k OR wing degD 


. a rey 


a ad n 


. na Tee Suey M Weale a} ot ime 6 


on mart = EAs pri 95 How 42s TF tnub ol ef 


: ae he , + ves 
a = Vey Tras) ws ‘elo wht eee : 
~ 
Y 7 
: 
<< ' ~ 
Bs 
i] 
». 
a) 
er 
~ 
* =. 
“wa 
i 
" 
Pt 
~\/ 
aes , 
ce } a 
e 
t i . # 4 
~ oe ; v's — 
be 
: wares 7 = . 
‘ he ‘ : 


JOURNAL 


OF 


a KP Sh Cpe Bg en Cs Od ned al 


OF 


THE SOURCE OF THE NILE 


CHAPTER IL 


LONDON TO ZANZIBAR, 1859. 


THE DESIGN—-THE PREPARATIONS—DEPARTURE—THE CAPE—THE 
ZULU KAFIRS — TURTLE - TURNING — CAPTURE OF A SLAVER— 
ARRIVE AT ZANZIBAR—-LOCAL POLITICS AND NEWS SINCE LAST 
VISIT—ORGANISATION OF THE EXPEDITION. 


My third expedition in Africa, which was avowedly for 
the purpose of establishing the truth of my assertion that 
the Victoria N’yanza, which I discovered on the 30th July 
1858, would eventually prove to be the source of the Nile, 
may be said to have commenced on the 9th May 1859, 
the first day after my return to England from my second 
expedition, when, at the invitation of Sir R. I. Murchison, 
I called at his house to show him my map for the infor- 
mation of the Royal Geographical Society. Sir Roderick, 
I need only say, at once accepted my views; and, know- 
ing my ardent desire to prove to the world, by actual in- 
A 


2 LONDON TO ZANZIBAR. [1859. 


spection of the exit, that the Victoria N’yanza was the 
source of the Nile, seized the enlightened view, that such a 
discovery should not be lost to the glory of England and 
the Society of which he was President ; and said to me, 
“Speke, we must send you there again.” I was then 
officially directed, much against my own inclination, to 
lecture at the Royal Geographical Society on the geo- 
graphy of Africa, which I had, as the sole surveyor of the 
second expedition, laid down on our maps.* A council 
of the Geographical Society was now convened to ascer- 
tain what projects I had in view for making good my 
discovery by connecting the lake with the Nile, as also 
what assistance I should want for that purpose. 

Some thought my best plan would be to go up the Nile, 
which seemed to them the natural course to pursue, espe- 
cially as the Nile was said, though nobody believed it, to 
have been navigated by expeditions sent out by Mehemet 
Ali, Viceroy of Egypt, up to 3° 22’ north latitude. To 
this I objected, as so many had tried it and failed, from 
reasons which had not transpired; and, at the same 
time, I said that if they would give me £5000 down at 
once, I would return to Zanzibar at the end of the year, 
march to Kazé again, and make the necessary investiga- 
tions of the Victoria lake. Although, in addition to the 
journey to the source of the river, I also proposed spend- 
ing three years in the country, looking up tributaries, 
inspecting watersheds, navigating the lake, and making 
collections on all branches of natural history, yet £5000 
was thought by the Geographical Society too large a sum 

* Captain Burton, on receiving his gold medal at the hands of Sir Rode- 
rick I. Murchison, said, “ You have alluded, sir, to the success of the last 
expedition. Justice compels me to state the circumstances under which it 
attained that success, To Captain Speke are due those geographical results 
to which you have alluded in such flattering terms. Whilst I undertook 
the history and ethnography, the languages, and the peculiarity of the people, 
to Captain Speke fell the arduous task of delineating an exact topography, 


and of laying down our positions by astronomical observations—a labour to 
which, at times, even the undaunted Livingstone found himself unequal.” 


1859. ] THE AUTHOR'S OWN SCHEME. 3 


to expect from the Government ; so I accepted the. half, 
saying that, whatever the expedition might cost, I would 
make good the rest, as, under any circumstances, I would 
complete what I had begun, or die in the attempt. 

My motive for deferring the journey a year was the 
hope that I might, in the meanwhile, send on fifty men, 
carrying beads and brass wire, under charge of Arab 
ivory-traders, to Karagiié, and fifty men more, in the 
same way, to Kazé; whilst I, arriving in the best season 
for travelling (May, June, or July), would be able to 
push on expeditiously to my depots so formed, and hus 
escape the great disadvantages of travelling with a: large 
caravan in a country where no laws prevail to protect 
one against desertions and theft. Moreover, I knew that 
the negroes who would have to go with me, as long as 
they believed I had property in advance, would work up 
to it willingly, as they would be the gainers by doing so ; 
whilst, with nothing before them, they would be always 
endeavouring to thwart my advance, to save them. from 
a trouble which their natural laziness would prompt them 
to escape from. 

This beautiful project, I am sorry to say, was doomed 
from the first; for I did not get the £2500 grant of 
money or appointment to the command until fully nine 
months had elapsed, when I wrote to Colonel Rigby, 
our Consul at Zanzibar, to send on the first instalment 
of property towards the interior. 

As time then advanced, the Indian branch of the Govern- 
ment very graciously gave me fifty artillery carbines, with 
belts and sword-bayonets attached, and 20,000 rounds of 
ball ammunition. They lent me as many surveying 
instruments as I wanted ; and, through Sir George Clerk, 
put at my disposal some rich presents, in gold watches, 
for the chief Arabs who had so generously assisted us in 
the last expedition. Captain Grant, hearing that I was 
bound on this journey, being an old friend and brother 


Be LONDON TO ZANZIBAR. [1859-60. 


sportsman in India, asked me to take him with me, and » 
his appointment was settled by Colonel Sykes, then chair- 
man of a committee of the Royal Geographical Society, 
who said it would only be a “matter of charity” to allow 
me a companion. 

Much at the same time, Mr Petherick, an ivory mer- 
chant, who had spent many years on the Nile, arrived in 
England, and gratuitously offered, as it would not inter- 
fere with his trade, to place boats at Gondokoro, and send 
a party of men up the White River to collect ivory in the 
meanwhile, and eventually to assist me in coming down. 
Mr Petherick, I may add, showed great zeal for geogra- 
phical exploits; so, as I could not get money enough to 
do all that I wished to accomplish myself, I drew out a 
project for him to ascend the stream now known as the 
Usiia river (reported to be the larger branch of the Nile), 
and, if possible, ascertain what connection it had with 
my lake. This being agreed to, I did my best, through 
the medium of Earl de Grey (then President of the Royal 
Geographical Society), to advance him money to carry out 
this desirable object. 

' The last difficulty I had now before me was to obtain 
a passage to Zanzibar. The Indian Government had 
promised me a vessel of war to convey me from Aden 
to Zanzibar, provided it did not interfere with the public 
interests. This doubtful proviso induced me to apply to 
Captain Playfair, Assistant-Political at Aden, to know 
what Government vessel would be available ; and should 
there be none, to get for me a passage by some American 
trader. ‘The China war, he assured me, had taken up all 
the Government vessels, and there appeared no hope left 
for me that season, as the last American trader was just 
then leaving for Zanzibar. In this dilemma it appeared 
that I must inevitably lose the travelling season, and 
come in for the- droughts and famines. The tide, how- 
ever, turned in my favour a little; for I obtained, by per- 


1859-60. ] ARRIVAL AT THE CAPE, . 5 
mission of the Admiralty, a passage in the British screw 
steam-frigate Forte, under orders to convey Admiral Sir 
H. Keppel to his command at the Cape ; and Sir Charles 
Wood most obligingly made a request that I should be 
forwarded thence to Zanzibar in one of our slaver-hunting 
cruisers by the earliest opportunity. 

On the 27th April, Captam Grant and I embarked on 
board the new steam-frigate Forte, commanded by Cap- 
tain E. W. Turnour, at Portsmouth; and after a long 
voyage, touching at Madeira and Rio de Janeiro, we 
arrived at the Cape of Good Hope on the 4th July. Here 
Sir George Grey, the Governor of the colony, who took a 
warm and enlightened interest in the cause of the expedi- 
tion, invited both Grant and myself to reside at his house. 
Sir George had been an old explorer himself—was once 
wounded by savages in Australia, much in the same man- 
ner as I had been in the Somali country—and, with a 
spirit of sympathy, he called me his son, and said he 
hoped I would succeed. Then, thinking how best he 
could serve me, he induced the Cape Parliament to ad- 
vance to the expedition a sum of £300, for the purpose of 
buying baggage-mules; and induced Lieut.-General Wyn- 
yard, the Commander-in-Chief, to detach ten volunteers 
from the Cape Mounted Rifle Corps to accompany me. 
When this addition was made to my force, of twelve mules 
and ten Hottentots, the Admiral of the station placed * x 
screw steam-corvette Brisk at my disposal, and we a 
sailed for Zanzibar on the 16th July, under the command 
of Captain A. F. de Horsey—the Admiral himself accom- 
panying us, on one of his annual inspections to visit the 
east coast of Africa and the Mauritius. In five days more 
we touched at East London, and, thence proceeding north, 
made a short stay at Delagoa Bay, where I first became 
acquainted with the Zult Kafirs, a naked set of negroes, 
whose national costume principally consists in having their 

hair trussed up like a hoop on the top of the head, and an 


ee 


6 LONDON TO ZANZIBAR. [1860. 


appendage like a thimble, to which they attach a mys- 
terious importance. They wear additional ornaments, 
charms, &c., of bird’ claws, hoofs and horns of wild 
animals tied on with strings, 
and sometimes an article 
like a kilt, made of loose 
strips of skin, or the entire 
skins of vermin strung close 
together. These things I 
have merely noticed in 
passing, because I shall 
hereafter have occasion to 
allude to a migratory peo- 
ple, the Watiita, who, dress- 
ing much in the same 
manner, extend from Lake 
N’yassa to Uzinza, and may 
originally have been a part 

ey t Sn a of this same Kafir race, 
who are themselves supposed to have migrated from 
the regions at present occupied by the Gallas. Next 
hy (the 28th) we went on to Europa, a small island of 
coralline, covered with salsolacious shrubs, and tenanted 
only by sea-birds, owls, finches, rats, and turtles. Of the 
last we succeeded in turning three, the average weight 
A. each being 360 Ib., and we took large numbers of 

elr egos ) 

We ie went to Mozambique, and visited the Portu- 
guese Governor, John Travers de Almeida, who showed 
considerable interest in the prospeets of the expedition, 
and regretted that, as it cost so much money to visit the 
interior from that’ place, his officers were unable to go 
there. One experimental trip only had been accomplished 
by Mr Soares, who was forced to pay the Maktia chiefs — 
120 dollars footing, to reach a small hill in view of the 
sea, about twenty-five miles off. 


o 


Ave.] CAPTURE OF A SLAVER. . 7 


Leaving Mozambique on the 9th August, bound for 
Johanna, we came the next day, at 11.30 a.m, in sight of 
a slaver, ship-rigged, bearing on us full sail, but so distant 
from us that her mast-tops were only just visible. As 
quick as ourselves, she saw who we were and tried to 
escape by retreating. This manceuvre left no doubt what 
she was, and the Brisk, all full of excitement, gave chase 
at full speed, and in four hours more drew abreast of her. 
A great commotion ensued on board the slaver. The sea- 
pirates threw overboard their colours, bags, and numerous 
boxes, but would not heave-to, although repeatedly chal- 
lenged, until a gun was fired across her bows. Our boats 
were then lowered, and in a few minutes more the “ prize” 


’ was taken, by her crew being exchanged for some of our 


men, and we learnt all about her from accurate reports 
furnished by Mr Frere, the Cape Slave Commissioner. 
Cleared from Havannah as “the Sunny South,” professing 
to be destined for Hong-Kong, she changed her name to 
the Manuela, and came slave-hunting in these regions. The 
slaver’s crew consisted of a captain, doctor, and several 
sailors, mostly Spaniards. ‘The vessel was well stored with 
provisions and medicines ; but there was scarcely enough 
room in her, though she was said to be only half freighted, 
for the 544 creatures they were transporting. The next 
morning, as we entered Pamoni harbour by an intricate 
approach to the rich little island hill Johanna, the slaver, 
as she followed us, stranded, and for a while caused con- 
siderable alarm to everybody but her late captain. He 
thought his luck very bad, after escaping so often, to be 
taken thus; for his vessel’s powers of sailing were so good, 
that, had she had the wind in her favour, the Brisk, even 
with the assistance of steam, could not have come up with 
her. On going on board her, I found the slaves to be 
mostly Wahiyow. A few of them were old women, but 
all the rest children. They had been captured during wars 
in their own country, and sold to Arabs, who brought 


4, 


x! 


8 . LONDON TO ZANZIBAR. [1860. 


them to the coast, and kept them half-starved until the 
slaver arrived, when they were shipped in dhows and 
brought off to the slaver, where, for nearly a week, whilst 
the bargains were in progress, they were kept entirely 
without food. It was no wonder, then, every man of the 
Brisk who first looked upon them did so with a feeling of 
loathing and abhorrence of such a trade. All over the 
vessel, but more especially below, old women, stark naked, 
were dying in the mest disgusting “ ferret-box” atmo- 
sphere ; while all those who had sufficient strength were 
pulling up the hatches, and tearing at the salt fish they 
found below, like dogs in a kennel. 

On the 15th the Manuela was sent to the Mauritius, and 
we, after passing the Comoro Islands, arrived at our desti- 
nation, Zanzibar—called Lungiija by the aborigines, the 
Wakhadim—and Ungitya by the present Wastiahili. 

On the 17th, after the anchor was cast, without a mo- 
ment’s delay I went off to the British Consulate to see my 
old friend Colonel Rigby. He was delighted to see us; 
and, in anticipation of our arrival, had prepared rooms for 
our reception, that both Captain Grant and myself might 
enjoy his hospitality until arrangements could be made for 
our final start into the interior. The town, which I had 
left in so different a condition sixteen months before, was 
in a state of great tranquillity, brought about by the 
energy of the Bombay Government on the Muscat side, 
and Colonel Rigby’s exertions on this side, in preventing 
an insurrection Sultan Majid’s brothers had created with 
a view of usurping his government. 


The news of the place was as follows :—In addition to 


the formerly constituted consulates—English, French, and 
American—a fourth one, representing Hamburg, had been 
created. Dr Roscher, who during my absence had made 
a successful journey to the N’yinyézi N’yassa, or Star 
Lake, was afterwards murdered by some natives in Uhi- 
yow; and> Lieutenant-Colonel Baron van der Decken, 


Ava. | STATE OF THE COUNTRY. 9 


another enterprising German, was organising an expedition 
with a view to search for the relics of his countryman, 
and, if possible, complete the project poor Roscher had 
commenced. 

Slavery had received a severe blow by the sharp mea- 
sures Colonel Rigby had taken in giving tickets of eman- 
cipation to all those slaves whom our Indian subjects the 
Banyans had been secretly keeping, and by fining the 
masters and giv- 
ing the money to 
the men to set 
them up in life. 
The interior of the 
continenthad been 
greatly disturbed, 
owing to constant 
war between the 
natives and Arab 
ivory merchants. 
Mgitrtt Mfupi (or | 
Short - legs), the Banyan, contemplacing his Account-Book, 
chief of Khoko in Ugogo, for instance, had been shot, and 
Mania Séra (the Tippler), who succeeded the old Sultan 
Findi Kira, of Unyanyembé, on his death, shortly after 
the late expedition left Kazé, was out in the field fighting 
the Arabs. Recent letters from the Arabs in the interior, 
however, gave hopes of peace being shortly restored. 
Finally, in compliance with my request—and this was the 
most important item of news to myself—Colonel Rigby 
had sent on, thirteen days previously, fifty-six loads of 
cloth and beads, in charge of two of Ramji’s men, con- 
signed to Misa at Kazé. 

To call on the Sultan, of course, was our first duty. He 
received us in his usually affable manner; made many 
trite remarks concerning our plans; was surprised, if my 
only object in view was to see the great river running out 


10 LONDON TO ZANZIBAR. [1860. 


of the lake, that I did not go by the more direct route 
across the Masai country and Usoga; and then, finding I 


Said Majid, Sultan of Zanzibar 


wished to see Karagté, as well as to settle many other 
great points of interest, he offered to assist me with all the 
means in his power. 

The Hottentots, the mules, and the baggage having 
been landed, our preparatory work began in earnest. It 
consisted in proving the sextants; rating the watches ; 
examining the compasses and boiling thermometers ; 
making tents and packsaddles; ordering supplies of 
beads, cloth, and brass wire; and collecting servants 
and porters. : 

Sheikh Said bin Salem, our late Cafila Bashi, or caravan 
captain, was appointed to that post again, as he wished to 


Ave. ] PREPARATIONS FOR THE START. 11 


prove his character for honour and honesty ; and it now 
transpired that he had been ordered not to go with me 
when I discovered the Victoria N’yanza. Bombay and his 
brother Mabriiki were bound to me of old, and the first 
to greet me on my arrival here ; while my old friends the 
Beltichs begged me to take them again. The Hottentots, 
however, had usurped their place. I was afterwards sorry 
for this, though, if I ever travel again, I shall trust to 
none but natives, as the climate of Africa is too trying to 
foreigners. Colonel Rigby, who had at heart as much as 
anybody the success of the expedition, materially assisted 
me in accomplishing my object—that men accustomed 
_ to discipline and a knowledge of English honour and 
honesty should be enlisted, to give confidence to the rest 
of the men; and he allowed me to select from his boat’s 
crew any men I could find who had served in men-of- 
war, and had seen active service in India. 

For this purpose my factotum, Bombay, prevailed on 
Baraka, Frij, and Rahan—all of them old sailors, who, 
like himself, knew Hindtistani—to go with me. With 
this nucleus to start with, I gave orders that they should 
look out for as many Wangiiana (freed men—~. e., men 
emancipated from slavery) as they could enlist, to carry 
loads, or do any other work required of them, and to fol- 
low me in Africa wherever I wished, until our arrival in 
Egypt, when I would send them back to Zanzibar. Hach 
was to receive one years pay in advance, and the re- 
mainder when their work was completed. 

While this enlistment was going on here, Ladha Damiji, 
the customs’ master, was appointed to collect a hundred 
pagazis (Wanyamitézi porters) to carry each a load of cloth, 
beads, or brass wire to Kazé, as they do for the ivory mer- 
chants. Meanwhile, at the invitation of the Admiral, and 
to show him some sport in hippopotamus-shooting, I went 
with him in a dhow over to Kiusiki, near which there is 
a tidal lagoon, which at high tide is filed with water, but 


12 LONDON TO ZANZIBAR. [1860. 


at low water exposes sand islets covered with mangrove 
shrub. In these islets we sought for the animals, know- 
ing they were given to lie wallowing in the mire, and we 
bagged two. On my return to Zanzibar, the Brisk sailed 
for the Mauritius, but fortune sent Grant and myself on a 
different cruise. Sultan Majid, having heard that a slaver 
was lying at Pangani, and being anxious to show his 
good faith with the English, begged me to take the com- 
mand of one of his vessels of war and run her down. 
Accordingly, embarking at noon, as soon as the vessel 
could be got ready, we lay-to that night at Tombat, with - 
a view of surprising the slaver next morning; but next 
day, on our arrival at Pangani, we heard that she had 
merely put in to provision there three days before, and 
had left immediately afterwards. As I had come so far, I 
thought we might go ashore and look at the town, which 
was found greatly improved since I last saw it, by the 
addition of several coralline houses and a dockyard. The 
natives were building a dhow with Lindi and Madagascar 
timber. On going ashore, I might add, we were stranded 
on the sands, and, coming off again, nearly swamped by 
the increasing surf on the bar of the river; but this was 
a trifle; all we thought of was to return to Zanzibar, and 
hurry on our preparations there. This, however, was not 
so easy: the sea current was running north, and the wind 
was too light to propel our vessel against it; so, after 
trying in vain to make way in her, Grant and I, leaving 
her to follow, took to a boat, after giving the captain, who 
said we would get drowned, a letter, to say we left the 
vessel against his advice. 

We had a brave crew of young negroes to pull us; but, 
pull as they would, the current was so strong that we 
feared, if we persisted, we should be drawn into the 
broad Indian Ocean ; so, changing our line, we bore into 
the little coralline island, Maziwa, where, after riding over 
some ugly coral surfs, we put in for the night. There we 


40 


The Course of the 
RIVER CALI 


cr 


CREAT KRISHNA 
through 


Cusha-Dwip, without 
and 
Shankha-Dwip. proper 
from the 
ie Unk Al Nas 

by 


Lieut. Francis Wilford. 


Xe 
aS; 


Remba T. 


S) 


nzibar I. 
Leas Q 


a9 
i) 
& 


a 


Ry 
Soma Giri, or 


MS of the Moou 


Note.__ The Chart: printed in blue 
ts a reduction of the Map of Eastern 


Equatorial Africa by Capt Speke. 


is 


80 


Longitude B. 35 of Greenwich 


a 


Serr. | THE SULTAN OF ZANZIBAR. 13 


found, to our relief, some fishermen, who gave us fish for 
our dinner, and directions how to proceed. 

Next morning, before daylight, we trusted to the boat 
and our good luck. After passing, without landmarks to 
guide us, by an intricate channel, through foaming surfs, 
we arrived at Zanzibar in the night, and found that the 
vessel had got in before us. 

Colonel Rigby now gave me a most interesting paper, 
with a map attached to it, about the Nile and the Moun- 
tains of the Moon. It was written by Lieutenant Wilford, 
from the ‘ Pttrans’ of the ancient Hindiis. As it exem- 
plifies, to a certain extent, the supposition I formerly 
arrived at concerning the Mountains of the Moon being 
associated with the country of the Moon, I would fain 
draw the attention of the reader of my travels to the 
volume of the ‘ Asiatic Researches’ in which it was pub- 
lished.* It is remarkable that the Hindis have christened 
the source of the Nile Amara, which is the name of a 
country at the north-east corner of the Victoria N’yanza. 
This, I think, shows clearly that the ancient Hindtis must 
have had some kind of communication with both the 
northern and southern ends of the Victoria N’yanza. 

Having gone to work again, I found that Sheikh Said 
had brought ten men, four of whom were purchased for 
one hundred dollars, which I had to pay; Bombay, 
Baraka, Frij, and Rahan had brought twenty-six more, 
all freed men ; while the Sultan Majid, at the suggestion 
of Colonel Rigby, gave me thirty-four men more, who 
were all raw labourers taken from his gardens. It was 
my intention to have taken one hundred of this descrip- 
tion of men throughout the whole journey; but as so 
many could not be found in Zanzibar, I still hoped to fill 
up ‘the complement in Unyamtiéazi, the land of the Moon, 
from the large establishments of the Arab merchants re- 
siding there. The payment of these men’s wages for the 

* Vol. iii. of a.D. 1801. 


14 LONDON TO ZANZIBAR. [1860. 


first year, as well as the terms of the agreement made 
with them, by the kind consent of Colonel Rigby were 
now entered in the Consular Office books, as a security 
to both parties, and a precaution against disputes on the 
way.* Any one who saw the grateful avidity with which 
they took the money, and the warmth with which they 
pledged themselves to serve me faithfully through all 
dangers and difficulties, would, had he had no dealings 
with such men before, have thought that I had a first- 
rate set of followers. I lastly gave Sheikh Said a double- 
barrelled rifle by Blissett, and distributed fifty carbines 
among the seniors of the expedition, with the condition 
that they would forfeit them to others more worthy if 
they did not behave well, but would retain possession of — 
them for ever if they carried them through the journey 
to my satisfaction. 

On the 21st, as everything was ready on the island, I 
sent Sheikh Said and all the men, along with the Hotten- 
tots, mules, and baggage, off in dhows to Bagamoyo, on 
the opposite mainland. Colonel Rigby, with Captain 
Grant and myself, then called on the Sultan, to bid him 
adieu, when he graciously offered me, as a guard of honour 
to escort me through Uzaramo, one jemadar and twenty- 
five Beltich soldiers. These I accepted, more as a govern- 
ment security in that country against the tricks of the 
natives, than for any accession they made to our strength. 
His highness then placed his 22-eun corvette, “ Secundra 
Shah,” at our disposal, and we went all three over to Baga- 
moyo, arriving on the 25th. Immediately on landing, 
Ladha and Sheikh Said showed us into a hut prepared for 
us, and all things looked pretty well. Ladha’s hundred 
loads of beads, cloths, and brass wire were all tied up for 
the march, and seventy-five pagazis (porters from the Moon 
country) had received their hire to carry these loads to Kazé, 
in the land of the Moon. Competition, I found, had raised 


* In Appendix A. will be found a, detailed list. 


Szpr. } CHARACTER OF THE MAINLAND. 15 


these men’s wages, for I had to pay, to go even as far as 
Kazé, nine and a quarter dollars a-head !—as Mastidi and 
some other merchants were bound on the same line as 
myself, and all were equally in a hurry to be off and avoid 
as much as possible the famine we knew we should have 
to fight through at this late season. Little troubles, of 
course, must always be expected, else these blacks would 
not be true negroes. Sheikh Said now reported it quite 
impossible to buy anything at a moderate rate; for, as I 
was a “ big man,” I ought to “pay a big price ;” and my 
men had all been obliged to fight in the bazaar before 
they could get even tobacco at the same rate as other men, 
because they were the servants of the big man, who could 
afford to give higher wages than any one else. The Hot- 
tentots, too, began to fall sick, which my Wangtiana 
laughingly attributed to want of grog to keep their spirits 
up, as these little creatures, the “ Tots,” had frequently at 
Zanzibar, after heavy potations, boasted to the more sober 
free men, that they “were strong, because they could stand 
plenty drink.” The first step now taken was to pitch 
camp under large shady mango-trees, and to instruct every 
man in his particular duty. At the same time, the Wan- 
gtiana, who had carbines, were obliged to be drilled in 
their use and formed into companies, with captains of ten, 
headed by General Baraka, who was made commander- 
in-chief. 

On the 30th September, as things were looking more 
Bagamoyoto Orderly, I sent forward half of the property, 
Cees and all the men I had then collected, to 
Ugéni, a shamba, or garden, two miles off; and on the 
2d October, after settling with Ladha for my “ African 
- money,”* as my pagazis were completed to a hundred and 
one, we wished Rigby adieu, and all assembled together 
at Ugéni, which resembles the richest“parts of Bengal. 

* See Appendix B. 


16 UZARAMO. [1860. 


CHAPTER II. 


*. 


UZARAMO. 


THE NATURE OF THE COUNTRY —THE ORDER OF MARCH—THE 
BEGINNING OF OUR TAXATION — SULTAN LION'S CLAW, AND 
SULTAN MONKEY'S TAIL-—THE KINGANI—JEALOUSIES AND DIF- 
FICULTIES IN THE CAMP—THE MURDERER OF M. MAIZAN. 


WE were now in U-zi-Ramo, which may mean the coun- 
try of Ramo, though I have never found any natives who 
could enlighten me on the 
derivation of this obviously 
triple word. The extent of 
the country, roughly speak- 
ing, stretches from the coast 
to the junction or bifurcation 
of the Kingani and its upper 
branch the M géta river, west- 
wards; and from the Kin- 
+ gani, north, to the : Litfigi 
river, south ; though in the 
southern portions several 
subtribes have encroached 
upon the lands. There are 
no hills in Uzaramo; but 
the land in the central line, 
formed like a ridge between the two rivers, furrow fashion, 
consists of slightly elevated flats and terraces, which, in the 


Oor.] THE COUNTRY AND ITS INHABITANTS. LY: 


rainy season, throw off their surplus waters to the north 
and south by nullahs into these rivers. The country is 
uniformly well covered with trees and large grasses, which, 
in the rainy season, are too thick, tall, and green to be 
pleasant ; though in the dry season, after the grasses have 
been burnt, it is agreeable enough, though not pretty, 
owing to the flatness of the land. The villages are not 
large or numerous, but widely spread, consisting generally 
of conical grass huts, while others are gable-ended, after 
the coast-fashion—a small collection of ten or twenty com- 
prising one village. Over these villages certain headmen, 
titled Phanzé, hold jurisdiction, who take black-mail from 
travellers with high presumption when they can. Gene- 
rally speaking, they live upon the coast, and call them- 
selves Diwans, headsmen, and subjects of the Sultan 
Majid; but they no sooner hear of the march of a cara- 
van than they transpose their position, become sultans in 
their own right, and levy taxes accordingly. 

The Wazaramo are strictly agriculturists; they have 
no cows, and but few goats. They are of low stature and 


Wazaramo, People of Uzaramo. 


thick set, and their nature tends to the boisterous. Ex- 
pert slave-hunters, they mostly clothe themselves by the 
| B 


18 UZARAMO. [1860. 


sale of their victims on the coast, though they do business 
by the sale of goats and grain as well. Nowhere in the 
interior are natives so well clad as these creatures. In 
dressing up their hair, and otherwise smearing their bodies 
with ochreish clay, they are great dandies. They always 
keep their bows and arrows, which form their national 
arm, in excellent order, the latter well poisoned, and 
carried in quivers nicely carved. To intimidate a caravan 
and extort a hongo or tax, I have seen them drawn out 
in line as if prepared for battle; but a few soft words 
were found sufficient to make them all withdraw and 
settle the matter at issue by arbjtration in some appointed 
place. A few men without property can cross their lands 
fearlessly, though a single individual with property would 
stand no chance, for they are insatiable thieves. But 
little is seen of these people on the journey, as the chiefs 
take their taxes by deputy, partly out of pride, and partly 
because they think they can extort more by keeping in 
the mysterious distance, At the same time, the caravan 
prefers camping in the jungles beyond the villages to 
mingling with the inhabitants, where rows might be 
engendered. We sometimes noticed Albinos, with grey- 
ish-blue eyes and light straw-coloured hair. Not unfre- 
quently we would pass on the track-side small heaps of 
white ashes, with a calcined bone or two among them. 
These, we were told, were the relics of burnt witches. The 
caravan track we had now to travel on leads along the 
right bank of the Kingani valley, overlooking Uzégiira, 
which, corresponding with Uzaramo, only on the other 
side of the Kingani, extends northwards to the Pangani 
river, and is intersected in the centre by the Wami river, 
of which more hereafter. - 
Starting on a march with a large mixed caravan, con- 
sisting of 1 corporal and 9 privates, Hotten- 
tots—1 jemadar and 25 privates, Beltichs—1 
Arab Cafila Bashi and 75 freed slaves—1 kirangozi, or 


To Bomani, 3d. 


Oct. ] DESERTERS—ORDER OF MARCH. 19 


leader, and 100 negro porters—12 mules untrained, 3 
donkeys, and 22 goats—one could hardly expect to find 
everybody in his place at the proper time for breaking 
ground ; but, at the same time, it could hardly be expected 
that ten men, who had actually received their bounty- 
money, and had sworn fidelity, should give one the slip 
the very first day. Such, however, was the case. Ten 
out of the thirty-six given by the Sultan ran away, because 
they feared that the white men, whom they believed to be 
cannibals, were only taking them into the interior to eat 
them ; and one pagazi, more honest than the freed men, 
deposited his pay upon the ground, and ran away too. Go 
we must, however; for one desertion is sure to lead to 
more; and go we did. Our procession was in this fashion: 
The kirangozi, with a load on his shoulder, led the way, 
flag in hand, followed by the pagazis carrying spears or 
bows and arrows in their hands, and bearing their share 
of the baggage in the shape either of bolster-shaped loads 
of cloth and beads covered with matting, each tied into 
the fork of a three-pronged stick, or else coils of brass or 
copper wire tied in even weights to each end of sticks 
which they laid on the shoulder ; then helter-skelter came 
the Wangitana, carrying carbines in their hands, and boxes, 
bundles, tents, cooking-pots—all the miscellaneous pro- 
perty—on their heads; next the Hottentots, dragging the 
refractory mules laden with ammunition-boxes, but very 
lightly, to save the animals for the future; and, finally, 
Sheikh Said and the Beltich escort; while the goats, sick 
women, and stragglers, brought up the rear. Fr om first 
to last, some of the sick Hottentots rode the hospital don- 
keys, allowing the negroes to tug their animals; for the 
smallest ailment threw them broadcast on their backs. 

In a little while we cleared from the rich gardens, mango 
clumps, and cocoa-nut trees, which characterise the fertile 
coast-line. After traversing fields of grass well clothed 
with green trees, we arrived at the little settlement of 


20 UZARAMO. [1860. . 


Bomani, where camp was formed, and everybody fairly ap- 
pointed to his place. The process of camp-forming would 
be thus: Sheikh Said, with Bombay under him, issues 
cloths to the men for rations at the rate of one-fourth 
load a-day (about 15 Ib.) amongst 165; the Hottentots 
cook our dinners and their own, or else lie rolling on the 
ground overcome by fatigue ; the Beltichs are supposed to 
guard the camp, but prefer gossip and brightening their 
arms. Some men aré told off to look after the mules, 
donkeys, and goats, whilst out grazing; the rest have to 
pack the kit, pitch our tents, cut boughs for huts and for 
fencing in the camp—a thing rarely done, by the by. 
After cooking, when the night has set in, the everlasting 
dance begins, attended with clapping of hands and jing- 
ling small bells strapped to the legs—the whole being — 
accompanied by a constant repetition of senseless words, 
which stand in place of the song to the negroes ; for song 
they have none, being mentally incapacitated for musical 
composition, though as timists they are not to be surpassed. 

What remains to be told is the daily occupation of 
Captain Grant, myself, and our private servants. Begin- 
ning at the foot: Rahan, a very peppery little negro, who 
had served in a British man-of-war at the taking of 
Rangoon, was my valet; and Baraka, who had been 
trained much in the same manner, but had seen engage- 
ments at Multan, was Captain Grant’s. They both knew 
Hindtstani; but while Rahan’s services at sea had been 
short, Baraka had served nearly all his life with English- 
men—was the smartest and most intelligent negro I ever 
saw—was invaluable to Colonel Rigby as a detector of 
slave-traders, and enjoyed his confidence completely—so 
much so, that he said, on parting with him, that he did 
“not know where he should be able to find another man 
to fill his post. These two men had now charge of our 
tents and personal kit, while Baraka was considered the 
general of the Wangtiana forces, and Rahan a captain of ten. 


Oct. ] PERSONAL OCCUPATIONS. 21 


My first occupation was to map the country. This is 
done by timing the rate of march with a watch, taking 
compass-bearings along the road, or on any conspicuous 
marks—as, for instance, hills off it—and by noting the 
watershed —in short, all topographical objects. On 
arrival in camp every day came the ascertaining, by boil- 
ing a thermometer, of the altitude of the station above the 
sea-level ; of the latitude of the station by the meridian 
altitude of a star taken with a sextant; and of the com- 
pass variation by azimuth. Occasionally there was the 
fixing of certain crucial stations, at intervals of sixty miles 
or so, by lunar observations, or distances of the moon 
either from the sun or from certain given stars, for deter- 
mining the longitude, by which the original-timed course 
can be drawn out with certainty on the map by proportion. 
Should a date be lost, you can always discover it by tak- 
ing a lunar distance and comparing it with the Nautical 
Almanac, by noting the time when a star passes the 
meridian if your watch is right, or by observing the phases 
of the moon, or her rising or setting, as compared with 
the Nautical Almanac. ‘The rest of my work, besides 
sketching and keeping a diary, which was the most trouble- 
some of all, consisted in making geological and zoological 
collections. With Captain Grant rested the botanical 
collections and thermometrical registers. He also boiled 
one cf the thermometers, kept the rain-gauge, and under- 
took the photography ; but after a time I sent the instru- 
ments back, considering this work too severe for the 
climate, and he tried instead sketching with water- 
colours—the results of which form the chief part of the 
illustrations in this book. The rest of our day went in 
breakfasting after the march was over—a pipe, to prepare 
us for rummaging the fields and villages to discover their 
contents for scientific purposes—dinner close to sunset, 
and tea and pipe before turning in at night. 

A short stage brought us to Ikambtirti, included in the 


/ ; : “ 
eo, & Le 


29 UZARAMO. [1860. 


district of Nzasa, where there is another small village 
presided over by Phanzé Khombé la Simba, 
meaning Claw of Lion. He, immediately 
after our arrival, sent us a present of a basket of rice, 
yalue one dollar, of course expecting a return—for abso- 
lute generosity is a thing unknown to the negro. Not 
being aware of the value of the offering, I simply re- 
quested the Sheikh to give him four yards of American 
sheeting, and thought-no more about the matter, until 
presently I found the cloth returned. The “Sultan” could 
not think of receiving such a paltry present from me, when 
on the former journey he got so much; if he showed this 
cloth at home, nobody would believe him, but would say 
he took much more and concealed it from his family, 
wishing to keep all his goods to himself. I answered that 
my footing in the country had been paid for on the last 
journey, and unless he would accept me as any other com- 
mon traveller, he had better walk away; but the little 
Sheikh, a timid, though very gentlemanly creature, know- 
ing the man, and dreading the consequences of too high a 
tone, pleaded for him, and proposed as a fitting hongo, 
one dubtiani, one sahari, and eight yards merikani,* as the 
American sheeting is called here. This was pressed by the 
jemadar, and acceded to by myself, as the very utmost I 
could afford. Lion’s Claw, however, would not accept it ; 
it was too far below the mark of what he got last time. 
He therefore returned the cloths to the Sheikh, as he could 
get no hearing from myself, and retreated in high dud- 
geon, threatening the caravan with a view of his terrible 
presence on the morrow. Meanwhile the little Sheikh, 
who always carried a sword fully two-thirds the length of 
himself, commenced casting bullets for his double-barrelled 
rifle, ordered the Wangtiana to load their guns, and came 
wheedling up to me for one more cloth, as it was no use 
hazarding the expedition’s safety for four yards of cloth. 


To Ikambtri, 
Ath, 


* See Appendix B. 


Oct. | NATIVE EXTORTIONS. 23 


This is a fair specimen of tax-gathering, within twelve 
miles of the coast, by a native who claims the protection 
of Zanzibar. We shall soon see what they are further on. 
The result of experience is, that, ardent as the traveller is 
to see the interior of Africa, no sooner has he dealings with 
the natives, than his whole thoughts tend to discovering 
some road where he won’t be molested, or a short cut, but 
long march, to get over the ground. 

Quite undisturbed, we packed and marched as usual, 
and soon passed Nzasa close to the river, 
which is only indicated by a line of trees 
running through a rich alluvial valley. We camped at 
the little settlement of Kizoto, inhospitably presided over 
by Phanzé Mikia ya Nyani, or Monkey’s Tail, who no 
sooner heard of our arrival than he sent a demand for his 
“rights.” One dubtiani was issued, with orders that no 
one need approach me again, unless he wanted to smell 
my powder. ‘Two taxes in five miles was a thing unheard 
of; and I heard no more about the matter, until Bombay 
in the evening told me how Sheikh Said, fearing awkward 
consequences, had settled to give two dubitiani, one being 
taken from his own store. Lion’s Claw also turned up 
again, getting his cloths of yesterday—one more being 
added from the Sheikh’s stores—and he was then advised. 
to go off quietly, as 1 was a fire-eater whom nobody dared 
approach after my orders had been issued. ‘This was our 
third march in Uzaramo; we had scarcely seen a man of 
the country, and had no excessive desire to do so. 

Deflecting from the serpentine course of the Kingani a 
To Kiranga little, we crossed a small bitter rivulet, and 
epee: GU. entered on the elevated cultivation of Kiranga 
Ranga, under Phanzé Mkungit-paré, a very mild man, 
who, wishing to give no offence, begged for a trifling 
present. He came in person, and his manner having 
pleased us, I gave him one sahari, four yards merikani, and 
eight yards kiniki, which pleased our friend so much that 


To Kizoto, 5th. 


4 UZARAMO. [1860. 


he begged us to consider his estate our own, even to the 
extent of administering his justice, should any Mzaramo 
be detected stealing from us. Our target-practice, whilst 
instructing the men, astonished him not a little, and pro- 
duced an exclamation that, with so many guns, we need 
fear nothing, go where we would. From this place a good 
view is obtained of Uzégitra. Beyond the flat alluvial 
valley of the Kingani, seven to eight miles broad, the 
land rises suddenly tova table-land of no great height, on 
which trees grow in profusion. In fact it appeared, as 
far as the eye could reach, the very counterpart of that 
where we stood, with the exception of a small hill, very 
distant, called Phongté. 

A very welcome packet of quinine and other medicines 
reached us here from Rigby, who, hearing our complaints 
that the Hottentots could only be kept alive by daily 
potions of brandy and quinine, feared our supplies were 
not enough, and sent us more. : 

We could not get the Sultan’s men to chum with the 
Wangtiana proper; they were shy, like wild animals— 
built their huts by themselves—and ate and talked by 
themselves, for they felt. themselves inferiors; and I had to 
nominate one of their number to be their immediate chief, 
answerable for the actions of the whole. Being in the 
position of “boots” to the camp, the tending of goats fell 
to their lot. Three goats were missing this evening, 
which the goatherds could not account for, nor any of 
their men. Suspecting that they were hidden for a private 
feast, I told their chief to inquire farther, and report. The 
upshot was, that the man was thrashed for intermeddling, 
and came back only with his scars. This was a nice sort 
of insubordination, which of course could not be endured. 
The goatherd was pinioned and brought to trial, for the 
double offence of losing the goats and rough-handling his 
chief. The tricking scoundrel—on quietly saying he could 
not be answerable for other men’s actions if they stole 


Ocr. | AN AFRICAN STRIKE. 25 


goats, and he could not recognise a man as his chief 
whom the Sheikh, merely by a whim of his own, thought 
proper to appoint—was condemned to be tied up for the 
night, with the prospect of a flogging in the morning. 
Seeing his fate, the cunning vagabond said, “ Now I do 
see it was by your orders the chief was appointed, and 
not by a whim of Sheikh Said’s; I will obey him for the 
future ;” and these words were hardly pronounced than 
the three missing goats rushed like magic into camp, 
nobody of course knowing where they came from. 

Skirting along the margin of the rising ground over- 
To Thitmba looking the river, through thick woods, clear- 
ei ed in places for cultivation, we arrived at 
Thttmba Lhéré. The chief here took a hongo of three yards 
merikani-and two yards kiniki without much fuss, for he 
_had no power. The pagazis struck, and said they would 
not move from this unless I gave them one fundo or ten 
necklaces of beads each daily, in lieu of rations, as they 
were promised by Ladha on the coast that I would do so 
as soon as they had made four marches. This was an ob- 
vious invention, concocted to try my generosity, for I had 
given the kirangozi a goat, which is customary, to “make 
the journey prosperous ”—had suspended a dollar to his 
neck in recognition of his office, and given him four yards 
merikani, that he might have a grand feast with his 
brothers ; while neither the Sheikh, myself, nor any one 
else in the camp, had heard of such a compact. With 
high words the matter dropped, African fashion. 

The pagazis would not start at the appointed time, hop- 
ing to enforce their demands of last night ; 
so we took the lead and started, followed by 
the Wangttana. Seeing this, the pagazis cried out with 
one accord: “The master is gone, leaving the responsi- 
bility of his property in our hands; let us follow, let us 
follow, for verily he is our father ;” and all came hurrying 
after us. Here the river, again making a bend, is lost to 


To Mihtigiié, 
8th. , 


26 UZARAMO. [1860. 


sight, and we marched through large woods and cultivated 
fields to Mithtgtié, observing, as we passed along, the 
ochreish colour of the earth, and numerous pits which the 
copal-diggers had made searching for their much-valued 
eum. A ‘large coast-bound caravan, carrying ivory tusks 
a double-toned bells suspended to them, ting-tonging 
as they moved along, was met on the way; and as some 
of the pagazis composing it were men who had formerly 
taken me to the Victoria N’yanza, warm recognitions 
passed between us. The water found here turned our 
brandy and tea as black as ink. The chief, being a 
man of small pretensions, took only one sahari and four 
yards merikani. 

Instead of going on to the next village we halted in 
To Muhonyérs, this jungly place for the day, that I might 
ae comply with the desire of the Royal Geogra- 
phical Society to inspect Mthonyéra, and report if there 
were really any indications of a “raised sea-beach” there, 
such as their maps indicate. An inspection brought me to 
the conclusion that no mind but one prone to discovering 
sea-beaches in the most unlikely places could have sup- 
posed for a moment that one existed here. The form and 
appearance of the land are the same as we have seen 
everywhere since leaving Bomani—a low plateau sub- 
tended by a bank cut down by the Kingani river, and 
nothing more. There are no pebbles; the soil is rich 
reddish loam, well covered with trees, bush, and grass, in 
which some pigs and antelopes are found. From the top 
of this embankment we gain the first sight of the East 
Coast Range, due west of us, represented by the high ele- 
phant’s-back hill, Mkambakt, in Usagara, which, joining 
Uragitiri, stretches northwards across the Pangani river to 
Ustimbara and the Kilimandjaro, and southwards, with a 
westerly deflection, across the Litfiji to Southern N’yassa. 
What course the range takes beyond those two extremes, 
the rest of the world knows as well as I. Another con- 


Oct. ] LOSS OF THE GOATS. 27 


spicuous landmark here is Kidtinda (the little hill), which 
is the southernmost point of a low chain of hills, also tend- 
ing northwards, and representing an advance-guard to the 
higher East Coast Range in its rear. At night, as we had 
no local “ sultans” to torment us, eight more men of Sultan 
Majid’s donation ran away, and, adding injury to injury, 
took with them all our goats, fifteen in number. This 
was a sad loss. We could keep ourselves on guinea-fowls 
or green pigeons, doves, &c.; but the Hottentots wanted 
nourishment much more than ourselves, and as their din- 
ners always consisted of what we left, “short-commons” 
was the fate in store for them. The Wangiana, instead 
of regarding these poor creatures as soldiers, treated them 
like children ; and once, as a diminutive Tot—the common 
name they go by—was exerting himself to lift his pack 
and place it on his mule, a fine Herculean Mgtiana stepped 
up behind, grasped Tot, pack and all, m his muscular 
arms, lifted the whole over his head, paraded the Tot 
about, struggling for release, and put him down amidst 
the laughter of the camp, then saddled his mule and 
patted him on the back. 

After sending a party of Beltich to track down the 
deserters and goats, in which they were not 
successful, we passed through the village of 
Sagéséra, and camped one mile beyond, close to the river. 
Phanzé Kirongo (which means Mr Pit) here paid us his 
respects, with a presentation of rice. In return he re- 
ceived four yards merikani and one dubtiani, which Bom- 
bay settled, as the little Sheikh, ever done by the sultans, 
pleaded indisposition, to avoid the double fire he was 
always subjected to on these occasions, by the sultans 
grasping on the one side, and my resisting on the other ; 
for I relied on my strength, and thought it very inad- 
visable to be generous with my cloth to the prejudice of 
future travellers, by decreasing the value of merchandise, 
and increasing proportionately the expectations of these 


To Sagéséra, 
10th. 


’ 


28 ; UZARAMO. ; [1860. 


negro chiefs. Fiom the top of the bank bordering on the 
valley, a good view was obtainable of the Uragtirt hills, 
and the top of a very distant cone to its northward ; but 
I could see no signs of any river joining the Kingani on 
its left, though on the former expedition I heard that the 
Mitikondoktia river, which was met with in Usagara, 
joined the Kingani close to Sagéséra, and actually formed 
its largest head branch. Neither could Mr Pit inform me 
what became of the-Mtkondoktia, as the Wazaramo are 
not given to travelling. He had heard of it from the 
traders, but only knew himself of one river beside the 
Kingani. It was called Wami in Uzégtira, and mouths 
at Utondtié, between the ports of Whindi and Saadani. 
To try and check the desertions of Sultan Majid’s men, I 
advised—ordering was of no use—that their camp should 
be broken up, and they should be amalgamated with the 
Wangitiana ; but it was found that the two would not mix. 
In fact, the whole native camp consisted of so many clubs 
of two, four, six, or ten men, who originally belonged to 
one village or one master, or were united by some other 
family tie which they preferred keeping intact; so they 
cooked together, ate together, slept together, and some- 
times mutinied together. The amalgamation having 


failed, I wrote some emancipation tickets, called the Sul- 


tan’s men all up together, selected the best, gave them 
these tickets, announced that their pay and all rewards 
would be placed for the future on the same conditions 
as those of the Wangttana, and as soon as I saw any 
signs of improvement in the rest, they would all be 
treated in the same manner ; but should they desert, they 
would find my arm long enough to arrest them on the 
coast and put them into prison. 

During this march we crossed three deep nullahs which 
To Maktitaniro, Crain the Uzaramo plateau, and arrived at 
Le the Maktitaniro, or junction of this line with 
those of Mboamaji and Kondiichi, which traverse central 


Oct. | THE MURDER OF M. MAIZAN. 29 


Uzaramo, and which, on my former return journey, I went 
down. The gum-copal diggings here cease. The Diim 
palm is left behind; the large rich green-leaved trees of 
_ the low plateau give place to the mimosa ; and now, hay- 
ing ascended the greater decline of the Kingani river, 
instead of being confined by a bank, we found ourselves on 
flat open park-land, where antelopes roam at large, buffalo 
and zebra are sometimes met with, and guinea-fowl are 
numerous. ‘The water for the camp is found in the river, 
but supplies of grain come from the village of Kipora 
farther on. 

A march through the park took us to a camp by a pond, 
To Matamombo, from which, by crossing the Kingani, rice and 
Lash. provisions for the men were obtained on the - 
opposite bank. One can seldom afford to follow wild 
animals on the line of march, otherwise we might have 
bagged some antelopes to-day, which, scared by the in- 
terminable singing, shouting, bell-jingling, horn-blowing, 
and other such merry noises of the moving caravan, could 
be seen disappearing in the distance. 

Leaving the park, we now entered the richest part of 
ToDégé la Mhora, Uzaramo, affording crops as fine as any part 
ir of India. Here it was, in the district of Dégé 
la Mhora, that the first expedition to this country, guided 
by a Frenchman, M. Maizan, came to a fatal termination, 
that gentleman having been barbarously murdered by 
the sub-chief Hembé. The cause of the affair was dis- 
tinctly explained to me by Hembé himself, who, with his 
cousin Dartinga, came to call upon me, presuming, as he 
was not maltreated by the last expedition, that the matter 
would now be forgotten. The two men were very great 
friends of the little Sheikh, and as a present was expected, 
which I should have to pay, we all talked cheerfully and 
confidentially, bringing in the fate of Maizan for no other 
reason than to satisfy curiosity. Hembé, who lives in the 
centre of an almost impenetrable thicket, confessed that 


30 UZARAMO. [1860. 


he was the murderer, but said the fault did not rest with 
him, as he merely carried out the instructions of his father, 
Mztingéra, who, a Diwan on the coast, sent him a letter 
directing his actions. Thus it is proved that the plot 
against Maizan was concocted on the coast by the Arab 
merchants—most likely from the same motive which has 
induced one rival merchant to kill another as the best 
means of checking rivalry or competition. When Arabs 
—and they are the only class of people who would do such 
a deed—found a European going into the very middle of 
their secret trading-places, where such large profits were 
to be obtained, they would never suppose that the scien- 
tific Maizan went for any other purpose than to pry into 
their ivory stores, bring others into the field after him, 
and destroy their monopoly, The Sultan of Zanzibar, in 
those days, was our old ally Said Said, commonly called 
the Emam of Muscat; and our Consul, Colonel Hamerton, 
had been M. Maizan’s host as long as he lived upon the 
coast. Both the Emam and Consul were desirous of seeing 
the country surveyed, and did everything in their power 
to assist Maizan, the former even appointing the Indian 
Misa to conduct him safely as far as Unyamitézi; but their 
power was not found sufficient to damp the raging fire of 
jealousy in the ivory-trader’s heart. Mtisa commenced the 
journey with Maizan, and they travelled together a march 
or two, when one of Maizan’s domestic establishment fell 
sick and stopped his progress. Mtisa remained with him ~ 
eight or ten days, to his own loss in trade and expense in 
keeping up a large establishment, and then they parted 
by mutual consent, Maizan thinking himself quite strong 
enough to take care of himself. This separation was, I 
believe, poor Maizan’s death-blow. His power, on the 
Emam’s side, went with Miisa’s going, and left the Arabs 
free to carry out their wicked wills. 
The presents I had to give here were one sahari and 


Oct. } GEOLOGY OF THE COUNTRY. 31 


eight yards merikani to Hembé, and the same to Daritinga, 
for which they gave a return in grain. 

Still following close to the river—which, unfortunately, 
is so enshrouded with thick bush that we 
could seldom see it—a few of the last villages 
in Uzaramo were passed. Here antelopes reappear amongst 
the tall mimosa, but we let them alone in prosecution of 
the survey, and finally encamped opposite the little hill 
of Kidtinda, which, lying on the left bank of the Kingani, 
stretches north, a little east, into Uzégitra. The hill crops 
out through pisolitic limestone, in which marine fossils 
were observable. It would be interesting to ascertain 
whether this lime formation extends down the east coast 
of Africa from the Somali country, where also, on my 
first expedition, I found marine shells in the limestone, 
especially as a vast continuous band of limestone is known 
to extend from the Tagus, through Egypt and the Somali 
country, to the Burrumputra. To obtain food it was 
necessary here to ferry the river and purchase from the 
Wazaramo, who, from fear of the passing caravans, had 
left their own bank and formed a settlement immediately 
under this -pretty little hill—rendered all the more en-. 
chanting to our eyes, as it was the first we had met 
since leaving the sea-coast. The Diwan, or head man, 
was a very civil creature; he presented us freely with 
two fine goats—a thing at that time we were very much 
in want of—and took, in return, without any comments, 
one dubtiani and eight yards merikani. 

The next day, as we had no further need of our Beltich 
escort, a halt was made to enable me to draw 
up a “ Progress Report,” and pack all the spe- 
cimens of natural history collected on the way, for the Royal 
Geographical Society. Captain Grant, taking advantage 
of the spare time, killed for the larder two buck antelopes,* 


To Kidiinda, 14th. 


Halt, 15th. 


* See Game List, Appendix C. 


32 UZARAMO. [ 1860. 


and the Tots brought in, in high excited triumph, a 
famous pig. 

This march, which declines from the Kingani a little, 
To the Mgéta leads through rolling, jungly ground, full of 
oo game, to the tributary stream Mgéta. It is 
fordable in the dry season, but has to be bridged by 
throwing a tree across it in the wet one. Rising in the 
Usagara hills to the west of the hog-backed Mkambakt, 
this branch intersects: the province of Ukhtiti in the 
centre, and circles round until it unites with the Kingani 
about four miles north of the ford. Where the Kingani 
itself rises, I never could find out; though I have heard 
that its source lies in a gurgling spring on the eastern 
face of the Mkambakt,, by which account the Mgéta is 
made the longer branch of the two. 


Ocr. | USAGARA, 55 


CELA. Fete ERT LL 
USAGARA. 


NATURE OF THE COUNTRY—RESUMPTION OF THE MARCH—A 
HUNT — BOMBAY AND BARAKA—THE SLAVE-HUNTERS — THE 
IVORY-MERCHANTS—COLLECTION OF NATURAL-HISTORY SPECI- 
MENS—A FRIGHTENED VILLAGE—TRACKING A MULE. 


Unver U-Sagara, or, as it might be interpreted, U-sa- 
Gara—country of Gara—is included all the country lying 
between the bifurcation of the 
Kingani and Mgéta rivers east, 
and Ugogo, the first country 
on the interior plateau west,— 
a distance of a hundred miles. 
On the north it is bounded 
by the Mukondoktia, or upper 
course of the Wami river, and _ 
on the south by the Rtiaha, or - 
northern great branch of the ”/.; 
Lifiji river. It forms a link of |? ~ 
the great East Coast Range ; 
but though it is generally com- 
prehended under the single ee ya! 
name Usagara, many sub-tribes ~~ srsagara, or Native of Veagar 
occupy and apply their own 

names to portions of it; as, for instance, the people 

Cc 


84 USAGARA. [1860.° 


on whose ground we now stood at the foot of the hills, 
are Wa-Khiitt, and their possessions consequently are 
U-Khittti, which is by far the best producing land 
hitherto alluded to since leaving the sea-coast line. Our 
ascent by the river, though quite imperceptible to the 
eye, has been 500 feet. From this level the range be- 
fore us rises in some places to 5000 or 6000 feet, not as 
one grand mountain, but in two detached lines, lying at 
an angle of 45 degrees from N.E. to S.W., and separated 
one from the other by elevated valleys, tables, and crab- 
claw spurs of hill which incline towards the flanking 
rivers. The whole having been thrown up by volcanic 
action, is based on a strong foundation of granite and 
other igneous rocks, which are exposed in many places in 
the shape of massive blocks; otherwise the hill-range is 
covered in the upper part with sandstone, and in the 
bottoms with alluvial clay: This is the superficial confi- 
guration of the land as it strikes the eye; but, knowing 
the elevation of the interior plateau to be only 2500 feet 
above the sea immediately on the western flank of these 
hills, whilst the breadth of the chain is 100 miles, the 
mean slope or incline of the basal surface must be on a 
gradual rise of twenty feet per mile. The hill tops and 
sides, where not cultivated, are well covered with bush 
and small trees, amongst which the bamboo is conspicu- 
ous; whilst the bottoms, having a soil deeper and richer, 
produce fine large fig-trees of exceeding beauty, the huge 
calabash, and a variety of other trees. Here, in certain 
places where water is obtainable throughout the year, and 
wars, or slave-hunts more properly speaking, do not dis- 
turb the industry of the people, cultivation thrives surpris- 
ingly; but such a boon is rarely granted them. It is in 
consequence of these constantly-recurring troubles that the 
majority of the Wasagara villages are built on hill-spurs, 
_ where the people can the better resist attack, or, failing, 
disperse and hide: effectually. The normal habitation is 


Oct. ] CHARACTER OF THE PEOPLE. 35 


the small conical hut of grass. These compose villages, 
varying in number according to the influence of their 
head men. There are, however, a few mud villages on the 
table-lands, each built in a large irregular square of cham- 
bers with a hollow yard in the centre, known as tembé. 

As to the people of these uplands, poor, meagre-looking 
wretches, they contrast unfavourably with the lowlanders 
on both sides of them. Dingy in colour, spiritless, shy, 
and timid, they invite attack in a country where every 
human being has a market value, and are little seen by 
the passing caravan. In habits they are semi-pastoral 
agriculturists, and would be useful members of society 
were they left alone to cultivate their own possessions, 
rich and beautiful by nature, but poor and desolate by 
force of circumstance. Some of the men can afford a 
cloth, but the greater part wear an article which I can 
only describe as a grass kilt. In one or two places 
throughout the passage of these hills a caravan may be 
_ taxed, but if so, only to a small amount; the villagers 
more frequently fly to the hill-tops as soon as the noise of 
the advancing caravan is heard, and no persuasions will 
bring them down again, so much ground have they, from 
previous experience, to fear treachery. It is such sad 
sights, and the obyious want of peace and prosperity, 
that weary the traveller, and make him ever think of 
pushing on to his journey’s end from the instant he 
enters Africa until he quits the country. 

Knowing by old experience that the beautiful green 
park in the fork of these rivers abounded in 
game of great variety and in vast herds, 
where no men are ever seen except some savage hunters 
sitting in the trees with poisoned arrows, or watching 
their snares and pitfalls, I had all along determined on a 
hunt myself, to feed and cheer the men, and also to collect 
some specimens for the home museums. In the first object 
we succeeded well, as “ the bags” we made counted two 


Halt, 17th and 
18th. 


36 USAGARA. [1860. 


brindled .gnti, four water-boc, one pallah-boc, and one 
pig,—enough to feed abundantly the whole camp round. 
The feast was all the better relished as the men knew 
well that no Arab master would have given them what 
he could sell; for if a slave shot game, the animals would 
be the master’s, to be sold bit by bit among the porters, 
and compensated from the proceeds of their pay. In the 
variety and number of our game we were disappointed, 
partly because so many wounded got away, and partly 
because we could not find what we knew the park to 
contain, in addition to what we killed—namely, elephants, — 
rhinoceros, giraffes, buffaloes, zebra, and many varieties 
of antelopes, besides lions and hyenas. In fact, “the 
park,” as well as all the adjacent land at the foot of the 
hills, is worth thinking of, with a view to a sporting 
tour as well as scientific investigation. 

A circumstance arose here, which, insignificant though 
it appeared, is worth noting, to show how careful one 
must be in understandmg and dealing with negro ser- 
vants. Quite unaccountably to myself, the general of — 
my Wangtana, Baraka, after showing much discontent 
with his position as head of Captain Grant’s establish- 
ment, became so insolent, that it was necessary to displace 
him, and leave him nothing to do but look after the men. 
This promoted Frij, who enjoyed his rise as much as 
Baraka, if his profession was to be believed, enjoyed his 
removal from that office. Though he spoke in this man- 
ner, still I knew that there was something rankling in his 
mind which depressed his spirits as long as he remained 
with us, though what it was I could not comprehend, nor 
did I fully understand it till months afterwards. It was 
ambition, which was fast making a fiend of him; and 
had I known it, he would, and with great advantage too, 
have been dismissed upon the spot. The facts were 
these: He was exceedingly clever, and he knew it. His 
command over men was surprising. At Zanzibar he was 


Oct. } AMBITION AND JEALOUSY. 37 


the Consuks right-hand man: he ranked above Bombay 
in the consular boat’s crew, and became a terror even to 
the Banyans who kept slaves. He seemed, in fact, in his 
own opinion, to have imbibed all the power of the British 
Consul who had instructed him. Such a man was an 
element of discord in our peaceful caravan. He was far 
too big-minded for the sphere which he occupied; and 
my surprise now is that he ever took service, knowing 
what he should, at the time of enlistment, have expected, 
‘that no man would be degraded to make room for him. 
But this was evidently what he had expected, though he 
dared not say it. He was jealous of Bombay, because he 
thought his position over the money department was 
superior to his own over the men; and he had seen 
Bombay, on one occasion, pay a tax in Uzaramo—a trans- 
action which would give him consequence with the native 
chiefs, Of Sheikh Said he was equally jealous, for a like 
reason ; and his jealousy increased the more that I found 
it necessary to censure the timidity of this otherwise 
worthy little man. Baraka thought, in his conceit, that 
he could have done all things better, and gained signal 
fame, had he been created chief. Perhaps he thought he 
had gained the first step towards this exalted rank, and 
hence his appearing very happy for the time. I could 
not see through so deep a scheme, and only hoped that 
he would shortly forget, in the changes of the marching 
life, those beautiful wives he had left behind him, which 
Bombay in his generosity tried to persuade me was the 
cause of his mental distraction. 

Our halt at the ford here was cut short by the increas- 
To Kirurt, 19% ing sickness of the Hottentots, and the pain- 
and 20th. ful fact that Captain Grant was seized with 


fever.* We had to change camp to the little village of 
z = 


. 


* It was such an attack as I had on my former journey; but while mine 
ceased to trouble me after the first year, his kept recurring every fortnight 
until the journey ended, 


38 USAGARA. [1860. 


' Kirtirti, where, as rice was grown—an article not to be 
procured again on this side of Unyamtiézi—we stopped a 
day to lay in supplies of this most valuable of all travelling 
food. Here I obtained the most consistent accounts of 
the river system which, within five days’ journey, trends 
through Uzégtira ; and I concluded, from what I heard, 
that there is no doubt of the Mikondoktia and Wami 
rivers being one and the same stream. My informants 
were the natives of thé settlement, and they all concurred 
in saying that the Kingani above the junction is called 
the Rift, meaning the parent stream. Beyond it, follow- 
ing under the line of the hills, at one day’s journey distant, 
there is a smaller river called Msongé. At an equal 
distance beyond it, another of the same size is known as 
Lingérengéri; and a fourth river is the Wami, which 
mouths in the sea at Utondtié, between the ports of 
Whindi and Saadani. In former years, the ivory-mer- 
chants, ever seeking for an easy road for their trade, and 
knowing they would have no hills to climb if they could 
only gain a clear passage by this river from the interior 
plateau to the sea, made friends with the native chiefs of 
Uzégiira, and succeeded in establishing it as a thorough- 
fare. Avarice, however, that fatal enemy to the negro 
chiefs, made them overreach themselves by exorbitant 
demands of taxes. Then followed contests forthe right 
of appropriating the taxes, and the whole ended in the 
closing of the road, which both parties were equally 
anxious to keep open for their mutual gain. This foolish 
disruption having at first only lasted for a while, the road 
was again opened and again closed, for the merchants 
wanted an easy passage, and the native chiefs desired 
cloths. But it was shut again; and now we heard of 
its being for a third time opened, with what success the 
future only can determine—for experience will not teach 
the negro, who thinks only for the moment. Had they 


Ocr. | EFFECTS OF NATIVE AVARICE. 39 


only sense to see, and patience to wait, the whole trade of 
the interior would inevitably pass through their country 
instead of Uzaramo ; and instead of being poor in cloths, 
they would be rich and well dressed like their neighbours. 
But the curse of Noah sticks to these his grandchildren 
by Ham, and no remedy that has yet been found will 
relieve them. They require a government like ours in 
India ; and without it, the slave-trade will wipe them off 
the face of the earth. 

Now leaving the open parks of pretty acacias, we 
To Dithimi, followed up the Mgazi branch of the Mgéta, 
Zit traversed large tree-jungles, where the tall 
palm is conspicuous, and drew up under the lumpy 
Mkambakt, to find a residence for the day. Here an 
Arab merchant, Khamis, bound for Zanzibar, obliged us 
by agreeing for a few dollars to convey our recent spoils 
in natural history to the coast. 

My plans for the present were to reach Zungoméro as 
soon as possible, as a few days’ halt would 
be required there to fix the longitude of the 
eastern flank of the East Coast Range by astronomical 
observation; but on ordering the morning’s march, the 
porters—too well fed and lazy—-thought our marching- 
rate much too severe, and resolutely refused to move. 
They ought to have made ten miles a-day, but preferred 
doing five. Argument was useless, and I was reluctant 
to apply the stick, as the Arabs would have done when 
they saw their porters trifling with their pockets. Deter- 
mining, however, not to be frustrated in this puerile 
manner, I ordered the bugler to sound the march, and 
started with the mules and coast-men, trusting to Sheikh 
and Baraka to bring on the Wanyamtiézi as soon as they 
could move them. The same day we crossed the Mgazi, 
where we found several Wakhititti spearing fish in the 


muddy hovers of its banks. 


To Hozti, 22d. 


40 USAGARA. [1860. 


We slept under a tree, and this morning found a com- 
fortable residence under the eaves of a capaci- 
ous hut. The Wanyamtézi porters next came 
in at their own time, and proved to us how little worth 
are orders in a land where every man, in his own opinion, 
is a lord, and no laws prevail. Zungoméro, bisected by 
the Mgéta, lies on flat ground, in a very pretty amphi- 
theatre of hills, 8. lat. 7° 26’ 53”, and E. long. 37° 36’ 45” 
It is extremely fertile,"and very populous, affording every- 
thing that man can wish, even to the cocoa and papwa 
fruits; but the slave-trade has almost depopulated it, and 
turned its once flourishing gardens into jungles. As I 
have already said, the people who possess these lands are 
cowardly by nature, and that is the reason why they are 


Zungoméro, 23d. 


Mkambaku Hill, viewed from Zungomero. 


so much oppressed. The Wastiahili, taking advantage of 
their timidity, flock here in numbers to live upon the 
fruits of their labours. The merchants on the coast, too, 
though prohibited by their Sultan from interfering with 
the natural course of trade, send their hungry slaves, as 
touters, to entice all approaching caravans to trade with 
their particular ports, authorising the touters to pay such 
premiums as may be necessary for the purpose. Where 


hal 


Oct. | MISCHIEFS OF A HALT, 41 


they came from we could not ascertain; but during our 
residénce, a large party of the Wastiahili marched past, 
bound for the coast, with one hundred head of cattle, fifty 
slaves in chains, and as many goats. Halts always end 
disastrously in Africa, giving men time for mischief ;— 
and here was an example of it. During the target-prac- 
tice, which was always instituted on such occasions to give 
confidence to our men, the little pepper-box Rahan, my 
head valet, challenged a comrade to a duel with carbines. 
Being stopped by those around him, he vented his wrath 
in terrible oaths, and swung about his arms, until his gun 
accidentally went off, and blew his middle finger off. 
Baraka next, with a kind of natural influence of affinity 
when a row is commenced, made himself so offensive to 
Bombay, as to send him running to me so agitated with ex- 
citement that I thought him drunk. He seized my hands, 
cried, and implored me to turn him off. What could this 
mean? I could not divine; neither could he explain, 
further than that he had come to a determination that I 
must send either him or Baraka to the right-about ; and 
his first idea was that he, and not Baraka, should be the 
victim. Baraka’s jealousy about his position had not 
struck me yet. I called them both together and asked 
what quarrel they had, but could not extract the truth. 
Baraka protested that he had never given, either by word 
or deed, the slightest cause of rupture; he only desired 
the prosperity of the march, and that peace should reign 
throughout the camp ; but Bombay was suspicious of him, 
and malignantly abused him, for what reason Baraka 
could not tell. When I spoke of this to Bombay, like a 
bird fascinated by the eye of a viper, he shrank before the 
slippery tongue of his opponent, and could only say, “No, 
Sahib—oh no, that is not it; you had better turn me off, 
for his tongue is so long, and mine so short, you never will 
believe me.” I tried to make them friends, hoping it was 
merely a passing ill-wind which would soon blow over ; 


42 USAGARA. [1860. 


but before long the two disputants were tonguing it again, 
and I distinctly heard Bombay ordering Baraka out of 
camp, as he could not keep from intermeddling, saying, 
which was true, he had invited him to join the expedition, 
that his knowledge of Hindttstani might be useful to us ; 
he was not wanted for any other purpose, and unless he 
was satisfied with doing that alone, we would get on much 
better without him. To this provocation Baraka mildly 
made the retort, “Pray don’t put yourself in a passion, 
nobody is hurting you ; it is all in your own heart, which 
is full of suspicions and jealousy without the slightest 
cause.” 

This complicated matters more than ever. I knew 
Bombay to be a generous, honest man, entitled by his 
former services to be in the position he was now holding 
as ftindi, or supervisor in the camp. Baraka, who never 
would have joined the expedition excepting through his 
invitation, was indebted to him for the rank he now en- 
joyed 
might have distinguished himself as a most useful accessory 
tothe camp. Again I called the two together, and begged 
them to act in harmony like brothers, noticing that there 
was no cause for entertaining jealousy on either side, as 
every order rested with myself to reward for merit or to 
punish. The relative position in the camp was like that of 
the senior officers in India, Bombay representing the Mulki 
lord, or Governor-General, and Baraka the Jungi lord, 
or Commander-in-Chief. To the influence of this dis- 
tinguished comparison they both gave way, acknowledging 
myself their judge, and both protesting that they wished to 
serve in peace and quietness for the benefit of the march. 

Zungoméro is a terminus or junction of two roads lead- 
ing to the interior—one, the northern, crossing over the 
Goma Pass, and trenching on the Mikondoktia river, and 
the other crossing over the Mabritki Pass, and edging on 
the Rtiaha river. They both unite again at Ugogi, the 


a command over seventy men, a duty in which he | 


Ocr. | DIFFICULTIES OF THE MARCH. 43 


western terminus on the present great Unyamtiézi line. 
On the former expedition I went by the northern line and 
returned by the southern, finding both equally easy, and, 
indeed, neither is worthy of special and permanent pre- 
ference. In fact, every season makes a difference in the 
supply of water and provisions; and with every year, 
owing to incessant wars, or rather slave-hunts, the habi- 
tations of the wretched inhabitants become constantly 
changed—eenerally speaking, for the worse. Our first 
and last object, therefore, as might be supposed, from 
knowing these circumstances, was to ascertain, before 
mounting the hill-range, which route would afford us the 
best facilities for a speedy march now. No one, however, 
could or would advise us. The whole country on ahead, 
especially Ugogo, was oppressed by drought and famine. 
To avoid this latter country, then, we selected the southern 
route, as by doing so it was hoped we might follow the 
course of the Rttaha river from Maroro to Usénga and 
Usanga, and thence strike across to Unyanyembé, sweep- 
ing clear of Ugogo. 

With this determination, after despatching a third set 
To Kirengié, Of specimens, consisting of large game ami- 
aa mals, birds, snakes, insects, land and fresh- 
water shells, and a few rock specimens, of which one was 
fossiliferous, we turned southwards, penetrating the forests 
which lie between the greater range and the little outlying 
one. At the foot of this is the Maji ya Whéta, a hot, deep- 
seated spring of fresh water, which bubbles up through 
many apertures in a large dome-shaped heap of soft lime— 
an accumulation obviously thrown up by the force of the 
spring, as the rocks on either side of it are of igneous 
character. Wearrived at the deserted village of Kirengité. 
This was not an easy go-ahead march, for the halt had 
disaffected both men and mules. Three of the former 
bolted, leaving their loads upon the ground; and on the 
line of march, one of the mules, a full-conditioned animal, 


44 USAGARA. [1860. 


gave up the ghost after an eighteen hours’ sickness. What _ 
his disease was I never pou ascertain ; but as all the 
remaining animals died afterwards much in the same 
manner, I may state for once and for all, that these 
attacks commenced with general swelling, at first on the 
face, then down the neck, along the belly and down the 
legs. It proved so obstinate that fire had no effect upon 
it; and although we .cut off the tails of some to relieve 
them by bleeding, stil they died. 

In former days Kirengiié was inhabited, and we reason- 
Halt, 28th. ably hoped to find some supplies for the 

jungly march before us. But we had calceu- 
lated without our host, for the slave-hunters had driven 
every vestige of humanity away; and now, as we were 
delayed by our three loads behind, there was nothing left 
but to send back and purchase more grain. Such was one 
of the many days frittered away in do-nothingness. 

This day, all together again, we rose the first spurs of 
the well-wooded Usagara hills, amongst which ~ 
the familiar eas was: plentiful, and at 
night we bivouacked in the jungle. 

Rising betimes in the morning, and starting with a 
To FE. Mbitiga, good will, we soon eicnes the first setile- 
pa ments of Mbitiga, from which could be seen 
a curious blue mountain, standing up like a giant over- 
looking all the rest of the hills. The scenery here formed 
a strong and very pleasing contrast to any we had seen 
since. leaving the coast. Emigrant Waziraha, who had 
been driven from their homes across the Kingani river by 
the slave-hunters, had taken possession of the place, and 
disposed their little conical-hut villages on the heights of 
the hill-spurs in such a picturesque manner, that one could’ 
not help hoping they would here at least-be allowed to 
rest In peace and quietness. The valleys, watered by little 
brooks, are far richer, and even prettier, than the high 
lands above, being lined with fine trees and evergreen 


To Camp, 29th. 


Oct. | ASPECT OF THE COUNTRY. 45 


shrubs ; while the general state of prosperity was such 
_ that the people could afford, even at this late season of in 
year, to turn their corn into malt to brew beer for sale ; 
and goats and fowls were plentiful in the market, 


Hill view from Eastern Mbuiga 


_Passing by the old village of Mbituga, which I occupied 
To W. Mbbiye, on my former expedition, we entered some 
oh huts on the western flank of the Mbiiga 
district ; and here, finding a coast-man, a great friend of 
the little sheikh’s, willing to take back to Zanzibar any- 
thing we might give him, a halt was made, and I drew up 
my reports. I then consigned to his charge three of the 
most sickly of the Hottentots in a deplorable.condition— 
one of the mules, that they might ride by turns—and all 
the specimens that had been collected. With regret I also 
sent back the camera; because I saw, had I allowed my 
companion to keep working it, the heat he was subjected 
to in the little tent whilst preparing and fixing his plates 
would very soon have killed him. The number of guinea- 


fowl seen here was most surprising. 


46 USAGARA. [1860. 


A little lighter and much more comfortable for the 
pay Mh ee good riddance of those grumbling “ Tots,” 
*™ we worked up to and soon breasted the stiff 
ascent of the Mabriki Pass, which we surmounted without 
much difficulty. This concluded the first range of these 
Usagara hills; and once over, we dropped down to the 
elevated valley of Makata, where we halted two days to 
shoot. As a travelling Arab informed me that the whole 
of the Maroro distriet had been laid waste by the ma- 
rauding Wahéhé, I changed our plans again, and directed 
our attention to a middle and entirely new line, which 
in the end would lead us to Ugogi. The first and only 
giraffe killed upon the journey was here shot by Grant, 
with a little 40-gauge Lancaster rifle, at 200 yards’ dis- 
tance. Some smaller animals were killed; but I wasted 
all my time in fruitlessly stalkimg some wounded striped 
eland—magnificent animals, as large as Delhi oxen—and 
some other animals, of which I wounded three, about the 
size of hartebeest, and much their shape, only cream- 
coloured, with a conspicuous black spot in the centre of 
~ each flank. The eland may probably be the animal first 

mentioned by Livingstone, but the other animal is not 
known. < 3 
Though reluctant to leave a place where such rare 
animals were to be found, the fear of remain- 
ing longer on the road induced us to leave 
Kikobogo, and at a good stride we crossed the flat valley 
of Makata, and ascended the higher lands beyond, where 
we no sooner arrived than we met the last down trader 
from Unyamtiézi, well known to all my men as the great 
Mamba or Crocodile. Mamba, dressed in a dirty Arab 
gown, with coronet of lion’s nails decorating a thread- 
bare cutch cap, greeted us with all the dignity of a savage 
potentate surrounded by his staff of half-naked officials. 
As usual, he had been the last to leave the Unyamitézi, 
and so purchased all his stock of ivory at a cheap rate, 


To Ngoto, 5th. 


Nov. ] AN ARAB TRADER. 47 


there being no competitors left to raise the value of that 
commodity ; but his journey had been a very trying one. 
With a party, at his own estimate, of two thousand souls 
—we did not see anything like that number—he had 
come from Ugogo to this, by his own confession, living 
on the products of the jungle, and by boiling down the 
skin aprons of his porters occasionally for a soup. Fa- 
mines were raging throughout the land, and the Arabs 
preceding him had so harried the country, that every 
village was deserted. On hearing our intention to march 
upon the direct line, he frankly said he thought we should 
“never get through, for my men could not travel as his 
had done, and therefore he advised our deflecting north- 
wards from New Mbitimi to join the track leading from 
Rittmtima to Ugogi. This was a sad disappointment ; 
but, rather than risk a failure, I resolved to follow his 
advice. 
After reaching the elevated ground, we marched over 
rolling tops, covered with small trees and a 
ToMtthandaand , . 
Myombo, 64 rich variety of pretty bulbs, and reached the 
fet habitations of Mtthanda, where we no sooner 
appeared than the poor villagers, accustomed only to 
rough handling, immediately dispersed in the jungles. 
By dit of persuasion, however, we induced them to sell] 
us provisions, though at a monstrous rate, such as no 
merchant could have afforded; and having spent the 
night quietly, we proceeded on to the upper courses of 
the M’yombo river, which trends its way northwards to 
the Miikondoktia river. The scenery was most interesting, 
with every variety of hill, roll, plateau, and ravine, wild 
and prettily wooded ; but we saw nothing of the people. 
Like frightened rats, as soon as they caught the sound 
of our advancing march, they buried themselves in the 
jungles, carrying off their grain with them. Foraging 
parties, of necessity, were sent out as soon as the camp 
was pitched, with cloth for purchases, and strict orders 


48 USAGARA. [1860. 


not to use force ; the upshot of which was, that my people 
got nothing but a few arrows fired at them by the lurk- 
ing villagers, and I was abused for my squeamishness. 
Moreover, the villagers, emboldened by my lenity, vaunt- 
ingly declared they would attack the camp by night, as 
they could only recognise in us such men as plunder their 
houses and steal their children. This caused a certain 
amount of alarm among my men, which induced them to 
run up a stiff bush-fence round the camp, and kept them 
talking all night. 
This morning we marched on as usual, with one of 
To New Mbtimi, hes Hottentots lashed on a donkey ; ; for the 
wretched creature, after lying in the sun 
2 ie became so sickly that he could not move or do 
anything for himself, and nobody else would do anything 
for him. The march was a long one, but under ordinary 
circumstances would have bedn very interesting, for we 
passed an immense lagoon, where hippopotami were snort- 
ing as if they invited an attack. In the larger tree- 
jungles the traces of elephants, buffaloes, rhinoceros, and 
antelopes were very numerous; while a rich variety of 
small birds, as often happened, made me wish I had 
come on a shooting rather than on a long exploring expe- 
dition. ‘Towards sunset we arrived at New Mbtmi, a very 
pretty and fertile place, lying at the foot of a cluster of 
steep hills, and pitched camp for three days to lay in 
supplies for ten, as this was reported to be the only place 
where we could buy corn until we reached Ugogo, a span 
of 140 miles. Mr Mbtmi, the chief of the place, a very 
affable negro, at once took us by the hand, and said he 
would do anything we desired, for he had often been to 
Zanzibar. He knew that the English were the ruling 
power in that land, and that they were opposed to 
slavery, the terrible effects of which had led to his aban- 
doning Old Mbtimi, on the banks of the Mikondoktia 


river, and residing here. 


Nov. ] PRICES OF PROVISIONS. 49 


The sick Hottentot died here, and we buried him with 
Halt, 9%, 10, Christian honours. As his comrades said, he 
ge died because he had determined to die,—an 
instance of that obstinate fatalism in their mulish tem- 
perament which no kind words or threats can cure. This 
terrible catastrophe made me wish to send all the remain- 
ing Hottentots back to Zanzibar; but as they all pre- 
ferred serving with me to returning to duty at the Cape, 
I selected two of the most sickly, put them under Tabib, 
one of Rigby’s old servants, and told him to remain with 
them at Mbttmi until such time as he might find some 
party proceeding to the coast; and, in the meanwhile, for 
board and lodgings I gave Mbitmi beads and cloth. The 
prices of provisions here being a good specimen of what 
one has to pay at this season of the year, I give a short 
list of them :—sixteen rations corn, two yards cloth ; three 
fowls, two yards cloth ; one goat, twenty yards cloth ; one 
cow, forty yards cloth,—the cloth being common American 
sheeting. Before we left Mbttmi, a party of forty men 
and women of the Waquiva tribe, pressed by famine, were 
driven there to purchase food. The same tribe had, how- 
ever, killed many of Mbtimi’s subjects not long since, and 
therefore, in African revenge, the chief seized them all, 
saying he would send them off for sale to the Zanzibar 
market unless they could give a legitimate reason for the 
cruelty they had committed. These Waquiva, I was given 
to understand, occupied the steep hills surrounding this 
place. They were a squalid-looking set, ke the generality 
of the inhabitants of this mountainous region. 

This march led us over a high hill to the Mdtnhwi 
To Matahwi,  Tiver, another tributary to the Mtkondokta. 
als It is all clad in the upper regions with the 
slender pole-trees which characterise these hills, inter- 
mingled with bamboo; but the bottoms are characterised 
by a fine growth of fig-trees of great variety, along with 

D 


50 USAGARA. [1860. 


high grasses; whilst near the villages were found good 
gardens of plantains, and numerous Palmyra trees. ‘The 
rainy season being not far off, the villagers were busy in 
burning rubble and breaking their ground. Within their 
reach everywhere is the sarsaparilla vine, but growing as 
a weed, for they know nothing of its value. 

Rising up from the deep valley of Mdtnhwi, we had to 
cross another high ridge before descending to 
the also ‘deep valley of Chongtié, as pictur- 
esque a country as the middle heights of the Himalayas, 
dotted on the ridges and spur-slopes by numerous small 
conical-hut villages; but all so poor that we could not, 
had we wanted it, have purchased provisions for a day’s 
consumption. 

Leaving this valley, we rose to the table of Manyovi, 
To Manyongs, OVerhung with much higher hills, looking, 
1h according to the accounts of our Hottentots, 
as they eyed the fine herds of cattle grazing on the slopes, 
so like the range in Kafraria, that they formed their 
expectations accordingly, and appeared, for the first time 
since leaving the coast, happy at the prospect before them, 
little dreaming that such rich places were seldom to be 
met with. The Wanyamtézi porters even thought they 
had found a’ paradise, and forthwith threw down their 
loads as the villagers came to offer them grain for sale ; 
so that, had I not had the Wangiiana a little under con- 
trol, we should not have completed our distance that day, 
and so reached Manyongé, which reminded me, by its 
ugliness, of the sterile Somali land. 

Proceeding through the semi-desert rolling table-land— 
To Riimtima, 12 one place occupied by men who build their 
ee villages in large open squares of flat-topped 
mud huts, which, when I have occasion to refer to them in 
future, I shall call by their native name tembé—we could 
see on the right hand the massive mountains overhanging 
the Mukondokta river, to the front the western chain of 


To Tzanzi, 13th. 


Noy. ] PURSUIT OF A LOST “ TOT.” 51 


these hills, and to the left the high crab-claw shaped ridge, 
which, extending from the western chain, circles round 
conspicuously above the swelling knolls which lie between 
the two main rocky ridges. Contorted green thorn-trees, 
“elephant-foot” stumps, and aloes, seem to thrive best 
here, by their very nature indicating what the country is, 
a poor stony land. Our camp was pitched by the river 
Rtmiima, where, sheltered from the winds, and enriched 
by alluvial soil, there ought to have been no scarcity ; but 
still the villagers had nothing to sell. 

On we went again to Marenga Mkhali, the “Salt Water,” 
to breakfast, and camped in the crooked green 
thorns by night, carrying water on for our 
supper. ‘This kind of travelline—forced marches—hard 
as it may appear, was what we liked best, for we felt that 
we were shortening the journey, and in doing so, shorten- 
ing the risks of failure by disease, by war, by famine, and 
by mutiny. We had here no grasping chiefs to detain us 
for presents, nor had our men time to become writable and 
truculent, concoct devices for stopping the way, or fight 
amongst themselves. 

On again, and at last we arrived at the foot of the 
western chain; but not all together. Some 
porters, overcome by heat and thirst, lay 
scattered along the road, while the corporal of the Hotten- 
tots allowed his mule to stray from him, never dreaming 
the animal would travel far from his comrades, and, in 
following after him, was led such a long way into the 
bush, that my men became alarmed for his safety, know- 
ing as they did that the “savages” were out living like 
monkeys on the calabash fruit, and looking out for any 
windfalls, such as stragglers worth plundering, that might 
come in their way. At first the Wangtiana attempted to 
track down the corporal ; -but finding he would not answer 
their repeated shots, and fearful for their own safety, they 
came into camp and reported the case. Losing no time, 


To Camp, 16th. 


To Inengé, 17th. 


52 USAGARA. [1860. 


I ordered twenty men, armed with carbines, to carry 
water for the distressed porters, and bring the corporal 


Bugu, Calabash, or Gouty-limbed Trees, 


back as soon as possible. They all marched off, as they 
always do on such exploits, in high good-humour with 
themselves for the valour which they intended to show; 
and in the evening came in, firing their guns in thé most 
reckless manner, beaming with delight; for they had the 
corporal in tow, two men and two women captives, and a 
spear asa trophy. Then in high impatience, all in a breath, 
they began:a recital of the great day’s work. The cor- 
poral had followed on the spoor of the mule, occasionally 
finding some of his things that had been torn from the 
beast’s back by the thorns, and, picking up these one by 
one, had become so burdened with the weight of them, 
that he could follow no farther. In this fix the twenty 
men came up with him, but not until they had had a 
scrimmage with the “savages,” had secured four, and 
taken the spear which had been thrown at them. Of the 


Nov. ] THE MISSING MULE. 53 


mule’s position no one could give an opinion, save that 
they imagined, in consequence of the thickness of the 
bush, he would soon become irretrievably entangled in the 
thicket, where the savages would find him, and bring him 
in as a ransom for the prisoners. 

What with the diminution of our supplies, the famished 
state of the country, and the difficulties which 
frowned upon us in advance, together with 
unwillingness to give up so good a mule, with all its gear 
and ammunition, I must say I felt doubtful as to what 
had better be done, until the corporal, who felt confident 
he would find the beast, begged so hard that I sent him in 
command of another expedition of sixteen men, ordering 
him to take one of the prisoners with him to proclaim to 
his brethren that we would give up the rest if they re- 
turned us the mule. The corporal then led off his band 
to the spot where he last saw traces of the animal, and 
tracked on till sundown; while Grant and myself went 
out pot-hunting, and brought home a bag consisting of 
one striped eland, one saltiana antelope, four guinea-fowl, 
four ringdoves, and one partridge—a welcome supply, 
considering we were quite out of flesh. 

Next day, as there were no signs of the trackers, I went 
again to the place of the elands, wounded a 
fine male, but gave up the chase, as I heard 
the unmistakable gun-firing return of the party, and 
straightway proceeded to camp. Sure enough, there they 
were; they had tracked the animal back to Marenga 
Mkhali, through jungle—for he had not taken to the toot- 
path. Then finding he had gone on, they returned quite 
tired and famished. To make the most of a bad job, I 
now sent Grant on to the Robého (or windy) Pass, on the 
top of the western chain, with the mules and heavy bag- 
gage, and directions to proceed thence across the brow of 
the hill the following morning, while I remained behind 

with the tired men, promising to join him by breaktfast- 


Halt, 18th. 


Halt, 19¢h. 


54 USAGARA. [1860. 


time. I next released the prisoners, much to their disgust, 
for they had not known such good feeding before, and 
dreaded being turned adrift again in the jungles to live on 
calabash seeds; and then, after shooting six guinea-fowl, 
turned in for the night. 

Betimes in the morning we were off, mounting the 
Robého, a good stiff ascent, covered with trees 
and large blocks of granite, excepting only 
where cleared for villdges; and on we went rapidly, until 
at noon the advance party was reached, located in a vil- 
lage overlooking the great interior plateau—a picture, as 
it were, of the common type of African scenery. Here, 
taking a hasty meal, we resumed the march all together, 
descended the great western chain, and, as night set in, 
camped in a ravine at the foot of it, not far from the 


great junction-station Ugogi, where terminate the hills of 
Usagara. 


To Camp, 20th. 


4 


Novy. ] ASPECT OF THE COUNTRY. 55 


CHART WRehY, 


UGOGO, AND THE WILDERNESS OF MGUNDA MKHALI. 


THE LIE OF THE COUNTRY—RHINOCEROS-STALKING—SCUFFLE OF 
VILLAGERS OVER A CARCASS—CHIEF “SHORT-LEGS” AND HIS 
SUCCESSOR—BUFFALO-SHOOTING—GETTING LOST—A TROUBLE- 
SOME SULTAN—DESERTIONS FROM THE CAMP—GETTING PLUN- 
DERED—-WILDERNESS MARCH—DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH THE 
LOCAL POWERS—MANUA SERA’S STORY—CHRISTMAS—THE RE- 
LIEF FROM KAZE. 


Tuts day’s work led us from the hilly Usagara range into 
To Campin the the more level 
Bassin & 22¢- an ds-ot the in- 
terior. Making a double 
march of it, we first stopped 
to breakfast at the quiet little 
settlement of Inengé, where 
cattle were abundant, but 
grain so scarce that the 
villagers were living on _ 
calabash seeds. Proceeding 

thence across fields delight- ~ 
fully checkered with fine 4 
calabash and fig trees, we 
marched, carrying water - 
through thorny jungles, un- 
til dark, when we bivouacked 
for the night, only to rest and push on again next morn- 


Mgogo, or Native of Ugogo. 


56 UGOGO. [1860. 


ing, arriving at Marenga Mkhali (the saline water) to 
breakfast. Here a good view of the Usagara hills is 


get le 

View cf Hast Coast Range from Marenga Mkhali, 
obtained. Carrying water with us, we next marched 
half-way to the first settlement of Ugogo, and bivouacked 
again, to eat the last of our store of Mbtimi grain. 

At length the greater famine lands had been spanned ; 
but we were not in lands of plenty—for 
the Wagogo we found, like their neighbours 
Wasagara, eating the seed of the calabash, to save their 
small stores of grain. 

The East Coast Range having been passed, no more hills 
Halt, 24h ana bad to be crossed, for the land we next en- 
tered on is a plateau of rolling ground, slop- 
ing southward to the Rtaha river, which forms a great 
drain running from west to east, carrying off all the rain- 
waters that fall in its neighbourhood through the East 
Coast Range to the sea. To the northward can be seen 
some low hills, which are occupied. by Wahtimba, a sub- 
tribe of the warlike Masai; and on the west is the large 
forest-wilderness of Mgtinda Mkhali. Ugogo, lying un- 
der the lee side of the Usagara hills, is comparatively 
sterile. Small outcrops of granite here and there poke 
through the surface, which, like the rest of the rolling 
land, being covered with bush, principally acacias, have a 


To E. Ugogo, 23d. 


Noy. | ASPECT OF THE COUNTRY. 57 


pleasing appearance after the rains have set in, but are too 
brown and desert-looking during the rest of the year. 
Large prairies of grass also are exposed in many places, 
and the villagers have laid much ground bare for agricul- 
tural purposes. 

Altogether, Ugogo has a very wild aspect, well in keep- 
ing with the natives who occupy it, who, more like the 
Wazaramo than the Wasagara, carry arms, intended for 
use rather than show. The men, indeed, are never seen 
without their usual arms—the spear, the shield, and the 
assagé. They live in flat-topped, square, tembé villages, 
wherever springs of water are found, keep cattle in plenty, 
and farm enough generally to supply not only their own 
wants, but those of the thousands who annually pass in 
caravans. They are extremely fond of ornaments, the 
most common of which is an ugly tube of the gourd 
thrust through the lower lobe of the ear. Their colour is 
a soft ruddy brown, with a slight infusion of black, not 
unlike that of a rich plum. Impulsive by nature, and 
exceedingly avaricious, they pester travellers beyond all 
conception, by thronging the road, jeering, quizzing, and 
pointing at them; and in camp, by intrusively forcing 
their way into the midst of the kit, and even into the 
stranger's tent. Caravans, in consequence, never enter 
their villages, but camp outside, generally under the big 
“ gouty-limbed” trees—encircling their entire camp some- 
times with a ring-fence of thorns to prevent any sudden 
attack. 

To resume the thread of the journey : we found, on ar- 
rival in Ugogo, very little more food than in Usagara, for 
the Wagogo were mixing their small stores of grain with 
the monkey-bread seeds of the gouty-limbed tree. Water 
“was so scarce in the wells at this season that we had to 
buy it at the normal price of country beer; and, as may 
be imagined where such distress in food was existing, 
cows, goats, sheep, and fowls were also selling at high rates, 


58 UGOGO. [1860. 


Our mules here gave us the slip again, and walked all 
the way back to Marenga Mkhali, where they were found 
and brought back by some Wagogo, who took four yards 
of merikani in advance, with a promise of four more on 
return, for the job—their chief being security for their 
fidelity. This business detained us two days, during 
which time I shot a new variety of florikan, peculiar in 
having a light blue band stretching from the nose over 
the eye to the occiput. Each day, while we resided here, 
cries were raised by the villagers that the Wahtimba were 
coming, and then all the cattle out in the plains, both far 
and near, were driven into the village for protection. 

At last; on the 26th, as the mules were brought in, 
ToCampin L paid a hongo or tax of four barsati and 
Bet 20u four yards of chintz to the chief, and de- 
parted, but not until one of my porters, a Mhéhé, 
obtained a fat dog for his dinner; he had set his heart 
on it, and would not move until he had killed it, and 
tied it on to his load for the evening’s repast. Passing 
through the next villages—a collection called Kiftktro— 
we had to pay another small tax of two barsati and four 
yards of chintz to the chief. There we breakfasted, and 
pushed on, carrying water to a bivouac in the jungles, as 
the famine precluded our taking the march more easily. 

Pushing on again, we cleared out of the woods, and 
Mon Ranyenyer emnen at the eastern border of the largest 
cose clearance of Ugogo, Kanyenyé. Hees we 
were forced to halt a day, as the mules were done up, 
and eight of the Wanyamttézi porters absconded, carrying 
with hem the best part of their loads. There was also 
another inducement for stopping here ; for, after stacking 
the loads, as we usually did on arriving in camp, against 
a large gouty-limbed tree, a hungry Mgooo, on eyeing our 
guns, offered his services to show us some bicornis rhino- 
ceros, which, he said, paid nightly visits to certain’ bitter 
pools that lay in the nullah bottoms not far off. This 


Nov. ] A RHINOCEROS BAGGED. 59 


exciting intelligence made me inquire if it was not pos- 
sible to find them at once ; but, being assured that they 


Our Camp in Ugcégo. 


lived very far off, and that the best chance was the night, 
I gave way, and settled on starting at ten, to arrive at 
the ground before the full moon should rise. 

I set forth with the guide and two of the sheikh’s boys, 
each carrying a single rifle, and ensconced myself in the 
nullah, to hide until our expected visitors. should arrive, 
and there remained until midnight. When the hitherto 
noisy villagers turned into bed, the silvery moon shed 
her light on the desolate scene, and the Mgogo guide, 
taking fright, bolted. He had not, however, gone long, 
when, looming above us, coming over the horizon line, 
was the very animal we wanted. 

In a fidgety manner the beast then descended, as if he 
expected some danger in store—and he was not wrong; 
for, attaching a bit of white paper to the fly-sight of my 
Blissett, I approached him, crawling under cover of the 
banks until within eighty yards of him, when, finding 
that the moon shone full on his flank, I raised myself 
upright and planted a bullet behind his left shoulder. 
Thus died my first rhinoceros. 


~ 


na 
a 


60 UGOGO. [1860. 


To make the most of the night, as 1 wanted meat for 
my men to cook, as well as a stock to carry with them, 
or barter with the villagers for grain, I now retired to my 
old position, and waited again. 

After two hours had elapsed, two more rhinoceros 
approached me in the same stealthy, fidgety way as the 
first one. They came even closer than the first, but, 
the moon having passed beyond their meridian, I could 
not obtain so clear a mark. Still they were big marks, 
and I determined on doing my best before they had time 
to wind us; so, stepping out, with the sheikh’s boys 
behind me carrying the second rifle to meet all emer- 
gencies, [-planted a ball in the larger one, and brought 
him round with a roar and whooh-whooh, exactly to the 
best position I could wish for receiving a second shot ; 
but, alas! on turning sharply round for the spare rifle, I 
had the mortification to see that both the black boys had 
made off, and were scrambling like monkeys up a tree. 
At the same time the rhinoceros, fortunately for me, 
on second consideration turned to the right-about, and 
shuffled away, leaving, as is usually the case when conical 
bullets are used, no traces of blood. 

Thus ended the night’s work. We now went home by 
dawn to apprise all the porters that we had flesh in store 
for them, when the two boys who had so shamelessly de- 
serted me, instead of hiding their heads, described all the 
night’s scenes with such capital mimicry as set the whole 
- camp ina roar. We had all now to hurry back to the 
carcass before the Wagogo could find it; but though this 
precaution was quickly taken, still, before the tough skin 
of the beast could be cut through, the Wagogo began 
assembling like vultures, and fighting with my men. A 
more savage, filthy, disgusting, but at the same time 
grotesque, scene than that which followed cannot be con- 
ceived, All fell to work armed with swords, spears, 
knives, and hatchets—cutting and slashing, thumping 


st 


WX! 
A 


Ugogo 


? 


e 


New Antelop 


Dec. | CUTTING UP THE GAME. 61 


and bawling, fighting and tearing, tumbling and wrest- 
ling up to their knees in filth and blood in the middle of 
the carcass. When a tempting morsel fell to the posses- 
sion of any one, a stronger neighbour would seize and 
bear off the prize in triumph. All right was now a 
matter of pure might, and lucky it was that it did not 
end in a fight between our men and the villagers. These 
might be afterwards seen, one by one, covered with blood, 
scampering home each with his spoil—a piece of tripe, or 
liver, or lights, or whatever else it might have been his 
fortune to get off with. 

We were still in great want of men; but rather than 
To Magomba's Stop a day, as all delays only lead to more 
Palace, 29h. difficulties, I pushed on to Magomba’s palace 
with the assistance of some Wagogo carrying our baggage, 
each taking one cloth as his hire. The chief wazir at 
once came out to meet me on the way, and in an appa- 
rently affable manner, as an old friend, begged that I would 
live in the palace—a bait which I did not take, as I knew 
my friend by experience a little too well. He then, in 
the politest possible manner, told me that a great dearth 
of food was oppressing the land—so much s0, that pretty 
cloths only would purchase grain. I now wished to 
settle my hongo, but the great chief could not hear of 
such indecent haste. 

The next day, too, the chief was too drunk to listen to 
Halt, 30, 1s, any one, and I must have patience. I took 
ane 2s out this time in the jungles very profitably, 
killing a fine buck and doe antelope, of a species unknown. 
These animals are much about the same size and shape as 
the common Indian antelope, and, like them, roam about 
in large herds. The only marked difference between the 
two is in the shape of their horns, as may be seen by the 
woodcut; and in their colour, in which, in both sexes, the 
Ugogo antelopes resemble the picticandata gazelle of Tibet, 
except that the former have dark markings on the face. 


62 UGOGO. [1860. 


At last, after thousands of difficulties much like those 
I encountered in Uzaramo, the hongo was 
settled by a payment of one kistitt, one 
dubtiani, four yards bendéra, four yards kiniki, and three 
yards merikani. The wazir then thought he would do 
some business on his own account, and commenced work 
by presenting me with a pot of ghee and flour, saying at 
the same time “empty words did not show true love,” 
and hoping that I would prove mine by making some 
slight return. To get rid of the animal, I gave him the 
full value of his present in cloth, which he no sooner 
pocketed than he had the audacity to accuse Grant of 
sacrilege for having shot a lizard on a holy stone, and 
demanded four cloths to pay atonement for this offence 
against the “church.” As yet, he said, the chief was not 
aware of the damage done, and it was well he was not ; 
for he would himself, if I-only paid him the four cloths, 
settle matters quietly, otherwise there would be no know- 
ing what demands might be made on my cloth. It was 
necessary to get up hot temper, else there was no know- 
ing how far he would go; so I returned him his presents, 
and told the sheikh, instead of giving four, to fling six 


To Camp in Bush, 
3d. 


_cloths in his face, and tell him that the holy-stone story 
was merely a humbug, and I would take care no more 


white men ever came to see him again. 

Some Wanyamtézi porters, who had been left sick here 
by former caravans, now wished to take service with me 
as far as Kazé; but the Wagogo, hearing of their desire, 
frightened them off it. A report also at this time was 
brought to us, that a caravan had just arrived at our last — 
ground, having come up from Whindi, direct by the line 
of the Wami river, in its upper course called Miukon- 
doktta, without crossing a single hill all the way ; I there- 
fore sent three men to see if they had any porters to spare, 
as it was said they had; but the three men, although 
they left their bows and arrows behind, never came back. 


Dec. | ELEPHANT-HUNTERS. 63 


Another mule died to-day. This was perplexing in- 
deed, but to stop longer was useless; so we pushed for- 

ward as best we could: to a pond at ae western end of 
the district, where we found a party of Maktia sportsmen 
who had just killed an elephant. They had lived in 
Ugogo one year and a half, and had killed in all seven- 
teen elephants; half the tusks of which, as well as some 
portion of the flesh, they gave to Magomba for. the privi- 
lege of residing there. There were many antelopes there, 
some of which both Grant and I shot for the good of the 
pot, and he also killed a crocuta hyena. From the pond 
we went on to the middle of a large jungle, and biv- 
ouacked for the night in a shower of rain, the second of 
the season. 

During a fierce down-pour of rain, the porters all 
quivering and quaking with cold, we at 
length emerged from the jungle, and en- 
tered the prettiest spot in Ugogo—the populous district 
of Usekhé—where little hills and huge columns of granite 
crop out. Here we halted. 

Next day came the hongo business, which was settled 
by paying one dubtiani, one kitambi, one 
msititt, four yards merikani, and two yards 
kiniki; but whilst we were doing it eight porters ran 
away, and four fresh ones were engaged (Wanyamtézi) 
who had run away from Kanyenyé. 

With one more march from this we reached the last 
district in Ugogo, Khoko. Here the whole 
of the inhabitants turned out to oppose us, 
imagining we had come there to revenge the Arab, Mo- 
ene hecannse the Wagogo attacked him a year ago, 
plundered his camp, ail arene him back to Kazé, for 
having shot their old chief “Short-legs.” They, how- 
ever, no sooner found out who we were than they allowed 
us to pass on and encamp in the outskirts of the Motinda 
Mkhali wilderness. To this position in the bush I strongly 


To Usekhé, 4th. 


Halt, 5th. 


To Khoko, 6th. 


64 UGOGO. [1860. 


objected, on the plea that guns could be best used against 
arrows in the open; but none would go out in the field, 
maintaining that the Wagogo would fear to attack us so 
far from their villages as we now were, lest we might cut 
them off in their retreat. 

Hori Hori was now chief in Short-legs’s stead, and 
affected to be much pleased that we were English, and 
not Arabs. He told us we might, he thought, be able to 
recruit all the men that we were in want of, as many 
Wanyamtiézi who had been left there sick wished to go 
to their homes; and I would only, in addition to their 
wages, have to pay their “hotel bills” to the Wagogo. 
This, of course, | was ready to do, though I knew the 
Wanyamitézi had paid for themselves, as is usual, by their 
work in the fields of their hosts. Still, as I should be de- 
priving these of hands, I could scarcely expect to get off 
for less than the value of a slave for each, and told Sheikh 
Said to look out for some men at once, whilst at the same 
time he laid in provisions of grain to last us eight days in 
the wilderness, and settle the hongo. 

For this triple business I allowed three days, during 
which time, always eager to shoot something, 
either for science or the pot, I killed a bicornis 
rhinoceros, at a distance of five paces only, with my small 
40 - gauge Lancaster, as the beast stood quietly feeding 
in the bush; and I also shot a bitch fox of the genus 
Otocyon lalandii, whose ill-omened cry often alarms the 
natives by forewarning them of danger. This was rather 
tame sport; but next day I had better fun. 

Starting in the early morning, accompanied by two of 
Sheikh Said’s boys, Stliman and Faraj, each 
carrying a rifle, while I carried a shot-cun, 
we followed a footpath to the westward in the wilderness 
of Mgtinda Mkhali. There, after walking a short while in 
the bush, as I heard the grunt of a buffalo close on my 
left, | took “Blissett” in hand, and walked to where I 


Halt, 7th. 


Halt, 8th. 


Dec. ] BUFFALO-STALKING, 65 


soon espied a large herd quietly feeding. They were quite 
unconscious of my approach, so I took a shot at a cow, and 
wounded her; then, after reloading, put a ball in a bull 
and staggered him also. This caused great confusion 
among them ; but as none of the animals knew where the 
shots came from, they simply shifted about in a fidgety 
manner, allowing me to kill the first cow, and even fire a 
fourth shot, which sickened the great bull, and induced 
him to walk off, leaving the herd to their fate, who, con- 
siderably puzzled, began moving off also. 

I now called up the boys, and determined on following 
the herd down before either skinning the dead cow or 
following the bull, who I knew could not go far. Their 
footprints being well defined in the moist sandy soil, we 
soon found the herd again; but as they now knew they 
were pursued, they kept moving on in short runs at a 
time, when, occasionally gaining glimpses of their large 
dark bodies as they forced through the bush, I repeated 
my shots and struck a good number, some more and some 
less severely. This was very provoking ; for all of them 
being stern shots were not likely to kill, and the jungle 
was so thick I could not get a front view of them. Pre- 
sently, however, one with her hind leg broken pulled up 
on a white-ant hill, and, tossing her horns, came down 
with a charge the instant I showed myself close to her. 
One crack of the rifle rolled her over, and gave me free 
scope to improve the bag, which was very soon done ; for 
on following the spoors, the traces of blood led us up to 
another one as lame as the last. He then got a second 
bullet in the flank, and, after hobbling a little, evaded our 
sight and threw himself into a bush, where we no sooner 
arrived than he plunged headlong at us from his ambush, 
just, and only just, giving me time to present my small 
40-gauge Lancaster. 

It was a most ridiculous scene. Stliman by my side, 

E 


66 UGOGO. [1860. 


with the instinct of a monkey, made a violent spring and 
swung himself by a bough immediately over the beast, 
whilst Faraj bolted away and left me single-gunned to 
polish him off. There was only one course to pursue, 
for in one instant more he would have been into me; 
so, quick as thought, I fired the gun, and, as luck would 
have it, my bullet, after passing through the edge of one 
of his horns, stuck in the spine of his neck, and rolled 
him over at my feet-as dead as a rabbit. Now, having 
cut the beast’s throat to make him “hilal,” according to 
Mussulman usage, and thinking we had done enough if I 
could only return to the first wounded bull and settle him 
too, we commenced retracing our steps, and by accident 
came on Grant. He was passing by from another quarter, 
and became amused by the glowing description of my boys, 
who never omitted to narrate their own cowardice as an ~ 
excellent tale. He begged us to go on in our course, 
whilst he would go back and send us some porters to 
carry home the game. i 

Now, tracking back again to the first point of attack, 
we followed the blood of the first bull, till at length I 
found him standing like a stuck pig in some bushes, 
looking as if he would like to be put out of his miseries. 
Taking compassion, I levelled my Blissett; but, as bad 
luck would have it, a bough intercepted the flight of the 
bullet, and it went “pinging” into the air, whilst the big 
bull went off at a gallop. To follow on was no difficulty, 
the spoor was so good; and in ten minutes more, as I 
opened on a small clearance, Blissett in hand, the great 
beast, from the thicket on the opposite side, charged down 
hike a mad bull, full of ferocity—as ugly an antagonist as 
ever I saw, for the front of his head was all shielded with 
horn. A small mound fortunately stood between us, and 
as he rounded it, I jumped to one side and let fly at his 
flank, but without the effect of stopping him; for, as 
quick as thought, the huge monster was at my feet, 


Three Buffalo Charges in one Day. Msunda Mkhali 


i 


Dec. | A WOUNDED BULL. 67 


battling with the impalpable smoke of my gun, which for- 
tunately hung so thick on the ground at the height of his 
head that he could not see me, though I was so close that 
I might, had I been possessed of a hatchet, have chopped 
off his head. This was a predicament which looked very 
ugly, for my boys had both bolted, taking with them my 
guns; but suddenly the beast, evidently regarding the 
smoke as a phantom which could not be mastered, turned 
round in a bustle, to my intense relief, and galloped off at 
full speed, as if scared by some terrible apparition. 

O what would I not then have given for a eun, the 
chance was such a good one! Still, angry though I was, 
I could not help laughing as the dastardly boys came into 
the clearance full of their mimicry, and joked over the 
scene they had witnessed in security, whilst my life was 
in jeopardy because they were too frightened to give me 
my gun. But now came the worst part of the day; for, 
though rain was falling, I had not the heart to relinquish 
my game. ‘Tracking on through the bush, I thought 
every minute [ should come up with the brute; but his 
wounds ceased to bleed, and in the confusion of the 
numerous tracks which scored all the forest we lost our 
own. 

Much disappointed at this, I now proposed to make for 
the track we came by in the morning, and follow it down 
into camp; but this luxury was not destined to be our 
lot that night, for the rain had obliterated all our foot- 
prints of the morning, and we passed the track, mistaking 
it for the run of wild beasts. It struck me we had done 
so; but say what I would, the boys thought they knew 
better ; and the consequence was that, after wandering for 
hours no one knew where—for there was no sun to guide 
us—I pulled up, and swore I would wait for the stars, 
else it might be our fate to be lost in the wilderness, 
which I did not much relish. We were all at this time 
“hungry as hunters,” and beginning to feel very miserable 


68 ~ UGOGO. [1860. 


from being wet through. What little ammunition | had 
left I fired off as signals, or made tinder of to get up a 
fire, but the wood would not burn. In this hapless con- 
dition the black boys began murmuring, wishing to go 
on, pretending, though both held opposite views, that 
each knew the way; for they thought nothing could be 
worse than their present state of discomfort. 

Night with its gloom was then drawing on, heightened 
by thunder and lightning, which set in all around us. 
At times we thought we heard musketry in camp, know- 
ing that Grant would be sure to fire signals for us; and 
doubtless we did so, but its sound and the thunder so 
much resembled one another that we distrusted our ears. 
At any rate, the boys mistook the west for the east; and 
as I thought they had done so, I stood firm to one spot, 
and finally lay down with them to sleep upon the cold 
wet ground, where we slept pretty well, bemg only dis- 
turbed occasionally by some animals sniffing at our feet. 
As the clouds broke towards morning, my obstinate boys 
still swore that west was east, and would hardly follow 
me when tracking down Venus; next up rose the moon, 
and then followed the sun, when, as good luck would 
have it, we struck on the track, and walked straight into 
camp. 

Here every one was in a great state of excitement: 
Grant had been making the men fire volleys. 
The little sheikh was warmly congratula- 
tory as he spoke of the numbers who had strayed away 
and had been lost in that wilderness; whilst Bombay 
admitted he thought we should turn up again if I did 
not listen to the advice of the boys, which was his only 
fear. Nothing as yet, | now found, had been done to 
further our march. The hongo, the sheikh said, had to 
precede everything; yet that had not been settled, because 
the chief deterred it the day of our arrival, on the plea 
that it was the anniversary of Short-legs’s death ; and he 


Halt, 9¢h. 


Dec. } FRESH DESERTIONS. 69 


also said, that till then all the Wagogo had been in 
mourning by ceasing to wear all their brass bracelets and 
other ornaments, and they now wished to solemnise the 
occasion by feasting and renewing their finery. This 
being granted, the next day another pretext for delay 
was found, by the Wahttmba having made a raid on their 
cattle, which necessitated the chief and all his men turn- 
ing out to drive them away; and to-day nothing could 
be attended to, as a party of fugitive Wanyamtiézi had 
arrived and put them all in a fright. These Wanyamitézi, 
it then transpired, were soldiers of Manta Séra, “ the 
Tippler,” who was at war with the Arabs. He had been 
defeated at Netrt, a district in Unyamiézi, by the 
Arabs, and had sent these men to cut off the caravan 
route, as the best way of retaliation that lay in his 
power. 

At last the tax having been settled by the payment of 
one dubtiani, two barsati, one sahari, six yards 
merikani, and three yards kiniki (not, how- 
ever, until I had our tents struck, and threatened to march 
away if the chief would not take it), I proposed going on 
with the journey, for our provisions were stored. But 
when the loads were being lifted, I found ten more men 
were missing; and as nothing now could be done but 
throw ten loads away, which seemed too great a sacrifice 
to be made in a hurry, I simply changed ground to show 
we were ready to march, and sent my men about, either 
to try to induce the fugitive Wanyamtiézi to take service 
with me, or else to buy donkeys, as the chief said he had 


Change ground, 
10th. 


some to sell. 

We had already been here too long. <A report was now 
spread that a lion had killed one of the chief’s 
cows; and the Wagogo, suspecting that our 
being here was the cause of this ill luck, threatened to attack 
us. This no sooner got noised over the camp than all my 
Wanyamiiézi porters, who had friends im Ugogo, left to 


Halt, 11th. 


a w - 


70 UGOGO. [1860. 


live with them, and would not come back again even when 
the “storm had blown over,” because they did not like 
the incessant rains that half deluged the camp. The chief, 
too, said he would not sell us his donkeys, lest we should 
give them back to Mohinna, from whom they were taken 
during his fight here. Intrigues of all sorts I could see 
were brewing, possibly at the instigation of the fugitive 
Wanyamttézi, who suspected we were bound to side with 
the Arabs—possibly from some other cause, I could not 
tell what ; so, to clear out of this pandemonium as soon 
as possible, [ issued cloths to buy double rations, intend- 
ing to cross the wilderness by successive relays in double 
the ordinary number of days. I determined at the same 
time to send forward two freed men to Kazé to ask Mtsa 
and the Arabs to send me out some provisions and men 
to meet us half-way. 

Matters grew worse and worse. The sultan, now find- 
ing me unable to move, sent a message to say 
if I would not give him some better cloths to 
make his hongo more respectable, he would attack my 
camp; and advised all the Wanyamtiézi who regarded 
their lives not to go near me if I resisted. This was by 
no means pleasant ; for the porters showed their uneasi- 
ness by extracting their own cloths from my bundles, 
under the pretext that they wished to make some purchases 
of their own. I ought, perhaps, to have stopped this ; but 
I thought the best plan was to show total indifference ; so, 
at the same time that they were allowed to take their 
cloths, I refused to comply with the chief’s request, and 
begged them to have no fear so long as they saw I could 
hold my own ground with my guns. 

The Wanyamitiézi, however, were panic-stricken, and 
half of them bolted, with the kirangozi at their head, 
carrying off all the double-ration cloths as well as their 
own. At this time, the sultan, having changed tactics, as 
he saw us all ready to stand on the defensive, sent back 


Halt, 12th. 


Dec. | INCREASING DIFFICULTIES. 71 


his hongo ; but, instead of using threats, said he would 
oblige us with donkeys or anything else if we would only 
give him a few more pretty cloths. With this cringing, 
perfidious appeal I refused to comply, until the sheikh, 
still more cringing, implored me to give way, else not a 
single man would remain with me. I then told him to 
settle with the chief himself, and give me the account, 
which amounted to three barsati, two sahari, and: three 
yards merikani ; but the donkeys were never alluded to. 

With half my men gone, I still ordered the march, 
though strongly opposed to the advice of one 
of old Mamba’s men, who was then passing 
by on his way to the coast, in command of his master’s 
rear detachment. He thought it impossible for us to pull 
through the wilderness, with its jungle grasses and roots, 
depending for food only on Grant’s gun and my own; 
still we made half-way to the Mdabtrt nullah, taking 
some of Mamba’s out to camp with us, as he promised to 
take letters and specimens down to the coast for us, pro- 
vided I paid him some cloths as ready money down, and 
promised some more to be paid at Zanzibar. These letters 
eventually reached home, but not the specimens. 

The rains were so heavy that the whole country was 
now flooded, but we pushed on to the nullah 
by relays, and pitched on its left bank. In 
the confusion of the march, however, we lost many more 
porters, who at the same time relieved us of their loads, 
by slipping off stealthily into the bush. 

The fifteenth was a forced halt, as the stream was so 
deep and so violent we could not cross it. 
To make the best of this very unfortunate 
interruption, I now sent on two men to Kazé, with letters 
to Misa and Sheikh Snay, both old friends on the former 
expedition, begging them to send me sixty men, each 
carrying thirty rations of grain, and some country tobacco. 
The tobacco was to gratify my men, who said of all things 


To Camp, 13th. 


To Camp, 14th. 


Halt five days. 


72 MGUNDA MKHALL [1860. 


they most wanted to cheer them was something to smoke. 
At the same time I sent back some other men to Khoko, 
with cloth to buy grain for present consumption, as some 
of my porters were already reduced to living on wild 
herbs and white ants. I then set all the remaining men, 
under the directions of Bombay and Baraka, to fell a tall 
tree with hatchets, on the banks of the nullah, with a 
view to bridging it ; but the tree dropped to the wrong 
side, and thwarted the plan. The rain ceased on the 17th, 
just as we put the rain-gauge out, which was at once 
interpreted to be our Uganga, or religious charm, and 
therefore the cause of its ceasing. It was the first fine 
day for a fortnight, so we were only too glad to put all 
our things out to dry, and rejoiced to think of the stream’s 
subsiding. My men who went back to Khoko for grain 
having returned with next to nothing—though, of course, 
they had spent all the cloths—I sent back another batch 
with pretty cloths, as it was confidently stated that grain 
was so scarce there, nothing but the best fabrics would buy 
it. This also proved a dead failure ; but although animals 
were very scarce, Grant relieved our anxiety by shooting 
a zebra and an antelope. 

After five halts, we forded the stream, middle deep, 
Fos ageen ean and pushed forward again, doing short stages 
marches in the of four or five miles a-day, in the greatest 

possible confusion ; for, whilst Grant and_I 
were compelled to go out shooting all day for the pot, the 
sheikh and Bombay went on with the first half of the 
property, and then, keeping guard over it, sent the men 
back again to Baraka, who kept rear-guard, to have the 
rest brought on. Order there was none; the men hated 
this “ double work ;” all the Wanyamtiézi but three de- 
serted, with the connivance of the coast-men, carrying off 
their loads with them, under a mutual understanding, as 
I found out afterwards, that the coast-men were to go 
shares in the plunder as soon as we reached Unyamiézi. 


Dec. | IN THE WILDERNESS. "3 


The next great obstacle in this tug-and-pull wilderness- 
march presented itself on the 24th, when, after the first 
half’ of the property had crossed the Mabungiirti nullah, it 
rose in flood and cut off the rear half. It soon, however, 
subsided ; and the next day we reached “the Springs,” 
where we killed a pig and two rhinoceros. Not content, 
however, with this fare—notwithstanding the whole camp 
had been living liberally on zebra’s and antelope’s flesh 
every day previously—some of my coast-men bolted on to 
the little settlement of Jiwa la Mkoa, contrary to orders, 
to purchase some grain; and in doing so, increased our 
transport difficulties. 

Pulling on in the same way again—when not actually 
engaged in shooting, scolding and storming at the men, 
to keep them up to the mark, and prevent them from 
shirking their work, which they were for ever trying to. 
do—we arrived on the 28th at the “ Boss,” a huge granite 
block, from the top of which the green foliage of the 
forest-trees looked like an interminable cloud, soft and 
waving, fit for fairies to dwell upon. Here the patience 
of my men fairly gave way, for the village of Jiwa la 
Mkoa was only one long march distance from us; and 
they, in consequence, smelt food on in advance much 
sweeter than the wild game and wild grasses they had 
been living on; and many more of them could not resist 
deserting us, though they might, had we all pulled to- 
gether, have gone more comfortably in, as soon as the 
rear property arrived next day with Baraka. 

All the men who deserted on the 25th, save Johur and 
Miitwana, now came into camp, and told us 
they had heard from travellers that those men 
who had been sent on for reliefs to Kazé were bringing 
us a large detachment of slaves to help us on. My men 
had brought no food either for us or their friends, as the 
cloths they took with them, “which were their own, 
were scarcely sufficient to purchase a meal—famines being 


Halt three days. 


74 MGUNDA MKHALI. [1861. 


as bad where they had been as in Ugogo. To try and 
get all the men together again, I now sent off a party 
loaded with cloths to see what they could get for us; but 
they returned on the 30th grinning and joking, with 
nothing but a small fragment of goat-flesh, telling lies 
by the dozens. Johur then came into camp, unconscious 
that Baraka by my orders had, during his absence, been 
inspecting his kit, where he found concealed seventy- 
three yards of cloth, which could only have been my pro- 
perty, as Johur had brought no akaba or reserve fund 
from the coast. 

The theft having been proved to the satisfaction of 
' every one, I ordered Baraka to strip him of everything 
and give him three dozen lashes; but after twenty-one 
had been given, the rest were remitted on his promising 
to turn Queen’s evidence, when it transpired that Mit- 
wana had done as much as himself. Johur, it turned 
out, was a murderer, having obtained his freedom by 
killing his master. He was otherwise a notoriously bad 
character; so, wishing to make an example, as I knew 
all my men were robbing me daily, though I could not 
detect them, I had him turned out of camp. Baraka was 
a splendid detective, and could do everything well when 
he wished it, so I sent him off now with cloths to see 
what he could do at Jiwa la Mkoa, and next day he re- 
turned triumphantly driving in cows and goats. Three 
Wanyamtézi, also, who heard we were given to shooting 
wild animals continually, came with him to offer their 
services as porters. 

As nearly all the men had now returned, Grant and I 
To Jiwa la Mkoa, Spent New Year’s Day with the first detach- 
ast ment at Jiwa la Mkoa, or Round Rock—a 
ick tembé village occupied by a few Wakimbii settlers, 
who, by their presence and domestic habits, made us feel 
as though we were well out of the wood. So indeed we 
found it; for although this wilderness was formerly an 


Jan. ] PUNISHMENT OF A THIEF. 75 


entire forest of trees and wild animals, numerous Wa- 
kimbt, who formerly occupied the banks of the Rtiaha to 


The Tembde, or Mud Village, at Jiwa la Mkoa. 


the southward, had been driven to migrate here, wherever 
they could find springs of water, by the boisterous naked 
pastorals the Warori. 

At night three slaves belonging to Sheikh Salem bin 
Saif stole into our camp, and said they had been sent by 
their master to seek for porters at Kazé, as all the Wan- 
yamtiézi porters of four large caravans had deserted in 
Ugogo, and they could not move. I was rather pleased 
by this news, and thought it served the merchants right, 
knowing, as I well did, that the Wanyamtézi, being na- 
turally honest, had they not been defrauded by foreigners 
on the down march to the coast, would have been honest 
still. Some provisions were now obtained by sending 
men out to distant villages; but we still supplied the 
camp with our guns, killing rhinoceros, wild boar, ante- 
lope, and zebras. The last of our property did not come 
up till the 5th, when another thief being caught, got 
fifty lashes, under the superintendence of Baraka, to show 
that punishment was only inflicted to prevent further 


crime. 


76 - MGUNDA MKHALT. [1861. 


The next day my men came from Kazé with letters 
from Sheikh Snay and Mtisa. They had been 
detained there some days after arrival, as 
those merchants’ slaves had gone to Utambara to settle 
some quarrel there ; but as soon as they returned, Mtisa 
ordered them to go and assist us, giving them beads to 
find rations for themselves on the way, as the whole 
country about Kazé had been half-starved by famines, 
though he did send a‘little rice and tobacco for me. The 
whole party left Kazé together ; but on arrival at Tura the 
slaves said they had not enough beads and would return 
for some more, when they would follow my men. This 
bit of news was the worst that could have befallen us ; 
my men were broken-hearted enough before, and this 
drove the last spark of spirit out of them. To make the 
best of a bad job, I now sent Bombay with two other men 
off to Misa to see what he could do, and ordered my other 
men to hire Wakimbtt from village to village. On the 
7th, a nervous excitement was produced in the camp by 
some of my men running in and calling all to arm, as 
the fugitive chief Manta Séra was coming, with thirty 
armed followers carrying muskets. Such was the case: 
and by the time my men were all under arms, with their 
sword-bayonets fixed, drawn up by my tent, the veritable 
“'Tippler” arrived ; but, not liking the look of such a for- 
midable array as my men presented, he passed on a short 
way, and then sent back a deputation to make known his 
desire of calling on me, which was no sooner complied 
with than he came in person, attended by a body-guard. 
On my requesting him to draw near and sit, his wooden 
stool was placed for him. He began the conversation by 
telling me he had heard of my distress from want of por- 
ters, and then offered to assist me with some, provided I 
would take him to Kazé, and mediate between him and 
the Arabs ; for, through their unjustifiable interference in 


Halt seven days. 


Jan. ] STORY OF MANUA SERA. 77 


his government affairs, a war had ensued, which termi- 
nated with the Arabs driving him from his possessions a 
vagabond. Mantia Séra, I must say, was as fine a young 
man as ever I looked upon. He was very handsome, and 
looked as I now saw him the very picture of a captain of 
the banditti of the romances. I begged him to tell me 
his tale, and, in compliance, he gave me the following 
narrative :— 

“Shortly after you left Kazé for England, my old 
father, the late chief Ftndi Kira, died, and by his desire 
I became lawful chief ; for, though the son of a slave girl, 
and not of Fiindi Kira’s wife, such is the law of inherit- 
ance—a constitutional policy established to prevent any 
chance of intrigues between the sons born in legitimate 
wedlock. Well, after assuming the title of chief, I gave 
presents of ivory to all the Arabs with a liberal hand, but 
most so to Mtisa, which caused great jealousy amongst 
the other merchants. Then after this [ established a pro- 
perty tax on all merchandise that entered my country. 
Fundi Kira had never done so, but I did not think that 
any reason why I should not, especially as the Arabs were 
the only people who lived in my country exempt from 
taxation. This measure, however, exasperated the Arabs, 
and induced them to send me hostile messages, to the 
effect that, if I ever meddled with them, they would de- 
throne me, and place Mkisiwa, another illegitimate son, 
on the throne in my stead. This,” Mantia Séra continued, 
“JT could not stand; the merchants were living on suffer- 
ance only in my country. I told them so, and defied 
them to interfere with my orders, for I was not a ‘woman,’ 
to be treated with contempt; and this got up a quarrel. 
Mkisiwa, seizing at the opportunity of the prize held out 
to him by the Arabs as his supporters, then commenced a 
system of bribery. Words led to blows; we had a long 
and tough fight ; I killed many of their number, and they 


78 MGUNDA MKHALI. ‘{1861. 


killed mine. Eventually they drove me from my palace, 
and placed Mkisiwa there as chief in my stead. My 
faithful followers, however, never deserted me ; so I went 
to Ruibtiga, and put up with old Matila there. The Arabs 
followed—drove me to Ngtrt, and tried to kill Matila for 
having fostered me. He, however, escaped them; but 
they destroyed his country, and then followed me down 
to Ngtrt. There we fought for many months, until all 
provisions were exhatisted, when I defied them to catch 
me, and forced my way through their ranks. It is need- 
less to say I have been a wanderer since; and though I 
wish to make friends, they will not allow it, but do all 
they can to hunt me to death. Now, as you were a friend 
of my father, I do hope you will patch up this war for me, 
which you must think is unjust.” 

I told Mantia Séra I felt very much for him, and I 
would do my best if he would follow me to Kazé; but I 
knew that nothing could ever be done unless he returned 
to the free-trade principles of his father. He then said 
he had never taken a single tax from the Arabs, and 
would gladly relinquish his intention to do so. The whole 
affair was commenced in too great a hurry ; but whatever 
happened he would gladly forgive all if I would use my 
influence to reinstate him, for by no other means could he 
ever get his crown back again. I then assured him that 
1 would do what I could to restore the ruined trade of 
his country, observing that, as all the ivory that went out 
of his country came to ours, and all imports were produc- 
tions of our country also, this war injured us as well as 
himself. Mantia Séra seemed highly delighted, and said 
he had a little business to transact in Ugogo at present, 
but he would overtake me in a few days. He then sent 
me one of my runaway porters, whom he had caught in 
the woods making off with a load of my beads. We then 
separated ; and Baraka, by my orders, gave the thief fifty 
lashes for his double offence of theft and desertion. 


—— 


Jan. | ANOTHER FUGITIVE CHIEF. 79 


On the 9th, having bought two donkeys and engaged 
To Garaéswi, vm, SeVeral men, we left Jiwa la Mkoa, with half 
ae eae our traps, and marched to Garaéswi, where, 
Halt, 12d ana tO my surprise, there were as many as twenty 
abs tembés—a recently-formed settlement of 
Wakimbit. Here we halted a day for the rear convoy, 
and then went on again by detachments to Zimbo, where, 
to our intense delight, Bombay returned to us on the 
13th, triumphantly firing guns, with seventy slaves ac- 
companying him, and with letters from Snay and Misa, 
in which they said they hoped, if I met with Mantia Séra, 
that I would either put a bullet through his head, or else 
bring him in a prisoner, that they might do for him, for 
the scoundrel had destroyed all their trade by cutting off 
caravans. Their fights with him commenced by his levy- 
ing taxes in opposition to their treaties with his father, 
Findi Kira, and then preventing his subjects selling 
them grain. 

Once more the whole caravan moved on; but as I had 
De Metoge to pay each of the seventy slaves sixteen 
Thembo, 14. yards of cloth, by order of their masters, in 
the simple matter of expenditure it would have been 
better had I thrown ten loads away at Ugogo, where 
my difficulties first commenced. On arrival at Mgongo 
Thembo—the Elephant’s Back—called so in consequence 
of a large granitic rock, which resembles the back of that 
animal, protruding through the ground—we found a 
clearance in the forest, of two miles in extent, under 
- cultivation. Here the first man to meet me was the 
fugitive chief of Rtibiga, Matila. This poor old man— 
one of the honestest chiefs in the country—had been to 
the former expedition a host and good friend. He now 
gave me a cow as a present, and said he would give me 
ten more if I would assist him in making friends with the 
Arabs, who had driven him out of his country, and had 
destroyed all his belongings, even putting a slave to reign 


80 MGUNDA MKHALI. [1861. 


in his stead, though he had committed no fault or inten- 
tional injury towards them. It was true Manta Séra, their 
enemy, had taken refuge in his palace, but that was not 
his fault; for, anticipating the difficulties that would 
arise, he did his best to keep Mantia Séra out of it, but 
Maniia Séra, being too strong for him, forced his way in. - 
I need not say I tried to console this unfortunate victim 
of circumstances as best I could, inviting him to go with 
me to Kazé, and promising to protect him with my life if 
he feared the Arabs; but the old man, being too feeble to 
travel himself, said he would send his son with me. 

Next day we pushed on a double march through the 
forest, and reached a nullah. As it crosses 
the track in a southernly direction, this might 
either be the head of the Kultlti mongo or river, which, 
passing through the district of Kiwélé, drains westward 
into the Malagarazi river, and thence into the Tanganyika, 
or else the most westerly tributary to the Rtaha river, 
draining eastward into the sea. The plateau, however, is 
apparently so flat here, that nothing but a minute survey, 
or rather following the watercourse, could determine the 
matter. Then emerging from the wilderness, 
we came into the open cultivated district of 
Titra, or “ put down”—called so by the natives because 
it was, only a few years ago, the first cleared space in the 
wilderness; and served as a good halting-station, after 
the normal ten days’ march in the jungles, where we had 
now been struggling more than a month. 

The whole place, once so fertile, was now almost depo- 
pulated and in a sad state of ruin, showing plainly the 
savage ravages of war; for the Arabs and their slaves, 
when they take the field, think more of plunder and 
slavery than the object they started on—each man of the 
force looking out for himself. The incentives, too, are so 
great ;—a young woman might be caught (the greatest 
treasure on earth), or a boy or a girl, a cow or a goat—all 


To Camp, 15th. 


To E. Tira, 16th. 


JAN. | A THEFT, AND RESTORATION. 81 


of them fortunes, of themselves too irresistible to be over- 
looked when the future is doubtful. Here Sheikh Said 
broke down in health of a complaint which he formerly 
had suffered from, and from which I at once saw he 
would never recover sufficiently well to be ever effective 
again. It was a sad misfortune, as the men had oreat 
confidence in him, being the representative of their Zan- 
zibar government: still it could not be helped; for, as a 
sick man is, after all, the greatest possible impediment to 
a march, it was better to be rid of him than have the 
trouble of dragging him ; so I made up my mind, as soon 
as we reached Kazé, | would drop him there with the 
Arabs. He could not be moved on the 16th, 
so I marched across the plain and put up in 
some villages on its western side. Whilst waiting for the 
sheikh’s arrival, some villagers at night stole several loads 
of beads, and ran off with them; but my men, finding 
the theft out in time, hunted them down, and recovered 
all but one load—for the thieves had thrown their loads 
down as soon as they found they were hotly pursued. 
Early this morning I called all the head men of the 
village together, and demanded the beads to 
be restored to me; for, as I was living with 
them, they were responsible, according to the laws of the 
country. They acknowledged the truth and force of my 
demand, and said they would each give me a Gow as an 
earnest, until their chief, who was absent, arrived. This, 
of course, was objected to, as the chief, in his absence, must 
have deputed some one to govern for him, and I expected 
him to settle at once, that I might proceed with the march. 
Then selecting five of my head men to conduct the case, 
with five of their elders, 1t was considered my losses were 
equivalent to thirty head of cattle. As I remitted the 
penalty to fifteen head, these were made over to me, and 
we went on with the march—all feeling delighted with the 
F 


To W. Tira, 17th. 


Halt, 18¢h. 


82 MGUNDA MKHALI. [1861. 


issue but the Hottentots, who, not liking the loss of the __ 
second fifteen cows, said that in Kafirland, where the laws 
of the country are the same as here, the whole would have 
been taken, and, as it was, they thought I was depriving 
them of their rights to beef. 

By a double march, the sheikh riding in a hammock 
To Camp, 1m. Sung on a pole, we now made Kiualé, or 
To £, Ribiga, “ Partridge” nullah, which, crossing the road 
og to the northward, drains these lands to the 
Malagarazi river, and thence into the Tanganyika lake. 
Thence, having spent the night in the jungle, we next 
morning pushed into the cultivated district of Rtbtiga, 
and put up in some half-deserted tembés, where the 
ravages of war were even more disgusting to witness than 
at Tira. The chief, as I have said, was a slave, placed 
there by the Arabs on the condition that he would 
allow all traders and travellers to help themselves without 
payment as long as they chose to reside there. In conse- 
quence of this wicked arrangement, | found it impossible 
to keep my men from picking and stealing. They looked 
upon plunder as their fortune and right, and my inter- 
ference as unjustifiable. 

By making another morning and evening march, we 
To W. Rubia, then reached the western extremity of this 
ee a cultivated opening ; where, after sleeping the 
To E. Unyan- night, we threaded through another forest to 
MO aoe the little clearance of Kigiié, and in one more 
march through forest arrived in the large and fertile dis- 
trict of Unyanyembé, the centre of Unyamtiézi—the Land 
of the Moon—within five miles of Kazé, which is the 
name of a well in the village of Tabora, now constituted 
the great central slave and ivory merchants’ depdt. My 
losses up to this date (23d) were as follows :—One 
Hottentot dead and five returned ; one freeman sent back 
with the Hottentots, and one flogged and turned off; 


JAN, | LOSSES TO THIS DATE. 83 


twenty-five of Sultan Majid’s gardeners deserted : ninety- 
eight of the original Wanyamtiézi porters deserted ; twelve 
mules and three donkeys dead. Besides which, more than 
half of my property had been stolen ; whilst the travelling 
expenses had been unprecedented, in consequence of the 


severity of the famine throughout the whole length of the 
march. 


View in Hastern Unyanyembe. 


84 UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


CHAPTER V. 
UNYAMUEZI. 


THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE OF U-N-YA-MUEZI—KAZE, THE CAPITAL 
—OLD MUSA—THE NAKED WAKIDI—THE N’YANZA, AND THE 
QUESTION OF THE RIVER RUNNING IN OR OUT—THE CONTEST 
BETWEEN MOHINNA AND “ SHORT-LEGS””—FAMINE—THE ARABS 
AND LOCAL WARS—THE SULTANA OF UNYAMBEWA—UNGURUE 
“THE PIG ”—PILLAGE. 


U-n-ya-mtiz1— Country of Moon—must have been 
one of the largest kingdoms in Africa. It is little inferior 
in size to England, and of much the same shape, though 
now, instead of being united, it is cut up into petty states. 
In its northern extremities it is known by the appella- 
tion U-stktma—country north; and in the southern, 
U-takama—country south. There are no historical tra- 
ditions known to the people; neither was anything ever 
written concerning their country, as far as we know, until 
the Hindtis, who traded with the east coast of Africa, 
opened commercial dealings with its people in slaves 
and ivory, possibly some time prior to the birth of our 
Saviour, when, associated with their name, Men of the 
Moon, sprang into existence the Mountains of the Moon. 
These Men of the Moon are hereditarily the greatest 
traders in Africa, and are the only people who, for love 
of barter and change, will leave their own country as 
porters and go to the coast, and they do so with as much 
zest as our country-folk go to a fair. As far back as we 


JAN. | CHARACTER OF THE PEOPLE. 85 


can trace they have done this, and they still do it as here- 
tofore. The whole of their country ranges from 3000 to 


Myamuezi, or Native cf Unyamuezi. 


4000 feet above the sea-level—a high plateau, studded 
with little outcropping hills of granite, between which, in 
the valleys, there are numerous fertilising springs of fresh 
water, and rich iron ore is found in sandstone. Generally 
industrious—much more so than most other negroes—they 
cultivate extensively, make cloths of cotton in their own 
looms, smelt iron and work it up very expertly, build 
tembés to live in over a large portion of their country, 
but otherwise live in grass huts, and keep flocks and herds 
of considerable extent. 

The Wanyamiiézi, however, are not a very well-favoured 
people in physical appearance, and are much darker than 
either the Wazaramo or the Wagogo, though many of 
their men are handsome and their women pretty ; neither 
are they well dressed or well armed, being wanting in 
pluck and gallantry. Their women, generally, are better 
dressed than the men. Cloths fastened round under 
the arms are their national costume, along with a neck- 


{an UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


lace of beads, large brass or copper wire armlets, and a 
profusion of thin circles, called sambo, made of the giraffe’s 
tail-hairs bound round by the thinnest iron ‘or copper 
wire; whilst the men at home wear loin-cloths, but in 
the field, or whilst travelling, simply hang a goat-skin over 
their shoulders, exposing at least three-fourths of their body 
in a rather indecorous manner. In all other respects they 
ornament themselves like the women, only, instead of a 
long coil of wire wound up the arm, they content them- 
selves with having massive rings of copper or brass on the 
wrist; and they carry for arms a spear and bow and 
arrows. All extract more or less their lower incisors, and 
cut a A between their two upper incisors. The whole 
tribe are desperate smokers, and greatly given to drink. 
On the 24th, we all, as many as were left of us, marched 
into the merchants’ depot, S. lat. 5° 0’ 52”, 
and E. long. 33° 1’ 34”,* escorted by Misa, 
who advanced to meet us, and guided us into his tembé, 
where he begged we would reside with him until we could 
find men to carry our property on to Karagtié. He added 
that he would accompany us; for he was on the point of 
going there when my first instalment of property arrived, 
but deferred his intention out of respect to myself. He 
had been detained at Kazé ever since [ last left it in con- 
sequence of the Arabs having provoked a war with Manta 
Séra, to which he was adverse. For a long time also he 
had been a chained prisoner ; as the Arabs, "jealous of the 
favour Mantia Séra had shown to him in preference to 
themselves, basely accused him of supplying Mantia Séra 
with gunpowder, and bound him hand and foot “like a 
slave.” It was delightful to see old Miisa’s face again, 
and the supremely hospitable, kind, and courteous manner 
in which he looked after us, constantly bringing in all 
kind of small delicacies, and seeing that nothing was 
‘wanting to make us happy. All the property I had sent 
on in Tees he had stored away; or rather, I should 
* See Note, page 123, 


To Kazé, 24th. 


| SS 


Waganda War Instruments. 


1. Warrior. 4. Men’s wreaths. g. King’s amulet of 12, 13, 14. Charms. 
2. Ivory ornaments 5. Head ornaments. : beads. 15. Spears. 

for legs. 6. Shield and spears. ro, Necklaces. 16, Anklet of serpent skin 
3. King’s leg ornaments. 7, 8. Necklaces. . ir. Woman’s dirk and bolt of wood. 


4 ‘ 
6 L- 


Jools pesSa]-90143 pue ‘astyd ‘sroourd “SMOT[AG UAPOOM & Surpiom Skog” 2g apatite a ac uO Tt 
‘sjayoiey ‘siautuey ‘sasnos ‘saatuy Swejpns yIAue auoys sty ye YUsyoetg “4 “SBa] S[PUMULID Of SYI0}S USPOO NM € 
ayi {oct SuLMeIp JOF DOA puvy SyIMUSYe[_ ‘OT ‘punois oy ‘uost AxyUNod Jo apeul sa0y Jo peo] = 
Suy[iy ut posn pvaucaygauz A7wo ayy ‘saoy uorzy “9 “IaYOUM JO Joyseq—ssvis ayy-Aevyjo dno suryuiqd “tf 


‘syIOTO yaeq Sursowuuey a0j yayyeur uapoop, *6 


‘((gomurekuep) Woop oy} JO pueT oy1 Jo “ozo ‘sjusTeTdoz] 


Sere 


7 SESS 


JAN. | PREPARATIONS FOR A CAMPAIGN. 87 


say, as much as had reached him, for the road expenses 
had eaten a great hole in it. 


Front View of Musa’s Tembe at Kaze. 


Once settled down into position, Sheikh Snay and the 
whole conclave of Arab merchants came to call.on me. 
They said they had an army of four hundred slaves armed 
with muskets ready to take the field at once to hunt down 
Mantia Séra, who was cutting their caravan road to pieces, 
and had just seized, by their latest reports, a whole convoy 
of their ammunition. I begged them strongly to listen to 
reason, and accept my advice as an old soldier, not to 
carry on their guerilla warfare in such a headlong hurry, 
else they would be led a dance by Manitia Séra, as we had 
been-by Tantia Topee in India. I advised them to allow 
me to mediate between them, after tellmg them what a 
favourable interview I had had with Mantia Séra and 
Maiila, whose son was at that moment concealed in Miisa’s 
tembé. My advice, however, was not wanted. Snay 
knew better than any one how to deal with savages, and 
determined on setting out as soon as his army had “ eaten 


their beef-feast of war.” 
On my questioning him about the Nile, Snay still 


88 UNYAMUEZI. [1861.0 


thought the N’yanza was the source of the Jub river,” as 
he did in our former journey, but gave way when I told 
him that vessels frequented the Nile, as this also coincided 
with his knowledge of navigators in vessels appearing on 
some waters to the northward of Unyoro. In a great 
hurry he then bade me good-bye; when, as he thought it | 
would be final, I gave him, in consideration for his former 
good services to the last expedition, one of the gold 
watches given me by the Indian Government. ~ I saw him 
no more, though he and all the other Arabs sent me 
presents of cows, goats, and rice, with a notice that they 
should have gone on their war-path before, only, hearing 
of my arrival, out of due respect to my greatness, they 
waited to welcome mein. Further, after doing for Mantia 
Séra, they were determined to go on to Ugogo to assist 
Salem bin Saif and the other merchants on, during which, 
at the same time, they would fight all the Wagogo who 
persisted in taking taxes and in harassing their caravans. 
At the advice of Mtsa, 1 sent Maiila’s son off at night to 
tell the old chief how sorry I was to find the Arabs so 
hot-headed I could not even effect an arrangement with 
them. It was a great pity; for Mantia Séra was so much 
liked by the Wanyamtézi, they would, had they been 
able, have done anything to restore him. 
Next day the non-belligerent Arabs left in charge of 
pet c, i bhe station, headed by my old friends Abdtilla 
and Mohinna, came to pay their respects 
again, recognising in me, as they said, a “ personification 
of their sultan,” and therefore considering what they were 
doing only due to my rank. They regretted with myself 
that Snay was so hot-headed; for they themselves thought 
a treaty of peace would have been the best thing for them, 
for they were more than half-ruined already,.and saw no 
hope for the future. Then, turning to geography, I told 


* The Jub is the largest river known to the Zanzibar Arabs. It de- 
bouches on the east coast north of Zanzibar, close under the equator. 


_ Jan. | ARAB GEOGRAPHY. 89 


Abdtilla all I had written and lectured in England con- 
cerning his stories about navigators on the Nainza, which 
I explained must be the Nile, and wished to know if I 
should alter it in any way: but he ae “Do not; you 
may depend it will all turn out. right ;” to which Misa 
added, all the people in the north told hit that when the 
N’yanza rose, the stream rushed with such violence it tore 
up islands and floated them away. 

I was puzzled at this announcement, not then knowing 
that both the lake and the Nile, as well as all ponds, 
were called N’yanza: but we shall sce afterwards that he 
- was right; and it was in consequence of this confusion 
in the treatment of distinctly different geographical fea- 
tures under one common name by these people, that in 
my former journey I could not determine where the lake 
ended and the Nile began. Abditilla again—he had done 
so on the former journey—spoke to me of a wonderful 
mountain to the northward of Karagtié, so high and 
steep no one could ascend it. It was, he said, seldom 
visible, being up in the clouds, where white matter, snow 
or hail, often fell. Misa said this hill was in Rtianda, a 
much larger country than Uritindi; and further, both 
men said, as they had said before, that the lands of 
Usoga and Unyoro were islands, being surrounded by 
water; and a salt lake, which was called N’yanza, though 
not ‘he great Victoria N’yanza, lay on the other side vet 
Unyoro, from which direction Rtmanika, king of Ka- 
ragtié, sometimes got beads forwarded to him iy Kam- 
- asi, king of Unyoro, of a different sort from any brought 
from Zanzibar. Moreover, these beads were said to have 
been plundered from white men by the Wakidi,—a stark- 
naked people who live up in trees have small stools fixed 
on behind, always ready for sitting—wear their hair hang- 
ing down as far as the rump, all cotta with cowrie- stalls 
etepent beads from wire attached to their ears and their 
lower lips—and wear strong iron collars and bracelets. 


90 UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


This people, I was told, are so fierce in war that no other 
tribe can stand against them, though they only fight with 
short spears. When this discourse was ended, ever per- 
plexed about the Tanganyika being a still lake, I inquired 
of Mohinna and other old friends what they thought 
about the Martmgt river: did it run into or out of the — 
lake? and they all still adhered to its running into the 
lake—which, after all, in my mind, is the most conclu- 
sive argument that it’does run out of the lake, making 
it one of a chain of lakes leading to the N’yassa, and 
through it by the Zambézi into the sea ; for all the Arabs 
on the former journey said the Risizi river ran out of 
the Tanganyika, as also the Kitangtilé ran out of the 
N’yanza, and the Nile ran into it, even though Snay said 
he thought the Jub river drained the N’yanza. All these 
statements were, when literally translated into English, 
the reverse of what the speakers, using a peculiar Arab 
idiom, meant to say; for all the statements made as to 
the flow of rivers by the negroes—who apparently give 
’ the same meaning to “ out” and “in” as we do—contra- 
dicted the Arabs in their descriptions of the direction of 
the flow of these rivers. 

Mchinna now gave us a very graphic description of his 
fight with Short-legs, the late chief of Khoko. About a 
year ago, as he was making his way down to the coast 
with his ivory merchandise, on arrival at Khoko, and 
before his camp was fortified with a ring-fence of thorns, 
some of his men went to drink at a well, where they no 
sooner arrived than the natives began to beat them with 
sticks, claiming the well as their property. This com- 
-menced a row, which brought out a large body of men, 
who demanded a bullock at the point of their spears. 
Mohinna hearing this, also came to the well, and said he 
would not listen to their demand, but would drink as he 
wished, for the water was the gift of God. Words then 
changed to blows. All Mohinna’s pagazis bolted, and his 


Jan. ] CHANGES IN THE COUNTRY. 91 


merchandise fell into the hands of the Wagogo. Had his 
camp been fortified, he thinks he would have been too 
much for his enemies; but, as it was, he retaliated by 
shooting Short-legs in the head, and at once bolted back 
to Kazé with a few slaves as followers, and his three 
wives. 

The change that had taken place in Unyanyembé since 
I last left it was quite surprising. Instead of the Arabs 
appearing merchants, as they did formerly, they looked 
more like great farmers, with huge stalls of cattle at- 
tached to their houses ; whilst the native villages were all 
in ruins—so much so that, to obtain corn for my men, | 
had to send out into the district several days’ journey off, 
and even then had to pay the most severe famine prices 
for what I got. The Wanyamiiézi, I was assured, were 
dying of starvation im all directions; for, in addition to 
the war, the last rainy season had been so light, all their 
crops had failed. 

27th and 28th.—I now gave all my men presents 
for the severe trials they had experienced in the wilder- 
ness, forgetting, as I told them, the merciless manner in 
which they had plundered me; but as I gave a trifle 
more, in proportion, to the three sole remaining pagazis, 
because they had now finished their work, my men were 
all discontented, and wished to throw back their presents, 
saying I did not love them, although they were “permin- 
ents,” as much as the “temperaries.” They, however, 
gave in, after some hours of futile arguments, on my 
making them understand, through Baraka, that what they - 
saw me give to the pagazis would, if they reflected, only 
tend to prove to them that I was not a bad master who 
forgot his obligations when he could get no more out of 
his servants. 

I then went into a long inquiry with Misa about our 
journey northward to Karagtié; and as he said there 
were no men to be found in or near Unyanyembé, for 


92 UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


they were either all killed or engaged in the war, it was 
settled he should send some of his head men on to Run- 
gtia, where he had formerly resided, trading for some 
years, and was a great favourite with the bbe of the 
place, by name Kiringtiana. He also settled that I might 
take out of his establishment of slaves as many men as | 
could induce to go with me, for he thought them more 
trouble than profit, hired porters being more safe ; more- 
over, he said the plan would be of great advantage to 
him, as I offered to pay, both man and master, each the 
same monthly stipend as I gave my present men. This 
was paying double, and all the heavier a burden, as the 
number I should require to complete my establishment 
to one hundred armed men would be sixty. He; however, 
very generously advised me not to take them, as they 
would give so much trouble; but finally gave way when 
I told him I felt I could not advance beyond Karagtié 
unless I was quite independent of the natives ther 
view in which he concurred. 

29th and 30th.—Jafti, another Indian merchant here, 
and co-partner of Mtisa, came in from a ten days’ search 
after grain, and described the whole country to be in 
the most dreadful state of famine. Wanyamiiézi were 
lying about dead from starvation in all directions, and he 
did not think we should ever get through Usiti, as Sttwa- 
rora, the chief, was so extortionate he would “tear us 
to pieces ;” but advised our waiting until the war was 
settled, when all the Arabs would combine and go with 
us. Mttsa even showed fear, but arranged, at my sugges- 
tion, that he should send some men to Rttmanika, eee 
ing him of our intention to visit him, and begging, at the 
same time, he would use his influence in preventing our 
being detained in Ustu. 

I may here explain that the country Uzinza was once 
a large kingdom, governed by a king named Ritima, of 
Wahtima blood. At his death, which took place in Da- 


JAN. | NATIVE POLITICS. 93 


gara’s time (the present Rttmanika’s father), the kingdom 
was contested by his two sons, Rohinda and Stiwarora, 
but, at the intercession of Dagara, was divided—Rohinda 
taking the eastern, called Ukhanga, and Stiwarora the 
western half of the country, called Ustii. This measure 
made Ustti feudatory to Karagtié, so that much of the 
produce of the extortions committed in Ustti went to 
Karagtié, and therefore they were recognised, though the 
odium always rested on Stiwarora, “the savage extor- 
tioner,’ rather than on the mild-disposed king of Kara- 
gié, who kept up the most amicable relations with every 
one who visited him. 

Misa, I must say, was most loud in his praises: of 
Rtmanika ; and on the other hand, as Misa, eight years 
ago, had saved Ritmanika’s throne for him against an 
insurrection got up by his younger brother Rogéro, 
Rttmanika, always regarding Misa as his saviour, never 
lost an opportunity to show his gratitude, and would have 
done anything that Mtisa might have asked him. Of this 
matter, however, more in Karagtié. 

31st.—To-day, Jaft, who had lost many ivories at 
Khoko when Mohinna was attacked there, prepared 100 
slaves, with Said bin Osman, Mohinna’s brother, with 
a view to follow down Snay, and, combining forces, 
attack Hori Hori, hoping to recover their losses; for it 
appeared to them the time had now come when their 
only hope left in carrying their trade to a successful issue, 
lay in force of arms. They would therefore not rest 
satisfied until they had reduced Khoko and Usekhé both, 
by actual force, to acknowledge their superiority, “feeding 
on them” until the Ramazan, when they would return 
with all the merchants detained in Ugogo, and, again 
combining their forces, they would fall on Ustu, to reduce 
that country also. 

When these men had gone, a lunatic set the whole 
place in commotion. He was a slave of Mtisa’s, who had 


94 _ UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


wounded some men previously in his wild excesses, and 
- had been tied up ; but now, breaking loose again, he swore 
he would not be satisfied until he killed some “big man.” 
His strength was so great no one could confine him, 
though they hunted him into a hut, where, having seized 
a gun and some arrows, he defied any one to put hands on 
him. Here, however, he was at last reduced to submission 
and a better state of his senses by starvation ; for I must 
add, the African is much given to such mental fits of 
aberration at certain periods: these are generally harmless, 
but sometimes not; but they come and they go again 
without any visible cause. 

1st.—Misa’s men now started for Rungtia, and pro- 
mised to bring all the porters we wanted by the first day 
of the next moon. We found that this would be early 
enough, for all the members of the expedition, except- 
ing myself, were suffering from the effects of the wilder- 
ness life—some with fever, some with scurvy, and some 
with ophthalmia—which made it desirable they should 
all have rest. Little now was done besides counting 
out my property, and making Sheikh Said, who became 
worse and worse, deliver his charge of Cafila Bashi over 
to Bombay for good. When it was found so much had 
been stolen, especially of the best articles, I was obliged to 
purchase many things from Misa, paying 400 per cent, 
which he said was their value here, over the market price 
of Zanzibar. I also got him to have all my coils of brass 
and copper wire made into bracelets, as is customary, to 
please the northern people. 

7th.—To-day information was brought here that whilst 
Mantia Séra was on his way from Ugogo to keep his 
appointment with me, Sheikh Snay’s army came on 
him at Titra, where he was ensconced in a tembé. 
Hearing this, Snay, instead of attacking the village at 
once, commenced negotiations with the chief of the 
place by demanding him to set free his guest, other- 


Fs. | AN ARAB RAID. 95 


wise they, the Arabs, would storm the tembé. The chief, 
unfortunately, did not comply at once, but begged grace 
for one night, saying that if Mantia Séra was found there . 
in the morning they might do as they liked. Of course 
Mantia bolted; and the Arabs, seeing the Ttira people 
all under arms ready to defend themselves the next 
morning, set at them in earnest, and shot, murdered, 
or plundered the whole of the district. Then, whilst 
Arabs were sending in their captures of women, children, 
and cattle, Mantia Séra made off to a district called Dara, 
where he formed an alliance with its chief, Kifttnja, and 
boasted he would attack Kazé as soon as the travelling 
season commenced, when the place would be weakened by 
the dispersion of the Arabs on their ivory excursions. 
This starting news set the place in a blaze, and 
brought all the Arabs again to seek my advice ; for they 
condemned what Snay had done in not listening to me 
before, and wished to know if I could not now treat 
for them with Mantia Séra, which they thought could be 
easily managed, as Mantia Séra himself was not only the 
first to propose mediation, but was actually on his way 
here for the purpose when Snay opposed him. I said 
nothing could give me greater pleasure than mediating 
for them, to put a stop to these horrors, but it struck me 
the case had now gone too far. Snay, in opposition to my 
advice, was bent on fighting; he could not be recalled ; 
and unless all the Arabs were of one mind, [ ran the risk 
of committing myself to a position I could not maintain. 
To this they replied that the majority were still at Kazé, 
all wishing for peace at any price, and that whatever 
terms I might wish to dictate they would agree to. 
Then I said, “What would you do with Mkisiwa? you 
‘have made him chief, and cannot throw him over.” “Oh, 
that,” they said, “can be easily managed ; for formerly, 
when we confronted Manta Séra at Netirt, we offered 
to give him as much territory as his father governed, 


96 UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


though not exactly in the same place; but he treated our 
message with disdain, not knowing then what a fix he 
was in. Now, however, as he has seen more, and wishes 
for peace himself, there can be no difficulty.” I then 
ordered two of my men to go with two of Mtisa’s to 
acquaint Mantia Séra with what we were about, and to 
know his views on the subject; but these men returned 
to say Manta Séra could not be found, for he was driven 
from “pillar to post® by the different native chiefs, as, 
wherever he went, his army ate up their stores, and 
brought nothing but calamities with them. Thus died 
this second attempted treaty. Musa then told me it was 
well it turned out so; for Mantia Séra would never be- 
lieve the Arabs, as they had broken faith so often before, 
even after exchanging blood by cutting incisions in one 
another’s legs—the most sacred bond or oath the natives 
know of. 

As nothing more of importance was done, I set out 
oe Tia with Grant to have a week’s shooting in the 
Niyama, 18% to district, under the guidance of an old friend, 

Fundi Sangoro, Misa’s “head gamekeeper,” 
who assured me that the sable antelope and blanc boc, 
specimens of which I had not yet seen, inhabited some 
low swampy place called N’yama, or “ Meat,” not far dis- 
tant, on the left bank of the Walé nullah. My com- 
panion unfortunately got fever here, and was prevented 
from going out, and I did little better; for although I 
waded up to my middle every day, and wounded several 
blane boc, [ only bagged one, and should not have got 
even him, had it not happened that some lions in the 
night pulled him down close to our camp, and roared so 
violently that they told us the story. The first thing in 
the morning I wished to have at them ; but they took 
the hint of daybreak to make off, and left me only the 
half of the animal. I saw only one sable antelope. We 
all went back to Kazé, arriving there on the 24th. 


Fes.-Marcn. | DEFEAT OF THE ARABS. 97 


25th to 13th—Days rolled on, and nothing was done 
in particular — beyond increasing my stock of know- 
ledge of distant places and people, enlarging my zoolo- 
gical collection, and taking long series of astronomical 
observations— until the 13th, when the whole of Kazé 
was depressed by a sad scene of mourning and tears. 
Some slaves came in that night—having made their way 
through the woods from Ugogo, avoiding the track to 
save themselves from detection—and gave information 
that Snay, Jafti, and five other Arabs, had been killed, 
as well as a great number of slaves. The expedition, 
they said, had been defeated, and the positions were so 
complicated nobody knew what to do. At first the 
Arabs achieved two brilliant successes, having succeeded 
in killmg Hori Hori of Khoko, when they recovered their 
ivory, made slaves of all they could find, and took a vast 
number of cattle ; then attacking Usekhé, they reduced 
that place to submission by forcing a ransom out of its 
people. At this period, however, they heard that a 
whole caravan, carrying 5000 dollars’ worth of property, 
had been cut up by the people of Mzanza, a small dis- 
trict ten miles north of Usekhé; so, instead of going on 
to Kanyenyé to relieve the caravans which were waiting 
there for them, they foolishly divided their forces into 
three parts. Of these they sent one to take their loot 
back to Kazé, another to form a reserve force at Mda- 
birt, on the east flank of the wilderness, and a third, 
headed by Snay and Jafi, to attack Mzanza. At the first 
onset Snay and Jaftt carried everything before them, and 
became so excited over the amount of their loot that they 
lost all feelings of care or precaution. 

In this high exuberance of spirits, a sudden surprise 
turned their momentary triumph into a total defeat ; for 
some Wahttmba, having heard the eres of the Wagogo, 
joined in their cause, and both together fell on the Arab 

G 


98 UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


force with such impetuosity that the former victors were 
now scattered in all directions. Those who could run fast 
enough were saved—the rest were speared to death by the 
natives. Nobody knew how Jafi fell; but Snay, after 
running a short distance, called one of his slaves, and 
begged him to take his gun, saying, “Tam too old to 
keep up with you; keep this gun for my sake, for I will 
lie down here and take my chance.” He never was seen 
again. But this was not all their misfortunes; for the 
slaves who brought in this information had met the first 
detachment, sent with the Khoko loot, at Kigtia, where, 
they said, the detachment had been surprised by Mantia 
Séra, who, having fortified a village with four hundred 
men, expecting this sort of thing, rushed out upon them, 
and cut them all up. 

The Arabs, after the first burst of their grief was over, 
came to me again in a body, and begged me to assist them, 
for they were utterly undone. Manta Séra prevented 
their direct communication with their detachment at 
Mdabiri, and that again was cut off from their caravans 
at Kanyenyé by the Mzanza people, and in fact all the 
Wagogo ; so they hoped at least I would not forsake them, 
which they heard I was going to do, as Manta Séra had 
also threatened to attack Kazé. I then told them, finally, 
that their proposals were now beyond my power, for I 
had a duty to perform as well as themselves, and in a day 
or two I should be off. 

14th to 17th,—On the 14th thirty-nine porters were 
brought in from Bungtta by Mtisa’s men, who said they 
had collected one hundred and twenty, and brought 
them to within ten miles of this, when some travellers 
frightened all but thirty-nine away, by telling them, “ Are 
you such fools as to venture into Kazé now? all the 
Arabs have been killed, or were being cut up and pursued 
by Mantia Séra.” This sad disappointment threw me 
on my “beam-ends.” For some reason or other none of 


Marcu. | AGAIN ON THE MARCH. 99 


Misa’s slaves would take service, and the Arabs prevented 
theirs from leaving the place, as it was already too short 
of hands. To do the best under these circumstances, I 
determined on going to Rungtia with what kit could be 
carried, leaving Bombay behind with Misa until such 
time as I should arrive there, and, finding more men, could 
send them back for the rest. I then gave Misa the last of 
the gold watches the Indian Government had given me ;* 
and, bidding Sheikh Said take all our letters and speci- 
mens back to the coast as soon as the road was found 
practicable, set out on the march northwards with Grant 
and Baraka, and all the rest of my men who were well 
enough to carry loads, as well as some of Misa’s head men, 
who knew where to get porters. 

After passing Masangé and Zimbili, we put up a night 
on ea the village of Iviri, on the northern border 
17th. of Unyanyembé, and found several ofticers 
Iwi "8* there, sent by Mkisiwa, to enforce a levy of 
To Iviri, 19% goldiers to take the field with the Arabs at 
bun ~ Kazé against Mantia Séra; to effect which, 
nulak sie, «they walked about ringing bells, and bawling 

out that if a certain percentage of all the in- 
habitants did not muster, the village chief would be seized, 
and their plantations confiscated. My men all mutinied 
here for increase of ration allowances. To find themselves 
food with, I had given them all one necklace of beads 
each per diem since leaving Kazé, in leu of cloth, which 
hitherto had been served out for that purpose. It was a 
very liberal allowance, because the Arabs never gave more 
than one necklace to every three men, and that, too, of 
inferior quality to what I served. I brought them to at 
last by starvation, and then we went on. Dipping down 
into a valley between two clusters of granitic hills, beauti- 
fully clothed with trees and grass, studded here and there 
with rich plantations, we entered the district of Usagan, 


* The two first gold watches were given away at Zanzibar. 


100 UNYAMUEZI. ‘[1861. 


and on the second day forded the Gombé nullah again— 
in its upper course, called Ktalé. 

Rising again up to the main level of the plantation, we 
To Ungigi’s Walked into the boma of the chief of Uny- 
Palace, 22d.  ambéwa, Singinya, whose wife was my old 
friend the late sultana Ungtigt’s lady’s-maid. Imme- 
diately on our entering her palace, she came forward to 
meet me with the most affable air of a princess, begged 
I would always come’to her as I did then, and sought to 
make every one happy and comfortable. Her old mistress, 
she said, died well stricken in years; and, as she had suc- 
ceeded her, the people of her country invited Singinya to 
marry her, because feuds had arisen about the rights of 
succession ; and it was better a prince, whom they thought 
best suited by birth and good qualities, should head their 
warriors, and keep all in order. At that moment Singinya 
was out in the field fighting his enemies; and she was 
sure, when he heard I was here, that he would be very 
sorry he had missed seeing me. 

We next went on to the district of Uktimbi, and put 
up in a village there, on approaching which 
all the villagers turned out to resist us, sup- 
posing we were an old enemy of theirs. They flew about 
brandishing their spears, and pulling their bows in the 
most grotesque attitudes, alarming some of my porters so 
much that they threw down their loads and bolted. All 
the country is richly cultivated, though Indian corn at 
that time was the only grain ripe. The square, flat-topped 
tembés had now been left behind, and instead the vil- 
lagers lived in small collections of grass huts, surrounded 
by palisades of tall poles. 

Proceeding on we put up at the small settlement of 
Usenda, the proprietor of which was a semi-negro Arab 
merchant called Sangoro. He had a large collection of 
women here, but had himself gone north with a view to 
trade in Karagtié. Report, however, assured us that he 


To Usenda, 23d. 


Maxcnu. | ANOTHER HALT. 101 


was then detained in Usti by Sttwarora, its chief, on the 
plea of requiring his force of musketeers to prevent the 
Watitita from pillaging his country, for these Wattita 
lived entirely on plunder of other people’s cattle. 

With one move, by alternately crossing strips of forest 
Ake ak and cultivation, studded here and there with 

small hills of granite, we forded the Quandé 
nullah—a tributary to the Gombé—and entered the rich 
flat district of Mininga, where the gingerbread-palm grows 
abundantly. The greatest man we found here was a 
broken-down ivory-merchant called Sirboko, who gave us 
a good hut to live in. Next morning, I believe at the 
suggestion of my Wangtiana, with Baraka at their head, 
he induced me to stop there; for he said Rungtia had been 
very recently destroyed by the Watiita, and this place 
could afford porters better than it. To all appearance 
this was the case, for this district was better cultivated 
than any place I had seen. I also felt a certain inclina- 
tion to stop, as I was dragging on sick men, sorely against 
my feelings; and I also thought I had better not go far- 
ther away from my rear property; but, afraid of doing 
wrong in not acting up to Miisa’s directions, I called up 
his head men who were with me, and asked them what 
they thought of the matter, as they had lately come from 
Rungita. On their confirming Sirboko’s story, and advis- 
ing my stopping, I acceded to their recommendation, 
and immediately gave Misa’s men orders to look out for 
porters. 

Hearing this, all my Wangtiana danced with delight ; 
and I, fearing there was some treachery, called Mtisa’s men 
again, saying I had changed my mind, and wished to go 
on in the afternoon ; but when the time came, not one of 
our porters could be seen. There was now no help for it; 
so, taking it coolly, I gave Miisa’s men presents, begged 
them to look sharp in getting the men up, and trusted all 
would end well in the long-run, Sirboko’s attentions 


102 UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


were most warm and affecting. He gave us cows, rice, 
and milk, with the best place he had to live in, and 
looked after us’ as constantly and tenderly as if he had 
been our father. It seemed quite unjust to harbour any 
suspicion against him. 

He gave the-following account of himself :—He used to 
trade in ivory, on account of some Arabs at Zanzibar. On 
crossing Usiti, he once had a fight with one of the chiefs 
of the country and killed him ; but he got through all right, 
because the natives, after two or three of their number had 
been killed, dispersed, and feared to come near his musket 
again. He visited Uganda when the late king Sunna was 
living, andeven traded with Usoga ; but as he was coming 
down from these northern countries he lost all his pro- 
perty by a fire breaking out in a village he stopped 
in, which drove him down here a ruined man. As it 
happened, however, he put up with the chief of this 
district, Ugali—Mr Paste—at a time when the Wattita 
attacked the place and drove all the inhabitants away. 
The chief, too, was on the point of bolting, when Sirboko 
prevented him by saying, “ If you will only have courage 
to stand by me, the Wattita shall not come near—at any 
rate, if they do, let us both die together.” The Wattita at 
that time surrounded the district, crowning all the little 
hills overlooking it ; but fearing the Arabs’ guns might be 
many, they soon walked away, and left them in peace. In 
return for this magnanimity, and feeling a great security 
in firearms, Ugali then built the large enclosure, with huts 
for Sirboko, we were now living in. Sirboko, afraid to 
return to the coast lest he should be apprehended for debt, 
has resided here ever since, doing odd jobs for other 
traders, increasing his family, and planting extensively. 
His agricultural operations are confined chiefly to rice, 


because the natives do not like it enough to be tempted: 
to steal it. : 


Sirboko's Slaves ‘carrying Fuel and cutting Rice. 


Marcu-Aprit. | A LIBERATED SLAVE. 103 


25th to 2d—I now set to work, collecting, stuffing, 
and drawing, until the 2d, when Mtisa’s men came in 
with three hundred men, whom I sent on to Kazé at 
once with my specimens and letters, directing Mtisa and 
Bombay to come on and join us immediately. Whilst 
waiting for these men’s return, one of Sirboko’s slaves, 
chained up by him, in the most piteous manner cried out 
to me: “Hai Bana wangi, Bana wangi (Oh, my lord, 
my lord), take pity on me! When I was a free man I saw 
you at Uvira, on the Tanganyika lake, when you were 
there ; but since then the Watiita, in a fight at Ujiji, 
speared me all over and left me for dead, when I was 
seized by the people, sold to the Arabs, and have been in 
chains ever since. Oh, I say, Bana wangi, if you would 
only liberate me I would never run away, but would serve 
you faithfully all my life.” This touching appeal was too 
strong for my heart to withstand, so I called up Sirboko, 
and told him, if he would liberate this one man to please 
me he should be no loser; and the release was effected. 
He was then christened Farhan (Joy), and was enrolled in 
my service with the rest of my freed men. I then inquired 
if it was true the Wabembé were cannibals, and also cir- 
cumcised. In one of their slaves the latter statement was 
easily confirmed. IJ was assured that he was a cannibal ; 
for the whole tribe of Wabembé, when they cannot get 
human flesh otherwise, give a goat to their neighbours for 
a sick or dying child, regarding such flesh as the best of 
all. No other cannibals, however, were known of; but 
the Masai, and their cognates, the Wahtmba, Watatirt, 
Wakasangé, Wanyaramba, and even the Wagogo and 
Wakimbt, circumcise. 

On the 15th I was surprised to find Bombay come in 
with all my rear property and a great quantity of Miisa’s, 
but without the old man. By a letter from Sheikh Said 
I then found that, since my leaving Kazé, the Arabs had, 


104 UNYAMUEZI, [1861. 


along with Mkisiwa, invested the position of Manta 
Séra at Kigité, and forced him to take flight again. After- 
wards the Arabs, returning to Kazé, found Mtsa prepar- 
ing to leave. Angry at this attempt to desert them, they 
persuaded him to give up his journey north for the pre- 
sent; so that at the time Bombay left, Misa was engaged 
as public auctioneer in selling the effects of Snay, Jaft, 
and others, but privately said he would follow me on to 
Karagtié as soon as his rice was cut. Adding a little 
advice of his own, Sheikh Said pressed me to go on with 
the journey as fast as possible, because all the Arabs had 
accused me of conspiring with Mantia Séra, and would 
turn against me unless I soon got away. 

2d to 30th.—Disgusted with Mitsa’s vacillatory con- 
duct, on the 22d I sent him a letter containing a bit 
of my mind. I had given him, as a present, sufficient 
cloth to pay for his porters, as well as a watch and a 
good sum of money, and advised his coming on at once, 
for the porters who had just brought in my rear property 
would not take pay to go on to Karagtié; and so I was 
detained again, waiting whilst his head man went to 
Rungtta to look for more. Five days after this, a party 
of Sangoro’s arrived from Karagiié, saying they had been 
detained three months in Ustti by Stiwarora, who had 
robbed them of an enormous quantity of property, and 
oppressed them so that all their porters ran away. Now, 
slight as this little affair might appear, it was of vital 
importance to me, as I found all my men shaking their 
heads and predicting what might happen to us when we 
got there; so, as a forlorn hope, I sent Baraka with 
another letter to Mtsa, offering to pay as much money 
for fifty men carrying muskets as would buy fifty slaves, 
and, in addition to that, I offered to pay them what my 
men were receiving as servants. Next day (23d) the 
chief Ugali came to pay his respects to us. He was a 
fine-looking young man, about thirty years old, the hus- 


APRIL. | FURTHER DETENTIONS AND DIFFICULTIES. 105 


band of thirty wives, but he had only three children. 
Much surprised at the various articles composing our kit, 
he remarked that our “ sleeping-clothes”—blankets— 
were much better than his royal robes; but of all things 
that amused him most were our picture-books, especially 
some birds drawn by Wolf. 

Everything still seemed going against me ; for on the 
following day (24th) Mitsa’s men came in from Rungtia 
to say the Wattita were “out.” They had just seized 
fifty head of cattle from Rungita, and the people were 
in such a state of alarm they dared not leave their homes 
and families. I knew not what to do, for there was 
no hope left but in what Baraka might bring; and 
as that even would be insufficient, I sent Mtisa’s men 
into Kazé, to increase the original number by thirty men 
more. 

Patience, thank God, I had a good stock of, so [ waited 
quietly until the 30th, when I was fairly upset by the 
arrival of a letter from Kazé, stating that Baraka had 
arrived, and had been very insolent both to Mitisa and to 
Sheikh Said. The bearer of the letter was at once to go 
and search for porters at Rungtia, but not a word was 
said about the armed men I had ordered. ‘At the same 
time reports from the other side came in, to the effect 
that the Arabs at Kazé and Mséné had bribed the Watitita 
to join them, and overrun the whole country from Ugogo 
to Ustti; and, in consequence of this, all the natives on 
the line I should have to take were in such dread of that 
terrible wandering race of savages, who had laid waste in 
turn all the lands from N’yassa to Ustti on their west 
flank, that not a soul dared leave his home. I could now 
only suppose that this foolish and hasty determination 
of the Arabs, who, quite unprepared to carry out their 
wicked alliance to fight, still had set every one against 
their own interests as well as mine, had not reached. 
Misa, so 1 made up my mind at once to return to Kazé, 


106 UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


and settle all matters I had in heart with himself and 
the Arabs in person. 

This settled, I next, in this terrible embarrassment, 
determined on sending back the last of the Hottentots, 
as all four of them, though still wishing to go on with 
me, distinctly said they had not the power to continue 
the march, for they had never ceased suffering from fever 
and jaundice, which had made them all yellow as guineas, 
save one, who was too black to change colour. It felt to 
me as if I were selling my children, having once under- 
taken to lead them through the journey ; but if I did not 
send them back then, I never could afterwards, and there- 
fore I allowed the more substantial feelings of humanity 
to overcome these compunctions. 

Next morning, then, after giving the Tots over in charge 
March back tp) Of Some men to escort them on to Kazé 
Kazé, wand 2d. ouietly, I set out myself with a dozen men, 
and the following evening I put up with Misa, who told 
me Baraka had just left without one man—all his slaves 
having become afraid to go, since the news of the Arab 
alliance had reached Kazé. Stiwarora had ordered his 
subjects to run up a line of bomas to protect his frontier, 
and had proclaimed his intention to kill every coast-man 
who dared attempt to enter Usti. My heart was ready 
to sink as I turned into bed, and I was driven to think 
of abandoning everybody who was not strong enough to 
go on with me carrying a load. 

3d to 13th.— Baraka, hearing I had arrived, then 
came back to me, and confirmed Misa’s words. The 
Arabs, too, came flocking in to beg, nay implore, me 
to help them out of their difficulties. Many of them 
were absolutely ruined, they said; others had their 
houses full of stores unemployed. At Ugogo those who 
wished to join them were unable to do so, for their porters, 
what few were left, were all dying of starvation ; and at 
that moment Mantia Séra was hovering about, shooting, 


May. | TREACHEROUS MURDER OF MAULA. 107 


both night and day, all the poor villagers in the district, 
or driving them away. Would to God, they said, I would 
mediate for them with Mantta Séra—they were sure I 
would be successful—and then they would give me as 
many armed men as I liked. Their folly in all their 
actions, I said, proved to me that anything I might 
attempt to do would be futile, for their alliance with 
the Wattita, when they were not prepared to act, at 
once damned them in my eyes as fools. This they in 
their terror acknowledged, but said it was not past 
remedy, if I would join them, to counteract what had 
been done in that matter. Suffice it now to say, after 
a long conversation, arguing all the pros and cons over, 
I settled I would write out all the articles of a treaty 
of peace, by which they should be liable to have all 
their property forfeited on the coast if they afterwards 
broke faith; and I begged them to call the next day 
and sign it. 

They were no sooner gone, however, than Misa as- 
sured me they had killed old Matila of Rtitbtiga in the most 
treacherous manner, as follows :—Khamis, who is an Arab 
of most gentlemanly aspect, on returning from Ugogo 
attended by slaves, having heard that Matila was desirous 
of adjusting a peace, invited him with his son to do so. 
When old Maiila came as desired, bringing his son with 
him, and a suitable offering of ivory and cattle, the Arab 
induced them both to kneel down and exchange blood 
with him, when, by a previously concerted arrangement, 
Khamis had them shot down by his slaves. This disgust- 
ing story made me quite sorry, when next day the Arabs 
arrived, expecting that I should attempt to help them ; 
but as the matter had gone so far, I asked them, in the 
first place; how they could hope Mantia Séra would have 
any faith in them when they were so treacherous, or trust 
to my help, since they had killed Matila, who was my 
protégé? They all replied in a breath, “Oh, let the past 


108 UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


be forgotten, and assist us now! for in you alone we can 
look for a preserver.” 

At length an armistice was agreed to; but as no one 
dared go to negotiate it but my men, I allowed them to 
take pay from the Arabs, which was settled on the 4th by 
ten men taking four yards of cloth each, with a promise 
of a feast on sweetmeats when they returned. Ex Mrs 
Misa, who had been put aside by her husband because 
she was too fat for her lord’s taste, then gave me three 
men of her private establishment, and abused Misa for 
being wanting in “brains.” She had repeatedly advised 
him to leave this place and go with me, lest the Arabs, 
who were all in debt to him, should put him to death ; 
but he still hung on to recover his remaining debts, a 
portion having Die realised by the sale of Snay’s and 
Jafi’’s effects ; for everything in the shape of commodities 
had been sold at the enormous price of 500 per cent—the 
male slaves even fetching 100 dollars per head, though 
the females went for less. The Hottentots now arrived, 
with many more of my men, who, seeing their old “flames,” 
Snay’s women, sold off by auction, begged me to advance 
them money to purchase them with, Fis: they could not 
bear to see these women, who were their own when they 
formerly stayed here, go off like cattle no one knew where. 
Compliance, of course, was impossible, as it would have 
crowded the caravan with women. Indeed, to prevent my 
men ever thinking of matrimony on the march, as well 
as to incite them on through the journey, I promised, as 
soon as we reached Egypt, to give them all wives and 
gardens’ at, Zanzibar, provided they did not contract mar- 
riages on the road. 

On the 6th, the deputation, headed by Baraka, returned 
triumphantly into Kazé, leading in two of Mantia Séra’s 
ministers—one of them a man with one eye, whom I called 
Cyclops—and two others, ministers of a chief called 
Kitambi, or Little Blue Cloth, After going a day’s jour- 


May. ] TREATY NEGOTIATED. 109 


ney, they said they came to where Mantia Séra was resid- 
ing with Kitambi, and met with a most cheerful and kind 
reception from both potentates, who, on hearing of my 
proposition, warmly acceded to it, issued orders at once 
that hostilities should cease, and, with one voice, said they 
were convinced that, unless through my instrumentality, 
Mantia Séra would never regain his possessions. Kitambi 
was quite beside himself, and wished my men to stop one 
night to enjoy his hospitality. Mantia Séra, after re- 
flecting seriously about the treacherous murder of old 
Mattila, hesitated, but gave way when it had been explained 
away by my men, and said, “No; they shall go at once, 
for my kingdom depends on the issue, and Bana Mzungit 
(the White Lord) may get anxious if they do not return 
promptly.” One thing, however, he insisted on, and that 
was, the only place he would meet the Arabs in was 
Unyanyembé, as it would be beneath his dignity to settle 
matters anywhere else. And further, he specified that he 
wished all the transactions to take place in Misa’s house. 
Next day, 7th, I assembled all the Arabs at Mtsa’s 
“court,” with all my men and the two chiefs, four men at- 
tending, when Baraka, “on his legs,” told them all I pro- 
posed for the treaty of peace. The Arabs gave their assent 
to it ; and Cyclops, for Mantia Séra, after giving a full nar- 
rative of the whole history of the war, in such a rapid and 
eloquent manner as would have done justice to our Prime 
Minister, said his chief was only embittered against Snay, 
and now Snay was killed, he wished to make friends with 
them. To which the Arabs made a suitable answer, add- 
ing, that all they found fault with was an insolent remark 
“which, in his wrath, Mantia Séra had given utterance to, 
that their quarrel with him was owing chiefly to a scurvy 
jest which he had passed on them, and on the character- 
istic personal ceremony of initiation to their Mussulman 
faith. Now, however, as Mantia Séra wished to make 
friends, they would abide by anything that I might pro- 


110 UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


pose. Here the knotty question arose again, what territory 
they, the Arabs, would give to Mantia Séra? I thought 
he would not be content unless he got the old place again ; 
but as Cyclops said no, that was not in his opinion abso- 
lutely necessary, as the lands of Unyanyembé had once 
before been divided, the matter was settled on the con- 
dition that another conference should be-held with Manta 
Séra himself on the subject. 

I now (8th and 9th)}sent these men all off again, inviting 
Mantta Séra to come over and settle matters at once, if he 
would, otherwise I should go on with my journey, for I 
could not afford to wait longer here. Then, as soon as 
they left, I made Misa order some of his men off to 
Runeitia, requesting the chief of the place to send porters 
to Mininga to remove all our baggage over to his palace; 
at the same time I begged him not to fear the Watiita’s 
threat to attack him, as Miisa would come as soon as the 
treaty was concluded, in company with me, to build a boma 
alongside his palace, as he did in former years, to be nearer 
his trade with Karagté. I should have mentioned, by the 
way, that Mtisa had now made up his mind not to go further 
than the borders of Ustti with me, lest I should be “torn 
to pieces,” and he would be “held responsible on the 
coast.” Misa’s men, however, whom he selected for this 
business, were then engaged making Mussulmans of all 
the Arab slave boys, and said they would not go until 
they had finished, although I offered to pay the “ doctor’s 
bill,” or allowance they expected to get. The ceremony, at 
the same time that it helps to extend their religion, as 
christening does ours, also stamps the converts with a mark 
effective enough to prevent desertion; because, after it has 
been performed, their own tribe would not receive them 
again. At last, when they did go, Misa, who was suffer- 
ing from a sharp illness, to prove to me that he was bent on 
leaving Kazé the same time as myself, began eating what 
he called his training pills—small dried buds of roses with 


May. ] DR K’YENGO, A MAGICIAN. rit 


alternate bits of sugar-candy. Ten of these buds, he said, 
eaten dry, were sufficient for ordinary eases, and he gave 
a very formidable description of the effect likely to follow 
the use of the same number boiled in rice-water or milk, 

Fearful stories of losses and distress came constantly 
in from Ugogo by small bodies of men, who stole their 
way through the jungles. To-day a tremendous commo- 
tion took place in Miisa’s tembé amongst all the women, 
as one had been delivered of still-born twins. They went 
about in procession, painted and adorned in the most 
grotesque fashion, bewailing and screeching, singing and 
dancing, throwing their arms and legs about as if they 
were drunk, until the evening set in, when they gathered 
a huge bundle of bulrushes, and, covering it over with a 
cloth, carried it up to the door of the bereaved on their 
shoulders, as though it had been a coffin. Then setting 
it down on the ground, they planted some of the rushes 
on either side of the entrance, and all kneeling together, 
set to bewailing, shrieking, and howling incessantly for 
hours together. 

After this (10th to 12th), to my great relief, quite un- 
expectedly, a man arrived from Ustti conveying a present 
of some ivories from a great mganga or magician, named 
Dr K’yengo, who had sent them to Misa as a recollection 
from an old friend, begging at the same time for some 
pretty cloths, as he said he was then engaged as mtongi 
or caravan director, collecting together all the native cara- 
vans desirous of making a grand march to Uganda. ‘This 
seemed to me a heaven-born opportunity of making friends 
with one who could help me so materially, and I begged 
Misa to seal it by sending him something on my account, 
as I had nothing by me ; but Misa objected, thinking it 
better simply to say I was coming, and if he, K’yengo, 
would assist me in Usitti, I would then give him some 
cloths as he wanted ; otherwise, Misa said, the man who 
had to convey it would in all probability make away with 


1aZ UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


it, and then do his best to prevent my seeing K’yengo. 
As soon as this was settled, against my wish and opinion, 
a special messenger arrived from Stiwarora to inquire of 
Misa what truth there was in the story of the Arabs 
having allied themselves to the Watitta. He had full 
faith in Misa, and hoped, if the Arabs had no hostile in- 
tentions towards him, he, Misa, would send him two men 
of his own, and prevail on the Arabs to send two of theirs ; 
further, Sttwarora wished Misa would send hima cat. A 
black cat was then given to the messenger for Sttwarora, 
and Misa sent an account of all that I had done towards 
effecting a peace, saying that the Arabs had accepted my 
views, and if he would have patience until I arrived in 
Usii, the four men required would be sent with me. 

In the evening my men returned again with Cyclops, 
who said, for his master, that Mantia Séra desired nothing 
more than peace, and to make friends with the Arabs; 
but as nothing was settled about deposing Mkisiwa, he 
could not come over here. Could the Arabs, was Manta 
Séra’s rejoinder, suppose for a moment that he would vol- 
untarily divide his dominion with one whom he regarded as 
his slave! Death would be preferable ; and although he 
would trust his life in the Mzungi’s hands if he called him 
again, he must know it was his intention to hunt Mkisiwa 
down like a wild animal, and would never rest satisfied 
until he was dead. The treaty thus broke down ; for the 
same night Cyclops decamped like a thief, after brandish- 
ing an arrow which Manta Séra had given him to throw 
down as a gauntlet of defiance to fight Mkisiwa to death. 
After this the Arabs were too much ashamed of themselves 
to come near me, though invited by letter, and Misa 
became so ill he would not take my advice and ride in a 
hammock, the best possible cure for his-complaint ; so, 
after being humbugged so many times by his procrastina- 
tions, I gave Sheikh Said more letters and specimens, with 
orders to take the Tots down to the coast as soon as prac- 


May. | THE TREATY NOT RATIFIED. 113 


ticable, and started once more for the north, expecting 
very shortly to hear of Mtisa’s death, though he promised 
to follow me the very next day or die in the attempt, and 
he also said he would bring on the four men required by 
Sttwarora ; for I was fully satisfied in my mind that he 
would have marched with me then had he had the resolu- 
tion to do so at all. 

Before I had left the district I heard that Mantia Séra 
To Mininga, 134 bad collected a mixed force of Warori, Wa- 
pid Ate gogo, and Wasakiima, and had gone off to 
Kigtté again, whilst the Arabs and Mkisiwa were feeding 
their men on beef before setting out to fight him. Manta | 
Séra, it was said, had vast resources. His father, Findi 
Kira, was a very rich man, and had buried vast stores of 
property, which no one knew of but Manta Séra, his 
heir. The Wanyamiiézi all inwardly loved him for his 
great generosity, and all alike thought him protected by a 
halo of charm-power so effective against the arms of the 
Arabs that he could play with them just as he lked. 

On crossing Unyambéwa (14th), when I a third time 
put up with my old friend the sultana, her chief sent word 
to say he hoped I would visit him at his fighting boma to 
eat a cow which he had in store for me, as he could not go 
home and enjoy the society of his wife whilst the war was 
going on; since, by so doing, it was considered he “would 
lose strength.” 

On arriving at Mininga, I was rejoiced to see Grant 
Mininea. 15m ¢0 greatly recovered. Three villagers had been 
19th.” attacked by two lions during my absence. ‘lwo 
of the people escaped, but the third was seized as he was 
plunging into his hut, and was dragged off and devoured 
by the animals. A theft also had taken place, hy which 
both Grant and Sirboko lost property; and the thieves 
had been traced over the borders of the next district. No 
fear, however, was entertained about the things being 

H 


114 UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


recovered, for Sirboko had warned Ugali the chief, and he 
had promised to send his Waganga, or magicians, out to 
track them down, unless the neighbouring -chief chose to 
give them up. After waiting two days, as no men came 
from Rungiia, I begged Grant to push ahead on to Ukitni, 
just opposite Rungtia, with all my coast-men, whilst I 
remained behind for the arrival of Mtsa’s men and porters 
to carry on the rest of the kit—for I had now twenty- 
two in addition to men permanently enlisted, who took 
service on the same rate of pay as my original coast- 
men; though, as usual, when the order for marching was 
issued, a great number were found to be either sick or 
malingering. 

Two days afterwards, Mtisa’s men came in with porters, 
To Mbist, 204 Who would not hire themselves for more than 
pao: two marches, having been forbidden to do so 
by their chief on account of the supposed Watiita invasion ; 
and for these two marches they required a quarter of the 
whole customary hire to Karagié. Mtsa’s traps, too, I 
found, were not to be moved, so I saw at once Misa had 
not kept faith with me, and there would be a fresh set of 
difficulties ; but as every step onwards was of the greatest 
importance—for my men were consuming my stores at a 
fearful pace—I paid down the beads they demanded, and 
next day joined Grant at Mbisti, a village of Uktini held 
by a small chief called Mchiméka, who had just concluded 
a war of two years’ standing with the great chief Uktilima 
(the Digger), of Ntnda (the Hump). During the whole 
of the two years’ warfare the loss was only three men on 
each side. Meanwhile Misa’s men bolted like thieves one 
night, on a report coming that the chief of Unyambéwa, 
after concluding the war, whilst amusing himself with his 
wife, had been wounded on the foot by an arrow that fell 
from her hand, The injury had at once taken a mortal 
turn, and the chief sent for his magicians, who said it 
was not the fault of the wife—somebody else must have 


See 4 a a ?- 
. » 7 . 4 iy “9 “- a 
= “me ; ae } “ahe 
aa _ j e e os ' " 
; / i i i 
3 y : | 
| . . ‘ = . . yy 
_ ; | 
4 — 7. . 
i AY rs i 
, : . q 
4 ’ | 
, ’ d 
. . « . ‘ 
. i ; 7 : my 
. ' , ‘ uh 
1 ; : AR 
: : ‘ P nt 
> } , , \\ bs a) 
q in — 4 4 


__ 
i] 
- 
a 
- 
P 
;. 
e 
: 


=| 


Harvest in Wanyamwezi, 1861. 


1, 2, 3, 4. Grain. Maize, etc., stacked for the Season. wet 
5. Men with long rackets thrashing Kafir corn (sorghum). 
6. Woman in the field cutting “sorghum” 


with a knife, and depositing it in a basket. 
7. Women separating 


ihe corn: from thechat by means Ge ain ee ee 


May. ] “THE PIG” AS CARAVAN-LEADER, 115 


charmed the arrow to cause such a deadly result, They 
then seized hold of their magic horn, primed for the pur- 
pose, and allowed it to drag them to where the culprits 
dwelt. Four poor men, who were convicted in this way, 
were at once put to death, and the chief from that moment 
began to recover, er. 

After a great many perplexities, I succeeded in. getting 
Mbist,2¢to  & kirangozi, or leader, by name Ungtrté 
Ble, (the Pig). He had several times taken cara- 
vans to Karagtié, and knew all the languages well, but 
unfortunately he afterwards proved to be what his name 
impled. That, however, I could not foresee ; so, trust- 
ing to him and good-luck, I commenced making fresh 
enlistments of porters; but they came and went in the 
most tantalising manner, notwithstanding I offered three 
times the hire that any merchant could afford to give. 
Every day seemed to be worse and worse. Some of 
Misa’s men came to get palm-toddy for him, as he was 
too weak to stand, and was so cold nothing would warm 
him. ‘There was, however, no message brought for my- 
self; and as the deputation did not come to me, I could 
only infer that I was quite forgotten, or that Misa, after 
all, had only been humbugging me. I scarcely knew 
what to do. Everybody advised me to stop where | was 
until the harvest was over, as no porters could be found 
on ahead, for Uktini was the last of the fertile lands on 
this side of Usti. 

Stopping, however, seemed endless; not so my sup- 
plies. I therefore tried advancing in detachments again, 
sending the free men off under Grant to Ukitlima’s, whilst 
I waited behind, keeping ourselves divided in the hopes 
of inducing all hands to see the advisability of exerting 
themselves for the general good—as my men, whilst we 
were all together, showed they did not care how long they 
were kept doing no more fatiguing work than chatting 
each other, and feeding at my expense, 


116 UNYAMUEZI. [1861]. 


In the meanwhile the villagers were very merry, brew- 
ing and drinking their pombé (beer) by turns, one house 
after the other providing the treat. On these occasions 
the chief—who always drank freely, and more than any 
other—heading the public gatherings of men and women, 
saw the large earthen pots placed all in a row, and the 
company taking long draughts from bowls made of plaited 
straw, laughing as they drank, until, half-screwed, they 
would begin bawling and shouting. ‘To increase the mer- 
riment, one or two jackanapes, with zebras’ manes tied 
over their heads, would advance with long tubes lke 
monster bassoons, blowing with all their might, contort- 
ing their faces and bodies, and going through the most 
obscene and ridiculous motions to captivate their simple 
admirers. This, however, was only the feast; the ball 
then began, for the pots were no sooner emptied than five 
drums at once, of different sizes and tones, suspended in a 
line from a long horizontal bar, were beaten with fury, and 
all the men, women, and children, singing and clappmg 
their hands in time, danced for hours together. 

A report reached me, by some of Sirboko’s men, whom 
he had sent to convey to us a small present of rice, that 
an Arab, who was crossing Msalala to our northward, had 
-been treacherously robbed of all his arms and guns by a 
small district chief, whose only excuse was that the Wan- 
yamttézi had always traded very well by themselves until 
the Arabs came into the country ; but now, as they were 
robbed of their property, on account of the disturbances 
caused by these Arabs, they intended for the future to take 
all they could get, and challenged the Arabs to do the same. 
” My patience was beginning to suffer again, for I could 
not help thinking that the chiefs of the place were pre- 
venting their village men going with me in order that my 
presence here might ward off the Wattita; so I called 
up the kirangozi, who had thirteen “ Watoto,” as they 
are called, or children of his own, wishing to go, and 


May. ] CONTINUED DIFFICULTIES. 117 


asked him if he knew why no other men could be got. 
As he could not tell me, saying some excused themselves 
on the plea they were cutting their corn, and others that 
they feared the Watiita, I resolved at once to move over 
to Ninda; and if that place also failed to furnish men, 
I would go on to Ustti or Karagiié with what men I 
had, and send back for the rest of my property; for 
though I could not bear the idea of separating from 
Grant, still the interests of old England were at stake, 
and demanded it. 

This resolve being strengthened by the kirangozi’s as- 
surance that the row in Msalala had shaken 
the few men who had half dreaded to go 
with me, I marched over to. Ntnda, and put up with 
Grant in Uktlima’s boma, when Grant informed me 


To Ninda, 31st. 


Ukulimas Village 


that the chief had required four yards of cloth from him 
for havmg walked round a dead lioness, as he had thus 
destroyed a charm that protected his people against any 
more of these animals coming, although, fortunately, the 
charm could be restored again by paying four yards of 


118 UNYAMUEZI. [1861. 


cloth. Uktlima, however, was a very kind and good man, 
though he did stick the hands and heads of his victims 
on the poles of his boma as a warning to others. He 
kept five wives, of whom the rest paid such respect to 
the elder one, it was quite pleasing to see them. A man 
of considerable age, he did everything the state or his 
great establishment required himself. All the men of his 
district clapped their hands together as a courteous salu- 
tation to him, and thé women curtsied as well as they do 
at our court—a proof that they respected him as a great 
potentate—a homage rarely bestowed on the chiefs of 
other small states. Uktlima was also hospitable ; for on 
one occasion, when another chief came to visit him, he 
received his guest and retainers with considerable cere- 
mony, making all the men of the village get up a dance; 
which they did, beating the drums and firing off guns, 
like a lot of black devils let loose. 

We were not the only travellers in misfortune here, for 
Halt at Ninda, Mastidi, with several other Arabs, all formed 
a in one large caravan, had arrived at Mchimé- 
ka’s, and could not advance for want of men. They told 
me it was the first time they had come on this line, and 
they deeply regretted it, for they had lost 5000 dollars’ — 
worth of beads by their porters running away with their 
loads, and now they did not know how to proceed. In- 
deed, they left the coast and arrived at Kazé immediately 
in rear of us, and had, like ourselves, found it as much as 
they could do even to reach this, and now they were at a 
standstill for want of porters. 

As all hopes of being able to get any more men were 
given up, I called on Bombay and Baraka to make arrange- 
ments for my going ahead with the best of my property 
as I had devised. They both shook their heads, and 
advised me to remain until the times improved, when the 
Arabs, being freed from the pressure of war, would come 
along and form with us a “siifari kt.” or grand march, as 


JUNE. | ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADVANCE. 119 


Uktlima and every one else had said we should be torn 
to pieces in Ustii if we tried to cross that district with so 
few men. I then told them again and again of the mes- 
sages I had sent on to Rtmanika in Karagtié, and to 
Stiwarora in Usiti, and begged them to listen to me, in- 
stancing as an example of what could be done by perse- 
verance the success of Columbus, who, opposed by his 
sailors’ misgivings, still went on and triumphed, creating 
for himself immortal renown. 

They gave way at last; so, after selecting all the best 
‘Form Campin Of my property, I formed camp at Phitinzé, 
Phtinzé, 8’. left Bombay with Grant. behind, as I thought 
Bombay the best and most honest man I had got, from 
his having had so much experience, and then went ahead 
by myself, with the Pig as my guide and interpreter, and 
Baraka as my factotum. The Wagtiana then all muti- 
nied for a cloth apiece, saying they would not lift a load 
unless I gave it. Of course a severe contest followed; I 
said, as I had given them so much before, they could not 
want it, and ought to be ashamed of themselves. They 
urged, however, they were doing double work, and would 
not consent to carry loads as they had done at Mgtinda 
Mkhali again. 

Arguments were useless, for, simply because they were 
Halt in Phinzs tired of going on, they would not see that 
Hayee oye: as they were receiving pay every day, they 
therefore ought to work every day. However, as they 
yielded at last, by some few leaning to my side, I gave 
what they asked for, and went to the next village, still 
inefficient in men, as all the Pig’s Watoto could not be 
collected together. This second move brought us into a 
small village, of which Ghiya, a young man, was chief. 

He was very civil to me, and offered to sell me a most 
charming young woman, quite the belle of 
the country; but as he could not bring me 
to terms, he looked over my picture-hooks with the great- 


To Ghiya’s, 7th. 


120 UNYAMUEZI. . [1861. 


est delight, and afterwards went into a discourse on geo- 
graphy with considerable perspicacity, seeming fully to 
comprehend that if I got down the Nile it would after- 
wards result in making the shores of the N’yanza like 
that of the coast at Zanzibar, where the products of his 
country could be exchanged, without much dithiculty, for 
cloths, beads, and brass wire. I gave him-a present; then 
a letter was brought to me from Sheikh Said, announcing 
Miisa’s death, and the fact that Mantia Séra was still 
holding out at Kigtté ; in answer to which I desired the 
sheikh to send me as many of Miisa’s slaves as would 
take service with me, for they ought now, by the laws of 
the Koran, to be all free. 

On packing up to leave Ghiya’s, all the men of the 
village shut the bars of the entrance, wishing 
to extract some cloths from me, as I had not 
given enough, they said, to their chief. They soon, how- 
ever, saw that we, being inside their own fort, had the 
best of it, and they gave way. We then pushed on to 
Ungirité’s, another chief of the same district. Here the 
men and women of the place came crowding to see me, 
the fair sex all playfully offering themselves for wives, 
and wishing to know which [ admired most. They were 
so importunate, after a time, that I was not sorry to hear 
an attack was made on their cattle because a man of the 
village would not pay his dowry-money to his father-in- 
law, and this set everybody flyig out to the scene of 
action. 

After this, as Bombay brought up the last of my 
skulking men, I bade him good-bye again, and made 
an afternoon-march on to Takina, in the district of 
Msalala, which we no sooner approached than all the 
inhabitants turned out and fired their arrows at us. They 
did no harm, however, excepting to create a slight alarm, 
which some neighbouring villagers took advantage of to 
run off with two of my cows. My men followed after 


To Ungtirtié’s, 8th. 


JUNE. | ARRIVAL AT MYONGA’s, 13] 


the thieves until these entered a boma and shut the gate 
in their faces. They called out for the cows to be returned 
to them, but called in vain, as the scoundrels said, “ Find- 
ings are keepings, by the laws of our country ; and as we 
found your cows, so we will keep them.” For my part 
I was glad they were gone, as the Wangitana never yet 
kept anything I put under their charge ; so, instead of 
allowing them to make a fuss the next morning, I marched. 
straight on for M’yonga’s, the chief of the district, who 
was famed for his infamy and great extortions, having 
pushed his exactions so far as to close the road. 

On nearing his palace, we heard war-drums beat in 
every surrounding village, and the kirangozi 
would go no farther until permission was 
obtained from M’yonga. This did not take long, as the 
chief said he was most desirous to see a white man, never 
haying been to the coast, though his father-in-law had, 
and had told him that the Waztingti were even greater 
people than the sultan reigning there. On our drawing 
near the palace, a small, newly-constructed boma was 
shown for my residence; but as I did not wish to stop 
there, knowing how anxious Grant would be to have his 
relief, | would not enter it, but instead sent Baraka to 
pay the hongo as quickly as possible, that we might move 
on again; at the same time ordering him to describe the 
position both Grant and myself were in, and explain that 
what I paid now was to frank both of us, as the whole of 
the property was my own. Should he make any remarks 
about the two cows that were stolen, I said he must know 
. that I could not wait for them, as my brother would die 
of suspense if we did not finish the journey and send back 
for him quickly. Off went Baraka with a party of men, 
stopping hours, of course, and firing volleys of aman 
tion away. He did not return again until the evening, 
when the palace - drums announced that the hongo had 
been settled for one barsati, one ligoi, and six yards 


To M’yonga’'s, 
9th. 


122 UNYAMUEZI, [1861. 


merikani. Baraka approached me triumphantly, saying 
how well he had managed the business. M’yonga did not — 
wish to see me, because he did not know the coast lan- 
guage. He was immensely pleased with the present 1 
had given him, and said he was much and very unjustly 
abused by the Arabs, who never came this way, saying 
he was a bad man. He should be very glad to see Grant, 
and would take nothing from him; and, though he did 
not see me in person, he would feel much affronted if I 
did not stop the night there. In the meanwhile he would 
have the cows brought in, for he could not allow any one 
to leave his country abused in any way. 

My men had greatly amused him by firing their guns 
off and showing him the use of their sword-bayonets. I 
knew, as a matter of course, that if I stopped any longer I 
should be teased for more cloths, and gave orders to my 
men to march the same instant, saying, if they did not— 
for I saw them hesitate—I would give the cows to the vil- 
lagers, since I knew that was the thing that weighed on 
their minds. This raised a mutiny. No one would go 
forward with the two cows behind; besides which, the 
day was far spent, and there was nothing but jungle, they 
said, beyond. ‘The kirangozi would not show the way, 
* nor would any man lift a load. A great confusion ensued. 
I knew they were telling lies, and would not enter the 
village, but shot the cows when they arrived, for the vil- 
lagers to eat, to show them I cared for nothing but mak- 
ing headway, and remained out in the open all night. 
Next morning, sure enough, before we could get under 
way, M’yonga sent his prime minister to say that the king’s 
sisters and other members of his family had been crying 
and tormenting him all night for having let me off so 
cheaply—they had got nothing to cover their nakedness, 
and [ must pay something more. This provoked fresh 
squabbles, The drums had beaten and the tax was settled; 
I could not pay more. The kirangozi, however, said he 


JuNE. | FURTHER EXACTIONS, 123 


would not move a peg unless 1 gave something more, 
else he would be seized on his way back. His “ children? 
all said the same; and as I thought Grant would only 
be worsted if I did not keep friends with the corre 
I gave four yards more merikani, and then went on my 
way. 

For the first few miles there were villages, but after 
that a long tract of jungle, inhabited chiefly by antelopes 
and rhinoceros. It was wilder in appearance than most 
parts of Unyamtiézi. In this jungle a tributary nullah 
to the Gombé, called Nurhtingtiré, is the boundary-line 
between the great Country of the Moon and the kingdom 
of Uzinza. 


[Note to page 86.—It may be as well to remark here, that the figures, both 
in latitude and longitude, representing the position of Kazé, computed by 
Mr Dunkin, accord with what appeared in ‘ Blackwood’s Magazine, com- 
puted by myself, and in the R. G.S. Journal Map, computed by Captain 
George. 

This applies also to the position of Ujiji; at any rate, the practical differ- 
ences are so trifling that it would require a microscope to detect them on 
the map. ] 


124 UZINZA. [1861. 


CHP DE yal 
UZINZA. 


THE POLITICS OF UZINZA—THE WAHUMA—“ THE PIG’S” TRICK 
—FIRST TASTE OF USUI TAXATION — PILLAGED BY MFUMBI 
—PILLAGED BY MAKAKA—PILLAGED BY LUMERESI—GRANT 
STRIPPED BY MYONGA—STRIPPED AGAIN BY RUHE—TERRORS 
AND DEFECTIONS IN THE CAMP—DRIVEN BACK TO KAZE WITH 
NEW TRIBULATIONS AND IMPEDIMENTS. 


Uzinza, which we now entered, is ruled by two Wahtma 
a chieftains of foreion blood, descended from 
frontier, 10Uh, the Abyssinian stock, of whom we saw speci- 

mens scattered all over Unyamtiézi, and who 
extended even down south as far as Fipa. Travellers see 
very little, however, of these Wahtima, because, being pas- 
torals, they roam about with their flocks and build huts as 
far away as they can from cultivation. Most of the small 
district chiefs, too, are the descendants of those who ruled 
in the same places before the country was invaded, and 
with them travellers put up and have their dealings. The 
dress of the Wahtima is very simple, composed chiefly of 
cow-hide tanned black—a few magic ornaments and 
charms, brass or copper bracelets, and immense numbers 
of sambo for stockings, which looked very awkward on 
their long legs. They smear themselves with rancid 
butter instead of macassar, and are, in consequence, very 
offensive to all but the negro, who seems, rather than 


otherwise, to enjoy a good sharp nose-tickler. For arms, 


JUNE. | THE WAHUMA AND WAZINZA. 125 


they carry both bow and spear; more generally the latter. 
The Wazinza in the southern parts are so much like the 
Wanyamitiézi, as not to re- 
quire any especial notice ; but 
in the north, where the coun- 
try is more hilly, they are 
much more energetic and ac- 
tively built. All alike live 
in grass-hut villages, fenced 
round by bomas in the south, 
but open in the north. Their 
country rises in high rolls, 
increasing in altitude as it ap- 
proaches the Mountains of the 
Moon, and is generally well 
cultivated, being subjected to 
more of the periodical rains 
than the regions we have left, OS ES a a 
though springs are not so 

abundant, I believe, as they are in the Land of the Moon, 
where they ooze out by the flanks of the little granitic 
hills. 

After tracking through several miles of low bush- 
jungle, we came to the sites of some old bomas that had 
been destroyed by the Wattita not long since. Farther 
on, as we wished to enter a newly-constructed boma, the 
chief of which was Maftimbi Wantti (a Mr Balls), we felt 
the effects of those ruthless marauders; for the villagers, 
thinking us Wattita in disguise, would not let us in; for 
those savages, they said, had once tricked them by enter-_ 
ing their village, pretending to be traders carrying ivory 
and merchandise, whilst they were actually spies. This 
was fortunate for me, however, as Mr Balls, like M’yonga, 
was noted for his extortions on travellers. We then went 
on and put up in the first large village of Bogtié, where I 
wished to get porters and return for Grant, as the place 


126 UZINZA. [1861. 


seemed to be populous. Finding, however, that I could not 
get a sufficient number for that purpose, I directed those 
who wished for employment to go off at once and take 
service with Grant. 

I found many people assembled here from all parts of 
the district, for the purpose of fighting M’yon- 
ga; but the chief Rthé, having heard of my 
arrival, called me to his palace, which, he said, was on my 
way, that he might see me, for he never in all his life had 
a white man for his guest, and was so glad to hear of my 
arrival that he would give orders for the dispersing of 
his forces. I wished to push past him, as I might be sub- 
jected to such calls every day ; but Ungtriié, in the most 
piggish manner—for he was related to Rthé—insisted 
that neither himself nor any of his children would ad- 
vance one step farther with me unless I complied with 
their wish, which was a simple conformity with the laws 
of their country, and therefore absolute. At length giv- 
ing in, I entered Rthé’s boma, the poles of which were 
decked with the skulls of his enemies stuck upon them. 
Instead, however, of seeing him myself, as he feared my 
evil eye, I conducted the arrangements for the hongo 
through Baraka, in the same way as I did at M’yonea’s, 
directing that it should be limited to the small sum of ene 
barsati and four yards kiniki. 

The drum was beaten, as the public intimation of the 
To Mihambo, payment of the hongo, and consequently of 
ee our release, and we went on to Mihambo, on 
the west border of the eastern division of Uzinza, which 
is called Ukhanga. It overlooks the small district of 
Sorombo, belonging to the great western division, known 
as Ustu, and is presided over by a Sorombo chief, named 
Makaka, whose extortions had been so- notorious that 
no Arabs now ever went near him. I did not wish to 
do so either, though his palace lay in the direct route. 
It was therefore agreed we should skirt round by the east 


To Rthé’s, 11th. 


JUNE. | OBSTINACY OF “THE PIG.” 127 


of this district, and I even promised the Pig I would 
give him ten necklaces a-day in addition to ‘his wages, 
if he would avoid all the chiefs, and march steadily ten 
miles every day. By doing so, we should have avoided 
the wandering Watitta, whosé depredations had laid waste 
nearly all of this country ; but the designing blackguard, 
in opposition to my wishes, to accomplish some object of 
his own, chose to mislead us all, and quietly took us 
straight into Sorombo to Kagiié, the boma of a sub-chief, 
called Mftimbi, where we no sooner arrived than the in- 
hospitable brute forbade any one of his subjects to sell 
us food until the hongo was paid, for he was not sure 
that we were not allied with the Watiitta to rob his coun- 
try. After receiving what he called his dues—one barsati, 
two yards merikani, and two yards kiniki—the drums beat, 
and all was settled with him; but I was told the head 
chief Makaka, who lived ten miles to the west, and so 
much out of my road, had sent expressly to invite me to 
see him. He said it was his right I should go to him as 
~ the principal chief of the district. Moreover, he longed 
for a sight of a white man; for though he had travelled 
all across Uganda and Usoga into Masawa, or the Masai 
country, as well as to the coast, where he had seen both 
Arabs and Indians, he had never yet seen an Englishman. 
If I would oblige him, he said he would give me guides 
to Sttwarora, who was his mkama or king. Of course I 
knew well what all this meant; and at the same time that 
I said I could not comply, I promised to send him a pre- 
sent of friendship by the hands of Baraka. 

This caused a halt. Makaka would not hear of such an 
arrangement. A present, he said, was due to him of course, 
but i more importancé than the present was his wish to 
see me. Baraka and all the men begged I would give in, 
as they were sure he must be a good man to ped: such a 
kind message. I strove in vain, for no one would lift a 
load unless I complied ; so, perforce, I went there, in com- 


128 UZINZA. [1861. 


pany, however, with Mfimbi, who now pretended to be 
great friends ; but what was the result? On entering the 
palace we were shown into a cowyard without a tree in 
it, or any shade; and no one was allowed to sell us food 
until a present of friendship was paid, after which the 
hongo would be discussed. 

The price of friendship was not settled that day, how- 
ever, and my men had to go supperless to bed. Baraka 
offered him one common cloth, and then another—all of 
which he rejected with such impetuosity that Baraka said 
his head was all on a whirl. Makaka insisted he would 
have a déolé, or nothing at all. I protested I had no 
déolés I could give him; for all the expensive cloths 
which I had brought from the coast had been stolen in 
Mgiinda Mkhali. I had three, however, concealed at the 
time—which I had bought from Misa, at forty dollars 
each—intended for the kings of Karagtié and Uganda. 

Incessant badgering went on for hours and hours, until 
at last Baraka, clean done with the incessant worry of this 
hot-headed young chief, told him, most unfortunately, he 
would see again if he could find a déolé, as he had one of 
his own. Baraka then brought one to my tent, and told 
me of his having bought it for eight dollars at the coast ; 
and as I now saw | was let in for it, I told him to give it. 
It was given, but Makaka no sooner saw it than he said 
he must have another one ; for it was all nonsense saying 
a white man had no rich cloths. Whenever he met 
Arabs, they all said they were poor men, who obtained all 
their merchandise from the white men on credit, which 
they refunded afterwards, by levying a heavy percentage 
on the sale of their ivory. 

I would not give way that night ; but next day, after 
fearful battling, the present of friendship was 
paid by Baraka’s giving first a dubtiani, then 
one sahari, then one barsati, then one kistitt, and then eight 
yards. of merikani— all of which were contested in the 


Halt, 16¢h. 


, 


Junr. ] CONTINUED EXTORTIONS. “129 


most sickening manner—when Baraka, fairly done up, 
was relieved by Makaka’s saying, “That will do for friend- 
ship ; if you had given the déolé quietly, all this trouble 
would have been saved ; for I am not a bad man, as you 
will see.” My men then had their first dinner here, after 
which the hongo had to be paid. This for the time was, 
however, more easily settled; because Makaka at once 
said he would never be satisfied until he had received, if 
I had really not got a déolé, exactly double in equivalents 
of all I had given him. ‘This was a fearful drain on my 
store ; but the Pig, seeing my concern, merely laughed at 
it, and said, “ Oh, these savage chiefs are all alike here ; 
you will have one of these taxes to pay every stage to 
Uyoftt, and then the heavy work will begin ; for all these 
men, although they assume the dignity of chief to them- 
selves, are mere officers, who have to pay tribute to Stwa- 
rora, and he would be angry if they were shortcoming.” 
The drums as yet had not beaten, for Makaka said he 
would not be satisfied until we had exchanged presents, 
to prove that we were the best of friends. To do this 
last act properly, I was to get ready whatever I wished 
to give him, whilst he would come and visit me with 
a bullock; but I was to give him a royal salute, or the 
drums would not beat. I never felt so degraded as when 
I complied, and gave orders to my men to fire a volley as 
he approached my tent; but I ate the dirt with a good 
grace, and met the young chief as if nothing had happened, 
My men, however, could not fire the salute fast enough 
for him; for he was one of those excitable impulsive 
creatures who expect others to do everything im as great 
a hurry as their minds wander. The moment the first 
volley was fired, he said, “ Now, fire again, fire again ; be 
quick, be quick! What’s the use of those things 0 
(meaning the guns.) “We could spear you all whilst you 
are loading: be quick, be quick, I tell you.” But Baraka, 
I 


130 : UZINZA. | [1861, 


to give himself law, said, “No; I must ask Bana” (master) 
“first, as we do everything by order ; this is not fighting 
at all.” 

The men being ready, file-firing was ordered, and then 
the young chief came into my tent. I motioned him to 
take my chair, which, after he sat down upon it, I was 
very sorry for, as he stained the seat all black with the. 
running colour of one of the new barsati cloths he had got 
from me, which, to improve its appearance, he had satur- 
ated with stinking butter, and had tied round his loins. 
A fine-looking man of about thirty, he wore the butt-end 
of a large sea-shell cut in a circle, and tied on his forehead, 
for a coronet, and sundry small saltiana antelope horns, 
stuffed with magic powder, to keep off the evil eye: His 
attendants all fawned on him, and snapped their fingers 
whenever he sneezed. After passing the first compliment, 
I gave him a barsati, as my token of friendship, and asked 
him what he saw when he went to the Masai country. 
He assured me “that there were two lakes, and not one ;” 
for, on going from Usoga to the Masai country, he crossed 
over a broad strait, which connected the big N’yanza with 
another one at its north-east corner. Fearfully impetuous, 
as soon as this answer was given, he said, “Now I have 
replied to your questions, do you show me all the things 
you have got, for I want to see everything, and be very 
good friends. I did not see you the first day, because you 
being a stranger, it was necessary I should first look into 
the magic horn to see if all was right and safe; and now 
I can assure you that, whilst I saw I was safe, I also saw 
that your road would be prosperous. I am indeed de- 
lighted to see you, for neither my father, nor any of my 
Ai ethers: ever were honoured with the “company of a 
white man in all their lives.” 

My guns, clothes, and everything were then inspected, 
and Bacted for in the most importunate manner. He 
asked for the picture- books, examined the birds with 


June. | AN IMPORTUNATE BEGGAR. A425 


intense delight—even trying to insert under their feathers 
his long royal finger-nails, which are grown like a China- 
man’s by these chiefs, to show they hive a privilege to 
live on meat. Then turning to the animals, he roared 
over each one in turn as he. examined them, and called 
out their names. My bull’s-eye lantern he coveted so 
much,-I had to pretend exceeding anger to stop his fur- 
ther importunities. He then began again begging for 
lucifers, which charmed him so intetioly I thought I 
should never get rid of him. He would have one box of 
them. I swore I could not part with them. He continued 
to beg, and I to resist. I offered a knife instead, but this 
he would not have, because the lucifers would be so valu- 
able for his magical observances. On went the storm, till 
at last I drove him off with a pair of my slippers, which 
he had stuck his dirty feet into without my leave. [ 
then refused to take his bullock, because he had annoyed 
me. On his part he was resolved not to beat the drum ; 
but he graciously said he would think about it if I paid 
another lot of cloth equal to the second déolé | ought to 
have given him. 

I began seriously to consider whether I should have this 
chief shot, as a-reward for his oppressive treachery, and a 
warning to others ; but the Pig said it was just what the 
Arabs were subjected to in Ubéna, and they found it best 
to pay down at once, and do all they were ordered. Liat 
acted rightly, I would take the bullock, and then give the 
cloth ; whilst Baraka said, “ We will shoot him if you give 
the order, only remember Grant is behind, and if you 
commence a row you will have to fight the woe way, 
for every chief in the country will oppose you.” 

I then told the Pig and Baraka to settle at once. They 
no sooner did so ak the drums beat, and Makaka, in the 
best humour possible, came over to say T had permission 
to go when I liked, but he hoped I would give him a gun 
Gi a box of lucifers. This was too provoking. ei he 


132 UZINZA. [1861. 


perpetual worry had given Baraka a fever, and had made 
me feel quite sick; so I said, if he ever mentioned a gun 
or lucifers again, I would fight the matter out with him, 
for I had not come there to be bullied. He then gave 
way, and begged I would allow my men to fire a volley 
outside his boma, as the Wattita were living behind a 
small line of granitic hills flanking the west of his district, 
and he wished to show them what a powerful force he had 
got with him. This was permitted; but his wisdom in 
showing off was turned into ridicule ; for the same evening 
the Watiita made an attack on his villages and killed three 
of his subjects, but were deterred from committing further 
damage by coming in contact with my men, who, as soon 
as they saw the Watiita fighting, fired their muskets off in 
the air and drove them away, they themselves at the same 
time bolting into my camp, and as usual vaunting their 
prowess. 

I then ordered a march for the next morning, and went 
out in the fields to take my regular observations for latitude. 
Whilst engaged in this operation, Baraka, accompanied 
by Wadimoyo (Heart’s-stream), another of my freemen, 
approached me in great consternation, whispering to them- 
selves. They said they had some fearful news to commu- 
nicate, which, when I heard it, they knew would deter our 
progress : it was of such great moment and magnitude, 
they thought they could not deliver it then. I said, 
“What nonsense! out with it at once. Are we such 
chickens that we cannot speak about matters like men ? 
out with it at once.” 

Then Baraka said, “I have just heard from Makaka, 
that a man who arrived from Ustti only a few minutes 
ago has said Stwarora is so angry with the Arabs that he 
has detained one caravan of theirs in his country, and, 
separating the whole of their men, has placed each of 
them in different bomas, with orders to his village officers 
that, in case the Wattita came into his country, without 


JUNE. | A MUTINY. 133 


further ceremony they were to be all put to death.” I 
said, “Oh, Baraka, how can you be such a fool? Do you 
not see through this humbug? Makaka only wishes to 
keep us here to frighten away the Watiita ; for Godsake 
be a man, and don’t be alarmed at such phantoms as 
these. You always are nagging at me that Bombay is 
the ‘big’ and you are the ‘small’ man. Bombay would 
never be frightened in this silly way. Now, do you reflect 
that I have selected you for this journey, as it would, if 
you succeed with me in carrying out our object, stamp 
you for ever as a man of great fame. Pray, don’t give 
way, but do your best to encourage the men, and let us 
march in the morning.” On this as on other occasions of 
the same kind, I tried to impart confidence, by explaining, 
in allusion to Petherick’s expedition, that I had arranged 
to meet white men coming up from the north. Baraka 
at last said, “All right—I am not afraid; I will do as 
you desire.” But as the two were walking off, I heard 
Wadimoyo say to Baraka, “Is he not afraid now? won't 
he go back ?”—which, if anything, alarmed me more than 
the first intelligence ; for [ began to think that they, and 
not Makaka, had got up the story. 

Allnight Makaka’s men patrolled the village, drumming 
and shouting to keep off the Wattita, and the next morn- 
ing, instead of a march, after striking my tent I found 
that the whole of my porters, the Pig’s children, were not 
to be found. They had gone off and hidden themselves, 
saying they were not such fools as to go any farther, as 
the Watiita were out, and would cut us up on the road. 
This was sickening indeed. 

I knew the porters had not gone far, so [ told the Pig 
to bring them to me, that we might talk the matter over; 
but say what I would, they all swore they would not 
advance a step farther. Most of them were formerly men 
of Utimbara. The Watitta had imvaded their country 
and totally destroyed it, killing all their wives and their 


134 UZINZA. [1861. 


children, and despoiling everything they held dear to 
them. They did not wish to rob me, and would give up 
their hire, but not one step more would they advance. 
Makaka then came forward and said, “Just stop here 
with me until this ill wind blows over;” but Baraka, 
more in a fright at Makaka than at any one else, said, No 
—he would do anything rather than that; for Makaka’s 
bullying had made him quite ill. I then said to my men, 
“Tf nothing else will suit you, the best plan I can think 
of is to return to Mihambo in Bogié, and there form a 
depot, where, having stored my property, I shall give the 
Pig a whole load, or 63 Ib., of Mzizima beads if he will 
take Baraka in disguise on to Sttwarora, and ask him to 
send me eighty men, whilst I go back to Unyanyembé to 
see what men I can get from the late Miisa’s establish- 
ment, and then we might bring on Grant, and move in a 
body together.” At first Baraka said, “Do you wish to 
have us killed? Do you think if we went to Stwarora’s 
you would ever see us back again? You would wait 
and wait for us, but we should never return.” To which 
I replied, “Oh, Baraka, do not think so! Bombay, if he 
were here, would go in a minute. Stiwarora by this time 
knows I am coming, and you may depend on it he will 
be just as anxious to have us in Ustii as Makaka is to 
keep us here, and he cannot hurt us, as Rtmanika is over 
him, and also expects us.” Baraka then, in the most 
doleful manner, said he would go if the Pig would. . The 
Pig, however, did not like it either, but said the matter 
was so important he would look into the magic horn all 
night, and give his answer next morning as soon as we 
arrived at Mihambo. 

On arrival at Mihambo next day, all the porters 
Retararto brought their pay to me, and said they would 
Mhambo, 4 not go, for nothing would induce them to 
advance a step farther. I said nothing ; but, with “ my 
heart in my shoes,” I gave what I thought their due 


JUNE. ] " AT A (DEAD LOCK. 135 


for coming so far, and motioned them to be off; then 
calling on the Pig for his decision, I tried to argue again, 
though I saw it was no use, for there was not one of my 
own men who wished to go on. They were unanimous in 
saying Ustti was a “fire,” and I had no right to sacrifice 
them. The Pig then finally refused, saying three loads 
even would not tempt him, for all were opposed to it. 
Of what value, he observed, would the beads be to him 
if his life was lost? This was crushing; the whole camp 
Was unanimous in opposing me. I then made Baraka 
place all my kit in the middle of the boma, which was a 
very strong one, keeping out only such beads as I wished 
him to use for the men’s rations daily, and ordered him 
to select a few men who would return with me to Kazé ; 
when I said, if I could not get all the men | wanted, I 
would try and duce some one, who would not fear, to 
go on to Ustti; failmg which, I would even walk back 
to Zanzibar for men, as nothing in the world would ever 
induce me to give up the journey. 

This appeal did not move him ; but, without a reply, 
he sullenly commenced collecting some men to accompany 
me back to Kazé. At first no one would go; they then 
mutinied for more beads, announcing all sorts of griev- 
ances, which they said they were always talking over to 
themselves, though I did not hear them. The greatest, 
however, that they could get up was, that I always paid 
the Wanyamiiézi “temporaries” more than they got, 
though “permanents.” “They were the flesh, and I was 
the knife ;” I cut and did with them just as [ liked, and 
they could not stand it any longer. However, they had 
to stand it; and next day, when I had brought them to 
reason, I gave over the charge of my tent and property to 
Baraka, and commenced the return with a bad hitching 
cough, caused by those cold easterly winds that blow over 
the plateau during the six dry months of the year, and 
which are, I suppose, the Harmattan peculiar to Africa. 


136 UZINZA. [186]. 


Next day I jomed Grant once more, and found he had 
collected a few Sorombo men, hoping to follow after me. 
I then told him all my mishaps in Sorombo, as well as of 
the “blue-devil” frights that had seized all my men. I 
felt greatly alarmed about the prospects of the expedition, 
scarcely knowing what I should do. I resolved at last, if 
everything else failed, to make up a raft at the southern 
‘end of the N’yanza, and try to go up to the Nile in that 
way. My cough daily grew worse. I could not lie or 
sleep on either side. Still my mind was so excited and 
anxious that, after remaining one day here to enjoy 
Grant’s society, I pushed ahead again, taking Bombay 
with me, and had breakfast at Mchiméka’s. 

There I found the Pig, who now said he wished he had 
taken my offer of beads, for he had spoken with his chief, 
and saw that I was right. Baraka and the Wangtiana 
were humbugs, and had they not opposed his going, he 
would have gone then; even now, he said, he wished [ 
would take him again with Bombay. Though half in- 
clined to accept his offer, which would have saved a long 
trudge to Kazé, yet as he had tricked me so often, I felt 
there would be no security unless I could get some coast 
interpreters, who would not side with the chiefs against 
meas he had done. From this I went on to Sirboko’s, 
and spent the next day with him talking over my plans. 
The rafting up the lake he thought a good scheme ; but he 
did not think I should ever get through Usiti until all the 
Kazé merchants went north in a body, for it was no use 
trying to foree my men against their inclinations; and if 
I did not take care how'l handled them, he thought they 
would all desert. 

My cough still grew worse, and became so bad that, 
whilst mounting a hill on entering Ungtigt’s the second 
day after, 1 blew and grunted like a broken-winded horse, 
and it became so distressing I had to halt a day. In two 
more marches, however, I reached Kazé, and put up with 


Jury. ] MUSA’S SUCCESSOR, ABDALLA. 137 


Miisa’s eldest son, Abdalla, on the 24 July, who now was 
transformed from a drunken slovenly boy into the appear- 
ance of a grand swell, squatting all day as his old father 
used to do. The house, however, did not feel the same— 
no men respected him as they had done his father. Sheikh 
Said was his clerk and constant companion, and the Tots 
were well fed on his goats—at my expense, however. On 
hearing my fix, Abdalla said I should have men; and, 
what’s more, he would go with me as his father had 
promised to do; but he had a large caravan detained in 
Ugogo, and for that he must wait. 

At that moment Mantia Séra was in a boma at Kigté, 
in alliance with the chief of that place; but there was no 
hope for him now, as all the Arabs had allied themselves 
with the surrounding chiefs, including Kitambi; and had 
invested his position by forming a line, in concentric circles, 
four deep, cutting off his supplies of water within it, so 
that they daily expected.to hear of his surrendering. The 
last news that had reached them brought intelligence of 
one man killed and two Arabs wounded; whilst, on the 
other side, Mantia Séra had lost many men, and was put 
to such straits that he had called out if it was the Arabs’ 
determination to kill him he would bolt again: to which 
the Arabs replied it was all the same ; if he ran up to the 
top of the highest mountain or down into hell, they would 
follow after and put him to death. 

3d.—After much bother and many disappointments, as 
I was assured I could get no men to help me until after 
the war was over, and the Arabs had been to Ugogo, and 
had brought up their property, which was still lying there, 
I accepted two men as euides—one named Bi, a very 
small creature, with very high pretensions, who was given 
me by Abdalla—the other, a steady old traveller, named 
Nasib (or Fortune), who was given me by Findi Sangoro. 
These two slaves, both of whom knew all the chiefs and 
languages up to and including Uganda, promised me 


138 UZINZA. [1861. 


faithfully they would go with Bombay on to Ustu, and 
bring back porters in sufficient number for Grant and 
myself to go on, together. They laughed at the stories 
I told them of the terror that had seized Baraka and 
all the Wangtiana, and told me, as old Musa had often 
done before, that those men, especially Baraka, had from 
their first leaving Kazé made up their minds they would 
not enter Usiti, or go anywhere very far north. : 

I placed those men on the same pay as Bombay, and 
then tried to buy some beads from the Arabs, as I saw it 
was absolutely necessary I should increase my fast-ebbing 
store if 1 ever hoped to reach Gondokoro. The attempt 


failed, as the Arabs would not sell at a rate under 2000 - — 


per cent ; and I wrote a letter to Colonel Rigby, ordering 
up fifty armed men laden with beads and pretty cloths— 
which would, I knew, cost me £1000 at the least—and 
left once more for the north on the 5th. 

Marching slowly, as my men kept falling sick, I did 
not reach Grant again until the 11th. His health had 
greatly improved, and he had been dancing with Ukt- 
lima, as may be seen by the accompanying woodcut. 
So, as I was obliged to wait for a short time to get a 
native guide for Btu, Nasib, and Bombay, who would 
show them a jungle-path to Usti, we enjoyed our leisure 
hours in shooting guinea-fowls for the pot. A report 
then came to us that Sttwarora had heard with dis- 
pleasure that I had been endeavouring to see him, but 
was deterred because evil reports concerning him had Been 
spread. This unexpected good news delighted me exceed- 
ingly ; confirmed my belief that Baraka, after all, was a 
coward, and induced me to recommend Bombay to make 
his cowardice more indisputable by going on and doing 
what he had feared to do. To which Bombay replied, “ Of 
course Iwill. It is all folly pulling up for every ill wind 


that blows, because, until one actually sees there is some- 


thing im it, you never can tell amongst these savages— 


vga 


Va bs 
Ahm 
is u 


ie 


pe 


Grant dancing with Ukulima. 


Juty. | PROSPECTS IMPROVING. 139 


‘shaves’ are so common in Africa. Besides, a man has 
but one life, and God is the director of everything.” 
“Bravo!” said L “we will get on as long as you keep to 
that way of thinking.” 

At length a guide was obtained, and with him came 
some of those men of the Pig’s who returned before ; for 
they had a great desire to go with me, but had been 
deterred, they said, by Baraka and the rest of my men. 
Seeing all this, 1 changed my plans again, intending, on 
arrival at Baraka’s camp, to prevail on the whole of the 
party to go with me direct, which I thought they could 
not now refuse, since Sttwarora had sent us an invitation. 
Moreover, I did not like the idea of remaining still whilst 
the three men went forward, as it would be losing time. 

These separations from Grant were most annoying, but 
they could not be helped ; so, when all was settled here, I 
bade him adieu—both of us saying we would do our best 
—and set out on my journey, thinking what a terrible 
thing it was I could not prevail on my men to view things 
as I did. Neither my experience with native chiefs, nor 
my money and guns, were of any use to me, simply be- 
cause my men were such incomprehensible fools, though 
many of them who had travelled before ought to have 
known better. 

More reports came to us about Stiwarora, all of the 
most inviting nature ; but nothing else worth mentioning 
occurred until we reached the border of Msalala, where an 
officer of M’yonga’s, who said he was a bigger man than 
his chief, demanded a tax, which I refused, and the dis- 
pute ended in his snatching Nasib’s gun out of his hands. 
I thought little of this affair myself, beyond regretting the 
delay which it might occasion, as M’yonga, I knew, would 
not permit such usage, if [ chose to go round by his palace 
and makea complaint. Both Bi and Nasib, however, were 
so greatly alarmed, that before [ could say a word they — 
got the gun back again by paying four yards merikani. 


140 UZINZA. [1861. 


We had continued bickering again, for Btu had taken 
such fright at this kind of rough handling, and the 
“push-ahead” manner in which I persisted “riding over 
the lords of the soil,” that I could hardly drag the party 
along, 

However, on the 18th, after breakfasting at Rtthé’s, we 
walked into Mihambo, and took all the camp by surprise. 
I found the Union Jack hoisted up on a flag-staff, high 
above all the trees, in the boma. Baraka said he had 
done this to show the Watiita that the place was occupied 
by men with guns—a necessary precaution, as all the 
villages in the neighbourhood had, since my departure, 
been visited and plundered by them. Ltimérési, the chief 
of the district, who lived ten miles to the eastward, had 
been constantly pressing him to leave this post and come 
to his palace, as he felt greatly affronted at our having 
shunned him and put up with Rthé. He did not want 
property, he said, but he could not bear that the strangers 
had lived with his mtoto, or child, which Rtthé was, and 
yet would not live with him. He thought Baraka’s de- 
termined obstinacy on this could only be caused by the 
influence of the head man of the village, and threatened 
that if Baraka did not come to visit him at once, he would 
have the head man beheaded. Then, shifting round a bit, 
he thought of ordering his subjects to starve the visitors 
into submission, and said he must have a hongo equal to 
Rthé’s. To all this Baraka replied, that he was merely a 
servant, and as he had orders to stop where he was, he 
could not leave it until I came; but to show there was no 
ill feeling towards him, he sent the chief a cloth. 

These first explanations over, I entered my tent, in 
which Baraka had been living, and there I found a lot of 
my brass wires on the ground, lying scattered about. I 
did not like the look of this, so ordered Bombay to resume 
his position of factotum, and count over the kit. Whilst 
this was going on, a villager came to me with a wire, and 


Jury. ] BARAKA’S KNAVERY. 141 


asked me to change it for a cloth. I saw at once what 
the game was; so I asked my friend where he got it, on 
which he at once pointed to Baraka. I then heard the 
men who were standing round us say one to another in 
under-tones, gigeling with the fun of it, “Oh, what a shame 
of him! Did you hear what Bana said, and that fool’s 
reply to it? What a shame of him to tell in that way.” 
Without appearing to know, or rather to hear, the by-play 
that was going on, I now said to Baraka, “ How is it this 
man has got one of my wires, for I told you not to touch 
or unpack them during my absence?” To which he coolly 
replied, in face of such evidence, “It is not one of your 
wires ; I never gave away one of yours; there are lots 
more wires besides yours in the country. The man tells 
a falsehood; he had the wire before, but now, seeing 
your cloth open, wants to exchange it.” “If that is the 
ease,’ I said, taking things easy, “ how is it you have 
opened my loads and scattered the wires about in the 
tent?” “ Oh, that was to take care of them ; for I thought, 
if they were left outside all night with the rest of the 
property, some one would steal them, and I should get the 
blame of it.” 

Further parley was useless; for, though both my wires 
and cloths were short, still it was better not to kick up a 
row, when I had so much to do to keep all my men in 
good temper for the journey. Baraka then, wishing to 
beguile me, as he thought he could do, into believing him 
a wonderful man for both pluck and honesty, said he had 
had many battles to fight with the men since T had been ~ 
gone to Kazé, for there were two strong parties in the 
camp; those who, during the late rebellion at Zanzibar, 
had belonged to the Arabs that sided with Stiltan Majid, 
and were royalists, and those who, having belonged to the 
rebellious Arabs, were on the opposite side. The battle 
commenced, he stated, by the one side abusing the other 
for their deeds during that rebellion, the rebels in this sort 


142 UZINZA. [1861. 


of contest proving themselves the stronger. But he, head- 
ing the royalist party, soon reduced them to order, though 
only for a short while, as from that point they turned 
round to open mutiny for more rations ; and some of the 
rebels tried to kill him, which, he said, they would have 
done had he not settled the matter by buying some cows 
for them. It was on this account he had been obliged to 
open my loads. And now he had told me the case, he 
hoped I would forgive him if he had done wrong. Now, 
the real facts of the case were these—though I did not 
find them out at the time :—Baraka had bought some 
slaves with my effects, and he had had a fight with some 
of my men because they tampered with his temporary 
wife—a princess he had picked up in Phtinzé. To obtain 
her hand he had given ten necklaces of my beads to her 
mother, and had agreed to the condition that he should 
keep the girl during the journey ; and after it was over, 
and he took her home, he would, if his wife pleased him, 
oive her mother ten necklaces more. 

Next day Baraka told me his heart shrank to the di- 
mensions of a very small berry when he saw whom I had 
brought with me yesterday—meaning Bombay, and the 
same porters whom he had prevented goimg on with me 
before. | said, “ Pooh, nonsense; have done with such 
excuses, and let us get away out of this as fast as we can. 
Now, like a good man, just use your influence with the 
chief of the village, and try and get from him five or six 
men to complete the number we want, and then we will 
work round the east of Sorombo up to Usiti, for Sttwarora. ° 
has invited us to him.” This, however, was not so easy ; 
for Ltimérési, having heard of my arrival, sent his Wan- 
yapara, or grey-beards, to beg I would visit him. He 
had never seen a white man in all his life, neither had 
his father, nor any of his forefathers, although he had 
often been down to the coast; I must come and see him, 
as I had seen his mtoto Rthé. He did not want property ; 


Jury. | A PRESSING INVITATION, 143 


it was only the pleasure of my company that he wanted, 
to enable him to tell all his friends what a great man had 
lived in his house. 

This was terrible: I saw at once that all my difficulties 
in Sorombo would have to be gone through again if I 
went there, and groaned when I thought what a trick the 
Pig had played me when I first of all came to this place ; 
for if I had gone on then, as I wished, I should have 
slipped past Ltimérési without his knowing it. 

I had to get up a storm at the grey-beards, and said I 
could not stand going out of my road to see any one now, 
for I had already lost so much time by Makaka’s trickery 
in Sorombo. Biwi then, quaking with fright at my obstin- 
acy, said, “ You must—indeed you must—give in and do 
with these savage chiefs as the Arabs when they travel, 
for I will not be a party to riding rough-shod over them.” 
Still I stuck out, and the grey-beards departed to teil their 
chief of it. Next morning he sent them back again to say 
he would not be cheated out of his rights as the chief of 
the district. Still I would not give in, and the whole day 
kept “jawing” without effect, for I could get no man to 
go with me until the chief gave his sanction. I then tried 
to send Bombay off with Btu, Nasib, and their guide, by 
night ; but though Bombay was willing, the other two 
hung back on the old plea. In this state of perplexity, 
Btti begged I would allow him to go over to Liimérési 
and see what he could do with a present. Biti really now 
was my only stand-by, so I sent him off, and next had the 
mortification to find that he had been humbugged by 
honeyed words, as Baraka had been with Makaka, into 
believing that Liimérési was a good man, who really had 
no other desire at heart than the love of seeing me. His 
boma, he said, did not lie much out of my line, and he 
did not wish a stitch of my cloth. So far from detaining 
me, he would give me as many men as | wanted ; and, as 
an earnest of his good intentions, he sent his copper 


144 _ UZINZA. [1861. 


hatchet, the badge of office as chief of the district, as 
a guarantee for me. 

To wait here any longer after this, I knew, would be a 
To Limérés's, mere waste of time, so I ordered my men to 
i pack up that moment, and we all marched 
over at once to Ltimérési’s; when we put up in his boma. 
Liimérési was not in then, but, on his arrival at night, he 


Lumeresi’s Residence. 


beat all his drums to celebrate the event, and fired a 
musket, in reply to which I fired three shots. The same 
night, whilst sitting out to make astronomical observa- 
tions, I became deadly cold—so much so, that the instant 
I had taken the star, to fix my position, I turned into bed, 
but could not get up again; for the cough that had stuck 
to me for a month then became so violent, heightened by 
fever succeeding the cold fit, that before the next morning 
I was so reduced I could not stand. For the last month, 
too, [ had not been able to sleep on either side, as interior 
pressure, caused by doing so, provoked the cough; but 
now I had, in addition, to be propped in position to get 
any repose whatever. The symptoms, altogether, were 


Juty.] SEVERE ILLNESS. 145 


rather alarming, for the heart felt inflamed and ready to 
burst, pricking and twingeing with every breath, which 
was exceedingly aggravated by constant coughing, when 
streams of phlegm and bile were ejected. The left arm 
felt half-paralysed, the left nostril was choked with mucus, 
and on the centre of the left shoulder-blade I felt a pain 
as if some one was branding me with a hot iron. All this 
was constant; and, in addition, I repeatedly felt severe 
pains—rather paroxysms of fearful twinges—in the spleen, 
liver, and lungs; whilst during my sleep I had all sorts 
of absurd dreams: for instance—I planned a march across 
Africa with Sir Roderick Murchison ; and I fancied some 
curious creatures, half-men and half-monkeys, came into 
my camp to inform me that. Petherick was waiting in 
boats at the south-west corner of the N’yanza, &e. &e. 
Though my mind was so weak and excited when 
I woke up from these trances, I thought of nothing 
but the march, and how I could get out of Litmérési’s 
hands. He, with the most benign countenance, came in 
to see me, the very first thing in the morning, as he said, 
to inquire after my health; when, to please him as much 
as I could, I had a guard of honour drawn up at the tent 
door to fire a salute as he entered; then giving him my 
iron camp-chair to sit upon, which tickled him much— 
for he was very corpulent, and he thought its legs would 
break down with his weight—we had a long talk, though 
it was as much as I could do to remember anything, my 
brain was so excited and weak. Kind as he looked and 
spoke, he forgot all his promises about coveting my pro- 
perty, and scareely got over the first salutation before he 
began begging for many things that he saw, and more 
especially for a déolé, in order that he might wear it on 
all great occasions, to show his contemporaries what a 
magnanimous man his white visitor was. I soon lost my 
temper whilst striving to settle the hongo. Limérési 


Kk 


146 UZINZA. [1861. 


would have a déolé, and I would not admit that I had 
one. 

93d to 31st-—Next morning I was too weak to speak 
moderately, and roared more like a madman than a 
rational being, as, breaking his faith, he persisted in 
bullying me. The day after, I took pills and blistered 
my chest all over ; still Limérési would not let me alone, 
nor come to any kind of terms until the 25th, when he 
said he would take a certain number of pretty common 
cloths for his children if I would throw in a red blanket 
for himself. I jumped at this concession with the greatest 
eagerness, paid down my cloths on the spot; and, thinking 
I was free at last, ordered a hammock to be slung on 
a pole, that I might leave the next day. Next morning, 
however, on seeing me actually preparing to start, Ltmé- 
rési found he could not let me go until I increased the 
tax by three more cloths, as some of his family complained 
that they had got nothing. After some badgering, I paid 
what he asked for, and ordered the men to carry me out 
of the palace before anything else was done, for I would 
not sleep another night where I was. Ltmérési then 
stood in my way, and said he would never allow a man 
of his country to give me any assistance until I was well, 
for he could not bear the idea of hearing it said that, 
after taking so many cloths from me, he had allowed me 
to die in the jungles—and dissuaded my men from obey- 
ing my orders. 

In vain I appealed to his mercy, declaring that the 
only chance left me of saving my life would be from the 
change of air in the hammock as I marched along. He 
would not listen, professing humanity, whilst he meant 
plunder ; and I now found he was determined not to beat 
the drum until I had paid him some more, which he was 
to think over and settle next day. When the next day 
came, he would not come near me, as he said I must 
possess a déolé, otherwise I would not venture on to 


Ave.] EXTORTIONS OF LUMERESI. 147 


Karagtté ; for nobody ever yet “ saw” Rttmanika without 
one. This suspension of business was worse than the 
rows; I felt very miserable, and became worse. At last, 
on my offering him anything that he might consider an 
equivalent for the déolé if he would but beat the drums 
of satisfaction, he said I might consider myself his pri- 
soner instead of his guest if I persisted in my obstinacy 
in not giving him Rtimanika’s déolé; and then again 
peremptorily ordered all of his subjects not to assist 
me in moving a load. After this, veering round for a 
moment on the generous tack, he offered me a cow, which 
I declined. 

1st to 4th—Still I rejected the offered cow, until the 
2d, when, finding him as dogged as ever, at the advice of 
my men I| accepted it, hoping thus to please him; but 
it was no use, for he now said he must have two déolés, 
or he would never allow me to leave his palace. Every 
day matters got worse and worse. Mfimbi, the small 
chief of Sorembo, came over, in an Oily-Gammon kind 
of manner, to say Makaka had sent him over to pre- 
sent his compliments to me, and express his sorrow on 
hearing that I had fallen sick here. He further informed 
me that the road was closed between this and Usii, for 
he had just been fighting there, and had killed the chief 
Gomba, burnt down all his villages, and dispersed all 
the men in the jungle, where they now resided, plunder- 
ing every man who passed that way. This gratuitous, 
wicked, humbugging terrifier helped to cause another 
defeat. It was all nonsense, I knew, but both Buti and 
Nasib, taking fright, begged for their discharges. In 
fearful alarm and anxiety, I then begged them to have 
patience and see the hongo settled first, for there was no 
necessity, at any rate, for immediate hurry ; I wished them 
to go on ahead with Bombay, as mm four days they could 
reach Stiwarora’s. But they said they could not hear of 
it—they would not go a step beyond this, All the chiefs 


148 UZINZA. [1861. 


on ahead would do the same as Lttmérési; the whole 
country was roused, I had not even half enough cloths 
to satisfy the Wastti; and my faithful followers would 
never consent to be witness to my being “torn to 
pieces.” 

5th and 6th—The whole day and half of the next 
went in discussions. At last, able for the first time to 
sit up a little, I succeeded in prevailing on Bit to 
promise he would go to Usiti as soon as the hongo was 
settled, provided, as he said, I took on myself all respon- 
sibilities of the result. This cheered me so greatly, I had 
my chair placed under a tree and smoked my first pipe. 
On seeing this, all my men struck up a dance, to the 
sound of the drums, which they carried on throughout 
the whole night, never ceasing until the evening of the 
next day. These protracted caperings were to be con- 
sidered as their congratulation for my improvement in 
health ; for, until I got into my chair, they always thought 
I was going to die. They then told me, with great mirth 
and good mimicry, of many absurd scenes which, owing 
to the inflamed state of my brain, had taken place during 
my interviews with Ltmérési. Bombay at this time 
very foolishly told Limérési, if he “really wanted a 
déolé,” he must send to Grant for one. This set the chief 
raving. He knew there was one in my box, he said, and 
unless I gave it, the one with Grant must be brought ; 
for under no circumstances would he allow of my proceed- 
ing northwards until that was given him. Biti and Nasib 
then gave me the slip, and slept that night in a neigh- 
bourmg boma without my knowledge. 

7th to 9th.—As things had now gone so far, I gave 
Ltimérési the déolé I had stored away for Riimanika, 
telling him, at the same time as he took it, that he was 
robbing Rttmanika, and not myself; but I hoped, now I 
had given it, he would beat the drums. The scoundrel 
only laughed as he wrapped my beautiful silk over his 


Ave] INCREASING DIFFICULTIES. 149 


great broad shoulders, and said, “Yes, this will complete 
our present of friendship; now then for the hongo—I 
must have exactly double of all you have given.” This 
Sorombo trick I attributed to the instigation of Makaka, 
for these savages never fail to take their revenge when 
they can. I had doubled back from his country, and now 
he was cutting me off in front. I expected as much when 
the oily blackguard Mftimbi came over from his chief to 
ask after my health ; so, judging from my experience with 
Makaka, I told Lttmérési at once to tell me what he con- 
sidered his due, for this fearful haggling was killing me 
by inches. I had no more déolés, but would make that 
up in brass wire. He then fixed the hongo at fifteen 
masango or brass-wire bracelets, sixteen cloths of sorts, 
and a hundred necklaces of sami-sami or red coral beads, 
which was to pay for Grant as well as myself. I paid it 
down on the spot; the drums beat the “satisfaction,” and 
I ordered the march with the greatest relief of mind 
possible. 

But Btti and Nasib were not to be found; they had 
bolted. The shock nearly killed me. I had walked all 
the way to Kazé and back again for these men, to show 
mine a good example—had given them pay and treble 
rations, the same as Bombay and Baraka—and yet they 
chose to desert. I knew not what to do, for it appeared 
to me that, do what I would, we would never succeed ; 
and in my weakness of body and mind I actually cried 
like a child over the whole affair. I would rather have 
died than have failed in my journey, and yet failure 
seemed at this juncture inevitable. 

Sth—As I had no interpreters, and could not go for- 
ward myself, I made up my mind at once to send back 
all my men, with Bombay, to Grant; after joining 
whom, Bombay would go back to Kazé again for other 
interpreters, and on his return would pick up Grant, 
and bring him on_ here. This sudden decision set all 


150 UZINZA. [1861. 


my men up in a flame; they swore it was no use my 
trying to go on to Karagité; they would not go with 
me; they did not come here to be killed. If I chose 
to lose my life, it was no business of theirs, but they 
would not be witness to it. They all wanted their dis- 
charge at once ; they would not run away, but must have 
a letter of satisfaction, and then they would go back to 
their homes at Zanzibar. But when they found they lost 
all their arguments and could not move me, they said 
they would go back for Grant, but when they had done 
that duty, then they would take their leave. 

10th to 15th.—This business being at last settled, I 
wrote to Grant on the subject, and sent all the men 
off who were not sick. Thinking then how I could 
best cure the disease that was keeping me down, as I 
found the blister of no use, I tried to stick a packing 
needle, used as a seton, into my side; but finding it was 
not sharp enough, in such weak hands as mine, to go 
through my skin, I got Baraka to try; and he failing too, 
I then made him fire me, for the coughing was so inces- 
sant I could get no sleep at night. I had now nothing 
whatever to think of but making dodges for lying easy, 
and for relieving my pains, or else for cooking strong 
broths to give me strength, for my legs were reduced to 
the appearance of pipe-sticks, until the 15th, when Ba- 
raka, in the same doleful manner as in Sorombo, came to 
me and said he had something to communicate, which 
was so terrible, if I heard it I should give up the march. 
Ltimérési was his authority, but he would not tell it until 
Grant arrived. I said to him, “Let us wait till Grant 
arrives ; we shall then have some one with us who won’t 
shrink from whispers”—meaning Bombay ; and so I let 
the matter drop for the time being. But when Grant 
came, we had it out of him, and found this terrible mys- 
tery all hung on Liimérési’s prognostications that we 
never should get through Ustti with so little cloth. 


Ave] THE WATUTA AGAIN. . 151 


16th to 19th—At night, I had such a terrible air- 
catching fit, and made such a noise whilst trying to 
fill my lungs, that it alarmed all the camp, so much 
so that my men rushed into my tent to see if I was 
dying. Itmérési, in the morning, then went on a visit- 
ing excursion into the district, but no sooner left than the 
chief of Isamiro, whose place lies close to the N’yanza, 
came here to visit him (17th); but after waiting a day 
to make friends with me, he departed (18th), as I heard 
afterwards, to tell his great Mhiima chief, Rohinda, the 
ruler of Ukhanga, to which district this state of Bogté 
belongs, what sort of presents I had given to Lttmérési. 
He was, in fact, a spy whom Rohinda had sent to ascer- 
tain what exactions had been made from me, as he, being 
the great chief, was entitled to the most of them himself. 
On Liimérési’s return, all the men of the village, as well 
as mine, set up a dance, beating the drums all day and 
all night. 

20th to 21st.—Next night they had to beat their 
drums for a very different purpose, as the Watiita, 
after lifting all of Makaka’s cattle in Sorombo, came 
hovering about, and declared they would never cease 
fighting until they had lifted all those that Limérési 
harboured round his boma; for it so happened that 
Liimérési allowed a large party of Watosi, alias Wahtima, 
to keep their cattle in large stalls all round his boma, 
and these the Wattita had now set their hearts upon. 
After a little reflection, however, they thought better of 
it, as they were afraid to come in at once on account of 
my guns. 

Most gladdening news this day came in to cheer me. 
A large mixed caravan of Arabs and coast-men, arriving 
from Karagtté, announced that both Rtimanika and St- 
warora were anxiously looking out for us, wondering 
why we did not come. So great, indeed, was Sttwarora’s 
desire to see us, that he had sent four men to invite us, 


152 UZINZA. [1861.. 


and they would have been here now, only that one of 
them fell sick on the way, and the rest had to stop for 
him. I cannot say what pleasure this gave me; my 
fortune, I thought, was made; and so I told Baraka, who, 
instead of rejoicing with me, only shook his head at it, 
and pretended he did not believe the news to be true. 
Without loss of time I wrote off to Grant, and got these 
men to carry the letter. 

Next day (22d) the Wastii from Stiwarora arrived. 
They were a very gentle, nice-dispositioned-looking set of 
men—small, but well knit together. They advanced to 
my tent with much seeming grace; then knelt at my 
feet, and began clapping their hands together, saying, at 
the same time, “ My great chief, my great chief, 1 hope 
you are well; for Stwarora, having heard of your deten- 
tion here, has sent us over to assure you that all those 
reports that have been circulated regarding his ill-treat- 
ment of caravans are without foundation ; he is sorry for 
what has happened to deter your march, and hopes you 
will at once come to visit him.” I then told them all that: 
had happened—how Grant and myself were situated— 
and begged them to assist me by going off to Grant's 
camp to inspire all the men there with confidence, and 
bring my rear property to me—saying, as they agreed to 
do so, “Here are some cloths and some beads for your 
expenses, and when you return [ will give you more.” 
Baraka at once, seeing this, told me they were not trust- 
worthy, for at Mihambo an old man had come there and 
tried to inveigle him in the same manner, but he kicked. 
him out of the camp, because he knew he was a touter, 
who wished merely to allure him with sweet words to 
fleece him afterwards. I then wrote to Grant another 
letter to be delivered by these men. | 

Limérési no sooner heard of the presents I had given 
them, than he flew into a passion, called them impostors, 
abused them for not speaking to him hefore they came to 


Ave. ] FRESH QUARREL WITH LUMERESI. 153 


me, and said he would not allow them to go. High 
words then ensued. I said the business was mine, and 
not his; he had no right to interfere, and they should 20. 
Still Limérési was obstinate, and determined they should 
not, for I was his guest; he would not allow any one to 
defraud me. It was a great insult to himself, if true, that 
Stiwarora should attempt to snatch me out of his house ; 
and he could not bear to see me take these strangers by 
the hand, when, as we have seen, it took him so long to 
entice me to his den, and he could not prevail over me 
until he actually sent his copper hatchet. 

When this breeze blew over, by Lttmérési’s walking 
away, I told the Wastti not to mind him, but to do just 
as I bid them. They said they had their orders to bring 
me, and if Liimérési would not allow them to go for Grant, 
they would stop where they were, for they knew that if 
Stiwarora found them delaying long, he would send more 
men to look after them. There was no peace yet, how- 
ever; for Ltmérési, finding them quietly settled down 
eating with my men, ordered them out of his district, 
threatening force if they did not comply at once. I tried 
my best for them, but the Wasit, fearing to stop any 
longer, said they would take leave to see Stiwarora, and in 
eight days more they would come back again, bringing 
something with them, the sight of which would make 
Litimérési quake. Further words were now useless, so | 
gave them more cloth to keep them up to the mark, and 
sent them off. Baraka, who seemed to think this gene- 
rosity a bit of insanity, grumbled that if I had cloths to 
throw away it would have been better had I disposed of 
them to my own men. 

Next day (26th), as I was still unwell, I sent four men to 
Grant with inquiries how he was getting on, and a request 
for medicines. The messengers took four days to bring 
back the information that Bombay had not returned from 
Kazé, but that Grant, having got assistance, hoped to 


154 UZINZA. [1861. 


break ground about the 5th of next month. They brought 
me at the same time information that the Wattita had 
invested Rtthé’s, after clearing off all the cattle in the 
surrounding villages, and had proclaimed their intention 
of serving out Ltmérési next. In consequence of this, 
Litmérési daily assembled his grey-beards and had councils 
of war in his drum-house ; but though his subjects sent to 
him constantly for troops, he would not assist them. 
Another caravan then arrived (31st) from Karagtié, in 
which I found an old friend, of half Arab breed, called 
Saim, who, whilst I was residing with Sheikh Snay at 
Kazé on my former expedition, taught me the way to 
make plantain-wine. He, like the rest of the porters in 
the caravan, wore a shirt of fig-tree bark called mbtigit. 
As I shall have frequently to use this word in the course 
of the Journal, I may here give an explanation of its mean- 
ing. The porter here mentioned told me that the people 
about the equator all wore this kind of covering, and made 
it up of numerous pieces of bark sewn together, which they 
stripped from the trees after cutting once round the trunk 
above and below, and then once more down the tree from 
the upper to the lower circular cutting. This operation 
did not kill the trees, because, if they covered the wound, 
whilst it was fresh, well over with plantain-leaves, shoots 
grew down from above, and a new bark came all over it. 
The way they softened the bark, to make it like cloth, was 
by immersion in water, and a good strong application 
of a mill-headed mallet, which ribbed it like corduroy.* 
Saim told me he had lived ten years in Uganda, had 


* If one asked the name of a tree, and it happened to be the kind from 
which this cloth was made, the answer would be “ mbigit.” If, again, the 
question was as to the bark, the same answer; and the same if hg the 
shirt and asked what it was. Hence I could not determine whether the word 
had been originally the name of the tree, of its bark, or of the article made 
from the bark, though I am inclined to think it is the bark, as there are 
many varieties of these trees, which, besides being called sea had their 
own particular names, oi 


Sept. | A NEW INTERPRETER, 155 


crossed the Nile, and had traded eastward as far as the 
Masai country. He thought the N’yanza was the source 
of the Ritviima river; as the river which drained the 
N’yanza, after passing ieiaretn Uganda and Usoga, went 
through Unyoro, and then all cound the Tanganyi ika lake 
into the Indian Ocean, south of Zanzibar. Kiganda, he also 
said, he knew as well as his own tongue ; ata: as I wanted 
an interpreter, he would gladly take service with me. This 
was just what I wanted—a heaven-born stroke of luck. 
I seized at his offer with avidity, gave him a new suit of 
clothes, which made him look quite a gentleman, and 
arranged to send him next day with a letter to Grant. 

lsé and 2d.—A great hubbub and confusion now 
seized all the place, for the Watttta were out, and had 
killed a woman of the place who had formerly been 
seized by them in war, but had since escaped and resided 
here. To avenge this, Ltmérési headed his host, and was 
accompanied by my men; but they succeeded in nothing 
save in frightening off their enemies, and regaining pos- 
session of the body of the dead woman. Then another 
hubbub arose, for it was discovered that three Wahtima 
women were missing (2d); and, as they did not turn up 
again, Limérési suspected the men of the caravan, which 
left with Saim, must have taken them off as slaves. He 
sent for the chief of the caravan, and had him brought 
back to account for this business. Of course the man 
swore he knew nothing about the matter, whilst Ltmérési 
swore he should stop there a prisoner until the women 
were freed, as it was not the first time his women had 
been stolen in this manner. About the same time a man 
of this place, who had been to Sorombo to purchase cows, 
came in with a herd, and was at once seized by Littmérési; 
for, during his absence, one of Ltimérési’s daughters had 
been ditiehed to be with child, and she, on being asked 
who was the cause of it, pointed out that man. To com- 
pensate for damage done to himself, as his daughter by 


156 UZINZA. [1861. 


this means had become reduced to half her market-value, 
Liimérési seized all the cattle this man had brought with 
him. 

3d to 10th—When two days had elapsed, one of the 
three missing Wahttma women was discovered in a vil- 
lage close by. As she said she had absconded because 
her husband had ill-treated her, she was flogged, to 
teach her better conduct. It was reported they had 
been seen in M’yonga’s establishment ; and I was at the 
same time informed that the husbands who were out in 
search of them would return, as M’yonga was likely to 
demand a price for them if they were claimed, in virtue of 
their being his rightful property under the acknowledged 
law of bitni, or findings-keepings. 

For the next four days nothing but wars and rumours 
of wars could be heard. The Watiita were out in all 
directions plundering cattle and burning villages, and the 
Wahtima of this place had taken such fright, they made 
a stealthy march with all their herds to a neighbour- 
ing chief, to whom it happened that one of Ltmérési’s 
grey-beards was on a visit. They thus caught a Tartar; 
for the grey-beard no sooner saw them than he went and 
flogged them all back again, rebuking them on the way 
for their ingratitude to their chief, who had taken them 
in when they sought his shelter, and was now deserted by 
them on the first alarm of war. 

10th.—Wishing now to gain further intelligence of 
Grant, I ordered some of my men to carry a letter 
to him; but they all feared the Wattita meeting them 
on the way, and would not. Just then a report came 
in that one of Ltimérési’s sons, who had gone near 
the capital of Ukhanga to purchase cows, was seized by 
Rohinda in consequence of the Isamiro chief telling him 
that Ltmérési had taken untold wealth from me, and he 
was to be detained there a prisoner until Ltmérési either 
disgorged, or sent me on to be fleeced again. Liimérési, 


Sepr. | A LESSON IN MODERATION. 157 


of course, was greatly perplexed at this, and sought my 
advice, but could get nothing out of me, for I laughed in 
my sleeve, and told him such was the consequence of his 
having been too greedy. 

llth to 15th. — Mastidi with his caravan arrived 
from Mchiméka—Ungirité “the Pig,” who had led me 
astray, was, by the way, his kirangozi or, caravan- 
leader. Mastidi told us he had suffered most severely 
from losses by his men running away, one after the other, 
as soon as they received their pay. He thought Grant 
would soon join me, as, the harvest being all in, the men 
about Riingiia would naturally be anxious for service. 
He had had fearful work with M’yonga, having paid him a 
gun, some gunpowder, and a great quantity of cloth; and 
he had to give the same to Rthé, with the addition of 
twenty brass wires, one load of mzizima, and one load of 
red coral beads. This was startling, and induced me to 
send all the men I could prudently spare off to Grant at 
once, cautioning him to avoid Rthé’s, as Lttmérési had 
promised me he would not allow one other thing to be 
taken from me. Litmérési by this time was improving, 
from lessons on the policy of moderation which I had been 
teaching him; for when he tried to squeeze as much more 
out of Mastidi as Rthé had taken, he gave way, and. let 
him off cheaply at my intercession. He had seen enough 
to be persuaded that this unlimited taxation or plunder 
system would turn out a losing game, such as Unyam- 
yembé and Ugogo were at that time suffering from. 
Moreover, he was rather put to shame by my saying, 
“Pray, who now is biggest—Rthé or yourself? for any 
one entering this country would suspect that he was, as 
he levies the first tax, and gives people to understand 
that, by their paying it, the whole district will be free to 
them; such at any rate he told me, and so it appears he 
told Mastidi. If you are the sultan, and will take my 
advice, I would strongly recommend your teaching Rthé 


158 UZINZA. [1861. 


a lesson, by taking from him what the Arabs paid, and 
giving it back to Mastidi. 

At midnight (16th) I was startled in my sleep by the 
hurried tramp of several men, who rushed in to say they 
were Grant’s porters—Bogtié men who had deserted him. 
Grant, they said, in incoherent, short, rapid, and excited 
sentences, was left by them standing under a tree, with ; 
nothing but his gun in his hand. All the Wangttana 
had beet either killed or driven away by M’yonga’s men, 
who all turned out and fell upon the caravan, shooting, 
spearing, and plundering, until nothing was left. The 
porters then, seeing Grant all alone, unable to help him, 
bolted off to inform me and Limérési, as the best thing 
they could do. Though disbelieving the story in all its 
minutie, I felt that something serious must have hap- 
pened ; so, without a moment’s delay, I sent off the last 
of my men strong enough to walk to succour Grant, 
carrying with them a bag of beads. Baraka then stepped 
outside my tent, and said in a loud voice, purposely for 
my edification, “There, now, what 1s the use of thinking 
any more about going to Karagtié? [said all along it was 
impossible ;” upon hearing which I had him up before all 
the remaining men, and gave him a lecture, saying, happen 
what would, I must die or go on with the journey, for 
shame would not allow me to give way as Baraka was 
doing. Baraka replied, he was not afraid—he only meant 
to imply that men could not act against impossibilities. 
“ Tmpossibilities !” I said ; “what is impossible? Could 
I not go on as a servant with the first caravan, or buy 
up a whole caravan if I hiked? What is impossible? For 
Godsake don’t try any more to frighten my men, for 
you have nearly killed me already in doing so.” 

Next day (17th) I received a letter from Grant, narrat- 
ing the whole of his catastrophes :— 


Szpr. | A CATASTROPHE. 159 


“IN THE JUNGLES, NEAR M’yonaa’s, 
16th Sept. 1861. 

“ My pear SPeKE,—The caravan was attacked, plun- 
dered, and the men driven to the winds, while marching 
this morning into M’yonga’s country. 

“ Awaking at cock-crow, I roused the camp, all anxious 
to rejoin you; and while the loads were being packed, 
my attention was drawn to an angry discussion between 
the head men and seven or eight armed fellows sent by 
Sultan M’yonga, to insist on my putting up for the day 
in his village. They were summarily told that as you 
had already made him a present, he need not expect a 
visit from me. Adhering, I doubt not, to their master’s 
instructions, they officiously constituted themselves our 
guides till we chose to strike off their path, when, quickly 
heading our party, they stopped the way, planted their 
spears, and dared our advance ! 

“ This menace made us firmer in our determination, 
and we swept past the spears. After we had marched 
unmolested for some seven miles, a loud yelping from 
the woods excited our attention, and a sudden rush was 
made upon us by, say, two hundred men, who came down 
seemingly in great glee. In an instant, at the caravan’s 
centre, they fastened upon the poor porters. The struggle 
was short; and with the threat of an arrow or spear at 
their breasts, men were robbed of their cloths and orna- 
ments, loads were yielded and run away with before resist- 
ance could be organised; only three men of a hundred 
stood by me, the others, whose only thought was their 
lives, fled into the woods, where I went shouting for 
them. One man, little Rahan—rip as he is—stood with 
cocked gun, defending his load, against five savages with 
uplifted spears. No one else could be seen. ‘T'wo or 
three were reported killed ; some were wounded. Beads, 
boxes, cloths, &c., lay strewed about the woods. In 


160 UZINZA. [1861. 


fact, I felt wrecked. My attempt to go and demand 
redress from the sultan was resisted, and, in utter despair, 

I seated myself among a mass of rascals jeering round me, 
and insolent after the success of the day. Several were 
dressed in the very cloths, &c., they had stolen from my 
men. 

“Tn the afternoon, about fifteen men and loads were 
brought me, with a message from the sultan, that the 
attack had been a mistake of his subjects—that one man 
had had a hand cut off for it, and that all the property 
would be restored! Yours sincerely, 

€ J. .W. GRANay 


Now, judging from the message sent to Grant by 
Myonga, it appeared to me that his men had mistaken 
their chief’s orders, and had gone one step beyond his 
intentions. It was obvious that the chief merely intended 
to prevent Grant from passing through or evading his 
district without paying a hongo, else he would not have 
sent his men to invite him to his palace, doubtless with 
instructions, if necessary, to use force. This appears the 
more evident from the fact of his subsequent contrition, 
and finding it necessary to send excuses when the property 
was in his hands; for these chiefs, grasping as they are, 
know they must conform to some kind of system, to save 
themselves from a general war, or the avoidance of their 
territories by all travellers in future. To assist Grant, 
I begged Liimérési to send him some aid in men at 
once; but he refused, on the plea that M’yonga was 
at war with him, and would kill them if they went. 
This was all the more provoking, as Grant, in a letter 
next evening, told me he could not get all his men to- 
gether again, and wished to know what should be done. 
He had recovered all the property except six loads of 
beads, eighty yards of American sheeting, and many 
minor articles, besides what had been rifled more or less 


Srpr. ] A MHUMA WOMAN, 161 


from every load. In the same letter he asked me to 
deliver up a Mhiima woman to a man who came with 
the bearers of his missive, as she had made love to Saim 
at Uktlima’s, and had bolted with my men to escape 
from her husband. 

On inquiring into this matter, she told me her face had 
been her misfortune, for the man who now claimed her stole 
her from her parents at Ujiji, and forcibly made her his 
wife, but ever since had ill-treated her, often thrashing her, 
and never giving her proper food or clothing. It was on 
this account she fell in love with Saim ; for he, taking 
compassion on her doleful stories, had promised to keep 
her as long as he travelled with me, and in the end to 
send her back to her parents at Ujiji. She was a beauti- 
ful woman, with gazelle eyes, oval face, high thin nose, 
and fine lips, and would have made a good match for 
Saim, who had a good deal of Arab blood in him, and was 
therefore, in my opinion, much of the same mixed Shem- 
Hamitic breed. But as I did not want more women in 
my camp, I gave her some beads, and sent her off with 
the messenger who claimed her, much against my own 
feelings. I now proposed to Grant that, as Lttmérési’s 
territories extended to within eight miles of M’yonga’s, 
he should try to move over the Msalala border by relays, 
when I would send some Bogté men to meet him; for 
though Ltimérési would not risk sending his men into the 
clutches of M’yonga, he was most anxious to have another 
white visitor. 

20th and 21st.—I again urged Liimérési to help on 
Grant, saying it was incumbent on him to call M’yonga 
to account for maltreating Grant’s porters, who were his 
own subjects, else the road would be shut up—he would 
lose all the hongos he laid on caravans—and he would 
not be able to send his own ivory down to the coast. This 
appeal had its effect: he called on his men to: volunteer, 

L 


ieee UZINZA. [1861. 


and twelve porters came forward, who no sooner left, than 
in came another letter from Grant, informing me that he 
had collected almost enough men to march with, and that 
M’yonga had returned one of the six missing loads, and 
promised to right him in everything. . 

Next day, however, I had from Grant two very opposite 
accounts—one, in the morning, full of exultation, in which 
he said he hoped to reach Rthé’s this very day, as his 
complement of porters was then completed ; while by the 
other, which came in the evening, I was shocked to hear 
that M’yonga, after returning all the loads, much reduced 
by rifling, had demanded as a hongo two guns, two boxes 
ammunition, forty brass wires, and 160 yards of American 
sheeting, in default of which he, Grant, must lend M’yonga 
ten Wangtiana to build a boma on the west of his district, 
to enable him to fight some Wasonga who were invading 
his territory, otherwise he would not allow Grant to move 
from his palace. Grant knew not what to do. He dared 
not part with the guns, because he knew it was against 
my principle, and therefore deferred the answer until he 
heard ‘from me, although all his already collected porters 
were getting fidgety, and two had bolted. In this fearful 
fix I sent Baraka off with strict orders to bring Grant 
away at any price, except the threatened sacrifice of men, 
guns, and ammunition, which I would not listen to, as 
one more day’s delay might end in further exactions ; at 
the same time, I cautioned him to save my property as far 
as he could, for it was to him that M’yonga had formerly 
said that what I paid him should do for all. 

Some of M’yonga’s men who had plundered Grant now 
“caught a Tartar.” After rifling his loads of a kilyndo, or 
bark box of beads, they, it appeared, received orders from 
M’yonga to sell a lot of female slaves, amongst whom were 
the two Wahttma women who had absconded from this. 
The men in charge, not knowing their history, brought 
them for sale into this district, where they were instantly 


Serr. | WAHUMA SUPERSTITION, 168 


recognised by some of Litmérési’s men, and brought in 
to him. The case was not examined at once, Ltimérési 
happening to be absent ; so, to make good their time, the 
men in charge brought their beads to me to be exchanged 
for something else, not knowing that both camps were 
mine, and that they held my beads and not Grant’s. Of 
course I took them from them, but did not give them a 
flogging, as I knew if I did so they would at once retaliate . 
upon Grant. The poor Wahtima women, as soon as 
Liimérési arrived, were put to death by their husbands, 
because, by becoming slaves, they had broken the laws of 
their race. 

22d to 24th.—At last I began to recover. All this 
exciting news, with the prospect of soon seeing Grant, 
did me a world of good,—so much so, that I began 
shooting small birds for specimens—watching the black- 
smiths as they made tools, spears, and bracelets—and 


Blacksmith s Shop. 


doctoring some of the Wahttma women who came to be 
treated for ophthalmia, in return for which they gave me 
milk. The milk, however, I could not boil excepting in 
secrecy, else they would have stopped their donations on 
the plea that this process would be an incantation or 
bewitchment, from which their cattle would fall sick and 


164 UZINZA. [1861. 


dry up. I now succeeded in getting Liimérési to send 
his Wanyapara to go and threaten M’yonga, that if he 
did not release Grant at once, we would combine to force 
him to do so. They, however, left too late, for the hongo 
had been settled, as I was informed by a letter from 
Grant next day, brought to me by Bombay, who had just 
returned from Kazé after six weeks’ absence. He brought 
with him old Nasib and another man, and told me both 
Buti and Nasib had hidden themselves in a boma close 
to Ltitmérési’s the day when my hongo was settled ; but 
they bolted the instant the drums beat, and my men 
fired guns to celebrate the event, supposing that the noise 
was occasioned by our fighting with Ltmérési. These 
cowards then made straight for Kazé, when Ftindi San- 
goro gave Nasib a flogging for deserting me, and made 
him so ashamed of his conduct that he said he would 
never do it again. Bui also was flogged, but, admitting 
himself to be a coward, was sent to the “right-about.” 
With him Bombay also brought three new déolés, for 
which I had to pay 160 dollars, and news that the war 
with Manta Séra was not then over. He had effected 
his escape in the usual manner, and was leading the 
Arabs another long march after him. 

Expecting to meet Grant this morning (25th), I strolled 
as far as my strength and wind would allow me towards 
Rthés; but I was sold, for Rthé had detained him for 
ahongo. Ltmérési also having heard of it, tried to in- 
terpose, according to a plan arranged between us in case 
of such a thing happening, by sending his officers to 
Ruhé, with an order not’to check my “ brother’s” march, 
as I had settled accounts for all. Later in the day, how- 
ever, | heard from Grant that Rtthé would not let him 
go until he paid sixteen pretty cloths, six wires, one gun, 
one box of ammunition, and one load of mzizima beads, 
coolly saying [ had only given him a trifle, under the 
condition that, when the big caravan arrived, Grant 


Srpr. | ARRIVAL OF GRANT. 165 


would make good the rest. I immediately read this 
letter to Liimérési, and asked him how I should answer 
it, as Grant refused to pay anything until I gave the 
order. 

To which Lumérési replied, Rthé, “ my child,” could 
not dare to interfere with Grant after his officers arrived, 
and advised me to wait until the evening. At all events, 
if there were any further impediments, he himself would 
go over there with a force and release Grant. In the 
evening another messenger arrived from Grant, giving 
a list of his losses and expenses at M’yonga’s. They 
amounted to an equivalent of eight loads, and were as 
follows :—100 yards cloth, and 4600 necklaces of beads 
(these had been set aside as the wages paid to the porters, 
but being in my custody, I had to make them good); 300 
necklaces of beads stolen from the loads; one brass wire 
stolen; one sword-bayonet stolen; Grant's looking-glass 
stolen; one saw stolen; one box ammunition stolen. Then 
paid in hongo, 160 yards cloth ; 150 necklaces; one scarlet 
blanket, double ; one case ammunition ; ten brass wires. 
Lastly, there was one donkey beaten to death by the 
savages. This was the worst of all; for this poor brute 
carried me on the former journey to the southern end of 
the N’yanza, and in consequence was a great pet. 

As nothing further transpired, and I was all in the 
dark (26th), 1 wrote to Grant telling him of my inter- 
views with Liimérési, and requesting him to pay nothing; 
but it was too late, for Grant, to my inexpressible delight, 
was the next person I saw; he walked into camp, and 
then we had a good laugh over all our misfortunes. Poor 
Grant, he had indeed had a most troublesome time of it. 
The scoundrel Ritthé, who only laughed at Limérési’s 
orders, had stopped his getting supplies of food for him- 
self and his men; told him it was lucky that he came 
direct to the palace, for full preparations had been made 
for stopping him had he attempted to avoid it ; would not 


166 UZINZA. [1861. 


listen to any reference being made to myself; badgered 
and bullied over every article that he extracted ; vands 
finally, when he found compliance with his extortionate 
requests was not readily granted, he beat the war-drums 
to frighten the porters, and ordered the caravan out of his 
palace, to where he said they would find his men ready to 
fight it out with them. It happened that Grant had just 
given Ruhé a gun when my note arrived, on which they 
Aide an agreement that it was to be restored, provided 
that, after +H8 full knowledge of all these transactions had 
reached us, it was both Liimérési’s and my desire that it 
should be so. 

I called Limérési (27th), and begged he would show 
whether he was the chief or not, by requirmg Ruthé to 
disgorge the property he had taken from me. His Wan- 
yapara had been despised, and I had been most unjustly 
treated. Upon this the old chief hung down his head, 
and said it touched his heart more than words could tell 
to hear my complaint, for until I came that way no one 
had come, and I had paid him handsomely. He fully 
appreciated the good service I had done to him and his 
country by opening a road which all caravans for the 
future would follow if properly dealt with. Having two 
heads in a country was a most dangerous thing, but it 
could not be helped for the present, as his hands were too 
completely occupied already. There were Rohinda, the 
Wattita, and M’yonga, whom he must settle with before 
he could attend to Rthé; but when he was free, then 
Rtthé should know who was the chief. To bring the 

matter to a climax, Mrs Liimérési then said she wea 
to have something, because Rtthé was her son, wae 
Litimérési was only her second husband and consort, for 
Rtthé was born to her by her former husband. She there- 
fore was queen. 


Difficulties now commenced again (28th). All the 


Sepr.-Ocr. ] CONTINUED DIFFICULTIES. 167 


Wangtiana struck, and said they would go no farther, J 
argued—they argued; they wanted more pay—I would 
not give more. Bombay, who appeared the only one 
ol my men anxious to go on with Grant and myself, 
advised me to give in, else they would all run away, he 
said. I still stuck out, saying that if they did go, they 
should be seized on the coast and cast into jail for de- 
sertion. I had sent for fifty more men on the same terms 
as themselves, and nothing in the world would make me 
alter what had been established at the British Consulate. 
There all their engagements were written down in the 
office-book, and the Consul was our judge. 

29th to 4th—This shut them up, but at night two of 
them deserted ; the Wanyamiézi porters also deserted, 
and I had to find more. Whilst this was going on, 
I wrote letters and packed up my specimens, and sent 
them back by my late valet, Rahan, who also got orders 
to direct Sheikh Said to seize the two men who deserted, 
and take them down chained to the coast when he went 
there. On the 4th, Lttmérési was again greatly per- 
plexed by his sovereign Rohinda calling on him for some 
cloths; he must have thirty at least, else he would not 
give up Ltmérési’s son. Further, he commanded in a 
bullying tone that all the Wahtima who were with Lt- 
mérési should be sent to him at once, adding, at the same 
time, if his royal mandate was not complied with as soon 
as he expected, he would at once send a force to seize 
Liimérési, and place another man in his stead to rule 
over the district. 

Liimérési, on hearing this, first consulted me, saying 
his chief was displeased with him, accusing him of being 
too proud, in having at once two such distinguished guests, 
and meant by these acts only to humble him. I replied, 
if that was the case, the sooner he allowed us to go, the 
better it would be for him; and, reminding him of his 


168 UZINZA. [1861. 


original promise to give me assistance on to Usiu, said he 
could do so now with a very good grace. 

Quite approving himself of this suggestion, Liimérési 
then gave me one of his officers to be my guide—his name 
was Sangizo. This man no sooner received his orders 
than, proud of his office as the guide of such a distin- 
guished caravan, he set to work to find us porters. 
Meanwhile my Wasitti friends, who left on the 25th of 
August, returned, bearing what might be called Sttwaro- 
ra’s mace—a long rod of brass bound up in stick charms, 
and called Kaquenzingiriri, “the commander of all things.” 
This they said was their chief's invitation to us ; Stiwarora 
did not want a hongo—he only wished to see us, and sent 
this Kaquenzingiriri, to command us respect. wherever we 
went. 

5th.—Without seeing us again, Litmérési, evidently 
ashamed of the power held over him by this rod of Stiwa- 
rora’s, walked off im the night, leaving word that he was 
on his way to Rthé’s, to get back my gun and all the 
other things that had been taken from Grant. The same 
night a large herd of cattle was stolen from the boma 
without any one knowing it ; so next morning, when the 
loss was discovered, all the Wahtima set off on the spoor 
to track them down ; but with what effect I never knew. 

As I had now men enough to remove half our property, 
I made a start of it, leaving Grant to bring 
up the rest. I believe I was a most miserable 
spectre in appearance, puffing and blowing at each step I 
took, with shoulder drooping, and left arm hanging like 
a dead log, which I was unable ever to swing. Grant, 
remarking this, told me then, although from a friendly 
delicacy he had abstained from saying so earlier, that 
my condition, when he first saw me on rejoining, gave 
him a sickening shock. Next day (7th) he came up with 


the rest of the property, carried by men who had taken 
service for that one march only. 


To Mtiamba, 6th. 


—~ 


Oor. ] A DISAPPOINTMENT. 169 


Before us now lay a wilderness of five marches’ dura- 
tion, as the few villages that once lined it 
had all been depopulated by the Sorombo 
people and the Wattita. We therefore had to lay in 
rations for those days, and as no men could be found who 
would take service to Karagité, we filled up our comple- 
ment with men at exorbitant wages to carry our things 
on to Ustii. At this place, to our intense joy, three of 
Sheikh Said’s boys came to us with a letter from Rigby ; 
but, on opening it, our spirits at once fell far below zero, 
for it only informed us that he had sent us all kinds of 
nice things, and letters from home, which were packed up 
in boxes, and despatched from the coast on the 30th Oc- 
tober 1860. 

The boys then told me that a merchant, mcknamed 
Msopora, had left the boxes in Ugogo, in charge of some 
of those Arabs who were detained there, whilst he went 
rapidly round by the south, following up the Ritiaha river 
to Usanga and Usenga, whence he struck across to Kazé. 
Sheikh Said, they said, sent his particular respects to me ; 
he had heard of Grant’s disasters with great alarm. If he 
could be of service, he would readily come to me; but he 
had dreamed three times that he saw me marching into 
Cairo, which, as three times were lucky, he was sure 
would prove good, and he begged I would still keep my 
nose well to the front, and push boldly on. Manta Séra 
was still in the field, and all was uncertain. Bombay 
then told me—he had forgotten to do so before—that 
when he was last at Kazé, Sheikh Said told him he was 
sure we would succeed if both he and myself pulled to- 
gether, although it was well-known no one else of my 
party wished to go northwards. 

With at last a sufficiency of porters, we all set out to- 
gether, walking over a new style of country. 
Instead of the constantly-reeurring outcrops 
of granite, as in Unyamiiézi, with valleys between, there 


Halt, 8th. 


To Kagongo, 9th. 


170 UZINZA. [1861. 


were only two lines of little hills visible, one right and 
one left of us, a good way off; whilst the ground over 
which we were travelling, instead of being confined like 
a valley, rose in long high swells of sandstone formation, 
covered with small forest-trees, among which flowers , 
like primroses, only very much larger, and mostly of a 
pink colour, were frequently met with. Indeed, we ought 
all to have been happy together, for all my men were paid 
and rationed trebly—far better than they would have been 
if they had been travelling with any one else ; but I had 
not paid all, as they thought, proportionably, and there- 
fore there were constant heartburnings, with strikes and 
rows every day. It was useless to tell them that they 
were all paid according to their own agreements—that all 
short-service men had a right to expect more in propor- 
tion to their work than long-service ones; they called it 
all love and partiality, and in their envy would think 
themselves ill-used. 

At night the kirangozi would harangue the camp, 
cautioning all hands to keep together on the 
Ime of march, as the Watiita were constantly 
hovering about, and the men should not squabble and 
fight with their master, else no more white men would 
come this way again. On the 11th we were out of 
Bogié, in the district of Ugomba, and next march 
brought us into Ugombé (12th), where we crossed the 
Ukongo nullah, draining westwards to the Malagarazi 
river. Here some of the porters, attempting to bolt, 
were intercepted by my coast-men and had a fight of it, 
for they fired arrows, and in return the coast-men cut 
their bows. The whole camp, of course, was in a blaze 
at this; their tribe was insulted, and they would not 
stand it, until Bombay put down their pride with a few 
strings of beads, as the best means of restoring peace in 
the camp. 


At this place we were visited by the chief of the dis- 


To Kagéra, 10th. 


Oct. ] ANOTHER EXTORTIONER, 171 


trict, Pongo (Bush-boc), who had left his palace to see 
Halt, 13ana US and invite us his way, for he feared we 
aii. might give him the slip by going west into 
Uyoft. He sent us a cow, and said he should like some 
return ; for Mastidi, who had gone ahead, only gave him a 
trifle, professing to be our vanguard, and tellmg him that 
as soon as we came with the large caravan we would 
satisfy him to his heart’s content. We wished for an 
interview, but he would not see us, as he was engaged 
looking into his magie horn, with an endeavour to see 
what sort of men we were, as none of our sort had ever 
come that way before. 

The old sort of thing occurred again. I sent him one 
kitambi and eight yards kiniki, explaining how fearfully 
I was reduced from theft and desertions, and begging he 
would have mercy; but instead of doing so, he sent the 
things back in a huff, after a whole day’s delay, and said 
he required, besides, one sahari, one kitambi, and eight 
yards kiniki. In a moment I sent them over, and begged 
he would beat the drums; but no, he thought he was 
entitled to ten brass wires in addition, and would accept 
them at his palace the next day, as he could not think of 
allowing us to leave his country until we had done him 
that honour, else all the surrounding chiefs would call him 
inhospitable. 

Too knowing now to be caught with such chaff, I told 
To Pongo’s resi- Lim, through Bombay, if he would consider 
dence, 15. the ten brass wires final, | would give them, 
and then go to his palace, not otherwise. He acceded to 
this, but no sooner got them, than he broke his faith, and 
said he must either have more pretty cloths, or five more 
brass wires, and. then, without doubt, he would beat the 
drums. <A long badgering bargain ensued, at which I 
made all my men be present as witnesses, and we finally 
concluded the hongo with four more brass wires. 

The drums then no sooner beat the satisfaction, than 


172 UZINZA. [1861. 


the Wastii mace-bearers, in the most feeling and good- 
mannered possible manner, dropped down on their knees 
before me, and congratulated me on the cessation of this 
tormenting business. Feeling much freer, we now went 
over and put up in Pongo’s palace, for we had to halt 
there a day to collect more porters, as half my men had 
just bolted. This was by no means an easy job, for all my 
American sheeting was out, and so was the kiniki. Pongo 
then for the first time showed himself, sneaking about 
with an escort, hiding his head in a cloth lest our “evil 
eyes” might bewitch him. Still he did us a good turn; 
for on the 16th he persuaded his men to take service with 
us at the enormous hire of ten necklaces of beads per man 
for every day's march—nearly ten times what an Arab 
pays. Fowls were as plentiful here as elsewhere, though 
the people only kept them to sell to travellers, or else for 
cutting them open for divining purposes, by inspection of 
their blood and bones. 

From the frying-pan we went into the fire in crossing 
To N’yartt- from Ugombé into the district of Wanga, 
wamba's, 17. where we beat up the chief, N’yarttwamba, 
and at once went into the hongo business. He offered a 
cow to commence with, which I would not accept until 
the tax was paid, and then I made my offering of two 
wires, one kitambi, and one kistitt. Badgering then com- 
menced: I must add two wires, and six makete or neck- 
laces of mzizima beads, the latter being due to the chief 
for negotiating the tax. When this addition was paid, we 
should be freed by beat of drum. 

I complied at once, by way of offering a special mark 
of respect and friendship, and on the reliance that he 
would keep his word. The scoundrel, however, no sooner 
got the articles, than he said a man had just come there 
to inform him that I gave Pongo ten wires and ten cloths ; 
he, therefore, could not be satisfied until I added one more 
wire, when, without fail, he would beat the drums. It was 


Ocr.] A THREATENED FIGHT, 17s 


given, after many angry words; but it was the old story 
over again—he would have one more wire and a cloth, or 
else he would not allow us to proceed on the morrow. 
My men, this time really provoked, said they would fight 
it out ;—a king breaking his word in that way! But in 
the end the demand had to be paid; and at last, at 9 P.m., 
the drums beat the satisfaction. 

From this we went on to the north end of Wanga, in 
To border of front of which was a wilderness, separating 
Ukhanga, 18. the possessions of Rohinda from those of 
Stiwarora. We put up in a boma, but were not long 
ensconced there when the villagers got up a pretext for a 
quarrel, thinking they could plunder us of all our goods, 
and began pitching into my men. We, however, proved 
more than a match for them. Our show of guns frightened 
them all out of the place ; my men then gave chase, firing 
off in the air, which sent them flying over the fields, and 
left us to do there as we liked until night, when a few of 
the villagers came back and took up their abode with us 
quietly. Next, after dark, the little village was on the 
alert again. The Watiita were out marching, and it was 
rumoured that they were bound for N’yartitwamba’s. The 
porters who were engaged at Pongo’s now gave us the slip; 
we were consequently detained here next day (19th), 
when, after engaging a fresh set, we crossed the wilder- 
ness, and in Ustti put up with Stiwarora’s border officer of 
this post, N’yamanira. 

Here we were again brought to a standstill. 


174 USUI. [1861. 


CIA PL RV LL 


*, 


USUI. 


TAXATION RECOMMENCED — A GREAT DOCTOR —SUWARORA PIL- 
LAGING — THE ARABS — CONFERENCE WITH AN AMBASSADOR 
FROM UGANDA—DISPUTES IN CAMP—RIVALRY OF BOMBAY AND 
BARAKA—DEPARTURE FROM THE INHOSPITABLE DISTRICTS. 


WE were now in Usiti, and so the mace-bearers, bemg on 
gee their own ground, forgot their manners, and 
Usti, 2044 and peremptorily demanded their pay before they 
would allow us to move one step farther. At 
first I tried to stave the matter off, promising great re- 
wards if they took us quickly on to Stwwarora; but they 
would take no altern wires 
each. I could not afford such a sum, and tried to beat 
them down, but without effect ; for they said they had it 
in their power to detain us here a whole month, and they 
could get us bullied at every stage by the officers of the 
stations. No threats of reporting them to their chief had 
any effect, so, knowing that treachery in these countries 
was a powerful enemy, I ordered them to be paid. N’ya- 
manira, the Mktingt, then gave us a goat and two pots of 
pombé, begeing, at the same time, for four wires, which I 
paid, hoping thus to get on in the morning. 
I then made friends with him, and found he was a great 
doctor as well as an officer. In front of his hut he had 
his church or uganga—a tree, in which was fixed a blaue 


Ocr. | "A GREAT MAGICIAN, 175 


boe’s horn charged with magic powder, and a zebra’s 
hoof, suspended by a string over a pot of water sunk in 
the earth below it. His badges of office he had tied on 
his head; the butt of a shell, representing the officer's 
badge, being fixed on the forehead, whilst a small sheep's 
horn, fixed jauntily over the temple, denoted that he was 
a magician. Wishing to try my powers in magical arts, 
as I laughed at his church, he begged me to preduce an 
everlasting spring of water by simply scratching the 
ground. . He, however, drew short up, to the intense de- 
light of my men, on my promising that I would do so if 
he made one first. 

At night, 22d, a steel seabbard and some cloths were 
extracted from our camp, so I begged my friend the great 
doctor would show us the use of his horn. This was pro- 
mised, but never performed. I then wished to leave, as 
the Wasi guides, on receiving their pay, promised we 
should; but they deferred, on the plea that one of them 
must see their chief first, and get him to frank us through, 
else, they said, we should be torn to pieces. I| said [ 
thought the Kaquenzingirini could do this ; but they said, 
“No; Sttwarora must be told first of your arrival, to 
prepare him properly for your coming ; so stop here for 
three days with two of us, whilst the third one goes to the 
palace and returns again ; for you know the chiets of these 
countries do not feel safe until they have had a look at 
the uganga.” 

One of them then went away, but no sooner had left 
than a man named Makinga arrived to invite us on, as he 
said, at his adopted brother K’yengo’s request. Makinga 
then told us that Stiwarora, on first hearing that we were 
coming, became greatly afraid, and said he would not let 
us set eyes on his country, as he was sure we were king- 
dethroners ; but, referring for opinion to Dr K’yengo, his 
fears were overcome by the doctor assuring him that he 
had seen hosts of our sort at Zanzibar; and he knew, 


176 USUL. [1861. 


moreover, that some years ago we had been to Ujiji and 
to Ukéréwé without having done any harm in those 
places ; and, further, since Mtisa had sent word that I 
had done my best to subdue the war at Unyanyembé, and 
had promised to do my best here, he, Stwarora, had been 
anxiously watching our movements, and longed for our 
arrival. This looked famous, and it was agreed we should 
move the next morning. Just then a new light broke in 
on my defeat at Sorombo, for with Makinga I recognised 
one of my former porters, who I had supposed was a 
“child” of the Pig’s. This man now said before all my 
men, Baraka included, that he wished to accept the load 
of mzizima I had offered the Pig if he would go forward 
with Baraka and tell Sttwarora I wanted some porters to 
help me to reach him. He was not a “child” of the Pig’s, 
but a “child” of K’yengo’s; and as Baraka would not 
allow him to accept the load of mzizima, he went on to 
K’yengo by himself, and told all that had happened. It 
was now quite clear what motives induced Sttwarora to 
send out the three Wasttii; but how I blessed Baraka for 
this in my heart, though I said nothing about it to him, 
for fear of his playing some more treacherous tricks. Grant 
then told me Baraka had been frightened at Mininga, by 
a blackguard Mganga to whom he would not give a 
present, into the belief that our journey would encounter 
some terrible mishap ; for, when the M’yonga. catastrophe 
happened, he thought that a fulfilment of the Mganga’s 
prophecy. 

I wished to move in the morning (23d), and had all 
hands ready, but was told by Makinga he must be settled. 
with first. His dues for the present were four brass wires, 
and as many more when we reached the palace. I could 
not stand this: we were literally, as Mtisa said we should 
be, being “torn to pieces ;” so I appealed to the mace- 
bearers, protested that Makinga could have no claims on 
me, as he was not a man of Usii, but a native of Utam- 


Ocr. | ASPECT OF THE COUNTRY. Lan 


bara, and brought on a row. On the other hand, as he 
could not refute this, Makinga swore the mace was all a 
pretence, and set a-fighting with the Wasii and all the 
men in turn. 

To put a stop to this, I ordered a halt, and called on 
the district officer to assist us, on which he said he would 
escort us on to Sttwarora’s if we would stop till next 
morning. This was agreed to; but in the night we were 
robbed of three goats, which he said he could not allow 
to be passed over, lest Sttwarora might hear of it, and he 
would get into a scrape. He pressed us strongly to stop 
another day whilst he sought for them, but I told him I 
would not, as his magic powder was weak, else he would 
have found the scabbard we lost long before this. 

At last we got under way, and, after winding through 
To Virembs's, 2% long forest, we emerged on the first of the 
gt populous parts of Ustu, a most convulsed- 
looking country, of well-rounded. hills composed of sand- 
stone. In all the parts not under cultivation they were 
covered with brushwood. Here the little grass-hut vil- 
lages were not fenced by a boma, but were hidden in 
large fields of plantains. Cattle were numerous, kept by 
the Wahtima, who would not sell their milk to us because 
we ate fowls and a bean called maharagie. 

Happily no one tried to pillage us here, so on we went 
fo Vikora's, to Vikora’s, another ofticer, living at N’yaka- 
aa senyé, under a sandstone hill, faced with a 
dyke of white quartz, over which leaped a small stream 
of water—a seventy-feet drop—which, it is said, St- 
warora sometimes paid homage to when the land was 
oppressed by drought. Vikora’s father it was whom Sir- 
boko of Mininga shot. Usually he was very severe with 
merchants in consequence of that act; but he did not 
molest us, as the messenger who went on to Stiwarora 
returned here just as we arrived, to say we must come 

M 


Js 


178 USUI. . [1861. 


on at once, as. Stiwarora was anxious to see us, and had 
ordered his Wakungtt not to molest us. Thieves that 
night entered our ringtfenes of thorns, and stole a cloth 
from off one of my men while he was sleeping. 

We set down Stiwarora, after this very polite message, 
To Kariwami's, ““ @ regular trump,” and walked up the hill of 
Bei N’yakasenyé with considerable mirth, singing 
his praises ; but we no sooner planted ourselves on the 
summit than we sang a very different tune. We were 
ordered to stop by a huge body of men, and to pay 
toll. 

Stiwarora, on second thoughts, had changed his mind, 
or else he had been overruled by two of his officers— 
Kariwami, who lived here, and Virembo, who lived two 
stages back, but were then with their chief. There was 
no help for it, so I ordered the camp to be formed, and 
sent Nasib and the mace-bearers at once off to the palace 
to express to his highness how insulted I felt as his 
euest, being stopped in this manner, even when I had 
his ii pemane ee with me as his authority that I was 
invited. there as a guest. ‘I was not a merchant who 
carried merchandise, but a prince like himself, come on a 
friendly mission to see him and Rttmanika. I was wait- 
ing at night for the return of the messengers, and sitting 
out with my sextant observing the stars, to fix my posi- 
tion, When some daring thieves, in the dark bushes close 
by, accosted two of the women of the camp, pretending 
a desire to know what I was doing. They were no 
sooner told by the unsuspecting women, than they whipped 
off their clothes and ran away with them, allowing their 
victims to pass me in a state of absolute nudity. I could 
stand this thieving no longer. My goats and other things 
had been taken away ‘vith oot causing me much aise 
of mind, but now, after this shocking event, I ordered 
my men to shoot at any thieves that came near them. 


Oot.] ° A MAGICIAN SHOT, 179 


This night one was shot, without any mistake about it; 
for the next morning we tracked him by his 
blood, and afterwards heard he had died of 
his wound. The Wasiti elders, contrary to my expecta- 
tion, then came and congratulated us on our success. 
They thought us most wonderful men, and possessed of 
supernatural powers; for the thief in question was a 
magician, who until now was thought to be invulnerable. 
Indeed, they said Arabs with enormous caravans had 
often been plundered by these people; but though they 
had so many more guns than ourselves, they never suc- 
ceeded in killing one. 

Nasib then returned to inform us that the king had 
heard our complaint, and was sorry for it, but said he 
could not interfere with the rights of his officers. He did 
not wish himself to take anything from us, and hoped we 
would come on to him as soon as we had satisfied his 
officers with the trifle they wanted. Virembo then sent 
us some pombé by his officers, and begged us to have 
patience, for he was then fleecing Mastidi at the encamp- 
ing-ground near the palace. This place was alive with 
thieves. During the day they lured my men into their 
huts by inviting them to dinner; but when they got 
them they stripped them stark-naked and let them go 
again ; whilst at night they stoned our camp. After this, 
one more was shot dead and two others wounded. 

I knew that Stiwarora’s message was all humbug, and 
that his officers merely kept about one per 
cent of what they took from travellers, pay- 
ing the balance into the royal coffers. Thinking I was 
now well in for a good fleecing myself, I sent Bombay off 
to Masiidi’s camp, to tell Insangéz, who was travelling 
with him on a mission of his master’s, old Miisa’s son, that 
I would reward him handsomely if he would, on arrival 
at Karagtié, get Rtmanika to send us his mace here in the © 


Halt, 27th. 


Halt, 28th. 


180 USUI. i [1861. 


same way as Stiwarora had done to help us out of Bogiié, 
as he knew Miisa at one time said he would go with us 
to Karagié in person. When Bombay was gone, Virembo 
then deputed Kariwami to take the hongo for both at 
once, mildly requiring 40 wires, 80 cloths, and 400 neck- 
laces of every kind of bead we possessed. This was, 
indeed, too much of a joke. I complained of all the losses 
I had .suffered, and begged for mercy; but all he said, 
after waiting the whole day, was, “ Do not stick at trifles; 
for, after settling with us, you will have to give as much 
more to Vikora, who lives down below.” 

Next morning, as I said I could not by any means pay 
such an exorbitant tax as was demanded, 
Kariwami begged me to make an offer, which 
I did by sending him four wires. These, of course, were 
rejected with scorn; so, in addition, I sent an old box. 
That, too, was thrown back on me, as nothing short of 
20 wires, 40 cloths, and 200 necklaces of all sorts of 
beads, would satisfy him; and this I ought to be con- 
tented to pay, as he had been so moderate because I was 
the king’s guest, and had been so reduced by robbery. 
I now sent six wires more, and said this was the last I 
could give—they were worth so many goats to me—and 
now, by giving them away, I should have to live on grain 
hike a poor man, though I was a prince in my own 
country, just like Stiwarora. Surely Sttwarora could not 
permit this if he knew it; and if they would not suttice, 
I should have to stop here until called again by Stwarora. 
The ruthian, on hearing this, allowed the wires to lie in his 
hut, and said he was going away, but hoped, when he 
returned, I should have, as I had got no cloths, 20 wires, 
and 1000 necklaces of extra length, strung and all ready 
for him. 

Just then Bombay returned flushed with the excitement 
of a great success, He had been in Mastidi’s camp, and 
had delivered my message to Insangéz. Masiidi, he said; 


Halt, 29th. 


Oct. ] BOMBAY AND SUWARORA TRIUMPH. 181 


had been there a fortnight unable to settle his hongo, for 
the great Mkama had not deigned to see him, though the 
Arab had been daily to his palace requesting an inter- 
view. “Well,” I said, “that is all very interesting, but 
what next ‘—will the big king see us?” “Ono; by the 
very best good fortune in ee world, on going at the 
palace I saw Stiwarora, and spoke to him at once; but he 
was so tremendously drunk, he could not understand me.” 
“What luck was there in that?” I asked. On which 
Bombay said, “Oh, everybody in the place congratulated 
me on my success in having obtained an interview with 
that great monarch the very first day, when Arabs had 
seldom that privilege under one full month of squatting ; 
even Mastidi had not yet seen him.” To which Nasib 
also added, “ Ah, yes—indeed it is so—a monstrous suc- 
cess ; there is great ceremony as well as business at these 
courts ; you will better see what I mean when you get to 
Uganda. These Wahtima kings are not like those you 
ever saw in Unyamiiézi or anywhere else; they have 
officers and soldiers like Said Majid, the Sultan at Zan- 
zibar.” “ Well,” said I to Bombay, “what was Stwarora 
like?” “Oh, he is a very fine man—just as tall, and in 
the face very like Grant ; in fact, if Grant were black you 
would not know the difference.” “And were his officers 
drunk too?” “O yes, they were all drunk together ; men 
were bringing in pombé all day.” “And did you get 
drunk?” “O yes,” said Bombay, grinning, and showing 
his whole row of sharp-pointed teeth, “they would make me 
drink ; and then they showed me the place they assigned 
for your camp when you come over there. It was not in 
the palace, but outside, without a tree near it; anything 
but a nice-looking residence.” I then sent Bombay to 
work at the hongo business ; but, after haggling till night 
with Kariwami, he was told he must bring fourteen brass 
wires, two cloths, and five mukhnai of kanyéra, or white 
porcelain beads—which, reduced, amounted to three hun- 


182 USUI. [1861. 


dred necklaces; else he said I might stop there for a 
month. 

At last I settled this confounded hongo, by paying 
seven additional wires in lieu of the cloth ; 
and, delighted at the termination of this te- 
dious affair, I ordered a march. Like magic, however, 
Vikora turned up, and said we must wait until he was 
settled with. His rank was the same as the others, and 
one bead less than I had given them he would not take. 
I fought all the day out, but the next morning, as he de- 
puted his officers to take nine wires, these were given, and 
then we went on with the journey. 

Tripping along over the hill, we descended to a deep 
miry watercourse, full of bulrushes, then over 
another hill, from the heights of which we 
saw Sttwarora’s palace, lying down in the Uthungiti valley, 


Halt, 30th. 


To Uthungit, 31st. 


Uthungu Valley. 


behind which again rose another hill of sandstone, faced 
on the top with a dyke of white quartz. The scene was 
very striking, for the palace enclosures, of, great extent, 
were well laid out to give effect. Three circles of milk 
bush, one within the other, formed the boma, or ring- 
fence. The chief’s hut (I do not think him worthy the 
name of king, since the kingdom is divided in two) was 


Our Camp in the Uthungu Valley. The Wasu bringing Provisions for sale. 


Noy.] USUI TAXATION, 183 


three times as large as any of the others, and stood by 
itself at the farther end; whilst the smaller huts, con- 
taming his officers and domestics, were arranged in little 
groups within the circle, at certain distances apart from 
one another, sufficient to allow of their stalling their cattle 
at night. 

On descending into the Uthungti valley, Grant, who was 
preceding the men, found Makinga opposed .to the pro- 
gress of the caravan until his dues were paid. He was a 
stranger like ourselves, and was consequently treated with 
scorn, until he tried to maintain what he called his right, 
by pulling the loads off my men’s shoulders, whereupon 
Grant cowed him into submission, and all went on again— 
not to the palace, as we had supposed, but, by the direction 
of the mace-bearers, to the huts of Stiwarora’s commander- 
in-chief, two miles from the palace; and here we found 
Masiidi’s camp also. We had no sooner formed camp for 
ourselves and arranged all our loads, than the eternal 
Vikora, whom I thought we had settled with before we 
started, made a claim for some more wire, cloth, and beads, 
as he had not received as much as Kariwami and Virembo. 
Of course I would not listen to this, as I had paid what 
his men asked for, and that was enough for me. Just 
then Mastidi, with the other Arabs who were travelling 
with him, came over to pay us a visit, and inquire what 
we thought of the Ustii taxes. He had just concluded 
his hongo to Stiwarora by paying 80 wires, 120 yards of 
cloth, and 130 Ib. of beads, whilst he had also paid to 
every officer from 20 to 40 wires, as well as cloths and 
beads. On hearing of my transactions, he gave it as his 
opinion that I had got off surprisingly well. 

Next morning (1st) Mastidi and his party started for 
Karagtié. They had been more than a year between this 
and Kazé, trying all the time to get along. Provisions 
here were abundant—hawked about by the people, who 
wore a very neat skin kilt strapped round the waist, but 


* 


184 USUI. [1861. 


otherwise were decorated like the Wanyamtezi. It was 
difficult to say who were of true breed here, for the inter- 
course of the natives with the Wahtima and the Wanya- 
miiézi produced a great variety of facial features amongst 
the people. Nowhere did I ever see so many men and 
women with hazel eyes as at this place. 

In the evening, an Uganda man, by name N ‘yamgundt, 
came to pay his respects to us. He was dressed in a large 
skin wrapper, made up of a number of very small antelope 
skins: it was as soft as kid, and just as well sewn as our 
gloves. To our surprise the manners of the man were 
quite in keeping with his becoming dress. I was enchanted 
with his appearance, and so were my men, though no one 
could speak to him but Nasib, who told us he knew him 
before. He was the brother of the dowager queen of 
Uganda, and, along with a proper body of officers, he had 
been sent by Mtésa, the present king of Uganda, to demand 
the daughter of Stiwarora, as reports had reached his king 
that she was surprisingly beautiful. They had been here 
more than a year, during which time this beautiful virgin 
had died; and now Stiwarora, fearful of the great king’s 
wrath, consequent on his procrastinations, was endeavour- 
ing to make amends for it, by sending, instead of his 
daughter, a suitable tribute in wires. I thought it not 
wonderful that we should be fleeced. 

Next day (2d) Sirhid paid us a visit, and said he was 
the first man in the state. He certainly was a nice- 
looking young man, with a good deal of the Wahttma 
blood in him. Flashily dressed in coloured cloths and a 
turban, he sat down in one of our chairs as if he had been 
accustomed to such a seat all his life, and spoke with 
oreat suavity. I explained our ditticulties as those of 
great men in misfortune ; and, after listening to our tale, 
he said he would tell Stim of the way we had been 
plundered, and impress upon him to deal lightly with us. 
I said I had brought with me a few articles of European 


Noy. ] SUWARORA’S REPRESENTATIVE. 185 


manufacture for Stiwarora, which I hoped would be ac- 
cepted if I presented them, for they were such things as 
only great men like his chief ever possessed. One was a 
five-barrelled pistol, another a large block-tin box, and so 
forth; but after looking at them, and seeing the pistol 
fired, he said: “No; you must not show these things at 
first, or the Mkama might get frightened, thinking them 
magic. J might lose my head for presuming to offer 
them, and then there is no knowing what might happen 
afterwards.” “ Then can I not see him at once and pay 
my respects, for I have come a great way to obtain that 
pleasure?” “ No,” said Sirhid, “ I will see him first ; for 
he is not a man lke myself, but requires to be well 
assured before he sees anybody.” “Then why did he 
invite me here?” “ He heard that Makaka, and after- 
wards Ltimérési, had stopped your progress; and as he 
wished to see what you were like, he ordered me to send 
some men to you, which, as you know, | did twice. He 
wishes to See you, but does not like doing things in a 
hurry. Superstition, you know, preys on these men’s 
minds who have not seen the world like you and myself.” 
Sirhid then said he would ask Sttwarora to grant us an 
interview as soon as possible; then, whilst leaving, he 
begged for the iron chair he had sat upon; but hearing 
we did not know how to sit on the ground, and therefore 
could not spare it, he withdrew without any more words 
about it. 

Virembo then said (3d) he must have some more wire 
and beads, as his proxy Kariwami had been satisfied with 
too little. I drove him off in a huff, but he soon came 
back again with half the hongo I had paid to Kariwami, 

nd said he must have some cloths, or he would not have 
anything. As fortune decreed it, just then Sirhid dropped 
in, and stopped his importunity for the time by saying 
that if we had possessed cloths his men must have known 
it, for they had been travelling with us. No sooner, how- 


186 USUL. [1861. 


ever, did Virembo turn tail than the Sirhid gave us a 
broad hint that he usually received a trifle from the 
Arabs before he made an attempt at arranging the hongo 
with Sttwarora. Any trifle would do, but he preferred 
cloth. 

This was rather perplexing. Sirhid knew very well 
that I had a small reserve of pretty cloths, though all the 
common ones had been expended; so, to keep in good 
terms with him who was to be our intercessor, I said I 
would give him the last I had got, if he would not tell 
Stiwarora or any one else what I had done. Of course 
he was quite ready to undertake the condition, so I gave 
him two pretty cloths, and he in return gave me two 
goats. But when this little business had been transacted, 
to my surprise he said: “I have orders from Stiwarora 
to be absent five days to doctor a sick relation of his, for 
there is no man in the country so skilled m medicines as 
myself; but whilst I am gone I will leave Karambilé, 
my brother, to officiate in my stead about taking your 
hongo ; but the work will not commence until to-morrow, 
for I must see Sttwarora on the subject myself first.” 

Irungti, a very fine-looking man of Uganda, now called 
on me and begged for beads. He said his king had heard 
of our approach, and was most anxious to see us. Hear- 
ing this, [ begged him to wait here until my hongo was 
paid, that we might travel on to Uganda together. He 
said, No, he could not wait, for he had been detained 
here a whole year already ; but, if I liked, he would leave 
some of his children behind with me, as their presence 
would intimidate Stwarora, and incite him to let us off 
quickly, 

I then begged him to convey a Colt’s six-chamber 
revolving rifle to his king, Mtésa, as an earnest that I 
was a prince most desirous of seeing him. No one, I said, 
but myself could tell what dangers and difficulties I had 
encountered to come this far for the purpose, and all was 


Noy. ] MTESA’S AMBASSADOR. 187 


owing to his great fame, as the king of kings, having 
reached me even as far off as Zanzibar. The ambassador 
would not take the rifle, lest his master, who had never 
seen such a wonderful weapon before, should think he had 
brought him a malign charm, and he would be in danger 
of losmg his head. I then tried to prevail on him to take 
a knife and some other pretty things, but he feared them 
all ; so, as a last chance—for I wished to send some token, 
by way of card or letter, for announcing my approach and 
securing the road—I gave him a red sixpenny pocket- 
handkerchief, which he accepted ; and he then told me he 
was surprised I had come all this way round to Uganda, 
when the road by the Masai country was so much shorter. 
He told me how, shortly after the late king of Uganda, 
Sunna, died, and before Mtésa had been selected by the 
officers of the country to be their king, an Arab caravan 
came across the Masai as far as Usoga, and begged for 
permission to enter Uganda ; but as the country was dis- 
turbed by the ‘elections, the officers of the state advised 
the Arabs to wait, or come again when the king was 
elected. I told him IJ had heard of this before, but also 
heard that those Arabs had met with great disasters, 
owing to the turbulence of the Masai. To which he re- 
plied: “That is true ; there were great difficulties in those 
times, but now the Masai country was in better order ; 
and as Mtésa was most anxious to open that line, he 
would give me as many men as I liked if I wished to go 
home that way.” 

This was pleasant information, but not quite new, for 
the Arabs had told me Mtésa was so anxious to open that 
route, he had frequently offered to aid them in it himself. 
Still it was most gratifying to myself, as I had written 
to the Geographical Society, on leaving Bogté, that if I 
found Petherick in Uganda, or on the northern end of the 
N’yanza, so that the Nile question was settled, [ would 
endeavour to reach Zanzibar via the Masai country. In 


188 USUI. [1861. 


former days, I knew, the kings of Uganda were in the 
habit of sending men to Karagité when they heard that 
Arabs wished to visit them—even as many as two hundred 
at a time—to carry their kit; so I now begged Irungtt 
to tell Mtésa that I should want at least sixty men ; and 
then, on his promising he would be my commissioner, I 
gave him the beads he had begged for himself. 

Ath to 6th—Karambilé now told us to string our 
beads on the fibre of the Mwalé tree, which was sold here 
by the Wastti, as he intended to live in the palace for a 
couple of days, arranging with Stwarora what tax we 
should have to pay, after which he would come and take 
it from us; but we must mind and be ready, for whatever 
Stiwarora said, it must be done instantly. There was no 
such thing as hageling with him ; you must pay and be 
off at once, failing which, you might be detained a whole 
month before there would be an opportunity to speak on 
the subject again. Beads were then served out to all my 
men to be strung, a certain quantity to every khambi or 
mess, and our work was progressing ; but next day we 
heard that Karambtilé was sick, or feigning to be so, and 
therefore had never gone to the palace at all. On the 6th, 
provoked at last by the shameful manner in which we 
were treated, I sent word to him to say, if he did not go 
at once I would go myself, and force my way in with my 
guns, for I could not submit to being treated like a slave, 
stuck out here in the jungle with nothing to do but shoot 
for specimens, or make collections of rocks, &e. This 
brought on another row; for he said both Virembo and 
Vikora had returned their hongos, and until their tongues 
were quieted he could not speak to Stwarora. 

To expedite matters (7th), as our daily consumption in 
camp was a tax of itself, I gave these tormenting creatures 
one wire, one pretty cloth, and five hundred necklaces of 
white beads, which were no sooner accepted than Karam- 
bulé, in the same way as Sirhid had done, said it would 


Noy.] CONTINUED EXTORTIONS. 189 


be greatly to my advantage if I gave him something 
worth having before he saw the Mkama. Only too olad 
to begin work, I gave him a red blanket, called joho, and 
five strings of mzizima beads, which were equal to fifty of 
the common white. 

8th and 9th.—All this time nothing but confusion 
reigned in camp, khambi fighting against khambi. Both 
men and women got drunk, whilst from outside we were 
tormented by the Wasi, both men and women pertinaci- 
ously pressing into our hut, watching us eat, and begging 
in the most shameless manner. They did not know the 
word bakhshish, or present ; but, as bad as the Egyptians, 
they held out their hands, patted their bellies, and said 
Kaniwani (my friend), until we were sick of the sound of 
that word. Still it was impossible to dislike these simple 
creatures altogether, they were such perfect children. If 
we threw water at them to drive them away, they came 
back again, thinking it fun. 

Ten days now had elapsed since we came here, still 
nothing was done (10th), as Karambtlé said, because 
Stiwarora had been so fully occupied collecting an army to 
punish an officer who had refused to pay his taxes, had 
ignored his authority, and had set himself up as king of 
the district he was appointed to superintend. After this, 
at midnight, Karambilé, in an excited manner, said he 
had seen Stiwarora, and it then was appointed that, not 
he, but Virembo should take the royal hongo, as well as 
the Wahinda, or princes’ shares, the next morning—after 
which, we might go as fast as we liked, for Sttwarora was 
so fully occupied with his army, he could not see us this 
time. Before, however, the hongo could be paid, I must 
give the Sirhid and himself twenty brass wires, three joho, 
three barsati, twenty strings of mzizima, and one thousand 
strings of white beads. They were given. 

A fearful row now broke out between Bombay and 
Baraka (11th). Many of my men had by this time been 


190 USUI. [1861. 


married, notwithstanding my prohibition. Baraka, for 
instance, had with him the daughter of Ungiirtte, chief of 
Phitnzé ; Wadimoyo, a woman called Manamaka; San- 
gizo, his wife and sister; but Bombay had not got one, 
and mourned for a girl he had set his eyes on, unfortu- 
nately for himself letting Baraka into his confidence. 
This set Baraka on the qui vive to catch Bombay tripping ; 
for Baraka knew he. could not get her without paying a 
good price for her, and therefore watched his opportunity 
to lay a complaint against him of purloining my property, 
by which scheme he would, he thought, get Bombay’s 


* 


place as storekeeper himself. In a sly manner Bombay — 


employed some of my other men to take five wires, a red 
blanket, and 500 strings of beads, to his would-be father- 
in-law, which, by a previously-concocted arrangement, was 
to be her dowry price. These men did as they were bid ; 
but the father-in-law returned the things, saying he must 
have one more wire. That being also supplied, the 
scoundrel wanted more, and made so much fuss about it, 
that Baraka became conversant with all that was going 
on, and told me of it. 

This set the whole camp in a flame, for Bombay and 
Baraka were both very drunk, as well as most of the 
other men, so that it was with great difficulty I could get 
hold of the rights of their stories. Bombay acknowledged 
he had tried to get the girl, for they had been sentimental- 
ising together for several days, and both alike wished to 
be married. Baraka, he said, was allowed to keep a wife, 
and his position demanded that he should have one also ; 
but the wires were his own property, and not mine, for he 
was given them by the chiefs as a perquisite when I paid 
their hongo through him. He thought it.most unjust and 
unfair of Baraka to call him to account in that way, but 
he was not surprised at it, as Baraka, from the beginning 
of the journey to the present moment, had always been 
backbiting him, to try and usurp his position. Baraka, 


Nov.]  QUARREL BETWEEN BOMBAY AND BARAKA. 191 


at this, somewhat taken aback, said there were no such 
things as perquisites on a journey like this; for whatever 
could be saved from the chiefs was for the common good 
of all, and all alike ought to share in it—repeating ror 
I had often expressed. Then Bombay retorted, trembling 
and foaming in his liquor: “1 know I shall get the apace 
of it, for whilst Baraka’s tongue is a yard long: mine is 
only an inch; but I would not have spent any wires of 
master’s to purchase slaves with (alluding to what Baraka 
had done at Mihambo) ; nor would I, for any purpose of 
making myself richer ; but when it comes to a wife, that’s 
a different thing.” 

In my heart I liked Bombay all the more for this con- 
fession, but thought it necessary to extol Baraka for his 
quickness in finding him out, which drove Bombay nearly 
wild. He wished me to degrade him, if I thought him 
dishonest ; threw himself on the ground, and Iisa my 
feet. I tipht thrash him, turn hard into a porter, or do 
anything else that I liked with him, as long as I did not 
bring a charge of dishonesty against.him. He could not 
explain himself with Baraka’s long tongue opposed to 
him, but there were many deficiencies in my wires before 
he took overcharge at Bogtié, which he must leave for 
settlement till the journey was over, and then, the whole 
question having been sifted at Zanzibar, we would see who 
was the most honest. I then counted all the wires over, 
at Bombay’s request, and found them complete in num- 
bers, without those he had set aside for the dowry money. 
Still there was a doubt, for the wires might have been cut 
by him without detection, as from the commencement they 
were of different lengths. However, I tried to make them 
friends, claimed all the wires myself, and cautioned every 
man in the camp again, that they were all losers when any- 
thing was misnppropriated for I brought this property to 
pay our way with, and whatever balance was over at the end 
of the journey I would divide amongst the whole of them. 


192 USUI. [1861, 


12th and 13th.—When more sober, Bombay again came 
to crave a thousand pardons for what he had done, threw 
himself down at my feet, then at Grant’s, kissed our toes, 
swore I was his Ma Bap (father and mother); he had no 
father or mother to teach him better; he owed all his 
prosperity tome; men must err sometimes; oh, if I would 
only forgive him,—and so forth. Then being assured that 
I knew he never would have done as he had if a woman’s 
attractions had not led him astray, he went to his work 
again like a man, and consoled himself by taking Sangizo’s 
sister to wife on credit instead of the old love, promising 
to pay the needful out of his pay, and to return her to 
her brother when the journey was over. 

In the evening Virembo and Karambiilé came to receive 
the hongo for their chief, demanding 60 wires, 160 yards 
merikani, 300 strings of mzizima, and 5000 strings of 
white beads; but they allowed themselves to be beaten 
down to 50 wires, 20 pretty cloths, 100 strings mzizima, 
and 4000 kiittamnazi, or cocoa-nut-leaf coloured beads, 
my white’ being all done. It was too late, however, to 
count all the things out, so they came the next day and 
took them. They then said we might go as soon as we 
had settled with the Wahinda or Water (the king’s 
children), for Stiwarora could not see us this time, as Ws 
was so engaged with his army; but he hoped to see us 
and pay us more respect when we returned from Uganda, 
httle thinking I had sworn in my mind never to see him, 
or return that way again. I said to those men, I thought 
he was ashamed to see us, as he had robbed us so after 
inviting us into the country, else he was too superstitious, 
for he ought at least to have given us a place in his 
palace. They both rebutted the insinuation; and, to 
change the subject, commenced levying the remaining 
BCS to the princes, which ended by my giving thirty- 
four wires and six pretty cloths in a lump. 


Noy. | AGAIN ON THE MARCH. 198 


Early in the morning we were on foot again, only too 
thankful to have got off so cheaply. Then 
men were appointed as guides and protectors, 
to look after us as far as the border. What an honour! 
We had come into the country drawn there by a com- 
bination of pride and avarice, and now we were leaving it 
in hot haste under the guidance of an escort of officers, 
who were in reality appointed to watch us as dangerous 
wizards and objects of terror. It was all the same to us, 
as we now only thought of the prospect of relief before us, 
and laughed at what we had gone through. 

Rising out of the Uthungii valley, we walked over 
rolling ground, drained in the dips by miry rush rivulets. 
The population was thinly scattered in small groups of 
grass huts, where the scrub jungle had been cleared away. 
On the road we passed cairns, to which every passer-by 
contributed a stone. Of the origin of the cairns I could 
not gain any information, though it struck me as curious I 
should find them in the first country we had entered gov- 
erned by the Wahtima, as I formerly saw the same thing 
in the Somali country, which doubtless, in earlier days, 
was governed by a branch of the Abyssinians. Arrived 
at our camping, we were immediately pounced upon by a 
deputation of officers, who said they had been sent by 
Semamba, the officer of this district. He lived ten miles 
from the road; but hearing of our approach, he had sent 
these men to take his dues. At first I objected to pay, 
lest he should afterwards treat me as Virembo had done; 
but I gave way in the end, and paid nine wires, two chintz 
and two bindéra cloths, as the guides said they would 
stand my security against any further molestation. 

Rattling on again as merry as larks, over the same red 
Aare sandstone formation, we entered a fine forest, 
16th. and trended on through it at a stiff pace until 
we arrived at the head of a deep valley called Lohtigati, 

N 


To Kitaré, 15th. 


194 USUI. [1861. 


which was so beautiful we instinctively pulled up to ad- 
mire it. Deep down its well-wooded side below us was 
a stream, of most inviting aspect for a trout-fisher, flowing 
towards the N’yanza. Just beyond it the valley was 
clothed with fine trees and luxuriant vegetation of all de- 
scriptions, amongst which was conspicuous the pretty 
pandana palm, and rich gardens of plantains ; whilst 
thistles of extraordinary size and wild indigo were the 
more common weeds. The land beyond that again rolled 
back in high undulations, over which, in the far distance, 
we could see a line of cones, red and bare on their tops, 
guttered down with white streaks, looking for all the 
world like recent volcanoes; and in the far background, 
rising higher than all, were the rich grassy hills of Kara- 
etté and Kashakka. 

On resuming our march, a bird, called khongota, flew 
across our path; seeing which, old Nasib, beaming with 
joy, in his superstitious belief cried out with delight, 
“ Ah, look at that good omen !—now our journey will be 
sure to be prosperous.” After fording the stream, we sat 
down to rest, and were visited by all the inhabitants, who 
were more naked than any people we had yet seen. All 
the maidens, even at the age of puberty, did not hesitate 
to stand boldly in front of us—for evil thoughts were not 
in their minds. From this we rose over a stony hill to 
the settlement of Vihembé, which, being the last on the 
Ustti frontier, induced me to give our guides three wires 
each, and four yards of bindéra, which Nasib said was 
their proper fee. Here Bombay’s would-be, but disap- 
pointed, father-in-law sent after us to say that he required 
a hongo; Stiwarora had never given his sanction to our 
quitting his country ; his hongo even was not settled. He 
wished, moreover, particularly to see us; and if we did not 
return in a friendly manner, an army would arrest our 
march immediately. 


. 


Noy. | BETTER PROSPECTS. 195 


CHAPTER VIIL 


KARAGUE. 


RELIEF FROM PROTECTORS AND PILLAGERS—-THE SCENERY AND 
GEOLOGY — MEETING WITH THE FRIENDLY KING RUMANIKA— 
HIS HOSPITALITIES AND ATTENTION—HIS SERVICES TO THE EX- 
PEDITION—PHILOSOPHICAL AND THEOLOGICAL INQUIRIES—THE 
ROYAL FAMILY OF KARAGUE—THE M-FUMBIRO MOUNTAIN— 
NAVIGATION OF “THE LITTLE WINDERMERE”—THE NEW-MOON 
LEVEE—RHINOCEROS AND HIPPOPOTAMUS HUNTING—MEASURE- 
MENT OF A FATTENED QUEEN—POLITICAL POLYGAMY—CHRIST- 
MAS—RUMOURS OF PETHERICK’S EXPEDITION— ARRANGEMENTS 
TO MEET IT—-MARCH TO UGANDA. 


Tuts was a day of relief and happiness. A load was 
removed from us in seeing the Wasti “ pro- 
tectors” depart, with the truly cheering infor- 
mation that we now had nothing but wild animals to 
contend with before reaching Karagté. This land is 
“neutral,” by which is meant that it is untenanted by 
human beings; and we might now hope to bid adieu for 
a time to the scourging system of taxation to which we 
had been subjected. 

Gradually descending from the spur which separates 
the Lohtigati valley from the bed of the Liért lo Urigi, 
or Lake of Urigi, the track led us first through a meadow 
of much pleasing beauty, and then through a passage 
between the “saddle-back” domes we had seen from the 
heights above Lohtigati, where a new geological formation 


To Vigtira, 17th. 


196 KARAGUE. [1861. 


especially attracted my notice. From the green slopes of 
the hills, set up at a slant, as if the central line of pressure 
on the dome top had weighed 
on the inside plates, protruded 
soft slabs of argillaceous sand- 
stone, whose laminze presented 
a beef-sandwich appearance, 
puce or purple alternating 
with creamy-white. Quartz 
and other igneous rocks were 
also scattered about, lying 
like superficial accumulations 
in the dips at the foot of the 
hills, and red sandstone con- 
glomerates clearly indicated 
the presence of iron. The soil 
itself looked rich and red, not 
unlike our own fine county 
of Devon. 

On arriving in camp we pitched under some trees, and 
at once were greeted by an officer sent by Rttmanika to 
help us out of Ustu. This was Kachtichtt, an old friend 
of Nasib’s, who no sooner saw him than, beaming with 
delight, he said to us, “ Now, was I not right when I told 
you the birds flying about on Lohtigati hill were a good 
omen? Look here what this man says: Rtimanika has 
ordered him to bring you on to his palace at once, and 
wherever you stop a day, the village officers are instructed 
to supply you with food at the king’s expense, for there 
are no taxes gathered from strangers in the kingdom of 
Karagté. Presents may be exchanged, but the name of 
tax is ignored.” Grant here shot a rhinoceros, which 
came well into play to mix with the day’s flour we had 
carried on from Vihembé. 

Deluded yesterday by the sight of the broad waters of 
the Litért lo Urigi, espied in the distance from the top 


One of the Waauma 


Nov.] THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 197 


of a hill, into the belief that we were in view of the 
ToFirst Urigi, 9 N’yanza itself, we walked triumphantly along, 
og thinking how well the Arabs at Kazé had 
described this to be a creek of the great lake; but on 
arrival in camp we heard from the village officer that we 
had been misinformed, and that it was a detached lake, 
but connected with the Victoria N’yanza by a passage in 
the hills and the Kitangtilé river. F ormerly, he said, 
the Urigi valley was covered with water, extending up to 
Ubha, when all the low lands we had crossed from Usitti 
had to be ferried, and the saddle-back hills were a mere 
chain of islands in the water. But the country had dried 
up, and the lake of Urigi became a small. swamp. He 
further informed us, that even in the late king Dagara’s 
time it was a large sheet of water; but the instant he 
ceased to exist, the lake shrank to what we now saw. 

Our day’s march had been novel and very amusing. 
The hilly country surrounding us, together with the val- 
ley, brought back to recollection many happy days I had 
once spent with the Tartars in the Thibetian valley of 
the Indus—only this was more picturesque ; for though 
both countries are wild, and very thinly inhabited, this 
was greened over with grass, and dotted here and there 
on the higher slopes with thick bush of acacias, the 
haunts of rhinoceros, both white and black; whilst in 
the flat of the valley, herds of hartebeests and fine cattle 
roamed about like the kiyang and tame yik of Thibet. 
Then, to enhance all these pleasures, so different from our 
former experiences, we were treated like guests by the 
chief of the place, who, obeying the orders of his king, 
Riimanika, brought me presents, as soon as we arrived, of 
sheep, fowls, and sweet potatoes, and was very thankful 
for a few yards of red blanketing as a return, without 
begging for more. 

The farther we went in this country the better we 
liked it, as the people were all kept in good order; and 


198 KARAGUE. [1861. 


the village chiefs were so civil, that we could do as we 
To Second Urigi, Liked. After following down the left side of 
ae the valley and entering the village, the cus- 
tomary presents and returns were made. Wishing then 
to obtain a better view of the country, I strolled over 
the nearest hills, and found the less exposed slopes well 
covered with trees. Small antelopes occasionally sprang 
up from the grass. 1 shot a florikan for the pot; and as 
I had never before seen white rhinoceros, killed one now ; 
though, as no one would eat him, I felt sorry rather than 
otherwise for what I had done. When I returned in the 
evening, small boys brought me sparrows for sale; and 
then I remembered the stories I had heard from Mtsa 
Mzitri—that in the whole of Karagtié these small birds 
were so numerous, the people, to save themselves from 
starvation, were obliged to grow a bitter corn which 
the birds disliked ; and so | found it. At night, whilst 
observing for latitude, I was struck by surprise to see a 
long noisy procession pass by where I sat, led by some 
men who carried on their shoulders a woman covered up 
ina blackened skin. On inquiry, however, I heard she was 
bemg taken to the hut of her espoused, where, “ bundling 
fashion,” she would be put in bed; but it was only with 
virgins they took so much trouble. 

A strange but characteristic story now reached my 
ears. Mastidi, the merchant who took up Insangéz, had 
been trying his best to deter Rtmanika from allowing 
us to enter his country, by saying we were addicted to 
sorcery; and had it not been for Insangéz’s remonstrances, 
who said we were sent up by Misa, our fate would have 
been doubtful. Rtimanika, it appeared, as I always had 
heard, considered old Misa his saviour, for having eight 
years before quelled a rebellion, when his younger brother, 
Rogéro, aspired to the throne ; whilst Mtisa’s honour and 
honesty were quite unimpeachable. But more of this 
hereafter. 


Nov. | ABUNDANCE OF GAME. 199 


Khonzé, the next place, lying in the bending concave 
To Khonsé, 200k, of this swamp lake, and facing Hangiro, was 
commanded by a fine elderly man called 
Miizéei, who was chief officer during Dagara’s time. He 
told me with the greatest possible gravity, that he re- 
membered well the time when a boat could have gone 
from this to Vigttra; as also when fish and crocodiles 
came up from the Kitangiilé ; but the old king no sooner 
died than the waters dried up; which showed as plainly 
as words could tell, that the king had designed it, to 
make men remember him with sorrow in all future ages. 
Our presents after this having been exchanged, the good 
old man, at my desire, explained the position of all the 
surrounding countries, in his own peculiar manner, by 
laying a long stick on the ground pointing due north and 
south, to which he attached shorter ones pointing to the 
centre of each distant country. He thus assisted me in 
the protractions of the map, to the countries which he 
east and west of the route. 

Shortly after starting this morning, we were summoned 
by the last officer on the Urigi to take 
breakfast with him, as he could not allow us 
to pass by without paying his respects to the king’s guests. 
He was a man of most affable manners, and loth we 
should part company without one night’s entertainment 
at least; but as it was a matter of necessity, he gave us 
provisions to eat on the way, adding, at the same time, he 
was sorry he could not give more, as a famine was then 
oppressing the land. We parted with reiterated com- 
pliments on both sides; and shortly after, diving into the 
old bed of the Urigi, were constantly amused with the 
variety of game which met our view. On several occasions 
the rhinoceros were so numerous and impudent as to con- 
test the right of the road with us, and the greatest sport 
was occasioned by our bold Wangtiana going at them in 
parties of threes and fours, when, taking good care of them- 


To Camp Kiwéra, 
21st. 


200 KARAGUE, [1861. 


selves at considerable distances, they fired their carbines all 
together, and whilst the rhinoceros ran one way, they ran 
the other. Whilst we were pitching our tents after sun- 
set by some pools on the plain, Dr K’yengo arrived with 
the hongo of brass and copper wires sent by Sttwarora for 
the great king Mtésa, in lieu of his daughter who died ; 
so next morning we all marched together on to Uthenga. 

Rising out of the bed of the Urigi, we passed over a 
low spur of beef-sandwich- clay sandstones, 
and descended into the close, rich valley of 
Uthenga, bound in by steep hills hanging over us more 
than a thousand feet high, as prettily clothed as the 
mountains of Scotland; whilst in the valley there were 
not only magnificent trees of extraordinary height, but 
also a surprising amount of the richest cultivation, amongst 
which the banana may be said to prevail. Notwithstand- 
ing this apparent richness in the land, the Wanyambo, 
living in their small squalid huts, seem poor. The tobacco 
they smoke is imported from the coffee-growing country 
of Uhaiya. After arrival in the village, who should we 
see but the Uganda officer, Irtnet! The scoundrel, in- 
stead of going on to Uganda as he had promised to do, 
conveying my present to Mtésa, had stopped here plunder- 
ing the Wanyambo, and getting drunk on their pombé, 
called, in their language, marwa—a delicious kind of wine 
made from the banana. He, of course, begged for more 
beads; but, not able to trick me again, set his drummers 
and fifers at work, in hopes that he would get over our 
feelings in that way. 

Henceforth, as we marched, Irtingi’s drummers and 
fifers kept us alive on the way. This we 
heard was a privilege that Uganda Wakungti 
enjoyed both at home and abroad, although in all ae 
countries the sound of the drum is considered a notice of 
war, unless where it happens to accompany a dance or 
festival. Leaving the valley of Uthenga, we rose over 


To Uthenga, 22d. 


To Rozoka, 23d. 


Nov.] GEOLOGY OF THE DISTRICT. 201 


the spur of N’yamwara, where we found we had attained 
the delightful altitude of 5000 odd feet. Oh, how we 
enjoyed it! every one feeling so happy at the prospect 
of meeting so soon the good king Rttmanika. Tripping 
down the greensward, we now worked our way to the 
Rozoka valley, and pitched our tents in the village. 

Kachtchtt here told us he had orders to precede us, and 
prepare Rtimanika for our coming, as his king wished to 
know what place we would prefer to live at—the Arab 
depdt at Kufro, on the direct line to Uganda, in his 
palace with himself, or outside his enclosures. Such 
politeness rather took us aback; so, giving our friend a 
coil of copper wire to keep him in good spirits, I said all 
our pleasure rested in seeing the king ; whatever honours 
he liked to confer on us we should take with good grace, 
but one thing he must understand, we came not to trade, 
but to see him and great kings, and therefore the Arabs 
had no relations with us. This little point settled, off 
started Kachtichtt in his usual merry manner, whilst I 
took a look at the hills, to see their geological formation, 
and found them much as before, based on streaky clay 
sandstones, with the slight addition of pure blue shales, 
and above sections of quartzose sandstone lying in flags, as 
well as other metamorphic and igneous rocks scattered 
about. 

Moving on the next morning over hill and dale, we 
ToKatawanga, came to the junction of two roads, where 
24th. Irungii, with his drummers, fifers, and amazon 
followers, took one way to Kufro, followed by the men 
carrying Sttwarora’s hongo, and we led off on the other, 
directed to the palace. The hill-tops in many places were 
breasted with dykes of pure white quartz, just as we had 
seen in Usii, only that here their direction tended more 
to the north. It was.most curious to contemplate, seeing 
that the chief substance of the hills was a pure blue, or 
otherwise streaky clay sandstone, which must have been 


202 KARAGUE. [1861. 


formed when the land was low, but has now been elevated, 
making these hills the axis of the centre of the continent, 
and therefore probably the oldest of all. 

When within a few miles of the palace we were ordered 
to stop and wait for Kachticht’s return ; but we no sooner 
put up in a plantain grove, where pombé was brewing, 
and our men were all taking a suck at it, than the worthy 
arrived to call us onthe same instant, as the king was 
most anxious to see us. The love of good beer of course 
made our men all too tired to march again; so I sent off” 
Bombay with Nasib to make our excuses, and in the 
evening found them returning with a huge pot of pombé 
and some royal tobacco, which Rttmanika sent with a 
notice that he intended it exclusively for our own use, for 
though there was abundance for my men, there was 
nothing so good as what came from the palace ; the royal 
tobacco was as sweet and strong as honey-dew, and the 
beer so strong it required a strong man to drink it. 

After breakfast next morning, we crossed the hill-spur 
To Werananjs called Weranhanjé, the grassy tops of which 
i were 5500 feet above the sea. Descending a 
little, we came suddenly in view of what appeared to us 
a rich clump of trees, im 8. lat. 1° 42’ 42”, and E. long. 
31° 1’ 49”; and, 500 feet below it, we saw a beautiful 
sheet of water lying snugly within the folds of the hills. 
We were not altogether unprepared for it, as Misa of old 
had described it, and Bombay, on his return yesterday, 
told us he had seen a great pond. The clump, indeed, was 
the palace enclosure. As to the lake, for want of a native 
name, I christened it the Little Windermere, because 
Grant thought it so like our own English lake of that 
name. It was one of many others which, like that of 
Unigi, drains the moisture of the overhanging hills, and 
gets drained into the Victoria N’yanza through the Kitan- 
ottlé river. 


To do royal otonts to the king of this charming land, 


Noy. | FIRST INTERVIEW WITH RUMANIKA. 205 


I ordered my men to put down their loads and fire a 
volley. This was no sooner done than, as we went to the 
palace gate, we received an invitation to come in at once, 
for the king wished to see us before attending to anything 
else. Now, leaving our traps outside, both Grant and 
myself, attended by Bombay and a few of the seniors 
of my Wangiiana, entered the vestibule, and, walking 
through extensive enclosures studded with huts of kingly 
dimensions, were escorted to a pent-roofed baraza, which 
’ the Arabs had built as a sort of government office, where 
the king might conduct his state affairs. 

Here, as we entered, we saw sitting cross-legged on the 
ground Ritmanika the king, and his brother Nnanaji, both 
of them men of noble appearance and size. The king 
was plainly dressed in an Arab’s black choga, and wore, 
for ornament, dress stockings of rich-coloured beads, and 
neatly - worked wristlets of copper. Nnanaji, being a 
doctor of very high pretensions, in addition to a check 
cloth wrapped round him, was covered with charms. At 
their sides lay huge pipes of black clay. In their rear, 
squatting quiet as mice, were all the king’s sons, some six 
or seven lads, who wore leather middle-coverings, and 
little dream-charms tied under their chins. ‘The first 
ereetings of the king, delivered in good Kisttahili, were 
warm and affecting, and in an instant we both felt and 
saw we were in the company of men who were as unlike 
as they could be to the common order of the natives of 
the surrounding districts. They had fine oval faces, large 
eyes, and high noses, denoting the best blood of Abyssinia. 
Having shaken hands in true English style, which is the 
peculiar custom of the men of this country, the ever- 
smiling Rtimanika begged us to be seated on the ground 
opposite to him, and at once wished to know what we 
thought of Karagtié, for it had struck him his mountains 
were the finest in the world; and the lake, too, did we 
not admire it? Then laughing, he inquired—for he knew 


204 KARAGUE. [1861. 


all the story—what we thought of Strwarora, and the 
reception we had met with in Ustu. When this was 
explained to him, I showed him that it was for the inter- 
est of his own kingdom to keep a check on Stiwarora, 
whose exorbitant taxations prevented the Arabs from 
coming to see him and bringing things-from all parts of 
the world. He made inquiries for the purpose of know- 
ing how we found our.way all over the world ; for on the 
former expedition a letter had come to him for Misa, 
who no sooner read it than he said I had called him and 
he must leave, as I was bound for Ujiji. 

This of course led to a long story, describing the world, 
the proportions of land and water, and the power of ships, 


Our Camp outside the Palace. 


which conveyed even elephants and rhinoceros—in fact, 
all the animals in the world—to fill our menageries at 
home,—&c. &c.; as well as the strange announcement 
that we lived to the northward, and had only come this 


Noy.] THE WHITE CHIEFS THRONE. 205 


way because his friend Mittsa had assured me without 
doubt that he would give us the road on through Uganda. 
Time flew like magic, the king’s mind was so quick and 
inquiring ; but as the day was wasting away, he gener- 
ously gave us our option to choose a place for our re- 
sidenceé in or out of his palace, and allowed us time to 
select one. We found the view overlooking the lake to 
be so charming, that we preferred camping outside, and 
set our men at once to work cutting sticks and long grass 
to erect themselves sheds. 

One of the young princes—for the king ordered them 
all to be constantly in attendance on us—happening to 
see me sit on an iron chair, rushed back to his father and 
told him about it. This set all the royals in the palace 
in a state of high wonder, and ended by my getting a 
summons to show off the white man sitting on his throne; 
for of course I could only be, as all of them called me, a 
king of great dignity, to indulge im such state. Rather 
reluctantly I did as I was bid, and allowed myself once 
more to be dragged into court. Rimanika, as gentle as 
ever, then burst into a fresh fit of merriment, and after 
making sundry enlightened remarks of inquiry, which of 
course were responded to with the greatest satisfaction, 
finished off by saying, with a very expressive shake of 
the head, “Oh, these Wazungt, these Wazunet! they 
know and do everything.” 

I then put in a word for myself. Since we had entered 
Karagtté we never could get one drop of milk either for 
love or for money, and I wished to know what motive 
the Wahitima had for withholding it. We had heard they 
held superstitious dreads ; that any one who ate the flesh 
of pigs, fish, or fowls, or the bean called maharagiié, if 
he tasted the products of their cows, would destroy their 
cattle—and I hoped he did not labour under any such 
absurd delusions. To which he replied, It was only the 
poor who thought so; and as he now saw we were in 


206 KARAGUE. [1861. 


want, he would set apart one of his cows expressly for 
our use. On bidding adieu, the usual formalities of hand- 
shaking were gone through; and on entering camp, I 
found the good thoughtful king had sent us some more 
of his excellent beer. 

The Wangtiana were now all in the highest of good- 
humour; for time after time goats and fowls were brought 
into camp by the officers of the king, who had received 
orders from all parts of the country to bring in supplies 
for his guests; and this kind of treatment went on for a 
month, though it did not diminish my daily expenditure 
of beads, as grain and plantains were not enough thought 
of. The cold winds, however, made the coast-men all 
shiver, and suspect, in their ignorance, we must be draw- 
ing close to England, the only cold place they had 
heard of. 

26th.—Hearing it would be considered indecent haste 
to present my tributary offering at once, I paid my morn- 
ing’s visit, only takmg my revolving-pistol, as | knew 
Rtimanika had expressed a strong wish to see it. The 
impression it made was surprising—he had never seen 
such a thing in his life; so, in return for his great gener- 
osity, as well as to show I placed no value on property, 
not being a merchant, I begged him to accept it. We 
then adjourned to his private hut, which rather surprised 
me by the neatness with which it was kept. The roof 
was supported by numerous clean poles, to which he had 
fastened a large assortment of spears—brass-headed with 
iron handles, and iron-headed with wooden ones—of excel- 
lent workmanship. A large standing-screen, of fine straw- 
plait work, in elegant devices, partitioned off one part of 
the room ; and on the opposite side, as mere ornaments, 
were placed a number of brass grapnels and small models 
of cows, made in iron for his amusement by the Arabs at 
Kufro, A little later in the day, as soon as we had done 
breakfast, both Rttmanika and Nnanaji came over to pay 


Nov.] THE KING’S BROTHER, ROGERO, 207 


us a visit; for they thought, as we could find our way 
all over the world, so we should not find much difficulty 
in prescribing some magic charms to kill his brother, 
Rogéro, who lived on a hill overlooking the Kitangiilé. 
Seating them both on our chairs, which amused them 
intensely, I asked Rtimanika, although I had heard before 
the whole facts of the case, what motives now induced 
him to wish the committal of such a terrible act, and 
brought out the whole story afresh. 

Before their old father Dagara died, he had unwittingly 
said to the mother of Rogéro, although he was the youngest 
born, what a fine king he would make; and the mother, 
in consequence, tutored her son to expect the command 
of the country, although the law of the land in the royal 
family is the primogeniture system, extending, however, 
only to those sons who are born after the accession of the 
king to the throne. 

As soon, therefore, as Dagara died, leaving the three 
sons alluded to, all by different mothers, a contest took 
place with the brothers, which, as Nnanaji held by Rt- 
manika, ended in the two elder driving Rogéro away. It 
happened, however, that half the men of the country, 
either from fear or love, attached themselves to Rogéro. 
Feeling his power, he raised an army and attempted to 
fight for the crown, which it is generally admitted would 
have succeeded, had not Misa, with unparalleled magna- 
nimity, employed all the ivory merchandise at his com- 
mand to engage the services of all the Arabs’ slaves 
residing at Kufro, to bring muskets against him. Rogéro 
was thus frightened away ; but he went swearing that he 
would carry out his intentions at some future date, when 
the Arabs had withdrawn from the country. 

Magic charms, of course, we had none; but the king 
would not believe it, and, to wheedle some out of us, said 
they would not kill their brother even if they caught 
him—for fratricide was considered an unnatural crime in 


208 KARAGUE, © [1861. 


their country—but they would merely gouge out his eyes 
and set him at large again; for without the power of 
sight he could do them no harm. 

I then recommended, as the best advice I could give 
him for the time being, to take some strong measures 
against Sttwarora and the system of taxation carried on 
in Ustii. These would have the effect of brmging men 
with superior knowledge into the country —for it was 
only through the power of knowledge that good govern- 
ment could be obtained. Stiwarora at present stopped 
eight-tenths of the ivory-merchants who might be inclined 
to trade here from coming into the country, by the foolish 
system of excessive taxation he had established. Next I 
told him, if he would give me one or two of his children, 
I would have them instructed in England ; for I admired 
his race, and believed them to have sprung from our old 
friends the Abyssinians, whose king, Sahéla Sélassié, had 
received rich presents from our Queen. They were Chris- 
tians like ourselves, and had the Wahtima not lost their 
knowledge of God they would be so also. 

A long theological and historical discussion ensued, 
which so pleased the king, that he said he would be de- 
lighted if 1 would take two of his sons to England, that 
they might bring him a knowledge of everything. Then 
turning again to the old point, his utter amazement that 
we should spend so much property in travelling, he wished 
to know what we did it for; when men had such means 
they would surely sit down and enjoy it. “Oh no,” was 
the reply ; “we have had our fill of the luxuries of life ; 
eating, drinking, or sleeping have no charms for us now ; 
we are above trade, therefore require no profits, and seek 
for enjoyment the run of the world. To observe and 
admire the beauties of creation are worth much more than 
beads to us. But what led us this way we have told you 
before ; it was to see your majesty in particular, and the 
great kings of Africa—and at the same time to open 


Nov. ] WIFE-FATTENING. 209 


another road to the north, whereby the best manufactures 
of Europe would find their way to Karagiié, and you 
would get so many more guests.” In the highest good- 
humour the king said, “ As you have come to see me and 
see sights, I will order some boats and show you over the 
lake, with musicians to play before you, or anything else 
that you like.” Then, after looking over our pictures with 
intensest delight, and admiring our beds, boxes, and outfit 
in general, he left for the day. 

In the afternoon, as I had heard from Misa that the 
wives of the king and princes were fattened to such an ex- 
tent that they could not stand upright, I paid my respects 
to Wazézérti, the king’s eldest brother—who, having been 
born before his father ascended his throne, did not come 
in the line of succession—with the hope of being able to 
see for myself the truth of the story. There was no mis- 
take about it. On entering the hut [ found the old man 
and his chief wife sitting side by side on a bench of earth 
strewed over with grass, and partitioned like stalls for 
sleeping apartments, whilst in front of them were placed 
numerous wooden pots of milk, and, hanging from the 
poles that supported the beehive-shaped hut, a large 
collection of bows six feet in length, whilst below them 
were tied an even larger collection of spears, intermixed 
with a goodly assortment of heavy-headed assagés. Iwas 
struck with no small surprise at the way he received me, 
as well as with the extraordinary dimensions, yet pleasing 
beauty, of the immoderately fat fair one his wife. She 
could not rise; and so large were her arms that, between 
the joints, the flesh hung down like large, loose-stuffed 
puddings. Then in came their children, all models of the 
Abyssinian type of beauty, and as polite in their manners 
‘as thorough-bred gentlemen. They had heard of my 
picture-books from the king, and all wished to see them ; 
which they no sooner did, to their infinite delight, espe- 

0 


210 KARAGUE. [1861. 


cially when they recognised any of the animals, than the 
subject was turned by my inquiring what they did with 
so many milk-pots. This was easily explained by Wazé- 
zértt himself, who, pointing to his wife, said, “'This is all 
the product of those pots: from early youth upwards we 
keep those pots to their mouths, as it-is the fashion at 
court to have very fat wives.” 

27th.—Ever anxious to push on with the journey, as I 
felt every day’s delay only tended to diminish my means 
—that is, my beads and copper wire—I instructed Bom- 
bay to take the under-mentioned articles to Rtmanika as 
a small sample of the products of my country ;* to say [ 
felt quite ashamed of their being so few and so poor, but 
I hoped he would forgive my shortcomings, as he knew 
1 had been so often robbed on the way to him; and I 
trusted, in recollection of Mtisa, he would give me leave 
to go on to Uganda, for every day’s delay was consuming _ 
my supplies. Nnanaji, however, it was said, should get 
something ; so, in addition to the king’s present, I appor- 
tioned one out for him, and Bombay took both up to the 
palace.t Everybody, I was pleased to hear, was surprised 
with both the quantity and quality of what I had been 
able to find for them; for, after the plundering in Ugogo, 
the immense consumption caused by such long delays on 
the road, the fearful prices | had had to pay for my por- 
ters’ wages, the cnormous taxes I had been forced to give 
both in Msalala and Uzinza, besides the constant thievy- 
ings in camp, all of which was made public by the con- 
stantly-recurring tales of my men, nobody thought I had 
got anything left. 


* Rumanike’s present.—One block-tin box, one Raglan coat, five yards 
scarlet broadcloth, two coils copper wire, a hundred large blue ege-beads 
five bundles best variegated beads, three bundles minute beads—pink blue, 
and white. * ; 

+ Nnanaj’’s present.—One déolé or gold-embroidered silk, two coils cov- 
per wire, fifty large blue ege-beads, five bundles best variegated beads, three 
bundles minute beads—pink, blue, and white. et : 


Noy. ] - RUMANIKA’S PRESENT. 211 


Rtimanika, above all, was as delighted as if he had 
come in for a fortune, and sent to say the Raglan coat 
was a marvel, and the scarlet broadcloth the finest thing 
he had ever seen. Nobody but Misa had ever given him 
such beautiful beads before, and none ever gave with such 
free liberality. Whatever I wanted I should have in 
return for it, as it was evident to him I had really done 
him a great honour in visiting him. Neither his father 
nor any of his forefathers had had such a great favour 
shown them. He was alarmed, he confessed, when he 
heard we were coming to visit him, thinking we might 
prove some fearful monsters that were not quite human, 
but now he was delighted beyond all measure with what 
he saw of us. A messenger should be sent at once to the 
king of Uganda to inform him of our intention to visit 
him, with his own favourable report of us. This was 
necessary according to the etiquette of the country. With- 
out such a recommendation our progress would be stopped 
by the people, whilst with one word from him all would 
go straight ; for was he not the gatekeeper, enjoying the 
full confidence of Uganda? A month, however, must 
elapse, as the distance to the palace of Uganda was great; 
but, in the mean time, he would give me leave to go about 
in his country to do and see what I liked, Nnanaji and 
his sons escorting me everywhere. Moreover, when the 
time came for my going on to Uganda, if I had not 
enough presents to give the king, he would fill up the 
complement from his own stores, and either go with me 
himself, or send Nnanaji to conduct me as far as the 
boundary of Uganda, in order that Rogéro might not 
molest us on the way. In the evening, Mastdi, with 
Sangoro and several other merchants, came up from Kufro 
to pay us a visit of respect. 

28th-and 29th.—A gentle hint having come to us that 
the king’s brother, Wazézéri, expected a trifle in virtue 
of his rank, I sent him a blanket and seventy-five blue 


y 


212 KARAGUE. [186]. 


ego-beads. These were accepted with the usual good 
grace of these people. The king then, ever attentive to 
our position as guests, sent his royal musicians to give us 


atune. The men composing the band were a mixture of 
Waganda and Wanyambo, who played on reed instru- 
ments made telescope fashion, marking time by hand- 
drums. At first they marched up and down, playing 
tunes exactly like the regimental bands of the Turks, and 
then commenced dancing a species of “hornpipe,” blow- 
ing furiously all the while. When dismissed with some 
beads, Nnanaji dropped in and invited me to accompany 
him out shooting on the slopes of the hills overlooking the 
lake. He had in attendance all the king’s sons, as well 
as a large number of beaters, with three or four dogs. 
Tripping down the greensward of the hills together, these 
tall, athletic princes every now and then stopped to see 
who could shoot furthest, and I must say I never wit- 
nessed better feats in my life. With powerful six-feet- 
long bows they pulled their arrows’ heads up to the wood, 
and made wonderful shots im the distance. They then 
placed me in position, and, arranging the field, drove the 
covers like men well accustomed to sport—indeed, it 
struck me they indulged too much in that pleasure, for 


Noy. ] GEOGRAPHY OF THE COUNTRY. 213 


we saw nothing but two or three montana and some 
diminutive antelopes, about the size of mouse deer, and so 
exceedingly shy that not one was bagged. | 
Returning home to the tents as the evening sky was 
illumined with the red glare of the sun, my attention was 
attracted by observing in the distance some bold sky- 
scraping cones situated in the country Rtianda, which at 
once brought back to recollection the ill-defined story I 
had heard from the Arabs of a wonderful hill always 
covered with clouds, on which snow or hail was con- 
stantly falling. This was a valuable discovery, for I 
found these hills to be the great turn-point of the Central 
African watershed. Without loss of time I set to work, 
and, gathering all the travellers [ could in the country, 
protracted, from their descriptions, all the distant topo- 
graphical features set down in the map, as far north as 3° 
of north latitude, as far east as 36°, and as far west as 26° 
of east longitude; only afterwards slightly corrected, as 
I was better able to connect and clear up some trifling 
but doubtful points. 

“Indeed, I was not only surprised at the amount of in- 
formation about distant places I was enabled to get here 
from these men, but also at the correctness of their 
vast and ‘varied knowledge, as I afterwards tested it by 
observation and the statements of others. I rely so far on 
the geographical information I thus received, that I would 
advise no one to doubt the accuracy of these protractions 
until he has been on the spot to test them by actual in- 
spection. About the size only of the minor lakes do I feel 
doubtful, more especially the Little Lttta Nzigé, which on 
the former journey I heard was a salt lake, because salt 
was found on its shores and in one of its islands. Now, 
without going into any lengthy details, and giving Rit- 
manika due credit for everything—for had he not ordered 
his men to give me every information that lay in their 
power, they would not have done ‘so—I will merely say 


214 KARAGUE. [1861. 


for the present that, whilst they conceived the Victoria 
N’yanza would take a whole month for a canoe to cross it, 
they thought the Little Liita Nzigé might be crossed in a 
week. The Mftmbiro cones in Riianda, which I believe 


ES re 


View of Mount Mfumbiro and Drainage System of the Lune Montes, 
taken from a height of 5500 feet. 


reach 10,000 feet, are said to be the highest of the 
“Mountains of the Moon.” At their base are both salt 
and copper mines, as well as hot springs. There are also 
hot springs in Mpororo, and one in Karagtié near where 
Rogéro lived. . 

30th.—The important business of announcing our ap- 
proach to Uganda was completed by Rttmanika appointing 
Kachtichtt to go to king Mtésa as quickly as possible, to 
say we were coming to visit him. He was told that we 
were very great men, who only travelled to see great kings 
and great countries; and, as such, Rttmanika trusted i 
should be received with courteous respect, and allowed to 
roam all over the country wherever we liked, he holding 


Nov. | NEWS FROM USUL 215 


himself responsible for our actions for the time being. In 
the end, however, we were to be restored to hime as he 
considered himself our father, and therefore must see that 
no accident befell us. 

To put the royal message in proper shape, I was now 
requested to send some trifle by way of a letter or visiting 
card; but, on taking out a Colt’s revolving-rifle for the 
purpose, Ritmanika advices me not to send it, as Mtésa 
might take fright, and, considering it a charm of evil 
quality, reject us as bad magicians, and close his gates on 
us. ‘Three bits of cotton cloth were then selected as the 
best thing for the purpose ; and, relying implicitly on the 
advice of Rtmanika, who declared his only object was to 
further our views, I arranged accordingly, and off went 
Kachiicht. 

To keep my friend in good-humour, and st him 
how well the English can appreciate a kindness, [ pre- 
sented him with a hammer, a sailor’s knife, a Rodger’s 
three-bladed penknife, a gilt letter-slip with paper and 
envelopes, some gilt pens, an ivory holder, and a variety 
of other small articles: Of each of these he asked the use, 
and then in high glee put it into the big block-tin box, i 
which he kept his other curiosities, and which | think he 
felt more proud of than any other possession. After this, 
on adjourning to his baraza, Ungtirtié the Pig, who had 
floored my march in Sorombo, and Makinga, our perse- 
cutor in Usiti, came in to report that the Wattita had 
been fighting in Usti, and taken six bomas, upon which 
eee Apieea me what I thought of it, and if I knew 
where the Wattita came from. I add I was not surprised 
to hear Ustti had attracted the Wattita’s cupidity, for 
every one knew of the plundering propensities of the in- 
habitants, and as they became rich by their robberies, they 
must in turn expect to be robbed. Where the Watiita 
came from, nobody could tell; they were dressed some- 
thing like the Zila Kafirs of the south, but appeared to 


216 KARAGUE. [1861. 


be now gradually migrating from the regions of Lake 
Nyassa. To this Dr K’yengo, who was now living with 
Ritmanika as his head magician, added that, whilst he was 
living in Utambara, the Watitita invested his boma six 
months; and finally, when all their cows and stores were 
exhausted, they killed all the inhabitants but himself, and 
he only escaped by the power of the charms which he 
carried about him. These were so powerful, that although 
he lay on the ground, and the Wattita struck at him with 
their spears, not one could penetrate his body. 

In the evening after this, as the king wished to see all 
my scientific instruments, we walked down to the camp ; 
and as he did not beg for anything, I gave him some gold 
and mother-of-pearl shirt-studs to swell up his trinket- 
box. The same evening I made up my mind, if possible, 
to purchase a stock of beads from the Arabs, and sent 
Baraka off to Kufro, to see what kind of a bargain he 
could make with them ; for, whilst I trembled to think 
what those “ blood-suckers” would have the impudence to 
demand when they found me at their mercy, I felt that 
the beads must be bought, or the expedition would 
certainly come to grief. 

1st and 2d.—Two days after this the merchants came 
in a body to see me, and said their worst beads would 
stand me 80 dollars per frasala, as they could realise 
that value in ivory on arrival at the coast. Of course no 
business was done, for the thing was preposterous by all 
calculation, being close on 2500 per cent above Zanzibar 

‘valuation, I was “game” to give 50 dollars, but as they 
would not take this, I thought of dealing with Rtmanika 
instead. I then gave Nnanaji, who had been constantly 
throwing out hints that I ought to give him a gun, as he 
was a great sportsman, a lappet of bead-work to keep his 
tongue quiet, and he in return sent me a bullock and 
sundry pots of pombé, which, in addition to the daily 
allowance sent by Rtimanika, made all my people drunk, 


Dec. | A DRUNKEN Row. aie 


and so affected Baraka that one of the women—also drunk 
—having given him some sharp abuse, he beat her in so 
violent a manner that the whole drunken camp set upon 
him, and turned the place into a pandemonium. <A row 
amongst negroes means a general rising of arms, legs, and 
voices; all are in a state of the greatest excitement ; and 
each individual thinks he is doing the best to mend matters, 
but is actually doing his best to create confusion. 

By dint of perseverance I now suceceded in having 
Baraka separated from the crowd and dragged before me 
for justice. JI found that the woman, who fully under- 
stood the jealous hatred which existed in Baraka’s heart ° 
against Bombay, flirted with both of them ; and, pretend- 
ing to show a preference for Bombay, set Baraka against 
her, when from high words they came to blows, and set 
the place in a blaze. It was useless to remonstrate— 
Baraka insisted he would beat the woman if she abused 
him, no matter whether I thought it cowardly or not ; he 
did not come with me expecting to be bullied in this way 
—the whole fault lay with Bombay—I did not do him 
justice—when he proved Bombay a thief at Ustu, I did 
not turn him off, but now, instead, I showed the preference 
to Bombay by always taking him when I went to Rtiman- 
ika. It was useless to argue with such a passionate man, 
so [ told him to go away and cool himself before morning. 

When he was gone, Bombay said there was not one man 
in the camp, besides his own set, who wished to go on to 
Egypt—for they had constant arguments amongst them- 
selves about it; and whilst Bombay always said he would 
follow me wherever I led, Baraka and those who held by him 
abused him and his set for having tricked them away from 
Zanzibar, under the false hopes that the road was quite 
safe. Bombay said his arguments were, that Bana knew 
better than anybody else what he was about, and he would 
follow him, trusting to luck, as God was the disposer of all 
things, and men could die but once. Whilst Baraka’s 


218 KARAGUE. [1861. 


arguments all rested the other way ;—that no one could 
tell what was ahead of him—Bana had sold himself to 
luck and the devil—but though he did not care for his 
own safety, he ought not to sacrifice the lives of others— 
Bombay and his lot were fools for their pains in trusting 
to him. 

3d.—At daybreak Rttmanika sent us word he was off 
to Moga-Namirinzi, a. spur of a hill beyond “the Little 
Windermere,” overlooking the Ingézi Kagéra, or river 
which separates Kishakka from Karagitié, to show me how 
the Kitangtilé river was fed by small lakes and marshes, 
m accordance with my expressed wish to have a better 
comprehension of the drainage system of the Mountains 
of the Moon. He hoped we would follow him, not by 
the land route he intended to take, but in canoes which 
he had ordered at the ferry below. Starting off shortly 
afterwards, | made for the lake, and found the canoes all 
ready, but so small that, besides two paddlers, only two 
men could sit down in each. After pushing through the 
tall reeds with which the end of the lake is covered, we 
emerged in the clear open, and skirted the farther side of 
the water until a small strait was gained, which led us 
into another lake, drained at the Hort een end into a vast 
swampy plain, covered entirely with tall rushes, excepting 
only im a few places where bald patches expose the surface 
of the water, or where the main streams of the Ingézi and 
Luchtvo valleys cut a clear drain for themselves. 

The whole scenery was most beautiful. Green and 
fresh, the slopes of the hills were covered with grass, with 
small clumps of soft cloudy-looking acacias growing at a 
few feet only above the water, and above them, facing 
over the hills, fine detached trees, and here and there the 
gigantic medicinal aloe. Arrived near the end of the 
Moga-Namirinzi hill in the second lake, the paddlers 
Behed into shore, where a large concourse of people, 
headed by Nnanaji, were Heal up to receive me I 


Dec. | GEOGRAPHY OF THE LAKE. 219 


landed with all the dignity of a prince, when the royal 
band struck up a march, and we all moved on to Rit- 
manika's frontier palace, talking away in a very compli- 
mentary manner, not unlike the very polite and flowery 
fashion of educated Orientals. 

Rttmanika we found sitting dressed in a wrapper made 
of an nzoé antelope’s skin, smiling blandly as we ap- 
proached him. In the warmest manner possible he 
pressed me to sit by his side, asked how I had enjoyed 
myself, what I thought of his country, and if I did not 
feel hungry ; when a pic-nic dinner was spread, and we 
all set to at cooked plantains and pombé, ending with a 
pipe of his best tobacco. Bit by bit Rtmanika became 
more interested in geography, and seemed highly ambi- 
tious of gaining a world-wide reputation through the 
medium of my pen. At his invitation we now crossed 
over the spur to the Ingézi Kagéra side, when, to surprise 
me, the canoes I had come up the lake in appeared before 
us. They had gone out of the lake at its northern end, 
paddled into, and then up the Kagéra to where we stood, 
showing, by actual navigation, the connection of these 
highland lakes with the rivers which drain the various 
spurs of the Mountains of the Moon. The Kagéra was 
deep and dark, of itself a very fine stream, and, consider- 
ing it was only one—and that, too, a minor one—of the 
various affluents which drain the mountain valleys into 
the Victoria N’yanza through the medium of the Kitan- 
gilé river, I saw at once there must be water sufficient to 
make the Kitangté a very powerful tributary to the lake. 

On leaving this interesting place, with the widespread 
information of all the surrounding countries I had gained, 
my mind was so impressed with the topographical features 
of all this part of Africa, that in my heart I resolved I 
would make Ritmanika as happy as he had made me, and 
asked K’yengo, his doctor, of all things I possessed what 
the king would like best. ‘To my surprise I then learnt 


920 KARAGUE. [1861. 


that Rimanika had set his heart on the revolving rifle 
I had brought for Mtésa—the one, in fact, which he had 
prevented my sending on to Uganda in the hands of 
Kachticht, and he would have begged me for it before had 
his high-minded dignity, and the principle he had estab- 
lished of never begging for anything, not interfered. I 
then said he should certainly have it; for as strongly as 
I had withheld from- giving anything to those begging 
scoundrels who wished to rob me of all I possessed in the 
lower countries, so strongly now did I feel inclined to be 
generous with this exceptional man Rtmanika. We then 
had another pic-nic together, and whilst I went home to 
join Grant, Rttmanika spent the night doing homage and 
sacrificing a bullock at the tomb of his father Dagara. 

Instead of paddling all down the lake again, I walked 
over the hill, and, on crossing at its northern end, wished 
to shoot ducks ; but the superstitious boatmen put a stop 
to my intended amusement by imploring me not to do so, 
lest the spirit of the lake should be roused to dry up the 
waters. 

4th—Rtimanika returned in the morning, walking up 
the hill, followed by a long train of his officers, and a 
party of men carrying on their shoulders his state carriage, 
which consisted of a large open basket laid on the top of 
two very long poles. After entering his palace, I imme- 
diately called on him to thank him for the great treat he 
had given me, and presented him, as an earnest of what 
I thought, with the Colt’s revolving rifle and a fair allow- 
ance of ammunition. His delight knew no bounds on be- 
coming the proprietor of such an extraordinary weapon, 
and induced him to dwell on his advantages over his 
brother Rogéro, whose antipathy to him was ever preying 
on his mind. He urged me again to devise some plan for 
overcoming him; and, becoming more and more con- 
fidential, favoured me with the following narrative, by 
way of evidence how the spirits were inclined to show all 


Dec. ] A ROYAL BURIAL, 29) 


~—— 


the world that he was the rightful successor to the throne: 
—When Dagara died, and he, Nnanaji, and Rogéro, were 
the only three sons left in line of succession to the crown, 
a small mystic drum of diminutive size was placed before 
them by the officers of state. It was only feather weight 
in reality, but, being loaded with charms, became so heavy 
to those who were not entitled to the crown, that no one 
could lift it but the one person whom the spirits were in- 
clined towards as the rightful successor. Now, of all the 
three brothers, he, Rttmanika, alone could raise it from 
the ground ;~+and whilst his brothers laboured hard, in 
vain attempting to move it, he with his little finger held 
it up without any exertion. 

This little disclosure in the history of Karagté led us 
on to further particulars of Dagara’s death and burial, 
when it transpired that the old king’s body, after the 
fashion of his predecessors, was sewn up in a cow-skin, 
and placed in a boat floating on the lake, where it 
remained for three days, until decomposition set in and 
maggots were engendered, of which three were taken into 
the palace and given in charge to the heir-elect; but 
instead of remaining as they were, one worm was trans- 
formed into a lion, another into a leopard, and the third 
into a stick. After this the body of the king was taken up 
and deposited on the hill Moga-Namirinzi, where, instead 
of putting him underground, the people erected a hut over 
him, and, thrusting in five maidens and fifty cows, enclosed 
the doorway in such a manner that the whole of them 
subsequently died from starvation. 

This, as may naturally be supposed, led into further 
genealogical disclosures of a similar nature, and I was told 
by Rttmanika that his grandfather was a most wonderful 
man; indeed, Karagtté was blessed with more super- 
natural agencies than any other country. Rohinda the 
Sixth, who was his grandfather, numbered so many years 
that people thought he never would die; and he even 


222. KARAGUE. [1861. 


became so concerned himself about it, reflecting that his 
son Dagara would never enjoy the benefit of his position 
as successor to the crown of Karagtté, that he took some 
magic powders and charmed away his life. His remains 
were then taken to Moga-Namirinzi, in the same manner 
as were those of Dagara; but, as an improvement on the 
maggot story, a young lion emerged from the heart of the 
corpse and kept guard over is hill, from whom other 
lions came into existence, until the whole place has become 
infested by them, and has since made Karagté a power 
and dread to all other nations; for these lions became 
subject to the will of Dagara, who, when attacked by 
the countries to the northward, instead of assembling an 
army of men, assembled his lion force, and so swept all 
before him. 

Another test was then advanced at the instigation of 
K’yengo, who thought Rttmanika not quite impressive 
enough of his right to the throne ; and this was, that each 
heir in succession, even after the drum dodge, was required 
to sit on the ground in a certain place of the country, 
where, if he had courage to plant himself, the land would 
oradually rise up, telescope-fashion, until it reached to the 
skies, when, if the aspirant was considered by the spirits 
the proper person to inherit Karagté, he would gradually 
be lowered again without any harm happening ; but, 
otherwise, the elastic hill would suddenly collapse, and he 
would be dashed to pieces. Now, Rtimanika, by his own 
confession, had gone through this ordeal with marked 
success ; so I asked him if he found the atmosphere cold 
when so far up aloft, and as he said he did go, laughing 
at the quaintness of the question, I told him I saw he 
had learnt a good practical lesson on the structure of the 
universe, which I wished he would explain to me. In a 
state of perplexity, K’yengo and the rest, on seeing me 
laughing, thought something was wrong; 80, turning 
about, Choe thotight again, and said, “ No, it must have 


7 a 
a = 
i 
: : ~~ 
a We o\ 
a in A 


: — 


lig t 
INE 


Lia 


Lh 


Carapue. 


I 


Little Windermere, 


Nzoe Antelopes. 


Dec.] KARAGUE SUPERSTITIONS. 223 


been hot, because the higher one ascended the nearer he 
got to the sun.” e 
This led on to‘one argument after another, on geology, 
geography, and all the natural sciences, and ended by 
Rimanika showing me an iron much the shape and size 
of a carrot. This he said was found by one of his vil- 
lagers whilst tilling the ground, buried some way down 
below the surface ; but dig as he would, he could not re- 
move it, and therefore called some more men to his help. 
Still the whole of them united could not lift the iron, 
which induced them, considering there must be some 
magic in it, to inform the king. “ Now,” says Rittmanika, 
“T no sooner went there and saw the iron, than, without 
the smallest exertion, I uplifted the iron, and brought it 
here as you see it. What can such a sign mean?” “Of 
course that you are the rightful king,” said his flatterers. 
“Then,” said Rttmanika, in exuberant. spirits, “during 
Dagara’s time, as the king was sitting with many other 
men outside his hut, a fearful storm of thunder and 
lightning arose, and a thunderbolt struck the ground in 
the midst of them, which dispersed all the men but 
Dagara, who calmly took up the thunderbolt and placed 
it in the palace. I, however, no sooner came into posses- 
sion, and-Rogéro began to contend with me, than the 
thunderbolt vanished. How would you account for this?” 
The flatterers said, “It is clear as possible ; God gave the 
thunderbolt to Dagara as a sign he was pleased with him 
and his rule; but when he found two brothers contending, 
he withdrew it to show their conduct was wicked.” 
5th.—Ritimanika in* the morning sent me a young 
male nzoé (water-boc)* which his canoe-men had caught 
in the high rushes at the head of the lake, by the king's 
order, to please me ; for I had heard this peculiar animal 
deseribed in such strange ways at Kazé, both by Mtisa 


* Since named by Dr P. L. Sclater ‘ Tragelaphus Spekii.” These nzoé 
have been drawn by Mr Wolf, from specttiens brought home by myself, 


224 KARAGUE. [1861. 


and the Arabs, I was desirous of having a look at one. 
It proved to be closely allied to a water-boe found by 
Livingstone on the Ngami Lake; but, instead of being 
striped, was very faintly spotted, and so long were its 
toes, it could hardly walk on the dry ground ; whilst its 
coat, also well adapted to the moist element it lived in, 
was long, and of such excellent quality that the natives 
prize it for wearing, almost more than any other of the 
antelope tribe. The only food it would eat were the tops 
of the tall papyrus rushes; but though it ate and drank 
freely, and lay down very quietly, it always charged with 
ferocity any person who went near it. 

In the afternoon Rtmanika. invited both Grant and my- 
self to witness his New Moon Levée, a ceremony which 


The King’s New ieehy Levee. 

takes place every month with a view of ascertaining how 

- » . . 5 
many of his subjects are loyal. On entering his palace 
enclosure, the first thing we saw was a blaue boe’s horn 
stuffed full of magic powder, with very imposing effect 
r Y TA 4 = } si = ( 
by K’yengo, and stuck in the ground, with its mouth 
pomting in the direction of Rogéro. In the second 
court, we feund thirty-five drums ranged on the ground 
with as many dru stand 
as many drummers standing behind them, and a 


Dec. | THE NEW MOON LEVEE. 225 


ing to escort us into the third enclosure, where, in his 
principal hut, we found Rimanika squatting on the 
ground, half-concealed by the portal, but showing his 
smiling face to welcome us in. His head was got up 
with a tiara of beads, from the centre of which, directly 
over the forehead, stood a plume of red feathers, and en- 
circling the lower face with a fine large white beard set 
in a stock or band of beads. We were beckoned to 
squat alongside Nnanaji, the master of ceremonies, and 
a large group of high officials outside the porch. Then 
the thirty-five drums all struck up together in very good 
harmony ; and when their deafening noise was over, a 
smaller band of hand-drums and reed instruments was 
ordered in to amuse us. 

This second performance over, from want of breath 
only, district officers, one by one, came advancing on tip- 
toe, then pausing, contorting and quivering their bodies, 
advancing again with a springing gait and outspread 
arms, which they moved as if they wished to force them 
out of their joints, in all of which actions they held 
drum-sticks or twigs in their hands, swore with a mani-— 
acal voice an oath of their loyalty and devotion to their 
king, backed by the expression of a hope that he would 
cut off their heads if they ever turned from his enemies, 
and then, kneeling before him, they held out their sticks 
that he might touch them. With a constant reiteration 
of these scenes—the saluting at one time, the music at 
another—interrupted only once by a number of girls 
dancing something like a good rough Highland fling whilst 
the little band played, the day’s ceremonies ended. 

6th and 7th—During the next two days, as my men 
had all worn out their clothes, I gave them each thirty 
necklaces of beads to purchase a suit of the bark cloth 
called mbiigti, already described. Finding the flour of 
the country too bitter to eat by itself, we sweetened it 

P 


226 KARAGUE. [1861. 


with ripe plantains, and made a good cake of it. The 
king now, finding me disinclined to fight his brother 
Rogéro, either with guns or magic horns, asked me to 
give him a “ doctor” or charm to create longevity and to 
promote the increase of his family, as his was not large 
enough to maintain the dignity of so great a man as him- 
self. I gave him a blister, and, changing the subject, 
told him the history of the creation of man. After 
listening to it attentively, he asked what thing in crea- 
tion I considered the greatest of all things in the world ; 
for whilst a man at most could only live one hundred 
years, a tree lived many; but the earth ought to be 
biggest, for it never died. 

I then told him again I wished one of his sons would 
accompany me to England, that he might learn the history 
of Moses, wherein he would find that men had souls which 
live for ever, but that the earth would come to an end in 
the fulness of time. This conversation, diversified by 
numerous shrewd remarks on the part of Rtimanika, led 
to his asking how I could account for the decline of 
countries, instancing the dismemberment of the Wahtima 
in Kittara, and remarking that formerly Karagtié in- 
cluded Urundi, Rttanda, and Kishakka, which collectively 
were known as the kingdom of Mért, governed by one 
man. Christian principles, I said, made us what we are, 
and feeling a sympathy for him made me desirous of 
taking one of his children to learn in the same school with 
us, who, on returning to him, could impart what he knew, 
and, extending the same by course of instruction, would 
doubtless end by elevating his country to a higher position 
than it ever knew before—é&e. &e. The policy and 
government of the vast possessions of Great Britain were 
then duly discussed, and Ritmanika acknowledged that 
the power of the pen was superior to that of the sword, 
and the electric telegraph and steam-engine the most won- 
derful powers he had ever heard of. 


Duc. | RUMANIKA’S GENEROSITY. 227 


Before breaking up, Rttmanika wished to give me any 
number of ivories I might like to mention, even three or 
four hundred, as a lasting remembrance that I had done 
him the honour of visiting Karagté in his lifetime, for 
though Dagara had given to coloured merchants, he would 
be the first who had given to a white man. Of course 
this royal offer was declined with politeness ; he must 
understand that it was not the custom of big men in my 
country to accept presents of value when we made visits 
of pleasure. I had enjoyed my residence in Karagtié, his 
intellectual conversations and his kind hospitality, all of 
which I should record in my books to hand down to 
posterity ; but if he would give me a cow’s horn, I would 
keep it as a trophy of the happy days I had spent in his 
country. He gave me one, measuring 3 feet 5 inches in 
length, and 18? inches in circumference at the base. He 
then offered me a large sheet, made up of a patchwork of 
very small N’yéra antelope skins, most exquisitely cured 
and sewn. ‘This I rejected, as he told me it had been 
given to himself, explaining that we prided ourselves on 
never parting with the gifts of a friend; and this speech 
tickled his fancy so much, that he said he never would 
part with anything I gave him. 

8th and 9th.—The 8th went off much in the usual way, 
by my calling on the king, when I gave him a pack of 
playing-cards, which he put into his curiosity-box. He 
explained to me, at my request, what sort of things he 
would like any future visitors to brmg him—a piece of 
gold and silver embroidery; but, before anything else, 
I found he would like to have toys—such as Yankee 
clocks with the face in a man’s stomach, to wind up be- 
hind, his eyes rolling with every beat of the pendulum ; 
or a china-cow milk-pot, a jack-in-the-box, models of men, 
carriages, and horses—all animals in fact, and railways in 
particular. : 

On the 9th I went. out shooting, as Rttmanika, with his 


228 KARAGUE. [1861. 


usual politeness, on hearing my desire to kill some rhino- 
ceros, ordered his sons to conduct the field for me. Off 
we started by sunrise to the bottom of the hills overlook- 
ing the head of the Little Windermere lake. On ar- 
rival at the scene of action—a thicket of acacia shrubs— 
all the men in the neighbourhood were assembled to beat. 
Taking post myself, by direction, in the most likely place 
to catch a sight of the animals, the day’s work began by 
the beaters driving the covers in my direction. In a very 
short time, a fine male was discovered making towards 
me, but not exactly knowing where he should bolt to. 
While he was in this perplexity, I stole along between the 
bushes, and caught sight of him standing as if anchored 
by the side of a tree, and gave him a broadsider with 
Blissett, which, too much for his constitution to stand, 
sent him off trotting, till exhausted by bleeding he lay 
down to die, and allowed me to give him a settler. 

In a minute or two afterwards, the good young princes, 
attracted by the sound of the gun, came to see what was 
done. ‘Their surprise knew no bounds ; they could scarcely 
believe what they saw ; and then, on recovering, with the 
spirit of true gentlemen, they seized both my hands, con- 
gratulating me on the magnitude of my success, and 
pointed out, as an example of it, a bystander who showed 
fearful scars, both on his abdomen and at the blade of his 
shoulder, who they declared had been run through by one 
of these animals. It was, therefore, wonderful to them, 
they observed, with what calmness I went up to such for- 
midable beasts. 

Just at this time a distant cry was heard that another 
rhinoceros was concealed in a thicket, and off we set to 
pursue her. Arriving at the place mentioned, I settled at 
once I would enter with only two spare men carrying 
guns, for the acacia thorns were so thick that the only 
tracks into the thicket were runs made by these animals. 
Leading myself, bending down to steal in, I tracked up 


Heads of three White Rhinoceros shot in Karague. 


Presenting my Spoils to Rumanika. 


Dec. | RHINOCEROS-STALKING. 229 


a run till half-way through cover, when suddenly be- 
fore me, like a pig from a hole, a large female, with her 
young one behind her, came straight down whoof-whoof- 
ing upon me. In this awkward fix I forced myself to one 
side, though pricked all over with thorns in doing so, and 
gave her one in the head which knocked her out of my 
path, and induced her for safety to make for the open, 
where I followed her down and gave her another. She 
then took to the hills and crossed over a spur, when, fol- 
lowing after her, in another dense thicket, near the head 
of a glen, I came upon three, who no sooner sighted me, 
than all in line they charged down my way.  Fortu- 
nately at the time my gun-bearers were with me ; so, jump- 
ing to one side, I struck them all three in turn. One of 
them dropped dead a little way on; but the others only 
pulled up when they arrived at the bottom. To please 
myself now I had done quite enough; but as the princes 
would have it, I went on with the chase. As one of the 
two, I could see, had one of his fore-lees broken, I went 
at the sounder one, and gave him another shot, which 
simply induced him to walk over the lower end of the 
hill. Then turning to the last one, which could not es- 
cape, I asked the Wanyambo to polish him off with their 
spears and arrows, that I might see their mode of sport. 
As we moved up to the animal, he kept charging with 
such impetuous fury, they could not go into him; so [| 
gave him a second ball, which brought him to anchor. 
In this helpless state the men set at him in earnest, and 
a more barbarous finale I never did witness. Every man 
sent his spear, assagé, or arrow, into his sides, until, com- 
pletely exhausted, he sank like a porcupine covered with 
quills. ‘The day’s sport was now ended, so 1 went home 
to breakfast, leaving instructions that the heads should be 
cut off and sent to the king as a trophy of what the white 
man could do. — 

10th and 11th.—The next day, when I called on Ri- 


230 KARAGUE. [1861. 


manika, the spoils were brought into court, and in utter 
astonishment he said, “Well, this must have been done 
with something more potent than powder, for neither the 
Arabs nor Nnanaji, although they talk of their shooting 
powers, could have accomplished such a great feat as this. 
It is no wonder the English are the greatest men in the 
world.” 

Neither the Wanyambo nor the Wahtima would eat the 
rhinoceros, so I was not sorry to find all the Wanyamtiézi 
porters of the Arabs at Kufro, on hearing of the sport, 
come over and carry away all the flesh. They passed by 
our camp half borne down with their burdens of sliced 
flesh, suspended from poles which they carried on their 
shoulders; but the following day I was disgusted by 
hearing that their masters had forbidden their eating 
“the carrion,” as the throats of the animals had not been 
cut; and, moreover, had thrashed them soundly because 
they complained they were shalf starved, which was per- 
fectly true, by the poor food that they got as their pay. 

12th.—On visiting Rttmanika again, and going through 
my geographical lessons, he told me, in confirmation of 
Miusa’s old stories, that in Rtianda there existed pig- 
mies who lived in trees, but occasionally came down at 
night, and, listening at the hut doors of the men, would 
wait until they heard the name of one of its inmates, 
when they would call him out, and, firing an arrow into 
his heart, disappear again in the same way.as they came. 
But, more formidable even than these little men, there 
were monsters who could not converse with men, and 
never showed themselves unless they saw women pass 
by ; then, in voluptuous excitement, they squeezed them 
to death. Many other similar stories were then told, 
when I, wishing to go, was asked if I could kill hippopo- 
tami. Having answered that I could, the king graciously 
said he would order some canoes for me next morning ; 
and as I declined because Grant could not accompany me, 


Dec.] ° A FATTENED PRINCESS. 251 


as a terrible disease had broken out in his leg, he ordered 
a pig-shooting party. Agreeably with this, the next day 
I went out with his sons, numerously attended; but 
although we beat the covers all day, the rain was so 
frequent the pigs would not bolt. 

14th.—After a long and amusing conversation with 
Rtimanika in the morning, I called on one of his sisters- 
in-law, married to an elder brother who was born before 
Dagara ascended the throne. She was another of those 
wonders of obesity, unable to stand excepting on all fours. 
I was desirous to obtain a good view of her, and actually 
to measure her, and induced her to give me facilities for 
doing so, by offering in return to show her a bit of my 
naked legs and arms. The bait took as I wished it, and 
after getting her to sidle and wriggle into the middle of 
the hut, I did as I promised, and then took her dimen- 
sions, as noted below.* All of these are exact except 
the height, and I believe I could have obtained this 
more accurately if I could have had her laid on the 
floor. Not knowing what difficulties I should have to 
contend with in such a piece of engineering, I tried to get 
her height by raising her up. This, after infinite exertions 
on the part of us both, was accomplished, when she sank 
down again, fainting, for her blood had rushed into her 
head. Meanwhile, the daughter, a lass of sixteen, sat 
stark-naked before us, sucking at a milk-pot, on which the 
father kept her at work by holding a rod in his hand, for 
as fattening is the first duty of fashionable female life, it 
must be duly enforced by the rod if necessary. I got up 
a bit of flirtation with missy, and induced her to rise and 
shake hands with me. Her features were lovely, but her 
body was as round as a ball. 

In the evening we had another row with my head men 
—Baraka having accused Bombay of trymg to kill him 

* Round arm, 1 ft. 11 in.; chest, 4 ft. 4 in.; thigh, 2 ft. 7 in. ; calf, 1 tt, 
8 in.; height, 5 ft. 8 in, 


232 KARAGUE. [1861. 


with magic. Bombay, who was so incessantly bullied by 
Baraka’s officious attempts to form party cliques opposed 
to the interests of the journey, and get him turned out of 
the camp, indiscreetly went to one of K’yengo’s men, and 
asked him if he knew of any medicine that would affect 
the hearts of the Wangtiana so as to incline them towards 
him; and on the sub-doctor saying Yes, Bombay gave 
him some beads, and bought the medicine required, which, 
put into a pot of pombé, was placed by Baraka’s side. 
Baraka in the meanwhile got wind of the matter through 
K’yengo, who, misunderstanding the true facts of the case, 
said it was a charm to deprive Baraka of his life. A court 
of inquiry having been convened, with all the parties con- 
cerned in attendance, K’yengo’s mistake was discovered, 
and Bombay was lectured for his folly, as he had a thou- 
sand times before abjured his belief in such magical follies; 
moreover, to punish him for the future, I took Baraka, 
whenever I could, with me to visit the king, which, little 
as it might appear to others, was of the greatest conse- 
quence to the hostile parties. 

15th and 16th—When I next called on Rimanika I 
gave him a Vautier’s binocular and prismatic compass ; on 
which he politely remarked he was afraid he was robbing 
me of everything. More compliments went round, and 
then he asked if it was true we could open a man’s skull, 
look at his brains, and close it up again; also if it was 
true we sailed all round the world into regions where 
there was no difference between night and day, and how, 
when we ploughed the seas in such enormous vessels as 
would carry at once 20,000 men, we could explain to the 
sailors what they ought to do; for, although he had heard 
of these things, no one was able to explain them to him. 

After all the explanations were given, he promised me 
a boat-hunt after the nzoé in the morning ; but when the 
time came, as difficulties were raised, I asked him to allow 
us to anticipate the arrival of Kachticht, and march on to 


Dro. ] GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION, 233 


Kitangtlé. He answered, with his usual courtesy, That he 
would be very glad to oblige us in any way that we liked: 
but he feared that, as the Waganda were such superstitious 
people, some difficulties would arise, and he must decline 
to comply with our request. “You must not,” he added, 
“expect ever to find again a reasonable man like myself.” 
I then gave him a book on “ Kafir laws,” which he said he 
would keep for my sake, with all the rest of the presents, 
which he was determined never to give away, though 
it was usual for him to send novelties of this sort to 
Mtésa, king of Uganda, and Kamrasi, king of Unyoro, as 
a friendly recognition of their superior positions in the 
world of great monarchies. 

17¢h.—Ritmanika next introduced me to an old woman 
who came from the island of Gasi, situated in the little 
Lita Nzigé. Both her upper and lower incisors had been 
extracted, and her upper lip perforated by a number of 
small holes, extending in an arch from one corner to the 
other. This interesting but ugly old lady narrated the 
circumstances by which she had been enslaved, and then 
sent by Kamrasi as a curiosity to Rtmanika, who had ever 
since kept her as a servant in his palace. A man from 
Rtianda then told us of the Wilyanwanttt (men-eaters), 
who disdained all food but human flesh; and Riimanika 
confirmed the statement. Though I felt very sceptical 
about it, I could not help thinking it a curious coincidence 
that the position they were said to occupy agreed with 
Petherick’s Nyam Nyams (men-eaters). 

Of far more interest were the results of a conversation 
which I had with another of Kamrasi’s servants, a man of 
Amara, as it threw some light upon certain statements | 
made by Mr Leon of thé people of Amara being Christians. 
He said they bore single holes in the centres both of their 
upper and lower lips, as well as in the lobes of both of 
their ears, ‘in which they wear small brass rings. ‘They 
live near the N’yanza—where it is connected by a strait 


234 KARAGUE. [1861. 


with a salt lake, and drained by a river to the northward— 
in comfortable houses, built like the tembés of Unyamtézi. 
When killing a cow, they kneel down in an attitude of 
prayer, with both hands together, held palm upwards, and 
utter Zit, a word the meaning of which he did not know. 
I questioned him to try if the word had any trace of a 
Christian meaning—for instance, as a corruption of Jesu— 
but without success. - Circumcision is not known amongst 
them, neither have they any knowledge of God or a soul. 
A tribe called Waktiavi, who are white, and described as 
not unlike myself, often came over the water and made 
raids on their cattle, usimg the double-edged simé as their 
chief weapon of war. These attacks were as often resented, 
and sometimes led the Wamara in pursuit a long way into 
their enemy’s country, where, at a place called Kisigtisi, 
they found men robed in red cloths. Beads were im- 
ported, he thought, both from the east and from Ukidi. 
Associated with the countries Masau or Masai, and Usam- 
birt, which he knew, there was a large mountain, the 
exact position of which he could not describe. 

I took down many words of his language, and found 
they corresponded with the North African dialects, as 
spoken by the people of Kidi, Gani, and Madi. The 
southerners, speaking of these, would call them Wakidi, 
Wagani, and Wamadi, but among themselves the syllable 
wa is not prefixed, as in the southern dialects, to signify 
people. Rtimanika, who appeared immensely delighted 
as he assisted me in putting the questions I wanted, and 
saw me note them down in my book, was more confirmed 
than ever in the truth of my stories that I came from the 
north, and thought as the beads came to Amara, so should 
I be able to open the road and bring him more visitors. 
This he knew was his only chance of ever seeing me any 
more, for I swore I would never go back through Usti, 
so greatly did I feel the indignities imposed on me by 
Sttwarora. 


Dec. | HIPPOPOTAMUS-HUNTING. 235 


18th.—To keep the king in good-humour, I now took 
a table-knife, spoon, and fork to the palace, which, after 
their several uses were explained, were consigned to his 
curiosity-box. Still Rttmanika could not understand how 
it was I spent so much and travelled so far, or how it 
happened such a great country as ours could be ruled by 
a woman. He asked the Queen’s name, how many chil- 
dren she had, and the mode of succession; then, when 
fully satisfied, led the way to show me what his father 
Dagara had done when wishing to know of what the 
centre of the earth was composed. At the back of the 
palace a deep ditch was cut, several yards long, the end of 
which was carried by a subterranean passage into the 
palace, where it was ended off with a cavern led into by 
a very small aperture. It then appeared that Dagara, 
having failed, in his own opinion, to arrive any nearer to 
the object in view, gave the excavating up as a bad job, 
and turned the cave into a mysterious abode, where it was 
confidently asserted he spent many days without eating or 
drinking, and turned sometimes into a young man, and 
then an old one, alternately, as the humour seized him. 

19th to 22d.—On the 19th I went fishing, but without 
success, for they said the fish would not take in the lake ; 
and on the following day, as Grant’s recovery seemed 
hopeless, for a long time at least, I went with ail the 
young princes to see what I could do with the hippopo- 
tami in the lake, said to inhabit the small island of Conty. 
The party was an exceedingly merry one. We went off 
to the island in several canoes, and at once found an im- 
mense number of crocodiles basking in the sun, but not 
a single hippopotamus was in sight. The princes then, 
thinking me “green” at this kind of sport, said the place 
was enchanted, but I need not fear, for they would bring 
them out to my feet by simply calling out certain names, 
and this was no sooner done than four old and one young 
one came immediately in front of us. It seemed quite a 


=” 


236 KARAGUE. [1861. 


sin to touch them, they looked all so innocent ; but as the 
king wanted to try me again, I gave one a ball on the head 
which sent him under, never again to be seen, for on the 
22d, by which time I supposed ‘he ought to have risen in- 
flated with gases, the king sent out his men to look out for 
him; but they returned to say, that whilst all the rest were 
in the old place, that one, in particular, could not be found. 

On this K’yengo,-who happened to be present whilst 
our interview lasted, explained that the demons of the 
deep were annoyed with me for intruding on their pre- 
serves, without having the courtesy to commemorate the 
event by the sacrifice “Of a goatoracow. Rtmanika then, 
at my suggestion, gave Nnanaji the revolving pistol I first 
gave him, but not without a sharp rebuke for his having 
had the audacity to beg a gun of me in consideration of 
his being a sportsman. We then went into a discourse on 
astrology, when the intelligent Rttmanika asked me if the 
same sun we saw one day appeared again, or whether 
fresh suns came every day, and whether or not the moon - 
made different faces, to laugh at us mortals on earth. 

23d and 24th.—This day was spent by the king intro- 
ducing me to his five fat wives, to show with what esteem 
he was held by all the different kings of the countries 
surrounding. From Mpororo—-which, by the by, is a 
republic —he was wedded to Kaogéz, the daughter of 
Kahaya, who is the greatest chief in the country; from 
Unyoro he received Katiyangi, Kamrasi’s daughter ; from 
Nkolé, Kambiri, the late Kasiyonga’s daughter; from 
Uttimbi, Kirangti, the late Kitéimbitia’s daughter ; and 
lastly, the daughter of Chitiariingi, his head cook. 

After presenting Riimanika with an india - rubber 
band—which, as usual, amused him immensely—for tlie 
honour he had done me in showing me his wives, a party 
of Waziwa, who had brought some ivory from Kidi, came 
to pay their respects to him. On being questioned by 
me, they said that they once saw some men like my - 


Dec. | A CHRISTMAS PRESENT. 237 


Wangtiana there ; they had come from the north to trade, 
‘but, though they carried firearms, they were all killed by 
the people of Kidi. This was famous; it corroborated 
what I knew, but could not convince others of—that 
traders could find their way up to Kidi by the Nile. It in 
a manner explained also how it was that Kamrasi, some 
years before, had obtained some pink beads, of a variety 
the Zanzibar merchants had never thought of bringing 
into the country. Bombay was now quite convinced, and 
we all became transported with joy, until Rtmanika, 
reflecting on the sad state of Grant’s leg, turned that joy 
into grief by saying that the rules of Uganda are so strict, 
that no one who is sick could enter the country. “To 
show,” he said, “how absurd they are, your donkey would 
not be permitted because he has no trousers; and you 
even will have to put on a gown, as your unmentionables 
will be considered indecorous.” I now asked Ritmanika 
if he would assist me in replenishing my fast-ebbing store 
of beads, by selling tusks to the Arabs at Kufro, when 
for every 35 lb. weight [ would give him 50 dollars by 
orders on Zanzibar, and would insure him from being 
cheated, by sending a letter of advice to our Consul resid- 
ing there. At first he demurred, on the high-toned prin- 
ciple that he could not have any commercial dealings 
with myself; but, at the instigation of Bombay and 
Baraka, who viewed it in its true character, as tending 
merely to assist my journey in the best manner he could, . 
without any sacrifice to dignity, he eventually yielded, 
and, to prove his earnestness, sent me a large tusk, with 
a notice that his ivory was not kept in the palace, but 
with his officers, and as soon as they could collect it, so 
soon I should get it. 

Ritmanika, on hearing that it was our custom to cele- 
brate the birth of our Saviour with a good 
‘feast of beef, sent us an ox. I immediately 
paid him a visit to offer the compliments of the season, 


Christmas Day. 


238 KARAGUE. [1861. 


and at the same time regretted, much to his amusement, 
that he, as one of the old stock of Abyssinians, who are 
the oldest Christians on record, should have forgotten 
this rite; but I hoped the time would come when, by 
making it known that his tribe had lapsed into a state 
of heathenism, white teachers would be induced to set it 
all to rights again. At this time some Wahaiya traders 
(who had been invited at my request by Rtimanika) 
arrived. Like the Waziwa, they had traded with Kidi, 
and they not only confirmed what the Waziwa had said, 
but added that, when trading in those distant parts,-they 
heard of Wangtiana coming in vessels to trade to the 
north of Unyoro; but the natives there were so savage, 
they only fought with these foreign traders, A man of 
Rtianda now informed us that the cowrie-shells, so plenti- 
ful in that country, come there from the other or western 
side, but he could not tell whence they were originally 
obtained. Ritimanika then told me Sttwarora had been so 
frightened by the Wattita, and their boastful threats to 
demolish Ustii bit by bit, reserving him only as a tit-bit 
for the end, that he wanted a plot of ground in Karaoté 
to preserve his property in. 

26th, 27th, and 28th.—Some other travellers from the 
north again informed us that they had heard of Wangtiana 
who attempted to trade in Gani and Chopi, but were 
killed by the natives. J now assured Rtmanika that in 
two or three years he would have a greater trade with 
Egypt than he ever could have with Zanzibar ; for when 
I opened the road, all those men he heard of would 
swarm up here to visit him. He, however, only laughed 
at my folly in proposing to go to a place of which all I 
heard was merely that every stranger who went there was 
killed. He began to show a disinclination to allow my 
going there, and though from the most friendly intention, 
this view was alarming, for one word from him could 
have ruined my projects. As it was, I feared my fol- 


Duc. ] NATIVE SUPERSTITIONS. 239 


lowers might take fright and refuse to advance with me. 
I thought it good policy to talk of there being many roads 
leading through Africa, so that Rttmanika might see he 
had not got, as he thought, the sole key to the interior. 
I told him again of certain views I once held of coming 
to see him from the north up the Nile, and from the east 
through the Masai. He observed that, “'To open either 
of those routes, you would require at least two hundred 
guns.” He would, however, do something when we re- 
turned from Uganda; for as Mtésa followed his advice 
in everything, so did Kamrasi, for both held the highest 
opinion of him. 

The conversation then turning on London, and the 
way men and carriages moved up the streets like strings 
of ants on their migrations, Rttmanika said the villages 
in Rtianda were of enormous extent, and the people great 
sportsmen, for they turned out in multitudes, with small 
dogs on whose necks were tied bells, aud blowing horns 
themselves, to hunt leopards. They were, however, highly 
superstitious, and would not allow any strangers to enter 
their country; for some years ago, when some Arabs went 
there, a great drought and famine set in, which they attri- 
buted to evil influences brought by them, and, turning 
them out of their country, said they would never admit 
any of their like amongst them again. [I said, in return, 
I thought his Wanyambo just as superstitious, for I ob- 
served, whilst walking one day, that they had placed a 
gourd on the path, and on inquiry found they had done 
so to gain the sympathy of all passers-by to their crop 
close at hand, which was blighted, imagining that the 
voice of the sympathiser heard by the spirits would in- 
duce them to relent, and restore a healthy tone to the 
crop. 

During this time an interesting case was brought before 
us for judgrhent. ‘Two men having married one woman, 
laid claim to her child, which, as it was a male one, be- 


240 KARAGUE. [1861. 


longed to the father. Baraka was appointed the umpire, 
and immediately comparing the infant’s face with those 
of its claimants, gave a decision which all approved of 
but the loser. It was pronounced amidst peals of laughter 
from my men ; for whenever any little excitement is going 
forward, the Wangtiana all rush to the scene of action to 
give their opinions, and joke over it afterwards. 

29th and 30th.—On telling Rtimanika this story next 
morning, he said, “ Many funny things happen in Ka- 
ragtié;” and related some domestic incidents, concluding 
with the moral that “Marriage in Karagté was a mere 
matter of money.” Cows, sheep, and slaves have to be 
given to the father for the value of his daughter; but if 
she finds she has made a mistake, she can return the 
dowry-money, and gain her release. The Wahtima, al- 
though they keep slaves and marry with pure negroes, | 
do not allow their daughters to taint their blood by mar- 
rying out of their clan. In warfare it is the rule that 
the Wahinda, or princes, head their own soldiers, and set 
them the example of courage, when, after firmg a few 
arrows, they throw their bows away, and close at once 
with their spears and assagés. Life is never taken in 
Karagtié, either for murder or cowardice, as they value 
so much their Wahtima breed ; but, for all offences, fines 
of cows are exacted according to the extent of the crime. 

31st—LHver proud of his history since I had traced 
his descent from Abyssinia and King David, whose hair 
was as straight as my own, Rtmanika dwelt on my 
theological disclosures with the greatest delight, and 
wished to know what difference existed between the 
Arabs and ourselves; to which Baraka replied, as the 
best means of making him understand, that whilst the 
Arabs had only one Book, we had two ; to which I added, 
Yes, that is true in a sense; but the real merits lie in 
the fact that we have got the better book, as may be in- 
ferred from the obvious fact that we are more prosperous, 


De. ] RUMANIKA’S RELIGION, 241 


and their superiors in all things, as I would prove to him 
if he would allow me to take one of his sons home to 
learn that book; for then he would find his tribe, after a 
while, better off than the Arabs are. Much delighted, he 
said he would be very glad to give me two boys for that 
purpose. 

Then, changing the subject, I pressed Ritmanika, as he 
said he had no idea of a God or future state, to tell me 
what advantage he expected from sacrificing a cow yearly 
at his father’s grave. He laughingly replied he did not 
know, but he hoped he might be favoured with better 
crops if he did so. He also placed pombé and grain, he 
said, for the same reason, before a large stone on the hill- 
side, although it could not eat, or make any use of it; 
but the coast-men were of the same belief as himself, and 
so were all the natives. No one in Africa, as far as he 
knew, doubted the power of magic and spells; and if a 
fox barked when he was leading an army to battle, he 
would retire at once, knowing that this prognosticated 
evil. There were many other animals, and lucky and 
unlucky birds, which all believed in. 

I then told him it was fortunate he had no disbelievers 
like us to contend with in battle, for we, instead of trust- 
ing to luck and such omens, put our faith only in skill and 
pluck, which Baraka elucidated from his military expe- 
rience in the wars in British India. Lastly, I explaimed 
to him how England formerly was as unenlightened as 
Africa, and believing in the same sort of superstitions, 
and the inhabitants were all as naked as his skin-wearing 
Wanyambo; but now, since they had grown wiser, and 
saw through such impostures, they were the greatest men 
in the world. He said, for the future he would disregard 
what the Arabs said, and trust to my doctrines, for with- 
out doubt he had never seen such a wise man as myself ; 
and the Arabs themselves confirmed this when they told 

Q 


242 KARAGUE. _ [1862. 


him that all their beads and cloths came from the land of 
the Wazitingt, or white men. 

Ist, 2d, and 3d.—The new year was ushered in by the 
most exciting intelligence, which drove us half wild with 
delight, for we fully believed Mr Petherick was indeed on 
his road up the Nile, endeavouring to meet us. It was 
this :—An officer of Rttmanika’s, who had been sent four 
years before on a mission to Kamrasi, had just then 
returned with a party of Kamrasi’s who brought ivory for 
sale to the Arabs at Kufro, along with a vaunting com- 
mission to inform Rtmanika that Kamrasi had foreign 
visitors as well as himself. They had not actually come 
into Unyoro, but were in his dependency, the country of 
Gani, coming up the Nile in vessels. They had been 
attacked by the Gani people, and driven back with con- 
siderable loss both of men and property, although they 
were in sailing vessels, and fired guns which even broke 
down the trees on the banks.. Some of their property 
had been brought to him, and he in return had ordered 
his subjects not to molest them, but allow them to come 
on to him. Rtmanika enjoyed this news as much as 
myself, especially when I told him of Petherick’s promise 
to meet us, just as these men said he was trying to do; 
and more especially so, when I told him that if he would. 
assist me in trymg to communicate with Petherick, the 
latter would either come here himself, or send one of his 
men, conveying a suitable present, whilst I was away in 
Uganda; and then in the end we would all go off to 
Kamrasi’s together. 

4th.—Entering warmly into the spirit of this impor- 
tant intelligence, Rttmanika inquired into its truth; and, 
finding no reason to doubt it, said he would send some 
men back with Kamrasi’s men, if I could have patience 
until they were ready to go. There would be no danger, 


as Kamrasi was his brothemie law, and would do all hae 
he told him. 


Jan. | SUPPOSED NEWS OF PETHERICK. 243 


I now proposed to send Baraka, who, ashamed to ery 
off, said he would go with Rtmanika’s officers if I allowed 
him a companion of his own choosing, who would take 
care of him if he got sick on the way, otherwise he should 
be afraid they would leave him to die, like a dog, in the 
jungles. We consoled him by assenting to the companion 
he wished, and making Ritmanika responsible that no 
harm should come to him from any of the risks which his 
imagination conjured up. Rttmanika then gave him and 
Ulédi, his selected companion, some sheets of mbitigt, in 
order that they might disguise themselves as his ofticers 
whilst crossing the territories of the king of Uganda. On 
inquiring as to the reason of this, it transpired that, to 
reach Unyoro, the party would have to cross a portion 
of Uddtt, which the late king Sunna, on annexing that 
country to Uganda, had divided, not in halves, but by 
alternate bands running transversely from Nkolé to the 
Victoria N’yanza. 

5th and 6th—To keep Ritmanika up to the mark, I 
introduced to him Saidi, one of my men, who was for- 
merly a slave, captured in Walamo, on the borders of 
Abyssinia, to show him, by his similarity to the Wahtima, 
how it was I had come to the conclusion that he was 
of the same race. Saidi told him his tribe kept cattle 
with the same stupendous horns as those of the Wahtima; 
and also that, in the same manner, they all mixed blood 
with milk for their dinners, which, to his mind, confirmed 
my statement. At night, as there was a partial eclipse of 
the moon, all the Wangttana marched up and down from 
Riimanika’s to Nnanaji’s huts, singing and beating our tin 
cooking-pots to frighten off the spirit of the sun from con- 
suming entirely the chief object of reverence, the moon. 

7th.—Our spirits were now further raised by the ar- 
rival of a semi-Hindt-Stahili, named Jima, who had just 
returned from a visit to the king of Uganda, bringing 
back with him a large present of ivory and slaves ; for he 


244 KARAGUE. [1862. 


said he had heard from the king of our intention to visit 
him, and that he had despatched officers to call us imme- 
diately. This intelligence delighted Ritmanika as much 
as it did us, and he no sooner heard it than he said, with 
ecstasies, “I will open Africa, since the white men desire 
it; for did not Dagara command us to show deference to 
strangers?” Then, turning to me, he added, “My only 
regret is, you will not. take something as a return for the 
great expenses you have been put to in coming to visit 
me.” The expense was admitted, for I had now been 
obliged to purchase from the Arabs upwards of £400 
worth of beads, to keep such a store in reserve for my 
return from Uganda as would enable me to push on to 
Gondokoro. I thought this necessary, as every report 
that arrived from Unyamtiézi only told us of further dis- 
asters with the merchants in that country. Sheikh Said 
was there even then, with my poor Hottentots, unable to 
convey my post to the coast. 

8th to 10th.—At last we heard the familiar sound of 
the Uganda drum. Matila,a royal officer, with a large 
escort of smartly-dressed men, women, and boys, leading 
their dogs and playing their reeds, announced to our 
straining ears the welcome intelligence that their king 
had sent them to call us. N’yamgundt, who had seen us 
in Ustti, had marched on to inform the king of our ad- 
vance and desire to see him; and he, intensely delighted 
at the prospect of having white men for his guests, de- 
sired no time should be lost in our coming on. Matila 
told us that his officers had orders to supply us with 
everything we wanted whilst passing through his country, 
and that there would be nothing to pay. 

One thing only now embarrassed me—Grant was worse, 
without hope of recovery for at least one or two months. 
This large body of Waganda could not be kept waiting. 
To get on as fast as possible was the only chance of ever 
bringing the journey to a successful issue; so, unable to 


Jan. | FAREWELL TO RUMANIKA. 245 


help myself, with great remorse at another separation, on 
the following day I consigned my companion, with several 
Wangiiana, to the care of my friend Riimanika. I then 
separated ten loads of beads and thirty copper wires for 
my expenses in Uganda; wrote a letter to Petherick, 
which I gave to Baraka ; and gave him and his companion 
beads to last as money for six months, and also a present 
both for Kamrasi and the Gani chief. To Nsangéz I 
gave charge of my collections in natural history, and 
the reports of my progress, addressed to the Geographical 
Society, which he was to convey to Sheikh Said at. Kazé, 
for conveyance as far as Zanzibar. 

This business concluded in camp, I started my men 
and went to the palace to bid adieu to Rtmanika, who 
appoimted Rozaro, one of his officers, to accompany me 
wherever I went in Uganda, and to bring me back safely 
again, At Rttmanika’s request I then gave Mtésa’s pages 
some ammunition to hurry on with to the great king of 
Uganda, as his majesty had ordered them to bring him, 
as quickly as possible, some strengthening powder, and 
also some powder for his gun. ‘Then, finally, to Maitla, 
also under Rttmanika’s instructions, I gave two copper 
wires and five bundles of beads; and, when all was com- 
pleted, set out on the march, perfectly sure in my mind 
that before very long I should settle the great Nile problem: 
for ever; and, with this consciousness, only hoping that 
Grant would be able to joi me before I should have to 
return again, for it was never supposed for a moment 
that it was possible I ever could go north from Uganda. 
Rumanika was the most resolute in this belief, as the 
kings of Uganda, ever since that country was detached 
from Unyoro, had been making constant raids, seizing 
cattle and slaves from the surrounding countrics. 


246 HISTORY OF THE WAHUMA. 


CHAPTER IX. 


HISTORY OF THE WATUMA. 


THE ABYSSINIANS AND GALLAS—THEORY OF CONQUEST OF INFERIOR 
BY SUPERIOR RACES—THE WAHUMA AND THE KINGDOM OF KIT- 
TARA—-LEGENDARY HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF UGANDA—ITS 
CONSTITUTION, AND THE CEREMONIALS OF THE COURT. 


THE reader has now had my experience of several of 
the minor states, and has presently to be introduced to 
Uganda, the most powerful state in the ancient but now 
divided great kingdom of Kittara. I shall have to record 
a residence of considerable duration at the court there ; 
and, before entering on it, I propose to state my theory 
of the ethnology of that part of Africa inhabited by the 
people collectively styled Wahttma— otherwise Gallas or 
Abyssinians. My theory is founded on the traditions of 
the several nations, as checked by my own observation 
of what I saw when passing through them. It appears 
impossible to believe, judging from the physical appear- 
ance of the Wahtima, that they can be of any other race 
than the semi-Shem-Hamiutic of Ethiopia. The traditions 
of the imperial’ government of Abyssinia go as far back 
as the scriptural age of King David, from whom the late 
reigning king of Abyssinia, Sahéla Sélassié, traced his 
descent. . 

Most people appear to regard the Abyssinians as a 
different race from the Gallas, but, I believe, without 


THE ABYSSINIANS AND GALLAS. 247 


foundation. Both alike are Christians of the oreatest 
antiquity. It is true that, whilst the aboriginal Abyssin- 
ians in Abyssinia proper are more commonly agricultur- 
ists, the Gallas are chiefly a pastoral people ; but I conceive 
that the two may have had the same relations with each 
other which 1 found the Wahtima kings and Wahtma 
herdsmen holding with the agricultural Wazinza in Uzinza, 
the Wanyambo in Karagtté, the Waganda in Uganda, and 
the Wanyoro in Unyoro. 

In these countries the government is in the hands of 
foreigners, who had invaded and taken possession of them, 
leaving the agricultural aborigines to till the ground, 
whilst the junior members of the usurping clans herded 
cattle—just as in Abyssinia, or wherever the Abyssinians 
or Gallas have shown themselves. ‘There a pastoral clan 
from the Asiatic side took the government of Abyssinia 
from its people and have ruled over them ever since, 
changing, by intermarriage with the Africans, the texture 
of their hair and colour to a certain extent, but still 
maintaining a high stamp of Asiatic feature, of which a 
marked characteristic is a bridged instead of bridgeless 
nose. 

It may be presumed that there once existed a foreign 
but compact government in Abyssinia, which, becoming 
great and powerful, sent out armies on all sides of it, 
especially to the south, south-east, and west, slave-hunting 
and devastating wherever they went, and in process of 
time becoming too great for one ruler to control. Junior 
members of the royal family then, pushing their fortunes, 
dismembered themselves from the parent stock, created 
separate governments, and, for reasons which cannot be 
traced, changed their names. In this manner we may 
suppose that the Gallas separated from the Abyssinians, 
and located themselves to the south of their native land. 

Other Abyssinians, or possibly Gallas—it matters not 
which they were or what we call them—lkewise detach- 


248 HISTORY OF THE WAHUMA. 


ing themselves, fought in the Somali country, subjugated 
that land, were defeated to a certain extent by the Arabs 
from the opposite continent, and tried their hands south as 
far as the Jub river, where they also left many of their 
numbers behind. Again they attacked Omwita (the 
present Mombas), were repulsed, were lost sight of in the 
interior of the continent, and, crossing the Nile close to its 
source, discovered the-rich pasture-lands of Unyoro, and 
founded the great kingdom of Kittara, where they lost 
their religion, forgot their language, extracted their lower 
incisors like the natives, changed their national name to 
Wahima, and no longer remembered the names of Hubshi 
or Galla—though even the present reigning kings retain 
a singular traditional account of their having once been 
half white and half black, with hair on the white side 
straight, and on the black side frizzly. It was a curious 
indication of the prevailing idea still entertained by them 
of their foreign extraction, that it was surmised in Unyoro 
that the approach of us white men into their country from 
both sides at once, augured an intention on our part to 
take back the country from them. Believing, as they do, 
that Africa formerly belonged to Europeans, from whom 
it was taken by negroes with whom they had allied 
themselves, the Wahtima make themselves a small residue 
of the original Huropean stock driven from the land—an 
idea which seems natural enough when we consider that 
the Wahtima are, in numbers, quite insignificant compared 
with the natives. 

Again, the princes of Unyoro are called Wawitt, and 
point to the north when asked where their country Uwitt: 
is situated, doubtfully saying, when questioned about its 
distance, “ How can we tell circumstances which took 
place in our forefathers’ times? we only think it is some- 
where near your country.” Although, however, this very 
interesting people, the Wahtima, delight in supposing 
themselves to be of European origin, they are forced to 


ORIGIN OF THE WAHUMA. 249 


confess, on closer examination, that although they came 
in the first instance from the doubtful north, they came 
latterly from the east, as part of a powerful Wahtima 
tribe, beyond Kidi, who excel in arms, and are so fierce 
_ no Kidi people, terrible in war as these too are described 
to be, can stand against them. This points, if our maps 
are true, to the Gallas—for all pastorals in these people’s 
minds are Wahitma; and if we could only reconcile our- 
selves to the belief that the Wawitt derived their name 
from Omwita, the last place they attacked on the east 
coast of Africa, then all would be clear: for it must be 
noticed the Wakama, or kings, when asked to what race 
they owe their origin, invariably reply, in the first place, 
from princes—giving, for instance, the titles Wawitti in 
Unyoro, and Wahinda in Karagiié—which is most likely 
caused by their never having been asked such a close 
question before, whilst the idiom of the language generally 
induces them to call themselves after the name applied to 
their country. 

So much for ethnological conjecture. Let us now deal 
with the Wahtima since they crossed the Nile and founded 
the kingdom of Kittara, a large tract of land bounded by 
the Victoria N’yanza and Kitangtilé Kagéra or River on 
the south, the Nile on the east, the Little Litita-Nzigé 
Lake* on the north, and the kingdoms of Uttmbi and 
Nkolé on the west. | 

The general name Kittara is gradually becoming extinct, 
and is seldom applied to any but the western portions; 
whilst the north-eastern, in which the capital is situated, 
is called Unyoro, and the other, Uddtt apart from Uganda, 
as we shall presently see. 

Nobody has been able to inform us how many genera- 
tions old the Wahtima government of Unyoro is. The 
last three kings are Chiawambi, N ‘yawongo, and the 
present king Kamrasi. In very early times dissensions 


* 7,¢,, Dead Locust Lake,—Liita, dead—Nzigé, locust. 


§ 


250 HISTORY OF THE WAHUMA. 


amongst the royal family, probably contending for the 
crown, such as we presume must have occurred in Abys- 
sinia, separated the parent stock, and drove the weaker 
to find refuge in Nkolé, where a second and inde- 
pendent government of Wahttma was established. Since 
then, twenty generations ago, it is said the Wahtima 
government of Karagiié was established in the same 
manner. The conspirator Rohinda fled from Kittara to 
Karagté with a large party of Wahtima; sought the 
protection of Nono, who, a Myambo, was king over 
the Wanyambo of that country; ingratiated himself 
and his followers with the Wanyambo; and, finally, 
designing a crown for himself, gave a feast, treacherously 
killed King Nono in his cups, and set himself on the 
throne, the first mkama or king who ruled in Karagiié. 
Rohinda was succeeded by Ntaré, then Rohinda IL., then 
Ntaré Il., which order only changed with the eleventh 
reign, when Ritisatira ascended the throne, and was suc- 
ceeded by Mehinga, then Kaliméra, then Ntaré VII., then 
Rohinda VI., then Dagara, and now Rttmanika. During 
this time the Wahtma were well south of the equator, 
and still destined to spread. Brothers again contended 
for the crown of their father, and the weaker took refuge 
in Uzinza, where the fourth Wahttma government was 
created, and so remained under one king until the last 
generation, when King Rima died, and his two sons, 
Rohinda, the eldest, and Stiwarora, contended for the 
crown, but divided the country between them, Rohinda 
taking the eastern half, and Stwarora the western, at the 
instigation of the late king Dagara of Karagté. 

This is the most southerly kingdom of the Wahtima, 
though not the farthest spread of its people, for we find 
the Wattisi, who are emigrants from Karagtié of the same 
stock, overlooking the Tanganyika Lake from the hills of 
Uhbha, and tending their cattle all over Unyamiiézi under 
the protection of the native negro chiefs; and we also hear 


> 


SPREAD OF THE WAHUMA. 251 


that the Wapoka of Fipa, south of the Ritkwa Lake, are 
the same. How or when their name became changed 
from Wahttma to Watiisi no one is able to explain; but, 
again deducing the past from the present, we cannot 
help suspecting that, in the same way as this change has 
taken place, the name Galla may have been changed 
from Hubshi, and Wahtima from Gallas. But though in 
these southern regions the name of the clan has been 
changed, the princes still retain the title of Wahinda as 
in Karagtié, mstead of Wawittt as in Unyoro, and are 
considered of such noble breed that many of the pure 
negro chiefs delight in saying, I am a Mhinda, or prince, 
to the confusion of travellers, which confusion is increased 
by the Wahtima habits of conforming to the regulations 
of the different countries they adopt. For instance, the 
Wahitma of Uganda and Karagtté, though so close to 
Unyoro, do not extract their lower incisors; and though 
the Wanyoro only use the spear in war, the Wahtima in 
Karagtié are the most expert archers in Africa. We are 
thus left only the one very distinguishing mark, the 
physical appearance of this remarkable race, partaking 
even more of the phlegmatic nature of the Shemitic 
father than the nervous boisterous temperament of the 
Hamitic mother, as a certain clue to their Shem-Ham- 
itic origin. 4 

It remains to speak of the separation of Uddii from 
Unyoro, the present kmgdom of Uganda—which, to say 
the least of it, is extremely interesting, inasmuch as the 
government there is as different from the other surround- 
ing countries as those of Europe are compared to Asia. 

In the earliest times the Wahtima of Unyoro regarded 
all their lands bordering on the Victoria Lake as their 
garden, owing to its exceeding fertility, and imposed the 
epithet of Wirt, or slaves, upon its people, because they 
had to supply the imperial government with food and 
clothing. Coffee was conveyed to the capital by the 


252 HISTORY OF THE WAHUMA. 


Wirt, also mbiigtt (bark-cloaks), from an inexhaustible 
fig-tree ; in short, the lands of the Wirt were famous for 
their rich productions. 

Now Wirt in the northern dialect changes to Waddt. 
in the southern; hence Uddt, the land of the slaves, 
which remained in one connected line from the Nile to 
the Kitangtilé Kagéra until eight generations back, when, 
according to tradition, a sportsman from Unyoro, by name 
Uganda, came with a pack of dogs, a woman, a spear, and 
a shield, hunting on the left bank of Katonga valley, not 
far from the lake. He was but a poor man, though so 
successful. in hunting that vast numbers of the Wirt 
flocked to him for flesh, and became so fond of him as to 
invite him to be their king, saying, “ Of what avail to us 
is our present king, living so far away that when we sent 
him a cow as a tributary offering, that cow on the journey 
gave a calf, and the calf became a cow and gave another 
calf, and so on, and yet the present has not reached its 
destination ?” 

At first Uganda hesitated, on the plea that they had 
a king already, but on being farther pressed consented ; 
when the people hearing his name said, “ Well, let it be 
so; and for the future let this country between the Nile 
and Katonga be called Uganda, and let your name be 
Kiméra, the first king of Uganda.” ; 

The same night Kiméra stood upon a stone with a 
spear in his hand, and a woman and dog sitting by his 
side; and to this day people assert that his footprints and 
the mark left by his spear-end, as well as the seats of 
the woman and dog, are visible. The report of these 
circumstances soon reached the great king of Unyoro, 
who, in his magnificence, merely said, “The poor creature 
must be starving; allow him to feed there if he likes.” 
The kings who have succeeded Kiméra are: 1. Mahanda; 
2, Katéréza; 3. Chabago ; 4. Simakokiro; 5, Kamanya ; 
6. Stunna; 7. Mtésa, not yet crowned. : 


“in 


ae 


Arms and Fashions of Uganda. 
«. Ordinary iron wire anklet, with cow’s tail hair inside. 


g. Bee-hive of bark. 


OS ee Ee ee a 


ae THE KINGDOM OF UGANDA. 253 


ce. 


- These kings have all carried on the same system of 
government as that commenced by Kiméra, and proved 
themselves a perfect terror to Unyoro, as we shall gee in 
the sequel. Kiméra, suddenly risen to eminence, orew 
proud and headstrong—formed a strong clan around him, 
whom he appointed to be his Wakungt, or officers— 
rewarded well, punished severely, and soon became mao- 
nificent. Nothing short of the grandest palace, a throne 
to sit upon, the largest harem, the smartest officers, the 
best dressed people, even a menagerie for pleasure—in 
fact, only the best of everything—would content him. 
Fleets of boats, not canoes, were built for war, and armies 
formed, that the glory of the king might never decrease. 
In short, the system of government, according to barbar- 
ous ideas, was perfect. Highways were cut from one 
extremity of the country to the other, and all rivers 
bridged. No house could be built without its necessary 
appendages for cleanliness; no person, however poor, 
could expose his person: and to disobev these laws was 
death. 

After the death of Kiméra, the prosperity of Uganda 
never decreased, but rather improved. The clan of offi- 
cers formed by him were as proud of their emancipation 
from slavery, as the king they had created was of his’ 
dominion over them. They buried Kiméra with state 
honours, giving charge of the body to the late king’s most 
favourite consort, whose duty it was to dry the corpse 
by placing it on a board resting on the mouth of an 
earthen open pot heated by fire from below. ' When this 
drying process was completed, at the expiration of three 
months, the lower jaw was cut out and neatly worked 
over with beads; the umbilical cord, which had been 
preserved from birth, was also worked with beads. These 
were kept apart, but the body was consigned toa tomb, 
and guarded ever after by this officer and a certain num- 
ber of the king’s next most favourite women, all of whom 


& 


254 HISTORY OF THE WAHUMA. 


planted gardens for their maintenance, and were restricted 
from seeing the succeeding king. 

By his large establishment of wives, Kiméra left a 
number of princes or Warangira, and as many princesses. 
From the Warangira the Wakungtt now chose as their 
king the one whom they thought best suited for the 
government of the country—not of too high rank by the 
mother’s side, lest their selection in his pride should kill 
them all, but one of low birth. The rest were placed 
with wives in a suite of huts, under charge of a keeper, to 
prevent any chance of intrigues and dissensions. They 
were to enjoy life until the prince-elect should arrive at 
the age of discretion and be crowned, when all but two of 
the princes would be burnt to death, the two being re- 
served in case of accident as long as the king wanted 
brother companions, when one would be banished to 
Unyoro, and the other pensioned with suitable possessions 
in Uganda. The mother of the king by this measure 
became queen-dowager, or N’yamasoré. She halved with 
her son all the wives of the deceased king not stationed 
at his grave, taking second choice ; kept up a palace only 
little inferior to her son’s with large estates, guided the 
prince-elect m the government of the country, and re- 
mained until the end of his minority the virtual ruler of 
the land; at any rate, no radical political changes could 
take place without her sanction. The princesses became 
the wives of the king; no one else could marry them. 

Both mother and son had their Katikiros or commander- 
in-chief, also titled Kamraviona, as well as other officers 
of high rank. Amongst them in due order of gradation 
are the Hmas, a woman who had the good fortune to have 
cut the umbilical cord at the king’s birth ; the Sawaganzi, 
queen’s sister and king’s barber; Kaggao, Pokino, Saki- 
bobo, Kittinzi, and others, governors of provinces ; Jumba, 
admiral of the fleet; Kastijt, guardian of the king’s 
sisters ; Mktienda, factor; Ktnsa and Usungii, first and 


HOUSEHOLD OFFICERS IN UGANDA. 255 


second class executioners; Mgemma, commissioner in 
charge of tombs ; Séritti, brewer ; Mftmbiro, cook ; 
humerous pages to run messages and look after the 
women, and minor Wakungti in hundreds. One Mkungit 
is always over the palace, in command of the Wanagalali, 
or guards, which are changed monthly ; another is ever 
in attendance as seizer of refractory persons. There are 
also in the palace almost constantly the Wanangalavi, or 
drummers; Nsasé, pea-gourd rattlers; Mulélé, flute- 
players; Mutkondéri, clarionet-players ; also players on 
wooden harmonicons and lap-harps, to which the players 
sing accompaniments; and, lastly, men who whistle on their 
fingers—for music is half the amusement of these courts. 
Everybody in Uganda is expected to keep spears, shields, 
and dogs, the Uganda arms and cognisance; whilst the 
Wakungt are entitled to drums. There is also a 
Neptune Meussa, or spirit, who lives in the depths of the 
N’yanza, communicates through the medium of his tem- 
poral Mkungt, and guides to a certain extent the naval 
destiny of the king. 

It is the duty of all officers, generally speaking, to 
attend at court as constantly as possible; should they 
fail, they forfeit their lands, wives, and all belongings. 
These will be seized and given to others more worthy of 
them ; as it is presumed that either insolence or disaffec- 
tion can be the only motive which would induce any 
person to absent himself for any length of time from the 
pleasure of seeing his sovereign. ‘Tidiness in dress is 
imperatively necessary, and for any neglect of this rule 
the head may be the forfeit. The punishment for such 
offences, however, may be commuted by fines of cattle, 
goats, fowls, or brass wire. All acts of the king are 
counted benefits, fur which he must be thanked; and so 
every deed done to his subjects is a gift received by 
them, though it should assume the shape of flogging or 


Daag =) 
fine; for are not these, which make better men of them, 


256 HISTORY OF THE WAHUMA. 


as necessary as anything? The thanks are rendered by 
erovelling on the ground, floundering about and whining 
after the manner of happy dogs, after which they rise up 
suddenly, take up sticks—spears are not allowed to be 
carried in court—make as if charging the king, jabbering 
as fast as tongues can rattle, and so they year fidelity 
for all their lives. 

This is the greater salutation; the lesser one is per- 
formed kneeling in an attitude of prayer, continually 
throwing open the hands, and repeating sundry words. 
Among them the word “ n’yanzig” is the most frequent 
and conspicuous; and hence these gesticulations receive 
the general designation n’yanzig—a term which will be 
frequently met with, and which T have found it necessary 
to use like an English verb. In consequence of these 
salutations, there is more ceremony in court than busi- 
ness, though the king, ever having an eye to his treasury, 
contintially finds some trifling fault, condemns the head 
of the culprit, takes his lquidation-present, if he has 
anything to pay, and thus keeps up his revenue. 

No one dare stand before the king whilst he is either 
standing still or sitting, but must approach him with 
eae eyes and pee knees, and kneel or sit when 
arrived. To touch the king’s throne or clothes, even by 
accident, or to look upon his women, is certain death. 
When sitting in court holding a levee, the king invariably 
has in attendance several women, Wabandwa, evil-eye 
averters or sorcerers. They talk in feigned voices raised 
to a shrillness almost amounting to a scream. They wear 
dried lizards on their heads, small goat-skin aprons trimmed 
with little bells, diminutive shields and spears set off with 
cock-hackles—their functions in attendance being to ad- 
minister cups of marwa (plantain- -wine). To complete 
the picture of the court, one must imagine a crowd of 
pages to run royal messages; they dare not walk, for such 
a deficiency in zeal to their master might cost their life. 


CEREMONIES AT COURT, 257 


A further feature of the court consists in the national sym- 
bols already referred to—a dog, two spears, and shield. 

With the company squatting in a large half-circle or 
three sides of a square many deep before him, in the 
hollow of which are drummers and other musicians, the 
king, sitting on his throne in high dignity, issues his 
orders for the day much to the following effect :—“ Cattle, 
women, and children are short in Uganda ; an army must 
be formed of one to two thousand strong, to plunder 
Unyoro. The Wasoga have been insulting his subjects, 
and must be reduced to subjection: for this emergency 
another army must be formed, of equal strength, to act 
by land in conjunction with the fleet. The Wahaiya 
have paid no tribute to his greatness lately, and must be 
taxed.” For all these matters the commander-in-chief tells 
off the divisional officers, who are approved by the king, 
and the matter is ended in court. The divisional officers 
then find subordinate officers, who find men, and the army 
proceeds with its march. Should any fail with their 
mission, reinforcements are sent, and the runaways, called 
women, are drilled with a red-hot iron until they are men 
no longer, and die for their cowardice. All heroism, how- 
ever, ensures promotion. ‘The king receives his army of 
officers with great ceremony, listens to their exploits, and 
gives as rewards, women, cattle, and command over men 
the greatest elements of wealth in Uganda—with a liberal 
hand. 

As to the minor business transacted in court, culprits 
are brought in bound by officers, and reported. At once 
the sentence is given, perhaps awarding the most torturous, 
lingering death—probably without trial or investigation, 
and, for all the king knows, at the instigation of some one 
influenced by wicked spite. If the accused endeavour to 
plead his defence, his voice is at once drowned, and the 
miserable victim dragged off in the roughest manner 

R 


958 HISTORY OF THE WAHUMA. 


possible by those officers who love their king, and delight 
in promptly carrying out his orders. Young virgins, the 
daughters of Wakungit, stark naked, and smeared with 
grease, but holding, for decency’s sake, a small square of 
mbiigti at the upper corners in both hands before them, 
are presented by their fathers in propitiation for some 
offence, and to fill the harem. Seizing-officers receive 
orders to hunt down Wakungit who have committed 
some indiscretions, and to confiscate their lands, wives, 
children, and property. An officer observed to salute 
informally is ordered for execution, when everybody near 
him rises in an instant, the drums beat, drowning his cries, 
and the victim of carelessness is dragged off, bound by | 
cords, by a dozen men at once. Another man, perhaps, 
exposes an inch of naked leg whilst squatting, or has his 
mbiigii tied contrary to regulations, and is condemned to 
the same fate. 

‘Fittes of cows, goats, and fowls are brought in and 
presented ; they are smoothed down by the offender's 
hands, and then applied to his face, to show there is no 
evil spirit lurking in the gift; then thanks are proffered 
for the leniency of the king in letting the presenter off 
so cheaply, and the pardoned man retires, full of smiles, 
to the ranks of the squatters. Thousands of cattle, and 
strings of women and children, sometimes the result of 
a victorious plundering hunt, or else the accumulated 
seizures from refractory Wakungt, are brought in; for: 
there is no more common or acceptable offering to ap-. 
pease the king’s wrath-towards any refractory or blunder- 
ing officer than a present of a few young beauties, who 
may perhaps be afterwards given as the reward of good 
service to other officers. 

Stick-charms, being pieces of wood of all shapes, sup- 
posed to have supernatural virtues, and coloured earths, 
endowed with similar qualities, are produced by the royal 
magicians. The master of the hunt exposes his spoils— 


CEREMONIES AT COURT. 259 


such as antelopes, cats, porcupines, curious rats, &c., all 
caught in nets, and placed in baskets—zebra, lion, and 
buffalo skins being added. The fishermen bring their 
spoils; also the gardeners. The cutlers show knives and 
forks made of iron inlaid with brass and copper ; the fur- 
riers, most beautifully-sewn patchwork of antelopes’ skins; 
the habit-maker, sheets of mbtigtt bark-cloth ; the black- 
smith, spears ; the maker of shields, his productions ;—and 
so forth ; but nothing is ever given without rubbing it 
down, then rubbing the face, and going through a long 
form of salutation for the gracious favour the king has 
shown in accepting it. 

When tired of business, the king rises, spear in hand, 
and, leading his dog, walks off without word or comment, 
leaving his company, like dogs, to take care of them- 
selves. 

Strict as the discipline of the exterior court is, that 
of the interior is not less severe. The pages alt wear 
turbans of cord made from aloe fibres. Should a wife 
commit any trifling indiscretion, either by word or deed, 
she is condemned to execution on the spot, bound by the 
pages and dragged out. Notwithstanding the stringent 
laws for the preservation of decorum by all male attend- 
ants, stark-naked full-grown women are the valets. 

On the first appearance of the new moon every month, 
the king shuts himself up, contemplating and arranging 
his magic horns—the horns of wild animals stuffed with 
charm-powder—for two or three days. These may be 
counted his Sundays or church festivals, which he dedi- 
cates to devotion. On other days he takes his women, 
some hundreds, to bathe or sport in ponds ; or, when tired 
of that, takes long walks, his women running after him, 
when all the musicians fall in, take precedence of the 
party, followed by the Wakungti and pages, with the king 
in the centre of the procession, separating the male com- 
pany from the fair sex. On these excursions no common 


260 HISTORY OF THE WAHUMA. 


man dare look upon the royal procession. Should any- 
body by chance happen to be seen, he is at once hunted 
down by the pages, robbed of everything he possesses, and 
may count himself very lucky if nothing worse happens. 
Pilgrimages are not uncommon, and sometimes the king 
spends a fortnight yachting; but whatever he does, or 
wherever he goes, the same ceremonies prevail—his musi- 
cians, Wakungtt, pages, and the wives take part in all. 

But the greatest of all ceremonies takes place at the 
time of the coronation. The prince-elect then first seeks 
favour from the kings of all the surrounding countries, 
demanding in his might and power one of each of their 
daughters in marriage, or else recognition in some other 
way, when the Ilmas makes a pilgrimage to the deceased 
king’s tomb, to observe, by the growth and other signs of 
certain trees and plants, what destiny awaits the king. 
According to the prognostics, they report that he will 
either have to live a life of peace, or after coronation 
take the field at the head of an army to fight either east, 
west, or both ways, when usually the first march is on 
Kittara, and the second on Usoga. The Meussa’s voice 
is also heard, but in what manner.I do not know, as all 
communication on state matters is forbidden in Uganda. 
These preliminaries being arranged, the actual coronation 
takes place, when the king ceases to hold any farther 
communion with his mother. The brothers are burnt to 
death, and the king, we shall suppose, takes the field at 
the head of his army. 

It is as the result of these expeditions that one-half 
Usoga and the remaining half of Uddti have been annexed 
to Uganda. 


Jan. | JOURNEY CONTINUED. 261 


CHAPTER ix: 
KARAGUE AND UGANDA. 


ESCAPE FROM PROTECTORS — CROSS THE KITANGULE, THE FIRST 
AFFLUENT OF THE NILE—ENTER UDDU— UGANDA —A RICH 
COUNTRY — DRIVING AWAY THE DEVIL A CONFLICT IN THE 
CAMP—-A PRETENDING PRINCE—'THREE PAGES WITH A DIPLO- 
MATIC MESSAGE FROM THE KING OF UGANDA—CRIME IN UGANDA. 


Crossing back over the Weranhanjé spur, I put up with 
the Arabs at Kufro. Here, for the first time 
in this part of the world, I found good Eng- 
lish peas growing. Next day (11th), crossing over a suc- 
cession of forks, supporters to the main spur, we encamped 
at Lttandalo. Here we were overtaken by Rozaro, who 
had remained behind, as I now found, to collect a large 
number of Wanyambo, whom he called his children, to 
share with him the gratuitous living these creatures always 
look out for on a march of this nature. 

After working round the end of the great spur, whilst 
following down the crest of a fork, we found 
Karagtié separated by a deep valley from the 
hilly country of Uhaiya, famous for its ivory and coffee 
productions. On entering the rich plantain gardens of 
Kisaho, I was informed we must halt there a day for 
Matila to join us, as he had been detained by Rtmanika, 
who, wishing to give him a present, had summoned 
Rozaro’s sister to his palace for that purpose. She was 


To Kufro, 10th. 


To Kisaho, 12¢h, 


262 KARAGUE AND UGANDA. [1862. 


married to another, and had two children by him, but 
that did not signify, as it was found in time her husband 
had committed a fault, on account of which it was thought 
necessary to confiscate all his property. 

At this place all the people were in a constant state of 
inebriety, drinking pombé~all day and all 
night. I shot a montana antelope, and sent 
its head and skin baek to Grant, accompanied with es 
daily report to Rtmanika. 

Maitila having joined me, we marched down to near the 
end of the fork overlooking the plain of Kat- 
angtilé —the Waganda drums beating, and 
whistles playing all the way as we went along. 

We next descended from the Mountains of the Moon, 
To Kitanguls, and spanned a long alluvial plain to the settle- 
15 ment of the so-long-heard-of Kitangtlé, where 
Rttmanika keeps his thousands and thousands of cows. 
In former days the dense green forests peculiar to the 
tropics, which grow in swampy places about this plain, 
were said to have been stocked by vast herds of ele- 
phants; but, since the ivory trade had increased, these 
animals had all been driven off to the hills of Kisiwa and 
Uhaiya, or into Uddti beyond the river, and all the way 
down to the N’yanza. 

To-day we reached the Kitangtlé Kagéra, or river, 
ane which, as I ascertained in the year 1858, falls 

o Ndongo, 16th. . : 2 : 
into the Victoria N’yanza on the west side. 
Most unfortunately, as we led off to cross it, rain began to 
pour, so that everybody and everything was thrown into 
confusion. I could not get a sketch of it, though Grant 
was more fortunate afterwards; neither could I measure 
or fathom it; and it was only after a long contest with 
the superstitious boatmen that they allowed me to cross 
in their canoe with my shoes on, as they thought the 
vessel would either upset, or else the river would firs up, 
in consequence of their Neptune taking offence at me. 


Halt, 13¢h. 


To Nariieri, 14th. 


Jan. | THE KITANGULE RIVER. 263 


Once over, I looked down on the noble stream with con- 
siderable pride. About eighty yards broad, it was sunk 


Ferry on the Kitangule River. 


down a considerable depth below the surface of the land, 
hke a huge canal, and is so deep, it could not be poled by 
the canoemen; while it runs at a velocity of from three 
to four knots an hour. 

I say I viewed it with pride, because I had formed my 
judgment of its being fed from high -seated springs in 
the Mountains of the Moon solely on scientific geographi- 
cal reasonings ; and, from the bulk of the stream, I also 
believed those mountains must attain an altitude of 8000 
feet * or more, just as we find they do in Rtianda. I 
thought then to myself, as I did at Rttmanika’s, when I 
first viewed.the Mftmbiro cones, and gathered all my 
distant geographical information there, that these highly 
saturated Mountains of the Moon give birth to the Congo 


* In ‘Blackwood’s Magazine’ for August 1859. 


264 KARAGUE AND UGANDA. [1862. 


as well as to the Nile, and also to the Shiré branch of the 
Zambézé. 

I came, at the same time, to the conclusion that all our 
previous information concerning the hydrography of these 
regions, as well as the Mountains of the Moon, originated 
with the ancient Hindiis, who told it to the priests of the 
Nile; and that all those busy Egyptian geographers, who 
disseminated thez7 knowledge with a view to be famous 
for their long-sightedness, in solving the deep - seated 
mystery which enshrouded the source of their holy river, 
were so many hypothetical humbugs. Reasoning thus, 
the Hindtt traders alone, in those days, I believed, had a 
firm basis to stand upon, from their intercourse with the 
Abyssinians — through whom they must have heard of 
the country of Amara, which they applied to the N’yanza 
and with the Wanyamiiézi or men of the Moon, from 
whom they heard of the Tanganyika and Karagtié moun- 
tains. I was all the more impressed with this belief, 
by knowing that the two church missionaries, Rebmann 
and Erhardt, without the smallest knowledge of the Hin- 
dtis’ map, constructed a map of their own, deduced from 
the Zanzibar traders, something on the same scale, by 
blending the Victoria N’yanza, Tanganyika, and N’yassa 
into one; whilst to their triuned lake they gave the 
name Moon, because the men of the Moon happened to 
live in front of the central lake. And later still, Mr 
Leon, another missionary, heard of the N’yanza and the 
country Amara, near which he heard the Nile made its 
escape. | 

Going on with the march we next came to Ndongo, a 
perfect garden of plantains. The whole country was rich 
—most surprisingly so. The same streaky argillaceous 
sandstones prevailed as in Karagtié. There was nothing, 
in fact, that would not have grown here, if it liked 
moisture and a temperate heat. It was a perfect paradise 
for negroes: as fast as they sowed they were sure of a 


Jan. | ASPECT OF THE COUNTRY. 265 


crop without much trouble ; though, I must say, they kept 
their huts and their gardens in excellent order. 

As Matila would stop here, I had to halt also. The 
whole country along the banks of the river, 
and near some impenetrable forests, was alive 
with antelopes, principally hartebeests, but I would not 
fire at them until it was time to return, as the villagers 
led me to expect buffaloes. The consequence was, as 
no buffaloes were to be found, I got no sport, though 
I wounded a hartebeest, and followed him almost into 
camp, when I gave up the chase to some negroes, and 
amused myself by writing to Rtmanika, to say if Grant 
did not reach me by a certain date, I would try to 
navigate the N’yanza, and return to him in boats up the 
Kitangtilé river. 

We crossed over a low spur of hill extending from the 
mountainous kingdom of Nkolé, on our left, 
towards the N’yanza. Here I was shown by 
Nasib a village called Ngandti, which was the farthest 
trading depot of the Zanzibar ivory-merchants. It was 
established by Mitisa Mzitri, by the permission of Rit- 
manika; for, as I shall have presently to mention, Sun- 
na, after annexing this part of Uddti to Uganda, gave 
Rtimanika certain bands of territory in it as a means 
of security against the possibility of its being wrested 
out of his hands again by the future kings of Unyoro. 
Following on Misa’s wake, many Arabs also came here to 
trade ; but they were so oppressive to the Waganda that 
‘they were recalled by Rttmanika, and obliged to locate 
themselves at Kufro. To the right, at the end of the 
spur, stretching as far as the eye could reach towards the 
N’yanza, was a rich, well-wooded, swampy plain, contain- 
ing large open patches of water, which not many years 
since, I was assured, were navigable for miles, but now, 
like the Urigi lake, were gradually drying up. Indeed, 
it appeared to me as if the N’yanza must have once 


Halt, 17th. 


To Ngambézi, 
18th. 


i 


eo 


266 KARAGUE AND UGANDA, [1862. 


washed the foot of these hills, but had since shrunk away 
from its original margin. 

On arrival at Ngambézi, I was immensely struck with 
the neatness and good arrangement of the place, as well 
as its excessive beauty and richness. No part of Ben- 
gal or Zanzibar could excel it in either respect; and 
my men, with one voice, exclaimed, “Ah, what people 
these Waganda are!” and passed other remarks, which 
may be abridged as follows :—“ They build their huts and 
keep their gardens just as well as we do at Ungtyja, with 
screens and enclosures for privacy, a clearance in front of 
their establishments, and a baraza or reception-hut facing 
the buildings. Then, too, what a beautiful prospect it 
has !—rich marshy plains studded with mounds, on each 
of which grow the umbrella cactus, or some other ever- 
green tree; and beyond, again, another hill-spur such as 
the one we have crossed over.” One of king Mtésa’s 
uncles, who had not been burnt to death by the order of 
the late king Sunna on his ascension to the throne, was 
the proprietor of this place, but unfortunately he was 
from home. However, his substitute gave me his baraza 
to live in, and brought many presents of goats, fowls, 
swect potatoes, yams, plantains, sugar-cane, and Indian 
corn, and apologised in the end for deficiency in hospi- 
tality. I, of course, gave him beads in return. 

Continuing over the same kind of ground in the next 
To Semizabi, Succeeding spurs of the streaky red-clay sand- 
toe stone hills, we put up at the residence of 
Isamgévi, a Mkungtt or district officer of Rttmanika’s. 
His residence was as well kept as Mtésa’s uncle’s; but 
instead of a baraza fronting his house, he had a small 
enclosure, with three small huts in it, kept apart for devo- 
tional purposes, or to propitiate the evil spirits—in short, 
according to the notions of the place, a church. This 
officer gave me a cow and some plantains, and I in return 
gave him a wire and some beads. Many mendicant 


if 


a 


eS 


——— 


= 


—————— 
—— 
——— 


——— 
———— 


<Ss 
———— 


= 


== 
— 


SSS 


Baraza and Residence of King Mtesa’s uncle Ngambezi. 


Jan. | A NATIVE CHURCH. 267 


women, called by some Wichwézi, by others Mabandwa, 
all wearing the most fantastic dresses of mbiigtt, covered 
with beads shells, and sticks, danced before us, singing a 
comic song, the chorus of which was a long shrill rolling 
Coo-r00-c00-r00, co0-r00-c00-r00, delivered as they came to 
a standstill. Their true functions were just as obscure as 
the religion of the negroes generally ; some called them 
devil-drivers, others evil-eye averters; but, whatever it 
was for, they imposed a tax on the people, whose minds 
being governed by a necessity for making some self-sacri- 
fice to propitiate something, they could not tell what, for 
their welfare in the world, they always gave them a trifle 
in the same way as the East Indians do their fakirs. 
After crossing another low swampy flat, we reached a 
To Kistiéré, much larger group, or rather ramification, of 
oe hill-spurs pointing to the N’yanza, called 
Kistiéré, and commanded by M’yombo, Rtmanika’s 
frontier officer. Immediately behind this, to the north- 
ward, commenced the kingdom of Unyoro; and here it 
was, they said, Baraka would branch off my line on his 
way to Kamrasi. Matila’s home was one march distant 
from this, so the scoundrel now left me to enjoy himself 
there, giving as his pretext for doing so, that Mtésa re- 
quired him, as soon as I arrived here, to send on a 
messenger that order might be taken for my proper pro- 
tection on the line of march; for the Waganda were a 
turbulent set of people, who could only be kept in order 
by the executioner; and doubtless many, as was customary 
on such occasions, hae be beheaded, as soon as Mtésa 
heard of my coming, to put the rest in a fright. I knew 
this was all eae of course, and I told him so; but it 
was of no use, and I was compelled to halt. , 
On the 23d another officer, named Maribti, came to me 
and said, Mtésa, having heard that Grant was 
left sick behind at Karagté, had given him 
orders to go there and fetch him, whether sick or well, for 


Halt, 20th to 
24th. 


268 KARAGUE AND UGANDA. [1862. 


Mtésa was most anxious to see white men. Hearing this 
I at once wrote to Grant, begging him to come on if he 
could do so, and to bring with him all the best of my 
property, or as much as he could of it, as I now saw there 
was more cunning humbug than honesty in what Rttman- 
ika had told me about the impossibility of our going 
north from Uganda, as well as in his saying sick men 
could not go into Uganda, and donkeys without trousers 
would not be admitted there, because they were considered 
indecent. If he was not well enough to move, I advised 
him to wait there until I reached Mtésa’s, when I would 
either go up the lake and Kitangtlé to fetch him away, 
or would make the king send boats for him, which I more 
expressly wished, as it would tend to give us a much better 
knowledge of the lake. 

Maiila now came again, after receiving repeated and 
To Nyagussa, 2DSTY messages, and I foreed him to make a 
ee move. He led me straight up to his home, 
a very nice place, in which he gave me a very large, clean, 
and comfortable hut—had no end of plantains brought for 
me and my men—and said, “ Now you have really entered 
the kingdom of Uganda, for the future you must buy no 
more food. At every place that you stop for the day, the 
officer in charge will bring you plantains, otherwise your 
men can help themselves in the gardens, for such are the 
laws of the land when a king’s guest travels in it. Any 
one found selling anything to either yourself or your men 
would be punished.” Accordingly, I stopped the daily 
issue of beads; but no sooner had I done so, than all my 
men declared they could not eat plantains. It was all 
very well, they said, for the Waganda to do so, because 
they were used to it, but it did not satisfy their hunger. 

Maiila, all smirks and smiles, on seeing me order the 
things out for the march, begged I would 
have patience, and wait till the messenger 


returned from the king; it would not take more than 


Halt, 25th. 


Jan. ] DRIVING OUT THE DEVIL. 269 


~ 


ten days at the most. Much annoyed at this nonsense, 
I ordered my tent to be pitched. I refused all Matla’s 
plantains, and gave my men beads to buy grain again 
with; and, finding it necessary to get up some indignation, 
said I would not stand being chained like a dog; if he 
would not go on ahead, I should go without him. Matila 
then said he would go to a friend’s and come back again. 
I said, if he did not, I should go off; and so the conver- 
sation ended. 

26th.—Drumming, singing, screaming, yelling, and 
dancing had heen going on these last two days and two 
nights to drive the Phépo or devil out of a village. The 
whole of the ceremonies were most ludicrous. An old 
man and woman, smeared with white mud, and holding 
pots of pombé in their laps, sat in front of a hut, whilst 
other people kept constantly bringing them baskets full 
of plantain-squash, and more pots of pombé. In the 
courtyard fronting them, were hundreds of men and 
women dressed in smart mbtigtis—the males wearing for 
turbans, strings of abrus-seeds wound round their heads, 
with polished boars’ tusks stuck in in a jaunty manner. 
These were the people who, all drunk as fifers, were keep- 
ing up such a continual row to frighten the devil away. 
In the midst of this assemblage I now found Kachiichi, 
Ritmanika’s representative, who went on ahead from Ka- 
ragié palace to tell Mtésa that I wished to visit him. 
With him, he said, were two other Wakungt of Mtésa’s, 
who had orders to bring on my party and Dr K’yengo’s. 
Mtésa, he said, was so mad to see us, that the instant he 
arrived at the palace and told him we wished to visit him, 
the king caused “fifty big men and four hundred small 
ones” to be executed, because, he said, his subjects were 
so bumptious they would not allow any visitors to come 
near him, else he would have had white men before. 

27th.—N’yamgundi, my old friend at Usiti, then came 
to me, and said he was the first man to tell Mtésa of our 


270 KARAGUE AND UGANDA. [1862. 


arrival in Usti, and wish to visit him. The handkerchief 
I had given Irungtt at Ustii to present as a letter to Mtésa 
he had snatched away from him, and given, himself, to 
his king, who no sooner received it than he bound it 
round his head and said, in ecstasies of delight, “Oh, the 
Mzungti, the Mzungti! he does indeed- want to see me.” 
Then giving him four cows as a return letter to take to 
me, he said, “ Hurry“off as quickly as possible and bring 
him here.” “The cows,” said N’yamgundt, “have gone 
on to Kistiéré by another route, but I will bring them 
here ; and then, as Maiila is taking you, I will go and 
fetch Grant.” I then told him not to be in such a hurry. 
I had turned off Maitila for treating me lke a dog, and I 
would not be escorted by him again. He replied that his 
orders would not be fully accomplished as long as any 
part of my establishment was behind; so he would, if I 
wished it, leave part of his “ children” to guide me on to 
Mtésa’s, whilst he went to fetch Grant. An officer, I 
assured him, had just gone on to fetch Grant, so he need 
not trouble his head on that score ; at any rate, he might 
reverse his plan, and send his children for Grant, whilst 
he went on with me, by which means he would fully ac- 
complish his mission. Long arguments ensued, and I at 
length turned the tables by asking who was the greatest 
—anyself or my children ; when he said, “ As I see you are 
the greatest, I will do as you wish ; and after fetching the 
cows from Kistiéré, we will march to-morrow at sunrise.” 

The sun rose, but N’yamgundt did not appear. I was 
To Mashonas, greatly annoyed lest Matila should come and 
28th. try to drive him away. I waited, restraining 
my impatience until noon, when, as I could stand it no 
longer, I ordered Bombay to strike my tent, and com- 
mence the march. A scene followed, which brought out 
my commander-in-chief’s temper in a rather surprising 
shape. “How can we go?” said Bombay. “Strike the 
tent,” said I. “Who will guide us?” said Bombay. “Strike 


Jan] A ROW WITH BOMBAY. 271 


the tent,” I said again. “But Rttmanika’s men have all 
gone away, and there is no one to show us the way.” 
“Never mind; obey my orders, and strike the tent,” 
Then, as Bombay would not do it, I commenced myself, 
assisted by some of my other men, and pulled it down 
over his head, all the women who were assembled under 
it, and all the property. On this, Bombay flew into a 
passion, abusing the men who were helping me, as there 
were fires and powder-boxes under the tent. I of course 
had to fly into a passion and abuse Bombay. He, ina 
still greater rage, said he would pitch into the men, for 
the whole place would be blown up. “That is no reason 
why you should abuse my men,” I said, “who are better 
than you by obeying my orders. If I choose to blow up 
my property, that is my look-out; and if you don’t do 
your duty, I will blow you up also.” Foaming and roar- 
ing with rage, Bombay said he would not stand being 
thus insulted. I then gave him a dig on the head with 
my fist. He squared up, and pouted like an enraged 
chameleon, looking savagely at me. I gave him another 
dig, which sent him staggering. He squared again: I 
gave him another ; till at last, as the claret was flowing, 
he sulked off, and said he would not serve me any more. 
I then gave Nasib orders to take Bombay’s post, and 
commence the march; but the good old man made Bom- 
bay give in, and off we went, amidst crowds of Waganda, 
who had collected te witness this comedy, and were all 
digeing at one another’s heads, showing off in pantomime 
the strange ways of the white man. N’yamgundti then 
joined us, and begged us to halt only one more day, as 
some of his women were still at Kistiéré; but Bombay, 
showing his nozzle rather flatter than usual, said, “No; I 
got this on account of your lies. I won't tell Bana any 
more of your excuses for stopping; you may tell him 
yourself if you like.” N’yamgundt, however, did not 
think this advisable, and so we went on as we were 


2 


Pi e4 KARAGUE AND UGANDA. [1862. 


doing. It was the first and last time I had ever occasion 
to lose my dignity by striking a blow with my own 
hands; but I could not help it on this occasion without 
losing command and respect; for although I often had 
occasion to award 100 and even 150 lashes to my men 
for stealing, I could not, for the sake of due subordination, 
allow any inferior officer to strike Bombay, and therefore 
had to do the work myself. 

Skirting the hills on the left, with a large low plain to the 
right, we soon came on one of those numerous rush-drains 
that appear to me to be the last waters left of the old 
bed of the N’yanza. This one in particular was rather 
large, being 150 yards wide. It was sunk where I crossed 
it, like a canal, 14 feet below the plain; and what with 
mire and water combined, so deep, I was obliged to take 
off my trousers whilst fording it. Once across, we sought 
for and put up in a village beneath a small hill, from the 
top of which I saw the Victoria N’yanza for the first time 
on this march. N’yamgundt delighted me much: treat- 
ing me as aking, he always fell down on his knees to 
address me, and made all his “children” look after my 
comfort in camp. 

We marched on again over the same kind of ground, 
alternately crossing rush-drains of minor im- 
portance, though provokingly frequent, and 
rich gardens, from which, as we passed, all the inhabitants. 
bolted at the sound of our drums, knowing well that they 
would be seized and punished if found gazing at the 
king’s visitors. Even on our arrival at Ukara not one 
soul was visible. The huts of the villagers were shown 
to myself and my men without any ceremony. The 
Wanyambo escort stole what they liked out of them, and 
I got into no end of troubles trying to stop the practice ; 
for they said the Waganda served them the same way 
when they went to Karagtié, and they had a right to 
retaliate now. To obviate this distressing sort of plunder- 


To Ukara, 29th. 


Jan. | A PRETENDER DETECTED. 273 


ing, I still served out beads to my men, and so kept them 
in hand a little; but they were fearfully unruly, and did 

_ not like my interference with what by the laws of the 
country they considered their right. 

Here I had to stop a day for some of N’yamgundit’s 
women, who, in my hurry at leaving Matila’s, 
were left behind. A letter from Grant was 
now brought to me by a very nice-looking young man, who 
had the skin of a leopard-cat (7. Serval) tied round his 
neck—a badge which royal personages only were entitled 
to wear. N’yamgundti seeing this, as he knew the young 
man was not entitled to wear it, immediately ordered his 
“children” to wrench it from him. Two ruffianly fellows 
then seized him by his hands, and twisted his arms round 
and round until I thought they would come out of their 
sockets. Without uttering a sound the young man 
resisted, until N’yamgundii told them to be quiet, for he 
would hold a court on the subject, and see if the young 
man could defend himself. The ruffians then sat on the 
ground, but still holding on to him; whilst N’yamgundtt 
took up a long stick, and breaking it into sundry bits of 
equal leneth, placed one by one in front of him, each of 
which was supposed to represent one number in line of 
succession to his forefathers. By this it was proved he 
did not branch in any way from the royal stock. N’yam- 
gundtt then turning to the company said, What would 
he do now to expiate his folly? If the matter was 
taken before Mtésa he would lose his head; was it not 
better he should pay one hundred cows? All agreeing to 
this, the young man said he would do so, and quietly al- 
lowed the skin to be untied and taken off by the ruffians. 

Next day, after crossing more of those abominable rush- 
drains, whilst in sight of the Victoria N’yanza, 
we ascended the most beautiful hills, covered 
with verdure of all descriptions. At Méritika, where I 

S) 


Halt, 30th. 


"To Méritka, 31st. 


* 


274 KARAGUE AND UGANDA. [1862. 


put up, there resided some grandees, the chief of whom 
was the king’s aunt. She sent me a goat, a hen, a basket 
of egos, and some plantains, in return for which I sent 
her a wire and some beads. I felt inclined to stop here a 
month, everything was so very pleasant. The tempera- 
ture was perfect. The roads, as indeed they were every- 
where, were as broad as our coach-roads, cut through the 
long grasses, straight-over the hills and down through the 
woods in the dells—a strange contrast to the wretched 
tracks in all the adjacent countries. The huts were kept 
so clean and so neat, not a fault could be found with them 
—the gardens the same. Wherever I strolled I saw 
nothing but richness, and what ought to be wealth. The 
whole land was a picture of quiescent beauty, with a 
boundless sea in the background. Looking over the hills, 
it struck the fancy at once that at one period the whole 
land must have been at a uniform level with their pre- 
sent tops, but that, by the constant denudation it was sub- 
jected to by frequent rains, it had been cut down and 
sloped into those beautiful hills and dales which now so 
much. pleased the eye ; for there were none of those quartz 
dykes I had seen protruding through the same kind of 
aqueous formations in Usti and Karagtié ; nor were there 
any other sorts of volcanic disturbance to distort the calm 
quiet aspect of the scene. 

From this, the country being all hill and dale, with 
miry rush-drains in the bottoms, I walked, 
carrying my shoes and stockings in my hands, 
nearly all the way. Rozaro’s “children” became more and. - 
more troublesome, stealing everything they could lay their 
hands upon out of the village huts we passed on the way. 
On arrival at Sangtia, I found many of them had been 
seized by some men who, bolder than the rest, had over- 
taken them whilst gutting their huts, and made them — 
prisoners, demanding of me two slaves and one load of — 


To Sangita, 1st. 


Fes. | GOVERNOR-GENERAL POKINO. 275 


beads for their restitution. I sent my men back to see 
what had happened, and ordered them to bring all the 
men on to me, that I might see fair play. They, however 
took the law into their own hands, drove off the Waganda 
villagers by firing their muskets, and relieved the dhicves 
A complaint was then laid against N’yamgundti by the 
chief officer of the village, and I was requested to halt. 
That I would not do, leaving the matter in the hands of 
the governor-general, Mr Pokino, whom I heard we should 
find at the next station, Masaka. 

On arrival there at the government establishment— 
a large collection of grass huts, separated 
one on the other within large enclosures, 
which overspread the whole top of a low fall was re- 
quested to withdraw and put up in some huts a short 
distance off, and wait until his excellency, who was from 
home, could come and see me ; which the next day he did, 
coming in state with a large number of officers, who 
brought with them a cow, sundry pots of pombé, enor- 
mous sticks of sugar-cane, and a large bundle of country 
coffee. This grows in great profusion all over this land 
in large bushy trees, the berries sticking on the branches 
like clusters of holly-berries. 

I was then introduced, and told that his excelleney was 
the appointed governor of all the land lying 
between the Katonga and the Kitangtlé 

rivers. After the first formalities were over, the complaint 

about the officers at Sangtia was preferred for decision, 
on which Pokino at once gave it against the villagers, as 
they had no right, by the nis of a land, to lay hands 
on a king's g ieee Just then Mattila arrived, and began to 
abuse N’yamgundi. Of course I would not stand this; 
br and, after telling all the facts of the case, I begged Pokino 
a” send Matila away out of my camp. Pakina said he 
could not do this, as it was by the king’s order he was 


To Masaka, 2d. 


Halt, 3d and 4¢h. 


* 


276 KARAGUE AND UGANDA. e (1862, 


appointed ; but he put Matila in the background, laugh- 
ing at the way he had “let the bird fly out of his hands,” 
and settled that N’yamgundtt should be my guide. I 
then gave him a wire, and he gave me three large sheets 
of mbtigtt, which he said I should require, as there were 
so many watercourses to cross on the road I was going. 
A secoud day’s halt was necessitated by many of my men 
catching fever, probably owing to the constant crossing of 
those abominable rush-drains. There was no want of food 
here, for I never saw such a profusion of plantains any- 
where. They were literally lying in heaps on the ground, 
though the people were brewing pombé all day, and cook- 
ing them for dinner every evening. 

- After crossing many more hills and miry bottoms, 
To Ugonzi, 5. constantly coming in view of the lake, we 
To Kitunttt, 6. reached Ugonzi, and after another march of 
the same description, came to Kituntiti, the last officer’s 
residence in Uddt. Formerly it was the property of a 
Beltich named Eseau, who came to this country with 
merchandise, trading on account of Said Said, late Sultan 
of Zanzibar ; but having lost it all on his way here, pay- 
ing mahongo, or taxes, and so forth, he feared returning, 
and instead made great friends with the late king Sunna, 
who took an especial fancy to him because he had a very 
large beard, and raised him to the rank of Mkunet. A 
few years ago, however, Eseau died, and left all his family 
and property to a slave named Ulédi, who now, in conse- 
quence, is the border officer. 

I became now quite puzzled whilst thinking which was — 
the finest spot I had seen in Uddt, so many 
were exceedingly beautiful; but I think I gave 
the preference to this, both for its own immediate neigh- 
bourhood and the long range of view it afforded of 
Uganda proper, the lake, and the large island, or group 
of islands, called Sésé, where the king of Uganda keeps 
one of his fleets of boats. 


Halt, 7th. 


Wy int ee 


Pombe Brewing. 


Gj 
(Hilt 


i 


ilu 
it 


Frs. | ROYAL PAGES. 277 


Some little boys came here who had all their hair 
shaved off excepting two round tufts on 
either side of the head. They were the 
king’s pages; and, producing three sticks, said they had _ 
brought them to me from their king, who wanted three 
charms or medicines. Then placing one stick on the 
ground before me, they said, “This one is a head which, 
being affected by dreams of a deceased relative, requires 
relief ;” the second symbolised the king’s desire for the 
accomplishment of a phenomenon to which the old phalic 
worship was devoted; “and this third one,” they said, 
“js asign that the king wants a charm to keep all his. 
subjects in awe of him.” I then promised I would do 
what I could when I reached the palace, but feared’to do 
anything in the distance. I wished to go on with the 
march, but was dissuaded by N’yamgundi, who said he 
had received orders to find me some cows here, as his 
king was most anxious | should be well fed. Next day, 
however, we descended into the Katonga valley, where, 
instead of finding a magnificent broad sheet of water, as 
I had been led to expect by the Arabs’ account of it, [ 
found I had to wade through a succession of rush-drains 
divided one from the other by islands. It took me two 
hours, with my clothes tucked up under my arms, to get 
through them all; and many of them were so matted with 
weeds, that my feet sank down as though I trod in a bog. 

The Waganda all said that at certam times in the 
year no one could ford these drains, as they all flooded ; 
but, strangely enough, they were always lowest when 
most rain fell in Uganda. No one, however, could ac- 
count for this singular fact. No one knew of a lake to 
supply the waters, nor where they came from. That 
they flowed into the lake there was no doubt—as I could 
see by the trickling waters in some few places—and they 
lay exactly on the equator. Rising out of the valley, I 
found all the country just as lilly as before, but many 


To Mbiulé, 8th. 


‘ 


278 KARAGUE AND UGANDA. [1862. 


of the rush-drains going to northward ; and in the dells 
were such magnificent trees, they quite took me by sur- 
prise. Clean-trunked, they towered up just as so many 
great pillars, and then spread out their high branches like 
a canopy over us. I thought of the blue gums of Australia, 
and believed these would beat them. At the village of 
Mbilé we were gracefully received by the local officer, 
who brought a small present, and assured me that the 
king was in a nervous state of excitement, always asking 
after me. Whilst speaking he trembled, and he was so 
restless he could never sit still. 

Up and down we went on again through this wonderful 
country, surprisingly rich in grass, cultiva- 
tion, and trees. Watercourses were as fre- 
quent as ever, though not quite so troublesome to the 
traveller, as they were more frequently bridged with poles 
or palm-tree trunks. 

This, the next place we arrived at, was N’yameundii’s 
own residence, where I stopped a day to try 
and shoot buffaloes. Mattila here had the 
coolness to tell me he must inspect all the things I had 
brought for presentation to the king, as he said it was the 
custom ; after which he would hurry on and inform his 
majesty. Of course I refused, saying it was uncourteous 
to both the king and myself. Still he persisted, until, 
finding it hopeless, he spitefully told N’yamgundt to keep 
me here at least two days. N’yamgundti, however, very 
prudently told him he should obey his orders, which were to 
take me on as fast as he could. I then gave N’yamgundtt 
wires and beads for himself and all his family round, 
which made Maiila slink farther away from me than ever. 

The buffaloes were very numerous in the tall grasses 
that lined the sides and bottoms of the hills; 
but although I saw some, I could not get a 
shot, for the grasses being double the height of myself, 
afforded them means of dashing out of view as soon as 


To Nakisi, 9th. 


To Kibibi, 10th. 


Halt, 11th. 


Fes. | A ROYAL EPISTLE. 279 


seen, and the rustling noise made whilst I followed them 
kept them on the alert. At night a hyena-came into my 
hut, and carried off one of my goats that was tied to a 
log between two of my sleeping men. 

During the next march, after passing some of the most 
To Nakatéma,  beautifully-wooded dells, in which lay small 
eis rush-lakes on the right of the road, draining, 
as I fancied, into the Victoria Lake, I met with a party of 
the king’s gamekeepers, staking their nets all along the 
side of a hill, hoping to catch antelopes by driving the 
covers with dogs and men. Farther on, also, I came on 
a party driving one hundred cows, as a present from Mtésa 
to Rttmanika, which the officers in charge said was their 
kine’s return for the favour Rittmanika had done him in 
sending me on to him. It was in this way that great kings 
sent “letters” to one another. 

Next day, after going a short distance, we came on the 
Yo Nyama Goma, Mwarango river, a broad rush-drain of three 
tore hundred yards’ span, two-thirds of which was 
bridged over. Until now I did not feel sure where the 
various rush-drains | had been crossing since leaving the 
Katonga valley all went to, but here my mind was made 
up, for I found a large volume of water going to the 
northwards. I took off my clothes at the end of the 
bridge and jumped into the stream, which I found was 
twelve yards or so broad, and deeper than my height. I 
was delighted beyond measure at this very surprising fact, 
that I was indeed on the northern slopes of the continent, 
and had, to all appearance, found one of the branches of the 
Nile’s exit from the N’yanza, I drew Bombay’s attention 
to the current ; and, collecting all the men of the country, 
inquired of them where the river sprang from. Some of 
them said, in the hills to the southward; but most of 
them said, from the lake. I argued the point with them ; 
for I felt quite sure so large a body of flowing water could 
not be collected together in any place but the lake. They 


280 KARAGUE AND UGANDA. [1862. 


then all agreed to this view, and further assured me it. 
went to Kamrasi’s palace in Unyoro, where it joined the 
N’yanza, meaning the Nile. 

Pushing on again we arrived at N’yama Goma, where 
I found Irungi—the great ambassador I had first met in 
Usiti, with all his “ children’—my enemy Makinga, and 
Sttwarora’s deputation with wire,—altogether, a collection 
of one hundred souls. They had been here a month 
waiting for leave to approach the king’s palace. Not a 
villager was to be seen for miles round; not a plantain 
remained on the trees, nor was there even a sweet potato 
to be found in the ground. The whole of the provisions 
of this beautiful place had been devoured by the king’s 
guests, simply because he had been too proud to see them 
in a hurry. This was alarming, for I feared I should 
be served the same trick, especially as all the people said 
this kind of treatment was a mere matter of custom which 
those great kings demanded as a respect due to their dig- 
nity ; and Bombay added, with laughter, they make all 
manner of fuss to entice one to come when in the dis- 
tance, but when they have got you in their power they 
become haughty about it, and think only of how they 
can best impose on your mind the great consequence 
which they affect before their own people. 

Here I was also brought to a standstill, for N’yamgundtt 
said I must wait for leave to approach the 
palace. He wished to have a look at the 
presents I had brought for Mtésa. I declined to gratify 
it, taking my stand on my dignity; there was no occasion 
for any distrust on such a trifling matter as that, for I was 
not a merchant who sought for gain, but had come, at 
great expense, to see the king of this region. I begged, 
however, he would go as fast as possible to announce my 
arrival, explain my motive for coming here, and ask for 
an early interview, as I had left my brother Grant behind 
at Karagtié, and found my position, for want of a friend 


Halt, 14th. 


Fsp. | PREPARATIONS FOR ROYAL VISIT. 281 


to talk to, almost intolerable. It was not the custom of 
my country for great men to consort with servants, and 
until I saw him, and made friends, I should not be happy. 
I had a great deal to tell him about, as he was the father 
of the Nile, which river drained the N’yanza down to my 

country to the northward. With this message N’yam- 
gundti hurried off as fast as possible. 

Next day (15th) I gave each of my men a fez cap, and 
a piece of red blanket to make up military jackets. I 
then instructed them how to form a guard of honour 
when I went to the palace, and taught Bombay the way 
Nazirs were presented at courts in India. Altogether we 
made a good show. When this was concluded I went 
with Nasib up a hill, from which we could see the 
lake on one side, and on the other a large range of huts 
said to belong to the king’s uncle, the second of the 
late king Sunna’s brothers, who was not burnt to death 
when he ascended the throne. 

I then (16th) very much wished to go and see the 
escape of the Mwérango river, as I still felt a little sceptical 
as to its origin, whether or not it came off those smaller 
lakes I had seen on the road the day before I crossed the 
river; but no one would listen to my project. They all 
said I must have the king’s sanction first, else people, from 
not knowing my object, would accuse me of practising 
witchcraft, and would tell their king so. They still all 
maintained that the river did come out of the lake, and 
said, if I liked to ask the king’s leave to visit the spot, then 
they would go and show it me. I gave way, thinking it 
prudent to do so, but resolved in my mind I would get 
Grant to see it in boats on his voyage from Karagiié. 
There were no guinea-fowls to be found here, nor a fowl, 
in any of the huts, so I requested Rozaro to hurry off to 
Mtésa, and ask him to send me something to eat. He 
simply laughed at my request, and said I did not know 
what I was doing. It would be as much as his life was 


282 KARAGUE AND UGANDA. [1862. 


worth to go one yard in advance of this until the king’s 
leave was obtained. I said, rather than be starved to 
death in this ignominious manner, I would return to 
Karagtté; to which he replied, laughing, “ Whose leave 
have you got to do that? Do you suppose you can do as 
you like in this country ?” 

Next day (17th), in the evening, N’yamgundti returned 
full of smirks and smiles, dropped on his knees at my feet, 
and, in company with his “children,” set to n’yanzigging, 
according to the form of that state ceremonial already 
deseribed.* In his excitement he was hardly able to say 
all he had to communicate. Bit by bit, however, I learned 
that he first went to the palace, and, finding the king had 
gone off yachting to the. Murchison Creek, he followed 
him there. The king for a long while would not believe 
his tale that I had come, but, being assured, he danced 
with delight, and swore he would not taste food until he 
had seen me. “Oh,” he said, over and over again and 
again, according to my informer, “can this be true? Can 
the white man have come all this way to see me? What 
a strong man he must be too, to come so quickly! Here 
are seven cows, four of them milch ones, as you say he 
likes milk, which you will give him; and there are three 
for yourself for having brought him so quickly. Now, 
hurry off as fast as you can, and tell him I am more 
delighted at the prospect of seeing him than he can be to 
see me. There is no place here fit for his reception. I 
was on a pilgrimage which would have kept me here 
seven days longer; but as I am so impatient to see him, I 
will go off to my palace at once, and will send word for 
him to advance as soon as I arrive there.” 

About noon the succeeding day, some pages ran in 
Ty Sane to say we were to come along without a 
Kibiga, 18 moment's delay, as their king had ordered it. 
He would not taste food until he saw me, so that every- 


* See p. 256. 


sc 


i 


(YA DMP ER Se 


View of King Mtesas Palace from my Hut—Uganda. 


Fx. | THE MYANZA RIVER. 283 


body might know what great respect he felt for me. In 
the ineariwhile: however, the wished for some gunpowder. 
I packed the pages off as fast as I could with some, and 
then tried myself to follow, but my men were all either 
‘sick or out foraging, and therefore we could not get under 
way until the evening. After going a certain distance, 
we came on a rush-drain, of much greater breadth even 
than the Mwérango, called the Moga (or river) Myanza, 
which was so deep I had to take off my trousers and tuck 
my clothes under my arms. It flowed into the Mwérango, 
but with scarcely any current at all. This rush-drain, all 
the natives assured me, rose in the hills to the southward 
—not in the lake, as the Mwérango did—and it was never 
bridged over like that river, because it was always fordable. 
This account seemed to me reasonable ; for though so much, 
broader in its bed than the Mweérango, it had no central, 
deep-flowing current. The time for judging as to their 
relative size, too, was favourable, as it was the height of 
the dry season, when most of the long grasses were burnt. 
When we were across this great rush-drain it was almost 
dark, so I gave orders to spend the night in the most 
favourable spot we could find. We had, however, to pass 
the late king Sunna’s kibtiga or palace before this could 
be done, as no eyes were allowed to dwell on the royal 
establishments of departed kings. 


19th. 


N . lat. 0° ‘on! 19”, eal E. fone 3 
44’ 30", iby was a  Tmagnificent sight. A whole hill was 
covered with gigantic huts, such as I had never seen in 
Africa before. I wished to go up to the palace at once, but 
the officers said, “No, that Roald be considered indecent 
in Uganda; you must draw up your men, and fire your 
guns off, to let the king know you are here ; we will then 
show you your residence) and to-morrow you will doubt- 
less be sent for, as the king could not now hold a levee 


284 KARAGUE AND UGANDA. [1862. 


whilst it is ramming.” I made the men fire, and then was 
shown into a lot of dirty huts, which, they said, were built 
expressly for all the king’s visitors. The Arabs, when they 
came on their visits, always put up here, and I must do 
the same. At first I stuck out on my claims as a foreign 
prince, whose royal blood could not stand such an indig- 
nity. The palace was my sphere, and unless I could get 
a hut there, I would return without seeing the king. 

In a terrible fright at my blustering, Nyamgundt fell 
at my feet, and implored me not to be hasty. The king 
did not understand who I was, and could not be spoken 
to then. -He implored me to be content with my lot for 
the present, after which the king, when he knew all about 
it, would do as I liked, he was sure, though no strangers 
had ever yet been allowed to reside within the royal 
enclosures. I gave way to this good man’s appeal, and 
cleaned my hut by firing the ground, for, like all the huts 
in this dog country, it was full of fleas. Once ensconced 
there, the king’s pages darted in to see me, bearing a mes- 
sage from their master, who said he was sorry the rain 
prevented him from holding a levee that day, but the 
next he would be delighted to see me. Irungit, with all 
Stiwarora’s men, then came to a collection of huts near 
where I was residing ; and whilst I lay in bed that night, 
Trungtt with all his wives came in to see me and beg for 
beads. \ 


Fez. | WAGANDA COSTUME. 285 


CHAP RE R xis 


PALACE, UGANDA. 


PREPARATIONS FOR THE RECEPTION AT TIE COURT OF MTESA, KING 
OF UGANDA — THE CEREMONIAL — AFRICAN DIPLOMACY AND 
DIGNITY — FEATS WITH THE RIFLE— CRUELTY, AND WASTEFUL- 
NESS OF LIFE—THE PAGES—THE QUEEN-DOWAGER OF UGANDA 
—HER COURT RECEPTION—I NEGOTIATE FOR A PALACE—CON- 
VERSATIONS WITH THE KING AND QUEEN—THE QUEEN'S GRAND 
ENTERTAINMENT—ROYAL DISSIPATION. 


To-pay the king sent his pages to announce his inten- 
Halt, fromign tion of holding a levee in my honour. | 
Feb. to 7h July. prepared for my first presentation at court, 
attired in my best, though in it I cut a poor figure in 
comparison with the display of the dressy Waganda. 
They wore neat bark cloaks resembling the best yellow 
corduroy cloth, crimp and well set, as if stiffened with 
starch, and over that, as upper-cloaks, a patchwork of 
small antelope skins, which I observed were sewn together 
as well as any English glovers could have pieced them ; 
whilst their head-dresses, generally, were abrus turbans, 
set off with highly-polished boar-tusks, stick-charms, seeds, 
beads, or shells; and on their necks, arms, and ankles 
they wore other charms of wood, or small horns stuffed 
with magic powder, and fastened on by strings generally 
covered with snake-skin. N’yamgundtt oad Maiila de- 
manded, as their official privilege, a first peep; and this 


286 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


being refused, they tried to persuade me that the articles 
comprising the present required to be covered with chintz, 


teat 


om 8s rie AA 
SS) yn! rAYY Yet: ons, 
is AH = 
Méganda, or Native of Uganda. 


for it was considered indecorous to offer anything to his 
majesty in a naked state. This little interruption over, 
the articles enumerated below * were conveyed to the 
palace in solemn procession thus:—With N’yamgundi, 
Maiila, the pages, and myself on the flanks, the Union- 
Jack carried by the kirangozi guide led the way, followed 
by twelve men as a guard of honour, dressed in red 
flannel cloaks, and carrying their arms sloped, with fixed 
bayonets ; whilst in their rear were the rest of my men, 
each carrying some article as a present. 

On the march towards the palace, the admiring cour- 
tiers, wonder-struck at such an unusual display, exclaimed, 


* 1 block-tin box, 4 rich silk cloths, 1 rifle (Whitworth’s), 1 gold chrono- 
meter, 1 revolver pistol, 3 rifled carbines, 3 sword-bayonets, 1 box ammuni- 


tion, 1 box bullets, 1 box gun-caps, 1 telescope, 1 iron chair, 10 bundles best 
beads, 1 set of table-knives, spoons, and forks. 


Fxp. | THE PALACE. 287 


in raptures of astonishment, some with both hands at. 
their mouths, and others clasping their heads with their 
hands, “Trungi! irungi!” which may be translated “ Beau- 
tiful! beautiful!” I thought myself everything was going 
on as well as could be wished; but before entering the 
royal enclosures, I found, to my disagreeable surprise, 
that the men with Stiwarora’s hongo or offering, which 
consisted of more than a hundred coils of wire, were 
ordered to lead the procession, and take precedence of 
me. ‘There was something specially aggravating in this 
precedence ; for it will be remembered that these very 
brass wires which they saw, I had myself intended for 
Mtésa, that they were taken from me by Stwarora as far 
back as Usiti, and it would never do, without remonstrance, 
to have them boastfully paraded before my eyes in this 
fashion. My protests, however, had no effect upon the 
escorting Wakungtt. Resolving to make them catch it, I 
walked along as if ruminating in anger up the broad high 
road into a cleared square, which divides Mtésa’s domain 
on the south from his Kamraviona’s, or commander-in- 
chief, on the north, and then turned into the court. The 
palace or entrance quite surprised me by its extraordinary 
dimensions, and the neatness with which it was kept. 
The whole brow and sides of the hill on which we stood 
were covered with gigantic grass huts, thatched as neatly 
as so many heads dressed by a London barber, and fenced 
all round with the tall yellow reeds of the common 
Uganda tiger-grass ; whilst within the enclosure, the lines 
of huts were joined together, or partitioned off into courts, 
with walls of the same grass. It is here most of Mtésa’s 
three or four hundred women are kept, the rest being 
quartered chiefly with his mother, known by the title 
of N’yamasoré, or queen-dowager. They stood in little 
groups at the doors, looking at us, and evidently pass- 
ing their own remarks, and enjoying their own jokes, 
on the triumphal procession. At cach gate as we passed, 


288 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


officers on duty opened and shut it for us, jingling the big 
bells which are hung upon them, as they sometimes are 
at. shop-doors, to prevent silent, stealthy entrance. 

The first court passed, I was even more surprised to 
find the unusual ceremonies that awaited me. There 
courtiers of high dignity stepped forward to greet me, 
dressed in the most scrupulously neat fashions. Men, 
women, bulls, dogs, and goats, were led about by strings ; 
cocks and hens were carried in men’s arms; and little 
pages, with rope-turbans, rushed about, conveying mes- 
sages, as if their lives depended on their swiftness, every 
one holding his skin-cloak tightly round him lest his 
naked legs might by accident be shown. | 

This, then, was the ante-reception court; and I might 
have taken possession of the hut, nm which musicians 
were playing and singing on large nine-stringed harps, 
like the Nubian tambira, accompanied by harmonicons. 
By the chief officers in waiting, however, who thought fit 
to treat us like Arab merchants, I was requested to sit on 
the ground outside in the sun with my servants. Now, 
IT had made up my mind never to sit upon the ground 
as the natives and Arabs are obliged to do, nor to make 
my obeisance in any other manner than is customary in 
England, though the Arabs had told me that from fear 
they had always complied with the manners of the court. 
I felt that if I did not stand up for my social position at 
once, I should be treated with contempt during the re- 
mainder of my visit, and thus lose the vantage-ground. 
I had assumed of appearing rather as a prince than a 
trader, for the purpose of better gaining the confidence 
of the king. To avert over-hastiness, however—for my 
servants began to be alarmed as I demurred against doing 
as I was bid—I allowed five minutes to the court to give 
me a proper reception, saying, if it were not conceded I 
would then walk away. 

Nothing, however, was done. My own men, knowing 


Fer. | TRIUMPH OVER SUWARORA. 289 


me, feared for me, as they did not know what a “savage” 
king would do in case I carried out my threat ; whilst 
the Waganda, lost in amazement at what seemed little 
less than blasphemy, stood still as posts. The affair ended 
by my walking straight away home, giving Bombay 
orders to leave the present on the ground, and to follow 
me. 

Although the king is said to be unapproachable, ex- 
cepting when he chooses to attend court—a ceremony 
_ which rarely happens—intelligence of my hot wrath and 
hasty departure reached him in an instant. He first, it 
seems, thought of leaving his toilet-room to follow me, 
but, finding I was walking fast and had gone far, changed 
his mind, and sent Wakungtt running after me. Poor 
creatures! they caught me up, fell upon their knees, and 
implored I would return at once, for the king had not 
tasted food, and would not until he saw me. I felt 
grieved at their touching appeals; but, as I did not un- 
derstand all they said, I simply replied by patting my 
heart and shaking my head, walking if anything all the 
faster. 

On my arrival at my hut, Bombay and others came in, 
wet through with perspiration, saying the king had heard 
of all my grievances. Stiwarora’s hongo was turned out 
of court, and, if I desired it, I might bring my own chair 
with me, for he was very anxious to show me great re- 
spect—although such a seat was exclusively the attribute 
of the king, no one else in Uganda daring to sit on an 
artificial seat. 

My point was gained, so I cooled myself with coffee 
and a pipe, and returned rejoicing in my victory, espe- 
cially over Stiwarora. After returning to the second tier 

of huts from which I had retired, everybody appeared to 
_beina hurried, confused state of excitement, not knowing 
what to make out of so unprecedented an exhibition of 

T 


290 “PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


temper. In the most polite manner, the officers in wait- 
ing begged me to be seated on my iron stool, which I had 
brought with me, whilst others hurried in to announce my 
arrival. But for a few minutes only I was kept in sus- 
pense, when a band of music, the musicians wearing on 
their backs long-haired goat-skins, passed me, dancing as 
they went along, like bears in a fair, and playing on reed 
instruments worked over with pretty beads in various 
patterns, from which’ depended leopard-cat skins—the time 
being regulated by the beating of long hand-drums. 

The mighty king was now reported to be sitting on his 
throne in the state hut of the third tier. I advanced, hat 
in hand, with my guard of honour following, formed im 
“open ranks,” who in their turn were followed by the 
bearers carrying the present. I did not walk straight up 
to him as if to shake hands, but went outside the ranks of 
a three-sided square of squatting Wakungi, all habited in 
skins, mostly cow-skins ; some few of whom had, in addi- 
tion, leopard-cat skins girt round the waist, the sign of 
royal blood. Here I was desired to halt and sit in the 
glaring sun ; so I donned my hat, mounted my umbrella, 
a phenomenon which set them all a-wondering and laugh- 
ing, ordered the guard to close ranks, and sat gazing at 
the novel spectacle. A more theatrical sight I never saw. 
The king, a good-looking, well-figured, tall young man of 
twenty-five, was sitting on a red blanket spread upon a 
square platform of royal grass, encased in tiger-grass reeds, 
scrupulously well dressed in a new mbiigt. The hair of 
his head was cut short, excepting on the top, where it was 
combed up into a high ridge, running from stem to stern 
like a cockscomb. On his neck was a very neat ornament 
—a, large ring, of beautifully-worked small beads, form- 
ing elegant patterns by their various colours. On one 
arm. was another bead ornament, prettily devised ; and on 
the other a wooden charm, tied by a string covered with 
snake-skin. On every finger and every toe he had alter- 


Frs.] | HIS MAJESTY OF UGANDA. 291 


~ 


nate brass and copper rings; and above the ankles, half- 
way up to the calf, a stocking of very pretty beads. 
Everything was light, neat, and elegant in its way; not 
a fault could be found with the taste of his “ getting up.” 
For a handkerchief he held a well-folded piece of bark, 
and a piece of gold-embroidered silk, which he constantly 
employed to hide his large mouth when laughing, or to 
wipe it after a drink of plantain-wine, of which he took 
constant and copious draughts from neat little gourd-cups, 
administered by his ladies-in-waiting, who were at once 
his sisters and wives. A white dog, spear, shield, and 
woman—the Uganda cognisance—were by his side, as 
also a knot of staff officers, with whom he kept up a brisk 
conversation on one side; and on the other was a band 
of Wichwézi, or lady-sorcerers, such as I have already 
deseribed. 

I was now asked to draw nearer within the hollow 
square of squatters, where leopard-skins were strewed 
upon the ground, and a large copper kettledrum, sur- 
mounted with brass bells on arching wires, along with 
two other smaller drums covered with cowrie-shells, and 
beads of colour worked into patterns, were placed. I 
now longed to open conversation, but knew not the lan- 
guage, and no one near me dared speak, or even lift his 
head from fear of being accused of eyeing the women ; 
so the king and myself sat staring at one another for full 
an hour—I mute, but he pointing and remarking with 
those around him on the novelty of my guard and general 
appearance, and even requiring to see my hat lifted, the 
umbrella shut and opened, and the guards face about and 
show off their red cloaks—for such wonders had never 
been seen in Uganda. 

Then, finding the day waning, he sent Matila on an 
embassy to ask me if I had seen him ; and on receiving my 
reply, “ Yes, for full one hour,” I was glad to find him rise, 
spear in hand, lead his dog, and walk unceremoniously 


. 


292 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


away through the enclosure into the fourth tier of huts ; 
for this being a pure levée day, no business was transacted. 


King cf Uganda retiring. 


The king’s gait in retiring was intended to be very majestic, 
but did not succeed in conveying to me that impression. 
It was the traditional walk of his race, founded on the step 
of the lion; but the outward sweep of the legs, intended 
to represent the stride of the noble beast, appeared to me 
only to realise a very ludicrous kind of waddle, which 
made me ask Bombay if anything serious was the matter 
with the royal person. 

I had now to wait, for some time, almost as an act of 
humanity; for I was told the state secret, that the king 
had retired to break his fast and eat for the first time 


‘ 


Fes. | INTERVIEW WITH THE KING. 293 


since hearing of my arrival; but the repast was no sooner 
over than he prepared for the second act, to show off his 
splendour, and I was invited in, with all my men, to the 
exclusion of all his own officers save my two guides. 
Entering as before, I found him standing on a red blanket, 
leaning against the right portal of the hut, talking and 
laughing, handkerchief in hand, to a hundred or more 
of his admiring wives, who, all squatting on the ground 
outside, in two groups, were dressed in new mbigtis. 
My men dared not advance upright, nor look upon the 
women, but, stooping, with lowered heads and averted 
eyes, came cringing after me. Unconscious myself, I 
gave loud and impatient orders to my guard, rebuking 
them for moving like frightened geese, and, with hat in 
hand, stood gazing on the fair sex till directed to sit and 
cap. 

Mtésa then inquired what messages were brought from 
Ritmanika ; to which Maiila, delighted with the favour of 
speaking to royalty, rephed by saying, Rimanika had 
gained intelligence of Englishmen coming up the Nile to 
Gani and Kidi. The king acknowledged the truthfulness 
of their story, saying he had heard the same himself; and 
both Wakungt, as is the custom in Uganda, thanked their 
lord in a very enthusiastic manner, kneeling on the ground 
—-for no one can stand in the presence of his majesty— 
in an attitude of prayer, and throwing out their hands as 
they repeated. the words N’yanzig, N’yanzig, ai N’yanzig 
Mkahma wangi, &c. &c., for a considerable time ; when, 
thinking they had done enough of this, and heated with 
the exertion, they threw themselves flat upon their 
stomachs, and, floundering about like fish on- land, re- 
peated the same words over again and again, and rose 
doing the same, with their faces covered with earth ; for 
majesty in Uganda is never satisfied till subjects have 
erovelled before it like the most abject worms. This. 
conversation over, after gazing at me, and chatting with 


\ 


> 


294 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


his women for a considerable time, the second scene ended. 
The third scene was more easily arranged, for the day was 
fast declining. He simply moved with his train of women 
to another hut, where, after seating himself upon his 
throne, with his women around him, he invited me to 
approach the nearest limits of propriety, and to sit as 
before. Again he asked me if I had seen him—evidently 
desirous of indulging in his regal pride; so I made the 
most of the opportunity thus afforded me of opening a 
conversation by telling him of those grand reports I had 
formerly heard about him, which induced me to come all 
this way to see him, and the trouble it had cost me to 
‘reach the object of my desire ; at the same time taking a . 
gold ring from off my finger, and presenting it to him, | 
said, “This is a small token of friendship; if you will 
inspect it, it is made after the fashion of a dog-collar, and, 
being the king of metals, gold, is in every respect appro- 
priate to your illustrious race.” 

He said, in return, “If friendship is your desire, what 
would you say if I showed you a road by which you 
might reach your home in one month?” Now everything 
had to be told to Bombay, then to Nasib, my Kiganda 
interpreter, and then to either Matla or N’yamgundit, 
before it was delivered to the king, for it was considered 
indecorous to transmit any message to his majesty except- 
ing through the medium of one of his officers.’ Hence I 
could not get an answer put in; for as all Waganda are 
rapid and impetuous in their conversation, the king, 
probably forgetting he had put a question, hastily changed 
the conversation and said, “ What guns have you got ? 
Let me see the one you shoot with.” I wished still to 
answer the first question first, as | knew he referred to the 
direct line to Zanzibar across the Masai, and was anxious, 
without delay, to open the subject of Petherick and Grant: 
but no one dared to deliver my statement. Much ae 
appointed, I then said, “I had brought the best shooting- 


Fr. | THE PRESENTS, AND THEIR RECEPTION. 295 


gun in the world—Whitworth’s rifle—which I begged he 
would accept, with a few other trifles ; and, with his per- 
mission, [ would lay them upon a carpet at his fect, as is 
the custom of my country when visiting sultans.” He 
assented, sent all his women away, and had an mbtgit 
spread for the purpose, on which Bombay, obeying my 
order, first spread a red blanket, and then opened each 
article one after the other, when Nasib, according to the 
usage already mentioned, smoothed them down with his 
dirty hands, or rubbed them against his sooty face, and 
handed them to the king to show there was no poison or 
witchcraft in them. Mtésa appeared quite confused with 
the various wonders as he handled them, made silly 
remarks, and pondered over them like a perfect child, 
until it was quite dark. Torches were then lit, and guns, 
pistols, powder, boxes, tools, beads—the whole collection, 
in short—were tossed together topsy-turvy, bundled into 
mbiigiis, and carried away by the pages. Mtésa now said, 
“ Tt is late, and time to break up; what provisions would 
you wish to have?” I said, “A little of everything, but 
no one thing constantly.” “ And would you like to see 
me to-morrow?” “ Yes, every day.” “Then you can’t 
to-morrow, for I have business; but the next day come if 
you like. You can now go away, and here are six pots 
of plantain-wine for you; my men will search for food 
to-morrow.” 

21st.—In the morning, whilst it rammed, some pages 
drove in twenty cows and ten goats, with a polite meta- 
phorical message from their king, to the effect that I had 
pleased him much, and he hoped I would accept these few 
“ chickens ” until he could send more,—when both Maiila 
and N’yamgundi, charmed with their success in having 
brought a welcome guest to Uganda, never ceased shower- 
ing eulogiums on me for my fortune in having gained the 
countenance of their king. The rain falling was considered 
at court a good omen, and everybody declared the king 


296 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


mad with delight. Wishing to have a talk with him 
about Petherick and Grant, I at once started off the 
Wakungii to thank him for the present, and to beg pardon 
for my apparent rudeness of yesterday, at the same time 
requesting I might have an early interview with his 
majesty, as I had much of importance to communicate ; 
but the solemn court formalities which these African kings 
affect as much as Oriental emperors, precluded my message 
from reaching the king. I heard, however, that he had 
spent the day receiving Stwarora’s hongo of wire, and 
that the officer who brought them was made to sit in an 
empty court, whilst the king sat behind a screen, never 
deigning to show his majestic person. I was told, too, - 
that he opened conversation by demanding to know how 
it happened that Sttwarora became possessed of the wires, 
for they were made by the white men to be given to 
himself, and Sttwarora must therefore have robbed me of 
them; and it was by such practices he, Mtésa, never could 
see any visitors. The officer's reply was, Stwarora would 
not show the white men any respect, because they were 
wizards who did not sleep in houses at night, but flew up 
to the tops of hills, and practised sorcery of every abomin- 
able kind. The king to this retorted, in a truly African’ 
fashion, “'That’s a lie; I can see no harm in this white 
man; and if he had been a bad man, Rtimanika would 
not have sent him on to me.” At night, when in bed, the 
king sent his pages to say, if I desired his friendship I 
would lend him one musket to make up six with what I 
had given him, for he intended visiting his relations the 
following morning. I sent three, feeling that nothing 
would be lost by being “ open-handed.” 

22d.—To-day the king went the round of his relations, 
showing the beautiful things given him by the white 
man—a clear proof that he was much favoured by the 
“spirits,” for neither his father nor any of his forefathers 
had been so recognised and distinguished by any “sign” 


Fup. | A SECOND INTERVIEW. 297 


as a rightful inheritor to the Uganda throne: an anti- 
Christian interpretation of omens, as rife in these dark 
regions now as it was in the time of King Nebuchad- 
nezzar. At midnight the three muskets were returned, 
and I was so pleased with the young king’s promptitude 
and honesty, I begged he would accept them. 

23d.—At noon Mtésa sent his pages to invite me to 
his palace. I went, with my guard of honour and my 
stool, but found I had to sit waiting in an ante-hut three 
hours with his commander-in-chief and other high officers 
before he was ready to see me. During this time Wasoga 
minstrels, playing on tambira, and accompanied by boys 
playing on a harmonicon, kept us amused; and a small 
page, with a large bundle of grass, came to me and said, 
“The king hopes you won’t be offended if required to sit 
on it before him; for no person in Uganda, however high 
in office, is ever allowed to sit upon anything raised above 
the ground, nor can anybody but himself sit upon such 
grass as this; it is all that his throne is made of. The 
first day he only allowed you to sit on your stool to 
appease your wrath.” 

On consenting to do in “Rome as the Romans do,” 
when my position was so handsomely acknowledged, [| 
was called in, and found the court sitting much as it 
was on the first day’s interview, only that the number of 
squatting Wakungit was much diminished ; and the king, 
instead of wearing his ten brass and copper rings, had my 
gold one on his third finger. This day, however, was 
eut out for business, as, in addition to the assemblage 
of officers, there were women, cows, goats, fowls, confis- 
cations, baskets of fish, baskets of small antelopes, por- 
cupines, and curious rats caught by his gamekeepers, 
bundles of mbtigt, &c. &c., made by his lnen-drapers, 
coloured earths and sticks by his magician, all ready for 
presentation ; but, as rain fell, the court broke up, and 
I had nothing for it but to walk about under my um- 


298 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


brella, indulging in angry reflections against the haughty 
king for not inviting me into his hut. 

When the rain had ceased, and we were again called 
in, he was found sitting in state as before, but this time 
with the head of a black bull placed before him, one horn 
of which, knocked off, was placed alongside, whilst four 
living cows walked about the court. 

I was now requested to shoot the four cows as quickly 
as possible; but having no bullets for my gun, I borrowed 
the revolving pistol I had given him, and shot all four in 
a second of time; but as the last one, only wounded, 
turned sharply upon me, I gave him the fifth and settled 
him. Great applause followed this wonderful feat, and 
the cows were given to my men. The king now loaded 
one of the carbines I had given him with his own hands, 
and giving it full-cock to a page, told him to go out and 
shoot a man in the outer court; which was no sooner 
accomplished than the little urchin returned to announce 
his success, with a look of glee such as one would see 
in the face of a boy who had robbed a bird’s nest, caught 
a trout, or done any other boyish trick. The king said 
to him, “ And did you do it well?” “ Oh yes, capitally.” 
He spoke the truth, no doubt, for he dared not have 
trifled with the king; but the affair created hardly any 
interest. I never heard, and there appeared no curiosity 
to know, what individual human being the urchin had 
deprived of life. | 

The Wakungt were now dismissed, and I asked to 
draw near, when the king showed me a book I had given 
to Rtmanika, and begged for the inspiring medicine which 
he had before applied for through the mystic stick. The 
day was now gone, so torches were lit, and we were ordered 
to go, though as yet I had not been able to speak one word 
I wished to impart about Petherick and Grant; for my 
interpreters were so afraid of the king they dared not open 


Fp, | EFFORTS TO RELIEVE GRANT. 299 


their mouths until they were spoken to. The king was 
now rising to go, when, in great fear and anxiety that the 
day would be lost, I said, in Kistiahili, “I wish you would 
send a letter by post to Grant, and also send a boat up 
the Kitangtlé, as far as Rttmanika’s palace, for him, for he 
is totally unable to walk.” I thus attracted his notice, 
though he did not understand one word I uttered. The 
result was, that he waited for the interpretation, and 
replied that a post would be no use, for no one would be 
responsible for the safe delivery of the message ; he would 
send N’yamgundt to fetch him, but he thought Rttmanika 
would not consent to his sending boats up the Kitangtilé 
as far as the Little Windermere; and _ then, turning 
round with true Mganda impetuosity, he walked away 
without taking a word from me in exchange. 
24th.—Harly this morning the pages came to say Mtésa 
desired [ would send him three of my Wangitiana to shoot 
cows before him. This was just what I wanted. It had 
struck me that personal conferences with me so roused the 
excitable king, that there was no bringing plain matters 
of business home to him; so, detaching seven men with 
Bombay, I told him, before shooting, to be sure and elicit 
the matter I wanted — which was, to excite the king’s 
cupidity by telling him I had a boat full of stores with 
two white men at Gani, whom I wished to eall to me if 
he would furnish some guides to accompany my men ; and 
further, as Grant could not walk, I wished boats sent for 
him, at least as far as the ferry on the Kitangilé, to which 
place Rtimanika, at any rate, would slip him down in 
canoes. At once, on arriving, Mtésa admitted the men, 
and ordered them to shoot at some cows; but Bombay, 
obeying my orders to first have his talk out, said, No— 
before he could shoot he must obey master and deliver his 
message ; which no sooner was told than the king, in a 
hurry, excited by the prospects of sport, impatiently said, 


300 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


“Very good; I will send men either by water or overland 
through Kidi,* just as your master likes; only some of 
his men had better go with mine: but now shoot cows, 
shoot cows; for I want to see how the Wangtiana shoot.” 
They shot seven, and all were given to them when they 
were dismissed. In the evening the pages came to ask 
me if I would like to shoot kites in the palace with their 
king; but I declined shooting anything less than elephants, 
rhinoceros, or buffaloes ; and even for these I would not go 
out unless the king went with me ;—a dodge I conceived 
would tend more than any other to bring us together, and 
so break through those ceremonial restraints of the court, 
which at present were stopping all plans of progression. 

25th.—The king invited me to shoot with him—really 
buffaloes—close to the palace ; but as the pages had been 
sent off in a hurry, without being fully instructed, I 
declined, on the plea that I had always been gulled and 
kept waiting, or treated with incivility, for hours before I 
obtained an interview ; and as | did not wish to have any 
more ruptures in the palace, 1 proposed Bombay should 
go to make proper arrangements for my reception on the 
morrow—as, anyhow, at present I felt indisposed. The 
pages dreaded their master’s wrath, departed for a while, 
and then sent another lad to tell me he was sorry to hear 
{ felt unwell, but he hoped I would come if only for a 
minute, bringing my medicines with me, for he himself 
felt pain. That this second message was a forged one I 
had no doubt, for the boys had not been long enough 
gone ; still, I packed up my medicines and went, leaving 
the onus, should any accident happen, upon the mis- 
chievous story-bearers. 

As I anticipated, on arrival at the palace I found the 
king was not ready to receive me, and the pages desired 
me to sit with the officers in waiting until he might 


* The straight road down the Nile through Unyoro no one dared allude to 
ai this time, as the two kings were always fighting. 


Fes. ] DOCTORING A KING. 301 


appear. I found it necessary to fly at once into a rage, 
called the pages a set of deceiving young blackguards, 
turned upon my heel, and walked straight back through 
the courts, intending to leave the See Everybody 
was alarmed ; information of my retreat at once reached 
the king, and he sent his Wakungti to prevent my egress. 
These officers passed me, as I was walking hurriedly 
along under my umbrella, in the last court, and shut the 
entrance-gate in front of me. This was too much, so I 
stamped, and, pointing my finger, swore in every language 
I knew, that if they did not open the gate again, as they 
had shut it at once, and that, too, before my face, I would 
never leave the spot I stood upon alive. Terror-stricken, 
the Wakungii fell on their knees before me, doing as they 
were bid; and, to please them, I returned at once and 
went up to the king, who, now sitting on his throne, 
asked the officers how they had managed to entice me 
back ; to which they all replied in a breath, n’yanzigeing 
heartily, “Oh, we were so afraid—he was so terrible! but 
he turned at once as soon as we opened the gate.” “ How ? 
what gate? tell us all about it.” And when the whole 
story was fully narrated, the matter was thought a good 
joke. After pausing a little, | asked the king what ailed 
him, for I was sorry to hear he had been sick; but instead 
of replying, he shook his head, as much as to say, I had 
put a very uncouth question to his majesty—and ordered 
some men to shoot cows. 

Instead of admiring this childish pastime, which in 
Uganda is considered royal sport, I rather looked dis- 
dainful, until, apparently disappointed at my indifference, 
he asked what the box I had brought contained. On 
being told it was the medicine he desired, he asked me to 
draw near, and sent his courtiers away. When only the 
interpreters and one confidential officer were left, besides 
myself, he wished to know if I could apply the medicine 
without its touching the afflicted part. To give him con- 


302 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


fidence in my surgical skill, | moved my finger, and asked 
if he knew what gave it action; and on his replying in 
the negative, I gave him an anatomical lecture, which so 
pleased him, he at once consented to be operated on, and 
I applied a blister to him accordingly. The whole opera- 
tion was rather ridiculous; for the blister, after being 
applied, had to be rubbed in turn on the hands and faces 
of both Bombay and Nasib, to show there was no evil 
spirit in the “doctor.” Now, thought I to myself, is the 
right time for business ; for I had the king all to myself, 
then considered a most fortunate occurrence in Uganda, 
where every man courts the favour of a word with his . 
king, and adores him as a deity, and he in turn makes 
‘himself as distant as he can, to give greater effect to his 
exalted position. The matter, however, was merely defer- 
red; for I no sooner told him my plans for communicating 
quickly with Petherick and Grant, than, after saying he 
desired their coming even more than myself, he promised 
to arrange everything on the morrow. 

26th.—In the morning, as agreed, I called on the king, 
and found the blister had drawn nicely ; so I let off the 
water, which Bombay called the malady, and so delighted 
the king amazingly. A basket of fruit, like Indian loquots, 
was then ordered in, and we ate them together, holding a 
discussion about Grant and Petherick, which ended by 
the king promising to send an officer by water to Kitan- 
gtlé, and another, with two of my men, wd Usoga and 
Kadi, to Gani; but as it was necessary my men should 
go in disguise, I asked the king to send me four mbtigt 
and two spears ; when, with the liberality of a great king, 
he sent me twenty sheets of the former, four spears, and 
a load of sun-dried fish strung on a stick in shape of a 
shield. 

27 th.—At last something was done. One Uganda 
officer and one Kidi guide were sent to my hut by the 
king, as agreed upon yesterday, when I detached Mabrtki 


Fre. | COURT ETIQUETTE. 303 


and Bilal from my men, gave them letters and maps 
addressed to Petherick ; and giving the officers a load of 
Mtendé to pay their hotel bills on the way, I gave them, 
at the same time, strict orders to keep by the Nile ; then, 
having dismissed them, I called on the king to make 
arrangements for Grant, and to complain that my resi- 
dence in Uganda was anything but cheerful, as my hut 
was a mile from the palace, in an unhealthy place, where 
he kept his Arab visitors. It did not become my dignity 
to live in houses appropriated to persons in the rank of 
servants, which I considered the ivory-merchants to be; 
_and as I had come only to see him and the high officers 
of Uganda, not seeking for ivory or slaves, I begged he 
would change my place of residence to the west end, 
when I also trusted his officers would not be ashamed 
to visit me, as appeared to be the case at present. Silence 
being the provoking resort of the king, when he did not 
know exactly what to say, he made no answer to my 
appeal, but instead, he began a discourse on geography, 
and then desired me to call upon his mother, N’yamasoré, 
at her palace Masorisori, vulgarly called Soli Soli, for she 
also required medicine ; and, moreover, I was cautioned 
that for the future the Uganda court etiquette required I 
should attend on the king two days in succession, and 
every third day on his mother the queen-dowager, as such 
were their respective nights. 

Till now, owing to the strict laws of the country, I had 
not been able to call upon anybody but the king himself. 
I had not been able to send presents or bribes to any one, 
nor had any one, except the cockaded pages, by the king’s 
order, visited me; neither was anybody permitted to sell 
me provisions, so that my men had to feed themselves by 
taking anything they chose from certain gardens pointed 
out by the king’s officers, or by seizing pombé or plantains 

which they might find Waganda carrying towards the 
palace. This non-interventive order was part of the royal 


304 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


policy, in order that the king might have the full fleecing 
of his visitors. 

To call upon the queen-mother respectfully, as it was 
the opening visit, I took, besides the medicine-chest, a 
present of eight brass and copper wire, thirty blue-egg 
beads, one bundle of diminutive beads, and sixteen cubits 
of chintz, a small guard, and my throne of royal grass. 
The palace to be visited lay half a mile beyond the 
king’s, but the highroad to it was forbidden me, as it is 
considered uncourteous to pass the king’s gate without 
going in. So after winding through back-gardens, the 
slums of Bandowaroga, I struck upon the highroad close 
to her majesty’s, where everything looked like the royal _ 
palace on a miniature scale. A large cleared space divided 
the queen’s residence from her Kamraviona’s. The outer 
enclosures and courts were fenced with tiger-grass ; and 
the huts, though neither so numerous nor so large, were 
constructed after the same fashion as the king’s. Guards 
also kept the doors, on which large bells were hung to 
give alarm, and officers in waiting watched the throne- 
rooms. All the huts were full of women, save those kept 
as waiting-rooms, where drums and harmonicons were 
placed for amusement. On first entering, I was required 
to sit in a waiting-hut till my arrival was announced ; but 
that did not take long, as the queen was prepared to 
receive me ; and being of a more affable disposition than 
her son, she held rather a levee of amusement than a stiff 
court of show. I entered the throne-hut as the gate of 
that court was thrown open, with my hat off, but umbrella 
held over my head, and walked straight towards her till 
ordered to sit upon my bundle of grass. 

Her majesty—fat, fair, and forty-five —was sitting, 
plainly garbed in mbtigt, upon a carpet spread upon the 
ground within a curtain of mbiiet, her elbow resting on a 
pillow of the same bark material ; the only ornaments on 
her person being an abrus necklace, and a piece of mbtgtt 


; 


Fess. | INTERVIEW WITH THE QUEEN-MOTHER. 305 


tied round her head, whilst a folding looking-glass, much 
the worse for wear, stood open by her side. An iron rod like 
a spit, with a cup on the top, charged with magic powder, 
and other magic wands, were placed before the entrance: 
and within the room, four Mabandwa sorceresses or devil- 
drivers, fantastically dressed, as before described, and a 
mass of other women, formed the company. For a short 
while we sat at a distance, exchanging inquiring glances 
at one another, when the women were dismissed, and a 
band of music, with a court full of Wakungii, was ordered 
in to change the scene. I also got orders to draw near 
and sit fronting her within the hut. Pombé, the best in 
Uganda, was then drunk by the queen, and handed to me 
and to all the high officers about her, when she smoked her 
pipe, and bade me smoke mine. The musicians, dressed 
in long-haired Usoga goat-skins, were now ordered. to 
strike up, which they did, with their bodies swaying or 
dancing like bears in a fair. Different drums were then 
beat, and I was asked if I could distinguish their dif- 
ferent tones. 

The queen, full of mirth, now suddenly rose, leaving 
me sitting, whilst she went to another hut, changed her 
mbigti for a déolé, and came back again for us to admire 
her, which.was no sooner done to her heart’s content, than 
a second time, by her order, the court was cleared, and, 
when only three or four confidential Wakungti were left, 
she took up a small faggot of well-trimmed sticks, and, 
selecting three, told me she had three complaints. “ This 
stick,” she says, “represents my stomach, which gives me 
much uneasiness ; this second stick my liver, which causes 
shooting pains all over my body ; and this third one my 
heart, for I get constant dreams at night about Sunna, my 
late husband, and they are not pleasant.” The dreams 
and sleeplessness I told her was a common widow's com- 
plaint, and could only be cured by her majesty making up 

U 


~ 


- 


306 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


her mind to marry a second time ; but before I could 
advise for the bodily complaints, it would be necessary for 
me to see her tongue, feel her pulse, and perhaps, also, her 
sides. Hearing this, the Wakungit said, “Oh, that can 
never be allowed without the sanction of the king ;” but 
the queen, rising in her seat, expressed her scorn at the 
idea of taking advice from a mere stripling, and submitted 
herself for examination. 

I then took out ‘two pills, the powder of which was 
tasted by the Wakungiti to prove that there was no devilry 
in “the doctor,’ and gave orders for them to be eaten at 
night, restricting her pombé and food until I saw her again. 
My game was now advancing, for I found through her I~ 
should get the key to an influence that might bear on the 
king, and was much pleased to hear her express herself 
delighted with me for everything I had done except 
stopping her grog, which, naturally enough in this great 
pombé-drinking country, she said would be a very trying 
abstinence. 

The doctoring over, her majesty expressed herself ready 
to inspect the honorarium I had brought for her, and the 
articles were no sooner presented by Bombay and Nasib, 
with the usual formalities of stroking to insure their purity, 
than she, boiling with pleasure, showed them all to her 
officers, who declared, with a voice of most exquisite 
triumph, that she was indeed the most favoured of queens. 
Then, in excellent good taste, after saying that nobody 
had ever given her such treasures, she gave me, in return, 
a beautifully - worked pombé sucking -pipe, which was 
acknowledged by every one to be the greatest honour she 
could pay me. 

Not satisfied with this, she made me select, though 
against my desire, a number of sambo, called here gundu, 
rings of giraffe hair wound round with thin iron or copper 
wire, and worn as anklets; and crowned all with sundry 
pots of pombé, a cow, and a bundle of dried fish, of the 


wa 
a 


Fr. | THE KAMBARI FISH. 307 


description given in the woodcut, called by my men 
Samaki Kambari. This business over, she begged me 


Kambari Fish. 


to show her my picture-books, and was so amused with 
them that she ordered her sorceresses and all the other 
women in again to inspect them with her. Then began a 
warm and complimentary conversation, which ended by an 
inspection of my rings and all the contents of my pockets, 
as well as of my watch, which she called Litbari—a term 
equivalent to a place of worship, the object of worship 
itself, or the iron horn or magic pan. Still she said I had 
not yet satisfied her ; [ must return again two days hence, 
for she liked me much—excessively—she could not say 
how much; but now the day was gone, I might go. 
With this queer kind of adieu she rose and walked away, 
leaving me with my servants to carry the royal present 
home. 

28th.—My whole thoughts were now occupied in 
devising some scheme to obtain a hut in the palace, not 
only the better to maintain my dignity, and so gain 
superior influence in the court, but also that I might have 
a better insight into the manners and customs of these 
strange people. I was not sorry to find the king attempt- 
ing to draw me to court, daily to sit in attendance on him | 
as his officers are obliged to do all day long, in order that 
he might always have a full court or escort whenever by 
chance he might emerge from his palace, for it gave me an 
opening for asserting a proper position. | 

Instead, therefore, of going at the call of his pages this 


308 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


morning, I sent Bombay with some men to say that 
although I was desirous of seeing him daily, I could not 
so expose myself to the sun. In all other countries I 
received, as my right, a palace to live in when I called on 
the king of the country, and unless he gave one now I 
should feel slighted ; moreover, I should like a hut in the 
same enclosure as himself, when I could sit and converse 
with him constantly, and teach him the use of the things 
I had given him. By Bombay’s account, the king was 
much struck with the force of my humble request, and 
replied that he should like to have Bana, meaning myself, 
ever by his side, but his huts were all full of women, and 
therefore it could not be managed; if, however, Bana . 
would but have patience for a while, a hut should be built 
for him in the environs, which would be a mark of dis- 
tinction he had never paid to any visitor before. Then 
changing the subject by inspecting my men, he fell so 
much in love with their little red “fez” caps, that he sent 
off his pages to beg me for a specimen, and, on finding 
them sent by the boys, he remarked, with warm approba- 
tion, how generous I was in supplying his wishes, and 
then, turning to Bombay, wished to know what sort of 
return-presents would please me best. Bombay, already 
primed, instantly said, “Oh, Bana, being a great man in 
his own country, and not thirsting for gain in ivory or 
slaves, would only accept such things as a spear, shield, 
or drum, which he could take to his own country as a 
specimen of the manufactures of Uganda, and a pleasing 
recollection of his visit to the king.” 

“ Ah,” says Mtésa, “if that is all he wants, then indeed 
will I satisfy him, for I will give him the two spears with 
which I took all this country, and, when engaged in so 
doing, pierced three men with one stab. ° . 

“ But, for the present, is it true what I have heard, that 
Bana would like to go out with me shooting?” “Oh, 
yes, he is a most wonderful sportsman—shoots elephants : 


‘Fx. } AN AWKWARD PRESENT. 309 


and buffaloes, and birds on the wing. He would like to 
go out on a shooting excursion and teach you the way.” 

Then turning the subject, in the highest good-humour 
the king made centurions of N’yamgundti and Mattila, my 
two Wakungii, for their good service, he said, in bringing 
him such a valuable guest. This delighted them so much 
that as soon as they could they came back to my camp, 
threw themselves at my feet, and n’yanzigging incessantly, 
narrated their fortunes, and begged, as a great man, I 
would lend them some cows to present to the king as an 
acknowledgment for the favour he had shown them. The 
cows, I then told them, had come from the king, and could 
not go back again, for it was not the habit of white men 
to part with their presents; but as I felt their promotion 
redounded on myself, and was certainly the highest com- 
pliment their king could have paid me, I would give them 
each a wire to make their salaam good. 

This was enough ; both officers got drunk, and, beating 
their drums, serenaded the camp until the evening set in, 
when, to my utter surprise, an elderly Meanda woman was 
brought into camp with the commander-in-chief’s meta- 
phorical compliments, hoping I would accept her “to carry 
my water ;” with this trifling addition, that in case I did 
not think her pretty enough, he hoped I would not hesi- 
tate to select which I liked from ten others, of “all colours,” 
Wahiima included, who, for that purpose, were then wait- 
ing in his palace. 

Unprepared for this social addition in my camp, I must 
now confess I felt in a fix, knowing full well that nothing 
so offends as rejecting an offer at once, soI kept her for the 
time being, intending in the morning to send her back 
with a string of blue beads on her neck; but during the 
night she relieved me of my anxieties by running away, 
which Bombay said was no wonder, for she had obviously 
_ been seized as part of some confiscated estate, and without 
~ doubt knew where to find some of her friends. 


310 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


To-day, for the first time since I have been here, I 
received a quantity of plantains. This was m conse- 
quence of my complaining that the king’s orders to my 
men to feed themselves at others’ expense was virtually 
making them a pack of thieves. 

1st.—I received a letter from Grant, dated 10th Feb- 
ruary, reporting Baraka’s departure for Unyoro on the 
30th January, escorted by Kamrasi’s men on their return, 
and a large party of Rtimanika’s bearing presents as a 
letter from their king; whilst Grant himself hoped to 
leave Karagtié before the end of the month. I then sent 
Bombay to see the queen, to ask after her health, beg for 
a hut in the palace enclosures, and say I should have 
gone myself, only I feared her gate might be shut, and I 
cannot go backwards and forwards so far in the sun with- 
out a horse or an elephant to ride upon. She begged I 
would come next morning. A wonderful report came 
that the king put two tops of powder into his Whitworth 
rifle to shoot a cow, and the bullet not only passed through 
the cow, but through the court fence, then through the 
centre of a woman, and, after passing the outer fence, flew 
whizzing along no one knew where. 

2d.—Calling on the queen early, she admitted me at 
once, scolding me severely for not having come or sent 
my men to see her after she had taken the pills. She 
said they did her no good, and prevailed on me to give 
her another prescription. Then sending her servant for 
a bag full of drinking-gourds, she made me select six of 
the best, and begged for my watch. That, of course, I 
could not part with ; but I took the opportunity of tell- 
ing her I did not like my residence; it was not only far 
away from everybody, but it was unworthy of my dig- 
nity. I came to Uganda to see the king and queen, 
because the Arabs said they were always treated with 
great respect ; but now I could perceive those Arabs did 
not know what true respect means. Being poor men, 


Marcz. | THE QUEEN-MOTHER AGAIN, 311 


they thought much of a cow or goat given gratis, and 
were content to live in any hovels. Such, I must inform 
her, was not my case. I could neither sit in the sun nor 
live m a poor man’s hut. When I rose to leave for 
breakfast, she requested me to stop, but I declined, and 
walked away. I saw, however, there was something 
wrong; for Matila, always ordered to be in attendance 
when anybody visits, was retained by her order to answer 
why I would not stay with her longer. If I wanted food 
or pombé, there was plenty of it in her palace, and her 
cooks were the cleverest in the world; she hoped I would 
return to see her in the morning. 

3d.—Our cross purposes seemed to increase ; for, while 
I could not get a satisfactory interview, the king sent for 
N’yamgunditi to ascertain why I never went to see him. 
I had given him good guns and many pretty things which 
he did not know the use of, and yet I would not visit 
him to explain their several uses. N’yamgundt told him 
I lived too far off, and wanted a palace. After this I 
walked off to see N’yamasoré, taking my blankets, a 
pillow, and some cooking-pots to make a day of it, and 
try to win the affections of the queen with sixteen cubits 
bindéra, three pints péké, and three pints mtendé beads, 
which, as Waganda are all fond of figurative language, I 
called a trifle for her servants. 

I was shown in at once, and found her majesty sitting 
on an Indian carpet, dressed in a red linen wrapper with 
a gold border, and a box, in shape of a lady’s work-box, 
prettily coloured in divers patterns with minute beads, 
by her side. Her councillors were in attendance ; and in 
the yard a band of music, with many minor Wakungtt 
squatting in a semicircle, completed her levee. Maitila 
on my behalf opened conversation, in allusion to her 
yesterday's question, by saying I had applied to Mtésa 
for a palace, that I might be near enough both their 
majesties to pay them constant visits. She replied, in a 


312 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


good hearty manner, that indeed was a very proper re- 
quest, which showed my good sense, and ought to have 
been complied with at once; but Mtésa was only a Kijana 
or stripling, and as she influenced all the government of 
the country, she would have it carried into effect. Com- 
pliments were now passed, my presents given and ap- 
proved of ; and the queen, thinking I must be hungry, 
for she wanted to eat herself, requested me to refresh my- 
self in another hut. I complied, spread my bedding, and 
ordered in my breakfast ; but as the hut was full of men, 
I suspended a Scotch plaid, and quite eclipsed her mbtigt 
curtain. 

Reports of this magnificence at once flew to the queen, 
who sent to know how many more blankets I had in my 
possession, and whether, if she asked for one, she would 
get it. She also desired to see my spoons, fork, and pipe 
—an English meerschaum, mounted with silver ; so, after 
breakfast, I returned to see her, showed her the spoons and 
forks, and smoked my pipe, but told her I had no blankets 
left but what formed my bed. She appeared very happy 
and very well, did not say another word about the blankets, 
but ordered a pipe for herself, and sat chatting, laughing, 
and smoking in concert with me. 

I told her I had visited all the four quarters of the globe, 
and had seen all colours of people, but wondered where 
she got her pipe from, for it was much after the Rttmish 
(Turkish) fashion, with a long stick. Greatly tickled at 
the flattery, she said, “We hear men like yourself come to 
Amara from the other side, and drive cattle away.” “The 
Gallas, or Abyssinians, who are tall and fair, like Ri- 
manika,” I said, “might do so, for they live not far off on 
the other side of Amara, but we never fight for such 
paltry objects. If cows fall into our hands when fighting, 
we allow our soldiers to eat them, while we take the 
government of the country into our own hands.” She 
then said, “We hear you don’t like the Unyamitiézi route, 


Marcu. | QUEENLY DISSIPATION. 313 


we will open the Ukori one for you.” “Thank your ma- 
jesty,” said I, in a figurative kind of speech to please 
Waganda ears ; and turning the advantage of the project 
on her side, “ You have indeed hit the right nail on the 
head. I do not like the Unyamiiézi route, as you may 
well imagine when I tell you I have lost so much pro- 
perty there by mere robbery of the people and _ their 
kings. The Waganda do not see me in a true light; but 
if they have patience for a year or two, until the Ukori 
_ road is open, and trade between our respective countries 
shall commence, they will then see the fruits of my ad- 
vent ; so much so, that every Mganda will say the first 
Uganda year dates from the arrival of the first Mzungti 
(white) visitor. As one coffee-seed sown brings forth fruit 
in plenty, so my coming here may be considered.” All 
appreciated this speech, saying, “The white man, he even 
speaks beautifully ! beautifully ! beautifully ! beautifully!” 
and, putting their hands to their mouths, they looked 
askance at me, nodding their admiring approval. 

The queen and her ministers then plunged into pombé 
and became uproarious, laughing with all their might and 
main. Small bugu cups were not enough to keep up the 
excitement of the time, so a large wooden trough was 
placed before the queen and filled with liquor. If any 
was spilt, the Wakungti instantly fought over it, dabbing 
their noses on the ground, or grabbing it with their hands, 
that not one atom of the queen’s favour might be lost ; 
for everything must be adored that comes from royalty, 
whether by design or accident. The queen put her head 
to the trough and drank like a pig from it, and was fol- 
lowed by her ministers. ‘The band, by order, then struck 
up a tune called the Milélé, playing on a dozen reeds, 
ornamented with beads and cow-tips, and five drums, of 
various tones and sizes, keeping time. The musicians 
dancing with zest, were led by four bandmasters, also 
dancing, but with their backs turned to the company to 


314 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


show off their long, shaggy, goat-skin jackets, sometimes 
upright, at other times bending and on their heels, like 
the hornpipe-dancers of western countries. 

It was a merry scene, but soon became tiresome ; when 
Bombay, by way of flattery, and wishing to see what the 
queen’s wardrobe embraced, told her, Any woman, how- 
ever ugly, would assume a goodly appearance if prettily 
dressed ; upon which her gracious majesty immediately 
rose, retired to her toilet-hut, and soon returned attired in 
a common check cloth, an abrus tiara, a bead necklace, and 
with a folding looking-glass, when she sat, as before, and 
was handed a blown-glass cup of pombé, with a cork float- 
ing on the liquor, and a napkin mbtigt covering the top, - 
by a naked virgin. For her kind condescension in assum- 
ing plain raiment, everybody, of course, n’yanzigged. Next 
she ordered her slave girls to bring a large number of 
sambo (anklets), and begged me to select the. best, for she 
liked me much. In vain I tried to refuse them: she had 
given more than enough for a keepsake before, and I was 
not hunery for property ; still I had to choose some, or I 
would give offence. She then gave me a basket of tobacco, 
and a nest of hen eggs for her “son’s” breakfast. When 
this was over, the Mtkondéri, another dancing-tune, with 
instruments something like clarionets, was ordered ; but 
it had scarcely been struck up, before a drenching rain, 
with strong wind, set in and spoilt the music, though not 
the playing — for none dared stop without an order; and 
the queen, instead of taking pity, laughed most boister- 
ously over the exercise of her savage power as the unfor- 
tunate musicians were nearly beaten down by the violence 
of the weather. 

When the rain ceased, her majesty retired a second time 
to her toilet-hut, and changed her dress for a puce-coloured 
wrapper, when I, ashamed of having robbed her of so 
many sambo, asked her if she would allow me to present 
her with a little English “wool” to hang up instead of 


Manrocz. | COURTLY INTRODUCTIONS. 315 


her mbiigtt curtain on cold days like this. Of course she 
could not decline, and a large double scarlet blanket was 
placed before her. “Oh, wonder of wonders!” exclaimed 
all the spectators, holding their mouths in both hands 
at a time—such a “pattern” had never been seen here 
before. It stretched across the hut, was higher than the 
men could reach—indeed it was a perfect marvel; and 
the man must be a good one who brought such a treasure 
as this to Uddt. “And why not say Uganda?” I asked. 
“ Because all this country is called Uddt. Uganda is per- 
sonified by Mtésa ; and no one can say he has seen Uganda 
until he has been presented to the king.” 

As I had them all in a good humour now, I complained 
I did not see enough of the Waganda—and as every one 
dressed so remarkably well, I could not discern the big 
men from the small; could she not issue some order by 
which they might call on me, as they did not dare do so 
without instruction, and then I, in turn, would call on 
them? Hearing this, she introduced me to her prime 
minister, chancellor of exchequer, women-keepers, hang- 
men, and cooks, as the first nobles in the land, that I 
might recognise them again if | met them on the road. 
All n’yanzigged for this great condescension, and said they 
were delighted with their guest ; then producing a strip 
of common joho to compare it with my blanket, they asked 
if I could recognise it. Of course, said I, it is made in 
my country, of the same material, only of coarser quality, 
_and everything of the same sort is made in Uzungt. 
Then, indeed, said the whole company, in one voice, we 
do like you, and your cloth too—but you most. I modestly 
bowed my head, and said their friendship was my chief 
desire. 

This speech also created great hilarity ; the queen and 
councillors all became uproarious. The queen began to 
sing, and the councillors to jom in chorus; then all sang 
and all drank, and drank and sang, till, in their heated 


316 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


excitement, they turned the palace into a pandemonium ; 
still there was not noise enough, so the band and drums 
were called again, and tomfool—for Uganda, like the old 
European monarchies, always keeps a jester—was made to 
sing in the gruff, hoarse, unnatural voice which he ever 
affects to maintain his character, and furnished with pombé 
when his throat was dry. 

Now all of a sudden, as if a devil had taken possession 
of the company, the prime minister with all the courtiers 
jumped upon their legs, seized their sticks, for nobody can 
carry a spear when visiting, swore the queen had lost her 
heart to me, and running into the yard, returned, charging 
and jabbering at the queen ; retreated and returned again, | 
as if they were going to put an end to her for the guilt of 
loving me, but really to show their devotion and true love 
to her. The queen professed to take this ceremony with 
calm indifference, but her face showed that she enjoyed it. 
I was now getting very tired of sitting on my low stool, 
and begged for leave to depart, but N’yamasoré would not 
hear of it; she loved me a great deal too much to let me 
go away at this time of day, and forthwith ordered in 
more pombé. The same roystering scene was repeated ; 
cups were too small, so the trough was employed; and the 
queen graced it by drinking, pig-fashion, first, and then 
handing it round to the company. 

Now, hoping to produce gravity and then to slip away, 
I asked if my medicines had given her any relief, that I 
might give her more to strengthen her. She said she 
could not answer that question just yet; for though the 
medicine had moved her copiously, as yet she had seen no 
snake depart from her. I told her I would give her some 
strengthening medicine in the morning: for the present, 
however, I would take my leave, as the day was far gone, 
and the distance home very great; but though I dragged 


my body away, my heart would still remain here, for I 
loved her much. 


Marcz. | A MESSAGE FROM THE KING. 317 


This announcement took all by surprise ; they looked 
at me and then at her, and looked again and laughed, 
whilst I rose, waved my hat, and said, “Ktta héri, Bibi” 
(good-bye, madam). On reaching home I found Maribi, 
a Mkungit, with a gang of men sent by Mtésa to fetch 
Grant from Kitangilé by water. He would not take any 
of my men with him to fetch the kit from Karagiié, as 
Mtésa, he said, had given him orders to find all the means 
of transport ; so I gave him a letter to Grant, and told 
him to look sharp, else Grant would have passed the Kit- 
angttlé before he arrived there. “Never mind,” says 
Maribi, “I shall walk to the mouth of the Katonga, boat 
it to Sésé island, where Mtésa keeps all his large vessels, 
and I shall be at Kitangilé in a very short time.” 
 4th—I sent Bombay off to administer quinine to the 
queen ; but the king’s pages, who watched him making 
for her gateway, hurried up to him, and turned him back 
by force. He pleaded earnestly that I would flog him if 
he disobeyed my orders, but they would take all the 
responsibility—the king had ordered it; and then they, 
forging a lie, bade him run back as fast as he could, saying 
I wanted to see the king, but could not till his return. 
In this way poor Bombay returned to me half-drowned in 
perspiration. Just then another page hurried in with 
orders to bring me to the palace at once, for I had not 
been there these four days; and while I was preparing to 
express the proper amount of indignation at this uncere- 
monious message, the last impudent page began rolling 
like a pig upon my mbiigiied or carpeted floor, till I 
stormed and swore I would turn him out unless he chose 
to behave more respectfully before my majesty, for I was 
no peddling merchant, as he had been accustomed to see, 
and would not stand it; moreover, 1 would not leave my 
hut at the summons of the king or anybody else, until I 
chose to do so. 

This expression of becoming wrath brought every one to 


318 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


a sense of his duty; and I then told them all I was exces- 
sively angry with Mtésa for turning back my messenger ; 
nobody had ever dared do such a thing before, and I would 
never forgive the king until my medicines had been given 
to the queen. As for my going to the palace, it was out 
of the question, as I had repeatedly before told the king, 
unless it pleased him to give me a fitting residence near 
himself. In order now that full weight should be given 
to my expressions, I sent Bombay with the quinine to the 
king, in company with the boys, to give an account of all 
that had happened; and further, to say I felt exceedingly 
distressed I could not go to see him constantly—that I 
was ashamed of my domicile—the sun was hot to walk 
in; and when IJ went to the palace, his officers in waiting 
always kept-me waiting like a servant—a matter hurtful 
to my honour and dignity. It now rested with himself 
to remove these obstacles. Everybody concerned in this 
matter left for the palace but Mata, who said he must 
stop in camp to look after Bana. Bombay no sooner 
arrived in the palace, and saw the king upon his throne, 
than Mtésa asked him why he came? “By the instructions 
of Bana,” was his reply—‘“for Bana cannot walk in the 
sun ; no white man of the sultan’s breed can do so.” 
Hearing this, the king rose in a huff, without deigning 
to reply, and busied himself in another court. Bombay, 
still sitting, waited for hours till quite tired, when he sent 
a boy in to say he had not delivered half my message ; he 
had brought medicine for the queen, and as yet he had 
no reply for Bana, Hither with haughty indifference, or 
else with injured pride at his not being able to command 
me at his pleasure, the king sent word, if medicine is 
brought for the queen, then let it be taken to her; and so 
Bombay walked off to the queen’s palace. Arrived there, 
he sent in to say he had brought medicine, and waited 
without a reply till nightfall, when, tired of his charge, 
he gave the quinine into N’yamgundt’s hands for delivery, 


Marcu.] JEALOUSY BETWEEN MOTHER AND Son, 319 


and returned home. Soon after, however, N’yameundtt 
also returned to say the queen would not take the dose 
to-day, but hoped I would administer it personally in the 
morning. 

Whilst all this vexatious business had been going on 
in court—evidently dictated by extreme jealousy, because 
I showed, as they all thought, a preference for the 
queen—Maitila, more than tipsy, brought a Mkungti of 
some standing at court before me, contrary to all law— 
for as yet no Mganda, save the king’s pages, had ever 
dared enter even the precincts of my camp. With a 
scowling, determined, hang-dog-looking countenance, he 
walked impudently into my hut, and, taking down. the 
pombé-suckers the queen had given me, showed them 
with many queer gesticulations, intended to insinuate 
there was something between the queen and me. Among 
his jokes were, that I must never drink pombé excepting 
with these sticks; if I wanted any when I leave Uganda, 
to show my friends, she would give me twenty more sticks 
of that sort if I liked them; and, turning from verbal 
to practical jocularity, the dirty fellow took my common 
sucker out of the pot, inserted one of the queen’s, and 
sucked at it himself, when I snatched and threw it away. 

Maiila’s friend, who, I imagined, was a spy, then asked 
me whom I liked most—the mother or the son ; but, with- 
out waiting to hear me, Matila hastily said, “The mother, 
the mother, of course! he does not care for Mtésa, and 
won't go to see him.” The friend coaxingly responded, 
“Oh no; he likes Mtésa, and will go and see him too; 
won't you?” I declined, however, to answer, from fear of 
mistake, as both interpreters were away. Still the two 
went on talking to themselves, Matila swearing that [ 
loved the mother most, whilst the friend said, No, he 
loves the son, and asking me with anxious looks, till they 
found I was not to be caught by chaff, and then, both 
tired, walked awdy—the friend advising me, next time I 


320 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


went to court, to put on an Arab’s gown, as trousers are 
indecent in the estimation of every Mganda. 

5th.—Alarmed at having got involved in something 
that looked like court intrigues, I called up N’yamgundi; 
told him all that happened yesterday, both at the two 
courts and with Maiila at home; and begged him to apply 
to the king for a meeting of five elders, that a proper 
understanding might be arrived at; but instead of doing 
as I desired, he got into a terrible fright, calling Maiila, 
and told me if I pressed the matter in this way men 
would lose their lives. Meanwhile the cunning black- 
guard Matila begged for pardon; said I quite misunder- 
stood his meaning; all he had said was that I was very 
fortunate, being in such favour at court, for the king and : 
queen both equally loved me. 

N’yamgundtt now got orders to go to Karagtié over- 
land for Dr K’yengo ; but, dreading to tell me of it, as I 
had been so kind to him, he forged a falsehood, said he 
had leave to visit his home for six days, and begged for 
a wire to sacrifice to his church. I gave him what he 
wanted, and away he went. I then heard his servants 
had received orders to go overland for Grant and K’yengo; 
so I wrote another note to Grant, telling him to come 
sharp, and bring all the property by boat that he could 
carry, leaving what he could not behind in charge of 
Rttmanika. 

At noon, the plaguy little imps of pages hurried in to 
order the attendance of all my men fully armed before 
the king, as he wished to seize some refractory officer. 
I declined this abuse of my arms, and said I should first 
go and speak to the king on the subject myself, ordering 
the men on no account to go on such an errand; and 
saying this, 1 proceeded towards the palace, leaving in- 
structions for those men who were not ready to follow. 
As the court messengers, however, objected to our going 
in detachments, I told Bombay to wait for the rest, and 


Maron. | AN UNAUTHORISED FORAY. 321 


hurry on to overtake me. Whilst lingering on the way, 
every minute expecting to see my men, the Wazinza, who 
had also received orders to seize the same officer, passed 
me, going to the place of attack, and, at the same time, 
I heard my men firing in a direction exactly opposite to 
the palace. I now saw I had been duped, and returned 
to my hut to see the issue. The boys had deceived us 
all. Bombay, tricked on the plea of their taking him by 
a short cut to the palace, suddenly found himself with all 
the men opposite the fenced gardens that had to be taken 
—the establishment of the recusant officer,—and the boys, 
knowing how eager all blacks are to loot, said, “Now, 
then, at the houses; seize all you can, sparing nothing— 
men, women, or children, mbtigtis or cowries, all alike— 
for it is the order of the king ;” and in an instant my men 
surrounded the place, fired their guns, and rushed upon 
the inmates. One was speared forcing his way through the 
fence, but the rest were taken and brought triumphantly 
into my camp. It formed a strange sight in the establish- 
ment of an English gentleman, to see my men flushed 
with the excitement of their spoils, staggering under loads 
of mbtigt, or leading children, mothers, goats, and dogs off 
in triumph to their respective huts. Bombay alone, of 
all my men, obeyed my orders, touching nothing; and 
when remonstrated with for having led the men, he said 
he could not help it—the boys had deceived him in the 
same way as they had tricked me. 

It was now necessary that I should take some critical 
step in African diplomacy ; so, after ordering all the 
seizures to be given up to Matila on behalf of the king, 
and threatening to discharge any of my men who dared 
retain one item of the property, I shut the door of my 
hut to do penance for two days, giving orders that no- 
body but my cook Ilmas, not even Bombay, should come 
near me; for the king had caused my men to sim—had 

x 


B22 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


disgraced their red cloth—and had inflicted on me a 
greater insult than I could bear. I was ashamed to show 
my face. Just as the door was closed, other pages from 
the king brought the Whitworth rifle to be cleaned, and 
demanded an admittance; but no one dared approach 
me, and they went on their way again. 

6th.—I still continued to do penance. Bombay, by my 
orders, issued from within, prepared for a visit to the king, 
to tell him all that~had happened yesterday, and also to 
ascertain if the orders for sending my men on a plunder- 
ing mission had really emanated from himself, when the 
bothering pages came again, bringing a gun and knife to 
be mended. My door was found shut, so they went to 
Bombay, asked him to do it, and told him the king de-— 
sired to know if I would go shooting with him in the 
morning. The reply was, “No; Bana is praying to-day 
that Mtésa’s sms might be forgiven him for having com-— 
mitted such an injury to him, sending his soldiers on a 
mission that did not become them, and without his 
sanction too. He is very angry about it, and wishes to 
know if it was done by the kine’s orders.” The boys said, 
“Nothing can be done without the king’s orders.” After 
further discussion, Bombay mtimated that I wished the 
king to send me a party of five elderly officers to counsel 
with, and set all disagreeables to rights, or I would not go 
to the palace again; but the boys said there were no 
elderly gentlemen at court, only boys such as themselves. 
Bombay now wished to go with them before the king, to 
explain matters to him, and to give him all the red cloths 
of my men, which I took from them, because they defiled 
their uniform when plundermg women and children ; but 
the boys said the king was unapproachable just then, being 
engaged shooting cows before his women. He then wished 
the boys to carry the cloth ; but they declined, saying it 
was contrary to orders for anybody to handle cloth, and 
they could not do it. 


Manrcz. ] A VISIT TO COURT. 323 


-CHAPTER XII < 


PALACE, UGANDA—Continued. 


CONTINUED DIPLOMATIC DIFFICULTIES — NEGRO CHAFFING — THE 
KING IN A NEW COSTUME—ADJUTANT AND HERON SHOOTING 
AT COURT—MY RESIDENCE CHANGED—SCENES AT COURT— 
THE KAMRAVIONA, OR COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF—QUARRELS—CON- 
FIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE KING—-COURT EXECU- 
TIONS AND EXECUTIONERS—ANOTHER DAY WITH THE QUEEN. 


7th—TueE farce continued, and how to manage these 
haughty capricious blacks puzzled my brains considerably ; 
but I felt that if I did not stand up now, no one would 
ever be treated better hereafter. I sent Nasib to the 
queen, to explain why I had not been to see her. I de- 
sired to do so, because I admired her wisdom ; but before 
I went I must first see the king, to provide against any 
insult being offered to me, such as befell Bombay when I 
sent him with medicine. Having despatched him, I re- 
paired again to the palace. In the ante-chamber I found 
a number of Wakungit, as usual, lounging about on the 
ground, smoking, chatting, and drinking pombé, whilst 
Wasoga amused them singing and playing on lap-harps, 
and little boys kept time on the harmonicon. 

These Wakungii are naturally patient attendants, being 
well trained to the duty; for their very lives depend upon 
their presenting themselves at court a certain number of 
months every year, no matter from what distant part of 


324 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


the country they have to come. If they failed, their 
estates would be confiscated, and their lives taken unless 
they could escape. I found a messenger who consented 
to tell the king of my desire to see him. He returned to 
say that the king was sleeping—a palpable falsehood. In 
a huff, I walked home to breakfast, leaving my attendants, 
Maiila and Ulédi, behind to make explanations. They saw _ 
the king, who simply asked, “ Where is Bana?” And on 
being told that I came, but went off again, he said, as I 
was informed, “That is a lie, for had he come here to see 
me he would not have returned ;” then rising, he walked 
away and left the men to follow me. 

I continued ruminating on these absurd entanglements, 
and the best way of dealing with them, when lo! to per- 
plex me still more, in ran a bevy of the royal pages to ask 
for mtendé beads—a whole sack of them; for the king 
wished to go with his women on a pilgrimage to the 
N’yanza. Thinking myself very lucky to buy the king’s 
ear so cheaply, I sent Maitla as before, adding that I con- 
sidered my luck very bad, as nobody here knew my posi- 
tion in society, else they would not treat me as they did. 
My proper sphere was the palace, and unless I got a hut 
there, I wished to leave the country. My first desire had 
always been to see the king; and if he went to the N’yanza, 
I trusted he would allow me to go there also. The boys 
replied, “ How can you go with his women? No one ever 
is permitted to see them.” “Well,” said I, “if I cannot 
go to the N’yanza with him” (thinking only of the great 
lake, whereas they probably meant a pond in the palace 
enclosures, where Mtésa constantly frolics with his women), 
“T wish to go to Usoga and Amara, as far as the Masai; 
for | have no companions here but crows and vultures.” 
They promised to take the message, but its delivery was 
quite another thing; for no one can speak at this court 


till he is spoken to, and a word put in out of season is a 
life lost. 


Marce. | MESSAGE FROM THE KING. 325 


On Matila’s return, I was told the king would not be- 
lieve so generous a man as Bana could have sent him so 
few beads; he believed most of my store must have been 
stolen on the road, and would ask me about that to-mor- 
row. He intimated that for the future I must fire a gun 
at the waiting-hut whenever I entered the palace, so that 
he might hear of my arrival, for he had been up that 
morning, and would have been glad to see me, only the 
boys, from fear of entering his cabinet, had forged a lie, 
and deprived him of any interview with me, which he 
had long wished-to get. This ready cordiality was as 
perplexing asall the rest. Could it be possible, I thought, 
[ had been fighting with a phantom all this while, and 
yet the king had not been able to perceive it? At all 
events, now, as the key to his door had been given, I would 
make good use of it and watch the result. Meanwhile 
Nasib returned from the queen-dowager’s palace without 
having seen her majesty, though he had waited there 
patiently the whole day long, for she was engaged in 
festivities, incessantly drumming and playing, in con- 
sequence of the birth of twins (Mabassa), which had just 
taken place in her palace; but he was advised to return 
on the morrow. 

8th.—After breakfast I walked to the palace, thinking 
I had gained all I wanted; entered, and fired guns, ex- 
pecting an instant admittance; but, as usual, I was re- 
quired to sit and wait ; the king was expected immediately. 
All the Wakungtt talked in whispers, and nothing was 
heard but the never-ceasing harps and harmonicons. In 
a little while I felt tired of the monotony, and wished to 
hang up a curtain, that I might lie down in privacy and 
sleep till the king was ready ; but the officers in waiting 
forbade this, as contrary to law, and left me the only 
alternative of walking up and down the court to kill 
time, spreading my umbrella against the powerful rays 
of the sun. A very little of that made me fidgety and 


326 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


impetuous, which the Waganda noticed, and from fear of 
the consequences, they began to close the gate to prevent 
my walking away. I flew out on them, told Bombay to 
notice the disrespect, and shamed them into opening it 
again. The king immediately, on hearing of this, sent 
me pombé to keep me quiet ; but as I would not touch it, 
saying I was sick at heart, another page rushed out to say 
the king was ready to receive me; and, opening a side 
gate leading into a small open court without a hut in it, 
there, to be sure, was his majesty, sitting on an Arab’s 
donkey-rug, propped against one page, and encompassed 
by four others. 

On confronting him, he motioned me to sit, which I did | 
upon my bundle of grass, and, finding it warm, asked leave 
to open my umbrella. He was much struck at the 
facility with which I could make shade, but wondered 
still more at my requiring it. I explained to him that | 
my skin was white because I lived in a colder country 
than his, and therefore was much more sensitive to the 
heat of the sun than his black skin; adding, at the same 
time, if it gave no offence, 1 would prefer sitting in the 
shade of the court fence. He had no objection, and opened 
conversation by asking who it was that gave me such of- 
fence in taking my guard from me to seize his Wakungt. 
The boy who had provoked me was then dragged in, tied 
by his neck and hands, when the king asked him by whose 
orders he had acted in such a manner, knowing that I 
objected to it, and wished to speak to him on the subject 
first. The poor boy, in a dreadful fright, said he had 
acted under instructions of the Kamraviona: there was 
no harm done, for Bana’s men were not hurt. “Well, 
then,” said the king, “if they were not injured, and you 
only did as you were ordered, no fault rests with you; but 
begone out of my sight, for I cannot bear to see you, and 
the Kamraviona shall be taught a lesson not to meddle 
with my guests again until I give him authority to do so.” 


Marcz. | A CONFIDENTIAL INTERVIEW. 327 


I now hoped, as I had got the king all by himself, and 
apparently in a good humour with me, that I might give 
him a wholesome lesson on the manners and customs of 
the English nation, to show how much I felt the slights I 
had received since my residence in Uganda ; but he never 
lost his dignity and fussiness as an Uganda king. My 
words must pass through his Mkungt, as well as my 
interpreter’s, before they reached him; and, as he had 
no patience, everything was lost, till he suddenly asked 
Maiila, pretending not to know, where my hut was; why 
everybody said I lived so far away; and when told, he 
said, “Oh! that is very far, he must come nearer.” Still 
I could not say a word, his fussiness and self-importance 
overcoming his inquisitiveness.. 

Rain now fell, and the king retired by one gate, whilst 
I was shown out of another, until the shower was over. 
As soon as the sky was clear again, we returned to the 
little court, and this time became more confidential, as he 
asked many questions about England—such as, Whether 
the Queen knew anything about medicines? whether 
she kept a number of women as he did? and what her 
palace was like ?—which gave me an opportunity of say- 
ing I would like to see his ships, for I heard they were 
very numerous—and also his menagerie, said to be full of 
wonderful animals. He said the vessels were far off, but 
he would send for them; and although he once kept a 
large number of animals, he killed them all im practising 
with his guns. The Whitworth rifle was then brought in 
for me to take to pieces and teach him the use of ; and then 
the chronometer. He then inquired if I would like to go 
shooting ? I said, “ Yes, if he would accompany me—not 
otherwise.” “ Hippopotami?” “ Yes; there is great fun 
in that, for they knock the boats over when they charge 
from below.” “Can you swim?” “Yes,” “So can I. 
And would you like to shoot buffalo?” “Yes, if you 
will go.” “At night, then, I will send my keepers to 


328 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


look out for them. Here is a leopard-cat, with white 
behind its ears, and a Ndézi porcupine, of the short- 
quilled kind, which my people eat with great relish ; and 
if you are fond of animals, I will give you any number of 
specimens, for my keepers net and bring in live animals 
of every kind daily ; for the present, you can take this 
basket of porcupines home for your dinner.” My men 
nyanzigged—the king walked away, giving orders for 
another officer to follow up the first who went to Ukori, 
and bring Petherick quickly—and I went home. 

This was to be a day of varied success. When I 
arrived at my hut I found a messenger sent by the 
queen, with a present of a goat, called “fowls for Bana, 
my son,” and a load of plantains, called potatoes, waiting 
for me; so I gave the bearer a fundo of mtendé beads, 
and told again the reasons why I had not been able to call 
upon the queen, but hoped to do so shortly, as the king 
had promised me a house near at hand. I doubt, how- 
ever, whether one word of my message ever reached her. 
That she wanted me at her palace was evident by the 
present, though she was either too proud or too cautious 
to say so. 

At night I overheard a chat between Sangizo, a 
Myamtiézi, and Ntalo, a freed man of Zanzibar, very 
characteristic of their way of chaffing. Sangizo opened 
the battle by saying, “ Ntalo, who are you?” NWN. “A 
Mgtiana” (freed man). S. “A Mgtiana, indeed! then 
where is your mother?” N. “She died at Angtija.” 
S. “Your mother died at Angtija! then where is your 
father?” N. “He died at Angiija likewise.” (S. “Well, 
that is strange; and where are your brothers and sisters ?” 
N. “They all died at Angija.” S. (then changing the 
word Angtija for Angtiza, says to Ntalo) “I think you 
said your mother and father both died at Angtiza, did you 
not?” N. “Yes, at Angtiza.” S. “Then you had two 
mothers and two fathers—one set died at Angtija, and 


Marc. | NEGRO CHAFFING. 329 


the other set at Angiza; you are a humbug; I don’t 
believe you; you are no Mgtiana, but a slave who has 
been snatched from his family, and does not know where 
any of his family are. Ah! ah! ah!” And all the men 
of the camp laugh together at the wretched Ntalo’s defeat; 
but Ntalo won’t be done, so retorts by saying, “ Sangizo, 
you may laugh at me because I am an orphan, but what 
are you? you are a savage—a Mshenzi; you come from 
the Mashenzi, and you wear skins, not cloths, as men do; 
so hold your impudent tongue ;”—and the camp pealed 
with merry boisterous laughter again. 

9th.—Early in the morning, and whilst I was in bed, 
the king sent his pages to request me to visit his royal 
mother, with some specific for the itch, with which her 
majesty was then afflicted. I said I could not go so far 
in the sun; I would wait till I received the promised 
palace near her. In the meanwhile I prepared to call on 
him. — I observed, in fact, that I was an object of jealousy 
between the two courts, and that, if I acted skilfully and 
decidedly, I might become master of the situation, and 
secure my darling object of a passage northwards. The 
boys returned, bringing a pistol to be cleaned, and a mes- 
sage to say it was no use my thinking of calling on the 
king—that I must go to the queen immediately, for she 
was very ill. So far the queen won the day, but I did 
not obtain my new residence, which [ considered the first 
step to accomplishing the greater object ; I therefore put 
the iron farther in the fire by saying I was no man’s 
slave, and I should not go until I got a house in the 
palace—Bombay could teach the boys the way to clean 
the pistol. The pert monkeys, however, turned up their 
noses at such menial service, and Ulédi was instructed in 
their stead. 
_ 10¢h,—To surprise the queen, and try another dodge, 

I called on her with all my dining things and bedding, 
to make a day of it, and sleep the mght. She admitted 


330 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


me at once, when I gave her quinine, on the proviso that I 
should stop there all day and night to repeat the dose, and 
tell her the reason why I did not come before. She affected 
great anger at Mtésa having interfered with my servants 
when coming to see her—sympathised with me on the 
distance I had to travel—ordered a hut to be cleared for 
me ere night—told me to eat my breakfast in the next 
court—and, rising abruptly, walked away. At noon we 
heard the king approaching with his drums and rattle- 
traps, but I still waited on till 5 p.m., when, on summons, 
I repaired to the throne-hut. Here I heard, in an adjoin- 
ing court, the boisterous, explosive laughs of both mother 
and son—royal shouts loud enough to be heard a mile off, 
and inform the community that their sovereigns were 
pleased to indulge in hilarity. Immediately afterwards, 
the gate between us being thrown open, the king, like a 
very child, stood before us, dressed for the first time, in 
public, in what Europeans would call clothes. For a cap 
he wore a Muscat alfia, on his neck a silk Arab turban, 
fastened with armg. Then for a coat he had an Indian 
kizbow, and for trousers a yellow woollen doti; whilst in 
his hand, in imitation of myself, he kept running his ram- 
rod backwards and forwards through his fingers. As I 
advanced and dofied my hat, the king, smiling, entered 
the court, followed by a budding damsel dressed in red 
bindera, who carried the chair I had presented to him, 
and two new spears. 

He now took his seat for the first time upon a chair, for 
I had told him, at my last interview, that all kings were 
expected to bring out some new fashion, or else the world 
would never make progress; and I was directed to sit 
before him on my grass throne. Talking, though I longed 
to enter into conversation, was out of ‘the question ; for 
no one dared speak for me, and I could not talk myself; 
so we sat and grinned, till in a few minutes the queen, 
full of smirks and smiles, joined us, and sat on a mbtiett. 


Marcn. ] MTESA IN FULL DRESS. 331 


I offered the medicine-chest as a seat, but she dared not 
take it; in fact, by the constitution of Uganda, no one, 
_however high in rank, not even his mother, can sit before 
the king. After sundry jokes, whilst we were all bursting 
with laughter at the theatrical phenomenon, the Wakungitt 
who were present, some twenty in number, threw them- 
selves in line upon their bellies, and, wriggling like fish, 
nyanzigged, n’goned, and demaned, and uttered other 
wonderful words of rejoicing —as, for instance, “ Hai 
Minangé! Hai Mkama wangi!” (O my chief! O my 
king!)—whilst they continued floundering, kicking about 
their legs, rubbing their faces, and patting their hands 
upon the ground, as if the king had performed some act 
of extraordinary munificence by showing himself to them 
in that strange and new position—a thing quite enough 
to date a new Uganda era from. 

The king, without deigning to look upon his grovelling 
subjects, said, “ Now, mother, take your medicine ;” for 
he had been called solemnly to witness the medical treat- 
ment she was undergoing at my hands. When she had 
swallowed her quinine with a wry face, two very black 
virgins appeared on the stage holding up the double red 
blanket I had given the queen; for nothing, however 
trifling, can be kept secret from the king. The whole 
court was in raptures. The king signified his approval 
by holding his mouth, putting his head on one side, and 
looking askance at it. The queen looked at me, then at 
the blanket and her son in turn; whilst my men hung 
down their heads, fearful lest they should be accused of 
looking at the ladies of the court; and the Wakungti 
nyanzigged again, as if they could not contain the grati- 
fication they felt at the favour shown them. Nobody 
had ever brought such wonderful things to Uganda before, 
and all loved Bana. 

Till now I had expected to vent my wrath on both to- 
gether for all past grievances, but this childish, merry, 


332 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


homely scene—the mother holding up her pride, her son, 
before the state officers—melted my heart at once. I 
laughed as well as they did, and said it pleased me ex- 
cessively to see them both so happy together. It was well 
the king had broken through the old-fashioned laws of 
Uganda, by sitting on an iron chair, and adopting Euro- 
pean dresses ; for now he was opening a road to cement 
his own dominions with my country. I should know 
what things to send that would please him. The king 
listened, but without replying ; and said, at the conclusion, 
“Tt is late, now let us move ;” and walked away, preserv- 
ing famously the lion’s gait. The mother also vanished, 
and I was led away to a hut outside, prepared for my 
night’s residence. It was a small, newly-built hut, just 
large enough for my bed, with a corner for one servant ; 
so I turned all my men away, save one—ate my dinner, 
and hoped to have a quiet cool night of it, when suddenly 
Matila flounced in with all his boys, lighting a fire, and 
‘they spread their mbtigtis for the night. In vain I pleaded 
I could not stand the suffocation of so many men, especi- 
ally of Waganda, who eat raw plantains ; and unless they 
turned out, I should do so, to benefit by the pure air. 
Maitila said he had the queen’s orders to sleep with Bana, 
and sleep there he would; so rather than kick him out, 
_ which I felt inclined to do, I smoked my pipe and drank 
pombé all night, turning the people out and myself in, in 
the morning, to prepare for a small house-fight with the 
queen. 
11th.—Early in the morning, as I expected, she de- 
manded my immediate attendance; and so the little 
diplomatic affair I had anticipated came on. I begin the 
game by intimating that I am in bed, and have not break- 
fasted. So at 10 a.m. another messenger arrives, to say 
her majesty is much surprised at my not coming. What 
can such conduct mean, when she arranged everything so 
nicely for me after my own desire, that she might drink 


Marcu. | HER MAJESTY IN A- PASSION, 333 


her medicine properly? Still I am not up; but nobody 
will let me rest from fear of the queen ; so, to while away 

the time, I order Bombay to call upon her, give the 
~ quinine, and tell her all that has happened ; at which she 
flies into a towering rage, says she will never touch 
medicine administered by any other hands but mine, and 
will not believe in one word Bombay says, either about 
Matila or the hut; for Matila, whose duty necessarily 
obliged him to take my servants before her majesty, had 
primed her with a lot of falsehoods on the subject ; and 
she had a fondness for Matila, because he was a clever 
humbug and exceeding rogue—and sent Bombay back to 
fetch me, for nobody had ever dared disobey her mandates 
before. 

It had now turned noon, and being ready for the visit, I 
went to see the queen. Determined to have her turn, she 
kept me waiting for a long time before she would show 
herself; and at last, when she came, she flounced up to 
her curtain, lay down in a huff, and vented her wrath, 
holding her head very high, and wishing to know how I 
could expect officers, with large establishments, to be 
turned out of their homes merely to give me room for one 
night; I ought to have been content with my fare ; it 
was no fault of Matila’s. I tried to explain through Nasib, 
but she called Nasib a liar, and listened to Matila who told 
the lies; then asked for her medicine; drank it, saying it 
was a small dose; and walked off in ill humour as she 
had come. I now made up my mind to sit till 3 PM, 
hoping to see the queen again, whilst talking with some 
Kidi officers, who, contrary to the general law of the 
country, indulged me with some discourses on geo- 
graphy, from which I gathered, though their stories were 
rather confused, that beyond the Asiia river, in the Galla 
country, there was another lake which was navigated by 
the inhabitants in very large vessels ; and somewhere in 
the same neighbourhood there was an exceedingly high 


334 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


mountain covered with yellow dust, which the natives 
collected, &c. &e. 

Time was drawing on, and as the queen would not 
appear of her own accord, I sent to request a friendly 
conversation with her before I left, endeavouring, as well 
as I could, to persuade her that the want of cordiality 
between. us was owing to the mistakes of interpreters, who 
had not conveyed to her my profound sentiments of 
devotion. This brotight her gracious corpulence out all 
smirks and smiles, preceded by a basket of sweet potatoes 
for “Bana, my son.” I began conversation with a speech 
of courtesy, explaining how I had left my brother Grant 
and my great friend Rimanika at Karagtié—hastening, 
in compliance with the invitation of the king, to visit 
him and herself, with the full hope of making friends in 
Uganda ; but now I had come, I was greatly disappointed ; 
for I neither saw half enough of their majesties, nor did 
any of their officers ever call upon me to converse and 
pass away the dreary hours. All seemed highly pleased, 
and complimented my speech; while the queen, turning 
to her officers, said, “If that is the case, I will send these 
men to you;” whereupon the officers, highly delighted at 
the prospect of coming to see me, and its consequence a 
present, n’yanzigged until I thought their hands would 
drop off. Then her majesty, to my thorough annoyance, 
and before I had finished half I had to say, rose from her 
seat, and, showing her broad stern to the company, walked 
straight away. The officers then drew near me, and 
begged I would sleep there another night; but as they 
had nothing better to offer than the hut of last night, I 
declined, and went my way, begging them to call and 
make friends with me. 

12th.—Immediately after breakfast the king sent his 
pages in a great hurry to say he was waiting on the hill 
for me, and begged I would bring all my guns immediately. 
I prepared, thinking, naturally enough, that some buffaloes 


Marcu. | ADJUTANT-SHOOTING. 335 


had been marked down; for the boys, as usual, were per- 
fectly ignorant of his designs. To my surprise, however, 
when I mounted the hill half-way to the palace, I found 
the king standing, dressed in a rich filigreed waistcoat, 
trimmed with gold embroidery, tweedling the loading-rod 
in his finger, and an alfia cap on his head, whilst his 
pages held his chair and guns, and a number of officers, 
with dogs and goats for offerings, squatting before him. 

When I arrived, hat in hand, he smiled, examined my 
firearms, and proceeded for sport, leading the way to a 
high tree, on which some adjutant birds were nesting, and 
numerous vultures resting. This was the sport; Bana 
must shoot a nundo (adjutant) for the king’s gratification. 
I begged him to take a shot himself, as I really could not 
demean myself by firing at birds sitting on a tree; but it 
was all of no use—no one could shoot as I could, and they 
must be shot. I proposed frightening them out with 
stones, but no stone could reach so high; so, to cut the 
matter short, I killed an adjutant on the nest, and, as the 
vultures flew away, brought one down on the wing, which 
fell in a garden enclosure. 

The Waganda were for a minute all spell-bound with 
astonishment, when the king jumped frantically in the air, 
clapping his hands above his head, and singing out, “ Woh, 
woh, woh! what wonders! Oh, Bana, Bana! what mir- 
acles he performs!”—and all the Wakungt followed in 
chorus. “Now load, Bana—load, and let us see you do 
it,” eried the excited king; but before I was half loaded, 
he said, “Come along, come along, and let us see the bird.” 
Then directing the officers which way to go—for, by the 
etiquette of the court of Uganda, every one must precede 
the king—he sent them through a court where his women, 
afraid of the gun, had been concealed. Here the rush 


“ 


onward was stopped by newly made fences, but the king» 


roared to the officers to knock them down. This was no 
sooner said than done, by the attendants in a body shoving 


536 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


on and trampling them under, as an elephant would crush 
small trees to keep his course. So pushing, floundering 
through plantain and shrub, pell-mell one upon the other, 
that the king’s pace might not be checked, or any one 
come in for a royal kick or blow, they came upon the 
prostrate bird. “Woh, woh, woh!” cried the king again, 
“there he is, sure enough ; come here, women—come and 
look what wonders!” And all the women, in the highest 
excitement, “woh-wohed” as loud as any of the men. 
But that was not enough. “Come along, Bana,” said the 
king, “we must have some more sport ;” and, saying this, 
he directed the way towards the queen’s palace, the 
attendants leading, followed by the pages, then the king, — 
next myself—for I never would walk before him—and 
finally the women, some forty or fifty, who constantly 
attended him. 

To make the most of the king’s good-humour, while I 
wanted to screen myself from the blazing sun, I asked him 
if he would like to enjoy the pleasures of an umbrella ; 
and before he had time to answer, held mine over him as 
we walked side by side. The Wakungti were astonished, 
and the women prattled in great delight ; whilst the king, 
hardly able to control himself, sidled and spoke to his 
flatterers as if he were doubly created monarch of all he 
surveyed. He then, growing more familiar, said, “ Now, 
Bana, do tell me—did you not shoot that bird with some- 
thing more than common ammunition? J] am sure you 
did, now ; there was magic in it.” And all I said to the 
contrary would not convince him. “But we will see 
again.” “At buffaloes?” I said. “No, the buffaloes are 
too far off now; we will wait to go after them until I 
have given you a hut close by.” Presently, as some 
herons were flying overhead, he said, “ Now, shoot, shoot!” 
and I brought a couple down right and left. He stared, 
and everybody stared, believing me to be a magician, 
when the king said he would like to have pictures of the 


Marcu. ] ROYAL IDEAS OF SPORT. Bay 


birds drawn and hung up in the palace; “but let us go 
and shoot some more, for it is truly wonderful.” Similar 
results followed, for the herons were continually whirl- 
ing round, as they had their nests upon a neighbouring 
tree ; and then the king ordered his pages to carry all 
the birds, save the vulture—which, for some reason, they 
did not touch—and show them to the queen. 

He then gave the order to move on, and we all repaired 
to the palace. Arrived at the usual throne-room, he took 
his seat, dismissed the party of wives who had been follow- 
ing him, as well as the Wakungi, received pombé from 
his female evil-eye averters, and ordered me, with my 
men, to sit in the sun facing him, till I complained of the 
heat, and was allowed to sit by his side. Kites, crows, 
and sparrows were flying about in all directions, and as 
they came within shot, nothing would satisfy the excited 
boy-king but I must shoot them, and his pages take them 
to the queen, till my ammunition was totally expended. 
He then wanted me to send for more shot; and as I told 
him he must wait for more until my brothers come, he 
contented himself with taking two or three sample grains 
and ordering his iron-smiths to make some like them. 

Cows were now driven in for me to kill two with one 
bullet ; but as the off one jumped away when the gun fired, 
the bullet passed through the near one, then through all 
the courts and fences, and away no one knew where. The 
king was delighted, and said he must keep the rifle to 
look at for the night. I now asked permission to speak 
with him on some important matters, when he sent his 
women away, and listened. I said I felt anxious about 
the road on which Mabriki was travelling, to which I 
added that I had ordered him to tell Petherick to come 
here or else to send property to the value of one thou- 
sand dollars; and I felt anxious because some of the 
queen’s officers felt doubtful about Waganda being able 

A'S 


338 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


to penetrate Kidi. He said I need not concern myself 
on that score; he was much more anxious for the white 
men to come here than even I was, and he would not 
send my men into any danger; but it was highly im- 
proper for any of his people to speak about such subjects. 
Then, assembling the women again, he asked me to load 
Whitworth for him, when he shot the remaining cow, 
holding the rifle in both hands close to his thigh. The 
feat, of course, brought forth great and uproarious con- 
gratulations from his women. The day thus ended, and 
I was dismissed. 

13th—Mabrtiki and Bilal come into camp: they re- 
turned last night; but the Waganda escort, afraid of my 
obtaining information of them before the king received 
it, kept them concealed. They had been defeated in 
Usoga, two marches east of Kira, at the residence of 
Nagozigombi, Mtésa’s border officer, who gave them two 
bullocks, but advised their returning at once to inform 
the king that the independent Wasoga had been fighting 
with his dependent Wasoga subjects for some time, and 
the battle would not be over -for two months or more, 
unless he sent an army to their assistance. 

I now sent Bombay to the king to request an inter- 
view, as I had much of importance to tell him; but he 
could not be seen, as he was deep in the interior of the 
palace enjoying the society of his wives. The Kamra- 
viona, however, was found there waiting, as usual, on the 
mere chance of his majesty taking it into his head to 
come out. He asked Bombay if it was true the woman 
he gave me ran away; and when Bombay told him, he — 
said, “Oh, he should have chained her for two or three 
days, until she became accustomed to her residence; for 
women often take fright and run away.in that way, be- 
lieving strangers to be cannibals.” But Bombay replied, 
“She was not good enough for Bana; he let her go off 
like a dog; he wants a young and beautiful Mhiima, or 


Marcu. | A “WEST-END” RESIDENCE OBTAINED. 339 


none at all.” “Ah, well, then, if he is so particular, he 
must wait a bit, for we have none on hand. What I gave. 
him is the sort of creature we give all our guests.” A 
Msoga was sent by the king to take the dead adjutant 
of yesterday out of the nest—for all Wasoga are expert 
climbers, which is not the case with the Waganda ; but 
the man was attacked half-way up the tree by a swarm 
of bees, and driven down again. 
14th.—After all the vexatious haggling for a house, I 
gained my object to-day by a judicious piece of bribery 
which I had intended to accomplish whenever I could. I 
now succeeded in sending—for I could not, under the 
jealous eyes in Uganda, get it done earlier—a present 
of fifteen pints mixed beads, twenty blue eggs, and five 
copper bracelets, to the commander-in-chief, as a mark 
of friendship. At the same time [ hinted that I should 
like him to use his influence in obtaining for me a near 
and respectable residence, where I hoped he, as well as all 
the Waganda nobility, would call upon me; for my life in 
Uganda was utterly miserable, being shut up like a hermit 
by myself every day. The result was, that a number of 
_ huts in a large plantain garden were at once assigned to 
me, on the face of a hill, immediately overlooking and close 
to the main road. It was considered the “ West Hnd.” 
It had never before been occupied by any visitors except- 
ing Wahinda ambassadors; and being near, and in full 
view of the palace, was pleasant and advantageous, as I 
could both hear the constant music, and see the throngs 
_ of people ever wending their way to and from the royal 
abodes. I lost no time in moving all my property, turning 
out the original occupants—in selecting the best hut for 
myself, giving the rest to my three officers—and ordering 
my men to build barracks for themselves, in street form, 
from my hut to the main road. There was one thing 
only left to be done ; the sanitary orders of Uganda re- 
quired every man to build for himself a house of parlia- 


340 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


ment, such being the neat and cleanly nature of the 
Waganda—a pattern to all other negro tribes. 

15th—As nobody could obtain an interview with the 
king yesterday, I went to the palace to-day, and fired three 
shots—a signal which was at once answered from within 
by a double discharge of a gun I had just lent him on his 
returning my rifle. In a little while, as soon as he had 
time to dress, the king, walking like a lon, sallied forth, 
leading his white dog, and beckoned me to follow him to 
the state hut, the court of which was filled with squatting 
men as usual, well dressed, and keeping perfect order. 
He planted himself on his throne, and begged me to sit 
by his side. Then took place the usual scene of a court . 
levee, as described in Chapter X., with the specialty, in 
this instance, that the son of the chief executioner—one 
of the highest officers of state—was led off for execution, 
for some omission or informality in his n’yanzigs, or | 
salutes. 

At this levee sundry Wakungt of rank complained that 
the Wanyambo plundered their houses at night, and rough- 
handled their women, without any respect for their great- 
ness, and, when caught, said they were Bana’s men. Bom- 
bay, who was present, heard the complaint, and declared 
these were Sttwarora’s men, who made use of the proxim- 
ity of my camp to cover their own transgressions. Then 
Stiwarora’s deputation, who were also present, cringed for- 
ward, n’yanzigging like Waganda, and denied the accusa- 
tion, when the king gave all warning that he would find 
out the truth by placing guards on the look-out at night. 

Till this time the king had not heard one word about 
the defeat of the party sent for Petherick. His kingdom 
might have been lost, and he would have been no wiser; 
when the officer who led Mabrttki came’forward and told 
him all that had happened, stating, in addition to what I 
heard before, that they took eighty men with them, and - 
rent into battle three times unsuccessfully. Dismissing 


Marcu. | MAGIC SHOOTING. 341 


business, however, the king turned to me, and said he 
never saw anything so wonderful as my shooting in his 
life ; he was sure it was done by magic, as my gun never 
missed, and he wished I would instruct him in the art. 
When I denied there was any art in shooting, further than 
holding the gun straight, he shook his head, and getting 
me to load his revolving pistol for him, he fired all five 
barrels into two cows before the multitude. He then 
thought of adjutant-shooting with ball, left the court sit- 
ting, desired me to follow him, and, leading the way, went 
into the interior of the palace, where only a few select 
officers were permitted to follow us. The birds were wild, 
and as nothing was done, I instructed him in the way to 
fire from his shoulder, placing the gun in position. He was 
shy at first, and all the people laughed at my handling 
royalty like a schoolboy; but he soon took to it very good- 
naturedly, when I gave him my silk necktie and gold 
cerest-ring, explaining their value, which he could not com- 
prehend, and telling him we gentlemen prided ourselves 
“on never wearing brass or copper. 

He now begged hard for shot; but I told him again his 
only chance of getting any lay in opening the road on- 
wards; it was on this account, I said, I had come to see 
him to-day. He answered, “Iam going to send an army 
to Usoga to force the way from where your men were 
turned back.” But this, I said, would not do for me, as I 
saw his people travelled like geese, not knowing the direc- 
tion of Gani, or where they were going to when sent. I 
proposed that if he would call all his travelling men of 
experience together, I would explain matters to them by 
a map I had brought; for I should never be content till 
I saw Petherick. 

The map was then produced. He seemed to compre- 
hend it immediately, and assembled the desired Wakungt; 
but, to my mortification, he kept all the conversation to 
himself, Waganda fashion ; spoke a lot of nonsense; and 


342 PALACE, UGANDA. |1862. 


then asked his men what they thought had better be done. 
The sages replied, “Oh, make friends, and do the matter 
gently.” But the king proudly raised his head, laughed 
them to scorn, and said, “ Make friends with men who 
have crossed their spears with us already! Nonsense! 
they would only laugh at us; the Uganda spear alone 
shall do it.” Hearing this bravado, the Kamraviona, the 
pages, and the elders, all rose to a man, with their sticks, 
and came charging at their king, swearing they would 
carry out his wishes with their lives. The meeting now 
broke up in the usual unsatisfactory, unfinished manner, 
by the king rising and walking away, whilst I returned 
with the Kamraviona, who begged for ten more blue eggs 
‘in addition to my present to make a full necklace, and 
told my men to call upon him in the morning, when he 
would give me anything I wished to eat. Bombay was 
then ordered to describe what sort of food I lived on 
usually ; when, Mganda fashion, he broke a stick into 
ten bits, each representing a different article, and said, 
“Bana eat mixed food always ;” and explaimed that stick 
No. 1 represented beef; No. 2, mutton; No. 3, fowl; No. 
4, eggs; No. 5, fish; No. 6, potatoes; No. 7, plantains ; 
No. 8, pombé ; No. 9, butter; No. 10, flour. 
16th.—To-day the king was amusing himself among 
his women again, and not to be seen. I sent Bombay 
with ten blue eggs as a present for the Kamraviona, inti- 
mating my desire to call upon him. He sent me a goat 
and ten fowls’ egos, saying he was not visible to strangers 
on business to-day. I inferred that he required the king’s 
permission to receive me. This double failure was a more 
serious affair than a mere slight ; for my cows were eaten 
up, and my men clamouring incessantly for food; and 
though they might by orders help themselves “ kti n’yan- 
gania”—by seizing—from the Waganda, it hurt my feel- 
ings so much to witness this, that I tried from the first 
to dispense with it, telling the king I had always flogged 


Marcu. | A ORISIS. 345 


my men for stealing, and now he turned them into a 
pack of thieves. I urged that he should either allow me 
to purchase rations, or else feed them from the palace as 
Rimanika did ; but he always turned a deaf ear, or said 
that what Sunna his father had introduced it ill became 
him to subvert; and unless my men helped themselves 
they would die of starvation. 

On the present emergency I resolved to call upon the 
queen. On reaching the palace, I sent an officer in to 
announce my arrival, and sat waiting for the reply fully 
half an hour, smoking my pipe, and listening to her in 
the adjoining court, where music was playing, and her 
voice occasionally rent the air with merry boisterous 
laughing. 

The messenger returned to say no one could approach 
her sanctuary or disturb her pleasure at this hour; I must 
wait and bide my time, as the Uganda officers do. Whew ! 
Here was another diplomatic crisis, which had to be dealt 
with in the usual way. “I bide my time!” I said, rising 
in a towering passion, and thrashing the air with my 
ramrod walking-stick, before all the visiting Wakungt, 
“ when the queen has assured me her door would always 
be open to me! I shall leave this court at once, and I 
solemnly swear I shall never set foot in it again, unless 
some apology be made for treating me like a dog.” Then, 
returning home, I tied up all the presents her majesty 
had given me in a bundle, and calling Matila and my 
men together, told them to take them where they came . 
from; for it ill became me to keep tokens of friendship 
when no friendship existed between us. I came to make 
friends with the queen, not to trade or take things from 
her—and so forth. The blackguard Maila, laughing, said, 
“Bana does not know what he is domg; it is a heinous 
offence in Uganda sending presents back ; nobody for 
their lives dare do so to the queen ; her wrath would know 
no bounds. She will say, ‘I took a few trifles from Bana 


344 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


as specimens of his country, but they shall all go back, 
and the things the king has received shall go back also, 
for we are all of one family;’ and then won’t Bana be 
very sorry? Moreover, Wakungii will be killed by dozens, 
and lamentations will reign throughout the court to pro- 
pitiate the devils who brought such disasters on them.” 
Bombay, also in a fright, said, “ Pray don’t do so; you 
don’t know these savages as we do; there is no knowing 
what will happen; if may defeat our journey altogether. 
Further, we have had no food these four days, because 
row succeeds row. If we steal, you flog us; and if we 
ask the Waganda for food, they beat us. We don’t know 
what to do.” I was imperative, however, and said, “ Matila 
must take back these things in the morning, or stand the 
consequences.” In fact, I found that, like the organ- 
grinders in London, to get myself moved on I must make 
myself troublesome. 

17th.—The queen’s presents were taken back by Maitila 
and Nasib, whilst I went to see the Kamraviona. Even 
this gentleman kept me waiting for some time to show 
his own importance, and then admitted me into one of 
his interior courts, where I found him sitting on the 
ground with several elders; whilst Wasoga minstrels 
played on their lap-harps, and sang songs in praise of 
their king, and the noble stranger who wore fine clothes 
and eclipsed all previous visitors. At first, on my ap- 
proach, the haughty young chief, very handsome, and 
twenty years of age, did not raise his head; then he 
begged me to be seated, and even inquired after my 
health, in a listless, condescending kind of manner, as if 
the exertion of talking was too much for his constitution 
or his rank; but he soon gave up this nonsense as I 
began to talk ; inquired, amongst other things, why I did 
not see the Waganda at my house, when I said I should 
so much like to make acquaintance with them, and begged 
to be introduced to the company who were present. 


Marcu. | INTRODUCTIONS TO NOBILITY. 345 


I was now enabled to enlarge the list of topics on which 
it is prohibited to the Waganda to speak or act under pain 
of. death. No one even dare ever talk about the royal 
- pedigree, of the countries that have been conquered, or 
even of any neighbouring countries ; no one dare visit the 
 king’s guests, or be visited by them, without leave, else 
the king, fearing sharers in his plunder, would say, What 
are you plucking our goose for? Neither can any one 
cast his eye for a moment on the women of the palace, 
whether out walking or at home, lest he should be 
accused of amorous intentions. Beads and brass wire, 
exchanged for ivory or slaves, are the only articles of 
foreign manufacture any Mganda can hold in his posses- 
sion. Should anything else be seen in his house—for 
instance, cloth—his property would be confiscated and 
his life taken. 

I was now introduced to the company present, of whom 
one Mgéma, an elderly gentleman of great dignity, had 
the honour to carry Sunna the late king; Mpungt, who 
cooked for Sunna, also ranks high in court; then Usungtt 
and Kiinza, executioners, rank very high, enjoying the 
_greatest confidence with the king; and, finally, Jumba 
-and Natigo, who traced their pedigree to the age of the 
first Uganda king. As I took down a note of their several 
names, each seemed delighted at finding his name written 
down by me; and Kiinza, the executioner, begged as a 
great favour that I would plead to the king to spare his 
son’s life, who, as I have mentioned, was ordered out to 
execution on the last levee day. At first I thought it 
necessary, for the sake of maintaining my dignity, to raise 
objections, and said it would ill become one of my rank to 
make any request that might possibly be rejected ; but as 
the Kamraviona assured me there would be no chance of 
failure, and everybody else agreed with him, I said it 
would give me intense satisfaction to serve him ; and the 
old man squeezed my hand as if overpowered with joy. 


346 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


This meeting, as might be imagined, was a very dull 
one, because the company, being tongue-tied as regards 
everything of external interest, occupied themselves solely 
on matters of home business, or indulged their busy 
tongues, Waganda fashion, in gross flattery of their 
“ j]lustrious visitor.” In imitation of the king, the Kam- 
raviona now went from one hut to another, requesting us 
to follow that we might see all his greatness, and then took 
me alone into a separate court, to show me his women, 
some five-and-twenty of the ugliest in Uganda. This, he 
added, was a mark of respect he had never conferred on 
any person before; but, fearing lest I should misunder- 
stand his meaning and covet any of them, he said, “ Mind 
they are only to be looked at.” 

As we retired to the other visitors, the Kamraviona, in 
return for some courteous remarks of mine, said all the 
Waganda were immensely pleased with my having come 
to visit them ; and as he heard my country is governed 
by a woman, what would I say if he made the Waganda 
dethrone her, and create me king instead? Without 
specially replying, I showed him a map, marking off the 
comparative sizes of British and Waganda possessions, 
and shut him up. The great Kamraviona, or commander- 
in-chief, with all his wives, has no children, and was eager 
to know if my skill could avail to remove this cloud in 
his fortunes. He generously gave me a goat and eggs, 
telling my men they might help themselves to plantains 
from any gardens they liked beyond certain limits, pro- 
vided they did not enter houses or take anything else. 
He then said he was tired, and walked away without 
another word. 

On returning home I found Nasib and Matla waiting 
for me, with all the articles that had been returned to 
the queen very neatly tied together. They had seen her 
majesty, who, on receiving my message, pretended exces- 
sive anger with her doorkeeper for not announcing my — 


Marcz. | UGANDA JUSTICE. 347 


arrival yesterday—flogged him severely—inspected all the 
things returned—folded them up again very neatly with 
her own hands—said she felt much hurt at the mistake 
_ which had arisen, and hoped I would forgive and forget 
it, as her doors would always be open to me. 

I now had a laugh at my friends Mattila and Bombay 
for their misgivings of yesterday, telling them I knew 
more of human nature than they did; but they shook 
their heads, and said it was all very well Bana having 
done it, but if Arabs or any other person had tried the 
same trick, it would have been another affair. “Just 
so,” said 1; “but then, don’t you see, I know my value 
here, which makes all the difference you speak of.” 

18th.— Whilst walking towards the palace to pay the 
king a friendly visit, 1 met two of my men speared on 
the head, and streaming with blood; they had been try- 
ing to help themselves to plantains carried on the heads 
of Waganda; but the latter proving too strong, my 
people seized a boy and woman from their party as wit- 
nesses, according to Uganda law, and ran away with 
them, tied hand and neck together. With this addition 
to my attendance I first called in at the Kamraviona’s for 
justice ; but as he was too proud to appear at once, I went 
on to the king’s, fired three shots as usual, and obtained 
admittance at once, when I found him standing in a yard, 
dressed in cloth, with his iron chair behind him, and my 
double-gun loaded with half charges of powder and a few 
grains of iron shot, looking eagerly about for kites to 
fly over. His quick eye, however, readily detected my 
wounded men and prisoners, as also some Wazinza pri- 
soners led in by Waganda police, who had been taken 
in the act of entering Waganda houses and assailing their 
women. Thus my men were cleared of a false stigma ; 
and the king, whilst praising them, ordered all the Waz- 
inza to leave his dominions on the morrow. 

The other case was easily settled by my wounded men 


348 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


receiving orders to keep their prisoners till claimed, when, 
should any people come forward, they would be punished, 
otherwise their loss in human stock would be enough. 
The Wangitana had done quite right to seize on the high- 
way, else they would have starved; such was the old law, 
and such is the present one. It was no use our applying 
for a change of system. At this stage of the business, the 
birds he was watching having appeared, the king, in a 
great state of excitément, said, “Shoot that kite,” and 
then “ Shoot that other ;” but the charges were too light ; 
and the birds flew away, kicking with their claws as if 
merely stung a little. 

Whilst this was going on, the Kamraviona, taking 
advantage of my having opened the door with the gun, 
walked in to make his salutations. A blacksmith pro- 
duced two very handsome spears, and a fisherman a basket 
of fish, from which two fish were taken out and given to 
me. The king then sat on his iron chair, and I on a 
wooden box which I had contrived to stuff with the royal 
orass he gave me, and so made a complete miniature 
imitation of his throne. The contrivance made him 
laugh, as much, I fancy, at his own folly in not allowing 
me to sit upon my portable iron stool, as at my ingenious 
device for carrying out my determination to sit before 
him like an Englishman. I wished to be communica- 
tive, and, giving him a purse of money, told him the 
use and value of the several coins; but he paid little 
regard to them, and soon put them down. The small- 
talk of Uganda had much more attractions to his mind 
than the wonders of the outer world, and he kept it 
up with his Kamraviona until rain fell and dispersed the 
company. 

19th.—As the queen, to avoid future difficulties, desired 
my officers to acquaint her beforehand whenever I wished 
to call upon her, I sent Nasib early to say I would call in 
the afternoon ; but he had to wait till the evening before 


Marcu. | TRAINING OF A PAGE, 349 


he could deliver the message, though she had been drum- 
ming and playing all the day. cud then complained 
against my men for robbing her gardeners on the high- 
way, wished to know why I didn’t call upon her oftenext 
appointed the following morning for an interview, and 
begged I would bring her some nliven medicines, as she 
Bafiored from constant twinges in her right side, sealing 
her “letter” with a present of a nest ae egos and one 
fowl. 

Whilst Nasib was away, I went to the Kamraviona 
to treat him as I had the king. He appeared a little 
more affable to-day, yet still delighted in nothing but 
what was frivolous. My beard, for instance, engrossed 
the major part of the conversation; all the Waganda 
would come out in future with hairy faces; but when I 
told them that, to produce such a growth, they must wash 
their faces with milk, and allow a cat to lick it off they 
turned up their noses in utter contempt. 

20th.—I became dead tired of living all alone, with 
nothing else to occupy my time save making these notes 
every day in my office letter-book, as my store of 
stationery was left at Karagté. I had no chance of 
seeing any visitors, save the tiresome pages, who asked me 
to give or to do something for the king every day; and my 
prospect was cheerless, as I had been flatly refused a visit 
to Usoga until Grant should come. For want of better 
amusement, | made a page of Litigoi, a sharp little lad, 
son of the late Beltich, but adopted by Ulédi, and treated 
him as a son, which he declared he wished to be, for he 
liked me better than’ Ulédi as a father. He said he dis- 
liked Uganda, where people’s lives are taken like those of 
fowls; and wished to live at the coast, the only place he 
ever heard of, where all the Wangtiana come from—great 
swells in Ltigoi’s estimation. Now, with Liigoi dressed in 
a new white pillow-case, with holes trimmed with black 
tape for his head and arms to go through, a dagger tied 


ate 


350 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


with red bindera round his waist, and a square of red 
blanket rolled on his shoulder as a napkin for my gun to 
rest on, or in place of a goat-skin rug when he wished to 
sit down, I walked off to inquire how the Kamraviona 
was, and took my pictures with me. 

Ltigoi’s dress, however, absorbed all their thoughts, 
and he was made to take it off and put it on again as 
often as any fresh visitor came to call. Hardly a word 
was said about anything else; even the pictures, which 
generally are in such demand, attracted but little notice. 
I asked the Kamraviona to allow me to draw his pet dog ; 
when the king’s sister Miengo came in and sat down, 
laughing and joking with me immoderately. 

At first there was a demur about my drawing the dog 
—whether from fear of bewitching the animal or not, I 
cannot say ; but instead of producing the pet—a beauti- 
fully-formed cream-coloured dog—a common black one 
was brought in, which I tied in front of Miengo, and then 
drew both woman and dog together. After this unlawful 
act was discovered, of drawing the king’s sister without 
his consent, the whole company roared with laughter, and 
pretended nervous excitement lest I should book them 
likewise. One of my men, Sangoro, did not return to 
camp last night from foraging; and as my men suspect 
the Waganda must have murdered him, I told the Kam- 
ravonia, requesting him to find out; but he coolly said, 
“Look for him yourselves two days more, for Wangtiana 
often make friends with our people, and so slip away from 
their masters ; but as they are also often murdered, pro- 
vided you cannot find him in that time, we will have the 
Mganga out.” 

21st.—Last night | was turned out of my bed by a 
terrible hue and cry from the quarter allotted to Rozaro 
and his Wanyambo companions; for the Waganda had 
threatened to demolish my men, one by one, for selzing 
their pombé and plantains, though done according to the 


Marcz. | A QUARREL, 351 


orders of the king; and now, finding the Wanyambo 
nearest to the road, they set on them by moonlight, with 
spear and club, maltreating them severely, till, with rein- 
forcements, the Wanyambo gained the ascendancy, seized 
two spears and one shield as a trophy, and drove their 
enemies off. In the morning, I sent the Wakungit off 
with the trophies to the king, again complaining that he 
had turned my men into a pack of highwaymen, and, 
as I foresaw, had thus created enmity between the Wa- 
ganda and them, much to my annoyance. I therefore 
begged he would institute some means to prevent any 
further occurrence of such scenes, otherwise I would use 
firearms in self-defence. 

Whilst these men were on this mission, ] went on a 
like errand to the queen, taking my page Liigoi with the 
liver medicine. The first object of remark was Liigoi, as 
indeed it was everywhere ; for, as I walked along, crowds 
ran after the little phenomenon. Then came the liver 
question ; and, finally, what I wanted—her complaint 
against my men for robbing on the road, as it gave me 
the opportunity of telling her the king was doing what I 
had been trying to undo with my stick ever since I left 
the coast; and I begged she would use her influence to 
correct these disagreeables. She told me for the future to 
send my men to her palace for food, and rob no more; in 
the meanwhile, here were some plantains for them. She 
then rose and walked away, leaving me extremely dis- 
appointed that I could not make some more tangible 
arrangement with her—such as, if my men came and 
found the gate shut, what were they to do then? there 
were forty-five of them; how much would she allow ? 
&e. &c. But this was a true specimen of the method of 
transacting business among the royal family of Uganda. 
They give orders without knowing how they are to be 
carried out, and treat all practical arrangements as trifling 
details not worth attending to. 


352 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


After this unsatisfactory interview, I repaired to the 
king’s, knowing the power of my gun to obtain an inter- 
view, whilst doubting the ability of the Wakungt to gain 
an audience for me. Such was the case. These men had 
been sitting all day without seeing the king, and three 
shots opened his gate immediately to me. He was sitting 
on the iron chair in the shade of the court, attended by 
some eighty women, tweedling the loading-rod in his 
fingers; but as my rod appeared a better one than his, 
they were exchanged. I then gave him a tortoise-shell 
comb to comb his hair straight with, as he invariably 
remarked on the beautiful manner in which I dressed my 
hair, making me uncap to show it to his women, and after- 
wards asked my men to bring on the affair of last night. 
They feared, they said, to speak on such subjects whilst 
the women were present. I begged for a private audi- 
ence; still they would not speak till encouraged and 
urged beyond all patience. I said, in Kistiahili, “Kbakka” 
(king), “my men are afraid to tell you what I want to 
say ;” when Matila, taking advantage of my having en- 
gaged his attention, though the king did not understand 
one word I said, said of himself, by way of currying favour, 
“T saw a wonderful gun in Rttmanika’s hands, with six 
barrels; not a short one like your fiver” (meaning the 
revolving pistol) “but a long one, as long as my arm.” 
“Indeed,” says the king, “we must have that.” A page 
was then sent for by Matila, who, giving him a bit of 
stick representing the gun required, told him to fetch it 
immediately. 

The king then said to me, “ What is powder made of 2” 
I began with sulphur (kibriti), intending to explain every- 
thing ; but the word kibriti was enough for him, and a 
second stick was sent for kibriti, the bearer being told to 
hurry for his life, and fetch it. The king now ordered 
some high officers who were in waiting to approach. 
They come, almost crouching to their knees, with eyes 


Marcz. | FRUITLESS INTERVIEWS, 353 


averted from the women ; and n’yanzigged for the favour 
of being called, till they streamed with perspiration. Four 
young women, virgins, the daughters of these high officers, 
nicely dressed, were shown in as brides, and ordered to 
sit with the other women. A gamekeeper brought in 
baskets small antelopes, called mpéo—with straight horns 
resembling those of the saltiana, but with coats like the 
hog-deer of India—intended for the royal kitchen. Elderly 
gentlemen led in goats as commutation for offences, and 
went through the ceremonies due for the favour of being 
relieved of so much property. Ten cows were then driven 
in, plundered from Unyoro, and outside, the voices of the 
brave army who captured them were heard n’yanzigging 
vehemently. Lastly, some beautifully-made shields were 
presented, and, because extolled, n’yanzigged over; when 
the king rose abruptly and walked straight away, leaving 
my fools of men no better off for food, or reparation for 
their broken heads, than if I had never gone there. 
22d.—I called on the queen to inquire after her health, 
and to know how my men were to be fed; but, without 
giving me time to speak, she flew at me again about my 
men plundering. The old story was repeated; I had 
forty-five hungry men, who must have food, and unless 
either she or the king would make some proper provision 
for them, I could not help it. Again she promised to 
feed them, but she objected to their bearing swords, “for 
of what use are swords? If the Waganda don’t like the 
Wangitiana, can swords prevail in our country?” And, 
saying this, she walked away. I thought to myself that 
she must have directed the attack upon my camp last 
night, and is angry at the Wangtiana swords driving her 
menaway. At 3 p.m.1 visited the king, to have a private 
chat, and state my grievances; but the three shots fired 
brought him out to levee, when animals and sundry other 
things were presented; and appointments of Wakungtt 
Zz 


354 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


were made for the late gallant services of some of the 
men in plundering Unyoro. 

The old executioner, Kiinza, being present, I asked the 
king to pardon his son. Surprised, at first Mtésa said, 
“Can it be possible Bana has asked for this?” And when 
assured, in great glee he ordered the lad’s release, amidst 
shouts of laughter from everybody but the agitated father, 
who n’yanzigged, cried, and fell at my feet, making a 
host of wonderful signs as a token of his gratitude ; for 
his heart was too full of emotion to give utterance to 
his feelings. The king then, in high good-humour, said, 
“You have called on me many times without our broach- 
ing the subject of Usoga, and perhaps you may fancy we 
are not exerting ourselves in the matter; but my army is 
only now returning from war” (meaning plundering in 
Unyoro), “and I am collecting another one, which will 
open Usoga effectually.” Before I could say anything, 
the king started up in his usual manner, inviting a select 
few to follow him to another court, when my medicine- 
chest was inspected, and I was asked to operate for fistula 
on one of the royal executioners. I had no opportunity 
of incurring this responsibility ; for while professing to 
prepare for the operation, the king went off in a fling. 

When I got home I found Sangoro, whom we thought 
lost or murdered, quietly ensconced in camp. He had 
been foraging by himself a long way from camp, in a 
neighbourhood where many of the king’s women are kept; 
and it being forbidden ground, he was taken up by the 
keepers, placed in the stocks, and fed, until to-day, when 
he extricated his legs by means of his sword, and ran 
away. My ever-grumbling men mobbed me again, 
clamouring for food, saying, as they eyed my goats, I 
lived at ease and overlooked their wants.. In vain I told 
them they had fared more abundantly than I had since 
we entered Uganda; whilst I spared my goats to have a 
little flesh every day, they consumed or squandered away 


Marcz. | EFFORTS TO OBTAIN SUPPLIES. 355 


the flesh of their cows as rapidly as possible, selling the 
skins for pombé, which I seldom tasted; they robbed me 
as long as I had cloth or beads, and now they had all 
become as fat as hogs by lifting food off-the Waganda 
lands. As I could not quiet them, I directed that, early 


_ next morning, Matila should go to the king and Nasib 


. to the queen, while I proposed going to Kamraviona’s to 


work them all three about this affair of food. 
23d.—According to the plan of last night, I called 
early on the Kamraviona. He promised me assistance, 
but with an air which seemed to say, What are the suffer- 
ings of other men tome? So I went home to breakfast, 
doubting if anything ever would be done. As Kaggo, 
however, the second officer of importance, had expressed 
a wish to see me, I sent Bombay to him for food, and 
waited the upshot. Presently the king sent to say he 
wished to see me with my compass; for the blackguard 
Maiila had told him I possessed a wonderful instrument, 
by looking at which I could find my way all over the 
world. I went as requested, and found the king sitting 
outside the palace on my chair dressed in cloths, with 
my silk neckerchief and crest-ring, playing his flute in 
concert with his brothers, some thirty-odd young men 


‘and boys, one half of them manacled, the other half free, 


with an officer watching over them to see that they com- 
mitted no intrigues. 

We then both sat side by side in the shade of the 
court-walls, conversed and had music by turns; for the 
king had invited his brothers here to please me, the first 
step towards winning the coveted compass. My hair 
must now be shown and admired, then my shoes taken 
off and inspected, and my trousers tucked up to show 
that I am white all over. Just at this time Bombay, 
who had been in great request, came before us laden with 
plantains, This was most opportune ; for the king asked 
what he had been about, and then the true state of the case. 


356 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


as regards my difficulties in obtaining food were, I fancy, 
for the first time, made known to him. In a great fit of 
indignation he said, “I once killed a hundred Wakungt in 
a single day, and now, if they won’t feed my guests, I will 
kill a hundred more; for I know the physic for bumptious- 
ness.” Then, sending his brothers away, he asked me to 
follow him into the back part of the palace, as he loved 
me so much he must show me everything. We walked 
along under the umbrella, first looking down one street 
of huts, then up another, and, finally, passing the sleeping- 
chamber, stopped at one adjoming it. “ That hut,” said 
the king, “is the one I sleep in; no one of my wives dare 
venture within it unless I call her.” He let me feel im- - 
mediately that for the distinction conferred on me in 
showing me this sacred hut a return was expected. Could 
I after that refuse him such a mere trifle as a compass ? 
I told him he might as well put my eyes out and ask me | 
to walk home, as take away that little instrument, which 
could be of no use to him, as he could not read or under- 
stand it. But this only excited his cupidity; he watched 
it twirling round and pointing to the north, and looked 
and begged again, until, tired of his importunities, I told 
him I must wait until the Usoga road was open before I 
could part with it, and then the compass would be nothing 
to what I would give him. Hearing this, he reared his 
head proudly, and, patting his heart, said, “ That is all on 
my shoulders; as sure as I live it shall be done; for that 
country has no king, and I have long been desirous of 
taking it.” I declined, however, to give him the instru- 
ment on the security of his promise, and he went to 
breakfast. 

I walked off to Usungtt to see what I could do for him 
in his misery. I found that he had a complication of 
evils entirely beyond my healing power, and among them 
inveterate forms of the diseases which are generally asso- — 
ciated with civilisation and its social evils. I could do 


Manrcz. | THE ROYAL HAREM. 35 


~y 


nothing to cure him, but promised to do whatever was in 
my power to alleviate his sufferings. 

24th.—Before breakfast I called on poor Usungit, pre- 
scribing hot coffee to be drunk with milk every morning, 
which astonished him not a little, as thé negroes only use 
coffee for chewing. He gave my men pombé and plan- 
tains. On my return I met a page sent to invite me_to 
the palace. I found the king sitting with a number of 
women. He was. dréssed in European clothes, part of 
them being a pair of trousers he begged for yesterday, 
that he might appear like Bana. ‘This was his first 
appearance in trousers, and his whole attire, contrasting 
strangely with his native habiliments, was in his opinion 
very becoming, though to me a little ridiculous; for the 
legs of the trousers, as well as the sleeves of the waistcoat, 
were much too short, so that his black feet and hands 
stuck out at the extremities as an organ-player’s monkey’s 
do, whilst the cockscomb on his head prevented a fez cap, 
which was part of his special costume for the occasion, 
from sitting properly. This display over, the women 
were sent away, and I was shown into a court, where a 
large number of plantains were placed in a line upon the 
ground for my men to take away, and we were promised 
the same treat every day. From this we proceeded to 
another court, where we sat in the shade together, when 
the women returned again, but were all dumb, because 
my interpreters dared not for their lives say anything, 
even on my account, to the king’s women. Getting 
tired, I took out my sketch-book and drew Litibtiga, the 
pet, which amused the king immensely as he recognised 
her cockscomb. 

Then twenty naked virgins, the daughters of Wakungi, 
all smeared and shining with grease, each holding a small 
square of mbiigtt for a fig-leaf, marched in a line before 
us, as a fresh addition to the harem, whilst the happy 
fathers floundered n’yanzigging on the ground, delighted 


at 


358 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


to find their darlings appreciated by the king. Seeing 
this done in such a quiet mild way before all my men, 
who dared not lift their heads to see it, made me burst 
into a roar of laughter, and the king, catching the infec- 
tion from me, laughed as well: but the laughing did not. 
end there—for the pages, for once giving way to nature, 
kept bursting—my men chuckled in sudden gusts—while 
even the women, holding their mouths for fear of detec- 
tion, responded—and we all laughed together. Then a 
sedate old dame rose from the squatting mass, ordered the 
virgins to right-about, and marched them off, showing 
their still more naked reverses. I now obtained permis- 


_ sion for the Wakungt to call upon me, and fancied I only 


required my interpreters to speak out like men when I 
had anything to say, to make my residence in Uganda 
both amusing and instructive ; but though the king, car- 
ried off by the prevailing good-humour of the scene we 
had both witnessed, supported me, I found that he had 
counter-ordered what he had said as soon as I had gone, 
and, in fact, no Mkungt ever dared come near me. 

25th.—To-day I visited Usungtt again, and found him ~ 
better. He gave pombé and plantains for my people, but 
would not talk to me, though I told him he had permis- 
sion to call on me. 

I have now been for some time within the court pre- 
cincts, and have consequently had an opportunity of wit- 
nessing court customs. Among these, nearly every day 
since [ have changed my residence, incredible as it may 
appear to be, I have seen one, two, or three of the 
wretched palace women led away to execution, tied by 
the hand, and dragged along by one of the body-guard, 
crying out, as she went to premature death, “Hai Min- 
angé!” (O my lord!) “ Kbakka!” (My king!) “Hai 
N’yawo!” (My mother!) at the top of her voice, in the 
utmost despair and lamentation; and yet there was not 
a soul who dared lift hand to save any of them, though 


Marcu. ] A QUEEN LED TO EXECUTION, 359 


many might be heard privately commenting on their 


beauty. 


A Queen dragged to Executicn 


26th.—To-day, to amuse the king, I drew a picture of 
himself holding a levee, and proceeded to visit him. On 
the way I found the highroad thronged with cattle cap- 
tured in Unyoro; and on arrival at the ante-chamber, 
amongst the officers in waiting, Masimbi (Mr Cowries or 
Shells), the queen’s uncle, and Congow, a young general, 
who once led an army into Unyoro, past Kamrasi’s palace. 
They said they had obtained leave for me to visit them, 
and were eagerly looking out for the happy event. At 
once, on firing, I was admitted to the king’s favourite 
place, which, now that the king had a movable chair to 
sit upon, was the shade of the court screen. We hada 
chat ; the picture was shown to the women; the king 
would like to have some more, and gave me leave to draw 
in the palace any time I liked. At the same time he 
asked for my paint-box, merely to look at it. Though I 
repeatedly dunned him for it, I could never get it back 
from him until I was preparing to leave Uganda. 

27th._—After breakfast I started on a visit to Congow ; 


360 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


but finding he had gone to the king as usual, called at 
Masimbi’s, and he being absent also, I took advantage of 
my proximity to the queen’s palace to call on her majesty. 
For hours I was kept waiting ; firstly, because she was at 
breakfast ; secondly, because she was “ putting on medi- 
cine ;” and, thirdly, because the sun was too powerful for 
her complexion; when I became tired of her nonsense, 
and said, “If she does not wish to see me, she had better 
say so at once, else I shall walk away ; for the last time I 
came I saw her but for a minute, when she rudely turned 
her back upon me, and left me sitting by myself.” I was 
told not to be in a hurry—she would see me in the even- 
ing. This promise might probably be fulfilled six blessed 
hours from the time when it was made; but I thought to 
myself, every place in Uganda is alike when there is no 
company at home, and so I resolved to sit the time out, 
like Patience on a monument, hoping something funny 
might turn up after all. 

At last her majesty stumps out, squats behind my red 
blanket, which is converted into a permanent screen, and 
says hastily, or rather testily, “ Can’t Bana perceive the 

‘angry state of the weather ?—clouds flying about, and the 
wind blowing half a gale? Whenever that is the case, I 
cannot venture out.” Taking her lie without an answer, 
I said, I had now been fifty days or so doing nothing in 
Uganda—not one single visitor of my own rank ever 
came near me, and I could not associate with people far 
below her condition and mine—in fact, all I had to amuse 
me at home now was watching a hen lay her eggs upon 
my spare bed. Her majesty became genial, as she had 
been before, and promised to provide me with suitable 
society. I then told her I had desired my officers several 
times to ask the king how marriages were conducted in 
this country, as they appeared so different from ours, but 
they always said they dared not put such a question to 
him, and now I hoped she would explain it to me. To 


Marcu. | MARRIAGE USAGES IN UGANDA, 361 


tell her I could not get anything from the king, I knew 
would be the surest way of eliciting what I wanted from 
her, because of the jealousy between the two courts; and 
in this instance it was fully proved, for she brightened up 
at once, and, when I got her to understand something of 
what I meant by a marriage ceremony, in high good- 
humour entered on a long explanation, to the following 
effect :-— 

There are no such things as marriages in Uganda ; there 
are no ceremonies attached to it. If any Mkungtt possessed 
of a pretty daughter committed an offence, he might give 
. her to the king as a peace-offering ; if any neighbouring 
king had a pretty daughter, and the king of Uganda 
wanted her, she might be demanded as a fitting tribute. 
The Wakungtt in Uganda are supplied with women by the 
king, according to their merits, from seizures in battle 
abroad, or seizures from refractory officers at home. The 
women are not regarded as property according to the 
Wanyamtiézi practice, though many exchange their daugh- 
ters ; and some women, for misdemeanours, are sold into 
slavery; whilst others are flogged, or are degraded to do 
all the menial services of the house. : 

The Wakungti then changed the subject by asking, if I 
married a black woman, would there be any offspring, and 
what would be their colour? The company now became 
jovial, when the queen improved it by making a signifi- 
cant gesture, and with roars of laughter asking me if I 
would like to be her son-in-law, for she had some beauti- 
ful daughters, either of the Wahtima or Waganda breed. 
Rather staggered at first by this awful proposal, I con- 
sulted Bombay what I should do with one if I got her. 
He, looking more to number one than my convenience, 
said,.“ By all means accept the offer, for if you don’t like 
her, we should, and it would be a good means of getting 
her out of this land of death, for all black people love 
Zanzibar.” The rest need not be told; as a matter of 


362 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


course I had to appear very much gratified, and as the 
bowl went round, all became uproarious. I must wait 
a day or two, however, that a proper selection might be 
made; and when the marriage came off, I was to chain 
the fair one two or three days, until she became used to 
me, else, from mere fright, she might run away. 

To keep up the spirits of the queen, though her frequent 
potions of pombé had wellnigh done enough, I admired 
her neck-ring, composed of copper wire, with a running 
inlaid twist of iron, and asked her why she wore such a 
wreath of vine-leaves, as I had often seen on some of the 
Wakungt. On this she produced a number of rings 
similar to the one she wore, and taking off her own, placed 
it round my neck. Then, pointing to her wreath, she 
said, “This is the badge of a kidnapper’s office—whoever 
wears it, catches little children.” I inferred that its pos- 
session, aS an insignia of royalty, conferred on the bearer 
the power of seizure, as the great seal in this country 
confers power on public officers. 

The queen’s dinner was now announced ; and, desiring 
me to remain where I was for a short time, she went to it. 
She sent me several dishes (plantain-leaves), with well- 
cooked beef and mutton, and a variety of vegetables, from 
her table, as well as a number of round moist napkins, 
made in the shape of wafers, from the freshly-drawn 
plantain fibres, to wash the hands and face with. There 
was no doubt now about her culinary accomplishments. 
I told her so when she returned, and that-I enjoyed her 
parties all the more because they ended with a dinner. 
“ More pombé, more pombé,” cried the queen, full of mirth 
and glee, helping everybody round in turn, and shout- 
ing and laughing at their Kiganda witticisms—making, 
though I knew not a word said, an amusing scene to 
behold—till the sun sank ; and her majesty remarking it, 
turned to her court and said, “If I get up, will Bana also 
rise, and not accuse me of deserting him?” With this 


Marcu. | TAILORING. 363 


Bpeech a general rising took place, and, watching the 
queen’s retiring, I stood with my hat in hand, whilst 
all the Wakungti fell upon their knees, and then all 
separated, 

28¢h.—I went to the palace, and found, as usual, a 
large levee waiting the king’s pleasure to appear ; amongst 
whom were the Kamraviona, Masimbi, and the kinp’s 
sister Miengo. I fired my gun, and got admitted at once, 
but none of the others could follow me save Miengo. The 
king, sitting on the chair with his women by his side, 
ordered twelve cloths, the presents of former Arab visitors, 
to be brought before him ; and all of these I was desired 
to turn into European garments, like my own coats, 
trousers, and waistcoats. It was no use saying I had no 
tailors—the thing must be done somehow; for he admired 
my costume exceedingly, and wished to imitate it now he 
had cloth enough for ever to dispense with the mbtigi. 

As I had often begged the king to induce his men, who 
are all wonderfully clever artisans, to imitate the chair 
and other things I gave him, I now told him if he would 
order some of his sempsters, who are far cleverer with 
the needle than my men, to my camp, I would cut up 
some old clothes, and so teach them how to work. This 
was agreed to, and five cows were offered as a reward ; 
but as his men never came, mine had to do the job. 

Mattila then engaged the king’s attention for fully an 
hour, relating what wonderful things Bana kept in his 
house, if his majesty would only deign to see them ; and, 
for this humbug, got rewarded by a present of threé* 
women. Just at this juncture an adjutant flew over- 
head, and, by way of fun, I presented my gun, when the 
excited king, like a boy from school, jumped up, forget- 
ting his company, and cried, “ Come, Bana, and shoot the 
nundo; I know where he has gone—follow me.” And 
away we went, first through one court, then through 
another, till we found the nundo perched on a tree, look- 


364 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


ing like a sedate old gentleman with a bald head, and 
very sharp, long nose. Politeness lost us the bird ; for 
whilst I wished the king to shoot, he wished me to do so, 
from fear of missing it himself. He did not care about 
vultures—he could practise at them at any time; but he 
wanted a nundo above all things. The bird, however, 
took the hint, and flew away. 


Marcu. ] A STATESMAN’S HAREM, 365 


CHAPTER XII. 


PALACE, UGANDA—Oontinued. 


A VISIT TO A DISTINGUISHED STATESMAN —A VISIT FROM THE 
KING——ROYAL SPORT—THE QUEEN'S PRESENT OF WIVES—THE 
COURT BEAUTIES AND THEIR REVERSES—JUDICIAL PROCEDURE 
IN UGANDA—-BUFFALO-HUNTING—A MUSICAL PARTY—MY MED- 
ICAL PRACTICE—A ROYAL EXCURSION ON THE N-YANZA—THE - 
CANOES OF UGANDA—A REGATTA—RIFLE PRACTICE—DOMESTIC 
DIFFICULTIES — INTERFERENCE OF A MAGICIAN——THE KING’S 
BROTHERS. 


29th. — AccorDING to appointment I went early this 
morning to visit Congow. He kept me some time wait- 
ing in his outer hut, and then called me in to where I 
found him sitting with his women—a large group, by no 
means pretty. His huts are numerous, the gardens and 
courts all very neat and well kept. He was much de- 
lighted with my coming, produced pombé, and asked me 
what I thought of his women, stripping them to the waist. 
He assured me that he had thus paid me such a compli- 
ment as nobody else had ever obtained, since the Waganda 
are very jealous of one another—so much so, that any one 
would be killed if found staring upon a woman even in 
the highways. I asked him what use he had for so many 
women? ‘To which he replied, “None whatever; the 
king gives them to us to keep up our rank, sometimes as 
many as one hundred together, and we either turn them 
into wives, or make servants of them, as we please.” Just 


366 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


then I heard that Mktienda, the queen’s woman-keeper, 
was outside waiting for me, but dared not come in, because 
Congow’s women were all out; so I asked leave to go 
home to breakfast, much to the surprise of Congow, who 
thought I was his guest for the whole day. It is con- 
sidered very indecorous in Uganda to call upon two 
persons in one day, though even the king or the queen 
should be one of them. Then, as there was no help for it 
—Congow could not detain me when hungry—he showed 
me a little boy, the only child he had, and said, with 
much fatherly pride, “Both the king and queen have 
called on me to see this fine little fellow ;” and we parted 
to meet again some other day. Outside his gate I found 
Mktienda, who said the queen had sent him to invite 
“her son” to bring her some stomach medicine in the 
morning, and come to have a chat with her. With 
Mktienda I walked home; but he was so awed by the 
splendour of my hut, with its few blankets and bit of 
chintz, that he would not even sit upon a cow-skin, but 
asked if any Waganda dared venture in there. He was 
either too dazzled or too timid to answer any questions, 
and in a few minutes walked away again. 

After this, I had scarcely swallowed my breakfast before 
I received .a summons: from the king to meet him out 
shooting, with all the Wangtiana armed, and my guns; 
and goimg towards the palace, found him with a large 
staff, pages and officers as well as women, in a plantain 
garden, looking eagerly out for birds, whilst his band was 
playing. In addition to his English dress, he wore a 
turban, and pretended that the glare of the sun was dis- 
tressing his eyes—for, in fact, he wanted me to give him 
a wideawake like my own. -Then, as if a sudden freak 
had seized him, though I knew it was. on account of 
Matila’s having excited his curiosity, he said, “Where 
does Bana live? lead away.” Bounding and scrambling, 
the Wakungtt, the women and all, went pell-mell through 


Marcz. | A ROYAL VISIT. 367 


everything towards my hut. If the Kamraviona or any 
of the boys could not move fast enough, on account of the 
crops on the fields, they were piked in the back till half 
knocked over; but, instead of minding, they trotted on, 
nyanzigging as if honoured by a kingly poke, though 
treated like so many dogs. 

Arrived at the hut, the king took off his turban as I 
took off my hat, and seated himself on my stool; whilst 
the Kamraviona, with much difficulty, was induced to sit 
upon a cow-skin, and the women at first were ordered to 


squat outside. LEverything that struck the eye was much. 


admired and begged for, though nothing so much as my 
wideawake and mosquito-curtains; then, as the women 
were allowed to have a peep in and see Bana in his den, 
I gave them two sacks of beads, tomake the visit pro- 
fitable, the only alternative left me from being forced 
into inhospitality, for no one would drink from my cup. 
Moreover, a present was demanded by the laws of the 
country. 

The king, excitedly impatient, now led the way again, 
shooting hurry-scurry through my men’s lines, which were 
much commented on as being different from Waganda 
hutting, on to the tall tree with the adjutant’s nest. One 
young bird was still living in it. There was no shot, so 
bullets must be fired; and the cunning king, wishing to 
show off, desired me to fire simultaneously with himself. 
We fired, but my bullet struck the bough the nest was 
resting on; we fired again, and the bullet passed through 
the nest without touching the bird. I then asked the 
king to allow me to try his Whitworth, to which a little 
bit of stick, as a charm to secure a correct aim, had been 
tied below the trigger-guard. This time I broke the bird’s 
leg, and knocked him half out of the nest; so, running 
up to the king, I pointed to the charm, saying, That has 
done .it—hoping to laugh him out of the folly; but he 
took my joke in earnest, and he turned to his men, com- 


, 


368 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


menting on the potency of the charm. Whilst thus 
engaged, I took another rifle and brought the bird down 
altogether. “ Woh, woh, woh !” shouted the king ; “ Bana, 
Mzungit, Mzungii!” he repeated, leaping and clapping his 
hands, as he ran full speed to the prostrate bird, whilst 
the drums beat, and the Wakungti followed him: “ Now, 
is not this a wonder? but we must go and shoot another.” 
“Where?” I said; “we may walk a long way without 
finding, if we have nothing but our eyes to see with. Just 
send for your telescope, and then I will show you how to 
look for birds.” Surprised at this announcement, the king 
sent his pages flying for the instrument, and when it 
came I instructed him how to use it; when he could see 
with it, and understand its powers, his astonishment 
knew no bounds; and, turning to his Wakungt, he said, 
laughing, “ Now, I do see the use of this thing I have 
been shutting up in the palace. On that distant tree I 
can see three vultures. To its right there is a hut, with a 
woman sitting inside the portal, and many goats are feed- 
ing all about the palace, just as large and distinct as if I 
- was close by them.” 

The day was now far spent, and all proceeded towards 
the palace. On the way a mistletoe was pointed out as a 
rain-producing tree, probably because, on a former occa- 
sion, I had advised the king to grow groves of coffee-trees 
about his palace to improve its appearance, and supply 
the court with wholesome food—at the same time inform- 
ing him that trees increase the falls of rain in a country, - 
though very high ones would be dangerous, because they 
attract lightning. Next the guns must be fired off; and, 
as it would be a pity to waste lead, the king, amidst 
thunders of applause, shot five cows, presenting his gun 
from the shoulder. 

So ended the day’s work in the field, but not at home; 
for I had hardly arrived there before the pages hurried in , 
to beg for powder and shot, then caps, then cloth, and, ” 


Marce. | AN INCONVENIENT PRESENT. 369 


everything else failing, a load of beads. Such are the 
persecutions of this negro land—the host every day must 
beg something in the most shameless manner from his 
guest, on the mere chance of gaining something gratis, 
though I generally gave the king some trifle when he 
least expected it, and made an excuse that he must wait 
for the arrival of fresh stores from Gani when he asked. 

30th. — To fulfil my engagement with the queen, I 
walked off to her palace with stomach medicine, thinking 
we were now such warm friends, all pride and distant 
ceremonies would be dispensed with; but, on the con- 
trary, I was kept waiting for hours till I sent in word to 
say, if she did not want medicine, I wished to go home, 
for I was tired of Uganda and everything belonging to it. 
This message brought her to her gate, where she stood 
laughing till the Wahtima girls she had promised me, one 
of twelve and the other a little older, were brought in and 
made to squat in front of us. ‘The elder, who was in the 
prime of youth and beauty, very large of limb, dark in 
colour, cried considerably; whilst the younger one, though 
very fair, had a snubby nose and everted lips, and laughed 
as if she thought the change in her destiny very good 
fun. J had now to make my selection, and took the 
smaller one, promising her to Bombay as soon as we 
arrived on the coast, where, he said, she would be con- 
sidered a Hubshi or-Abyssinian. But when the queen 
saw what I had done, she gave me the other as well, 
saying the little one was too young to go alone, and, if 
separated, she would take fright and run away. Then 
with a gracious bow I walked off with my two fine spe- 
cimens of natural history, though I.would rather have 
had princes, that I might have taken them home to be 
instructed in England ; but the queen, as soon as we had 
cleared the palace, sent word to say she must have an- 
other parting look at her son with his wives. Still laugh- 
2A 


370 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


ing, she said, “ That will do; you look beautiful ; now go 
away home;” and off we trotted, the elder sobbing bitterly, 
the younger laughing. 

Ag soon as we reached home, my first inquiry was con- 
cerning their histories, of which they appeared to know 
but very little. The elder, whom I named Méri (plan- 
tains), was obtained by Sunna, the late king, as a wife, 
from Nkolé; and though she was a mere Kahala, or girl, 
when the old king-died, he was so attached to her he 
gave her twenty cows, in order that she might fatten up 
on milk after her native fashion; but on Sunna’s death, 
when the establishment of women was divided, Méri fell 
to N’yamasoré’s (the queen’s) lot. The lesser one, who © 
still retains the name of Kahala, said she was seized in © 
Unyoro by the Waganda, who took her to N’yamasoré, but 
what became of her father and mother she could not say. : 

It was now dinner-time, and as the usual sweet potatoes 
and goat’s flesh were put upon my box-table, I asked them 
to dine with me, and we became great friends, for they 
were assured they would finally get good houses and 
gardens at Zanzibar; but nothing would induce either of 
them to touch food that had been cooked with butter. 
A dish of plantains and goat-flesh was then prepared ; 
but though Kahala wished to eat it, Méri rejected the 
goat’s flesh, and would not allow Kahala to taste it either; 
and thus began a series of domestic difficulties. On in- 
quiring how I could best deal with my difficult charge, 
I was told the Wahtma pride was so great, and their 
tempers so strong, they were more difficult to break in 
than a phtinda, or donkey, though, when once tamed, they 
became the best of wives. 

31st.—I wished to call upon the queen and thank her 
for her charming present, but my hungry men drove me 
to the king’s palace in search of food. The gun firing 
brought Mtésa out, prepared for a shooting trip, with his 
Wakungit leading, the pages carrying his rifle and ammu- 


Marcz. | A ROYAL SPORTSMAN. 371 


nition, and a train of women behind. The first thing seen 
outside the palace gate was a herd of cows, from which 
four were selected and shot at fifty paces by the king, 
firmg from his shoulder, amidst thunders of applause and 
hand-shakings of the elders. I never saw them dare 
touch the king’s hand before. Then Mtésa, turning 
kindly to me, said, “Pray take a shot;” but I waived 
the offer off, saying he could kill better himself. Ambi- 
tious of a cut above cows, the king tried his hand at some 
herons perched on a tree, and, after five or six attempts, 
hit one in the eye. Hardly able to believe in his own 
skill, he stood petrified at first, and then ran madly to the 
fallen bird, crying “Woh, woh, woh! can this be ?—is 
it true? Woh, woh!” He jumped in the air, and all his 
men and women shouted in concert with him. Then he 
rushes at me, takes both my hands—shakes, shakes— 
woh, woh !—then runs to his women, then to his men ; 
shakes them all, woh-wohing, but yet not shaking or 
wohing half enough for his satisfaction, for he is mad 
with joy at his own exploit. 

The bird is then sent immediately to his mother, whilst 
he retires to his palace, woh-wohing, and talking “ten to 
the dozen” all the way, and boasting of his prowess. 
“Now, Bana, tell me—do you not think, if two such 
shots as you and I were opposed to an elephant, would 
he have any chance before us? I know I can shoot—I 
am certain of it now. You have often asked me to go 
hippopotamus-shooting with you, but I staved it off until 
I learnt the way to shoot. Now, however, I can shoot— 
and that remarkably well too, I flatter myself. I will 
have at them, and both of us will go on the lake together.” 
The palace was now reached ; musicians were ordered to 
play before the king, and Wakungtt appointments were 
made to celebrate the feats of the day. Then the royal 
cutler brought in dinner-knives made of iron, inlaid with 
squares of copper and brass, and goats and vegetables 


372 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


were presented as usual, when by torchlight we were dis- 
missed, my men taking with them as many plantains as 
they could carry. 

1st.—I stayed at home all this day, because the king 
and queen had set it apart for looking at and arranging 
their horns—mapembé, or fetishes, as the learned call 
such things—to see that there are no imperfections in the 
Uganga. This was something like an inquiry into the 
ecclesiastical conditién of the country, while, at the same 
time, it was a religious ceremony, and, as such, was appro- 
priate to the first day after the new moon appears. This 
being the third moon by account, in pursuance of ancient 
custom, all the people about court, including the king, © 
shaved their heads—the king, however, retaining his 
cockscomb, the pages their double cockades, and the 
other officers their single cockades on the back of the 
head, or either side, according to the official rank of each. 
My men were occupied making trousers for the king all 
day ; whilst the pages, and those sent to learn the art of 
tailoring, instead of doing their duty, kept continually 
begging for something to present to the king. 

2d.—The queen now taking a sporting fit into her head, 
sent for me early in the morning, with all my men, armed, 
to shoot a crested crane in her palace; but though we 
were there as required, we were kept waiting till late in 
the afternoon, when, instead of talking about shooting, as 
her Wakungti had forbidden her doing it, she asked after 
her two daughters—whether they had run away, or if 
they liked their new abode? I replied I was sorry cir- 
cumstances did not permit of my coming to thank her 
sooner, for I felt grateful beyond measure to her for 
having charmed my house with such beautiful society. 
I did not follow her advice to chain either of them with 
iron, for I found cords of love, the only instrument white 
men know the use of, quite strong enough. Fascinated 
with this speech, she said she would give me another of a 


Apri. | UGANDA OBSERVATORIES. 373 


middle age between the two, expecting, as I thought, that 
she would thus induce me to visit her more frequently 
than I did her son; but, though I thanked her, it fright- 
ened me from visiting her for ages after. 

She then said, with glowing pride, casting a sneer on 
the king’s hospitality, “In the days of yore, Sunna, when- 
ever visitors came to see him, immediately presented 
them with women, and, secondly, with food; for he was 
very particular in looking after his guests’ welfare, which is 
not exactly what you find the case now, I presume.” The 
rest of the business of the day consisted in applications 
for medicine and medical treatment, which it was difficult 
satisfactorily to meet. 

3d.—To-day Kattimba, the king’s head page, was sent 
to me with déolés to be made into trousers and waist- 
coats, and a large sixty-dollar silk I had given him to 
cover the chair with. The king likes rich colours, and I 
was solemnly informed that he will never wear anything 
but clothes like Bana. 

4th.—By invitation I went to the palace at noon, with 
guns, and found the king holding a levee, the first since 
the new moon, with all heads shaved in the manner I have 
mentioned. Soon rising, he showed the way through the 
palace to a pond, which is described as his bathing 
N’yanza, his women attending, and pages leading the 
way with his guns. From this we passed on to a jungle 
lying between the palace hill and another situated at the 
northern end of the lake, where wild buffaloes frequently 
lie concealed in the huge papyrus rushes of a miry drain ; 
but as none could be seen at that moment, we returned 
again to the palace. He showed me large mounds of 
earth, in the shape of cocked hats, which are private 
observatories, from which the surrounding country can 
be seen. By the side of these observatories are huts, 
smaller than the ordinary ones used for residing in, where 
the king, after the exertion of “looking out,” takes his 


374 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


repose. Here he ordered fruit to be brought— the 
Matungitirti, a crimson pod filled with acid seeds, which 
has only been observed growing by the rivers or waters 
of Uganda—and Kasori, a sort of liquorice-root. He 
then commenced eating with us, and begging again, un- 
successfully, for my compass. I tried again to make him 
see the absurdity of tying a charm on Whitworth’s rifle, 
but without the least effect. In fact he mistook all my 
answers for admiration, and asked me, in the simplest 
manner possible, if I would like to possess a charm; and 
even when I said “No, I should be afraid of provoking 
Libari’s” (God's) “anger if I did so,” he only wondered at 
my obstinacy, so thoroughly was he wedded to his belief. 
He then called for his wideawake, and walked with us 
into another quarter of his palace, when he entered a 
dressing-hut, followed by a number of full-grown, stark- 
naked women, his valets; at the same time ordering a 
large body of women to sit on one side the entrance, 
whilst I, with Bombay, were directed to sit on the other, 
waiting till he was ready to hold another levee. From this 
we repaired to the great throne-hut, where all his Wakungtt 
at once formed court, and business was commenced. 
Amongst other things, an officer, by name Mbogo, or the 
Buffalo, who had been sent on a wild-goose chase to look 
after Mr Petherick, described a journey he had made, 
following down the morning sun. After he had passed 
the limits of plantain-eatmg men, he came upon men 
who lived upon meat alone, who never wore mbigiis, 
but either cloth or skins, and instead of the spear they 
used the double-edged sime. He called the people Was- 
ewe, and their chief Kisawa; but the company pro- 
nounced them to be Masawa (Masai). 

After this, about eighty men were marched into the 
court, with their faces blackened, and strips of plantain- 
bark tied on their heads, each holding up a stick in his 
hand in place of a spear, under the regulation that no 


APRIL. | UGANDA JUSTICE. 375 


person is permitted to carry weapons of any sort in the 
palace. They were led by an officer, who, standing like 
a captain before his company, ordered them to jump and 
praise the king, acting the part of fugleman himself, 
Then said the king, turning to me, “Did I not tell you 
I had sent many men to fight? These are some of my 
army returned ; the rest are coming, and will eventually, 
when all are collected, go in a body to fight in Usoga.” 
Goats and other peace-offerings were then presented ; and, 
finally, a large body of officers came in with an old man, 
with his two ears shorn off for having been too handsome 
in his youth, and a young woman who, after four days’ 
search, had been discovered in his house. They were 
brought for judgment before the king. 

Nothing was listened to but the plaintiff’s statement, 
who said he had lost the woman four days, and, after con- 
siderable search, had found her concealed by the old man, 
who was indeed old enough to be her grandfather. From 
all appearances one would have said the wretched girl had 
run away from the plaintiff's house im consequence of ill 
treatment, and had harboured herself on this decrepid old 
man without asking his leave ; but their voices in defence 
were never heard, for the king instantly sentenced both 
to death, to prevent the occurrence of such impropriety 
again; and, to make the example more severe, decreed 
that their lives should not be taken at once, but, being 
fed to preserve life as long as possible, they were to be 
dismembered bit by bit, as rations for the vultures, every 
day, until life was extinct. The dismayed criminals, 
struggling to be heard, in utter despair, were dragged 
away boisterously in the most barbarous manner, to the 
drowning music of the milélé and drums. 

The king, in total unconcern about the tragedy he had 
thus enacted, immediately on their departure said, “ Now, 
then, for shooting, Bana; let us look at your gun.” It 
happened to be loaded, but fortunately only with powder, 


376 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


to fire my announcement at the palace; for he instantly 
placed caps on the nipples, and let off one barrel by acci- 
dent, the contents of which stuck in the thatch. This 
created a momentary alarm, for it was supposed the 
thatch had taken fire; but it was no sooner suppressed 
than the childish king, still sitting on his throne, to as- 
tonish his officers still more, levelled the gun from his 
shoulder, fired the contents of the second barrel into the 
faces of his squatting Wakungi, and then laughed at his 
own trick. In the meanwhile cows were driven in, 
which the king ordered his Wakungti to shoot with car- 
bines ; and as they missed them, he showed them the way 
to shoot with the Whitworth, never missing. The com- 
pany now broke up, but I still clung to the king, begging 
him to allow me to purchase food with beads, as I wanted 
it, for my establishment was always more or less in a 
starving state; but he only said, “ Let us know what you 
want and you shall always have it ;” which, in Uganda, I 
knew from experience only meant, Don’t bother me any 
more, but give me your spare money, and help yourself 
from my spacious gardens—Uganda is before you. 
5th.—To-day the king went on a visit to his mother, 
and therefore neither of them could be seen by visitors. 
I took a stroll towards the N’yanza, passing through the 
plantain-groves occupied by the king’s women, where my 
man Sangoro had been twice taken up by the Mgemma 
and put in the stocks. The plantain gardens were beauti- 
fully kept by numerous women, who all ran away from 
fright at seeing me, save one who, taken by surprise, threw 
herself flat on the ground, rolled herself up in her mbtigt, 
and, kicking with her naked heels, roared murder and 
help, until I poked her up, and reproached her for her 
folly. This little incident made my fairies bolder, and, 
sidling up to me one by one, they sat in a knot with me 
upon the ground ; then clasping their heads with their 
hands, they woh-wohed in admiration of the white man ; 


Aprtt. | PROMPT JUSTICE. 377 


they never in all their lives saw anything so wonderful ; 
his wife and children must be like him ; what would not 
* Sunna have given for such a treat ?—but it was destined to 
Mtésa’s lot. What is the interpretation of this sign, if it 
does not point to the favour in which Mtésa is upheld by 
the spirits ? I wished to go, but no: “Stop a little more,” 
they said, all in a breath, or rather out of breath in their 
excitement; “remove the hat and show the hair ; take off 
the shoes and tuck up the trousers ; what on earth is kept 
in the pockets? Oh, wonder of wonders !—and the iron !” 
As I put the watch close to the ear of one of them, “ Tick, 
tick, ticks—woh, woh, woh”—everybody must hear it; and 
then the works had to be seen. “Oh, fearful!” said one, 
“hide your faces; it is the Libari. Shut it up, Bana, 
shut it up; we have seen enough; but you will come 
again and bring us beads.” So ended the day’s work. 

6th.—To-day I sent Bombay to the palace for food. 
Though rain fell in torrents, he found the king holding a 
levee, giving appointments, plantations, and women, ac- 
cording to merit, to his officers. As one officer, to whom 
only one woman was given, asked for more, the king called 
him an ingrate, and ordered him to be cut to pieces on the 
spot; and the sentence was, as Bombay told me, carried 
into effect—not with knives, for they are prohibited, but 
with slips of sharp-edged grass, after the executioners had 
first dislocated his neck by a blow delivered behind the 
head, with a sharp, heavy-headed club. 

No food, however, was given to my men, though the 
king, anticipating Bombay’s coming, sent me one load of 
tobacco, one of butter, and one of coffee. My residence in 
Wganda became much more merry now, for all the women 
of the camp came daily to call on my two little girls ; 
during which time they smoked my tobacco, chewed my 
coffee, drank my pombé, and used to amuse me with 
queer stories of their native land. Rozaro’s sister also 
came, and proposed to marry me, for Matila, she said, was 


378° PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


a brutal man; he killed one of his women because he did 
not like her, and now he had clipped one of this poor 
creature’s ears off for trying to run away from him ; and 
when abused for his brutality, he only replied, “ It was no 
fault of his, as the king set the example in the country.” 

In the evening I took a walk with Kahala, dressed in 
a red scarf, and in company with Ltigoi, to show my 
children off in the gardens to my fair friends of yesterday. 
Everybody was surprised. The Mgemma begged us to 
sit with him and drink pombé, which he generously sup- 
plied to our heart’s content; wondered at the beauty of 
Kahala, wished I would give him. a wife like her, and 
lamented that the king would not allow his to wear such - 
pretty clothes. We passed on a little farther, and were 
invited to sit with another man, Ltkanikka, to drink 
pombé and chew coffee—which we did as before, meeting 
with the same remarks; for all Waganda, instructed by 
the court, know the art of flattery better than any people 
in the world, even including the French. 

7th.—In the morning, whilst it rained hard, the king 
sent to say he had started buffalo-shooting, and expected 
me to join him. After walking a mile beyond the palace, 
we found him in a plantain garden, dressed in imitation 
of myself, wideawake and all, the perfect picture of a 
snob. He sent me a pot of pombé, which I sent home 
to the women, and walked off for the shooting-ground, 
two miles farther on, the band playing in the front, fol- 
lowed by some hundred Wakungti—then the pages, then 
the king, next myself, and finally the women—the best 
in front, the worst bringing up the rear, with the king’s | 
spears and shield, as also pots of pombé, a luxury the 
king never moves without. It was easy to see there would 
be no sport, still more useless to offer any remarks, there- 
fore all did as they were bid. The broad road, like all 
in Uganda, went straight over hill and dale, the heights 
covered with high grass or plantain groves, and the val- 


Aprat.. | A BREACH OF ETIQUETTE. 379 


leys with dense masses of magnificent forest-trees sur- 
rounding swamps covered with tall rushes half bridged. 
Proceeding on, as we came to the first water, I com- 
menced flirtations with Mtésa’s women, much to the sur- 
prise of the king and every one. The bridge was broken, 
as a matter of course; and the logs which composed it, 
lying concealed beneath the water, were toed successively 
by the leading men, that those who followed should not 
be tripped up by them. This favour the king did for 
me, and I in return for the women behind; they had 
never been favoured in their lives with such gallantry, 
and therefore could not refrain from laughing, which 
attracted the king’s notice and set everybody in a giggle ; 
for till now no mortal man had ever dared communicate 
with his women. 

Shortly after this we left the highway, and, turning 
westwards, passed through a dense jungle towards the 
eastern shores of the Murchison Creek, cut by runnels 
and rivulets, where on one occasion I offered, by dumb 
signs, to carry the fair ones pick-a-back over, and after 
crossing a second myself by a floating log, offered my 
hand. The leading wife first fears to take it, then grows 
bold and accepts it; when the prime beauty, Libtiga, 
following in her wake, and anxious to feel, | fancy, what 
the white man is like, with an imploring face holds out 
both her hands in such a captivating manner, that though 
I feared to draw attention by waiting any longer, I could 
not resist compliance. The king noticed it; but instead 
of upbraiding me, passed it off as a joke, and running up 
to the Kamraviona, gave him a poke in the ribs, and 
whispered what he had seen, as if it had been a secret. 
“ Woh, woh!” says the Kamraviona, “what wonders will 
happen next ?” 

We were now on the buffalo ground; but nothing could 
be seen save some old footprints of buffaloes, and a pitfall 
made for catching them. By this time the king was tired; 


380 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


and as he saw me searching for a log to sit upon, he made 
one of his pages kneel upon all fours and sat upon his 
back, acting the monkey in aping myself; for otherwise 
he would have sat on a mbiigii, in his customary manner, 
spread on the ground. We returned, pushing along, up 
one way, then another, without a word, in thorough con- 
fusion, for the king delights in boyish tricks, which he 
has learned to play successfully. Leaving the road 
and plunging into thickets of tall grass, the band and 
Wakungti must run for their lives, to maintain the order 
of march, by heading him at some distant point of exit 
from the jungle ; whilst the Kamraviona, leading the pages 
and my men, must push head first, like a herd of buffaloes, 
through the sharp-cutting grass, at a sufficient rate to 
prevent the royal walk from being impeded; and the 
poor women, ready to sink with exhaustion, can only be 
kept in their places by fear of losing their lives. 
We had been out the whole day ; still he did not tire of 
these tricks, and played them incessantly till near sun- 
down, when we entered the palace. Then the women and 
Wakungti separating from us, we—that is, the king, the 
Kamraviona, pages, and myself—sat down to a warm 
feast of sweet potatoes and plantains, ending with pombé 
and fruit, whilst moist circular napkins, made in the shape 
of magnificent wafers out of plantain fibre, acted at once 
both the part of water and towel. This over, as the guns 
had to be emptied, and it was thought sinful to waste the 
bullets, four cows were ordered in and shot by the king. 
Thus ended the day, my men receiving one of the cows. 

8th.—As Mtésa was tired with his yesterday’s work, 
and would not see anybody, I took Ltigoi and Kahala, 
with a bundle of beads, to give a return to the Mgemma 
for his late treat of pombé. His household men and 
women were immensely delighted with us, but more so, 
they said, for the honour of the visit. They gave us more 
pombé, and introduced us to one of N’yamasoré’s numerous 


Aprit. | ATTEMPTS AT DISTILLATION, 381 


sisters, who was equally charmed with myself and my 
children. The Mgemma did not know how he could treat 
us properly, he said, for he was only a poor man; but he 
would order some fowls, that I might carry them away. 
When I refused this offer, because we came to see him, 
and not to rob him, he thought it the most beautiful 
language, and said he would bring them to the house 
himself. I added, I hoped he would do so in company 
with his wife, which he promised, though he never dared 
fulfil the promise ; and, on our leaving, sent all his ser- 
vants to escort us beyond the premises. In the evening, 
as the king’s musicians passed the camp, I ordered them 
in to play the milélé, and give my men and children a 
treat of dancing. The performers received a bundle of 
beads and went away happy. 

9th.—I called on Congow, but found him absent, wait- 
ing on the king, as usual; and the king sent for my big 
rifle to shoot birds with. 

10th.—In consequence of my having explained to the 
king the effect of the process of distilling, and the way of 
doing it, he sent a number of earthen pots and btigts of 
pombé that I might produce some spirits for him ; but as 
the pots sent were not made after the proper fashion, I 
called at the palace and waited all day in the hope of 
seeing him. No one, however, dared enter his cabinet, 
where he had been practising “Uganga” all day, and so 
the pombé turned sour and useless. Such are the ways 
of Uganda all over. 

11th—The king was out shooting ; and as nothing else 
could be done, I invited Ulédi’s pretty wife Gtrikt: to eat 
a mutton breakfast, and teach my child Méri not to be so 
proud. In this we were successful; but whether her 
head had been turned, as Bombay thought, or what else, 
we know not; but she would neither walk nor talk, nor 
do anything but lie at full length all day long, smoking 
and lounging in thorough indolence. 


382 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


12th.—I distilled some fresh pombé for the king; and 
taking it to him in the afternoon, fired guns to announce 
arrival. He was not visible, while fearful shrieks were 
heard from within, and presently a beautiful;woman, one 
of the king’s sisters, with cockscomb erect, was dragged 
out to execution, bewailing and calling on her king, the 
Kamraviona, and Mzungt, by turns, to save her life. 
Would to God I could have done it! but I did not know 
her crime, if crime she had committed, and therefore had 
to hold my tongue, whilst the Kamraviona, and other 
Wakungtt present, looked on with utter unconcern, not 
daring to make the slightest remark. It happened that 
Irungitt was present in the ante-chamber at this time ; and 
as Matila came with my party, they had a fight in re- 
spect to their merits for having brought welcome guests 
to their king. Mtésa, it was argued, had given N’yam- 
gundtii more women and men than he did to Matla, 
because he was the first to bring intelligence of our com- 
ing, as well as that of K’yengo, and Stwarora’s hongo to 
his king ; whilst, finally, he superseded Matila by taking 
me out of his charge, and had done a further good ser- 
vice by sending men on to Karagté to fetch both Grant 
and K’yengo. 

Maitila, although he had received the second reward, 
had literally done nothing, whilst Irungt had been years 
absent at Usti, and finally had brought a valuable hongo, 
yet he got less than Matila. This, Irungit said, was an in- 
justice he would not stand ; N’yamgundii fairly earned his 
reward, but Matila must have been tricking to get more 
than himself. He would get a suitable offering of wire, 
and lay his complaint in court the first opportunity. 
“Pooh, pooh! nonsense!” says Mattila, laughing ; “I will 
give him more wires than you, and then let us see who 
will win the king’s ear.” Upon this the two great chil- 
dren began collecting wire and quarrelling until the sun 
went down, and I went home. I did not.return to a 


Aprit.. | A FLIRTATION. : 383 


quiet dinner, as I had hoped, but to meet the summons of 
the king. Thinking it policy to obey, I found him wait- 
ing my coming in the palace. He made apologies for not 
answering my gun, and tasted some spirits resembling 
toddy, which I had succeeded in distilling. He imbibed 
it with great surprise ; it was wonderful tipple ; he must 
have some more ; and, for the purpose of brewing better, 
would send the barrel of an old Brown Bess musket, as well 
as more pombé and wood in the morning. 

13¢h.—As nothing was done all day, I took the usual 
promenade in the Seraglio Park, and was accosted by a 
very pretty little woman, Kariana, wife of Dttmba, who, 
very neatly dressed, was returning from a visit. At first 
she came trotting after me, then timidly paused, then 
advanced, and, as I approached her, stood spellbound at 
my remarkable appearance. At last recovering herself, 
she woh-wohed with aH the coquetry of a Mganda woman, 
and a flirtation followed ; she must see my hair, my watch, 
the contents of my pockets—everything ; but that was 
not enough. I waved adieu, but still she followed. I 
offered my arm, showing her how to take it in Huropean 
fashion, and we walked along, to the surprise of every- 
body, as if we had been in Hyde Park rather than in Cen- 
tral Africa, flirting and coquetting all the way. I was 
surprised that no one came to prevent her forwardness ; 
but not till I almost reached home did any one appear, 
and then, with great scolding, she was ordered to return— 
not, however, without her begging I would call in and see 
her on some future occasion, when she would like to give 
me some pombé. 

14th.—As conflicting reports came about Grant, the 
king very courteously, at my request, forwarded letters to 
him. I passed the day in distilling pombé, and the even- 
ing in calling on Mrs Dimba, with Mém, Kahala, Liigoi, 
and a troop of Wanyamtiézi women. She was very 
agreeable; but as her husband was attending at the 


384 , PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


palace, could not give pombé, and instead gave my female 
escort sundry baskets of plantains and potatoes, signifying 
a dinner, and walked half-way home, flirting with me as 
before. 

15th.—I called on the king with all the spirits I had 
made, as well as the saccharine residue. We found him 
holding a levee, and receiving his offerigs of a batch of 
girls, cows, goats, and other things of an ordinary nature. 
One of the goats presented gave me an opportunity of 
hearing one of the strangest stories I had yet heard in this 
strange country: it was a fine for attempted regicide, which 
happened yesterday, when a boy, finding the king alone, 
which is very unusual, walked up to him and threatened — 
to kill him, because, he said, he took the lives of men un- 
justly. The king explained by description and pantomime 
how the affair passed. When the youth attacked him he 
had in his hand the revolving pistol I had given, him, and 
showed us, holding the weapon to his cheek, how he had 
presented the muzzle to the boy, which, though it was 
unloaded, so frightened him that he ran away. All the 
courtiers n’yanzigged vigorously for the condescension of 
the king in telling us this story. There must have been 
some special reason why, in a court where trifling breaches 
of etiquette were punished with a cruel death, so grave a 
crime should have been so leniently dealt with; but I 
could not get at the bottom of the affair. The culprit, a 
good-looking young fellow of sixteen or seventeen, who 
brought in the goat, made his n’yanzigs, stroked the goat 
and his own face with his hands, n’yanzigged again with 
prostrations, and retired. ‘ 

After this scene, officers announced the startling fact 
that two white men had been seen at Kamrasi’s, one with 
a beard like myself, the other smooth-faced. I jumped at 
this news, and said, “Of course, they are there ; do let me 
send a letter to them.” I believed it to be Petherick and 
a companion whom I knew he was to bring with him. 


APRIL. | A TALK WITH HIS MAJESTY. 385 


The king, however, damped my ardour by saying the 
information was not perfect, and we must wait until 
certain Wakunett, whom he sent to search in Unyoro, 
returned. 

16th.—The regions about the palace were all in a state ° 
of commotion to-day, men and women running for their 
lives in all directions, followed by Wakungt and their 
retainers. The cause of all this commotion was a royal 
order to seize sundry refractory Wakungt, with their 
property, wives, concubines—if such a distinction can be 
made in this country—and families all together. At the 
palace Mtésa had a musical party, playing the flute occa- 
sionally himself. After this he called me aside, and said, 
“ Now, Bana, I wish you would instruct me, as you have 
so often proposed doing, for I wish to learn everything, 
though I have little opportunity for doing so.” Not 
knowing what was uppermost in his mind, I begged him 
to put whatever questions he liked, and he should be 
answered serzatim—hoping to find him inquisitive on 
foreion matters; but nothing was more foreign to his 
mind: none of his countrymen ever seemed to think be- 
yond the sphere of Uganda. 

The whole conversation turned on medicines, or the 
cause and effects of diseases. Cholera, for instance, very 
much affected the land at certain seasons, creating much 
mortality, and vanishing again as mysteriously as it 
came. What brought this scourge? and what would 
cure it? Supposing a man had a headache, what should 
he take for it? or a leg-ache, or a stomach-ache, or itch ; 
in fact, going the rounds of every disease he knew, until, 
exhausting the ordinary complaints, he went into particu- 
lars in which he was personally much interested ; but I - 
was unfortunately unable to prescribe medicines which 
produce the physical phenomenon next to his heart. 

17th—I called upon the king by appointment, and | 

238 


386 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


found a large court, where the Wakungti caught yester- 
day, and sentenced to execution, received their reprieve 
on paying fines of cattle and young damsels—their daugh- 
ters. A variety of charms, amongst which were some 
bits of stick strung on leather and covered with serpent- 
skin, were presented and approved of. Kaggao, a large 
district officer, considered the second.in rank here, re- 
ceived permission for me to call on him with my medi- 
cines. I pressed the king again to send men with mine 
to Kamrasi’s, to call Petherick. At first he objected that 
they would be killed, but finally he yielded, and appointed 
Budja, his Unyoro ambassador, for the service. ‘Then, 
breaking up the court, he retired with a select party of 
Wakungii, headed by the Kamraviona, and opened a con- — 
versation on the subject which is ever uppermost with 
the king and his courtiers. 

18th.—To-day I visited Kaggao with my medicine- 
chest. He had a local disease, which he said came to him 
by magic, though a different cause was sufficiently obvious, 
and wanted medicine such as | gave Mktienda, who re- 
ported that I gave him a most wonderful draught. Unfor- 
tunately I had nothing suitable to give my new patient, 
but cautioned him to have a care lest contagion should 
run throughout his immense establishment, and explained 
the whole of the circumstances to him. - Still he was not 
satisfied ; he would give me slaves, cows, or ivory, if I 
would only cure him. He was a very great man, as I 
could see, with numerous houses, numerous wives, and 
plenty of everything, so that it was ill-becoming of him 
to be without his usual habits. Rejecting his munificent 
offers, | gave him a cooling dose of calomel and jalap, 
which he drank like pombé, and pronounced beautiful— 
holding up his hands, and repeating the words “ Beautiful, 
beautiful! they are all beautiful together! There is Bana 
beautiful ! his box is beautiful ! and his medicine beauti- 
ful !”—and, saying this, led us in to see his women, who 


Aprit. | AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR, 387 


at my request were grouped in war apparel—viz,, a dirk 
fastened to the waist by many strings of coloured beads. 
There were from fifty to sixty women present, all very 
lady-like, but none of them pretty. Kaggao then in- 
formed me the king had told all his Wakungtt he would 
keep me as his guest four months longer to see if Pethe- 
rick came; and shouldshe not by that time, he would give 
me an estate, stocked with men, women, and cattle, in per- 
petuity, so that, if I ever wished to leave Uganda, I should 
always have something to come back to; so I might now 
know what my fate was to be. Before leaving, Kaggao 
presented us with two cows and ten baskets of potatoes. 

19th.—I sent a return present of two wires and twelve 
fundo of beads of sorts to Kageao, and heard that the 
king had gone to show himself off to his mother dressed 
Bana fashion. In the evening Kattinzi, N’yamasoré’s 
brother, just returned from the Unyoro plunder, called 
on me whilst I was at dinner. Not knowing who he was, 
and surprised at such audacity in Uganda, for he was the 
first officer who ever ventured to come near me in this 
manner, I offered him a knife and fork, and a share in 
the repast, which rather abashed him; for, taking it as 
a rebuff, he apologised immediately for the liberty he had 
taken, contrary to the etiquette of Uganda society, in 
coming to a house when the master was at dinner; and 
he would have left again had I not pressed him to re- 
main. Katitinzi then told me the whole army had re- 
turned from Unyoro, with immense numbers of cows, 
women, and children, but not men, for those who did not 
run away were killed fighting. He offered me a present 
of a woman, and pressed me to call on him. 

20th.—Still I found that the king would not send his 
Wakungii for the Unyoro expedition, so I called on him 
about it. Fortunately he asked me to speak a sentence 
in English, that he might hear how it sounds; and this 
gave me an opportunity of saying, if he had kept his 


a 


eee? 


388 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


promise by sending Budja to me, I should have despatched 
letters to Petherick. This was no sooner interpreted than 
he said, if I would send my men to him with letters in 
the morning he would forward them on, accompanied 
with an army. On my asking if the army was intended . 
to fight, he replied in short, “First to feel the way.” On 

hearing this, I strongly advised him, if he wished the 


road to be kept permanently open, to try conciliation 


with Kamrasi, and send him some trifling present. 

Now were brought. in some thirty-odd women for 
punishment and’ execution, when the king, who of late 
had been trying to learn Kistiahili, in order that we might 
be able to converse together, asked me, in that language, . 
if I would like to have some of these women ; and if so, 
how many? On my replying “One,” he begged me to 


_ take my choice, and a very pretty one was selected. God 


only knows what became of the rest; but the one I | 
selected, on reaching home, I gave to Ilmas, my valet, 
for a wife. He and all the other household servants were 
much delighted with this charming acquisition; but the 
poor girl, from the time she had been selected, had flat- 
tered herself she was to be Bana’s wife, and became im- 
mensely indignant at the supposed transfer, though from 
the first I had intended her for Ilmas, not only to favour 
him for his past good services, but as an example to my 
other men, as I had promised to give them all, provided 
they behaved well upon the journey, a “ free-man’s 
garden,” with one wife each and a purse of money, to 
begin a new life upon, as soon as they reached Zanzibar. 
The temper of Méri and Kahala was shown in a very 
forcible manner: they wanted this maid as an addition 
to my family, called her into the hut and chatted till 
midnight, instructing her not to wed with Ilmas; and 
then, instead of turning into bed as usual, they all three 
slept upon the ground. My patience could stand this 
phase of henpecking no longer, so I called in Manamaka, 


Apri. | EXCURSION TO THE N’YANZA. 389 


the head Myamtiézi woman, whom I had selected for 
their governess, and directed herto assist Ilmas, and put 
them to bed “ bundling.” . 

21st—In the morning, before I had time to write let- 
ters, the king invited me to join him at some new tank 
he was making between his palace and the residence of 
his brothers. I found him sitting with his brothers, all 
playing in concert on flutes. I asked him, in Kistiahili, 
if he knew where Grant was? On replying in the nega- 
tive, I proposed sending a letter, which he approved of ; 
and Budja was again ordered to go with an army 
for Petherick. 

22d.—Mabriki and Bilal, with Budja, started to meet 
Petherick, and three more men, with another letter to 
Grant. I called on the king, who appointed the 24th 
instant for an excursion of three days’ hippopotamus- 
shooting on the N’yanza. 

23d.—To-day occurred a brilliant mstance of the capri- 
cious restlessness and self-willedness of this despotic king. 
At noon, pages hurried in to say that he had started for 
the N’yanza, and wished me to follow him without delay. 
N’yanza, as I have mentioned, merely means a piece of 
water, whether a pond, river, or lake; and as no one 
knew which N’yanza he meant, or what project was on 
foot, I started off in a hurry, leaving everything behind, 
and walked rapidly through gardens, over hills, and across 
rushy swamps, down the west flank of the Murchison 
Creek, till 3 p.m, when I found the king dressed in 
red, with his Wakungt in front and women behind, 
travelling along in the confused manner of a pack of 
hounds, occasionally firing his rifle that I might know 
his whereabouts. He had just, it seems, mingled a little 
business with pleasure ; for noticing, as he passed, a wo- 
man tied by the hands to be punished for some offence, the 
nature of which I did not learn, he took the executioner’s 
duty on himself, fired at her, and killed her outright. 


< 


390 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


On this occasion, to test all his followers, and prove 
their readiness to serve him, he had started on a sudden 


View of the 


freak for the three days’ excursion on the lake one day 
before the appointed time, expecting everybody to fall 
into place by magic, without the smallest regard to each 
one’s property, feelings, or comfort. The home must be 
forsaken without a last adieu, the dinner untasted, and no 
provision made for the coming night, in order that his 
impetuous majesty should not suffer one moment’s disap- 
pointment. The result was natural: many who would 
have come were nowhere to be found; my guns, bed, 
bedding, and note-books, as well as cooking utensils, were 
all left behind, and, though sent for, did not arrive till 
the following day. 

On arrival at the mooring station, not one boat was to 
be found, nor did any arrive until after dark, when, on 
the beating of drums and firing of guns, some fifty large 
ones appeared, They were all painted with red clay, and 
averaged from ten to thirty paddles, with long prows 
standing out like the neck of a syphon or swan, decorated 
on the head with the horns of the Nsunnti (lencotis) ante- 


4 
Aprit. | UGANDA BOATS. 391 


lope, between which was stuck upright a tuft of feathers 
exactly like a grenadier’s plume. These arrived to con- 


Murchison Creek. 


vey us across the mouth of a deep rushy swamp to the 
royal yachting establishment, the Cowes of Uganda, dis- 
tant five hours’ travelling from the palace. We reached 


Uganda Boat. 


the Cowes by torchlight at 9 p.m., when the king had 
a picnic dinner with me, turned in with his women 


892 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


in great comfort, and sent me off to a dreary hut, where 
I had to sleep upon a grass-strewn floor. I was surprised 
we had to walk so far, when, by appearance, we might 
have boated it from the head of the creek all the way 
down ; but, on inquiry, was informed the swampy nature 
of the ground at the head of the creek~precluded any ap- 
proach to the clear water there, and hence the long over- 
land journey, which,.though fatiguing to the unfortunate 
women, who had to trot the whole way behind Mtésa’s 
four-mile-an-hour strides, was very amusing. ‘The whole 
of the scenery—hill, dale, and lake—was extremely beau- 
tiful. The Wangiiana in my escort compared the view 
to their own beautiful Poani (coast); but in my opinion it 
far surpassed anything I ever saw, either from the sea or 
upon the coast of Zanzibar. 

The king rose betimes in the morning and called me, 
unwashed and very uncomfortable, to picnic 
with him, during the collection of the boats. 
The breakfast, eaten in the open court, consisted of sundry 
baskets of roast-beef and plantain-squash, folded in 
plantain-leaves. He sometimes ate with a copper knife 
and picker, not forked—but more usually like a dog, with 
both hands. The bits too tough for his mastication he 
would take from his mouth and give as a treat to the 
pages, who n’yanzigged, and swallowed them with much 
seeming relish. Whatever remained over was then divided 
by the boys, and the baskets taken to the cooks. Pombé 
served as tea, coffee, and beer for the king; but his 
guests might think themselves very lucky if they ever 
got a drop of it. 

Now for the lake. Everybody in a hurry falls into his 
place the best way he can—Wakungit leading, and women 
behind. They rattle along, through plantains and shrubs, 
under large trees, seven, eight, and nine feet in diameter, 
till the beautiful waters are reached—a picture of the Rio 
scenery, barring that of the higher mountains in the back- 


Cowes, 24th. 


APRIL. | A DAY ON THE LAKE. 393 


ground of that lovely place, which are here represented 
by the most beautiful little hills. A band of fifteen 
drums of all sizes, called the Mazagtizo, playing with 
the regularity of a lot of factory engines at work, an- 
nounced the king’s arrival, and brought all the boats 
to the shore—but not as in England, where Jack, with 
all the consequence of a lord at home, invites the ladies 
to be seated, and enjoys the sight of so many pretty 
faces. Here every poor fellow, with his apprehensions 
written in his face, leaps over the gunwale into the 
water — ducking his head from fear of being accused 
of gazing on the fair sex, which is death—and_ bides 
patiently his time. They were dressed in plantain- 
leaves, looking lke grotesque Neptunes. The king, in 
his red coat and wideawake, conducted the arrange- 
ments, ordering all to their proper places—the wo- 
men in certain boats, the Wakungtt and Wangitana in 
others, whilst I sat in the same boat with him at his 
feet, three women holding mbitigtis of pombé behind. 
The king’s Kistiahili now came into play, and he was 
prompt in carrying out the directions he got from myself 
to approach the hippopotami. But the waters were too 
large and the animals too shy, so we toiled all the day 
without any effect, going only once ashore to picnic ; not 
for the women to eat—for they, poor things, got no- 
thing—but the king, myself, the pages, and the principal 
Wakungtt. As a wind-up to the day's amusement, the 
king led the band of drums, changed the men according 
to their powers, put them into concert pitch, and readily 
detected every slight irregularity, showing himself a 
thorough musician. 
This day requires no remark, everything done being 
the counterpart of yesterday, excepting that 
the king, growing bolder with me in con- 
sequence of our talking together, became more playful 
and familiar—amusing himself, for instance, sometimes 


Cowes, 25th. 


394 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


by catching hold of my beard as the rolling of the boat 
unsteadied him. 

We started early in the usual manner ; but after work- 
ing up and down the creek, inspecting the 
inlets for hippopotami, and tiring from want 
of sport, the king changed his tactics,and, paddling and 
steering himself with a pair of new white paddles, finally 
directed the boats to.an island occupied by the Mgussa, or 
Neptune of the N’yanza, not in person—for Mgussa is a 
spirit—but by his familiar or deputy, the great medium 
who communicates the secrets of the deep to the king of 
Uganda. In another sense, he might be said to be the 
presiding priest of the source of the mighty Nile, and as — 
such was, of course, an interesting person for me to meet. 
The first operation on shore was picnicking, when many 
large bigts of pombé were brought for the king; next, 
the whole party took a walk, winding through the trees, 
and picking fruit, enjoying themselves. amazingly, till, 
by some unlucky chance, one of the royal wives, a most 
charming creature, and truly one of the best of the lot, 
plucked a fruit and offered it to the king, thinking, doubt- 
less, to please him greatly; but he, like a madman, flew 
into a towering passion, said it was the first time a woman 
ever had the impudence to offer him anything, and 
ordered the pages to seize, bind, and lead her off to 
execution. 

These words were no sooner uttered by the king than 
the whole bevy of pages slipped their cord turbans from 
their heads, and rushed like a pack of cupid beagles upon 
the fairy queen, who, indignant at the little urchins dar- 
ing to touch her majesty, remonstrated with the king, and 
tried to beat them off like flies, but was soon captured, 
overcome, and dragged away, crying, in the names of the 
Kamraviona and Mzungtt (myself), for help and_pro- 
tection ; whilst Libtiga, the pet sister, and all the other 
women, clasped the king by his legs, and, kneeling, im- 


Cowes, 26th. 


- Aprit.] THE NEPTUNE OF THE N’YANZA. 395 


plored forgiveness for their sister. The more they craved 
for mercy, the more brutal he became, till at last he took 
a heavy stick and began to belabour the poor victim on 
the head. 

Hitherto I had been extremely careful not to interfere 
with any of the king’s acts of arbitrary cruelty, knowing 
that such interference, at an early stage, would produce 
more harm than good. This last act of barbarism, how- 
ever, was too much for my English blood to stand; and 
as I heard my name, Mzungt, imploringly pronounced, 
I rushed at the king, and, staying his uplifted arm, 
demanded from him the woman’s life. Of course I ran 
imminent risk of losing my own in thus thwarting the 
capricious tyrant; but his caprice proved the friend of 
both. The novelty of interference even made him smile, 
and the woman was instantly released. 

Proceeding on through the trees of this beautiful island, 
we next turned into the hut of the Mgussa’s familiar, 
which at the farther end was decorated with many mystic 
symbols—amongst others a paddle, the badge of his high 
oftice—and for some time we sat chatting, when pombé 
was brought, and the spiritual medium arrived. He was 
dressed Wichwézi fashion, with a little white goat-skin 
apron, adorned with numerous charms, and used a paddle 
for a mace or walking-stick. He was not an old man, 
though he affected to be so—walking very slowly and 
deliberately, coughing asthmatically, glimmering with his 
eyes, and mumbling like a witch. With much affected 
difficulty he sat at the end of the hut beside the symbols 
alluded to, and continued his coughing full half an hour, 
when his wife came in in the same manner, without say- 
ing a word, and assumed the same affected style. The 
king jokingly looked at me and ‘laughed, and then at 
these strange creatures, by turn, as much as to say, What 
do you think of them? but no voice was heard save that 
of the old wife, who croaked like a frog for water, and, 


396 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


when some was brought, croaked again because it was 
not the purest of the lake’s produce—had the first cup 
changed, wetted her lips with the second, and hobbled 
away in the same manner as she came. 

At this juncture the Mgussa’s familiar motioned the 
Kamraviona and several officers to draw around him, 
when, in a very low tone, he gave them all the orders of 
the deep, and walked away. His revelations seemed un- 
propitious, for we immediately repaired to our boats and 
returned to our quarters. Here we no sooner arrived than 
a host of Wakungit, lately returned from the Unyoro war, 
came to pay their respects to the king: they had returned 
six days or more, but etiquette had forbidden their ap- — 
proaching majesty sooner. Their successes had been great, 
their losses nal, for not one man had lost his life fighting. 
To these men the king narrated all the adventures of the 
day; dwelling more particularly on my defending his wife’s 
life, whom he had destined for execution. This was 
highly approved of by all; and they unanimously said 
Bana knew what he was about, because he dispenses 
justice like a king in his own country. 

Early in the morning a great hue and cry was made 
because the Wangtiana had been seen bath- 
ing in the N’yanza naked, without the slight- 
est regard to decency. We went boating as usual all day 
long, sometimes after hippopotami, at others racing up 
and down the lake, the king and Wakungiti paddling and 
steering by turns, the only break to this fatigue being 
when we went ashore to picnic, or the king took a turn 
at the drums. During the evening some of the principal 
Wakungti were collected to listen to an intellectual dis- 
course on the peculiarities of the different women in the 
royal establishment, and the king in good-humour de- 
scribed the benefits he had derived from this pleasant 
tour on the water. 


Whilst I was preparing my Massey’s log to show the 


Cowes, 27th. 


Arrit. | UGANDA ARCHERY. 397 


use of it to the king, he went off boating without me ; 
and as the few remaining boats would not take 
me off because they had received no orders 
_ to do so, I fired guns, but, getting no reply, went into the 
country hoping to find game; but, disappointed in that 
also, I spent the first half of the day with a hospitable old 
lady, who treated us to the last drop of pombé in her 
house—for the king’s servants had robbed her of nearly 
everything—smoked her pipe with me, and chatted in- 
cessantly on the honour paid her by the white king’s 
visit, as well as of the horrors of Uganda punishment, 
when my servants told her I saved the life of one queen. 
Returning homewards, the afternoon was spent at a 
hospitable officer's, who would not allow us to depart 
until my men were all fuddled with pombé, and the 
evening setting in warned us to wend our way. On 
arrival at camp, the king, quite shocked with himself for 
having deserted me, asked me if I did not hear his guns 
fire. He had sent twenty officers to scour the country, 
looking for me everywhere. He had been on the lake the 
whole day himself, and was now amusing his officers with 
_ a little archery practice, even using the bow himself, and 
making them shoot by turns. A lucky shot brought forth 
immense applause, all jumping and n’yanzigging with de- 
light, whether it was done by their own bows or the king's. 

A shield was the mark, stuck up at only thirty paces ; 
still they were such bad shots that they hardly ever hit it. 
Now tired of this slow sport, and to show his superior 
prowess, the king ordered sixteen shields to be placed 
before him, one in front of the other, and with one shot 
from Whitworth pierced the whole of them, the bullet 
passing through the bosses of nearly every one. “ Ah!” 
says the king, strutting about with gigantic strides, and 
brandishing the rifle over his head before all his men, 
“what is the use of spears and hows? I shall never fight 
with anything but guns in future.” These Wakungit, hav- 


Cowes, 28th. 


398 , PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


ing only just then returned from plundering Unyoro, had 
never before seen their king in a chair, or anybody sitting, 
as I was, by his side; and it being foreign to their notions, 
as well as, perhaps, unpleasant to their feelings, to find a 
stranger sitting higher than themselves, they complained 
against this outrage to custom, and induced the king to 
order my dethronement. The result was, as my iron stool 
was objectionable, I stood for a moment to see that I 
thoroughly understood their meaning ; and then, showing 
them my back, walked straightway home to make a grass 
throne, and dodge them that way. 

There was nothing for dinner last night, nothing again 
this morning, yet no one would go in to 
report this fact, as rain was falling, and the 
king was shut up with his women. Presently the. thought 
struck me that the rifle, which was always infallible mm 
gaining me a speedy admittance at the palace, might be 
of the same service now. I therefore shot a dove close to 
the royal abode, and, as 1 expected, roused the king at 
once, who sent out his pages to know what the firmg was 
about. When told the truth—that 1 had been trying to 
shoot a dish of doves for breakfast, as I could get neither 
meat nor drink from his kitchen—the head boy, rather 
guessing than understanding what was told him, distorted 
my message, and said to the king, as I could not obtain 
a regular supply of food from his house, I did not wish to 
accept anything further at his hands, but intended forag- 
ing for the future in the jungles. The king, as might be 
imagined, did not believe the boy’s story, and sent other 
pages to ascertain the truth of the case, bidding them 
listen well, and beware of what they were about. This 
second lot of boys conveyed the story rightly, when the 
king sent me a cow. As I afterwards heard, he cut off 
the ears of the unfortunate little mischief-maker for not 
making a proper use of those organs; and then, as the 
lad was the son of one of his own officers, he was sent 


Cowes, 29th. 


Apri. | GEOGRAPHY OF THE LAKE. 399 


home to have the sores healed. After breakfast the king 
ealled me to go boating, when I used my grass throne, to 
the annoyance of the attendants. This induced the king 
to say before them, laughing, “Bana, you see, is not to 
be done ; he is accustomed to sit before kings, and sit he 
will.” Then, by way of a change, he ordered all the drums 
to embark and play upon the waters; whilst he and his 
attendants paddled and steered by turns, first up the creek, 
and then down nearly to the broad waters of the lake. 

There was a passage this way, it was said, leading up 
to Usoga, but very circuitous, on account of reefs or shoals, 
and on the way the Kitiri island was passed; but no 
other Kitiri was known to the Waganda, though boats 
sometimes went coasting down the western side of the 
lake to Ukéréwé. The largest island on the lake is the 
Sésé,* off the mouth of the Katonga river, where another 
of the high priests of the Neptune of the N’yanza. resides, 
The king’s largest vessels are kept there; and it is famous 
for its supply of mbtigt barks. We next went on shore 
to picnic, when a young hippopotamus, speared by har- 
poon, one pig, and a pongo or bush-boc, were presented 
to the king. I now advised boat-racing, which was duly 
ordered, and afforded much amusement, as the whole fifty 
boats formed in line, and paddled furiously to the beat of 
drum to the goal which I indicated. 

The day was done. In great glee the king, ever much 
attached to the blackguard Maiila, in consequence of his 
amusing stories, appointed him to the office of seizer, or 
chief kidnapper of Wakungit; observing that, after the 
return of so many officers from war, much business in that 
line would naturally have to be done, and there was none 
so trustworthy now at court to carry out the king’s orders. 
All now went to the camp; but what was my astonish- 
ment on reaching the hut to find every servant gone, along 
with the pots, pans, meat, everything; and all in conse- 


* Some say a group of forty islands compose Sésé. 


400 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862.° 


quence of the king’s having taken the drums on board, 
which, being unusual, was regarded as one of his delusive 
tricks, and a sign of immediate departure. He had told 
no one he was going to the N’yanza, and now it was 
thought he would return in the same way. I fired for my 
supper, but fired in vain. Boys came out, by the king’s 
order, to inquire what I wanted, but left again without 
doing anything further. 

At my request thé king sent off boats to inquire after 
the one that left, or was supposed to have 
left, for Grant on the 3d of March, and he 
then ordered the return home, much to my delight; for, 
beautiful as the N’yanza was, the want of consideration 
for other people’s comfort, the tiring, incessant boating, 
all day long and every day, in the sun, as well as the 
king’s hurry-scurry about everything he undertook to do, 
without the smallest forethought, preparation, or warn- | 
ing, made me dream of my children, and look forward 
with pleasure to rejoming them. Strange as it may 
appear to Englishmen, I had a sort of paternal love for 
those little blackamoors as if they had been my offspring ; 
and I enjoyed the simple stories that their sable visitors 
told me every day they came over to smoke their pipes, 
which they did with the utmost familiarity, helping them- 
selves from my stores Just as they liked. 

Without any breakfast, we returned by the same route 
by which we had come, at four miles an hour, till half the 
way was cleared, when the king said, laughing, “ Bana, 
are you hungry ?”—a ridiculous question after twenty- 
four hours’ starvation, which he knew full well—and led 
the way into a plantain-grove, where the first hut that. 
was found was turned inside out for the king’s accommo- 
dation, and picnic was prepared. As, however, he ordered 
my portion to be given outside with the pages’, and allowed. 
neither pombé nor water, I gave him the slip, and walked 
hurriedly home, where 1 found Kahala smirking, and 


Cowes, 30th. 


Max.) INTELLIGENCE OF GRANT. 401 


apparently glad to see us, but Méri shamming ill in bed, 
whilst Manamaka, the governess, was full of smiles and 
conversation. She declared Méri had neither tasted food 
nor slept since my departure, but had been retching all 
the time. Dreadfully concerned at the doleful story, I 
immediately thought of giving relief with medicines, but 
neither pulse, tongue, nor anything else indicated the 
slightest disorder; and to add to these troubles, Ilmas’s 
woman had tried during my absence to hang herself, be- 
cause she would not serve as servant, but wished to be my 
wife ; and Bombay’s wife, after taking a dose of quinine, 
was delivered of a still-born child. 
1st.—I visited the king, at his request, with the medi- 
cine-chest. He had caught a cold. He showed me several 
of his women grievously affected with boils, and expected 


Captain Grant leaving Karague. 


me to cure them at once. I then went home, and found 
twenty men who had passed Grant, coming on a stretcher 
2 


402 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


from Karagtié, without any of the rear property. Méri, 
still persistent, rejected strengthening medicines, but said, 
in a confidential manner, if [ would give her a goat to sac- 
rifice to the Uganga she would recover in no time. There 
was something in her manner when she said this that I 
did not like—it looked suspicious ; and I contented myself 
by saying, “ No, I am a wiser doctor than any in these 
lands; if anybody could cure you, that person is myself : 
and further, if I gave you a goat to sacrifice, God would 
be angry with both of us for our superstitious credulity; 
you must therefore say no more about it.” 

2d.—The whole country around the palace was in a 
state of commotion to-day, from Matila and his chil- | 
dren hunting down those officers who had returned from 
the war, yet had not paid their respects to the king at the 
N’yanza, because they thought they would not be justified 
in calling on him so quickly after their arrival. Maiila’s 
house, in consequence of this, was full of beef and pombé; 
whilst, in his courtyard, men, women, and children, with 
feet in stocks, very like the old ‘parish stocks in England, 
waited his pleasure, to see what demands he would make 
upon them as the price of their release. After anxiously 
watching, I found out that Méri was angry with me for 
not allowing [lmas’s woman to live in my house ; and, to 
conquer my resolution against it—although I ordered it 
with a view to please Imas, for he was desperately in love 
with her—she made herself sick by putting her finger down 
her throat. I scolded her for her obstinacy. She said she 
was ill—it was not feigned; and if I would give her a 
goat to sacrifice she would be well at once; for she had 
looked into the magic horn already, and discovered that if 
I gave her a goat for that purpose it would prove that I 
loved her, and her health would be restored to her at once. 
Hallo! Here was a transformation from the paternal posi- 
tion into that of a henpecked husband! Somebody, I 
smelt at once, had been tampering with my household 


May. | MERI DISMISSED. 403 


whilst I was away. I commenced investigations, and after 
a while found out that Rozaro’s sister had brought a 
magician belonging to her family into the hut during my 
absence, who had put Méri up to this trick of extorting a 
goat from me, in order that he might benefit by it himself, 
for the magician eats the sacrifice, and keeps the skin. 

I immediately ordered him to be seized and bound to 
the flag-staff, whilst Maiila, Ulédi, Rozaro, and Bombay 
were summoned to witness the process of investiga- 
tion. Rozaro flew into a passion, and tried to release the 
magician as soon as he saw him, affecting intense indigna- 
tion that I should take the law into my own hands when 
one of Ritimanika’s subjects was accused; but only lost his 
dignity still more on being told he had acknowledged his 
inability to control his men so often when they had mis- 
behaved, that I scorned to ask his assistance any longer. 
He took huff at this, and, as he could not help himself, 
walked away, leaving us to do as we liked. The charge 
was fully proved. The impudent magician, without leave, 
and contrary to all the usages of the country, had en- 
tered and set my house against itself during my absence, 
and had schemed to rob me of a goat. I therefore 
sentenced him to fifty lashes—twenty-five for the injury 
he had inflicted on me by working up a rebellion in my 
house, and the remaining twenty-five for attempting 
larceny—saying, as he had wanted my goat and its skin, 
so now in return I wanted his skin. - These words were 
no sooner pronounced than the wretched Méri cried out 
against it, saying all the fault was hers: “ Let the stick 
skin my back, but spare my doctor; it would kill me to 
see him touched.” 

This appeal let me sce that there was something in the 
whole matter too deep and intricate to be remedied by 
my skill. I therefore dismissed her on the spot, and gave 
her, as a sister and free woman, to Ulédi and his pretty 
Mhitma wife, giving Bombay orders to carry the sentences 


404 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


into execution. After walking about till after dark, on 
returning to the empty house, I had some misgivings as 
to the apparent cruelty of abandoning one so helpless to 
the uncertainties of this wicked world. Ilmas’s woman 
also ran away, doubtless at the instigation of Rozaro’s 
sister, for she had been denied any further access to the 
house as being at the bottom of all this mischief. 

3d.—I was haunted all night by my fancied cruelty, 
and in the morning sent its victim, after Uganda fashion, 
some symbolical presents, including a goat, in token of 
esteem ; a black blanket, as a sign of mourning ; a bundle 
of gundti anklets; and a packet of tobacco, in proof of 
my forgiveness. . 


May. | A. VICTORIOUS ARMY. 405 


CHAPTER XTVe 
PALACE, UGANDA—Continued. 7 


RECEPTION OF A VICTORIOUS ARMY AT COURT— ROYAL SPORT—A 
REVIEW OF THE TROOPS—NEGOTIATIONS FOR THE OPENING OF 
THE ROAD ALONG THE NILE—GRANT’S RETURN—PILLAGINGS— 
COURT MARRIAGES—THE KING'S BROTHERS—DIVINATIONS AND 
SACRIFICES—THE ROAD GRANTED AT LAST—THE PREPARATIONS 
FOR CONTINUING THE EXPEDITION—THE DEPARTURE. 


I now received a letter from Grant to say he was coming 
by boat from Kitangtilé, and at once went to the palace 
to give the welcome news to the king. The road to the 
palace 1 found thronged with people; and in the square 
outside the entrance there squatted a multitude of at- 
tendants, headed by the king, sitting on a cloth, dressed 
in his national costume, with two spears and a shield by 
his side. On his right hand the pages sat waiting for 
orders, while on his left there was a small squatting 
eluster of women, headed by Wichweézis, or attendant 
sorceresses, offering pombé. In front of the king, in 
form of a hollow square, many ranks deep, sat the vic- 
torious officers, lately returned from the war, variously 
dressed; the nobles distinguished by their leopard-cat 
skins and dirks, the commoners by coloured mbtigt and 
cow or antelope skin cloaks ; but all their faces and arms 
were painted red, black, or smoke-colour. Within the 
square of men, immediately fronting the king, the war- 


Pid 


406 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


arms of Uganda were arranged in three ranks ; the great 
war-drum, covered with a leopard-skin, and standing on a 
large carpeting of them, was placed in advance ; behind 
this, propped or hung on a rack of iron, were a variety of 
the implements of war in common use, offensive and de- 
fensive, as spears—of which two were-of copper, the rest 
iron—and shields of wood and leather; whilst in the last 
row or lot were arranged systematically, with great taste 
and powerful effect, the supernatural arms, the god of 
Uganda, consisting of charms of various descriptions and 
in great numbers. Outside the square again, in a line 
with the king, were the household arms, a very handsome 
copper kettledrum, of French manufacture, surmounted 
on the outer edge with pretty little brass bells depending 
from swan-neck-shaped copper wire, two new spears, a 
painted leather shield, and magic wands of various de- 
vices, deposited on a carpet of leopard-skins—the whole 
scene giving the effect of true barbarous royalty in its 
uttermost magnificence. 

Approaching, as usual, to take my seat beside the king, 
some slight sensation was perceptible, and I was directed 
to sit beyond the women. The whole ceremonies of this - 
grand assemblage were now obvious. Each regimental 
commandant in turn narrated the whole services of his 
party, distinguishing those subs who executed his orders 
well and successfully from those who either deserted be- 
fore the enemy or feared to follow up their success. The 
king listened attentively, making, let us suppose, very 
shrewd remarks concerning them; when to the worthy 
he awarded pombé, helped with gourd-cups from large 
earthen jars, which was n’yanzigged for vehemently ; and 
to the unworthy, execution. When the fatal sentence was 
pronounced, a terrible bustle ensued, the convict wrestling 
and defying, whilst the other men seized, pulled and tore 
the struggling wretch from the crowd, bound him hands 
and head together, and led or rather tumbled him away. 


May. ] THE KING'S BROTHERS. 407 


After a while, and when all business was over, the 
king begged me to follow him into the palace. He asked 
again for stimulants—a matter ever uppermost in his mind 
—and would not be convinced that such things can do 
him no possible good, but would in the end be deleterious. 
Grant’s letter was then read to him before his women, and 
Ll asked for the dismissal of all the Wanyambo, for they 
had not only destroyed my peace and home, but were 
always getting me into disrepute by plundering the Wa- 
ganda in the highways. No answer was given to this; 
and on walking home, I found one of the king’s women at 
my hut, imploring protection against the Wanyambo, who 
had robbed and bruised her so often, she could not stand 
such abuse any longer. 

4th—I sent Maitila, early in the morning, with the 
plundered woman, and desired him to request that the 
Wanyambo might be dismissed. He returned, saying he 
delivered my message, but no reply was given. I then 
searched for the king, and found him at his brothers’ suite 
of huts playing the flute before them, On taking my seat, 
he proudly poimted to two vultures which he had shot 
with bullet, saying to his brothers, “There, do you see 
these birds? Bana shoots with shot, but I kill with 
bullets.” To try him, I then asked for leave to go to 
Usoga, as Grant was so far off; but he said, “No, wait 
until he comes, and you shall both go together then ; you 
fancy he is far off, but I know better. One of my men 
saw him coming along carried on a stretcher.” I said, 
“No; that must be a mistake, for he told me by letter he 
would come by water.” 

Heavy rain now set in, and we got under cover; but 
the brothers never moved, some even sitting in the stream- 
ing gutter, and n’yanzigging whenever noticed. The 
eldest brother offered me his eup of pombé, thinking I 
would not drink it ; but when he saw its contents vanish- 
ing fast, he cried “Iékerow !” (hold fast!) and as I pre- 


408 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. | 


tended not to understand him, continuing to drink, he 
rudely snatched the cup from my lips. Alternate con- 
certs with the brothers, and conversation about hunting, 
in consequence of a bump caused by a fall when steeple- 
chasing, which was discovered on my forehead, ended this 
day’s entertainment. 

5th.—As all the Wangttana went rae acs I was com- 
pelled to stop at home. The king, however, sent an officer 
for Grant, because I would not believe in his statement 
yesterday that he was coming by land; and I also sent a 
lot of men with a litter to help him on, and bring me an 
answer. 

6th.—I went to the palace at the king’s command. 
He kept us waiting an hour, and then passing out by a 
side gate, beckoned us to follow. He was dressed in 
European clothes, with his guns and tin box of clothes 
leading the way. His first question was, “ Well, Bana, 
where are your guns? for I have called you to go shoot- 
ing.” “The pages never said anything about shooting, 
and therefore the guns were left behind.” Totally un- 
concerned, the king walked on to his brothers, headed by 
a band and attendants, who were much lauded for being 
ready at a moment’s notice. A grand flute concert was 
then played, one of the younger brothers keeping time 
with a long hand-drum; then the band played; and 
dancing and duets and singing followed. After the usual 
presentations, fines, and n’yanzigeings, I asked for leave to 
go and meet Grant by water, but was hastily told that two 
boats had been sent for him when we returned from the 
N’yanza, and that two runners, just returned from Karagté, 


said he was on the way not far off. The child-king then * | 


changed his dress for another suit of, clothes for his 
brothers to admire, and I retired, much annoyed, as he 
would neither give pombé for myself, nor plantains for 
my men: and I was further annoyed on my arrival at 
home, to find the Wangttana mobbing my hut and clam- 


i May.] THE WITCH-QUEEN, 409 


ouring for food, and calling for an order to plunder if I 
did not give them beads, which, as the stock had run 
short, I could only do by their returning to Karagtté 
for the beads stored there; and, even if they were ob- 
tained, it was questionable if the king would revoke his 
order prohibiting the sale of provisions to us. 

7th.—To-day I called at the queen’s, but had to wait 
five hours in company with some attendants, to whom 
she sent pombé occasionally ; but after waiting for her 
nearly all day, they were dismissed, because excess of busi- 
ness prevented her seeing them, though I was desired to 
remain. I asked these attendants to sell me food for 
beads, but they declared they could not without obtain- | 
ing permission. In the evening the queen stumped out 
of her chambers and walked to the other end of her 
palace, where the head or queen of the Wichwézi women 
lived, to whom everybody paid the profoundest respect. 
On the way I joined her, she saying, in a state of high 
anger, “ You won't call on me, now I have given you such 
a charming damsel: you have quite forgotten us in your 
- love of home.” Of course Méri’s misdemeanour had to be 
explained, when she said, “ As that is the case, I will give 
you another; but you must take Méri out of the country, 
else she will bring trouble on us; for, you know, I never 
gave girls who lived in the palace to any one in my life 
before, because they would tell domestic affairs not proper, 
for common people toe know.” I then said my reason for 
not seeing her before was, that the four times I had sent 
messengers to make an appointment for the following day, 
they had been repulsed from her doors. This she would 
not believe, but called me a story-teller in very coarse 
language, until the men who had been sent were pointed 
out to her, and they corroborated me. 

The Wichwézi queen met her majesty with her head 
held very high, and instead of permitting me to sit on my 
box of grass, threw out a bundle of grass for that purpose. 


410 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. ~ 


All conversation was kept between the two queens; but 
her Wichwézi majesty had a platter of clay-stone brought, 
which she ate with great relish, making a noise of satisfac- 
tion like a happy guinea-pig. She threw me a bit, which, 
to the surprise of everybody, I caught and threw into my 
mouth, thinking it was some confection; but the harsh taste 
soon made me spit it out again, to the amusement of the 
company. On returning home I found the king had 
requested me to call on him as soon as possible with the 
medicine-chest. 

8th.—Without a morsel to eat for dinner last night, or 
anything this morning, we proceeded early to the palace, 
in great expectation that the medicines in request would 
bring us something ; but after waiting all day till 4 Pp.m., 
as the king did not appear, leaving Bombay behind, I 
walked away to shoot a guinea-fowl within earshot of the 
palace. The scheme was successful, for the report of the 
gun which killed the bird reached the king’s ear, and 
induced him to say that if Bana was present he would be 
glad to see him. This gave Bombay an opportunity of 
telling all the facts of the case; which were no sooner 
heard than the king gave his starving guests a number of 
plantains, and vanished at once, taking my page Ltgoi 
with him, to instruct him in Kistahili (Zanzibar language), 

9th.—As the fruit of last night’s scheme, the king sent 
us four goats and two cows. In great good-humour I now 
called on him, and found him walking about the palace 
environs with a carbine, looking eagerly for sport, whilst 
his pages dragged about five half-dead vultures tied in a 
bundle by their legs to a string. “These birds,” said he, 
tossing his head proudly, “were all shot flying, with iron 
slugs, as the boys will tell you. I like the carbine very 
well, but you must give me a double smooth gun.” This 
I promised to give when Grant arrived, for his good-nature 
in sending so many officers to fetch him. 

We next tried for guinea-fowl, as I tell him they are 


May. | EVASION OF KAHALA, 411 


the game the English delight in; but the day was far 
spent, and none could be found. A boy then in atten- 
dance was pointed out as having seen Grant in Uddtt ten 
days ago. If the statement were true, he must have 
crossed the Katonga. But though told with great appa- 
rent circumspection, I did not credit it, because my men 
sent on the 15th ultimo for a letter to ascertain his where- 
abouts had not returned, and they certainly would have 
done so had he been so near. To make sure, the king 
then proposed sending the boy again with some of my 
men ; but this I objected to as useless, considering the boy 
had spoken falsely. Hearing this, the king looked at the 
boy and then at the women in turn, to ascertain what they 
thought of my opinion, whereupon the boy cried. Late 
in the evening the sly little girl Kahala changed her cloth 
wrapper for a mbiigt, and slipped quietly away. I did 
not suspect her intention, because of late she had appeared 
much more than ordinarily happy, behaving to me in 
every respect like a dutiful child to a parent. A search 
was made, and guns fired, in the hopes of frightening her 
back again, but without effect. 

10th.—I had promised that this morning I would teach 
the king the art of guinea-fowl shooting, and when I 
refched the palace at 6 a.m., I found him already on the 
ground, He listened to the tale of the missing girl, and 
sent orders for her apprehension at once; then proceeding 
with the gun, fired eight shots successively at guinea-birds 
sitting on trees, but missed them all. After this, as the 
birds were scared away, and both iron shot and bullets 
were expended, he took us to his dressing-hut, went imside 
himself, attended by full-grown naked women, and ordered 
a breakfast of pork, beef, fish, and plantains to be served 
me outside on the left of the entrance; whilst a large 
batch of his women sat on the right side, silently coquet- 
ting, and amusing themselves by mimicking the white 
man eating. Poor little Litigoi joined in the repast, and 


412 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


said he longed to return to my hut, for he was half 
starved here, and no one took any notice of him; but he 
was destined to be a royal page, for the king would not 
part with him. A cold fit then seized me, and as I asked 
for leave to go, the king gave orders for one of his wives 
to be flogged. The reason for this aet of brutality I 
did not discover; but the moment the order was issued, 
the victim begged the pages to do it quickly, that the 
king’s wrath might be appeased ; and in an instant I saw 
a dozen boys tear their cord-turbans from their heads, 
pull her roughly into the middle of the court, and be- 
labour her with sticks, whilst she lay floundering about, 
screeching to me for protection. All I did was to turn 
my head away and walk rapidly out of sight, thinking it 
better not to interfere again with the discipline of the 
palace ; indeed, I thought it not improbable that the king 
did these things sometimes merely that his guests might 
see his savage power. On reaching home | found Kahala 
standing like a culprit before my door. She would not 
admit, what I suspected, that Méri had induced her to 
run away, but said she was very happy in my house until 
yester-evening, when Rozaro’s sister told her she was very 
stupid living with the Mzungti all alone, and told her to 
run away; which she did, taking the direction of N’yama- 
soré’s, until some officers finding her, and noticing beads 
on her neck, and her hair cut, according to the common 
court fashion, in slopes from a point in the forehead to 
the breadth of her ears, suspected her to be one of the 
king’s women, and kept her in confinement all night, till 
Mtésa’s men came this morning and brought her back 
again. As a punishment, I. ordered her to live with 
Bombay ; but my house was so dull again from want of 
some one to eat dinner with me, that I remitted the 
punishment, to her great delight. 

11th.—To-day I received letters from Grant, dated 
22d, 25th, 28th April, and 2d May. They were brought 


May. |. INTELLIGENCE OF PETHERICK. 413 


by my three men, with Karagtié pease, flour, and ammu- 
nition. He was at Matila’s house, which proved the king’s 
boy to be correct ; for the convoy, afraid of encountering 
the voyage on the lake, had deceived my companion and 
brought him on by land, like true negroes. 

12th.—I sent the three men who had returned from 
Grant to lay a complaint against the convoy, who had 
tricked him out of a pleasant voyage, and myself out of 
the long-wished-for survey of the lake. They carried at 
the same time a present of a canister of shot from me to 
the king. Delighted with this unexpected prize, he imme- 
diately shot fifteen birds flying, and ordered the men to 
acquaint me with his prowess. 

13th.—To-day the king sent me four cows and a load 
of butter as a return-present for the shot, and allowed one 
of his officers, at my solicitation, to go with ten of my men 
to help Grant on. He also sent a message that he had 
just shot thirteen birds flying. 

14th.—Mabriiki and Bilal returned with Budja and his 
ten children from Unyoro, attended by a deputation of 
. four men sent by Kamrasi, who were headed by Kidgwiga. 
Mtésa, it now transpired, had followed my advice of 
making friendship with Kamrasi by sending two brass 
wires as a hongo instead of an army, and Kamrasi, in 
return, sent him two elephant-tusks. Kidgwiga said 
Petherick’s party was not in Unyoro—they had never 
reached there, but were lying at anchor off Gani. Two 
white men only had been seen—one, they said, a hairy 
man, the other smooth-faced ; they were as anxiously in- 
quiring after us as we were after them: they sat on chairs, 
dressed like myself, and had guns and everything precisely 
like those in my hut. On one occasion they sent up a 
necklace of beads to Kamrasi, and he, in return, gave 
them a number of women and tusks. If [ wished to go 
that way, Kamrasi would forward me on to their position 
in boats ; for the land route, leading through Kidi, was a 


414 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


jungle of ten days, tenanted by a savage set of people, 
who hunt everybody, and seize everything they see. 

This tract is sometimes, however, traversed by the 
Wanyoro and Gani people, who are traders in cows and 
tippet monkey-skins, stealthily travelling at night; but 
they seldom attempt it, from fear of being murdered. 
Baraka and Ulédi, sent from Karagiié on the 30th Janu- 
ary, had been at Kamrasi’s palace upwards of a month, 
applying for the road to Gani, and as they could not get 
that, wished to come with Mabriikito me; but this Kam- 
rasi also refused, on the plea that, as they had come from 
Karagtié, so they must return there. Kamrasi had heard 
of my shooting with Mtésa, as also of the attempt made 
by Mabritki and Ulédi to reach Gani vid Usoga. He had 
received my present of beads from Baraka, and, in addi- 
tion, took Ulédi’s sword, saying, “ If you do not wish to 
part with it, you must remain a prisoner in my country all 
your life, for you have not paid your footing.” Mabrtki 
then told me he was kept waiting at a village, one hour's 
walk from Kamrasi’s palace, five days before they were 
allowed to approach his majesty ; but when they were 
seen, and the presents exchanged, they were ordered to 
pack off the following morning, as Kamrasi said the 
Waganda were a set of plundering blackguards, ' 

This information, to say the least of it, was very embar- 
rassing—a mixture of good and bad. Petherick, I now 
felt certain, was on the look-out for us ; but his men had 
reached Kamrasi’s, and returned again before Baraka’s 
arrival, Baraka was not allowed to go on to him and 
acquaint him of our proximity, and the ¥ faganda were so 
much disliked in Unyoro, that there seemed no hopes of 
our ever being able to communicate by letter. To add to 
my embarrassments, Grant had not been able to survey 
the lake from Kitangtilé, nor had Usoga and the eastern 
side of the lake been geen. 


15¢th.—I was still laid up with the cold fit of the 10th, 


= = = = 
SS SSS 
| ‘ 
ae 
7 
SS Ss = 


SS 
— 
———— 
SS : = 


=> 


meee 


i i \ Mi 


The King of Uganda reviewine Troops. ~ 


& 
May. ] _ MUSTERING OF THE ARMY. 415 
a; 

which turned into a low kind of fever. TI sent Bombay 
to the king to tell him the news, and ask him what he 
thought of doing next. He replied that he would push 
for Gani direct ; and sent back a pot of pombé for the 
sick man. 

16th.—The king to-day inquired after my health, and, 
strange to say, did not accompany his message with a 
begging request. 

17th.—My respite, however, was not long. At the 
earliest possible hour in the morning the king sent beg- 
ging for things one hundred times. refused, supposing, 
apparently, that I had some little reserve store which I 
wished to conceal from him. 

18th and 19th.—I sent Bombay to the palace to beg 
for pombé, as it was the only thing I had an appetite for, 
but the king would see no person but myself. He had 
broken his rifle washing-rod, and this must be mended, 
the pages who brought it saying that no one dared take it 
back to him until it was repaired. A guinea-fowl was sent 
after dark for me to see, as a proof that the king was a 
sportsman coplete. 

20th.—The king going out shooting borrowed my 
powder-horn. The Wangttana mobbed the hut and 
bullied me for food, merely because they did not like the 
trouble of helping themselves from the king’s garden, 
though they knew I had purchased their privilege to do 
so at the price of a gold chronometer and the best guns 
England could produce. 

21st.—I now, for the first time, saw the way in which 
the king collected his army together. The highroads were 
all thronged with Waganda warriors, painted in divers 
colours, with plantain-leaf bands round their heads, scanty 
goat-skin fastened to their loins, and spears and shield in 
their hands, singing the tambtiré or march, ending with a 
repetition of the word Mkavia, or Monarch. They sur- 
passed in number, according to Bombay, the troops and 


416 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


ragamuffins enlisted by Sultain Majid when Sayyid 
Sir Gni threatened to attack Zanzibar; in fact, he never 
saw such a large army collected anywhere. 

Bombay, on going to the palace, hoping to obtain 
plantains for the men, found the king holding a levee, 
for the purpose of despatching this said army somewhere, 
but where no one would pronounce. The king, then, 
observing my men who had gone to Unyoro together 
with Kamrasi’s, questioned them on their mission ; and . 
when told that no white men were there, he waxed wrath- 
ful, and said it was a falsehood, for his men had seen 
them, and could not be mistaken. Kamrasi, he said, 
must have hidden them somewhere, fearful of the number 
of guns which now surrounded him; and, for the same 
reason, he told lies, yes, lies—but no man living shall 
dare tell himself lies; and now, as he could not obtain 
his object by fair means, he would use arms and force it 
out. Then, turning to Bombay, he said, “ What does your 
master think of this business?” upon which Bombay 
replied, according to his instructions, “Bana wishes no- 
thing done until Grant arrives, when all will go together.” 
On this the king turned his back and walked away. 

22d.—Kaittinzi called on me early, because he heard I 
was sick. I asked him why the Waganda objected to my 
sitting on a chair; but, to avoid the inconvenience of 
answering a troublesome question, without replying, he 
walked off, saying he heard a noise in the neighbourhood 
of the palace which must be caused by the king ordering 
some persons to be seized, and his presence was so neces- 
sary he could not wait another moment. My men went 
for plantains to the palace and for pombé on my behalf ; 
but the king, instead of giving them anything, took two 
fez caps off their heads, keeping them to himself, and 
ordered them to tell Bana all his beer was done. 

23d.—Kidgwiga called on me to say Kamrasi so very 
much wanted the white men at Gani to visit him, he had 


May. | GRANT AT HAND. 417 


sent a hongo of thirty tusks to the chief of that country 
in hopes that it would insure their coming to see him. 
He also felt sure if I went there his king would treat me 
with the greatest respect. This afforded an opportunity 
for putting in a word of reconciliation. I said that it 
was at my request that Mtésa sent Kamrasi a present; 
and so now, if Kamrasi made friends with the Waganda, 
. there would be no difficulty about the matter. 

24th.—The army still thronged the highways, some 
going, others coming, like a swarm of ants, the whole day 
long. Kidgwiga paid another visit, and I went to the 
palace without my gun, wishing the king to fancy all my 
powder was done, as he had nearly consumed all my store; 
but the consequence was that, after waiting the whole 
day, I never saw him at all. In the evening pages in- 
formed me that Grant had arrived at N’yama Goma, one 
march only distant. 

25th.—I prepared twenty men, with a quarter of mut- 
ton for Grant to help him on the way, but they could not 
go without a native officer, lest they should be seized, and 
no officer would lead the way. The king came shooting 
close to my hut and ordered me out. I found him march- 
ing Rozaro about in custody with four other Wanyambo, 
who, detected plundering by Kittinzi, had set upon and 
beaten him severely. The king, pointing them out to me, 
said, he did not like the system of plundering, and wished 
to know if it was the practice in Karagtié. Of course I 
took the opportunity to renew my protest against the 
plundering system; but the king, changing the subject, 
told me the Wazungtt were at Gani inquiring after us, 
and wishing to come here. To this I proposed fetching 
them myself in boats, but he objected, saying he would 
send men first, for they were not farther off to the north- 
ward than the place he sent boats to, to bring Grant. He 
said he did not like Unyoro, because Kamrasi hides him- 

2D 


418 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


self like a Neptune in the Nile, whenever his men go on 
a visit there, and instead of treating his guests with 
respect, he keeps them beyond the river. For this reason 
he had himself determined on adopting the passage by 
Kidi, 

I was anxious, of course, to go on with the subject thus 
unexpectedly opened, but, as ill-luck would have it, an 
adjutant was espied sitting on a tree, when a terrible fuss 
and excitement ensued. The women were ordered one way 
and the attendants another, whilst I had to load the gun 
in the best way I could with the last charge and a half 
left in the king’s pouch. Ten grains were all he would 
have allowed himself, reserving the residue, without re- — 
flecting that a large bird required much shot; and he was 
shocked to find me lavishly use the whole, and still say it 
was not enough. 

The bird was then at a great height, so that the first 
shot merely tickled him, and drove him to another tree. 
“Woh! woh!” cried the king, “I am sure he is hit ; look 
there, look there ;” and away he rushed after the bird; 
down with one fence, then with another, in the utmost 
confusion, everybody trying to keep his proper place, till 
at last the tree to which the bird had flown was reached, 
and then, with the last charge of shot, the king killed his 
first nundo. The bird, however, did not fall, but lay like 
a spread eagle in the upper branches. Wasoga were called 
to climb the tree and pull it down; whilst the king, in 
eestasies of joy and excitement, rushed up and down the 
potato-field like a mad bull, jumping and plunging, wavy- 
ing and brandishing the gun above his head; whilst the 
drums beat, the attendants all woh-wohed, and the 
women, joining with their lord, rushed about lullalooing 
and dancing like insane creatures. Then began congra- 
tulations and handshakings, and, finally, the inspection 
of the bird, which, by this time, the Wasoga had thrown 
down, Oh! oh! what a wonder! Its wings outspread 


May. | A REVIEW. 419 


reached further than the height of a man; we must 20 
and show it to the brothers. Even that was not enough 
—we must show it to the mother; and away we all 
rattled as fast as our legs could carry us. 

Arrived at the queen’s palace, out of respect to his 
mother, the king changed his European clothes for a white 
kid-skin wrapper, and then walked in to see her, leaving 
us waiting outside. By this time Colonel Congow, in his 
full-dress uniform, had arrived in the square outside, with 
his regiment drawn up in review order. The king, hear- 
ing the announcement, at once came out with spears and 
shield, preceded by the bird, and took post, standing 
armed, by the entrance, encircled by his staff, all squat- 
ting, when the adjutant was placed in the middle of the 
company. Before us was a large open square, with the 
huts of the queen’s Kamraviona or commander-in-chief 
beyond. The battalion, consisting of what might be 
termed three companies, each containing 200 men, being 
drawn up on the left extremity of the parade-ground, re- 
ceived orders to march past in single file from the night 
of companies, at a long trot, and re-form again at the 
other end of the square. 

Nothing conceivable could be more wild or fantastic 
than the sight which ensued—the men all nearly naked, 
with goat or cat skins depending from their girdles, and 
smeared with war colours according to the taste of each 
individual ; one-half of the body red or black, the other 
blue, not in regular order—as, for instance, one stocking 
would be red, the other black, whilst the breeches above 
would be the oy posite colours, and so with the sleeves and 
waistcoat. HE man carried the same arms—two spears 
and one shield—held as if approaching an enemy, and they 
thus moved in three lines of single rank and file, at fifteen 
to twenty paces asunder, with the same high action and 
elongated step, the ground leg only being bent, to give 
their strides the greater force. After the men had all 


420 , PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


started, the captains of companies followed, even more 
fantastically dressed ; and last of all came the great Col- 
onel Congow, a perfect Robinson Crusoe, with his long 
white-haired goat-skins, a fiddle-shaped leather shield, 
tufted with white hair at all six extremities, bands of 
long hair tied below the knees, and a magnificent helmet, 
covered with rich beads of every colour, in excellent taste, 
surmounted with a plume of crimson feathers, from the 
centre of which rose a bent stem, tufted with goat-hair. 
Next they charged in companies to and fro; and, finally, 
the senior officers came charging at their king, making 
violent professions of faith and honesty, for which they 
were applauded. The parade then broke up, and all went 
home. 

26th.—One of king Mtésa’s officers now consenting to 
go to N’yama Goma with some of my men, | sent Grant 
a quarter of goat. The reply brought to me was, that he 
was very thankful for it; that he cooked it and ate it on 
the spot; and begged I would see the king, to get him 
released from that starving place. Rozaro was given over 
to the custody of Kittinzi for punishment. At the same 
time, the queen, having heard of the outrages committed 
against her brother and women, commanded that neither | 
my men nor any of Rozaro’s should get any more food at 
the palace ; for as we all came to Uganda in one body, so 
all alike were, by her logic, answerable for the offence. I 
called at the palace for explanation, but could not obtain 
admittance because I would not fire the gun. 

27th.—The king sent to say he wanted medicine to 
propitiate lightning. I called and described the effects of 
a lightning-rod, and tried to enter into the Unyoro busi- 
ness, wishing to go there at once myself. He objected, 
because he had not seen Grant, but appointed an officer to 
go through Unyoro on to Gani, and begged I would also 
send men with letters. Our talk was agreeably interrupted 
by. guns in the distance announcing Grant’s arrival, and I 


ie 


| 


ian 


Wty 


MY 
Uy 
Ye iy 


UL. ie 


May. | ARRIVAL OF GRANT. 421 


took my leave to welcome my friend. How we enjoyed 
ourselves after so much anxiety and want of one another's 
company, I need not describe. For my part, I was only 
too rejoiced to see Grant could limp about a bit, and was 
able to laugh over the picturesque and amusing account 
he gave me of his own rough travels. 

28th.—The king in the morning sent Budja, his ambas- 
sador, with Kamrasi’s Kidgwiga, over to me for my men 
and letters, to go to Kamrasi’s again and ask for the road 
to Gani. I wished to speak to the king first, but they 
said they had no orders to stop for that, and walked 
straight away. I sent the king a present of a double- 
barrelled gun and ammunition, and received in answer a 
request that both Grant and myself would attend a levee, 
which he was to hold in state, accompanied by his body- 
guard, as when I was first presented to him. In the after- 
noon we proceeded to court accordingly, but found it 
scantily attended ; and after the first sitting, which was 
speedily over, retired to another court, and saw the women. 
Of this dumb show the king soon got tired; he therefore 
called for the iron chair, and entered into conversation, at 
first about the ever-engrossing subject of stimulants, till 
we changed it by asking him how he liked the gun? He 
pronounced it a famous weapon, which he would use 
intensely. We then began to talk in a general way about 
Sttwarora and Ritmanika, as well as the road through 
Unyamtiézi, which we hoped would soon cease to exist, 
_ and be superseded by one through Unyoro. 

Tt will be kept in view that the hanging about at this 
court, and all the perplexing and uritating negotiations 
here described, had always one end in view—that of reach- 
' ing the Nile where it pours out of the N’yanza, as I was 
long certain that it did. Without the consent and even 
the aid of this capricious barbarian I was now talking to, 
such a project was hopeless. JI naturally seized every 
opportunity for putting in a word in the direction of my 


424 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


was deep Uganda policy in this: it was for the purpose 
of treating Grant as a separate, independent person, and 
so obtaining a fresh hongo or tax. Laughing at the 
trick, I thanked her for the beer, taking it personally on 
my household, and told her when my property arrived 
from Karagtié, she should have a few more things as I 
promised her; but the men sent had neither brought my 
brother in a vessel, as they were ordered, nor did they 
bring my property from Karagté. 

Still the queen was not content: she certainly expected 
something from Grant, if it was ever so little, for she was 
entitled to it, and would not listen to our being one 
house. ‘Turning the subject, to put in a word for my 
great object, I asked her to use her influence in opening 
the road to Gani, as, after all, that was the best way to 
get new things into Uganda. Cunning as a fox, the 
queen agreed to this project, provided Grant remained 
behind, for she had not seen enough of him yet, and she 
would speak to her son about the matter in the morning. 

This was really the first gleam of hope, and I set to 
putting our future operations into a shape that might 
lead to practical results without alarming our capricious 
host. I thought that whilst I could be employed in in- 
specting the river, and in feeling the route by water 
to Gani, Grant could return to Karagtié by water, 
bringing up our rear traps, and, in navigating the lake, 
obtain the information he had been frustrated in getting 
by the machinations of his attendant Maribt. It was 
agreed to, and all seemed well; for there was much left 
to be done in Uganda and Usoga, if we could only make 
sure of communicating once with Petherick. Before going 
home we had some more polite conversation, during which 
the queen played with a toy in the shape of a cocoa du 
mer, studded all over with cowries: this was a sort of 
doll, or symbol of a baby, and her dandling it was held 
to indicate that she would ever remain a widow. In the — 


= 


——> 


—| 


| | 
i 


if 


————S 


—=S 


= 


if. 


lk 


—— 


— 


—————- 


= 


——— 
Ss 
——— 
= 
— 
——_—— = 
———_—> 
= 


—= 
SS 


A 
— 
=. 


AD 
TEAR ZE 
— 


SE 


Speke introduces Grant to the Queen Dowager of Uganda. 


Re 
itt 


Juxr.] KINGLY IMPORTUNITIES. 4.25 


evening the king returned all our rifles and guns, with 
a request for one of them; as also for the iron chair he 
sat upon when calling on us, an iron bedstead, and the 
Union_ Jack, for he did not honour us with a visit for 
nothing; and the head page was sent to witness the trans- 
fer of the goods, and see there was no humbug about it. 
Tt was absolutely necessary to get into a rage, and tell 
- the head page we did not come to Uganda to be swindled 
in that manner, and he might tell the king I would not 
part with one of them. 

2d.—K’yengo, who came with Grant, now tried to 
obtain an interview with the king, but could not get 
admission. I had some further trouble about the disposal 
of the child Méri, who said she never before had lived in a 
poor man’s house since she was born. I thought to con- 
tent her by offermg to marry her to one of Rttmanika’s 
sons, a prince of her own breed, but she would not listen 
to the proposal. ; 

3d.—For days past, streams of men have been carrying 
fageots of firewood, clean-cut timber, into the palaces of 
the king, queen, and the Kamraviona; and to-day, on 
calling on.the king, I found him engaged having these 
faggots removed by Colonel Mkavia’s regiment from one 
court into another, this being his way of ascertaining 
their quantity, instead of counting them. About 1600 
men were engaged on this service, when the king, stand- 
ing on a carpet in front of the middle hut of the first 
court, with two spears in his hand and his dog by his side, 
surrounded by his brothers and a large staff of officers, 
gave orders for the regiment to run to and fro in column, 
that he might see them well; then turning to his staff, 
ordered them to run up and down the regiment, and see 
what they thought of it. This ridiculous order set them 
all flying, and soon they returned, charging at the king 
with their sticks, dancing and jabbering that their num- 
bers were many, he was the greatest king on earth, and 


* 


426 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


their lives and services were his for ever. The regiment 
now received orders to put down their faggots, and, taking 
up their own sticks in imitation of spears, followed the 
antics of their officers in charging and vociferating. Next, 
Mkavia presented five hairy Usoga goats, n’yanzigging and 
performing the other appropriate ceremonies. On asking 
the king if he had any knowledge of the extent of his 
army, he merely said, “ How can I, when these you see 
are a portion of them just ordered here to carry wood ¢” 

The regiment was now dismissed; but the officers were 
invited to follow the king into another court, when he 
complimented them on assembling so many men; they, 
instead of leaving well alone, foolishly replied they were 
sorry they were not more numerous, as some of the men 
lived so far away they shirked the summons; Maia, 
then, ever forward in mischief, put a cap on it by saying, 
if he could only impress upon the Waganda to listen to 
his orders there would never be a deficiency. Upon which 
the king said, “ If they fail to obey you, they disobey me ; 
for I have appointed you as my orderly, and thereby you 
personify the orders of the king.” Up jumped Maiila in 
a moment as soon as these words were uttered, charging 
with his stick, then floundering and n’yanzigging as if he 
had been signally rewarded. I expected some piece of 
cruel mischief to come of all this, but the king, in his 
usual capricious way, suddenly rising, walked off to a 
third court, followed only by a select few. 

Here, turning to me, he said, “ Bana, I love you, because 
you have come so far to see me, and’ have taught me so 
many things since you have been here.” Rising, with my 
hand to my heart, and gracefully bowing at this strange 
announcement—for at that moment I was full of hunger 
and wrath—I intimated I was much flattered at hearing 
it, but as my house was in a state of starvation, I trusted 
he would consider it. “What!” said he, “do you want 
goats?” “Yes, very much.” The pages then received 


June. | SUPPLIES OBTAINED. 427 


orders to furnish me with ten that moment, as the king’s 
farmyard was empty, and he would reimburse them as 
soon as more confiscations took place. But this, I said, 
was not enough; the Wangtiana wanted plantains, for 
they had received none these fifteen days. “What!” said 
the king, turning to his pages again, “have you given 
these men no plantains, as I ordered? Go and fetch 
them this moment, and pombé too, for Bana.” 

The subject then turned on the plan I had formed of 
going to Gani by water, and of sending Grant to Kara- 
gué by the lake; but the king’s mind was fully occupied 
with the compass I had given him. He required me to 
explain its use, and then broke up the meeting. , 

4th.—Viariingi, an officer sent by Rttmanikg to escort 
Grant to Uganda, as well as to apply to king Mtésa for 
a force to fight his brother Rogéro, called on me with 
Rozaro, and said he had received instructions from his 
king to apply to me for forty cows and two slave-boys, 
because the Arabs who pass through his country to Uganda 
always make him a present of that sort after receiving them 
from Mtésa. After telling him we English never give the 
presents they have received away to any one, and never 
make slaves, but free them, I laid a complaint against 
Rozaro for having brought much trouble and disgrace 
upon my camp, as well as much trouble on myself, and 
begged that he might be removed from my camp. 
Rozaro then attempted to excuse himself, but without 
success, and said he had already detached his residence 
from my camp, and taken up a separate residence with 
Viartingi, his superior officer. 

I called on the king in the afternoon, and found the 
pages had already issued plantains for my men and 
pombé for myself. The king addressed me with great 
eordiality, and asked if I wished to go to Gani. I an- 
swered him with all promptitude,—Yes, at once, with 
some of his officers competent to judge of the value of all I 


* 


428 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


point out to them for future purposes in keeping the road 
permanently open. His provoking capriciousness, how- 
ever, again broke in, and he put me off till his messen- 
gers should return from Unyoro. I told him his men had 
gone in vain, for Budja left without my letter or my 
men; and further, that the river route is the only one 
that will ever be of advantage to Uganda, and the sooner 
it was opened up the.better. I entreated him to listen to 
my advice, and send some of my men to Kamrasi direct, 
to acquaint him with my intention to go down the river 
in boats to him; but I could get no answer to this. Bom- 
bay then asked for cows for the Wangtiana, getting 
laughed at for his audacity, and the king broke up the 
court and walked away. 

5th.—I started on a visit to the queen, but half-way 
met Congow, who informed me he had just escorted her 
majesty from his house, where she was visiting, to her 
palace. By way of a joke and feeler, I took it in my 
head to try, by taking a harmless rise out of Congow, 
whether the Nile is understood by the natives to be 
navigable near its exit from the N’yanza. I told him he 
had been appomted by the king to escort us down the 
river to Gani. He took the affair very seriously, deliver- 
ing himself to the following purport: “ Well, then, my 
days are numbered ; for if I refuse compliance, I shall lose 
my head; and if I attempt to pass Kamrasi’s, which is 
on the river, I shall lose my life; for I am a marked man 
there, having once led an army past his palace and back 
again. It would be no use calling it a peaceful mission, 
as you propose; for the Wanyoro distrust the Wagan 
to such an extent, they would fly to arms at once.” 

Proceeding to the queen’s palace, we met Mtirondo, who 
had once travelled to the Masai frontier. He gaid it 
would take a month to go in boats from Kira, the most 
easterly district in Uganda, to Masai, where there is 
another N’yanza, joined by a strait to the big N’yanza, 


JuNE. | INFORMATION REGARDING THE LAKE. 429 


which king Mtésa’s boats frequent for salt; but the same 
distance could be accomplished in four days overland, 
and three days afterwards by boat. The queen, after 
_ keeping us all day waiting, sent three bunches of plan- 
tains and a pot of pombé, with a message that she was 
too tired to receive visitors, and hoped we would call 
another day. 

6th.—I met Pokino, the governor-general of Uddii, in 
the morning’s walk, who came here at the same time as 
Grant to visit the king, and was invited into his house 
to drink pombé. His badge of office is an iron hatchet, 
inlaid with copper and handled with ivory. He wished 
to give us a cow, but put it off for another day, and 
was surprised we dared venture into his premises without 
permission from the king. After this, we called at the 
palace, just as the king was returning from a walk with 
his brothers. He saw us, and sent for Bana. We entered, 
and presented him with some pictures, which he greatly 
admired, looked at close and far, showed to the brothers, 
and inspected again. Pokino at this time came in with a 
number of well-made shields, and presented them grovel- 
ling and n’yanzigging; but though the governor of an 
important province, who had not been seen by the king 
for years, he was taken no more notice of than any com- 
mon Mkungt. A plan of the lake and Nile, which I 
brought with me to explain our projects for reaching 
Karagtié and Gani, engaged the king’s attention for a 


while; but still he would not agree to let anything be 


done until his messenger returned from Unyoro. Finding 
* him inflexible, I proposed sending a letter, arranging that 
his men should be under the guidance of my men after 
they pass Unyoro on the way to Gani; and this was 
acceded to, provided I should write a letter to Petherick 
by the morrow. I then tried to teach the king the use of 
the compass. To make a stand for it, [ turned a drum on. 
its head, when all the courtiers flew at me as if to prevent 


430 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


an outrage, and the king laughed. I found that, as the © 
instrument was supposed to be a magic charm of very won- 
derful powers, my meddling with it and treating it as an 
ordinary movable was considered a kind of sacrilege. 
7th—I wrote a letter to Petherick, but the promised 
Wakungtt never came for it. As K’yengo was ordered.to 
attend court with Rttmanika’s hongo, consisting of a few 
wires, small beads, and a cloth I gave him, as well as a | 
trifle from Nnanaji, I sent Bombay, in place of going my- 
self, to remind the king of his promises for the Wakungt 
to Gani, as well as for boats to Karagtié, but a grunt was 
the only reply which my messenger said he obtained. 
8th.—Calling at the palace, I found the king issuing 
for a walk, and joined him, when he suddenly turned 
round in the rudest manner, re-entered his palace, and 
left me to go home without speaking a word. The capri- 
cious creature then reissued, and, finding me gone, inquired 
after me, presuming I ought to have waited for him. 
9th.— During the night, when sleeping profoundly, some 
person stealthily entered my hut and ran off with a box 
of bullets towards the palace, but on the way dropped his 
burden. Matla, on the way home, happening to see it, 
and knowing it must be mine, brought it back again. I 
stayed at home, not feeling well. 
10th.—K’yengo paid his hongo in wire to the king, and 
received a return of six cows. Still at home, an invalid, 
I received a visit from Méri, who seemed to have quite 
recovered herself. Speaking of her present quarters, she 
said she loved Ulédi’s wife very much, thinking birds of — 
a feather ought to live together. She helped herself to a — 
quarter of mutton, and said she would come again. 
11th.—To-day Viartingi, finding Rozaro’s men had 
stolen thirty cows, twelve slaves, and a load of mbtgt 
from the Waganda, laid hands on them himself for Ru- 
manika, instead of giving them to king Mtésa. Such 
are the daily incidents among our neighbours. 


eo 


JUNE. | UGANDA THIEVERY. 431 


12¢h.—At night a box of ammunition and a bag of shot, 
which were placed out as a reserve present for the king, 
to be given on our departure, were stolen, obviously by 
the king’s boys, and most likely by the king’s orders ; for 
he is the only person who could have made any use of 
them, and his boys alone know the way into the hut: 
besides which, the previous box of bullets was found on 
the direct road to the palace, while it was well known 
that no one dared to touch an article of European manu- 
facture without the consent of the king. 

13th.—I sent a message to the king about the theft, 
requiring lim, if an honest man, to set his detectives to 
work, and ferret it out; his boys, at the same time, to 
show our suspicions, were peremptorily forbidden ever to 
enter the hut again. Twice the king sent down a hasty 
message to say he was collecting all his men to make a 
search, and, if they do not succeed, the Mganga would be 
sent; but nothing wasdone. The Kamraviona was sharply 
rebuked by the king for allowing K’yengo to visit him 
before permission was given, and thus defrauding the royal 
exchequer of many pretty things, which were brought for 
majesty alone. At night the rascally boys returned again 
to plunder, but Kahala, more wakeful than myself, heard 
them trying to untie the door-handle, and frightened them 
away in endeavouring to awaken me. 

14th and 15th.—Grant, doing duty for me, tried a day’s 
penance at the palace, but though he sat all day in the 
antechamber, and musicians were ordered into the presence, 
nobody called for him. K’yengo was sent with all his 
men on a Wakungii-seizing expedition,—a good job for 
him, as it was his perquisite to receive the major part of 
the plunder himself. = 

16th.—I sent Kahala out of the house, giving her 
finally over to Bombay as a wile, because she preferred 
playing with dirty little children to behaving like a young 
lady, and had caught the itch, This was much against 


432 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. . 


her wish, and the child vowed she would not leave me 
until force compelled her; but I had really no other way 
of dealing with the remnant of the awkward burden 
which the queen’s generosity had thrown on me. K’yengo 
went to the palace with fifty prisoners; but as the king 
had taken his women to the small pond, where he has 
recently placed a tub canoe for purposes of amusement, 
they did no business. 

17th.—I took a first convalescent walk. The king, who 
was out shooting all day, begged for powder in the even- 
ing. Ulédi returned from his expedition against a 
recusant officer at Kituntt, bringing with him a spoil 
of ten women. It appeared that the officer himself had 
bolted from his landed possessions, and as they belonged 
to “the church,” or were in some way or other sacred 
from civil execution, they could not be touched, so that 
Ulédi lost an estate which the king had promised him. 
We heard that Ilmas, wife of Majanja, who, as I already 
mentioned, had achieved an illustrious position by services 
at the birth of the king, had been sent to visit the late 
king Stinna’s tomb, whence, after observing certain trees 
which were planted, and divining by mystic arts what the 
future state of Uganda required, she would return at a 
specific time, to order the king at the time of his coronation 
either to take the field with an army, to make a pilgrim- 
age, or to live a life of ease at home; whichever of these 
courses the influence of the ordeal at the grave might 
prompt her to order, must be complied with by the king. 

18¢h.—I called at the palace with Grant, taking with 
us some pictures of soldiers, horses, elephants, &c. We 
found the guard fighting over their beef and plantain 
dinner. Bombay remarked that this daily feeding on 
beef would be the lot of the Wangtiana if they had no 
religious scruples about the throat-cutting of animals for 
food. ‘This, I told him, was all their own fault, for they 
have really no religion or opinions of their own; and had 


JuNE.] PALACE GUARDS AT DINNER. 433 


they been brought up in England instead of Africa, it 
would have been all the other way with them as a matter 
of course ; but Bombay replied, “ We could no more throw 


sSBy 


beeedlcmeehnd——| J —}—oA 
i 
Beeaer: 


u 
i 
I 
anne 
yal 
bi 
ANAT 


(SSS esieee 


om 
a 
wa 

iS 


Palace Guards at Dinner—Uganda. 


off the Mussulman faith than you could yours.” A man 
with a maniacal voice sang and whistled by turns. Kat- 
timba, the officer of the guard, saw our pictures, and being 
a favourite, acquainted the king, which gained us an 
admittance. 

We found his majesty sitting on the ground, within 
a hut, behind a portal, encompassed by his women, and 
took our seats outside. At first all was silence, till one 
told the king we had some wonderful pictures to show 
him ; and in an instant he grew lively, crying out, “Oh, 
let us see them!” and they were shown, Bombay explain- 
ing. Three of the king’s wives then came in, and offered 
him their two virgin sisters, n’yanzigging incessantly, and 
beseeching their acceptance, as by that means they them- 

25 


434 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


selves would become doubly related to him. Nothing, 
however, seemed to be done to promote the union, until 
one old lady, sitting by the king’s side, who was evidently 
learned in the etiquette and traditions of the court, said, 
“Wait and see if he embraces, otherwise you may know 
he is not pleased.” At this announcement the girls 
received a hint to pass on, and the king commenced 
bestowing on them a series of huggings, first sitting on 
the lap of one, whom he clasped to his bosom, crossing 
his neck with hers to the right, then to the left, and, 
having finished with her, took post in the second one’s lap, 
then on that of the third, performing on each of them the 
same evolutions. He then retired to his original position, 
and the marriage ceremony was supposed to be concluded, 
and the settlements adjusted, when all went on as before. 

The pictures were again looked at, and again admired, 
when we asked for a private interview on business, and 
drew the king outside. I then begged he would allow me, 
whilst his men were absent at Unyoro, to go to the Masai 
country, and see the Salt Lake at the north-east corner of 
the N’yanza, and to lend me some of his boats for Grant 
to fetch powder and beads from Karagtié. This important 
arrangement being conceded by the king more promptly 
than we expected, a cow, plantains, and: pombé were 
requested ; but the cow only was given, though our men 
were said to be feeding on grass. Taking the king, as it 
appeared, in a good humour, to show him the abuses 
arising from the system of allowing his guests to help 
themselves by force upon the highways, I reported the 
late seizures made of thirty cows and twelve slaves by the 
Wanyambo ; but, though surprised to hear the news, he 
merely remarked that there were indeed a great number 
of visitors in Uganda. During this one day we heard the 
sad voices of no less than four women, dragged from the 
palace to the slaughter-house. 

19th.—To follow up our success in the marching ques- 


JUNE. | PROSPECTS OF DEPARTURE. 435 


tion and keep the king to his promise, I called at his 
palace, but found he had gone out shooting. To push 
my object further, I then marched off to the queen’s to 
bid her good-bye, as if we were certain to leave next day; 
but as no one would dare to approach her cabinet to apprise 
her of our arrival, we returned home tired and annoyed. 

20th.—The king sent for us at noon; but when we 
reached the palace we found he had started on a shooting 
tour; so, to make the best of our time, we called again 
upon the queen for the same purpose as yesterday, as also 
to get my books of birds and animals, which, taken merely 
to look at for a day or so, had been kept for months, 
After hours of waiting, her majesty appeared standing in 
an open gateway; beckoned us ‘to advance, and offered 
pombé ; then, as two or three drops of rain fell, she said 
she could not stand the violence of the weather, and 
forthwith retired without one word being obtained. An 
officer, however, venturing in for the books, at length I 
got them. 

21st.—To-day I went to the palace, but found no one ; 
the king was out shooting again. 

22d.—We resolved to-day to try on a new political 
influence at the court. Grant had taken to the court of 
Karagtié a jumping-jack, to amuse the young princes ; but 
it had a higher destiny, for it so fascinated king Rt- 
manika himself that he would not part with it—unless, 
indeed, Grant would make him a big one out of a tree 
which was handed to him for the purpose. We resolved 
to try the influence of such a toy on king Mtésa, and 
brought with us, in addition, a mask and some pictures. 
But although the king took a visiting card, the gate was 
never opened to us. Finding this, and the day closing, 
we deposited the mask and pictures on a throne, and 
walked away. We found that we had thus committed a 
serious breach of state etiquette ; for the guard, as soon as 
they saw what we had done, seized the Wangtiana for our 


436 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


offences in defiling the royal seat, and would have bound 
them, had they not offered to return the articles to us. 

93d.—Harly in the morning, hearing the royal proces- 
sion marching off on a shooting excursion, we sent Bom- 
bay running after it with the mask and pictures, to 
acquaint the king with our desire to see him, and explain 
that we had been four days successively foiled in attempts 
to find him in his palace, our object being an eager 
wish to come to some speedy understanding about the 
appointed journeys to the Salt Lake and Karagtié. The 
toys produced the desired effect ; for the king stopped and 
played with them, making Bombay and the pages don the 
mask by turns. He appointed the morrow for an inter- 
view, at the same time excusing himself for not having 
seen us yesterday on the plea of illness. In the evening 
Kahala absconded with another little girl of the camp in 
an opposite direction from the one she took last time; but | 
as both of them wandered about not knowing where to 
go to, and as they omitted to take off all their finery, they 
were soon recognised as in some way connected with my 
party, taken up, and brought ito camp, where they were 
well laughed at for their folly, and laughed in turn at the 
absurdity of their futile venture. 

24th.—Hoping to keep the king to his promise, I went 
to the palace early, but found he had already gone to see 
his brothers, so followed him down, and found him en- 
gaged playing on a harmonicon with them. Surprised at 
my intrusion, he first asked how I managed to find him 
out; then went on playing for a while; but suddenly 
stopping to talk with me, he gave me an opportunity of 
telling him I wished to send Grant off to Karagtié, and 
start myself for Usoga and the Salt Lake in the morning. 
“What! going away?” said the king, as if he had never 
heard a word about it before; and then, after talking 
the whole subject over again, especially dwelling on the 
quantity of powder I had in store at Karagué, he pro- 


JUNE. | PROMISE OF AN ESCORT. 437 


mised to send the necessary officers for escorting us on 
our respective journeys in the morning. 

The brothers’ wives then wished to see me, and came 
before us, when I had to take off my hat and shoes as 
usual, my ready compliance inducing the princes to pass 
various compliments on my person and disposition. The 
brothers then showed me a stool made of wood after the 
fashion of our sketching-stool, and a gun-cover of leather, 
made by themselves, of as good workmanship as is to be 
found in India. The king then rose, followed by his 
brothers, and we all walked off to the pond. The effect 
of stimulants was mooted, as well as other physiological 
phenomena, when a second move took us to the palace by 
torchlight, and the king showed a number of new huts 
just finished, and beautifully made. Finally, he settled 
down to a musical concert, in which he took the lead 
himself. At eight o’clock, being tired and hungry, I re- 
minded the king of his promises, and he appointed the 
morning to call on him for the Wakungt, and took leave. 

25th.—Makinga, hearing of the intended march through 
Usoga, was pleased to say he would like to join my camp 
and spend his time in buying slaves and ivory there. I 
went to the palace for the promised escort, but was no 
sooner announced by the pages than the king walked off 
into the interior of his harem, and left me no alternative 
but to try my luck with the Kamraviona, who, equally 
proud with his master, would not answer my call,—and 
so another day was lost. 

26th—This morning we had the assuring intelligence 
from Kaddii that he had received orders to hold himself 
in readiness for a voyage to Karagtié in twenty boats with 
Grant, but the date of departure was not fixed. The 
passage was expected to be rough, as the water off the 
mouth of the Kitangtilé Kagéra (river) always runs high, 
so that no boats can go there except at night, when the 
winds of the day subside, and are replaced by the calms 


438 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


of night. I called at the palace, but saw nothing of the 
king, though the court was full of officials ; and there were 
no less than 150 women, besides girls, goats, and various 
other things, seizures from refractory state officers, who, it 
was said, had been too proud to present themselves at 
court for a period exceeding propriety. 

All these creatures, I was assured, would afterwards be 
given away as return-presents for the hongos or presents 
received from the king’s visitors. No wonder the tribes 
of Africa are mixed breeds. Amongst the officers in wait- 
ing was my friend Budja, the ambassador that had been 
sent to Unyoro with Kidgwiga, Kamrasi’s deputy. He 
had returned three days before, but had not yet seen the 
king. As might have been expected, he said he had been 
anything but welcomed in Unyoro. Kamarasi, after keep- 
ing him half-starved and in suspense eight days, sent a 
message—for he would not see him—that he did not de- 
sire any communication with blackguard Waganda thieves, 
and therefore advised him, if he valued his life, to return 
by the road by which he came as speedily as possible. 
Turning to Congow, I playfully told him that, as the road 
through Unyoro was closed, he would have to go with me 
through Usoga and Kidi; but the gallant colonel merely 
shuddered, and said that would be a terrible undertaking. 

27th—The king would not show, for some reason or 
other, and we still feared to fire guns lest he should think 
our store of powder inexhaustible, and so keep us here 
until he had extorted the last of it. I found that the 
Waganda have the same absurd notion here as the Wan- 
yambo have in Karagtié, of Kamrasi’s supernatural power 
in being able to divide the waters of the Nile in the same 
manner as Moses did the Red Sea. 

28th.—The king sent a messenger-boy to inform us that 
he had just heard from Unyoro that the white men were 
still at Gani inquiring after us; but nothing was said of 
Budja’s defeat. I sent Bombay immediately off to tell 


3 


JUNE. | CHANGE OF PLANS. 439 


him we had changed our plans, and now simply required 
a large escort to accompany us through Usoga and Kidi 
to Gani, as further delay in communicating with Petherick 
might frustrate all chance of opening the Nile trade with 
Uganda. He answered that he would assemble all his 
officers in the morning to consult with them on the sub- 
ject, when he hoped we would attend, as he wished to 
further our views. A herd of cows, about eighty in num- 
ber, were driven in from Unyoro, showing that the silly 
king was actually robbing Kamrasi at the same time that 
he was trying to treat with him. K’yengo informed us 
that the king, considering the surprising events which had 
Jately occurred at his court, being very anxious to pry into 
the future, had resolved to take a very strong measure for 
accomplishing that end. This was the sacrifice of a child 
by cooking, as described in the introduction—a ceremony 
which it fell to K’yengo to carry out. 

29th—To have two strings to my bow, and press our 
departure as hotly as possible, I sent first Frij off with 
Nasib to the queen, conveying, as a parting present, a 
block-tin brush-box, a watch without a key, two sixpenny 
pocket-handkerchiefs, and a1 white towel, with an intima- 
tion that we were going, as the king had expressed his 
desire of sending us to Gani. Her majesty accepted the 
present, finding fault with the watch for not ticking like 
the king’s, and would not believe her son Mtésa had been 
so hasty in giving us leave to depart, as she had not been 
consulted on the subject yet. Setting off to attend the 
king at his appointed time, I found the Kamraviona 
already there, with a large court attendance, patiently 
awaiting his majesty’s advent. As we were all waiting 
on, I took a rise out of the Kamraviona by telling him I 
wanted a thousand men to march with me through Kidi 
to Gani. Surprised at the extent of my requisition, he 
wished to know if my purpose was fighting. I made him 
a present of the great principle that power commands 


440 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


respect, and it was to prevent any chance of fighting that 
we required so formidable an escort. His reply was that 
he would tell the king; and he immediately rose and 

walked away home. 

K’yengo and the representatives of Ustti and Karagtté 
now arrived by order of the king to bid farewell, and 
received the slaves and cattle lately captured. As I was 
very hungry, I set off home to breakfast. Just as I had 
gone, the provoking king inquired after me, and so 
brought me back again, though I never saw him the 
whole day. K’yengo, however, was very communicative. 
He said he was present when Sunna, with all the forces 
he could muster, tried to take the very countries I now 
proposed to travel through ; but, though in person excit- 
ing his army to victory, he could make nothing of it. He. 
advised my returning to Karagtié, when Rttmanika would 
give me an escort through Nkolé to Unyoro ; but finding 
that did not suit my views, as I swore I would never 
retrace one step, he proposed my going by boat to 
Unyoro, following down the Nile. 

This, of course, was exactly what I wanted ; but how 
could king Mtésa, after the rebuff he had received from 
Kamrasi, be induced to consent to it? My intention, I 
said, was to try the king on the Usoga and Kidi route 
first, then on the Masai route to Zanzibar, affecting per- 
fect indifference about Kamrasi; and all those failing— 
which, of course, they would—I would ask for Unyoro 
as a last and only resource. Still I could not see the 
king to open my heart to him, and therefore felt quite 
nonplussed. “Oh,” says K’yengo, “the reason why you 
do not see him is merely because he is ashamed to show | 
his face, having made so many fair promises to you which 
he knows he never can carry out; bide your time, and 
all will be well.” At 4 P.M., as no hope of seeing the 
king was left, all retired. 

30th.-—Unexpectedly, and for reasons only known to 


Jury. | UGANDA RELIGION, 441 


himself, the king sent us a cow and load of butter, 
which had been asked for many days ago. The new 
moon seen last night kept the king engaged at home, 
paying his devotions with his magic horns or fetishes in 
the manner already described. The spirit of this religion 
—if such it can be called—is not so much adoration of a 
Being supreme and beneficent, as a tax to certain malig- 
nant furies—a propitiation, in fact, to prevent them bring- 
ing evil on the land, and to insure a fruitful harvest. It 
was rather ominous that hail fell with violence, and light- 
ning burnt down one of the palace huts, while the king 
was in the midst of his propitiatory devotions. 

1st—As Bombay was ordered to the palace to instruct 
the king in the art of casting bullets, I primed him well 
to plead for the road, and he reported to me the results, 
thus: First, he asked one thousand men to go through 
Kidi. This the king said was impracticable, as the 
Waganda had tried it so often before without success. 
Then, as that could not be managed, what would the 
king devise himself? Bana only proposed the Usoga and 
Kidi route, because he thought it would be to the advan- 
tage of Uganda. “Oh,” says the king, cunningly, “if 
Bana merely wishes to see Usoga, he can do so, and I 
will send a suitable escort, but no more.” To this Bombay 
replied, “ Bana never could return; he would sooner do 
anything than return—even penetrate the Masai to Zan- 
zibar, or go through Unyoro;” to which the king, ashamed 
of his impotence, hung down his head and walked away. 

In the meanwhile, and whilst this was going on at the 
king’s palace, I went with Grant, by appointment, to see 
the queen. As usual, she kept us waiting some time, then 
appeared sitting by an open gate, and invited us, together 
with many Wakungti and Wasumbiia, to approach. Very 
lavish with stale sour pombé, she gave us all some, saving 
the Wasumbtia, whom she addressed very angrily, asking 
what they wanted, as they have been months in the 


442 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


country. These poor creatures, in a desponding mood, 
defended themselves by saying, which was quite true, that 


Waéganda Officers drinking Pombe, or Plantain-Wine. 


they had left their homes in Sorombo to visit her, and to 
trade. They had, since their arrival in the country, been 
daily in attendance at her palace, but never had the good 
fortune to see her excepting on such lucky occasions as 
brought the Wazungtt (white men) here, when she opened 
her gates to them, but otherwise kept them shut. The 
queen retorted, “And what have you brought me, pray ? 
where is it? Until 1 touch it you will neither see me nor 
obtain permission to trade. Uganda is no place for idle va- 
gabonds.” We then asked for a private interview, when, a 
few drops of rain falling, the queen walked away, and we 
had orders to wait a little. Durmg this time two boys 
were birched by the queen’s orders, and an officer was 
sent out to inquire why the watch we had given her did 
not go. ‘This was easily explained. It had no key ; and, 
never losing sight of the main object, we took advan- 
tage of the opportunity to add, that if she did not 
approve of it, we could easily exchange it for another 


Jcty. | INTERVIEW WITH THE QUEEN. 443 


on arrival at Gani, provided she would send an officer 
with us. 

The queen, squatting within her hut, now ordered both 
Grant and myself to sit outside and receive a present of 
five eggs and one cock each, saying coaxingly, “These 
are for my children.” Then taking out the presents, she 
learned the way of wearing her watch with a tape guard 
round her neck, reposing the instrument in her bare 
bosom, and of opening and shutting it, which so pleased 
her, that she declared it quite satisfactory. The key was 
quite a minor consideration, for she could show it to her 
attendants just as well without one. The towel and 
handkerchiefs were also very beautiful, but what use 
could they be put to? “Oh, your majesty, to wipe the 
mouth with after drinking pombé.” “Of course,” is the 
reply — “excellent; I won't use a mbtigtt napkin any 
more, but have one of these placed on my cup when it is 
brought to drink, and wipe my mouth with it afterwards, 
But what does Bana want?” “The road to Gani,” says 
Bombay for me. “The king won’t see him when he goes 
to the palace, so now he comes here, trusting your supe- 
rior influence and good-nature will be more practicable.” 
“Oh!” says her majesty, “Bana does not know the facts 
of the case. My son has tried all the roads without 
success, and now he is ashamed to meet Bana face to face.” 
“Then what is to be done, your majesty?” “Bana must 
go back to Karagiié and wait for a year, until my son is 
crowned, when he will make friends with the surrounding 
chiefs, and the roads will be opened.” “ But Bana says he 
will not retrace one step; he would sooner lose his life.” 
“Oh, that’s nonsense! he must not be headstrong; but 
before anything more can be said, I will send a message 
to my son, and Bana can then go with Kaddti, K’yengo, 
and Viariingi, and tell all they have to say to Mtésa to- 
morrow, and the following day return to me, when every- 
thing will be concluded.” We all now left but Kaddi 


444 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


and some of the qucen’s officers, who waited for the 
message to her son about us. To judge from Kaddt, it 
must have been very different from what she led us to 
expect, as, on joining us, he said there was not the smallest 
chance of our getting the road we required, for the queen 
was so decided about it no further argument would be 
listened to. 

2d.—Three goats were stolen, and suspicion falling on 
the king’s cooks, who are expert foragers, we sent to the 
Kamraviona, and asked him to order out the Mganga ; 
but his only reply was, that he often loses goats in the 
same way. He sent us one of his own for present pur- 
poses, and gave thirty baskets of potatoes to my men. 
As the king held a court, and broke it up before 8 a.m., 
and no one would go there for fear of his not appearing 
again, I waited till the evening for Bombay, Kaddt, 
K’yengo, and Viartingi, when, finding them drunk, I went 
by myself, fired a gun, and was admitted to where the 
king was hunting guinea-fowl. On seeing me, he took 
me affectionately by the hand, and, as we walked along 
together, he asked me what I wanted, showed me the 
house which was burnt down, and promised to settle the 
road question in the morning. 

3d.—With Kaddt, K’yengo, and Viaritingi all in attend- 
ance, we went to the palace, where there was a large 
assemblage prepared for a levee, and fired a gun, which 
brought the king out in state. The Sakibobo, or provincial 
governor, arrived with a body of soldiers armed with 
sticks, made a speech, and danced at the head of his men, 
all pointing sticks upwards, and singing fidelity to their 
king. 

The king then turned to me, and said, “ I have come 
out to listen to your request of last night. What is it 
you do want?” Isaid, “To open the country to the 
north, that an uninterrupted line of commerce might exist 
between England and this country by means of the Nile. 


Juty. | THE ROUTE GRANTED AT LAST. 4A5 


I might go round by Nkolé” (K’yengo looked daggers at 
me); “but that is out of the way, and not suitable to 
the purpose.” The queen’s deputation was now ordered 
to draw near, and questioned in a whisper. As K’yengo 
was supposed to know all about me, and spoke fluently 
both in Kiganda and Kistiahili, he had to speak first ; but 
K’yengo, to everybody’s surprise, said, “ One white man 
wishes to go to Kamrasi’s, whilst the other wishes to return 
through Unyamtiézi.” This announcement made the king 
reflect ; for he had been privately primed by his mother’s 
attendants, that we both wished to go to Gani, and there- 
fore shrewdly inquired if Rtmanika knew we wished to 
visit Kamrasi, and whether he was aware we should 
attempt the passage north from Uganda. “Oh yes! of 
course Bana wrote to Bana Mdogo” (the little master) 
“as soon as he arrived in Uganda, and told him and 
Ritimanika all about it.” “ Wrote! what does that mean ?” 
and I was called upon to explain. Mtésa, then seeing a 
flaw in K’yengo’s statements, called him a story-teller ; 
ordered him and his party away, and bade me draw 
near. 

The moment of triumph had come at last, and suddenly 
the road was granted! The king presently let us see the 
motive by which he had been influenced. He said he 
did not like having to send to Rttmanika for everything : 
he wanted his visitors to come to him direct ; moreover, 
Riimanika had sent him a message to the effect that we 
were not to be shown anything out of Uganda, and 
when we had done with it, were to be returned to him. 
Rttmanika, indeed! who cared about Rttmanika? Was 
not Mtésa the king of the country, to do as he liked? and 
we all laughed. Then the king, swelling with pride, 
asked me whom I liked best—Rtmanika or himself,—an 
awkward question, which I disposed of by saying I liked 
Rtmanika very much because he spoke well, and was 
very communicative ; but I also liked Mtésa, because his 


446 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


habits were much like my own—fond of shooting and 
roaming about; whilst he had learnt so many things 
from my teaching, I must ever feel a yearning towards 
him. 

With much satisfaction I felt that my business was 
now done; for Budja was appointed to escort us to 
Unyoro, and Jumba to prepare us boats, that we might 
go all the way to Kamrasi’s by water. Viartingi made a 
petition, on Rttmanika’s behalf, for an army of Waganda 
to go to Karagité, and fight the refractory brother, Rogéro; 
but this was refused, on the plea that the whole army was 
out fighting at the present moment. The court then 
broke up and we went home. 

To keep the king up to the mark, and seal our passage, 
in the evening I took a Lancaster rifle, with ammunition, 
and the iron chair he formerly asked for, as a parting 
present, to the palace, but did not find him, as he had 
gone out shooting with his brothers. 

4th.—Grant and I now called together on the king to 
present the rifle, chair, and ammunition, as we could not 
thank him in words sufficiently for the favour he had 
done us in granting the road through Unyoro. I said 
the parting gift was not half as much as I should like to 
have been able to give ; but we hoped, on reaching Gani, 
to send Petherick up to him with everything that he 
could desire. We regretted we had no more powder or 
shot, as what was intended, and actually placed out 
expressly to be presented on this occasion, was stolen. 
The king looked hard at his head page, who was once 
sent to get these very things now given, and then turning 
the subject adroitly, asked me how many cows and women 
I would like, holding his hand up with spread fingers, 
and desiring me to count by hundreds; but the reply 
was, Five cows and goats would be enough, for we wished 
to travel lightly in boats, starting from the Murchison 
Creek. Women were declined on such grounds as would 


Jury. ] PREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE. 4.4.7 


seem rational to him. But if the king would clothe my 
naked men with one mbiigit (bark cloth) each, and give a 
small tusk each to nine Wanyamitiézi porters, who desired 
to return to their home, the obligation would be great. 

Everything was granted without the slightest hesita- 
tion; and then the king, turning to me, said, “ Well, 
Bana, so you really wish to go?” “Yes, for I have not 
seen my home for four years and upwards ”—reckoning 
five months to the year, Uganda fashion. “And you can 
give me no stimulants?” “No.” “Then you will send 
me some from Gani—brandy if you like; it makes people 
sleep sound, and gives them strength.” Next we went to 
the queen to bid farewell, but did not see her. 

On returning home [ found half my men in a state of 
mutiny. They had been on their own account to beg for 
the women and cows which had been refused, saying, If 
Bana does not want them we do, for we have been starved 
here ever since we came, and when we~go for food get 
broken heads ; we will not serve with Bana any longer ; 
but as he goes north, we will return to Karagtié and 
Unyanyembé. Bombay, however, told them they never 
had fed so well in all their lives as they had in Uganda, 
counting from fifty to sixty cows killed, and pombé and 
plantains every day, whenever they took the trouble to for- 
age ; and for their broken heads they invariably received a 
compensation in women ; so that Bana had reason to regret 
every day spent in asking for food for them at the palace 
—a favour which none but his men received, but which 
they had not, as they might have done, turned to good 
effect by changing the system of plundering for food in 
Uganda. ; 

5th.—By the king’s order we attended at the palace 
early. The gun obtained us all a speedy admittance, 
when the king opened conversation by saying, “ Well, 
Bana, so you really are going?” “Yes; I have enjoyed 
your hospitality for a long time, and now wish to return 


448 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


to my home.” “What provision do you want?” I said, 
Five cows and five goats, as we shan’t be long in Uganda ; 
and it is not the custom of our country, when we go vis- 
iting, to carry anything away with us. The king then 
said, “ Well, I wish to give you much, but you won't have 
it ;” when Budja spoke out, saying, “ Bana does not know 
the country he has to travel through; there is nothing 
but jungle and famine on the way, and he must have 
cows ;” on which the king ordered us sixty cows, fourteen 
goats, ten loads of butter, a load of coffee and tobacco, 
one hundred sheets of mbiigt, as clothes for. my men, 
at a suggestion of Bombay’s, as all my cloth had been 
expended even before I left Karagté. 

This magnificent order created a pause, which K’yengo 
took advantage of by producing a little bundle of pecu- 
liarly-shaped sticks and a lump of earth—all of which 
have their own particular magical powers, as K’yengo 
described to the king’s satisfaction. After this, Viartingi 
pleaded the cause of my mutinous followers, till I shook 
my finger angrily at him before the king, rebuked him for 
intermeddling in other people’s affairs, and told my own 
story, which gained the sympathy of the king, and in- 
duced him to say, “Supposing they desert Bana, what 
road do they expect to get?” Matila was now appointed 
to go with Rozaro to Karagtié for the powder and other 
things promised yesterday, whilst Viartingi and all his 
party, though exceedingly anxious to get away, had orders 
to remain here prisoners as a surety for the things arriy- 
ing. Further, Kaddti and two other Wakungt received 
orders to go to Ustti with two tusks of ivory to purchase 
gunpowder, caps, and flints, failing which they would 
proceed to Unyanyembé, and even to Zanzibar, for the 
king must not be disappointed, and failure would cost 
them their lives. 

Not another word was said, and away the two parties 
went, with no more arrangement than a set of geese— 


Jury. | PREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE. 449 


Matila without a letter, and Kaddt without any provision 
for the way, as if all the world belonged to Mtésa, and he 
could help himself from any man’s garden that he liked, 
no matter where he was. In the evening my men made 
a humble petition for their discharge, even if I did not 
pay them, producing a hundred reasons for wishing to 
leave me, but none which would stand a moment’s argu- 
ment: the fact was, they were afraid of the road to Un- 
yoro, thinking I had not sufficient ammunition. 

6th.—I visited the king, and asked leave for boats to go 
at once ; but the fleet admiral put a veto on this by making 
out that dangerous shallows exist between the Murchison 
Creek and the Kira district station, so that the boats of 
one place never visit the other; and further, if we went 
to Kira, we should find impracticable cataracts to the 
Urondogani boat-station ; our better plan would therefore 
be, to deposit our property at the Urondogani station, and 
walk by land up the river, if a sight of the falls at the 
mouth of the lake was of such material consequence to us. 

Of course this man carried everything his own way, for 
there was nobody able to contradict him, and we could 
not afford time to visit Usoga first, lest by the delay we 
might lose an opportunity of communicating with Pethe- 
rick. Grant now took a portrait of Mtésa by royal per- 
mission, the king sitting as quietly as his impatient nature 
weuid permit. Then at home the Wanyamttézi porters 
received their tusks of ivory, weighing from 16 to 50 lb. 
each, and took a note besides on Rtimanika each for 
twenty fundo of beads, barring one Bogtié man, who, 
having lent a cloth to the expedition some months previ- 
ously, thought it would not be paid him, and therefore 
seized a sword as security ; the consequence was, his tusk 
was seized until the sword was returned, and he was dis- 
missed minus his beads, for having so misconducted 
himself, The impudent fellow then said, “Tt will be well 

25 


450 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


for Bana if he succeeds in getting the road through Un- 
yoro ; for, should he fail, I will stand in his path at Booté.” 
Kitiinzi offered an ivory for beads, and when told we were 
not merchants, and advised to try K’yengo, he said he 
dared not even approach K’yengo’s camp lest people should 
tell the king of it, and accuse him of seeking for magical 
powers against his sovereign. Old Nasib begged for his 
discharge. It was granted, and he took a §50 letter on 
the coast, and a letter of emancipation for himself and 
family, besides an order, written in Kistiahili, for ten fundo 
of beads on Rttmanika, which made him very happy. 

In the evening we called again at the palace with 
pictures of the things the king required from Rtmanika, 
and a letter informing Rttmanika what we wished done 
with them, in order that there might be no mistake, re- 
questing the king to forward them after Matla. Just then 
Kaddit’s men returned to say they wanted provisions for 
the way, as the Wazinza, hearing of their mission, asked 
them if they knew what they were about, gomg to a 
strange country without any means of paying their way. 
But the king, instead of listening to reason, impetuously 
said, “If you do not pack off at once, and bring me the 
things I want, every man of you shall lose his head ; and 
as for the Wazinza, for interfering with my orders, they 
shall be kept here prisoners until you return.” 

On the way home, one of the king’s favourite women 
overtook us, walking, with her hands clasped at the back 
of her head, to execution, crying, “ N’yawo!” in the most 
pitiful manner. A man was preceding her, but did not 
touch her; for she loved to obey the orders of her king 
voluntarily, and, in consequence of previous attachment, 
was permitted, as a mark of distinction, to walk free. 
Wondrous world ! it was not ten minutes since we parted 
from the king, yet he had found time to transact this bloody 
piece of business. 


Jury. } FAREWELL TO MTESA. 45] 


7th.—Early in the morning the king bade us come to 
him to say farewell. Wishing to leave behind a favour- 
able impression, I instantly complied. On the breast of 
my coat I suspended the necklace the queen had given 
me, as well as his knife, and my medals. I talked with 
him in as friendly and flattering a manner as I could, 
dwelling on his shooting, the pleasant cruising on the lake, 
and our sundry picnics, as well as the grand prospect 
there was now of opening the country to trade, by which 
his guns, the best in the world, would be fed with powder 
—and other small matters of a like nature,—to which he 
replied with great feeling and good taste. We then all 
_ rose with an English bow, placing the hand on the heart 
whilst saying adieu; and there was a complete uniform- 
ity in the ceremonial, for whatever I did, Mtésa, in an 
instant, mimicked with the instinct of a monkey. 

We had, however, scarcely quitted the palace gate before 
the king issued himself, with his attendants and his 
brothers leading, and women bringing up the rear ; here 
K’yengo and all the Wazinza joined in the procession with 
ourselves, they kneeling and clapping their hands after the 
fashion of their own country. Budja just then made me 
feel very anxious, by pointing out the position of Urondo- 
gani, as I thought, too far north. I called the king's 
attention to it, and in a moment he said he would speak 
to Budja in such a manner that would leave no doubts in 
my mind, for he liked me much, and desired to please me 
in all things. As the procession now drew close to our 
camp, and Mtésa expressed a wish to have a final look at 
my men, I ordered them to turn out with their arms and 
n’yanzig for the many favours they had received. Mtésa, 
much pleased, complimented them on their goodly appear- 
ance, remarking that with such a force I would have no 
difficulty in reaching Gani, and exhorted them to follow 
me through fire and water; then, exchanging adicus 


452 PALACE, UGANDA. [1862. 


again, he walked ahead in gigantic strides up the hill, the 
pretty favourite of his harem, Litibtiga—beckoning and 
waving with her little hands, and erying, “ Bana! Bana !” 
—trotting after him conspicuous amongst the rest, though 
all showed a little feeling at the severance. We saw them 
no more. 


JULY. | AGAIN ON THE MARCH. 453 


CHAPTER XV. 


MARCH DOWN THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. 


KARI—TRAGIC INCIDENT THERE—-RENEWAL OF TROUBLES—QUAR- 
RELS WITH THE NATIVES—-REACH THE NILE—DESCRIPTION OF 
THE SCENE THERE—SPORT—-CHURCH ESTATE—ASCEND THE 
RIVER TO THE JUNCTION WITH THE LAKE—RIPON FALLS— 
GENERAL ACCOUNT OF THE SOURCE OF THE NILE—DESCEND 
AGAIN TO URONDOGANI—THE TRUCULENT SAKIBOBO. 


7th to 11th.—WitxH Budja appointed as the general direc- 
tor, a lieutenant of the Sakibobo’s to furnish us with sixty 
cows in his division at the first halting-place, and Kasoro 
(Mr Cat), a lieutenant of Jumba’s, to provide the boats at 
Urondogani, we started at 1 P.M. on the journey north- 
wards. The Wangtana still grumbled, swearing they 
would carry no loads, as they got no rations, and threat- 
ening to shoot us if we pressed them, forgetting that their 
food had been paid for to the king in rifles, chronometers, 
and other articles, costing about 2000 dollars, and, what 
was more to the point, that all the ammunition was in our 
hands. A judicious threat of the stick, how- 
Pin ag eee, put things right, and on we marched 
To Nasirié, 8%. five successive days to Kari—as the place 
To Namaouja, : 
Oth. was afterwards named, in consequence of the 
Te i tragedy mentioned below—the whole dis- 
o Kari, 11th. : : * : . 
; tance accomplished being thirty miles from 


the capital, through a fine hilly country, with jungles and 


454 THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. [1862. 


rich cultivation alternating. The second march, after 
crossing the Katawana river with its many branches flow- 
ing north-east into the huge rush-drain of Lttajerri, car- 
ried us beyond the influence of the higher hills, and away 
from the huge grasses which characterise the southern 
boundary of Uganda bordering on the lake. 

Each day’s march to Kari was directed much in the 
same manner. After a certain number of hours’ travel- 
ling, Budja appointed some village of residence for the 
night, avoiding those which belonged to the queen, lest 
any rows should take place in them, which would create 
disagreeable consequences with the king, and preferring © 
those the heads of which had been lately seized by the 
orders of the king. Nevertheless, wherever we went, all 
the villagers forsook their homes, and left their houses, 
property, and gardens an easy prey to the thieving pro- 
pensities of the escort. To put a stop to this vile practice 
was now beyond my power; the king allowed it, and his 
men were the first in every house, taking goats, fowls, 
skins, mbtigtis, cowries, beads, drums, spears, tobacco, 
pombé—in short, everything they could lay their hands 
on—in the most ruthless manner. It was a perfect ma- 
rauding campaign for them all, and all alike were soon 
laden with as much as they could carry. 

A halt of some days had become necessary at Kari to 
collect the cows given by the king; and, as it is one of 
his most extensive pasture-grounds, I strolled with my 
rifle (11th) to see what new animals could be found; but 
no sooner did I wound a zebra than messengers came 
running after me to say Kari, one of my men, had been 
murdered by the villagers three miles off; and such was 
the fact. He, with others of my men, had been induced 
to go plundering, with a few boys of the Waganda escort, 
to a certain village of potters, as pots were required by 
Budja for making plantain-wine, the first thing ever 
thought of when a camp is formed. On nearing the place, 


Juy. } MURDER OF KARI. 455 


however, the women of the village, who were the only 
people visible, instead of running away, as our braves ex- 
pected, commenced hullalooing, and brought out. their 
husbands. Flight was now the only thought of our men, 
and all would have escaped had Kari not been slow and 
his musket empty. The potters overtook him, and, as he 
pointed his gun, which they considered a magic-horn, they 
speared him to death, and then fled at once. Our sur- 
vivors were not long in bringing the news into camp, 
when a party went out, and in the evening brought in 
the man’s corpse and everything belonging to him, for 
nothing had been taken. 

12th.—To enable me at my leisure to trace up the Nile 
to its exit from the lake, and then go on with the journey 
as quickly as possible, | wished the cattle to be collected 
and taken by Budja and some of my men with the heavy 
baggage overland to Kamrasi’s. Another reason for doing 
so was, that I thought it advisable Kamrasi should be 
forewarned that we were coming by the water route, lest 
we should be suspected and stopped as spies by his 
officers on the river, or regarded as enemies, which would 
provoke a fight. Budja, however, objected to move until 
a report of Kari’s murder had been forwarded to the king, 
lest the people, getting bumptious, should try the same 
trick again ; and Kasoro said he would not go up the river, 
as he had received no orders to do so. 

In this fix I ordered a march back to the palace, men- 
tioning the king’s last words, and should have gone, had 
not Budja ordered Kasoro to go with me. A page then 
arrived from the king to ask after Bana’s health, carrying 
the Whitworth rifle as his master’s card, and begging for a 
heavy double-barrelled gun to be sent him from Gani. I 
called this lad to witness the agreement I had made with 
Budja, and told him, if Kasoro satisfied me, I would 
return by him, in addition to the heavy gun, a Massey’s 
patent log. I had taken it for the navigation of the lake, 


456 THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. [1862. 


and it was now of no further use to me, but, being an 
instrument of complicated structure, it would be a valu- 
able addition to the king’s museum of magic charms. I[ 
added I should like the king to send me the robes of 
honour and spears he had once promised me, in order 
that I might, on reaching England, be «able to show my 
countrymen a specimen of the manufactures of his country. 
The men who were with Kari were now sent to the palace, 
under accusation of having led him into ambush, and a 
complaint was made against the villagers, which we 
waited the reply to. As Budja forbade it, no men would 
follow me out shooting, saying the villagers were out 
surrounding our camp, and threatening destruction on 
any one who dared show his face; for this was not the 
highroad to Uganda, and therefore no one had a right 
to turn them out of their houses and pillage their 
gardens. 

13th.—Budja lost two cows given to his party last 
night, and seeing ours securely tied by their legs to trees, 
asked by what spells we had secured them; and would 
not believe our assurance that the ropes that bound them 
were all the medicines we knew of. One of the queen’s 
sisters, hearing of Kari’s murder, came on a visit to con- 
dole with us, bringing a pot of pombé, for which she 
received some beads. On being asked how many sisters 
the queen had, for we could not help suspecting some 
imposition, she replied she was the only one, till assured 
ten other ladies had presented themselves as the queen’s 
sisters before, when she changed her tone, and said, “That 
is true, I am not the only one; but if I had told you 
the truth I might have lost my head.” This was a 
significant expression of the danger of telling court 
secrets. | 

I suspected that there must be a considerable quantity 
of game in this district, as stake-nets and other traps were 
found in all the huts, as well as numbers of small ante- 


Juty.] HOSTILITY OF THE NATIVES. 457 
- 


lope hoofs spitted on pipe-sticks—an ornament which is 
counted the special badge of the sportsman in this part 
of Africa. Despite, therefore, of the warnings of Budja, 
IT strolled again with my rifle, and saw pallah, small 
plovers, and green antelopes with straight horns, called 
mpéo, the skin of which makes a favourite apron for the 
Mabandwa. 

14th.—I met to-day a Mhtima cowherd in my strolls 
with the rifle, and asked him if he knew where the game 
lay. The unmannerly creature, standing among a thou- 
sand of the sleekest cattle, gruffishly replied, “What can 
I know of any other animals than cows?” and went on 
with his work, as if nothing in the world could interest 
him but his cattle-tending. I shot a doe, leucotis, called 
here nsunnitiy, the first one seen upon the journey. 

15th.—In the morning, when our men went for water 
to the springs, some Waganda in ambush threw a spear 
at them, and this time caught a Tartar, for the “horns,” 
as they called their guns, were loaded, and two of them 
received shot-wounds. In the evening, whilst we were 
returning from shooting, a party of Waganda, also lying in 
the bush, called out to know what we were about ; saying, 
“Ts it not enough that you have turned us out of our 
homes and plantations, leaving us to live like animals in 
the wilderness?” and when told we were only searching 
for sport, would not believe that our motive was any other 
than hostility to themselves. 

At night one of Budja’s men returned from the palace, 
to say the king was highly pleased with the measures 
adopted by his Wakungt, in prosecution of Kari’s affair. 
He hoped now, as we had cows to eat, there would be 
no necessity for wandering for food, but all would keep 
together “in one garden.” At present no notice would be 
taken of the murderers, as all the culprits would have fled 
far away in their fright to escape chastisement. But when 
a little time had elapsed, and all would appear to have 


458 THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. [1862. 


been forgotten, officers would be sent and the miscreants 
apprehended, for it was impossible to suppose anybody 
could be ignorant of the white men being the guests of 
the king, considering they had lived at the palace so 
long. The king took this opportunity again to remind 
me that he wanted a heavy solid double gun, such as 
would last him all his life; and intimated that in a few 
days the arms and robes of honour were to be sent. 

16th.—Most of the cows for ourselves and the guides 
—for the king gave them also a present, ten each—were 
driven into camp. We also got 50 lb. of butter, the re- 
_ mainder to be picked up on the way. I strolled with the 
gun, and shot two zebras, to be sent to the king, as, by the 
constitution of Uganda, he alone can keep their royal skins. 

17th—We had to halt again, as the guides had lost 
most of their cows, so I strolled with my rifle and shot a 
ndjezza doe, the first I had ever seen. It is a brown 
animal, a little smaller than the leucotis, and frequents 
much the same kind of ground. 

18th.—We had still to wait another day for Budja’s 
cows, when, as it appeared all-important to communicate 
quickly with Petherick, and as Grant’s leg was considered 
too weak for travelling fast, we took counsel together, and 
altered our plans. I arranged that Grant should go to 
Kamrasi’s direct with the property, cattle, and women, 
taking my letters and a map for immediate despatch 
to Petherick at Gani, whilst I should go up the river to 
its source or exit from the lake, and come down again 
navigating as far as practicable. 

At night the Waganda startled us by setting fire to the 
huts our men were sleeping in, but providentially did more 
damage to themselves than to us, for one sword only was 
buried in the fire, whilst their own huts, intended to be 
vacated in the morning, were burnt to the ground. To 
fortify ourselves against another invasion, we cut down all 
their plantains to make a boma or fence. 


Jury. | ARRIVAL AT THE NILE. 459 


We started all together on our respective journeys ; but, 
eg the Lita after the third mile, Grant turned west, to 
To Kiwukéi, JOM the highroad to Kamrasi’s, whilst I went 
20th. east for Urondogani, crossing the Litajerri, a 
huge rush-drain three miles broad, fordable nearly to the 
right bank, where we had to ferry in boats, and the cows to 
be swum over with men holding on to their tails. It was 
larger than the Katonga, and more tedious to cross, for it 
took no less than four hours, mosquitoes in myriads biting 
our bare backs and legs all the while. The Litajerri is 
said to rise in the lake and fall into the Nile, due south of 
our crossing-point. On the right bank wild buffalo are 
described to be as numerous as cows, but we did not see 
any, though the country is covered with a most inviting 
jungle for sport, with intermediate lays of fine grazing 
erass. Such is the nature of the country all the way to 
Urondogani, except in some favoured spots, kept as tidily 
as in any part of Uganda, where plantains grow in the 
utmost luxuriance. From want of guides, and misguided 
by the exclusive ill-natured Wahtima, who were here in 
great numbers tending their king’s cattle, we lost our way 
continually, so that we did not reach the boat-station 
until the morning of the 21st. 

Here at last I stood on the brink of the Nile; most 
To Urondogani, beautiful was the scene, nothing could surpass 
git it! It was the very perfection of the kind of 
effect aimed at in a highly kept park ; with a magnificent 
stream from 600 to 700 yards wide, dotted with islets and 
rocks, the former occupied by fishermen’s huts, the latter 
by sterng and crocodiles basking in the sun,—flowing 
between fine high grassy banks, with rich trees and 
plantains in the background, where herds of the nsunnt 
and hartebeest could be seen grazing, while the hippopo- 
tami were snorting in the water, and florikan and guinea- 
fowl rising at our feet. Unfortunately, the chief district 
officer, Mlondo, was from home, but we took possession 


4.60 THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. [1862. 


of his huts—clean, extensive, and tidily kept—facing the 
river, and felt as if a residence here would do one good. 
Delays and subterfuges, however, soon came to damp our 
spirits. The acting officer was sent for, and asked for 
the boats; they were all scattered, and could not be col- 
lected for a day or two; but, even if they were at hand, 
no boat ever went up or down the river. The chief was 
away and would be sent for, as the king often changed 
his orders, and, after all, might not mean what had been 
said. The district belonged to the Sakibobo, and no re- 
presentative of his had come here. These excuses, of 
course, would not satisfy us. The boats must be collected, 
seven, if there are not ten, for we must try them, and 
come to some understanding about them, before we march 
up stream, when, if the officer values his life, he will let 
us have them, and acknowledge Kasoro as the king’s 
representative, otherwise a complaint will be sent to the 
palace, for we won't stand trifling. 

We were now confronting Usoga, a country which may 
be said to be the very counterpart of Uganda in its rich- 
ness and beauty. Here the people use such huge iron- 
headed spears with short handles, that, on seeing one to- 
day, my people remarked that they were better fitted for 
digging potatoes than piercing men. Elephants, as we 
had seen by their devastations during the last two 
marches, were very numerous in this neighbourhood. 
Till lately, a party from Unyoro, ivory-hunting, had 
driven them away. Lions were also described as very 
numerous and destructive to human life. Antelopes were 
common in the jungle, and the hippopotami, though fre- 
quenters of the plantain-garden and constantly heard, 
were seldom seen on land in consequence of their un- 
steady habits. 

The king's page again came, begging I would not for- 
get the gun and stimulants, and bringing with him the 
things I asked for—two spears, one shield, one dirk, two 


Juty.] ANTELOPE-SHOOTING, 461 


leopard-cat skins, and two sheets of small antelope skins. 
I told my men they ought to shave their heads and bathe 
in the holy river, the cradle of Moses—the waters of 
which, sweetened with sugar, men carry all the way from 
Eeypt to Mecca, and sell to the pilgrims. But Bombay, 
who is a philosopher of the Epicurean school, said, “ We 
don’t look on those things in the same fanciful manner 
that you do; we are contented with all the common- 
places of life, and look for nothing beyond the present. 
If things don’t go well, it is God’s will; and if they do 
go well, that is His will also.” 

22d.—The acting chief brought a present of one cow, 
one goat, and pombé, with a mob of his courtiers to pay 
his respects. He promised that the seven boats, which 
are all the station could muster, would be ready next 
day, and in the meanwhile a number of men would con- 
duct me to the shooting-ground. He asked to be shown 
the books of birds and animals, and no sooner saw some 
specimens of Wolf's handiwork, than, in utter surprise, he 
exclaimed, “I know how these are done; a bird was 
caught and stamped upon the paper,” using action to his 
words, and showing what he meant, while all his followers 
nyanzigged for the favour of the exhibition. 

In the evening [ strolled in the antelope parks, enjoy- 
ing the scenery and sport excessively. A noble buck 
nsunnti, standing by himself, was the first thing seen on 
this side, though a herd of hartebeests were grazing on 
the Usoga banks. One bullet rolled my fine friend over, 
but the rabble looking on no sooner saw the hit than they 
rushed upon him and drove him off, for he was only 
wounded. A chase ensued, and he was tracked by his 
blood, when a pongo (bush boc) was started and divided 
the party. It also brought me to another single buck 
nsunnti, which was floored at once, and left to be carried 
home by some of my men in company with Waganda, 
whilst I went on, shot a third nsunnii buck, and tracked 


462 THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. [1862. 


him by his blood till dark, for the bullet had pierced. his 
lungs and passed out on the other side. Failing to find 
him on the way home, I shot, besides florikan and guinea- 
chicks, a wonderful goatsucker, remarkable for the ex- 
ceeding length of some of its feathers floating out far 


Goatsucker (Cosmetornis Spekii). 


beyond the rest in both wings.* Returning home, | 
found the men who had charge of the dead buck all in a 
state of excitement ; they no sooner removed his carcass, 
than two hons came out of the jungle and lapped his 
blood. All the Waganda ran away at once; but my braves 
feared my anger more than the lions, and came off safely 
with the buck on their shoulders. 

23d.— Three boats arrived, like those used on the 
Murchison Creek, and when I:demanded the rest, as well 
as a decisive answer about going to Kamrasi’s, the acting 
Mkungit said he was afraid accidents might happen, and 

* Named by Dr P. L, Sclater, Cosmetornis Speku. The seventh pen 


feathers are double the length of the ordinaries, the eighth double that of 


the seventh, and the ninth 20 inches long. Bombay says the same bird is 
found in Uhiyow. 


Juty. | NEWS FROM COURT. 463 


he would not take me. Nothing would frighten this pig- 
headed creature into compliance, though I told him I had 
arranged with the king to make the Nile the channel of 
communication with England. I therefore applied to him 
for guides to conduct me up the river, and ordered Bom- 
bay and Kasoro to obtain fresh orders from the king, as 
all future Wazungti, coming to Uganda to visit or trade, 
would prefer the passage by the river. I shot another 
buck in the evening, as the Waganda love their skins, 
and also a load of guinea-fowl—three, four, and five at a 
shot—as Kasoro and his boys prefer them to anything, 

24th.—The acting officer absconded, but another man 
came in his place, and offered to take us on the way up 
the river to-morrow, humbugging Kasoro into the belief 
that his road to the palace would branch off from the 
first stage, though in reality it was here. The Mkungi’s 
women brought pombé, and spent the day gazing at us, 
till, in the evening, when I took up my rifle, one ran after 
Bana to see him shoot, and followed like a man; but the 
only sport she got was on an ant-hill, where she fixed 
herself some time, popping into her mouth and devouring 
the white ants as fast as they emanated from their cells— 
for, disdaining does, I missed the only pongo buck I got 
a shot at in my anxiety to show the fair one what she 
came for. 

Reports came to-day of new cruelties at the palace. 
Kasoro improved on their off-hand manslaughter by say- 
ing that two Kamravionas and two Sakibobos, as well as 
all the old Wakungtt of Sunna’s time, had been executed 
by the orders of king Mtésa. He told us, moreover, that 
if Mtésa ever has a dream that his father directs him to 
kill anybody as being dangerous to his person, the order 
is religiously kept. I wished to send a message to Mtésa 
by an officer who is starting at once to pay his respects 
at court; but although he received it, and promised to 
deliver it, Kasoro laughed at me for expecting that one 


464 THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. [1862. 


word of it would ever reach the king; for, however ap- 
propriate or important the matter might be, it was more 
than anybody dare do to tell the king, as it would be an 
infringement of the rule that no one is to speak to him 
unless in answer to a question. My second buck of the 
first day.was brought in by the natives, but they would 
not allow it to approach the hut until it had been skinned; 
and I found their reason to be a superstition that other- 
wise no others would ever be killed by the inmates of 
that establishment. | 

I marched up the left bank of the Nile at a considerable 
To Isamba Rapids, distance from the water, to the Isamba Rapids, 
ee passing through rich jungle and plantain-gar- — 
dens. Nango, an old friend, and district officer of the 
place, first refreshed us with a dish of plantain-squash 
and dried fish, with pombé. He told us he is often 
threatened by elephants, but he sedulously keeps them 
off with charms; for if they ever tasted a plantain they 
would never leave the garden until they had cleared it 
out. He then took us to see the nearest falls of the Nile 
—extremely beautiful, but very confined. The water ran 
deep between its banks, which were covered with fine 
grass, soft cloudy acacias, and festoons of lilac convolvuli; 
whilst here and there, where the land had slipped above 
the rapids, bared places of red earth could be seen, like 
that of Devonshire ; there, too, the waters, impeded by a 
natural dam, looked like a huge mill-pond, sullen and 
dark, in which two crocodiles, laving about, were looking 
- out for prey. Krom the high banks we looked down upon 
a line of sloping wooded islets lying across the stream, 
which divide its waters, and, by interrupting them, cause 
at once both dam and rapids. The whole was more fairy- 
like, wild, and romantic than—I must confess that my 
thoughts took that shape—anything I ever saw outside of 
a theatre. It was exactly the sort of place, in fact, where, 
bridged across from one side-slip to the other, on a moon- 


Juty. | A “CHURCH ESTATE,” 465 


light night, brigands would assemble to enact some dread- 
ful tragedy. Even the Wangtiana seemed spellbound at 
the novel beauty of the sight, and no one thought of 
moving till hunger warned us night was setting in, and 
we had better look out for lodgings. 

Start again, and after drinking pombé with Nango, 
when we heard that three Wakungti had been 
seized at Kari, in consequence of the murder, 
the march was recommenced, but soon after stopped by 
the mischievous machinations of our guide, who pretended 
it was too late in the day to cross the jungles on ahead, 
either by the road to the source or the palace, and there- 
fore would not move till the morning ; then, leaving us, 
on the pretext of business, he vanished, and was never 
seen again. A small black fly, with thick shoulders and 
bullet-head, infests the place, and torments the naked 
arms and legs of the people with its sharp stings to an 
extent that must render life miserable to them. 

After a long struggling march, plodding through huge 
To Church Estate, grasses and jungle, we reached a district which 
Le I cannot otherwise describe than by calling it 
a “Church Estate.” It is dedicated in some mysterious 
manner to Ltbari (Almighty), and although the king 
appeared to have authority over some of the inhabitants 
of it, yet others had apparently a sacred character, ex- 
empting them from the civil power, and he had no right to 
dispose of the land itself. - In this territory there are small 
villages only at every fifth mile, for there is no road, and 
the lands run high again, whilst, from want of a guide, we 
often lost the track. It now transpired that Budja, when 
he told at the palace that there was no road down the 
banks of the Nile, did so in consequence of his fear that 
if he sent my whole party here they would rob these 
church lands, and so bring him into a scrape with the 
wizards or ecclesiastical authorities. Had my party not 

26 


To Kirindi, 26th. 


466 THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. [1862. 


been under control, we could not have put up here ; 
but on my being answerable that no thefts should take 
place, the people kindly consented to provide us with 
board and lodgings, and we found them very obliging. 
One elderly man, half-witted—they said the king had 
driven his senses from him by seizing his house and 
family—came at once on hearing of our arrival, laughing 
and singing in a loose jaunty maniacal manner, carrying 
odd sticks, shells, and a bundle of mbtigt rags, which he 
deposited before me, dancing and singing again, then re- 
treating and bringing some more, with a few plantains 
from a garden, which I was to eat, as kings lived upon 
flesh, and “poor Tom” wanted some, for he lived with — 
lions and elephants in a hovel beyond the gardens, and 
his belly was empty. He was precisely a black ape 
of the English parish idiot. 

At bats with a good push for it, crossing hills a 
o Ripon Falls, eee huge grasses, as well as extensive 
Fee. village niga lately devastated by ele- 
phants—they had eaten all that was eatable, and what 
would not serve for food they had destroyed with their 
trunks, not one plantain or one hut being left entire—we 
arrived at the extreme end of the journey, the farthest 
point ever visited by the expedition on the same parallel 
of latitude as king Mtésa’s palace, and just forty miles 
east of it. 

We were well rewarded ; for the “stones,” as the Wa- 
ganda call the falls, was by far the most interesting sight 
I had seen in Africa. Hverybody ran to see them at once, 
though the-march had been long and fatiguing, and even 
my sketch-block was called into play. Though beautiful, 
the scene was not exactly what I expected ; for the broad 
surface of the lake was shut out from view by a spur of 
hill, and the falls, about 12 feet deep, and 400 to 500 feet 
broad, were broken by rocks. Still it was a sight that 
attracted one to it for hours—the roar of the waters, the 


The Ripon Falls—the Nile flowing out of Victoria N’yanza. 


~ Whee 


e 
< 
“ 


aa io 
> | pe nae ital 
[teat 


Juty. | THE OUTLET OF THE NILE. 467 


thousands of passenger-fish, leaping at the falls with all 
their might, the Wasoga and Waganda fishermen com- 
ing out in boats and taking post on all the rocks with 
rod and hook, hippopotami and crocodiles lying sleepily 
on the water, the ferry at work above the falls, and 
cattle driven down to drink at the margin of the lake, 
—1made, in all, with the pretty nature of the country— 
small hills, grassy-topped, with trees in the folds, and 
gardens on the lower slopes—as interesting a picture as 
one could wish to see. 

The expedition had now performed its functions. I 
saw that old father Nile without any doubt rises in the 
Victoria N’yanza, and, as I had foretold, that lake is the 
great source of the holy river which cradled the first 
expounder of our religious belief. I mourned, however, 
when I thought how much I had lost by the delays in 
the journey having deprived me of the pleasure of going 
to look at the north-east corner of the N’yanza to see 
what connection there was, by the strait so often spoken 
of, with it and the other lake where the Waganda went to 
get their salt, and from which another river flowed to the 
north, making “ Usoga an island.” But I felt I ought to 
be content with what I had been spared to accomplish ; 
for I had seen full half of the lake, and had information 
given me of the other half, by means of which I knew all 
about the lake, as far, at least, as the chief objects of 
geographical importance were concerned. 

Let us now sum up the whole and see what it is worth. 
Comparative information assured me that there was as 
much water on the eastern side of the lake as there is on 
the western—if anything, rather more. The most remote 
waters, or top head of the Nile, is the southern end of the 
lake, situated close on the third degree of south latitude, 
which gives to the Nile the surprising length, in direct 
measurement, rolling over thirty-four degrees of latitude, 
of above 2300 miles, or more than one-eleventh of the cir- 


468 THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. [1862. 


cumference of our globe. Now from this southern point, 
round by the west, to where the great Nile stream issues, 
there is only one feeder of any importance, and that is the 
Kitangtlé river; whilst from the southernmost point, 
round by the east, to the strait, there are no rivers at all 
of any importance ; for the travelled Arabs one and all 
aver, that from the west of the snow-clad Kilmandjaro to 
the lake where it is-cut by the second degree, and also 
the first degree of south latitude, there are salt lakes and 
salt plains, and the country is hilly, not unlike Unya- 
mtiézi; but they said there were no great rivers, and the 
country was so scantily watered, having only occasional 
runnels and rivulets, that they always had to make long 
marches in order to find water when they went on their 
trading journeys: and further, those Arabs who crossed 
the strait when they reached Usoga, as mentioned before, 
during the late interregnum, crossed no river either. 

There remains to be disposed of the “salt lake,” which 
I believe is not a salt, but a fresh-water lake; and my 
reasons are, as before stated, that the natives call all 
lakes salt, if they find salt beds or salt islands in such 
places. Dr Krapf, when he obtained a sight of the 
Kenia mountain, heard from the natives there that there 
was a salt lake to its northward, and he also heard that a 
river ran from Kenia towards the Nile. If his informa- 
tion was true on this latter point, then, without doubt, 
there must exist some connection between his river and 
the salt lake I have heard of, and this in all probability 
would also establish a connection between my salt lake 
and his salt lake which he heard was called Baringo.* In 
no view that can be taken of it, however, does this un- 
settled matter touch the established fact that the head of ~ 
the Nile is in 3° south latitude, where, in the year 1858, I 
discovered the head of the Victoria N’yanza to be. 


* It is questionable whether or not this word is a corruption of Bahr 
(sea of) Ingo. ; 


Juty. | THE RIPON FALLS. 4.69 


IT now christened the “stones” Ripon Falls, after the 
nobleman who presided over the Royal Geographical So- 
ciety when my expedition was got up; and the arm of 
water from which the Nile issued, Napoleon Channel, in 
token of respect to the French Geographical Society, for the 
honour they had done me, just before leaving England, in 
presenting me with their gold medal for the discovery of 
the Victoria N’yanza. One thing seemed at first perplexing 
—the volume of water in the Kitangiilé looked as large as 
that of the Nile ; but then the one was a slow river and the 
other swift, and on this account I could form no adequate 
judgment of their relative values. 

Not satisfied with my first sketch of the falls, I could 
Ripon Falls, not resist sketching them again ; and then, as 
a the cloudy state of the weather prevented my 
observing for latitude, and the officer of the place said a 
magnificent view of the lake could be obtained from the 
hill alluded to as intercepting the view from the falls, we 
proposed going there ; but Kasoro, who had been indulged 
with nsunnt antelope skins, and with guinea-fowl for 
dinner, resisted this, on the plea that I never should be 
satisfied. There were orders given only to see the “ stones,” 
and if he took me to one hill I should wish to see another 
and another, and so on. It made me laugh, for that had 
been my nature all my life; but, vexed at heart, and 
wishing to trick the young tyrant, I asked for boats to 
shoot hippopotami, in the hope of reaching the hills to 
pienic ; but boating had never been ordered, and he would 
not listen to it. “Then bring fish,” I said, that. I might 
draw them: no, that was not ordered. “Then go you to 
the palace, and leave me to go to Urondogani to-morrow, 
after I have taken a latitude ;” but the wilful creature 
would not go until he saw me under way. And as no- 
body would do anything for me without Kasoro’s orders, 
I amused the people by firing at the ferry-boat upon the 
Usoga side, which they defied me to hit, the distance 


470 THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. [1862 


being 500 yards ; but nevertheless a bullet went through 
her, and was afterwards brought by the Wasoga nicely 
folded up in a piece of mbiigt. Bombay then shot a — 
sleeping crocodile with his carbine, whilst I spent the day 
out watching the falls. 

This day also I spent watching the fish flymg at the 
Ripon Fas, _—_ ‘falls, and felt as if I only wanted a wife and 
est family, garden and yacht, rifle and rod, to 
make me happy here for life, so charming was the place. 
What a place, I thought to myself, this would be for 
missionaries ! They never could fear starvation, the land 
is so rich; and, if farming were introduced by them, they 
might have hundreds of pupils. I need say no more. 

In addition to the rod-and-lne fishing, a number of 
men, armed with long heavy poles with two iron spikes, 
tied prong-fashion to one end, rushed to a place over a 
break in the falls, which tired fish seemed to use as a 
baiting-room, dashed in their forks, holding on by the 
shaft, and sent men down to disengage the pinned fish 
and relieve their spears. The shot they make in this 
manner is a blind one—only on the chance of fish being 
there—and therefore always doubtful in its result. 

Church Estate again. As the clouds and Kasoro’s wil- 
fulness were still against me, and the weather 
did not give hopes of a change, I sacrificed 
the taking of the latitude to gain time. I sent Bombay 
with Kasoro to the palace, asking for the Sakibobo him- 
self to be sent with an order for five boats, five cows, and 
five goats, and also for a general order to go where I like, 
and do what I like, and have fish supplied me; “for, 
though I know the king likes me, his officers do not ;” 
and then on separating I retraced my steps to the Church 
Estate. 

1st.—To-day, after marching an hour, as there was now 
no need for hurrying, and a fine pongo buck, the Ngubbi 
of Uganda, offered a tempting shot, I proposed to shoot 


Return, 31st. 


N’samma Antelope—Ueganda. 


Ave. ] ANTELOPE-SHOOTING. 471 


it for the men, and breakfast in a neighbouring village. 
This being agreed to, the animal was despatched, and we 
no sooner entered the village than we heard that nsamma, 
a magnificent description of antelope, abound in the long 
grasses close by, and that a rogue elephant frequents the 
plantains every night. This tempting news created a halt. 
In the evening I killed a nsamma doe, an animal very 
much like the Kobus Ellipsiprymnus, but without the 
lunated mark over the rump; and at night, about 1 a.m, 
turned out to shoot an elephant, which we distinctly 
heard feasting on plantains; but rain was falling, and 
the night so dark, he was left till the morning. 

2d.—I followed up the elephant some way, till a pongo 
offering an irresistible shot [sent a bullet through him, 
but he was lost after hours’ tracking in the interminable 
large grasses. An enormous snake, with fearful mouth 
and fangs, was speared by the men. In the evening I 
wounded a buck nsamma, which, after tracking till dark, 
was left to stiffen ere the following morning; and just 
after this, on the way home, we heard the Rogue elephant | 
erunching the branches not far off from the track ; but as 
no one would dare follow me against the monster at this 
late hour, he was reluctantly left to do more injury to the 
gardens. 

3d.—After a warm search in the morning we found the 
nsamma buck lying in some water; the men tried to 
spear him, but he stood at bay, and took another bullet. 
This was all we wanted, affording one good specimen ; 
so, after breakfast, we marched to Kirindi, where the vil- 
lagers, hearing of the sport we had had, and excited with 
the hopes of getting flesh, begged us to halt a day. 

4th.—Not crediting the stories told by the people about 
the sport here, we packed to leave, but were no sooner 
ready than several men ran hastily in to say some fine 
bucks were waiting to be shot close by. ‘This was too 
powerful a temptation to be withstood, so, shouldering the 


472 THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. [1862. 


rifle, and followed by half the village, if not more, women 
included, we went to the place, but, instead of finding a 
buck—for the men had stretched a point to keep me at 
their village—we found a herd of does, and shot one at 
the people’s urgent request. 

We reached this in one stretch, and. put up in our 
Urondogani Old quarters, where the women of Mlondo 
agen Ot. provided -pombé, plantains, and potatoes, as 
before, with occasional fish, and we lived very happily till 
the 10th, shooting buck, guinea-fowl, and florikan, when, 
Bombay and Kasoro arriving, my work began again. These 
two worthies reached the palace, after crossing twelve con- 
siderable streams, of which one was the Ltajerri, rising in 
the lake. The evening of the next day after leaving me 
at Kira, they obtained an interview with the king imme- 
diately ; for the thought flashed across his mind that 
Bombay had come to report our death, the Waganda 
having been too much for the party. He was speedily 
undeceived by the announcement that nothing was the 
matter, excepting the inability to procure boats, because 
the officers at Urondogani denied all authority but the 
Sakibobo’s, and no one would show Bana anything, how- 
ever trifling, without an express order for it. 

Trate at this announcement, the king ordered the Saki- 
bobo, who happened to be present, to be seized and bound 
at once, and said warmly, “Pray, who is the king, that 
the Sakibobo’s orders should be preferred to mine?” and 
then, turning to the Sakibobo himself, asked what he 
would pay to be released? The Sakibobo, alive to his 
danger, replied at once, and without the slightest hesita- 
tion, Kighty cows, eighty goats, eighty slaves, eighty 
mbtigt, eighty butter, eighty coffee, eighty tobacco, 
eighty jowari, and eighty of all the produce of Uganda. 
He was then released. Bombay said Bana wished the 
Sakibobo to come to Urondogani, and give him a start 
with five boats, five cows, and five goats; to which the 


Ava.] PREPARATIONS FOR VOYAGE. 473 


king replied, “Bana shall have all he wants, nothing 
shall be denied him, not even fish ; but it is not necessary 
to send the Sakibobo, as boys carry all my orders to kings 
as well as subjects. Kasoro will return again with you, 
fully instructed in everything, and, moreover, both he and 
Budja will follow Bana to Gani.” Four days, however, 
my men were kept at the palace ere the king gave them 
the cattle and leave to join me, accompanied with one 
more officer, who had orders to find the boats at once, see 
us off, and report the circumstance at court. Just as at 
the last interview, the king had four women, lately seized 
and condemned to execution, squatting in his court. He 
wished to send them to Bana, and when Bombay demurred, 
saying he had no authority to take women in that way, 
the king gave him one, and asked him if he would like to 
see some sport, as he would have the remaining women 
cut to pieces before him. Bombay, by his own account, 
behaved with great propriety, saying Bana never wished 
to see sport of that cruel kind, and it would ill become 
him to see sights which his master had not. Viartingi 
sent me some tobacco, with kind regards, and said he and 
the Wazinza had just obtained leave to return to their 
homes, K’yengo alone, of all the guests, remaining be- 
hind as a hostage until Mtésa’s powder-seeking Wakungit 
returned. Finally, the little boy Ligoi had been sent to 
his home. Such was the tenor of Bombay’s report. 
11th—The officer sent to procure boats, impudently 
saying there were none, was put in the stocks by Kasoro, 
whilst other men went to Kirindi for sailors, and down 
the stream for boats. On hearing the king’s order that 
I was to be supplied with fish, the fishermen ran away, 
and pombé was no longer brewed from fear of Kasoro. 
12th—To-day we slaughtered and cooked two cows 
for the journey—the remaining three and one goat hav- 
ing been lost in the Litajerri—and gave the women of the 
place beads in return for their hospitality. They are 


AT 4, THE NORTHERN SLOPES OF AFRICA. [1862. 


nearly all Wanyoro, having been captured in that coun- 
try by king Mtésa and given to Mlondo. They said their 
teeth were extracted, four to six lower incisors, when they 
were young, because no Myoro would allow a person to 
drink from his cup unless he conformed to that custom. 
The same law exists in Usoga. 


Ave. ] START DOWN THE RIVER, 475 


CHAPTER XVI. 


BAHR EL ABIAD. 


FIRST VOYAGE ON THE NILE—THE STARTING—DESCRIPTION OF 
THE RIVER AND THE COUNTRY—MEET A HOSTILE VESSEL—A 
NAVAL ENGAGEMENT—DIFFICULTIES AND DANGERS—JUDICIAL 
PROCEDURE—MESSAGES FROM THE KING OF UGANDA—HIS 
EFFORTS TO GET US BACK—-DESERTION—THE WANYORO TROOPS 
—KAMRASI— ELEPHANT-STALKING—DIABOLICAL POSSESSIONS, 


In five boats of five planks each, tied together and 
caulked with mbtiet rags, I Etarted with 
twelve Wanetiana, Kasoro and his page- 
followers, and a small crew, to reach Kamrasi’s palace 
in Unyoro—goats, dogs, and kit, besides grain and dried 
meat, filling up the complement—but how many days it 
would take nobody knew. Paddles propelled these vessels, 
but the lazy erew were slow in the use of them, indulging 
sometimes in racing spurts, then composedly resting on 
their paddles whilst the gentle current drifted us along. 
The river, very unlike what it was from the Ripon Falls : 
downward, bore at once the character of river and lake— 
clear in the centre, but fringed in most places with tall 
rush, above which the green banks sloped back like park 
lands. It was all very pretty and very interesting, and 
would have continued so, had not Kasoro diseraced the 
Union Jack, turning it to piratical purposes in less than 
one hour. 


To N’yassi, 13th. 


476 BAHR EL ABIAD. [1862. 


A party of Wanyoro, in twelve or fifteen canoes, made 
of single tree trunks, had come up the river to trade with 
the Wasoga, and having stored their vessels with mbtigi, 
dried fish, plantains cooked and raw, pombé, and other 
things, were taking their last meal on shore before they 
returned to their homes. Kasoro seeing this, and bent 
on a boyish spree, quite forgetting we were bound for 
the very ports they were bound for, ordered our sailors 
to drive in amongst them, landed himself, and sent the 
Wanyoro flying before I knew what game was up, and 
then set to pillaging and feasting on the property of 
those very men whom it was our interest to propitiate, 
as we expected them shortly to be our hosts. 

The ground we were on belonged to king Mtésa, being 
a dependency of Uganda, and it struck me as singular 
that Wanyoro should be found here; but I no sooner 
discovered the truth than I made our boatmen disgorge 
everything they had taken, called back the Wanyoro to 
take care of their things, and extracted a promise from 
Kasoro that he would not practise such wicked tricks again, 
otherwise we could not travel together. Getting to boat 
again, after a very little paddling we pulled in to shore, 
on the Uganda side, to stop for the night, and thus allowed 
the injured Wanyoro to go down the river before us. I 
was much annoyed by this interruption, but no argument 
would prevail on Kasoro to go on. This was the last 
village on the Uganda frontier, and before we could go 
any farther in boats it would be necessary to ask leave of ~ 
Kamrasi’s frontier officer, N’yamyonjo, to enter Unyoro. 
The Wangttana demanded ammunition in the most impe- 
rious manner, whilst I, in the same tone, refused to issue 
any lest a row should take place and they then would 
desert, alluding to their dastardly desertion in Msalala, 
when Grant was attacked. Ifa fight should take place, 
I said they must flock to me at once, and ammunition, 
which was always ready, would be served out to them. 


Ava. | APPEARANCES OF HOSTILITY, ATT 


They laughed at this, and asked, Who would stop with 
me when the fight began? This was making a jest of 
what I was most afraid of—that they would all run away. 

I held a levee to decide on the best manner of proceed- 
Downthe Nie Wg: The Waganda wanted us to stop for 
and back again, the day and feel the way gently, arguing 

that etiquette demands it. Then, trying to 
terrify me, they said, N’yamyonjo had a hundred boats, 
and would drive us back to a certainty if we tried to 
force past them, if he were not first spoken with, as the 
Waganda had often tried the passage and been repulsed. 
On the other hand, I argued that Grant must have 
arrived long ago at Kamrasi’s, and removed all these 
difficulties for us; but, I said, if they would send men, . 
let Bombay start at once by land, and we will follow in 
boats, after giving him time to say we are coming. This 
point gained after a hot debate, Bombay started at 10 
A.M., and we not till 5 p.M., it bemg but one hour’s jour- 
ney by water. ‘The frontier line was soon crossed; and 
then both sides of the river, Usoga as well as Unyoro, 
belong to Kamrasi. 

I flattered myself all my walking this journey was 
over, and there was nothing left but to float quietly 
down the Nile, for Kidgwiga had promised boats, on 
Kamrasi’s account, from Unyoro to Gani, where Pethe- 
rick’s vessels were said to be stationed; but this hope 
shared the fate of so many others in Africa. In a little 
while an enormous canoe, full of well-dressed and well- 
armed men, was seen approaching us. We worked on, 
and found they turned, as if afraid. Our men paddled 
faster, they did the same, the pages keeping time play- 
fully by beat of drum, until at last it became an exciting 
chase, won by the Wanyoro by their superior numbers. 
The sun was now setting as we approached N’yamyonjo’. 
On a rock by the river stood a number of armed men, 
jumping, jabbering, and thrusting with their spears, just 


478 BAHR EL ABIAD. [1862. 


as the Waganda do. I thought, indeed, they were Wa- 
ganda doing this to welcome us; but a glance at Kasoro’s 
glassy eyes told me such was not the case, but, on the 
contrary, their language and gestures were threats, defy- 
ing us to land. 

The bank of the river, as we advanced, then rose higher, 
and was crowned with huts and plantations, before which 
stood groups and lines of men, all fully armed. Further, 
at this juncture, the canoe we had chased turned broad- 
side on us, and joined in the threatening demonstra- 
tions of the people on shore. I could not believe them 
to be serious—thought they had mistaken us—and stood 
up in the boat to show myself, hat in hand. I said I was 
an Englishman going to Kamrasi’s, and did all I could, 
but without creating the slightest impression. They had 
heard a drum beat, they said, and that was a signal of 
war, so war it should be; and Kamrasi’s drums rattled 
up both sides the river, preparing everybody to arm. 
This was serious. Further, a second canoe full of armed 
men issued out from the rushes behind us, as if with a 
view to cut off our retreat, and the one in front advanced 
upon us, hemming us in. To retreat together seemed our 
only chance, but it was getting dark, and my boats were 
badly manned. I gave the order to close together and 
retire, offerme ammunition as an incentive, and all came 
tome but one boat, which seemed so paralysed with fright, 
it kept spinning round and round like a crippled duck. 

The Wanyoro, as they saw us retreating, were now 
heard to say, “They are women, they are running, let 
us at them ;” whilst I kept roaring to my men, “ Keep 
together—come for powder ;” and myself loaded with 
small shot, which even made Kasoro laugh and inquire if 
it was intended for the Wanyoro. “Yes, to shoot them 
like guinea-fowl ;” and he laughed again. But confound 
my men! they would not keep together, and retreat with 
me. One of those served with ammunition went as hard 


Ava.] A RETREAT, 479 


as he could go up stream to be out of harm’s way, and 
another preferred hugging the dark shade of the rushes 
to keeping the clear open, which I desired for the benefit 
of our guns. It was now getting painfully dark, and the 
Wanyoro were stealing on us, as we could hear, though 
nothing could be seen. Presently the shade-seeking boat 
was attacked, spears were thrown, fortunately into the river 
instead of into our men, and grappling-hooks were used 
to link the boats together. My men cried, “ Help, Bana! 
they are killing us;” whilst I roared to my crew, “Go in, 
go in, and the victory will be ours;” but not a soul 
would—they were spell-bound to the place; we might 
have been cut up in detail, it was all the same to those 
cowardly Waganda, whose only action consisted in crying, 
“ N’yawo! n’yawo !”—mother, mother, help us! 

Three shots from the hooked boat now finished the 
action. The Wanyoro had caught a Tartar. Two of 
their men fell—one killed, one wounded. They were 
heard saying their opponents were not Waganda, it were 
better to leave them alone; and retreated, leaving us, 
totally uninjured, a clear passage up the river. But where 
was Bombay all this while? He did not return till after 
us, and then, in considerable excitement, he told his tale. 
He reached N’yamyonjo’s village before noon, asked for 
the officer, but was desired to wait in a hut until the chief 
should arrive, as he had gone out on business; the vil- 
lagers inquired, however, why we had robbed the Wan- 
yoro yesterday, for they had laid a complaint against us. 
Bombay replied it was no fault of Bana’s, he did every- 
thing he could to prevent it, and returned all that the 
boatmen. took. 

These men then departed, and did not return until 
* evening, when they asked Bombay, impudently, why he 
was sitting there, as he had received no invitation to 
spend the night; and unless he walked off soon they 
would set fire to his hut. Bombay, without the smallest 


480 BAHR EL ABLAD. [1862. 


intention of moving, said he had orders to see N’yam- 
yonjo, and until he did so he would not budge. “ Well,” 
said the people, “ you have got your warning, now look 
out for yourselves ;” and Bombay, with his Waganda 
escort, was left again. Drums then began to beat, and 
men to hurry to and fro with spears and shields, until 
at last our guns were heard, and, guessing the cause, 
Bombay with his Waganda escort rushed out of the hut 
into the jungle, and, without daring to venture on the 
beaten track, through thorns and thicket worked his way 
back to me, lame, and scratched all over with thorns. 

Crowds of Waganda, all armed as if for war, came to con- 
gratulate us in the morning, jumping, jabber- 
ing, and shaking their spears at us, denoting 
a victory gained—for we had shot Wanyoro and no harm 
had befallen us. “ But the road,” I cried, “has that been 
gained? Iam not going to show my back. We must go 
again, for there is some mistake ; Grant is with Kamrasi, 
and N’yamyonjo cannot stop us. If you won't go in boats, 
let us go by land to N’yamyonjo’s, and the boats will follow 
after.” Not a soul, however, would stir. N’yamyonjo was 
described as an independent chief, who listened to Kamrasi 
only when he liked. He did not like strange eyes to sce 
his secret lodges on the N’yanza; and if he did not wish 
us to go down the river, Kamrasi’s orders would go for 
nothing. His men had now been shot; to go within his 
reach would be certain death. Argument was useless, 
boating slow, to send messages worse ; so I gave in, turned 
my back on the Nile, and the following day (16th) came 
on the Ltajerri. 

Here, to my intense surprise, I heard that Grant’s camp 
was not far off, on its return from Kamrasi’s. I could not, 
rather would not, believe it, suspicious as it now appeared 
after my reverse. ‘The men, however, were positive, and 
advised my going to king Mtésa’s—a ridiculous proposi- 
tion, at once rejected ; for I had yet to receive Kamrasi’s 


Return to Kiwtt- 
kéri, 15th. 


Ava. ] RETRACING OUR STEPS. 481 


answer to our Queen, about opening a trade with England. 
I must ascertain why he despised Englishmen without 
speaking with them, and I could not believe Kamrasi 
would prove less avaricious than either Rttmanika or 
Mtésa, especially as Rttmanika had made himself respon- 
sible for our actions. We slept that night near Kari, the 
Waganda eating two goats which had been drowned in the 
Litajerri; and the messenger-page, having been a third time 
to the palace and back again, called to ask after our wel- 
fare, on behalf of his king, and remind us about the oun 
and brandy promised. 

17th and 18th—The two following days were spent 
wandering about without guides, trying to keep the track 
Grant had taken after leaving us, crossing at first a line 
of small hills, then traversing grass and jungle, like the 
dal of India. Plantain-gardens were frequently met, and 
the people seemed very hospitably inclined, though they 
complained sadly of the pages rudely rushing into every 
hut, seizing everything they could lay their hands on, and 
even eating the food which they had just prepared for 
their own dinners, saying, in a mournful manner, “If it 
were not out of respect for you we should fight those little 
rascals, for it is not the king’s guest nor his men who do 
us injury, but the king’s own servants, without leave or 
licence.” I observed that special bomas or fences were 
erected to protect these villages against the incursions of 
lions. Buffaloes were about, but the villagers cautioned 
us not to shoot them, holding them as sacred animals ; 
and, to judge from the appearance of the country, wild 
animals should abound, were it not for the fact that every 
Mganda seems by instinct to be a sportsman. 

At last, after numerous and various reports about Grant, 
mnpretnivene We heard his drums last night, but we arrived 
19th. this morning just in time to be too late. He 
avas on his march back to the capital of Uganda, as the 

2H 


482 BAHR EL ABIAD. [1862. 


people had told us, and passed through N’yakinyama just 
before I reached it. What had really happened I knew 
not, and was puzzled to think. To insist on a treaty, de- 
manding an answer, to the Queen, seemed the only chance 
left ; so I wrote to Grant to let me know all about it, and 
_ waited the result. He very obligingly came himself, said 
he left Unyoro after stopping there an age asking for the 
road without effect, and left by the orders of Kamrasi, 
thinking obedience the better policy to obtain our ends. 
Two great objections had been raised against us ; one was 
that we were reported to be cannibals, and the other that 
our advancing by two roads at once was suspicious, the 
more especially so as the Waganda were his enemies ; had 
we come from Ritimanika direct, there would have been no 
objection to us. 

When all was duly considered, it appeared evident to 
me that the great king of Unyoro, “the father of all the 
kings,” was merely a nervous, fidgety creature, half afraid 
of us because we were attempting his country by the 
unusual mode of taking two routes at once, but wholly 
so of the Waganda, who had never ceased plundering 
his country for years. As it appeared that he would 
have accepted us had we come by the friendly route of 
Kistiéré, a further parley was absolutely necessary, and 
the more especially so, as now we were all together 
and in Uganda, which, in consequence, must relieve 
him from the fear of our harbouring evil designs against 
him. No one present, however, could be prevailed on 
to go to him in the capacity of ambassador, as the fron- 
tier officer had warned the Wagéni or guests that, if 
they ever attempted to cross the border again, he was 
bound in duty, agreeably to the orders of his king, to 
expel them by force; therefore, should: the Wagéni at- 
tempt it after this warning, their first appearance would 
be considered a casus belli; and so the matter rested for 
the day. 


Ava. ] BETTER PROSPECTS. 483: 


To make the best of a bad bargain, and as N’yakin- 
To Grant's yama was “eaten up,” we repaired to Grant’s 
Cares 20k camp to consult with Budja; but Budja was 
found firm and inflexible against sending men to Unyoro. 
His pride had been injured by the rebuffs we had sus- 
tained. He would wait here three or four days as I pro- 
posed, to see what fortune sent us, if I would not be con- 
vineed that Kamrasi wished to reject us, and he would 
communicate with his king in the meanwhile, but nothing 
more. Here was altogether a staggerer: I would stop 
for three or four days, but if Kamrasi would not have us 
by that time, what was to be done? Would it be prudent 
to try Kistéré now Baraka had been refused the Gani 
route? or would it not be better still for me to sell Kam- 
rasi altogether, by offermg Mtésa five hundred loads of 
ammunition, cloth, and beads, if he would give us a thou- 
sand Waganda as a force to pass through the Masai to 
Zanzibar, this property to be sent back by the escort from 
the coast? Kamrasi would no doubt catch it if we took 
this course, but it was expensive. 

Thus were we ruminating, when lo, to our delight, as if 
they had been listening to us, up came Kidgwiga, my old 
friend, who, at Mtésa’s palace, had said Kamrasi would be 
very glad to see me, and Vittagitra, Kamrasi’s commander- 
in-chief, to say their king was very anxious to see us, and 
the Waganda might come or not as they liked. Until 
now, the deputation said, Kamrasi had doubted Budja’s 
word about our friendly intentions, but since he saw us 
withdrawing from his country, those doubts were re- 
moved. ‘The N’yanswengé, they said — meaning, | 
thought, Petherick—was still at Gani; no English or 
others on the Nile ever expressed a wish to enter Un- 
yoro, otherwise they might have done so; and Baraka 
had left for Karagtié, carrying off an ivory as a present 
from Kamrasi. 

21st.—I ordered the march to Unyoro; Budja, however, 


484 BAHR EL ABIAD. [1862. 


kept brooding over the message sent to the Waganda, to 
the effect that they might come or not as they liked, and 
considering us with himself to have all been treated “like 
dogs,” begged me to give him my opinion as to what 
course he had better pursue; for he must, in the first 
instance, report the whole circumstances to the king, and 
could not march at once. This was a blight on our pros- 
pects, and appeared very vexatious, in the event of Budja 
waiting for an answer, which, considering Mtésa had 
ordered his Wakungtt to accompany us all the way to 
Gani, might stop our march altogether. 

I therefore argued that Kamrasi’s treatment of us was 
easily accounted for: he heard of us coming by two 
routes from an enemy’s country, and was naturally suspi- 
cious of us; that had now been changed by our with- 
drawing, and he invited us to him. Without doubt, his 
commander-in-chief was never very far away, and followed 
on our heels. Such precaution was only natural and reason- 
able on Kamrasi’s part, and what had been done need not 
alarm any one. “If you do your duty properly, you will 
take us at once into Unyoro, make your charge over to 
these men, and return or not as you like; for in dog so 
you will have fulfilled both Mtésa’s and Kamrasi’s orders 
at once.” “ Very good,” says Budja, “ let it be so; for 
there is great wisdom in your words; but I must first 
send to my king, for the Waganda villagers have struck 
two of your men with weapons” (this had happened just 
before my arrival here), “and this is a most heinous offence 
in Uganda, which cannot be overlooked. Had it been 
done with a common stick, it could have been overlooked ; 
but the use of weapons is an offence, and both parties 
must go before the king.” ‘This, of course, was objected 
to on the plea that it was my own affair. Iwas king of 
the Wangtiana, and might choose to dispense with the 
attendance. The matter was compromised, however, on 
the condition that Budja should march across the border 


Ave. | THE JOURNEY CONTINUED. 485 


to-morrow, and wait for the return of these men and for 
further orders on the Unyoro side. 

The bait took. Budja lost sight of the necessity there 
was for his going to Gani to bring back a gun, ammu- 
nition, and some medicine—that is to say, brandy—for 
his king; and sent his men off with mine to tell Mtésa 
all our adventures—our double repulse, the intention to 
wait on the Unyoro side for further orders, and the account 
of some Waganda having wounded my men. I added 
my excuses for Kamrasi, and laid a complaint against 
Mtésa’s officers for having defrauded us out of ten cows, 
five goats, six butter, and sixty mbtiet. It was not that 
we required these things, but I knew that the king had 
ordered them to be given to us, and I thought it right we 
should show that his officers, if they professed to obey his 
orders, had peculated. After these men had started, some 
friends of the villager who had been apprehended on the 
charge of assailing my men, came and offered Budja five 
cows to overlook the charge ; and Budja, though he could 
not overlook it when I pleaded for the man, asked me to 
recall my men. Discovering that the culprit was a queen’s 
man, and that the affair would cause bad blood at court 
should the king order the man’s life to be taken, I tried 
to do so, but things had gone too far. 

Again the expedition marched on in the right direction. 

__ We reached the last village on the Uganda 

To North Frontier 4 f 
non, Vesely frontier, and there spent the night. Here 
Grant shot a nsunnti buck. The Wangttana 
mutinied for ammunition, and would not lift a load until 
they got it, saying, “ Unyoro is a dangerous country,” 
though they had been there before without any more than 
they now had in pouch. The fact was, my men, in con- 
sequence of the late issues on the river, happened to have 
more than Grant’s men, and every man must have alike. 
The ringleader, unfortunately for himself, had lately fired 
at a dead lion, to astonish the Unyoro, and his chum had 


486 BAHR EL ABIAD. (£1862. 


fired a salute, which was contrary to orders ; for ammuni- 
tion was at a low ebb, and I had done everything in my 
power to nurse it. Therefore, as a warning to the others, 
the guns of these two were confiscated, and a caution 
given that any gun in future let off, either by design or 
accident, would be taken. : 
To-day I felt very thankful to get across the much-vexed 
__ boundary-line, and enter Unyoro, guided by 
Staton, Unyor, ” Kamrasi’s deputation of officers, and so shake 
Wet off the apprehensions which had teased us 
for so many days. ‘This first march was a picture of all 
the country to its capital: an interminable forest of small 
trees, bush, and tall grass, with scanty villages, low huts, 
and dirty-looking people clad in skins; the plantain, 
sweet potato, sesamum, and tlézi (millet) forming the 
chief edibles, besides goats and fowls; whilst the cows, 
which are reported to be numerous, being kept, as every- 
where else where pasture-lands are good, by the wander- 
ing, unsociable Wahtima, are seldom seen. No hills, 
except a few scattered cones, disturb the level surface of 
the land, and no pretty views ever cheer the eye. Uganda 
is now entirely left behind; we shall not see its like again; 
for the further one leaves the equator, and the rain-attract- 
ing influences of the Mountains of the Moon, vegetation 
decreases proportionately with the distance. 
Fortunately the frontier village could not feed so large 
To Kidgwiga's, & party as ours, and therefore we were com- 
ath pelled to move farther on, to our great delight, 
through the same style of forest acacia, cactus, and tall 
grass, to Kidgwiga’s gardens, where we no sooner arrived 
than Mtésa’s messenger-page, with a party of fifty 
Waganda, dropped in, in the most unexpected manner, 
to inquire after “his royal master’s friend, Bana.” The 
king had heard of the fight upon the river, and thought 
the Wangtiana must be very good shots. He still trusted 
we would not forget the gun and ammunition, but, above 


Ava. ] IN UNYORO. 487 


all, the load of stimulants, for he desired that above all 
things on earth. This was the fourth message to remind 
us of these important matters which we had received since 
leaving his gracious presence, and each time brought by 
the same page. While the purpose of the boy’s coming 
with so many men was not distinctly known, the whole 
village and camp were in a state of great agitation, Budja 
fearing lest the king had some fault to find with his work, 
and the Wanyoro deeming it a menace of war, whilst I 
was afraid they might take fright and stop our progress. 

But all went well in the end; Massey’s log, which I 
have mentioned as a present I intended for Mtésa, was 
packed up, and the page departed with it. Some of 
Rtimanika’s men, who came into Unyoro with Baraka, 
with four of K’yengo’s, were sent to call us by Kamrasi. 
Through Rttmanika’s men it transpired that he had stood 
security for our actions, else, with the many evil reports 
of our being cannibals and suchlike, which had preceded 
our coming here, we never should have gained admittance 
to the country. The Wanyoro, who are as squalid-looking 
as the Wanyamitiézi, and almost as badly dressed, now 
came about us to hawk ivory ornaments, brass and copper 
twisted wristlets, tobacco, and salt, which they exchanged 
for cowries, with which they purchase cows from the 
Waganda, As in Uganda, all the villagers forsake their 
huts as soon as they heard the Wagéni (guests) were com- 
ing; and no one paid the least attention to the traveller, 
save the few head-men attached to the escort, or some 
professional traders. 

25th to 28th.—I had no sooner ordered the march than 
Vittagtira counter-ordered it, and held a levee to ascertain, 
as he said, if the Waganda were to go back; for though 
Kamrasi wished to see us, he did not want the Waganda. 
It was Kamrasi’s orders that Budja should tell this to his 
“child the Mkavia,” meaning Mtésa; for when the Wa- 
ganda came the first time to see him, three of his family 


488 BAHR EL ABIAD. [1862. 


died ; and when they came the second time, three more 
died; and as this rate of mortality was quite unusual in 
his family circle, he could only attribute it to foul magic. 
The presence of people who brought such results was of 
course by no means desirable. This neat message elicited 
a declaration of the necessity of Budja’s going to Gant 
with us, and a response from the commander-in-chief, 
probably to terrify the Waganda, that although Gani was 
only nine days’ journey distant from Kamrasi’s palace, 
the Gani people were such barbarians, they would call a 
straight-haired man a magician, and any person who tied 
his mbtigti in a knot upon his shoulder, or had a full set 
of teeth as the Waganda have, would be surely killed by 
them. Finally, we must wait two days, to see if Kamrasi 
would see us or not. Such was Unyoro diplomacy. 

An announcement of a different kind immediately 
followed. The king had heard that I gave a cow to 
Vittagtira and Kidewiga when they first came to me 
in Uganda, and wished the Wanyamtiézi to ascertain 
if this was true. Of course, I said they were my guests 
in Uganda, and if they had been wise they would have 
eaten their cow on the spot; what was that to Kamrasi ? 
It was a pity he did not treat us as well who have come 
into his country at his own invitation, instead of keeping 
us starving in this gloomy wilderness, without a drop of 
pombé to cheer the day ;—why could not he let us go on? 
He wanted first to hear if the big Mzungt, meaning my- 
self, had really come yet. All fudge! 

Three days were spent in simply waiting for return 
messages on both sides, and more might have been lost in 
the same way, only we amused Vittagtira and gave him 
confidence by showing our pictures, looking-glass, scissors, 
knives, &e., when he promised a march in the morning, 
leaving a man behind to bring on the Wangtiana sent to 
Mtésa’s, it being the only alternative which would please 
Budja ; for he said there was no security for life in Unyoro, 


Ava. ] A MESSAGE FROM MTESA. 489 


where every Mkungii calls himself the biggest man, and 
no true hospitality j is to be found. 

The next two days took us through Chagamoyo to Kir- 
To Chagamoyo, atosi, by the aid of the compass ; for the route 
Kamrasi’s men took differed from the one 
which Budja knew, and he declared the Wan- 
yoro were leading us into a trap, and would not be con- 
vinced we were going on all right till I pulled out the 
compass and confirmed the Wanyoro. We were anything 
but welcomed at Kiratosi, the people asking by what bad- 
luck we had come there to eat up their crops; but in a 
little while they flocked to our doors and admired our 
traps, remarking that they believed each iron box con- 
tained a couple of white dwarfs, which we carry on our 
shoulders, sitting straddle-legs, back to back, and they fly 
off to eat people whenever they get the order. One of 
these visitors happened to be the sister of one of my men, 
named Bartiti, who no sooner recognised her brother, than, 
without saying a word, she clasped her head with her 
hands, and ran off, crying, to tell her husband what she 
had seen. A spy of Kamrasi dropped the report that the 
Wangitiana were returning from Mtésa’s, and hurried on to 
tell his king. 

31st.—Some Waganda hurrying in, confirmed the report 
of last night, and said the Wangiiana, footsore, had been 
left at the Uganda frontier, expecting us to return, as 
Mtésa, at the same time that he approved highly of my 
having sent men back to inform him of Kamrasi’s con- 
duct, begged we would instantly return, even if found 
within one march of Kamrasi’s, for he had much of im- 
portance to tell his friend Bana. The message continued 
to this effect: I need be under no apprehensions about 
the road to the coast, for he would give me as many men 
as I liked; and, fearing I might be short of powder, he 
had sent some with the Wangtiana. Both Wangtiana 
were by the king given women for their services, and an 


a pia 30th. 


Kos , “ 


490 BAHR EL ABIAD. [1862, 


old tin cartridge-box represented Mtésa’s card, it being 
an article of European manufacture, which, if found in the 
possession of any Mganda, would be certain death to him. 
Finally, all the houses and plantains where my men were 
wounded had been confiscated. 

When this message was fully delivered, Budja said we 
must return without a day’s delay. J,on the contrary, 
called up Kidgwiga. I did not like my men having been 
kept prisoners in Uganda, and pronounced in public that 
I would not return. It would be an insult to Kamrasi 
my doing so, for I was now in his “house” at his own 
invitation. I wished Bombay would go with him (Kidg- 
wiga) at once to his king, to say I had hoped, when I 
sent Budja with Mabriiki, in the first instance, conveying 
a friendly present from Mtésa, which was done at my 
instigation, and I found Kamrasi acknowledged it by a 
return-present, that there would be no more fighting be- 
tween them. I said I had left England to visit these 
countries for the purpose of opening up a trade, and I 
had no orders to fight my way except with the force of 
friendship. That Rtmanika had accepted my views Kam- 
rasi must be fully aware by Baraka’s having visited him ; 
and that Mtésa did the same must be also evident, else 
he would never have ordered his men to accompany me 
to Gani; and I now fondly trusted that these Waganda 
would be allowed to go with me, when, by the influence 
of trade, all animosity would cease, and friendly relations 
- be restored between the two countries. 

This speech was hardly pronounced when Kajunjti, a 
fine athletic man, dropped suddenly in, nodded a friendly 
recognition to Budja, and wished to know what the Wa- 
ganda meant by taking us back, for the king had heard 
of their intention last night ; and when told by Budja his 
story, and by Kidgwiga mine, he vanished like a shadow. 
Budja, now turning to me, said, “If you won’t go back, 
I shall; for the orders of Mtésa must always be obeyed, 


Ava.] RENEWED DIFFICULTIES. 491 


else lives will be lost ; and I shall tell him that you, since 
leaving his country, and getting your road, have quite 
forgotten him.” “If you give such a message as that,” I 
said, “you will tell a falsehood. Mtésa has no right to 
order me out of another man’s house, to be an enemy with 
one whose friendship I desire. I am not only in honour 
bound to speak with Kamrasi, but I am also bound to 
carry out the orders of my country just as much as you 
are yours ; moreover, I have invited Petherick to come to 
Kamrasi’s by a letter from Karagtié, and it would be ill- 
becoming in me to desert him in the hands of an enemy, 
as he would then certainly find Kamrasi to be if I went 
back now.” Budja then tried the coaxing dodge, saying, 
“There is much reason in your words, but I am sorry you 
do not listen to the king, for he loves you as a brother. 
Did you not go about like two brothers—walking, talk- 
ing, shooting, and even eating together? It was the 
remark of all the Waganda, and the king will be so vexed 
when he finds you have thrown him over. I did not tell 
you before, but the king says, ‘How can I answer Rt- 
manika if Kamrasi injures Bana? Had I known Kam- 
rasi was such a savage, I would not have let Bana go 
there; and I should now have sent a force to take him 
away, only that some accident might arise from it by 
Kamrasi’s taking fright; the road even to Gani shall be 
got by force if necessary.” Then, finding me still per- 
sistent, Budja turned again and threatened us with the 
_ king’s power, saying, “If you choose to disobey, we will 

see whether you ever get the road to Gani or not; for 
Kamrasi is at war on all sides with his brothers, and 
Mtésa will ally himself with them at any moment that 
he wishes, and where will you be then ?” 

Saying this, Budja walked off, muttering that our be- 
ing here would much embarrass Mtésa's actions 5 whilst 
my Wangtiana, who have been attentively listening, like 
timid hares, made up their minds to leave me, and tried, 


492 BAHR EL ABIAD. [1862. 


through Bombay, to obtain a final interview with me, 
saying they knew Mtésa’s power, and disobedience to him 
would only end in taking away all chance of escape. In 
reply, I said I would not listen to them, as I had seen 
enough of them to know it was no use speaking with a 
pack of unreasonable cowards, having tried it so often 
before ; but I sent a message requesting them, if they did 
desert me at last, to leave my guns; and, further, added 
an intimation that, 4s soon as they reached the coast, 
they would be put into prison for three years. The 
scoundrels insolently said “tttendé sétu” (let’s be off), 
rushed to the Waganda drums, and beat the march. 
1st.—Harly in the morning, as Budja drummed the 
home march, I called him up, gave him a glass rain- 
gauge as a letter for Mtésa, and instructed him to say I 
would send a man to Mtésa as soon as I had seen Kam- 
rasi about opening the road; that I trusted he would 
take all the guns from the deserters and keep them for 
me, but the men themselves I wished transported to an 
island on the N’yanza, for I could never allow such 
scoundrels again to enter my camp. It was the effect 
of desertions like these that prevented any white men 
visiting these countries. This said, the Waganda all left 
us, taking with them twenty-eight Wangtiana, armed 
with twenty-two carbines. Amongst them was the 
wretched governess, Manamaka, who had always thought 
me a wonderful magician, because I possessed, in her 
behef, an extraordinary power in inclining all the black 
kings’ hearts to me, and induced them to give the roads 
no one before of my colour had ever attempted to use. 
With a following reduced to twenty men, armed with 
fourteen carbines, I now wished to start for Kamrasi’s, 
but had not even sufficient force to lift the loads. <A little 
while elapsed, and a party of fifty Wanyoro rushed wildly 
into camp, with their spears uplifted, and looked for the 
Waganda, but found them gone. The athletic Kajunjit, 


Serr, | A MESSENGER FROM KAMRASI. 493 


it transpired, had returned to Kamrasi’s, told him our 
story, and received orders to snatch us away from the 
Waganda by force, for the great Mkamma, or king, was 
most anxious to see his white visitors; such men had 
never entered Unyoro before, and neither his father nor 
his father’s fathers had ever been treated with such a 
visitation ; therefore he had sent on these fifty men to 
fall by surprise on the Waganda, and secure us. But 
again, in a little while, about 10 am, Kajunjt, in the 
same wild manner, at the head of 150 warriors, with the 
soldier’s badge—a piece of mbtigt or plantain-leaf tied 
round their heads, and a leather sheath on their spear- 
heads, tufted with cow’s-tail—rushed in exultingly, hav- 
ing found, to their delight, that there was no one left 
to fight with, and that they had gained an easy victory. 
They were certainly a wild set of ragamufiins—as different 
as possible from the smart, well-dressed, quick-of-speech 
Waganda as could be, and anything but prepossessing 
to our eyes. However, they had done their work, and 
I offered them a cow, wishing to have it shot before 
them; but the chief men, probably wishing the whole 
animal to themselves, took it alive, saying the men were 
all the king’s servants, and therefore could not touch a 
morsel. 

Kamrasi expected us to advance next day, when some 
men would go on ahead to announce our arrival, and 
bring a letter which was brought with beads by Gani 
before Baraka’s arrival here. It was shown to Baraka in 
the hope that we-would come by the Karagtté route, but 
not to Mabrtiki, because he came from Uganda. Kaidg- 
wiga informed us that Kamrasi never retaliated on 
Mtésa when he lifted Unyoro cows, though the Waganda 
keep their cattle on the border—which simply meant he 
had not the power of doing so. ‘The twenty remaining 
Wangtiana, conversing over the sudden scheme of the 
deserters, proposed, on one side, sending for them, as, had 


494: BAHR EL ABIAD. [1862.. 


they seen the Wanyoro arrive, they would have changed 
their minds; but the other side said, “ What! those brutes 
who said we should all die here if we stayed, and yet 
dared not face the danger with us, should we now give 
them a helping hand? Never! We told them we would 
share our fate with Bana, and share it we will, for God 
rules everything: every man must die when his time 
comes.” 

We marched for the first time without music, as the 
drum is never allowed to be beaten in. ~ 
Unyoro’ except when the necessities of war 
demand it, or fora dance. » Wanyamtiézi and Wanyoro, 
in addition to our own twenty men, carried the luggage, 
though no one carried more than the smallest article he 
could find. It was a pattern Unyoro march, of only two 
hours’ duration. On arrival at the end, we heard that 
elephants had been seen close by. Grant and I then 
prepared our guns, and found a herd of about a hundred 
feeding on a plain of long grass, dotted here and there by 
small mounds crowned with shrub. The animals appeared 
to be all females, much smaller than the Indian breed; 
yet, though ten were fired at, none were killed, and only 
one made an attempt to charge. I was with the little 
twin Manta at the time, when, stealing along under cover 
of the high grass, I got close to the batch and fired at 
the largest, which sent her round roarmg. The whole of 
them then, greatly alarmed, packed together and began 
sniffing the air with their uplifted trunks, till, ascertain-— 
ing by the smell of the powder that their enemy was in 
front of them, they rolled up their trunks and came close 
to the spot where I was lying under a mound. My scent 
then striking across them, they pulled up short, lifted 
their heads high, and looked down sideways on us. This 
was a bad job. I could not get a proper front shot at 
the boss of any of them, and if I had waited an instant 
we should both have been picked up or trodden to death ; 


To Uttiti, 2d. 


A 


Hh | 
ie 
i 


UMA 


The Hlephants’ Charge. 


Szpt. | DEMONIACAL POSSESSION. 495 


so I let fly at their temples, and instead of killing, sent 
the whole of them rushing away at a much faster pace 
than they came. After this I gave up, because I never 
could separate the ones I had wounded from the rest, and 
thought it cruel to go on damaging more. Thinking over 
it afterwards, I came to the conclusion I ought to have 
put in more powder; for I had, owing to their inferior 
size to the Indian ones, rather despised them, and fired 
at them with the same charge and in the same manner 
as I always did at rhinoceros. Though puzzled at the 
strange sound of the rifle, the elephants seldom ran far, 
packed in herd, and began to graze again. Frij, who 
was always ready at spinning a yarn, told us with much 
gravity that two of my men, Ulédi and Wadi Hamadi, 
. deserters, were possessed of devils (Phépo) at Zanzibar. 
Ulédi, not wishing to be plagued by his Satanic majesty’s 
angels on the march, sacrificed a cow and fed the poor, 
according to the great Phépo’s orders, and had been 
exempted from it; but Wadi Hainadi, who preferred 
taking his chance, had been visited several times: once 
at Ustti, when he was told the journey would be pros- 
perous, only the devil wanted one man’s life, and one 
man would fall sick ; which proved true, for Hassani was 
murdered, and Grant fell sick in Karagtié. The second 
time Wadi Hamadi saw the devil in Karagté, and was 
told one man’s life would be required in Uganda, and 
such also was the case by Karis murder; and a third 
time, in Unyoro, he was possessed, when it was said that 
the journey would be prosperous but protracted. 
3d.—Though we stormed every day at being so shame- 
fully neglected and kept in the jungles, we could not get 
on, nor find out the truth of our position. I asked if 
Kamrasi was afraid’ of us, and looking into his magic 
horn ; and was answered, “No; he is very anxious to see 
you, or he would not have sent six of his highest officers 
to look after you, and prevent the unruly peasantry from 


496 BAHR EL ABIAD. [1862. 


molesting you.” “Then by whose orders are we kept 
here?” “By Kamrasi’s.” “Why does Kamrasi keep us 
here?” “He thinks you are not so near, and men have 
gone to tell him.” “How did we come here from the 
last ground?” “ By Kamrasi’s orders; for nothing can 
be done excepting by his orders.” “Then he must know 
we are here?” “He may not have seen the men we sent 
to him; for unless he shows in public no one can see 
hin.” The whole affair gave us such an opinion of Kam- 
rasi as induced us to think it would have served him 
right had we joined Mtésa and given him a thrashing. 
This, I said, was put in our power by an alliance with 
his refractory brothers ; but Kidewiga only laughed and 
said, “ Nonsense! Kamrasi is the chief of all the countries 
round here—Usoga, Kidi, Chopi, Gani, Uléga, every- 
where; he has only to hold up his hand and thousands 
would come to his assistance.” Kwibéya, the officer of 
the place, presented us with five fowls on the part of 
the king, and some baskets of potatoes. 

Ath.—We halted again, it was said, m order that 
Kwibéya might give us all the king had desired him to 
present. I sent Bombay off with a message to Kamrasi 
explaining everything, and begging for an early interview, 
as I had much of importance to communicate, and wished, 
of all things, to see the letter he had from Gani, as it 
must have come from our dear friends at home. Seven 
goats, flour, and plantains, were now brought to us; and 
as Kidewiga begged for the flour without success, he flew 
into a fit of high indignation because these things were 
given and received without his having first been con- 
sulted. He was the big man and appointed go-between, 
and no one could dispute it, This was rather startling 
news to us, for Vittagtira said he was commander-in-chief; 
Kajunjtt thought himself biggest, so did Kwibéya, and 
even Dr K’yengo’s men justified Budja’s speech. | 

5th and 6th.—Still another halt, with all sorts of ex- 


Sept. | DREAMS AND THEIR INTERPRETATIONS. 497 


cuses. rij, it appeared, dreamt last night that the king 
of Uganda came to fight us for not complying with tig 
orders, and that all my men ran away except Ulédi and 
himself. This, according to the interpretation of the coast, 
would turn out the reverse, otherwise his head must be 
wrong, and, according to local science, should be set right 
again by actual cautery of the temples; and as Grant 
dreamt a letter came from Gani which I opened and ran 
away with, he thought it would turn out no letter at all, 
and therefore Kamrasi had been humbugging us. We 
heard that Bombay had shot a cow before Kamrasi, and 
would not be allowed to return until he had eaten it. 

At last we made a move, but only of two hours’ dura- 
Change ground, tion, through the usual forest, in which ele- 
ae phants walked about as if it were their park. 
We hoped at starting to reach the palace, but found we 
must stop here until the king should send for us. We 
were informed that doubtless he was looking into his 
Uganga, or magic horn, to discover what he had to expect 
from us; and he seemed as yet to have found no ground 
for being afraid of us. Moreover, it is his custom to keep 
visitors waiting on him in this way, for is he not the 
king of kings, the king of Kittara, which includes all the 


countries surrounding Unyoro ? 


ort 


498 UNYORO, [1862. 


CHAPTER XVIL 
UNYORO. 


INVITATION TO THE PALACE AT LAST—JOURNEY TO IT—BOMBAY’S 
VISIT TO KING KAMRASI— OUR REPUTATION AS CANNIBALS — 
RECEPTION AT COURT — ACTING THE PHYSICIAN AGAIN — ROYAL 
MENDICANCY. 


We halted again, but in the evening one of Dr K’yengo’s 
To Chagtizi, on Men came to invite us to the palace. He ex- 
the katt vor, plained that Kamrasi was in a great rage 
oe because we only received seven goats instead 
of thirty, the number he had ordered Kwibéya to give us, 
besides pombé and plantains without limitation. I com- 
plained that Bombay had been shown more respect than 
myself, obtaining an immediate admittance to the king’s 
presence. ‘I'o this he gave two ready answers—that every 
distinction shown my subordinate was a distinction to 
myself, and that we must not expect court etiquette from 
savages. 

9th.—We set off for the palace. This last march dif- 
fered but little from the others. Putting Dr K’yengo’s 
men in front, and going on despite all entreaties to 
stop, we passed the last bit of jungle, sighted the Kidi 
hills, and, in a sea of swampy grass, at. last we stood in 
front of and overlooked the great king’s palace, situated 
N. lat. 1° 37’ 43”, and E. long. 32° 19’ 49”, on a low 
tongue of land between the Kaftt and Nile rivers. It was 


Sepr.] _ KAMRASTS PALACE, 499 


a dumpy, large hut, surrounded by a host of smaller ones, 
and the worst royal residence we had seen since leaving 


} 


1) 
/ 


y 


N 


i) 
Ni 


fl 


King Kamrasi’s Palace, from my hut—Unyoro. 


Uzinza. Here Kajunjit, coming from behind, overtook us, 
and, breathless with running, in the most excited manner 
abused Dr K’yengo’s men for leading us on, and ordered 
us to stop until he saw the king, and ascertained the place 
his majesty wished us to reside in. Recollecting Mtésa’s 
words that Kamrasi placed his guests on the N’yanza, I 
declined going to any place but the palace, which I main- 
tained was my right, and waited for the issue, when 
Kajunjti returned with pombé, and showed us to a small, 
dirty set of huts beyond the Kaftt river—the trunk of the 
Mwérango and N’yanza branches which we crossed in 
Uganda—and trusted this would do for the present, as 
better quarters in the palace would be looked for on the 
morrow. This was a bad beginning, and caused a few of 
the usual anathemas in which our countrymen give vent 
to their irritation. 

Two loads of flour, neatly packed in long strips of rush- 


500 UNYORO. (1862. 


pith, were sent for us “ to consume at once,” as more 
would be given on the morrow. ‘To keep us amused, 
Kidgwiga informed us that Kamrasi and Mtésa—in fact, 
all the Wahtima—came originally from a stock of the 
same tribe dwelling beyond Kidi. All bury their dead 
in the same way, under ground; but the kings are toasted 
first for months till they are like sun-dried meat, when 
the lower jaw is cut out and preserved, covered with 
beads. The royal tombs are put under the charge of 
special officers, who occupy huts erected over them. The 
umbilical cords are preserved from birth, and, at death, 
those of men are placed within the door-frame, whilst 
those of women are buried without—this last act corre- 
sponding, according to Bombay, with the custom of the 
Wahiyow. On the death of any of the great officers of 
state, the finger-bones and hair are also preserved ; or if 
they have died shaven, as sometimes occurs, a bit of their 

mbtigti dress will be preserved in place of the hair. Their 
' families guard their tombs. 

The story we heard at Karagtié, about dogs with horns 
in Unyoro, was confirmed by Kidgwiga, who positively 
assured us that he once saw one in the possession of an 
official person, but it died. The horn then was stuffed 
with magic powder, and, whenever an army was ordered 
for war, it was placed on the war-track for the soldiers to 
step over, in the same way as a child is sacrificed to 
insure victory in Unyamtiézi. Of the Karagté story, 
according to which all the Kidi people sleep in trees, 
Kidgwiga gave me a modified version. He said the 
bachelors alone do so, whilst the married folk dwell in 
houses. As most of these stories have some foundation 
in fact, we presumed that the people of Kidi sometimes 
mount a tree to sleep at night when travelling through 
their forests, where lions are plentiful—but not other- 
wise. 


10th.—I sent Kidgwiga with my compliments to the 


Szpr. | A ROYAL PRESENT. 501 


king, and a request that his majesty would change my 
residence, which was so filthy that I found it necessary 
to pitch a tent, and also that he would favour me with 
an interview after breakfast. The return was a. present 
of twenty cows, ten cocks, two bales of flour, and two 
pots of pombé, to be equally divided between Grant and 
myself, as Kamrasi recognised in us two distinct camps, 
because we approached his country by two different routes 
a smart method for expecting two presents from us, 
which did not succeed, as I thanked for all, Grant being 
“my son” on this occasion. The king also sent his 
excuses, and begged pardon for what happened to us on 
entering his country, saying it could not have taken place 
had we come from Riimanika direct. His fear of the 
Waganda gave rise to it, and he trusted we would forget 
and forgive. To-morrow our residence should be changed, 
and an interview follow, for he desired being friends with 
us just as much as we did with him. 

At last Bombay came back He reported that he had 
not been allowed to leave the palace earlier, though he 
pleaded hard that I expected his return; and the only 
excuse he could extract from the king was, that we were 
coming in charge of many Wakungiti, and he had found it 
necessary to retard our approach in consequence of the 
famine at Chagtizi. His palace proper was not here, but 
three marches westward: he had come here and pitched 
a camp to watch his brothers, who were at war with him. 
Bombay, doing his best to escape, or to hurry my march, 
replied that he was very anxious on our account, because 
the Waganda wished to snatch us away. 

It was no doubt this hint that brought the messenger 
to our relief yesterday; and otherwise we might have 
been kept in the jungle longer. When told by Bombay 
of our treatment on the Nile, the king first said he did 
not think we wished to see him, else we would have 
come direct from Rttmanika; but when asked if Baraka’s 


502 UNYORO. [1862. 


coming with Rtmanika’s officers was not sufficient to 
satisfy him on this point, he hung down his head, and 
evaded the question, saying he had been the making 
of king Mtésa of Uganda; but he had turned out a bad 
fellow, and now robbed him right and left.* The Gani 
letter, supposed to be from Petherick, was now asked 
for, and a suggestion made about opening a trade with 
Gani, but all with the provoking result we had been so 
well accustomed to. “No letter like that referred to had 
ever been received, so that Frij’s interpretation about 
Grant’s lettier-dream was right; and if we wished to go 
to Gani, the king would send men travelling by night, 
for his brothers at war with him lay upon the road. 
As to. the Uganda question, and my desiring him to 
make friends with Mtésa, in hopes that the influence 
of trade would prevent any plundering in future, he 
merely tossed his head. He often said he did not know 
what to think about his guests, now he had got them ; to 
which Bombay, in rather successful imitation of what he 
had heard me say on like occasions, replied, “ If you do 
not like them after you have seen them, cut their heads 
off, for they are all in your hands.” 

11th—wWith great apparent politeness Kamrasi sent 
in the morning to inquire how we had slept. He had 
“heard our cry”—an expression of regal condescension— 
and begged we would not be alarmed, for next morning 
he would see us, and after the meeting change our resi- 
dence, when, should we not approve of wading to his 
palace, he would bridge all the swamps leading up to it ; 
but for the present he wanted two rounds of ball-cartridge 
—one to fire before his women, and the other before his 
officers and a large number of Kidi men who were there 
on a visit. To please this childish king, Bombay was 


* This obviously was an allusion to the way in which the first king of 
Uganda was countenanced by the great king of Kittara, according to the 
tradition given in Chapter IX. 


Sepr. | BOMBAY AND THE KING. 503 


sent with two other of my men, and no sooner arrived 
than a cow was placed before them to be shot. Bombay, 
however, thinking easy comphance would only lead to 
continued demands on our short store of powder, said he 
had no order to shoot cows, and declined. <A strong 
debate ensued, which Bombay, by his own account, turned 
to advantage by saying, “What use is there in shooting 
cows? we have lots of meat; what we want is flour to 
eat with it.” To which the great king retorted, “If you 
have not got flour, that is not my fault, for I ordered your 
master to come slowly, and to bring provisions along with 
him.” 

' Then getting impatient, as all his visitors wanted sport, 
he ordered the cow out again, and insisted on my men 
shooting at it, saying at the same time to his Kidi visitors, 
boastfully, “ Now I will show you what devils these Wan- 
etiana are: with firearms they can kill a cow with one 
bullet ; and as they are going to Gani, I advise you not to 
meddle with them.” The Kidi visitors said, “ Nonsense ; 
we don’t believe in their power, but we will see.” Irate 
at his defeat, Bombay gave orders to the men to fire over 
the cow, and told Kamrasi why he had done so—Bana 
would be angry with him. “ Well,” said the king of kings, 
“if that is true, go back to your master, tell him you have 
disappointed me before these men, and obtain permission 
to shoot the cow in the morning ; after which, should you 
succeed, your master can come after breakfast to see me— 
but for the present, take him this pot of pombé.” 

12th.—To back Bombay in what he had said, I gave 
him two more cartridges to shoot the cow with, and 
orders as well to keep Kamrasi to his word about the 
oft-promised interview and change of residence. He 
gave me the following account on his return :—Upwards 
of a thousand spectators were present when he killed the 
cow, putting both bullets into her, and all in a voice, 
as soon as they saw the effect of the shot, shouted in 


504 UNYORO. [1862. 


amazement; the Kidi visitors, all terror-stricken, erying 
out, as they clasped their breasts, “Oh, great king, do 
allow us to return to our country, for you have indeed 
got a new species of man with you, and we are greatly 
afraid!”—a lot of humbug and affectation to flatter the 
king, which pleased him greatly. It was not sufficient, 
however, to make him forget his regal pride; for though 
Bombay pleaded hard for our going to see him, and for a 
change of residence, the immovable king, to maintain the 
imperial state he had assumed as “king of kings,” only 
said, “ What difference does it make whether your master 
sees me to-day or to-morrow? If he wants to communi- 
~ cate about the road to Gani, his property at Karagtié, or 
his guns at Uganda, he can do so as well through the 
medium of my officers as with me direct, and I will send 
men whenever he wishes to do so. Perhaps you don’t 
know, but I expect men from Gani every day, who took a 
present of slaves, ivory, and monkey-skins to the foreigners 
residing there, who, in the first instance, sent me a neck- 
lace of beads [showing them] by some men who wore — 
clothes. They said white men were coming from Karagté, 
and requested the beads might be shown them should they 
do so. They left this two moons before Baraka arrived 
here, and I told them the white men would not come here, 
as I heard they had gone to Uganda.” 

Bombay then, finding the king very communicative, 
went at him for his inhospitality towards us, his turning 
us back from his country twice, and now, after inviting 
us, treating us as Stwarora did. On this he gave, by 
Bombay’s account, the following curious reason for his 
conduct :—* You don’t understand the matter. At the 
time the white men were living in Uganda, many of the 
people who had seen them there came and described them 
as such monsters, they ate up mountains and drank the 
N’yanza dry ; and although they fed\on both beef and 
mutton, they were not satisfied until they got a dish of 


Szpr. | ROYAL EXCUSES. 505 . 


the ‘tender parts’ of human beings three times a-day. 
Now, I was extremely anxious to see men of such won- 
derful natures. I could have stood their mountain-eating 
and N’yanza-drinking capacities, but on no consideration 
would I submit to sacrifice my subjects to their appetites, 
and for this reason I first sent to turn them back; but 
afterwards, on hearing from Dr K’yengo’s men that, 
although the white men had travelled all through their 
country, and brought all the pretty and wonderful things 
of the world there, they had never heard such monstrous 
imputations cast upon them, I sent a second time to call 
them on: these are the facts of the case. Now, with 
regard to your accusation of my treating them badly, it 
is all their own fault. I ordered them to advance slowly 
and pick up food by the way, as there is a famine here ; 
but they, instead, hurried on against my wishes. That 
they want to see and give me presents you have told me 
repeatedly—so do I them; for J want them to teach me 
the way to shoot, and when that is accomplished, I will 
take them to an island near Kidi, where there are some 
men {his refractory brothers] whom I wish to frighten 
away with guns; but still there is no hurry,—they can 
come when I choose to call them, and not before.” Bom- 
bay to this said, “I cannot deliver such a message to 
Bana; I have told so many falsehoods about your saying 
you will have an interview to-morrow, I shall only catch 
a flogging ;” and forthwith departed. 

13th.—More disgusted with Kamrasi than ever, I called 
Kidgwiga up, and told him I was led to expect from Rt- 
manika that I should find his king a good and reasonable 
man, which I believed, considering it was said by an un- 
prejudiced person. Mtésa, on the contrary, told me Kam- 
rasi treated all his guests with disrespect, sending them 
to the farther side of the N’yanza. I now found his 
enemy more truthful than his friend, and wished him to 
betoldso. “For the future, I should never,” I said, “men- 


506 UNYORO. [1862.- 


tion his name again, but wait until his fear of me had 
vanished ; for he quite forgot his true dignity as a host 
and king in his surprise and fear, merely because we were 
in a hurry and desired to see him.” He was reported to- 
day, by the way, to be drunk. 

As nothing could be done yesterday, in consequence of 
Change to West the king being in his cups, the Wakungit con- 
2 veyed my message to-day, but with the usual 
effect, till a diplomatic idea struck me, and I sent another 
messenger to say, if our residence was not changed at 
once, both Grant and myself had made up our minds to 
cut off our hair and blacken our faces, so that the king of 
all kings should have no more cause to fearus. Ignoring 
his claims to imperial rank, I maintained that his reason 
_ for ill-treating us must be fear,—it could be nothing else. 

This message acted like magic; for he fully believed we 
would do as we said, and disappoint him altogether of the 
strange sight of us as pure white men. The reply was, 
Kamrasi would not have us disfigured in this way for all 
‘the world ; men were appointed to convey our traps to 
the west end at once; and Kidgwiga, Vittagtira, and 
Kajunjti rushed over to give us the news in all haste lest 
we should execute our threat, and they were glad to find 
us with our faces unchanged. I now gave one cow to the 
head of Dr K’yengo’s party, and one to the head of Rt- 
manika’s men, because I saw it was through their instru- 
mentality we gained admittance in the country; and we 
changed residence to the west end of Chagtizi, and found 
there comfortable huts close to the Kaft, which ran im- 
mediately between us and the palace. 

Still our position in Unyoro was not a pleasant one. 
In a long field of grass, as high as the neck, and half 
under water, so that no walks could be taken, we had 
nothing to see but Kamrasi’s miserable huts and a few 
distant conical hills, of which one, Udongo, we conceive, 
represents the Padongo of Brun-Bollet, placed by him in 1° 


’ Sept. | THE KING STILL INVISIBLE. 507 


south latitude, and 35° east longitude. We were scarcely 
inside our new dwelling when Kamrasi sent a cheer of two 
pots pombé, five fowls, and two bunches of plantains, 
hoping we were now satisfied with his favour; but he 
damped the whole in a moment again, by asking for a 
many-bladed knife which his officers had seen in Grant’s 
possession. I took what he sent, from fear of giving 
offence, but replied that I was surprised the great king 
should wish to see my property before seeing myself, and 
although I attached no more value to my property than 
he did to his, I could not demean myself by sending him 
trifles in that way. However, should he, after hearing my 
sentiments, still persist in asking for the knife to be sent 
by the hands of a black man, I would pack it up with all 
the things I had brought for him, and send them by a black 
man, judging that he liked black men more than white. 

Dr K’yengo’s men then informed us they had been twice 
sent with an army of Wanyoro to attack the king’s bro- 
thers, on a river-island north of this about three days’ 
journey, but each time it ended in nothing. You fancy 
yourself, they said, in a magnificent army, but the enemy 
no sooner turn out than the cowardly Wanyoro fly, and 
sacrifice their ally as soon as not into the hands of the 
opponents. They said Kamrasi would now expect us to 
attack them with our guns. Rionga was the head of the 
rebels ; there were formerly five, but now only two of the 
brothers remained. 

15th.—Kamrasi, after inquiring after our health, and 
how we had slept, through a large deputation of head men, 
alluded to the knife question of yesterday, thinking it 
very strange that after giving me such nice food I should 
deny him the gratification of simply looking at a knife ; 
he did not intend to keep it if it was not brought for him, 
but merely to look at and return it. To my reply of 
yesterday I added, I had been led, before entering Unyoro, 
to regard Kamrasi as the king of all kings—the greatest 


508 UNYORO. [1862. 


king that ever was, and one worthy to be my father ; but 
now, as he expected me to amuse him with toys, he had 
lowered himself in my estimation to the position of being 
my child. To this the sages said, “Bana speaks beauti- 
fully, feelingly, and moderately. Of course he is displeased 
at seeing his property preferred before himself; all the 
right is on his side: we will now return and see what can 
be done—though none but white men in their greatness 
dare send such messages to our king.” 

Dr K’yengo’s men were now attacked by Kidgwiga for 
having taken a cow from me yesterday,and told they should 
not eat it, because both they and myself were the king’s 
cuests, and it ill became one to eat that which was given 
as a dinner for the other. Fortunately, foreseeing this 
kind of policy, as Kamrasi had been watching our actions, 
I invariably gave in presents those cows which came with 
us from Uganda, and therefore defied any one to meddle 
with them. This elicited the true facts of the case. Dr 
K’yengo’s men had been sent out to our camp to observe 
if anybody received presents from us, as Kamrasi feared 
his subjects would have the fleecing of us before his turn 
came ; and these men had reported the two cows given by 
me as mentioned above. Kamrasi no sooner heard of this 
than he took the cows and kept them himself. In their 
justification, Dr K’yengo’s men said that had they not 
been in the country before us, Kamrasi would not have 
had such guests at all; for when he asked them if the 
Waganda reports about our cannibalism and other mon- 
strosities were true, their head man denied it all, offered 
to stand security for our actions, and told the king if he 
found us cannibals he might make a Mohammedan of 
him, and sealed the statement-with his oath by throwing 
down his shield and bow and walking over them. To 
this Kamrasi was said to have replied, “I will accept 
your statements, but you must remain with me until 
they come.” 


Serr. ] A DISTANT JOURNEY. 509 


Kajunjti came with orders to say Kamrasi would seize 
anybody found staring at us. I requested a definite an- 
swer would be given as regards Kamrasi’s seeing us. Dr 
K’yengo’s men then said they were kept a week waiting 
before they could obtain an interview, whilst Kajunju 
excused his king by saying, “ At present the court is full 
of Kidi, Chopi, Gani, and other visitors, who he does 
not wish should see you, as some may be enemies in dis- 
guise. They are all now taking presents of cows from 
Kamrasi, and going to their homes, aud, as soon as they 
are disposed of, your turn will come.” 

16th—We kept quiet all day, to see what effect that 
would have upon the king. Kidegwiga told us that, when 
he was a lad, Kamrasi sent him with a large party of Wan- 
yoro to visit a king who lived close to a high mountain, 
two months’ journey distant, to the east or south-east of 
this, and beg for a magic horn, as that king’s doctor 
was peculiarly famed for his skill as a magician. The 
party carried with them 600 majembé (iron spades), two 
of which expended daily paid for their board and lodg- 
ings on the way. The horn applied for was sent by a 
special messenger to Kamrasi, who, in return, sent one 
of his horns ; from which date, the two kings, whenever 
one of them wishes to communicate with the other, sends, 
on the messenger’s neck, the horn that had been given 
him, which both serves for credentials and security, as no 
one dare touch a Mbakka with one of these horns upon 
his neck. 

A common source of conversation among our men now 
was the desertion of their comrades, all fancying how 
bitterly they would repent it when they heard how we 
had succeeded, eating beef every day; and Ulédi now, in 
a joking manner, abused Mekttitb for having urged him 
to desert. He would not leave Bana, and if he had not 
stopped, Mektttb would have gone, for they both served 
one master at Zanzibar, and therefore were like brothers ; 


510 UNYORO. [1862. 


whilst Mekttib, laughing over the matter as if it were a 
good joke, said, “I packed up my things to go, it 1s true ; 
but I reflected if I got back to the coast Said Majid would 
only make a slave of me again.” M’yinzuggi, the head of 
Riimanika’s party, gave me to-day a tippet monkey-skin 
in return for the cow I had given him on the 14th. 
These men, taking their natures from.their king Rt- 
manika, are by far the most gentle, polite, and attentive 
of any black men we have travelled amongst. 

17th.—Tired and out of patience with our prison—a 
river of crocodiles on one side, and swamps in every 
other direction, while we could not go out shooting with- 
out a specific order from the king—I sent Kidgwiga and 
Kajunji to inform Kamrasi that we could bear this life 
no longer. As he did not wish to see white men, our re- 
siding here could be of no earthly use. I hoped he would 
accept our present from Bombay, and give us leave to 
depart for Gani. The Wakungt, who thought, as well as 
ourselves, that we were in nothing better than a prison, 
hurried off with the message, and soon returned with a 
message from their king that he was busily engaged de- 
corating his palace to give us a triumphant reception ; 
for he was anxious to pay us more respect than anybody 
who had ever visited him before. We should have seen 
him yesterday, only that it raimed; and, as a precaution 
against our meeting being broken up, a shed was being 
built. He could not hear of our leaving the country 
without seeing him. 

18¢h.—At last we were summoned to attend the king’s 
levee ; but the suspicious creature wished his officers to 
inspect the things we had brought for him before we went 
there. Here was another hitch, I could not submit to 
such disrespectful suspicions, but if he wished Bombay to 
convey my present to him, I saw no harm in the proposi- 
tion. The king waived the point, and we all started, 


Srpr. | FIRST INTERVIEW WITH KAMRASI, 511 


carrying as a present the things enumerated in the note.* 
The Union Jack led the way. At the ferry three shots 
were fired, when, stepping into two large canoes, we all 
went across the Kaft together, and found, to our surprise, 
a small hut built for the reception, low down on the oppo- 
site bank, where no strange eyes could see us. 

Within this, sitting on a low wooden stool placed upon 
a double matting of skins — cows’ below and leopards’ 
above—on an elevated platform of grass, was the great 
king Kamrasi, looking, enshrouded in his mbtigt dress, 
for all the world like a pope in state—calm and actionless. 
One bracelet of fine-twisted brass wire adorned his left 
wrist, and his hair, half an inch long, was worked up into 
small peppercorn-like knobs by rubbing the hand cir- 
cularly over the crown of the head. His eyes were long, 
face narrow, and nose prominent, after the true fashion of 
his breed ; and though a finely-made man, considerably 
above six feet high; he was not so large as Rttmanika. A 
cow-skin, stretched out and fastened to the roof, acted as 
a canopy to prevent dust falling, and a curtain of mbtigt 
concealed the lower parts of the hut, in front of which, on 
both sides of the king, sat about a dozen head men. 

This was all. We entered and took seats on our own 
iron stools, whilst Bombay placed all the presents upon 
the ground before the throne. As no greetings were ex- 
changed, and all at first remained as silent as death, I 
commenced, after asking about his health, by saying I had 
journeyed six long years (by the African computation of 
five mouths in the year) for the pleasure of this meeting, 


* 1 double rifle, 1 block-tin box, 1 red blanket, 1 brown do., 10 copper 
wire, 4 socks full of different-coloured minute beads, 2 socks full of blue 
and white pigeon eggs, 1 Rodgers’s pen-knife, 2 books, 1 elastic circle, 1 red 
handkerchief, 1 bag gun-caps, 1 pair scissors, 1 pomatum-pot, 1 quart bottle, 
1 powder-flask, 7 lb. powder, 1 dressing-case, 1 blacking-box, 1 brass lock 
and key, 4 brass handles, 8 brass sockets, 7 chintz, 7 bindera, 1 red bag, 
1 pair glass spectacles, 1 lucifer-box. 


512 UNYORO. [1862. 


coming by Karagiie é instead of by the Nile, because the 
“Wanya Béri” (Bari people at Gondokoro) had defeated 
the projects of all former attempts made by white men to 
reach Unyoro. The purpose of my coming was to ascer- 
tain whether his majesty would like to trade with our 
country, exchanging ivory for articles of Huropean manu- 
facture ; as, should he do so, merchants would come here 
in the same way as they went from Zanzibar to Karagité. 
Ritmanika-and Mtésa were both anxious for trade, and 
I felt sorry he would not listen to my advice and make 
friends with Mtésa; for unless the influence of trade was 
brought in to check the Waganda from pillaging the 
country, nothing would do so. 

Kamrasi, in a very quiet, mild manner, instead of an- 
swering the question, told us of the absurd stories which 
he had heard from the Waganda, said he did not believe 
them, else his rivers, deprived of their fountains, would 
have run dry ; and he thought, if we did eat hills and the 
tender parts of mankind, we should have had enough to 
satisfy our appetites before we reached Unyoro. Now, 
however, he was glad to see that, although our hair was 
straight and our faces white, we still possessed re and 
feet like other men. 

The present was then opened, and everything in turn 
placed upon the red blanket. The goggles created some 
mirth ; so did the scissors, as Bombay, to show their use, 
clipped his beard, and the lucifers were considered a won- 
der; but the king scarcely moved or uttered any remarks 
till all was over, when, at the instigation of the courtiers, 
my chronometer was asked for and shown. This wonder- 
ful instrument, said the officers (mistaking it for my 
compass), was the magic horn by which the white men 
found their way everywhere. Kamrasi said he must have 
it, for, besides it, the gun was the only thing new to him. 
The chronometer, however, I said, was the only one left, 
and could not possibly be parted with ; though, if Kamrasi 


Serr. | INTERVIEW WITH THE KING. 513 


liked to send men to Gani, a new one could be obtained 
for him. 

Then, changing the subject, much to my relief, Kamrasi 
asked Bombay, “ Who governs England?” “A woman.” 
“Has she any children?” “ Yes,” said Bombay, with ready 
impudence ; “these are two of them” (pointing to Grant 
and myself). That settled, Kamrasi wished to know if 
we had any speckled cows, or cows of any peculiar 
colour, and would we like to change four large cows for 
four small ones, as he coveted some of ours. This was a 
staggerer. We had totally failed, then, in conveying to 
this stupid king the impression that we were not mere 
traders, ready to bargain with him. We would present 
him with cows if we had such as he wanted, but we could 
not bargain. The meeting then broke up in the same 
chilling manner as it began, and we returned as we came, 
but no sooner reached home than four pots of pombé were 
sent us, with a hope that we had arrived all safely. The 
present gave great satisfaction. The Wangtiana accused 
Frij of having “unclean hands,” because the beef had not 
lasted so long as it should do—it being a notable fact in 
Mussulman creed, that unless the man’s hands are pure 
who cuts the throat of an animal, its flesh will not last 
fresh half the ordinary time. 

19th.—As the presents given yesterday occupied the 
king’s mind too much for other business, I now sent to 
offer him one-third of the guns left in Uganda, provided 
he would send some messengers with one of my men to 
ask Mtésa for them, and also the same proportion of the 
sixty loads of property left in charge of Rttmanika at 
Karagiié, if he would send the requisite number of porters 
for its removal. But of all things, I said, I most wished 
to send a letter to Petherick at Gani, to apprise him of 
our whereabouts, for he must have been four years wait- 
ing our arrival there, and by the same opportunity I 

2K 


514 UNYORO. [1862. 


would get a watch for the king. He sent us to-day two 
pots of pombé, one sack of salt, and what might be called 
a screw of butter, with an assurance that the half of 
everything which came to his house—and everything was 
brought from great distances in boats—he would give 
me; but for the present the only thing he was in need of 
was some medicine or stimulants. Further, I need be 
under no apprehension if I did not find men at once to 
go on the three respective journeys ; it should be all done 
in good time, for he loved me much, and desired to show 
us so much respect that his name should be celebrated for 
it in songs of praise until he was bowed down by years, 
and even after death it should be remembered. 

I ascertained then that the salt, which was very white 
and pure, came from an island on the Little Ltta Nzigé, 
about sixty miles west from the Chagtizi palace, where the 
lake is said to be forty or fifty miles wide. It is the same 
piece of water we heard of in Karaeté as the Little Lita 
Nzigé, beyond Utttmbi; and the same story of Unyoro 
beimg an island circumscribed by it and the Victoria 
N’yanza connected by the Nile, is related here, showing 
that both the Karagtié and Unyoro people, as indeed all 
negroes and Arabs, have the common defect in their 
language, of using the same word for a peninsula and an 
island. The Waijasi—of whom we saw a specimen in the 
shape of an old woman, with her upper lip edged with a 
row of small holes, at Karagtté—occupy a large island 
on this lake named Gasi, and sometimes come to visit 
Kamrasi. Ugungti, a dependency of Kamrasi’s, occupies 
this side the lake, and on the opposite side is Ulégga ; 
beyond which, in about 2° N. lat. and 28° E. long., is the 
country of Namachi; and further west still about 2°, the 
Wilyanwantii, or cannibals, who, according to the report 
both here and at Karagté, “bury cows but eat men.” 
These distant people pay their homage to Kamrasi, though 
they have six degrees of longitude to travel over, They 


Serr. | A RACE OF CANNIBALS. 515 


are, I believe, a portion of the N’yam N’yams—another 
name for cannibal—whose country Petherick said he 
entered in 1857-58. Among the other wild legends 
about this people, it was said that the Wilyanwantti, 
in making brotherhood, exchanged their blood by drink- 
ing at one another’s veins; and, in lieu of butter with 
their porridge, they smear it with the fat of fried human 
flesh. 

20th.—I had intended for to-day an expedition to the 
lake ; but Kamrasi, harbouring a wicked design that we 
should help in an attack on his brothers, said there was 
plenty of time to think of that; we would only find that 
all the waters united go to Gani, and he wished us to be 
his guests for three or four months at least. Fifty Gani 
men had just arrived to inform him that Rionga had 
lately sent ten slaves and ten ivory tusks to Petherick’s 
post, to purchase a gun; but the answer was, that a 
thousand times as much would not purchase a weapon 
that might be used against us; for our arrival with Kam- 
rasi had been heard of, and nothing would be done to 
jeopardise our road. 

To talk over this matter, the king invited us to mect 
him. We went as before, minus the flag and firing, and 
met a similar reception. The Gani news was talked over, 
and we proposed sending Bombay with a letter at once. 
I could get no answer ; so, to pass the time, we wished to 
know from the king’s own lips if he had prevented Baraka 
from going to Gani, as he had carried orders from Ri- 
manika as well as from myself to visit Kamrasi, to give 
him fifty egg-beads, seventy necklaces of mtendé, and 
seventy necklaces of kttttiamnazi beads, and then to pass 
on to Gani and give its chief fifty egg-beads and forty 
necklaces of ktittiamnazi. Kamrasi replied, “I did not 
allow him to go, because I heard you had gone to Uganda;” 
and Dr K’yengo’s men happening to be present, added, 
“Baraka used up all the beads save forty which he gave 


516 UNYORO. ~ [1862. 


to Kamrasi, living upon goats all the way; and when he 
left, took back a tusk of ivory.” 

This little controversy was amusing, but did not suit 
Kamrasi, who had his eye on a certain valuable possession 
of mine. He made his approach towards it by degrees, 
beginning with a truly royal speech thus: “I am the king 
of all these countries, even including Uganda and Kidi— 
though the Kidi people are such savages they obey no 
man’s orders—and you are great men also, sitting on 
chairs before kings; it therefore ill becomes us to talk of 
such trifles as beads, especially as I know if you ever 
return this way I shall get more from you.” “ Begging 
your majesty’s pardon,” I said, “ the mention of beads 
only fell in the way of our talk like stones in a walk; our 
motive being to get at the truth of what Baraka did and 
said here, as his conduct in returning after receiving 
strict orders from Rttmanika and ourselves to open the 
road, is a perfect enigma to us. We could not have 
entered Unyoro at all excepting through Uganda, and 
we could not have put foot in Uganda without visiting 
its king.” Without deigning to answer, Kamrasi, in the 
metaphorical language of a black man, said, “ It would 
be unbecoming of me to keep secrets from you, and there- 
fore [ will tell you at once; I am sadly afflicted with a 
disorder which you alone can cure.” “ What is it, your 
majesty? I can see nothing in your face; it may perhaps 
require a private inspection.” “ My heart,” he said, “is 
troubled, because you will not give me your magic horn— 
the thing, | mean, in your pocket, which you pulled out 
one day when Budja and Vittagtira were discussing the 
way; and you no sooner looked at it than you said, ‘ That 
is the way to the palace.” 

So! the sly fellow has been angling for. the chronometer 
all this time, and I can get nothing out of him until 
he has got it—the road to the lake, the road to Gani, 
everything seemed risked on his getting my watch-—a 


Szpr. | STRUGGLE FOR THE CHRONOMETER, , S17 


chronometer worth £50, which would be spoilt in his 
hands in one day. To undeceive him, and tell him it was 
the compass which I looked at and not the watch, I knew 
would only end with my losing that instrument as well ; so 
I told him it was not my guide, but a time-keeper, made 
for the purpose of knowing what time to eat my dinner 
by. It was the only chronometer I had with me; and I 
begged he would have patience until Bombay returned 
from Gani with another, when he should have the option 
of taking this or the new one. “No; I must have the 
one in your pocket; pull it out and show it.” This was 
done, and I placed it on the ground, saying, “The instru- 
ment is yours, but I must keep it until another one comes.” 
“No; I must have it now, and will send it you three times 
every day to look at.” 

The watch went, gold chain and all, without any bless- 
ings following it; and the horrid king asked if I could 
make up another magic horn, for he hoped he had de- 
prived us of the power of travelling, and plumed himself 
on the notion that the glory of opening the road would 
devolve upon himself. When I told him that to purchase 
another would cost five hundred cows, the whole party 
were more confirmed than ever as to its magical powers ; 
for who in his senses would give five hundred cows for the 
mere gratification of seeing at what time his dinner should 
be eaten? Thus ended.the second meeting. Kamrasi now 
said the Gani men would feast on beef to-morrow, and the 
next day be ready to start with my men for Petherick’s 
camp. He then accompanied us to the boats, spear in 
hand, and saw us cross the water. Long tail-hairs of the 
giraffe surrounded his neck, on which little balls and other 
ornaments of minute beads, after the Uganda fashion, 
were worked. In the evening four pots of pombé and a 
pack of flour were brought, together with the chronometer, 
which was sent to be wound up—damaged of course—the 
seconds-hand had been dislodged. 


518 UNYORO. [1862. 


21st—I heard from Kidgwiga that some of those Gani 
men now ordered to go with Bombay had actually been 
visiting here when the latter shot his first cow at the 
palace, but had gone to their homes to give information 
of us, and had returned again. Eager to get on with my 
journey, and see European faces again, I besought the 
king to let us depart, as our work was ‘all finished here, 
since he had assured us he would like to trade with 
England. The N’yanswengé—meaning Petherick’s party 
—who have hitherto been afraid to come here, would do 
so now, when they had seen us pass safely down, and 
could receive my guns and property left to come from 
Uganda and Karagiié, which we ourselves could not wait 
for. Kamrasi, thinking me angry for his having taken 
the watch so rudely out of my pocket, took fright at the 
message, sent some of his attendants quickly back to me, 
requesting me to keep the instrument until another ar- 
rived, and begged I would never say I wished to leave 
his house again. 

22d.—Kamrasi sent to say Bombay was not to start 
to-day, but to-morrow, so we put the screw on again, and 
said we must go at once ; if he would give us guides to 
Gani, we would return him his twenty cows and seven 
goats with pleasure. I let him understand we suspected 
he was keeping us here to fight his brothers, and told him 
he must at once know we would never lift hand against 
them. It was contrary to the laws of ourland. “I have 
got no orders to enter into black men’s quarrels, and my 
mother” (the Queen), “whom I see every night in my sleep 
calling me home, would be very angry if she heard of it. 
Rtimanika once asked me to fight his brothers Rogéro 
and M’yongo, but my only ‘reply to all had been the 
same —I have no orders to fight with, only to make 
friends of, the great kings of Africa.” 

The game seemed now to be won. At once Kamrasi 
ordered Bombay to prepare for the journey. Five Wan- 


Serr. | DEPARTURE OF BOMBAY. 519 


yoro, five Chopi men, and five Gani men, were to escort 
him. There was no objection to his c carrying arms. The 
moment he returned, which ought to be in little more 
than a fortnight, we would all go together. An earnest 
request was at the same time made that I would not 
bully him in the mean time with any more applications to 
depart. So Bombay and Mabrtki, carrying their muskets, 
and a map and letter for Petherick, departed. 

23d and 24th.— Kamrasi, presuming he had gained 
favour in our eyes, sent, begging to know how we had 
slept, and said he would like us to inform him what part 
of his journey Bombay had this morning reached—a fact 
which he had no doubt must be divinable through the 
medium of our books. The reply was, that Bombay’s 
luck was so good we had no doubt regarding his success; 
but now he had gone, and our days here were numbered, 
we should like to see the palace, his fat wives and chil- 
dren, as well as the Wanyoro’s dances, and all the gaiety 
of the place. We did not think our reception-hut by the 
river sufficiently dignified, and our residence here was alto- 
gether like that of prisoners—seeing no one, knowing no 
one. In answer to this, Kamrasi sent one pot of pombé 
and five fowls, begging we would not be alarmed ; we 
should see everything in good time, if we would but have 
patience, for he considered us very great men, as he was 
a great man himself, and we had come at his invitation. 
He must request, in the mean time, that we would send 
no more messages by his officers, as such messages are 
never Carel, properly. At present there was a great 
deal of business in the palace. 

We asked for some butter, but could get none, as all 
the milk in the palace was consumed by the wives and 
children, drinking all day long, to make themselves im- 
movably fat. 

25th.—In the morning, the commander-in-chief wished 
us to cast a horoscope, and see where Bombay was, and if 


520 UNYORO. [1862. 


he were getting on well. That being negatived, he told 
us to put our hut in order, as Kamrasi was coming to see 
us. Accordingly we made everything as smart as pos- 
sible, hanging the room round with maps, horns, and 
skins of animals, and placed a large box covered with a 
red blanket, as a throne for the king to sit upon. As he 
advanced, my men, forming a guard of honour, fired three 
shots immediately on his setting foot upon our side the 
river; whilst Frij, with his boatswain’s whistle, piped the 
‘Rogue’s March, to prepare us for his majesty’s approach. 
We saluted him, hat in hand, and, leading the way, 
showed him in. He was pleased to be’ complimentary, 
remarking, what Waséja (fine men) we were, and took 
his seat. We sat on smaller boxes, to appear humble, 
whilst his escort of black “swells” filled the doorway, 
squatting on the ground, so as to stop the light and inter- 
fere with our decorations. 

After the first salutations, the king remarked the head 
of a nsamma buck, and handled it; then noticed my 
mosquito-curtains hanging over the bed, and begged for 
them. He was told they could not be given until Bombay 
returned, as the mosquitoes would eat us up. “ But there 
were two,” said the escort, “ for we have seen one in the 
other hut.” That was true ; but were there not two white 
men? However, if the king wanted gauze, here was a 
smart gauze veil—and the veil vanished at once. The 
iron camp-bed was next inspected, and admired; then 
the sextant, which was coveted and begged for, but with- 
out success, much to the astonishment of the king, as his 
attendants had led him to expect he would get anything 
he asked for. Then the thermometers were wanted and 
refused ; also table-knives, spoons, forks, and even cook- 
ing-pots, for we had no others, and could not part with 
them. The books of birds and animals had next to be 
seen, and being admired were covetec, the king offering 
one of the books I first gave him in exchange for one of 


Szpr. | A ROYAL VISIT. 521 


these. In fact, he wanted to fleece us of everything ; so, 
to shut him up, I said I would not part with one bird 
for one hundred tusks of ivory; they were all the collec- 
tions I had made in Africa, and if I parted with them my 
journey would go for nothing; but if he wanted a few 
drawings of birds I would do some for him—at present I 
wished to speak to him. “Well, what is it? we are all 
attention.” “I wish to know positively if you would 
like English traders to come here regularly, as the Arabs 
do to trade at Karagtté? and if so, would you give me a 
pembé (magic horn) as a warrant, that everybody may 
know Kamrasi, king of Unyoro, desires it ?” 

Kamrasi replied, “I like your proposition very much ; 
you shall have the horn you ask for, either large or small, 
just as you please; and after you have gone, should we 
hear any English are at Gani wishing to come here, as 
my brothers are in the way we will advance with spears 
whilst they approach with guns, and, between us both, 
my brothers must fly—for I myself will head the expedi- 
tion. But now you have-had your say I will have mine 
if you will listen.” “All right, your majesty ; what is 
it?” “TI am constantly stricken with fever and pains, 
for which I know no remedy but cautery ; my children 
die young; my family is not large enough to uphold my 
dignity and station in life ; in fact, [ am infirm and want 
stimulants, and I wish you to prescribe for me, which, 
considering you have found your way to this, where no- 
body came before, must be easy to you.” Two pills and 
a draught for the morning were given as a preliminary 
measure, argument being of no avail; and to our delight 
the king said it was time to go. . 

We jumped off our seats to show him the way, hoping 
our persecutions were over ; but still he sat, and sat, until 
at length, finding we did not take the hint to give him a 
parting present, he said, “I never visited any big mats 
house without taking home some trifle to show my wife 


522 , UNYORO. [1862. 


and children.” “Indeed, great kine! then you did not 
come to visit us, but to beg, eh? You shall have nothing, 
positively nothing ; for we will not have it said the king 
did not come to see us, but to beg.” Kamrasi’s face 
changed colour; he angrily said, “Irokh togend” (let us 
rise and go), and forthwith walked straight out of the hut. 
Frij piped, but no guns fired ; and as he-asked the reason 
why, he was told it would be offensive to say we were 
glad he was going. The king was evidently not pleased, 
for no pombé came to-day. 


Serr. | NEW MOON CEREMONIES. 523 


Ot API Re x VII 


UN YORO—Continued. 


THE CEREMONIES OF THE NEW MOON—KAMRASIS RULE AND 
DISCIPLINE—AN EMBASSY FROM UGANDA, AND ITS RESULTS — 
THE REBELLIOUS BROTHERS —- AN AFRICAN SORCERER AND 
HIS INCANTATIONS—THE KAMRAVIONA OF UNYORO—BURIAL 
CUSTOMS—ETHIOPIAN LEGENDS—COMPLICATED DIPLOMACY FOR 
OUR DETENTION—PROPOSAL TO SEND PRINCES TO ENGLAND — 
WE GET AWAY. 


26th.—WeE found that the palace was shut up in conse- 
quence of the new moon, seen for the first time last even- 
ing; and incessant drumming was the order of the day. 
Still, private interviews might be granted, and I sent to 
inquire after the state of the king’s health, The reply 
was, that the medicine had not been taken, and the king 
was very angry because nothing was given him when he 
took the trouble to call on us. He never called at a big 
man’s house and left it mwiko (empty-handed) before ; if 
there was nothing else to dispose of, could Bana not have 
given him a bag of beads ¢ 

: To save us from this kind of incessant annoyance, I 
now thought it would be our best policy to mount the 
high horse and bully him. Accordingly, we tied up a bag 
of the commonest mixed beads, added the king’s chrono- 
meter, and sent them to Kamrasi with a violent message 
that we were thoroughly disgusted with all that had 


524 UNYORO. [1862, 


happened ; the beads were for the poor beggar who came 
to our house yesterday, not to see us, but to beg; and as 
we did not desire the acquaintance of beggars, we had 
made up our minds never to call again, nor receive any 
more bread or wine from the king. 

This appeared to be a hit. Kamrasi, evidently taken 
aback, said, if he thought he should have offended us by 
begging, he would not have begged. He was not a poor 
man, for he had many ¢ows, but he was a beggar, of course, 
when beads were in the question ; and, having unwittingly 
offended, as he desired our friendship, he trusted his 
offence would be forgiven. On opening the chronometer, 
he again wrenched back the seconds-hand, and sent it for 
repair, together with two pots of pombé as a peace-offer- 
ing. Fri, who accompanied the deputation, overheard 
the counsellors tell their king that the Waganda were on 
their way back to Unyoro to snatch us away; on hearing 
which the king asked his men if they would ever permit 
it; and, handling his spear as if for battle, said at the 
same time he would lose his own head before they should 
touch his guests. Then, turning to Frij, he said, “ What 
would you do if they came ?—go back with them?” To 
which Irij said, “ No, never, when Gani is so near; they 
might cut our heads off, but that is all they could do.” 
The watch being by this time repaired, it gave me the 
opportunity of sending Kidgwiga back to the palace to 
say we trusted Kamrasi would allow Budja to come here, 
if only with one woman to carry his pombé, else Mtésa 
would take offence, form an alliance with Rionga, and 
surround the place with warriors, for it was not becoming 
in great kings to treat civil messengers like dogs. 

The reply to this was, that Kamrasi was very much 
pleased with my fatherly wisdom and advice, and would 
act up to it, allowing Budja only to approach with one 
woman; we need, however, be under no apprehensions, 
for Kamrasi’s power was infinite; the Gani road should 


Serr. | WARLIKE PREPARATIONS. 525 


be opened even at the spear’s point ; he had been beating 
the big drum in honour of us the whole day; he would 
not allow any beggars to come and see us, for he wanted 
us all to himself, and for this reason had ordered a fence 
to be built all round our house; but he had got no present 
from Grant yet, though all he wanted was his mosquito- 
curtains, whilst he wished my picture-books to show his 
women, and be returned. We sent a picture of Mtésa asa 
gift, the two books to look at, and an acknowledgment that 
the mosquito-curtains were his, only he must have patience 
until Bombay arrived ; but his proposition about the fence 
we rejected with scorn. The king had been raising an 
army to fight Rionga—the true reason, we suspect, for the 
beating of the drum. 

27th and -28th.—There was drumming and music all 
day and night, and the army was being increased to a 
thousand men, but we poor prisoners could see nothing of 
it. Frij was therefore sent to inspect the armament and 
bring us all the news. Some of N’yamyonjo’s men, seeing 
mine armed with carbines, became very inquisitive about 
them, and asked if they were the instruments which shot 
their men on the Nile—one in the arm, who died; the other 
on the top of the shoulder, who was recovering. The 
drums were kept in private rooms, to which a select few 
only were admitted. Kamrasi conducts all business him- 
self, awarding punishments and seeing them carried out. 
The most severe instrument of chastisement is a knob- 
stick, sharpened at the back, like that used in Uganda, 
for breaking a man’s neck before he is thrown into the 
N’yanza ; but this severity is seldom resorted to, Kamrasi 
being of a mild disposition compared with Mtésa, whom . 
he invariably alludes to when ordering men to be flogged, 
telling them that were they in Uganda, their heads would 
suffer instead of their backs. In the day’s work at the 
palace, army collecting, ten officers were bound because 
they failed to bring a sufficient number of fighting men, 


526 UNYORO. [1862. 


but were afterwards released on their promising to bring 
more. 

Nothing could be more filthy than the state of the 
palace and all the lanes leading up to it: it was well, 
perhaps, that we were never expected to go there, for 
without stilts and respirators it would have been imprac- 
ticable, such is the dirty nature of the people. The king’s 
cows, even, are kept in his palace enclosure, the calves 
actually entering the hut, where, like a farmer, Kamrasi 
walks amongst them up to his ankles in filth, and, inspect- 
ing them, issues his orders concerning them. What has 
to be selected for his guests he singles out himself. 

Dr K’yengo’s men, who had been sent three times into 
action against the refractory brothers, asked leave to 
return to Karagiié; but the king, who did not fear for 
their lives when his work was to be done, would not give 
them leave, lest accident should befall them on the way. 
We found no prejudice against eating butter amongst 
these Wahtima, for they not only sold us some, but mixed 
it with porridge and ate it themselves. 

29th.—The king has appointed a special officer to keep 
our table supplied with sweet potatoes, and sent us a pot 
of pombé, with his excuses for not seeing us, as business 
was so pressing, and would continue to be so until the 
army marched. Budja and Kasoro were again reported to 
be near with a force of fifty Waganda, prepared to snatch 
us away; and the king, fearing the consequences, had sent to 
inform Budja, that if he dared attempt to approach, he would 
slip us off in boats to Gani, and then fight it out with the 
' Waganda; for his guests, since they had been handed 
over to him, had been treated with every possible respect. 

To keep Kamrasi to his promise, as we particularly 
wished to hear the Uganda news, Frij was.sent to inform 
him on my behalf that Mtésa only wished to make friends 
with all the great kings surrounding his country before 
his coronation took place, when his brothers would be 


Szpr. | MTESA AND THE DESERTERS. 527 


burnt, and he would cease to take advice from his mother. 
To treat his messengers disrespectfully could do no good, 
and might provoke a war, when we should see my deserters 
joined with the Waganda really coming in force against 
us ; whereas, if we saw Budja, we could satisfy him, and 
Mtésa too, and obviate any such calamity. The reply 
was, that Kamrasi would arrange for our having a meet- 
ing with Budja alone if we wished it; he did not fear my 
deserters siding with king Mtésa, but he detested the 
Waganda, and could not bear to see them in his country. 

30th.—At breakfast-time we heard that my old friend 
Kasoro had come to our camp without permission, to the 
surprise of everybody, attended by all his boys, leaving 
Budja and his children, on account of sickness, at the 
camp assigned to the Waganda, five miles off. Kasoro 
wished to speak to us, and we invited him into the hut; 
but the mterview could not be permitted until Kamrasi’s 
wishes on the subject had been ascertained. In a little 
while the Kamraviona, having seen Kamrasi, said we 
might converse with one another whilst his officers were 
present listening, and sent a cow as a present for the 
Waganda. Kasoro with his children now came before us 
in their usual merry manner, and, after saluting, told us 
how the deserters, on reaching Uganda, begged for leave 
to proceed to Karagtié; but Mtésa, who would only allow 
two of them to approach him, abused them, saying, “ Did 
I not command you to take Bana to Gani at all risks ? 
If there was no road by land, you were to go by water ; 
or, if that failed, to go under-ground, or in the air above ; 
and if he died, you were to die with him: what, then, do 
you mean by deserting him and flying here? You shall 
not move a yard from this until I receive a messenger 
from him to hear what he has got to say on the matter.” 
Mtésa would not take their arms, even at the desire of 
Budja, on my behalf; for as no messenger on my behalf 
came to him, he would not believe what Budja said, and 


528 UNYORO. [1862. 


feared to touch any of our property. The chief item of 
court news was, that Mtésa had shot a buffalo which was 
attacking him behind his palace, and made his Wakungt 
carry the animal bodily, whilst life was in it, into his 
court. The ammunition I wrote for to Rttmanika had 
been brought by Mattila. 

As Kasoro still remained silent with-regard to Mtésa’s 
message, I told him we shot two of N’yamyonjo’s men on 
our retreat up the Nile, and that Kamrasi turned us back 
because some miscreant Waganda had forged lies and told 
him we were terrible monsters, who ate hills and human 
flesh, and drank up all the water of the lake. He laughed, 
but still was silent; so I said, “ What message have you 
brought from Mtésa?” To which, in a timid, modest 
kind of manner, he said, “ Bana knows—what more need 
Isay? Has he forgotten Mtésa, who loves him so?” J 
said, “No, indeed, I have not forgotten Mtésa; and, more- 
over, as | expected you back again, I have sent Bombay 
to bring the stimulants and all the things I promised 
Mtésa from Gani; in two or three days he will return.” 
“No,” said Kasoro, “ that is not it; we must go to Gani 
with you; for Mtésa says he loves you so much he will 
never allow you to part from his hand until his servants 
have seen you safely at your homes.” 

I replied, “If Mtésa wishes you to see my vessels and 
all the wonders they contain, as far as I am concerned 
you may do so, and I shall be only too happy to show 
you a little English hospitality ; but the road is in Kam- 
rasis hands, and his wishes must now be heard.” The 
commander-in-chief, now content with all he had heard, 
went to Kamrasi to receive his orders, whilst I gave 
Kasoro a feast of porridge and salt, with pombé to wash 
it down, and a cow to take home with him ; for the poor 
creatures said they were all starving, as the Wanyoro 
would not allow them to take a single plantain from the 
field until Kamrasi’s permission had been given. 


Serr. | THE WAGANDA DISMISSED, 529 


Kamrasi’s reply now arrived ; it was to the following 
effect :—“ Tell my children, the Waganda, they were never 
turned out of Unyoro by my orders: if they wish to go to 
Gani, they can do so; but, first of all, they must return to 
Mtésa, and ask him to deliver up all of Bana’s men.” I 
answered, “No; if any one of those scoundrels who has 
deserted me ever dares show his face to me again, I will 
shoot him like a dog. Moreover, I want Mtésa to take 
their guns from them, and, without taking life, to trans- 
port them all to an island on the N’yanza, where they can 
spend their days in growing plantains; for it is such men 
who prevent our travelling in the country and visiting 
kings.” Kasoro on this said, “Mtésa will do so in a 
minute if you send a servant to him, but he won’t if we 
only say you wish it.” 

The commander-in-chief then added, as to Kasoro’s wish 
to accompany me, “If Mtésa will send another time one 
of his people whose life he wishes sacrificed on the jour- 
ney, or tells us, Here is a man whom I wish you to send 
to Gani at all hazards, and without responsibility for his 
life on our part, we will be very glad to send him; but 
as we are at war with the Gani people continually, there 
will be no security for a Mganda’s life there.” To this I 
added, “ Now, Kasoro, you see how it is; Kamrasi does not 
wish you to go to Gani, so if you take my advice you will 
return to Mtésa. Give this tin cartridge-box, which first 
came from him, back to him again, to show him you have 
seen me, and say, This is Bana’s letter ; he wishes you to 
transport the deserters and seize their guns. The guns, of 
course, I shall want again at some other time, when I will 
send one of my English children to visit him; for now 
Kamrasi has opened his country to us, and given us leave 
to come and purchase ivory, I never shall be very far 
away.” I gave them three pills for Budja, blistered two 
of the pages, and started the whole merrily off, Kasoro 

: 2h . 


530 UNYORO. [1862. 


asking me to send Mtésa some pretty things from England 
such as he never saw. 

1st—Kamrasi sent his commander-in-chief to inquire 
after my health, and to say Budja had left in fear and 
trembling lest Mtésa should cut all their heads off for 
failing in the mission; but he had sent Kidgwiga’s bro- 
ther with a pot of pombé to escort the-Waganda beyond 
his frontier, and cheer them on the way ; for the tin car- 
tridge-box, he thought, would save their lives by satisfying 
Mtésa they had seen me. The commander-in-chief then 
told me Kamrasi did not wish them to accompany me 
through Kidi, for the Kidi people don’t like the Waganda, 
and, discovering their nationality by the fulness of their 
teeth, would bring trouble on us whilst trying to knll 
them. I said I thanked Kamrasi for his having treated 
the Waganda with such marked respect, in allowing them 
to see me, and sending them back with an escort; but I 
thought it would have been better if he had spoken the 
truth plainly out, for then I could have told them I feared 
to have them in company with me. In return for my 
civilities, the king then sent one of his Chopi officers to 
see me, who went four stages with Bombay, and he also 
sent some rich beads which he wished me to look at. 
They were nicely kept in a neat though very large casing 
of rush pith, and were those sent as a letter from Gani, 
to inform him that we were expected to come vid Karagtié. 
After this, to keep us in good-humour, Kamrasi sent to 
inform us that some Gani men, twenty-five in number, 
had just arrived, and had given him a lion-skin, several 
tippet monkey-skins, and some giraffe hair, as well as a 
stick of copper or brass wire. Bombay was met by them 
on the confines of Gani. 

2d.—The king sent me a pot of pombé to-day, inquir- 
ing after my health, and saying he would like to take the 
medicine I gave him if I would send Frij over to admin- 
ister it, but he would be ashamed to swallow pills before 


Ocr. | THE KING'S BROTHERS. 531 


me. Hitherto he had not been able to take the medicine 
from press of business in collecting an army to fight his 
brothers ; but as his troops would all leave for war to-day, 
he expected to have leisure. 

In plying the Kamraviona to try if we could get rid of 
the annoying restraints which made our residence here a 
sort of imprisonment, I discovered that the whole affair 
was not one of blunder or accident, but that we actually 
were prisoners thus by design. It appeared that Kamrasi’s 
brothers, when they heard we were coming into Unyoro, 
murmured, and said to the king, “ Why are you bringing 
such guests amongst us, who will practise all kinds of 
diabolical sorcery, and bring evil on us?” To which 
Kamrasi replied; “I have invited them to come, and they 
shall come ; and if they bring evil with them, let that all 
fall on my shoulders, for you shall not see them.” He 
then built a palaver-house on the banks of the Kaft to 
receive us in privately; and when we were to go to Gani, 
it was his intention to slip us off privately down the 
Kafti. The brothers were so thoroughly frightened, that 
when Kamrasi opened his chronometer before them to 
show them the works in motion, they turned their heads 
away. The large block-tin box I gave Kamrasi, as part 
of his hongo, was, I heard, called Mzungi, or the white 
man, by him. 

In the evening the beads recently brought from Gani 
were sent for my inspection, with an intimation that 
Kamrasi highly approved of them, and would like me to 
give him a few like them. Some of Kamrasi's spies, 
whom he had sent to the refractory allies of Rionga his 
brother, returned bringing a spear and some grass from 
the thatch of the hut of a Chopi chief. The removal of 
the grass was a piece of state policy. It was stolen by 
Kamrasi’s orders, in order that he might spread a charm 
on the Chopi people, and gain such an influence over 
them that their spears could not prevail against the 


532 UNYORO. [1862. 


Wanyoro ; but it was thought we might possess some 
still superior magic powder, as we had come from such a 
long distance, and Kamrasi would prefer to have ours. 
These Chopi people were leagued with the brothers, and 
thus kept the highroad to Gani, though the other half 
of Chopi remained loyal; and though Kamrasi con- 
tinually sent armies against the refractory half which 
aided his brothers, they never retaliated by attacking 
this place. . 

We found, by the way, that certain drumming and 
harmonious accompaniments which we had been accus- 
tomed to hear all day and night were to continue for four 
moons, in celebration of twins born to Kamrasi since we 
came here. ‘ 

3d.—Kamrasi’s political department was active again 
to-day. Some Gani officials arrived to inform him that 
there were two white men in the vessel spoken of as at 
Gani; a second vessel was coming in there, and several 
others were on their way. A carnelian was shown me 
which the Gani people gave to Kamrasi many years ago. 
Kamrasi expressed a wish that I would exchange magic 
powders with him. He had a very large variety, and 
would load a horn for me with all those I desired most. 
He wanted also medicines for longevity and perpetual 
strength. Those I had given him had, he said, deprived 
him of strength, and he felt much reduced by their effects. 
He would like me to go with him and attack the island 
his three brothers, Rionga, Wahitt, and Pohtika, are in 
possession of. When I said I never fought with black 
men, he wished to know if I would not shoot them if 
they attacked me. My reply was, alluding to our fight 
in the river, “How did N’yamyonjo’s men fare?” | 
found that Kamrasi had thirty brothers and as many 
sisters. 

4th.—I gave Kamrasi a bottle of quinine, which we 
eall “strong back,” and asked him in return for a horn 


i 


TT 


< ee ea 


————- 


——<———— 


Kamrasi’s Magician in search of the Ramguage. 


Ocr. | A MAGICIAN. 533 


containing all the powders necessary to give me the oift 
of tongues, so that I should be able to converse with any 
black men whom I might meet’ with. We heard that 
Kamrasi has called all his Gani guests to play before 
him, and a double shot from his Blissett rifle announced 
to our ears that he in turn was amusing them. This 
was the first time the gun had been discharged since he 
received it, and, fearing to fire it himself, he called one 
of my men to do it for him. 

5th.—At 9 a.M., the time for measuring the fall of rain 
for the last twenty-four hours, we found the rain-gauge 
and bottle had been removed, so we sent Kidgwiga to 
inform the king we wished his magicians to come at once 
and institute a search for it. Kidgwiga immediately 
returned with the necessary adept, an old man, nearly 
blind, dressed in strips of old leather fastened to the 
waist, and carrying in one hand a cow’s horn primed 
with magic powder, carefully covered on the mouth with 
leather, from which dangled an iron bell. The old crea- 
ture jingled the bell, entered our hut, squatted on his 
hams, looked first at one, then at the other—inquired 
what the missing things were like, grunted, moved his 
skinny arm round his head, as if desirous of catching air 
from all four sides of the hut, then dashed the accumu- 
lated air on the head of his horn, smelt it to see if all 
was going right, jingled the bell again close to his ear, 
and grunted his satisfaction ; the missing articles must 
be found. 

To carry out the incantation more effectually, however, 
all my men were sent for to sit in the open before the 
hut, when the old doctor rose, shaking the horn and tink- 
ling the bell close to his ear. He then, confronting one 
of the men, dashed the horn forward as if intending to 
strike him on the face, then smelt the head, then dashed 
at another, and so on, till he became satisfied that my 
men were not the thieves. He then walked into Grant's 


534 UNYORO. [1862. 


hut, inspected that, and finally went to the place where 
the bottle had been kept. There he walked about the 
grass with his arm up, and jingling the bell to his ear, 
first on one side, then on the other, till the track of a 
hyena gave him the clue, and in two or three more steps 
he found it. A hyena had carried it into the grass and 
dropped it. Bravo, for the infallible horn! and well done 
the king for his honesty in sending it! So I gave the 
king the bottle and gauge, which delighted him amaz- 
ingly ; and the old doctor, who begged for pombé, got a 
goat for his trouble. My men now, recollecting the pow- 
der robbery at Uganda, said king Mtésa would not send 
his horn when I asked for it, because he was the culprit 
himself. 

6th. — Kidgwiga told us to-day that king Kamrasi’s 
sisters are not allowed to wed; they live and die virgins 
in his palace. Their only occupation in life consisted in 
drinking milk, of which each one consumes the produce 
daily of from ten to twenty cows, and hence they become 
so inordinately fat that they cannot walk. Should they 
wish to see a relative, or go outside the hut for any pur- 
pose, it requires eight men to lift any of them on a litter. 
The brothers, too, are not allowed to go out of his reach. 
This confinement of the palace family is considered a 
state necessity, as a preventive to civil wars, in the 
same way as the destruction of the Uganda princes, after 
a certain season, is thought necessary for the preservation 
of peace there. ;' 

7th.—In the morning the Kamraviona called, on the 
king’s behalf, to inquire after my health, and also to make 
some important communications. First he was to request 
a supply of bullets, that the king might fire a salute when 
Bombay returned from Gani; next, to ask for stimulative 
medicine, now that he had consumed all I gave him, and 
gone through the preliminary course ; further, to request 
[ would spread a charm over all his subjects, so that their 


Oct. ] A THEFT AT THE PALACE. 535 


hearts might be inclined towards him, and they would 
come without calling and bow down at his feet ; finally, 
he wished me to exchange my blood with him, that we 
might be brothers till death. I sent the bullets, advised 
him to wait a day or two for the medicine, and said there 
was only one charm by which he could gain the influence 
he required over his subjects—this was, knowledge and 
the power of the pen. Should he desire some of my 
children (meaning missionaries) to come here and instruct 
his, the thing would be done; but not in one year, nor 
even ten, for it takes many years to educate children. 

As to exchanging my blood with a black man’s, it was 
a thing quite beyond my comprehension ; though Ri- 
manika, I must confess, had asked me to do the same 
thing. The way the English make lasting friendships is 
done either by the expressions of their hearts, or by the 
exchange of some trifles, as keepsakes ; and now, as I had 
given Kamrasi some specimens of English manufacture, 
he might give me a horn, or anything else he chose, which 
I could show to my friends, so as to keep him in recollec- 
tion all my life. 

The Kamrayiona, before leaving, said, for our informa- 
tion, that a robbery had occurred in the palace last night; 
for this morning, when Kamrasi went to inspect his 
Mzungii (the block-tin box), which he had forgotten to 
lock, he found all his beads had been stolen. After. snif- 
fing round among the various wives, he smelt the biggest 
one to be the culprit, and turned the beads out of her 
possession. Deputies came in the evening with a pot of 
pombé and small screw of butter, to tell me some Ganj 
people had just arrived, bringing information that the 
vessel at Gani had left to go down the river; but when 
intelligence reached the vessel of the approach of my 
men they turned and came back again. Bombay was well 
feasted on the road by Kamrasi’s people, receiving eight 
cows from one and two cows from another. 


* 


536 UNYORO. [1862. 


8th and 9th.—We had a summons to attend at the 
Kaftt palace with the medicine-chest, a few select persons 
only to be present. It rained so much on the 8th as to 
stop the visit, but we went next day. After arriving 
there, and going through the usual salutations, Kamrasi 
asked us from what stock of people we came, explaining his 
meaning by saying, “ As we, Rtimanika, Mtésa, and the rest 
of us (enumerating the kings), are Wawitti (or princes), 
Uwitti (or the country of princes) being to the east.” 
This interesting announcement made me quite forget to 
answer his question, and induced me to say, “ Omwita, 
indeed, was the ancient name for Mombas, if you came 
from that place: I know all about your race for two thou- 
sand years or more. Omwita, you mean, was the last 
country you resided in before you came here, but origi- 
nally you came from Abyssinia, the sultan of which, our 
great friend, is Sahéla Sélassie.” ' 

He pronounced this name laughing, and said, “ Formerly 
our stock was half-white and half-black, with one side of 
our heads covered with straight hair, and the other side 
frizzly : you certainly do know everything.” The subject 
then turned upon medicine, and, after inspecting the chest, 
and inquiring into all its contents, it ended by his begging 
for the half of everything. The mosquito-curtains were _ 
again asked for, and refused until I should leave this. As 
Kamrasi was anxious I should take two of his children to 
England to be instructed, I agreed to do so, but said I 
thought it would be better if he invited missionaries to 
come here and educate all his family. His cattle were 
much troubled with sickness, dying in great numbers— 
could I cure them? As he again began to persecute us 
with begging, wanting knives and forks, &c., I advised his 
using ivory as money, and purchasing what he wanted 
from Gani. This brought out the interesting fact, the 
truth of which we had never reached before, that when 
Petherick’s servant brought him one necklace of beads, 


* 


Ocr.] KAMRASI AND HIS MEDICINES. 537 


and asked after us, he gave in return fourteen ivories, 
thirteen women, and seven mbiigit cloths. One of his 
men accompanied the visitors back to the boats, and saw 
Petherick, who took the ivory and rejected the women. 

10th.—At 2 P.M. we were called by Kamrasi to visit 
him at the Kaftt palace again, and requested to bring a 
lot of medicines tied up in various coloured cloths, so that 
he might know what to select for different ailments. We 
repaired there as before, putting the medicines into the 
sextant-stand box, and found him lying at full length on 
the platform of his throne, with a glass-bead necklace of 
various colours, and a charm tied on his left arm. Nobody 
was allowed to be present at our interview. The medi- 
cines, four varieties, were weighed out into ten doses each, 
and their uses and effects explained. He begged for four 
bottles to put them in, till he was laughed out of it by 
our saying he required forty bottles; for if the powders 
were mixed, how could he separate them again? And to 
keep his mind from the begging tack, which he was getting 
alarmingly near, I said, “Now I have given you these 
things because you would insist on having them. I must 
also tell you they are dangerous in your hands, in conse- 
quence of your being ignorant of their properties. If you 
take my advice you won't meddle with them until the 
two children you wish educated have learnt the use of 
them in England; and if I have to take boys from this, I 
hope they will be of your family.” He said, “ You speak 
like a father to us, and we very much approve. Here is 
a pot of pombé ; I did not give you one yesterday.” 

11th.—To-day, the king having graciously granted per- 
mission, we went out shodtiig, but saw only a few buffalo 
tracks. 

12th.—The Kamraviona was sent to inquire after our 
health, and to ascertain from me all I knew respecting 
the origin of Kamrasi’s tribe, the distribution of countries, 
and the seat of the government. I sent the king a diagram, 


538 UNYORO. [1862. 


painted in various colours, with full explanations of every- 
thing, and asked permission to send two more of my men 
in search of Bombay, who had now been absent twenty 
days. The reply was, that if Bombay did not return 
within four days, Kamrasi would send other men after 
him on the fifth day ; and, in the mean time, he sent one 
pot of pombé as a token of his kind regard. 

13th.—The Kamraviona was sent to inquire after our 
health, to ask for médicine for himself, and to inquire 
more into the origin of his race. I, on the other hand, 
wishing to make myself as disagreeable as possible, in 
order that Kamrasi might get tired of us, sent Frij to ask 
for fresh butter, eggs, tobacco, coffee, and fowls, every day, 
saying, I will pay their price when I reach Gani, for we 
were suffering from want of proper food. Kamrasi was 
surprised at this clamour for food, and inquired what we 
ate at home that we were so different from everybody 
else. 

We heard to-day a strange story, involving the tragic 
fate of Budja. On coming here, he had been bewitched 
by Kamrasi’s frontier officer, who put the charm into a 
pot of pombé. From the moment Budja drank it he was 
seized with sickness, and remained so until he reached 
the first station in Uganda, when he died. The facts of 
the bewitchment had been found out by means of the 
perpetrator’s wives, who, from the moment the pombé 
was drunk, took to precipitate flight, well knowing what 
effects would follow, and dreading the chastisement Mtésa 
would bring upon their household. We heard, too, that 
the deserters had returned to the place they deserted 
from, with thirty Waganda, and a present of some cows 
for me. 

14th.—Kamrasi sent me four parcels of coffee, very 
neatly enclosed in rush pith. 

15th—Getting more impatient, and desirous to move 
on at any sacrifice, I proposed giving up all claims to my 


Ocr.] THE KINGS IMPORTUNITIES. 539 


muskets, as well as the present of cows from Mtésa, if 
Kamrasi would give us boats to Gani at once; but the 
reply was simply, Why be in such a hurry ? . 

16th.—The Kamraviona was sent to us with a load of 
coffee, which Kamrasi had purchased with cowries, and to 
inquire how we had slept. Very badly, was the reply, 
because we knew Bombay would have been back long 
ago if Kamrasi was not concealing him somewhere, and 
we did not know what he was doing with deserters and 
Waganda. Kamrasi then wanted us to paint his mbtigt 
cloths in different patterns and colours; but we sent him 
instead six packages of red-ink powder, and got abused for 
sauciness. He then wanted black ink, else how could he 
put on the red with taste ; but we had none to give him. 
Next, he asked leave for my men to shoot cows before his 
Kidi visitors, which they did to his satisfaction, instruct- 
ing him at the same time to fire powder with his own rifle; 
when, triumphant with his success, he protested he would 
_ never use anything but guns again, and threw away his 
spear as useless. Bombay, we learned, had reached Gani, 
and ought to return in eight days. 

17th and 18th.—A large party of Chopi people arrived, 
by Kamrasi’s orders, to tell the reason which induced them 
to apply for guns to the white men at Gani, as it appeared 
evident they must have wished to fight their king. The 
Kidi visitors got broken heads for helping themselves from 
the Wanyoro’s fields, and when they cried out against such 
treatment, were told they should rob the king, if they 
wished to rob at all. 

19th.—Nothing was done because Kamrasi was dis- 
missing his ‘Kidi guests, 200, with presents of cows and 
women. ’ 

20th.—Having asked Kamrasi to return my pictures, 
he sent the book of birds, but not of animals ; and said he 
could not see us until a new hut was built, because the old 
one was flooded by the Kaft, which had been rising several 


540 UNYORO. [1862. 


days. We must not, he said, talk about Bombay any more, 
because everybody said he was detained by the N’yanswengé 
(Petherick’s party), and would return here with the new 
moon. I would not accept the lie, saymg, How can my 
“children” at Gani detain my messengers, when they have 
received strict orders from me by letter to send an answer 
quickly ? It was all Kamrasi’s doing, for he had either 
hidden Bombay, or ordered his officers to take him slowly, 
as he did us, stopping four days at each stage. 

Frij again told me he was present when Said Said, the 
Sultan of Zanzibar, sent an army to assist the Wagtinya 
at Amu, on the coast, against the incursions of the Masai. 
These Amti people have the same Wahtima features as 
Kamrasi, whom they also resemble both in general 
physical appearance, and in many of them having cir- 
cular marks, as if made by cautery, on the forehead and 
temples. These marks I took not to be tatooing or decor- 
ative, but as a cure for disease—cautery being a favourite 
remedy with both races. 

The battle lasted only two days, though the Masai 
brought a thousand spears against the Arabs’ cannon. 
But this was not the only battle Said Said had to fight 
on those grounds; for some years previously he had to 
subdue the Waziwa, who live on very marshy land, into 
respect for his sovereignty, when the battle lasted years, 
in consequence of the bad nature of the ground, and the 
trick the Waziwa had of staking the ground with spikes. 
The Wastiahili, or coast-people, by his description, are the 
bastards or mixed breeds who live on the east coast of 
Africa, extending from the Somali country to Zanzibar. 
Their laneuage is Kistiahili; but there is no land Usiia- 
hil, though people talk of going to the Stiahili in the 
same vague sense as they do of going to the Mashenzi, 
or amongst the savages. The common story amongst the 
Wastiahili at Zanzibar, in regard to the government of 
that island, was, that the Wakhadim, or aborigines of 


Ocr.] CURIOUS CUSTOM AS REGARDS TWINS. 54] 


Zanzibar, did not like the oppressions of the Portuguese, 
and therefore allied themselves to the Arabs of Muscat— 
even compromising their natural birthright of freedom in 
government, provided the Arabs, by their superior power, 
would secure to them perpetual equity, peace, and justice. 
The senior chief, Sheikh Mtthadim, was the mediator on 
their side, and without his sanction no radical changes 
compromising the welfare of the land could take place ; 
the system of arbitration being, that the governing Arab 
on the one side, and the deputy of the Wakhadim on the 
other, should hold conference with a screen placed between 
them, to obviate all attempts at favour, corruption, or 
bribery. 

The former report of the approach of all of my men, 
with as many Waganda and cows for me, turned out partly 
false, inasmuch as only one of my men was with 102 Wa- 
ganda, whilst the whole of the deserters were left behind 
in Uganda with cows; and Kamrasi hearing this, ordered all 
to go back again until the whole of my men should arrive. 

21st.—I was told how a Myoro woman, who bore 
twins that died, now keeps two small pots in her house, 
as effigies of the children, into which she milks herself 
every evening, and will continue to do so five months, 
fulfilling the time appointed by nature for suckling chil- 
dren, lest the spirits of the dead should persecute her. 
The twins were not buried, as ordinary people are buried, 
under ground, but placed in an earthenware pot, such as 
the Wanyoro use for holding pombé. They were taken to 
the jungle and placed by a tree, with the pot turned mouth 
downwards. Manta, one of my men, who is a twin, 
said, in Ngtirti, one of the sister provinces to Unyanyembé, 
twins are ordered to be killed and thrown into water the 
moment they are born, lest droughts and famines or floods 
should oppress the land. Should any one attempt to 
conceal twins, the whole family would be murdered by 
the chief; but, though a great traveller, this is the only 


542 UNYORO. [1862. 


instance of such brutality Manta had ever witnessed in 
any country. 

In the province of Unyanyembé, if a twin or twins die, 
they are thrown into water for the same reason as in 
Ngtirt; but as their numbers increase the size of the 
family, their birth is hailed with delight. Still there is a 
source of fear there in connection with twins, as I have 
seen myself; for when one dies, the mother ties a little 
gourd to her neck as a proxy, and puts into it a trifle 
of everything which she gives the living child, lest the 
jealousy of the dead spirit should torment her. Further, 
on the death of the child, she smears herself with butter 
and ashes, and runs frantically about, tearing her hair 
and bewailing piteously ; whilst the men of the place use 
towards her the foulest language, apparently as if in 
abuse of her person, but in reality to frighten away the 
demons who have robbed her nest. 

22d.—I sent Frij to Kamrasi to find out what he was 
doing with the Waganda and my deserters, as I wished 
to speak with thei two head representatives. I also 
wanted some men to seek for and fetch Bombay, as I 
said I believed him to be tied by the leg behind one of 
the visible hills in Kidi. The reply was, 102 Waganda, 
with one of my men only, had been stationed at the 
village my men deserted from since the date (13th) we 
heard of them last. They had no cows for me, but each 
of the Waganda bore a log of firewood, which Mtésa had 
ordered them to carry until they either returned with me 
or brought back a box of gunpowder, in default of which 
they were to be all burnt in a heap with the logs they 
carried. Kamrasi, still acting on his passive policy, would 
not admit them here, but wished them to return with a 
message, to the effect that Mtésa had no right to hold 
me as his guest now I had once gone into another’s hands. 
We were all three kings to do with our subjects as we 
liked, and for this reason the deserters ought to be sent 


Ocr. | ANXIETY REGARDING BOMBAY. 543 


on here; but if I wished to speak to the Waganda, he 
would call their officer. There was no fear, he said, about 
Bombay; he was on his way ; but the men who were 
escorting him were spinning out the time, stopping at 
every place, and feasting every day. To-morrow, he added, 
some more Gani people would arrive here, when we should 
know more about it. I still advised Kamrasi to give the 
road to Mtésa, provided he gave up plundering the Wan- 
yoro of women and cattle ; but if my counsel was listened 
to, I could get no acknowledgment that it was so. 

23d and 24th.—I sent to inquire what news there was 
of Bombay’s coming, and what measures Kamrasi had 
taken to call the Waganda’s chief officer and my deserters 
here ; as also to beg he would send us specimens of all 
the various tribes that visit him, in order that we might 
draw them. He sent four loads of dried fish, with a 
request for my book of birds again, as it contains a por- 
trait of king Mtésa, and proposed seeing us at the newly- 
constructed Kaftt palace to-morrow, when all requests 
would be attended to. In the meanwhile, we were told 
that Bombay had been seen on his way returning from 
Gani; and the Waganda had all run away frightened, 
because they were told the Kidi and Chopi visitors, who 
had been calling on Kamrasi lately, were merely the 
nucleus of an army forming to drive them away, and to 
subdue Uganda. Mtésa was undergoing the coronation 
formalities, and for this reason had sent the deserters to 
Karis hill, giving them cows and a garden to live on, as 
no visitors can remain near the court whilst the solemnities 
of the coronation were going on. The thirty-odd brothers 
will be burnt to death, saving two or three, of which one 
will be sent into this country—as was the case with one 
of the late king Sunna’s brothers, who is still in Unyoro 
—and the others will remain in the court with Mtésa as 
playfellows until the king dies, when, like Sunna’s two 
brothers still living in Uganda, one at N’yama Goma and 


544 UNYORO. [1862. 


one at Ngambézi, they will be pensioned off. After the 
coronation is concluded, it is expected Mtésa will go 
into Kittara, on the west of Uganda, to fight first, and 
then, turning east, will fight with the Wasoga; but we 
think, if he fights anywhere, it will be with Kamrasi. 

25th and 26th.—I sent Frij to the palace to inquire 
after Bombay, and got the usual reply: “Why is Bana 
in such a hurry? He is always for doing things quickly. 
Tell my ‘brother’ to keep his mind at rest; Bombay is 
now on the boundary of Gani coming here, and will in 
due course arrive.” Both Riimanika’s men and those be- 
longing to Dr K’yengo asked Kamrasi’s leave to return 
to their homes, but were refused, because the road was 
unsafe. “Had they not,” it was said, “heard of Budja’s 
telling Mtésa that K’yengo’s children prevented the white 
men from returning to Uganda? and since then Mtésa had 
killed his frontier officer for being chicken-hearted, afraid 
to carry out his orders, and had appointed another in his 
stead, giving him strict orders to make prisoners of all 
foreigners who might pass that way ; and, further, when 
some twenty Wanyoro were going to Karagiié, they were 
hunted down by Mtésa’s orders, and three of their num- 
ber killed ; for he was determined to cut off all intercourse 
between this country and Karagté. They must therefore 
wait till the road is safe.” 

Hearing this, Dr K’yengo’s men, who happened to ‘be 
as well off here as anywhere, accepted the advice; but 
Rttmanika’s men said, “We are starving ; we have been 
here too long already doing nothing, and must go, let 
what will happen to us.” Kamrasi said, “ What will be 
the use of your going empty-handed? I cannot send 
cows and slaves to Rtmanika when the road is so unsafe ; 
you must wait a bit.” But they still urged as before, and 
so forced the king reluctantly to acquiesce, but only on 
the condition that two of their head men should remain 
behind until some more of Rtimanika’s men came to 


Ocr.] -KAMRASTS EQUIVOCATIONS, 545 


fetch them away—in fact, as we had been accredited to 
him by Rttmanika, he wanted to keep some of that king's 
people as a security until we were out of his hands. 
27th.—I sent Frij to the palace to ask once more for 
leave to visit the Lita Nzigé river-lake to the westward, 
and to request Kamrasi would send men to fetch my pro- 
perty from Karagté. He sent four loads of small fish 
and one pot.of pombé, to say he would see me on the 
morrow, when every arrangement would be made. Late 
at night orders came announcing that | might write my 
despatches, as sixty men were ready to start for Karagtié. 
28th.—I sent one of my men with despatches to Kam- 
rasil, who detained him half the day, and then ordered 
him to call to-morrow. This being the fifteenth or 
twentieth time Kamrasi had disappointed me, after pro- 
mising an interview, that we might have a proper under- 
standing about everything, and when no begging en his 
part was to interrupt our conversation, I sent him a 
threatening message, to see what effect that would have. 
The purport of it was, that I was afraid to send men to 
Karagiié, now I had seen his disposition to make prisoners 
of all who visit him. Here had I been kept six weeks 
waiting for Bombay’s return from Gani, where I only per- 
mitted him to go because I was told the journey to and 
fro would only occupy from eight to ten days at most. 
Then Ritmanika’s men, who came here with Baraka, 
though daily crying to get away, were still imprisoned 
here, without any hope before them. If I sent Msalima, 
he would be kept ten years on the road. If I went to the 
lake Liita Nzigé, God only knows when he would let me 
come back; and now, for once and for all, I wished to 
sacrifice all my property, and leave the countries of black 
kings ; for what Kamrasi had done, Mtésa had done like- 
wise, detaining the two men I detached on a friendly 
mission, which made me fear to send any more and in- 
2M 


546 | UNYORO. [1862. 
quire after my guns, lest he should seize them likewise. 
I would stay no longer among such people. 

Kamrasi, in answer, begged I would not be afraid ; 
there was no occasion for alarm; Bombay would be here 
shortly. I had promised to wait patiently for his return, 
and as soon as he did return, I would be sent off without 
one day’s delay, for I was not his slave, that he should use 
violence upon me. Rttmanika’s men, too, would be al- 
lowed to go, only that the road was unsafe, and he feared 
Rttmanika would abuse him if any harm befell them. 

29th.—To-day I met Kamrasi at his new reception- 
palace on this side the Kafti—taking a Bible to explain 


all I fancied I knew about the origin and present condi- — 


tion of the Wahtima branch of the Ethiopians, beginning 
with Adam, to show how it was the king had heard by 
tradition that at one time the people of his race were half 
white and half black. Then, proceeding with the Flood, 
I pointed out that the Europeans remained white, retain- 
ing Japhet’s blood; whilst the Arabs are tawny, after 
Shem; and the Africans black, after Ham. And, finally, to 
show the greatness of the tribe, I read the 14th chapter of 
2d Chronicles, in which it is written how Zerah, the Ethi- 
opian, with a host of a thousand thousand, met the Jew 
Asa with a large army, in the valley of Zephathah, hear 
Mareshah ; adding to it that again, at a much later date, 
we find the Ethiopians battling with the Arabs in the 
Somali country, and with the Arabs and Portuguese at 
Omwita (Mombas)—in all of which places they have taken 
possession of certain tracts of land, and left their sons to 
people it. PA 

To explain the way in which the type or physical fea- 
tures of people undergo great changes by interbreeding, 
Mtésa was instanced as having lost nearly every feature 
of his Mhtima blood, by the kings of Uganda having 
been produced, probably for several generations running, 
of Waganda mothers. This amused Kamrasi greatly, 


ZO 


\ 


i 


| unt! 


Kamrasi’s first Lesson 1m the Bible. 


Oor. | KAMRASI AND THE BIBLE. 547 


and induced me to inquire how his purity of blood was 
maintained —“ Was the king of Unyoro chosen, as in 
Uganda, haphazard by the chief men—or did the eldest 
son sit by succession on the throne?” The reply was, 
“The brothers fought for it, and the best man gained the 
crown.” 

Kamrasi then began counting the leaves of the Bible, 
an amusement that every negro that gets hold of a book 
indulges in; and, concluding in his mind that each page 
or leaf represented one year of time since the beginning of 
creation, continued his labour till one quarter of the way 
through the book, and then only shut it up on being told, 
if he desired to ascertain the number more closély, he had 
better count the words. 

I begged’ for my picture-books, which were only lent 
him at his request for a few days ; and then began a bad- 
gering verbal conflict: he would not return them until I 
drew others like them; he would not allow me to go to 
the Little Lita Nzigé, west of this, until Bombay re- 
turned, when he would send me with an army of spears 
to lead the way, and my men with their guns behind to 
protect the rear. This was for the purpose of making us 
his tools in his conflict with his brothers. JI complained 
that he had, without consulting me, ordered away the 
men who had been sent, either to fetch me back to 
Uganda, or else get powder from me, although they had 
orders to carry out their king’s desire, under the threat 
of being burnt with the fire logs they carried ; and all 
this Kamrasi had professed to do merely out of respect 
for my dignity, as I was no slave, that Mtésa should 
order me about. I argued, founding on each particular in 
* succession, that his conduct throughout was most unjusti- 
fiable, and anything but friendly. He then produced an 
officer, who was to escort my man Msalima to Karagiié, 
giving him orders to collect the sixty men required on 
the way; five of Rtmanika’s men could go with him, but 


548 UNYORO. _ (1862. 


five must stop, until other Karagtié men came to say the 
road was safe, when he would send by them the present 
he had prepared for Rttmanika. 

Then, turning to us, he said, “ Why have you not 
brought the medicine-chest and the saw? We wish to 
see everything you have got, though we do not wish to 
rob you.” When these things came for inspection, he 
coveted the saw, and discovered there were more varieties 
of medicine in the chest than had been given him. This 
he was told was not the case, because the papers given him 
contained mixed medicines—a little being taken from 
every bottle. “But there are no pills; why won’t you 
give us pills? We have men, women, and children who 
require pills as well as you do.” We were much annoyed 
by this dogged begging; and as he said, “ Well, if you 
won't give me anything, [ will go,” we at once rose, hat 
in hand; when, regretting the hastiness of his speech, he 
begged us to be seated again, and renewed his demands. 
We told him the road to Gani was the only condition on 
which we would part with any more medicine; we had 
asked leave to go a hundred times, and that was all we 
now desired. At last he rose and walked off in a huff; 
but, repenting before he reached home, he sent us a pot of 
pombé, when, in return, I finished the farce by sending 
him a box of pills. 

30th.—I gave Msalima a letter in the Kistiahili or 
coast language to convey to Rttmanika, ordering all my 
property to be sent here, his ‘account of the things as 
they left him to be given to Msalima to convey to the 
coast, while I sent him one pound of gunpowder as a sort 
of agency fee. Msalima also took a map of all the 
countries we had passed, with lunar observations, and a 
letter to Rigby, by which he, Baraka, and‘Ulédi would be 
able to draw their pay on arrival. 

31st.—I sent Frij with a letter to the king, containing 
an acknowledgment that, on the arrival of the rear pro- 


Nov.] RETURN OF BOMBAY, 549 
A ee 


perty from Karagtté, he would be entitled to the half of 
everything, reserving the other half for any person I might 
in future send to take them from him. He accepted the 
letter, and put it into his mzungti—the tin box I had 
given him. He said he would take every care of the kit 
from the time it arrived, and would not touch his share 
of it until my deputy arrived. An inhabitant of Chopi 
reported that he heard Bombay's gun fire the evening 
before he left home, and was rewarded with the present 
of a cow. 

1st.—I purchased a small kitten, Fel’s serval, from an 
Unyoro man, who requested me to give it back to him to 
eat if it was likely to die, for it is considered very good 
food in Unyoro. 

Bombay at last arrived with Mabriiki in high glee, 
dressed in cotton jumpers and drawers, presents given 
them by Petherick’s outpost. Petherick himself was not 
there. The journey to and fro was performed in fourteen 
days’ actual travelling, the rest of the time being frittered 
away by the guides. The jemadar of the guard said he 
commanded two hundred Turks, and had orders to wait 
for me, without any limit as to time, until I should arrive, 
when Petherick’s name would be pointed out to me cut on 
a tree; but as no one in camp could read my letter, they 
were doubtful whether we were the party they were 
looking out for. e 

They were all armed with elephant-guns, and had killed 
sixteen elephants. Petherick had gone down the river 
eight days’ journey, but was expected to return shortly. 
Kamrasi would not see Bombay immediately on his return, 
but sent him some pombé, and desired an interview the 
following day. 

2d.—I sent Bombay with a farewell present to Kamrasi, 
consisting of one tent, one mosquito-curtain, one roll of 
bindera or red cotton cloth, one digester pot, one saw, six 
copper wires, one box of beads, containing six varieties of 


550 UNYORO. [1862. 


the best sort, and a request to leave his country. Much 
pleased with the things, Kamrasi ordered the tent to be 
pitched before all his court, pointed out to them what clever 
people the white people are, making iron pots instead of 
earthen ones. Covetous and never satisfied, however, 1n- 
stead of returning thanks, he said he was sure I must have 
more beads than those I sent him; and, instead of granting 
the leave asked for, said he would think about it, and send 
the Kamraviona in the evening with his answer. This, 
when it came, was anything but satisfactory; for we were 
required to stop here until the king should have prepared 
the people on the road for our coming, so that they might 
not be surprised, or try to molest us on the way. Kam- 
rasi, however, returned the books of birds and animals, 
requesting a picture of the king of Uganda to be drawn 
for him, and gave us one pot of pombé. 

3d.—I sent the picture required, and an angry message 
to Kamrasi for breaking his word, as he promised us we 


Kimenya the Dwarf. 


should go without a day’s delay; and go we must, for I 
could neither eat nor sleep from thinking of my home. 


Nov. | KIMENYA THE DWARF. 551 


His only reply to this was, Bana is always in a preposter- 
ous hurry. He answered, that for our gratification he had 
directed a dwarf called Kimenya to be sent to us, and the 
Kamraviona should follow after. Kimenya, a little old man, 
less than a yard high, called on us with a walkinge-stick 
higher than himself, made his salaam, and sat down very 
composedly. He then rose and danced, singing without 
invitation, and following it up with queer antics. Lastly, 
he performed the tambiira, or charging-march, in imitation 
of Wakungti, repeating the same words they use, and 
ending by a demand for simbi, or cowrie-shells, modestly 
saying, “I am a beggar, and want simbi; if you have not 
500 to spare, you must at any rate give me 400,” 

He then narrated his fortune in life. Born in Chopi, 
he was sent for by Kamrasi, who first gave him two 
women, who died; then another, who ran away; and, 
finally, a distorted dwarf like himself, whom he rejected, 
because he thought the propagation of his pigmy breed 
would not be advantageous to society. Bombay then 
marched him back to the palace, with 500 simbi strung 
in necklaces round his neck. When these two had gone, 
the Kamraviona arrived with two spears, one load of flour, 
and a pot of pombé, which he requested me to accept, 
adding that the spears were given as it was observed [I 
had accepted some from the king of Uganda; a shield was 
still in reserve for me, and spears would be sent for Grant. 
Then with regard to my going, Kamrasi must beg us to 
have patience until he had sent messengers into Kadi, 
requesting the natives there not to molest me on the way, 
for they had threatened they would do so, and, if they 
persisted, he would send us with a force by another route 
md Ugungti—another attempt to draw us off to fight 
against his brothers. 

I stormed at this announcement as a breach of faith ; 
said I had given the king my only tent, my only digester, 
my only saw, my only wire, my only mosquito-curtains, 


552 UNYORO. [1862. 


and my last of everything, because he had assured me I 
should have to pay no more chiefs, and he would give me 
the road at once. If he did not intend now to fulfil his 
promise, I begged he would take back his spears, for I 
would only accept them as a farewell present. The Kam- 
raviona finding me rather warm, with the usual pertina- 
cious duplicity of a negro, then said, “ Well, let that sub- 
ject drop, and consider the present Kamrasi promised you 
when you gave him the Uganga” (meaning the watch) ; 
“ Kamrasi’s horn is not ready yet.” This second prevarica- 
tion completely set my dander up. If I did not believe in 
his dangers of the way before, it quite settled my opinion 
of the worth of his words now. I therefore tendered him 
what might be called the ultimatum to this effect. There 
was no sincerity in such hageling; I would not submit to 
being told lies by kings or anybody else. He must take 
back the spears, or give us the road to-morrow; and 
unless the Kamraviona would tell him this and bring me 
an answer at once, the spears should not remain in my 
hut during the mght. Evidently in alarm, the Kamra- 
viona, with Kidewiga and Frij in company to bear him 
witness, returned to the palace, telling Kamrasi that he 
saw we were in thorough earnest. He extracted a pro- 
mise that Kamrasi would have a farewell meeting with 
us either to-morrow or the next day, when we should have 
a large escort to Petherick’s boats, and the men would be 
able to bring back anything that he wanted ; but he could 
not let us go without a parting interview, such as we had 
at Uganda with Mtésa. 

The deputation, delighted with their success and the 
manner in which it was effected, hurried -back to me at 
once, and said they were so* frightened themselves that 
they would have skulked away to their*homes and not 
come near me if they could not have arranged matters 
to my satisfaction. Kamrasi would not believe I had 
threatened to turn out his spears until Frij testified to their 


Noy. | A LAST MESSAGE TO MTESA, 5538 


statements ; and he then said, “Let Bana keep the spears 
and drink the pombé, for I would not wish him to be a 
prisoner against his will.” Bombay, after taking back the 
dwarf, met one of N ‘yamasoré’s officers, just arrived from 
Uganda on some important business, and upbraided Mtésa 
for not having carried out my instructions. The officer in 
turn tried to defend Mtésa’s conduct by saying he had 
given the deserters seventy cows and four women, as well 
as orders to join us quickly; but they had been delayed 
on the road, because wherever they went they plundered, 
and no one liked their company. Had we returned to 
Uganda, Mtésa would have given us the road through 
Masai, which, in their opinion, is nearer for us than this 
one. 

This officer had been wishing to see us as much as we 
had been to see him; but Kamrasi would not allow him 
to get access to us, from fear, it was said, lest the Waganda 
should know where we were hidden, and enable Mtésa to 
send an army to come and snatch us away. As the 
officer said he would deliver any message I might wish to 
send to Uganda, I folded a visiting-card as a letter to the 
queen-dowager, intimating that I wished the two men 
whom I sent back to Mtesa to be forwarded on to Karagité ; 
but desired that the remainder, who deserted their master 
in difficulty, should be placed on an island of the N’yanza 
to live in exile until some other Englishmen should come 
to release them; that their arms should be taken from 
them and kept in the palace. I said further, that should 
Mtésa act up to my desires, I would then know he was 
my friend, and other white men would not fear to enter 
Uganda ; but if he acted otherwise, they would fear lest 
he should imprison them, or seize their property or their 
men. If these deserters escaped punishment, no white 
men would ever dare trust their lives with such men 
again. The officer said he should be afraid to deliver 
such a message to Mtésa direct ; but he certainly would 


554 UNYORO. [1862. 


tell the queen every word of it, which would be even more 
efficacious. 

4th.—I bullied Kamrasi by telling him we must go 
with this moon, for the benefit of its light whilst crossmg 
the Kidi wilderness ; as if we did not reach the vessels in 
time for seasonable departure down the Nile, we should 
have to wait another year for their return from Kharttm. 
“What!” said Kamrasi, “does Bana forget my promised 
appointment that I would either see him to-day or to- 
morrow? I cannot do so to-day, and therefore to-morrow 
we will certainly meet and bid good-bye.” The Gani 
men, who came with Bombay, said they would escort us 
to their country, although, as a rule, they never cross the 
Kidi wilderness above once in two years, from fear of the 
hunting natives, who make game of everybody and every- 
thing they see; in other. words, they seize strangers, 
plunder them, and sell them as slaves. ‘To cross that 
tract, the dry season is the best, when all the grass is 
burnt down, or from the middle of December to the end 
of March. I gave them a cow, and they at once killed it, 
and, sitting down, commenced eating her flesh raw, out 
of choice. 

5th.—The Kamraviona came to inform us that the 
king was ready for the great interview, where we could 
both speak what we had at heart, for as yet he had only 
heard what our servants had to say; and there was a 
supplement to the message, of the usual kind, that he 
would like a present of a pencil, The pencil was sent 
in the first place, because we did not like talking about 
trifles when we visited great kings. 

The interview followed. It was opened on our side by 
our saying we had enjoyed his hospitality a great number 
of days, and wished to go to our homes; should he have 
any message to send to the great Queen of England, we 
should be happy to convey it. Along yarn then emanated 
from the throne. He defended his over-cautiousness when 


Nov. | ATTEMPTS AT FURTHER DELAY. 555 


admitting us into Unyoro. It was caused at first by 
wicked men who did not wish us to visit him ; he subse- 
quently saw through their representations, and now was 
very pleased with us as he found us. Of course he could 
not tie us down to stopping here against our wish, but, 
for safety’s sake, he would like us to stop a little longer, 
until he could send messengers ahead, requesting the wild 
men in Kidi not to molest us. That state trick failing to 
frighten and stop us, he tried another, by saying, when we 
departed, he hoped we would leave two men with guns 
behind, to occupy our present camp, and so delude the 
people into the belief that merely a party of their fol- 
lowers, and not the white men themselves, had left his 
house, for the purpose of spreading terror in the minds 
of the people we might meet, who, not knowing the num- 
ber of men behind, would naturally conclude there was 
a large reserve force ready to release us in case of ne- 
cessity. 

This foxy speech was too transparent to require one 
moment's reflection. In a country where men were pro- 
perty, the fate of one or two left behind was obvious ; 
and had we doubted that his object was to get possession 
of them, his next words would have sufticiently revealed 
it. He said, “As you gave men to Mtésa, why would 
you refuse them to me?” but was checkmated on being 
told, “Should any of those men who deserted us in this 
country ever reach their homes, they will all be hung for 
breaking their allegiance or oath.” “Well,” says the 
king, “I have acceded to everything you have to say ; 
and the day after to-morrow, when IT shall have had time 
to collect men to go with you, and selected the two princes 
you have promised to educate, we will meet again and 
say good-bye; but you must give me a gun and some 
more medicine, as well as the powder and ball you pro- 
mised after reaching the vessels.” This was all acquiesced 
in, and we wished to take his portrait, but he would not 


556 UNYORO, [1862. 


have it done on any consideration. The Kamraviona and 
Kidgwiga followed us home, and told Bombay the king 
did not wish us to leave till next moon, and then he 
would like us to fight his brothers on the way. This 
message, sent in such an underhand manner after the 
meeting, Bombay refused to deliver, telling them he 
should be afraid to do so. 

6th.—The Kamraviona was sent to us with four loads 
of fish and a request for ammunition, notwithstanding 
everything asked for yesterday had been refused until we 
reached the vessels. “ Confound Kamrasi!” was the reply; 
“does he think we came here to trick kings that he 
doubts our words? We came to open the road; and, as 
sure as we wish it, we will send him everything that has 
been promised, Why should he doubt our word more 
than anybody else? We are not accustomed to be treated 
in this manner, and must beg he won't insult us any more. 
Then about fighting his brothers, we have already given 
answer that we never fight with black men; and should 
the king persist in it, we will never take another thing 
from his hands. The boys shall not go to England, neither 
will any other white men come this way.” The Kamra- 
viona made the following answer :—“ But there are two 
more things the king wishes to know about: he has asked 
the question before, but forgotten the answers. Is there 
any medicine for women or children which will prevent 
the offspring from dying shortly after birth ?—for it is a 
common. infirmity in this country with some women, that 
all their children die before they are able to walk, whilst 
others never lose a child. The other matter of inquiry 
was, What medicine will attach all subjects to their king ? 
—for Kamrasi wants some of that most particularly.” I 
answered, “ Knowledge of good government, attended with 
wisdom and. justice, is all the medicine we know of; and 
this his boys can best learn in England, and instruct him 
in when they return.” 


Nov. ] LAST INTERVIEW WITH KAMRASI. 557 


7th—We went to meet Kamrasi at his Kaftt palace 
to bid good-bye. After all the huckstering and begging 
with which he had tormented us, the state he chose to 
assume on this occasion was very ludicrous. He sat with 
an air of the most solemn dignity, upon his throne of skins, 
regarding us like mere slaves, and asking what things we 
intended to send to him. On being told we did not like 
being repeatedly reminded of our promises, he came down 
a little from his dignity, saying, “ And what answer have 
you about the business on the island ?”—meaning the 
request to fight his brothers. That, of course, could not 
be listened to, as it was against the principles of our 
country. Grant’s rings were then espied, and begged for, 
but without success. We told him it was highly improper 
to beg for everything he saw, and if he persisted in it, no 
one would ever dare to come near him again. 

Then, to change the subject, we begged K’yengo’s men 
might be allowed to go as far as Gani with us; but no 
reply was given, until the question was put again, with a 
request that the reasons might be told us for his not 
wishing it, as we saw great benefit would be derived 
to Unyoro, as the Wanyamiiézi, instead of trading merely 
with Karagtié and Zanzibar, would bring their ivory 
through this country and barter it, thus converting Un- 
yoro into a great commercial country; when Kamrasi 
said, “ We don’t want any more ivory in Unyoro; for the 
tusks are already as numerous as grass.” Kidgwiga was 
then appointed to receive all the things we were to send 
back from Gani; our departure was fixed for the 9th; 
and the king walked away as coldly as he came, whilst 
we felt as jolly as birds released from a cage. 

Floating islands of grass were seen going down the 
Kafti, reminding us of the stories told at Kazé by Misa 
Mziiri, of the violent manner in which, at certain seasons, 
the N’yanza was said to rise and rush with such velocity 
that islands were uprooted and carried away. In the 


558 UNYORO. [1862.. 


evening a pot of pombé was brought, when the man in 
charge, half-drunk, amused us with frantic charges, as if 
he were fighting with his spear; and after settling the 
supposed enemy, he delighted in trampling him under 
foot, spearing him repeatedly through and through, then 
wiping the blade of the spear in the grass, and finally 
polishing it on his tufty head, when, with a grunt of satis- 
faction, he shouldered arms and walked away a hero. 

8th.—As the king seemed entirely to disregard our 
comfort on the journey, we made a request for cows, 
butter, and coffee, in answer to which we only got ten 
cows, the other things not being procurable without delay. 
Twenty-four men were appointed to escort us and bring 
back our presents from Gani, which were to be—six car- 
bines, with a magazine of ammunition, a large brass or 
iron water-pot, a hair-brush, lucifers, a dinner-knife, and 
any other things procurable that had never been seen in 
Unyoro. 

Two orphan boys, seized by the king as slaves, were 
brought for education in England ; but as they were both 
of the common negro breed, with nothing attractive about 
them, and such as no one could love but their mothers, 
we rejected them, fearing lest no English boys would care 
to play with them, and told Kamrasi that his offspring 
only could play with our children, and unless I got some. 
princes of that interesting breed, no one would ever 
undertake to teach children brought from his country. 
The king was very much disappointed at this announce- 
ment; said they were his adopted children, and the only 
ones he could part with, for his own boys were mere balls 
of fat, and too small to leave home. 


Nov. ] OFF AT LAST. 559 


CHAPTER XIX. 


THE MARCH TO MADI. 


SAIL DOWN THE KAFU—THE NAVIGABLE NILE—FISHING AND 
SPORTING POPULATION—THE SCENERY ON THE RIVER—AN 
INHOSPITABLE GOVERNOR—KARUMA FALLS—NATIVE SUPERSTI- 
TIONS ——- THIEVERIES — HOSPITABLE RECEPTION AT KOKI BY 
CHONGI. 


AFTER giving Kamrasi a sketching-stool, we dropped 
To North Cha. own the Kafti two miles in a canoe, in order 
asta that the common people might not see us ; 
for the exclusive king would not allow any eyes but his 
own to be indulged with the extraordinary sight of white 
men in Unyoro! ‘The palace side of the river, however, as 
we paddled away, was thronged with anxious spectators, 
amongst whom the most conspicuous was the king’s 
favourite nurse. Dr K’yengo’s men were very anxious to 
accompany us, even telling the king, if he would allow the 
road to be opened to their countrymen, all would hongo, 
or pay customs-duty, to him; but the close, narrow- 
minded king could not be persuaded. Bombay here told 
us Kamrasi at the last moment wished to give me some 
women and ivory; and when told we never accepted 
anything of that sort, wished to give them to my head 
servants; but this being contrary to standing orders also, 
he said he would smuggle them down to the boats for 
Bombay in such a manner that I should not find it out. 


560 THE MARCH TO MADI. [1862. 


We were now expected to march again, but beimg 
anxious myself to see more of the river, before 
starting, I obtained leave to go by boat as 
far as the river was navigable, sending our cattle by land. 
To this concession was accompanied a request for a few 
more gun-caps, and liberty was given us to seize any 
pombé which might be found coming on the river in boats, 
for the supplies to the palace all come in this manner. 
We then took boat again, an immense canoe, and, after 
going a short distance, emerged from the Kaft, and found 
ourselves on what at first appeared a long lake, averaging 
from two hundred at first to one thousand yards broad, 
before the day’s work was out; but this was the Nile 
again, navigable in this way from Urondogani. 

Both sides were fringed with the huge papyrus rush. 
The left one was low and swampy, whilst the right one— 
in which the Kidi people and Wanyoro occasionally hunt 
—rose from the water in a gently sloping bank, covered 
with trees and beautiful convolvuli, which hung in fes- 
toons. Floating islands, composed of rush, grass, and 
ferns, were continually in motion, working their way 
slowly down the stream, and proving to us that the Nile 
was in full flood. On one occasion we saw hippopotami, 
which our men said came to the surface because we had 
domestic fowls on board, supposing them to have an anti- 
pathy to that bird. Boats there were, which the sailors 
gave chase to; but, as they had no liquor, they were 
allowed to go their way, and the sailors, instead, set to 
lifting baskets and taking fish from the snares which 
fishermen, who live in small huts amongst the rushes, 
had laid for themselves. 

After arrival, as we found the boatmen wished to make 
off, instead of carrying out their king’s orders to take us 
to the waterfall, we seized all the paddles, and kept their | 
tongues quiet by giving them a cow to eat. The over- 
land route, by which Kidgwiga and the cattle went, was 


To Kitwara, 10th. 


Nov. ] VOYAGE DOWN THE RIVER. 561 


not so interesting, by all accounts, as the river one; for 
they walked the whole way through marshy ground, and 
crossed one drain in boats, where some savages struggled 
to plunder our men of their goats. 

With a great deal of difficulty, and after hours of de- 
lay, we managed to get under way with two 
boats besides the original one; and, after an 
hour and a half’s paddling in the laziest manner possible, 
the men seized two pots of pombé and pulled in to Koki, 
guided by a king’s messenger, who said this was one of 
the places appointed by order to pick up recruits for the 
force which was to take us to Gani. We found, however, 
nothing but loss and disappointment—one calf stolen, 
and five goats nearly so. Fortunately, the thief who 
attempted to run off with the goats was taken by my 
men in the act, tied with his hands painfully tight be- 
hind his back, and left, with his face pamted white, till 
midnight, when his comrades stole into Bombay’s hut and 
released him. After all these annoyances, the chief officer 
of the place offered us a present of a goat, but was sent to 
the right-about in scorn. How could he be countenanced 
as a friend when the men under him steal from us ? 

The big boat gave us the slip, floating away and leay- 
ing its paddles behind. ‘To supply its place, 
we took six small boats, turning my men into 
sailors, and going as we liked. The river still continued 
beautiful ; but after paddling three hours we found it 
bend considerably, and narrow to two hundred yards, the 
average depth being from two to three fathoms. At 
the fourth hour, imagining our cattle to be far behind, 
we pulled in, and walked up a well-cultivated hill to 
Yaragonjo’s, the governor of these parts. The guide, 
however, on first sighting his thorn-fenced cluster of huts, 
regarding it apparently with the awe and deference due to 
a palace, shrank from advancing, and merely pointed, till 

2N 


To Koki, 11th. 


To Gténi, 8., 
12th. 


562 THE MARCH TO MADI. [1862. 


he was forced on, and in the next minute we found our- 
selves confronted with the heads of the establishment. 
The father of the house, surprised at our unexpected 
manner of entrance—imagining, probably, we were the 
king’s sorcerers, in consequence of our hats, sent to fight, 
“the brothers ”—without saying a word, quietly beckoned 
us to follow him out of the gate by the same way as we 
came. Preferring, however, to have a little talk where 
we were, we remained: 

The eldest son, a fine young man considerably above 
six feet high, with large gashes on his body received 
in war during late skirmishes with the refractory bro- 
thers, now came in, did the honours, and, on hearing of 
the importance of his visitors, directed us to some huts 
a little distance off, where we could rest for the night, 
for there was no accommodation for such a large party 
in the palace. The red hill we were now on, with plan- 
tain- gardens, fine huts neatly kept, and dense grasses 
covering the country, reminded us of our residence in 
Uganda. The people seemed of a decidedly sporting 
order, for they kept hippopotamus-harpoons, attached to 
strong ropes with trimmers of pith wood, in their huts ; 
and, outside, trophies of their toil in the shape of a pile 
of heads, consisting of those of buffalo and hippopotami. 
The women, anything but pretty, wore their mbtigt cut 
into two flounces, fastened with a drawing-string round 
the waist ; and, in place of stockings, they bound strings 
of small iron beads, kept bright and shining, carefully up 
the leg from the ankle to the bottom. of the calf. 

Kidgwiga with our cattle arrived in the morning. A 
To Giéni, N., bundle of cartridges, stolen from one of the 
Bt men’s pouches, which we knew could only 
have been done by some comrade, was* discovered by 
stopping the rations of flesh. The guilty person, to save 
detection, threw it on the road, and allowed some of the 
natives to pick it up. Strange as it may appear, the only 


Nov.] SOLD AGAIN, 563 


motive for this petty theft was the hope of being able to 
sell the cartridges for a trifle at Gani. Yaragonjo brought 
us a present of a goat and plantains. He was sorry he 
sent us back yesterday from his house; and invited us 
to change ground to another village close by, where he 
would make arrangements for our receiving other boats, 
as the ones we had in possession must go back. Presum- 
ing this to be a very fair proposition, and thinking we 
would only have to walk across an elbow of land where 
the river bends considerably, we gave him a return-pre- 
sent of beads, and did as we were bid; but, after moving, 
it was obvious we had been sold. We had lost our 
former boats, and no others were near us; therefore, 
feeling angry with Yaragonjo, I walked back to his palace, 
taking the presented goat with me, as I knew that would 
touch the savage in the most tender part; then flaring up 
with the officer for treating the king’s orders with con- 
tempt, as well as his guests, by sending us into the 
jungles like a pack of thieves, whose riddance from his 
presence was obviously his only intent, I gave him his 
goat again, and said I would have nothing more to say 
to him, for I should look to the king for redress. 

This frightened him to such an extent that he imme- 
diately produced another and finer goat, which he begged 
me to accept, promising to convey all my traps to the 
next governor’s, where there would be no doubt about 
our getting boats. He did not imtend to deceive us, but 
committed an error in not informing us he had no boats 
of his own; and, to show his earnestness, accompanied us 
to the camp. Here I found the missing calf taken at 
Koki, and a large deputation of natives awaiting our 
arrival. They told me that the Koki governor had taken 
such fright in consequence of my anger when I refused 
his proffered goat, that he had traced the calf back to 
Kitwara, and now wished to take Kidgwiga a prisoner 
to Kamrasi’s for having seized five cows of his, and a 


564 THE MARCH TO MADI. [1862. 


woman from another governor. As yet I had not heard 
of this piece of rough justice; and, on inquiry, found out 
that he had been compelled to do as he had done, because 
those officers, on finding we had gone ahead in boats, 
would not produce the complement of men required of 
them by the king’s orders for escorting us to Gani; but 
now they sent the men, the woman and cows could not 
be returned, as they had been sent overland by the ordi- 
nary route to the ferry on the Nile. 

Of course we would not listen to this reference for justice 
with Kamrasi, as the woman and cows were still all alive; 
commended Kidewiga for carrying out his orders so well, 
and told the officers they had merited their punishment 
—as how could the affairs of government be carried on, 
when subordinate officers refused immediate compliance ? 
The sub-mkungtt of Northern Gtiéni, Kasoro, now prof- 
fered a goat and plantains, and everything was settled 
for the day. 

With a full complement of porters, travelling six miles 
To Kijumbitra, through cultivation and jungle, we reached 
1s the headquarters of governor Kaért, where 
all the porters threw down their loads and bolted, though 
we were still two miles from the post. We inquired for the 
boats at once, but were told they were some distance off, 
and we must wait here for the night. Four pots of pombé 
were sent us, and Kaérti thought we would be satisfied 
and conform. We suspected, however, that there was 
some trick at the bottom of all; so, refusing the liquor, 
we said, with proper emphasis, “ Unless we are forwarded 
to the boats at once, and get them on the following morn- 
ing, we cannot think of receiving presents from any one.” 
This served our purpose, for ‘a fresh set of porters was 
found like magic, and traps, pombé, and all together, were 
forwarded to the journey’s end—a snug batch of huts im- 
bedded in large plantain cultivation surrounded by jungle, 
and obviously near the river, as numerous huge harpoons, 


Noy. | NATIVE INFORMATION. 565 


intended for striking hippopotami, were suspended from 
the roof. Kaérti here presented us with a goat, and pro- 
mised the boats in the morning. 

After fighting for the boats, we still had to wait the 
day for Kidgwiga and his men, who said it 
was all very well our pushing ahead, indif- 
ferent as to whether men were enlisted or not, but he 
had to prepare for the future also, as he could never 
recross the Kidi wilderness by himself; he must have 
a suflicient number of men to form his escort, and 
these were now grinding corn for the journey. Numer- 
ous visitors called on us here, and consequently our 
picture-books were in great request. We gave Kaérit 
some beads. 

After walking two miles to the boats, we entered the 
To Koki in district of Chopi, subject to Unyoro, and went 
Chopi, 164, down the river, keeping the Kikungtirti cone 
in view. On arrival at camp, Viarwanjo, the officer of the 
castrict, a very smart fellow, arrived with a large escort of 
spearmen, presented pombé, ordered fowls to be seized for 
us, and promised one boat in the morning, for he had no 
more disposable, and even that one he felt anxious about 
lest the men on ahead should seize it. 

I gave Viarwanjo some beads, and dropped down the 
fe Eoraeauk river in his only wretched little canoe—he, 
Le with Grant and the traps, going overland. | 
caught a fever, and so spent the mght. 

Here I halted to please Magamba, the governor, who is 
a relation of the king. He called in great 
state, presented a cow and pombé, was much 
pleased with the picture-books, and wished to feast his 
eyes on all the wonders in the hut. He was very com- 
municative, also, as far as his limited knowledge permitted. 
He said the people are only a sub-tribe of the Madi; and 
the reason why the right bank of the river is preferred to 
the left for travelling is, that Rionga, who lives down the 


Halt, 15th. 


Halt, 18¢h. 


566 THE MARCH TO MADI. [1862. 


river, is always on the look-out for Kamrasi’s allies, with 
a view to kill them. Magamba also, on being questioned, 
told us about Urtri, a province of Unyoro, under the 
jurisdiction of Kiméziri, a noted governor, who covers his 
children with bead ornaments, and throws them into the 
N’yanza, to prove their identity as his own true offspring; 
for should they sink, it stands to reason-some other per- 
son must be their father; but should they float, then he 
recovers them. One of Kamrasi’s cousins, Kaoroti, with 
his chief officer, called on us, presenting five fowls as an 
honorarium. He had little to say, but begged for medicine, 
and when given some in a liquid state, said his sub would 
like some also; then Kidgwiga’s wife, who was left behind, 
must have some; and as pills were given for her, the two 
men must have dry medicine too, to take home with them. 


Group of Kidi Men on a Visit to King Kamrasi. 


Severe drain as this was on the medicine-chest, Magamba 
and his wife must have both wet and dry; and even others 


Noy. | SCENERY OF THE RIVER. 567 


put in a claim, but were told they were too healthy to 
require physicking. Many Kidi men, dressed as in the 
woodcut, crossed the river to visit Kamrasi; they could 
not, however, pass us without satisfying their curiosity 
with a look. Usually these men despise clothes, and 
never deign to put any covering on except out of respect, 
when visiting Kamrasi. Their “sow-wester ”-shaped wigs 
are made of other men’s hair, as the negro hair will not 
grow long enough. A message came from Ukéro, the 
governor-general of Chopi, to request we would not go 
down the river in boats to-morrow, lest the Chopi ferry- 
men at the falls should take fright at our strange appear- 
ance, paddle precipitately across the river, hide their 
boats, and be seen no more. 

We started, leaving all the traps and men to follow, 
erat far hs and made this place in a stride, as a whisper 
Karima Falls, warned me that Kamrasi’s officers, who are 
19th, é 

as thick as thieves about here, had made up 
their minds to keep us each one day at his abode, and 
show us “hospitality.” Such was the case, for they all 
tried their powers of persuasion, which failing, they took 
the alternative of making my men all drunk, and sending 
to camp sundry pots of pombé. The ground on the line 
of march was highly cultivated, and intersected by a deep 
ravine of running water, whose sundry branches made the 
surface very irregular. The sand-paper tree, whose leaves 
resemble a cat’s tongue in roughness, and which is used in 
Uganda for polishing their clubs and spear-handles, was 
conspicuous; but at the end of the journey only was 
there anything of much interest to be seen, There sud- 
denly, in a deep ravine one hundred yards below us, the 
formerly placid river, up which vessels of moderate size 
might steam two or three abreast, was now changed into 
a turbulent torrent. Beyond lay the land of Kidi, a 
forest of mimosa trees, rising gently away from the water 
in soft clouds of green. This, the governor of the place, 


568 THE MARCH TO MADI. [1862. 


Kija, described as a sporting-field, where elephants, hip- 
popotami, and buffalo are hunted by the occupants of 
both sides of the river. The elephant is killed with a 
new kind of spear, with a double-edged blade a yard long, 
and a handle which, weighted in any way most easy, is 
pear-shaped. 

With these instruments in their hands, some men climb 
into trees and wait for the herd to pass, whilst others 
drive them under. The hippopotami, however, are not 
hunted, but snared with ltinda, the common tripping-trap 
with spike-drop, which is placed in the runs of this ani- 
mal, described by every South African traveller, and 
generally known as far as the Hametic language is 


spread. The Kartima Falls, if such they may be called, 


The Karuma Falls—Kidi. 


are a mere sluice or rush of water between high syenitic 
stones, falling in a long slope down a ten-fect drop. There 
are others of minor importance, and one within ear-sound, 
down the river, said to be very grand, 


Noy. | NATIVE TRADITIONS. 569 


The name given to the Karima Falls arose from the 
absurd belief that Kartima, the agent or familiar of a 
certain great spirit, placed the stones that break the 
waters in the river, and, for so doing, was applauded by 
his master, who, to reward his services by an appropriate 
distinction, allowed the stones to be called Karttma. Near 
this is a tree which contains a spirit whose attributes for 
gratifying the powers and pleasures of either men or 
women who summon its influence in the form appropriate 
to each, appear to be almost identical with that of Maha- 
deo’s Ligna in India. 

20th.—We halted for the men to collect and lay in a 
_store of food for the passage of the Kidi wilderness. Pre- 
sents of fish, caught in baskets, were sent us by Kiya. 
They were not bad eating, though all ground animals of 
the lowest order. At the Grand Falls below this, Kidg- 
wiga informs us, the king had the heads of one hundred 
men, prisoners taken in war against Rionga, cut off and 
thrown into the river. 

21st and 22d.—The governor, who would not let us go 
until we saw him, called on the 22d with a large retinue, 
attended by a harpist, and bringing a present of one cow, 
two loads flour, and three pots of pombé. He expected 
a chair to sit upon, and got a box, as at home he has a 
throne only a little inferior to Kamrasi’s. He was very 
generous to Bombay on his former journey to Gani; and 
then said he thought the white men were all flocking this 
way to retake their lost country ; for tradition recorded 
that the Wahttma were once half-black and half-white, 
with half the hair straight and the other half curly; and 
how was this to be accounted for, unless the country 
formerly belonged to white men with straight hair, but 
was subsequently taken by black men? We relieved his 
apprehensions by telling him his ancestors were formerly 
all white, with straight hair, and lived in a country be- 
yond the salt sea, till they crossed that sea, took posses- 


570 THE MARCH TO MADI. [1862. 


sion of Abyssinia, and are now generally known by the 
name of Hubshies and Gallas ; but neither of these names 
was known to him. 

On the east, beyond Kidi, he only knew of one clan 
of Wahtima, a people who subsist entirely on meat and 
milk, The sportsmen of this country, like the Wanyamtézi, 
plant a convolvulus of extraordinary size by the side of 
their huts, and pile the jaw-bones and horns of their 
spoils before, as a means of bringing good-luck. This 
same flower, held in the hand when a man is searching 
for anything that he has lost, will certainly bring him to 
the missing treasure. In the evening, Kidgwiga, at the 
head of his brave army, made one of their theatrical 
charges on “Bana” with spear and shield, swearing they 
would never desert him on the march, but would die to a 
man if it were necessary ; and if they deserted him, then 
might they be deprived of their heads, or of other personal 
possessions not much less valuable. 

Just as we were ready for crossing the river, a line of 
To Ist Campin Midi men was descried filing through the 
eet jungle on the opposite side, making their 
way for a new-moon visit to Rionga, who occasionally 
leads them in battle against Ukéro. The last time they 
fought, two men only were killed on Kamrasi’s side, whilst 
nine fell on Rionga’s. There was little done besides cross- 
ing, for the last cow was brought across at sunset—the 
ferrying-toll for the whole being one cow, besides a pre- 
sent of beads to the head officer. Kidgwiga’s party sacri- 
ficed two kids, one on either side the river, flaying them 
with one long cut each down their breasts and bellies. 
These animals were then, spread-eagle fashion, laid on 
their backs upon grass and twigs, to be stepped over by 
the travellers, that their journey might be prosperous ; and 
the spot selected for the ordeal was chosen in deference 
to the Mzimt, or spirit—a sort of wizard or ecclesiastical 
patriarch, whose functions were devoted to the falls. 


Noy. ] THE KIDI WILDERNESS. 571 


After a soaking night, we were kept waiting till noon 
To2d Camp, for the fats porters ordered by Kesar to 
sae carry our property to the vessels wherever 
they might be. Only twenty-five men arrived, notwith- 
standing the wife and one slave belonging to a local officer, 
who anid not supply the men aire of him, were 
seized and confiscated by Ukéro, of Wiré. We now mus- 
tered twenty Wangitana, twenty-five country porters, 
and thirty-one of Kidgwiga’s “ children ”—making a total, 
with ourselves, of seventy-eight souls. by a late arrival a 
message came from Kamrasi. Its import was, that we 
must defer the march, as it was reported the refractory 
brother Rionga harboured designs of molesting us on the 
way, and entice the king Siackivnad it panics to clear 
the road by first fighting him. Without heeding this 
cunning advice, we made a short march across swamps, and 
through thick jungle and long grasses, which proved any- 
thing but pleasant—wet and labouring hard all the way. 

It was a rainy day, and we had still to toil on fighting 
To3d Camp, With the grasses. We marched up the wet 
ge margin of swamp all day, crossing the water 
at a fork near the end. The same jungle prevails on all 
sides, excluding all view; and the only signs of man’s 
existence in these wilds lay in the meagre path, which is 
often lost, and an occasional hut or two, the temporary 
residence of the sporting Kidi people. 

After toiling five miles through the same terrible grasses, 
To 4th Camp, nd crossing swamp after swamp, we were at 
od last rewarded by astriking view. ‘The jungles 
had thinned; we found ourselves unexpectedly standing 
on the edge of a plateau, on the west of which, for distance 
interminable, lay apparently a low flat country of grass, 
yellowed by the sun, with a few trees or shrubs only hint 
scattered over the surface ; while, from fifteen to twenty 
miles in the rear, bearing south by west, stood conspicu- 
ously the hill of Kisiiga, said to be situated in Chopi, not 


572 THE MARCH TO MADI. [1862. 


far from the refractory brothers. But this view was only 
for the moment; again we dived into the grasses and 
forced our way along. Presently elephants were seen, 
also buffalo; and the guide, to make the journey propi- 
tious, plucked a twig, caused it of its leaves and branches, 

waved it like a ad up the line of march, muttered some 
unintelligible words to himself, broke it in twain, and 
threw the separated bits on either side of the path. 

Immediately after starting, the guide ran up on an 
To 5th Camp,  2nt-hill and pointed out to us all the glories 
Be of the country round. In our rear we could 
see back upon Wiré and the hill of Kistiga ; to the west 
were the same low plains of grass; east and by south, the 
jungles of Kidi; and to the northward, over downs of 
orass, the tops of some hills, which marked the neighbour- 
ing village of Koki, which we were making for. Its 
appearance in the distance warned us that we were closing 
on the habitations of men, and we were told that Bombay 
had drunk pombé there. Then plunging through grass 
again over our heads, and crossing constant swamps, we 
arrived at a stream which drains all these lands to west- 
ward, and rested a while that the men might bathe, and 
also that they might set fire to the grass as a telegraph to 
the settlement of Koki, to apprise av people of our ad- 
vance, and be ready with their pombé ere our arrival. 
Shortly after, towards the close of the day’s work, as a 
solitary buffalo was seen grazing by a brook, I put a bullet 
through him, and allowed the savages the pleasure of 
despatching him im their own wild fashion with spears. 

It was a sight quite worthy of a little delay. No sooner 
was it observed that the huge beast could not retire, than, 
with springmg bounds, the men, all spear in hand, as if 
advancing on an enemy, went top speed‘at him, over rise 
and fall alike, till, as they neared the maddened bull, he 
instinctively advanced to meet his assailants with the best 
charge his exhausted body could muster up. Wind, how- 


Nov. | ARRIVAL AT KOKI. 573 


ever, failed him soon; he knew his disadvantage, and 
tried to hide by plunging in the water—the worst policy 
he could have pursued, for the men from the bank above 
him soon covered him with bristling spears, and gained 
their victory. Now, what was to be done with this huge 
carcass ? No one could be induced to leave it. A cow 
was offered as a bribe on reaching camp; but no, the 
buffalo was bigger than a cow, and must be quartered 
on the spot ; so, to gain our object, we went ahead and 
left the rear men to follow, thus Saving a cow in rations, 
for we required to slaughter one every day. 

By dint of hard perseverance we accomplished ten miles 
To 6th Camp, OVer the same downs of tall grass with occa- 
a sional swamps. We saw a herd of hartebeest, 
and reached at night a place within easy run of Koki in 
Gani. 

The weather had now become fine. At length we 
To Koki in Gani, leached the habitations of men—a collection 
et of conical huts on the ridge of a small chain 
of granitic hills lying north-west. As we approached 
the southern extremity of this chain, knots of naked 
men, perched like monkeys on the granite blocks, were 
anxiously watching our arrival. The guides, following the 
usages of the country, instead of allowmg us to mount 
the hill and look out for accommodation at once, desired 
us to halt, and sent on a messenger to inform Chongi, 
the governor-general, that we were visitors from Kam- 
rasi, who desired he would take care of us and forward us 
to our brothers. This Mercury brought forth a hearty 
welcome; for Chongi had been appointed governor by 
Kamrasi of this district, which appears to have been the 
extreme northern limit of the originally vast kingdom of 
Kittara. All the élite of the place, covered with war- 
| paints, and dressed, so far as their nakedness was covered 
at all, like clowns in a fair, charged down the hill full tilt 
with their spears, and, after performing their customary 


574 THE MARCH TO MADI. [1862. 


evolutions, mingled with our men, and invited us up the 
hill, where we no sooner arrived than Chongi, a very old 


Group of Gani Men. 


man, attended by his familiar, advanced to receive us— 
one holding a white hen, the other a small gourd of 
pombé and a little twig. 

Chongi gave us all a friendly harangue by way of 
erecting ; at taking the fowl by one ic swayed it to 
and fro close to the ground in front oh his assembled 
visitors. After this ceremony had been also repeated by 
the familiar, Chongi then took the gourd and twig, and 
sprinkled the contents all over us ; retired to the Uganga, 
or magic house—a very diminutive hut—sprinkled pombé 
over it; and, finally, spreading a cow-skin under a tree, 
bade us sit, and gave us a jorum of pombé, making many 
apologies that he could not show us more hospitality, as 
famine had reduced his stores. What politeness in the 
midst of such barbarism!!! Nowhere had we seen such 
naked creatures, whose sole dress consisted of bead, iron, 


Nov.] THE GANI AND THEIR COSTUME. 575 


or brass ornaments, with some feathers or cowrie-beads on 
the head. Even the women contented themselves with a 
few fibres hung like tails before and behind. Some of 
our men who had seen the Watita in Utambara, declared 
these savages to resemble them in every particular, save 
one small specialty in their costume, alluded to in the 
description of the Ztlt, Kafirs’ dress. The hair of the 
men was dressed in the same fantastic fashion, and 
the women placed half-gourds over the baby as it rode 
on its mother’s back. They also, like the Kidi people, 
whom they much fear, carry diminutive stools to sit upon 
wherever they go. 

Their habitat extends from this to the Astia river, 
whilst the Madi occupy all the country west of this 
meridian to the Nile, which is far beyond sight. The 
villages are composed of little conical huts of grass, on 
a framework of bamboo raised above low mud _ walls. 
There are no sultans here of any consequence, each village 
appointing its own chief. The granitic hills, like those of 
Unyamitiézi, are extremely pretty, and clad with trees, 
contrasting strangely with the grassy downs of indefinite 
extent around, which give the place, when compared with 
a people, the appearance of a paradise within the infernal 
regions. From the site of Koki we saw the hills behind 
which, according to Bombay, Petherick was situated with” 
his vessels; and we also saw a nearer hill, behind which 
his advanced post of elephant-hunters were waiting our 
arrival. 

I tried to ascertain if there were any prefixes, as in 
the South African dialects, by which one might deter- 
mine the difference between the people and the country ; 
but I was assured that both here and in the adjacent 
countries these people say Chopi, Kidi, Gana, Madi, 
Bari, alike for person and_ place, though Jo in their 
language is the equivalent for Wa in South Africa, and 
Dano takes the place of Mt, All the words and sys- 


576 THE MARCH TO MADI. [1862. 


tem of language were wholly changed—as, for example, 
Poko poko wingi bongo, means “we do not understand ;” 
Mazi, “ fire ;” Pi, “ water ;” Pé, “there is none ;” Bugra, 
“cow.” In sound, the language of these people resembles 
that of the Tibet Tartars. Chongi considers himself the 
greatest man in the country, and of noble descent, his 
great-erandfather having been a Mhttma, born at Urutri, 
in Unyoro, and appointed by the then reigning king to 
rule over this country, and keep the Kidi people in 
check. 

30th.—We halted, at the earnest solicitation of Chongi, 
as well as of the Chopi porters, who said they required a 
day to lay in grain, as the Wichwézi, or mendicant sor- 
cerers—for so they thought fit to designate Petherick’s 
elephant-hunters—had eaten up the country all about 
them, and those who went before with Bombay to visit 
their camp could get no food. 

1st.—We halted again at the request of all parties, and 
much to the delight of old Chongi, who supplied us with 
abundant pombé, promised a cow, that we should not be 
put to any extra expense by stopping, and said that with- 
out fail he would furnish us with guides who knew a short 
cut across country, by which we might reach the Wich- 
wézi camp in one march, instead of going by the circuit- 
ous route which Bombay formerly took. The cow, how- 
ever, never came, as the old man did not intend to give 
his own, and his officers refused to obey his orders in 
giving one of theirs. 

We left Koki with difficulty, in consequence of the 
To Midta, 42 Chopi porters refusing to carry any loads, 

leaving the burden of lifting them on the 

country people, as they said, “We have endured all the 
trouble and hardships of bringing these ‘visitors through 
the wilderness ; and now, as they have visited you, it is 
your place to help them on.” The consequence was, we 
had to engage fresh porters at every village, each in turn 


Dec. | THE MADI. 577 


saying he had done all the work which with justice fell 
to his lot, till at last we arrived at the borders of a jungle, - 
where the men last engaged, feeling tired of their work, 
pleaded ignorance of the direct road, and turned off to 
the longer one, where villages and men were in abun- 
dance, thus upsetting all our plans, and doubling the 
actual distance. 

To pass the night half-way was now imperative, as 
we had been the whole day travelling without making 
good much ground. From the Gani people we had, with- 
out any visible change, mingled with the Madi people, 
who dress in the same naked fashion as their neighbours, 
and use bows and arrows. Their villages were all sur- 
rounded with bomas (fences), and the country in its gene- 
ral aspect resembled that of Northern Unyamitézi. At one 
place, the good-natured simple people, as soon as we 
reached their village, spread a skin, deposited a stool 
upon it, and placed in front two pots of pombé. At the 
village where we put up, however, the women and chil- 
dren of the head man at first all ran away, and the head 
man himself was very shy of us, thinking we were some 
unearthly creatures. He became more reconciled to us, 
however, when he perceived we fed like rational beings ; 
and, calling his family in by midnight, presented us with 
pombé, and made many apologies for having allowed us 
to dine without a drop of his beer, for he was very glad 
to see us. 


578 MADI. [1862. 


CHAPTER: XX, 


MADI. 


JUNCTION OF THE TWO HEMISPHERES—THE FIRST CONTACT WITH 
PERSONS ACQUAINTED WITH EUROPEAN HABITS—INTERRUPTIONS 
AND PLOTS—THE MYSTERIOUS MAHAMED—NATIVE REVELRIES— 
THE PLUNDERING AND TYRANNY OF THE TURKS —THE RAS- 
CALITIES OF THE IVORY TRADE—FEELING FOR THE NILE — 
TAKEN TO SEE. A MARK LEFT BY A EUROPEAN — BUFFALO, 
ELAND, AND RHINOCEROS STALKING—-MEET BAKER—PETHERICK’S 
ARRIVAL AT GONDOKORO. 


AFTER receiving more pombé from the chief, and, strange 
to say, hot water to wash with—for he did 
not know how else he could show hospitality 
better—we started again in the same straggling manner as 
yesterday. In two hours we reached the palace of Pié- 
joko, a chief of some pretensions, and were summoned to 
stop and drink pombé. In my haste to meet Petherick’s 
expedition, | would listen to nothing, but pushed rapidly 
on, despite all entreaties to stop, both from the chief and 
from my porters, who, I saw clearly, wished to do me out 
of another day. 

Half my men, however, did stop there, but with the 
other half Grant and I went on; and, as the sun was 
setting, we came in sight of what we thought was Pethe- 
rick’s outpost, N. lat. 3° 10’ 33”, and E. long. 31°50’ 45”. 
My men, as happy as we were ourselves, now begged I 
would allow them to fire their guns, and prepare the 


To Faloro, 3d. 


Dec. | MEETING WITH PETHERICK’S TURKS. 579 


Turks for our reception. Crack, bang, went their carbines, 
and in another instant crack, bang, was heard from the 
northerners’ camp, when, lke a swarm of bees, every 
height and other conspicuous place was covered with 
men. Our hearts leapt with an excitement of joy only 
known to those who have escaped from long-continued 
banishment among barbarians, once more to meet with 
civilised people, and join old friends. Every minute in- 
creased this excitement. We saw three large red flags 
heading a military procession, which marched out of the 
camp with drums and fifes playing. I halted and allowed 
them to draw near. When they did so, a very black 
man, named Mahamed, in full Egyptian regimentals, with 
a curved sword, ordered his regiment to halt, and threw 
himself into my arms, endeavouring to hug and kiss me. 
Rather staggered at this unexpected manifestation of 
affection, which was like a conjunction of the two hemi- 
spheres, I gave him a squeeze in return for his hug, but 
raised my head above the reach of his lips, and asked 
who was his master? “ Petrik,” was the reply. “ And 
where is Petherick now?” “Oh, he is coming.” “ How 
is it you have not got English colours, then?” “ The 
colours are Debono’s.” “ Who is Debono?” “The same 
as Petrik ; but come along into my camp, and let us talk 
it out there;” saying which, Mahamed ordered his regi- 
ment (a ragamuffin mixture of Nubians, Egyptians, and 
slaves of all sorts, about two hundred in number) to right- 
about, and we were guided by him, whilst his men kept 
up an incessant drumming and fifing, presenting arms, and 
firing, until we reached his huts, situated in a village 
kept exactly in the same order as that of the natives. 
Mahamed then gave us two beds to sit upon, and ordered 
his wives to advance on their knees and give us coffee, 
whilst other men brought pombé, and prepared us a din- 
ner of bread and honey and mutton. 

A large shed was cleared for Grant and myself, and all 


580 MADI. [1862. 


my men were ordered to disperse, and chum in ones and 
twos with Mahamed’s men; for Mahamed said, now we 
had come there, his work was finished. “If that is the 
case,” I said, “tell us your orders; there must be some 
letters.” He said, “No, I have no letters or written 
orders ; though I have directions to take you to Gondokoro 
as soon as you come. I am Debono’s Vakil, and am glad 
you are come, for we are all tired of waiting here for you. 
Our business has been to collect ivory whilst waiting for 
you.” I said, “ How is it Petherick has not come here to 
meet me? is he married?” “Yes, he is married; and 
both he and his wife ride fore-and-aft on one animal at 
Khartiim.” “Well, then, where is the tree you told Bom- 
bay you would point out to us with Petherick’s name on 
it?” “Oh, that is on the way to Gondokoro. It was not 
Petherick who wrote, but some one else, who told me to 
look out for your coming this way. We don’t know his 
name, but he said if we pointed it out to you, you would 
know at once.” 

4th—After spending the night as Mahamed’s guest, I 
strolled round the place to see what it was like, and found 
the Turks were all married to the women of the country, 
whom they had dressed in clothes and beads. Their 
children were many, with a prospect of more. Temporary 
marriages, however, were more common than others—as, 
in addition to their slaves, they hired the daughters of 
the villagers, who remained with them whilst they were 
trading here, but went back to their parents when they 
marched to Gondokoro. They had also many hundreds 
of cattle, which it was said they had plundered from the 
natives, and now used for food, or to exchange for ivory, 
or other purposes. The scenery and situation were perfect 
for health and beauty. The settlement lay at the foot of 
small, well-wooded granitic hills, even prettier than the out- 
crops of Unyamiiézi, and was intersected by clear streams. 

At noon, all the rear troops arrived with Bombay and 


Dec. | WIVES AND CHILDREN OF THE TURKS. 581 


Pigjoko in person. This good creature had treated Bom- 
bay very handsomely on his former journey. He said he 


Turks’ Wives and Children 


felt greatly disappointed at my pushing past him yester- 
day, as he wished to give me a cow, but still hoped I 
would go over and make friends with him. I gave him 
some beads, and off he walked. Old Chongi’s “children,” 
who had escorted us all the way from Kamrasi’s, then 
took some beads and cast-off clothes for themselves and 
their father, and left us in good-humour. 

This reduced the expedition establishment to my men 
and Kidgwiga’s. With these, now, as there was no letter 
from Petherick, I ordered a march for the next morning, 
but at once met with opposition. Mahamed told me that 
there were no vessels at Gondokoro; we must wait two 
months, by which time he expected they would arrive 
there, and some one would come to meet him with beads. 
I said in answer, that Petherick had promised to have 
boats there all the year round, so I would not wait. 
“Then,” said Mahamed, “we cannot go with you, for 
there is a famine at this season at Gondokoro.” I said, 


582 MADI. [1862. 


“Never mind; do you give me an interpreter, and I will 
goaslam.” “No,” said Mahamed, “that will not do, as 
the Bari people are so savage, you could not get through 
them with so small a force; besides which, just now 
there is a stream which cannot be crossed for a month 
or more.” 

Unable to stand Mahamed’s shifting devices with equa- 
nimity any longer, I accused him of trying to trick me in 
the same way as all the common savage chiefs had done 
wherever I went, because they wished me to stop for their 
own satisfaction, quite disregarding my wishes and inter- 
ests ; so I said I would not stop there any longer ; I would 
raft over the river, and find my way through the Bari, as 
I had through the rest of the African savages. We talked 
and talked, but could make nothing of it. I maintained 
that if he was commissioned to help me, he at least could 
not refuse to give me a guide and interpreter ; when, if I 
failed in the direct route, | would try another, but go I 
must, as I could not hold out any longer, being short of 
beads and cows. I had just enough, but none to spare. 
He told me not to think of such a thing, as he would give 
me all that was needful, both for myself and my men ; 
but if I would have patience, he would collect all his 
officers, and the next morning would see what their 
opinions were on the subject. 

5th.—I found that every one of Mahamed’s men was 
against our going to Gondokoro. They told me, in fact, 
with one voice, that it was quite impossible ; but they said, 
if I liked they would furnish me guides to escort me on 
~ ten marches to a depét at the further end of the Madi 
country, and if I chose to wait there until they could 
collect .all their ivory tusks together and join us, we 
would be a united party too formidable to ‘be resisted by 
the Bari people. This offer of immediate guides I of 
course accepted at once, as to keep on the move was my 
only desire at that time ; for my men were all drunk, and 


Dec. | EXCUSES FOR DELAY. 583 


Kidgwiga’s were deserting. Once more on the way, I did 
not despair of reaching Gondokoro by myself. In the 
best good-humour now, I showed Mahamed our picture- 
books ; and as he said he always drilled his two hundred 
men every Friday, I said I would, if he liked, command 
them myself. This beg agreed to, all the men turned 
out in their best, and, to my surprise, they not only knew 
the Turkish words of command, but manceuvred with some 
show of good training; though, as might have been ex- 
pected with men of this ragamuffin stamp, all the privates 
gave orders as well as their captains. 

When the review was over, | complimented Mahamed 
on the efficiency of his corps, and, retiring to my hut, as 
I thought I had him now in.a good-humour, again dis- 
cussed our plans for going ahead the next day. Scarcely 
able to look me in the face, the humbugging scoundrel 
said he could not think of allowing me to go on without 
him, for if any accident happened he would be blamed for 
it. At the same time, he could not move for a few days, 
as he expected a party of men to arrive about the next 
new moon with ivory. My hurry he thought very un- 
called for ; for, as I had spent so many days with Kam- 
rasi, why could I not be content to do so with him ? 

I was provoked beyond measure with this, as it upset 
all my plans. Kidgwiga’s men were deserting, and I feared 
I should not be able to keep my promise to Kamrasi of 
sending him another white visitor, who would perhaps do 
what I had left undone, when I did not follow up the 
connection of the Little Lita Nzigé with the Nile. We 
battled away again, and then Mahamed said there was not 
one man in his camp who would go with me until their 
crops were cut and taken in; for whilst residing here 
they grew grain for their support. We battled again, 
and Mahamed at last, out of patience himself, said, “ Just 
look here, what a fix I am in,” showing me a hut full of 
ivory. “ Who,” he said, “is to carry all this until the 


584 MADI. [1862. 


natives have got in their crops?” This, I said, so far as 
I was concerned, was all nonsense. I merely had asked 
him for a guide and interpreter, for go I must. In a 
huff he then absconded; and my men—those of them 
who were not too drunk—came and said to me, “ For 
Godsake let us stop here. Mahamed says the road is 
too dangerous for us to go alone; he has promised to 
carry all our loads for us if we stop; and all Kamrasi’s 
men are running away, because they are afraid to go on.” 

6th.—Next morning I called Kidgwiga, and begged him 
to procure two men as guides and interpreters. He said 
he could not find any. I then went at Mahamed again, 
who first said he would give me the two men I wanted, 
then went off, and sent word to say he would not be 
visible for three days. This was too much for my patience, 
so I ordered all my things to be tied up in marching 
order, and gave out that I should leave and find out the 
way myself the following morning. Like an evil spirit 
stirred up, my preparations for going no sooner were heard 
of than Mahamed appeared again, and after a long and 
sharp contest in words, he promised us guides if I would 
consent to write him a note, testifying that my going was 
against his expressed desire. 

This was done; but the next morning (7th), after our 
things were put out for the march, all Kidgwiga’s men 
bolted, and no guides would take service with us. It was 
now obvious that, even supposing I succeeded in taking 
Kidgwiga to Gondokoro, he would not have a sufficient 
escort to come back with, unless, indeed, it happened that - 
Englishmen might be there who might wish to carry out 
my investigations by penetrating to the Little Lita Nzigé, 
and to pay a visit to Kamrasi. I therefore called Kidg- 
wiga, and after explaining these circumstances, advised 
him to go back to Kamrasi. He was loth to leave, he 
said, until his commission was fully performed ; but as I 
thought it advisable, he would consent. I then gave him 


Dec. ] FAREWELL TO KIDGWIGA. 585 


a double gun and ammunition, as well as some very rich 
beads which I obtained from Mahamed’s stores, to take 
back to Kamrasi, with orders to say that, as soon as [| 
reached Gondokoro or Kharttim, I would send another 
white man to him—not by the way I had come through 
Kidi, but by the left bank of the Nile: to which Kidg- 
wiga replied, “ That will do famously, for Kamrasi will 
change his residence soon, and come on the Nile this 
side of Rionga’s palace, in order that he may cut in 
between his brother and the Turks’ guns.” 

After this, I gave a lot of rich beads to Kidgwiga for 
himself, and a lot also for the senior officers at the Chopi 
and Kamrasi’s palaces, and sent the whole set off as happy 
as birds. When these men were gone, I tried to get up 
an elephant-shooting excursion due west of this, with a 
view to see where the Nile was, for I would not believe 
it was very far off, although no one as yet, since I left 
Chopi, either would or could tell me where the stream 
had gone to. 

8th.—Mahamed professed to be delighted I had made 
up my mind to such a scheme. He called the heads of 
the villages to give me all the information I sought for, 
and went with me to the top of a high rock, from which 
we could see the hills I first viewed at Chopi, sweeping 
round from south by east to north, which demarked the 
line of the Astia river. The Nile at that moment was, I 
believed, not very far off; yet, do or say what I would, 
everybody said it was fifteen marches off, and could not 
be visited under a month.* It would be necessary for me 
to take thirty-six of Mahamed’s men, besides all my own, 
to go there, which, he said, I was welcome to, but I should 
have to pay them for their services. This was a damper 


at once. 
I knew in my mind all these reports were false, but, 


* It will appear shortly that it was actually not more than two marches 
to the northward of Faloro. 


586 MADI. [1862. 


rather than be out of the way when the time came for 
marching, I agreed to wait patiently, write the history of 
the Wahttma, and make collections, till Mahamed was 
ready, trusting that I might find some one at Gondokoro 
who would finish what I had left undone; or else, after 
arriving there, 1 might go up the Nile in boats and see 
for myself. The same evening I was attracted by the 
sound of drums to a neighbouring village, where, by the 
moonlight, I found the natives were dancing. ‘A more 
indecent or savage spectacle I never witnessed. The 
whole place was alive with naked humanity in a state of 
constant motion. Drawing near, I found that a number 
of drums were beaten by men in the centre. Next to 
them was a deep ring of women, half of whom carried 
their babies; and outside these again was a still deeper 
circle of men, some blowing horns, but most holding their 
spears erect. ‘To the sound of the music both these rings 
of the opposite sexes kept jumping and sidling round and 
round the drummers, making the most grotesque and 
obscene motions to one another. 

9th to 14th.—Nothing of material consequence hap- 
pened until the 14th, when eighty of Rionga’s men 
brought in two slaves and thirty tusks of ivory, as a 
present to Mahamed. Of course, I knew this was a bribe 
to induce Mahamed to fight with Rionga against Kamrasi ; 
but, counting that no affair of mine, I tried to induce 
these men to give me some geographical information of 
the countries they had just left. Not one of them would 
come near me, for they knew I was friends with Kam- 
rasi; and Mahamed’s men, when they saw mine attempt- 
ing to converse with them, abused them for “prying into 
other men’s concerns.” “These men,” they said, “are our 
friends, and not yours ; if we choose to give them presents 
of cloth and beads, and they give us a return in ivory, 
what is that to you?” Mysterious Mahamed next came 
to me, and begged for a blanket, as he said he was going 


Dec. | SECRET EXPEDITION OF MAHAMED, 587 


off for a few days to a depdt where he had some Ivory ; 
and he also wanted to borrow a musket, as one of his had 
been burnt. 

My suspicions, and even apprehensions, were now 
greatly excited. I began to think he had prevailed on 
me to stop here, that I might hold the place whilst he 
went to fight Kamrasi with Rionga’s men; so I begged 
him to listen to my advice, and not attempt to cross the 
Nile, “else,” I said, “all his guns would be taken from 
him, and his passage back cut off.” At once he saw the 
drift of my thought, and said he was not going towards 
the Nile, but, on the contrary, he was going with Rionga’s 
men in the opposite direction, to a place called Paira. 
“Tf that is the case,” I said, “why do you want a gun?” 
“ Because there are some other matters to settle. I shall 
~ not be long away, and my men will take care of you 
whilst I am gone.” I gave him the blanket after this, 
but was too suspicious of his object to lend him a gun. 

15th to 20th—I saw Mahamed march his regiment out 
of the place, drums and fifes playing, colours flying, a 
hundred guns firing, officers riding,—some of them on 
donkeys, and others—yes, actually—on cows! while a host 
of the natives, Rionga’s men included, carrying spears and 
bows and arrows, looked little like a peaceful caravan of 
merchants, but very much resembled a band of marauders. 
After this I heard they were not going to Rionga himself, 
but were going to show Rionga’s men the way that they 
made friends with old Chongi of Koki. In reality, Chongi 
had invited Mahamed to fight agaimst an enemy of his, 
in whose territories immense stores of ivory were said to 
be buried, and the people had an endless number of cattle 
—for they lived by plunder, and had lifted most of old 
Chongi’s ; and this was the service on which the expedi- 
tion had set off. 

21st to 31st.—I had constantly wondered, ever since I 
first came here, and saw the brutal manner in which the 


588 MADI. . [1863. 


Turks treated the natives, that these Madi people could 
submit to their “Egyptian taskmasters,” and therefore 


Wet AWE 
aN ak 7 
= Sans Yr 


Removing a Village—Madi. 


was not surprised now to find them pull down their huts 
and march off with the materials to a distant site. Every 
day this sort of migration continued, just as you see in 
the picture ; and nothing more important occurred until 
Christmas-day, when an armadillo was caught, and I 
heard from Mahamed’s head wife that the Turks had 
plundered and burnt down three villages, and in all pro- 
bability they would return shortly laden with ivory. This 
was a true anticipation ; for, on the 31st, Mahamed came 
in with his triumphant army laden with ivory, and driv- 
ing in five slave-girls and thirty head of cattle. 

1st to 3d.—I_ now wished to go on with the journey, 
as I could get no true information out of these suspicious 
blackguards who called themselves Turks; but Mahamed 
postponed it until the 5th, by which time he said he 
would be able to collect all the men he wanted to carry 


Jan. | THE TURKS PACKING UP. 589 


his ivory. Rionga’s men then departed, and Mahamed 
showed some signs of getting ready by ordering one 


Turks tying up Ivories for the March. 


dozen cows to be killed, the flesh of which was to be 
divided amongst those villagers who would carry his 
ivory, and the skins to be cut into thongs for binding 
the smaller tusks of ivory together in suitable loads. 

4th and 5th.—Another specimen of Turkish barbarity 
came under my notice, in the head man of a village 
bringing a large tusk of ivory to Mahamed, to ransom his 
daughter with ; for she had been seized as a slave on his 
last expedition, in common with others who could not 
run away fast enough to save themselves from the Turks. 
Fortunately for both, it was thought necessary for the 
Turks to keep on good terms with the father as an in- 
fluential man; and therefore, on receiving the tusk, 
Mahamed gave back the girl, and added a cow to seal 


their friendship. 


a 


590 MADI. [1863. 


6th to 10th.—I saw this land-pirate Mahamed take a 


blackmail like a negro chief. Some men who had fled 


from their village when Mahamed’s plundering party 
passed by them the other day, surprised that he did not 
stop to sack their homes, now brought ten large tusks of 
ivory to him to express the gratitude they said they felt for 
his not having molested them. Mahamed, on finding how 
easy it was to get taxes in this fashion, instead of thank- 
ing them, assumed the air of the great potentate, whose 
clemency was abused, and told the poor creatures that, 
though they had done well in seeking his friendship, 
they had not sufficiently considered his dignity, else they 
would have brought double that number of tusks, for it 
was impossible he could be satisfied at so low a price. 
“What,” said these poor creatures, “can we do then? 
for this is all that we have got.” “Oh,” says Mahamed, 
“if it is all you have got now in store, I will take these 
few for the present; but when I return from Gondokoro, 


LT expect you will bring me just as many more. Good-bye, 


and look out for yourselves.” 

Tired beyond all measure with Mahamed’s procrastina- 
tion, as I could not get him to start, I now 
started myself, much to his disgust, and went 
ahead again, leaving word that I would wait for him at 
the next place, provided he did not delay more than one 
day. The march led us over long rolling downs of grass, 
where we saw a good many antelopes feeding; and after 
going ten miles, we came, among other villages, to one 
named Panyoro, in which we found it convenient to put up. 
At first all the villagers, thinking us Turks, bolted away 
with their cattle and what stores they could carry ; but, 
after finding out who we were, they returned again, and 
gave us a good reception, helping us to rig up a shed with 
grass, and bringing a cow and some milk for our dinner. 

12th.—To-day I went out shooting, but though I saw 
and fired at a rhinoceros, as well as many varieties of 


To Panyoro, 11th. 


WA i 


Nee “ 
in. s 


Why 
WK 


on the March. 


Mahamed’s Part: 


JAN. | THE NILE ONCE MORE. 591” 


antelopes, I did not succeed in killing one head, All my 
men were surprised as well as myself; and the villagers 
who were escorting me in the hope of getting flesh, were 
so annoyed at their disappointment, they offered to cut 
my fore-finger with a spear and spit on it for good-luck. 
Joining in their talk, I told them the powder must be 
crooked ; but, on inspecting my rifle closer, I found that 
the sights had been knocked on one side a little, and this 
created a general laugh at all in turn. Going home from 
' the shooting, I found all the villagers bolting again with 
their cattle and stores, and, on looking towards Faloro, 
saw a party of Turks coming. 

As well as I could I reassured the villagers, and brought 
them back again, when they said to me, “ Oh, what have 
you done? We were so happy yesterday when we found 
out who you were, but now we see you have brought 
those men, all our hearts have sunk again ; for they beat 
us, they make us carry their loads, and they rob us in 
such a manner, we know not what to do.” I told them 
I would protect them if they would keep quiet ; and, 
when the Turks came, I told them what I had said to the 


head man. ‘They were the vanguard of Mahamed’s party, ~ 
and said they had orders to march. on as far as Apuddo’ 


with ‘me, where we must all stop for Mahamed, who, as 
well as he could, was collecting men. -There was a cer- 
tain tree near Apuddo which was marked by an English- 
man two years ago, and this, Mahamed thought, would 
keep us amused. 

The next march brought us to Paira, a collection of 
villages within sight of the Nile. It was 
truly ridiculous ; here had we been at Faloro 
so long, and yet could not make out what had become of 
the Nile. In appearance it was a noble stream, flowing 
on a flat bed from west to east, and immediately beyond 
it were the Jbl (hills) Ktkt, rising up to a height of 
2000 feet above the river. Still we could not make out 


To Paira, 18th. 


592 MADI. [1863, 


all, until the following day, when we made a march 
parallel to the Nile, and arrived at Jaifi. 


The Nile and Jbl Kuku. 


This was a collection of huts close to a deep nullah 
which drains the central portions of Eastern 
Madi. At this place the Turks killed a croco- 
dile and ate him on the spot, much to the amusement of 
my men, who immediately shook their heads laughingly, 
and said, “ Ewa, Allah! are these men, then, Mussulmans ? 
Savages in our country don’t much like a crocodile.” 
After crossing two nullahs, we reached Apuddo, and at 
once | went to see the tree said to have been 
cut by an Englishman some time before. 
There, sure enough, was a mark, something like the 
letters M. I, on its bark, but not distinct enough to be 
ascertained, because the bark had healed up. In describ- 
ing the individual who had done this, the Turks said he 
was exactly like myself, for he had a long beard, and a 
voice even much resembling mine. He came thus far 
with Mahamed from Gondokoro two years ago, and then 
returned, because he was alarmed at the accounts the 
people gave of the countries to the southward, and he did 


To Jaifi, 14th. 


To Apuddo, 15th. 


Jan. | AN ATTACK AND ITS RESULTS. 593 


not hike the prospect of having to remain a whole rainy 
season with Mahamed at Faloro. He knew we were 
endeavouring to come this way, and directed Mahamed 
to point out his name if we did go. 

We took up our quarters in the village as usual, but 
the Turks remained outside, and carried off all the tops 
of the villagers’ huts to make a camp for themselves. I 
rebuked them for doing so, but was mildly told they had 
no huts of their own. They carried no pots either for 
cooking their dinners, and therefore took from the vil- 
lagers all that they wanted. It was a fixed custom now, 
they told us, and there was no use in our trying to 
struggle against it. If the natives were wise, they would 
make enough to sell; but as they would not, they must 
put up with their lot; for the “government” cannot be 
baulked of its ivory. Truly there seemed to be nothing 
but misery here ; food was so scarce the villagers songht 
for wild berries and fruits; whilst the Turks helped them- 
selves out of their half-filled bins—a small reserve store 
to last up to the far-distant harvest. Then, to make 
matters worse, all the village chiefs were at war with one 
another. 

At night a party of warriors walked round our village, 
Halt, és ana but feared to attack it because we were in- 
ee side. Next morning the villagers turned out 
and killed two of the enemy; but the rest, whilst retreat- 
ing, sang out that they would not attempt to fight until 
“the guns” were gone—after that, the villagers had better 
look out for themselves. I now proposed going on if the 
Apina, or chief of the village, would give me a guide; but 
he feared to do so lest I should come to grief, and Ma- 
hamed would then be down upon him. Struggling was 
useless, for I had no beads to pay my way with, and my 
cows were now all finished ; so I took the matter quietly, 
and went out foraging with the rifle. 

2P 


1 oe 


594 MADI. [1863, 


18th and 19th.—Antelopes were numerous, but so wild 
I could not get near them. On bending round home- 
wards, however, three buffaloes, feeding in the distance, 
on the top of a roll of high ground beyond where we 
stood, were observed by the natives, who had flocked out 
in the hopes of getting flesh. To stalk them, I went up 
wind to near where I expected to find them; then bidding 
the natives lie down, I stole along through the grass until 
at last I saw three pairs of horns glistening quite close in 
front of me. Anxious lest they should take sudden fright, 
I gently raised myself, wishing to fire, but I was quite 
puzzled; there was no mistake about what they were ; 
still, look from as high as I would, I could not see their 
bodies. The thought never struck me they were lying — 
down in such open ground in the day-time; so, as I could 
not go closer without driving them off, I took a shot 
with my single rifle at where I judged the chest of the 
nearest one ought to be, and then discovered my error. | 
In an instant all three sprang on their legs and scampered — 
off. I began loading, but before I had half accomplished — 
my object, those three had mingled with the three pre- 
viously seen grazing, and all six together came charging 
straight at me. I really thought I should now catch a 
toss, if I were not trampled to death; but suddenly, as 
they saw me standing, whether from fear or what else I 
cannot say, they changed their ferocious-looking design, 
swerved round, and galloped off as fast as their legs could 
earry them. This was bad luck; but Grant made up for 
it the next day by killing a very fine buck nsamma. 

20th.—I went again after the herd of six buffaloes, as 
I thought one was wounded, and after walking up a long 
sloping hill for three miles towards the east, I found my- 
self at once in view of the Nile on one hand, and the 
long-heard-of Astia river on the other, backed by hills 
even higher than the Jbl Ktkt. The bed of the Astia 
seemed very large, but, beg far off, was not very dis- 


Jan] BUFFALO-STALKING, 595 


tinct, nor did I care to go and see it then; for at that 
moment, straight in front of me, five buffaloes, five gir- 
affes, two eland, and sundry other antelopes, were too 
strong a temptation. 

The place looked like a park, and I began stalking in 
it, first at the eland, as I wanted to see if they corre- 
sponded with those I shot in Usagara; but the gawky 
giraffes, always in the way, gave the alarm, and drove all 
but two of the buffaloes away. At these two I now went 
with my only rifle, leaving the servants and savages be- 
hind. They were out in the open grass feeding com- 
posedly, so that I stole up to within forty yards of them, 
and then, in a small naked patch of ground, I waited my 
opportunity, and put a ball behind the shoulder of the 
larger one. At the sound of the gun, in an instant both 
bulls charged, but they pulled up in the same naked 
ground as myself, sniffing and tossing their horns, while 
looking out for their antagonist, who, as quick as them- 
selves, had thrown himself flat on the ground. 

There we were, like three fools, for twenty minutes or 
so; one of the buffaloes bleeding at the mouth and with 
a broken hind-leg, for the bullet had traversed his body, 
and the other turning round and round looking out for 
me, while I was anxiously watching him, and by degrees 
loading my gun. When ready, I tried a shot at the 
sound one, but the cap snapped and nearly betrayed me, 
for they both stared at the spot where I lay—the sound 
one sniffing the air and tossing his horns, but the other 
bleeding considerably. Some minutes more passed in this 
manner, when they allowed me to breathe freer by walk- 
ing away. I followed, of course, but could not get a good 
chance; so, as the night set in, I let them alone for the 
time being, to get out the following morning. 

21st and 22d.—At the place where I left off, I now 
sprang a large herd of fifty or more buffaloes, and followed 
them for a mile, when the wounded one, quite exhausted 


596 MADI. [1863. 


from the fatigue, pulled up for a charge, and allowed me 
to knock him over. This was glorious fun for the villa- 
gers, who cut him up on the spot and brought him home. 
Of course, one half the flesh was given to them, in return 
for which they brought us some small delicacies to show 
their gratitude; for, as they truly remarked, until we 
came to their village they never knew what it was to get 
a present, or any other gift but a good thrashing. 

23d.—To-day I fried the ground again, and, whilst 
walking up the hill, two black rhinoceros came trotting 
towards us in a very excited manner. I did not wish to 
fire at them, as what few bullets remained in my store 
I wished to reserve for better sport, and therefore, for the 
time being, let them alone. Presently, however, they 
separated ; one passed in front of us, stopped to drink in 
a pool, and then lay down in it. Not heeding him, I 
walked up the hill, whilst the other rhinoceros, still trot- , 
ting, suddenly turned round and came to drink within fifty 
yards of us, obstructing my path ; this was too much of 
a joke ; so, to save time, I gave him a bullet, and knocked 
him over. To my surprise, the natives who were with me 
would not touch his flesh, though pressed by me to “ n’yam 
n’yam,” or to eat. I found that they considered him an 
unclean beast; so, regretting I had wasted my bullet, I 
went farther on and startled some buffaloes. 

Though I got very near them, however, a small antelope 
springing up in front of me scared them away, and I 
could not get a front shot at any of them. Thus the 
whole day was thrown away, for [had to return empty- 
handed. 

24th to 30¢h—Grant and I after this kept our pot 
boiling by shooting three more antelopes ; but nothing of 
consequence transpired until the 30th, when Btkhet, Ma- 
hamed’s factotum, ‘arrived with the greater part of the 
Turk’s property. He then confirmed a report we had 
heard before, that, some few days previously, Mahamed 


Jan. | TYRANNY OF THE TURKS. 597 


had ordered Btikhet to go ahead and join us, which he 
attempted to do; but, on arrival at Panyoro, his party 
had a row with the villagers, and lost their property. 
Bukhet then returned to Mahamed and reported his defeat 
and losses ; upon hearing which, Mahamed at once said to 
him, “ What do you mean by returning to me empty- 
handed? go back at once and recover your things, else 
how can I make my report at Gondokoro?” With these 
peremptory orders Btkhet went back to Panyoro, and 
commenced to attack it. The contest did not last long; for, 
after three of Bttkhet’s men had been wounded, he set fire 
to the villages, killed fifteen of the natives, and, besides 
recovering his own lost property, took one hundred cows. 
31st—To-day Mahamed came in, and commenced to 
arrange for the march onwards. This, however, was no 
easy matter, for the Turks alone required six hundred 
porters—half that number to carry their ivory, and the 
other half to carry their beds and bedding; whilst from 
fifty to sixty men was the most a village had to spare, 
and all the village chiefs were at enmity with one another. 
The plan adopted by Mahamed was, to summon the 
heads of all the villages to come to him, failing which, he 
would seize all their belongings. Then, having once got 
them together, he ordered them all to furnish him with so 
many porters a-head, saying he demanded it of them, for 
the “great government’s property ” could not be-left on 
the ground. Their separate interests must now be sacri- 
ficed, and their feuds suspended ; and if he heard, on his 
return again, that one village had taken advantage of the 
other’s weakness caused by their employment in his service, 
he would then not spare his bullets,—so they might look 
out for themselves. 
Some of the Turks, having found ninety-nine eggs in a 
crocodile’s nest, had a grand feast. They gave us two of 
the eggs, which we ate, but did not like, for they had a 


highly musky flavour. 


598 MADI. [1863. 


1st—On the 1st of February we went ahead again, 
with Bikhet and the first half of Mahamed’s establish- 
ment, as a sufficient number of men could not be collected 
at once to move all together. In a little while we struck 
on the Nile, where it was running like a fine Highland 
stream between the gneiss and mica-schist hills of Ktkt, 
and followed it down to near where the Asta river joined 
it. For awhile we sat here watching the water, which 
was greatly discoloured, and floating down rushes. The 
river was not as full as it was when we crossed it at the 
Karttma Falls, yet, according to Dr Khoblecher’s* ac- 
count, it ought to have been flooding just at this time: 
if so, we had beaten the stream. Here we left it again 
as it arched round by the west, and forded the Asta river, 
a stiff rocky stream, deep enough to reach the breast when 
waded, but not very broad. It did not appear to me as 
if connected with the Victoria N’yanza, as the waters 
were falling, and not much discoloured ; whereas, judging 
from the Nile’s condition, it ought to have been rising. 
No vessel ever could have gone up it, and it bore no 
comparison with the Nile itself. The exaggerated ac- 
count of its volume, however, given by the expeditionists 
who were sent up the Nile by Mehemet Ah, did not sur- 
prise us, since they had mistaken its position; for we 
were now 3° 42’ north, and therefore had passed their 
“farthest point” by twenty miles. __ 

In two hours more we reached a settlement called 
Madi, and found it deserted. Every man and woman 
had run off into the jungles from fright, and would not 
come back again. We wished ourselves at the end of the 
journey ; thought anything better than this kind of exist- 
ence—living entirely at the expense of others; even the 
fleecings in Ustii felt less dispiriting ; but it could not be 


* Dr Khoblecher, the founder of the Austrian Church Mission Establish- 
ment of Gondokoro, ascertained that the Nile reached its lowest level there 
in the middle of January, 


Fes. | JOURNEY CONTINUED. 599 


helped, for it must always exist as long as these Turks 
are allowed to ride rough-shod over the people. The 
Turks, however, had their losses also; for on the way 
four Bari men and one Bari slave-girl slipped off with a 
hundred of their plundered cattle, and neither they nor 
the cattle could be found again. Mijalwa was here con- 
victed of having stolen the cloth of a Turk whilst living 
in his hut when he was away at the Paira plundering, 
and got fifty lashes to teach him better behaviour for 
the future. 

A party of fifty men came from Labitiré, a station on 
ahead of this, to take service as porters, 
knowing that at this season the Turks 
always come with a large herd of plundered cattle, 
which they call government property, and give in pay- 
ment to the men who carry their tusks of ivory across 
the Bari country. 

We now marched over a rolling ground, covered in 

; some places with bush-jungle, in others with 
Barwtidi, 6th ; 3 
and Labiré, 7 villages, where there were fine trees, resem- 
and 8th. i . . 

bling oaks in their outward appearance ; and 

stopping one night at the settlement of Barwtidi, arrived 
at Labtiré, where we had to halt a day for Mahamed to 
collect some ivory from a depdt he had formed near by. 
We heard there was another ivory party collecting tusks 
at Obbo, a settlement in the country of Pantiquara, 
twenty miles east of this. 

Next we crossed a nullah draining into the Nile, and, 

; travelling over more rolling ground, flanked 

To Mtgi, 9th. 5 : 
Halt, 10h and on the right by a range of small hills, put up 
j at the Madi frontier station, Mtigi, where we 
had to halt two days to collect a full complement of por- 
ters to traverse the Bari country, the people of which are 
denounced as barbarians by the Turks, because they will 
not submit to be bullied into carrying their tusks for 
them.. Here we felt an earthquake. The people would 


Halt, 3d to 5th. 


600 MADI. [1863. 


not take beads, preferring, they said, to make necklaces 
and belts out of ostrich-eggs, which they cut into the size 
of small shirt-buttons, and then drill a hole through their 
centre to string them together. A passenger told us that 
three white men had just arrived in vessels at Gondokoro; 
and the Bari people, hearing of our advance, instead of 
trying to kill us with spears, had determined to poison 
all the water in their country. Mahamed now disposed 
of half of his herd of cows, giving them to the chiefs of 
the villages in return for porters. These, he said, were 
all that belonged to the government; for the half of all 
captures of cows, as well as all slaves, all goats, and 
sheep, were allowed to the men as part of their pay. 
When all was settled we marched, one thousand strong, 
Te Write’ to Wurtingi; and next day, by a double march, » 
12th. arrived at Marsan, in the Bari country. I 
To Marsan, 154- Vished still to put up in the native villages, 
but Mahamed so terrified all my men, by saying these 
Bari would kill us in the night if we did not all sleep 
together in one large camp, that we were obliged to sub- 
mit. The country, still flanked on the right by hills, was 
undulating and very prettily wooded. Villages. were 
numerous, but as we passed them the inhabitants all fled 
from us, save a few men, who, bolder than the rest, would 
stand and look on at us as we marched along. Both 
night and morning the Turks beat their drums; and when- 
ever they stopped to eat they sacked the villages. 
Pushing on by degrees, stopping at noon to eat, we 
To Doro, Wu, C#Me again in sight of the Nile, and put up 
at a station called Doro, within a short dis- 
tance of the well-known hill Rijeb, where Nile voyagers 
delight in cutting their names. The country continued 
the same, but the grass was conspicuously becoming shorter 
and finer every day—so much so, that my men all declar- 
ed it was a sign of our near approach to England. After 
we had settled down for the night, and the Turks had 


Fes. | HOSTILE DEMONSTRATIONS. 601 


finished plundering the nearest villages, we heard two 
guns fired, and immediately afterwards the whole place 
was alive with Bari people. Their drums were beaten as 
a sign that they would attack us, and the war-drums of 
the villages around responded by beating also. The Turks 
grew somewhat alarmed at this, and as darkness began 
to set in, sent out patrols in addition to their nightly 
watches. The savages next tried to steal in on us, but 
were soon frightened off by the patrols cocking their 
guns. Then, seeing themselves defeated in that tactic, 
they collected in hundreds in front of us, set fire to the 
grass, and marched up and down, brandishing ignited 
grass in their hands, howling like demons, and swearing 
they would annihilate us in the morning. 

We slept the night out, nevertheless, and next morning 
To Gondokoro, Walked in to Gondokoro, N. lat. 4°54’ 5”, and 
te E. long. 31° 46’ 9”, where Mahamed, after 
firing a salute, took us in to see a Circassian merchant, 
named Kirshid Agha. Our first inquiry was, of course, 
for Petherick. A mysterious silence ensued; we were 
informed that Mr Debono was the man we had to thank 
for the assistance we had received in coming from Madi ; 
and then in hot haste, after warm exchanges of greeting 
with Mahamed’s friend, who was Debono’s agent here, we 
took leave, to hunt up Petherick. Walking down the 
bank of the river—where a line of vessels was moored, and 
on the right hand a few sheds, one-half broken down, with 
a brick-built house representing the late Austrian Church 
Mission establishment—we saw hurrying on towards us 
the form of an Englishman, who, for one moment, we be- 
lieved was the Simon Pure; but the next moment my 
old friend Baker, famed for his sports in Ceylon, seized 
me by the hand. A little boy of his establishment had 
reported our arrival, and he in an instant came out to 
welcome us. What joy this was I can hardly tell. We 
could not talk fast enough, so overwhelmed were we both 


602 MADI. [1863. 


to meet again. Of course we were his guests in a moment, 
and learned everything that could be told. I now first 


Mission-House, Gondokoro. 


heard of the death of H.R.H. the Prince-Consort, which 
made me reflect on the inspirmg words he made use of, 
in compliment to myself, when I was introduced to him 
by Sir Roderick Murchison a short while before leaving 
England. Then there was the terrible war in America, 
and other events of less startling nature, which came on 
us all by surprise, as years had now passed since we had 
received news from the civilised world. 

Baker then said he had come up with three vessels—one 
dyabir and two nuggers—fully equipped with armed men, 
camels, horses, donkeys, beads, brass wire, and everything 
necessary for a long journey, expressly to look after us, 
hoping, as he jokingly said, to find us on the equator in 
some terrible fix, that he might have the pleasure of help- 
ing us out of it. He had heard of Mahamed’s party, and 
was actually waiting for him to come in,that he might 
have had the use of his return-men to start with comfort- 
ably. Three Dutch ladies,* also, with a view to assist us 


* The Baroness Miss A. van Capellan, and Mrs and Miss Tinne. 


Frp. | MEETING WITH BAKER. 603 


in the same way as Baker (God bless them), had come 
here in a steamer, but were driven back to Kharttim by 
sickness. Nobody had even dreamt for a moment it was 
possible we could come through. An Italian, named 
Miani, had gone farther up the Nile than any one else; 
and he, it now transpired, was the man who had cut his 
name on the tree by Apuddo. But what had become of 
Petherick? He was actually trading at N’yambara, seventy 
miles due west of this, though he had, since I left him 
in England, raised a subscription of £1000, from those of 
my friends to whom this Journal is most respectfully 
dedicated as the smallest return a grateful heart can give 
for their attempt to succour me, when knowing the fate 
of the expedition was in great jeopardy. 

Instead of coming up the Nile at once, as Petherick 
might have done—so I was assured—he waited, whilst a 
vessel was building, until the season had too far advanced 
to enable him to sail up the river. In short, he lost the 
north winds at 7° north, and went overland to his trading 
depot at N’yambara. Previously, however, he had sent 
some boats up to this, under a Vakil, who had his orders 
to cross to his trading depot at N’yambara, and to work 
from his trading station due south, ostensibly with a view 
to look after me, though contrary to my advice before 
leaving him in England, in opposition to his own proposed 
views of assisting me when he applied for help to suecour 
me, and against the strongly-expressed opinions of every 
European in the same trade as himself; for all alike said 
they knew he would have gone to Faloro, and pushed 
south from that place, had his trade on the west of the 
Nile not attracted him there. 

Baker now offered me his boats to go down to Kharttim, 
and asked me if there was anything left undone which 
it might be of importance for him to go on and complete, 
by survey or otherwise ; for, although he should like to 
go down the river with us, he did not wish to return 


604 MADI. [1863. 


home without having done something to recompense him 
for the trouble and expense he had incurred in getting 
up his large expedition. Of course I told him how dis- 
appointed I had been in not getting a sight of the Little 
Litta Nzigé. I described how we had seen the Nile 
bending west where we crossed in Chopi, and then, after 
walking down the chord of an are described by the river, 
had found it again in Madi coming from the west, 
whence to the south, and as far at least as Koshi, it was 
said to be navigable, probably continuing to be so right 
into the Little Lititta Nzigé. Should this be the case, then, 
by building boats in Madi above the cataracts, a vast 
region might be thrown open to the improving influences 
of navigation. Further, I told Baker of my contract with 
Kamrasi, and of the property I had left behind, with a 
view to stimulate any enterprising man who might be 
found at this place to go there, make good my promise, 
and, if found needful, claim my share of the things, for 
the better prosecution of his own travels there. This 
Baker at once undertook, though he said he did not want 
my property; and I drew out suggestions for him how 
to proceed. He then made friends with Mahamed, who 
promised to help him on to Faloro, and I gave Mahamed 
and his men three carbines as an honorarium. 

I should now have gone down the Nile at once if the 
moon had been in “ distance” for fixing the longitude; but 
as it was not, I had to remain until the 26th, living with 
Baker. Ktirshid Agha became very great friends with 
us, and, at once making a present of a turkey, a case of 
wine, and cigars, said he was only sorry for his own sake 
that we had found a fellow-countryman, else he would 
have had the envied honour of claiming us as his guests, 
and had the pleasure of transporting us’ in his vessels 
down to Khartiim. 

The Rev. Mr Moorlan, and two other priests of the 
Austrian Mission, were here on a visit from their station 


Fs. | FAILURE OF THE AUSTRIAN MISSION. 605 


at Kich, to see the old place again before they left for 
Kharttim ; for the Austrian Government, discouraged by 
the failure of so many years, had ordered the recall of 
the whole of the establishment for these regions, It was 
no wonder these men were recalled; for, out of twenty 
missionaries who, during the last thirteen years, had 
ascended the White river for the purpose of propagating 
the Gospel, thirteen had died of fever, two of dysentery, 
and two had retired broken in health, yet not one convert 
had been made by them. 

The fact is, there was no government to control the 
population or to protect property; boys came to them, 
looked at their pictures, and even showed a disposition to 
be instructed, but there it ended; they had no heart to 
study when no visible returns were to be gained. One 
day the people would examine the books, at another 
throw them aside, say their stomachs were empty, and 
run away to look for food. The Bari people at Gondo- 
koro were described as being more tractable than those of 
Kich, being of a braver and more noble nature; but they 
were all half-starved—not because the country was too 
poor to produce, but because they were too lazy to culti- 
vate. What little corn they grew they consumed before 
it was fully ripe, and then either sought for fish in the 
river or fed on tortoises in the interior, as they feared 
they might never reap what they sowed. 

The missionaries never had occasion to complain of 
these blacks, and to this day they would doubtless have 
been kindly inclined towards Europeans, had the White 
Nile traders not brought the devil amongst them. Mr 
Moorlan remembers the time when they brought food for 
sale; but now, instead, they turn their backs upon all 
foreigners, and even abuse the missionaries for having 
been the precursors of such dire calamities. The shell of 
the brick church at Gondokoro, and the cross on the top 
of a native-built hut in Kich, are all that will remain to 


606 MADI. [1863. 


bear testimony of these Christian exertions to improve 
the condition of these heathens. Want of employment, I 
heard, was the chief operative cause in killing the poor 
missionaries ; for, with no other resource left them to kill 
time, they spent their days eating, drinking, smoking, and 
sleeping, till they broke down hee constitutions by living 
too fast. 

Mr Moorlan became very fs idisy and said he was 
sorry he could not. do more for us. His headquarters 
were at Kich, some way down the river, where, as we 
passed, he hoped at least he might be able to show us 
as much attention and hospitality as lay in his power. 
Mosquitoes were said to be extremely troublesome on the _ 
river, and my men begged for some clothes, as Petherick, 
they said, had a store for me under the charge of his 
Vakil. The storekeeper was then called, and confirming 
the story of my men, I begged him to give me what was 
my own. It then turned ae that it was all Petherick’s, 
but he had orders to give me on account anything that 
I wanted. This being settled, I took ninety-five yards of 
the commonest stuff as a makeshift for mosquito-curtains 
for my men, besides four sailor’s shirts for my head men. 

On the 18th, Ktirshid Agha was summoned by the 
constant fire of musketry, a mile or two down the river, 
and went off in his vessels to the relief. A party of his 
had come across from the N’yambara country with ivory, 
and on the banks of the Nile, a few miles north of this, 
were engaged fighting with the natives. He arrived just 
in time to settle the difficulty, and next day came back 
again, having shot some of the enemy and captured their 
cows. Petherick, we heard, was in a difficulty of the same 
kind, upon which I proposed to go down with Baker and 
Grant to succour him ; but he arrived in time, in company 
with his wife and Dr James Murie, to save us the trouble, 
and told me he had brought a number of men with him, 
carrying ivory, for the purpose now of looking after me 


Fsp. | ARRIVAL OF PETHERICK, 607 


on the east bank of the Nile, by following its course up to 
the south, though he had given up all hope of seeing me, 
as a report had reached him of the desertion of my porters 
at Ugogo. He then offered me his dyabir, as well as any- 
thing else that I wanted that lay within his power to give. 
Suffice it to say, I had, through Baker's generosity, at that 
very moment enough and to spare; but at his urgent re- 
quest I took a few more yards of cloth for my men, and 
some cooking fat; and, though I offered to pay for it, he 
declined to accept any return at my hands. 

Though I naturally felt much annoyed at Petherick— 
for I had hurried away from Uganda, and separated from 
Grant at Kari, solely to keep faith with him—I did not 
wish to break friendship, but dined and conversed with 
him, when it transpired that his Vakil, or agent, who 
went south from the N’yambara station, came amongst 
the N’yam N’yam, and heard from them that a large 
river, four days’ journey more to the southward, was flow- 
ing from east to west, beyond which lived a tribe of 
“women, who, when they wanted to marry, mingled 
with them in the stream and returned; and then, again, 
beyond this tribe of women there lived another tribe of 
women and dogs, Now, this may all seem a very strange 
story to those who do not know the negro’s and Arab’s 
modes of expression ; but to me it at once came very na- 
tural, and, according to my view, could be interpreted 
thus :—The river, running from east to west, according 
to the native mode of expressing direction, could be no- 
thing but the Little Ltita Nzigé running the opposite 
way, according to fact and our mode of expression. The 
first tribe of women were doubtless the Wanyoro—called 
women by the naked tribes on this side because they 
wear bark coverings—an effeminate appendage, in the 
naked man’s estimation ; and the second tribe must have 
been in allusion to the dog-keeping Waganda, who also 
would be considered women, as they wear bark clothes. 


608 MADI. [1863. 


In my turn, I told Petherick he had missed a good thing 
by not going up the river to look for me ; for, had he done 
so, he would not only have had the best ivory-grounds to 
work upon, but, by building a vessel in Madi above the 
cataracts, he would have had, in my belief, some hundred 
miles of navigable water to transport his merchandise. 
In short, his succouring petition was-most admirably 
framed, had he stuck to it, for the welfare of both of us.* 

We now received our first letters from home, and in 
one from Sir Roderick Murchison I found the Royal Geo- 
graphical Society had awarded me their “ founder’s medal” 
for the discovery of the Victoria N’yanza in 1858. 


* See Petherick’s succouring petition, addressed to the Right Hon. Lord 
Ashburton, President of the Royal Geographical Society, in the Proceedings 
of that Society, dated 19th June 1860. 


The Nile below Junction of the Asua River. 


CONCLUSION. 609 


CONCLUSION. 


My journey down to Alexandria was not without ad- 
venture, and carried me through scenes which, in other 
circumstances, it might have been worth while to de- 
scribe. Thinking, however, that I have already sufi- 
ciently trespassed on the patience of the reader, I am 
unwilling to overload my volume with any matter that 
does not directly relate to the solution of the great pro- 
blem which I went to solve. Having now, then, after a 
period of twenty-eight months, come upon the tracks of 
European travellers, and met them face to face, I close 
my Journal, to conclude with a few explanations, for the 
purpose of comparing the various branches of the Nile 
with its affluents, so as to show their respective values. 

The first affluent, the Bahr el Ghazal, took us by-sur- 
prise ; for instead of finding a huge lake, as described in 
our maps, at an elbow of the Nile, we found only a small 
piece of water resembling a duck-pond buried in a sea of 
rushes. ~The old Nile swept through it with majestic 
grace, and carried us next to the Geraffe branch of the 
Sobat river, the second affluent, which we found flowing 
into the Nile with a graceful semicircular sweep and good 
stiff current, apparently deep, but not more than fifty 
yards broad. 

Next in order came the main stream of the Sobat, flow- 
ing into the Nile in the same graceful way as the Geratffe, 
which in breadth it surpassed, but in velocity of current 

2Q 


610 CONCLUSION. 


was inferior. The Nile by these additions was greatly 
increased; still it did not assume that noble appearance 
which astonished us so much, immediately after the 
rainy season, when we were navigating it in canoes in 
Unyoro. 

I here took my last lunar observations, and made its 
mouth N. lat. 9° 20’ 48”, E. long. 31°24’ 0”. The 
Sobat has a third mouth farther down the Nile, which 
unfortunately was passed without my knowing it; but as 
it is so well known to be unimportant, the loss was not 
great. 

Next to be treated of is the famous Blue Nile, which 
we found a miserable river, even when compared with the 
Geraffe branch of the Sobat. It is very broad at the 
mouth, it is true, but so shallow that our vessel with diffi- 
culty was able to come up it. It had all the appearance 
of a mountain stream, subject to great periodical fluctua- 
tions. I was never more disappointed than with this river ; 
if the White river was cut off from it, its waters would all 
be absorbed before they could reach Lower Egypt. 

The Atbara river, which is the last affluent, was more 
like the Blue river than any of the other affluents, being 
decidedly a mountain stream, which floods in the rains, 
but runs nearly dry in the dry season. 

I had now seen quite enough to satisfy myself that the 
White river which issues from the N’yanza at the Ripon 
Falls, is the true or parent Nile ; for in every instance of 
its branching, it carried the palm with it in the distinctest 
manner, viewed, as all the streams were by me, in the dry 
season, which is the best time for estimating their relative 
perennial values. 

Since returning to England, Dr Murie, who was with 
me at Gondokoro, has also come home ; and he, judging 
from my account of the way in which we got ahead of 
the flooding of the Nile between the Kartima Falls and 
Gondokoro, is of opinion that the Little Lita Nzigé must 


CONCLUSION. 611 


be a great backwater to the Nile, which the waters of the 
Nile must have been occupied in filling during my resi- 
dence in Madi; and then about the same time that I set 
out from Madi, the Little Lita Nzigé having been sur- 
charged with water, the surplus began its march north- 
wards just about the time when we started in the same 
direction. For myself, I believe in this opinion, as he no 
sooner asked me how I could account for the phenomenon 
I have already mentioned of the river appearing to de- 
_ erease in bulk as we descended it, than I instinctively 
advanced his own theory. Moreover, the same hypo- 
thesis will answer for the sluggish flooding of the Nile 
down to Egypt. 

I hope the reader who has followed my narrative thus 
far will be interested in knowing how “ my faithful chil- 
dren,” for whose services I had no further occasion, and 
whom I had taken so far from their own country, were 
disposed of. At Cairo, where we put up in Shepherd’s 
Hotel, I had the whole of them photographed, and in- 
dulged them at the public concerts, tableaux vivants, &c. 
By invitation, we called on the Viceroy at his Rhoda 
Island palace, and weré much gratified with the reception; 
for, after hearing all our stories with marked intelligence, 
he most graciously offered to assist me in any other 
undertaking which would assist to open up and develop 
the interior of Africa. 

I next appointed Bombay captain of the “faithfuls,” and 
gave him three photographs of all the eighteen men and 
three more of the four women, to give one of each to our 
Consuls at Suez, Aden, and Zanzibar, by which they might 
be recognised. I also gave them increased wages, equal 
to three years’ pay each, by orders on Zanzibar, which was 
one in addition to their time of service; an order for a 
grand “freeman’s garden,” to be purchased for them at 
Zanzibar; and an order that.each one should receive 
ten dollars dowry-money as soon as he could find a wife. 


612 CONCLUSION. 


With these letters in their hands, I made arrangements 
with our Consul, Mr Drummond Hay, to frank them 
through Suez, Aden, and the Seychelles to Zanzibar. 

Since then, I have heard that Captain Bombay and his 
party missed the Seychelles, and went on to the Mauritius, 
where Captain Anson, Inspector-General of Police, kindly 
took charge of them, and made great lions of them, <A 
subscription was raised to give them a purse of money ; 
they were treated with tickets to the “circus,” and sent 
back to the Seychelles, whence they were transported by 
steamer to Zanzibar, and taken in charge by our lately- 
appointed Consul, Colonel Playfair, who appears to have 
taken much interest in them. Further, they all volun- 
teered to go with me again, should I attempt to cross 
Africa from east to west, through the fertile zone. 


= /MWNVAYMPER, 6° 


it ) s 4 


ane Be bes. : he ae F : 
1, Sikujua. 2, Kahala, dlias Raziki. 3, Mzizi. 4, Faida, since married to Fiij. 


a Nel Fold 1 SS 2d OY B.C 9 


NATIVE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EXPEDITION. 


THESE men all severally agreed, before Colonel Rigby, Sheikh 
Said, Bombay, and myself, to serve as my servants on the fol- 
lowing terms, as registered in the office-books at the British 
Consulate, Zanzibar, on the 8th September 1860 :— 


Supposing I gave Sheikh Said $500—Bombay, Baraka, and 
Rahan, $60 each—the Wangtiana $25 each—and Sultan Majid’s 
Wattima gardeners $7 each, in ready money down, and pro- 
mised to give them as much more on arrival in Egypt, as well 
as free clothes and rations on the journey, and a free passage 
back from Egypt to Zanzibar—then they bound themselves to 
follow me wherever I chose to lead them in Africa, and do any 
kind of duty, without hesitation, that men in such positions whilst. 
travelling with caravans might reasonably be expected to do. 


The money alluded to having been paid by me in the presence 
of all, the books were signed, and our compact concluded. 


614 


APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX A—Oontinued. 


List or MEN ENGAGED AT ZaNzIBAR—their Pay, their Appointments, 


and how disposed of. 


e x E 
gulce 3 S¢ 
oalog Names. 2 3 held by each iow Senyicee 2 
E 5 g s 23 fadividnnl. terminated. . if 

1 | 500| Said bin Salem | Arab | Cafila Bashi Deeb sick at 

azé 

2| 25 | Stlimani Negro 

ae nae ee glen Discharged with 

5 | 95 | Yakut aes o Sheikh Sheikh Said at 

6 | 25| Ytsuf do. Paid i 

7 | 25 | Saadi do. ; 

8 | 60 | Bombay do. | Factotum Paid off, Egypt 

9 | 60| Baraka do. | Commander- | Sent back, Unyoro 

in-Chief 
10 | 60} Rahan do. | Valet Sent back, Bogté 
11 | 25 | Frij do. | Cook Paid off, Egypt 
12} 25 | Mabrttki do. | Valet do, 
13 | 25 | Ulédi, sen. do. do. do. 
14 | 25} Ilmasi do. do. do. 
15 | 25} Abédi do. | Porter Deserted, Bogtié 
16 | 25} Rahan do. do. Deserted, Unyoro | 1 
17 | 25 | Wadimoyo do. do. do. 2 
18 | 25 | Wadihamadi do. do. do. 3 
19 | 25 | Saad Allah do. do. Deserted, Bogtié 
20 | 25 | Tabibtt do, do. Sent back, Usu- 
gara 
21 | 25} Kari do. do, Murdered, Uganda] . 
22 | 25) Matiko do, do. Deserted, Unyoro | 4 
23 | 25 | Nasibt do. do. Left in Uganda 
24 | 25 | Mtsa do. do. Deserted, Unyoro | 5 
25 | 25 | Mabritki do, do. do. 6 
26 | 25 | Hassani do. do. Died, Kazé 
27 | 25 | Baraka do. do. Deserted, Unyoro “if 
28 | 25 | Johur do. do. Discharged, M’gun- 
da Mkhali 

29 | 25 | Mabrtiki do. do. Deserted, Unyoro | 8 
80 | 25 | Mutwané do. do. Left sick, Ukuni 
31 | 25 | Bilal do. do. Deserted, Unyoro | 9 
32 | 25 | Othman do. do. do, 10 
33 | 25 | Muftah do. do. do. ak 
34 | 25 | Ulédi do. do. do. 12 
35 | 25) Jtma do. do. do. * 13 
86 | 25 | Ulédi do. do. Sent back, Unyoro 
37 | 25 | Mabrtiki do. do, Left, sick, Bogité 
38 | 25 | Sirboko do. do. Deserted, Unyoro | 14 
39 | 25 | Masibti do. do. do. 15 
40 | 25 | Msalima do. do. Sent back, Unyoro 


Remarks. 


Wattma 
or 
slaves. 


Wangtiana, or slaves freed. 


: APPENDIX. 615 
APPENDIX A—Continued. 
List or Men Eneacep at Zanzipar—Continued. 
o 
ees B & 
- E a E 3 Highest ap- How and where 35 
ie oy Names. 22 Aes pete their services = 3! Remarks. 
EMER We oe pee Speen tt Get terminated. 8 
Balas es individual. SS 
Pe oo eo 
a = S 
41 | 7 | Mekttib Negro | Porter Paid eff, Egypt 
42 | 7 | Baraka do. do. ‘Deserted, Cee 
43} 7 | Kani do. do. do. 
44 | 7 | Kirambt do. do. do. 
45 | 7 | Kinanda do. do. Died, Miningu 
46 | 7 | Mdara do. do. Deserted, Uzaramo 
47 | 7 | Mdyabtiana do. do. 0. 
48 | 7 | Ulédi do, | Valet Paid off, Egypt 
49) 7 | Mzungt do. | Porter Deserted, Uzaramo} 16 
50 | 7 | Thanun do. do. Deserted, Ugogo . 
51 7 Kariombé do. do. Deserted, coast q 
52 | 7 | Kingunga do. do. Deserted, Uzaramo a 
53 | 7 | Matona do. do. do. — 
54] 7 | Malini do. do. Deserted, coast Ss 
55 | 7 | Darara do. do. do. a 
56 | 7 | Khamisi do. do. Deserted, Uzaramo | 
67 | 7 | Yuktt do. do. Deserted, Unyoro | 17 te 
58 | 7 | Hutibt do. do Deserted, coast E 
59 | 7 | Panamba do, do do. 
60 | 7 | Pakartia do. do. do. sy 
61) 7 | Yaha do, do. do, i 
62) 7 | Namaganga do. do. Deserted, Uzaramo SI 
63 | 7 | Khamsi do. do. do. d 
64 | 7 | Wilyamanga do. do. Deserted, coast 8 
65 | 7 | Mkaté do. | Pot-boy Paid off, Egypt 3 
66 | 7 | Mptianda do. | Porter Deserted, Uzaramo ae 
67 | 7 | Kirambitt do. do. Left sick, Bogiié 
68 | 7 | Msaram do do. Deserted, Uzaramo 
69 | 7 | Kirtmba do. do. Deserted, coast 
70| 7 | Kamtina do, do, do. 
71} 7 | Sulamini do. do. Deserted, Ugogo 
72 | 7 | Bariti do. | Under-valet | Paid off, Egypt 
73 | 7 | Umburi do. | Porter do, 
74 | 7 | Makarani do. do. Deserted, Ugogo | 18 
75 | 7 | Ulimengo do. | Goatherd Paid off, Egypt 
76 | 7 | Khamsini do. | Porter do. 


—_ 
SODNMBMPwhH 


HOTTENTOTS, CAPE MOUNTED 


Mithalder 
Vandermerwe 
Adams 


‘April 


Jansen 
Lemon 
Middleton 
Peters 
Reyters 
Arries 


Corporal 
Trumpeter 
Private 


RIFLEMEN. 


Sent back, Mininga 
Sent back, Usagara 
do. 

Sent back, Mininga 
Sent back, Usagara 
Sent back, Mininga 
do. 


Died, Usagara 
Sent back, Usagara 
do. 


616 


List oF MEN 


Numerical 
numbers. 


O COND Or GO DOR 


APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX A—Continued. 


AS THE WANGUANA. 


Names. 


Hassani 
Sangoro 
Tlmasi 
Khamisi 
Mtamani 
Matagiri 
Sadiki 
Manta 
Nondo 
Sampti 
Farhan 
Saidi 
Chauri 
Mijaliwa 
Sangoro 
Murzitki 
Farhan 
Chongo 
Mditrt 
Pilimboft 
Kitidtirt 
Fisi 


What race they 
belong to. © 


Highest appoint- 
ments held by 
each individual, 


How and where their ser- 
vices terminated. 


Murdered, Karagtié 
Deserted, Unyoro 
do. 


do. 
Paid off, Egypt 
do. 


do. 
do. 
Sent back, Uganda 
Deserted, Unyamtiézi 
Deserted, apheee 
0. 


do. 
Deserted, Abi Ahmed 
Deserted, Unyoro 


Paid off, Egypt 
Deserted, Unyoro 
O. 


ENGAGED IN THE INTERIOR ON THE SAME TERMS 


No. of guns stolen 
by deserters 


bone 
mMOwo 


24 


-APPENDIX. 


PAs Ee ele Ne Dex ot BD. 


617 


List oF Property (African money) sent forward to Kazé to the care of Misa 
M’ziiri, carried by 56 Pagazis, or Wanyamitiézi Porters, who were paid 


in advance $511, under the command of two Freed Slaves, who received 


$100. 


Quan-| Measure- 


tity. ments. 
122 | Bolts 

2 do. 

71 do. 
42 | Pieces 
5 do. 

5 do. 
40 | Cubits 
16 do 

6 Frasala 

6 do. 

9 do. 
12 do, 
20 do. 

9 do. 


FIRST LOT. 


Material forming 20 Loads. 


Merikani, or American sheeting, 
Joho, or red blanketing, 

Kiniki, or Indian blue stuffs, 
Barsati, or coloured cloths, 


Sahari, do. 
Dubiiani, do. 

Bindéra, or Indian red stuffs, 
Chintz, : 


Total, 
Material forming 36 Loads. 


Sami-Sami, or carmine beads, 
Golabi, or pink beads, A 
Kadtindtigtrt, or Indian red beads, 
Langio, or blue beads, 

Kanyéra, or white beads, 

Mzizima, or blue circlet beads, 


Total, 


N}|OoConeco 


Nl ONWWOoOOCCWN 


wlpooocooooe 


> ecoscsco 


618 APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX B—Continued. 


List or Property (African money) taken with the Expedition, carried by 100 
Pagazis, or Wanyamitézi Porters, who were paid in advance $925, under 
my command, 

SECOND LOT. 


Quan-| Measure- 
tity. ments. 


Material forming 59 Loads. 


dols. qrs. a. 
332 Bolts Merikani, . 3 . 5 - | 9942-0 
60 do. Kiniki, : : 5 F P46. _ 2°50 
10 do. Missiiti, coloured stuffs, : : a G7 elm 
5 do, Chintz, ‘ : : ; : co ee heey) 
10 Pieces Kistitt, js 5 : : 4 > ESO) 
42 do. | Barsati, : . 2 5 : * nee Bh. 
22 do. Sahari, ; : 4 ‘ : Sal Dole SOMO 
25 do. Dubtiani,  . . : 3 A) ore ocak XG) 
5 do. Kikti, coloured stuffs, ; : , : A TOO 
5 do. Khtidrangi, do. . : z ere tO) Oke 
2 do. Déolé, gold embroidered, . ‘ : sy) WE BP) 
2 do. Chibaya, do. : oa ee Oy Oe) 
2 |Waistcoats} Kizbao, do. A : : =i) yO 0) 
4 Cubits Bindéra, do, , : : : fi A TO) 
12 Caps Kofia, Fez, . ° : ; : . 6. VOu 0 
5 do. Kofia, Surat, mB Ow 
24 | Bundles | Very minute beads—red, pink, white, and blue—- 
expressly for the Wahiima kings, were con- 


cealed in these loads, . E 2 culleetcs 2) 40) 
Totaly .5|L239 0 ee 


Material forming 28 Loads. 
103 Frasala | Langio, : é : ‘ : | Ose OmmesO) 
103 do. Sami-Sami, . : «5 | fe PLS AZO 
105 do. Kitittiamnazi, or cocoa-nut leaf, 5 : BP Ge iG) 
103 do. Golabi, . 5 ‘ . : spake Ph 0 
7 do. Mzizima, . - : : : See @ 
Total, .| 535 2 0 


Material forming 18 Loads. 


0 do, Brass wire, . A : : : - | 90 
93 do, Copper wire, a : - : </1380 1 0 


Totals |0220 LS20 


APPENDIX, 619 


bbe eN el Xa), 


List oF Large Game BAGGED BY THE East AFRICAN EXPEDITION. 


1860. 
Sept. 
Oct. 15. 
Oct. 17. 


Oct. 25. 
Oct. 28. 
INoy:. 3. 


Noy. 18. 


Noy. 27. 
Noy. 30. 


1861. 


Feb. 21. 
Aug. 25. 
Oct. 22. 


Nov. 17. 


1862. 


July 14. 


Nov. 27. 
Dec. 24. 


Kiisiki—One male hippopotamus, 

Kidtinda—One male and one female pallah boc, one female wart hog. 

Mgéta—One male and one female brindled gnu, two male ellipsi- 

prymna, one male pallah boe. 

Zungoméro—One male and one female zebra. 

Kirengite—One calf red antelope (?). 

Makata—One male giraffe, one female ellipsiprymna. 4th. One male 
reduncus antelope. 

Inengé—One female striped eland, one female saltiana antelope, one 
female red antelope (?). 

East Kanyenyé—One male black rhinoceros. 

West Kanyenyé—One male and one female New Ugogo antelope. 
Dec. 2. One male New Ugogo antelope, one male pallah boc. 34d. 
One female New Ugogo antelope. 

Khoko—One female black rhinoceros. 8th. One male and two female 
buffaloes, 

Wilderness—One female saltiana antelope. 18th. One male zebra, 
one male saltiana antelope. 20th. One male saltiana antelope, 
2ist. Two male zebras. 22d. One male zebra, one female wart 
hog. 24th. One female duyker boc. 24th. One male black rhino- 
ceros, one male duyker boc. 27th. One female black rhinoceros, 
one male wart hog. 31st. One male zebra. Jan. 2, 1861. One 
female zebra, one male duyker boc. 3d. One male black rhinoceros, 
4th. One female saltatrix antelope, one male wart hog. 6th, One 
male and one female zebra. 


Kazé—One male blanc boe. 
Ukitini—One female bush boc. 


Usiti—One male grys boc. 
Karagtié—One (?) white rhinoceros. 19th. Two male white rhino- 


ceros. Dec. 9. Three male white rhinoceros. Jan. 13, 1862. One 
male grys boc. 


Uganda—One female lencotis antelope. 16th. Two male zebras. 
17th. One female ndjezza antelope. 22d. One male lencotis an- 
telope. 24th. One male lencotis antelope. 25th. One male len- 
cotis antelope. Aug. 1. One female nsamma antelope, one male 
bush boc. 3d. One male nsamma antelope. 4th. One female 
nsamma antelope. 15th. One male lencotis antelope. 

Gani—One male buffalo. 

Madi—One male bush boc. Jan. 19, 1863. One male nsamma ante- 
lope. 21st. One male buffalo, 23d. One male black rhinoceros. 
28th. One female lencotis antelope. 29th. One male and one fe- 


male lencotis antelope. 


620 


APPENDIX. 


ALP EaH UNG Dexa) 


LIST OF ASTRONOMICALLY FIXED STATIONS. 


In offering this List of Astronomically Fixed Stations made solely on this 
expedition, I wish it to be understood that the results in Latitudes and Longi- 
tudes are reductions, or rather recalculations, which have been made by Mr 
E. Dunkin, Computer to the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, from my crude 
Oisarritione os it is the best security that I can produce for their accuracy. 


My sextants were 8-inch. J. H. SPEKE. 
No. Station. South Latitude. | East Longitude. 
1 Bagamoyo, . 6° 25’ 59" 
2 Bomani, 6 30 44 
3 Ikambiuri, 6 33 49 
4 Kizoto, : 6 38 29 
5 Kiranga Ranga, . 6 42 49 
6 | Mihigié, 6 53 49 
7 Matamombo, 7 10 39 
8 Dégé la Mhora, 714 9 
9 Kadunda, de Alby 3 
10 Kirin, 7 24 34 38°14’ 0" 
11 Duthtmi, 7224513 
12 Zungoméro, 7 26 53.5'"| 37 36 45 
13 Kirengté, eee a 
14 Makata, 7 20 37 
15 | Ngoto, 7 13 54 
16 Muhanda, eu gre9 
17 Mbiuni, 6 56 30 
18 Manyongé, . 6 47 0 
19 Rimiiima, 6 46 29 
20 E, Ugogo, 6 31 12 35 32 4 
21 W. Kanyanyé, ; 6 23 51 35 6 10 
22 Mdaburu, t 6 21 49 34 50 8 
23 The “ Springs,” : 6 7 52 
24 The “ Boss,” : 6.3 59 34 18 30 
25 Jiwa la Mkoa, 6 0 37 
26 Kazé, 5 0 52 33 1 34 
27 Sh Usagari, . F 4 49 33 
28 Ungiigt’s, % 4 40 19 
29 Mininga, A 418 34 32 39 50 
30 | Mbisii, cmd bad Bpbe 32 23 15 
31 Ninda, : 3 58 59 
32 Phiinze, 3 53 35 
33 Takina, K 3 50 20 
34 Myonga’ 8) « s 3 46 45 
35 és, 3 3 34 24 


APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX D—(Continued. 


No. Station. South Latitude. 
36 Mihambo, 3° 29! 59” 
37 Kague, 3 25 26 
38 Makaka’s, 3 28 24 
39 Limérési’s, . 3 26 10 
40 Miamba, 323 7 
41 | Kagongo, 3.19 27 
42 Kagéra, : 3 14 34 
43 1st Uyombé, 3 11-4 
44 Pongo’s, 3 3 37 
45 N’yartiamba’s, 3 0 58 
46 N. Wanga, 2 57 43 
47 N’yamanira’s, 2 49 27 (?) 
48 Kafumbu, : 2 49 34 
49 Vikora’s, . oh 2 48 44 
50 Kariwami’s, - 2 47 24 
51 Uthungu, 2 41 33 
52 Kitaré, 235 8 
53 Vihembé, 2 27 30 
54 | Vigitra, 2 21 43 
55 Ist Urigi, 2, 11 23 
56 Khonzé, 2 528 
57 Kiwéra, 1 59 53 
58 Uthenga, 1 55 28 
59 Rozoka, Le50ns7 
60 Katawanga, . 1 45 53 
61 Rimanika’s Palace, 1 42 42.5 
62 Katangilé, . 1 16 40 
63 Ndongo, 1 12 35 
64 Negambézi, . tht BD 
65 Kasiiéré, 0 55 19 
66 N’yagussa, . 0 53 33 
67 Ukara, 0 45 48 
68 Mértika, 036 2 
69 Sangtia, . 0 30 47 
70 Masaka, 020 2 
71 | Kitinti, . 0 7 40 
Cross the Bquator to | North Latitude. 
72 Nakiusi, (OY ie alkss 
73 Kibibi, 015 0 
74 Nakatéma, . 0 17 55 
75 N’yama Goma, . 0 17 15 
76 Mtésa’s Palace, 0 21 19 
77 | Nasirié, 0 32 30 
78 Namaouja, . 0 39 44 
79 Baja, © 47 35 
80 Kari, . 0 51 45 
81 Urondogani, 0 52 27 
82 Isamba, 0 43 49 
83 Kiantkka, 0 53 30 


62] 


East Longitude. 


32° 6 30” 


31 28 40 
31 28 30 


31 1 49 


31 33 15 


32 9 45 


32 44 30 


622 APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX D—Continued. 


No. Station. North Latitude. East Longitude. 
84 Kidgwigy’s, . : 2 - eo 6” 
85 Utiti,. ; ‘ j : 1 24 538 
86 Chaguzi, S., 36 39 


87 Kamrast’s Palace, 37 43 32° 19’ 49” 


88 Kiratosi, 


91 Gutada, 

92 5th Kidi, 

93 Midta, . 
94 Faloro, Xs 
95 Panyoro, . 
96 Paira, . : 
97 Apuddo, . 
98 Madi, . 5 
99 Laburé, é 
100 Miugi, . 

101 Marsan, 

102 Doro, . 
103 Gondokoro, . 
104 Middle Sobat’ s Mouth, : 


10 33 31 50 45 


54 2 31 46 9 
20 48 31 24 0 


ORR RP RWWWWWWWNNHR EHH 
bo 
a 
bo 
J 


List of Magnetic VARIATION RESULTS, recalculated by Mr Dunxin from 


my Observations between ZANZIBAR and GonpoKoRro. My compasses 
were small prismatic. 


Srations. West Longitude. SrarTions. West Longitude. 
Kirengté. . . 11-12’ Ritmanika’s. . . 10°58’ 
Mibtiga 5 oa). 127 Masaka lao. oO. 9.44 
dei MaQvhsshe Se Gee oe 12.0 Kibipse oe a. 9.28 
Wego) Haus 11.19 Mité6sa' seat 04: 9.59 
Mdabiri. . . 11.33 Urondogani. . 10.18 
KazeSee. cele 12.8 Kamrasi’s . . 8.48 
Mininga . ; 11.47 Falovon eae 8.16 
Mitamba. . . 11.20 Gondokoro . . 8.53 
N’yamanira’s . 11.0 


J. H. Spexe. 


APPENDIX. 623 


ACE a Hy Ne De TeX ee Hs 


_ Hereurs of Srartons determined by Observations of Boiling-Point of Water 
between ZanzipaR and GonpoxKoro, recalculated by E. Dunxin. 
Means of two Thermometers boiled by Grant and myself. They are 
given to show the table-land formation of the interior of Africa. 


STarrons. Se age STATIONS. ea 
Zanzibar. RUS on cee 3402 
REC is) es 262 Walt Rivers. 3388 
SUERTE 8k) ra 391 Kaze" 3 Adee 3564 
Zungoméro’. . . 516 PVT secs ee) Ue Pe 3359 
RGrenene lsh te 689 Usacarinse i mete. 3292 
Mbitiga, EF. . . . 1068 Usagari, NG 9.0) ee 3413 
Mibifiga, We . <, << 1093 Unyambéwa. . . 3690 
Kikobogo. . . . 1717 Uiktim big ese oe. 3489 
Makata—. 9 <=. ". 1605 Mininga see. is 3438 
Mocks. Ia. oR 1592 Min oe 2: ae 3338 
Mivibands aah «ss 1648 Niindacy -c Bey ara 3265 
M’yombo ase. ©. 1514 Ruheise Be 3181 
Mbt Ts 2. os 1487 Makakes") 9" i 0. 3313 
Mdunhwi... . 2054 Liimérési’s . . . 3354 
REAMZE en 9s ge le 2474 Kagongo eae 3527 
Manyongé. .. . 2959 Kaperai.) icuue = a 3588 
RiimUMA. «ees 2468 Wyombs “~, ae 3483 
Marenga Mkhali_ . 2848 Uist; Smee. ee 3989 
inten pane Ge cnn. 3633 NEU x Sammie Se 3873 
BA Roebého ~. . .. 4712 Kariwamis . . . 3974 
W. Robého .. . 5148 Wthuncieee. <u. 4001 
Marenga Mkhali_. 2498 Karty yan pee tu sans 4204 
RU COPOraeret 3, 1. 3123 Walecnnyes § eae 3563 
E. Kanyenyé. . . 2674 WetiiNates eee. es 3487 
W. Kanyenyé . . 2580 Urigi Mee 3447 
isckchewe A+ . is 3329 Whonzoeta es) at 3392 (2) 
KhokGe-. <« . - 3255 (WaneGgh © A ee 3931 
Ist Camp in Jungle 3408 N’yamwara Hill, . 4592 
3d Camp in Jungle . 3511 Ritmanika’s . . . 4661 
Mabungtri .. . 3731 Little Windermere . 3639 
CPR es DOSS one 3702 MitGSa'Sie We es 3400 
JiwalaMkoa .. 4090 Namaouja. . . . 3103 
Mgongo Thembo 3964 Ripon Falls*. . . 3308 (2) 
ptitayedis er ss 3691 Urondogani . . . 2865 (?) 
Pier AVV.ce cel ot he 6 3597 Kigagasitg so: ones 2856 (2) 
HGHD ISS 4 tte opens 3715 Kartima Falls . . 2970 (2) 


P.S.—There were three cataracts observed on the Nile:—1l. From Ripon Falls to 
Urondogani ; 2. From Kartima Falls to the Little Lita Nzigé (?); 3. From Paira, in 
Madi, to near Gondokoro. The rest of the Nile was more like a long pond thana river. 

This list of altitudes, as the boiling-point of water is liable to show an error of 
300 feet, can only be considered as approximate to the truth. This may be clearly 


by the observations on the Nile. J. H. Speke. 
Wie The tebic used in the reduction are deduced from Regnault’s ‘ Tables des 


i de la Vapeur d’ Eau.’ ; 
eecancl mean ee ater reading for level of sea, 29,92 in. EpwiIn DuUNKIN. 


* On my former journey, the height of the Victoria N’yanza was made by boiling thermometer 
$740 feet, as engraved on the map. 


ACP ENG) eX re 


CLIMATE OF VICTORIA N’YANZA, 


YANZA, 1861-2, TABULATED FROM 


AKE N’ 
RANT’S DarLy OBSERVATIONS BY FRANCIS GALTON. 


CLIMATE OF THE COUNTRIES BORDERING ON THE I, 
G 


& : lees : ; Zi 3 w a a 
8 (ayedg) a} sj es fc be i 5 re es cy Ss ci aaa 
A Bly dee : 4 a : 1 4 + ey 
e SPULM JUOTRAIIg wl iz 7 7 Ss I : a n 2 a a 7 
=a] Loa > = 
re = a 
‘Sphoyd Yovlq MOT YYIM “4Gsvor1dA0 
(oueds) 10 ‘spnoyo Suyooy YALA “reapo AOA Joypo st AYs oY], “SULIOSIEpuNT} pur s1aMoys Woeppus Ut syrey AYory wey 
. iC) 8 ke Yo} <H nN © S oS 
a “STOMOYS JYSI[S lll ce 4 4 a a I & a & A & a] @ 
8 pues wey jo skeq ‘uorytodoard Aq poonpep ‘Ayo exe () syoxovrq Ur pepuyout ssoyy pue ‘Ajyred axe x yst1oyse we Aq poyzeur sroquunu OL 
o = * * * =a cond * 
“TyUO pL Sas Ssh a taal ea) pe a) ifs) Bi ee) il fr) 
5 rod ‘skeq urey | & a * pS 3s i cS = = S 
S ———————> PS OS oS etn retin et 
a ‘sheq Aurey Jo ‘on Go HAD EDLC CFO HOD GI.09 a9 HH co 2 mowHoOo | Soca OOH OIGr || 19 
[ae] ton 
7 id = 
‘sou uM | SLSASA SYVSSASSSSSFS | Gumsnem!| 829s] (&-wo9) -yooq-ojouw SYSHIZE | Sl a 
y : no A rior" " ‘ei * ‘af [surr0js Aavay ¢ Pee cir} 04 pepnyye wopyas urery ri o8 “os ricd [fi 
*, « ~ a a> 
osucy curex | RSRAHRRASR SAhygee AARaS & 5 RAARAAAA | S| S 
. = O 5 onl re 
PION CURR | is BSsiss S55SLSS80esqe SSSss é S eSsssesssg | S| & 
5 - ‘qeay Tensnun Aue 
; ‘oyedg ureydep Aq yySrayr0y JO yooq-ejou ut p09 
a youe weye4 “VUIxeuL epues—_ -210N *s4ny papmora 
eB Se see a na Ul Suny a10M sieqour 
< Pee Ss a -OULIOY} OL ‘anpea 
& GESTS SS Snes ToyZqnop jo ole oseqy, 
* 2) Ags a i 
2 WOH UIA | BELSAMSSSes  sasser 22282 a S SSZSSSSS || 3B) B 
a , “WOYLY OOM VUITXBU ON 
‘Wd g§ ye ‘du1oq oy} 07 .¢ 
Surppe Aq pourezqo ore osatqy, 
‘omMpeIod ura], ULOTL SRS SEIS Kes RSSSSs SSLSE _s = RERARENN || S S 
a e eno 
‘pua s IFS ¥ =P] SssSoVs SOBs oyssoyesol oyssoy |] soous [io SSS SS SS | PS ORS SESS oe eH 
P& Yq9L =9 . < ‘ od >) z - 43 - : a | eo 
ob 5 3 
Ginge 4 ay 8 ea Ip ie I 3 5 y zs g S = a = 5 Sige 
WL 8} OF JST oy woyy—n | BQ 5 = | 4 a 5 5 4 n ° 4/|a = 
rd 
a ee 
“uwormuny de, “MOTYVAVTA . ; 4 : : 7 | Se 
LL RETEL ‘TPA9T-B9S 9AOQP 499F NOTES ae O6Fe _ 00FE eee vas oe F00¢8|| 3] ss 
‘ons we, due, o10fu 3 |e 
Pavey “epues A 0 10) D é z 5 
Ss 


APPENDIX. 625 


APPENDIX G. 


LIST OF PLANTS COLLECTED BY CAPTAIN GRANT BETWEEN 
ZANZIBAR AND CAIRO. 


THIs unique collection is the first that was ever made by the drying process 
in the interior west of Zanzibar. It has been arranged at Kew by Dr 
Thomson, and is highly commended by Dr Hooker, who regrets with myself 
that better facilities are not instituted for the guidance of explorers in 
foreign countries. J. H. Spex. 


JV. B.—The numbers in parentheses after each species are those of Captain Grant’s Note- 
Book, and are attached to the specimens deposited in the Kew Herbarium. 
The native names are given within quotation marks. 


I. RANUNCULACE, Juss. 


Clematis brachiata, Thunb. ; Madi and Ukidi forest, 1862. (564.) 

C. n. sp.; common about waste grounds, 2}° 8. (190.) 

C. incisodentata, Reich.; Wahiyow cure headaches by smelling its dried 
leaves and flowers till blood comes from the nose. Uganda forests; amongst 
tall grasses. Alt. 4000 ft. Aug. 1862. (564.) 

4 C. sp.; 2 ft. high; erect woody stem. ‘The ripe feathery seeds form a white 

ball on the top of the flower stalk. 1° 42'S, Feb. 1862. (440.) 
1 Ranunculus pinnatus, Port.; Marenga M’Khali. 1860. Lat. 6° 44’ 8S. Alt. 
3198 ft.; by water. 


whee 


Il ANONACEA, Juss. 


Hezxalobus senegalensis, A. D. C.; ‘‘Imkooa;” 5 ft. cire. tree, with cedar- 
like wood; the Wanyamiuézi colour their gums and teeth with its one to 
two stoned drupes. 5° 8. and 2°N. Dec. 1862. (683.) . 

Anona senegalensis, Pers., var. ; ‘‘Mtaotao;” 12 inch cire., and 10 ft. high 
tree; fruit a red edible drupe, seldom attaining perfection ; wood makes 
good hoe-handles; Unyoro, 2° N., and Madi, 3° N. Dec, 1862. (6253.) 


~ 


i 


Ill. MENISPERMACE, Juss. 


Chasmanthera sp.; thick root (yellowish); Unyoro plantain-grove. Nov. 
1862. 


— 


IV. NYMPHAACED, 
Nymphea lotus, L., white water-lily; flower-stalks 12 ft. long; Nile. 2° N. 


622. 
N. s Hae Willd. ; ‘‘Maoongee-Oongee;” flowers and roots eaten by the 
Wahiyow. Karagité Lake, R. Katonga, and Nile 2° N. Common, Flower 


a lilac purple, and half the size of No. 1. (622.1.) 
2k 


spo fe 


626 APPENDLX. 


_ 


i i 


HN ee 


ee 


Nee whore as 


— 


= bo 


i 


V. CRUCIFERA, Juss. 


Morettia sp.; pods curved, $ inch long. Great spheres of this plant (withered) 
were found blowing over the sandy Balama desert. 22° N. April 1863. 

Sisymbrium sp. (drawing—no specimen) ; flowers yellow; pods round 3 linear 
and many-seeded ; stem purple on one side; leaves pinnatifid. 1° 42’ 8. 
Feb. 1862. (446.) : 

Senebiera Nilotica, DO. ; smells like wild cress; Nile bank, 163° N. April 
1863. 


VI. CAPPARIDEA#. 


Gynandropsis pentaphylla, DC.; common near every hut; spinage is made 
from its leaves. 7° 27'S. and 1° 42’S. (380.) ; 

Cleome monophylla, L. Alt. 3900 ft. 5° 5’ S., and 32° E. 

Polanisia oxyphylla, DC.; common; Mininga. 4°S. April 1861. (186.) 

P. sp.; common, waste grounds. 5° 1’ S., and 33° E. 

Cadaba farinosa, Forsk., called ‘‘Kana;” spinage is made from the leaves 
of this shrub at Madi. 3° N. Jan. 1863. (746.) 

Physanthemum glaucum, Kl. ; bush about Madi plains. Jan. 1863. 

Crateva Adansonii, Guill. and Perr.; 10 ft. cire. tree; fresh shoots made into 
spinage, and young branches into tooth-scrubbers. 3°15’ N. Jan. 1863. 
(748. ) 

Capparis tomentosa, Reich.; ‘‘ Kowangwee;” in famines spinage is made 
from its leaves; Madi plains. Jan. 25, 1863. (751.) 

Niebuhria ? sp.; Mgetariver. 7° 20'S. 4 to 7 ft. high. 

NV. sp.; Mohonyera. 6° 55’S., and 38° 32’ E. 

Moerua oblongifolia ? Reich. ; Kich country; Nile. 7° N. March 1863. 

Boscia sp. n.; *‘ WZazza;” moderately-sized tree, with long lanceolate leaves 
and terminal inflorescence; Madi. 3° N. Feb. 4, 1863.  (757.) 

Capparidee sp. (drawing—no specimen); shrub; purple lines on the back of 
the large yellow petals; stem rose-bush appearance, covered with stiff, 
short, curved-down thorns. 1° 42'S. Alt. 4700 ft. April 1862. (497.) 


Vil. BIXACE. 
Fiacourtia ? sp. (leaves only); ‘‘ M’seengeerra” (Kin.); slender; hazel-leaved 
like tree, with a few thorns; by burn; Madi. Feb. 1863. 
Cochlospermum n. sp.; erect, solitary, woody; 3 to 18 in. long; stem, with 
large yellow flower; in bare forest; Madi. Dec. 10, 1862. (692.) 


VIII. VIOLACEA. 
Tonidium sp. Alt. 4000. Dry forest, near Simbah. 5° 26’ S., 33° E. 


IX. POLYGALACEA. 
Polygala sp. ; 1 moisture. Novy. 1862. 2° to 3° N. 
P. sp.; Unyoro plateaux. 2°N. July 1862. 
P.n. sp.; erect, woody plant, on high ground; Madi. 3°N. Dee. 1862. 


X. CARYOPHYLLEA. 


Polycarpea corymbosa, Lam.; Madi, rocks. Dee. 1862. 
Mollugo cerviana, L. 7° 27’ S., 37° E. Zungomero. Oct. 1860. 
M. nudicaulis, L.; weed; Zungoméro. Oct. 1860. 


XI. PORTULACACEA. 


Portulaca oleracea, L. ; spinage made from its leaves, which are supposed to 
possess great virtue as poultices; weed. 2°N. Oct. 1862. Common. (608.) 
P. quadrifida, Willd. (no specimen.) (593.) . 


Talinum cuneifolium, Willd. ; on cleared ground. 2°N. J uly 1862. 


XII. TAMARIXINE A. 
Tamarix gallica, L.? ‘‘Jow” of India; Nile banks, 15° to 16° N. April 
1863. Common; not met with till these latitudes. 


APPENDIX. 62 


=I 


XIII ELATINEA, 


1 Lancretia suffruticosa, Del. ; rigid plant; near cult. ; Nile banks. 16° N. 
April 16, 1863. 

XIV. DIPTEROCARPEA. 

1 Lophira alata, Banks; 6 ft. cire. tree; ‘‘ Meeenzerrah ;” the handsomest tree 
seen on the route. Its leaf is used as a charm—namely, if human and buffalo 
blood be mixed upon its surface, and a native inoculated with the mixture, 
good fortune attends him. The young leaves are of a dull red colour, and 
attain a length of 2 ft. Observed only at 3°15’ N. Dee. 10, 1862. (679.) 


XV. MALVACEA. 

1 Sida cordifolia, Cay.; common weed; near cult. 2° N. Aug. 1862. 

2 S. rhombifolia, L.; common weed; near cult. 2° N. Aug. 1862. 

3 S. alba, L.; common weed; near cult. Oct. 1862. 

4S. (Dictyocarpus) Schimperiana, Hochst. Alt. 5000 f. 2°S. Karagiié hills. 
Nov. 29, 1861. (163.) 

1 Abutilon muticum, Don; about fields; Kartoum. April 2, 1863. 

2 A. sp.; common about fields; M’bwiga. 7°S. Oct. 1860. 

1 Urena lobata, L.; ‘*‘Milenda;” bark made into cordage. 2° to 3°N. Fre- 
quent. (610.) 

1 Pawonia Schimperiana, Hochst. Alt. 5000 ft. 2°S. March 1862. (478.) 

2 P. n. sp.; moist rocky soil; pretty fleshy-pink flowers; Ugani and Madi. 
Dec. 4, 1862. Plentiful. (654.) 

3 P. macrophylla, K. Mey. ; Uganda plantain-groves. July 1862. 

1 Hibiscus crassinervius, Hochst.; Karagié valleys. 2°S. Dec. 1861. (215.) 

2 H. gossypinus, Thunb. ; grassy hill slopes. Alt. 5000 ft. Nov. 1861. (162.) 

3 H. cannabinus, L.; ‘‘Sun,” cult. in India for hemp; near corn-fields, 
Mininga. 4°18’S. (169.) 

4 H. heterotrichus, . Mey.; cordage made from its bark; amongst vegetation, 
2°N. Oct. 1862. (586.) 

5 H. sp.; open ground; Madi. Dec. 1862. 

6 H. sabdariffa, L.; Roselle; cult. in Unyoro, 2° N., and Ugani 3° N., for 
its seed, bark, and leaves, the bark making beautiful but short cordage; 
the leaves make a spinage in the Land of the Moon, called there 
“*Tocos’was’ ;”’ and the seed is eaten roasted by the Wagani. (570.) 

7 H. n. sp.; an under-shrub; banks of the R. Kuffo, Unyoro, 2° N. Sept. 
1862. 

1 Gossypium punctatum, Sch. and Th.; 4 to 8 ft. high; perennial cotton bush 
planted here and there by habitations on the route. 7° 27’S., 374° E., and 
4° N. Oct. 1860. The Wanyamitézi make a coarse heavy cloth of it; 
others cultivate merely enough for sewing purposes; while at 4° N. they 
make it into front and rear fringes for the women. Irrigation not employed 
in these latitudes. : 

1 Eriodendron anfractuosum, DC.; ‘‘Meesoofee;” cotton tree, 10 ft. high, 
with green bark and thorns or excrescences on its bark, 7° 27’ S. and 
aN we (Tee 

1 es a L.; Baobab; ‘‘Booyoo;” 54 ft. in cire.; rope and 
kilts are made from its bark, water-buckets from its gourds, and seeds 
mashed in water have a pleasant acid taste ; dry situations. 7° 8. and 2° N. 
22. 

1 ihe ste sp. (drawing—no specimen); 3 to 5 ft. high; waved, tubular, 
grooved stem; bushy; near huts in rank cult. 1° 42'S. April 1862. (493.) 


XVI. STERCULIACE. 


Sterculia tomentosa, Guill and Per. ; ‘‘ M’loolooma;” 10 ft. cire. tree, whose 
seeds are eaten raw in dearths; cordage made from the bark of young 
trees; M’gunda Mkhali, and 3° N. Feb. 1863. An ice-coloured gum 
appears on the stalk of a freshly-pulled seed-vessel. (759. ) 

8. sp.; shrubby tree; unburst pods (in sets of fives) are size and shape of a 
huge caterpillar; threads of gum appear wherever a branch is severed. The 
Sultan of Ukuni has his hut-lashings made from its bark, considered so good ; 

’ bows made from its wood. 3° 58'S. Sept, 28, 1861. 


> 


628 APPENDIX. 


XVII. BYTTNERIACEA. 


Melhania Forbesii, Planch. mss; 3 ft. high; on bare cult. heights. 3° N. 
Dec. 1862. (729.) 

Dombeya multiflora, Endl.; ‘‘Keenga;” 3 ft. cire. tree; leafless, but 
covered with blossom, in Jan.; the Men of the Moon consider its wood 
tough and excellent for bows. 3°N. Feb. 1, 1863. Frequent. (737.) 

D. sp. ; same size and locality as above. 

D. sp.; shrub with rich clusters of white flowers; Nile banks. 2° N. Nov. 
1862. 


a 


wr 


XVIII. TILIACEA. 


Corchorus sp. (drawing—no specimen). Each leaf has one hair (}-inch long) 
on either side of its base ; foot high, with smooth, shining, pink stem, which 
is very tough ; leaves make a stringy spinage. 1°-2° N. 1862. Common. 
(542. ) : 

C. trilocularis, L. ; near fields. Nouses. 2°N. Oct. 1862. (544.) 

Triumfetta annua, L.; grows lowly amongst cult. 2° N. Oct. 15, 1862. 
(589. ) 

T. semitriloba, L. var.; Unyoro plantain-groves. Nov. 1862. 

T. rhomboidea, L.; near fields. 5°S. 1861. 

Grewia, n. sp. Shrub with snowy-white flowers; amongst granite rocks. 
Alt. 4488. 6°S., 34° E. Jan. 1, 1861. 

G. sp. ; shrub with delicate purplish flowers; fruit, a pea-sized, smooth, 
yellow, dry, one-stoned drupe; in water-cuts, Karagié hills. Alt. 5000. 
Dec. 1861. (381.) 

G. sp.; ‘‘M’koma;” 12 ft. circ. tree; wood with a black heart resem- 
bling rosewood ; uses—bows and arrows, building purposes, and ropes from 
bark ; no insect is said to touch it; drupes, pea-size, light-coloured, and 
pleasant-tasting. Unyanyembé, 5° S., and Madi. Dec. 1862. Spread 
generally. (760.5.) 

Antichorus depressus, L. fil.; near cotton-fields; right bank Nile. 16° N. 
April 16, 1863. 


bo mw bo Lol 5°) = 


ive) 


_ 


XIX. ZYGOPHYLLEA. 


Tribulus terrestris, L. 7° 27'S., 374° E. Oct. 1860; and 2° N. 1862. 
Fagonia cretica, L.; shingle desert behind Berber. 174° N. April 25, 
1863. 


— 


XX. GERANIACEA. 


Oxalis corniculata, L.; common near cult. Novy. 1861. (189.) 
Biophytum sensitivum, DC. Alt. 3900. 5° 5’S., and 2° N. (584.) 


ee 


XXI. SIMARUBEA. 


Balanites Agyptiaca, Del.; *‘ M’choonchoo;” 6 ft. cire. tree; drupe edible, 
and tasting like an intensely bitter date; kernels made into oil and mixed 
with red clay for anointing the person ; bark of young trees makes strong 
cordage. 3° N., Jan. 1863; and frequently in other latitudes. (745.) 

Harrisonia sp.; ‘ M’ceeniingo.” Its boughuig, thorned branches catch one’s 
clothes in the woods. Flowers, a pink yellow. Madi. Dec. 1862. (700.) 


XXII. OCHNACE A, 
1 Ochna sp.; root deeply imbedded; flower blood-red. Alt. 1700 ft., M’bumi 
6° 56/8. Nov. 8, 1860. 
pi aoe pink flowers ; grows in patches in light forest, Land of the Moon. 
an. 1861. ‘ 
3 O.? sp.; ordinary-sized tree; Madi woods. Dee. 1862. 


be 


—_ 


bo 


XXIII. RUTACEA. 
peal L. ; cult. by Arabs in their gardens at Unyanyembé. 5° 8. 


— 


APPENDIX. 629 


XXIV. MELIACEA. 


Trichilia emetica, Vahl.; flowers, Jan. ; grown by huts to 8 ft. cire.; the 
bark is used medicinally in syphilis. 3°, 4°,5°N. Jan. 1863. (747.) 

Khaya? sp.; 10 ft. cire.; handsome tree, with small, lime-sized, four-seg- 
mented capsules ; an amber-coloured, glistening-fractured, tasteless, scent- 
less gum exudes from wounds. Madi. Feb. 4, 1863. (756.) 

Soymida sp. ; ‘‘M’bawa;” (leaf, gum, and seed-vessel) ; tree 15 ft. cire., 
branching at 20 ft.; immense canoes are made by the Wahiyow from its 
trunk ; a disagreeably-smelling, wax-coloured gum accumulates in tears 
from wounds in the bark ; near water. 3° N. Dee. 1862. (731.) 


XXV. OLACINE. 


Opilia celtidifolia, Endl.; tree by watercourse, unknown to our men. Madi. 
Jan. 1863. 

1 Ximenia Americana, L.; ‘‘M’toondwah” (Kinyoro), and ‘ M’peenjee” 

(Kisttahili) ; oil is extracted from the kernels, and used as an unguent; 

Land of the Moon, Unyoro, and Ugani. 1861, 1862, and 1863. (640.) 


XXVI. CELASTRACEA, 

Gymnosporia coriacea, Guill. and Per.; ‘‘ M’thoozeea ;” 30 inch cire. tree; its 
roots are used medicinally by women, also as a purgative. 5°S. and 3° N. 
Dec. 1862. Very frequent. (728.6.) 

G. sp. ; flowering shrub. Alt. 4800, East African chain, 6° 38’ S. 


XXVIL RHAMNEZ. 

1 Rhamnus sp. (leaves only); shrub by water, with red, currant-sized, and 
coloured berries, soft and sweet, with hard stone ; fish are brought to the 
surface by throwing a mash of its leaves and berries into the water. 
Wanyamiézi name, “* M’qneete-quete.” 3° N. Dec. 1862. (723.) : 

Zizyphus jujuba? Lam.; ‘‘ M’konazee” (Kis.), ‘‘Kalembo” (Kin.); fruit 
nearly all stone, nauseous and woody; mashed and thrown into water 
brings fish to the surface; goats eat the leaves; branches made into 
fences. Ugani. Nov. 1862. Common everywhere. (638.) 


XXVIII. AMPELIDEA. 
1 Vitis sp.; wild vine. Usui slopes, 2° 42’ S., Nov. 1861; and Unyoro, 2° N. 
208. 
V. . % <«M’peengee-peengee ;” 3 ft. high shrub, with one-stoned, pear-shaped, 
deep purple, pink-spotted, edible fruit, not pleasant to the taste; neither 
tendrils nor thorns. Madi woods. Dec. 6, 1862. (658.) 
1 Cissus quadrangularis, L.; ‘‘Meoleh-oleh;” spreads itself over lofty trees, 
Unyoro, Nov. 9, 1862. (616.) 

2 C. cyphopetala, Fres.; climbing amongst shrubs, Unyoro plateaux, Noy. 
1862. (389.) : ; , 

3 (. cirrhosa, Pers.; in thicket of bushes, Karagité, Dec. 1862. 

4 OC. subdiaphana, Steud. ; climber amongst bushes, Unyoro forest, 1862. 


XXIX. SAPINDACEA. 
1 Cardiospermum haliacacabum, L.; common. 7° S. to 2°N. Leaves are made 
into spinage by Wahiyow. (558.) 
XXX. BURSERACEA, 


g Jendron Africanum, Arn.; B’dellium (resin), “*M’Gazoo” (Kin. ), and 

: “eerie of toe Wanyamitézi boil its gum, mix it with butter, and 
anoint their persons. 2°S., April 1862; and rocky heights by huts, Ugani, 
3° N., Nov. 1862. Frequent. (496.) 

1 Boswellia sp. (leaf only); 20 in. in girth, stunted 5 ft. high tree, growing 
locally in patches. 3° N. 1863. Amber-coloured gum exudes profusely 
from the stem. Sp. of “‘Looban,” or frankincense. (739.) 

XXXI. ANACARDIACEA#. 
1 Rhus villosa, L.; thorny flowering shrub, 2° S. and 3° N. 1861 and 1862. 


(415.) 


a 


— 


—~ 


— 


bo 


_ 


bo 4 


630 APPENDIX. 


2 Rhus sp. ; ‘‘M’sangool’a ;” shrub with white-scented flowers and light foliage ; 
not edible; wood makes tooth-scrubbers for natives, who imagine that 
plants for spinage can be found if its seeds are thrown about. Madi, 
Dec. 1862. (697.) 

1 Odina fruticosa, Hochst.; ‘‘M’sangar’a;” lofty, elegant, thornless, 6 ft. 
cire. tree; wood made into posts. Madi heights, 3° N. Dec. 1862. Gum, 
sweet tasting ; pods, glossy and a red brown. (672.) 

2 O. Schimperi, Hochst.; “‘ M’oooomboo;” 3 ft. cire. tree ; wood heavy; nets 
for game made from its roots; fruit scarcely edible. 5° 8. to 3° N.  (549.) 

1 Sclerocarya birrea, Hochst.; ‘‘ M’choowee;” grows to 12 ft. circ.; the ker- 
nels of the fruit (whose unripe sarcocarp is apple-scented) are milky and 
eaten like ground-nuts; leaves of young branches are notched at tips, 
older ones are pointed; large grain-mortars and stools are made from its 
red wood; forest tree ; occasional. 5° S. and 3°15’ N. (682.) 

1 Sorindeia Madagascarensis, DC.; 8 ft. cire. tree; the 2 ft. long bunches (say 200 
plums each) of sparrow-egg-sized, mango-tasting, yellow fruit, hang curi- 
ously from the main trunk and boughs like parasites; they grow also 
from amongst the leaves. Banks of rivers. 7°S. Oct. 1860. (25.) 

1 Anacardiacee ?? ‘‘M’sdowee;” circ. 74 ft. Leaves compound, smelling of 

sweetbriar ; flowers 3 in. long, erect catkins; edible bullet-sized plum ; 
timber somewhat like deal, but heavier, and made into grain-mortars. 
Turah nullah, Jan. 15, 1861; and Madi, 3° N. (8.) 

XXXII. LEGUMINOS A. 

Crotalaria glauca, Willd.; ‘‘M’cewe;” 3 ft. high. Plantain’- groves, 
Unyoro, 27th Aug. 1862, The people of Madi eat its flowers, pods, and 
leaves as spinage. (566.) 

2 C. calycina, Schrank ; plateaux. 2° N. Oct. 1862. (573.) 

3 C. cephalotes, Steud.; bare woods. 3° and 2° N. 

4 0. mossambicencis, Kl.; 6 ft. high; flowers bright yellow. Zungoméro, 

Oct. 1862 ; and Nile banks, Nov. 1862. 

5 0. capensis, Jacq. ; light soil forests. Alt. 3800. 5° S. 

6 OC. globifera, Mey. ; field weed. 4°18’ S. March 1861. (176.) 

ii 

8 

9 


i 


CO. striata, DC. ; rank cult. Alt. 3800. 5° S., 33° E. 

C. incana, L. ; dry soil. Right bank Nile. 5° 10'N. 

C. Goréensis, G. and P. ; height 6in. Alt. 5000. 5°S. Feb. 1862. (442.) 
10 C. n. sp. ; grows in light tufts; hills. 2°S8. Dec. 1861. (397.) 
11 C. n. sp. ? very handsome ; fallow and grassy ground. 2° N. Aug. 1862. 
12 C.? sp.; long root; near cult., 4° 18’ 8., April 1861. (183.) 
1 Lupinus albus, L. ; var. Cult., 15° N., March 1863. Now ripe. 
1 Trifolium polystachyum, Fres. ; E. African chain., Alt. 4700., Dec. 1860. 
1 Indigofera paucifolia, Del. ; right bank Blue Nile, 16° N.; used for fencing 

and firewood. Also Nile, 15° N. 


2 I. marginella, Steud. ; erect stemmed; woody. Karagiié, March 1862. (483.) 

3 I. pentaphylla, L.; Madi woods, Dec. 1862. 

4 I. stenophylla, Guill. and Pers. ; waste ground, 3° N. Feb. 1863. 

5 I. melanotricha, Steud. ; grassy plateaux, 2° N. (574.) 

6 I. hirsuta, L. ; the natives, do not use these indigo plants as dyes. 4° 18’ 
8., and 2°. N. (182.) 

7 I. endecaphylla, L.; small plant, with liquorice-tasting tapering root. Makata, 

7S. 3d Nov. 1860. 

8 I. sp.; growing 10 ft. high,amongst thorns, reeds, grasses, &c., M’ Geta river. 
7° 20'S. Oct. 1860. ; 

9 I. ? sp.; bushy plant; open ground, 3° N., Dec. 1862. 

1 Psoralea plicata, Del. Nile banks. 16th April 1863. 

1 Tephrosia sp.; Uganda groves. July 1862. 

2 ee ; creeps along the ground amongst luxuriant cult, 5°S., 33° E. Alt. 

3 7. sp.; 8 ft. to 9 ft. high. Madi burn bank, Dec. 1862. 

4 7. sp.; leaves small, and prettily ribbed behind. 3° N., 14th Dec. 1862. 

5 1. Vogelii, Hook. fil. ; rich white flowers, bushy, and 7 ft. high ; sometimes 


hedging dwellings ; sh of i avosmenised a SA Sian 
1862. sry a mash of its leaves is used in destroying fish. 1° to 2 


o DAS 


bo 


a 


Ne wNre 


metho 


APPENDIX. 631 


Tephrosia longipes, Meisa. Karagiié, March 1862, alt. 5000 ft. (487.) 

T. sp.; grows in tufts; many-podded; hills, 2° S., Dec. 1861. (401.) 

7. sp. (drawing—no specimen) ; purple flowered plant, covered with silky 

pubescence. 1° 42'S. Feb. 1862. (431.) 

T. sp. (drawing—no specimen); stem inclining to four-cornered ; covered, 
as also the backs of the leaflets, with brown crooked hairs. 1° 42’ S., and 
0° 30’N. 1862. (432.) 

Sesbania digyptiaca, Pers. ; tree 30 inches in girth ; herdboys use its seeds as 
a rattle; Indian hedge plant. 3° N. Dec. 1863. (710.) 

Herminiera Elaphroxylon, Guill. and Per. The ‘‘ Ambash” or pith tree of the 
Nile, from 3° to 8° N. Natives use its light logs to assist them when swim- 
ming across the Nile; grows so rapidly that in three years it almost choked 
up the channel of the R. Bahr-el-Gazelle. March 1863. 

Astragalus venosus, Hochst.; herbaceous plant; groves, 1° N. (529.) 

Pisum sativum, L.; cult. at Karagité. Alt. 4000 to 5000 ft. Feb. 1862. (466.) 

Arachis hypogea, L.; ground nut. Cultivated to a small extent from 7° S. 
to 2° N. Eaten roasted, boiled, or converted into an oil. (64.) 

Desmodium sp.; 7 to 9 ft. high; sticky mouldy stem; abundant in grassy 
forests; Uganda and Unyoro. 1862. (434 and 568.) 

Uraria picta, Desv.; foot high; rocky soil; Madi, Dec. 1862. (666.) 

Alysicarpus Wallichii, W. and A. var. ; a decoction of its leaves used along 
with Calophanes radicans to reduce or soothe swollen legs. Karagiié hills 
and grassy plains of Unyoro. Feb. and Sept. 1862. (435.) 

Smithia n. sp. ; near cult. Mininga. 4°18’S. (177.) 

Zornia diphylla, Benth.; in tufts, on surface rocks, Unyoro forests. Aug. 
1862. 

Aischynomene indica, L. ; ‘‘ M’peecee;” ‘*Solah” of India; in marshes gene- 
rally. 5° S. to 2° N. In Sept. (the height of the dry season, at 3° S.) 
this plant lies dead on the dried mud; use, floats for nets; erect, 7 ft. 
high. (127.) ; : 

4). Schimperi ? Hochst.; ‘*‘ Kong’gdld;” sp. of Indian ‘‘Solah”’ (pith) ; 
20 ft. high bushy tree. Waganda make theix shields of its light wood ; 
Wanyoro use it as trimmers and door-bolts ; Wanyamtézi as load-levers. 
Oct. 1862. (615.) 

Alhagi mauroram, Tourn.; thorny plant eaten by camels; Thebes, 264° N. 
May 1863. 

Glycine labialis, W. and A.; slender climber; plateaux, 2° N., Nov. 1862. 

Canavalia gladiata ? DC.; waxy, sweet-scented, rose-pink flowers. Wan- 
yamtiézi spin its beans as an amusement; amongst grasses, Chopeh, 22d 
Nov. 1862. (628.) ; 

Erythrina sp.; handsome scarlet flowering shrub, with moulded stem and 
slightly bent down thorns. Karagité, Feb. 1862. (426.) , s 

Vigna luteola, Benth. ; ‘‘ Koondé;” coarse bean, cult. by natives, 5° S., and 
2°N. Karagté, March 1862. (489.) et " 

V. sp. ; creeper, with rose-coloured flowers. M’geta banks, ie 20 S108 E. z 

Lablab vulgaris, Savi. ; coarse bean; ‘‘Gueengueezoo” and ‘‘ Maharagé ; 
grown on the E. coast, and Karagité. Feb. 1862. Leaves are dried and made 
into a spinage. (425.) ; ; i ae 

Psophocarpus sp. ; climber, with winged pods overhanging water, M bwiga. 
Alt. 1354., 7° 24’ S. re. ' 

Dolichos biflorus, L.; small herbaceous plant, 6° 55’ S., Oct. 1860. 

D.2 sp.; Trefoil leaves. Usui slopes. Nov. 1861. (206.) 

D.? sp.; resembles the ‘‘dall” of India. 2° .N. Oct. 1862. 

Phaseolus lunatus, L. ; Duffin bean. Kazeh, 5°S8. | 1860. , 

P. Mungo, L.; ‘‘Moong ke dal” of India. Sown in ridges, 5 8. Uncom- 


mon. (59 and 82.) 


chosia viscosa, DC. ; near cult. Unyoro. Nov. 1862. F 
aoe ; elegant racemes of erect flowers. 2° S. Dec. 1861. (416.) 
R. minima, DC. M’geta banks, 7° 20’S., 38° E. } 4 
Pachyrhizus sp. ? 4 ft. high, with handsome flowers. Madi woods, Jan. 1863. 
Cajanus indicus, DC.; pigeon-peas; ‘‘ Baraz (Kis.); or Indian ‘‘ Urrur 


‘‘ke dall;”” met with and cultivated everywhere; grows to 7 ft. high; 


632 APPENDIX. 


tastes like a coarse description of field peas; the Wahiyow strike a light 
by using friction with its wood and a reed. (530.) 

Eriosema parviflorum, E. Mey. Karagité. 1862. (420.) 

E. n. sp. ; stems zigzag very much; low bush. Madi slopes, Dec. 1862. 

E. sp.; 2 ft. high, erect. Karagité hills, Feb. 1862. (414) ; 

Lonchocarpus philenoptera, Benth.; 5 ft. cir., rather ash-like tree, with 
erect clusters of handsome flowers attractive to bees. 7°S. 

L. laciflorus? Guill. and Per.; ‘‘ Mowileh ;” 30 in. cir. tree, in lilac, sweet- 
scented blossom. Madi. 3°N. 13th Jan. 1863. (743.) 

Dalbergia melanoxylon, Guill. and Per.; ‘“‘M’pingo” (Kis.) ; ‘‘M’Gembeh” 
(Ugogo); ‘‘M’Teendeea” (Kin.); 20 in. cir. tree ; wood considered first-class, 
being impervious to insects; very hard and heavy, with dull purple heart, 
resembling rosewood when polished; uses—arrow-tips, wooden hammers 
(for beating bark cloths), rafters; root a cure for toothache. Met with 
from 5° 8. to 5° N.  (3.), : 

1 Abrus Schimperi, Hochst. ; seemed to be a woody-climber. Madi. 3° N. 1863. 

2 A. precatorius, L. ; found curling up a young tree. Ukuni, 4°S., Sept. 1861; 
Zanzibar men consider the roots boiled in grain and eaten a certain remedy 
for swollen testicles; after taking it vomiting is said to ensue; plentiful in 
Uganda, where the king’s officers wear wreaths of its scarlet seeds. (122.) 

1 Parkinsonia aculeata, L. ; seems to have been imported here by the Austrian 
Mission. Gondokoro, 5° N. 1863. 

Poinciana pulcherrima, L. Zanzibar. 

Piliostigma Thonningii 2? Schum.; ‘‘M’Keendambogo” (Kin.); ‘‘ Keeteém- 
bee” (Kis.) ; a brushwood tree, found everywhere, growing like the ‘*‘ dik” 
of India; short lashings can be stripped from the bark ; the leaves are used 
to cover sores. (95.): 

1 Cassia obovata, Coll. ; senna; seen being collected from sand-covered fields of 
Kartoum, March 1863. 

C. acutifolia, Del.; also gathered, to a smaller extent, from the sand-covered 
fields of Kartoum. March 1863. 

3 0. Tora, L.; amongst grasses and near moisture. 2°N. 27th Oct. 1862. (600.) 

4 @. occidentalis, L.; bush, near water, Nile banks. March 1863. 

5 O. sp.; ‘‘ Meeks’ ;” 5 ft. to 6 ft. high; outspreading, sombre, green 
foliaged, yellow flowering, black podded bush; seen as fencing, and com- 
mon. 3°N. 12th Feb. 1863. (76.) 

6 C. sp.; a wild senna; near acutifolia, but pubescent with broader leaves. 
Desert valley, near Korosko, 21° N. April 1863. 

7 C. mimosoides, L. ; foot high; wing-like stipules remain withered on the stem 
after the leaves have fallen off. 2°S. and 2° N. (445.) 

8 C. sp. (Sect. Chameecrista); small herbaceous plant, growing locally. Alt. 
1200 ft. M’bwiga, Oct. 1860. 

9 CO. sp, (drawing—no specimen) ; yellow flowering tree; pod 5 in. by 1; seeds 
elongate and round ; leaves thickly paired. 1° 42'S. Feb. 1862. (430.) 

10 C. sp. (drawing—no specimen) ; 6 ft. high shrub, with yellow flowers ; pods 
4 in. long, round, glossy, and brown, with green edges, crammed with flat, 
fig-shaped seeds; midribs red ; the branches smell so nastily the natives use 
them to drive away mosquitoes. 1°42’8., alt. 5000 ft., March 1862. (454.) 

1 Cordyla Richardi, Planch. ; 12 ft. cir. tree; fruit large walnut size; gum in 
deep red bosses. 6 miles 8. of Gondokoro, 15th Feb. 1862. 

1 Swartzia marginata, Benth. ; ‘‘M’nyembé;” ordinary-sized tree. 3° N. 
1862. (644.) 

1 Afzelia Petersiana? Kl. ; ‘Makola;” 9 to 12 ft. cire. tree, branching 
at 10 to 25 ft.; Uzaramo, Usekhe, and Unyamitézi forests; Gani and 
Madi, 3° N. Uses—young purple-tinted leaves are eaten as a spinage, 
no ropes, but drums, door-planks, quivers, and pipe-bowls are made from 
its light mahogany-coloured wood by the Wanyamwtézi; a brown, tasteless, 
volatile gum exudes from wounds ; flowers richly perfumed. (14 and 27.) 

1 Detariwm sp.; seed only. The natives at 3° 15’ N. eat its fruit, and call the 
tree Bootoo. Feb. 1863. (761.) 

1 Tamarindus Indica, L. ; ‘* Looquajoo;” ranges from Rumuma, alt. 2700 
ft., 6° 46’ 8. to 3° and 4° N., in the Bari country. (124 and 541.) 


Reon 


eH bv 


ee 


to 


APPENDIX. 633 


1 Novum genus (near Copaifera) ; ‘* M’chenga.” Livingstone gives the name 
**Chenga” to a similar tree. Covers the Wanyamiési forests ; bark made 
into bandboxes, immense round stores for grain, and fibred kilts. (82.) 

2 N. genus, 2d species ? (leaf only); ‘*Miombo;” girth 9 ft. ; 50 ft. high, 
with dark-green foliage ; considered a first-class wood ; made into rafters ; 
flowers yield the best-flavoured and whitest honey, and the bark is con- 
verted into boats, roofing, grain-bins, kilts, and matches; while in Uhiyow 
the cloth from its bark is said to bleach like sheeting, 24° and 52° S. 
32°F. Alt. 4148, (1,) : 

1 Dichrostachys nutans, Benth.; Shillook country. Nile banks, March 1863. 

2 D. sp.; flowers bottle-brush shape; one-half rose-pink, contrasting beauti- 
fully with other lemon-yellow half. Bruce figures this amongst his Abys- 
sinian plants. Alt. 2700. 6° 46'S. (20.) 

1 Mimosa asperata, L.; thorny bush, in every swamp. 2°N., &c.  (575.) 

1 Acacia Arabica, L.; ‘*Soonud” (Arab). Bagara Arabs, &c., dye their clothes 
with its pods. The coarse-made boats of the Upper Nile are built of its 
cross-grained wood, not considered durable. About 10° N. the trees mea- 
sured § and 10 ft. in girth; those forming forests in low islands, at 12° N., 
measured but from 4 to 6 ft. At Muscat, this species is used in extracting 
spirit from the date. Seen also at Siout avenue, Nile bank, 28° N. (769.) 

2 A. Seyal? Del.; ‘‘ M’salla.” Forests of it at 9° N. Nile left bank, March 
3, 1863; tree stems Indian red, concealing a soft apple-green bark ; height, 
12 to 18 ft.; flat-topped, and branches much broken by wild elephant eat- 
ing its legumes; found also at 18° N., where camels eagerly fed upon it ; 
hard, brittle gum accumulates on the trunk. (767.7.) 

3 A. sp. (near Seyal); ‘* M’seekeezzee;” inner bark used as lashings for tem- 
porary huts. 2° 8S. and 3° N. 1861, 1862. (677.) 

4 A, sp. (near or same as last). A bush with pale hazel bark, scaling. Kara- 
gué valley, Dec. 6, 1861. (384.) 

5 A. eburnea ? Willd. ; 30 ft. high; top, flatasatable. E. African chain, alt. 
4750 ft., 6° 38'S. Dec. 1860. 

6 A. sp. (not in flower); also ‘‘ M’salla;” 10 ft. girth, with white 2-inch long 
double, bulbless thorns set closely all over the stem; inner bark made into 
lashings. Woods, Dec. 12, 1862. (690.5.) 

7 A. catechu ? L. ‘‘M’wombweh;” tree 20 to 30 in. girth, covered with angry, 
black, flattened thorns. 3° N., and Noer country 8° N.; one had ripened 
red pods, white bark, and double black flattened thorns. March 9, 1863. 
No uses known except fencing. (767.8 and 756.5.) 

8 A. albida, Del.; ‘‘ Haraz” (Arab.) ; leaves eaten by goats, and its bark used 
for curing leather. Nile bank, 15° N. March 1863. (771.) 

9. A. sp. Madi wood. Dec. 1862. ‘ ; ; 

10 A. sp., ‘* M’footamvool’ah;” 30-inch cire. tree ; thornless, with pyramidal 
clusters of jasmine-scented flowers, delicate-tinted foliage, and whitish 
finely-striated boughs. Steaming the eyes over its boiled roots, and after- 
wards washing the face, is considered a cure for ophthalmia by the Wan- 
yamtiézi. Madi, Feb. 4, 1863. (755.) 

11 A. pennata, Willd. ; pea-sized, yellow, scented heads of flowers. Nov. 16, 
1860. 

12 A. sp., “‘M’gongwah;” 10 to 12 ft. cire. tree, with marble-sized spots of 

kli ; pod torted, dull red, 10 inches by 14, thin as brown 
sparkling gum; pod contorted, du d, y 14, 
paper, containing ten flat, shiny seeds ; uses—hatchet-handles and build- 
ing purposes; black as rosewood, and said to sink in water; plentiful. 
22 (LOT: 

1 Abie, Ye ; “Iubach” (Arab.); shady, ornamental trees, planted by 
Government-house, Kartoom, 153° N. April 5, 1863. (773.) 

2 A. sp., ‘‘M’sangal’a ;” young thornless tree, with long, uniform, boughing 
branches ; bark brown like the mountain ash and circularly lined; used in 
building. Stream bank. 3°N. Feb. 10, 1863. (764.) : 

3 A. rhombifolia, Benth.; small bushy tree; no uses. Madi. 3°N. Feb. 6, 
1863. (760.) : gh? 

1 Zygia sp. (leaf only) ; “ M’koondee ;” at 4 ft. high, measured 27 ft. in girth; 
branched into noble boughs at 15 ft.; flower, a round, pink, pendant tassel, 


6 


=! 


ee os bo 


Or 


[ooh Ror) 


— 


34 APPENDIX. 


with here and there two long pods attached ; these latter are used for lash- 
ing round poisoned arrows instead of leather; fruit said to be edible ; 
uses—boats, drums; wood takes a fine polish. The largest growing tree in 
Uhiyow. Wahiyow say it is their largest tree. 7°S. Oct. 31, 1860. (4.) 

Zygian sp.; 20 to 30 ft. high; gracefully foliaged ; honey-sucking birds hover 
amongst its branches. 2°41 8. Nov. 1861. (205.) 


XXXII. MYRTACEA. 


Syzygium Guineense, DC.; ‘M’sawa;” 20 to 30 in. cire. tree; fruit edible ; 
timber red and cross-grained. 3° N. Dec. 18, 1862. (708.) ; 
Caryophyllus aromaticus, L. ; Clove; groves of them cult. for exportation at 
Zanzibar. 
XXXIV. ONAGRARIAi. 


Epilobium hirsutum, L. ; willow herb; pink flowers. By edge of Marenga- 
M’khalé stream, alt. 3900 ft., 6° 44’S. Nov. 1860. 

Jussiea villosa Lam. ; 4 ft. high. Marshes, 3° N., Nov. 1862; and Nile 
banks, 10° N., March 1863. 

J. repens, L. Near springs, 5° S. Flowers yellow. 2°N. Oct. 1862. 

J. linifolia, Vahl.; stem and leaves tinted red; flowers yellow. 73° S. 
Oct. 1860. 

J. augustifolia, Lam. Zungomero river bank, 7$° 8. Oct. 1860. 

Ludwirgia parvijiora, Roxb. Near moisture, Unyoro. Nov. 1862. 

Trapa natans, L.; ‘‘Singara.” The Waganda gather its four-pronged nut on 
the shores of Victoria N’yanza; wild boars eat them. Equator and Nile, 
2°N. May and Nov. 1862. (515.) 


XXXV. LYTHRACE. 


Lawsonia alba, Lam.; ‘‘ Hin’a,” or ‘‘Henna;” dye shrub. Phile ruins, Nile, 
24° N. May 16, 1863. 

Nescea erecta, Guill.; diminutive plant; swamps. Madi. Oct. 14, 1862. 

Ammannia vesicatoria, Roxb.; in bog on Madi rocks. Dec. 1863. 


XXXVI. COMBRETACE. 


Combretum eleagnifolium; Planch, Madi, 3°N. Dec. 1862. 

C. sp. (Lerminalia hirta, Steud) ; velvet-surfaced leaf, rough underneath ; no 
timber. E. African chain, alt. 4700 ft., 6° 30'S. Dec. 19, 1860. (34.) 
C. sp. (like one of Kotschy’s); thicket bush, with arching branches, and 
four-winged ovate capsules; leaves rather linear, in whorls of fours, with 
shining surface, and wavy entire edges; in water-courses. Madi. 3° N. 

Dec. 20, 1862. Nouses. (717.) 

C. sp.; ‘*M’Landal’a;” 30-in. circ, stunted tree; abundant in all forests; 
fruit in bunches, of four-winged, rounded capsules ; leaves eliptical, alter- 
nate, crisp, and glossy. (121.5.) 

C. sp.; 5 to 6 ft. high; shrub, with rich, port-wine coloured, bottle-brush 
shaped flowers. Near water, amongst rank vegetation, 7° S. 38° E. Oct. 
1860. 

C. sp.; four-winged capsules. Madi. Feb. 1863. 

C. sp.; Madi. Dee. 1862. (734.5.) 

C. sp.; no specimen ; handsome creeper ; stamina and corolla all of a brilliant 
vermilion colour; capsules five-winged; branches boughing over, and at 
times seen catching hold of and climbing up trees ;- flowers like bottle- 
brushes on the dead-like, now leafless, stems. 5° S., Ukuney, Aug. 1861. 
(91.) 

Terminalia sp.; ‘‘M’foof'oo”; handsome trunked tree, 10 to 12 ft. cire.; 
wood, lemon-yellow under the bark, cutting into which a sticky juice 
exudes. The Arabs of Unyanyembe build their houses of this wood. 
Wanyamitézi tint their bark-cloths yellow with it; fruit, flat oblong, 2 by 
1 in., winged all round the spherical seed ; kernel as sweet as an almond. 
Gani. Dec. 1, 1862. (643.) 

Powrea sp.; near P. constricta. Zanzibar. Aug. 1860. 

Anogeissus acuminatus, Wall.; 4 to 6 ft. cire. tree, with airy foliage; rare. 
Bari country. 4°N. Feb. 18, 1863. 


Hm bo 


a) 


_ 


) 


“i 


a 


1 


2 
7 


a) 


1 
1 
1 


APPENDIX. 635 


XXXVII. FICOIDEA. 


Trianthema erystallina ; Vahl. (not of Wight), ‘Ice plant.” Sheep are said to 
fatten readily upon it. Captain Speke had seen it in the Somali country. 
Desert on right bank of Nile, 18° 45’ N. May 1, 1863. (776.) 


XXXVIIT. MELASTOMACEAR. 

Osbeckia eximia, Sond; 4 ft. high, purple flowering plant; near water, 
Ukidi forest. Nov. 1862. 

O. Zanzibariensis, Naud,; stem roughly-haired. Zanzibar. 1860. 

Argyrella incana, Naud.; richly flowering (rose-pink) plant ; by water, 
Karagiié, 2° S., Feb. 1862; and Ukidi, Nov. 1862. (403. ) 

Tristemma sp. (near JT. littorale); rough-stemmed erect plant; surface of 
leaves rough as a file when rubbed reversely; uncommon. Dec. 1862. 


3°N. (730.) 
XXXIX. CRASSULACE. 

Bryophyllum calycinum, L.; very fleshy; planted by huts in Madi; said to 
have medicinal properties ; also grows wild in dells. Dee. 1, 1862. (646.) 

Kalenchoe glandulosa, Hochst; 4 ft. high, fleshy plant. 2° S. Dec. 1861. 
387.) 

XL. CUCURBITACEA. 

Citrullus colocynthis, Schrad.; Shell colocynth; ‘‘Hundhul” (Turk); from 
the fruit, a tarry, fish-oil smelling liquid is extracted by heat, and sold at 2d. 
per pint, for smearing leather water-sacks previous to entering the desert; 
camels refuse its fresh-looking green, leaves, Abo-Ahmed desert, 19° N. 
May 2, 1863. (774.) 

Momordica sp. (cf. M. Vogelii Planch.); climber, with rich creamy flowers 
and prickly round fruit. 73° S. and 23° N. Nov. 26, 1862. Whole plant 
smelling unpleasantly. (633.) 

M. sp.; Zungomero, 73° 8. Oct. 1860. 

Cucurbita maxima, Duch.; excellent pumpkin with large slightly elongated 
fruit; leaves, male flowers, and seeds eaten cooked. 5° S. to 2° N, Oct. 
1862. (599.) alt 

Lagenaria vulgaris, Ser. ;° ‘‘ Booyoo”; Bottle-gourd. Drinking-cups, bottles, 
quivers, musical sounding-boards, &c., are all made from the fruit of this 
useful plant; common by habitations. (598.) 

Mukia scabrella, Arn.; climber. Nile banks, March 1863. 

Melothria triangularis, Benth.; climber. Forest, 24° N. Dec. 1862. 

Bryonia laciniosa, L.; climber, with beautiful scarlet and white berries (beads 
like them would be vastly admired by natives at 2° N.); plant offensive to 
handle. Unyoro, Dec. 1862. (617.) 

Luffa pentandra, Roxb.; Towel-gourd, grows wild over the garden fences, 
Unyamyembé, 5°S. 1861. Nile banks, 6°-9° N. aN 

L.? sp.; amongst grasses; fruit prickly. Nile, 16° N. April 16, 1863. 

Coccinia indica, W.and A.; Waganda make garlands of the leaves. Unyoro, 
Nov. 1862. (597.) ; ‘ 

Cucumis sativus; common cucumber; gardens of Arabs, 5° S. Called gene- 
rally ‘‘Matango.” (67.) ‘ bE 

Oucurbitacea; creeper with yellow flowers. 7° 20'S. Oct. 1860. ie 

C. sp.; climbs up acacias; flower, yellowish white; leaves much divided. 
Noer country, 84° N. March 9, 1863. ; 

C. sp.; ivy-leaved creeper. 7° 20'S. Oct. 1860. eae 

C.. sp.; climber, flowers yellow, leaves compound. Zungomero, 7° 27'S. Oct. 
1860. 

Carica papaya, L.; grown in the gardens of Arabs. 5°S. (13.) 


XLI. UMBELLIFERA. 
tyle natans, L.; marshes. 1° 39 N. Alt. 3300 ft. Oct. 1862. 
Pca abyssinica, Hochst.; flowering shrub, 2° 8. Dee. 1861. (299.) 
Steganotenia sp.; ‘‘ Meonga Pembe”; considered an evil-producing tree; 
with a branch in the hand, cattle or other property may be stolen without 
discovery, it producing unconsciousness on those to whom the property may 
belong; forest tree. Madi, &c. 1861-62. (689.) 


636 APPENDIX. 


—a 


Bmwoe 


Re RwL 


— 


Lefeburia, n. sp.; moarsh, by R. Wallah. 5°S. Alt. 3800 ft. E 

Peucedanum? sp.; 6 to 7 ft. high; walking-stick thickness, tapering root. 
R. Kafu banks. Aug. 1862. (581.) 

Cachrys abyssinica, Hochst ; 5 ft. high, whole plant sweetly perfumed (some- 
thing like peppermint) ; in woods, 3° N. Nov. and Dec. 1862. (709.) 


XLII. RUBIACEA. 

Coffea arabica, L.; ‘‘M’wanee;” coffee cultivated in considerable quantities 
on and about the equator. The trees grow 10 and 12 ft. high, their bough- 
ing branches affording shade. The berry is gathered before it has com- 
pletely formed, sun-dried and eaten raw as a stimulant, chiefly by the Wan- 
yambo. The natives never drink it as we do. Alt. 4000 feet. 1° 40’ S. 
May 1862. (509.) 

Crossopteryx febrifuga, Afr. ‘* M’teloambai ;” bushy-growing tree, whose seeds 
roasted are used by the Wanyamiézi to fumigate their bark-cloths, or, 
powdered and put in grease, to form a scented pomade for the body. 5°S., 
3° N. 1861-62. (698.) 

Hymenodictyon sp.; ‘‘M’fo;” 6 to 8 ft. high shrub, with clusters of olive- 
shaped, purple-brown seed-vessels, covered with grey excrescences. Madi- 
burn bank. Dee. 12, 1862. (686.) . 

Sarcocephalus sp.; serubby-looking tree, with 10-inch diameter rounded leaves, 
and rough, brown-skinned, pink-cutting, sweet apple-tasted fruit, orange 
size ; full of seeds. Near water, Madi woods. Dec. 1862. (690.) 

Mussenda n. sp.; pretty shrub; the leaves next the flowers are canary yellow. 
In rocky places, Gani, 3° N. Dec. 1863. (669.) 

Vignaldia quartiniana? A. Rich. Ukidi and Madi (rocks). Dee. 11, 1862. 

V. sp.; erect plant, with deep purple flowers. 2°41’S. Alt. 4000. Nov. 1861. 
(140.) 

Stylocoryne sp.; richly flowering, jasmine-scented shrub, with evergreen leaves 
in whorls of threes; by water, Karagié, 2°S. Feb. 1862. (422.) 

Gardenia lutea, Fres.; “ Kolola;” its roots, boiled with the flour of An- 
dropogon sorghum and the mixture drank, is considered by the Wanyamtézi 
a cure for heematuria—blood in the bladder; the contorted branches make 
an impenetrable fence. 5° 8. and 3° N. 1861-63. (762.) 

Randia dumetorum, Lam. ; prickly, stiff-branched shrub. 3°N. Feb. 13, 1863. 

Hedyotis dichotoma. A. Rich. Karagié and Uganda groves. 1862. (447.) 

H. sp. Madi bogs, Dee. 1862. 

HT, sp.; bushed, linear-leaved weed. 5° 8. 32° E. Alt. 4000. 

H. (Kohautia sp.); near pauciflorum); very delicate lilac-coloured flowers. 
Grows out of water, 7° 20’S. Oct. 1860. 

Otomeria sp. ; inflorescence spires up the stem, rare; corolla pink, except the 
inside, which is white; stems seem eaten down by goats or cattle. Open 
ground, Madi, Dee. 15, 1862. (691.) 

Rosea sp.; straight thickly- growing branches, leaves opposite. 4°N. Dec. 1862. 

Canthium sp.; tree with clusters of hard several-seeded berries. Madi, Dec. 
1862. 

Pavetta sp.; shrub by water, with leaves feeling like leather, and bunches of 
white flowers. 2°S. Nov. 29, 1861. (160.) 

Psychotria? sp. in fr.; ‘*M’sweet’x,” shrub by rocky burn, with currant- 
sized, sweet-tasting, scarlet berries, not eaten by natives. Faloro, 31° N. 
Dec. 14, 1862. (694.) iin 

Mitracarpum sp. ; diminutive, sandy soil, near water, Ukidi, Nov. 1862. 

M. sp.; hardy. Unyoro plateaux, Noy. 1862; and 5° S. 

epel eee natalensis ? Hochst. ; low sandy ground in forest, 2° 45’ N. Noy. 
862. 

S. sp.; corolla sky blue. Alt. 5000 ft. 2°S. Feb. 1862. (439.) 

S. sp.; low grounds about Madi, Dec. 1862. : 

S, Ruellice, DC. ; opposite leaved; near cult., 2° N., Aug. 1862. 

Pentanisia sp.; pink flowers, whole plant very milky, found growing in a 
sesamum field ; root tuberous. 2°.N. July 29, 1862. (531.) 

Rubia cordifolia, L.; Red madder ; clinging plant, 2°S. Dec. 1861. (383. ) 

Rubiacea in fruit; erect shrub, with pear-shaped leaves in whorls of threes : five- 
seeded seed-vessel, black, and from leaf-axles. 2°. March 18, 1863. ‘(481,) 


bo 


wy) 


eo MrT oe i) 


1 


2 
3 
1 
1 


1 
1 


1 


bo 


2 
1 


(SU) 


ay 


_ 


APPENDIX. 637 


Rubiacea, leaves only ; bark yellow, brittle and light as a cork, considered a 


remedy for swollen limbs, by powdering the burnt root and rubbing it into 
cuts made with a knife, while the patient sits under the tree. Madi woods, 
&e. 1861-63.  (740.) 

R.; “‘Mkoolookootoot’oo ; edible, pleasant-tasting drupe, green gage size 
and colour. Madi, Dec. 1862. (678.) 


XLUI. LORANTHACEA. 


Loranthus Acacie, Zuce. ; red parasite, found growing upon Acacia seyal, Nile 
bank, March 29, 1863. 

L. sp. n. ; clove-coloured parasite, found grafted on the tops of trees. Noy. 14, 
1860. 2° 41’ S. Alt. 4000 feet. Nov. 2, 1861. (6.) 

L. sp. n.; parasite, grafted, 3 ft. long wands. 6° 47’ S. Alt. 3250 feet. Nov. 
14, 1861. 

Viscum sp.; (cf. V. tuberculatum Rich.); mistletoe. Usui terrace top, 2° 
42'S. Alt. 4500 ft. Noy. 1861. Berries orange. (143.) 


XLIV. COMPOSIT A. 


Vernonia Vogeliana, Benth.; salt-bush ; burn-bank, 3° N. Dec. 1862. 

V. stoechadifolia, Sch. bip.; mixed with Hygrophila spinosa, and both burnt, 
salt is extracted from their ashes. Forests, 2° N.; open woods, 3°N. Aug. 
and Dec. 1862. 

V. sp.; dwarf-growing thistle; in patches on stony ground, 3° N. Dec. 
1862. 

V. sp.; neat slim plant, with golden florets; 2 ft. high. 1° 42’S. Dec. 1862, 


V. sp.; leafy-stemmed, erect plant, with alternate leaves. Dec. 1862. 

V. sp.; common. Woods, 3° N. Dec. 1862. 

V. sp.; 2 ft. high; white button-like flowers; near cult., 1° 42’ 8. Dec. 
1861. (395.) 

V. sp.; weed by huts, with mauve flowers. Unyoro, Oct. 1862. 


0 V. sp.; coarse, thick-stemmed plant, with pretty purple and white flowers. 


1° 42'S. Alt. 5000ft. Feb. 1862. 

Stengelia sp.? florets white ; those unblown a pale purple. 1° 42/8. Dee. 
1861. (218.) 

S. sp. ? (same as Barter’s 368); hardy bush. 2° N. Dec. 1862. 

S. sp.? dwarf thistle? Madi. Dec. 1862. ; 

Elephantopus scaber, L.; lilac flowers. Alt. 5000 ft. 1°42’S. F ‘eb, 1862. (444.) 

Ageratum conyzoides, L.; common near fields, 2° N. Oct. 1862. ' 

Erigeron?? sp.; beautiful plant, with round, purple button-flowers, Moist 
places, 4° 15'S. 1861. Salt is extracted from its ashes. (85.) Or ty! 

Nidorella sp.; orange-yellow flowers, erect, woody ; near moisture, 7° 20'S. 
Oct. 1860. 

Spheranthus swaveolens ? DC. ** Bozeea ;” blue button-flowers ; mud edges of 
Madi burn, Dec. 18, 1862. Wanyamiiézi, when troubled with ague, 
mash up the whole plant, add cold water, and wash the body with the 
mixture. ; : 

S. hirtus, Willd.; purple buttons ; grows in thick tufts on cracked clay, near 
rice-fields, Zungomero. Oct. 1860. ; ’ 

Dichrocephala latifolia, DC. . African chain. Alt. 4700 ft. 1860. 

Conyza sp.; (near C. digyptiaca); greenish yellow flowers ; stem 2 to 3 ft. 
high; erect, but waving upwards ; by huts, 2° N. Oct. 15, 1862. (590.) 

C. sp.; flowers yellow; 2ft. high. 2°S, Dec. 1861. (398.) =¥ 

Blumea runcinata, DC.; 4 ft. high, with bell-shaped, gracefully drooping 
mauve flowers; near cult., 2° N. Oct. 15, 1862. (591.) 

B. alata ? DO. ; differs from No. 3, by its leat edges on the stem being 
entire; bank of R. Kafu, 2°N. Oct. 1862. (611.) P 

B. pterodonta, DC.; 4 to 7 ft. high ; weed ; by huts, 2 N. Whole plant 
sticky, and smelling between mint and celery. Oct. 15, 1862. (592.) 

B.? sp. Karagié. Feb. 1862. (466.) , - 

Pluchea sp.; lilac-flowering 5 ft. high bush; on borders of water-cut, Kan- 


638 APPENDIX. 


yenye, 6° 24’ S., where the water was undrinkable from brackishness; salt 
extracted from its ashes, (46.) 


1 Franceuria crispa, Cass.; Nile, 16° N. April 16, 1863. 

1 Varthemia Arabica, Boiss. ; Nile, 16° N. April 16, 1863. 

1 Grangea maderaspatana, Poir.; grows flatly ; Nile bank, 14°-15° N. 

1 Poloa? sp.; 1 ft. high ; flowers yellow ; root fibrous ; sandy soil, 3° N. Dec. 
1862. 

2 P.?? sp.; pretty little white flowering plant, covering fallow ground. 2° N. 
Aug. 1862. ™ 

1 Ambrosia maritima, L.; bushes of it cover the sloping clay banks of the 
Nile at 16° N. April 16, 1863. “22 

1 Eclipta erecta, L.; weed ; white flowers. 73°S. Oct. 1860. 

1 Wedelia sp.; root woody ; common by roadsides. 6° 8S. Alt, 3800 ft. 

2 W. sp.; flowers and stem purple; Uganda plantain wastes, July 18, 1862. 


(527, No. 2.) ‘ 
Spilanthes Africana, DC.; single small yellow flower; Robeho. Alt. 4700 
ft. 6° 38’S., Dec. 1860 ; and 2° N., Oct. 1862. 
Chrysanthellum Indicum, DC.; by eult., 2° N. Aug. 1862. 
Verbesina sp.; 14 ft. high; flower yellow ; fields, 4° 18’ S. _(187.) 
V. sp.; Gani., 3° N., Dec. 1862 ; and leavesfrom 1° 42'S. Dec. 1861. (448.) 
V. sp.; yellow cornflower; 4 ft. high. 1°42’S. 1861. (406.) 
V. sp.; 3 to 4 ft. high ; purple at lower part of stem ; covering fallow ground, 
1° 42S. March 1862. Sometimes roots from the stem. (448.) 
1 Bidens leucantha, L. 1° 42’ S., Dec. 1861 ; and 2° N., common. (394.) 
1 Ximenesia encelioides, Cav.; flowers yellow. 153° N. April 1863. 
1 Cotula abyssinica, Schultz ; most diminutive, with yellow flower; by a well; 
Nile, March 1863. 
1 Gnaphalium sp. (near G. Schimperi) ; large bush, with handsome clusters of 
soft white flowers ; by water, 1° 42’S. Dec. 1861. (409.) 
1 Helichrysum sp. (near H. ferruginum); everlasting yellow flowers; root 
woody ; East Coast range, 7° 24’S. Oct. 30, 1860. 
1 Antennaria sp.; bills of Chogwe, 6° 51’ 8., Alt. 3000 ft. Nov. 13, 1860. 
1 Kleinia? sp.; diminutive, with port-wine flowers. Alt. 1750 ft. Oct. 1860. 
1 Emilia sp.; orange flowers ; stems leafless ; plantain groves, 1° N. July 1862. 
2 
3 


=) 


He Oo LD 


H#. sagittata, DC.; Zanzibar, 7° 27’8., &c.; orange flowers. 
Hi. sp.; 9 in. high, with orange flowers; grows bushily by cult., 1° 42’S., 
Feb. 1862. (464.) 
1 Senecio sp.; weed; Unyoro fields. Novy. 1862. 
1 Echinops sp.; 4 ft. high ; pink-flowered, alternate-leaved thistle. 2° 41/8. 
and 2°N. Feb. 1861. Alt. 4200 ft. (141.) 
2 #. sp.; elegant plant, with bushing branches and round blue flower. Madi 
wastes. Dec. 1862. 
Cullumia sp. (near a Cape sp.) ; diminutive plant, 5° 5’S., alt. 3900 ft. 1860. 
C. sp. ; yellow flowering thistle; very handsome. 2° N., Aug. 1862; and 
3° N., Dee. 1862. : 
3 C. sp.; pretty plant. 4° 18’ S., March 1861. (170.) 
1 Carthamus tinctorius, L.; ‘‘ Gartoom” (Turk) ; Safflower ; cult. for its oil, 
used in burning, at Kartoom, 15}° N. Feb. 2, 1863. (778.) 
1 Arctotis?? sp.; flower brightest scarlet ; drooping ; light-soiled open forest, 
5° S., 33° HE. Alt. 3800 ft. 
2 A.?? sp.; flower erect ; deep scarlet ; root tuberous ; common, E. Equatorial 
Africa. 1860. 
1 Centaurea caleitrapa L.; star-thistle ; delicately scented ; Thebes and Carnac 
au Ee seen carrying away a load of it—probably for fodder. May 
1 ener ae Cass. Usagara hills, 6°51’S. Nov. 13, 1860. Alt. 
1 Dicoma sp. n.; pale pink pistils. 1° 42'S. 1862. (459.) 
; ance SP. 3 spinage eee of the leaves, 73° S.; 37° 31’ E. Oct. 1860. 
onchus oleracens, L.; flower yellow ; stem milky; by water, 1° 42’ S, 
1862. (407.) 2°N, April 1862.” age iene 
1 Composita dubia ; flower yellow ; root carrot-shaped. 6° 55’S. Oct. 1860. 


Noe 


in) 


me bo 


APPENDIX. 639 


XLV. SAPOTACEZ. 


Bassia Parkii, G. Don; Sheabutter ; “*Meepampa;” tree, 10 to 15 ft. in 
girth, with bare branches, the leaves and flowers raying from their tips ; 
general look of an oak; villagers cut away the very thick bark; milk 
exudes profusely, forming a hard white insoluble gum ; timber cross-grained, 
cedar-coloured, and too hard for the soft iron tools of natives; flowers 
heavily scenting the air, and covered with the honey-bee ; only seen at 
3° N., Dec. 1862. (650.) 

Chrysophyllym ? sp. (seed only) ; ‘‘Chenjha ;” girth 10 ft. ; lofty tree ; fruit, 
green gage size, with one to three flat stones ; a sweet drink is made from 
their pulp ; wood made into spear-handles. 5° S. to 3° 15’ N.; near water. 
(93. ) 

C. sp.; (near C’. Macalismontanum) ; very milky ; tree growing like a huge 
bush on the face of the rocky hills, 3°15’ N. Dec. 1862. Leaves (chiefly 
at the branch-tips, where the fruit is found) silvery white underneath ; 
ropes made from inner bark; frequent. (703.) 

Mimusops Kummel, Bruce; ‘*M’nyemvee;” lofty tree, 5 ft. in girth, bed of 
rocky stream, 3° 15’ N., Dee. 1862; common; fruit one-stoned, dry, but 
sweet-tasted ; orange-yellow, and sometimes reddish. 


XLVI. MYRSINEZE. 
Embelia sp.; ‘‘ M’Sekzer’a ;” 30 inch cire. tree, whose young shoots grow 
straight for 10 ft., with a red-brown mould over them; fruit not edible, 
and small, like shot. 3°15’N. Dec. 1862. (695.) 


XLVII. OLEACE. 


Chionanthus ? sp.; *‘ Meesoo;” a wild olive; handsome, lofty, tall-trunked 
tree, in low moist ground, 3° 15’ N., with sweet-scented white flowers ; 
edible, large pea-sized, one-stoned drupes in clusters. Dec. 1860. (701.) 


XLVIIL JASMINACE. 
Jasminum sp. (no specimen), in shaded nullah bed, Ukuni, 4° S. Sept. 1861. 


(117.) 
XLIX. APOCYNEA. 


Landolphia florida ? Pal.; a tree-climber, remarkably milky, with clusters of 
white scented flowers, covering lofty trees. Wahiyow make playing-balls 
of its rubber. Natives say, if its milk be rubbed on the body, it is difficult 
to get it off, while that of the “ M’pira,” another ‘‘india-rubber,” can be 
easily washed off. (707.) ; ’ : 

Carissa sp.; girth 30 in. ; flowers handsome ; jasmine-scented ; in red clus- 
ters before blooming, afterwards becoming a pink-white ; double, straight, _ 
inch long, pink-tipped thorns; bark, mouldy-green; banks of Little Win- 
dermere, 1° 42'S. Dec. 3, 1861. (214.) k ‘ ' 

C. sp.; ‘‘M’fombwah ;” resembling an orange-tree, but with 2 in. long, pink- 
pointed, double thorns, and clusters of jasmine-scented flowers; branches 
angle wherever the leaves and thorns are thrown out; fruit eaten by the 
Wanyamitiézi, and its disagreeably smelling tasteless roots used by them to 
remedy coughs and chest complaints. 3° N. Dec. 1862. (688.) 

Adenium sp.; 3 ft. high, scarlet-flowering bush, with swollen rapidly-taper- 
ing branches. 4° N., Bari country. Feb. 15, 1863. (766.) 

A, sp.; 1 to 2 ft. high, with rich pink flowers. 6° 55'S. Oct. 1860. 

Holarrhena febrifuga ? common ; jasmine-scented plant or bush. Alt. 1300 
to 1500 ft. M’bwiga. Nov. 1860. 


L. ASCLEPIADEA. 

e .; milky-climber, with minute, red flowers, and covered with red 
ee ait ; 3 N, Dec. 1862; and Nile banks, 6° N., Feb. 1863. (711.) 
Calotropis procera, R. Br., ‘* Madar” of Punjab; met with 3° 15’ N., in Feb. 

1863, on our entrance into the Egyptian country ; not seen since 7°S, 
Demia barbata? Klotzsch; white-flowered climber.’ 2° N., Nov. 1862; and 
5°10’ N. 1863. : ; 
Gomphocarpus sp. (near G. Sruticosis) ; 4 to 5 ft. high bush; near recent cul- 
tivation; rare. 5°S., 33° E, 1861. 


640 APPENDIX. 


2 Gomphocarpus physocarpus ? K. Meyer.  (728.5.) 

3 G. sp.; 3 ft. high; near water, 2° N., Nov. 1862. (606.) 

4 G. sp.; very showy bushy plant; by water, alt. 3193 ft., 6° 44’ S., Nov. 16, 
1860. 

5 G. sp.; bulbous; M’bumi, 6° 44’ S. iz 

6 G. sp.; 4 ft. high, with carrot-shaped root; eaten medicinally by natives, 
and worn as a charm by those desirous of an increase to their family. 2° N. 
Aug. 1862. (555.) 

7G. sp.; Karagité hills, alt. 5000 ft., Dec. 5, 1861. (216.) 

1 Leptadenia lancifolia? Dne.; flower yellow, backs of petals green. The 


natives of 3° N. make spinage of its flowers and tender shoots. Jan. 26, 
1863. (749.) ae / 

L. pyrotechnica, Dne. ; 6 to 8 ft. high, girth 20 in.; resinous shrub in desert ; 
20° N., the only procurable firewood. April 29, 1863. (775.) 

1 Brachystelma n. sp.; bushy plant, with flower a dark purple star; leaves 
thread-like; root edible,“ liquorice-tasting, garden-turnip size; rare; for- 
ests, 6° S. Jan. 1, 1861. 

2 B? sp. (in fruit); 9 inch high, with bulbous, tasteless, edible root, 1° 42’ 8, 
Feb. 1862. (468.) 

1 Asclepiadea? dubia ; flowering climber, in Unyoro thickets, July 1862. 


Li. LOGANIACEAE. 


1 Strychnos sp.; ‘‘ M’phoondoo ; ” scrubby-looking tree, with orange-coloured and. 
sized fruit; a loose tough skin covers the rather flat, elongated, acidulated 
drop-like seeds, which are irregularly packed in a sweet-tasting yellow pulp. 
6° 21'S. Woods, 3° N, Feb. 9, 1863; and 2° N. (762-5.) 

2 8.2 (no specimen) ; fruit, not edible, monster orange-sized, with brittle rind, 
and full of yellow pulp; leaves have a distinct rib on either side of the 
main one, and: their tips are as sharp as needles; 15 ft. high shrub; in 
forests, 4° S., to 2° N. 


LIL GENTIANACEA. 


1 Octopleura loselioides, Benth. ; swamps, about 3° 15’ N. Dec. 15, 1862. A 
Brazilian plant. 


bo 


LUI. CONVOLVULACEA. 

1 Argyreia sp.; ‘‘Mohambo”; 3 ft. high; delicate, mauve-coloured, im- 
mense flowers; root round, 20 in. cire. Considered lucky to have the 
skulls of wild animals placed by it; or, with a branch in the hand, the 
hunter is certain of sport; Chopeh, Noy. 22, 1862, 25° N. The large 
roots at first require forcing in water. (627.) 

1 Batatas edulis, Choisy ; ‘‘veeazee,”’ sweet potato, cultivated from Zanzibar 
to Egypt; obtainable from the fields, or in a dried state, nearly every month 
in the year; make a beer from it at Bogwé, 34° 8. (173.) 

B. pentaphylla, Choisy ; left bank Blue Nile. 1863. 

Tpomea palmata, Forsk; common. Nile banks, 9° N., &. March 1863. 

I. asarifolia R. & S.; binds down the sands of the right bank of Nile, 143° N. 
March 1863. ‘ 

I. reniformis, Choisy ; yellow-flowered, flatly-growing creeper; hard mud- 
shores, Nile. Noer country, 83° N. March 9, 1863. 

I. reptans, Choisy ; water convolvulus. Nile edges, 18° N. March 18, 1863 ; 
also amongst luxuriant vegetation, Equator, and 2° N. 

I. involucrata, Beauv. ; climber. Forests, 2° N. Novy. 1862. 

I. commatophylla ? Rich.; on and near surface rocks. Forests, 2° N. Dee. 
1862. 

I. capitata, Choisy ; twiner amongst bushes. 3°15’ N. Dec. 1862. 

I. pterygocaulos ? Choisy. Nile banks. 

I. pinnata Hochst.; white-flowering, running plant, neat moisture lying on 
masses of rock. 3°15’ N. Dec. 1862. (656.) 

10 J.? sp.; very handsome ; flowers large, and pale port-coloured, with deep- 
green, long heart-shaped leaves, much impressed from below; stem 
slightly lactescent ; climbs to 15 ft. along with the previous year’s stem in 
seed. 2°41’ S., 1861; and 2° N. Aug. 8, 1862. (145 & 559.) 


~ es hoe bo 


ooaon- lore) it 


APPENDIX, 641 


11 Jpomea sp.; climber, with pinnatifid, deep-green, handsome, impressed- 


from-under leaves ; bud purple ; but one specimen seen. 5° 26’ S. 1861, 
1] Hewittia bicolor, W. and A. Nile banks, N. Nov. 1862. 
1 pes ? sp.; leaves only ; crawls flat on bare ground. 2° 41/8, Nov. 1861. 
88.) 
1 Breweria malvacea, Klotszch ; erect, with pink flowers and soft silvery leaves, 
2° 42'S. (202.) 


f B. sp.; common near huts, Chopeh, 1° 40’ N. Nov. 1862. 


_ 


volvulus linifolius, L.; blue flowers, growing flatly near cult., 1° 30’ N, 
July 29, 1862. 

Convolvulacea dubia (cf. Hygrocharis, D. C. Prod. ix. 451). Minute plant, with 
snow-white flowers, growing flatly on the ground in plantain - groves ; 
rootlets come from the stem, and the seed-vessel turns into the ground after 
the corolla falls off. July 1862; Equator. (529.) 


LIV. SOLANACEA. 


mo OF 


1 Lycopersicum esculentum, Don.—Tomatoe. 7° 27’ S.; and near swamps, 4° 
to 5’S. ; natives surprised at our eating them. (91.) 

1 Solanwm nigrum, L.; black nightshade ; scarlet-berried ; leaves made into 
spinage. 4° 18'S., 1° 42’S., and 28° N. 

2 S. sp. ; common by waste fields, 5° S., 33° E. Alt. 3800 ft. 

3 S. sp. ; foot high; mauve flowers; prickly toothed leaves; stem covered 
with a 3 to 5 stellate pubescence, not edible. By huts, 1° 45’ N. ‘Nov. 
1862. (605.) 

4 8. Melongena, L. Egg plant; ‘‘Brinjall;” gardens of the Arabs, 5° S. 
(683.) 

1 Withania somnifera, Dun.; many-seeded, with scarlet berries in a loose 
envelope. Sultan of Ukuni, at 4°S8., had its roots hung over his door in the 
idea that it brought him many welcome visitors ; Nubians have some faith 
in it as a medicine; near huts, 3° 15’ N. Dec. 10, 1862. (674.) 

Physalis angulata ; leaves used as a vegetable ; by hnts, 2° N. 1862. 

Scopolia Datora, Dun. (called ‘‘Thatoora’). This plant was gathered 
to be smoked by a man suffering from spitting blood and weak chest. 
They also smoke it after excessive drinking. 28° N. May 24, 1863. 

P19: 

1 Ni Lyte tabacum, I.; seen cultivated from 7° S. to 4° N. Sold either as 
leaves, in plaited form, or manufactured into cakes, the consistence of peat ; 
seldom or never chewed, and rarely snuffed. (185.) 

2 N: rustica, L.; cult. at Kartoum and farther N. April 23, 1863. 

1 Capsicum frutescens, L.; red pepper of Unyoro. Nov. 1862. 

1 Datura stramonium, L.; thorn apple (from fig. and notes), ““Nanaha ;” 4 
ft. high in gardens, 1° 42'S. At the coast, mats are made from its fibre. 


(154. ) 


ne 


LV. BORAGINEA: 

1 Heliophytum indicum, DC.; 7° 20'S. Oct. 1860. i ante 
iD Paictropaan Europeum, L.; near cult.; Nile banks, 16° N. April 16, 
1863. : oo 
Coldenia procumbens, L.; grows flatly on baked mud. 3° 15’ N. Jan. 1863. 
‘chium longifolium, Del.; stings the fingers; by a well, 15° N. March 

1863. : “— 
1 Cynoglossum micranthum, Desf.; common, 1° 42'S. March 1862. (456.) 
LVL SCROPHULARIACE. 
Doratanthera linearis, Benth. ; near cotton fields right bank Nile, 16° N. 
April 1863. 
Dopatrium Senegalense, Be 


°15’N. Dec. 1862. f 
rants pumila, Benth. Jan. 14, 1860, 5° 45’ 8., alt. 4300 ft. ; and Dec. 1861, 
1° 42’ S., alt. 5500 ft. Abundant in swamps by rock ; its roots, eaten with 
salt, are used as a gargle. (122.) ; 
“2S 


ee 


— 


nth. ; grows in water which lies on surface rocks. 


— eH 


642 APPENDIX. 


1 
1 


Herpestes floribunda, R. Br.; swamps, 3°15’ N. Dec. 1862. 
Ilysanthes sp.; 6 inch high; erect stem, with violet-coloured flowers ; 
amongst swampy grasses, 3°15’ N. Dec. 1862. 


2 I. sp.; bushy minute plant; on rocky ground, 3° 15’ N. Dec. 1862. 


3 


el 


Ne 


bo 


| 


28 


I. sp.; diminutive ; flowers white, red tinted inside ; by rock and water ; alt. 
5500 ft. 1° 42/8. 1861. (211.) 

Veronica anagallis, L.; E. Coast Range, alt. 4700 ft. 6°38’ S. Dec. 19, 1860. 

Scoparia dulcis, L.; common in waste ground, 5° 1’S. Alt. 4000 ft. ae: 

Ramphicarpa fistulosa, Benth. ; dries black; swamps and meadows, 3 15 
N. Dec. 1862. ; , 

Cycnium longiflorum, E. and Zey.; flowers (both pink and white) in tufts 
during the very driest season ; dries indigo colour ; E. Coast Range. Nov. 
1860. Common in dry localities. (443.) 

C. sp. n.; ‘M’sweera M’dogo ;” crawling, white-flowered, purple-stemmed 
plant on bare open sandy heights, 3° 15’ N. Dee. 9, 1862. Dries black ; un- 
common. Wanyamiézi, when bitten by a particular snake, cure themselves 
by using the black fibrous roots of this plant. _(670.) 

Striga Senegalensis, Benth. ; dries black. 2° 41’S., alt. 4500ft. Nov. 1861. 
(204. ) 

S. hermonthica, Benth. ; field pink; common in fallow ground; Uganda, 
Aug. 1862. (572.) 

Sopubia ramosa, Hochst. ; erect, woody, pink-flowered plant in grassy plateaux. 
2° N., Oct. 20, and Dec. 1862. Wahiyow extract salt water (for cooking 
purposes) from its ashes ; uncommon. (594.) 

S. sp. n.; flower a rich pink ; leaves in whorls of filaments ; plant woody, and 
tendency to purple ; dry ground, alt. 5500 ft., 1° 42'S. Dec. 1861. Un- 
common. (411.) 

Scrophulariacea dubii generis ; purple plant, with filiform leaves, and white 
flowers ; stem smooth, shiny, and woody ; near water, 1° 42’ S. Alt. 5000 ft. 
Feb. 1862. (402.) 


LVI. LENTIBULARIEA. | 


Utricularia sp. ; yellow flowering floater ; marshes, 2° N. Aug. 1862. 
U. sp. (near U. Stellaris), 2° N. Oct. and Nov. 1861. 
LVI. BIGNONIACE. 

Stereospermum sp.; ‘‘Mololo” (Kin.); 3 ft. cire. tree ;.in full pink-white 
bloom, 3°15’ N. Jan. 26, 1863. Seed-vessel an 18-inch long, round, 
purpled, silvery-spotted pod, likea whip-snake; sand-bees make their cocoons 
from its delicate leaves ; frequent by water ; wood useless. (750.) 

S. discolor, R. Br. This ordinary-sized tree ornaments the hillsides at 6°-7° 
Bs with its rich blossom, perfuming the air to some distance. Alt. 1200 ft. 

60. 

Spathodea levis? P. Beauv. (leaf-only); Madi. Dec. 1862. Resembles 
anes ; 3 ft. cire. tree with file-surfaced, compressed, dry, serrate-edged 
eaves. 

S. sp. (near 8. campanulata); 4 ft. cire. 20 ft. high tree, with clusters of 
the most brilliant scarlet flowers tipping its densely -foliaged branches ; 
thornless ; in forests near springs; about 2° N. only. Sept. 8, 1862. (571.) 

S. sp. (no specimen, from fig, and notes) ; pods 24 in. long, yellow, velvet- 
one with a double row of seeds ; flowers yellow ; low grounds, 1° 42’ §, 

Kigelia pinnata, DC.; ‘*M’sankwa” (Kin.); ‘‘Malegea” (Kis.); everywhere ; 
Wanyamitézi polish their spear-handles with its leaves and sand ; they 
roast and eat its seeds in famines ; an elastic wood, used for bows. (23.) 


LIX. PEDALIACEA. : 
Sesamum indicum, L.; ‘‘Mafoot’a;” article of food; cult. from 4° 18’ S. 
to 2" N. (more or less) for its oil, also to be eaten toasted, or to flavour 
potherbs. (74) 
. sp. n.; in rank vegetation attains a height of 8 feet, growing like the fox- 


Sa common in moist places, 5° S., 2° 41’ S, Alts. 3000 and 4000 f¢. 


— 


, APPENDIX, 643 


3 Sesamum sp.; pink flowers ; 18 in. high ; in dry woods; stunted-like: 6° 55’ 
iets. alt..2800 f, Mchonyera, Oct 1960 ba ae a 
4 S. sp. (near last) ; purple flowers ; common, 5° S. 1860. 


LX. SELAGINEZ. 
1 Hebenstreitia dentata, L.; E. Coast Range, 6° 38’ 8. Alt. 4700 ft. Dee. 1860. 


LXT. ACANTHACE. 

1 Thunbergia atriplicifolia, B. Mey. ; orange-yellow flowers ; E. Coast Range, 

, 6° 38'S. Alt. 4700 ft. Dec. 1860. 

2 iat Boj.; twines round grasses; uncommon, 2° N. July 29, 1862. 
De . 

1 Nelsonia tomentosa, R. Br.; common about waste fields, 7° 25’ S. 

1 Brilliantaisia sp.; 6 ft. high, 4 to 6 in. cire.; thick-jointed, regularly- 
squared stem, with large, lilac-spotted flowers ; rare; Uganda and Unyoro; 
near cult. Sept. 27, 1862. (583.) 

2 B. sp. (cf. B. Vogeliana Benth.) ; aromatic smelling-plant, amongst rank 
vegetation in low grounds, 73° S. Alt. 896 ft. 1860. 

1 Calophanes radicans? mashed and mixed with Alysicarpus Wallichii, and hot 
water added, makes a soothing wash for swollen limbs. 2° 41’8.; low 
grounds. Feb. 1862. (436.) 

1 Hygrophila sp.; erect purple stem and flowers ; calyx, after throwing off the 
corolla, becomes black. By water, 2° 42’S. Feb. 1862. (404.) 

2 H. spinosa, T. And. ; three varieties observed, all probably the same plant— 
one a dwarf on meadow ground, 3° 15’ N.; 2d, 3 ft. high, near cultivation, 
4° 18’ S.; and 3d, a 10-ft. high 10-in. circumference plant,’ cultivated 
inside the hut enclosures, 3° 15’ N., for the salt its ashes produce. (582, 
589.) 

1 Ruellia patula ? Jacq.; diminutive ; open grounds, 3° 15’ N.” Dec. 1862. 

2 R. sp. (ef. cyanea and prostrata); blue flowers ; stem rather woody ; growing 
on the steep banks of the Nile amongst rocks and.grasses, about 2° N. 
Dec. 1862. Servants have eaten this plant as a spinage at Chogwe hills, 
on E. coast of Africa. (665.) 

1 Phaylopsis longifolia, Sims.; rocky heights in shade, 3°15’ N. Dec. 1862. 

1 Barleria sp.; spiny diminutive plant ; loc. forgotten. 1860. 

2 B. sp.; dry ground, 7° 10'S. Oct. 1860. . 

1 Crossandra sp.; foot high, with pale scarlet flowers, in patches under deep 
shade, by water, 3° 15’ N., Dec. 1862; and on rocky soil of Usui, Nov. 
1861. (685 and 135.) 

lL Lepidagathis mollis, T. And.; inflorescence in balls of florets at leaf-axles. 
3°15’ N. Dec. 1862. ‘ 

| Blepharis edulis, Pers. This was the only vegetation found on the firm 
sand desert behind Meroe, 16° 50’ N. April 2, 1863. 

1 Acanthus arboreus, Forsk. var. pubescens ; grows from 4 to 19 ft. high ; 
flowers pink, and handsome ; low moist grounds generally. 2° 8. to 1’ N, 
1861-62. (136.) ) ee 4 : 

| Justicia blepharostegia, E. Mey.; rose-pink flowers. 1° 42'S. Feb. 1862. 
433. 

Mid: } Sp. ef. J. palustris) ; by vegetation ; Unyoro, 2°N., Oct. 1862. (494 and 
603. : bey i, 

J. ote inches high ; in tufts all over the bare hills of Karagué ; 1° 42’S.; 
flowers yellow. Dec. 2, 1861.  (213.) , ae ¥ 

| J. (Rostellaria) sp.; eaten as spinage by the Expedition, but not appreciated. 
5° 50’ S. Alt. 4000 ft. : . > ° 397 4 

| J. sp.; woody hardy plant with white flowers; E. Coast Range, 6° 38’ 8. 
Alt. 4700 ft. te 

| J. neglecta ? T. And.; climber ; common near huts, amongst tall grasses; with 
pretty pink flowers; 2° N. 1862. 

J. sp. (near last), 74°S. Oct. 1860. : ea er 

J. sp. (near J. anselliana); amongst grasses of Madi swamps, 3° 15’ N. 


Dec. 1862. , See 
Schwabea ciliaris, Nees. Common in low grounds, near rocks, 3° 15’ N, 


Dee. 1862. 


644 APPENDIX. 


1 Dicliptera bupleuroides, Nees; pink-flowered, common on light stony ground, 


eb 


ao) 


to 


bo 


= 


bo 


lll SoH ella bo 


bo 


3° 15’ N.’ Dec. 1862. 
LXII. VERBENACE. 


Lippia, sp. (from fig. and notes; no specimen); flower diminutive and yel- 
low. 1° 42'S. Feb. 1862. (438.) 

L. sp.; common near cultivation, 2° N. Sept. 1862. : . 

Lantana sp. (from fig, and notes); 3 to 5 ft. high; flowers rose-pink ; ripe 
berries rich purple, and tasting like junipers. Karagiié hills, 1° 42'S. Dee. 
1861. (158.) 

Premna simensis ? Klotszch; 5° 8S. 1860. : 

Clerodendron cordifolium, Rich.; handsome twining plant; green calex be- 
comes a dull purple after the corolla has fallen off. Sept. 3, 1862, and Dee. 
1862. 2°-3° N. (566 and 676.) 

C. sp. n.; handsome 2-ft.’ high shrub, with clusters of white flowers ; 
young shoots bave rich purple velveting over them. The Wanyambo suck 
their plantain-wine through tubes of this shrub, calling them ‘‘ Meereej’a.” 
1° 43/8. Alt. 5000 ft. March 1862. (461.) 

Cyclonema sp.; light-purple flowers; berry black; common on wastes, 
2° 41'S. Nov. 1861. (203.) 

Vitex sp. (near one of Barters); ‘‘M’thalassee;” bush-sized, with oblong, 
smooth-surfaced, acrid, yellowish drupes growing from the axles of the. 
stalked leaves, which are simple and in whorls of threes. Madi, 3° 15’ N. 
Feb. 5, 1863. Has a rich perfume about it. (701.6.) 

V. sp.; trunk 4 to 5 ft. circumference, with inch-long, reddish-yellow, acrid, 
one-stoned drupe; leaves ternate, toothed, and longly-stalked; branch 
bark red; wood very brittle. 3°15’ N. Woods. Dec. 1862. (649.) 

V. sp. (= 5 of Livingstone, or V. umbrosa Don) ‘‘ M’foo;” very handsome 
umbrageous tree; fruit (procurable throughout the year) a plum, date-size,| 
damson-coloured, and tasting pleasantly; difficult to clean the stone; 
a light wood, made into drums. Forests, 3° 58’ S; 24° N. Oct. 1861, 
1862. (81.) 

LXUI. LABIATA. 


Ocimum canum, L.; near cult. ‘*Toolsie” of India, 2°N. Aug. 1862. 

Moschosma polystuchyum, Benth.; Nile banks, 5° N. Feb. 28, 1863. 

Acrocephalus villosus, Benth.; 3 ft. high ; honey-bee very fond of its pale lilae 
flowers; beds of this weed by huts, 2° N. Oct. 1862. (585). 

A. sp.; hardy, slightly-scented plant, with flowers and bracts lilac; the 
midribs of the large bractez are green. 2° 41/8. 1861. (139.) 

A. sp.; 2 to 3 ft. high; blue-flowered, handsome plant; the broad bractez 
are all lilac white, except their veins, which are green; in patches on low 
light soil, by water; salt is said to be extracted from its ashes. 21° N; 
forest of Ukidi, Nov. 26, 1862.~ (632.) 

Plectranthus sp. ; erect - growing plant in water -ecuts of hills, 1° 42’ S. 
Flowers white, diminutive, with pink spots. Dec. 1861. (385.) 

P. sp.; delieate erect plant, with fibrous root. 5°S. 1860. 

P. sp.; grows in patches in flat ground near Madi burn, 3° N. Dec. 1862. 

P. sp.; loves moisture on tops and in crevices of boulders. 3° N. Dee. 1862. 

Coleus barbatus, Benth.; blue flowers and stem; leaves smell strongly of, but 
more richly than, ripe guavas; natives consider sitting muffled up over its 
burning leaves, and inhaling their smoke, an immediate cure for fever; 
grows in Kuphorbia hedges, 4° 18’ 8. ; and 1° 42’S. 1861.  (73.) ; 

0. SP. OR: heavy-smelling plant; by cult., 2° N. Oct. 15, 1862. 
(588, 

Hoslundia decumbens, Benth. Zanzibar. Sept. 1860. 

Pycnostachys, %. sp.; occasionally in moist dips of forest, 24° N. Nov. 1862. 

: 5 sides of the Nile; amongst rushes. Novy. 1862. 

Molanthus, n. sp. ? showy-looking plant; in dry open or ae 
4000 ft. 1861. > a seas Ae 

4. sp.; lilac flowers growing on one side of stalk; creeps, throwing up erect 
stems; sweet-scented; found on bare surface rocks, amidst Df. high 
grasses, on forest heights, 1° 42'S, Nov. 1861. (150 and 458.) 


APPENDIX. G45 


? 
3 Holanthus sp. ; stem black, as if fire had scorchedit. Rocks of Madi, 3° 
15’ N. Dec. 1862. 

4 4. sp.; resembles No. 2; surface rocks, Aug. 1862, 2° N. 

1 Hyptis pectinata, Poir. ; weed by the village fences, 3° 15’ N., 21st Dec. 1862, 
and near water, Zungomero, 7° 27’ S., 1860. Strong aroma from the 
leaves (24). 

2 4H. brevipes, Poir. ; florets are massed in the form of a ball; low grounds, 

i about 3° 15’ N. Dee. 1862. 

3 H. spicigera, Lam.; ‘‘ Neeno;” cultivated by the natives of Gani, at 3° N., 
as a grain, and eaten roasted by them; they also extract oil from it; seeds 

both black and white. Dee. 1862. Plant smells strongly. 

H.? sp.; 4 ft. high; covered densely with yellow florets, and smelling like 
a sweet herb; rare to find leaves on the stem; dry woods of Madi, 3° 15’ N. 
Dec. 1862. Frequent; root deeply set in the ground. (732.) 

Leucas martinicensis, R. Br.; near fields, 4° 18S. 1861. (181.) 

L. (§ Loxostoma), n. sp.; 2 to 3 ft. high, covered with soft pubescence; 
flowers white. Near water, 1° 42’S. and 3° N., Feb, 1862. (413.) 

Leonotis sp. (from fig. and notes), 3 to 5 ft. high, with scarlet flowers ; com- 
mon by cult., 4° S. to 2° N. (423.) 

Labiatarum, novum genus ; woody, straight, 4 to 6 ft. high, purple-flowered 
plant; on the grassy banks of Madi burn, 3°15’ N. The four seeds are pro- 
tected by an enveloping calyx, and feathered white in a beautiful manner. 
Frequent in forests. (705.) 


LXIV. PLUMBAGINE. 
Plumbago zeylanica, L.; diminutive white flowers; seems to survive the 
driest season; stem very clammy; E. Coast Range, 6° 30’ S., Alt. 4000 ft. 


17th Dec. 1860. 
LXV. PROTEACEE. 


1 Protea sp.; ‘‘M’zaza” (Kin.); ‘‘ King’eezee”’ (Kihiyow); tree 20 in. in 
girth and 10 ft. high; leaves grow obliquely to the stems; flower sun- 
flower size, and rich white in colour, opening to the sun. Natives say 
where this tree is in abundance, copal is also found. Wood useless, ex- 
cept as a brilliant firewood ; leaves make a spinage in dearths, and black 
ants are fond of them. Madi woods, Dec. 1862. (673.) 


LXVI. SALVADORACEA. 


Salvadora persica, L.; ‘‘ Arak” (Turk.); large bush; wood makes tooth- 
scrubbers for natives. Nile banks in any quantity at 7° N. March 1863. 


LXVI. POLYGONACEZ. 


Rumex obtusifolius, L.; near moisture, 6° 38'S., E. Coast Range. Dec. 1860. 
R. Abyssinicus, Jacg.; grows 12 ft. high near cultivation, 2° N., amongst 
grasses. Nov. 1862. Also 1° 42'S. People of Fipa, at 8°S., are said to 
eat its leaves. (418 and 625.) } 
3 R. Maderensis, Lowe; 10 to 12 ft. high; in hedges; leaves much eaten away. 
4°18’S. 1861. (77.) 
1 Polygonum barbatum, L.; moist places, E. Coast Range. Nov. 1860. 
2 P. sp.; flowers and stem pink and pink-streaked ; anthers blue ; seeds are 
star-like prickles ; leaf-bases sheath the stem. 1” 42’ S. Feb, 1862. _(437.) 
3 P. tomentosum, Willd. Nile banks, Nov. 1862 ; and 8° N., March 1863. 


LXVIIL NYCTAGINE. 


ia sp. (near B. paniculata); foot high; diminutive pink flowers, 
: OC teas aa stem ae jointed branches; leaves grow flatly on the 
ground ; root carrot-shape. The roots are eaten in famines by the Wahi- 
yow; in cleared ground, 2° N., July 1862. (540. ) es OE 
2 B. grandiflora, Rich. ; straggling plant. Alt. 4700 ft., 6° 30'S. 


LXIX. CHENOPODIACE. 


1 Chenopodium album, L.; uncommon ; fallow ground, 2° N., Nov. 1862, 
(609.) 


.> 


KH & toe 


~ 


— 


Ne 


646 APPENDIX., 


2 Chenopodium botrys, L.; 2 to 6 ft. high; smells medicinally ; its leaves and 
flowers, pounded into flour, are applied to eruptions on the legs ; extremely 
handsome in its bright red autumnal colours; about houses and fields, 
1° 42’ S., March 5, 1862; and 2°41’S. (200 and 465.) : 


LXxX. AMARANTACEA:. 

1 Celosia argentea, L.; 4 ft. high, with salmon-coloured flowers ; the stem of 
the season falls down and takes root; near cult., Uganda, and 2° N., _ 
July 1862. (531.) 

C. trigyna, L.; pot-herb; by huts, Noy. 1862. 

Amarantus caudatus, L.; Love lies bleeding; carmine flowers and_pink- 
veined leaves; grown near huts for medicinal purposes—natives boiling the 
stems and leaves, washing the head with the infusion, and rubbing the 
powder of its charred roots into cuts made in the temples, to cure headaches. 
1° 42’8.; 1° to3°N. (449.) 

2A. blitum, L.; wild amaranth (no specimen, fig. and description); flowers 

white; 3 to 5 ft. high; near huts, in rank vegetation, 1° 42’S. and 3° N. 
April 1862. (493.) 

1 Zrua lanata, Juss.; pot-herb; grows prettily over huts like an ivy, 73° S. 
and 2° N. Nov. 1862, &e. 

4, javanica, Juss.; on shingle desert near Berber, 173° N. Not met with 
till in these latitudes. 142° N., March and April 1863. 

1 Achyranthes aspera, L.; about huts, 4° 18’ 8., March 1863. (184.) The same 
(monstrous, 768); 4to6ft. high; Nileedge, 7° N. Its root mashed, put in 
hot water, and applied as a poultice to Bombay’s ear, brought a discharge, 
and cured him of temporary deafness. 

Digera arvensis, Forsk.; by a well, Nile bank, 174° N., March 1863. 

Amarantacearum, novum genus ; about corn-fields of Mininga, 4° 18’ S. 
March 1861. (179.) 

LXXI. PHYTOLACCACE. 
1 Phytolacca Abyssinica, Mey.; bush with scarlet berries, whose pulp colours 
cloth or the fingers gamboge ; 1° 42’ 8. Alt. 5000 ft., Dec. 1861. (217.) 


LXXIl. THYMELAACE. 
1 Gnidia involucrata, Steud. ; 3 ft. hgh; on bare heights of Madi, 3° 15’ N. 


Dec. 1862. 
LXXIII. HEUPHORBIACEA. 

1 Luphorbia hypericifolia, L. ; 1ts juices, rubbed upon a snare, are supposed to 
attract guinea-fowl. 2° N., Oct. 1862. (602.) 

2H. sp. (Bracteis longecaudatis), 5 ft. high, bush growing in light soil, 
Unyanyembe, 5° 8S. 1861. 

3 £. antiquorum, L. (no specimen); ‘‘ Mtoopa;” tree 3 to 43 ft. in 
girth, with four to six angled 12 in. cire. boughs; common over the 
whole route as fences, solitary trees, &c., and dotting the bare hills of 
Karagté, alt. 5000 ft. The Bari people, at 43° N., tried to poison the run- 
ning streams with its branches as we marched through ; its milk is used.as 
aglue. (151.) 

4 H. tirucalli? L. ‘‘Mnyal’a;” a dense fence of this tree-sized bush sur- 
rounds nearly all the villages in the Land of the Moon, growing often to 
twenty odd feet high; a variety creeps over rocks. The milk is used for 
poisoning fish. 7°S. to 34° N. (1514 and 675.) 

5 HL. sp.; 10 ft. high, bushy, with marked leaves; flowers small, in red 
panicles ; drips with milk ; rare ; only seen at 3° 15’ N., by villages. Feb 

fi, aa This specimen, not having died, is now growing at Kew. (754.) : 
calypha crenat 8 = indi aS % 
re Oh eas Hochst. (= indica L.), by cult., 5° 8. and 2° N. Aug. 

2 A. villicaulis, Hochst. ; pink pistles, much branched. 

3 A. sp. ; brushwood on bank of Madi burn. Dec. 1862. 

4 A.sp.; ‘*Mcete ;” its wands of great length and uniform thickness, with 
reddish or hazel bark, are made into strong trays and baskets by the 
people of Unyoro, 2°N.; also by rivulets, 1°42’ 8S. Nov. 1861 (161 
and 6258.) The roots are chewed, but have no taste, ; 


eb 


iw) 


a 


APPENDIX. 647 


5 Acalypha sp. Karagtié, 1° 42'S. Nov. 1861. 


6 A. sp. M’bwiga, 7° 24'S. Alt. 1350 ft. ; overhanging water. 


1 Tragia cordata, Vahl. ; ‘‘M’wavee ;” nasty stinging climber, paining for a 


longer time than the nettle; by water in thicket, 1° 42’ S. Alt. 5000 ft. 
Dec. 6, 1861. (388.) 

1 Ricinus communis, L. ; castor oil; found everywhere near dwellings ; oil for 
unguents or itch is expressed; no case observed of its having been used 
internally. The leaves have virtues amongst natives. (121.) 

1 Croton, sp. (near tilifolium); ‘‘M’pefoo;” 30 in. cire. tree, with soft, 
beech-tree looking bark; in shady, moist ground, 3° 15’N. Dec. 1862. 
Inflorescence a panicle of a half inch diameter; spherical seed-vessels, whose 
stalks are covered with a dry red dust; immense leaves, swelling somewhat 
like celery ; no uses known; not common. (706.) 

1 Crozophora plicata, A. Juss.; small pink flowers; grows flat on dry clay, 
Nile edges, 16° N. March 16, 1863. 

1 Jatropha sp. ; foot high; root firmly set in the ground; a yellow or gamboge 
colour exudes at incisions, shining on paper after becoming dry ; seed-vessel 
(unripe) with three hard-rinded seeds; uncommon; near stream, 3° 15’ N. 
Jan. 2, 1863. (736.) 

1 Manihot utilissima, var. heterophylla; ‘‘Mahogo;” the staple food of 
Zanzibar people, where some kinds can be eaten raw, boiled, fried, roasted, 
or in flower; not met with between the equator and 15° N., 4° 18’ S., &e. 

68.) 

tl beeeea multiflorum; by water, 3°15’ N. Dec. 1862. 

1 Phyllanthus niruri, L.; by dwellings, 2° N. Oct. 1862. 

1 Cluytia lanceolata, Forsk.; shrub by water, 1° 42’S. Feb. 1862. (421 
and 479.) 

1 Briedelia sp. ; Madi, rocky heights. Feb. 1862. : ; 

2 B. sp.; branches have blunt thorns, and grow level and thickly; Madi 
burn, 3° 15’ N. Dec. 1862. ; : 

1 Hymenocardia Heudelotii, Planch.; 30 in. cire. tree, with brittle wood ; 
“© M’palanyonga.” 3°15’ N. Dec. 1862. (733.) 


LXXIV. CERATOPHYLLEAS, 
1 Ceratophyllum sp.; water plant; Nile, 2° N. Oct. 1862. 


LXXV. SALICINEA, 
1 Salix Dgyptiaca, L.; Gherri Pass, by edge of Nile, 16° N. March 1863. 


LXXVI. ULMACE#, 
1 Celtis integrifolia; ‘‘M’Leweh;” 12 ft. girth, thickly-foliaged, hand- 
one rats ithe natives of Fipa are said to make necklaces from its seeds. 
3° 30’ N. Feb. 1863. (753.) 


LXXVII. URTICACES. 


1 Urtica dioica? L.; 3 ft. high by borders of Lake Windermere, 1° 40/ 8., 
where its 2-ft. long tapering roots are used medicinally ; ab, 2°. Ne 
found it by habitations growing 7 ft. high. (892 and 470.) 

1 Fleurya cestuans? On rock under shade of tree, 3° 15’ N, Dec. 1862. 

1 ie sativa, L. ; ‘‘Bhang;” grows 5 ft. high near cottage dung-heaps in 
the Land of the Moon, where the men whoop and scream loudly while smok- 
ing it. 4° 18'S. April 1861. (75.) 4 “ie 

1 Ficus sycamorus, L.; Sycamore fig; ‘‘M’Kooyoo; bark-cloths are sage 
times made from young trees of it; found along the whole route ; also in 
Egypt, at Schendi. April 1863. Yields a birdlime for the natives. 

2 F. riparia, Hochst. ; leaves rounded, and dessert-plate size. _(40.) ae 

3 F. sp.; 12 ft. cire. ; Ares lane Nes ee sweet, pear-shaped, half-inc 

i it. Jan. and Feb. : 52. . : 

4 F. a aime? Min ; ‘M’koo;” trunk, 12 to 20 ft. cire., with huge boughs ; 
‘several barks can be stripped off a single individual of this genus for bar i 
cloths, without injuring the tree, if the bare part be for a time wrappe¢ 


648 APPENDIX. 


round with plantain leaf, or otherwise protected, until a fresh bark has 
grown ; this tree also affords short ropes. 5° S. to 3° 30’ N. (636.) 

5 Ficus sp. (F. glumose proxime affinis sed glaber) ; ‘* M’cheeree ; ” 5 ft. in girth, 
with reddish, globular, minute figs in leaf-axles; also a bark-cloth and 
rope tree. 6° 8. to 3° 15’N. (689.) Birdlime gathered from its trunk. 

6 F. virgata? Roxb.; branches erect, and very rough-surfaced leaves. 3° 15’ 
N. Dec. 1862. 

1 Planta exogena anomala dioica (male flowers only); woody shrub; ‘‘ Boss” 
rock, 6° 4’S. Alt. 4068 ft. Dec. 28, 1860. 


LXXVIIL ORCHIDEA. 


1 Lissochilus sp.; yellow-flowering plant; by water; East Coast Range, alt. 
4700 ft., 6° 38'S. 

2 L. sp.; 5 ft. high, with yellow flowers, and unbranched, erect stem; Karagté, 
2° 40'S. March 1862. 463.) 

1 Angrecum? sp.; in fruit; found upon a Kigelia; leaves speckled with 
black; each seed-vessel has a long withered appendage attached; roots 
uniform, witha yellow strong string in their centre. Some natives con- 
sider these parasites a remedy for ophthalmia, by mashing them in water, 
and washing the whole body and eyes externally with the liquid. 3° 15’N. 
Dec. 1862. (716.) 

1 Ansellia sp.; found in thick clusters on lofty-stemmed trees ; Mbwiga, 7° 30'S. 

' ‘Oct. 1860. Alt. 1200 ft. Flowers yellow; zebra-barred inside. Uhiyow 
mee Know it by the name of ‘‘ Mitodlo,” and use its jointed roots medi- 
cinally. 

1 Polystachya sp. ; growing upon Angreecum; root like a small onion; linear 
6-in. long leaves. Dec. 1862. (715.) 


LXXIX. SCITAMINEA. 


1 Amomum sp. (leaves and seeds.) The scarlet underground fruit of Uganda, and 
21° N. Each is the size and shape of a small plantain; four or five of those 
‘adhere to one common short stalk, growing underground at the root of the 
stem, until ripe, when they push up the earth like moles. The scarlet peel 
and an inner white membrane are thrown away, while the pulp round the 
apple-like seeds is sucked, tasting like a lime, and said to be refreshing in 
fevers; roots, in joints, grow creepingly, sending up and down shoots and 
roots. The Waganda string the fruit into necklaces. Grows 4 ft. high, in 
rather dry ground, amongst tall grasses ; frequent. May 1862. (631.) 


LXXX. MUSACEA, 


1 Musa sapientum, L. (no specimen); plantain; ‘‘N’deezee.” The staple 
food of the countries one degree on either side of the equator, acres of 
ground being covered with its groves. There are half-a-dozen varieties— 
the boiling, baking, drying, fruit, and wine-making sorts. Uses—a chip 
from the stem washes the hands, and makes the wet flesh-rubber of the 
Waganda ; thread and lashings for loads are also taken from the stem: 
rain is collected in the green leaves, which can be made. into an ingenious 
temporary pipe; the dry leaves make screen-fences and sacks to hold grain 
or provisions ; the fruit dried (from Ugigi) is like a Normandy pippin; a 
variety, when green and boiled, is an excellent vegetable, while another 
pe a wine resembling hock in flavour; at 2° N. they cease to be grown 
12. 
2 M. ensete? Bruce; one specimen looking at least 10 ft. cire. and only 5 ft. 
high, growing outside a plantain-grove on the equator, was fruitless and wild 
with huge leaves, gigantic diameter, and quite an oddity, its stem being 
only twice the height of its breadth, which seems the characteristic of this 
plant. Numerous smaller ones grew amongst rocks at 3°15’ N. Leaves 
coarser than the plantain, with midrib brick-red. Its black, irregular- 
yo Bey, oe 18 ie into necklaces, charms, and tiaras by the 
aganda; no other uses known to our men; goa f 
30 and E163) 3 goats seem fond of the leaves. 


1 
2 
3 
4 


to 


eee 


ae) 


APPENDIX. 649 


LXXXI. IRIDEA. 


Gladiolus sp.; 2 ft. high; flowers white, with pink edges, 1° 40’ S. Alt. 
5000 ft. March 1862. (473.) 

G. sp.; flowers transparent horn-colour; moist ground, 5° 50’S, Alt. 
4000 ft. 1861. 

G. sp.; 2% ft. high, with yellow-tinged flowers ; by fences and moist places, 
5° 50'S. 1861. 

G. sp. ; foot high, with bright pink flowers; grows in quantities by hedges, 


5° 50'S. 1861. 
LXXXII. AMARYLLIDES. 


Crinum sp.; umbellate bulbous lily; flower stalk 20 to 24 inch long, witin 
five drooping white flowers; a line of pink purple in the centre of each 
petal; burn bank, 3°15’ N. Jan. 1863; very handsome. (742.) 

Narcissus? sp. no specimen; umbellate, bulbous ; 8 inches high ; flowers white, 
with a waxy yellow corona; its leaves, tasting of onions, cooked with 
mashed ground nuts, make a delicious spinage; on sandy, moist places, 
about 6° 8. Dec. 1860. 28.) 


LXXXTIT. HYPOXIDEH, 


Hypozis sp.; height 6 ft.; bushes of it grow where springs ooze from the 
rock ; linear leaves, from the crown only ; stem 4 to 5 ft. girth at base; the 
branches break like a rotten stick,—vitality only showing in the very centre ; 
flowers withered ; seemed purple. Dec. 1860. Alt. 4068 ft. ‘* Boss” rock, 
about 6° S.  (782.) , 

H, sp.; bulbous, with yellow flower; E. of coast range. Oct. 1860. 


LXXXIV. PONTEDERIACEA. 


Monochoria natans, Beauy. ; aquatic plant, with blue flowers ; floating leaves 
cordate, submerged ones linear; stagnant water in bed of stream, 3° 15’ N. 
Dec. 1862. (726 and 727.) 

M. sp. ; flowers white ; leaves heart-shaped ; roots purple and fibrous; grows 
in stagnant water and mud which has lodged on rocks, 3° 15’N. Dee. 
1862.  (655.) 

LXXXYV. LILIACES. 

Aloe sp. (no specimen, from fig. and notes) ; 12 to 15 ft. high ; leaves linear, ser- 
rated, fleshy, and from the crown only; growing upon a sandstone island, 
Urigé valley, about 2°S. Nov. 1861. (147.) ' 

A. sp.; inflorescence branched ; flowers scarlet, with yellow tips; leaves 3 
ft. long; surface marked with indistinct white streaks ; their edges sharply 
thorned, and the juice smelling disagreeably. The Banians of the coast 
cut its leaves into small pieces, soak them in lime juice, put them in the sun, 
and a pickle is formed. 1°8. to2°.N., &e. (613 and 429.) 

Sanseviera sp. ; small clusters of flowers grow upon the erect, branchless stem ; 
the long leaves yield the beautiful white ropery of Uganda; generally found 
on mounds of red clay thrown up by white ants. (531.) _ 

Veltheimia sp.; inflorescence an erect plume ; upper bells pink, lower yellow ; 
appears in swamps, after the first burst of the rains; alt. 4490 ft. ; natives 
collect its flowers for spinage ; very good, but too honey-tasting. 6° S. and 
1°N. 1860-61. (81.) ; i 

Allium cepa, lu. (no specimen) ; (onion) ; cult. by Arabs only, at 5 8. 

Scilla sp.; small white flowers and onion-like root. 5° 5’S. Alt. 3600 ft. 

Urginea ? sp. ; Scaly bulb; stem 3 ft. high, covered with white flowers, mid- 
ribs of sepals brown below ; bulb tasted nauseous and bitter. The Men of 
the Moon roast its leaves and stalks, and cook them as spinage; rocky 
ground, 3° 15’ N. Dec. 1862. (702. ) oe 

Asphodelus sp. ; common in every marsh, 6° 4 8. Dec. 1860. 

Chlorophytum sp.; white flowers, in swamps, 5 40 S. Alt. 3800 ft. 

Asphodelea indeterminata ; common in bogs, 5° 50’. Alt. 4000 ft. 


2 A. indeterminata (from fig. and notes, no specimen); stem 3 to 4 ft. high ; 


flowers green, with white edges; leaves radical. 1° 40’ S. Feb. 1862. 
(419.) 


650 APPENDIX. 


1 Gloriosa virescens, Lindl. ; clove grove, Zanzibar, &c., and 1° 40’ S. Feb. 1862. 
484. 

1 eon sp.; ‘‘Mpopo M’weeto ;” i. e., wild beetul, used as fences growing 
10 ft. high, with clusters of one-seeded berries from tips of branches; no re- 
semblance to beetul palm seen at Zanzibar. 2° N. Novy. 1862. (612.) 

1 Asparagus sp.; 4 to 5 ft. high; very elegant, with white flowers, attractive to 
bees; thorned branches. Sore eyes are said to be cured by chewing its roots 
with salt, and squirting the liquid into the eyes. 7° 8., and in every forest; 
a variety (or the same’) climbs up trees with its opposite branches. (38.) 

1 Smilax kraussiana, Meisn.; ‘‘ M’kolol’a;” 3 to 4 ft. high, growing in patches 
in open dry forest, clinging to any support by its pair of tendrils; stem is 
thorned, and dies every season ; dried leaves have a rich flavour of prunes ; 
roots, deeply imbedded, are stem-like, with knots showing the growth 
of each year. Wanyamuézi use its roots medicinally. Sept. 1861, and 3° 
15’ N., Dec. 1862. (207 & 739.5.) 


LXXXVL DIOSCOREACE. 


Dioscorea sp.; ‘‘ veeazee-koo,” yam; grown here and there on mounds; leaves 
opposite, with seven reticulated veins; stem has occasional green stumpy 
thorns upon it. 5° 8.,to 2° N. (526.) 

D. bulbifera, L.; climber, with alternate leaves, having reticulated veins, and 
thornless stem; bulbs, Brazil-nut size and shape; cutting like a potato when 
unripe, and eating pleasantly boiled. Plantaim groves, 2° N. (1514, and 
P. 8. 526.) 


—" 


bo 


LXXXVII. COMMELYNACE. 


Commelyna sp. ; sky-blue flowers ; spinage made from its leaves. Zanzibar. 
1860. . 

C. sp.; 15 in. high, with chocolate-coloured flowers, on black soil, 5° 5’ S$. 
Alt. 3600 ft. 

C. latifolia, Hochst. (from fig. and notes, no specimen); flowers blue, anthers 
yellow ; potherb; everywhere on rich soil near huts. (491.) 

Cyanotis, sp. (from fig. and notes, no specimen); common in moist dips of 
forests. (455.) 

C. abyssinica, A, Rich. 23° N. Nov. 1862. 

C. longifolia, Benth. 6°S, Alt. 3800 ft. 

Aneilema sp.; near moist sandy soil. 5° 8. to 4° 18'S. (165.) 

A. sp.; inswamps. 6°S. Alt. 3800 ft. 

DR ae ties sp.; lilac-coloured flowers; common in bogs, 24° N. Nov. 

62. 


— 


_ oo bo 


ell SoM ee WS) 


LXXXVIII. JUNCACEAL. 


Flagellaria indica, L.; stem, inch cire.; climbing reed; vies in height with 
trees, leaf-tips having tendrils. Mgveta river, 7° 20'S. 1860. 


LXXXIX. HYDROCHARIDE. 

Ottelia sp.; water-plant, with white flower just above water. 21° N., Nile, 
Nov. 10, 1862. (620-5.) 

O. sp.; water-plant with frilled-edged yard-long leaves; yellow flowers, 
having rather flattened stalks, much roughed, or feeling like a file. Nile, 
144° N. March 19, 1863. 770.5.) 

3 O. sp.; in stagnant water ; flowers yellow; leaves 10 in. long; section of 
seed-vessel shows six spiral cells. 3°15’ N. Dee. 1862. (696.) 

Hydrilia dentata ? (leaves only) ; grows nearly submerged, Nile, 2? N. Nov. 
1862. 


_ 


_ 


— 


1 Vallisneria sp.; minute water-plant; propagates from suckers. Nile ed 
144° N. March 1863. aes 
XC. ALISMACEA. : 
1 Sagittaria obtusifolia, Roxb.; water-plant. Nile, 4° 55’ N. Feb. 22, 1863. 


(767.) 
XCI. NAIADEA. 


Aponogeton sp.; grows submerged; flowers alone above water; in stagnant 
water collected on rocks, Ukidi forests, 24° N. Nov. 1862. 


_ 


oe be 


APPENDIX. 651 


2 Aponogeton sp. ; marsh-plant with bright purple flowers, generally two on a 
stalk. 5° 45'S. Alt. 4377 ft. Jan. 24, 1863. 
1 Potamogeton lucens? L. Nile, 22 N. Noy. 1862. 


XCIL ARACEA, 

1 Colocasia antiquorum ; ‘Myoog’wah;” a few plants generally round or 
outside the huts of Uganda and ,\Unyoro; also cultivated on the bank of 
a stream, at 2° S.; petioles and leaves make a potherb ; Waganda use it for 
sore throat. (149.) 

1 Auchomanes Hookeri? Schott; ‘‘Yalwah;” bulb 30 in. circumference ; one 
erect 3 ft. high-feathered stem, with curving-down thorns. Wanyamuézi eat 
its bulb boiled. 3°15’ N. Dec. 1862. (712.) 

1 Amorphophallus? sp.; leaf only ; 1 ft. high; not in flower. 24° N. Nov. 
1862. : 

1 Richardia? sp.; leaf only ; Madi bog; rare. Dec. 1862. 

1 Pistia stratiotes, L.; in the beginning of March the Nile and Bahr Giraffe, in 
flood, carry down these floating rosettes in great quantities to about 13° N., 
beyond which scarcely one is visible; Lake Windermere, and 2°N. Nov. 
1862. ' 

XCIII. PALM. 

1 Phenix sp. ; wild date ; clusters of them growing on the hillsides, 30 and 40 ft. 
high, with pendant bunches of Indian red fruit; not edible; no uses. 
Equator, and 1° 40'S. The edible date is unknown in the countries tra- 
versed—i.e., from 8° S. to 5° N. 

1 Cucos nucifera, L.; cocoa-nut tree; very abundant at Zanzibar ; a few on the 
main coast ; and none in the interior; ‘‘ M’nazee.” 

1 Borassus dihiopicus, Mart.; Deleb palm; ‘‘M’voomo;” young ones are 
called ‘‘ Meelalla;” at 4° 18’ S.; one bare log measured 37% ft. long, and 
greatest circumference 9 ft. 3 in.; the leaves furnished thatch, rope, sieves, 
fences, firewood, and flageolet reeds ; Wanyamitézi eat the roots boiled in 
famines ; a sweet insipid toddy is extracted ; very few about the equator ; 
plentiful in the Shiluk country, 11° N., where the natives make its leaves 
into beautiful strong white baskets and mats for the markets on the Nile. (71.) 

1 Hyphene thebaica, Mart.; Doom palm; ‘‘Mohamma;” the people of Ber- 
ber (18° N.), &c., make its leaves into coarse rope, and its trunk into 
beams and posts; male trees very handsomely foliaged; female naked as 
poles, both often branching three times ; fruit eaten by donkeys as well as 
men; a few on the E. coast; none in the interior; first observed Feb, 28, 
1863, at 6° N., where it begins to be plentiful. 

2 H. n. sp.; ‘‘ Mizanza:” 30 it. high; never branching; leaves much re- 
sembling the doom, but less spreading ; fruit (in immense clusters, de- 
pending over the fronds that have withered) perfect ellipses, 14 inches long, 
having a shining, deep purple, brittle skin inclosing the nut, covered with 
a stringy, dry, yellow substance ; not edible ; male organs similar to, but 
longer than, the doom; our camel-drivers collected its green leaves to 
make shackles for their camels, as the fibre does not chafe the skin like the 
doom; one of our men had seen it growing in Mambweh, 8° or 9° 8. lat. 
They were observed to grow in desolate valleys of desert sand, walled in 
with crags of slate, about 21° N. May 9, 1863. (777.) 

XCIV. GRAMINEA. 

1 Oryza sativa, L.; rice; not cultivated by the natives in the interior ; Arabs 
grow it for their own consumption, from 7° 27'S. to 4° 18’ S.; a small black 
caterpillar, appearing with the first burst of rains, is often very injurious to 
the young plants ; irrigation was not observed. _ oe. ee 

1 Zea mays, L.; Indian corn ; grown in ridges ; plentiful from 7° 20’ to 4°8.; but 
very rare as the equator is approached ; and quite unknown beyond it, 

hwards to 5° N. 
1 Pero latifolia, Ait.; 3 ft. ‘tails with rich purple awns. Uganda plantain- 
July 1862. (527. , 4 

u er euah a & Caiire corn; ‘‘ Jowar;” “* M’tama 3" or ‘‘ Doora; 
more or less procurable along the whole route; the bitter red variety 
most frequently grown ; without it the African cowd neither have his beer 


652 APPENDIX. 


nor his stirabout. This grain is used by the Waganda to assist in ferment- 
ing their plantain-wine. . 

2 Andropogon eucomis, Nees; cottony flower; marsh, 5°S. Alt. 3960 ft. 

3 AL sp. (§ Gymnandropogon), stigmas rusty ; stalk a pink purple ; by mois- 
ture, Alt. 3600 ft. Natives in famines eat its millet. 5° 5'S. 

4 A. sp. paniculata ; 2 ft. high, 1° 40’S. March 1862. (486.) 

1 Saccharum officinarum, L. ; sugar cane ; seen only on and about the equator ; 
the red-stalked variety most frequent ; they make no further use of it than 
eating the cane. ‘ 

2 8.2 sp. (no flowers) ; 4 to 5 feet high; the grass used for thatch in Uganda 
and Unyoro ; equator, and 2° N. ; : 

1 Cymbopogon finitimus, Hochst.; 6 to 7 ft. high; covering the Northern 
sporting grounds of Uganda, 1° N. July 17, 1862. (525.) 

2 0. cymbarius, var.; 6 ft. high ; growing richly under the shade of trees on 
the luxuriant rocky heights of Gani, 3° N. Dec. 1862. 

C. hirtus ; Nile banks, about 5° N. March 1863. 

Anthistiria, sp.; on dry sandy soil, near Tura nullah, 5° 26'S. Alt. 3800 ft. 

A. imberbis, Retz.; 2 to 24 ft. high; the grass that clothes and waves like 
corn on the treeless hills of Karagié, alt. 5000 to 5500 ft. Dec. 1861. 
Cattle are never grazed upon it. (417.) 

3 A. ciliata, Retz.; 24 ft. high ; growing under trees in rich low ground with 
great luxuriance; in famines the natives eat its grain. 5° 5’ 8. Alt. 
3600 ft. 

1 Pogonatherwm ? sp. (leaves only) ; a black spur ergot grows in its stems when 
in dry ground ; this, or a variety, grows submerged in a perfect network, 
which supports a man, or water-boc as they plunge through it. 

Brianthus aureus 2 Nees; stigmas rust-coloured; swamps, 5° 8. Alt. 3600 ft. 

Vossia procera, Griff. ; back-waters of the Nile. Nov. 1862. 

Manisurus granularis, L.; weed. 2° N. Nov. 1862. 

Helopus annulatus, Nees ; stigmas black. 5° 5’S. Alt. 3600 ft. 

Digitaria sanguinalis, L.; waste grounds, Uganda. July 1862. 

D, mutica? Forsk; ereeping grass ; stems a foot high branch from immediately 
above the rootlets ; donkeys seek for and devour it greedily ; looks a sweet 
grass. 1° 40'S. March 1862.  (477.) 

Panicum sp. (near P. brizanthum, Hochst.) ; grows about cult., 1° 40’ S. 
March 1862. (488.) 

2 P. sp. (near P. brizanthwm Hochst.) ; 3 feet high ; 2° N., on plateaux. Nov. 

1862. 

3 P. sp.; 3 feet high. 4°18’S. Alt. 3800 ft. March 1861. (167.) 

4 P. sp.; grows under trees, 1° 40'S. Dee. 1861. (400.) 

5 P. sp.; very handsome ; 6 to 8 ft. high; near river bank ; two of its dark 
panicles very commonly grow from one stem. 5°S. 1861. 

Oplismenus colonus, L.; Nile bank, 16° N. April 1863. 

2 0. crus Galli, L. ; grows along with marsh plants, its stem lying 3 or 4 feet 
on the ground, and then grows 6 feet high ; diminutive specimens were ob- 
served to have their leaves zebra-marked (i.¢., with black bars at 3-inch 
intervals), and pink edges ; uncommon ; in boggy places, 5° 16’S., 5° 5’ S. 
Aug. 1862. (580.) 

1 Tricholena, sp.; 3 feet high ; by pathways ; flowers handsome, and rich pink ; 
5°S. Alt. 3960 ft. 

1 Penicillaria spicata, ‘‘ Bajra;” seen only near the coast; not cult. in the 
interior, 

1 Setaria verticillata, Beauy.; nasty weed growing near huts, and sticking to 
one’s clothes ; cattle are said to die from eating it. (476.) 2 

2S. glauca, Beauv. ; thinly spread over the Unyanyembé forests in low ground; 
brilliant golden flowers. i , 

3 8S. aurea, Hochst.; by path ; liable to small round fungi, the dust of which is 
eaten by the natives. 2° N. Nov. 1862. . 

Pennisetum polystachyum, Schott ; E. coast range, Oct. 1860. 

P. Benthami, Steud. ; ““Maweengo-weengo;” 10 ft. high reed, with fox-brush 
flower ; by water; equator, 3° N., &c. The tall white fences round the 
palace, &c., and interiors of all Uganda houses, are of this reed ; a strip 


Nor os 


Dee eee 


—l 


APPENDIX. 653 


from its bark answers all the purposes of a knife in cutting meat up ; the 
king’s victims are, we were told, cut to pieces with it. (713.) 

1 Stipa n. sp.; the jungle-grass about 3° 10’ N. Dec. 1862. 

1 Aristida n. sp.; 3 ft. high, with very elegant panicle, 4° 18’ S. May 1861. 
Near cult. (164.) 

1 Sporobolus elongatus, R. Br. ; 3 to 4 ft. high, in grassy jungles of 1° 40’ to 2° 
N. ; silvery grey, span long, close panicle. (482 and 563.) 

S. sp.; boggy ground, 5° S. 

Arundo phragmites, L.; ‘*Matete;” 8 ft. high. From 4° 55’ N. to the 
Bahr-el Gazal (9° N.), the banks of the Nile to the horizon are a sea 
of this reed; at 28° N. it is diminutive, and creeps along the sand. The 
Waganda on the equator make their flutes from it; said to grow arm-thick- 
ness at Lake Nyassa, where it is used in making huts. (576 and 780.) 

Cynodon dactylon, Pers. ; Indian Dib grass; cattle love it; natives at 2° 
N. make bedding or lay their floors with it. 5° S. to 2° N. Noy. 1862. 

Daetyloctenium aegyptiacum ; grows most abundantly on waste ground, also 
on the flat roofs of the Arabs’ houses in Unyanyembé; natives gather the 
ears, dry them in the sun, beat out the grain on the rocks, grind and make 
stirabout of it. 5°S., &e. Feb. 1861. (10.) 

Microchloa setacea, R. Br. ; stigma white ; light soil, near water, 5° 5’ 8, 

Chloris meecana, Hochst. ; 3 to 4 ft. high; plantain-groves, equator. July 
1862. (528.) 

C. sp. ; common, by paths, 2° N. Novy. 1862. 

Eleusine coracana, Gaert. ; Murwa; ‘‘ oolézee;”’ cult. everywhere in the 
route, sometimes in ridges, and dt others broadcast ; its flour, if soaked 
for a night in water, makes very fair unleavened cakes; a coarse beer, 
tasting pleasantly bitter, is made from its grain mixed with that of doora, 
7.e., sorghum ; natives also make stirabout of it; plaintain-wine fermented 
by it has an extra aroma imparted to it. ; : 

£. indica, L.; grows in tufts generally; 2 ft. high; by fields. As grazing 
for cattle the natives esteem it (though tough) more than any other 
species. (485.) 

Eragrostis megastachya, Koch. ; in sesamum fields, 2° N., and also at 16° N. 
April 1863. (5821.) 

2 #. sp. right bank Nile, 16° N. April 1863. 

3 E.? n. sp.; boggy ground, 5°S. 1861. 

4 E.? n. sp.; fine plant; in tufts by pathway, 2°N. Aug. 1862. 

5 BH. cynosuroides, Retz; 3 or 4 ft. high, lining the sandy banks of the Nile; 16° 
to 17° N., where it is made into very coarse rope. April 1863. (774-7.) 

A Bambusa, sp.; bamboo ; 15 to 20 ft. high ; 2 to 3 in, in cire., in thick clumps, 
Usagara hills 64°, and not again till 3° 15’ N., where the natives construct 
their houses, baskets, bows, and spear-handles of it ; sides of rocky streams, 
(37 and 719-5.) : 2 

Triticum satiown, L., wheat; never met with from Zanzibar to 153° N. (the 
Soudan), where it is cult. by irrigation. 


Lt OS) 


a oe 


bo He 


— 


to 


_ 


— 


XCV. CYPERACEAS, 


1 Cyperus articulatus, L. ; Nile edges, 2°N.- Nov. 1862. 

2 CO. rotundus, L.; 5° 6S. Alt. 3800 ft. ¥ “ 

3 C. sp. (same from Barter); Rush; Nile edges, DWNe © INOS 1862. 

4 OC. squarrosus, Rottb. ; on rocky heights, 3° 15’ N. Dee. 1862. 

5 ©. aristatus, Rottb. ; diminutive. 5° S., 1860; and 2°N., 1862. ; 

6 C. pulvinatus, Nees; common ; in tufts ; marshes, DIN: “3 Sept. 1862, 

7 O. mucronatus, Rottb. ; the only vegetation within arm’s-length of the bub- 
bling from a hot spring (too hot for the hand), abundant all round it; near 

igoméro, 3° 33'S. 

8 et es L.; moist ground ; hillsides, 3° 1’ N., Dee. 1862. 2 

9 C. flavescens, L. ; in tufts; low rocky ground, 3° 15’ N., Dee. 1862. 

10 © alopecuroides, Rotth.; “Magiidee;” 8 ft. Ingh; useful as thatch; 
Little Windermere, 1° 40’ S., Mareh 1862. (480.) as 

11 C. longus, L.; grows on cataraet rocks at Gherri, 16° N., &e. ; also on the 


654 APPENDIX. 


rocky edges of the R. Asua, 3° 40’ N. ; camels devour it greedily on arriv- 
ing from the Nubian desert. (774-6.) ; y : 

12 Cyperus denudatus, L. 5°S. Alt. 3960 ft. Stigmas white, stem triangular. 

13 C. spherocephalus, Vahl.; golden yellow flower. 6°S. Alt. 4488 ft. Jan. I, 
1861. 

14 ©. lanceus, Thunb.; deep-brown flowers. 6°S. Jan. 1, 1861. 

15 C. sp.; on sandgnear water, 5° 6S. Alt. 3800 ft. 

1 Papyrus antiquorum ; morasses, Zanzibar island. The shallow borders of 
lakes Victoria and Windermere are thickets of this rush, growing to 15 ft. 
high. Nile banks, 4° 56’N. Not so much of it farther north. Uses— 
leaves eaten by water-boc, and made into soft bedding at 1° 40'S. Stem 
made into screens; strips from the bark make beautiful fish-cruives; and 
at Unyoro, a bundle of pith, cut into long strips, forms a wrapper or covers 
ajar. (386, 

1 Marton Sang Oi Vahl. ; chill-top, alt. 5500 ft. 1° 40'S. Dec. 1861. 
412. 

2 M. a ft. high; E. Coast Range, Oct. 1860. 

1 Kyllingia, sp.; flower white, round hill-top,.by water, Dec. 1861. (410.) 

2 K. alba? Nees. Zanzibar; and 2° N., by moist ground, Nov. 1862. 

3 K. macrocephala ? ‘‘Keeldlo,” 18 inches high; sweetly perfumed ; roots 
purple; the latter are pounded by Wanyamtézi women, andrubbed on their 
bodies as a scent; by rocky burn, 3°15’ N. Dec. 15, 1862. (693.) 

4 K. aurea, Nees; common in moist woods, 6° 48. Alt. 4068 ft. Dec. 1860. 

1 Fuirena wnbellata? Rotth.; ‘*Keekal’a.” 3 ft. long; five-sided, sharp- 
edged; lodging plant on sandy edges of burn. Madi, Dec. 21, 1862. Root 
embedded a foot deep. Natives extract salt from its ashes; flowers whorl 
up the stem. (721.) 

F. pubescens, Kunth.; 1 ft. high. 6°S, Jan. 1, 1862. 

3 F. sp.; in tufts on swamps, 3°15’ N. Dec. 1862. 

1 Isolepis saviana ? diminutive plant; marshes, 2° N. Sept. 1862. 

Trichelostylis, sp. 4° 18'S. April 1861. (168.) 

T. sp.; 2 ft. high; stigmas rust-coloured. 4° 18’ and 5° 55’S. Alt. 3700 ft. 

Abilgaardia monostachya, Vahl.; grassy plateaux, 2° N. Nov. 1862. 

A. pilosa, Nees; forest; near 5° 8, 

Scleria, sp.; grows 7 ft. high in an erect bush, on burn-side, 3°15’ N. Fruit 
resembling diminutive acorns; leaves sharp-edged. Jan. 1863. 

S. sp.; 1 ft. high; marshes, 2° N. Aug. 1862. 

S. sp.; 6in. high; growing in tufts on soil the debris of rock ; seeds white, three- 
cornered and milky; stem, three-cornered; fibrous roots are red-purple; 
whole plant delicately scented. Dec. 1862. (668.) 

1 Diplacrum caricinum, KR. Br.; very diminutive; sandy soil. Dee. 1862. 

1 Antrolepis, Welw. n. g. sp. n.; 4 to9in. high; growing like white daisies 

in rather moist places. Alt. 3900 ft. 5° 26’S. Uncommon. 

1 Lipocarpha argentea, R. Br.; in tufts on moist ground; below Madi rocks. 
(684.) ‘ 


ee ee 


co bo 


XCVI. FILICES. 


1 Asplenium furcatum, L. 3°15’ N. Dee. 1862. 
1 Actiniopteris radiata, B. Jan. 11, 1861. 
1 Nephrodium propinguum, Br. Nov. 1862. 
1 Nephrolepis tuberosa, Pr. 3°15’ N. Dee. 1862. 
1 Phymatodes vulgaris, Pr. (simple frond.) Zanzibar. 
P. vulgaris (pmnate frond). Zanzibar. 
1 Ceratopteris thalictroides, Bury ; in bog, Madi. Dec. 1862. 
1 Marsilia quadrifolia, L. Nile. March 9, 1863. 
1 Lycopodium rupestre, L. Madi. Nov. 1862. 


a 


APPENDIX. 65 


Or 


NOTES ON OTHER PLANTS PARTLY FROM NATIVE INFORMATION. 


M’bango (Kisitahili) ; hard, heavy wood, on logs of which the bark-cloths of 
Unyoro are beaten. (107.) 

M’cherengeh (Kis.); the Wamyambo make their milk-pots from this wood, as it 
smells sweetly. (109.) 

Chenjha (Kis.); M’Keendah (Kinyoro); (seeds only) 10 ft. cire. tree; one to 
three stoned edible fruit. (93.) 

almiere aaa natives cure fever from a decoction of its fibrous roots. 
116.1. 

Ktannee (Kis); its fibre made into rope. (5.) 

M’Koma (Kin.) ; 12 ft. cire.; black-hearted wood; made into bows, &e. (131.) 

**M’Koonoongo”’ (Kis.); 6 ft. cire.; with black, angry, thorn; incised bar 
smells strongly of citron ; rose-coloured wood, used as railings, and thought 
most endurable ; tooth-scrubbers, which induce saliva, and the steam from 
the boiled seeds scents clothes; its bows are esteemed, and its powdered 
bark yields a scarlet dye. (98, &c.) 

Miloombo (Kis.); the most common of all the bark-cloth trees. 

Meeleendee meela (Kis.); M’Songo (Kin.); wood made into drumsticks and 
harmonicons. (120, &c.) ? 

Moowalé (Kis.); palm, yielding the most beautiful strong, soft fibre, made into 
guitar-strings, cloths, used for stringing beads, and called ‘‘ ootembweh.”’ 
(70.) 

Mizzizeema (Unyoro) ; made into canoes, 45 feet long. (502.) 

M’nyameet’a (Karagiié) ; fruit-tree ; three stones in each fruit, (428.) 

M’pembeezoo (Kis.) ; roots used as purgatives. 4° 8. (112.) 

M’talawanda (Kis.) ; walnut-coloured wood ; fruit edible ; gun-stocks, also long 
hand-drums of Karagiié made of it. 4° to2°N. Large yellow deciduous 
flowers. (660.1.) 

M’tatee (Kin.) ; Wanyamitiézi forest tree ; 12 ft. circ., with cedar-coloured wood, 
and small edible fruit ; first-rate bows. (102.) 

M’teessa (Uganda) ; 40 to 50 ft. high; unbranched stem and nota palm. Ugan- 
da dells. (518.) 

M’toondoo ; Wanyamiiési forests; 12 ft. cire. Uses—drums, beams, troughs, 
&e., and bark made into vats for grain, planks, and rope; resembles the 
‘*Miombo ;” might camp half a regiment under it; fruit flat-marble size 
and shape; very pleasant-tasting fig. (5 and 661.) 

M’toom’wew ; an ash-stick-like wood, growing in the Fipa district ; its pure 
white kernels are worn as beads. 

Uranga (Kis.); arrowroot-like, herbaceous plant, grown in Usagara ; leaf, 
petiole, and root all eaten. (16.) 

M’Vooleh (Kis.) ; uses—immense canoes and large purposes. (512.) 
M’Yokka Yokka; an 18 ft. high tree ; a decoction from the bark of its root 
and stem is red, tastes like quinine, and is used medicinally. (115.1.) 
Yoomboo (Kis.); a tuber, resembling and tasting like Jerusalem artichokes ; 

cult. 4°18’ S. and 1°S. (86.) : = 

M’yézi (Kin.) ; palm, at Ugigi, from which an oil is extracted. (719.) 

Crowfoot-shaped, straw-coloured, 18 inch high vessel, with numerous arms, and 
centre only racket-ball size ; only one found blowing about in the forest. 
34° S.  (390.) - ' ; 

Large, handsome, densely-foliaged, sombre tree, with deep green, simple leaves, 
whose yellow, stoned fruit resembles in shape and taste the Loquat of India, 
but is smaller. Found only about the equator. (511.) : 

M’pembo; 12 feet in girth, with simple elliptical leaves ; fruit rough, russet- 
brown, peach-size, tasting insipidly, with a large stone; uses—canoes, 
drums, &e. 7°S. 13th Nov, 1860, (2.) 


658 APPENDIX. 


tropical weeds, most of them common to India and Africa. The cul- 
tivated plants, which, it will be seen, have been carefully collected or 
noted, are also generally diffused. 

The new plants belong, for the most part, to African genera ; but 
there are two (Harrisonia and Soymida), which were previously only 
known as Indian. The Umbellifere, which are very remarkable, be- 
long to Abyssinian types. Several Cape genera are represented, as, 
for instance, Arctotis and Cullumia, among thistles; Hebenstreitia, 
Protea, Gnidia, The Melastomacee, and many of the Labiate, recall 
the Madagascar flora; and in the Anona, Lophira, and Landolphia, we 
have marked West African forms. 

Besides a very curious new genus of Leguminose, and another of 
Cyperacee, which had already been sent to England by Kirk and 
Welwitsch, there are seemingly new and remarkable genera of Amar- 
antaceee, Scrophulariacee, Labiate, and Asphodelew, and a very curi- 
ous plant, unfortunately in imperfect condition, of which the order is 
undeterminable without better materials. 


THE END. 


aa 
Pe 


PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS, EDINBURGH. 


ae 
Serene 


See 
nes 


Sangreren ios 


