The Mysteries of Britain (Lewis Spence, 1928)
========================
Spence's 1928 survey of Britain's secret rites and traditions — druids, megaliths, and the native mystery tradition restored. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.283526).

THE  MYSTERIES
OF  BRITAIN


Secret  Rites  and  Traditions
of  Ancient  Britain  Restored


49403

t>y

LEWIS  SPENCE


THE  AQUARIAN  PRESS
37/38  Margaret  Street,  London,  W.l


First  Published  . . . November  1928
This  Impression April  1970


© RIDER  AND  COMPANY  1970


USNt'JiJU-  a K<  iM  A EOJ-.0&ISA1
HfflRARY,  MffiVS  DBHtt.

A«.BTo -Mtefcyj

Bat® / r.  .7. . . . . • A . . | . .gym

Call


ISBN  0 85030  051  7
Reprinted  in  Great  Britain  by
Stephen  Austin  and  Sons,  Ltd.,  Caxton  Hill,  Hertford


PREFACE


THAT  the  island  of  Britain  was  the  seat  of
the  development  of  a cultus  and  secret
tradition  of  extraordinary  vitality  and  individ-
uality is  no  new  thesis,  but,  so  far,  it  is  one  which
has  not  been  dealt  with  in  any  tolerable  or  scientific
manner,  nor  has  the  evidence  concerning  it  been
examined  in  the  light  of  modern  research,  especially
as  regards  recent  valuable  conclusions  in  Folklore
and  Archaeology.  All  I can  claim  to  have  done  in
the  present  volume  is  to  have  collected  the  data
concerning  it  and  to  have  made  an  effort  to  system-
atize the  same,  with  the  dual  intention  of  proving
its  authentic  character  and  value  to  British  mystics
as  providing  them  with  a horizon  of  native  and,
therefore,  sympathetic  lore  and  practice  ; and  its  long
survival  in  these  islands — a survival  which,  in  certain
districts,  appears  to  have  lasted  until  a time  which
we  are  now  accustomed  to  regard  as  comparatively
recent.

That  the  cult  we  call  **  Druidism  n possessed  a
much  higher  mystical  tendency  than  the  generality
of  British  people  are  aware  has,  of  course,  been
frequently  advanced  as  a serious  contention.  But,
because  of  the  bizarre  method  by  which  this  view  has
formerly  been  advanced,  a perfectly  sound  hypothesis
has  not  only  been  seriously  damaged,  but  has  been
greeted  with  unmerited  contempt.  I have  striven,
in  setting  it  forth  in  a more  catholic  manner,  to
employ  only  such  sources  as  appeared  to  me


6 Preface

absolutely  worthy  of  credence  and  to  eschew  anything
in  the  nature  of  the  extreme  or  the  empirical — in
short,  to  let  the  evidence  plead  for  the  theory  by
virtue  of  its  copiousness,  its  obviousness,  and  its
generally  overwhelming  character.  At  the  same
time,  I have  made  every  endeavour  to  arrange  and
select  this  in  such  a manner  that  the  orderly
presentation  of  facts  would  not  in  any  way  derogate
from  their  weight  or  possible  acceptance,  and  to  digest
them  into  the  beginnings  of  a system  which  will  at
least  give  pause  to  those  who  altogether  deny  the
former  presence  of  a highly  intellectualized  cultus
and  mystery  in  our  islands,  or  its  survival  in  a more
or  less  official  form  until  recent  times.

The  nucleus  of  proof  is,  naturally,  to  be  sought
in  Wales,  the  last  stronghold  of  official  Druidism,
where  a quite  extraordinary  treasure  of  manuscript
material  relating  to  it  still  exists.  It  has  been  far
too  much  the  fashion  to  assume  a problematical  or
comparatively  recent  origin  for  ancient  Cambrian
literary  sources.  But  I believe  I have  brought
sufficient  evidence  to  bear  to  show  conclusively  that
this  great  corpus  of  venerable  material  is  not  only
authentic  in  essence,  but  of  such  preponderating
value  as  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  overestimate.
Especially  do  I believe  the  writings  preserved  by
Iolo  Morganwg  in  Barddas  to  have  been  handed
down  from  an  immemorial  antiquity,  as  his  editors
maintained,  and  to  enshrine  the  beliefs,  ideas,  and
practices  of  the  Secret  Tradition  of  Britain,  and  I
feel  that  the  unbiassed  reader  will,  after  having
perused  the  evidence  relative  to  this,  find  himself  in
general  agreement  with  this  view.

The  evidence  concerning  the  rites  and  ceremonies
of  initiation  is,  I think,  clear  and  conclusive,  and
should  once  for  all  lay  at  rest  any  dubiety  on  this


Preface  7

particular  head.  It  should  also  be  of  peculiar  value
to  British  mystics,  as  providing  them  with  a general
view  of  a system  or  code  of  conduct  by  which  their
ancestors  sought  to  gain  a knowledge  of  that  higher
existence  which  they  personally  seek  to  attain,  and
I am  not  without  hope  that  it  may  induce  them  to
consider  the  propriety  of  examining  further,  and
perhaps  embracing  a soul-philosophy  more  in  natural
conformity  with  our  native  psychology  than  any
exotic  system  can  possibly  be.

We  Britons  are,  alas,  too  prone  to  find  in  alien
systems,  aesthetic  and  philosophic,  that  which  is
seemingly  more  desirable  than  anything  of  native
origin.  So  far  as  mystical  philosophy  is  concerned,
we  have  not  until  the  present,  perhaps,  had  any  real
opportunity  of  gauging  the  values  of  a tradition
developed  in  accordance  with  Western,  and  more
exclusively  Britannic,  mentality.  But  I feel  that
with  the  mass  of  fact  I have  been  enabled  to  place
before  him,  the  British  mystic  may  no  longer  believe
himself  compelled  to  seek  guidance  from  Oriental
cults  and  philosophies  of  arcane  origin,  but  may
turn  for  the  purposes  of  psychical  instruction  and
enlightenment  to  the  noble  and  venerable  tradition  of
his  fathers,  in  which  he  cannot  but  discover  ideals
and  beliefs  which  strike  a familiar  and  hereditary
chord,  to  his  refreshment,  encouragement,  and  final
illumination.  I have  also  carefully  indicated  the
sources  from  which  he  may  gain  a more  comprehen-
sive knowledge  of  the  system  in  its  entirety.

I cannot  close  without  expressing  my  sincere
thanks  to  Miss  Wendy  Wood  for  the  eight  excellent
drawings  which  she  has  made  for  this  book.
Deeply  imbued  with  the  Keltic  spirit  and  versed  in
the  details  of  Keltic  antiquity,  she  has  also  infused
them  with  the  richness  of  Keltic  imagination  and


8 Preface

mysticism.  I have  also  to  thank  my  daughter  Rhoda
for  tireless  assistance  in  gathering  and  arranging  the
materials  which  are  the  foundations  of  this  attempt
to  rebuild  the  house  of  our  decaying  British  tradition
— an  edifice  which,  I am  convinced,  the  patriotic
mystic  will  lend  every  aid  in  gloriously  rebuilding  !

L.  S.

66  Arden  Street,

Edinburgh.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER  I
INTRODUCTORY

Britain  an  Insula  Sacra— Survival  of  Her  Occult
Tradition— Proposed  Reconstruction  of  Same—

C/ESAR  ON  DrUIDISM — BRITAIN  THE  DrUIDIC  TlEET —
Procopius  on  Ferry  of  the  Dead — Question  of
Early  Religious  Influence  Associated  with
Ethnology — Must  Look  to  Spain — Capsian  Culture
— Allied  with  Tardenoisian — Azilian  and  Cam-
pignian  Cultures  in  Britain — Neolithic  Times—
Megalithic  Peoples  and  Early  Traders — Dolmens
and  Long  Barrows— Voyages  of  the  Long  Barrow
Men,  2,000  b.c. — Cult  of  the  Dead  of  the  Long
Barrow  Men  in  Spain— Central  European  Invaders
—Cult  of  the  Dead  Survives  in  Britain — Origin
of  Civilization,  Eastern  v.  Western — Iberian
Culture  of  Spain,  Eastern  or  Western?—
“Capsian”  Paintings  on  Megalithic  Monuments —

Cult  of  the  Dead  in  Old  Stone  Age— Development
of  Mummification — The  Dolmen  and  the  Mastaba —
“Orientalists”  and  Occidentalists  on  Origin  of
Monuments — Theory  of  the  Origin  of  the  Cult  of
the  Dead — Egypt  and  Britain  Drew  it  from  a
Common  Source  in  North-West  Africa— Cult  of
the  Dead  and  of  Osiris  in  Egypt — Book  of  the
Dead— Sanconiathon  and  the  Cabiri — Capsian  and
Azilian  in  Spain— These  Flourished  Long  Before
Egyptian  Civilization— Culture  Proceeds  North
and  East — First  Egyptians  Iberians — Theories  of
Hall  and  Sergi — Iberian  Rites  Still  Found
in  North-West  Africa — Druidism — Mr.  T.  D.
Kendrick’s  “The  Druids”— Druidism  Alluded  to
200  b.c. — The  British  Element  in  Druidism —
Druidism  a Keltic  Religion,  According  to  Kendrick
— Britain  Secluded  During  the  Iron  Age— Its
“Religious  Distinction” — Kelts  Adopt  the  Native
Religion — Kelts  Form  a Priestly  Class  in  Gaul —
Admixture  with  Aboriginal  Faith— Druidism  in
Gaul  and  Britain— Were  the  Druids  “Official”  in
Britain? — Justification  of  “Official”  Druidism  in
Britain— Druidism  and  the  Stone  Circles  . . 17

9


10  Contents

CHAPTER  II

THE  CULT  OF  THE  DEAD
Druidism  a Cult  of  the  Dead — Evidences  for  this
Theory — The  Gauls  Children  of  Dis — Classical
References  to  Gaulish  Ideas  of  Immortality —

Human  Sacrifices  to  the  Dead— Cult  of  the  Dead
Among  the  Kelts — No  Relation  to  Pythagorean
Doctrine  of  Re-Birth — Theory  of  the  “Sidhe”  or
“Fairies”  as  the  Dead — “Changelings”,  or
Returned  Spirits — Early  Keltic  View  of  the  Cult
—Druidic  Classes— Their  Character  and  Accom-
plishment— Systems  of  Writing,  Ogham  and
Bobileth—  Ostensible  Disappearance  of  the  Druids
— Their  Probable  Survival  as  Culdees — Cult  of
the  Culdees — Druids  Disguised  as  Monks — St.
Columba  as  a Druid — “Christ  is  My  Druid” —
Druidism  in  Ireland— Sorceries  of  the  Irish
Druids — Survival  of  Druidism  in  Wales—
Allusions  to  it  by  Welsh  Bards  ...  47

CHAPTER  III

THE  MYSTERY  OF  KELTIC  PHILOSOPHY
Keltic  Psychology— Britain  Presently  Lacks  a Native
Mysticism— Welsh  Mystical  Literature — Survival
of  Druidic  Ideas  most  Probable — The  Children  of
Llyr— The  Don  Group — Pwyll — Keridwen  and
Her  Family— Her  Myth  and  its  Importance — The
Brotherhood  of  the  Pheryllt — The  Magical  City
of  Emrys— The  Cauldron  of  Keridwen— A Vessel
of  Initiation— The  Druidesses  of  Sena— “Bacchic”

Poem  by  Aneurin — The  “Serpent’s  Egg”  of  the
Druids — Edward  Williams  on  Cymric  Literary
Survivals — Sharon  Turner ’s  Beliefs— N ash’s

Criticisms— Reasons  for  Crediting  the  Authentic
Character  of  Welsh  Bardic  Manuscripts  . . 71

CHAPTER  IV
“BARDDAS”

History  of  the  Volume— Collected  by  Iolo  Morganwg
— Its  Authenticity  Championed  by  its  Editors —
Proofs  of  the  Same — “Genuine  Remains  of  Ancient
Druidism”— “The  Book  of  Symbols” — Secret
Writings  of  the  Bards— The  Mystic  Letters  O I V,
and  their  Significance— Secret  of  the  Bards  of
Britain — “The  Book  of  Theology” — Union  of
Deity  with  “Powerlessness” — “Annwn”,  or  the
Abyss— The  Cycles  or  Planes  of  Existence— Abred,
the  Physical  Plane— Gwynvyd,  the  Spiritual  Plane


Contents

— Ceugant,  the  Circle  of  Deity— The  Enigma  of
the  Bards — The  Names  of  God — “The  Book  of
Bardism” — Catechism  of  the  Bards — The  Signifi-
cance of  the  Plane  of  Gwynvyd — The  Fall  into
Abred — Awen,  or  Inspiration — The  Doctrine  of
Eneidvaddeu — “ The  Book  of  Wisdom” — Doctrine
of  the  Elements — The  Eight  Parts  of  Man — The
Seats  of  the  Faculties — Superficial  Resemblance
of  “Barddas”  Philosophy  to  Oriental  Systems —
Actual  Similarity  Denied — A Common  Origin
More  Probable — The  “Theology”  of  “Barddas”
Reviewed  .

CHAPTER  V

THE  ARCANE  TRADITION  IN  BRITISH
MEDIAEVAL  LITERATURE
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth’s  “Historia”— Its  Sources
Authentic — British  Kings  as  “Gods” — A Druid
Sacrifice — The  Flamens  of  Britain — Merlin  and
Vortigern— The  Myth  of  Stonehenge,  a Tradition
of  Reality— Merlin  as  a Druid— The  Controversy
as  to  this— A Breton  Poem  on  Merlin — Arthurian
Literature — Welsh  and  Norman-French — Goidelic
Equivalents— Canon  MacCulloch  on  Arthur— The
Cauldron  of  Keridwen  and  the  Grail— An  act  of
Initiation— Arthur  and  Osiris — British  Legends
of  Visits  to  the  Underworld— Thomas  the
Rymour;  Kirk  of  Aberfoyle — “The  Long  Preserved
Ritual  of  a Hereditary  Cult”

CHAPTER  VI

THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE  GRAIL
The  Grail  and  the  Secret  Tradition  of  Britain— The
Keltic  Cauldron  and  the  Grail — Brons  and  Bran
—Mr.  A.  E.  Waite  on  the  Druidic  Sources  of
the  Legend — The  Welsh  “Perceval” — Dramatis
Personae  of  Keridwen ’s  Myth  Therein— The  Conte
del  Graal— Canon  MacCulloch  on  the  Grail — The
Myth  Explained — The  Grail  as  Cauldron  .

CHAPTER  VII

THE  SECRET  TRADITION  IN  RITE  AND
LEGEND

Rites  and  Legends  Bearing  on  the  Secret  Tradition—
A Sixteenth  Century  Welsh  Idol  of  Hu— The
Changeling  Superstition— Hallow  E’en  Ceremonies
—Nineteenth  Century  Pagan  “Priests”  in  Wales
—Arthur’s  Ship  of  Glass— Witchcraft  and  the


12


Contents

Secret  Tradition— Witch  and  Druid  Magics—
Druidic  Survivals  in  Scotland — Action  by  the
General  Assembly  in  1649 — The  Antiquities  of
Slains — The  Cauldron  of  Keridwen  in  Scotland
— The  Rite  of  the  Mistletoe — Gog  and  Magog,

Gods  of  Cockaigne— Godiva  and  Brigantia  . . 14S

CHAPTER  VIII

THE  HIGHER  PHILOSOPHY  OF  BRITISH
MYSTICISM

The  Nature  of  God — Hu  the  Supreme  Druidic  Deity —

His  Form  as  an  Ox  or  Bull — Esus  or  Hesus — The
Three  Circles  or  Planes  of  Being— The  Necessary
Obligations  of  Man — The  Faculties  of  the  Soul —

“The  Sentences  of  Bardism” — Aphorisms  Contained
Therein — “.The  Ten  Commandments  of  the  Bards”

— “The  Three  Deliverances” — Their  Triumphant
Spirit— The  Philosophy  of  Joy — Difference
Between  Eastern  and  Western  Ideas  of  Psychic
Development— Western  Lays  Stress  on  Scientific
Knowledge— Initiation  through  Knowledge  Essen-
tial to  Psychic  Growth— The  Laws  of  Man’s
Actions— The  “Vigours”  or  Powers  of  Man— The
Conditions  of  Animation — Druidic  “Relativity” —

The  Stabilities  of  Unity— The  Conclusion  of
Abred— Moral  Uses  of  War— The  Foundations  of
Abred — The  Necessities  of  Gwynvyd — The  Secrets
of  Death — The  Conquest  of  Death  and  Hell —

Appeal  for  a Closer  Consideration  of  the  British
Mysteries  ......  176

CHAPTER  IX
THE  WAY  OF  INITIATION
Reconstructing  the  Initiatory  Rites— “The  Chair  of
Taliesin”— A Poem  of  Initiation — Its  Significance
—The  Herbs  of  Initiation — Initiation  in  the
Twelfth  Century— Remains  of  Keridwen ’s  Temple
on  Snowdon— Introductory  Formula  of  Initiation
— The  Shape-Shifting  of  Keridwen — Its  Signifi-
# cance — The  Higher  Mysteries — Rites  of  the

Coracle — Taliesin  on  Initiation— The  Song  of
Keridwen — Davies  on  her  Cultus — Christianity
and  Paganism  Side  by  Side — Did  the  Druids  Employ
the  Stone  Circles? — Not  Built  by  Druids,  but
Used  by  them — Proofs  of  this — Stone  Circles  as
“Caer  Sidis” — Their  Astronomical  or  Cosmic
Aspect — Chambers  of  Initiation


i93


13


Contents

CHAPTER  X

THE  WRITINGS  OF  “MORIEN"
“Neo-Druidism” — “Morien’s”  System— The  Triad  of
the  Sun — The  Negative  Principles — The  Druid
Economy  of  Nature — The  Earth  as  “Bovine  Bardic
Enclosure” — Taliesin  as  the  Sun — The  Myth  of
Keridwen  a Cosmic  Allegory— The  Path  of  Souls  215

CHAPTER  XI

DRUID  ISM  AND  THE  SECRET  TRADITION
IN  IRELAND

Early  Druids  in  Ireland — The  First  Druidic  Ceremony
—The  Legend  of  Etain— Druidic  Rites — Magical
Wars— Ancient  Nunneries  as  Druidic  Retreats—
Survival  of  Druidism  in  Ireland — The  Sacred
Cow — Irish  Culdees — The  Round  Towers —

Druidic  Medicine  . . . . . 223

CHAPTER  XII

SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSIONS
Ancient  Sanctity  of  Britain — “Iberian”  Origins —
Survival  of  Iberian  Faith  in  Britain — The  Cult
of  the  Dead — Welsh  Literature — Keridwen —
“Barddas”— The  Books  of  Bardism  and  Wisdom
—Mediaeval  and  Arthurian  Literature— The  Grail
Legend — Arthur  and  ' Osiris— Evidences  of

Survival  of  the  Old  Cult— The  Higher
Philosophy  of  British  Mysticism — The  Rites  of
Initiation — Stone  Circles — Circles  and  Planes —

The  Writings  of  “Morien” — Conclusions — The
Pantheon  of  Initiation— The  . Grail  Sagas
Allegorical— Authenticity  of  Material  Contained
in  “Barddas”— The  Question  of  Oriental
Influence — General  Aspect  of  the  British
Mystical  Cult— The  “Topography”  of  the  Planes
— Later  Druidic  Psychology— A Process  of
Psychic  Refinement— Initiation  the  Process  of
Exaltation  from  Abred  into  Gwynvyd— The  Drops
of  Inspiration— Keridwen  as  the  Cauldron—
Sky-Father  and  Earth-Mother — Late  Alien
Influence  Absent — A Call  to  British  Mystics


234


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS


The  Rite  of  Initiation  . .

Frontispiece

Stonehenge  Restored  .

Facing  Page

32

Druid’s  Chair,  Cornwall

H 99

4S

Druidic  Alphabets  ....

64

The  Magical  City  of  Emrys  .

78

A Druidic  Orgy  ....

99  99

92

This  Goddess  Kkridwen

99  99

108

The  Descent  Into  Annwn

99  99

1 22

Druidic  Jewel  .....

The  Head  of  Bran

150

The  Birth  of  Taliesin  .

166

Esus  or  Hu

180

Plan  of  Initiatory  Chambers  .

An  Initiate  .

99  99

196

Druidic  Monument,  New  Grange,  Ireland  .

226

Round  Tower,  Brechin,  Scotland

99  99

240

*3


r :


The  Mysteries  of  Britain


CHAPTER  l

INTRODUCTORY

To  the  peoples  of  antiquity  the  isle  of  Britain  was
the  very  home  and  environment  of  mystery,  a sacred
territory,  to  enter  which  was  to  encroach  upon  a
region  of  enchantment,  the  dwelling  of  gods,  the
shrine  and  habitation  of  a cult  of  peculiar  sanctity  and
mystical  power.  Britain  was,  indeed,  the  insula
sacra  of  the  West,  an  island  veiled  and  esoteric,  the
Em*  the  Occident.  Legends  of  its  strange  and
perilous  marvels  were  current  among  the  semi-
civilized  races  who  dwelt  over  against  its  ghostly
white  cliffs  ; it  was  regarded  as  the  haunt  and  refuge
of  giants,  demons,  and  spirits  ; by  not  a few,  even  as
the  paradise  and  resort  of  the  dead.  The  early
accounts  of  its  terrors  show  how  varied  were  the
wonders  ascribed  to  it.  Perhaps  that  instinct  or
policy  of  secrecy  which  inspired  early  traders  to
surround  an  area  of  mercantile  monopoly  with  tales  of
dread  was  responsible  for  much  of  this  supernatural
reputation.  But  the  fame  of  Britain  as  a territory
withdrawn  and  occult  cannot  altogether  be  explained
by  such  a theory.

The  intention  of  this  book  is  to  explain  the  ancient
status  of  Britain  as  a country  of  almost  unique
sanctity  in  the  ancient  world,  and  to  demonstrate  the
survival  of  the  mysticism  and  occult  tradition  which


1 7


18  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
were  certainly  developed  among  our  British  ancestors
to  an  extent  unrivalled  on  the  continent  of  Europe.

I shall  also  endeavour  to  make  it  plain,  by  arguments
founded  upon  authority,  that  the  tradition  of
mysticism  which  flourished  in  our  island  was  of  equal
antiquity  and  sanction  with  that  developed  in  Egypt
and  the  East,  and  in  no  sense  derivative  from  it  so
far  as  its  origins  were  concerned.

The  romance  of  distance  has,  indeed,  played  havoc
with  our  native  occult  philosophy.  Either  because
the  East  appears  to  us  more  glamorous  than  our
own  environment,  or  because  we  have  become
conventionally  used  to  the  notion,  we  assume  that
she  is  the  mother  of  all  mystery,  that  her  ancient
civilizations — Egypt,  Babylonia,  and  India — were
the  sole  and  world-originators  of  secret  lore.  Yet  it
is  demonstrable  that  on  our  insular  and  isolated  soil
there  arose  an  arcane  tradition  as  potent  and  as
majestic  as  any  similar  system  fostered  by  the
Orient,  and  better  accommodated  to  our  racial
psychology.

Although  it  is  impossible  to  dogmatize  concerning
the  origins  and  earlier  affinities  of  this  separate
British  tradition,  we  can  affirm  with  confidence  that
through  long  and  insular  segregation  it  developed
a system  entirely  its  own,  which  was  handed  down
through  the  ages  and  is  still  capable  of  extensive
recovery.  Just  as  in  the  early  centuries  of  our  era,
and  before  them,  Britain  was  regarded  as  specifically
sacred,  an  enclosure  of  the  gods,  so  throughout  the
Age  of  Romance  was  she  thought  of  as  peculiarly
the  island  of  faerie  glamour  and  enchanted  adventure.
This  secondary  phase  was  merely  a survival  of  the
much  more  venerable  belief  in  her  religious  sanctity.
But  if  she  is  no  longer  the  haunted  and  magical
island  of  Spanish  and  French  romancers,  the  elder


Introductory  19

conception  of  her  as  the  birthplace  of  a distinct  occult
tradition  should  hold  a vivid  and  abiding  interest  for
those  of  her  sons  and  daughters  who  still  feel  inspired
by  her  mystical  significance.  The  attempt  will  be
made  in  these  pages  to  reconstruct  the  fragments  of
the  ancient  British  esoteric  philosophy  in  such  a
manner  that  the  salient  outlines  at  least  of  its  edifice
may  be  apparent  and  distinct,  and  that  its  system
may  be  at  the  disposal  of  British  mystics  for’  their
use  and  comprehension  as  more  suited  by  its  genius
to  the  native  mentality  and  disposition  than  the
exotic  cultus  so  long  in  vogue.

Evidences  regarding  the  belief  in  the  sacred  and
mystical  character  of  the  British  Isles  in  early  times
are  readily  forthcoming.  Julius  Caesar,  who’ almost
certainly  received  his  information  from  the  ^duan
Druid  Diviciacus,  the  friend  of  Cicero,  says  of  the
Druid  cult : It  is  believed  that  this  discipline  was
first  instituted  in  Britain,  and  from  thence  transferred
to  Gaul,  for  even  at  this  day  those  who  desire  to  be
perfect  adepts  of  their  art  make  a voyage  thither  to
learn  it.”  1 It  is  thus  clear  from  Caesar’s  testimony
that  the  Gaulish  Druids  regarded  Britain  not  only  as
the  birthplace  of  their  cult,  but  in  some  respects  as
its  official  headquarters,  its  Tibet.  Every  religion
looks  with  veneration  toward  the  place  of  its  origin,
and  the  mere  fact  that  the  Gaulish  Druids  not  only
believed  the  British  Isles  to  be  the  first  home  of
their  faith,  but  that  they  actually  sent  their  neophytes
for  instruction  to  its  seminaries  is  perhaps  the  best
testimony  the  experienced  student  of  religious  science
could  desire  in  arriving  at  a conclusion  favourable  to
the  inception  of  Druidism  in  our  island.

Procopius,  the  Byzantine  historian,  who  flourished
in  the  sixth  century  (a.d.  500-565)  unquestionably

1 De  Bello  Gallico,  Bk.  VI,  13.


20  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
refers  to  a late  form  of  the  belief  in  the  mysterious
reputation  of  Britain  in  his  De  Bello  Gothico.1
Speaking  of  the  Isle  of  Brittia,  by  which  he  means
Britain,  he  states  that  it  is  divided  by  a wall.
Thither  fishermen  from  the  Breton  coast  are
compelled  to  ferry  over  at  darkest  night  the  shades
of  the  dead,  unseen  by  them,  but  marshalled  by  a
mysterious  leader.  The  fishermen  who  are  to  row
the  dead  across  to  the  British  coast  must  go  to  bed
early,  for  at  midnight  they  are  aroused  by  a tapping
at  the  door,  and  someone  calls  them  in  a low  voice.
They  rise  and  go  down  to  the  shore,  attracted  by
some  force  which  they  cannot  explain.  Here  they
find  their  boats  apparently  empty,  yet  the  water
rises  to  the  bulwarks,  as  if  they  were  crowded.
Once  they  commence  the  voyage,  their  vessels
cleave  the  waves  speedily,  making  the  passage,
usually  a day  and  a half’s  sailing,  in  an  hour.  When
the  British  shore  is  reached,  the  souls  of  the  dead
leave  the  craft,  which  at  once  rise  in  the  sea  as  if
unloaded.  Then  a loud  voice  on  shore  is  heard
calling  the  name  and  style  of  those  who  have
disembarked.  How  hard  Keltic  lore  dies  is
illustrated  by  the  fact  that  it  is  still  usual  at  Treguier
in  Brittany  to  convey  the  dead  to  the  churchyard  in
a boat  over  a part  of  the  river  called  the  “ Passage
de  1’ Enter,”  instead  of  taking  the  shorter  way  by
land.2

As  has  already  been  said,  the  argument  to  be
upheld  in  these  pages  is  that  European  civilization,
both  Eastern  and  Western,  arose  from  a common
centre.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  religious  and
mystical  ideas  which  flowed  from  that  common  fount
had  also  a single  and  primitive  origin.  Just  as  the

* Dindorff’s  edition,  Vol.  IT,  p.  559.

3 See  mv  Legends  and  Romances  of  Brittany,  p.  383.


Introductory  21

Cult  of  the  Dead,  which  appears  to  have  been  the
native  and  pristine  religious  impulse  of  this  early
culture,  developed  certain  special  tendencies  and
characteristics  in  Egypt  and  the  East,  there  is
reliable  evidence  that  it  similarly  developed  in
Britain,  taking  on  the  colour  of  its  insular  environ-
ment and  evolving  an  occult  tradition  of  equal
potency  and  authority  capable  of  revealing  to  us  a
mystery  as  majestic  and  more  in  consonance  with
our  peculiar  psychology.

With  this  theory  are  indissolubly  associated  those
problems  of  the  origin  of  our  race  which  for  so  long
have  aroused  the  fiercest  controversy,  but  which
modern  archaeology  has  to  a great  extent  succeeded
in  resolving.  It  has  been  the  bane  of  that  species  of
mysticism  which  drew  authority  from  alien  sources
that  many  of  its  most  powerful  apologists  were
unconversant  with  the  sciences  of  archaeology  and
anthropology,  and  that  they  have  recognized  sources
of  dubious  character  and  alleged  inspiration  whilst
neglecting  the  proven  conclusions  of  science.  These
notions  have,  however,  been  utterly  wrecked  by
recent  archaeological  demonstration  and  need  not
detain  us  here.

The  race  now  generally  called  “Iberian”  or
“Mediterranean”  by  the  majority  of  ethnologists,
was  probably  the  last  wave  of  a well-marked  stock
having  its  origin  in  North-Western  Africa,  and
which  during  thousands  of  years  sent  out  impulses
to  both  East  and  West.  Its  precise  place  of  origin
we  do  not  know,  but  Sergi,  perhaps  the  most
competent  and  experienced  of  its  historians,  believed
this  to  be  situated  in  the  region  of  the  Sahara,  which
was  not  always  prone  to  desert  conditions.  That  it
gave  Egyptian  civilization  its  first  impetus  I hope  to
show,  and  if  it  flourished  more  exceedingly  in  the


22  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
Nile-land  than  elsewhere,  that  was  almost  wholly  on
account  of  the  propitious  environment  it  encountered
there.  Similarly  it  took  on  special  attributes  in
Britain,  the  Cult  of  the  Dead  which  it  carried  with  it
to  our  island,  as  it  did  to  Egypt,  culminating  in  the
sublime  and  intellectual  system  of  Druidism,  which
found  here  its  natural  home  and  environment,  which
survived  in  Britain  long  after  it  had  perished  else-
where, and  lingered  on,  affecting  the  entire  process
and  history  of  British  mystical  thought  even  to  the
present  time.

In  order  to  justify  the  above  statements  a
digression  into  the  sphere  of  archaeology  and
ethnology  is  essential.  This  will  draw  its  facts  and
sustain  its  arguments  from  the  writings  of  authorities
who  have  given  the  most  recent  attention  to  the
problems  of  European  archaeology  and  those  of  the
Near  East.  In  Europe,  the  history  of  civilization
may  be  said  to  begin  with  the  Aurignacian  or  Cro-
Magnon  race,  who  appear  to  have  entered  our
continent  about  23000  b.c.  Certain  authorities
believe  them  to  have  had  an  African  origin.  The
Capsians,  who  followed  them,  roughly  about  10000
b.c. , were  admittedly  of  African  origin,  and  their
culture  was  superior  to  that  of  their  predecessors,  in
the  domestication  of  the  dog  and  the  use  of  the  bow.
Like  the  Aurignacians,  the  Capsians  were  artists
who  left  their  paintings  on  the  walls  of  their  rock-
shelters  in  the  central  parts  of  Spain,  only  these
display  a much  more  marked  conventional  treatment
of  the  subject  and  were  nearly  all  of  a religious  or
magical  character.

Bosch  Gimpera,  a Spanish  archaeologist  of
experience,1  has  given  it  as  his  opinion  that  the

1 See  his  Ensayo  de  una  reconstruction  de  la  etnologie  pre-
historia  de  la  Peninsula  Iberia  (Barcelona,  1923).


Introductory  23

Capsians  were  a mixed  race,  comprising  “Mediter-
ranean” or  “Iberian”  elements,  negroid  and
“Armenoid”  strains.  Their  culture,  characterized
by  small  finely-worked  flakes,  has  been  allied  by  some
authorities  with  that  of  Tardenoisian  (about  6000
B.c.)  which  shows  certain  superficial  resemblances
to  it.  But  the  affinity  is  now  regarded  as  question-
able. The  Azilian  culture,  a degeneration  of  that  of
the  Aurignacian,  is  discovered  in  Britain,  at  the
Victoria  Cave  near  Settle,  and  in  the  island  of
Oronsay  and  at  the  Mac  Arthur  Cave  near  Oban.
Further,  a culture  having  widespread  centres  in
France,  Belgium,  Germany,  and  parts  of  Italy,  and
known  as  the  Campignian  (about  4000  b.c.)  and
characterized  by  unpolished  flint  implements,  is  also
encountered  in  Britain.  All  these  cultures  are
associated  with  the  period  of  low  development
occurring  between  the  Old  and  New  Stone  Ages.

Coming  to  Neolithic  or  New  Stone  Age  times,
the  stream  of  culture  seems  to  have  arrived  by  sea
from  the  south.

Since  the  close  of  the  War,  British  archaeology  has
experienced  a process  of  reconstruction  more
fundamental  than  that  applied  to  many  departments
of  our  national  life  equally  in  need  of  reorganization.
More,  indeed,  has  been  achieved  during  this  decade
in  the  solution  of  vexed  questions  than  during  the
preceding  century,  and  the  enthusiastic  revival  of
antiquarian  effort  in  France,  Spain,  and  Scandinavia
has  placed  an  extraordinary  stream  of  new  and
convincing  data  at  the  disposal  of  British  students.
Obscurities  in  British  prehistory  were  due  chiefly  to
a poverty  of  Continental  analogies,  but  comparison
of  the  results  of  recent  excavations  abroad  has  made
it  possible  not  only  to  point  with  precision  to  the
Continental  areas  of  origin  of  the  several  primitive


24  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
cultures  whose  remains  are  found  on  British  soil,  but
even  in  some  cases  to  the  actual  localities  and
identical  sites  in  Spain,  in  Gaul,  and  elsewhere
whence  they  must  have  been  carried  to  our  shores
some  twenty  to  forty  centuries  ago.  At  first,

conservative  antiquaries  were  chary  of  giving  assent
to  conclusions  so  novel  and  far-reaching  in  their
consequences  to  British  prehistory.  But  the

evidence  has  been  so  overwhelming  in  its  character
and  so  universal  in  its  acceptance  as  to  justify
complete  agreement  with  its  deductions.

These  most  surprising  results  have  been  arrived
at  chiefly  through  painstaking  comparison  between
British  and  Continental  megalithic  or  rough  stone
forms  of  architecture,  pottery,  and  artifacts  in  stone
and  bronze,  and  by  the  rise  of  a wonderful  European
journalism  of  antiquity  hitherto  unapproached  in
accuracy,  perception,  and  distinction.  The  remark-
able conclusions  alluded  to  are  to  a great  extent  due
to  the  excellent  pioneer  work  accomplished  in  Spain
by  Senors  Obermeier  and  Bosch  Gimpera,  and  in
Great  Britain  by  Messrs  O.  G.  S.  Crawford,  E.  H.
Stone,  and  Professor  V.  Gordon  Childe.

Concentration  on  the  question  of  the  trade-routes
blazed  by  the  ancient  peoples  of  the  Mediterranean
and  Atlantic  areas  during  the  New  Stone  and  Bronze
Ages  has,  indeed,  revolutionized  our  comprehension
of  the  Western  World  four  thousand  years  ago,  and
has  made  it  clear  that  the  traders  of  Spain  and
Brittany  even  at  that  dim  era  regularly  engaged  in  a
continuous  and  well-organized  commerce  with  our
islands.  Not  only  did  they  carry  with  them  such
articles  of  merchandise  as  they  could  barter  for  gold,
amber,  and  jet,  but  they  instructed  our  rude  fore-
fathers in  their  own  system  of  rough  stone  building
to  such  purpose  that  in  many  cases  the  result  was


Introductory  25

an  almost  exact  model  of  structures  to  be  found  on
Continental  sites  to-day.

From  Los  Millares  in  Almeria  in  the  South  of
Spain  is  a far  cry  to  lone  Rhinaire,  in  Caithness.
Yet,  as  has  been  definitely  proved,  the  horned  cairn
at  the  Scottish  site  reproduces  exactly  the  plan  of
some  ancient  tombs  at  the  Almerian  station,  and
exhibits  the  selfsame  system  of  corbelling.  Four
thousand  years  ago  men  from  Southern  Spain  in
large  dug-out  boats  plugged  with  Spanish  cork  were
coasting  the  Iberian  sea-line,  rounding  the  horns  of
Brittany,  and  making  slow  passage  by  the  aid  of
leathern  sails  up  the  West  Coast  of  Scotland  and
through  the  Pentland  Firth  to  Denmark  in  search  of
gold  and  amber.  Some  of  these  .vessels  have
actually  been  found  in  the  raised  beaches  of  Scotland,
still  containing  the  green-stone  adzes  they  brought
with  them.  The  rectangular  chambers  with  lateral
niches  in  the  Orkneys  repeat  above  ground  the
subterranean  chambers  of  Anghelu  Ruju  in  Sardinia,
the  brochs  or  dry-stone  towers  which  stud  the  coasts
of  Scotland  are  practically  identical  with  the  nuraghi
of  Sardinia,  even  if  somewhat  later  in  period  than  the
latter,  and  the  remarkable  series  of  tombs  scattered
along  the  western  and  northern  coasts  of  Scotland
serve  to  indicate  the  line  of  the  trade-route  from
Southern  Spain  to  Denmark.  On  the  other  hand,
Danish  amber  and  English  jet  are  found  in  the  graves
at  Los  Millares,  and  help  to  indicate  the  precise  kind
of  treasure  which  the  early  traders  were  anxious  to
secure.

These  early  traders  to  Britain  seem  to  have
introduced  first  the  “dolmen’ ’ type  of  grave,  a large
stone  raised  on  three  or  four  monoliths.  • A later
form  is  the  chambered  long  barrow  and  the  cairn,
which  penetrated  inland  in  Britain  as  elsewhere.


26  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
The  long  barrows  were  used  as  collective  sepulchres
in  which  the  dead  were  usually  buried,  although  in
Yorkshire  and  some  parts  of  Scotland  undoubted
evidences  of  cremation  are  forthcoming.

The  men  who  constructed  these  long  barrows  were
long-skulled  and  short  in  stature.  That  they  came
by  sea  and  from  the  South-West  is  certain,  as  the
distribution  of  their  burial-places  reveals,  and  the
barrows  they  built  can  be  referred  only  to  similar
structures  in  Spain  and  the  Western  Mediterranean,
especially  in  Almeria.

These  long  barrow  men  were  traders,  voyaging
from  Spain  to  Denmark  by  way  of  the  northern
coasts  of  Scotland,  as  the  series  of  these  tombs  shows,
and  the  Danish  amber  and  British  jet  found  in  their
Spanish  burial-places  are  eloquent  of  the  far-flung
traffic  in  which  they  engaged.  But  few  signs  are
evident  of  any  colonization  on  a large  scale  by  this
enterprising  race  of  maritime  merchants,  which  may
be  dated  at  about  2000  b.c.,  and  is  contemporary
with  the  Middle  Minoan  civilization  in  Crete.  But
the  long  barrow  culture  did  not  impinge  on  our
eastern  coasts,  or,  indeed,  press  far  inland,  although
it  seems  improbable  that  it  may  have  been  “taken
over  by  the  natives  from  traders  touching  on  the
shore  “ as  Professor  Childe  suggests.  Surely  had
such  been  the  case  such  precise  similarity  to  Iberian
models  as  he  alludes  to  could  scarcely  have  resulted.

The  lives  of  the  builders  of  the  long  barrows  were
evidently  almost  entirely  conditioned  by  the  Cult  of
the  Dead.  That  these  New  Stone  Age  people  were
originally  of  African  origin  is  now  clear.1  In  Spain,
extraordinary  numbers  of  religious  objects  associated
with  this  cult  have  been  found,  made  chiefly  from
bone,  idols  of  a flat  or  “plaque”  shape,  and
1 See  ChHde,  Dawn  of  European  Civilization,  p.  136.


Introductory  27

“croziers”  of  schist.  These  objects,  taken  from
tombs,  show  how  elaborate  the  Cult  of  the  Dead
had  become  in  the  Iberian  peninsula  at  that  early
period.

Regarding  the  race  and  culture  of  the  folk  who
followed  the  men  of  the  long  barrows  in  Britain  there
is  now  no  dispute.  In  the  Rhineland,  a fusion
between  the  “bell-beaker 55  people  and  the  “battle-
axe 5 5 folk  of  Thuringia  had  taken  place.  The  former
were  probably  of  Italic  origin,  and  had  opened  up  the
Brenner  route  from  Italy  for  the  amber  trade,  linking
up  the  Elbe  Valley  with  the  Adriatic  about  2000  b.c.
They  were  a race  of  prospectors  and  traders.  The
battle-axe  folk  were  users  and  makers  of  bronze
implements,  coming  from  Hungary  and  Tran-
sylvania. These,  mingled  with  a small  proportion
of  “Alpines,”  or  short-skulled  people,  invaded
Britain.  This  mixed  race  was  short-skulled,
although  certain  structural  peculiarities  seem  to  show
that  they  were  not  without  “Nordic”  or  Northern
racial  affinities.  They  spread  rapidly  in  Britain,
introducing  a metal  culture  into  the  island  for  the
first  time,  manufacturing  gold  objects  on  a fairly  large
scale,  and  a peculiar  shape  of  food-vessel  with  a
bell-shaped  mouth.  Their  contribution  to  British
culture  was  certainly  greater  than  that  of  their
Atlantic  predecessors.  But  the  cultures  overlapped
and  mixed.  And  there  is  sufficient  evidence  that  the
religious  and  mystical  ideas  of  the  earlier  Iberian
peoples  triumphed,  completely  dominating  in  the
end  those  of  the  Central  European  new-comers,  and
giving  for  all  time  a peculiarly  “Iberian”  aspect  to
British  religious  and  mystical  thought.  Britain  was,
indeed,  destined  to  remain  Iberian  in  a religious
sense  long  after  the  Iberian  Cult  of  the  Dead  had
vanished  in  its  own  original  milieu.  Once  introduced,


28  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
this  Iberian  form  appears  to  have  taken  a powerful
hold  on  the  imagination  of  the  native  stock  and  its
successors,  and  even  the  later  Celtic  invaders  seem
to  have  adapted  its  basic  principles  and  to  have
grafted  their  mythology  upon  it.  This  then  it  was
which  rendered  British  mystical  thought  unique  in
Europe,  and  which  caused  it  to  be  looked  upon  by
the  peoples  of  the  Continent  at  the  beginning  of  the
Christian  era  as  the  exemplar  and  prototype  of  the
ancient  faith  of  the  West.

Controversy  rages  on  the  question  of  the  priority
of  civilization  in  East  and  West.  Those  who
maintain  the  more  venerable  character  of  Eastern
civilization  regard  the  Iberian  culture  of  Spain  as  a
reflection  of  that  of  the  Eastern  Mediterranean,  or,
at  least,  a carrier  of  its  benefits  to  more  northern
lands.  But  the  bare  fact  that  the  megalithic  or
rough  stone  monuments  of  Spain  exhibit  exactly
similar,  if  more  conventionalized,  paintings  to  those
of  the  more  ancient  Capsian  culture  which  came  from
North-West  Africa,  should  give  the  protagonists  of
Eastern  civilization  considerable  pause.  It  is
precisely  the  great  centres  of  megalithic  architecture
in  Europe  which  have  obviously  the  closest  affiliation
with  survivals  from  the  Old  Stone  Age  of  the  West,
an  age  pre-dating  anything  that  the  Nile  and
Mesopotamia  have  to  show.

Even  the  Old  Stone  Age  in  Spain  and  France  was
not  only  demonstrably  native  to  the  West  and  more
ancient  than  the  cultures  of  the  East,  but  it  assuredly
exhibits  the  earliest  known  germs  of  the  great  Cult
ot  the  Dead.  Late  Aurignacian  burials  display  the
first  steps  in  die  development  of  mummification  at  a
period  at  least  14000  years  B.c.  The  flesh  was
removed  from  the  bones  and  these  were  painted  red,
the  colour  of  life.  ‘ ' The  dead  man  was  to  live  again


Introductory  29

in  his  own  body,  of  which  the  bones  were  the  frame-
work,” says  Professor  Macalister.  “To  paint  it
with  the  colour  of  life  was  the  nearest  thing  to
mummification  that  the  Palaeolithic  people  knew ; it
was  an  attempt  to  make  the  body  again  serviceable
for  its  owner’s  use.”  Microscopic  examination  has
proved  that  the  bones  so  painted  were  in  several
cases  wrapped  around  by  skins,  the  first  rude
prototype  of  mummy-swathing.  The  simple  fact  is
that  Egypt  has  nothing  so  ancient  to  show  in  the  way
of  early  efforts  at  embalming.

Several  gifted  writers  among  the  “Orientalists”
have  attempted  to  prove  Eastern  influence  in  the
megalithic  culture  of  the  West  by  showing  that  the
structure  known  as  the  “dolmen”  was  modelled  on
the  Egyptian  mastaba.  Among  these  Elliot  Smith1
and  Perry  are  the  most  outstanding  British  defenders
of  this  theory.  But  the  Egyptian  mastaba  differs
radically  from  the  dolmen  in  that  it  was  a funerary
chapel  built  over  the  actual  tomb  cut  in  the  rock,
whereas  the  dolmen  was  the  substructure  of  a grave-
mound.  Elliot  Smith,  Perry,  and  Professor  Peake,
observing  the  association  between  European
megalithic  structures  and  gold,  have  inferred  there-
from that  Eastern  prospectors  for  the  precious  metal
built  these  monuments,  Peake  believing  them  to  have
been  Sumerians,  while  Elliot  Smith  and  his  school
lean  to  an  Egyptian  origin.  The  religious  urge  in
Egypt,  the  latter  think,  the  need  for  life-giving
substances  employed  in  the  Cult  of  the  Dead,  aroused
a spirit  of  exploration  in  Egypt  and  stimulated  distant
voyages.  But  no  metal  in  a worked  state  is  to  be
found  in  the  megalithic  monuments,  and  the  explana-
tion that  the  Eastern  voyagers  refused  to  initiate  the

1 See  his  “Evolution  of  the  Rock-cut  Tomb  and  Dolmen”,  in
Essays  Presented  to  Sir  William  Ridgeway.


30  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
natives  into  the  art  of  metal-working,  while
instructing  them  in  the  art  of  dolmen-building  (that
is,  according  to  Smith  and  Perry,  mastaba-building)
will  scarcely  recommend  itself  as  being  well  founded
or  reasonable.  Why  the  “prospectors”  should  have
taught  the  rude  populations  of  Spain  and  Brittany
the  rudiments  of  their  religion  and  the  art  of
imitating  the  mastaba  and  yet  have  refused  them  the
boon  of  instruction  in  ore-working,  is  not  sufficiently
made  plain.  There  is  no  real  reason  to  believe  that
the  dolmen  was  not  the  invention  of  the  late  survivors
of  the  Old  Stone  Age  civilization  of  the  Atlantic  or
Western  region.  “The  great  centres  of  megalithic
architecture  in  Europe  are  precisely  those  regions
where  the  Old  Stone  Age  survivals  are  most
numerous,”  remarks  Professor  Childe.  He  goes  on
to  remark  that  this  thesis,  too,  has  its  difficulties.
“How  did  megalithic  architecture  spread  from  the
Atlantic  Coast  to  the  Caucasus,  to  say  nothing  of
India  or  the  Pacific  Islands?  If  the  comparison
drawn  (in  a preceding  chapter)  between  the  early
civilizations  of  the  Near  East  and  the  West  has  any
weight,  it  would  be  absurd  to  argue  that  the  Western
barbarians  taught  the  Egyptians  and  Cretans  the
Cult  of  the  Dead.”

So  it  would  certainly  appear  to  one  who  was  not
armed  with  a third  and  alternative  theory — the  thesis
that  both  West  and  East  drew  the  idea  of  the  Cult
of  the  Dead  from  a common  source,  a North  African
source.  My  own  belief  is  that  this  great  and  ancient
cult,  dating  from  the  late  Palaeolithic  times,  spread
from  some  centre  in  North-West  Africa  to  Egypt
on  the  one  hand,  and  to  Spain,  Gaul,  and  eventually
to  Britain  on  the  other.  That  it  had  already  begun
to  develop  in  Spain  in  late  Aurignacian  times  we  have
seen,  and  that  it  invaded  Britain  through  “Spanish”


e precisely  what
l-West  African


Introductory  31

influence  about ^ 2000  b.c.,  and  Egypt  about  the
First  Dynasty,  is  also  clear.  My  contention  is  that
it  was  this  very  ancient  cult  which  brought  to  Britain
the  elements  of  that  faith  which  later  took  shape  as
Druidism,  a religion  which  came  to  have  an  especial
hold  and  sanction  in  our  island,  and  which  was
indeed,  the  root  and  beginning  of  British  mysticism!
Britain,  we  know  from  Caesar,  was  regarded  as  the
official  home  of  Druidism.  Let  us  see  t ‘ '
evidence  we  possess  of  the  North-
origin  of  the  Cult  of  the  Dead.

Mummification,  the  preservation  of  the  human
b°dy  ate  death  in  order  that  it  might  once  more  be
revivified  by  the  return  of  the  spirit,  seems  to  have
arisen  in  Egypt  out  of  the  Cult  of  Osiris,  god  of  the
dead  and  the  Underworld.  Osiris  does  not  make  his
appearance  in  Egypt  before  the  period  of  the  First
Dynasty,  or  about  3400  B.c.,  when  a centre  of  his
worship  is  found  at  Abydos.  The  so-called  Book
of  the  Dead,  or  early  fragments  of  it,  are  known  to
have  been  in  use  in  Egypt  early  in  the  Osirian  era
Now  the  Book  of  the  Dead  is  obviously,  in  its
earlier  fragments,  the  written  expression  of  a much
older  ritual  dating  from  prehistoric  times,  and
digested  into  writing  in  early  Dynastic  or  late  pre-
Dynastic  times  It  is  also  the  book  of  Osiris  and
the  Osirian  cult.  Dr.  Budge  says  of  Osiris  “his
home  and  origin  were  possibly  Libyan,”  that  is,  he
came  from  the  West.

, Sancomathon  the  Carthaginian  writer,  tells  us
that  the  cult  of  the  Cabiri,  a mysterious  religion,
originated  in  North-West  Africa,  and  was  delivered
among  others  “ to  the  Egyptian  Osiris.”  The
Cabin  are  said  by  Sanconiathon  to  have  been  the
inventors  of  boats,  of  the  arts  of  fishing,  building  and
agriculture,  writing  and  medicine.  There  is  little


32  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
doubt,  indeed,  that  they  were  the  old  civilized  race
of  the  West,  whom  we  have  seen  penetrating  to
British  shores  in  their  dug-out  canoes.  If  Osiris  was
one  of  its  apostles,  then  the  religion  of  the  Cabiri
was  merely  the  Cult  of  the  Dead,  as  Sanconiathon
asserts.  Cicero  calls  the  Cabiri  the  “ Sons  of
Proserpine,”  goddess  of  the  Underworld,  which  is
to  say  as  much.  Dionysus  of  Halicarnassus,
Macrobius,  Varro,  and  others,  regarded  the  Cabiri
as  the  Penates  of  the  Romans,  that  is  the  dead
presiding  as  household  familiars,  and  Vossius  thought
them  the  ministers  of  the  gods  who  were  deified  after
their  death.  Strabo  regarded  them  as  the  ministers
of  Hecate,  and  Bochart  recognized  them  as
“infernal  deities.”*

This  Cabirian  cult,  then,  hailing  from  North-West
Africa,  is  evidently  nothing  but  a dim  survival  or
memorial  of  the  ancient  civilized  race  of  that  region,
which  made  its  way  into  Spain,  and  after  undergoing
many  phases  there  from  Palaeolithic  to  Neolithic
times,  gradually  found  its  way,  or  sent  its  doctrine
of  the  Cult  of  the  Dead,  to  Egypt  on  the  one  hand
and  to  Britain  on  the  other.  This  theory  explains  in
a word  all  the  notions  of  Egyptian  influence  in
Britain,  and  the  many  apparent  resemblances  between
Egyptian  and  British  mysticism  and  folk-belief.

But  it  may  be  said,  and  with  some  justice,,  that  all
this  is  scarcely  of  the  nature  of  evidence.  Who,
after  all,  was  Sanconiathon,  someone  may  ask,  the
problematical  Carthaginian  model  of  a late  Roman
writer?  It  has,  however,  been  proved  long  ago  that
Sanconiathon ’s  account  was  in  all  probability  genuine
enough.  Still,  let  us  get  on  to  firmer  footing.  We
have  it  on  the  soundest  authority  that  more  than
one  race  of  African  origin  invaded  or  crossed  over  to
* See  Rich,  Occult  Sciences , p.  160  ff.


Introductory  33

Europe  in  Palaeolithic  and  Neolithic  times.  Great
theories,  indeed,  stand  or  fall  by  this  assertion,  and
they  are  backed  by  sturdy  proofs  enow.  The
Capsian  Culture,  which  came  to  Europe  as  we  have
seen,  emanated  from  North-West  Africa ; it  is,
indeed,  named  after  Capsa  or  Gafsa  in  Tunis.  The
Azilian  culture  is  also  indisputably  African.  “ With
the  Capsian  culture,”  says  Professor  Macalister,

‘ ‘ must  undoubtedly  be  associated  the  Spanish  wall-
paintings  at  Alpera,  Cozul,  and  elsewhere  . . .

the  Capsian  flint  industry  is  the  parent  of  the
Azilian-Tardenoisian.  The  Azilian  culture  in
its  earliest  phase  is  to  be  found  in  North-West
Africa.

Now  my  point  is  that  these  ancient  cultures  were
flourishing  in  North-West  Africa  and  Spain  at  a
period  about  10,000  years  ago  and  more,  when
Egypt  had  no  definite  culture  of  any  kind  whatsoever,
save  the  Badarian  (ca.  9000  b.c.)  in  itself  an  echo  of
the  Solutrean  or  late  Aurignacian.  The  North
African  cultus  had,  indeed,  been  preceded  by  that  of
a much  older  race,  the  Cro-Magnon,  which  seems
to  have  arrived  in  Spain  about  20,000  years  ago,  and
which  certainly  laid  the  foundations  of  the  art  of
mummification.  Yet  in  face  of  these  facts  the
“Orientalists”  insist  that  “civilization”  is  of  older
origin  in  Egypt  and  the  East  1 Is  it  contended  that
the  early  culture  of  the  Aurignacians,  Capsians,  and
Azilians,  primitive  though  it  was,  did  not  precede
anything  Egypt  had  to  show,  that  they  perished
utterly  and  transmitted  no  traditions  either  to  the
peoples  who  succeeded  them  or  to  the  East?  Is  it
quite  improbable  that  their  cultural  and  religious
ideas,  however  elementary,  did  not  gradually  and  in
the  course  of  ages  find  their  way  to  Egypt  (where
they  developed  under  more  favourable  conditions)  as  |

c I


34  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
they  certainly  did  to  Britain  at  a later  time  by  a much
more  difficult  and  dangerous  route  ? Or  is  it
contended  that  the  similarity  between  their  beginnings
and  that  of  Egypt  is  merely  fortuitous  ?

Professor  Macalister,  in  a memorable  passage  in
his  Handbook  of  European  Archeeology , gives
it  as  his  opinion  that  the  Aurignacian  race  originated
in  Central  Africa.  All  authorities  agree  that  the
Capsian  and  Azilian  cultures  developed  in  North-
West  Africa.  That  this  culture  reached  the  East
and  may  have  sent  back  cultural  gifts  in  a superior
form  to  Western  Europe  at  a later  period,  I do  not
for  a moment  deny.  But  that  is  altogether  another
matter,  and  in  any  case  the  “ Orientalists”  have
grossly  exaggerated  the  importance  of  the  “come-
back”. The  point  is  that  the  earliest  signs  of
civilization  appear  in  North-Western  Africa  and
Western  Europe,  and  that  nothing  analogous  appears
in  Egypt  until  about  9000  B.C.,  and  even  that  date
is  dubious.

Now  it  cannot  be  questioned  that  the  earliest
civilized  inhabitants  of  Egypt  were  of  Iberian  stock.
Mr.  H.  R.  Hall,  an  excellent  authority,  speaking  of
the  earliest  inhabitants  of  Egypt,  says  : “ We  see
Egypt  originally  inhabited  by  a stone-using  H ami  tic
race  (the  Iberians)  related  to  the  surrounding
Semites,  Libyans,  and  Mediterraneans.”  Again,
he  says : “In  the  Delta,  they  (the  invading
Armenoids)  probably  found  a civilization  of  a
primitive  Mediterranean  type  much  more  advanced
than  in  the  Upper  country.  . . . The  hiero-

glyphic system,  and  all  the  accompanying  culture
that  it  implies,  may  have  been  theirs,  but  was  more
likely  M editerranean . ” 1

No  one  gave  closer  or  more  prolonged  study  to

1 Cambridge  Ancient  History,  Vol.  I,  p.  264.


Introductory  35

the  origins  of  the  Mediterranean  or  Iberian  race  than
the  late  Professor  Sergi  of  Rome.  He  writes  :
“ But  that  original  stock  could  not  have  its  cradle
in  the  basin  of  the  Mediterranean,  a basin  more  fitted
for  the  confluence  of  peoples  and  for  their  active
development ; the  cradle  whence  they  dispersed  in
many  directions  was  more  probably  in  Africa.  The
study  of  the  fauna  and  flora  of  the  Mediterranean
exhibits  the  same  phenomenon  and  becomes  another
argument  in  favour  of  the  African  origin  of  the
M editerranean  p eoples . ’ ’

He  proceeds  to  say  that  a study  of  the  Hamitic
race  has  assisted  him  in  arriving  at  a conclusion.  In
the  description  “Hamitic”  he  includes  ancient  and
modern  Egyptians,  Nubians,  Abyssinians,  Gallas,
Somalis,  Berbers,  Fulahs,  and  the  Guanches  of  the
Canaries.  The  physical  characteristics  of  all  these
peoples  he  finds  to  be  essentially  the  same,  and  he
looks  for  their  place  of  origin  in  Africa.  At  first  he
did  so  in  East  Africa,  in  the  region  of  the  great  lakes,
near  the  sources  of  the  Nile  and  in  Somaliland,
chiefly  encouraged  to  do  so  by  the  fact  that  the  race
was  so  frequently  and  anciently  portrayed  on  the
Egyptian  monuments,  and  by  the  presence  of  flint
implements  of  the  Palaeolithic  Age  in  the  Nile  valley.
But  extensive  finds  of  worked  flints  are  also  found
in  North  Africa  and  the  Sahara.  “ The  idea  has
thus  arisen  that  Western  rather  than  . Eastern  Africa
was  the  original  home  of  these  peoples.”  That  the
Iberians  of  North-West  Africa  carried  their  culture
to  Egypt  seems,  therefore,  much  more  than  probable.
The  Western  sites  pre-date  those  of  Egypt,  and  that
fact  alone  should  weigh  with  us,  for  the  Iberians  were
merely  the  cultural  descendants  of  the  Capsians  and
Azilians.  Moreover,  as  I shall  show  at  a later  stage,
some  of  the  rites  and  customs  of  the  early  Iberian


36  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
peoples  of  Britain  are  still  to  be  found  in  their  pristine
entirety  among  their  Iberian  kindred  in  North-West
Africa.  That  the  entire  rite  of  Beltane,  a rite
adopted  from  the  British  Iberians  by  the  Kelts,
should  survive  in  Morocco  is,  perhaps,  the  best  proof
not  only  of  the  Iberian  origin  of  Druidism,  but  of  the
fact  that  an  Iberian  people  actually  brought  it  to
our  island.

The  earliest  notices  of  religion  in  Britain  allude
to  a strange  cult  called  Druidism,  which,  as  we  have
seen,  the  Gauls  believed  to  have  originated  in  -the
country.  An  extraordinary  mass  of  ponderous
nonsense  has  been  accumulated  through  the  centuries
relative  to  the  nature  and  beliefs  of  this  cult,  and  it
is  only  recently  that  modern  methods  of  study  have
been  applied  to  the  examination  of  such  fragmentary
material  relative  to  it  as  is  worthy  of  examination
and  has  come  down  to  us.  In  his  remarkably
interesting  book  The  Druids , a study  in  Keltic
Prehistory1  Mr.  T.  D.  Kendrick,  of  the  British
Museum,  has  succeeded  in  placing  the  entire  question
on  a much  more  tolerable  basis  than  formerly,  and
has  made  it  possible  to  draw  certain  more  or  less
final  conclusions  regarding  the  origins  and  nature  of
Druidism.

He  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  Saxon  invasion
blotted  out  all  memory  of  the  Druids  in  Britain,  and
that  this  was  gradually  recovered  only  by  the  scholar-
ship of  the  sixteenth  century,  a conclusion  which  is
certainly  open  to  challenge,  as  I hope  to  show  later.
But  he  is  abundantly  justified  in  his  statement  that
the  romantic  revival  ridiculously  exaggerated  the
tradition  of  Druidism,  describing  it,  however
alluringly,  in  an  unnatural  and  theatrical  manner,
at  the  same  time  disseminating  the  mendacious
* 1927.."


Introductory  37

legend  that  the  Druids  were  actually  the
builders  of  the  great  stone  monuments  of  a prior
age.

Who,  then,  were  the  Druids?  What  were  the
origins  of  Druidism,  what  was  its  nature  and  forms
of  worship?  To  these  questions  which  have
agitated  British  archaeology  for  nearly  four  centuries
it  is  still  -impossible  to  supply  definite  and  concrete
answers,  but  they  are  now  capable  of  being
replied  to  in  a sufficiently  satisfactory  general
manner.

Although  at  the  dawn  of  British  history  we
discover  Druidism  as  a cult  practised  officially  by  a
people  of  Keltic  race,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe
that  it  was  not  of  Keltic  origin,  but  had  been  adopted
by  the  Keltic  invaders  of  Britain  from  her  older  and
preceding  population.  But  Mr.  Kendrick  refuses  to
discuss  Druidic  origins  in  Britain  other  than  in  the
light  of  what  we  know  of  Druidism  in  Gaul,  on  the
grounds  that  in  Britain  f * it  is  too  nebulous  a thing  to
allow  a reasonable  basis  for  discussion.”  Nor  can
he  square  Druidic  ascendancy  in  Gaul  with  Caesar’s
statement  that  it  originated  in  our  island,  to  which
the  Kelts  had  penetrated  only  after  their  arrival  in
Gaul.  Caesar,  he  believes,  merely  recorded  an
opinion,  not  a statement  of  fact,  which,  however,  was
associated  with  the  information  that  serious  devotees
of  Druidism  betook  themselves  to  Britain  for  its
closer  study.

Proceeding,  Mr.  Kendrick  reasonably  infers  that,
did  Druidism  originate  in  Britain,  it  must  have  been
established  here  long  before  Caesar  wrote.  From  a
passage  in  Diogenes  Laertius  (Vitae,  intro,  i.)  we
are  aware  that  Sotion  of  Alexandria  had  alluded  to
Druidism  as  early  as  about  200  B.c.  in  the  twenty-
third  book  of  his  Succession  of  Philosophers , now


38  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
lost.  Its  origin  in  Gaul,  and,  a fortiori , in  Britain,
were  this  the  place  of  its  beginning,  must  thus  be  of
still  greater  antiquity,  and,  accepting  the  statement  in
Caesar’s  writings  as  an  expression  of  a general
belief,  Mr.  Kendrick  finds  it  “ difficult  to  resist  the
conclusion  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  La  Tene
period  (the  Iron  Age)  at  the  time  of  the  first  Keltic
traffic  with  England,  there  existed  in  our  country
some  novel  religious  element  that  after  the  Keltic
invasion  was  grafted  upon  Keltic  faith  and  spread
throughout  Gaul,  giving  rise  to  what  thenceforward
was  termed  Druidism.”

But  what  was  the  specifically  British  element  in
Druidism  ? he  asks.  Was  it  the  priesthood  itself,  or
the  Druidic  theology  or  dogma?  It  does  not  seem
likely  to  have  been  the  first,  in  view  of  the  complete
subjugation  of  the  conquering  Kelts  by  a defeated
caste  which  it  implies.  Nor  were  the  Roman
invaders  particularly  impressed  by  the  Druid
hegemony  in  Britain,  to  which  they  vouchsafe  only
passing  mention.

But  certain  of  the  Keltic  tribes  and  confederates
did  not  have  Druids,  who  seem  to  have  been  confined
to  Gaul  and  Britain.  The  original  Keltic  province
lying  between  Switzerland  and  Hungary  where  the
La  Tene  iron  culture  arose  was  certainly  not
peopled  by  a homogeneous  race,  if  it  enjoyed  a
common  culture  and  language,  and  when  at  last  it
broke  up  in  emigration  its  different  elements  were
unlikely  to  retain  the  self-same  religious  ideas.  For
this  and  other  reasons,  Mr.  Kendrick  believes
Druidism  in  Gaul  to  have  been  of  Keltic  origin,  and
he  can  find  nothing  in  its  beliefs  “ that  was  not  also
known  to  one  or  other  of  the  indogermanic  peoples.* *
He  admits  that  there  is  not  “ much  encouragement
for  inquiry  on  these  lines,’*  however,  and  “ that  the


Introductory  39

time  has  come  to  attempt  another  method  of
approach.”

This,  Mr.  Kendrick  also  admits,  is  “merely  a
hypothetical  reconstruction  of  events,”  Summarized,
it  amounts  to  this  : Gaul  and  Britain  during  the
Bronze  Age  had  achieved  a general  cultural  unity
and  enjoyed  intimate  trade  relations.  This  implies
a certain  religious  unity.  Two  distinct  provinces  of
culture  in  this  area  can  be  distinguished — one
Western  Gaul,  Ireland,  and  Western  and  South-
Western  England,  the  other  and  more  important,
Northern  Gaul  and  South-Eastern  and  Eastern
England.  The  common  religious  bond  joining  all
must  have  been  of  high  antiquity,  as  a homogeneous
flint  culture  had  prevailed  over  the  entire  area  for
thousands  of  years.

But  at  the  beginning  of  the  Iron  Age  Britain
became  relatively  more  secluded  because  of  the
new  Ligurian  and  East  Germanic  influences  which
were  changing  Continental  civilization,  and  had,
therefore,  better  opportunities  for  preserving  its
ancient  religion  in  a pure  form.  This  gave  it  a
“religious  distinction”  on  the  Continent,  and  “native
enterprise”  may  have  done  the  rest.  At  this
juncture  the  Kelts  arrived  in  Eastern  and  North-
Eastern  Gaul,  developing  their  special  iron  culture
of  the  La  Tene  type  in  the  Marne  area.  It  has  been
shown  that  Stone  Age  artistic  traditions  in  this  very
area  were  preserved  until  Roman  times,  and  there
seems  to  be  “an  equal  probability  of  the  persistence
of  native  religious  tradition.”  The  Keltic  invaders
adopted  the  native  faith  of  the  land.  Then  came
the  Keltic  invasion  of  Britain.  But  it  was  an
invasion  of  Kelts  whose  minds  had  already  been
sophisticated  by  the  prehistoric  religious  ideas  of  the
Marne  area.  In  Britain  they  encounter  the  same


40  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
faith  in  its  pristine  purity,  and  would,  therefore,
have  no  difficulty  in  its  adoption .

At  the  period  of  the  concentration  of  the  Kelts  in
their  ancient  home  in  the  Alpine  lands  and  in  Central
Europe  they  had  not  yet  organized  a priestly  class  of
their  own,  but  when  they  did  so  at  last,  they  did  so
in  Gaul,  Mr.  Kendrick  believes,  at  some  time  in  the
fourth  or  third  century  b.c.  Thus  the  origin  of
Druids  and  of  Druidism  are  different  events  due  to
different  causes.  Druidism  in  Gaul,  for  Mr.
Kendrick,  is  Keltic  religion  after  amalgamation  with
the  native  faith  it  found  in  Gaul  on  its  settlement
there.  Druidism  in  Britain  is  the  inclusion  in  the
Kelticized  faith  of  the  ancient  native  British  religion,
which  in  itself  was  a purer  form  of  the  Continental
native  element  in  Druidism.

But  while  Druidism  in  Gaul  was  governed  by  a
priestly  caste,  it  seems  to  have  been  in  Britain  still
under  the  sway  of  kings  and  chiefs  rather  than  a
priesthood.  At  the  time  of  the  Keltic  invasion  of
our  island  the  Continental  Kelts  of  Gaul  had  not  yet
developed  the  system.  Those  who  called  themselves
“Druids,**  when  at  last  the  word  was  introduced,
“ were  only  the  magicians  and  soothsayers  of  a
fugitive  and  desperate  people**  shattered  by  the
Belgic  occupation  and  the  coming  of  the  Romans.
In  view  of  evidence  to  the  contrary  it  is  difficult  to
agree  with  Mr.  Kendrick  on  this  head,  and  his
attitude  regarding  it  appears  to  me  rather  deliberately
wayward,  as  I hope  to  be  able  to  show,  although  he
seems  more  favourably  disposed  to  the  theory  of  a
Druidic  official  priesthood  in  Ireland,  a “ faint
reflection  “ of  the  Gallic  system.

If  I have  paraphrased  Mr.  Kendrick’s  conclusions
at  some  length,  I have  done  so  because  they  agree
with  my  own  so  completely  that  on  perusing  his


Introductory  41

excellent  book  I recognized  not  only  the  almost  entire
identity  of  his  views  with  those  held  by  myself  for
many  years,  but  a treatment  of  the  subject  so
convincing,  yet  so  free  from  dogmatism  as  to  provide
a most  suitable  starting-point  for  such  an  inquiry  as
that  on  which  I have  embarked  in  this  volume.  Of
course,  Mr.  Kendrick  is  in  no  sense  responsible  for
the  superstructure  which  I hope  to  erect  on  the
bedrock  of  his  conclusions,  of  which  my  own,  prior
to  reading  his  work,  were  the  more  nebulous  and
shadowy  duplicates.  But  a few  of  his  minor  findings
appear  to  me  rather  unjustified,  and  in  this  prelimin-
ary examination  of  the  Druidic  question  I feel  I
should  advance  my  own  views  before  approaching
other  issues.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  a little  surprising  to  discover
that  Mr.  Kendrick  almost  entirely  ignores  the  subject
of  traditional  survivals  of  the  Druidic  faith.  In  view
of  the  extraordinary  degree  of  attention  which  has
been  paid  to  this  question  by  writers  on  Folklore,
both  accurate  and  the  reverse,  this  attitude  appears
to  me  somewhat  unaccountable,  but  as  it  is  obviously
Mr.  Kendrick’s  expressed  intention  to  employ  only
such  materials  as  might  justly  be  classed  as
“historical”,  and  as  the  whole  tenor  of  the  present
volume  is  in  consonance  with  tradition,  it  is
unnecessary  to  stress  the  point,  which  we  will  have
abundant  opportunity  of  returning  to.  But  the
almost  entire  neglect  of  the  traditional  aspect  of  his
subject  takes  a more  positive  form  when  he  gives  it
as  his  opinion  that  the  Saxon  invasion  blotted  out  all
memory  of  the  Druids  in  Britain,  and  that  the
recollection  of  them  was  only  recovered  by  later
scholarship.  The  truth  is  that  a hundred  customs,
chiefly  local,  scores  of  little  rites  and  festivals  survive
in  contradiction  of  this  assertion,  and  these  are  almost


42  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
as  numerous  in  allegedly  Saxon  England  as  in  Keltic
Scotland  and  Ireland.  All  the  same,  these  may  not
have  been  remembered  as  “Druidic.”  As  in  this
chapter  I am  dealing  with  generalities  alone,  I refrain
from  citing  instances,  and  leave  for  the  moment  the
question  of  < the  Druidic  nature  of  these  rites,  but  I
hope  to  adduce  testimony  that  not  only  did  a concrete
memory  of  Druidism  survive  the  Saxon  invasion,  but
that  a very  powerful  traditional  recollection  of  it  was
handed  down,  and  that  the  ripest  Keltic  scholarship
is  equal  to  the  refutation  of  the  theory  that  local
place-names  display  only  a fragmentary  reminiscence
of  it,  as  Mr/  Kendrick  believes.

The  argument  that  no  regular  and  official  caste  of
Druids  existed  in  Britain,  and  that  they  were  only
the  magi  and  sorcerers  of  “a  fugitive  and  desperate
people”  at  the  time  of  the  coming  of  the  Romans
seems  not  only  to  lack  cogency,  but  to  run  directly
counter  to  all  the  evidence.  The  very  circumstance
that  the  Gauls  sent  their  neophytes  to  our  island  for
instruction,  is  in  itself  almost  sufficient  to  refute  it.
To  whom  did  these  apply  for  instruction  in  the
priestly  art  and  function?  To  the  native  kings  and
chiefs,  whom,  Mr.  Kendrick  supposes,  took  the  place
in  Britain  of  the  official  priesthood  in  Gaul?  Not
only  is  this  highly  unlikely  on  the  face  of  it,  but  the
existence  of  a large  and  powerful  caste  of  Druids  in
Mona  or  Anglesea  refutes  it.  Tacitus  distinctly
alludes  to  Mona  as  the  last  refuge  of  Druidism  in
Britain  (“insulam  incolis  validam  et  perfugarum
receptaculum”),  and  this  accounts  for  the  absence  of
Druids  in  other  parts  of  what  is  now  England  at  a
certain  period.  And  I shall  only  remark  here  that
the  best  possible  evidence  exists  of  the  presence  in
Scotland  at  a much  later  date  of  a caste  of  Pictish
Druids  who  owed  nothing  to  Irish  culture,  and  who


r


Introductory  43

were,  indeed,  hostile  to  the  intervention  of  Irish
Christian  missionaries.  As  is  now  well  known,  the
Piets  were  a people  of  ancient  British  stock,  mingled
with  aborigines,  the  very  stock,  indeed,  among  which
Druidism,  or  at  least  its  aboriginal  phase,  was  most
likely  to  have  flourished  most  strongly  and  to  have
survived  longer  than  elsewhere,  on  Mr.  Kendrick’s
own  showing,  and  the  late  existence  of  Druidism  and
a Druidic  priesthood  in  Pictavia  is  beyond  dispute.

Not  only  is  this  the  case,  but  it  must  be  manifest
that  if  Caesar  does  not  allude  to  the  existence  of
Druids  in  South-Eastern  Britain,  that  he  does  not
do  so  for  political  reasons.  Students  from  Gaul  were
not  going  all  the  way-  to  Anglesea  for  their
instruction.  One  sometimes  sighs  for  a little
practical  commonsense  in  modern  archaeology,  and
it  is  badly  needed  here.  It  has  been  made  clear  by
M.  Camille  Jullian  that  the  Gaulish  Druids  took  a
leading  part  in  the  rebellion  of  Vercingetorix,  but
that  Cassar  ignored  the  circumstance,1  and  Professor
Haverfield  saw  in  this  studied  neglect  a desire  on
the  part  of  the  Roman  conqueror  not  to  intermeddle
with  a religious  caste.8  Mr.  T.  Rice  Holmes,
dealing  very  humanly  with  the  question,  suggests
that  “ Caesar  may  have  bought  over  the  Arch-
Druid  ”3  and  thus  have  considered  himself  compelled
to  secrecy.

However  this  may  have  been,  it  seems  incredible
that  no  Druid  caste  officiated  between  Druidic
Northern  Gaul  and  Druidic  Anglesea.  The
historical  memory  of  the  Druids  was  entirely  at  the
mercy  of  their  Roman  enemies,  and  Caesar,  if  reason-
ably just,  was  certainly  not  generously  disposed  to

1 Vercingetorix,  pp.  107-n,  1902.

3 Eng.  Hist.  Review,  18,  p.  336,  1903.

3 Ancient  Britain,  p.  298,  note.


44  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
his  foes.  I submit  that  this  is  a case  where  the
absence  of  records  is  more  eloquent  than  their
presence.  We  have  also  to  bear  in  mind  that  Caesar
had  only  a very  limited  knowledge  of  Britain,  and
that  he  expressly  states  that  only  the  south-eastern
coasts  were,  inhabited  by  the  non-Druidic  Belgae.
Mr.  T.  Rice  Holmes  reasonably  concludes  : “ It  was
British  Druidism  that  supported  and  renovated
the  Druidism  of  Gaul,  and  formed  one  of  the  bonds
of  union  between  the  two  Keltic  lands.”1  In  any
case  it  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose  that  Caesar
distinctly  states  that  Britain  was  the  Mecca  of  Druid
disciples,  and  that  Tacitus  makes  it  clear  that
Anglesea  was  an  important  Druid  centre.  The  two
facts  combined  suffice  to  demonstrate  that  Druidism,
so  far  from  languishing  in  Britain,  had  a powerful
hold  in  the  island.  It  remains  to  show  later  that
this  authority  and  tradition  was  not  destroyed  in
Roman  times,  but  was  retained  as  a secondary  and
secret  faith  in  many  parts  of  the  country  long
subsequent  to  the  introduction  of  Christianity,  and
that  it  contributed  largely  to  the  secret  arcane
tradition  of  the  island  of  Britain.

The  late  Sir  John  Rhys  was  originally  of  the
opinion  that  Druidism  reached  Gaul  ‘ ‘undoubtedly
through  the  Belgae,  who  had  settled  in  Britain”.
But  in  a later  publication  he  gave  it  as  his  opinion
that  other  people  of  Brythonic  stock  preceded  the
Belgae  in  our  island.  From  this  he  gathered  that
the  date  of  the  first  mention  of  Druidism  threw  no
light  on  its  place  of  origin.  He  also  believed  that
no  “Belgic  or  Brythonic  people  ever  had  Druids”,
but  received  the  belief  from  the  older  non- Keltic
inhabitants.

That  the  Druids  used  the  stone  circles  of  Britain

* Ancient  Britain,  p.  298.


Introductory  45

for  religious  purposes  is  denied  almost  by  the
collective  opinion  of  modern  archaeology.  Tradition
as  unanimously  credits  them  with  the  erection  of
most  of  our  rough  stone  monuments,  but  tradition,
according  to  the  modern  archaeologist,  is  “an  ass”!
1 he  writer  of  the  official  Government  guide  to
Stonehenge  dismisses  the  theory  in  a few  scathing
sentences,1  as  does  Mr.  T.  Rice  Holmes,  who  admits
that  “in  this  country  also  the  belief  has  long
been  growing  that  Druidism  was  of  non-Keltic
origin”.2  Yet  M.  Salomon  Reinach3  attributes
the  megalithic  monuments  of  Gaul  to  Druidic
influence.

The  truth  is  that  the  stone  monuments,  or  most  of
them,,  were  constructed  at  a period  so  relatively  early
that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  posit  very  much
concerning  the  religion  of  the  people  who  raised
them.  Mr.  Stevens  thinks  that  “it  would  not  be
inconsistent  with  existing  evidence  to  set  the  date  of
Stonehenge  roughly  at  from  1700-1800  years  b.c.”.
Now  this  is  precisely  the  period  at  which  the  men
from  Spain,  whose  culture  is  referable  much  farther
back  to  North-West  African  sources,  were  voyaging
to  Britain  and  seemingly  settling  there.  Whether
their  cult  was  “Druidism”  or  not,  it  certainly  had
m it  the  germs  of  that  Iberian  faith  from  which
Druidism  later  resulted,  so  that  if  Stonehenge  and
other  circles  of  the  kind  were  not  “built  by  the
Druids  , they  may  at  least  have  been  erected  by
proto- Druids,  as  I fully  believe  posterity  will
discover,  by  a people  who,  if  they  had  not  yet  finally
developed  the  faith  of  Druidism,  which  they  were
found  in  possession  of  in  Caesar’s  time,  nearly

1 H.  Sumner,  Stonehenge,  pp.  66  ff.

3 Ancient  Britain,  p.  115.

3 Revue  Celtique,  XIII,  p.  194,  1892,


46  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
seventeen  hundred  years  later,  were  at  least  develop-
ing its  tenets.

If  the  theory  I have  put  forward  in  this  book  is
worth  anything  at  all,  it  must  stand  or  fall  by  proof,
to  be  adduced  as  we  learn  more  of  our  megalithic
monuments,  that  the  development  of  Druidism  was
associated  with  them.  Druidism  was  a thing
“Iberian”  in  the  first  instance,  and  so  were  they.
Stonehenge  was  built  at  a period  when  the  bronze
culture  had  begun  to  overlap  that  of  polished  stone.
Mr.  Kendrick,  from  technical  considerations,
believes  it  to  have  been  erected  in  the  La  Tene
or  Iron  Age.  “If,”  he  says,  “ Stonehenge  was
not  a temple  of  Druidism,  then  it  must  have  been
a disused  ruin  in  the  La  Tene  period,  when  Druidism
was  the  religion  of  the  land.”  He  also  points  to
the  fact  that  a La  T ene  man  was  buried  within  its
area,  and  believes  that  the  “Kelticized  population
of  Wessex  took  advantage  of  the  ancient  national
sanctity  of  the  old  circle-site  on  Salisbury  Plain  to
construct  thereon  a temple  for  their  faith  that  should
serve  as  a rallying-point,  and,  more  than  that,  a
stimulus,  for  Druidism  after  the  failure  of  the  order
in  Gaul,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  ist  century  b.c.”
He  does  not,  however,  class  the  other  British
megalithic  structures  along  with  Stonehenge,  which
he  regards  as  relatively  “classical”  to  their  type,
and  sophisticated  by  Mediterranean  architectural
models.  But  he  wisely  concludes  that  the  true
temples  of  the  Druids  in  general  were  natural  groves,
except  when  the  gradual  influence  of  civilization
“prompted  them  to  translate  the  groves  into  build-
ings”, such  as  Stonehenge,  thus  wiping  out  the
possibility  of  the  megalithic  altars  and  rude  stone
circles  being  Druidic.  But,  as  I have  suggested,
they  may  have  been  proto-Druidic,


CHAPTER  II


THE  CULT  OF  THE  DEAD

In  our  search  for  the  origins  of  the  ancient  mysticism
of  Britain  we  are  almost  immediately  arrested  by  the
absorbing  question  of  Druidism,  which,  like  an
immense  forest,  seems  to  draw  all  paths  to  it.  As
I have  shown,  efforts  have  been  made  to  prove  that
Druidism  scarcely  flourished  with  such  vigour  in  our
island  as  in  Gaul,  and  that  in  any  case  the  Roman
occupation  speedily  stamped  it  out.  But  the
authorities  who  have  advanced  this  view  have
omitted  all  consideration  of  the  question  of  its
survivals,  those  festivals  and  popular  rites  which  can
indubitably  be  proved  to  have  been  derived  from  it,
and  which  not  only  illustrate  its  former  ascendancy
in  Britain,  but  its  age-long  presence  in  the  by-ways
of  popular  affection  for  centuries  after  the  Saxon
invasion  of  England.

As  I have  said  tentatively,  I believe  Druidism  to
have  arisen  out  of  a Cult  of  the  Dead  which  had
gradually  been  taking  form  during  the  long  centuries
of  the  Old  Stone  Age,  and  which,  in  the  New  Stone
Age,  had  in  a generalized  state  been  disseminated
east  and  west  from  some  point  in  North-West  Africa
to  Spain  on  the  one  hand  and  to  Egypt  on  the  other.
From  the  former  country  it  gradually  found  its  way,
both  directly  and  through  Gaul,  to  Britain.  At  the
commencement  of  the  Iron  Age  it  became  more
especially  segregated  in  this  island,  which  at  that
period  was  more  culturally  apart  from  the  Continent

47


48  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
than  during  the  Bronze  Age.  That  this  cult  took
on  the  colours  of  its  environment  in  both  Egypt  and
Britain  is  scarcely  to  be  wondered  at,  but  that  it
remained  a Cult  of  the  Dead  in  both  countries  there
is  evidence  irrefragable.

That  evidence,  in  the  case  of  Egyptian  religion,
is  so  generally  accepted  as  to  need  no  demonstration
here.  But  as  regards  its  application  to  the  early
British  faith,  proof  is  essential,  for  the  reason  that
so  far  it  has  not  been  tested  or  even  advanced
theoretically  in  any  but  a rather  perfunctory  way.
Let  us  see  then  what  evidence  exists  that  Druidism
was  actually  a branch  of  the  great  Iberian  or
Mediterranean  Cult  of  the  Dead.

“ The  Gauls,”  says  Caesar,1  “ state  that  they  are
all  descended  from  a common  father,  Dis,  and  say
that  this  is  the  tradition  of  the  Druids.”  Now  Dis
is  merely  the  Latin  form  of  Pluto  or  Hades,  god  of
the  dead,  lord  of  the  shadowy  region  of  the  departed.
To  him  is  ascribed  the  invention  of  honouring  the
dead  with  funeral  obsequies,  and  he  it  was  who  seized
upon  Proserpine  and  haled  her  off  to  his  gloomy
dwelling  beneath  the  earth.  Black  bulls  were  his
victims  in  sacrifice,  the  river  Styx  must  be  ferried
to  reach  his  realm.  According  to  Rhys,  he  is  the
Keltic  god  Llyr,  or  Bran.

“ With  grand  contempt  for  the  mortal  lot,”  says
Ammanus  Marcellinus,2  “ they  professed  the  immor-
tality of  the  soul.”  “ One  of  their  dogmas,”  writes
Pomponius  Mela,3  “has  come  to  common  know-
ledge, namely,  that  souls  are  eternal,  and  that  there
is  another  life  in  the  infernal  regions.  . . . And

it  is  for  this  reason,  too,  that  they  burn  or  bury  with
their  dead  things  appropriate  to  them  in  life,  and  that
in  times  past  they  even  used  to  defer  the  completion

» VI,  18,  i.  2 XV,  g,  4.  3 De  Situ  Orbis , III,  2,  18,  19.


The  Cult  of  the  Dead  49
of  business  and  the  payment  of  debts  until  their
arrival  in  another  world.  Indeed,  there  were  some
of  them  who  flung  themselves  willingly  on  the  funeral
piles  of  their  relatives  in  order  to  share  the  new  life
with  them.”

Valerius  Maximus,*  describing  the  Druids  of
southern  France,  says  : It  is  said  that  they  lend  to
each  other  sums  that  are  repayable  in  the  next
world,  so  firmly  are  they  convinced  that  the  souls
of  men  are  immortal.”

That  they  sacrificed  criminals  and  even  the
innocent  to  the  manes  of  the  dead  or  to  the  gods  of
the  dead  is  also  clear  enough  from  the  statements
of  Caesar , Dion  Cassius,  Tacitus,  Diodorus  Siculus,
and  other  classical  writers.  This  is  a practice  which
can  spring  only  from  one  idea,  that  of  placation  of
the  dead.  True,  it  is  occasionally  to  be  observed
as  an  offering  to  the  powers  of  growth,  a rite  of  the
resurrection  of  the  “dead”,  so  to  speak,  but  its  early
history  and  origin  undoubtedly  point  in  the  first
instance  to  a rite  intended  for  the  placation  of  the
deceased,  and  its  relics  are  to  be  found  in  ancient
Egypt  and  elsewhere.  Caesar2  informs  us  that  it  was
a custom  of  the  Gauls  to  immolate  the  favourite
animals  of  the  dead  man  on  the  funeral  pile,  and  he
adds  that  not  long  before  his  time  slaves  and
retainers  had  been  sacrificed.  “ Their  funerals,”  he
says,  “are  very  sumptuous  and  magnificent  in
proportion  to  their  quality.  Everything  that  the
deceased  person  set  the  greatest  value  on  is  cast  into
the  pile,  even  animals,  and  formerly  those  vassals
and  clients  whom  they  held  the  dearest  were  obliged
to  attend  them  to  the  other  world.”  They  also
believed  “ that  the  gods  are  never  appeased  but
by  the  death  of  one  man  for  another,  wherefore  they
* II,  6,  IO.  a VI,  19,  4,

D


50  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
have  public  offerings  of  the  kind  which  are  committed
to  the  care  of  the  Druids,  who  have  large,  hollow
images  bound  about  with  osiers,  into  which  they  put
men  alive,  and,  setting  fire  to  the  image,  suffocate
them.  They  believe  thieves,  outlaws,  and  other
offenders  to  be  the  most  grateful  offerings  to  the  gods,
but,  when  honesty  has  made  them  scarce,  the
innocent  are  forced  to  supply  their  places.”

That  the  Cult  of  the  Dead  was  well  developed
among  the  Kelts  there  are  many  other  evidences.
The  bards  sang  the  praises  of  departed  heroes,  and
the  tombs  of  some  of  these  were  regarded  as  sacred
places.  More  than  one  Irish  god  was  believed  to
have  his  dwelling  in  a burial  cairn.  In  some  cases
the  dead  were  interred  around  the  family  hearth,  the
spot  round  which  the  domestic  lares  or  ghosts  were
wont  to  congregate.  On  All  Souls’  Eve  the  Kelts
of  Brittany  are  still  accustomed  to  spread  a feast  for
the  hungry  dead,  as  did  the  Egyptians  periodically.
The  ram  and  the  serpent,  Keltic  symbols  of  the
Underworld,  are  discovered  as  figurines  among
Gaulish  grave-goods.

Canon  MacCulloch,  writing  on  the  Cult  of  the
Dead  in  his  compendious  work  The  Religion  of  the
Ancient  Celts , says  :

The  dead  were  also  fed  at  the  grave  or  in  the  house.
Thus  cups  were  placed  in  the  recess  of  a well  in  the
churchyard  of  Kilranelagh  by  those  interring  a child
under  five,  and  the  ghost  of  the  child  was  supposed  to
supply  the  other  spirits  with  water  from  these  cups.  In
Ireland,  after  a death,  food  is  placed  out  for  the  spirits,
or,  at  a burial,  nuts  are  placed  in  the  coffin.  In  some
parts  of  France  milk  is  poured  out  on  the  grave,  and  both
in  Brittany  and  in  Scotland  the  dead  are  supposed  to
partake  of  the  funeral  feast.  These  are  survivals  of
pagan  times,  and  correspond  to  the  rites  in  use  among
those  who  still  worship  ancestors.  In  Keltic  districts  a
cairn  or  a cross  is  placed  over  the  spot  where  a violent
or  accidental  death  has  occurred,  the  purpose  being  to


The  Cult  of  the  Dead  51

appease  the  ghost,  and  a stone  is  often  added  to  the

cairn  by  all  passers-by.1

The  practice  of  holding  funeral  games  was  also  a
Keltic  rite  associated  with  the  Cult  of  the  Dead,  and
recalls  the  Trojan  obsequies.  The  dead  were
commemorated  at  certain  of  the  festivals  of  fertility,
such  as  Luguasad  and  Samhain,  which  symbolized
the  birth  and  death  of  vegetation,  and  which  appear
to  have  arisen  out  of  the  notion  that  certain  slain
persons  represented  spirits  of  fertility.  “ The  time
of  earth’s  decay,”  says  Canon  MacCulloch,  ‘‘was
the  season  when  the  dead,  her  children,  would  be
commemorated.”2  Sir  James  Fraser  believes  that
the  feast  of  All  Saints  (November  ist)  was  intended
to  take  the  place  of  the  pagan  Cult  of  the  Dead.3

Now  this  form  of  the  Cult  of  the  Dead,  as  mani-
fested in  Druidism,  must  not  be  directly  identified
with  the  Pythagorean  doctrine  of  re-birth  or  metem-
psychosis,, according  to  which  the  soul  took  another
bodily  shape  after  death.  It  is  clear  that  in  Druidism
we  have  an  ancient  and  conservative  form  of  the  Cult
of  the  Dead  preserving  a more  early  phase  of  it  than
that  which  was  developed  in  Egypt.  Mr.  Kendrick
has  shown  that  although  Caesar  identified  the  belief
of  the  Druids  in  immortality  with  the  Pythagorean
doctrine,  and  was  followed  in  so  doing  by  Hippolytus,
Clement,  Valerius  Maximus ; and  others,  that  they
probably  knew  of  it  only  in  terms  of  Caesar’s  state-
ment, that  it  was  improbable  that  any  intercourse
took  place  between  Pythagoras  or  his  disciples  and
the  Kelts,  so  brief  was  the  vogue  of  his  doctrine  and
so  circumscribed  its  scope.  Again,  “The  recorded
instances  of  resemblances  between  the  Druidic  and
Pythagorean  systems  are  not  sufficiently  remarkable
to  justify  a claim  for  their  intimate  relationship  ; and

* p.  167.  a op.  cit.  pp.  169-170,  3 Adonis,  p.  253  ff.

49403


52  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
secondly,  in  each  case  the  growth  of  the  systems  can
be  explained  in  local  terms  without  recourse  to  such
distant  borrowings”.  He  observes,  too,  that  the
views  of  the  Gauls  on  the  question  of  the  soul’s
immortality,  quoted  above  from  Mela,  show  that  they
did  not  at  all  appreciate  or  profess  Pythagoras’s
teaching,  “according  to  which  such  continued  enjoy-
ment of  one’s  belongings  or  the  transaction  of
postponed  affairs  after  death  was  impossible.  They
could  not  have  believed,  it  is  clear,  in  an  instant
metempsychosis,  perhaps  into  animal  as  into  other
human  bodies,  but  rather  in  the  survival  of  the
identity  of  the  deceased  in  its  recognizable  form.”1

Mr.  Kendrick  then  proceeds  to  search  Keltic  litera-
ture for  instances  of  a belief  in  metempsychosis,  and
discovers  several  allegories,  which,  he  demonstrates,
although  occasionally  produced  to  assist  the  theory  of
transmigration,  are  scarcely  illustrative  of  the  belief.

But  a far  more  trustworthy  method  of  arriving  at
the  true  significance  of  the  Druidic  or  ancient  British
Cult  of  the  Dead,  with  its  belief  that  souls  might
return  to  the  body,  is  to  be  found  in  the  survival  of
an  idea  which  can  readily  enough  be  linked  with
ancient  Keltic  dogma.  The  Keltic  belief  in  a race
of  sidhe  or  fairies,  by  no  means  yet  abolished,  is  most
definitely  a relic  of  the  great  Cult  of  the  Dead  as  it
flourished  in  Druidic  times  and,  indeed,  supplies  all
the  evidence  required  that  Druidism  was  essentially
a mystery  associated  with  the  Otherworld  and  the
belief  in  a process  of  reincarnation — but  a reincarna-
tion taking  place  at  a period  sufficiently  removed  from
death  to  permit  of  a more  or  less  prolonged  existence
in  the  Otherworld.

Research  has  now  made  it  clear  that  the  Keltic
sidhe  or  “fairies”,  as  the  word  has  rather  loosely


The  Cult  of  the  Dead  53
been  translated,  are  nothing  more  or  less  than  the
spirits  of  the  dead.  As  the  fairies  of  later  folklore  they
are  also,  obviously  enough,  the  ghosts  of  the  departed.

That  in  many  countries  fairies  were  regarded  as
connected  with  the  dead  there  is  proof  pressed  down
and  running  over.  They  were  thought  of  as  dwelling
in  a dim,  subterranean  sphere,  in  sepulchral  barrows,
or  in  a far  paradise,  like  those  fays  encountered  by
Ogier  the  Dane  or  Thomas  the  Rymour.  The  Fairy
Queen  in  the  old  ballad  warns  Thomas  against  eating
the  apples  and  pears  which  hung  in  her  gardens,  for
to  partake  of  the  food  of  the  dead  is  to  know  no
return.  This  place  of  faery  seems  to  be  the  same
as  the  island  of  Avallon  (the  Place  of  Apples)  or  the
Keltic  Tir-nan-Og,  the  Land  of  Heart’s  Desire  and
renewed  youth.  A fairy  who  taught  sorcery  to  the
Scottish  witches  was  said  to  have  been  killed  at  the
battle  of  Pinkie  some  thirty  years  before.  I think,
too,  that  in  the  wearing  of  butterflies’  wings  by  the
fays  of  art  and  folk-tale  one  can  discern  a folk-
memory  of  that  Keltic  belief  that  butterflies  were  the
souls  of  the  dead.  Some  races  still  retain  the  belief
that  on  the  death  of  a person  his  soul  at  once  takes
up  its  abode  in  the  body  of  a new-born  child.  But  the
fairies  are  souls  waiting  their  turn  in  a dim  paradise
for  an  opportunity  to  recommence  the  earth-life.

The  belief  that  the  fays  were  a dwarfish  race
appears  to  have  been  a later  borrowing  from  the  idea
of  the  small  and  swarming  Teutonic  elves.  The  fays
of  Keltic  folklore  are  of  normal  human  height.  The
Irish  sidhe,  Morgan  le  Fay,  the  Welsh  Y Mamau,
or  “the  Mothers”,  are  all  of  mortal  bulk.  So  were
the  Breton  fays,  and  those  Scottish  fairies  who
carried  off  Tamlane  and  taught  witches  the  lore  of
the  sorcerer.  And  each  and  all  of  them  were  in  some
manner  associated  with  the  realm  of  the  departed.


54  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

The  belief  in  fairy  changelings  is  obviously  the
survival  of  an  idea  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  return
to  inhabit  the  bodies  of  mortal  children.  Faerie  is,
indeed,  like  the  Melanesian  mana,  a great  reservoir
of  soul-force,  to  which  the  human  spirit,  its  bodily
sheath  destroyed  or  outworn,  returns,  and  which  is
ever  ready  to  pour  out  its  psychic  energy  into  the
new-born  mortal  frame.

The  belief  in  the  sidhe  or  fairies,  the  dead  awaiting
a return  to  mortal  life,  was  essentially  a feature  of
Druidic  belief,  as  early  Irish  and  later  Welsh
literature  shows,  and  this  in  itself  suffices  to  demon-
strate that  Druidism  was  a Cult  of  the  Dead.  How
far  the  idea  of  the  sidhe  was  Keltic  and  how  far
aboriginal  or  Iberian  is  a problem  the  answer  to  which
is  not  far  to  seek,  for  we  find  the  sidhe  constantly
associated  with  burial  chambers  in  Ireland  and  Scot-
land which  were  originally  of  Iberian  or  “aboriginal”
origin.  That  they  were  accepted  and  used  as  Keltic
and  Druidic  burial-places  is  certain  enough,  indeed
they  were  probably  employed  in  many  cases  as  graves
by  successive  generations  in  Ireland  and  Britain  for
centuries,  as  excavation  has  abundantly  proved.

But  if  Druidism  was,  like  the  religion  of  Egypt,
a Cult  of  the  Dead,  it  was  so  with  a difference.  That
cult  was  of  early  and  rapid  development  in  Egypt
owing  chiefly  to  its  exceptionally  hot  and  dry  climate,
which  seems  to  have  suggested  and  even  naturally
favoured  the  process  of  mummification.  In  Britain
the  Cult  of  the  Dead  passed  through  the  same  early
phases  as  in  Egypt,  that  is,  coloration  of  the  bones
with  red  pigment,  probable  wrapping  in  skins,  and
cairn-burial  accompanied  by  grave-goods.  Here  and
there  too,  large  monolithic  temples,  somewhat
resembling  the  grove-like  pillared  structures  of
Egypt,  arose  in  association  with  it.


The  Cult  of  the  Dead  55
But  when  the  Kelts  entered  Britain,  bringing  with
them  the  La  Tene  iron  culture,  they  appear  to  have
introduced  a form  of  thought  somewhat  opposed  to
the  ancient  Iberian  or  Mediterranean  belief  in  the
necessity  for  preserving  the  relics  of  the  dead.  There
seems  to  have  been  a clash  of  ideas  between  the
Keltic  conquerors  and  the  Iberian  inhabitants  which,
in  the  event,  resulted  in  a confusion  of  ideas,  the
acceptance  on  either  side  of  a part  of  the  religious
beliefs  of  the  other.  The  Kelts  seem  at  first  to  have
feared  or  disliked  the  Cult  of  the  Dead  as  they  found
it  in  Gaul  and  Britain.  Instead  of  regarding  life  as
a mere  ante-chamber  of  death,  a preparation  for  the
hereafter,  as  did  the  Iberians  of  Egypt  and  Britain,
they  rather  considered  it  as  one  of  the  main  objects
of  religion  to  preserve  life  in  the  fleshly  body,  and
to  keep  the  world  of  spirits  at  bay  by  placation  and
other  means,  as  many  other  primitive  people  have
done  and  still  do.  This  explains  their  partiality  for
the  mistletoe,  the  plant  and  emblem  of  life,  the  divine
life-substance  or  protoplasm,  their  aversion  from
thieves,  highwaymen,  and  murderers,  whom  they
burned  in  the  sacred  fires  along  with  the  beasts  of
prey  which  depleted  their  flocks  and  herds.  In  short,
any  agency  destructive  of  life  or  sustenance  they
waged  relentless  war  upon,  and  this  outlook  is  still,
and  always  has  been,  typical  of  British  popular
philosophy  and  folk-sentiment.  The  Kelt  was
terrified  of  the  sidhe  or  fairies,  the  spirits  of  the  dead,
to  whom  the  Egyptians  and  Babylonians  paid  such
meticulous  reverence.  The  Oriental  has  always  been
comparatively  indifferent  to  or  acquiescent  in  the  idea
of  death  ; ‘ the  Westerner  has  almost  from  the  first
dreaded  and  disliked  it ; and  in  this  difference  of
attitude  we  shall  probably  find  grounds  for  much  of
the  objection  to  early  British  survivals  in  later  times.


56  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

But  the  Kelts  could  not  altogether  overcome  the
Iberian  predilection  for  the  worship  of  the  departed,
and  had  necessarily  to  compound  with  it.  This
explains,  for  example,  their  doctrine  that  money  lent
during  life  might  be  repaid  in  the  Otherworld.  Time
and  again  yve  find  the  Cult  of  the  Dead  breaking
through  the  structure  of  Druidism  or  Iberian- Keltic
religion,  merging  with  it  at  last  in  a complete  pattern
to  compose  a very  special  type  of  British  Mysticism.

If  these  conclusions  be  granted,  we  are  now
enabled  to  take  a clearer  view  of  Druidism  and  to
correct,  in  virtue  of  the  light  thus  vouchsafed  us,
older  theories  concerning  its  tenets  and  practice.
They  may  also  assist  us  in  allotting  to  folk-beliefs
of  later  times,  traditional  festivals  and  the  like,  a
Druidical  significance  so  far  as  their  manifestations
square  with  the  known  facts.

All  the  evidence,  classical  and  otherwise,  goes  to
show  that  the  Druids  were  a well-defined,  priestly
class  with  sub-divisions  having  different  functions,
religious,  oracular,  magical,  administrative,  and
bardic.  Diodorus,  Strabo,  and  Timagenes,  Cicero
and  Tacitus,  allude  to  these  classes  separately  or
generally.  The  Irish  evidence  substantiates  their
existence.  The  Gaulish  Druids,  prophets,  and  bards
are  reflected  in  the  Irish  Druids,  Fathi  or  Vates,  and
Filid  or  poets.  In  Wales  both  Druids  and  bards
are  found,  and  long  after  Druidism  had  outwardly
vanished  in  the  Principality  the  derwydd-vard,  or
Druid-bard,  survived  as  a repository  of  Druid
philosophy  and  belief.  That  both  sections  of  the
Keltic  race,  Goidelic  and  Brythonic,  were  under  the
sway  of  the  Druids  is  abundantly  clear.  That  Keltic
religion  and  Druidism  are  interchangeable  terms  is
also  indubitable.  That  is  as  much  as  to  say  that  it
was  not  the  mere  addition  of  something  Iberian  and


The  Cult  of  the  Dead  57
aboriginal  as  an  annexe  to  Keltic  faith,  but  a long-
continued  and  well-developed  fusion  of  early  Keltic
belief  with  Iberian  belief,  welded  as  to  its  parts,  as
the  Kelt-Iberian  race  had  been  welded  in  Spain  and
Southern  Gaul,  and  thus  the  psychological  con-
comitant of  the  physical  and  racial  admixture.  The
same  process  took  place  in  Britain  as  on  the
Continent,  the  Iberian  and  Keltic  races  fusing  in
these  islands  in  the  same  manner,  and  producing  a
like  religious  result.  Only,  by  virtue  of  segregation
from  the  Continent,  Druidism  in  Britain  seems  to
have  taken  on  a special  and  insular  colouring,  and  to
have  survived  for  a considerably  longer  period  in  the
more  outlying  parts  of  the  British  archipelago.

Those  who  exalt  the  knowledge  and  philosophy
of  the  Druids  to  supreme  heights  of  magical  and
mystical  ascendancy  are  obviously  as  mistaken  as
the  opposing  school  who  wish  to  reduce  their  status
to  that  of  mere  witch-doctors.  The  probability  is
that  they  were  at  least  the  equals  in  scientific  ability
and  general  scholarship  with  the  Egyptian  priest-
hood of  the  closing  centuries  of  the  last  pre-Christian
millennium,  Pomponius  Mela  refers  to  them  as
“teachers  of  wisdom”,  and  as  professing  a know-
ledge of  the  size  and  shape  of  the  world,  and  the
movements  of  the  heavens  and  stars.  They  were,
he  says,  the  instructors  of  the  Gallic  nobles.

Caesar  alludes  to  the  Druids  as  teachers  held  in
great  honour,  learning  a great  number  of  verses  by
rote  as  part  of  their  mystery,  making  use  of  Greek
letters,  and  versed  in  astronomical  science.
Diviciacus,  the  ^Eduan  Druid,  is  quoted  by  Cicero
as  having  “that  knowledge  of  Nature  which  the
Greeks  call  physiologia”.  Says  Mr.  Kendrick  :

This,  in  conjunction  with  Caesar’s  testimony,  throws  a

flood  of  light  on  the  conditions  of  service  in  the  priest-


58  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

hood  during  the  first  century  before  Christ,  and  at  once
disposes  of  the  quite  natural  idea  that  all  its  members
were  secluded  and  mysterious  ancients,  holding  aloof
from  the  common  world  in  a gloomy  atmosphere  of
esoteric  ritual  and  priestly  taboos.  For  Divitiacus  was
a man  of  affairs,  acknowledged  ruler  of  the  yEdui,  and  a
politician  and  diplomatist  of  established  reputation
throughout  the  whole  of  Gaul.1

Diodorus  Siculus  describes  the  Druids  as
“philosophers  and  theologians”,  and  Ammianus
Marcellinus  tells  us  that  they  were  “uplifted  by
searchings  into  secret  and  sublime  things”.  Dion
Chrysostom  says  that  “they  concern  themselves  with
divination  and  all  branches  of  wisdom”.

Now  I submit  that  all  this  goes  to  show  that  if  the
Druids  were  not  the  possessors  of  a vast  corpus  of
native  learning,  they  were  at  the  least  far  removed
from  the  status  of  mere  medicine-men,  which  some
obviously  rather  cynical  authorities  profess  to  believe
they  occupied.  The  very  fact  that  they  employed
written  characters  disposes  of  the  charge,  for  it  is
known  that  they  possessed  a system  of  writing  peculiar
to  themselves.  This  is  the  alphabet  known  as  Ogham,
so  called  after  Ogmios,  the  Keltic  god  of  learning
and  eloquence,  a method  of  writing  which  seems  to
have  been  confined  entirely  within  the  four  seas  of
Britain.  Inscriptions  carved  in  its  characters  have
been  discovered  on  rough  stone  monuments,  crom-
lechs, and  other  stones,  as  well  as  on  fragments  of
wood,  in  Cornwall,  South  Wales,  the  North  and
West  of  Scotland,  and  in  Ireland.  Antiquarians
have  been  familiar  with  the  key  to  these  symbols  for
upwards  of  a century  (indeed,  in  some  quarters  it  was
never  lost),  and  it  was  readily  found  that  the  language
which  they  embodied  was  the  Old  Keltic,  the  fore-
runner of  the  tongue  now  known  as  Q-Keltic  or  Gaelic.
Its  characters  are  of  the  very  simplest  and  most
* op.  cit.  p.  80,


The  Cult  of  the  Dead  59
primitive  form.  Indeed,  it  would  be  extremely
difficult  to  point  to  a script  more  artless  or  more
practical  in  its  design  and  ease  of  employment.  It
consists  of  a series  of  strokes  written  or  carved  on
either  side,  or  both,  of  a dividing  line.  Thus  for  the
vowels  the  letter  A is  merely  a single  straight  stroke
meeting  the  line  at  right-angles.  O consists  of  two
similar  strokes,  U of  three,  E of  four,  and  I' of  five.

H is  a straight  stroke  beneath  the  line,  and  D,
T,  C,  and  Q or  K are  represented  by  from  two
to  five  strokes  of  the  same  kind.  B,  L,  W,  S,  and
N are  indicated  by  from  one  to  five  strokes  above
the  line,  whilst  M,  G,  NG,  F,  and  R are  slanting
strokes  crossing  the  line  from  right  to  left.  The
system  can  be  mastered,  so  far  as  its  alphabetics  are
concerned,  in  less  than  a quarter  of  an  hour,  and
bears  a close  resemblance  to  the  elementary  exercises
in  Pitman’s  shorthand.

Another  variety  is  known  as  Virgular  Ogham,  in
which  the  strokes  are  indicated  by  a series  of  arrow-
heads. In  this  system  none  of  the  strokes  intersect
the  medial  line.  This  line  frequently  consisted
merely  of  the  edge  or  corner  of  the  stone  or  stick
on  which  the  inscription  was  carved;  that  is,  the
letters  were  carved  on  two  faces  of  the  stone,  the
edge  acting  as  the  dividing  line.  The  majority  of
inscriptions  in  Ogham  appear  to  date  from  the  early
pre-Christian  centuries,  and  that  it  was  a script  in
use  among  the  Druids  in  Ireland,  Cornwall,  and
Scotland  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt.

But,  besides  the  Ogham,  the  Druids  of  Britain
made  use  of  an  even  more  interesting  and  certainly
more  involved  system  of  writing.  This,  called  by
a British  name,  Bobileth,  which  may  be  translated
‘Tree-writing”,  consisted  of  thirty-four  characters,
and  in  Old  Keltic,  or  Gaelic,  was  known  as


60  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
Bethluisnion,  from  the  names  of  the  first  three  letters,
“Beth”,  the  birch  tree,  “Luis”,  the  quicken,  and
“Nion”,  the  ash.  Of  this  alphabet  each  letter  was
named  after  a tree.  It  was  written  on  tree  bark,  or
on  smooth  tablets  of  birchwood  known  in  Erse  as
Taible  Fileadh,  or  “Poets’  Tablets”,  and  the
characters  themselves  were  described  as  “twigs”
and  “branch-letters”.  It  was  to  this  kind  of  writing
that  the  Welsh  bard  Taliesin  alluded  when  he  sang  :
“ I know  every  reed  or  twig  in  the  cavern  of  the
chief  diviner.”  The  Bobileth  script  could  be  used
symbolically  by  composing  a message  made  up  of  the
leaves  of  the  appropriate  trees  strung  on  a cord,  a
system  which  recalls  the  quipus  or  messages  of  the
ancient  Incan  Peruvians  made  of  knotted  strings.
Very  probably  this  was  the  original — or  at  least  one
of  the  earliest-— methods  of  communication  in  vogue
in  Britain  before  it  occurred  to  the  Druidic  inventors
that  to  write  the  hieroglyphs  or  pictures  of  the  trees
themselves  was  a much  more  simple  and  effective
process,  and  we  can  scarcely  doubt  that  from  some
such  mode  of  picture-writing  the  Bobileth  alphabet
was  later  developed  ; in  any  case  the  tree-names  of
the  alphabet  are  still  preserved  in  the  Keltic
languages  of  Britain.

Under  Roman  persecution  the  Druids  disappeared
— or  seemed  to  disappear.  Says  Strabo  : “ On
account  of  their  evil  sacrifices  the  Romans
endeavoured  to  destroy  all  the  superstition  of  the
Druids,  but  in  vain.”  The  Druids  were,  indeed,
the  protagonists  of  their  country’s  liberty,  the  patriots
of  an  island  Keltic  in  its  culture  and  sentiment,  and
still  preponderatingly  so,  whatever  may  be  said  or
written  to  the  contrary.  They  saw  their  beloved
isle  invaded,  torn,  and  despoiled  by  the  crudest  of
materialists,  by  men  whose  whole  desire  was  to  loot


The  Cult  of  the  Dead


61


it  of  its  treasure  of  gold  and  pearls,  as  they  them-
selves declared — first  by  Julius  Caesar,  the  decadent
of  Roman  society,  “ the  inevitable  co-respondent  in
every  fashionable  divorce  case”,  as  he  has  been
called,  then  by  Agricola,  the  sycophantic  servant  of
a wretched  tyrant.  Did  not  the  Druids  appreciate
and  rightly  gauge  the  character  of  their  enemies  ? •
In  view  of  the  known  culture  of  Britain,  its  beautiful
craftsmanship  and  work  in  enamelling,  jewellery,  and
coinage,  the  eloquence  of  its  priesthood,  the  skill  of
its  mariners,  whose  vessels  were  of  a tonnage  and
sailing  capacity  immeasurably  superior  to  the  rather
primitive  galleys  of  the  Romans,  the  assumption  that
our  ancestors  were  mere  barbarians  is  indeed  one  of
extraordinary  short-sightedness.

The  Druids  retreated  in  front  of  their  merciless
enemies  to  the  forests  and  fastnesses  of  our  island.1
But  on  the  retreat  of  the  Italian  conquerors  and  their
rather  pitiful  native  auxiliaries,  they  returned,  as  the
Irish  version  of  Nennius  declares,  in  the  reign  of
Vortigern.2  A number  of  them  had  revolted  against
Rome  after  the  death  of  Nero  in  the  year  a.d.  68,
which  in  itself  is  the  best  of  proof  that  more  than  a
century  after  the  first  Roman  invasion  of  our  island
the  order  had  not  been  effaced.  In  a.d.  70  a diet
of  them  gathered  and  prophesied  the  world-empire
of  the  Kelts.3  Ausonius  mentions  that  even  in  the
fourth  century  men  in  Gaul  were  wont  to  boast  of
their  Druidic  descent/  And  if  the  tradition  flourished
so  long  in  Gaul,  how  much  more  must  it  have  done
so  ^ in  the  remote  and  un- Romanized  portions  of
Britain,  in  Wales,  Scotland,  and  Ireland  ? In  the  sixth
century  the  Druids  opposed  Columba  in  Scotland
as  in  Ireland  they  had  opposed  St.  Patrick,  pitting
their  magic  against  that  of  the  Christian  missionaries.


■ D’Arbois,  Les  Druides,  p.  73.

2 P*  238 » and  Hist,  Britonum,  p.  40.


3 Tacitus,  IV,  54,  4.

4 V,  12;  XI,  17


62  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

I believe  that  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  Druids
flourished  for  centuries  as  a cultus  under  the  name
of  Culdees.  The  Culdees  are  generally  supposed  to
have  been  a caste  of  Christian  priests  or  monks  of
early  British  origin,  unfriendly  to  Roman  authority
and  discipline.  But  there  are  many  circumstances
connected  with  them  which  seem  to  show  that,  if
they  practised  a species  of  Christianity,  their  doctrine
still  retained  a large  measure  of  the  Druidic
philosophy,  and  that,  indeed,  they  were  the  direct
descendants  of  the  Druidic  caste.

We  find  the  Culdees,  previously  to  the  arrival  of
Augustine  in  597,  in  various  parts  of  England,
Scotland,  and  Ireland,  and  they  must  have  differed
in  their  views  very  considerably  from  the  Roman
priesthood,  else  they  would  not  have  been  persecuted
by  them,  as  Bede  avers.  They  married,  and  their
abbots  held  office  by  hereditary  right,  so  that  in
Armagh  fifteen  generations  held  the  episcopate
successively.  They  dwelt  in  colleges,  practising
music  as  well  as  the  mechanical  arts.  They  cele-
brated Easter  at  a different  period  from  the  Roman
hierarchy,  holding  it  a month  before  the  Roman
festival.  They  shaved  the  head  in  a tonsure  from
their  foreheads  backward,  in  the  form  of  a crescent,
baptized  infants  by  immersion,  without  the  conse-
crated chrism,  were  opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  the
real  presence,  and  denied  the  worship  of  saints  and
angels.  They  condemned  the  mass,  paid  no  respect
to  holy  relics,  and  refused  to  offer  up  prayers  for  the
dead.  In  fact,  anything  less  resembling  Roman
practice  than  theirs  can  scarcely  be  imagined.  Many
early  Christian  writers  condemn  the  rudeness  of  their
forms  of  worship  and  the  unauthorized  character  of
their  ecclesiastical  government.  The  second  Council
of  Chalons  denounced  them  as  heretics  in  813,  and


The  Cult  of  the  Dead  63
the  fifth  canon  of  the  Council  of  Ceal-Hythe  decreed
in  816  that  they  were  not  to  be  permitted  to  function
as  priests  in  England.

At  St.  Andrew’s,  in  Fife,  the  Culdees  “continued
to  worship  in  a certain  corner  of  the  church  after
their  own  manner”,  says  the  registry  of  the  Priory
of  St.  Andrew’s,  “nor  could  this  evil  be  removed
till  the  time  of  Alexander  of  blessed  memory,  in
1124”,  so  that  Culdees  and  Roman  priests
performed  their  services  in  the  same  church  for
nearly  three  hundred  years  !

Now  it  is  only  in  such  districts  as  Druidism  is
known  to  have  lingered  in  for  generations  that
hereditary  priestly  descent  in  the  Christian  Church
has  been  observed.  In  Brittany  it  prevailed  until  it
was  abolished  by  Hildebert,  Archbishop  of  Tours,
in  1127.  At  the  end  of  that  century  Giraldus
Cambrensis  complains  of  it  as  a disgrace  to  Wales  that
sons  should  follow  their  fathers  in  the  priestly  office.

Moreover,  it  is  precisely  in  these  localities  where
. Druidism  had  been  most  strongly  entrenched  that  we
find  the  largest  Culdee  settlements.  At  Ripon  and
York  they  dwelt  and  flourished  in  the  time  of  Bede,
and  they  worshipped  at  the  Church  of  St.  Peter  in
the  latter  city  so  late  as  the  year  936.  Their  chief
seat  in  Scotland  was  the  island  of  Iona,  the  ancient
name  of  which  was  Inis  Druineach,  or  “the  island
of  the  Druids”.

With  the  monastery  of  St.  Columba  at  Iona  is
associated  a weird  legend  which  tells  how  the  saint
was  unable  to  found  a church  there  because  of  the
machinations  of  an  evil  spirit,  who  threw  down  the
walls  as  fast  as  they  were  built  until  a human  victim
was  sacrificed  and  buried  under  the  foundations.1
Very  probably  the  story  is  a survival  from  the
* Jamieson,  Hist,  of  the  Culdees , p.  ai.


64  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
Druidic  forerunners  of  Columba.  Under  each  of  the
twelve  pillars  of  one  of  the  circular  temples  of  Iona,
according  to  Higgins,  a human  body  was  found  to
have  been  buried.1  Jamieson  remarks  that  the
Culdees  succeeded  the  Druids  in  Iona  at  no  great
length  of  time.  When  Columba  came  to  Iona  he
was  opposed  by  one  Broichan,  a Druid,  and
Odonellus  relates  that  on  the  Saint’s  landing  in  the
island  he  was  met  by  Druids,  who  disguised  them-
selves in  the  habits  of  monks.  They  told  him  that
they  had,  come  there  to  preach  the  Gospel,  but  he
discovered  the  imposture,  and  they  resigned  the  field
to  him.2

All  this  tends  to  show  that  the  Culdees,  who  dwelt
on  Iona  and  professed  the  rule  of  Columba,  were
merely  Christianized  Druids,  mingling  with  their
faith  a large  element  of  the  ancient  Druidic  cultus.

The  account  of  the  coming  of  Columba  in
Adamnan’s  life  of  the  saint  reveals  very  clearly  that
he  himself  was  not  unacquainted  with  Druidic  lore.
Indeed,  he  opposed  the  Druids  with  arts  similar  to
their  own.  In  a striking  passage  Canon  MacCulloch
observes  :

Since  Christian  writers  firmly  believed  in  the  magical
powers  of  the  Druids,  aided,  however,  by  the  devil,  they
taught  that  Christian  saints  had  miraculously  overcome
them  with  their  own  weapons.  St.  Patrick  dispelled  snow-
storms and  darkness  raised  by  Druids,  or  destroyed
Druids  who  had  brought  down  fire  from  heaven.  Similar
deeds  are  attributed  to  St.  Columba  and  others.  The
moral  victory  of  the  Cross  was  later  regarded  also  as  a
magical  victory.  Hence  also  lives  of  Keltic  saints  are
full  of  miracles  which  are  simply  a reproduction  of
Druidic  magic — controlling  the  elements,  healing,  carry-
ing live  coals  without  hurt,  causing  confusion  by  their
curses,  producing  invisibility  or  shape-shifting,  making
the  ice-cold  waters  of  a river  hot  by  standing  in  them

1 G.  Higgins,  The  Celtic  Druids , p.  202.

2 Higgins,  p.  204;  Smith,  Life  of  Columba , p.  92.


fl

3

TfoiBSL

-J

3

3eith

X

L

LotK

a.

T>

"Luis

X

?

fWn.

H

Nulrv

*v

§

Salk

\

F

lea-tov

Ff

M

N«iga3<m

L

$

Sail

<?6

3

^atb'Woith

D

Dulr

T

Teilmou

T

T»t*ne

C

Ca9i

C

Coll

a

M

Moiria

M

Mu-in.

G

T>

Cat\

1

G

T

Gort

Vd&x

3

3

TM>e

7\)

U

3uiS

A

A Cab

\L4

A

Alllm

X

0

Osc

V)

0

Oh

T

u

Ufa.

Av

u

Ux

2

E

Esu.

Kb

E

Eacfka.

3=

T

JascKim

7

tr

tfodfia.

ist  Col.  : Bobileth  alphabet
2nd  Col.  : Beth-luis-nori  alphabet


{k ).  d.  t.  C.  yn.  ir  l.  ft,


-/  //  fff  /m  /////  , ||  hi  mi  mu

ft  -Kft  (j)  Jk.  XL.  0.  -O.

THK  OGHAM  ALPHABET


The  Cult  of  the  Dead  65

at  their  devotions,  or  walking  unscathed  through  the  >
fiercest  storms.  They  were  soon  regarded  as  more  expert
magicians  than  the  Druids  themselves.  They  may  have
laid  claim  to  magical  powers,  or  perhaps  they  used . a
natural  shrewdness  in  such  a way  as  to  suggest  magic.
But  all  their  power  they  ascribed  to  Christ.  “Christ  is
my  Druid” — the  true  miracle-worker,  said  St.  Columba.
Yet  they  were  imbued  with  the  superstitions  of  their  own
age.  Thus  St.  Columba  sent  a white  stone  to  King  Brude
at  Inverness  for  the  cure  of  his  Druid  Broichan,  who
drank  the  water  poured  over  it  and  was  healed.  Soon
similar  virtues  were  ascribed  to  the  relics  of  the  saints
themselves,  and  at  a later  time,  when  most  Scotsmen
ceased  to  believe  in  the  saints,  they  thought  that  the
ministers  of  the  kirk  had  powers  like  those  of  pagan
Druid  and  Catholic  saint'.  Ministers  were  levitated,  or
shone  with  a celestial  light,  or  had  clairvoyant  gifts,  or,
with  dire  results,  cursed  the  ungodly  or  the  benighted
prelatist.  They  prophesied,  used  trance-utterance,  and
exercised  gifts  of  healing.  Angels  ministered  to  them,
as  when  Samuel  Rutherford,  having  fallen  into  a well
when  a child,  was  pulled  out  by  an  angel.  The  sub-
stratum of  primitive  belief  survives  all  changes  of  creed,
and  the  folk  impartially  attributed  magical  powers  to
pagan  Druid,  Celtic  saints,  old  crones  and  witches,  and
Presbyterian  ministers.1

Still,  the  people  would  not  have  believed  these
things  possible  had  not  a large  leaven  of  the  old  belief
survived.  Indeed,  its  last  echoes  have  not  yet  died
away,  even  in  the  great  cities  of  Scotland,  much  less
in  the  Highlands  and  islands.

I think  I have  said  enough  to  prove  that  Druidism
had  not  died  out  in  Scotland  at  least  in  the  sixth
century,  and  that  is  all  I wish  to  do  at  the  moment.

I might  speak  of  Columba’s  magical  war  with  the
Druids  of  Inverness,  or  of  the  proof  that  Druids
survived  in  other  districts  of  the  North,  but  the  above
evidence  surely  suffices.

The  evidence  of  the  survival  of  a Druid  priesthood
in  Ireland  until  comparatively  late  times  is  sufficiently
plentiful.  In  Erin  they  were  not  only  the  companions

* op.  cit.  pp.  331-2.

B


66  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
but  the  tutors  of  the  native  kings  and  princes,  and
they  sat  in  judgement  in  criminal  cases,  as  did  the
filid,  their  descendants  and  successors.  That  they
had  written  records  we  know,  for  King  Loegaire
requested  that  the  books  of  Saint  Patrick  and  those
of  the  Druids  should  both  be  subjected  to  the  ordeal
by  water  to  prove  which  were  the  more  efficacious.
They  were  in  the  habit  of  baptizing  children,  and
of  one  hero  it  is  told  that  they  chanted  the  baptismal
rite  over  him  as  an  infant.  They  also  took  part  in
burial  rites,  and  presided  over  the  sacrifices  which
were  made  at  the  entombment.  They  practised  the
healing  art,  and  of  Cuchullin  it  was  said  that  had
Fergus  been  ill  * ‘he  would  have  taken  no  rest  till  he
had  found  a Druid  able  to  discover  the  cause  of  that
illness’* . They  are  spoken  of  as  wearing  cloaks  of
white,  and  in  some  cases  as  wearing  bulls’  hides,
presumably  after  sacrifice.  They  also  wore  a tonsure
which  seems  to  have  borne  some  relation  to  that  used
later  by  the  Culdees.  The  Irish  texts  appear  to  have
been  re-edited  with  special  relation  to  the  omission
of  all  material  relating  to  the  Druids,  but  in  most
accounts  of  the  salient  occurrences  in  Irish  history
they  are  referred  to  in  such  a manner  as  makes  it
impossible  to  doubt  their  great  influence  in  political
and  public  affairs.  The  Irish  deities  known  as  the
Tuatha  De  Danann  are  alluded  to  as  masters  of
Druidic  lore.  Female  Druids  functioned  as  priest-
esses or  guardians  of  the  sacred  fires  at  Kildare  and
elsewhere,  and  to  them  Christian  nuns  duly
succeeded.

In  the  Irish  popular  tales  and  sagas  Druidism  is
mentioned  so  frequently  as  to  prove  beyond  doubt
that  it  was  the  ancient  religion  of  Erin.  In  these
“Druidism”  stands  for  magic,  and  slat  na  draoichta
or  “the  rod  of  druidism”  for  the  magic  wand.  Of


The  Cult  of  the  Dead  67
their  feats  in  the  mysterious  arts  the  sagas  are
eloquent.  They  flooded  plains,  produced  blizzards
and  fiery  hail-storms,  overcast  mountains,  and  turned
stones  into  armed  men.  They  assumed  what  shapes
they  pleased,  or  made  others  assume  them.  They
could  cause  forgetfulness  by  a magic  draught,  and
seem  to  have  possessed  hypnotic  powers.  Their
training  included  memorizing  long  incantations  and
spells,  and  these  descended  to  the  filid , or  poets,  their
successors.  The  very  earliest  written  records  of
Ireland  refer  to  “the  Science  of  Goibniu”,  a master
of  Druidic  magic,  and  to  “the  healing  of  Diancecht”,
and  these  are  to  be  found  in  manuscripts  of  the  eighth
or  ninth  century  still  in  use  magically  in  Christian
times.

“ When  we  recall  the  fact,”  says  Mr.  Kendrick,

that  there  most  certainly  were  important  assemblies
held  in  Ireland,  taking  place  at  fixed  intervals  and
attended  by  delegates  from  distant  parts,  it  will  be
seen  that  we  cannot  fairly  assume  that  Irish  Druidism
lacked  that  co-ordination  of  its  members  such  as
obtained  in  Gaul.”  And  again  : “ It  is  significant
that  the  Druids  of  Ireland  were  servants  of  the
primitive  Keltic  festival-system  in  its  central
European  form.”

The  evidence  for  the  existence  of  Druidism  in
Wales  is  even  more  abundant,  and  exhibits  more
positive  proofs  of  the  continuance  of  the  cult  in  the
Principality  until  a relatively  late  date.  There  is
every  reason  to  believe  that  on  the  arrival  of  the
Saxons  and  the  consequent  withdrawal  of  the  Kelts
of  South  Britain  to  what  is  now  called  Wales,  whence
large  numbers  of  them  certainly  sought  refuge,  the
cult  of  Druidism  found  a haven  among  the  Welsh
mountains . I am  aware  that  several  writers  of
authority  have  questioned  both  the  emigration  and


68  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
the  religious  revival  which  accompanied  it,  but  they
have  done  so  not  on  acceptable  historical  evidence,
but  on  “reasonable”  grounds  alone.  However,  no
arguments  are  reasonable  which  do  not  rest  on  solid
proof,  and  these  certainly  do  not.

That  Druidism  did  not  die  out  in  Wales  after  the
Roman  period  is  clear  enough  , although  the  point  has
been  hotly  contested.  Not  only  do  the  Triads
conserve  notices  of  its  survival  until  at  least  the  sixth
century  of  our  era,  but  the  memorials  of  folklore
prove  it  to  have  lasted  much  longer  in  a more  or  less
corrupted  form.  Indeed,  the  Bards  of  Wales  pre-
tended to  a knowledge  of  the  mystical  lore  of  the
Druids.  The  bard  Gwalchmai  (n  50-1 190)  says,  in
his  elegy  on  the  death  of  Madog,  Prince  of  Powys  :
“ Would  to  God  the  day  of  doom  were  arrived,  since
Druids  are  come  bringing  the  news  of  woe.”

We  find  the  position  of  the  Bard  laid  down  clearly
enough  by  Cynddelw,  a contemporary  of  Gwalchmai,
in  his  panegyric  on  Owen  Gwynedd,  in  which  he
says  : “ Bards  are  constituted  the  judges  of  excel-
lence, and  bards  will  praise  thee,  even  Druids  of  the
circle,  of  four  dialects,  coming  from  the  four  regions.”
Elsewhere  in  a poem  recited  at  a poetic  contest,  he
speaks  of  “Druids  of  the  splendid  race,  wearers  of
the  gold  chains”,  as  if  they  were  still  existing.  In
another  poem  addressed  to  Owen  Cyveilcawg,  Prince
of  Powys,  he  makes  repeated  mention  of  the  Druids  :
“It  is  commanded  by  Druids  of  the  land  . . .
let  songs  be  prepared”,  and  in  his  elegy  on  the  death
of  Rhiryd,  he  calls  himself  “a  bard  of  Keridwen,
the  mystic  goddess”,  and  alludes  to  the  poems  of
Taliesin  as  follows  : “ From  the  mouth  of  Taliesin
is  the  Bardic  mystery,  concealed  by  the  Bards”.
Llywarch  ab  Llewelyn  (1160-1220)  also  alludes  to
“the  order  of  the  primitive  Bards”,  and  speaks  of


The  Cult  of  the  Dead  69
the  prophecies  of  the  Druids  as  if  they  were  his
contemporaries.  Philip  Brydydd,  president  of  the
Bards  (1200-1250),  alludes  to  the  Bardic  contests  and
to  aspirants  to  the  chair  he  holds,  saying  that  none
in  the  presence  of  the  grave  Druids  of  Britain  could
aspire  to  it  without  distinction  in  their  art ; thus  also
mentioning  the  Druids  as  his  contemporaries.

There  is,  indeed,  little  doubt  that  some  more  or
less  corrupted  survival  of  Druidism  was  known  in
Wales  even  so  late  as  the  thirteenth  century,  as  we
shall  see  in  the  ensuing  chapters.

Note  : Davies  in  his  Mythology  of  the  British
Druids1  rather  elaborately  outlines  the  evidence  for
the  existence  of  Druidism  in  North  Britain  in  the
sixth  century  a.d.  In  the  story  of  Coll,  “the  great
mystagogue’’  of  Cornwall,  he  says,  it  is  stated  that
this  magician  gave  to  Brynach,  prince  of  the
Northern  Gwyddelians  of  Strathclyde,  in  Scotland,
a present  of  the  Eaglet  which  was  deposited  by  the
mystical  sow  whose  symbolical  progeny  was  farrowed
nearly  over  the  entire  length  of  Britain.  The  young
of  this  eagle  were  the  “two  dusky  birds  of
Gwenddoleu,  prince  of  the  Strathclyde  Britons,  who
lived  about  593,  and  who  was  defeated  and  slain  by
the  Saxon  prince  of  Deira  and  Bernicia,  the  defeat
of  a Druidic  prince  and  mystic,  Davies  believed,  by
a Christian  Saxon  ruler.  Merlin,  he  states,  was  a
priest  of  Gwenddoleu,  as  is  mentioned  in  the  poem
called  Avallenau  , and  to  him  the  prince  presented
a hundred  and  forty-seven  apple  trees,  which  Davies
thought  were  the  mystical  letters  enshrining  the
secrets  of  Druidism.  Gwenddoleu,* * he  writes,

“ was  the  head  of  an  ancient  Druidical  establishment
in  North  Britain.’’

Continuing  his  description  of  Merlin,  he  writes  :


70  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

Merddin  is  styled  supreme  judge  of  the  North ; that  is,  of
the  regions  beyond  the  little  kingdom  of  Strath  Clwyd;
and  the  Syw,  or  diviner,  of  every  region  : and  in  virtue
of  this  office  he  was  Cerddglud  Clyd  LMant , president
of  Bardic  lore,  about  the  waters  of  Clyde.  He  was
companion  of  Canawon  Cyrdlaith,  the  offspring  of  the
goddess  of  slaughter,  whom  Aneurin  thus  commemo-
rates, in  the  songs  of  the  Gododin : “ If,  in  the  banquet
of  mead  and  wine,  the  Saxons  sacrificed  to  Slaughter,
the  mother  of  Spoliation ; the  energetic  Eidiol  also
honoured  her  before  the  mount,  in  the  presence  of  the
god  of  victory,  the  king  who  rises  in  light,  and  ascends
the  sky.”  And  this  connection  between  the  British
divinities  of  slaughter  and  victory  is  marked  in  the
character  of  Merddin,  or  Merlin,  who  is  styled : Allwedd
byddin  Budd  Ner — the  key  or  interpreter  of  the  army  of
the  god  of  -victory.

He  was  the  brother  of  Gwenddydd  Wen , Adlam
Cerddeu — the  fair  lady  of  the  day,  the  refuge  of  Bardic
lore — a mythological  character;  and  this  lady  addresses
the  venerable  priest  in  the  following  terms:  “Arise  from
thy  secret  place,  and  unfold  the  books  of  the  Awen  (Bardic
spirit) , the  object  of  general  dread,  and  the  speech  of
Bun  (Proserpine)  and  the  visions  of  sleep.”

These  are  some  of  the  qualifications  of  Merddin,  as
recorded  by  a Northern,  but  unknown  Bard,  who  wrote
in  his  name  and  character  about  the  year  948.  He  was
a supreme  judge,  a priest,  and  a prophet — and  he  was
conversant  in  the  mysteries  of  the  very  same  divinities,
Cynllaith,  Budd , Awen , and  Bun,  which  were  revered  at
the  great  temple  of  Stonehenge.

Stephens,  however,  in  his  Literature  of  the
Kymry1  does  not  believe  these  poems  to  be  earlier
than  the  reign  of  Owen  Gwynedd  (1160),  and  points
to  a circumstance  of  anachronism  in  that  the  poet  has
made  Merlin  a devout  Christian  ! It  is  difficult,
therefore,  to  regard  this  “evidence”  seriously,  and
it  is  only  given  here  for  the  sake  of  completeness.
At  the  same  time  it  is  certainly  partially  authenti-
cated by  other  more  trustworthy  MSS.,  and  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  Druidism  did  survive  in  the
Cymric  portion  of  Southern  Scotland  for  centuries.
* p.  233  ff.


CHAPTER  III


THE  MYSTERY  OF  KELTIC  PHILOSOPHY

The  mystery  of  Keltic  thought  has  been  the  despair
of  generations  of  philosophers  and  aesthetes.  The
debate  concerning  it  has  been  scarcely  less  amazing
in  its  vehemence  than  that  other  and  allied  contro-
versy on  the  origin  of  the  Keltic  race.  Renan  and
Arnold  manifestly  wrestled  with  it  much  in  the  same
primitive  manner  as  the  astrologers  of  Chaldea  strove
with  the  science  of  the  stars.  But  an  abyss  so
profound  is  scarcely  to  be  plumbed  by  the  discern-
ment of  the  polite  essayist,  or  measured  by  the  logical
processes  of  the  student  of  Comparative  Religion.
It  is  a task  for  the  prophet  or  the  seer,  for  a Blake
or  a Brahan  Seer.  To  the  man  who  has  no  magic
in  his  blood  the  cavern  of  Keltic  profundity  is  for  ever
sealed.  He  who  approaches  it  must,  I feel,  not
alone  be  of  the  ancient  stock  of  the  first  culture-
bringers  of  this  island,  but  he  must  also  have  heard
since  childhood  the  deep  and  repeated  call  of  ancestral
voices  urging  him  to  the  task  of  the  exploration  of
the  mysteries  of  his  people.

The  Kelts,  that  race  of  artists,  poets,  and  aristo-
crats, appear  originally  to  have  formed  themselves
into  a nation  in  the  region  betwixt  France  and
Hungary,  in  all  likelihood  in  the  South  German  plain
between  Switzerland  and  Bohemia,  and  probably
developed  slowly  as  a nation  from  a race  known  as
the  “Urn-Field  people”,  a Bronze  Age  folk.  In
the  course  of  generations  they  became  welded  into
n


72  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

a nation,  and  as  such  they  were  known  to  the
Greeks  at  least  500  years  before  our  era  their
country  being  spoken  of  by  Hellenic  writers  as
Keltica.  They  introduced  the  iron  civilization  of  La
Tene  into  Gaul  and  Britain,  and  in  doing  so  mingled
with  races  of  older  occupancy,  losing  some  of  their
racial  characteristics  in  the  process,  perhaps.  But
their  cultural  and  aesthetic  outlook,  their  peculiar
philosophy,  they  did  not  lose,  notwithstanding  that
this  must  have  been  powerfully  affected  by  the  beliefs
and  customs  of  the  peoples  with  whom  they  inter-
mixed, so  that  even  to-day,  although  the  name  Kelt
is  rather  confusedly  applied  to  mixed  races  of  almost
wholly  different  physical  appearance,  to  Welsh,  Irish,
Scots,  and  Bretons  alike,  there  still  remains  among
these  dissimilar  types  a mental  habitude  and  a
similarity  of  opinion  and  outlook  which  reveal  the
previous  existence  of  a common  philosophy  and  a
common  tradition.

The  Kelt,  tall  or  short,  long-  or  round-skulled,
dark,  fair  or  rufous,  is  nevertheless  scarcely  to  be
mistaken  so  far  as  his  mental  qualities  are  concerned.
He  was  labelled  by  the  older  School  of  Anthro-
pologists,  by  Broca,  and  others,  as  “sanguine-
bilious”,  and  one  can  see  no  good  reason  to  doubt
or  discard  the  psychological  diagnosis.  He  reveals
himself  normally  as  a man  frequently  gloomy  and
irritable,  prone  to  the  sudden  illumination  of
enthusiasm,  a man  of  prolonged  silences,  suddenly
garrulous,  dreamy,  but  passing  from  repose  to  violent
but  usually  short-lived  action.  Conservative  and
superstitious,  fatalist,  fearless,  he  is  all  these  things.
Yet  he  is  as  various  individually  as  the  men  of  other
races,  in  some  cases  highly  emotional,  in  others
strangely  passive.  In  all  probability  the  general  type
of  man  we  now  call  the  Kelt  displays  the  several


Mystery  of  Keltic  Philosophy  73
psychological  facets  of  the  various  races  with  whom
his  primal  stock  originally  mingled,  and,  according
to  the  law  of  miscegenation,  these  assume  a different
form  with  each  individual,  as  he  throws  back  to
Iberian,  Teutonic,  or  other  ancestors.  But,  despite
the  intermixture,  the  ancient  leaven  of  Kelticism
triumphs  and  the  peculiar  genius  of  the  ancient  race
—strong  because  so  ancient  and  so  perfectly  moulded
in  the  matrix  of  its  origin— shines  with  an  almost
superhuman  radiance  through  the  veils  of  alien
character  or  idiosyncracy  which  in  some  cases  even
seem  at  first  sight  to  have  obliterated  it.  One  must
often  wait  long  and  patiently  to  behold  the  illumina-
tion. But  some  day  under  stress  of  passion  or  triumph
or  sorrow  it  will  manifest  itself  in  such  a way  that  it
cannot  be  mistaken,  in  the  sad,  low,  characteristic
laugh,  the  gloomy  and  ominous  scowl,  in  a quick
exasperation  and  fierce  resentment  which  will  surprise
or  amuse  men  of  slower  blood,  or  in  the  proud  and
haughty  scorn  to  which  the  finer  and  more  purely-
bred  scions  of  this  race  of  Europe’s  aristocrats  are
so  disconcertingly  prone.

What  is  the  mystical  secret  of  the  Kelt,  poet,
prophet,  warrior,  aristocrat  among  aristocrats  ? It  is
the  memory,  the  soul-recollection  of  a former  moral
and  intellectual  pre-eminence  which  he  has  not  lost,
for  its  gifts  remain  within  him,  but  the  arcanum  of
which  he  cannot  discover.  He  is  like  a man  with  a
chest  of  treasure  who  has  lost  the  key.

In  this  repository  lie  the  Books  of  the  Secrets  of
Britain,  those  most  ancient  and  mysterious  volumes
containing  the  lore  of  the  civilizing  race  of  this  island
in  its  pristine  days.  The  secrets  it  holds  are  of
inestimable  spiritual  concern  and  importance  to  the
people  of  a land  still  overwhelmingly  Keltic  in
thought  and  character.  That  Britain,  to  which  the


74  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
whole  world  looks  for  guidance  in  science  and  political
thought,  which  governs  almost  one  quarter  of  the
globe,  which  has  achieved  triumphs  unparalleled  in
the  fields  of  scholarship,  invention,  and  government,
whose  light  burns  above  those  of  all  nations,  should
yet  not  be  enabled  to  boast  a native  mysticism  of  her
own,  but  be  compelled  to  borrow  from  Eastern
sources  to  supply  this  deficiency,  is  humiliating
indeed.  It  is  not  that  that  native  mystical  tradition
does  not  exist.  It  lies  almost  undisturbed  in  the
cavern  of  the  Keltic  past,  whence  it  is  still  possible  to
regain  it  for  the  behoof  of  our  race.

The  first  task  before  us  in  seeking  to  recover  the
secret  of  the  Keltic  Grail  is,  naturally,  to  review
briefly  the  material,  documentary  and  otherwise,
which  may  help  us  to  a just  understanding  of  the
mystical  literature  of  the  British  Kelt.  It  is  from
this  and  from  the  relics  of  early  British  faith  and
philosophy  as  evinced  in  popular  rites  of  immemorial
tradition  that  we  hope  to  glean  the  broken  sherds  of
the  vessel  of  British  native  mysticism,  and  to  piece
them  into  a recovered  and  restored  whole.

The  mystical  and  occult  literature  of  the  Brythonic
Kelts  of  South  Britain  is  partly  derived  from  the
collection  of  tales  known  as  the  Mabinogion ,
which,  though  existing  in  a MS.  of  the  fourteenth
century,  was  obviously  composed  at  a much  earlier
date,  as  its  mythological  character  proves.  The
Welsh  Triads  likewise  enshrine  similar  material,
dating,  probably,  from  the  twelfth  century,  but
embalming  mystical  lore  greatly  more  ancient.  The
so-called  Book  of  Taliesin , written,  or  more  probably
re-written,  at  some  time  during  the  fifteenth  century,  is
on  the  same  footing.  The  many  efforts  to  disprove  the
authentic  and  ancient  character  of  the  mythological
material  contained  in  these  MSS.  have  signally


Mystery  of  Keltic  Philosophy,  75
failed,  made  as  they  were  by  literary  persons  for  the
most  part  unacquainted  with  mythological  science.

The  question  of  the  survival  of  Druidical  know-
ledge in  the  bardic  poetry  of  Wales  is  one  which  has
been  debated  with  unusual  heat.  One  of  the  earliest
protagonists  of  the  theory  of  its  continuity  was  the
Rev.  Edward  Davies,  who,  in  his  Mythology  of  the
British  Druids,  uncompromisingly  and  whole-
heartedly addressed  himself  to  its  affirmation.  It  has
been  proved  amply  enough  by  Nash  and  others1  that
his  translations  of  the  ancient  Welsh  poems  were
somewhat  inexact  and  garbled,  and  that  his  mytho-
logical notions  of  the  existence  of  a “Helio-Arkite”
religion  in  Wales  until  a late  date  were  sufficiently
absurd.  But  as  the  “translations”  of  his  critics  were
equally  bad  and  their  views  equally  unsound,  allow-
ances must  be  made  for  him.  His  theories  were
further  elaborated  by  the  Hon.  Algernon  Herbert  in
his  anonymous  works.:  Britannia  after  the  Romans
(1836)  and  The  Neo-Druidic  Heresy  ( 1838),  in
which  he  gave  it  as  his  belief  that  the  adherence  to
the  old  paganism  of  the  Druids  had  caused  a schism
in  the  British  Church,  and  encouraged  the  mainten-
ance of  a Neo-Druidic  heresy  therein.

Their  opponents  indicated  not  only  that  the
majority  of  their  translations  were  inexact,  but  that
many  of  the  passages  believed  to  be  of  a mystical
or  mythological  nature  were  in  reality  of  Christian
origin.  But  in  doing  so,  they  went  too  far — as  far,
indeed,  as  Davies  and  Herbert  had  gone  in  the  other
direction.  The  truth  is  that  when  the  Welsh  poems
in  The  Book  of  Taliesin,  The  Red  Book  of  Hergest,
The  Black  Book  of  Caermarthen , and  in  the  tales
in  the  Mabinogion  are  sifted  and  examined
scientifically,  they  still  contain  a residuum  of  mystical
* See  his  Taliesin , 1858.


76  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
and  mythological  material  not  to  be  accounted  for  by
the  methods  of  their  critics.

These  were  not  practical  mythologists  or  mystics,
and  most  of  them  (Nash,  in  particular,  as  Skene  has
shown)  had  a very  short  way  of  dismissing  evidence
which  ran  counter  to  their  ideas.  They  stressed  the
notion  that  the  bards  of  Wales,  Taliesin,  Llywarch
Hen,  and  Aneurin  referred  to  the  deities  of  ancient
Britain  aesthetically,  as  might  the  Augustan  poets  to
the  gods  of  classical  mythology.  But  the  direct  and
personal  manner  in  which  the  allusions  are  often  made
renders  such  an  idea  quite  untenable.

Moreover,  as  will  be  shown,  there  is  nothing
inherently  impossible  in  the  idea  that  the  ancient
British  religion  and  mysticism  lingered  in  Wales  and
other  distant  parts  of  the  island  for  many  centuries
after  the  departure  of  the  Romans.  Those  who
adopt  the  negative  positive  have  to  explain  the
presence  of  hundreds  of  surviving  superstitions  in
Britain  at  the  present  time,  the  burning  of  a Welsh
Druidic  idol  along  with  its  priest  in  London  in  the
reign  of  Henry  VIII,  the  comparatively  recent
sacrifice  of  bulls  in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland  in
connection  with  primitive  rites,  the  existence  of  such
celebrations  as  the  worship  of  Shoney  in  the  North
of  Scotland,  and  many  other  similar  festivals  which
will  be  adduced  in  their  proper  place,  the  late
observance  of  witchcraft,  a broken-down  survival  of
Iberian- Keltic  religion,  and  a host  of  other  evidences.
They  have  also  to . account  satisfactorily  for  the
survival  of  antique  faiths  elsewhere  in  lands  where
paganism  has,  to  all  intents,  seemingly  been  rooted
out  for  centuries,  for  the  Nagualism  of  M exico  and
Central  America,  for  the  Antiche  Religione  or  the
worship  of  Diana  in  modern  Italy,  and  for  similar
beliefs  and, practices  in  the  Balkans  and  Russia,


Mystery  of  Keltic  Philosophy  77

This  is  not  the  place  for  a full-dress  discussion  on
the  authenticity  of  the  ancient  Welsh  literature  as  a
whole.  Yet  the  present  writer  cannot  but  subscribe
to  its  partial  witness  for  the  preservation  of  a very
considerable  body  of  authentic  British  lore  of  Druidic
and  Keltic  origin.  That  being  so,  he  will  endeavour
to  employ  only  such  evidences  of  it  as  appear  to  him
safe  and  reasonable  to  make  use  of,  and  will  do  so  with-
out further  apology  for  its  witness  unless  where  such
appears  essential  to  the  course  of  reasonable  proof.

Before  proceeding  to  examine  the  mystical  material
they  contain,  it  will  be  well  to  summarize  briefly  such
information  as  we  possess  regarding  the  principal
divinities  of  whom  these  tales  and  poems  recount  the
adventures.  Some  of  them  have  been  identified  with
the  gods  of  the  Gaels,  but  the  majority  of  them  have
a local  and  strictly  “Welsh”  character.  It  is  safe
to  say,  however,  that  they  are  of  both  Brythonic  and
Goidelic  origin , the  results  of  a mingling  of  beliefs  and
tales  common  to  both  branches  of  the  Keltic  family,
as  is  admitted  by  the  majority  of  standard  authorities.

The  first  group  to  attract  our  attention,  and
perhaps  the  most  outstanding,  is  that  of  Llyr,  as
alluded  to  in  the  Mabinogion.  Llyr  is  god  of  the
sea,  and  the  histories  of  his  sons  Bran  and
Manawydden,  his  daughter  Branwen,  and  the  half-
brothers  Nissyen  and  Evanissyen  are  recounted  in
the  stories  of  Branwen  and  Manawydden.  These
allude  to  the  invasion  of  Ireland,  to  whose  king
Branwen  had  been  married.  Manawydden  is  Lord
of  Elysium,  and  a craftsman  and  agriculturist.  Bran
is  chiefly  famous  as  the  possessor  of  a magical  head
which,  after  death,  prophesied  and  protected  the
island  of  Britain  from  invasion.  He  presided  over
poetry  and  bardic  music,  and  was  of  titan  mould.
He  seems  to  have  been  associated  with  the  world


78  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
o£  the  hereafter,  or  rather  the  underworld  of  fertility,
as  is  his  sister  Branwen,  as  her  possession  of  a magic
cauldron  reveals.

The  children  of  Don,  another  Brythonic  group,
are  Gwydion,  Gilvaethwy,  Amasthon,  Govannon,  and
Arianrhod,  with  her  sons  Dylan  and  Llew.  They
resemble  the  Irish  Tuatha  De  Danaan,  and  their
adventures  are  described  in  the  mabinogi  of  Math,
which  recounts  the  passion  of  Gilvaethwy  for  Math's
handmaiden  Goewin,  and  the  manner  in  which
Gwydion  procures  the  magical  swine  of  Pryderi,
which  had  been  gifted  him  by  Arawn  Lord  of  Annwn
or  Hades.  Math  is  obviously  a territorial  and
local  god  of  Gwynedd  in  Wales,  a magician  par
excellence , a “god  of  Druidism”.  Gwydion  is  the
patron  of  poetry,  divination,  and  prophecy,  the  ideal
bard,  as  well  as  a philosopher  and  culture-bringer.
Amasthon  is  a husbandman,  and  Govannon  a
“smith”  or  artificer,  a species  of  Keltic  Vulcan.
Arianrhod,  or  “Silver  Wheel”,  represented  the
constellation  Corona  Borealis,  but  is  also  associated
with  the  earth's  fertility.

Another  group  found  in  the  Mabinogion  is  that  of
Pwyll,  Prince  of  Dyved,  his  wife  Rhiannon,  and
their  son  Pryderi.  Pwyll  changes  places  for  a year
with  Arawn,  King  of  Annwn,  or  Hades,  and  makes
war  on  his  rival  Havgan.  Still  another  group  is  that
of  Beli  and  his  sons  Llud,  Caswallawn,  and  Llevelys.

In  The  Book  of  Taliesin  we  encounter  a group  still
more  important  from  the  mystical  point  of  view,  that
of  Keridwen,  her  hideous  son  Avagddu,  his  sister
Creirwy,  and  his  brother  Morvran.  So  that
Avagddu,  the  ugly,  may  be  compensated  by  the
possession  of  supernatural  knowledge,  Keridwen
prepares  a cauldron  of  inspiration  which  must  be
brewed  for  a year,  and  which  will  produce  three


[To  face  page  78


Mystery  of  Keltic  Philosophy  79
drops  of  divine  fluid.  She  sets  a servant,  Gwion,
to  watch  it,  and  the  three  drops  falling  on  his  finger,
he  conveys  it  to  his  mouth  and  becomes  inspired.
Keridwen,  in  her  anger,  pursues  him,  and  as  he
assumes  various  forms,  a hare,  a fish,  and  a grain
of  wheat,  in  his  flight,  she  takes  on  the  shape  of  a
greyhound,  an  otter,  and  at  last  a hen,  in  which  guise
she  swallows  the  grain,  later  bearing  Gwion  as  a
child,  whom  she  abandons  to  the  sea  in  a coracle.
As  we  shall  see,  this  myth  is  all-important  to  an
understanding  of  British  mystical  lore.  The  child
she  abandons  to  the  waves  becomes,  later,  Taliesin,
the  magical  bard.

The  Druidic  bards  who  lived  and  sang  under  the
Welsh  princes  unanimously  represent  Keridwen  as
presiding  over  the  hidden  mysteries  of  their  ancient
cult.  Cynddelw,  who  flourished  about  the  middle
of  the  twelfth  century,  sings:  “How  mysterious
were  the  ways  of  the  songs  of  Keridwen  ! How
necessary  to  understand  them  in  their  true  sense  V*
Llywarch  ap  Llywelyn,  who  wrote  between  1160
and  1220,  asks  for  “inspiration  as  if  it  were  from
the  Cauldron  of  Keridwen”,  and  says  that  he  will
address  his  lord  “with  the  dowry  of  Keridwen,  the
Ruler  of  Bardism”.  It  was  essential  for  those  bards
who  aspired  to  the  Chair  of  Song  to  have  tasted  the
waters  of  inspiration  from  her  cauldron,  to  have  been
initiated  into  her  mysteries.  That  the  myth  of
Keridwen  of  the  Lake  of  Tegid,  the  god  or  genius
of  which  was  the  husband  of  this  deity,  is  all-
important  in  our  quest  may  be  gathered  from  a
passage  in  The  Book  of  Taliesin.

Then  she  (Keridwen)  determined,  agreeably  to  the  mys-
tery  of  the  books  of  Pheryllt,  to  prepare  for  her  son  a
cauldron  of  water  of  inspiration  and  knowledge.  . . .

In  the  meantime  Keridwen,  with  due  attention  to  the
books  of  astronomy,  and  to  the  hours  of  the  planets,


80  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

employed  herself  daily  in  collecting  plants  of  every  species,
which  preserved  any  rare  virtues.  . . . She  stationed

Gwion  the  Little,  the  son  of  Gwreany  the  Herald  of
Llanvair,  in  Powys,  the  land  of  rest,  to  superintend  the
preparation  of  the  cauldron.

The  Pheryllt,  according  to  whose  ritual  she  pro-
ceeded, are  frequently  mentioned  by  the  bards  of
Wales,  and  an  old  chronicle,  quoted  by  Dr.  Thomas
Williams,  states  that  the  Pheryllt  had  a college  at
Oxford  prior  to  the  foundation  of  that  University.
These  Pheryllt  appear  to  have  been  a section  of  the
Druidic  brotherhood,  teachers  and  scientists,  skilled
in  all  that  required  the  agency  of  fire,  hence  the  name
has  frequently  been  translated  “alchemists*’  or
“metallurgists’*.  Indeed,  chemistry  and  metallurgy
are  known  as  Cehyddydan  Pheryllt,  or  “the  arts  of
the  Pheryllt’’,  who  would  seem  to  have  had  as  their
headquarters  the  city  of  Emrys  in  the  district  of
Snowdon,  famous  for  its  magical  associations,  the
city  of  the  dragons  of  Beli.1

Somewhere  in  the  district  of  Snowdon  lie  the
remains  of  this  ancient  British  city  of  Emrys,  or  “the
ambrosial  city”,  also  known  in  Welsh  tradition  as
the  city  of  Dinas  Affaraon,  or  “the  higher  powers’*.
To  this  mysterious  community  the  poems  of  the
Welsh  bards  allude  so  frequently  as  to  place  its  actual
existence  beyond  all  question.  Not  only  is  it  men-
tioned in  The  Black  Book  of  Caermarthen  and  other
Cymric  manuscripts  as  the  centre  of  mystical  rites,
but  it  is  alluded  to  by  one  of  Camden’s  commentators
as  occupying  the  summit  of  “the  panting  cliff’’  on
Snowdon  itself.  Davies  says  that  it  stood  “upon
the  road  from  the  promontory  of  Lleyn  to  that  part
of  the  coast  which  is  opposite  Mona’’  (Anglesey),
and  Gibson,  in  his  work  on  Camden,  identifies  it
with  the  ruins  of  an  exceedingly  strong  fortification
« Myvyrian  'Archaeology,  II,  p.  59.


Mystery  of  Keltic  Philosophy  81
encompassed  by  a triple  wall  on  an  eminence  called
Broich  y Ddinas,  “the  ridge  of  the  city”,  which
forms  part  of  the  summit  of  Penmaen.  Within  each
wall  the  foundation  of  at  least  a hundred  towers  of
about  six  yards’  diameter  remain,  and  the  defences
themselves  were  at  least  six  feet  in  thickness.  “ The
greatness  of  this  work,’’  he  says,  “ shows  that  it  was
a princely  fortification,  strengthened  by  Nature  and
workmanship,  seated  on  the  top  of  one  of  the  highest
mountains  of  that  part  of  Snowdon  which  lie  toward
the  sea.’’

In  Emrys  were  concealed  in  the  time  of  Bile  the
solar  deity,  and  in  the  time  of  Prydain  the  son  of
i®dd  the  Great,  the  dragons  which  are  so  frequently
referred  to  as  harnessed  to  the  car  of  Keridwen,  so
it  appears  not  improbable  that  the  city  was  in  some
manner  associated  with  her  mysteries.  Davies
believed  that  the  Pheryllt  were  priests  of  those
mysteries  in  the  ambrosial  city  of  Emrys.

Now  what,  precisely,  is  the  significance  of  the
goddess  Keridwen  and  her  mystical  cauldron  ?
Mythically  speaking,  the  vessel  in  question  was
designed  for  the  preparation  of  a brew  which  induced
inspiration  and  awoke  the  prophetic  and  bardic  facul-
ties. The  myth  is  obviously  an  allegory  of  initiation,
of  which  the  tasting  of  the  water  was  an  essential  rite.

In  the  poem  known  as  “The  Chair  of  Taliesin”
in  The  Book  of  Taliesin  (No.  XIII)  a number  of
ingredients  are  enumerated  which  went  to  compose
the  mystical  elixir  brewed  in  the  Cauldron  of
Keridwen,  the  Pair  Pumwydd,  the  “Cauldron  of  the
Five  Trees”,  so-called  in  allusion  to  the  five
particular  trees  or  plants  requisite  to  the  preparation.
Certain  Cymric  legends  represent  this  Pair  as  a bath,
the  water  of  which  conferred  immortality,  but
deprived  the  bather  of  utterance — an  allusion,


82  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
perhaps,  to  the  oath  of  secrecy  administered  prior  to
initiation.  Elsewhere  Taliesin  alludes  to  it  as  “the
Cauldron  of  the  ruler  of  the  deep”,  and  states  that
it  will  not  boil  the  food  of  him  who  is  not  bound  by
his  oath.

It  is  thus  clear  enough  that  the  Welsh  Bards  made
use  in  their  initiatory  rites  of  a decoction  of  plants
or  herbs  which  they  believed  could  bestow  certain
powers  of  inspiration,  eloquence,  prophecy,  and  song
upon  the  votary  who  partook  of  it.  The  use  of  such
purificatory  or  lustrational  water  was  not  unknown
in  the  mysteries  of  Greece  and  Rome.  In  connection
with  the  mysteries  of  Ceres  a decoction  of  laurel,
salt,  barley,  sea-water,  and  crowns  of  flowers  was
employed,  and  this  appears  as  similar  to  the
ingredients  of  Keridwen’s  cauldron,  which,  according
to  Taliesin,  contained  berries,  the  foam  of  the  ocean,
cresses,  wort  and  vervain  which  had  been  borne  aloft
and  kept  apart  from  the  influence  of  the  moon.  A
part  of  this  potion  was  also  added  to  the  Gwin,  or
Bragwod,  or  sacred  drink  used  commonly  by  the
British  initiates,  which  was  made  from  wine,  honey,
water,  and  malt,  and  which  thus  resembles  the  liquor
of  the  devotees  of  Ceres,  a concoction  of  wine,  barley,
water,  and  meal.

The  residue  of  the  water  in  the  cauldron  of
Keridwen  was,  as  we  have  seen,  poisonous  and
accursed,  that  is,  it  was  symbolically  supposed  to
contain  the  sins  and  pollutions  of  the  novitiates,  and
was  cast  out,  precisely  as  was  the  residue  of  the  water
employed  in  the  mysteries  of  Ceres.1

The  mysterious  cauldron  is  alluded  to  by  Taliesin
as  having  been  instituted  by  nine  maidens  who
“warmed  it  with  their  breath”.  Davies2  believes


* Athenceus,  Lib.  XI,  Ch.  15.
9 British  Druids , p.  223.


Mystery  of  Keltic  Philosophy  83
them  to  have  been  the  GwylHon,  or  “fairies’*,
prophetic  damsels  who  bore  a resemblance  to  the  nine
muses  of  classical  lore.  They  are  mentioned  by
Taliesin  as  preparing  their  cauldron  in  a “quad-
rangular caer”  or  sanctuary  in  “the  island  of  the
strong  door”.  This  seems  to  refer  to  the  island  of
Seon  mentioned  in  the  same  poem,  and  which  must
surely  be  one  and  the  same  with  the  Sena  or  lie  de
Sein,  not  far  from  Brest,  mentioned  by  Pomponius
Mela1  as  the  “abode  of  priestesses  holy  in  perpetual
virginity,  and  nine  in  number.  They  are,”  he  pro-
ceeds, “ called  Gallicenae,  and  are  thought  to  be
endowed  with  singular  powers.  By  their  charms
they  are  able  to  raise  the  winds  and  seas,  to  turn
themselves  into  what  animals  they  will,  to  cure
wounds  and  diseases  incurable  by  others,  to  know
and  predict  the  future.”  In  a word,  they  were
Druidesses,  as  modern  authorities  have  admitted.
Once  a year  they  unroofed  their  temple,  and  if,  in
the  task  of  re-thatching  it,  one  of  them  stumbled,
she  was  immediately  torn  in  pieces  by  the  others.

Strabo  likewise  mentions  these  priestesses  of  Sena
as  the  devotees  of  “Bacchus”,  “possessed  of
Dionysius”.  This  is,  of  course,  merely  another  way
of  saying  that  these  women  were  the  hierophants  of
a Keltic  deity  whose  rites  and  mysteries  resembled
those  of  Bacchus,  the  orgiastic  celebrations  which
preceded  the  deity’s  gifts  of  inspiration  and  prophecy.
M.  Salmon  Reinach  dismisses  the  stories  of  Strabo
and  Mela  as  a fable  based  on  the  myth  of  Circe,  but,
as  Canon  Mac.Culloch  reasonably  remarks,  “ even  if
they  are  garbled,  they  seem  to  be  based  on  actual
observation  and  are  paralleled  from  other  regions.

• . • The  facts  that  the  rites  were  called
Dionysiac  is  no  reason  for  denying  the  fact  that  some

* op.  cit.  p.  317.


84  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
orgiastic  rites  were  practised.  Classical  writers
usually  reported  all  barbaric  rites  in  terms  of  their
own  religion.”1  Says  Mr.  Kendrick  : “ Although
it  is  quite  possible  the  authors  were  tempted  to
interpret  the  reputed  existence  of  Keltic  island-
communication  in  the  terms  of  classical  mythology,
with  its  tales  of  the  Isle  of  Circe  and  so  on,  yet,  since
there  is  abundant  evidence  that  the  Gauls,  like  many
other  ancient  peoples,  felt  that  some  peculiar  holiness
was  attached  to  lonely  islands,  it  is  almost  an
inevitable  consequence  that  the  quality  of  sacredness
should  be  translated  to  those  who  lived  upon
them.”

It  is  obviously  to  some  such  orgiastic  ceremony
that  the  bard  Aneurin  alludes  in  a poem  cited  by
Davies.2

In  the  presence  of  the  blessed  ones,  before  the  great
assembly,  before  the  occupiers  of  the  holme,  when  the
house  was  recovered  from  the  swamp,  surrounded  with
crooked  horns  and  crooked  swords,  in  honour  of  the
mighty  king  of  the  plains,  the  king  with  open  counten-
ance : I saw  dark  gore  arising  on  the  stalks  of  plants,  on
the  clasp  of  the  chain,  on  the  bunches  on  the  sovereign,
on  the  bush  and  spear.  Ruddy  was  the  sea-beach,  whilst
the  circular  revolution  was  performed  by  the  attendants,
and  the  white  bands,  in  graceful  extravagance.

The  assembled  train  were  dancing,  after  the  manner,
and  singing  in  cadence,  with  garlands  on  their  brows;
loud  was  the  clattering  of  shields  round  the  ancient
cauldron  in  frantic  mirth,  and  lively  was  the  aspect  of
him,  who,  in  his  prowess,  had  snatched  over  the  ford  that
involved  ball  which  cast  its  rays  to  a distance,  the  splendid
product  of  the  adder,  shot  forth  by  serpents.

But  wounded  art  thou,  severely  wounded,  thou
delight  of  princesses,  thou  who  lovedst  the  living  herd !
It  was  my  earnest  wish  that  thou  mightest  live,  O thou  of
victorious  energy ! Alas,  thou  Bull,  wrongfully  oppressed,
thy  death  I deplore.  Thou  hast  been  a friend  of  tran-
quillity !

* op.  cit.  p.  139.
a op.  cit.  appendix,  p.  574.


Mystery  of  Keltic  Philosophy  85

In  view  of  the  sea,  in  the  front  of  the  assembled  men,
and  near  the  pit  of  conflict,  the  raven  has  pierced  thee  in
wrath !

That  these  Druidesses  of  Sena  were  identified
with  the  nine  guardians  of  the  Cauldron  of  Keridwen,
shows  that  they  were  the  hereditary  priestesses  of
her  cult,  like  the  priestesses  of  Galatian  Artemis  or
the  goddesses  of  Gaul  with  their  female  votaries.  But
the  allusion  of  Aneurin  to  the  “involved  ball”
introduces  us  to  another  phase  of  the  Keltic
mysteries.

The  ball  in  question  is,  of  course,  the  celebrated
serpent’s  egg  of  Druidic  lore.  The  locus  classicus
of  its  allusion  is  the  well-known  statement  of  Pliny1
who  says  of  it  :

There  Is  also  another  kind  of  egg,  of  much  renown  in
the  Gallic  provinces,  but  ignored  by  the  Greeks.  In  the
summer,  numberless  snakes  entwine  themselves  into  a
ball,  held  together  by  a secretion  from  their  bodies  and
by  the  spittle.  This  is  called  anguinum.  The  Druids
say  that  hissing  serpents  throw  this  up  into  the  air,  and
that  it  must  be  caught  in  a cloak,  and  not  allowed  to
touch  the  ground;  and  that  one  must  instantly  take  to
flight  on  horseback,  as  the  serpents  will  pursue  until  some
stream  cuts  them  off.  It  may  be  tested,  they  say,  by
seeing  if  it  floats  against  the  current  of  a river,  even
though  it  be  set  in  gold.  But  as  it  is  the  way  of  magicians
to  cast  a cunning  veil  about  their  frauds,  they  pretend
that  these  eggs  can  only  be  taken  on  a certain  day  of
the  moon,  as  though  it  rested  with  mankind  to  make  the
moon  and  the  serpents  accord  as  to  the  moment  of  the
operation.  I myself,  however,  have  seen  one  of  these
eggs;  it  was  round,  and  about  as  large  as  a smallish
apple;  the  shell  was  cartalaginous,  and  pocked  like  the
arms  of  a polypus.  The  Druids  esteem  it  highly.  It  is
said  to  ensure  success  in  lawsuits  and  a favourable  recep-
tion with  princes ; but  this  is  false,  because  a man  of  the
Vocontn,  who  was  also  a Roman  knight,  kept  one  of
these  eggs  in  his  bosom  during  a trial,  and  was  put  to
death  by  the  Emperor  Claudius,  as  far  as  I can  see,  for
that  reason  alone.  ’


86


The  Mysteries  of  Britain
Regarding  the  precise  nature  of  this  “snakes*
egg”  there  is  considerable  conflict  of  opinion.
Certain  prehistoric  beads  of  blue  and  green  glass,
sometimes  carved  and  inlaid  with  white  paste,  are
known  in  Cornwall,  Wales,  and  Scotland  as  “snake-
stones”  and  in  Ireland  as  “Druids’  Glass.”  These
appear  to  date  from  the  early  centuries  before  the
Christian  era,  and,  as  the  Druids  must  have  been
familiar  with  them,  it  is  improbable  that  they  would
have  regarded  them  as  natural  formations.  Nor  do
they  fit  in  with  the  description  of  Pliny,  who
represents  the  anguinum  as  about  the  size  of  an  apple,
and  its  shell  or  husk  as  horny.

Some  authorities  believe  the  “serpent’s  egg”  to
have  been  a fossil  echidnus  or  ammonite.  But  when
we  recall  the  circumstance  that  the  Druids  were
known  to  the  Welsh  bards  as  Naddred,  or  Adders,
in  allusion  probably  to  their  supposed  regeneration  as
initiates,  an  allegorical  reference  to  the  serpent  which
casts  its  skin,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  statement  of
Pliny  is  merely  a confused  account  of  the  manner  in
which  the  Druids  or  “Adders”  assembled  and
manufactured  these  emblems,  which  were  probably
glass  balls  covered  with  skin,  and  known  to  the
Kymry  as  Gleiniau  Nadredd.  That  they  were
supposed  to  ensure  good  fortune  in  lawsuits  seems
to  indicate  their  probable  significance  as  amulets
radiating  “rightness”  or  justice,  and  perhaps  bestow-
ing eloquence  in  advocacy.

We  now  approach  another  and  most  important
avenue  of  possible  proof  that  the  philosophic  ideas
of  the  Druids  actually  did  survive  in  Wales
by  the  aid  of  the  Bards.  In  the  first  place  it
may  he  interesting,  if  nothing  more,  to  quote
from  the  “Advertisement”  of  Poems , Lyrical
and  Pastoral  published  in  1794,  by  Edward


Mystery  of  Keltic  Philosophy  87
Williams,  who  afterwards  edited  the  Myvyrian
Archaeology.

He  maintained  [says  Skene1]  that  there  had  existed  at
an  early  period,  when  bardism  flourished  as  an  institution
of  the  country,  four  chairs  or  schools  of  bards,  and  that
one  of  these  chairs  still  remained — the  chair  of  Glamorgan
. . . that  the  succession  of  bards  and  bardic  presidents

could  be  traced  back  to  1300  . . . that  Llywelyn  Sion,
who  was  bardic  president  in  1580  and  died  in  1616,  had
reduced  this  system  to  writing  under  the  title  of  the  Book
of  Bardism,  or  the  Druidism  of  the  Bards  of  the  Isle  of
Britain,  which  he  professed  to  have  compiled  from  old
books  in^the  collection  of  MSS.  at  Raglan  Castle.

The  “Advertisement’ * is  as  follows  :

The  patriarchal  religion  of  Ancient  Britain,  called
Druidism,  but  by  the  Welsh  most  commonly  Barddas,
Bardism,  though  they  also  term  it  Derwyddoniaeth,  Druid-
ism,  is  no  more  inimical  to  Christianity  than  the  religion
of  Noah,  Job,  or  Abraham ; it  has  never,  as  some  imagine
been  quite  extinct  in  Britain;  the  Welsh  Bards  have,
through  all  ages  down  to  the  present,  kept  it  alive,
ihere  is  in  my  possession  a manuscript  synopsis  of  it
by  Llewelyn  Sion,  a Bard,  written  about  the  year  ic6o*
its  truth  and  accuracy  are  corroborated  by  innumerable
notices  and  allusions  m our  Bardic  manuscripts  of  every
t0  Tahesin  in  the  sixth  century,  whose  poems
exhibit  a compkte  system  of  Druidism.  By  these
(undoubtedly  authentic)  writings  it  will  appear  that  the
D?uid?smBntlSh  ChnStiamty  was  strongly  tinctured  with

Sharon  Turner,  the  celebrated  antiquary,
addressed  himself  to  the  consideration  of  Williams’s
presentation  of  Sion’s  work,  and  wrote  :

thJmfLitrIadS’  ?f  PT56’  only  prove  that  the  b^ds  of
Ibt  tWS  f??e  notlons>  but  il:  is  highly  prob-

from  their"sto>S  d °n  “*  P°int  ***  derived

r,Jh!.ey  !?ention  three  circles  of  existence:—!,  The
CyZch  y Ceugant,  or  all-enclosing  Circle,  which  contains

& abo7e  o?“ooH’  The  TX*

uie  abode  of  good  men  who  have  passed  through  their
« Four  Ancient  Books  of  Wales,  I,  29.


88  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

terrestrial  changes.  3,  The  circle  of  Abred  or  Evil,  that
in  which  mankind  pass  through  their  various  stages  of
existence  before  being  qualified  to  enter  the  circle  of
felicity.

All  animated  beings  have  three  stages  of  existence
to  pass  through— the  state  of  Abred  or  evil,  in  Annwn  or
the  Great  Deep ; the  state  of  freedom  in  the  human  form,
and  the  state  of  lqve,  which  is  happiness  in  the  Nef  or
heaven.  All  beings  but  God  must  undergo  three  angen
or  necessities;  they  must  have  a beginning  in  Annwn  or
the  great  deep,  a progression  in  Abred  or  the  state  of
evil,  and  a completion  in  the  circle  of  felicity  in  heaven.

In  passing  through  the  changes  of  being,  attached
to  the  state  of  Abred , it  is  possible  for  man  by  misconduct
to  fall  retrograde  into  the  lowest  state  from  which  he  had
emerged.  There  are  three  things  which  will  inevitably
plunge  him  back  into  the  changes  of  Abred — 1,  Pride;
for  this  he  will  fall  to  Annwn,  which  is  the  lowest  point
at  which  existence  begins.  2,  Falsehood,  which  will
re-plunge  him  in  Obryn,  or  a transmigration  into  some
degrading  form.  3,  Cruelty,  which  will  consign  him  to
Cydvtl,  or  a transmigration  into  some  ferocious  beast.
From  these  he  must  proceed  again  in  due  course  through
changes  of  being,  up  to  humanity.

Humanity  was  the  limit  of  degrading  transmigra-
tions; all  the  changes  above  humanity  were  felicitating,
and  they  were  to  be  perpetual,  with  ever-increasing  acqui-
sitions of  knowledge  and  happiness.

Now  Nash,  as  he  is  bound  to  do  in  view  of  his
thesis  of  the  dubious  character  of  all  Welsh  Bardic
literature,  tries  to  throw  cold  water  upon  the  authentic
nature  of  Sion’s  writings.  He  says  :

The  MS.  of  Llywelyn  Sion  was,  according  to  the  state-
ment of  Dr.  Owen  Pughe,  last  transcribed  and  revised  by
Edward  Davydd  of  Margam,  who  died  in  1690.  The
latter  says,  in  his  preface,  that  he  compiled  it  from  the
books  of  bards  and  learned  teachers,  lest  the  materials
should  become  lost,  and  more  particularly  from  the  books
of  Meyrig  Davydd,  Davydd  Llwyd  Mathew,  Davydd
Benwyn,  and  Llywelyn  Sion,  who  were  Bardic  presidents
of  the  Glamorgan  chair  from  1560  to  1580.  . . .

Llywelyn  Sion,  who  died  in  1616,  says  that  the  authors,
teachers,  and  judges,  who  sanctioned  this  system  and
code,  were  the  Druids  and  Bards  after  they  had  come
to  the  faith  in  Christ.


Mystery  of  Keltic  Philosophy  89

“ The  original  manuscript  of  Edward  Davydd  is
(wrote  Turner  in  1803)  yet  extant  in  the  library  of
Llan  Haran,  in  Glamorganshire.”

What,  one  asks,  is  there  of  the  improbable  in  all
this?  “ It  does  not  follow,”  says  Skene,  “ because
the  poems  are  not  what  Davies  and  Herbert
represent  them  to  be  that  they  are  therefore  not
genuine.”  Have  the  literatures  of  other  countries
not  been  handed  down  by  means  more  devious  than
we  find  recorded  by  Sion  ? What  of  the  Central
American  “ Popol  Vuh”,  the  Kabbala,  the
Scriptures  themselves,  the  works  of  the  classical  era  ?
Are  the  evidences  of  their  antiquity  in  manuscript
any  more  “respectable”?  1

And  did  Llywelyn  Sion  actually  invent  the  mystic
cycles  of  which  he  speaks  ? If  he  did,  it  is  surprising
that  they  so  closely  resemble  those  of  other  myth-
ologies, and  that  one  of  these  cycles  at  least  is
mentioned  in  several  of  the  old  lays  and  in  the
Mabinogion.  It  seems  to  me,  indeed,  highly
improbable  that  Sion  “invented”  this  mystical
progression  for  the  following  reasons  : (1)  That,  as
I shall  show  later,  it  agrees  with  the  circumstances  of
other  and  similar  systems  ; (2)  that  similar  mystical
cosmologies  have  come  down  to  us  unimpaired  from
an  even  greater  antiquity  than  we  are  here  dealing
with  ; and  (3)  that  the  system  bears  the  impress  of
authority  and  tradition  on  the  face  of  it.

But  Davies,  the  extreme  protagonist  of  Neo-
Druidism,  would  have  none  of  Sion’s  system,  and
attributed  a later  French  origin  to  it.  “ It  is  not,”
he  says,  “ the  Druidism  of  History,  or  of  the  British
Bards.  In  this  estimate  Nash  agrees  with  him.
But  he  seems  to  have  been  carried  away  by  the  fact
that  Edward  Williams’s  son,  Taliesin  Williams
published  a version  of  the  Book  of  Bardism  which


90  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
did  not  contain  any  reference  to  the  mysteries,  and
that  the  Book  containing  the  material  of  Sion
remained  unpublished  at  the  time  of  Edward
Williams’s  death,  although  it  was  later  published,
under  the  title  of  Barddas , for  the  Welsh  Society
in  1862.

Before  dealing  with  the  extraordinary  material
contained  in  Barddas — material  which  entirely
shatters  the  contentions  of  the  critics  of  the  authentic
character  of  the  Druidic  tradition  in  Wales— let  me
remark  that  it  is  amazing  to  a modern  student  of
myth  and  folklore  that  the  antagonists  of  the  Bardic
and  Druidic  tradition  should  have  utterly  denied  the
mythological  authenticity  of  many  of  the  poems  and
even  of  the  incidents  in  the  Mabinogion . These  are
now,  especially  the  latter,  fully  recognized  by
standard  authorities  as  the  veritable  remains  of
Brythonic  myth.  And  if  the  mythology  of  the  Keltic
race,  whose  priests  were  the  Druids,  should  have
been  handed  down  almost  unimpaired,  why  may  not
the  philosophy  of  the  Druids  have  been  preserved  by
similar  means?  That  this  was  actually  achieved  I
hope  to  demonstrate  in  the  succeeding  chapter.


CHAPTER  IV
“barddas”

“Barddas,”  the  volume  containing  the  material  the
existence  of  which  Nash  had  denied,  was  published
under  the  auspices  of  the  Welsh  Manuscript  Society
at  Llandovery  in  1862,  with  translations  and  notes  by
the  Rev.  J.  Williams  ab  Ithel,  rector  of  Llanyo-
mowddwy , Merionethshire.  In  its  title  it  purported
t°  be  “ a collection  of  original  documents  illustrative
of  the  theology,  wisdom  and  usages  of  the  Bardo-
Druidic  system  of  the  Isle  of  Britain.”*

In  the  preface  it  is  stated  that  the  promoters  of
the  National  Eisteddfod  held  at  Llangollen  in  1858,
desirous  of  rescuing  the  traditions  of  the  bards  from
oblivion,  offered  a prize  for  “ the  fullest  illustration
from  original  sources  of  the  theology,  discipline  and
usages  of  the  Bardo-Druidic  system  of  the  Isle  of
Britain.  Only  one  composition  was  received,
bearing  the  anonymous  signature  of  “Plennydd.”
With  respect  to  its  authenticity,  the  judges  stated
that  the  manuscripts  it  contained  were  genuine,
though  their  authors  cannot  in  many  instances  be
named,  any  more  than  we  can  name  the  authors  of
the  Common  Law  of  England,  yet  the  existence  of
the  peculiar  dogmas  and  usages  which  they  represent
may  be  proved  from  the  compositions  of  the  Bards,
from  the . era  of  Taliesin  down  to  the  present  time
• • • it  is  among  the  remains  of  Bardism  . .

we  may  hope  to  discover,  if  at  all,  that  Golden

* The  word  “Barddas”  means  “Bardism”.

91


92  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
Key,  concealed  and  secured,  which  can  open  the
mysteries  or  esoteric  doctrine  of  ancient  nations.”

With  few  exceptions,  we  are  told,  the  documents
included  in  the  collection  were  gathered  from  the
manuscripts  of  the  late  Iolo  Morganwg,  frequently
mentioned  in  the  preceding  chapter  as  Edward
Williams.  They  were  in  his  handwriting,  and  the
judges  had  every  reason  to  believe  that  they  were
transcripts  from  older  manuscripts.  He  made  them
in  the  first  instance  on  the  backs  of  old  letters  and
bills,  in  which  state  they  were  discovered  after  his
death.  The  Editor,  writing  of  these,  says  : ” We
have  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  fully  and
carefully  those  papers  . . . and  unhesitatingly

pronounce  him  to  be  incapable  of  perpetrating  literary
deceit  or  forgery.”  Indeed,  the  style  is  in  general
too  archaic  for  the  eighteenth  century,  and  it  appears
that  Iolo  Morganwg  himself  did  not  fully  understand
certain  of  the  documents,  nor  did  he  correct  the  errors
they  obviously  contained.  It  is  clear,  too,  that  in
making  his  transcripts  he  had  frequently  more  than
one  original  to  found  upon,  and  the  lack  of  uniformity
in  some  of  the  details  conclusively  proves  that  he  was
merely  a copyist  and  nothing  more.

Again,  he  refers  to  the  actual  existence  of  some  of
the  documents  which  he  has  copied,  and  gives  with
great  minuteness  the  names  and  addresses  of  the
owners.  He  further  states  : ” The  Triades  that  are
here  selected  are  from  a manuscript  collection  by
Llywelyn  Sion,  a Bard  of  Glamorgan,  about  the  year
1560.  Of  this  manuscript  I have  a transcript ; the
original  is  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Richard  Bradford
of  Bettws,  near  Bridgend,  in  Glamorgan,  son  of  the
late  Mr.  John  Bradford,  who,  for  skill  in  ancient
British  Bardism,  left  not  his  equal  behind.”  This
statement  must  have  been  penned  nearly  a century


A DRUIDIC  ORGY


“Barddas”  93

before  the  publication  of  Barddas  and  was  printed
in  Williams's  Poems,  Lyrical  and  Pastoral  already
alluded  to.  Had  the  reference  been  a false  one  it
would  certainly  have  been  refuted  at  the  time.

Other  critics  attempted  to  refer  the  material  of
Barddas  to  the  Eisteddvoddau  held  subsequently
to  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century,  when  certain
bardic  rites  were  authorized  which  were  handed
down  through  the  medium  of  the  bardic  chair  of
Glamorgan.  These  were  said  to  be  the  invention
ot  the  bards  of  the  fifteenth,  sixteenth  and
seventeenth  centuries,  simply  because  the  code  had
not  been  reduced  to  writing  before  their  time.  Some
actuaHy  said  that  they  derived  it  from  the  Brahmins
°t  India  ! This  notwithstanding,  it  bears  the  stamp
ot  authenticity  in  every  line,  and  that  it  could  have
been  invented”  by  Welsh  bards  who  lived  centuries
apart  and  had  not  a scintilla  of  knowledge  regarding
Brahmimsm  or  any  other  esoteric  religion  is  a
suggestion  of  the  most  jejune  description.  Indeed
one  is  forced  to  agree  with  the  editor  of  Barddas
when  he  says  : We  believe  that  the  bards  of  the
fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries  were,  to  some
extent,  acquainted  with  the  poetical  productions  of
their  predecessors,  even  if  they  did  not  agree  upon
any  system  drawn  from  their  writings.  Many
passages  in  the  volume  may  be  paralleled  from  the
works  of  the  Welsh  bards.  The  material  of
Barddas,  its  editor  believed,  had  been  collected
chiefly  from  the  works  of  bards  who  flourished  from
f,e  frte“th  t0  the  seventeenth  century,  bv

RS^aSe"’  Wh°  C°Pied  th6m  “ Ae  of

. ,There  la  no  doubt;”  6ays  the  edit°r>  “ that  these
bards  viewed  the  traditions  of  the  Gorsedd  as  the
genuine  remains  of  Ancient  Druidism ; and  there  is


94  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
reason  to  believe  that  in  their  main  features  they  were
so.1  The  variations  observable  in  minor  points
would  indicate  in  what  direction,  and  to  what  extent,
they  suffered  in  their  passage  from  the  Christian  era
downwards.”

That  the  introduction  of  Christianity  did  not  mean
the  abandonment  of  the  Druidic  philosophy  is  clear
enough  from  certain  passages  in  the  works  ot  the
Welsh  bards.  One  of  the  triads  refers  especially  to
this  when  it  says  : “There  are  three  special  doctrines
that  have  been  obtained  by  the  nation  of  the  Cymry  :
the  first,  from  the  age  of  ages,  was  that  of  the
Gwyddoniaid,  prior  to  the  time  of  Prydain,  son  of
Aedd  the  Great ; the  second  was  Bardism,  as  taught
by  the  Bards,  after  they  had  been  instituted ; the
third  was  the  Faith  in  Christ,  being  THE  BEST
OF  THE  THREE.”

Indeed,  Christianity  seems  to  have  been  regarded
by  the  Kelts  as  the  fulfilment  of  Druidism,  a creed
attuned  so  closely  to  the  nobler  aspirations  of  the
Keltic  spirit  that  it  was  easy  of  assumption  by  it.
What  has  been  said  concerning  the  Culdee  caste
obviously  aids  this  reflection,  and  it  is  known  that
many  Druids  actually  became  Christian  priests.
The  famous  bull  of  Pope  Gregory  I (a.d.  540 — 604)
permitted  a fusion  between  Keltic  and  Christian
belief  which  rendered  the  latter  easier  of  acceptance
without  altogether  destroying  the  former.

We  come  now  to  the  material  in  Barddas  itself.

The  first  book  is  entitled  “Symbol”  and  deals
with  the  origin  of  letters,  the  alphabet  and  the  secret
writing  of  the  Bards.  Letters,  says  the  Bardic
tradition,  were  invented  by  Einiged  the  Giant,  son
of  Alser,  for  the  purpose  of  recording  praiseworthy
actions,  and  the  wooden  blocks  on  which  they  were


•*  Italics  are  mine. — L.S.


“Barddas”  95

inscribed  were  known  as  coelbren.1  Bran  the
Blessed  it  was  who  brought  the  art  of  dressing  goat-
skin as  parchment  from  Rome.  The  three  original
letters  were  obtained  by  Menw  the  Aged  from  the
voice  of  God  Himself,  which  manifested  itself  in  rays
of  light,  thus  | J \ in  three  columns.  The  sense
of  O was  given  to  the  first  column,  I to  the  second
or  middle,  and  V to  the  third,  whence  the  word  01 V,
which  may  not  be  pronounced.  As  a bardic  poem
says  :

The  Eternal,  Origin,  Self-existent  Distributor.

Holy  be  the  lips  that  canonically  pronounce  them ;

Another  name  in  full  word,

Is  OI  and  OIV  the  word — Ieuan  Rudd  sang  it.

By  this  name  the  Universe  calls  God  inwardly —
the  sea,  the  land,  earth  and  air,  and  all  the  visibles
and  invisibles  of  the  world,  all  the  worlds  of  all  the
Celestials  and  Terrestrials,  every  thing  animate  and
inanimate.  The  three  mystic  letters  signify  the  three
attributes  of  God  : love,  knowledge  and  truth.  It
was  because  of  this  principle  that  three  degrees
were  conferred  upon  the  Bards  of  the  Isle  of
Britain.

Out  of  the  knowledge  of  the  vocalization  of
language  and  speech  received  from  these  three
principal  letters  sixteen  letters  were  formed ; all
letters  employed  by  the  Bards  were  developed  from
them,  and  formed  the  Abcedilros,  a word  composed
of  the  ten  primary  letters.  Later  other  letters  were
formed,  to  the  number  of  twenty-four.

But  only  a Bard  of  thorough  secrecy  knows  how
the  name  of  God  is  to  be  spoken  audibly  by  means
of  the  three  principal  columns  of  letters,  because  only
he  knows  their  meaning,  accent  and  powers.  This

* At  least  a dozen  passages  In  the  bardic  poems’  written
between  jioo  and  1600  allude  to  this  tradition.


96  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
secret  must  not  be  divulged  save  to  him  who  is
warranted  as  having  A wen  1 from  God,  for  God  alone
can  pronounce  His  name  perfectly.  He  who  reasons
and  meditates  will  comprehend  the  meaning  of  the
primitive  system  of  sixteen  letters  and  will  perceive
and  understand  the  Name  of  God  and  the  just
reverence  due  to  Him.  The  three  letters  O.I.V.
were  originally  and  authoritatively  written  <^>  j V*
and  without  the  violation  of  secrecy  there  cannot  be
another  system  arising  from  these  letters.

From  this  trinity  of  letters  arose  the  custom  of
casting  knowledge  into  Triads,  and  the  three  rays  of
light  were  regarded  as  the  three  principal  signs  of  the
sciences,  and  from  them  were  obtained  fixity  and
authority  for  the  arts  and  sciences.

After  a dissertation  on  the  traditions  of  the  manner
in  which  Bardism  and  the  Gorsedd  were  established,
we  receive  enlightenment  on  the  principal  elements
of  things.  These  are  power,  matter  and  mode.
The  elements  of  Science  are  life,  intellect  and
affection  ; of  Wisdom,  object,  mode  and  benefit ; and
of  Memorials,  understanding  from  affection,
distinctive  sign  and  reverence  for  the  better.

The  three  foundations  of  Awen  from  God  are  : to
understand  the  truth,  to  love1  the  truth  and  to
maintain  the  truth.

A long  description  of  Cymric  arithmetic  follows,
and  of  the  technical  making  of  books  or  coelbren%
neither  of  which  is  germane  to  our  subject.  But  we
may  quote  the  following  :

The  mysteries  of  the  Bards,  that  is  to  say,  the  secret
coelbren s,  are  small  ebillion , a finger  long,  having  notches,
so  that  they  may  be  used  by  two  persons  or  more,  who
are  confidants.  It  is  by  placing  and  joining  them  together,
with  reference  to  what  is  secret,  that  words  and  phrases
are  formed ; and  by  bundling  them  into  words  according

* Genius,  or  inspiration.


“Barddas”  97

to  secrecy,  missive  epistles  and  secret  books  are  con-
structed, the  meaning  of  which  no  one  knows  but
confidants;  nor  is  it  right,  according  to  usage  and  troth,
to  divulge  the  same.  They  are  called  the  Charms  of  the
Bards,  or  Bardic  Mystery.

Secret  coelvains  are  similar,  made  of  small  stones
bearing  the  marks  of  mystery ; and  it  is  by  disposing
them,  according  to  the  arrangement  and  art  of  the  secret,
that  necessary  sciences  are  demonstrated.  And  where
such  coelbrens  exhibit  the  number  of  the  letters  of  the
Historical  coelbren,  let  them  be  made  secret  by  changing
one  letter  for  another,  so  that  it  be  not  ascertained,  except
from  the  necessity  and  declination  of  the  same  letter
twice  in  the  same  meaning  and  power.

That  is,  they  are  to  be  cast  in  cipher.

The  last  entry  in  the  Book  of  Symbols  is  the
following  questionary  : ■

Question — What  is  the  Dasgubell  Rodd?

Answer — The  keys  of  the  primitive  coelbren.

Q. — What  is  it  that  explains  the  primitive  coelbren?

A. — The  Dasgubell  Rodd.

Q. — What  else?

A. — The  secret  of  the  Dasgubell  Rodd.

Q. — What  secret?

A. — The  secret  of  the  Bards  of  the  Isle  of  Britain.

Q. — What  will  divulge  the  secret  of  the  Bards  of  the  Isle
of  Britain?

A. — Instruction  by  a master  in  virtue  of  a vow.

Q. — What  kind  of  vow?

A. — A vow  made  with  God.

For  us  the  second  book,  entitled  “ Dwy-
ffyddiaeth”,  or  “Theology”,  is  of  greatly  more
importance,  for  in  it  are  enshrined  the  mystical  teach-
ings of  Bardism.  It  opens  with  a large  number  of
theological  triads,  which  need  not  be  quoted  at  this
juncture.  But  farther  on  we  encounter  the  caption
“Druidism”,  in  which  document  we  are  informed
of  the  Druidical  ideas  concerning  the  nature  of  god-
head. God  is  goodness  and  power,  and  is  opposed
in  duality  to  Cythraul,  darkness  and  powerless

* The  Dasgubell  Rod  is  the  “gift  besom”,  which  is  supposed
to  sweep  away  what  hides  the  truth.


98  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
inability.  God  mercifully  united  Himself  with  this
lifelessness  or  evil  with  the  intention  of  subduing  it
unto  life  or  goodness,  and  from  this  intellectual
existences  and  animations  first  sprang.

These  began  in  the  depths  of  Annwn , or  the
abyss,  the  lowest  and  least  grade,  for  there  can  be
no  intellectual  existence  without  gradation,  and  in
respect  of  gradation  there  cannot  but  be  a beginning,
a middle,  an  end  or  extremity — first,  augmentation
and  ultimate  or  conclusion.  “Thus  animations  in
Annwn  are  partakers  of  life  and  goodness  in  the
lowest  possible  degree  and  of  death  and  evil  in  the
highest  degree.  Therefore  they  are  necessarily  evil,
because  of  the  preponderance  of  evil  over  the  good.
Their  duration  is  necessarily  short,  but  by  dissolution
and  death  they  are  removed  gradually  to  a higher
degree,  where  they  receive  an  accumulation  of  life
and  goodness,  and  thus  they  progress  from  grade  to
grade,  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  extremity  of  life
and  goodness,  God,  of  his  merciful  affection  for
animated  beings,  preparing  the  ways  along  Abred,
out  of  pure  love  to  them,  until  they  arrive  at  the  state
and  point  of  human  existence,  where  goodness  and
evil  equiponderate,  neither  weighing  down  the  other.
From  this  sprang  liberty  and  choice  and  elective
power  in  man,  so  that  he  can  perform  whichever  he
likes  of  any  two  things,  as  of  good  and  evil ; and  thus
is  it  seen  that  the  state  of  humanity  is  a state  of
probation  and  instruction,  where  the  good  and  evil
equiponderate,  and  animated  beings  are  left  to  their
own  will  and  pleasure.”

There  are  three  circles  of  spiritual  evolution,  the
Circle  of  Abred,  in  which  are  all  corporal  and  dead
existences,  the  Circle  of  Gwynvyd,  in  which  are  all
animated  and  immortal  beings,  and  the  Circle  of
Ceugant,  where  there  is  only  God.  Abred  thus


“Bar  ddas”  99

includes  humanity,  and  all  below  it.  But,  necessarily
evil  as  its  condition  is,  God  does  not  hate  the  lower
things  existing  in  it,  knowing  that  they  cannot  be
otherwise.  But  when  life  arrives  at  the  point  of
humanity  in  Abred,  where  good  and  evil  equi-
ponderate, man  is  free  from  all  obligation,  and  his
state  is  one  of  will  and  freedom  and  ability,  where
every  act  is  one  of  consent  and  choice.  Whatever
he  does  he  could  do  differently,  therefore  it  is  right
that  he  should  receive  punishment  or  reward  as  his
works  require.

The  enigma  of  the  Bards  is  posited  thus  :

“ There  is  nothing  truly  hidden  but  what  is  not
conceivable  ;

There  is  nothing  not  conceivable  but  what  is
immeasurable  ;

There  is  nothing  immeasurable  but  God  ;

There  is  no  God  but  that  which  is  not  conceivable  ;

There  is  nothing  not  conceivable  but  that  which  is
truly  hidden  ;

There  is  nothing  truly  hidden  but  God."

Its  solution  is  as  follows  :

What  is  not  conceivable  is  the  greatest  of  all,  and
the  immeasurable  of  what  is  not  in  place  ;

God  is  the  greatest  of  all,  and  the  immeasurable
of  intelligence  ;

And  there  can  be  no  existence  to  any  thing  but
from  intelligence  ;

And  the  non-existence  of  all  things  comes  from
what  is  not  in  place.

God  the  Father,  we  are  informed,  is  called  by
some  Hen  Ddihenydd,  that  is  “ Ancient  and
Unoriginated  One,”  “the  original  lifespring,  or
springing  into  life  at  the  lowest  point  of  animated


100  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
existence,  or  out  of  the  chaotic  mass  of  matter  in  its
utmost  state  of  decomposition,”  according  to  a note
or  gloss  of  Iolo  Morganwg.  God  the  Son  is  called
Iau,  that  is  the  Younger,  the  last  manifestation  of  the
Deity  or  God  under  a finite  form  and  corporeity.
“ And  when  He  became  man  in  this  world,  he  was
called  Jesus  Christ,”  or  God  the  Dovydd,  that  is
“ God  the  Tower”.  And  he  had  other  names,  such
as  Perydd  or  “the  First  Cause,”  and  “ God  the
Ner  ” or  “Energy”,  and  “ God  the  Nav,”  or
Creator.  He  is  also  called  “Hu  the  Mighty,”  or
“the  Pervader.”1

The  next  manuscript  in  the  ■ * Book  of  Theology  ’ ’ ,
as  this  department  of  Barddas  may  be  called,  is
“The  Book  of  Bardism”,  by  Llywelyn  Sion  himself.
This  he  professes  to  have  extracted  from  old  books,
“namely  the  books  of  Einion  the  Priest,  Taliesin  the
Chief  of  Bards,  Davydd  Ddu  of  Hiraddug,  Cwtta
Cyvarwydd,  Jonas  of  Menevia,  Ederyn  the  Golden-
tongued,  Sion  Cent,  Rhys  Goch,  and  others  in  the
Library  of  Raglan,  by  permission  of  the  lord  William
Herbert,  earl  of  Pembroke,  to  whom  God  grant  that
I may  prove  thankful  as  long  as  I live.  The  first  is
a Treatise  in  the  form  of  Question  and  Answer,  by
a Bard  and  his  Disciple — the  work  of  Sion  Cent,
which  contains  many  of  the  principal  subjects  of  the
primitive  wisdom,  as  it  existed  among  the  Bards  of
the  Isle  of  Britain  from  the  age  of  ages.”3

It  is  couched  in  the  form  of  question  and  answer
between  the  Bard  and  his  disciple.

The  Bard  first  informs  the  novice  that  he  “came.

1 He  is  probably  one  and  the  same  with  that  Hesus,  described
by  Lucan  as  a god  of  the  Gauls,  and  may  later  have  been
confounded  with  Jesus,

3 It  should  be  mentioned  here  that  the  existence  of  every  one
of  the  bards  alluded  to  has  been  authenticated,  and  that  the
works  of  most  of  them  have  been  published  in  The  Myvyrian
Archceohgy  and  elsewhere.  See  notes  to  Barddas,  pp.  224-5.


“Barddas”  101

from  the  Great  World”  and  had  his  beginning  in
Annwn,  but  that  he  is  now  in  the  Little  World,
having  traversed  the  circle  of  Abred , and  is  a man  at
its  termination  and  extreme  limits.  Before  that,  he
was  in  Annwn  "the  least  possible  that  was  capable  of
life”,  and  he  has  come  through  every  form  capable
of  body  and  life  to  the  state  of  man  along  the  circle
of  Abred.

Gwynvyd , he  assures  the  novice,  “cannot  be
obtained  without  seeing  and  knowing  everything,  but
it  is  not  possible  to  see  and  to  know  everything
without  suffering  everything.  And  there  can  be  no
full  and  perfect  love  that  does  not  produce  those
things  which  are  necessary  to  lead  to  the  knowledge
that  causes  Gwynvyd,  for  there  can  be  no  Gwynvyd
without  the  complete  knowledge  of  .every  form  of
existence,  and  of  every  evil  and  good,  and  of  every
operation  and  power  and  condition  of  evil  and  good.
And  this  knowledge  cannot  be  obtained  without
experience  in  every  form  of  life,  in  every  incident,  in
every  suffering,  in  every  evil  and  in  every  good,  so
that  they  may  be  respectively  known  one  from  the
other.  All  this  is  necessary  before  there  can  be
Gwynvyd,  and  there  is  need  of  them  all  before  there
can  be  perfect  love  of  God,  and  there  must  be  perfect
love  of  God  before  there  can  be  Gwynvyd .”

Every  living  being  shall  attain  at  last  to  the  circle
of  Gwynvyd,  traversing  the  circle  of  Abred  from  the
depth  of  Annwn,  and  passing  through  death  to  the
circle  of  Gwynvyd,  so  that  at  length  the  Abred  will
end  for  ever,  “and  there  shall  be  no  migrating
through  every  form  of  existence  after  that.”  But
God  alone  can  traverse  the  circle  of  Ceugant.  But
none  shall  go  at  death  to  Gwynvyd  who  in  life  did  not
attach  himself  to  goodness  and  godliness  and  every
act  of  wisdom,  justice  and  love.  It  is  a preponder-


102  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
ance  of  these  qualities  which  open  to  the  human  soul
the  gates  of  Gwynvyd.  But  he  who  does  not  follow
goodness  “shall  fall  in  Abred  to  a corresponding  form
and  species  of  existence  of  the  same  nature  as  himself,
whence  he  shall  return  to  the  state  of  man  as
before.  . . . And  thus  shall  he  fall  for  ever  until
he  seeks  godliness.”  One  may  fall  many  times  in
Abred , and  the  migration  of  most  through  it  is  long.
Even  the  angels  who  reached  Gwynvyd  fell  once
more  in  Abred  through  attempting  to  reach  Ceugant,
the  sphere  inhabited  by  God  alone.

When  the  Cymry  were  converted  to  the  faith  of
Christ,  says  Sion,  their  Bards  obtained  a clearer
A wen,  or  inspirational  vision,  from  God.  Awen  is
to  be  obtained  by  habituating  oneself  to  a holy  life,  to
love,  justice  and  mercy  and  the  practice  of  good
sciences,  and  the  avoidance  of  all  hatred  and  cruelty.

That  transmigration  of  a kind  is  implied  in  the
bardic  writings  may  be  observed  from  the  following
passage  : “ When  a wicked  man  dies  and  his  soul
enters  the  meanest  worm  in  existence,  he  becomes
better  and  ascends  on  the  migration  of  Abred.’'
The  bard  Casnodyn  (a.d.  1290-1340)  seems  to
allude  to  this  belief  when  he  says  :

Thou  didst  prepare  the  slough  of  hell  suitable  for  Satan,

The  habitation  for  worms,  where  they  will  be  in  mortal
strife.

There  follows  a quaint  myth  of  the  creation,  in
which  Hebrew  and  Cymric  ideas  are  strangely
associated,  and  in  which  we  are  informed  that  the
first  man  was  Menyw  the  Aged.1  The  world,  it  is
said,  was  formed  out  of  the  manred,  atoms  collected
out  of  the  infinite  expanse  in  the  circle  of  Ceugant
and  arranged  in  order  in  the  circle  of  Gwynvyd  “as
1 Cf.  the  Egyptian  Mena,  or  Menes.


“Bard  das”  103

worlds  and  lives  and  creatures,  without  number,
weight  or  measure.  And  Annwn,  the  abyss,  was
created  in  the  extreme  limits  of  the  circle  of
Gwynvyd” .

W e have  next  to  traverse  an  immense  tract  of  long
and  rather  sententious  triads  which  need  not  detain
us  here,  such  as  “The  three  indispensables  of  godli-
ness : love  ; truth  ; and  prudence.”  But  we  return
to  essentials  when  we  encounter  the  doctrine  of
Eneidvaddeu.

In  the^  Laws  of  Dyvnwal  Moelmud  we  read  :
“There  are  three  strong  punishments  : eneidvaddeu  ;
cutting  off  a limb  ; and  banishment  from  the  country,
by  the  cry  and  pursuit  of  men  and  dogs ; and  it  is
for  the  king  to  direct  which  he  willeth  to  be  inflicted.”
This  makes  the  doctrine  in  question  as  old  at  least
as  430  b.c.,  says  the  commentator  of  Barddas , and
it  is  plain  that  the  significance  of  the  word  is
“reparation”.  As  the  passages  in  relation  to  it  are
somewhat  obscure  I prefer  to  quote  them  :

In  three  ways  a man  may  happen  to  become
eneidvaddeu;  one  is  punishment  due,  by  the  verdict  of
country  and  law,  for  injurious  evil— an  injurious  evil
being  killing  and  burning,  murder  and  waylaying,  and
the  betraying  of  country  and  nation.  That  is  to  say,  he
who  commits  those  evils  ought  to  be  executed;  and  every
execution  takes  place  either  by  the  judgment  of  a court
of  law,  or  in  war  by  the  verdict  of  country  and  nation.
The  second  is  the  man  who  surrenders  himself,  at  the
demand  of  justice  which  he  feels  in  his  conscience,  to
execution  for  an  injurious  and  punishable  evil,  which
he  confesses  to  have  committed,  and  where  he  cannot
render  compensation  and  satisfaction  for  the  injury  he
has  done,  otherwise  than  by  submitting  voluntarily  to
the  punishment  due  for  what  he  has  done.  The  third
is  the  man  who  undergoes  the  danger  and  chance  of
execution  in  behalf  of  truth  and  justice,  at  the  call  of
peace  and  mercy,  and  is  slain.  Such  a man  is  adjudged
to  be  slain  for  the  good  which  he  has  done;  and  on
that  account  he  ascends  to  the  circle  of  Gwynvyd . In


104  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

any  other  than  these  three  ways,  a man  cannot  be
adjudged  as  eneidvaddeu  by  man,  for  it  is  God  alone  who
knows  how  to  judge  what  is  otherwise.  The  first  of  them
will  remain  in  Abred,  in  the  state  and  nature  of  man,
without  falling  lower;  and  the  other  two  will  ascend  to
the  circle  of  Gwynvyd.

The  three  accelerations  of  the  end  of  Abred : diseases;
fighting;  and  becoming  eneidvaddeu , justly,  reasonably,
and  necessarily,  from  doing  good ; for  without  them  there
would  be  no  release  from  Abred,  but  at  a much  later
period.  Herein  is  seen  that  it  was  for  the  benefit  of,
and  mercy  to,  living  beings,  God  ordained  the  mutual
fighting  and  mutual  slaughter  which  take  place  among
them.

We  now  come  to  the  third  book,  “The  Book  of
Wisdom”,  in  which  we  are  first  attracted  by  the
doctrines  of  the  elements  : “ Manred , the  original
form  of  all  the  materials,  or  all  the  constituents,  that
is,  the  elements,  of  which  the  first  four  of  the  five
were  dead,  namely,  calas,  fluidity,  breath,  and  fire,
until  God  agitated  them  by  uttering  His  Name,  when
instantly  they  became  alive  and  in  one  triumphant
song,  and  manifested  their  condition.

‘ ‘The  three  materials  of  every  being  and  existence  :
calas , and  hence  every  motionless  body  and  solidity,
and  every  hardness  and  concretion ; fluidity,  and
hence  every  cessation,  migration,  and  return;  and
nwyvre,  hence  every  animation  and  life,  and  every
strength,  understanding  and  knowledge,  and  the
same  is  God,  without  Whom  there  can  be  no  life
and  vitality.

Others  say  :

There  are  three  materials  of  everything,  namely  :
calas,  and  hence  every  corporeity  ; fluidity,  and  hence
every  colour  and  form,  and  every  course  and  return  ;
and  nwyvre,  and  hence  every  life,  being  God,  from
Whom  proceeds  every  soul,  animation,  strength  and
understanding,  for  where  He  is  not,  neither  one  nor
another  of  these  things  can  exist.”


“Barddas”  105

According  to  another  mode,  as  other  teachers  say
from  an  old  account  :

Earth,  water,  firmament,  fire  and  nyv  ; and  the
nyv  is  God,  and  life,  and  intellect.  From  the  first
four  are  all  death  and  mortality  ; and  from  the  fifth
are  all  life  and  animation,  all  power,  knowledge,  and
motion .

We  next  come  to  statements  regarding  the
Materials  of  Man.  These  are  attributed  to  the  Bard
Taliesin,  are  taken  from  The  Book  of  Llanwrst
and  are  as  follows  :

There  are  eight  parts  in  man:  the  first  is  the  earth,
which  is  inert  and  heavy,  and  from  it  proceeds  the  flesh;
the  second  are  the  stones,  which  are  hard,  and  are  the
substance  of  the  bones;  the  third  is  the  water,  which  is
moist  and  cold,  and  is  the  substance  of  the  blood;  the
fourth  is  the  salt,  which,  is  briny  and  sharp,  and  from  it
are  the  nerves,  and  the  temperament  of  feeling,  as  regards
bodily  sense  and  faculty;  the  fifth  is  the  firmament,  or
wind,  out  of  which  proceeds  the  breathing;  the  sixth  is  the
sun,  which  is  clear  and  fair,  and  from  it  proceed  the  fire,
or  bodily  heat,  the  light  and  colour;  the  seventh  is  the
Holy  Ghost,  from  Whom  issue  the  soul  and  life ; and  the
eighth  is  Christ,  that  is  the  intellect,  wisdom,  and  the  light
of  soul  and  life.

If  the  preponderating  part  of  man  is  from  the  earth,  he
will  be  foolish,  sluggish  and  very  heavy  ; also  a short,
little,  and  slender  dwarf,  in  a great  or  small  degree,
according  to  the  preponderance.  If  it  should  be  from  the
firmament,  he  will  be  light,  unsteady,  garrulous,  and  fond
of  gossip.  If  from  the  stones,  his  heart,  understanding
and  judgment  will  be  hard,  and  he  will  be  a miser  and  a
thief.  If  from  the  sun,  he  will  be  genial,  affectionate,
active,  docile,  and  poetic.  If  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  then
he  will  be  godly,  amiable,  and  merciful,  with  a just  and
gentle  judgment,  and  abounding  in  arts.  And  being
thus,  he  cannot  but  equiponderate  with  Christ,  and  divine
sonship.

The  parts  of  the  human  body  in  which  the  faculties
lie  are  enumerated  as  follow  ;

1 . In  the  forehead  are  the  sense  and  intellect ;

2 . In  the  nape  is  the  memory  ;


106

3-

4-
5*
6.

7*

8.

9'

10.

11.

12.


The  Mysteries  of  Britain
In  the  pate  are  discretion  and  reason  ;
In  the  breast  is  lust ;

In  the  heart  is  love  ;

In  the  bile  are  anger  and  wrath  ;

In  the  lungs  is  the  breath  ;

In  the  spleen  is  joyousness  ;

In  the  body  is  the  blood  ;

In  the  liver  is  the  heat ;

In  the  spirit  is  the  mind  ;

In  the  soul  is  faith.


We  are  then  introduced  to  a long  series  of
dissertations  on  the  cycle  of  the  year,  and  the  months,
and  later  to  the  “Book  of  Privilege  and  Usage",
deals  with  the  laws  and  regulations  of

The  surprising  resemblance  of  the  ideas  discovered
in  Barddas  to  certain  systems  of  Eastern
philosophy  and  theology  cannot  but  have  struck  the
reader.  Indeed,  it  must  be  clear  that  it  enshrines
the  remains  of  a world-system  of  thought  probably
greatly  more  ancient  than  Druidism  itself,  and
containing  ideas  common  to  Egyptian,  Brahmin  and
Buddhist  philosophy.

But  that  it  was  copied  from  any  of  these  at  first-
hand it  is  ludicrous  to  suppose.  There  was,  indeed,
no  opportunity  for  a Welsh  bard  or  bards  of  the
thirteenth  or  any  century  up  to  the  seventeenth
deliberately  borrowing  from  the  sacred  systems  of  the
East.  True,  in  Roman  times  a great  deal  of
Oriental  philosophy  found  its  way  to  Britain,  and  it
is  possible  that  this  may  have  coloured  Druidism  to
some  extent.  But  the  main  beliefs  set  forth  in  the
system  appearing  in  Barddas  are  already  indicated,
if  roughly,  in  what  Caesar  and  other  classical  writers
have  to  say  regarding  Druidism.


“Barddas”  107

It  seems,  indeed,  much  more  probable  that  the
system  appearing  in  Barddas  had  its  primal
origin  in  that  North-West  African  centre  whence
came  the  Iberian  race,  than  in  the  East.  That  it  had
absorbed  Christian  elements  as  well  is  obvious,  but
in  the  course  of  centuries  of  Christianity  it  was
impossible  that  it  should  not  be  so.  But  this  renders
it  no  more  “Christian”  than  certain  American  Indian
legends  have  become  Christian  through  European
sophistication.

Let  us  briefly  review  the  “theological”  material
drawn  from  Barddas.  First,  we  have  in  God  and
Cythraul , light  and  darkness,  an  evidence  of  that
duality  visible  in  most  religions  which  have  passed
the  primary  stage.  Only,  we  do  not  find  Cythraul ,
which  is  described  as  “darkness”  and  “powerless
inability”,  as  an  active  force  of  evil,  like  Satan,  or
the  Persian  Ahriman.  Indeed,  this  “inability”  is
so  little  harmful  that  God  actually  unites  with  it  to
“subdue  it  unto  life.”

Annwn,  the  abyss,  is  a region  by  no  means  exotic,
for  it  enters  into  the  mabinogi  of  “Pwyll,  Prince  of
Dyfed.”  Its  ruler  is  Arawn,  who  takes  Pwyll’s
place  on  earth  for  a year  while  the  Prince  of  Dyfed
sets  the  affairs  of  his  dark  realm  to  rights.  It  is  also
mentioned  in  the  ancient  poem  called  “The  Spoils  of
Annwn ” in  The  Book  of  Taliesin,  and  the  name
may  even  have  been  applied  in  a mocking  sense  to
that  part  of  Britain  north  of  the  Wall.

But  the  earliest  type  of  Annwn  was  rather  a place
of  Elysium  than  an  abyss  of  death,  or  it  may  be,
conversely,  that  it  was  the  idea  of  a grim  gulf  which
was  transformed  to  the  notion  of  a place  of  delight.
In  any  case,  early  ideas  of  the  Otherworld  are  usually
sufficiently  vague,  but  it  certainly  looks  as  if  the  word
had  been  utilized  in  the  Bardic  writings  as  a specific


108  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
name  for  a pit  of  matter  awaiting  the  vivifying
influence  of  soul-force  to  spring  into  life.  In  this  it
bears  a resemblance  to  certain  American  Indian
mythic  centres,  especially  to  that  of  the  Zuni  of  New
Mexico,  and  it  is  similar  to  the  state  alluded  to  in  a
hymn  in  the  Hindu  Rig- Veda,  when  there  was
neither  entity  nor  non-entity,  when  the  Universe  was
undistinguishable  water  enveloped  in  darkness.
“The  desire  (Karma)  arose  in  it,  which  was  the
primal  germ  of  mind  . . the  bond  between

entity  and  non-entity.”  This  is  certainly  a most
curious  correspondence,  but  to  argue  that  those  from
whose  writings  the  materials  in  Barddas  was  taken
knew  of  this  somewhat  obscure  hymn,  is  absurd.  We
find  much  the  same  state  of  things  alluded  to  in  the
Egyptian  myth  of  Ra,  in  his  form  of  Khepera.
“Heaven,”  says  Ra,  “ did  not  exist,  and  earth  had
not  come  into  being,  and  the  things  of  the  earth  and
creeping  things  had  not  come  into  existence  in  that
place,  and  I raised  them  from  out  of  Nu,  from  a state
of  inactivity.”  This  Nu  was  a watery  abyss,  similar
to  Annwn  (pronounced  “Anoon”).  When  the  myth
was  affixed  to  the  theology  of  the  Osirian  religion  we
read  that  Osiris  gave  the  primeval  abyss  a soul  of
its  own.

From  Annum , life  crawls  out  to  Abred , the  circle
of  trial,  the  material  world.  Abred  is,  indeed,  the
earth-plane,  which  cannot  but  be  evil,  but  from  which
the  rise  to  G'wynvyd  is  certain,  sooner  or  later,
although  many  relapses  into  Abred  may  take  place
before  its  consummation.  But  we  shall  return  to  the
consideration  of  the  theology  of  Barddas  in  a
subsequent  chapter  after  dealing  with  matters  which
may  throw  considerable  light  upon  it.


CHAPTER  V


THE  ARCANE  TRADITION  IN  BRITISH
MEDIEVAL  LITERATURE

We  have  now  to  pursue  our  quest  for  the  evidences
of  the  survival  of  native  arcane  belief  in  the  mediaeval
literature  of  Britain.  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth’s
Historia  Re  gum  Britannize  has  been  so  canvassed  by
the  critics  that  I do  not  propose  to  enter  the  welter
of  controversy  concerning  the  authenticity  of  its
sources.  I will  only  say  that  from  the  first  I almost
instinctively  adopted  the  theory  of  its  derivation  from
ancient  Cambrian  and  Breton  sources.  Subsequent
study  of  the  work  has  not  shaken  that  early
impression,  but  I may  perhaps  briefly  justify  it  here.

Geoffrey’s  proper  name  was  Grufydd  ab  Arthur,
he  was  a Welshman  and  Archdeacon  of  Monmouth,
therefore  had  exceptional  opportunities  of  gleaning
the  traditions  of  his  race  as  current  during  the  twelfth
century.  He  states  clearly  in  the  preface  of  one  of
the  earliest  manuscript  copies  of  his  work  that  he
“turned  this  book  from  Kymraeg  to  Latin  and  in
my  old  age  retranslated  it  from  Latin  to
Kymraeg.”  It  was,  therefore,  first  written  in  the
Welsh  tongue.  A later  version  of  the  manner  in
which  it  was  composed  states  that  Walter  Mapes,
Archdeacon  of  Oxford,  brought  a book  from  Brit-
tany, written  in  the  British  language,  which  could  only
be  translated  by  one  who  had  a knowledge  of  Kymric,
and  that  this  is  the  basis  of  Geoffrey’s  history.

There  seems  to  be  nothing  inharmonious  in  the
two  statements.  Geoffrey  might  well  have  drawn
the  materials  of  his  history  from  Welsh  tradition  and

XOp


110  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
from  such  a Breton  book,  and  I have  never  felt
constrained  to  credit  for  a moment  that  his  work  is
“one  of  the  great  literary  ruses  of  all  time.”  His
facts  differ  materially  from  those  of  Nennius  and  the
Cymric  chronicles  by  being  more  diffusive  in  parts,
defective  in  others  and  less  particular  in  all.  I do
not  for  a moment  suggest  that  much  of  it  is  not
fabulous,  but  this  does  not  at  all  detract  from  the
probability  that  it  was  drawn  from  such  sources  as  I
believe  it  to  have  been.  Moreover,  many  of  the
allusions  to  the  Arthurian  story  are  such  as  were
almost  certainly  derived  from  a Breton  source.
Arthur’s  residence  is  invariably  given  as  Caerleon,
while  the  British  chronicles  as  constantly  refer  it  to
Cornwall.  Moreover  the  Roman  wars  of  that  hero
are  altogether  unknown  to  the  native  legends,  and
the  descriptions  of  Paris,  Burgundy,  the  Alps  and
Italy  could  certainly  not  have  been  written  in  the
first  instance  by  a contemporary  Briton.  Again,
Geoffrey  displays  an  almost  complete  ignorance  of
Kymric  incidents  in  Arthur’s  career,  and  the
discrepancies  between  his  work  and  that  of  Nennius
as  regards  early  British  chronicles  are  so  salient  as
to  render  it  positive  that  he  followed  some  alien  source
in  the  main.  The  mere  fact,  too,  that  the  Breton
book  is  associated  with  the  name  of  Walter  Mapes,
the  great  introducer  of  Cymric  romance  in  Norman
dress,  is  sufficient  to  justify  Geoffrey’s  statement  that
he  procured  it  from  Mapes,  who  never  at  any  time
denied  the  circumstance.

But  this  is  not  to  say  that  Geoffrey  had  not  access
to  certain  Welsh  manuscripts  and  traditions,  or  that
he  did  not  make  use  of  them.  That  he  did,  is,  I
think,  obvious  enough,  from  the  fact  that  he  was
also  the  author  of  the  Vita  Merlini , the  prophecies
of  Merlin.


The  Arcane  Tradition  111
Now,  Mr.  Kendrick  says  that  in  his  history  and
his  Vita  Geoffrey  mentions  not  a word  about
Druidical  training  or  practice.  But  that  is  surely
beside  the  question.  He  alludes  to  Merlin,  for
example,  as  “rex  erat  et  vates”,  a king  and  a
prophet.  But  as  we  do  not  have  the  Welsh  version
of  his  history  to  guide  us,  we  cannot  say  from  what
word  the  expression  “vates”  was  translated.

In  Geoffrey’s  history,  then,  I believe  we  have  a
mingling  of  British  and  Armorican  traditions.  What
light,  precisely,  does  it  cast  on  the  early  British
tradition  of  arcane  belief,  if  any  at  all  ?

In  Chapter  X we  read  how  Bladud  kept  fires  in
the  Temple  of  Minerva  which  never  went  out,  and
how  he  taught  necromancy  in  his  kingdom,  “nor  did
he  leave  off  practising  his  magical  operations  till  he
attempted  to  fly  to  the  upper  region  of  the  air  with
wings  which  he  had  prepared,  and  fell  down  upon
the  Temple  of  Apollo  in  the  city  of  Trinovantum,
where  he  was  dashed  to  pieces.”  This  is  precisely
what  we  find  certain  Irish  Druids  practising.

Then  we  read  of  King  Leir,  who  partitioned  the
kingdom  between  his  daughters,  and  of  the  manner
in  which  he  was  buried  in  a tomb  under  the  River
Sore  at  Leicester,  “which  had  been  built  originally
underground  to  the  honour  of  the  god  Janus”.
Janus  here  undoubtedly  stands  for  Bran  “the
Blessed”,  whose  triple-faced  head,  like  that  of  the
Roman  god,  had  magical  properties  of  guardianship,
and  Leir  himself  is  merely  the  British  sea-god  Llyr,
the  father  of  Manannan.  Belinus,  who  follows  in
the  chronicle,  is  another  Druidical  god  disguised  as
a British  king.

Searching  for  other  reminiscences  of  the  survivals
of  Druidic  belief,  we  encounter  a reference  to  Lud,
who  rebuilt  the  walls  of  Trinovantum,  or  London,


112  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
who  is  the  Keltic  deity  Llud  or  Nodens.  A little
farther  on,  we  read  of  a great  sacrifice  of  animals
offered  up  by  Cassibelaun  to  “the  tutelary  gods’1  in
token  of  victory.  “At  this  solemnity  they  offered
forty  thousand  cows  and  a hundred  thousand  sheep,
and  also  fowls  of  several  kinds  without  number,
besides  thirty  thousand  wild  beasts  of  several  kinds.
As  soon  as  they  had  performed  these  solemn  honours
to  their  gods,  they  feasted  themselves  on  the
remainder,  as  was  usual  at  such  sacrifices.”  The
description  of  the  animals  thus  slaughtered  is  pre-
cisely in  line  with  Druidic  practice,  especially  with
regard  to  the  wild  beasts,  of  which  many  thousands
were  annually  sacrificed  at  the  Druidic  festivals.

In  the  nineteenth  chapter  of  the  fourth  book  an
account  is  given  of  the  manner  in  which  Lucius,  King
of  Britain,  embraced  Christianity.  The  passage
reads  :

The  holy  doctors,  after  they  had  almost  extinguished
paganism  over  the  whole  island,  dedicated  the  temples,
that  had  been  founded  in  honour  of  many  gods,  to  the
one  only  God  and  His  saints,  and  filled  them  with  con-
gregations of  Christians.  There  were  then  in  Britain
eight  and  twenty  flamens,  as  also  three  archflamens,  to
whose  jurisdiction  the  other  judges  and  enthusiasts  were
subject.  These  also,  according  to  the  apostolic  com-
mand, they  delivered  from  idolatry,  and  where  they  were
flamens  made  them  bishops,  where  archflamens,  arch-
bishops. The  seats  of  the  archflamens  were  at  the  three
noblest  cities,  viz.,  London,  York,  and  the  City  of
Legions,  which  its  old  walls  and  buildings  show  to  have
been  situated  upon  the  River  Uske  in  Glamorganshire.
To  these  three,  now  purified  from  superstition,  were  made
subject  twenty-eight  bishops,  with  their  dioceses.

This  account  is  usually  regarded  as  entirely
fabulous.  But  when  one  recalls  what  has  already
been  said  regarding  the  Culdees  and  the  existence
in  the  early  British  Church  for  many  centuries  of  a
caste  which  in  many  ways  differed  from  the  orthodox


The  Arcane  Tradition  113

clergy,  it  seems  not  altogether  improbable  that  it
may  be  based  on  fact,  if  it  is  not  altogether  accurate.

The  next  reference  of  interest  is  that  concerning
Merlin,  who  was  consulted  by  Vortigern  regarding
the  building  of  a tower  in  which  he  might  successfully
defend  himself  from  the  fury  of  the  Saxons.  Hearing
that  Merlin  is  a man  who  never  had  a father,  and
being  advised  by  his  magicians  to  seek  for  such  an
one  and  to  sprinkle  the  foundations  of  the  tower  with
his  blood,  in  order  to  put  a finish  to  an  earthquake
which  constantly  overthrows  it,  Vortigern  sends  for
him.  He  confutes  the  magicians,  and  tells  the  king
that  his  tower  will  not  stand  because  of  two  dragons,
red  and  white,  which  fie  beneath  it  in  a pool.  Merlin
then  prophesies  concerning  the  future  of  Britain  in
a strain  which  indubitably  must  have  been  borrowed
from  native  Cambrian  sources.

Later,  Aurelius,  King  of  Britain,  desirous  of
erecting  a monument  to  those  British  nobles  who  had
been  slaughtered  by  the  Saxons,  once  more  consults
Merlin  as  to  the  nature  it  should  take,  and  the
enchanter  advises  him  to  send  to  Ireland  for  the
Giants’  Dance  (Stonehenge),  and  to  erect  it  in
Britain  as  a lasting  memorial  to  the  dead  heroes.
At  this  Aurelius  laughed,  and  Merlin,  rebuking  him,
answered  :

I entreat  your  majesty  to  forbear  vain  laughter,  for
what  I say  is  without  vanity.  They  are  mystical  stones,
and  of  a medicinal  virtue.  The  giants  of  old  brought
them  from  the  farthest  coast  of  Africa,  and  placed  them
in  Ireland,  while  they  inhabited  that  country.  Their
design  in  this  was  to  make  baths  in  them  when  they
should  be  taken  with  any  illness.  For  their  method  was
to  wash  the  stones,  and  put  their  sick  into  the  water,
which  infallibly  cured  them.  With  the  like  success  they
cured  wounds  also,  adding  only  the  application  of  some
herbs.  There  is  not  a stone  there  which  has  not  some
healing  virtue.


114  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
The  stones  were  accordingly  taken  down  and  con-
veyed to  Britain,  where  they  were  re-erected.

1 submit  that  this  account  is  a broken  and  hazy
tradition  of  the  actual  carriage  of  certain  of  the  stones
of  Stonehenge  to  Salisbury  Plain.  I do  not  for  a
moment  me'an  to  convey  the  impression  that  Stone-
henge was  erected  by  the  Druids,  for  there  is  the
best  possible  evidence  that  it  was  built  1700-1800
years  b.c.,  although  it  was  certainly  utilized  by  the
Druids  in  their  time.  But  I wish  to  indicate  the
African  association  of  the  cult  connected  with
Stonehenge,  as  mentioned  in  the  legend,  and  to
point  out  that  certain  of  the  stones  or  lesser  uprights
are  actually  of  non-local  origin,  having  been  brought,
according  to  Dr.  Thomas,  of  H.M.  Geological
Survey,  from  the  Prescelly  Range  in  Pembrokeshire.
That  they  were  erected  a little  later  than  the  large
outer  stones  is  certain.  Their  “alien”  origin  is  thus
soundly  proven,  and  I believe  Geoffrey’s  account
of  the  business  to  be  a distorted  and  time-worn
memory  of  the  manner  in  which  they  were  conveyed
from  west  to  east.  His  history  is  thus  justified  to  a
great  extent  as  a record  of  traditions  extraordinarily
venerable  and  important.1

But  was  Merlin  really  a “Druid”?  Indeed,  are
there  any  grounds  for  believing  that  he  ever  existed  ?
Says  Mr.  Kendrick  :

Actually  the  Merlin  stories  form  a group  that  origin-
ally concerned  two  distinct  persons,  one  a sixth  century
Welsh  prince,  Myrddin  ab  Morfryn,  and  the  other
Vortigern’s  prophet  Ambrosius,  who  figures  in  the
Historia  Britonum  of  Nennius.  Geoffrey  used  the  name
Merlinus  for  both  these  persons,  and  then  proceeded  to
combine  the  stories  about  them  as  though  they  referred
to  a single  individual.  The  Welsh  prince  is  certainly  the
hero  of  his  later  Vita.  Merlini , but  in  the  earlier  Historia

* On  the  whole  question  of  Stonehenge  see  F.  Stevens’s
Stonehenge  To-day  and  Yesterday,  published  by  the  Stationery
Office.


The  Arcane  Tradition  115

Regum  Britannics  it  is  Ambrosius  who  is  uppermost  in
his  mind;  in  fact,  in  his  first  work  he  plainly  says  that
Ambrosius  was  another  name  for  Merlin.

Other  authorities,  however,  have  different  explana-
tions of  the  personality  of  Merlin.  Canon  MacCulloch
regards  him  as  “an  ideal  magician,  possibly  an  old
god,  like  the  Irish  ‘god  of  Druidism’  ”.  Rhys
believed  him  to  be  a description  of  Keltic  Zeus,  who
was  worshipped  at  Stonehenge.

It  has  been  assumed  by  certain  authorities,  the
Comte  de  Villemarque  among  them,1  that  Myrddin
ab  Morfryn  was  a different  personage  from  Merlin-
Ambrosius,  or  Merlin  Emrys,  as  he  is  sometimes
called.  But  both  appear  to  have  lived  in  Strathclyde,
both  were  enchanters  and  predicted  the  same  events.
Again  Merlin- Ambrosius  appears  as  a young  man
before  Vortigern  about  the  year  480,  and  Merlin  ap
Morfryn  at  the  Court  of  Rydderch  Hael  is  an  old
man  in  570.  Merlin  ab  Morfryn  the  prince  was
apparently  the  person  whose  character  formed  the
nucleus  from  which  the  other  was  developed  as  a
figure  in  later  romance.  At  the  Court  of  Rydderch
Hael  he  was  known  as  Lalockin,  or  “the  twin”,  and
in  the  dialogue  between  him  and  his  sister
Gwenddydd  she  alludes  to  him  as  “my  world-famous
twin  brother”.  The  Welsh  bards  of  the  twelfth
century,  too,  put  the  predictions  of  Merlin- Ambrosius
into  the  mouth  of  Merlin  ab  Morfryn,  and  this  more
than  a century  after  Geoffrey’s  history  had  been
written,  therefore  they  must  have  believed  them  to
be  identical.  It  seems  probable  that  Merlin-
Ambrosius  was  so  called  because  of  his  patronage
by  Aurelius  Ambrosius,  brother  of  Uther  Pendragon,
who  was  supposed  to  have  destroyed  the  unpatriotic
Vortigern,  and  to  have  transplanted  Stonehenge.  In
all  likelihood  Merlin- Ambrosius  is  a mythological
1 Barzaz  Breiz,  Intro.,  p.  12,  Vol.  I.


116  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
character  engrafted  on  to  Merlin  ab  Morfryn,  who
in  his  youth  may  have  been  associated  with  Aurelius
Ambrosius.  Indeed,  there  are  several  Welsh  poems
attributed  to  Merlin,  and  there  is  no  good  reason  why
he  should  not  be  regarded  as  a real  man,  a “bardic
president  about  the  Water  of  Clyde”,  as  his  sister
calls  him,  renowned  as  an  enchanter  and  wise  man
in  the  sixth  century.  I am  aware  that  recent
criticism  absolutely  denies  the  reality  of  Merlin,  but
that  a Merlin  actually  existed  is  proved,  and  I cannot
subscribe  to  decisions  which  are  obviously  based  more
on  a mere  affectation  of  contempt  for  tradition,  and
even  fact,  than  on  reasonable  or  historical  grounds.
To  see  the  entire  corpus  of  Arthurian  literature
rejected  as  an  archaeologist  of  the  Tape-Measure
School  might  reject  an  artifact  because  it  had  no
“horizon”,  is  painful  indeed.  When  will  historical
critics  learn  that  tradition,  in  the  proper  hands,  can
be  as  of  much  avail  as  written  record?  But  the
Welsh  poems  which  presume  to  have  been  written
by  him  are  certainly  much  later  than  the  actual
Merlin’s  time.  That  Cymric  tradition  acknowledged
Merlin  as  a Druid  may  be  seen  from  the  following
verses  from  the  Breton,  given  by  Villemarque  :

Merlin  I Merlin  l where  art  thou  going
So  early  in  the  day  with  thy  black  dog?

Oil  oil  oil  oi ! oil
Ioi  l oi!  oi  l ioi ! oil

I have  come  here  to  search  for  the  way,

To  find  the  red  egg;

The  red  egg  of  the  marine  serpent,

By  the  sea  side  in  the  hollow  of  the  stone.

1 am  going  to  seek  in  the  valley,

The  green  water  cress,  and  the  golden  grass,

And  the  top  branch  of  the  oak,

In  the  wood  by  the  side  of  the  fountain.


The  Arcane  Tradition  117

Merlin!  Merlin!  retrace  your  steps;

Leave  the  branch  on  the  oak,

And  the  green  water  cress  in  the  valley,

As  well  as  the  golden  grass ;

And  leave  the  red  egg  of  the  marine  serpent,

In  the  foam  by  the  hollow  of  the  stone.

Merlin!  Merlin!  retrace  thy  steps,

There  is  no  diviner  but  God.

Villemarque,  writing  of  the  above  poem,  says  :

This  (the  Herbe  d’or,  golden  grass)  is  a medicinal
plant,  which  the  peasant  Bretons  hold  in  great  estimation.
They  pretend  that  at  a distance  it  shines  like  gold;  and
it  is  for  this  they  give  it  the  name.  If  one  should  happen
to  tread*  upon  it,  he  will  fall  asleep,  and  come  to  under-
stand the  languages  of  birds,  dogs  and  wolves.  It  is
but  rarely  to  be  met  with,  and  then  only  early  in  the
morning ; to  gather  it,  it  is  necessary  to  go  barefooted
and  in  a shirt,  and  it  should  not  be  cut,  but.  plucked
out  from  the  root.  It  is  said  that  holy  men  only  will
be  able  to  find  it.  It  is  no  other  than  the  Selage.  Also,
in  going  to  gather  it  barefooted,  and  in  a white  robe,
and  fasting,  no  iron  should  be  employed,  the  right  hand
should  be  passed  under  the  left  arm,  and  the  linen  should
only  be  used  once.”*

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  Geoffrey’s  writings  are
perhaps  more  redolent  of  Druidism  than  certain  critics
may  credit,  that  if  he  does  not  actually  mention  the
word  “Druid”,  his  pages  enshrine  a goodly  propor-
tion of  traditional  material  referring  to  Druidic
customs  and  personages,  proving  that  the  tradition  of
Druidism,  if  concealed  by  the  Bardic  caste,  was  by
no  means  popularly  defunct  in  his  day,  as,  indeed,
we  know  from  the  material  concerning  Prince  Hywel.

The  value  of  the  Arthurian  literature  in  the
conservation  of  ancient  British  mysticism  is  very
considerable.  That  literature  may  for  all  practical
purposes  be  divided  into  two  sections  : that  which
was  the  work  of  Welsh  bards  and  arose  out  of  Welsh
tradition , and  that  which  was  probably  derived  there-
from and  composed  in  Norman-French  and  English.

* It  will  be  observed  that  the  same  procedure  applies  to  the
plucking  of  this  plant  as  to  that  of  the  mandrake.


118  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

It  is  surprising  what  a hold  the  Arthurian  saga
seems  to  have  taken  on  the  British  mind  from  first
to  last,  and  this  can  only  be  accounted  for,  I think,
not  only  by  the  circumstances  that  it  had  a native
origin,  or  that  it  appealed  to  the  generations  “when
chivalry  lifted  up  her  lance  on  high”,  but  that  it  was
innately  and  instinctively  felt  that  in  these  ancient
British  tales  there  resided  not  only  the  memory  of
brave  and  romantic  things,  but  a mystical  tradition
much  more  profound  and  thought-compelling.

This  occult  tradition,  indeed,  emerged  more  clearly
defined  in  the  literature  of  the  Grail,  which,  in  some
respects,  is  an  appendix  to  the  Arthurian  saga.  But
the  latter  itself  in  its  more  separate  form  is  our  theme
at  the  moment.

It  would  be  fruitless  here  to  deal  at  any  length
with  the  origins  of  the  Arthurian  saga.  That  it  was
Keltic  and  British  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt.
It  appears  from  a comparative  study  to  have  been
common  to  both  branches  of  the  Keltic  race  in
Britain,  and  the  Normans,  making  conquests  in  South
Wales,  became  familiar  with  it.  As  Rhys  indicates,
the  names  Arthur  and  Airem  proceed  from  a common
verbal  root.  Airem  and  Emer  were,  in  Irish  legend,
the  sons  of  Golam  or  Mil,  and  are  the  Keltic
equivalents  of  Romulus  and  Remus,  sons  of  Mars.
Emer  seems  to  have  been  the  eponymous  ancestor
of  the  non-Keltic  inhabitants  of  Ireland,  and  was
slain  by  Airem,  the  progenitor  of  the  conquering
Kelts.  Airem  wedded  Etain,  daughter  of  Etar,
King  of  the  Echraidi  or  Faery,  who  was  carried  off
by  one  Mider,  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as
Guinevere  was  spirited  away  by  Modred.  Etain  and
Guinevere  were  both  daughters  of  fairy  kings.
“ Provided  due  allowance  is  made  for  the  difference
between  the  social  settings  of  the  respective  stories,”


The  Arcane  Tradition  119
says  Rhys,  “the  similarity  becomes  more  unmistak-
able the  more  it  is  scanned”  . The  names  of  both
queens,  too,  can  be  traced  etymologically  to  a similar
root , implying  ■ ‘ ghostly  ” or  “ shadowy” . Thus  not
only  the  circumstances  of  the  legends  but  the  actual
similarity  of  the  names  of  their  principal  personages
seem  to  show  that  the  northern  Goidelic  Kelts
possessed  a body  of  myth  almost  precisely  parallel
with  the  Arthurian  story  of  the  Brythons.  The  high
literary  excellence  and  more  formal  shape  of  the
Arthurian  tradition,  coming  from  the  south,  probably
dictated  the  absorption  of  the  similar  Goidelic  myth,
and  resulted  in  the  final  reunion  of  traditions  which
must  have  had  a similar  provenance  in  the  misty
past,  when  Goidel  and  Cymry  were  as  yet  undivided.
The  existence  of  a powerful  British  or  Welsh-
speaking state  in  Strathclyde  in  the  south-west  of
Scotland  and  Cumberland  probably  did  much  to  fuse
the  two  Keltic  legends  into  one,  and  the  later
migration  of  many  of  its  inhabitants  to  North  Wales
must  have  assisted  the  process.

“ The  original  machinery,  so  to  say,  of  Welsh
tales,”  says  Rhys,1  “was  magic  and  the  super-
natural. . . . This  was  also  probably  the  case

with  the  stories  about  Arthur  as  they  came  from  the
mouths  of  the  Brythonic  Kelts.”  That. they  had  their
origin  in  mythological  ideas  associated  with  the
religion  of  the  Druids  there  can  be  no  doubt.  . Says
Canon  MacCulloch  : “We  may  postulate  a local
Arthur  saga  fusing  an  old  Brythonic  god  with  the
historic  sixth  century  Arthur.  From  this  or  from
Geoffrey’s  handling  of  it  sprang  the  great  romantic
cycle.  In  the  ninth  century  Nennius’s  Arthur  is  the
historic  war-chief,  possibly  Count  of  Britain,  but  in
the  references  to  his  hunting  the  Porcus  Tr'oit  (the
* Arthurian  Legend , p.  2,


120  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
Twrch  Trwyth)  the  mythic  Arthur  momentarily
appears.  Geoffrey’s  Arthur  differs  from  the  later
Arthur  of  romance,  and  he  may  have  partially
rationalized  the  saga,  which  was  either  of  recent
formation  or  else  local  and  obscure,  since  there  is  no
reference  to  Arthur  in  the  Mabinogion.  . . .In

Geoffrey,  Arthur  is  the  fruit  of  Igerna’s  amour  with
Uther,  to  whom  Merlin  has  given  her  husband’s
shape.  Arthur  conquers  many  hosts  as  well  as
giants,  and  his  court  is  the  resort  of  all  valorous
persons.  But  he  is  at  last  wounded  by  his  wife’s
seducer,  and  carried  to  the  Isle  of  Avallon  to  be
cured  of  his  wounds,  and  nothing  more  is  ever  heard
of  him.  Some  of  these  incidents  occur  also  in  the
stories  of  Fionn  and  Mongan,  and  those  of  the
mysterious  begetting  of  a wonder  child  and  his  final
disappearance  into  fairyland  are  local  forms  of  a tale
common  to  all  branches  of  the  Kelts.  This  was  fitted
to  the  history  of  the  local  god  or  hero  Arthur,  giving
rise  to  the  local  saga  to  which  were  afterwards  added
events  from  the  life  of  the  historic  Arthur.  This
complex  saga  must  then  have  acquired  a wider  fame
long  before  the  romantic  cycle  took  its  place,  as  is
suggested  by  the  purely  Welsh  tales  of  Kulhwych
and  the  Dream  of  Rhonabwy , in  the  former  of  which
the  personages  (gods)  of  the  Mabinogion  figure  in
Arthur’s  train,  though  he  is  far  from  being  the
Arthur  of  the  romances.  Sporadic  references  to
Arthur  occur  also  in  Welsh-  literature,  and  to  the
earlier  saga  belongs  the  Arthur  who  spoils  Elysium
of  its  cauldron  in  a Taliesin  poem.  . . . He

may  have  been  the  object  of  a cult  as  these  heroes
(Fionn  and  Cuchulainn)  perhaps  were,  or  he  may
have  been  a god  more  and  more  idealized  as  a hero.
If  the  earlier  form  of  his  name  was  Artor,  ‘a  plough-
man’, but  perhaps  with  a wider  significance,  and


The  Arcane  Tradition  121
having  an  equivalent  in  Artaius,  a Gaulish  god
equated  with  Mercury,  he  may  have  been  a god  of
agriculture  who  became  a war-god.  But  he  was  also
regarded  as  a culture-hero,  stealing  a cauldron  and
also  swine  from  the  gods*  land,  the  last  incident
euhemerized  into  the  tale  of  an  unsuccessful  theft
from  March,  son  of  Meirchion,  while,  like  other
culture-heroes,  he  is  a bard.”

This  pretty  well  summarizes  the  question  of
Arthurian  origins.  In  Arthur’s  saga  nearly  all  the
characters  are  reminiscent  of  ancient  Brythonic
deities,  Kai,  Per edur,  and  the  rest.  It  remains  for  us
to  discover  precisely  how  much  of  the  mystical  tradi-
tion is  to  be  found  remaining  in  (i)  the  native  Welsh
poems  which  allude  to  him  and  (2)  in  the  Norman
and  English  romances  which  deal  with  his  story.

We  have  already  dealt  to  some  extent  with  the
tradition  of  Arthur  as  alluded  to  in  the  pages  of
Geoffrey  and  Nennius.  The  early  Welsh  poems
contain  few  references  to  Arthur,  indeed  only  five
mention  him  at  all,  and  then  it  is  rather  the
“historical”  than  the  mythical  Arthur.  But  there  is
one  poem  which  merits  our  especial  consideration.
That  is  the  poem  generally  known  as  “The  Spoils
of  Annwn”,  credited  to  the  bard  Taliesin.  Owing
to  its  importance  to  our  general  thesis  it  is  essential
that  the  poem  be  here  given  in  its  entirety.  The
translation  is  that  of  Thomas  Stephens.1

Praise  to  the  Lord,  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  high  region,

Who  hath  extended  his  dominion  to  the  shore,  of  the  world,
Complete  was  the  prison  of  Gwair  in  Caer  Sidi.

Through  the  permission  of  Pwyll  and  Pryderi
No  one  before  him  went  to  it;

A heavy  blue  chain  firmly  held  the  youth,

And  for  the  spoils  of  Annwn  gloomily  he  sings,

And  till  doom  shall  he  continue  his  lay.

Thrice  the  fullness  of  Pridwen  we  went  into  it,

Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Sidi.

1 See  his  Literature  of  the  Kymry,  p.  192  ff.


122  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

Am  I not  a candidate  for  fame,  to  be  heard  in  the  song,
In  Caer  Pedryvan  four  times  revolving!

It  will  be  my  first  word  from  the  cauldron  when  it  expresses ;
By  the  breath  of  nine  damsels  it  is  gently  warmed.

Is  it  not  the  cauldron  of  the  chief  of  Annum,  in  its  fashion?
With  a ridge  round  its  edge  of  pearls!

It  will  not  boil  the  food  of  a coward  not  sworn,

A sword  bright  flashing  to  him  will  be  brought,

And  left  in  the  hand  of  Llemynawg,

And  before  the  portals  of  hell,  the  horns  of  light  shall  be
burning.

And  when  we  went  with  Arthur  in  his  splendid  labours,
Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Vediwid  (or  the
inclosure  of  the  perfect  ones).

Am  I not  a candidate  for  fame,  to  be  heard  in  the  song,

In  the  quadrangular  inclosure,  in  the  island  of  the  strong  door,
Where  the  twilight  and  the  jet  of  night  moved  together.
Bright  wine  was  the  beverage  of  the  host,

Three  times  the  fullness  of  Pry d wen,  we  went  on  sea,

Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Rigor  (or  the
inclosure  of  the  Royal  party).

I will  not  have  merit,  with  the  multitude  in  relating  the
hero’s  deeds,

Beyond  Caer  Wydr’they  beheld  not  the  prowess  of  Arthur?
Three  times  twenty-hundred  men  stood  on  the  wall,

It  was  difficult  to  converse  with  their  sentinel.

Three  times  the  fullness  of  Prydwen,  we  went  with  Arthur,
Except  seven,  none  returned,  from  Caer  Colur  (or  the
gloomy  inclosure).

I will  not  have  merit  from  the  multitude  with  trailing  shields,
They  know  not  on  what  day,  or  who  caused  it,

Nor  what  hour  in  the  splendid  day  Cwy  was  born,

Nor  who  prevented  him  from  going  to  the  meanders  of
Devwy.

They  know  not  the  brindled  ox,  with  his  thick  head-band,
And  seven  score  knobs  in  his  collar.

And  when  we  went  with  Arthur  of  mournful  memory,
Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Vandwy  (or  the
inclosure  resting  on  the  height).

I will  not  have  merit  from  men  of  drooping  courage,

They  know  not  what  day  the  chief  was  caused,

Nor  what  hour  in  the  splendid  day  the  owner  was  born ;
What  animal  they  keep  of  silver  head.

When  we  went  with  Arthur  of  mournful  contention,

Except  seven,  none  returned  from  Caer  Ochren  (or  the
inclosure  of  the  shelving  side ) .


v/w


THE  DESCENT  INTO  ANNWN


The  Arcane  Tradition  123

Monks  pack  together  like  dogs  in  the  choir
From  their  meetings  with  their  witches;

Is  there  but  one  course  to  the  wind,  one  to  the  water  of
the  sea,

Is  there  but  one  spark  to  the  fire  of  the  unbounded  tumult?
Monks  pack  together  like  wolves,

From  their  meetings  with  their  witches,

They  know  not  when  the  twilight  and  the  dawn  divide,

Nor  what  the  course  of  the  wind,  nor  who  agitates  it,

In  what  place  it  dies,  on  what  region  it  roars.

The  grave  of  the  saint  is  vanishing  from  the  foot  of  the
altar.

I will  pray  to  the  Lord,  the  great  Supreme,

That  I be  not  wretched — may  Christ  be  my  portion.

The  last  line,  as  Davies  surmised,  is  almost
certainly  a later  addition.  Critics  have  turned  away
from  this  most  abstruse  poem  in  despair.  What  is
its  purport,  its  hidden  meaning?  “ Could  Lycophon
or  the  sibyls,”  asks  Turner,  “ or  any  ancient  oracle
be  more  elaborately  incomprehensible?”  Davies
believed  that  it  was  associated  with  his  “Arkite”
mythology.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  the  Arthur
with  whom  we  have  to  do  is  not  the  Arthur  of
romance,  but  of  myth,  and  that  the  expedition  in
which  he  sailed  had  for  its  object  the  exploration  of
the  infernal  regions.  The  poem  is  on  the  same  lines
as  “The  Harrying  of  Hell”,  the  descent  into  the
gulf,  to  cow  its  evil  denizens  and  carry  away  its
secrets  and  treasures.  It  is,  indeed,  part  of  the  ritual
of  the  candidate  for  adeptship  into  the  British
mysteries,  resembling  that  for  the  neophyte  into  the
Osirian,  Cabiric  or  Orphean  mysteries.

If  the  poem  be  analysed,  the  first  verse  will  be
found  to  refer  to  the  Underworld  region  of  Annwn.
“The  prison  of  Gwair  in  Caer  Sidi”  may  be
explained  as  follows  : Gwair  ap  Geircin  had
attempted  the  journey,  or  essayed  the  adeptship,  had
failed,  and  had  been  imprisoned  in  Caer  Sidi,  which
sometimes  means  the  Zodiac,  sometimes  Ann,wn


124  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
itself.  He  was  known  as  “one  of  the  three  supreme
prisoners  of  the  isle  of  Britain”,  and  was  held  in
bondage  by  Pwyll,  Prince  of  Annwn  and  Pryderi,  his
son.  The  intention  of  Arthur  and  his  company  was
probably  to  rescue  him  or  complete  his  initiation,  and
for  that  purpose  three  times  a greater  number  of
initiates  than  could  be  contained  by  Arthur’s  ship
Pridwen  essayed  the  task.  Annwn  is  described  in
the  Mabinogion  of  Pwyll  as  a palatial  dwelling  replete
with  every  luxury  rather  than  a darksome  abyss,  thus
showing  that  the  idea  of  it  had  become  conven-
tionalized.

The  second  verse  alludes  to  the  mystic  cauldron  of
Keridwen,  warmed  by  the  breath  of  the  nine  damsels,
the  cauldron  of  inspiration  already  described,  and
“the  island  of  the  strong  door”  mentioned  in  the
fourth  verse  has  reference  to  some  such  mysterious
island  as  Sena,  where  dwelt  the  nine  damsels  or
Druidesses.  The  Caer  Wydr  spoken  of  in  the  fifth
verse  was  Arthur’s  vessel  of  glass  constructed  for
the  especial  purpose  of  the  exploration  of  Annwn,
and  the  bard  says  that  he  “will  not  have  merit  with
the  multitude  in  relating  the  hero’s  deeds,  because
they  could  not  see  his  prowess  after  he  had  entered
Caer  Wydr,  or  the  ‘place’  or  vessel  of  glass”.
Merlin  made  a similar  voyage  in  a similar  ship  or
diving-bell,  as  did  Alexander  the  Great,  and  indeed
the  latter  story  is  mentioned  by  Taliesin.  The
allusion  to  “the  brindled  ox  with  his  headband”  is
obviously  to  the  sacred  beast  which  figured  in  all
such  mysteries,  the  Osirian  and  the  Mithraic  as  well
as  the  British,  the  White  Bull  of  the  Sun.  The
place-names  which  conclude  most  of  the  stanzas
appear  to  have  reference  to  various  regions  in
Annwn.

The  last  verse  may  be  an  addition,  but  in  any  case


The  Arcane  T radition  125

it  seems  to  cast  aspersions  on  the  knowledge  of
churchmen  compared  with  that  of  the  Druidic  bards,
especially  as  regards  their  ignorance  of  the  regions
or  planes  of  Druidical  cosmogony.

Taken  as  a whole,  this  mysterious  poem  seems  to
refer  to  a definite  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  initiates
of  some  mystical  society  to  explore  the  underworld
plane  of  Annwn.  Attempts  have  been  made  to  prove
that  it  really  has  reference  to  an  expedition  of  Arthur
to  Caledonia,  which  was  euphemistically  known  as
Annwn  or  Hades,  probably  by  virtue  of  the  old
tradition  mentioned  by  Procopius  which  alluded  to  the
fatal  conditions  prevailing  north  of  the  Roman  Wall.
But  the  mystical  allusions  in  the  poem  readily  dispose
of  such  a hypothesis.

Rhys,  writing  on  the  subject,  says*  :

The  principal  treasure,  which  he  and  his  men  carried
away  thence,  was  the  Cauldron  of  the  Head  of  Hades,  that
is  to  say,  of  Pwyll.  In  that  poem,  xxx,a  Pwyll  and
Pryderi  are  associated  together,  and  the  cauldron  is  found
at  a place  called  Caer  Pedryvan,  the  Four-horned  or  Four-
cornered  Castle  in  Ynys  Pybyrdor  or  the  Isle  of  the  Active
Door,  the  dwellers  of  which  are  represented  quaffing
sparkling  wine  in  a clime  that  blends  the  grey  twilight
of  the  evening  with  the  jet-black  darkness  of  night ; so  lamps
burn  in  the  front  of  the  gates  of  Uffern  or  Hell.  Besides
the  names  Caer  Pedryvan  and  Uffern,  it  has  these  others  :
Caer  Vedwit,  meaning  probably  the  Castle  of  Revelry,
in  reference  to  the  wine-drinking  there;  Caer  Golud,  or
the  Castle  of  Riches ; Caer  Ochren,  Caer  Rigor,  and  Caer
Vandwy,  all  three  of  unknown  interpretation.

Elsewhere  Taliesin  sings  :

Perfect  is  my  chair  in  Caer  Sidi :

Plague  and  age  hurt  him  not  who’s  in  it —

They  know,  Manawydan  and  Pryderi.

Three  organs  round  a fire  sing  before  it,

And  about  its  points  are  ocean’s  streams
And  the  abundant  well  above  it — .

Sweeter  than  white  wine  the  drink  in  it.

i The  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  300.
a “ The  Spoils  of


126  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

Rhys  equates  this  with  passages  in  the  Welsh
“Seint  Greal”  legend,  and  states  with  reference  to
Gweir  that  “he  had  only  returned  after  a terrible
imprisonment  there  (Caer  Sidi),  an  initiation  which
made  him  for  ever  a bard”.  Farther  on,  once  more
referring  to 'the  cauldron,  he  says  :

With  regard  to  that  vessel,  Taliessin,  in  poem  xxx,
mentions  the  following  things  respecting  it : The  Cauldron
of  the  Head  of  Hades  had  a rim  set  with  pearls  adorning
it ; the  fire  beneath  it  was  kindled  by  the  breath  of  nine
maidens,  utterances  might  be  heard  issuing  from  it;
and  it  would  not  boil  food  for  a coward.  The  other  poem
does  not  mention  the  cauldron  as  being  at  Caer  Sidi,  but
says  that  he  who  has  his  seat  there  has  nought  to  fear
from  plague  or  old  age.  Compare  with  this  what  is  said
of  the  Grail  in  the  romances,  where  Pelles  and  his  brother
figure.  The  Grail,  when  it  comes,  feeds  those  at  the
table  with  whatever  kind  of  food  each  one  desires.  But
those  who  are  not  worthy  are  not  allowed  by  it  to  remain
or  to  approach  too  near  with  impunity.  Similarly  those
who  worship  at  the  Grail  Chapel  at  King  Peleur’s  remain
young  nor  mark  the  lapse  of  time.  Add  to  this  that  the
Grail  heals  the  sick  and  wounded.  By  means  of  accounts
other  than  those  in  which  the  Grail  belongs  to  Pelles  or
Peleur,  the  correspondence  between  it  and  the  Cauldron
of  Pwyll,  Head  of  Hades,  might,  perhaps,  be  more  strik-
ingly shown ; but  the  foregoing  is  sufficiently  near  for  our
purpose.  • Now,  as  the  original  identity  of  Pelles  and
Peleur  with  Pwyll  and  Pryderi  has  been  shown  to  be
probable,  as  has  also  the  identity  of  Carbonek,  where  the
Holy  Grail  was  kept,  with  Caer  Pedryvan,  where  Pwyll’s
Cauldron  was  found  by  Arthur  and  his  men,  the  conclusion
is  all  but  inevitable,  that  the  famous  Cauldron  served  as  a
prototype  of  the  far  more  famous  Grail.

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  visit  to  Annwn,  the
“Astral  Plane”,  as  we  might  call  it,  was  for  the
purpose  of  seizing  its  spoils,  its  cauldron  of  mystical
wisdom  or  inspiration.  It  is  plain  that  a certain  ritual
must  be  gone  through,  a severe  initiation,  before
its  portals  could  be  gained,  and  there  was  a risk  of
failure  and  “imprisonment”,  even  of  destruction.
The  prize  was  the  Grail  or  cauldron  of  prophecy,


The  Arcane  Tradition  127

which  renewed  life  and  gave  health  to  the  soul.  That
the  cultus  which  guarded  the  secret  was  one  of  select
initiates  is  obvious  from  the  allusion  to  the  multitude
who  “know  not”  the  ritual  of  its  mysteries.

But  what  of  Arthur’s  connection  with  this  myth
or  initiation  and  of  the  Harrying  of  Hades  ? It  is
plain  that  he,  like  Osiris,  is  the  god  of  a mystical
cult  who  must  periodically  take  a journey  through
the  underworld,  not  only  for  the  purpose  of  subduing
its  evil  inhabitants,  but  of  learning  their  secrets  and
passwords  in  order  that  the  souls  of  the  just,  the
perfected  initiates,  will  be  enabled  to  journey  through
that  plane  unharmed.  This  Osiris  did.  By  his
agency,  through  the  spells  and  passwords  given. in
his  books,  the  dead  Osirian,  the  man  of  his  cult,  is
franked  safely  through  the  gloomy  region  of  Amenti,
the  Egyptian  Annwn,  to  the  golden  realm  of  the
divinity,  so  that  he  may  live  for  ever.

That  Arthur  and  Osiris  are  indeed  figures
originating  in  a common  source  must  be  reasonably
clear  to  the  student  of  myth.  Druidism  is  only  the
cult  of  Osiris  in  another  form,  and  Arthur  seems  to
have  a common  origin  with  Ausar  or  Osiris.  When
Arthur  is  slain  at  the  battle  of  Camelon  by  his
treacherous  nephew  Modred,  he  is  carried  off  in  a
barque  by  his  sister  to  the  mysterious  Isle  of  Avallach
Or  Avallon,  an  oversea  or  underworld  locality,  “the
Place  of  Apples”.  There  he  remains,  neither  alive
nor  dead,  awaiting  the  fateful  day  when  Britain  shall
require  his  sword.

The  history  of  Osiris  has  many  points  of  resem-
blance with  that  of  Arthur.  When  slain  by  his
treacherous  brother  Set,  the  body  of  the  Egyptian
god  was  ferried  in  the  sacred  barque  across  the  Nile,
accompanied  by  his  mourning  sisters  Isis  and
Nephthys,  to  the. region  of  Aalu  in  the  West,  a place


128  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
of  plenteous  fruits  and  grain.  There  Osiris  was
supposed  to  rule  as  the  god  of  the  not-dead,  awaiting
a glorious  resurrection.

Both  Arthur  and  Osiris  were  associated  with  the
cult  of  the  bull.  Osiris,  indeed,  is  referred  to  as  a
bull,  the  Apis  bull  was  merely  a form  of  him,  and
in  the  poem  by  Taliesin  quoted  previously,  the
sacred  ox  is  alluded  to  in  connection  with  Arthur’s
descent  into  Annwn.

Horus  is  probably  the  resurrected  form  of  Osiris,
and  his  myth  bears  a close  resemblance  to  that  of
Arthur.  Like  that  monarch,  he  gathers  round  him
a company  of  warriors  who  devote  themselves  to  the
destruction  of  evil  monsters.  Horus  was  typified  by
the  hawk,  as  Arthur  was  by  the  crow,  for  no
Englishman  in  olden  times  would  kill  a crow  lest  it
held  the  hero’s  spirit.  The  name  of  Arthur’s
nephew  Gwalchmei  also  means  “hawk”.

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  points  of  resemblance
between  Arthur  and  Osiris  are  neither  few  nor
unimportant,  and  that  their  myths  appear  to  have
arisen  from  a common  source.  That  Arthur  was
the  god  of  a mystical  cult,  one  of  whose  rites  was
associated  with  a real  or  allegorical  passage  through
a lower  plane  from  which  mysterious  secrets  and
treasures  might  be  reft,  seems  certain  enough.  Are
there  any  evidences  of  the  survival  of  that  belief  in
British  literature  or  tradition?

Let  us  first  examine  the  Scottish  legend  of  Thomas
the  Rymour,  which  survives  in  a very  ancient  ballad
form.  Thomas  meets  with  the  Queen  of  Faerie  at
the  Eildon  Tree,  near  Ercildoune,  and  enters  her
mystic  hill.  After  a long  journey  through  the  Keltic
Underworld,  they  reach  a sphere  which  is  unques-
tionably one  and  the  same  with  the  Annwn  of  Welsh
legend.  It  is,  indeed,  Avallon,  for  it  is  wealthy  in


The  Arcane  Tradition  129
apple-trees,  which,  however,  must  not  be  plucked.
But  that  Thomas  entered  it  as  an  initiate  is  clear
from  the  fact  that  its  queen  instructs  him  in  the  art
of  prophecy,  the  very  art,  indeed,  sought  in  Annum
or  Avallon  by  Arthur  and  his  followers.  Moreover,
the  region  in  which  Thomas  actually  lived  was  long
before  his  day  either  a part  of  the  Keltic  and  Welsh-
speaking kingdom  of  Strathclyde  or  closely  in
cultural  touch  with  it.  The  Keltic  implications  of
the  myth  are  not  far  to  seek.  His  surname  of
Learmont,  indeed,  if  it  be  actually  historical,  might
be  interpreted  as  signifying  the  Mount  of  Ler  or
Llyr,  the  old  British  sea-god,  father  of  Manannan,
from  whom  the  Isle  of  Man  and  Clackmannan  take
their  names.  But  this  is  a mere  walking  upon  the
sands  of  surmise,  and  much  surer  footing  is  to  be
found  in  the  known  fact  that  he  flourished  in  an
environment'  which  in  his  time  was  by  no  means  yet
dissociated  from  Keltic  tradition,  and  in  the
assuredly  Keltic  colouring  of  the  myth  in  which  he
appears.  Not  only  is  the  name  of  Thomas  Rymour
traditionally  connected  with  prophecies  which  con-
tain a wealth  of  Keltic  allusions,  but  something  more
than  mere  tradition  associates  his  name  with  the
authorship  of  a romance  the  setting  and  personnel
of  which  are  essentially  Keltic — that  Sir  Tristram ,
which  was  cobbled  and  completed  by  a Wizard  still
more  potent  than  he.  There  exist,  too,  excellent
reasons  for  believing  that  even  in  the  fourteenth
century  his  countryside  had  not  altogether  cast  off
the  memory  and  influences  of  that  Brythonic
civilization  which  had  formerly  flourished  there.  The
etymology  by  which  his  sobriquet  of  "True
Thomas"  is  explained  as  "Druid"  Thomas  may
seem  far-fetched  enough,  but  has  authority  behind
it  at  least  equal  in  value  to  the  evidence  afforded  by


130  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
that  tradition  of  prophetic  practice  which  is  said  to
have  given  him  the  title.

But  even  more  valuable  as  a clue  to  the  Keltic
character  of  Thomas’s  legend  is  that  portion  of  it
which  records  his  durance  in  a subterranean  environ-
ment which  recalls  the  underground  dun  of  the
sidhe  or  fairies  of  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  Brittany.
Not  only  is  it  the  veritable  Queen  of  Faerie  herself
who  spirits  Thomas  away,  but  the  description
afforded  of  her  and  the  mise  en  scene  of  her  domain,
no  less  than  certain  happenings  therein,  prove  her
to  be  of  Keltic  provenance.  She  is  attired  in  a
manner  which  corresponds  closely  with  the  descrip-
tions we  have . of  the  sidhe  of  Ireland,  and  is
accompanied  by  the  inevitable  greyhounds  so  dear
to  these  picturesque  mound-dwellers.  Like  the
Loathly  Lady  of  Arthurian  story,  she  assumes  a
hag-like  aspect  on  being  kissed.  Once  beneath
Eildon  Hill,  Thomas  beholds  the  orchard  so  charac-
teristic of  the  Keltic  Otherworld,  but  is  warned  that
he  must  not  partake  of  its  fruit,  a certain  proof  that
this  is  no  other  than  the  food  of  the  dead,  of  which
if  a man  eat  he  may  give  up  all  hope  of  regaining
upper  earth.  He  hears,  too,  the  rushing  of  the  great
waters  which  separate  the  Keltic  Otherworld  from
the  land  of  the  quick.

It  is  also  noticeable  that  the  names  alluded  to  in
the  prophecies  of  Thomas  are  almost  exclusively
those  of  Keltic  mages  and  scribes,  Merlin  and  Gildas
being  chiefly  quoted,  and  the  legends  relating  to  the
first-mentioned  being  freely  drawn  upon.  The
Arthurian  character  of  many  of  the  prophecies  is,
indeed,  too  marked  to  be  ignored,  and  Scott,  duly
impressed  by  this,  gave  it  as  his  opinion  in  his
introduction  to  Sir  Tristram  that  Thomas  had
collected  his  material  from  among  the  floating


The  Arcane  Tradition  131
traditions  of  the  British  or  Welsh-speaking  people
of  Strathclyde,  which  still  lingered  in  the  southern
counties  during  the  fourteenth  century.

Now  it  is  apparent,  although  it  has  not  so  far  been
alluded  to  in  any  study  of  the  subject,  that  Thomas’s
legend  has  many  points  of  resemblance  with  that  of
Merlin  himself,  especially  as  detailed  in  Breton
folklore.  Like  Thomas,  Merlin  was  a soothsayer
who  fell  a victim  to  the  wiles  of  a fairy  enchantress,
Vivien,  whom,  according  to  one  Breton  form  of  the
legend,  he  met  in  the  glades  of  Broceliande.  He
dwelt  with  her  in  Joyous  Garden,  but  in  this  case
it  was  the  man  and  not  the  ” gay  lady e”  who
exhibited  signs  of  age  once  the  troth  was  plighted.
“ It  was  foreseen  long  ago,”  says  Merlin,  ” that  a
lady  should  lead  me  captive,  and  that  I should
become  her  prisoner  for  all  time.”  For  a season
he  leaves  Joyous  Gardenias  Thomas  and  Tann-
hauser  leave  their  places  of  durance.  But  Vivien
learns  from  him  an  enchantment  which  will  keep  him
with  her  for  ever,  and  employs  it  to  retain  him  in  her
power.  Waving  her  cloak  round  his  head,  she
plunges  him  into  a deep  slumber,  and  transports  him
once  more  to  Joyous  Garden,  where  he  is  doomed
to  remain  as  the  prisoner  of  love  for  ever.

But  the  important  thing  for  us  is  that  Thomas’s
myth  relates  the  adventures  of  a man,  and  a man
who  once  actually  existed,  in  search  of  initiation  in
the  Underworld.  Here  we  have  a Scotsman  of  the
thirteenth  century  experiencing  practically  the  same
adventures  in  the  Underworld,  or  astral  plane,  as
did  Arthur  and  his  companions.

And  this  is  only  one  of  a number  of  accounts  in
which  living  men  are  said  to  have  probed  the  secrets
of  the  supernatural  world  and  penetrated  to  some
subterranean  sphere  in  search  of  hidden  knowledge


132  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
— sure  evidence  that  the  Cult  of  Druidic  initiation
survived  well  into  modern  times.

It  will  be  germane  to  the  argument  if  we  examine
one  or  two  of  the  more  modern  of  these  explorations.
Let  us  turn  to  The  Secret  Commonwealth  of  Elves,
Fauns,  and  Fairies,  written  in  1691  by  the  Rev.
Robert  Kirk,  M.A.,  Minister  of  Aberfoyle  in
Scotland,  and  edited  by  the  late  Andrew  Lang  in
1893.  The  MS.  of  the  book  seems  to  have  been  in
the  possession  of  Colin  Kirk,  Writer  to  the  Signet,
Edinburgh,  and  does  not  appear  to  have  been  printed
before  the  issue  of  1815  by  Messrs.  Longman,
Scott's  statement  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.

The  circumstances  of  Kirk’s  life  are  well  enough
authenticated.  He  was  a student  of  theology  at  St.
Andrews  University,  but  took  his  Master  of  Arts
degree  at  Edinburgh.  He  was  the  seventh  and
youngest  son  of  James  Kirk,  who  had  also  held  the
charge  of  Aberfoyle,  and  he  originally  ministered  at
Balquidder.  A Keltic  scholar,  he  translated  the
Bible  and  Psalter  into  Gaelic,  publishing  the  latter  in
1684.  He  was  twice  married,  first  to  Isobel,
daughter  of  Sir  Colin  Campbell  of  Mochester,  and
secondly  to  the  daughter  of  Campbell  of  Forday,  who
survived  him.  I mention  these  facts  merely  to  show
that  he  was  not  apochryphal.  He  died  in  1692,  at
the  age  of  5 1 , and  his  tomb  is  inscribed  * ‘ Robertus
Kirk,  B.M.,  Linguae  Hiberniae  Lumen.”  “In
Scott’s  time,”  says  Lang,  “the  tomb  was  to  be
seen  in  the  east  end  of  the  Churchyard  of  Aberfoyle  ;
but  the  ashes  of  Mr.  Kirk  are  not  there.  His
successor,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Cochrane,  in  his  Sketches
of  Picturesque  Scenery , informs  us  that,  as  Mr.
Kirk  was  walking  on  a dunshi,  or  fairy-hill,  in  his
neighbourhood,  he  sunk  down  in  a swoon,  which  was
taken  for  death.”  ” After  the  ceremony  of  a


The  Arcane  Tradition  133
seeming  funeral,”  writes  Scott,  ” the  form  of  the
Rev.  Robert  Kirk  appeared  to  a relation,  and
commanded  him  to  go  to  Grahame  of  Duchray.
‘Say  to  Duchray,  who  is  my  cousin  as  well  as  your
own,  that  1 am  not  dead,  but  a captive  in  Fairyland  ;
and  only  one  chance  remains  for  my  liberation.
When  the  posthumous  child,  of  which  my  wife  has
been  delivered  since  my  disappearance,  shall  be
brought  to  baptism,  I will  appear  in  the  room,
when,  if  Duchray  shall  throw  over  my  head  the  knife
or  dirk  which  he  holds  in  his  hand,  I may  be
restored  to  society  ; but  if  this  is  neglected,  I am  lost
for  ever'.  True  to  his  tryst,  Mr.  Kirk  did  appear
at  the  christening  and  ‘was  visibly  seen’ ; but
Duchray  was  so  astonished  that  he  did  not  throw  his
dirk  over  the  head  of  the  appearance,  and  to  society
Mr.  Kirk  has  not  yet  been  restored.”  It  is  still
believed  in  the  neighbourhood  that  Kirk  was  spirited
away  by  the  fairies.

Kirk,  as  Lang  points  out,  treated  the  world  of
faery  as  ‘‘a  mere  fact  in  nature”,  his  Presbyterianism
notwithstanding.  He  did  not  believe  the  dwellers  in
fairyland  to  be  the  dead,  but  aery  spirits,  ‘‘an
abstruse  people,”  the  forerunners  of  our  more
substantial  race.  Indeed,  he  speaks  of  the  Elves  as
though  he  were  describing  the  denizens  of  the  Astral
Plane,  and  their  Kingdom  as  that  plane  itself.  But
the  point  for  us  is  that  in  order  to  get  into  communion
with  these  beings  it  was  essential  for  a man  to  under-
go a particular  ceremony  of  initiation  into  ‘‘the
Second  Sight.”

There  be  odd  Solemnities  at  investing  a Man  with  the
Priviledges  of  the  whole  Mistery  of  this  Second  Sight
[writes  Kirk].  He  must  run  a Tedder  of  Hair  (which
bound  a Corps  to  the  Bier)  in  a Helix  (?)  about  his
Midle,  from  End  to  End;  then  bow  his  Head  downwards,


134  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

as  did  Elijah,  I Kings  18,  42,  and  look  back  thorough
his  Legs  until!  he  sie  a Funerall  advance  till  the  People
cross  two  Marches ; or  look  thus  back  thorough  a Hole
where  there  was  a Knot  of  Fir.  But  if  the  Wind  change
Points  while  the  Hair  Tedder  is  ty’d  about  him,  he  is  in
Peril  of  his  Lyfe.  The  usewall  Method  for  a curious
Person  to  get  a transient  Sight  of  this  otherwise  invisible
Crew  of  Subterraneans  (if  impotently  and  over  rashly
sought)  is  to  put  his  (left  Foot  under  the  Wizard’s  right)
Foot,  and  the  Seer’s  Hand  is  put  on  the  Inquirer’s  Head,
who  is  to  look  over  the  Wizard’s  right  shoulder  (which
hes  ane  ill  Appearance,  as  if  by  this  Ceremony  ane  implicit
Surrender  were,  made  of  all  betwixt  the  Wizard’s  Foot
and  his  Hand,  ere  the  Person  can  be  admitted  a privado
to  the  Airt) ; then  will  he  see  a Multitude  of  Wight’-s,
like  furious  hardie  Men,  flocking  to  him  haistily  from  all
Quarters,  as  thick  as  Atoms  in  the  Air;  which  are  no
Nonentities  or  Phantasms,  Creatures  proceiding  from  ane
affrighted  Apprehensione,  confused  or  crazed  Sense,  but
Realities,  appearing  to  a stable  Man  in  his  awaking  Sense,
and  enduring  a rational!  Tyrall  of  their  Being.  Thes
thorow  Fear  strick  him  breathless  and  speechless.  The
Wizard,  defending  the  Lawfulness  of  his  Skill,  forbids
such  Horror,  and  comforts  his  Novice  by  telling  of
Zacharias,  as  being  struck  speechless  at  seeing  Appari-
tions, Luke  I.  20.  Then  he  further  maintains  his  Airt,
by  vouching  Elisha  to  have  had  the  same,  and  disclos’d
it  thus  unto  his  Servant  in  2 Kings  6,  17,  when  he
blinded  the  Syrians ; and  Peter  in  Act  5,  9,  forseing  the
Death  of  Saphira,  by  perceaving  as  it  were  her  Winding-
sheet  about  her  beforehand;  and  Paul  in  2nd  Corinth.
12,  4,  who  got  such  a Vision  and  Sight  as  should  not,
nor  could  not  be  told.  . . . And  again,  that  Men  of

the  Second  Sight  (being  designed  to  give  warnings  against
secret  Engyns)  surpass  the  ordinary  Vision  of  other
Men,  which  is  a native  Habit  in  some,  descended  from
their  Ancestors,  and  acquired  as  ane  artificiall  Improve-
ment of  their  natural  Sight  in  others ; resembling  in  their
own  Kynd  the  usuall  artificiall  Helps  of  optic  Glasses  (as
Prospectives,  Telescopes,  and  Microscopes),  without
which  asctitious  Aids  those  Men  here  treated  of  do
perceive  Things  that,  for  their  Smalness  or  Subtility,
and  Secrecy,  are  invisible  to  others,  tho  dayly  conversant
with  them;  they  having  such  a Beam  continuallie  about
them  as  that  of  the  Sun,  which  when  it  shines  clear  only,
lets  common  Eyes  see  the  Atomes,  in  the  Air,  that  with-
out those  Rayes  they  could  not  discern ; for  some  have
this  Second  Sight  transmitted  from  Father  to  Sone  thorow


The  Arcane  Tradition  135

the  whole  Family,  without  their  own  Consent  or  others
teaching,  proceeding  only  from  a Bounty  of  Providence
it  seems,  or  by  Compact,  or  by  a complexionall  Quality  of
the  first  Acquirer.

Now  this,  I suggest,  is  an  account  not  of  something
imaginary,  but  of  the  long-preserved  ritual  of  a
hereditary  cult  whose  members  actually  or  professedly
were  able  to  communicate  with  and  enter  some  other
plane  resembling  that  Annwn  of  which  Taliesin’s
mystical  poem  speaks,  a long  descended  Keltic  rite
of  occult  potency,  recognized  as  practicable  by  men
living  only  1.37  years  ago.

I have  followed  Kirk  so  long  because  I desired  to
indicate  the  presence  and  survival  of  what  I believe
to  have  been  a definite  tradition  of  contact  with
another  plane,  through  the  medium  of  a certain  cult
in  descent  from  the  ancient  British  mystics.  But
before  leaving  him,  there  are  one  or  two  points  which
I should  like  to  allude  to  more  particularly,  although
I shall  later  return  to  the  whole  question  of  the
survival  of  the  ancient  cults  in  Britain.  He  tells  us
that  “if  invited  and  earnestly  required,  these
Companions  make  themselves  known  and  familiar  to
men ; otherwise,  being  in  a different  State  and
Element,  they  neither  can  nor  will  easily  converse
with  them.’’  This  reveals  the  fact  that  a certain
ritual  of  invocation  was  employed  to  get  en  rapport
with  the  “fairy’  ’ world.  Again,  it  is  stated  that  men
occasionally  employ  stratagems  “for  procuring  a
Privacy  to  any  of  these  Mysteries.”  This  seems  to
indicate  that  mysteries  were  held,  that  these  were  in
line  of  descent  from  the  ancient  British  mysteries,
and  that  they  were  frequented  and  continued  by
people  who  actually  were,  or  believed  themselves  to
be,  initiates.  Such  a condition  of  broken-down
mysticism,  or  mysticism  employed  for  evil  purposes,


136  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
was  undeniably  in  use  in  connection  with  the  cult  of
witchcraft,  as  we  shall  see  later.

Finally,  as  regards  the  places  in  which  these  rites
and  mysteries  may  have  been  held,  certain  writers
believe  them  to  have  been  the  “Fairy  Hills”  or
“howes”  in  various  parts  of  Scotland.  Indeed  the
late  Mr.  David  MacRitchie  in  his  Testimony  of
Tradition  put  forward  the  theory  that  the  Piets  were
a dwarfish  race  dwelling  in  such  hills  and  earth-houses
and  were  mistaken  for  fairies  or  brownies  by  Kirk
and  others.  Referring  to  the  Fairy  Hill  at  Aber-
foyle,  where  Kirk  lived,  Mr.  MacRitchie  writes  :
“How  much  of  this  chowe’  is  artificial,  or  whether
any  of  it  is,  remains  to  be  discovered.”*  It  is  much
larger  than  most  artificial  tumuli,  and  like  most  of
such  mounds,  is  probably  sepulchral.  Tales  and
legends  of  the  entrance  of  humans  into  “fairy”
mounds  where  they  were  instructed  in  supernatural
secrets  are  so  numerous  as  to  defy  description.

To  return  to  Arthurian  literature.  Its  more
modern  phase,  the  Anglo-Norman,  holds  a very
considerable  amount  of  proof  of  the  survival  of  a
belief  in  early  British  mysticism,  but  that  part  of  it
which  has  an  arcane  significance  is  contained  in  the
legends  of  the  Holy  Grail,  with  which  I shall  deal
in  the  following  chapter.


1 See  also  his  book  The  Underground  Life,  privately  printed,
Edinburgh,  1892.


DRUIDIC  JEWEL

l in  a barrow  at  Kingston,  Barham  Downs,  near  Canterbury,
and  representing  the  several  circles  or  planes  of  existence)


[To  face  page  136


CHAPTER  VI


THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE  GRAIL

Some  recent  writers,  among  them  Miss  Jessie  L.
Weston,  who  speaks  with  authority,  have  given  it  as
their  opinion  that  the  legend  of  the  Holy  Grail,
although  of  British  origin,  has  certainly  been
sophisticated  by  Oriental  or  alien  ideas.  That  may
be  so,  so  far  as  its  later  elements  are  concerned,  but
in  its  early  form  it  is  demonstrably  of  British
provenance,  as  I hope  to  prove  in  this  chapter.  I
also  wish  to  demonstrate  that  the  legend  is  in  direct
association  with  the  secret  mystical  tradition  of  our
island,  of  the  existence  of  which  I have  already
afforded  considerable  proof ; that  it  has  indeed  a unity
with  and  was  drawn  from  that  venerable  body  of
occult  belief  which  I believe  is  capable  of  rescue  for
the  use  of  British  mystics.

As  I have  shown,  the  poem  of  Taliesin  on  “The
Spoils  of  Annwn ’ described  the  descent  of  a body
of  initiates  or  mystics  into  the  lowest  plane  or  circle,
for  the  express  purpose  of  recovering  therefrom  the
cauldron  of  Pwyll,  the  Lord  of  Annwn.  In  that
poem  Pwyll  and  Pryderi,  his  son,  are  associated
together  by  name,  and  the  cauldron  is  found  at  a
place  called  Caer  Sidi  or  Caer  Pedryvan,  “the  Four-
cornered  Castle”  in  the  Isle  of  the  Active  Door.
Now  in  Norman  Grail  romances  the  Grail  is  said  to
be  in  the  keeping  of  Pelles  or  Pefeur,  merely
Normanized  forms  of  Pwyll,  in  the  Castle  of
Carbonek,  which  is  merely  Caer  Bannauc,  the

*37  '■■■  \


138  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
“peaked”  or  “horned”  castle,  having  reference  to
the  points  or  corners  of  Caer  Sidi.1

The  vessel  which  Arthur  and  his  companions
recover  from  Annwn  is  described  in  the  Taliesin  poem
as  a cauldron,  the  rim  of  which  is  set  with  pearls.
The  fire  beneath  it  was  kindled  by  the  breath  of  nine
maidens,  oracular  speech  emanated  from  it,  and  it
would  not  cook  the  food  of  a coward.  Compare  this
with  the  description  of  the  Grail  in  the  Norman
romances,  where  Pelies  and  his  brother  are
mentioned.  The  Grail,  when  it  appears,  supplies
them  at  the  table  with  whatever  kind  of  food  each
desires,  but  the  unworthy  were  not  permitted  to
remain  near  it  or  to  approach  it  without  hurt  to
themselves.  Those  who  worship  at  the  Grail
Chapel  of  Peleur  remain  young,  and  to  them  the
passage  of  time  signifies  nothing.  The  Grail,  too,
heals  the  sick  and  wounded.  It  is  thus  obvious
enough  that  the  Grail  was  nothing  more  nor  less  than
the  magic  cauldron  of  Pwyll  given  a later  Christian
interpretation.

The  Grail  is  said  to  have  been  brought  to  Britain
by  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  who  collected  the  blood  of
Christ  in  the  vessel  and  conveyed  it  to  the  West,  or
gave  it  to  one  Bron  or  Brons  to  convey  thither.
Brons,  it  is  clear,  is  merely  Bran  the  Blessed  of
Welsh  literature.  Brons,  sailing  from  Palestine,  is
said  to  have  floated  across  on  a shirt  taken  from
Joseph’s  Son.  But  this  is  nothing  but  a later
“re-hash”  of  the  voyage  of  Bran  to  Ireland,  to  which
he  is  said  to  have  been  wafted.  Bran,  too.  or  rather
his  mystical  head,  which  in  his  legend  takes  the  place
of  the  Grail,  provides  in  Welsh  myth  banquet  and
mirth  for  eight  years  to  his  funeral  bearers.  Rh^s,

1 Some  authorities  give  the  derivation  as  Cor-arbenig,  “the
sovereign  chair”.


The  Mystery  of  the  Grail  139
in  speaking  of  the  soundness  of  the  comparison,
remarks  : “We  have  in  reality  to  go  further  : it  is
not  a case  of  similarity  so  much  as  of  identity.  The
voyage  of  Bron  is  but  a Christian  version  of  the
voyage  of  Bran,  and  one  cannot  be  surprised  to  find
one  of  the  romances  of  the  Quest  of  the  Holy  Grail
stating  that  the  vessel  was  in  the  keeping  of  Bron,
represented  as  dwelling  ‘in  these  isles  of  Ireland’.”

In  the  Mabinogion  story  of  Kulhwch  and  Olwen,
Kulhwch  is  commanded  by  the  giant  Yspydaden  to
procure  for  him  the  Mwys,  or'  dish  of  Gwyddno
Garanhir.  This  trencher  or  platter  was  capable  of
feeding  all  the  world,  nine  at  a time,  and  it  was
thought  to  have  disappeared  with  Merlin  along  with
the  other  treasures  of  Britain  “when  he  entered  the
Glass  House  in  Bardsey.”

But  I wish  to  make  it  clear  that  I am  here
concerned  with  the  Grail  romances  only  in  so  far  as
they  reveal  evidences  of  the  survival  of  native  British
mystical  tradition.  That  the  Grail  tradition  was
diverted  to  Christian  purposes  and  therefore
penetrated  and  sophisticated  by  Christian  and
Oriental  influence  is  admitted,  but  with  this  side  of
the  inquiry  I have  logically  no  concern,  even  with
the  theory  that  the  Keltic  Church  in  Wales  employed
the  Grail  legend  to  combat  the  pretensions  of  the
Roman  pontiff  to  British  ecclesiastical  hegemony.
What  I look  for  is  evidence  of  the  survival  of  the
original  native  occult  tradition  associated  with  the
Grail  in  its  form  of  a cauldron  of  inspiration  situated
on  another  plane,  to  reach  which  initiation  into  a
mystical  or  Druidic  brotherhood  was  essential.

We  have  seen  that  there  is  actually  traditional
continuity  between  the  Taliesin  poem  of  “The  Spoils
of  Annwn ” and  the  Grail  legends,  that  the  one  arose
out  of  the  other,  that  the  Grail  was  in  the  first  place


140  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
the  cauldron  of  inspiration  of  a Druidic  cult  before  it
was  thought  of  as  the  dish  which  held  the  blood  of
the  Redeemer.  In  one  of  the  later  romances  it  is
described  as  a salver  containing  a head,  in  another  as
a reliquary,  again  as  a “dish”  or  cup.  It  matters
not  in  what  form  it  may  appear  in  Christian
symbolism,  as  it  still  indubitably  retains  therein  the
eucharistic  character  of  its  new  forms  notwith-
standing the  clearest  evidences  of  its  “pagan”  or
Druidic  origins  as  the  Keltic  cauldron  of  inspiration
and  plenty,  the  cauldron  of  the  Dagda,  of  Keridwen,
of  Pwyll.  Even  its  Anglo-Norman  name,  Graal,  a
dish  made  of  costly  materials  used  for  purposes  of
festival,  is  merely  a translation  of  the  Keltic  word
mowys  or  mias.

In  a striking  passage  on  the  folklore  antecedents
of  the  Grail,  Mr.  A.  E.  Waite  writes  :x

The  antecedents  of  folklore  passed  into  the  literature
of  the  Graal  undergoing  great  transmutations,  and  so
also  did  certain  elements  of  old  Druidism  merge  into
Christianity ; Rite  and  Myth  and  Doctrine  were  tinged
by  Tradition  and  Doctrine  and  Rite  for  things  which
co-exist  tend  to  dovetail,  at  least  by  their  outer  edges;
and  there  are  traces,  I think,  of  a time  when  the  priest
who  said  mass  at  the  altar  was  not  only  a Druid  at  heart,
but  in  his  heart  saw  no  reason  also  for  the  Druid  to  be
priest  any  less.  Long  after  the  conversion  of  the  Celt,
enigmatical  fables  and  mystical  Rites  lingered  in  Gaul
and  Britain,  and  if  one  could  say  that  the  Cauldron  of
Ceridwen  was  a vessel  of  pagan  doctrine,  then  in  an
equal  symbolical  sense  it  became  a vessel  of  hotch-potch
under  the  strange  aegis  of  the  Celtic  Church.  There  were
masters  of  mysteries  and  secret  science,  whose  knowledge,
it  is  claimed,  was  perpetuated  under  the  shadow  of  that
Church  and  even  within  the  pale  thereof.  The  Bardic
Sanctuary,  by  the  evidence  of  some  who  claimed  to  speak
in  its  name,  opposed  no  precious  concealed  mysteries,  and
perhaps  on  its  own  part  the  Church  received  into  its
• alembic  much  that  was  not  of  its  matter,  expecting  to
convert  it  therein  and  turn  it  out  in  a new  form.  In

* The  Hidden  Church  of  the  Holy  Grail,  pp.  176  ff.


The  Mystery  of  the  Grail  141

the  fourth  century  there  were  professors  at  Bordeaux  who
had  once  at  least  been  Druids,  and  for  the  doctrines  of
their  later  reception  the  heart  of  their  old  experience  may
have  been  also  an  alembic,  St.  Beuno  in  his  last  moments
is  recorded  to  have  exclaimed : “ I see  the  Trinity  and
Peter  and  Paul,  and  the  Druids  and  the  Saints!”- — a choir
invisible,  the  recognition  of  which  would,  if  known,  have
imperilled  his  canonisation,  supposing  that  its  process
had  been  planned  in  Rome.  At  a much,  later  period,  even
in  the  twelfth  century,  we  have  still  the  indication  of
perpetuated  mysteries,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the
belief  in  these  was  promoted  generally  by  the  bards.  The
twelfth  century  saw  also  the  beginning  of  a great  revival
of  literature  in  Wales.  There  are  eertain  Iolo  manuscripts
which  are  late  and  of  doubtful  authenticity,  but  accepting
their  evidence  under  all  necessary  reserves,  they  refer  the
revival  in  question  to  Rhys  ap  Twdur,  who  assumed  the
sovereignty  of  South  Wales,  bringing  with  him  “the
system  of  the  Round  Table,  as  it  is  with  regard  to  min-
strels and  bards”.  And  when  the  time  came  for  the
last  struggle  between  the  Celtic  and  Latin  Rites  for  the
independence  of  the  British  Church,  I can  well  believe
that  all  which  remained,  under  all  transformations,  of
that  old  mixed  wisdom  of  the  West  was  also  fighting  for
its  life.  When  pseudo-Taliesin  prophesied  the  return
of  Cadwaladr,  who  had  passed  into  the  unmanifest,  like
Arthur,  and,  like  Arthur,  was  destined  to  return,  I believe
also  that  this  allegory  of  rebirth  or  resurrection,  if  it
referred  on  one  side  to  the  aspirations  of  the  Celtic
Church  did  not  less  embody  on  another  the  desired  notion
of  a second  spring  for  the  mysteries  which  once  dwelt
in  Wales,  which  even  after  many  centuries  were  interned
rather  than  dead.

But  to  the  tales  themselves . The  W elsh  Perceval
or  Peredur  gives  the  first  form  of  the  Grail  legend.
We  are  not  here  concerned  with  the  story  itself,  but
only  with  those  details  in  it  which  illustrate  our  thesis
of  the  survival  of  the  British  tradition.

The  mother  of  Peredur,  we  are  told,  had  two
brothers,  Peles  and  Peleur,  as  they  are  called  in  the
Welsh  * ‘ Seint  Greal.  * * These  are  merely  the  Pwyll
and  Pryderi  of  the  old  tradition,  as  has  been  said.
Peredur  destroys  a monster  known  as  the  Addanc  or
A vane  of  the  Lake.  This  was  a mighty  beaver,


142  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
which  in  another  Welsh  tale  was  said  to  have  been
drawn  from  the  waters  of  its  lake  by  the  god  or  hero
Hu.  Now  in  an  ancient  Welsh  poem,  “Cadair
Ceridwen”,  or  “The  Chair  of  Keridwen”,1  the
goddess  mentions  this  animal  as  follows  :

I saw  a fierce  conflict  in  the  vale  of  Beaver,  on  the
day  of  the  Sun,  at  the  hour  of  dawn,  between  the  birds
of  Wrath  and  Gwydion.  On  the  day  of  Jove,  they  (the
birds  of  Wrath)  securely  went  to  Mona,  to  demand  a
sudden  shower  of  the  sorcerers;  but  the  goddess  of  the
silver  wheel, a of  auspicious  mien,  the  dawn  of  serenity,
the  greatest  restrainer  of  sadness,  in  behalf  of  the  Britons,
speedily  throws  round  his  hall  the  stream  of  the  Rainbow,
a stream  which  scares  away  violence  from  the  earth,  and
causes  the  bane  of  its  former  state,  round  the  circle  of
the  world,  to  subside.  The  books  of  the  Ruler  of  the
Mount  record  no  falsehood.  The  Chair  of  the  Preserver
remains  here;  and  till  the  doom,  shall  it  continue  in
Europe.

Thus  the  Avanc  and  Keridwen,  goddess  of  the
cauldron,  are  associated,  and  the  whole  passage
unquestionably  relates  to  a part  of  the  ceremony  of
initiation  into  the  rites  of  Keridwen,  goddess  of  the
cauldron  of  inspiration,  a passage  referring  to  the
strife  between  sun  and  storm,  order  and  chaos,  and
one  which  could  be  equated  from  the  rituals  of  more
than  one  secret  tradition.

Next  the  castle  visited  by  Peredur,  and  which  is
obviously  the  Castle  of  the  Grail  and  the  Fisher  King
(for  the  Welsh  version  is  later  and  probably  borrowed
much  of  its  “machinery”  from  Norman  sources)  is
merely  the  Palace  of  Caer  Sidi  or  Caer  Bannauc,  the
royal  seat  of  Annwn,  the  centre  of  the  mysteries  of
the  Astral  Plane,  where  the  cauldron  of  inspiration
(or  Grail)  was  kept.  Here  he  meets  the  owner  of
the  Castle,  his  uncle  (the  “Fisher  King”  of  the  Grail
versions)  who  was  watching  his  men  fishing  in  the

Welsh  Archeeology,  p.  66.  * Arianrhod.


The  Mystery  of  the  Grail  143
lake.  He  tells  Peredur,  in  the  true  accents  of  one
who  has  arcane  knowledge  to  conceal,  that  whatever
strange  things  he  may  see  in  the  castle,  he  must
not  speak  of.

The  late  Mr.  Alfred  Nutt  believed  that  in  the
original  Keltic  tradition  the  surname  of  the  Fisher
King  had  a significance  now  lost.1  Now  the  brother
of  this  Fisher  King  is  called  in  the  Norman-French
Grail  romances  Goon  Desert,  Gornumant,  and
Gonemans,  which,  as  Rhys  has  shown,3  are  merely
corruptions  of  the  name  of  Gwyn,  son  of  Nudd,  King
of  the  demons  of  the  Otherworld.  Now  Gwyn,  in
Welsh  myth,  has  a brother  or  companion  Gwydno,
whose  name  seems  to  have  meant  “Tall  Crane”,  or
“Stalking  Person”,  and  he  was  famous  as  the  owner
of  a weir  in  which  fish  to  the  value  of  a hundred
pounds  were  caught  on  the  eve  of  the  First  of  May
each  year.  Connected  with  this  story  was  the  legend
of  the  finding  of  the  babe  Taliesin  in  this  weir,  as
recorded  beforehand,  that  Taliesin,  indeed,  who  was
the  son  of  Keridwen,  born  to  her  after  she  had
swallowed  Gwion,  the  watcher  of  her  cauldron,  that
very  Taliesin  who  was  the  “official”  bard  of  the
mysteries  of  Caer  Sidi  or  Annwn,  and  who  boasts
that  he  was  present  with  Arthur  when  he  stole  the
cauldron  of  inspiration  therefrom,  whose  “rebirth”,
as  Canon  MacCulloch  acutely  observes,  “is  con-
nected with  his  acquiring  of  inspiration”.3

It  is  thus  clear  enough  that  the  whole  Grail  myth
is  founded  in  the  central  idea  of  the  cauldron  of
inspiration  in  Annwn,  the  mystical  plane,  that  this  is,
indeed,  the  hub  from  which  all  the  spokes  of  the
wheel  radiate.  The  Red  Book  of  Hergest,  of  which
the  Welsh  “Peredur”  or  “Perceval”  is  a part,  is

1 Holy  Grail,  p.  123.  3 Arthurian  Legend,  pp.  315-16.

3 op.  cit.  p.  1 18.


144  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
found  in  a Welsh  manuscript  of  the  end  of  the
thirteenth  century,  so  that  at  that  relatively  late  date
we  find  the  initiation  story  of  the  Annwn  Plane,
somewhat  garbled,  perhaps,  but  still  flourishing,  if
with  a Christian  interpretation.

The  Conte  del  Graal  of  Robert  de  Borron  and  his
continuators,  commenced  about  the  third  quarter  of
the  twelfth  century,  is  “a  composition”,  says  Rhys,1
“ which  cannot  help  striking  a student  of  Welsh
literature  and  mythology  as  one  of  the  oldest  in  point
of  time  and  allusion  within  the  whole  cycle  of  Grail
romance.”  It  says  of  the  Rich  Fisher:  “much
knew  he  of  black  art,  more  than  an  hundred  times
changed  he  his  semblance”  .

Now  the  whole  turning-point  and  key  of  the  Conte
del  Graal  is  connected  with  the  mystic  question  which
Perceval  fails  to  put  to  the  Fisher  King,  the
“suppressed  word” , as  Mr.  Waite  calls  it.  “In  the
Conte  del  Graal,”  he  writes,2  “ the  law  and  order  of
the  Quest  is  that  Perceval  shall  ask  the  meaning  of
these  wonders  which  he  sees  in  the  pageant  at  the
Castle  of  the  Quest.”  The  prime  question  he
should  have  put  to  the  sick  Fisher  King  was  : “Unto
whom  one  serveth  of  the  Graal?”  and  this  query
would  have  released  the  King  from  his  mystical
dumbness  and  have  permitted  him  to  pass  on  the
translation  of  the  Secret  Words,  the  keys  of  the
mystery  he  conserved,  and  have  dispelled  the
Enchantment  of  Britain.  Because  he  did  not  ask  the
question  Perceval  was  assailed  with  reproaches.

If  we  look  a little  more  closely  into  the  story  of
the  Lame  Fisher  King  and  his  brother  we  find
plenty  of  evidence  that  they  are  the  people  of  the
Underworld  well  defined  in  myth.  In  the  first  place,
the  ruler  of  Hades  is  frequently  lame,  and  Vulcan,
* op.  cit.  p.  117.  2 op.  cit.  p.  153.


The  Mystery  of  the  Grail  145
Weyland  Smith  and  even  the  mediaeval  Satan  show
this  deformity.  Pwyll,  or  the  Fisher  King,  is,
indeed,  the  grand  black  magician  of  the  Underworld,
who,  still,  has  the  means  of  fertility,  inspiration  and
regeneration  in  his  mystical  cauldron.

The  three  properties  of  the  cauldron— inexhaustibility,
inspiration,  and  regeneration — may  be  summed  up  in  one
word,  fertility;  and  it  is  significant  that  the  (Irish)  god
with  whom  such  a cauldron  was  associated,  Dagda,  was
a god  of  fertility.  But  we  have  just  seen  it  associated,
directly  or  indirectly,  with  goddesses — Cerridwen,
Branwen,  the  women  from  the  lake — and  perhaps  this
may  point  to  an  earlier  cult  of  goddesses  of  fertility,  later
transferred  to  gods.  In  this  light  the  cauldron’s  power
of  restoring  to  life  is  significant,  since  in  early  belief  life
is  associated  with  what  is  feminine.  . . . Again,
the  slaughter  and  cooking  of  animals  was  usually
regarded  as  a sacred  act  in  primitive  life.  The  animals
were  cooked  in  enormous  cauldrons,  which  were  found
as  an  invariable  part  of  the  furniture  of  every  Celtic
house.  The  quantities  of  meat  which  they  contained
may  have  suggested  inexhaustibility  to  people  to  whom
the  cauldron  was  already  a symbol  of  fertility.  Thus  the
symbolic  cauldron  of  a fertility  cult  was  merged  with  the
cauldron  used  in  the  religious  slaughter  and  cooking  of
animal  food.  The  cauldron  was  also  used  in  ritual.  The
Cimri  slaughtered  human  victims  over  a cauldron  and
filled  it  with  their  blood.  . . .

Like  the  food  of  men,  which  was  regarded  as  the  food
of  the  gods,  the  cauldron  of  this  world  became  the
marvellous  cauldron  of  the  Otherworld,  and  as  it  then
became  necessary  to  explain  the  origin  of  such  cauldrons
on  earth,  myths  arose,  telling  how  they  had  been  stolen
from  the  divine  land  by  adventurous  heroes,  Cuchulainn,
Arthur,  etc.  In  other  instances,  the  cauldron  is  replaced
by  a magic  vessel  or  cup  stolen  from  supernatural  beings
of  the  Fionn  saga  or  of  marchen.  Here,  too,  it  may  be
noted  that  the  Graal  of  Arthurian  romance  has  affinities
with  the  Celtic  cauldron.  . . . Thus  in  the  Graal

there  was  a fusion  of  the  magic  cauldron  of  Celtic  pagan-
ism and  the  Sacred  Chalice  of  Christianity,  with  the
product  made  mystic  and  glorious  in  a most  wonderful
manner.1


MacCulloch,  op.  cit  pp.  382-3.


146  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

In  fact  the  whole  myth  explains  the  bringing  of
the  mystical  tradition,  the  Essence  of  Divine  Life,  and
all  that  it  implied  from  another  plane,  just  as  domestic
animals  such  as  the  pig,  the  dog,  and  the  deer  were
also  brought  from  that  plane,  or  as  fire  was  thought
of  as  having  been  brought  from  heaven  by
Prometheus,  or  cattle  from  “Fairyland”.  Long
afterwards,  as  folk-tale  assures  us,  the  notion
lingered  that  all  good  gifts  emanated  from  the  Under-
world, and  many  are  the  stories  told  of  men  and
women  who  penetrated  the  fairy-hill  to  gain  either
hidden  lore  or  magical  objects,  as  we  shall  see  when
we  come  to  consider  the  subject  in  its  folklore  aspect.
In  numerous  instances  these  had  first  to  lose  their
senses,  to  become  unconscious  or  fall  asleep  before
admittance  to  the  fairy  realm.  The  Grail  legends
are  merely  Christianized  versions  of  this  theme,
glorified  and  sanctified  to  fit  them  to  the  more  exalted
aim.  They  enshrine  the  remains  of  an  ancient
British  code  of  initiation  deflected  to  the  uses  of
Christianity.

We  have  seen  that  in  some  versions  of  the  Grail
legend  Peredur  or  Perceval  is  told  by  the  Fisher
King  that  he  must  not  ask  the  reason  of  anything  he
beholds,  whereas  in  the  others  he  is  blamed  for
refraining  from  putting  the  question.  The  second  is
manifestly  a perversion  of  the  first,  obviously  designed
for  later  religious  reasons.  To  ask  the  reason  of  any
mystery  in  the  Land  of  Enchantment  or  to  put
questions  to  any  enchanted  person  is  speedily  to  meet
with  disaster.  It  is  a relic  of  an  ancient  system  of
taboos.  Peredur  must  not  interrogate  the  King  of
Annwn  on  matters  relating  to  the  mysteries  of  the
Underworld,  simply  because  the  replies  to  these
would  instantly  have  placed  that  ruler’s  occult  power
in  the  hands  of  another.


The  Mystery  of  the  Grail  147
The  Grail  as  a cauldron  may  for  a moment  attract
our  attention.  The  cauldron  is  a symbol  of  the
magical  brew,  and  as  such  has  its  later  counterpart
in  the  witches’  cauldron.  Now  from  one  point  of
view  the  cauldron  is  obviously,  besides  being  the
symbol  of  inspiration,  plenty,  and  fertility,  the
symbol  of  Annwn  itself,  the  region  or  plane  in  which
the  lower  life  which  was  sooner  or  later  to  overflow
into  Ahred , the  earth-plane,  seethed  and  bubbled.
It  is  the  symbol  of  life,  psychical  as  well  as  physical,
germinating  and  evolving.  Moreover,  the  myth  of
Arthur’s  journey  to  Annwn  is  an  allegory  of  the
ascent  from  Annwn , through  initiation,  into  Abred.
The  “life”  which  seethes  in  the  cauldron  of  Pwyll  is
removed  by  the  initiates  to  a higher  plane.  It  is
obviously  a myth  of  the  evolution  of  life  and  spirit
from  a lower  to  a more  exalted  sphere.  It  follows
that  there  was  probably  a similar  story,  now  lost,  of
the  evolution  of  soul-life  from  Abred  to  Gwynvyd ,
the  sphere  of  immortal  beings,  the  whole  composing
an  allegory  of  the  soul’s  journey.


CHAPTER  VII


THE  SECRET  TRADITION  IN  RITE  AND  LEGEND

The  ancient  secret  tradition  o£  Britain  survives  in  a
fragmentary  manner  in  numerous  legends,  local
customs  and  festivals,  in  curious  rites  connected  with
such  localities  as  holy  wells  and  in  other  manifesta-
tions. It  is,  of  course,  questionable  how  far  some  of
these  are  associated  with  the  ancient  occult  tradition
of  the  island,  and  many  of  them  may  be  merely
survivals  of  the  popular  beliefs  which  constituted  its
baser  side,  bearing,  indeed,  the  same  relationship  to
the  philosophical  part  of  it,  the  official  cult,  so  to
speak,  as  do  the  rites  of  the  Sudra  caste  of  India  to
Brahminism.  For  what  was  preserved  by  popular
favour  alone  could  scarely  have  been  of  much  mystical
value  in  the  higher  sense,  or  have  enjoyed  much
official  countenance.  At  the  same  time,  popular
rites  and  festivals  may  have  conserved  certain  ideas
capable  of  throwing  light  on  the  Secret  Tradition,
especially  in  so  far  as  they  may  be  of  Iberian  origin.
With  those  which  have  no  bearing  on  the  Secret
Tradition  we  are,  of  course,  not  concerned.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  notable  that  the  idea  of
Annwn,  the  mystic  plane  to  which  Arthur  and  his
companions  were  thought  to  have  penetrated,  still
survives  as  a part  of  modern  Welsh  folklore.  The
late  Sir  John  Rhys,  in  his  Celtic  Folklore,  provides
many  traditions  of  Annwn , how  the  “Plant  Annwn”,
or  denizens  of  that  realm,  were  wont  to  penetrate  to
this  upper  world,  hunting  the  souls  of  doomed  men

148


The  Secret  Tradition  149
who  had  died  without  baptism  or  penance  with  their
ban-hounds.  Indeed,  they  came  into  such  close
contact  with  the  sons  of  men  that  the  latter  were
actually  able  to  capture  one  of  their  milk-white  kine  !

Strangely  enough  we  do  not  find  any  reminiscences
in  modern  Keltic  folklore  of  the  other  planes  in  the
mystic  circle,  but  that  merely  implies  that  the  circle
of  Annwn  was  believed  to  lie  much  nearer  that  of
A bred,  the  dwelling-place  of  man,  than  the  others,
and  that  therefore  communication  with  it  was  much
more  common.

Now  there  is  some  evidence  that  Arthur,  in  his
mythological  aspect,  superseded,  or  was  a “ surro-
gate” of  a certain  Hu  Gadarn,  who,  we  will
remember,  was  responsible  for  dragging  the  Avanc
or  monster  of  the  lake  from  his  watery  abyss  by
means  of  large  horned  oxen.  It  seems,  indeed,  that
at  one  time  a complete  saga  must  have  existed  of  the
Harrying  of  Hell  by  this  Hu,  of  which  the  capture  of
the  Avanc  and  the  raid  for  the  Cauldron  were
subsidiary  parts  ; that  the  manner  in  which  the  secrets
of  the  mystical  plane  of  Annwn  had  been  recovered
by  the  brotherhood  of  an  occult  priesthood  had  been
digested  into  writing  or  into  these  mnemonic  poems
of  which  the  British  Druids  were  wont  to  make  use.
In  his  Celtic  Folklore  Sir  John  Rhys  makes  it  plain
that  modern  Welsh  peasants  believe  Arthur  to  have
been  the  hero  of  the  Avanc  exploit  rather  than  Hu
the  mighty.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  Arthur
has  taken  over  many  of  Hu’s  attributes  and
adventures.

But  that  the  rites  of  Hu  Gadarn  or  Arthur — for
the  two  are,  as  we  shall  see,  one  and  the  same —
survived  until  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  at
least  is  plain  from  several  passages  in  English  and
Welsh  literature.  One  of  the  objects  of  pilgrimage


150  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
in  the  Principality  prior  to  the  Reformation  was
the  image  of  Darvell  Gadarn  in  the  Diocese  of  St,
Asaph.  In  a letter  from  Ellis  Price  to  Cromwell,
Secretary  to  Henry  VIII.,  dated  April  6th,  1538,
the  image  is  described  as  follows  :

There  ys  an  Image  of  Darvellgadarn  within  the  said
diocese,  in  whome  the  people  have  so  greate  confidence,
hope,  and  truste,  that  they  cumme  dayly  a pillgramage
unto  hym,  somme  with  kyne,  other  with  oxen  or  horsis,
and  the  reste  withe  money;  in  so  much  that  there  was
fyve  or  syxe  hundrethe  pilgrimes  to  a mans  estimacion,
that  offered  to  the  said  image  the  fifte  daie  of  this  presente
monethe  of  Aprill.  The  innocente  people  hath  ben  sore
aluryd  and  entised  to  worship  the  saide  image,  in  so  much
that  there  is  a commyn  sayinge  as  yet  amongst  them  that
who  so  ever  will  offer  anie  thinge  to  the  saide  Image  of
Darvellgadern,  he  hathe  power  to  fatche  hym  or  them
that  so  offers  oute  of  Hell  when  they  be  dampned.

Now  this  idol  was  taken  to  Smithfield  in  the  same
year  and  burned.  It  is  obvious,  of  course,  that
Darvell  Gadarn  and  Hu  Gadarn  are  one  and  the
same.  Besides,  it  was  peculiarly  the  province  of  Hu
Gadarn  to  draw  souls  out  of  Annwn,  or  “Hell”.
He  was  the  supreme  deity,  who  by  the  strength  of
his  emanations  (his  solar  oxen)  drew  the  Avanc  or
beaver  (the  sun)  out  of  the  lake,  an  allegory  of  his
ability  to  rescue  life  from  the  darkness  of  the  abyss.

Now  all  this  points  to  the  existence  and  function-
ing of  the  ancient  British  Tradition  in  the  sixteenth
century  at  least,  for  the  worship  of  a deity  like
Darvell  Gadarn  could  not  have  existed  in  Wales
unless  it  were  associated  with  a mystic  brotherhood
or  priesthood,  without  whom  it  would  have  had  no
sanction  or  status,  no  binding  force.  And  this  is
rather  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  when  the  idol  was
taken  to  Smithfield  there  was  taken  with  it  a “friar”
who  bore  the  same  name  as  itself,  and  who  was  also
committed  to  the  flames.  Had  he  been  a friar  in  Holy


The  Secret  Tradition  151
Orders  such  a fate  would  certainly  not  have  been
meted  out  to  him,  nor  could  he  have  borne  such  a
name,  and  it  therefore  appears  as  if  he  must  have
been  not  only  the  living  representative  of  the  god,
but  the  conservator  of  his  mysteries  and  the  ancient
British  Secret  Tradition,  visited  by  hundreds  of
pilgrims,  who  worshipped  the  idol  as  a quite  familiar
deity.1

It  is  also  to  be  noticed  that  oxen  were  offered  up
to  this  image.  This  not  only  makes  it  plain  that  it
represented  the  Hu  Gadarn  of  Welsh  myth,  but  that
it  was  identified  with  the  sacred  solar  ox  or  bull
symbolic  of  that  deity,  and  which  we  have  seen  was
referred  to  in  more  than  one  of  the  British  mystical
poems.

In  the  superstition  concerning  changelings,  we  also
find  a very  distinct  trace  of  a belief  in  the  return  of
the  soul  to  the  dreary  region  of  Annwn.  The
superstition  ran  that  the  fairies  frequently  exchanged
their  offspring  for  that  of  human  beings,  leaving
behind  a withered  and  often  half-idiot  elf  in  place  of
the  robust  human  babe  which  they  had  spirited  away.
As  we  have  already  seen,  the  belief  in  fairies  probably
originated  from  the  Cult  of  the  Dead.  That  is,  they
were  supposed  to  be  the  (evil?)  dead  waiting  for
re-birth,  and  that  they  were  also  associated  with
Annwn  is  positive.  The  changeling  was  thus  a soul
from  Annwn , struggling  to  get  a hold  on  Abred , the
earth-plane,  whereas  the  belief  that  it  was  possible
for  the  fairies  to  spirit  children  away  seems  to  have
arisen  from  the  idea  that  the  human  soul,  if  its
earth-journey  were  not  satisfactory,  might  once  more
lapse  into  the  depths  of  Annwn.

In  a word,  the  superstition  about  changelings  is

* The  worship  of  Hu  Gadarn  in  Wales  at  such  a late  date  as
1538  suffices  to  quash  utterly  the  arguments  of  the  opponents
of  the  theory  that  Druidism  collapsed  in  Roman  times,


152  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
undoubtedly  a memory  of  a cult  which  believed  in  the
progression  or  retrogression  of  souls  rather  than  in
their  transmigration.  For  after  all,  there  is  very
little  evidence  that  transmigration  in  its  usually
accepted  form  was  believed  in  by  our  forefathers,
whereas  there  is  abundant  proof  that  a great  scheme
of  psychic  evolution  underlay  their  theology.  A
ceremony  which  has  also  obvious  relationships  to  the
belief  in  the  plane  of  Annwn , and  which,  indeed,
displays  the  remains  of  mystic  rites  associated  with
the  ancient  brotherhood  who  presided  over  its  ritual,
is  that  of  Hallow-e’en.

In  his  account  of  the  Bards,  Owen  tells  us  that
in  North  Wales  the  first  day  of  November  was
attended  by  many  ceremonies,  such  as  lighting  a
large  fire  and  running  through  it,  “running  away  to
escape  from  the  black  short- tailed  sow”,  and  so  forth.
He  says  :

“ Amongst  the  first  aberrations  may  be  traced  that  of
the  knowledge  of  the  great  Huon  or  the  Supreme  Being,
which  was  obscured  by  the  hieroglyphics  or  emblems  of
his  different  attributes,  so  that  the  grovelling  minds  of
the  multitude  often  sought  not  beyond  those  representa-
tions for  the  objects  of  worship  and  adoration.  This
opened  an  inlet  for  numerous  errors  more  minute;  and
many  superstitions  became  attached  to  their  periodical
solemnities  and  more  particularly  to  their  rejoicing  fires
and  the  appearance  of  vegetation  in  spring  and  of  the
completion  of  harvest  in  autumn.  ”

Huon  is,  of  course,  the  same  as  Hu  Gadarn,  so
that  here  once  more  we  find  him  associated  with  a
rite  of  the  Underworld,  for  the  Hallow-e’en  fire
was  nothing  more  or  less  than  a symbol  of  that  of
Annwn,  as  is  easily  proved  by  the  reference  to
the  “black  short-tailed  sow”.  The  reader  will
remember  that  the  pig  was  one  of  the  “Spoils  of
Annwn" , given  to  the  earth  by  Pwyll.  The  minister
of  Kirkmichael  in  Perthshire,  writing  in  the  Statistical


The  Secret  Tradition  153
Account,  says  : “ Formerly  the  Hallow  Even  Fire,
a relic  of  Druidism,  was  kindled  in  Buchan,  various
magic  ceremonies  were  then  celebrated  to  counteract
the  influences  of  witches  and  demons.  . . .

Societies  were  formed,  either  by  pique  or  humour,
to  scatter  certain  fires,  and  the  attack  and  defence
were  often  conducted  with  art  and  fury.”  It  is
surely  clear  enough  that  this  rite,  totally  unlike  the
more  innocent  amusements  associated  with  Hallow-
e’en in  more  modern  times,  was  the  memorial  of  a
very  ancient  myth  interpreted  by  dramatic  action,
descriptive  of  the  attack  on  the  fiery  underworld
plane  by  a society  or  brotherhood  of  mystics.
Dramas  of  the  kind  were  invariably  associated  with
the  Mysteries  of  the  ancient  world,  in  Greece  and
Egypt  especially.  And  that  these  celebrations  were
popularly  believed  to  have  descended  from  the  Druids
is  not  only  stated  by  the  minister  of  Kirkmichael,  but
by  the  minister  of  Callander,  who  in  the  same  Account
states  that:  ‘‘The  people  received  the  consecrated
fire  from  the  Druid  priests  next  morning,  the  virtues
of  which  were  supposed  to  continue  for  a year.”

It  is  by  no  means  a simple  task  to  trace  the  eroded
outline  of  the  mystical  tradition  of  Britain  in  folk-
belief  and  legend,  and  in  many  instances  the
professional  exponents  of  Folklore  have  made  the
task  all  the  more  difficult  by  their  insistence  in
regarding  all  ancient  beliefs  as  having  a bearing  on
vegetation  or  other  rites,  neglecting  altogether  the
deeper  significance  which  lies  beneath  these  tales.  In
order  to  prove  that  a recognized  caste  of  celebrants
did  actually  exist  within  living  memory,  I will  now
turn  to  various  evidences  of  their  presence,  in  Wales
at  least.  In  Lewis’s  Topographical  Dictionary  of
W ales  we  read  that  the  W ell  of  F ynnori  Elian
“ Even  in  the  present  age  is  frequently  visited  by  the


154  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

superstitious  . . the  ceremonies  performed

by  the  applicant  standing  upon  a certain  spot  near
the  well  while  the  owner  of  it  reads  a few  passages  of
the  sacred  Scriptures,  and  then  taking  a small
quantity  of  water  gives  it  to  the  former  to  drink,
throwing  the  residue  over  his  head,  which  is  repeated
three  times.”  Foulkes,  in  his  Enwogion  Cymru ,
published  in  1870,  says  that  the  last  person  to  have
charge  of  the  Well  was  a certain  John  Evans.
Before  him  a woman  had  officiated  there  and  many
amusing  tales  of  her  shrewdness  were  recounted.
Says  Rhys  in  his  Celtic  Folklore  :

A series  of  articles  on  the  Well  appeared  in  1861  and
were  afterwards  published,  I am  told,  as  a shilling  book
which  I have  not  seen,  and  they  dealt  with  the  superstition,
with  the  history  of  John  Evans,  and  with  his  confessions
and  conversions.1  I have  searched  in  vain  for  any
accounts  in  Welsh  of  the  ritual  followed  at  the  Well.
When  Mrs.  Silvan  Evans  visited  the  place  the  person  in
charge  of  the  Well  was  a woman,  and  Peter  Roberts  in
his  Cambrian  Popular  Antiquities , published  in  London
in  1815,  alludes  to  her  or  a predecessor  of  hers  in  the
following  terms:  “ Near  the  well  resided  some  worthless
and  infamous  wretch  who  officiated  as  priestess.  . . .”

There  is,  I think,  very  little  doubt  that  the  owner  or
guardian  of  the  Well  was,  so  to  say,  the  representative
of  an  ancient  priesthood  of  the  Well.  That  priesthood
dated  it's  origin  probably  many  centuries  before  a Christian
church  was  built  near  the  Well,  and  coming  down  to
later  times,  we  have  unfortunately  no  sufficient  data  to
show  how  the  right  to  such  priesthood  was  acquired,
whether  by  inheritance  or  otherwise;  but  we  know  that
a woman  might  have  charge  of  St.  Elian’s  Well.

Sir  John  also  left  behind  him  data  regarding  a
similar  site  in  Pembrokeshire,  the  Church  of  St.  Teilo.
The  building,  he  tells  us,  is  in  ruins,  but  the  church-
yard is  still  used  and  contains  two  of  the  most  ancient
post- Roman  inscriptions  in  the  Principality.  This
well  was  thought  to  be  good  for  the  whooping-cough,

1 Italics  mine. — L.S.


The  Secret  Tradition  155
and  when  Sir  J ohn  made  inquiries  as  to  whether  any
rite  or  ceremony  must  be  performed  in  order  to  derive
benefit  from  the  water,  he  was  told  that  the  water
must  be  lifted  out  of  the  well  and  given  to  the  patient
to  drink  by  somebody  born  in  the  adjoining  house,
preferably  by  the  heir . The  water,  it  appears,  was
drawn  from  the  well  in  a skull  which  was  said  to  be
the  skull  of  St.  Teilo,  and,  indeed,  he  was  shown  the
skull.  Sir  John  learned  later  that  this  well  is  known
as  the  Oxen’s  Well,  and  that  the  family  owning  and
occupying  the  adjoining  farmhouse  had  been  there  for
centuries . Their  name  was  Melchior,  by  no  means
a common  one  in  the  Principality,  and  having  a sound
sufficiently  priestly,  in  all  conscience.  There  was
also  current  a legend  relating  to  the  manner  in  which
the  skull  came  to  be  used  as  a drinking  vessel.  “In
this  particular  instance,”  says  Sir  John  Rhys,“  we
have  a succession  which  seems  to  point  unmistakeably
to  an  ancient  priesthood  of  a sacred  spring.  ”

Now  mark  that  this  well  was  known  as  the
“Oxen’s  Well”,  that  is,  it  was  associated  in  some
manner  with  the  cult  of  Hu  Gadarn,  the  mystic  deity
of  the  Brythonic  race  who  with  his  sacred  oxen  was
supposed  to  have  overcome  the  powers  of  evil.
Here  we  have  a case,  as  Rhys,  a very  sound
authority,  was  convinced,  of  the  survival  of  a
hereditary  priesthood  in  Wales  from  pre-Christian
times  until  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century!
We  seem  to  have  clear  evidence  not  only  that  such  a
cult  actually  'existed,  but  that  it  was  in  some  way
associated  with  the  mystic  ox  and  thus  with  the  occult
brotherhood  who  were  led  by  Arthur  into  the  gloomy
abyss  of  Annwn.

Elsewhere  on  British  soil  there  are  evidences  of
the  existence  of  persons  who  appear  to  have  been
inculcated  into  a mysterious  and  magical  society


156  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
whose  writings  they  actually  preserved.  A woman
attainted  by  the  Presbytery  of  Perth  for  sorcery  in
1626  stated  that  she  had  a book  containing  magical
knowledge  which  was  her  “Goodsire’s,  her  Grand-
sire’s,  and  was  a thousand  years  old.”  Her  son,
Adam  Bell,'  read  it  to  her.  Again  there  are  many
proofs,  as  we  shall  see  when  we  come  to  deal  with
the  cult  of  witchcraft,  of  persons  being  initiated  into
the  ritual  of  that  cult  either  by  their  relatives  or  by
friends.

It  will  be  necessary  to  say  a word  here  regarding
Arthur’s  glass-ship,  alluded  to  in  the  legend  of  the
descent  into  Annwn.  This  vessel  has  been  construed
by  various  authorities  as  a diving-beU,  and  so  forth,
and  has  been  equated  with  the  boat  of  glass  in  Irish
myth  in  which  Condla  the  Red  was  spirited  away  to
the  Land  of  the  Everliving  by  a fairy  princess.  But
I think  it  is  obvious  that  the  vessel  has  more  a
spiritual  than  a material  significance,  that,  indeed,  it
more  nearly  resembles  the  ship  of  the  Egyptian
Osiris,  which  was  supposed  to  navigate  the  dark
waters  of  Amend,  the  Egyptian  Underworld.  The
two  myths  are,  indeed,  one,  and  obviously  emanate
from  a common  source.  This  craft  is,  indeed,  the
ship  of  souls,  just  as  is  the  barque  of  Osiris,  and  in
this  connection  we  may  recall  the  myth  cited  by  the
late  Greek  writer  Procopius,  quoted  at  the
commencement  of  this  volume,  in  which  he  describes
the  passage  of  the  dead  souls  by  ship  to  the  shores
of  Britain.  This  proves  that  a very  ancient  myth
actually  existed  relative  to  the  bearing  of  the  souls
of  the  departed  into  the  land  of  darkness  by  means
of  a magical  vessel.  This  magical  vessel  was,
indeed,  the  vehicle  by  which  the  astral  shape  was
transported  into  its  appropriate  plane,  and,  in  the
case  of  Arthur  and  his  comrades,  it  was  obviously


! able  to  transport  also  the  astral  shapes  of  the  living

| to  an  extra-terrestrial  sphere.  What  was  the  nature

| of  this  vessel  ?

That  this  ship  had  a solar  significance  we  may  be
pretty  certain.  The  similar  Egyptian  barque  which
plumbed  the  depths  of  Amend  was  certainly  of  solar
origin,  and  its  symbolical  significance  seems  to  be
that  of  light  invading  darkness,  the  ship  of  the  Sun
god  penetrating  the  gloom  of  the  world  of  Death  or
non-being.

Perhaps  the  derivation  of  Caer  Sidi,  a part  of
Annwn,  is,  as  Rhys  thought,  Caer  Shee,  “City  of
the  Fairies”.  It  is  notable  that  four  organs  play
around  its  fire.  This  instrument  has  a long  associa-
tion with  mysteries,  from  those  of  Byzantium  to  the
present  day,  as  in  Masonry.

Searching  through  the  detritus  of  Folklore  for
evidences  of  the  Secret  Tradition,  we  have  now  to
consider  what  precisely  were  its  associations,  if  any,
with  the  cult  known  as  witchcraft.  What  exactly
was  witchcraft,  and  was  it  intimately  associated  with
the  ancient  Secret  Tradition  of  Britain?  We  are
now  aware  that  witchcraft  was  by  no  means  a thing
of  hallucination,  that  it  did  not  originate  in  the
I imaginations  of  disgruntled  old  women.  Research

I has  made  it  abundantly  clear  that,  as  known  in  the

I sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  it  was  the  last

1 remaining  fragment  of  a . very  ancient  cult,  which

I probably  had  its  origin  in  prehistoric  times.  I

I believe  it  to  have  had  its  beginnings  in  a caste  of

I women  associated  with  horse-breeding  or  cattle-

I raising,  or  both,  as  the  entire  folklore  of  the  cult  has

I reminiscences  of  association  with  the  horse  and  with

I domestic  cattle.  Some  such  caste,  ! think,  as  that

I of  the  Amazons  of  classical  lore  may  possibly  have

I been  the  prototype  of  the  witch  cult.  The  tendency


158  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
of  the  witch  to  bespell  cattle,  her  obvious  power  over
flocks  and  herds,  and  her  traditional  aspect  as  a
horse-using-  sorceress  has  led  me  to  believe  that  some-
where in  North-West  Africa  a female  religion  arose
out  of  the  usages  of  such  a body  of  women  as  I
describe,  which  later  lost  its  significance  with  respect
to  pastoral  affairs,  and  became  purely  and  simply
magical  and  occult.  That  it  was  thus  of  “Iberian”
origin  is  also  highly  probable,  and  thus  it  was  bound
to  have  been  conhected  with  that  general  aboriginal
body  of  faith  and  superstition  on  which  Druidism  was
founded,  that,  indeed,  it  represented  the  lower  cultus
in  Britain  and  elsewhere,  an  aboriginal  faith.

Although  we  do  not  hear  a great  deal  about  it  in
British  history,  there  is  no  doubt  that  witchcraft,  as
a more  or  less  secret  cult,  persisted  in  Britain
throughout  the  ages,  but  I do  not  believe  it  to  have
been  part  of  Druidism  or  of  the  Secret  Tradition.
Rather  was  it  a debased  remnant  of  that  still  older
Iberian  magic  which  to  some  extent  Druidism
embraced,  but  which  it  also  superseded  and  perhaps
tried  to  weed  out.  As  Sir  James  Frazer  has  shown
in  his  Golden  Bough,  the  Druids  seem  to  have
burned  animals  whom  they  believed  to  be  witches  in
disguise,  and  a fortiori,  it  seems  probable  that  they
also  burned  sorcerers,  male  or  female,  on  occasion.
The  Druidic  priestesses  of  whom  we  read,  those  for
example  of  the  Island  of  Sena,  or  of  Anglesey,
although  perhaps  acting  as  a separate  female  caste,
do  not  appear  to  have  been  of  the  character  of
witches.  There  is,  however,  one  connection  between
the  nine  muse-like  maidens  who  kept  the  Cauldron
of  Keridwen  warm,  and  who  have  been  identified
with  the  priestesses  of  Sena,  and  the  cult  of  more
modern  witchcraft,  and  that  is  the  Cauldron  itself.

But  was  the  witch’s  cauldron  of  tradition  the  same


The  Secret  Tradition  159
as  that  of  Keridwen?  The  Cauldron  of  Keridwen
was  obviously  a vessel  of  inspiration,  whereas  the
cauldron  of  the  witches  was  a vessel  for  the  brewing
of  poisonous  concoctions.  We  will  remember,
however,  that  the  contents  of  Keridwen’s  Cauldron
were  of  a poisonous  nature  with  the  exception  of  the
first  three  drops  which  sprang  from  it,  and  this  would
seem  to  link  it  with  the  magical  vessel  of  the  witches.
I do  not  believe,  however,  that  this  cauldron  was
originally  part  and  parcel  of  the  witch’s  magical
apparatus.  I rather  incline  to  think,  as  the  evidence
tends  to  show,  that  it  had  been  adopted  by  the
members  of  the  witch-cult  from  that  which  conserved
the  Secret  Tradition.

For  these  and  other  reasons  I do  not  think  that  the
witch-cult  had  any  connection,  official  or  otherwise,
with  that  of  Druidism  or  the  Secret  Tradition.  I
rather  believe,  as  I have  already  said,  that  it  arose
out  of  the  ancient  aboriginal  or  Iberian  body  of  gross
superstition  once  existing  in  Britain,  Gaul  and  Spain.
But  it  seems  to  me  extremely  probable  that  it
borrowed  much  from  the  cult  of  the  Secret  Tradition,
especially  as  regards  some  of  its  ritual  practices,
which  it  would  debase  and  turn  to  evil  uses .

Many  of  the  magical  acts  of  the  witches  are
identical  with  those  which  are  alluded  to  as  having
been  practised  by  the  Druids,  such  as  levitation,  the
raising  of  storms,  the  use  of  herbs,  transformation
into  animal  shapes  and  so  forth,  and  it  may  be  that
the  lower  castes  of  official  Druidism  actually  employed
stratagems  of  the  kind  which  they  had  borrowed  from
the  practitioners  of  the  aboriginal  religion  for  the
purpose  of  overawing  the  people,  just  as  the  earliest
Christian  disciples  in  Britain  and  elsewhere  seem  to
have  used  a certain  amount  of  low-caste  black  magic
for  a similar  purpose.


160  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
We  now  come  to  evidence  which  makes  it  plain
that  a strong  leaven  of  the  old  Druidic  cult,  the
vehicle  of  the  Secret  Tradition,  survived  until  what
may  be  called  comparatively  recent  times  in  Scotland.
As  late  as  1649  to  1678,  according  to  the  records  of
the  Presbytery  of  Dingwall,  bulls  were  sacrificed  in
the  parish  of  Gairloch  in  Ross-shire  and  oblations  of
milk  poured  on  the  hills.

The  Rev.  James  Rust,  minister  of  Slains,  in  his
Druidism  Exhumed,  published  in  1871,  provides  the
following  valuable  evidence  of  the  survival  of  Druidic
belief  in  eighteenth  century  Scotland.1

As  there  was  in  the  seventeenth  century  a number
of  superstitions  prevalent  in  Scotland,  as  well  as  in
England,  which  had  come  into  being  in  Popish  times,
as  well  as  a number  which  had  had  an  existence  before
Popish  times,  belonging  to  the  earlier  system  of  religion,
the  Druidical,  and  which  had  been  tolerated,  connived  at,
or  at  least  not  extirpated,  the  General  Assembly  of  the
Church  of  Scotland  resolved  to  take  action  against  them.
As  the  most  of  these  superstitions,  they  said,  proceeded
from  ignorance,  they  resolved  that  the  most  strenuous
efforts  should  be  made  throughout  Scotland  for  bringing
education  to  the  doors  of  all,  even  of  the  poorest,  by  the
erection  and  extension  of  Parochial  Schools,  and  by
urging  that  Bibles  should  be  possessed  in  every  family,
and  the  inmates  taught  to  read  them.  But  besides  this,
they  appointed  a Commission.  The  General  Assembly  of
1649  approving  off  a recommendation  of  the  Assembly
1647,  appointed  a large  Commission  of  their  own  number.
Along  with  the  Ministers  appointed,  there  were  Sir
Archibald  Johnston  of  Warristoun,  “Clerk  Register”;
Mr.  Thomas  Nicholson,  “His  Majesty’s  Advocate”  ; Mr.
Alexander  Pierson,  one  of  the  ordinary  “Lords  of  Session”,
Sir  Lewis  Stewart,  Mr.  Alexander  Colvill,  and  Mr.  James
Robertson,  “Justice  Deputes”;  Messrs.  Rodger  Mo  wet,
John  Gilmoir,  and  John  Nisbet,  “Lawyers” ; with  Doctors
Sibbald,  Cunninghame,  and  Purves,  “Physicians”.  And
they  did  “ordain  the  said  brethren  to  make  report  of  the
result  of  their  consultations  and  conferences  from  time
to  time,  as  they  make  any  considerable  progress,  to  the
Commission  for  public  affairs.  And  the  said  Commission

1 PP*  38  ff-


The  Secret  Tradition  161

shall  make  report  to  the  next  General  Assembly”.  Among
other  matters,  to  which  they  directed  their  attention,  were
the  Druidical  customs  observed  at  the  fires  of  Beltane,
Midsummer,  Halloweven,  and  Yuil.  All  these  customs
and  fires  were  ordered  to  be  abolished.  They  succeeded
outwardly  among  the  old,  although  the  youth  of  the
country  still  enjoy  in  many  places  some  of  these  same
customs  and  fires,  although  they  have  forgotten  the  object
of  their  institution,  and  of  course  the  superstition  itself.
They  directed  their  attention  to  the  Remains  of  Di'uidical
Superstition  and  Sorcery  practised  at  the  old  places  of
worship,  dedicated  not  only  to  the  greater,  but  to  the
lesser  gods,  the  familiar  spirits,  the  household  divinities,
or  demigods  of  the  ancients,  who,  as  was  supposed,
could  be  consulted,  and  could  grant  charming  powers  to
their  votaries,  at  those  pieces  of  ground  which  the  Druids
had  consecrated  to  them,  and  which  had  continued  for
thousands  of  years  untilled.  These  were  ordered  to  be
cultivated  under  severe  church  censures  and  civil  penalties,
church  and  state  then  acting  hand  in  hand  in  the  matter.
As  one  of  the  results  of  this  Commission,  we  find  some
most  important  minutes  in  the  Kirk  Session  Register  Book
of  Slains,  stating  that  inquisition  was  made  by  the  mini-
ster and  Elders  of  Slains,— as  must  have  been  done  by
other  Ministers  and  Sessions,— into  old  Druidical  super-
stitious practices  and  places  within  the  parish.  And
from  that  inquisition,  we  learn  that  within  Slains  there
were  different  pieces  of  land  dedicated  to  the  demi-gods
of  the  Druids,  those  imps  who  became  the  little  elfin  tricky
semidemons  of  the  Christians;  and  that  these  places  were
called  after  those  fancied  creatures  by  words  both  of
Lowland  Scots  and  Highland  Gaelic,  as  the  Guidmanes
j fauld , and  Garlet,  or  Garleachd , connected  with  Garlaoch,

I An  Elf.

j From  entries  in  the  Kirk  Session  Register  Book

of  the  Parish  of  Slains  we  find  that  several  persons
! were  “delaytit”  or  summoned  before  it  for  practising

j pagan  rites  in  connection  with  hallow  fires  and

| refusing  to  till  the  ancient  Druidical  fields.

Here  then  we  have  the  General  Assembly  of  the
; Church  of  Scotland  only  280  years  ago,  or  but  four

I “lifetimes”  since,  fully  persuaded  that  Druidism  was

| being  practised  all  over  Scotland,  and  taking  steps

to  put  it  down.  How  those  steps  were  received  by

; L


162  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
their  congregations  is  probably  well  illustrated  by
Mr.  John  Buchan’s  most  interesting  novel  Witch
Wood.

In  writing  further  of  the  antiquities  of  his  parish,
Mr.  Rust  deals  with  the  belief  that  the  spirits  of  the
Keltic  past  were  wont  to  manifest  themselves  on
occasion  to  the  people  in  old  times,  who  were  not
infrequently  decoyed  into  the  recesses  of  the  earth.
There  was  at  least  three  places  within  the  Parish
of  Slains  dedicated  to  the  “Good  People”,  and  these
remained  uncultivated  in  the  midst  of  cultivated
ground  until  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century.
“It  continued  also  to  be  employed  for  generations
for  magical  superstitious  purposes,  after  the  other
Elfin  places  had  been  destroyed,  desecrated,  or
cultivated  by  authority.  I knew  the  woman,  Mary
Findlay,  who  died  a few  years  ago  at  a great  age,
who  was  the  last  person  laid  down  in  infancy  at  the
Cairn,  because  she  was  supposed  to  be  an  Elfin
Changeling.”

But  let  us  examine  what  he  says  regarding  the
Lykar  Cairn  :

Lykar  Cairn  lay  eight  hundred  yards  N.N.E.  of  the
Parish  Church  in  the  south  angle  formed  by  the  Castle
Road,  where  it  diverges  from  the  Turn-the-neuk  Road,
in  a small  valley  surrounded  by  natural  eminences  or
knolls,  the  most  striking  of  which,  and  to  the  base  of
which  it  was  nearest,  is  Maids  emaaighe , which  means
“The  knoll  of  the  very  great  caldron”.  It  comes  from
Maidse,  fern.  “A  knoll,  lump,  or  hillock” ; and  ma,  a
comparative  with  a superlative  meaning,  of  mor,  great,
and  aighe,  a genitive  of  aghann , fern,  a caldron.  This
will  turn  out,  as  we  shall  find,  to  have  the  same  meaning
as  Bennachie,  and  it  will  contribute  to  make  a most
interesting  disclosure  of  the  Druidical  religious  system.
We  shall  therefore  reserve  the  further  consideration  of
this  till  we  come  to  consider  under  a distinct  branch,
and  in  a subsequent  part,  the  Utensil  or  Structure  called
“The  Caldron”,  so  much  celebrated  in  Welsh  Mythology,
but  of  which  no  notice  has  been  taken  in  Scotland,


The  Secret  Tradition  163

although  we  might  upon  the  smallest  reflection  have
anticipated  that  what  prevailed,  or  existed  in  the  one  place,
did  so  originally  in  the  other.

So  the  Cauldron  of  Keridwen  was  associated  with
the  survival  of  Druidic  belief  in  Scotland  so  lately
as  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century  ! Mr.  Rust
points  out  that  this  name  “the  Cauldron  is  con-
nected with  numerous  localities  in  Scotland,  at
Aberdeen  (Kettle-hill  or  Cadhal,  a cauldron),  where,
according  to  local  tradition,  the  cauldron  “was  made
by  the  Piets”,  and  was  used  by  large  crowds  “for
religious  purposes” . Place-names,  too,  in  which
enter  the  word  Aden,  Eden  or  Edin,  as  in
Edinburgh,  were,  thought  Rust,  connected  with  the
cult  of  the  cauldron,  from  the  Gaelic  Aidheann,  a
cauldron,  kettle,  or  goblet”.  ^

“ The  drinking  of  the  water  of  this  cauldron,”
says  Mr.  Rust,  “ was  one  of  the.  rites  of  the
Novitiate’s  Initiation  into  the  Druidical  mysteries
and  craft,  after  twenty  years  of  hard  study.  It  was
the  previous  hard  study,  and  not  the  caldron  decoc-
tion, which  made  him  so  great  an  adept  in  the
Druidical  art  and  science,  and  opened  up  futurity  to
his  view.  The  Novitiate  promised  to  the  admitting
Hierophant  and  his  three  accompanying  Druids,
during  the  dark  hours  of  night,  that  he  would  be
faithful  to  the  Druidical  caste.  And  the  most  fearful
oaths  were  undertaken  by  him,  and  as  dreadful  orgies
gone  through  by  him.”

“ In  Bennachie,  a Druidical  locality,”  says  Rust,
“is  the  ‘Maiden  Casay’,  or  Mha-adhann-casach,
‘The  Great  Cauldron  Ascent’,  and  The  Maiden
Stene’,  or  Mha-adhann-lia,  ‘The  Very  Great
Cauldron  Stone’,  the  Cauldron  on  which  has  been
removed,  probably  when  the  modern  road  was
formed . ” But  upon  the  stone  itself  is  incised  a figure


164  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
which  Rust  believed  to  be  a representation  o£  the
Cauldron  itself.  “ The  Structure,”  he  says,

“ according  to  the  figure,  allowed  the  flames  to  play
below  and  around  the  Caldron,  which  was  always
seething  with  its  mysterious  and  wonder-working
contents.  It  is,”  says  Rust,  “ the  holy  Caldron,
the  Caldron  of  knowledge  and  initiation,  for  it  has
the  Z figure  passing  through  it.  This  Z figure  has
been  erroneously  styled  sometimes  the  Broken
Spear,  and  sometimes  the  Broken  Sceptre,  and
because  neither  of  these  was  satisfactory  it  has  been
sometimes  called  by  others  just  the  Z figure,  because
it  resembles  that  letter  of  the  alphabet ; and  they
could  not  think  of  anything  else  upon  which  they
could  agree.  But  that  Figure  is  just  the  zigzag
lightning  of  Heaven,  drawn  down  by  the  Druids,
who  pretended  to  be  possessed  of  this  divine  power.
By  this,  they  alleged,  they  produced  the  real  celestial
fire,  which  they  sold  to  their  votaries  for  domestic
purposes  at  so  dear  a rate,  but,  according  to  their
accounts  and  belief,  so  worthy  of  the  price.  This
belief  in  the  Heaven-produced  fire  was  firm,  deep,
and  universal.”

That  pagan  rites  in  Scotland  were  regarded  as
“common  usage”  is  rendered  clear  enough  from  a
passage  in  the  Chronicle  of  Lanercost  (Bk.  II,  ch.
viii),  from  which  it  appears  that  John,  the  parish
priest  of  Inverkeithing,  in  Fife,  was  cited  before  his
bishop  in  1282  for  having  celebrated  Easter  Week
* ‘according  to  the  rites  of  Priapus’ 1 by  collecting  the
maidens  of  the  town  and  making  them  dance  round
the  figure  of  the  phallic  deity,  singing  the  while.
He  pleaded  the  “common  usage  of  the  country”  and
was  allowed  to  retain  his  benefice.  This  is  precisely
what  was  done,  so  far  as  the  date  was  concerned,
by  the  priest  of  Darvel  Gadarn  in  Wales,  who


The  Secret  Tradition  165

celebrated  his  highest  rites  on  April  5th,  Easter  Day.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  stern  battle  of  the  early
Keltic  Church  for  a separate  Easter  arose  out  of
especial  veneration  for  a Keltic  seasonal  festival  of
great  antiquity.

It  cannot  but  be  interesting  to  us  to  examine
briefly  such  of  the  Druidic  rites  whose  details  are
known  in  order  to  discover  how  much  light  these
may  cast  upon  the  Secret  Tradition.  The  rite  which
perhaps  has  been  described  more  frequently  than
any  other  was  that  of  the  ceremonial  gathering  of
the  mistletoe.  From  the  accounts  of  Pliny  and
Maximus  of  Tyre  we  know  that  the  oak  tree  was
sacred  to  the  Kelts,  and  it  therefore  follows  that  the
gathering  of  the  mistletoe  was  definitely  associated
with  the  fundamentals  of  their  faith.  The  Druidical
groves  were  composed  of  oak  trees,  and  the  sacred
ceremonies  of  the  Druids  were  invariably  graced  by
the  presence  of  oak  branches.  In  short,  the  oak
tree  was  in  itself  a deity.

The  mistletoe  is  not  frequently  found  on  the  oak,
it  is  more  apt  to  twine  parasitically  on  the  poplar  and
the  willow.  Its  precise  significance,  I believe,  has
been  altogether  missed  by  the  majority  of  those
writers  who  have  dealt  with  this  aspect  of  it.  It  has
been  thought  to  be  a sign  of  the  especial  favour  of
the  god,  the  symbol  of  immortality,  of  lightning,  and
so  forth  ! But  I believe  it  to  be  the  symbol  of  the
essence  of  life,  regarded  by  the  ancients  indeed  as
the  protoplasmic  material  of  existence.  .j

It  was  culled  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  moon.  Extra-
ordinary preparations  for  feast  and  sacrifice  were  |

made  beneath  the  tree  which  bore  it,  says  Pliny,  and
two  white  bulls  whose  horns  had  never  been  bound
were  conveyed  thither.  A white-clad  Druid  climbed
the  tree  and  cut  the  mistletoe  with  a golden  sickle.


166  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
As  it  fell  it  was  caught  in  a white  cloth.  The  bulls
were  then  sacrificed  and  prayers  offered  up  to  the
god.  Among  the  Kelts  the  mistletoe  was  known  as
an  “all-heal”,  and  the  liquor  brewed  from  it  was
supposed  to  make  barren  animals  fruitful,  a fact
which  buttresses  my  contention  that  it  was  regarded
as  the  protoplasm  of  life.  Canon  MacCulloch  wisely
sees  in  Pliny’s  account  the  description  of  a rite  which
‘ ‘was  an  attenuated  survival  of  something  which  had
once  been  important,  but  it  is  more  likely  that  Pliny
gives  only  a few  picturesque  details,  and  passes  by
the  rationale  of  the  ritual.  He  does  not  tell  us  who
the  ‘god’  of  whom  he  speaks  was,  perhaps  the  sun-
god,  or  the  god  of  vegetation  . . . the  oxen

may  have  been  incarnations  of  the  god  of  vegeta-
tion”. I believe  the  god  of  the  mistletoe  and  the
oak  to  have  been  that  Hu  of  whom  I have  already
spoken.  Now  we  will  recall  that  the  image  of
Darvel  Gadarn”  which  was  burned  at  Smithfield
in  1538  had  oxen  offered  up  to  it.  I believe  this
image  to  have  been  the  oak  tree  in  an  anthropo-
morphic or  man-like  shape.  It  appears  to  have  been
of  wood,  and,  of  course,  we  know  that  Darvel
Gadarn  was  merely  another  name  for  Hu  Gadarn,
the  god  of  Plenty,  invariably  associated  in  Keltic
folklore  with  the  ox,  indeed  in  his  symbolized  form
the  ox  itself.

It  seems  probable  that  the  mistletoe  as  the  symbol
of  the  essence  of  life  was  introduced  into  the  ritual
of  initiation  of  the  Secret  Tradition  just  as  wheat
was  in  that  of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries.  We  find
it  regarded  as  a cure  for  many  kinds  of  disorders.
It  must  indeed  have  been  looked  upon  as  the
primordial  agency  of  life  itself.  Were  the  “pearls”
on  the  rim  of  the  Cauldron  of  Inspiration  mistletoe
berries?  This  may  appear  very  far-fetched,  but  I


The  Secret  Tradition  167
believe  it  to  be  not  improbable.  Did  Hu  or  Arthur
bring  back  from  Annwn  not  only  the  Cauldron  of
Inspiration  but  the  secret  of  life  as  emblemed  by  the
mistletoe  ?

Much  has  been  written  regarding  the  human
sacrifice 'of  the  Druids.  To  which  god  or  gods  was
this  sacrifice  made?  We  are  informed  that  huge
images  of  wickerwork  were  erected,  and  that  these
were  filled  with  victims,  either  criminals  or  slaves.
The  only  trace  of  British  gods  designed  in  wicker-
work which  I can  discover  is  that  connected  with
the  figures  of  Gog  and  Magog,  the  giants  in  the
Guildhall.  In  a curious  anonymous  work  entitled
The  Giants  in  Guildhall,  published  in  1741,  and  now
exceedingly  scarce,  it  is  stated  that  the  figures  they
replaced  in  1708  were  made  of  wickerwork.  Let
us  look  for  a moment  into  the  genealogy  of  Gog  and
Magog.

In  wellnigh  two  thousand  years  of  existence
Imperial  London  has  succeeded  in  retaining  a wealth
of  folklore  and  legend  quite  commensurate  with  her
importance  and  celebrity.  It  is  significant,  however,
to  the  student  of  her  tradition  that  at  least  eighty
per  cent,  of  it  is  Keltic  and  pre-Keltic,  and  of
exceedingly  venerable  origin.  Roman,  Saxon,  and
Norman  occupations  have  scarcely  coloured  London's
pristine  and  native  mythology,  the  associations  of
which  are  as  Brythonic  every  whit  as  those  of  the
folk-tales  of  Cambria.

Indeed,  London’s  very  name  seems  to  be  referable
to  certain  British  deities,  her  tutelary  patrons.
Doctor  Henry  Bradley,  a sound  authority,  has
explained  “London”  as  a possessive  formed  from
some  such  appellation  as  Londinos,  derived  from  the
old  Keltic  adjective  meaning  “fierce”,  and  Mr.
Gordon  Home,  the  recent  historian  of  Roman


168  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
London,  gives  it  as  his  opinion  that  “the  only  con-
clusion at  which  it  is  possible  to  arrive  is  that  the
twin  hills  beside  the  Thames  formed  at  some  remote
period  the  possession,  and  doubtless  the  strong-
hold, of  a person  or  family  bearing  the  name
Londinos”.,

This  is  sound,  and  clear  enough  so  far  as  it  goes,
but  who  were  the  “Fierce  Ones’’  of  the  twin  hills
beside  the  Thames?  If  reference  be  made  to  the
names  of  other  British  cities  more  or  less  coeval  with
London,  it  will  at  once  be  seen  that  a very  consider-
able proportion  of  them  received  their  names  from
tutelary  or  guardian  deities.  Camulodunum,  or
Colchester,  is  merely  the  dun  or  hill  of  Camulus,
the  Keltic  war-god,  the  name  of  Eboracum,  or  York,
has  been  traced  to  the  Iberian  divinity  Ipor  or
Hyperion,  and  Corinium,  or  Cirencester,  was  the
city  of  Corineus,  an  eponymous  deity  of  the  island.
There  are  literally  scores  of  examples.  Thus  it
seems  highly  probable  that  London  was  named  not
after  ariy  tribe  or  gens,  but  from  a sub-title  of  the
gods  who  presided  over  the  region.

Nor  are  there  lacking  the  titles  and  traditions  of
gods  whose  characteristics  well  merit  the  formidable
description  preserved  in  the  place-name.  From  time
immemorial,  almost,  the  names  of  Gog  and  Magog
have  been  associated  with  the  site.  Its  legendary
appellation  Cockaigne,  as  indigenous  to  it  as
Lyonesse  to  Cornwall  or  Alba  to  Scotland,  has  time
and  again  been  explained  as  “the  land  or  region  of
Gog”,  the  pleasant  place  or  paradise  of  the  Keltic
Ogmios.  Indeed,  there  is  no  dubiety  concerning  the
veridically  British  character  of  the  twin  titan-deities
Gog  and  Magog.  Their  figures  were  formerly
carved  into  the  slope  of  Plymouth  Hoe,  the
Gogmagog  Hills  in  Cambridgeshire  still  embalm  the


The  Secret  Tradition  169
memory  of  their  names,  and  the  carved  and  painted
statues  of  them  which  loom  up  at  the  farther  end  of
the  Guildhall  are  the  successors  of  those  once  carried
through  the  streets  of  the  capital  on  Michaelmas
Day,  at  the  festival  of  the  Lord  Mayor's  Show.

In  his  New  View  of  London  (1708),  Hatton
assures  us  that  hackney  coachmen  in  the  City  were
wont  to  swear  “by  Gog  and  Magog”,  and  he  further
makes  it  clear  that  a very  vivid  terror  inspired  certain
Londoners,  even  at  that  late  date,  at  the  mere
mention  of  them.  Some  apprentices,  he  tells  us,
were  as  “frighted  at  the  names  of  Gog  and  Magog
as  little  children  are  at  the  terrible  sound  of  Raw-head
and  Bloody-bones” , and  evinced  a livelier  fear  of
them  than  at  the  prospect  of  being  haled  before  the
Lord  Mayor  or  Chamberlain.  Surely  a terror  so
long-established  could  have  survived  only  on  account
of  an  exceptionally  powerful  folk-memory  of  ancient
sacrifices  to  the  deities  in  question,  and  the  student
of  tradition  is  probably  justified  in  equating  the  giants
of  London  with  Ogmios,  the  fierce  Keltic  god  of
eloquence,  who,  garbed  in  lion-skin,  and  with  club  in
hand,  drew  all  men  after  him  in  chains  and  demanded
more  than  occasional  human  holocausts.  Magog,
the  “Mother  Gog”,  is  evidently  his  female  counter-
part, and  her  replacement  by  a male  figure  of
Corineus  is  evidently  a late  and  faltering  acquiescence
in  the  bowdlerized  British  mythology  of  Geoffrey
of  Monmouth  and  John  Milton.  Probably,  too,  the
name  Og,  or  Ogmios,  became  confused  in  later
times,  and  by  the  same  “authorities”,  with  those  of
Gog  and  Magog,  the  Biblical  monarchs  of  the  Land
of  Bashan.  On  the  whole,  then,  it  appears  highly
probable  that  the  twin  hills  on  either  side  of  the
Walbrook  were  regarded  as  the  duns  or  mounts  of
Og  and  his  consort,  just  as  the  twin  rocks  at  the


170  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
extremity  of  Land’s  End  were  once  regarded  as  their
citadels.

• There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Gog  and  Magog  were
deities  of  fertility,  but  it  is  also  clear  that  Gog  was
one  and  the  same  with  the  Keltic  Ogmios,  the  god
of  poetry  -and  inspiration.  Magog,  it  may  be
inferred,  was  also  associated  with  the  inspirational
faculty.  This  would  equate  her  with  Keridwen,  and
indeed  I see  no  reason  to  think  that  she  is  not  one
and  the  same  with  that  goddess,  who  in  more  than
one  place  is  described  as  “the  old  giantess”.  But
the  important  thing  for  us  is  that  in  the  capital  of
England  in'  pre-Roman  times  the  rites  of  these
monstrous  deities  were  actually  celebrated,  and  that
the  memory  of  them  remained  for  so  long.  We  are
informed  by  more  than  one  writer  that  the  people
of  London  in  the  eighteenth  century  almost  wor-
shipped them,  and  seemed  in  a sense  to  regard  them
as  the  palladia  of  the  nation.  Even  now,  were  these
effigies  to  be  removed  from  their  ancient  positions
in  the  Guildhall  one  can  envisage  something  of  the
anger  which  would  ensue.

Do  we  not  take  too  much  for  granted  that  the
passage  of  time  utterly  overwhelms  ancient  belief,
and  that  during  the  past  century  we  have  made  such
strides  in  thought  and  progress  as  entirely  to  discount
what  we  label  the  “superstitions”  of  other  ages?
True,  there  may  have  been  during  the  past  sixty
or  seventy  years  a much  more  wholesale  breakaway
from  old  tradition  than  ever  before,  but  it  is  certain
that  only  a very  few  generations  ago  British  people
were  much  more  closely  in  touch  with  the  remnants
of  the  faith  ancillary  to  the  Secret  Tradition  than
many  moderns  imagine.  Festivals  like  Shrovetide
and  Yule  are  undoubtedly  remnants  of  Druidic  ritual,
but  it  is  equally  clear  that  they  enshrine  many


The  Secret  Tradition  171
survivals  from  pre-Keltic  practice.  At  Martinmas
Saint  Martin  is  said  to  have  been  cut  up  and  eaten
in  the  form  of  an  ox.  This  is  clear  evidence  that
St.  Martin  merely  took  the  place  of  the  god  Hu,
who  was  symbolized  by  that  animal.  The  Irish
Tailteann  Games  still  hold  the  memory  of  Tailtiu
the  fostermother  of  Lug,  who  died  in  the  Kalends
of  August,  and  Lammas  was  the  ancient  Keltic  feast
of  Lug  himself.  Another  ancient  British  rite,  in  all
probability  associated  with  the  Secret  Tradition,
survives  in  the  annual  celebration  at  Coventry  of  the
Festival  of  Godiva.  M/ho  and  what  precisely  was
Godiva  ?

Godiva’ s historical  existence  is  by  no  means  at
stake.  Her  personal  reality  is  at  once  conceded.
She  was  the  mother  not  only  of  the  patriotic  Saxon
princes  Edwin  and  Morcar,  but  also  of  a heroine
with  associations  even  more  romantic  than  her  own,
Edith  Swan-neck,  wife  of  that  Harold  who  fell  at
Senlac  or  Hastings.  But,  this  notwithstanding,  the
story  of  her  noble  sacrifice  is  demonstrably  of  the
nature  of  legend.  Roger  of  Wendover,  who  first
alludes  to  it,  wrote  in  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth
century,  or  about  a hundred  and  fifty  years  after
the  death  of  the  central  figure.  No  previous
chronicler  makes  mention  of  her  unselfish  perform-
ance, and  in  the  eyes  of  the  folkloreist  it  embraces
so  many  circumstances  obviously  connected  with
ancient  British  religious  rite  as  makes  it  evident  that
it  must  have  arisen  therefrom.

It  is,  indeed,  quite  unnecessary  to  prove,  as  has
been  done,  that  Coventry  was,  at  the  supposed  date
of  the  Countess’s  famous  ride,  a village  inhabited
by  some  three  hundred  serfs  dwelling  in  wooden
huts,  that  it  had  no  market-place,  nor  groaned  under
the  tolls  and  taxes  alluded  to  in  the  legend.  But  it


172  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
is  of  importance  that  Godgifu  or  Godiva,  and  her
husband  Leofric,  Earl  of  Mercia,  were  the  restorers,
if  not  the  founders,  of  its  monastery  of  St.  Osburg.
For,  with  the  restoration  of  this  religious  house,  the
prosperity  of  Coventry  as  a market-town  commences.
Godiva  came  to  be  regarded  as  a civic  benefactress,
consequently  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  that  her  fame
was  confounded  at  a later  date  with  the-  myth  of  the
ancient  British  local  goddess  Brigantia  or  Brigit,
whose  story,  during  the  early  Christian  centuries,
had  itself  grown  dim  and  confused  in  the  popular
imagination.  In  the  Keltic  period,  this  divinity,  or
her  human  representative,  rode  through  the  village
of  Coventry  at  the  period  of  the  summer  festival  at
the  end  of  May.  But  her  feast  and  attributes  were
in  the  course  of  time  confounded  with  and  latterly
absorbed  by  the  legend  of  the  fair-haired  Saxon
Countess.

This  is  a process  with  which  the  mythologist  is
well  acquainted.  The  memory  of  a god  wanes,  and
his  legend  is  appropriated  by  a later  hero  or  saint,
with  modifications  of  time  and  place.  Just  as  in
Ireland  the  goddess  Brigantia,  with  whom  we  have
here  to  deal,  became  the  Christian  St.  Bridget,  there
is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  in  Coventry  a similar
process  took  place,  and  that  Brigantia  or  Brigiddu
became  confused  with  the  saintly  Godgifu,  the
“God-given”.

For  our  contention,  the  salient  points  of  Godiva’s
legend  are  that  she  passed  through  Coventry
innocent  of  any  covering  save  that  of  her  abundant
golden  hair,  and  that  in  doing  so,  she  was  spied
upon.  There  is  good  proof  that  the  ancient  Keltic
deity,  or  a woman  representing  her,  appeared  in  this
condition  at  her  annual  festival ; and  to  spy  upon
godhead,  or  its  representative,  was,  of  course,  the


The  Secret  Tradition  173

unpardonable  sin,  punished  with  the  deprivation  of
sight.

That  Coventry  was  anciently  situated  in  a district
in  which  Druidical  rites  were  practised  is  generally
conceded.  At  the  village  of  Southam,  hard  by,  the
Godiva  procession  was  formerly  celebrated  with  a
faithfulness  equal  to  that  evinced  in  the  larger  town-
ship. But  curious  variations  of  the  ceremony,  even
more  eloquent  of  its  Druidical  character  than  the  rite
obtaining  at  Coventry,  were  celebrated  there.  The
pageant  was  headed  by  a personage  known  as  “Old
Brazen-Face1”,  who  wore  a mask  representing  a
bull’s  head,  with  horns  complete.  At  certain  festivals
the  hide  and  head  of  a sacrificed  bull  were  worn  by
the  Druidic  officiants,  so  that  “Old  Brazen-Face”
may  well  be  regarded  as  the  degenerate  descendant
of  these.  His  name  is,  of  course,  an  appellation
of  the  Keltic  sun-god,  whose  burning  visage,
surrounded  by  lambent  rays,  was  frequently  cast  in
brazen  discs.  The  expression  “Old”  is  frequently
prefixed  to  the  names  of  discredited  deities,  as  in
“Old  Scratch”,  “Old  Harry”.  Then  came  Godiva
in  a lace  mantle,  followed  by  a second  Godiva,  whose
body  was  stained  black.  This,  Pliny  tells  us,  is
precisely  how  the  women  of  the  ancient  Britons
decorated  themselves  on  occasions  of  religious
festival,  smearing  their  bodies  with  woad,  “so  that
they  resembled  the  swarthy  Ethiopians”.  At  Fenny
Compton,  not  far  from  Southam,  where  this  Godiva
rite  is  held,  is  Woad  Farm,  perhaps  the  very  site
where  the  plants  from  which  the  dye  was  made  were
formerly  obtained . That  a preponderatingly  British
element  has  survived  in  Warwickshire  has  been
maintained  by  generations  of  archaeologists,  and  what
more  probable  than  that  it  continued  the  practice  of
its  ancient  rites,  placating  later  Christian  opinion  by


174  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
their  attribution  to  the  saintly  identity  of  a worthy
daughter  of  Mother  Church?

Coventry  was  formerly  situated  near  the  southern
boundaries  of  the  great  British  tribe  of  the  Brigantes,
the  presiding  deity  of  whom  was  the  goddess
Brigantia  or  Brigiddu,  the  same,  as  has  been
indicated,  with  the  Irish  Brigit,  later  Christianized
into  St.  Bridget.  She  was  also  known  as  Danu  or
Anu,  and  is  undoubtedly  identical  with  that  “Black
Annis”  who  was  supposed  to  lurk  in  the  Dane  (or
Danu)  Hills  in  Leicestershire,  and  to  carry  off
children  and  sheep  to  her  cavern — a memorial  of
human  and  animal  sacrificial  offerings.  She  was  a
divinity  of  the  earth,  a goddess  of  fertility,  wor-
shipped almost  exclusively  by  women.  The  name
“Black  Annis”  obviously  relates  to  her  woad-stained  t

appearance,  and  accounts  for  the  “Black  Godiva”.

But  how  to  explain  “Peeping  Tom” ? The  shrine
of  Brigiddu  at  Kildare,  in  Ireland,  was  enclosed  by
a fence  which  no  man  might  pass  or  peep  through,
nor  was  any  man  permitted  to  gaze  upon  the  sacred
virgins  dedicated  to  the  goddess.  Thus,  when  one
or  more  of  them  rode  through  the  streets  of  British
Coventry  at  the  time  of  the  festival  of  the  goddess,
no  “Peeping  Tom”  dared  offend,  or  the  outraged  ’

deity  would  summarily  have  deprived  him  of  sight.

To  such  a custom,  then,  we  may  trace  the  beginnings
of  the  Godiva  legend.

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  rite  has  a certain
bearing  on  the  ritual  of  the  Secret  Tradition.  Not
only  does  it  show  its  capacity  for  survival,  but  I
think  it  reveals  part  of  the  representation  gone
through  in  the  initiatory  ceremony,  or  at  least  that
it  is  associated  with  the  ritual  of  the  faith  ancillary
to  the  Tradition  itself.  Briginda  was  a goddess  of
knowledge,  she  was  worshipped  by  poets,  and  had


The  Secret  Tradition  175
two  sisters  of  the  same  name  connected  with  leech-
craft  and  smithwork.  She  was  indeed  a goddess  of
culture  and  poetry,  and  is  the  equivalent  of  the
Gaulish  goddess  Brigindo.  The  name  seems  to  come
from  the  Welsh  root  "bri”,  "honour”  or  "renown”.
Her  cult  until  lately  was  known  in  the  Hebrides,
where,  on  St.  Bride’s  Day,  Candlemas  Eve,  women
dressed  a sheaf  of  oats  in  female  clothes,  and  set  it
with  a club  in  a basket  called  "Bride’s  Bed”,  to  the
accompaniment  of  the  cry  : ‘ ‘ Bride  is  come  1 Bride
is  welcome!”  She  was  undoubtedly,  as  Canon
MacCulloch  says,  "an  early  teacher  of  civilization,
inspirer  of  the  artistic,  poetic,  and  mechanical
faculties,  as  well  as  a goddess  of  fire  and  fertility”.

It  seems  to  me  that,  like  Keridwen,  she  presided
over  the  female  department  of  the  ancient  mysteries,
as  Hu  presided  over  the  male  portion.  In  all
likelihood  her  worship  obtained  more  in  the  north
and  central  parts  of  what  is  now  England  and
Scotland,  and  in  Ireland.  But  the  fact  that  she  is
associated  with  wells,  with  inspiration , and  with
agriculture  seems  to  equate  her  almost  entirely  with
Keridwen,  the  goddess  of  the  Sacred  Cauldron.


CHAPTER  VIII


THE  HIGHER  PHILOSOPHY  OF  BRITISH
MYSTICISM

It  is  now  necessary  to  turn  to  the  higher  aspects  of
the  Secret  Tradition  of  Britain  as  enunciated  in  its
most  distinguished  document,  that  Barddas  already
described  in  a former  chapter,  only  the  superficial
philosophy  of  which  was  touched  upon.  In  the  first
place  it  will  be  necessary  to  satisfy  ourselves
regarding  the  notion  of  deity  as  there  set  forth.

God,  we  are  told,  is  three  things,  and  cannot  be
otherwise  : coeval  with  all  time ; co-entire  with  all
essence  ; and  co-local  with  all  mental  purpose.  He
is  inconceivable  and  incomprehensible,  the  greatest
and  the  most  immeasurable  of  all  that  are  together
in  place.

But  of  what  god  are  these  statements  made?  It
seems  probable  that  the  Welsh  bards  of  later  times
recognized  the  God  of  Christianity  as  the  supreme
divinity,  but  there  are  not  wanting  allusions  to  a
certain  Hu  whose  nature  has  already  been  touched
upon.

Now  concerning  this  Hu  there  is  a considerable
diversity  of  opinion.  “ The  meaning  of  Hu,”
explains  a note  to  Barddas,  “ is  that  which  is  apt
to  pervade,  or  to  spread  over.  It  is  used  as  an
epithet  of  the  Deity,  in  reference  to  His  omniscience,
and  is  not  unfrequently  to  be  met  with  as  such  in  the
works  of  the  Bards.  * ’ The  bard  Cynddelw  identifies
him  with  Jesus,  and  the  annotator  ventures  the

176


The  Higher  Philosophy  177
opinion  that  he  was  identical  with  the  Heus1  of
Lactantius  and  the  Hesus  of  Lucan,  described  as
a god  of  the  Gauls.

Canon  MacCulloch3  regards  him  as  probably  “an
old  culture-god  of  some  tribes”,  and  adds  that  the
triads  referring  to  him  are  of  later  date.  Rhys3
speaks  of  him  as  a “British  Hercules”,  and  thinks
that  he  was  superseded  by  Arthur.  In  fact,  very
little  notice  has  been  taken  of  him  by  the  official
mythologists.  But  it  is  obvious  from  the  constant
reference  to  him  in  the  triads  that  he  was  a personage
of  importance,  a culture-god,  skilled  in  the  arts  of
husbandry,  a law-giver,  probably  of  solar  origin.
He  is  alluded  to  as  the  “supreme  proprietor  of  the
isle  of  Britain”,  and  as  “a  bull  dwelling  in  a sacred
stall”,  a statement  which  seems  to  equate  him  with
Osiris.  Undoubtedly  he  is  the  individual  alluded  to
in  the  poem  of  “The  Spoils  of  Annwn”  as  “the
brindled  ox  with  the  thick  head-band,  having  seven-
score  knobs  in  his  collar”.  That  such  an  animal
was  kept  by  the  Druids  as  a symbol  of  this  deity  in
the  same  manner  as  the  priests  of  Egypt  kept  the
Apis  bull  as  the  representative  of  Osiris,  is  proved
by  a passage  in  the  same  poem  : “ They  know  not
what  animal  they  (the  Druids)  keep  of  the  silver
head.”  The  name  of  this  bull  or  ox  seems  to  have
been  Elzen,  judging  from  a poem  by  Merlin,  and  its
slaughter  by  the  pagan  Saxons  is  deplored  by  that
magus.

This  not  only  equates  Hu  to  some  extent  with
Osiris,  but  associates  his  worship  with  that  of
Mithraism  and  the  bull-cults  of  the  Mediterranean
area.  Now  the  Gaulish  god  Esus,  or  Hesus,
mentioned  previously  and  alluded  to  by  Lucan,  is

1 Hu,  in  Welsh,  is  pronounced  Has,  or  He.
s op.  cit.  p.  124,  note.  3 Celtic  Folklore , p.  142.


178  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
depicted  on  an  altar  found  at  Paris  as  a woodman
cutting  down  a tree,  and  on  the  same  altar  a bull  is
represented.  There  is  a similar  altar  at  Treves.
Pre- Roman  bronze  bulls  have  been  found  at
Hallstadt  in  Austria,  and  at  La  Tene.  “ Many
place-names  in  which  the  word  tamos  occurs,  in
Northern  Italy,  the  Pyrenees,  Scotland,  Ireland,
and  elsewhere,”  says  Canon  MacCulloch,  “ suggest
that  the  places  bearing  these  names  were  sites  of  a
bull-cult.”  He  adds  that  possibly  the  animal  tended
to  become  the  symbol  of  a god,  a tendency  perhaps
aided  by  the  spread  of  Mithraism,  and  states  that
“a  later  relic  of  the  bull-cult  may  be  found  in  the
carnival  procession  of  the  Bceuf  Gras  at  Paris”.1
We  will  also  recall  the  sacrifice  of  bulls  at  Gairloch
and  elsewhere  in  Britain  in  later  times.

That  Hu  was  a culture-god  symbolized  by  the  bull
(as  was  Osiris)  is  therefore  clear  enough,  and  that
he  had  a common  origin  with  the  Egyptian  god  in
North-West  Africa  is  also  extremely  probable.
Frazer,  in  a note  to  the  Golden  Bough , mentions
the  discovery  of  a Druidic  grave  in  North  Africa,
complete  with  implements,  and  Westermarck  pro-
vides many  evidences  of  the  survival  in  Morocco  of
the  rite  of  Bealtainn,  a ceremony  for  the  annual
purification  of  cattle  by  passing  them  through  the
sacred  fire  or  smoke.

Now  we  are  informed  in  Barddas  that  God  alone
can  endure  the  eternities  of  Ceugant , and  as  we
know  the  three  circles  of  the  Keltic  psychic
progression  to  have  been  depicted  in  solar  form,  as
shown  on  the  early  British  coins,  and,  according  to
some,  in  the  stone  circles  at  Avebury  and  elsewhere,
Ceugant , the  dwelling  of  the  Most  High  Hu,  was
probably  regarded  as  the  sun  itself,  Gwynvyd , the
1 op.  cit.  p.  209.


The  Higher  Philosophy  179
happy  dwelling  of  immortal  beings,  as  its  outer  rim,
and  Abred,  as  the  outer  darkness.  But  the  drawing
of  the  psychic  scheme  in  Barddas  shows  Abred  as
the  central  figure,  Gwynvyd  as  the  outer,  and
Ceugant  as  corresponding  to  the  rays  of  the
luminary.  It  may  thus  be  that  Abred  or  Annwn  was
regarded  as  a fiery  solar  abyss  wherein  all  things
germinated,  a torrid  and  burning  alembic  of  life.
But  as  Abred  is  obviously  the  earth-plane,  some
confusion  may  have  taken  place  between  it  and
Annwn  in  the  mind  of  the  draughtsman  of  this  plan.
In  all  probability  the  three  psychic  planes  of  man
were  Annwn,  the  place  of  germinal  existence,  Abred ,
the  earth-plane,  and  Gwynvyd,  the  plane  of  justified
spirits.  Ceugant,  the  plane  of  God,  was  unapproach-
able and  reserved  for  deity  alone.  That  some
confusion  certainly  did  exist  is  clear  from  two
statements  in  the  Book  of  Dwyfyddiaeth , placed  side
by  side,  one  of  which  bears  out  that  the  three  states
of  existence  of  living  beings  are  “the  state  of  Abred
in  Annwn  ; the  state  of  liberty  in  humanity,  and  the
state  of  love,  that  is  Gwynvyd  in  Heaven".  While
the  other  lays  down  as  the  three  necessities  of  all
animated  existence,  “beginning  in  Annwn;  pro-
gression in  Abred  ; and  plenitude  in  Gwynvyd” .

The  three  necessary  obligations  of  man  are  set
forth  as  suffering,  change,  and  choice,  and  his
equiproportions  as  Abred  and  Gwynvyd,  necessity
and  liberty,  evil  and  good,  to  which  he  has  the  power
of  attaching  himself  as  he  pleases.  This  is  no
philosophy  of  fatalism,  and  as  such  is  differentiated
from  the  Eastern  systems  and  marks  the  growth  and
acceptance  of  the  Western  doctrine  of  human  free-
will, which,  indeed,  is  insisted  on.  Yet  there  are
obvious  associations  with  the  doctrine  of  escape,  as
observed  in  the  Oriental  systems,  for  we  are  told


180  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
that  Man  does  “escape”  from  Abred  and  Cythmul
(evil)  to  Gwynvyd  through  forgetfulness  and  death.
Thus  former  states  cannot  be  recalled  in  the  happier
sphere,  although  elsewhere  it  is  explicitly  set  forth
that  it  is  essential  for  perfectitude  that  they  should  be.

There  are  thus  the  three  planes  and  no  others  in
our  early  British  mystical  philosophy,  not  seven  as
in  the  Eastern.  Nor  does  it  seem  to  have  been
assumed  that  man  has  numerous  psychic  bodies,  as  in
the  Eastern  philosophies,  although,  as  has  been  shown,
he  is  composed  of  various  “materials”,  or  elements.

In  the  triads  of  Bardism  is  an  interrogatory  which
throws  considerable  light  on  the  early  British  notions
concerning  the  faculties  of  the  soul.  To  the  question
“What  is  conscience?”  the  reply  is  “The  eye  of
God 'in  the  heart  of  man,  which  sees  everything  that
is  perceptible  in  its  right  form,  place,  time,  cause,
and  purpose.  ” Reason  is  explained  as  the  revolving
of  the  conscience,  whilst  it  contemplates  by  means
of  sight,  hearing,  and  experience  whatever  comes
before  it,  and  understanding  is  described  as  the
working  of  the  conscience  whilst  it  exercises  its
energies  and  might  for  the  purpose  of  acquiring
knowledge.

In  this  questionary  God  is  described  as  the  life  of
all  lives,  the  spirit  of  God  as  the  power  of  all  powers,
and  the  providence  of  God  as  the  order  of  orders
and  the  system  of  systems.  Truth  is  the  science  of
Wisdom  preserved  in  memory  by  conscience,  and
the  soul  is  the  breath  of  God  in  a carnal  body,  while
Life  is  the  might  of  God.

In  The  Sentences  of  Bardism , written  by  leuan
ab  Hywel  Swrdwal,  a poet  who  flourished  about
1450,  a good  deal  of  insight  is  given  into  the  Bardic
philosophy  of  existence.  It  is  indeed  strange  to  find
in  the  Wales  of  this  particular  era  so  much  of


THE  GOD  ESUS  OR  HU

Notre  Dame,  Paris,


bas-relief  found


1 rom


[To  face  page  1S0


The  Higher  Philosophy  181
profound  thought  as  is  contained  in  these  sentences,
sentiments  indeed,  which,  if  they  had  been  known  to
the  doctors  of  Elizabethan  London,  might  have
caused  them  to  revise  their  opinions  of  contemporary
Keltic  civilization ! Let  us  glance  briefly  at  a few
of  these  aphorisms.

That  does  not  but  exist,  we  are  told,  from  which
a greater  amount  of  good  than  evil  can  be  produced,
since  it  cannot  be  otherwise  in  virtue  of  God’s  power,
wisdom,  and  love.  Of  that  which  is  neither  good
nor  bad,  neither  the  existence  nor  non-existence  is
safe  for  man,  for  nothing  in  reason  is  known  of  it.
Others  say  that  it  is  the  material  of  everything.
However,  there  is  only  God  that  knows  its  good  and
evil,  its  utility  and  inutility,  whether  the  good  or  evil
be  the  greater.  Where  a great  good  to  all,  without
harm  to  anyone,  can  be  comprehended,  it  cannot  be
but  that  it  is  in  existence,  since  otherwise  the  three
principal  attributes  of  God,  namely,  knowledge,
wisdom,  and  mercy,  would  not  stand  without  being
opposed  by  distress  and  necessity : “therefore
Bardism  is  true”.

Truth  cannot  be  had  from  that  in  which  every
truth  cannot  consist,  and  which  will  not  consist  in
every  truth,  for  truth  cannot  be  had  from  what  will
contradict  or  withstand  that  which  is  true.  The  very
power  of  God,  we  are  further  informed,  is  a
guarantee  that  the  best  of  all  things  are  in  existence.

“ The  Ten  Commandments  of  the  Bards”  found
in  the  Blue  Book  have  obviously  been  interpene-
trated by  Christian  thought.  For  example,  we  are
told  to  keep  Sunday  religiously  and  to  beware  of
worshipping  idols,  which  shows  that  the  tendency
to  worship  idols  was  actually  present.  But  certain
passages  betray  the  Keltic  mentality.  That,  for
example,  concerning  the  three  deliverances-— “there


182  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
will  be  no  transgression  which  will  not  be  set  right,
no  displeasure  which  will  not  be  forgiven,  and  no
anger  which  will  not  be  pacified,  and  thence  will  be
obtained  the  three  excellences  : first,  there  will  be
nothing  ill-favoured  which  shall  not  be  adorned  ;
secondly,  there  will  be  no  evil  which  shall  not  be
removed  ; thirdly,  there  will  be  no  desire  which  shall
not  be  attained.  And  from  reaching  this  mark  : in
the  first  place,  there  can  be  nothing  which  shall  not
be  known  ; there  can  be  no  loss  of  anything  beloved
which  shall  not  be  regained  ; thirdly,  there  can  be
no  end  to  the  Gwynvyd  which  shall  be  attained.
And  it  is  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  an  under-
standing might  and  love  other  than  these  things,
with  the  careful  performance  of  what  is  possible.”

These  latter  sentiments  particularly  display  a
Keltic  bias.  Possibly  there  is  nothing  Biblical  about
them,  and  there  is  certainly  nothing  of  the  hard,  dry
theology  of  the  Teuton  in  the  yearning  beauty  they
contain.  The  core  of  their  philosophy  seems  to
imply  that,  the  struggle  of  the  soul  notwithstanding,
all  will  be  well  in  the  end.  They  reiterate  the
age-long  cry  of  the  poet  that  beauty  cannot  die,  that
somewhere,  even  though  occluded  by  clouds,  it
awaits  the  spirit  at  the  end  of  its  journey,  and  that
despite  human  agony,  there  is  certainty  of  gain  at
the  conclusion  of  the  struggle.  This  is  not  fatalism,
nor  has  it  anything  to  do  with  the  ugly  philosophy
of  punishment  which  seems  to  have  a peculiarly
Judaic  origin  and  to  have  arisen  through  a survival
of  early  barbarous  beliefs.  It  is  indeed  the  philosophy
of  joy,  which  shines  through  all  Keltic  art,  however
shadowed  it  may  seem  in  places.

Wherefore,  then,  the  struggle  of  man?  It  seems
to  me  that  in  our  native  British  mysticism  the  idea
of  struggle,  of  evolution,  is  stressed  more  as  a


The  Higher  Philosophy  183
natural  and  necessitous  course  than  as  a series  of
phases  through  which  the  human  soul  must  pass,
almost,  indeed,  as  an  act  of  psychic  growth,  rather
than  a definite  rule  which  it  must  observe.  The
Oriental  philosophies  seem  to  indicate  that  - it  is
necessary  for  man,  if  he  would  develop  in  psychic
stature,  to  tread  a certain  path  definitely  laid  out  for
him,  a path  which  may  take  him  aeons  of  ages  ere  it
lead  him  to  the  ultimate.  At  practically  every  step
of  this  path  choice  is  afforded  him  to  tread  rightly
or  wrongly  ; but  the  mysticism  of  our  fathers,  or  so
it  seems  to  me,  lays  less  of  stress  on  choice.  Man
must  progress  whether  he  would  or  not.  True,  he
may  fall  back  into  Abred  time  and  again,  but
ultimately  he  must  gain  Gwynvyd.  True,  there  is
a belief  associated  with  the  Eastern  philosophies  that
in  the  end  all  life  must  return  to  God,  but  not  only
does  the  process  seem  to  be  very  much  more  pro-
longed, but  it  does  not  seem  to  be  so  mechanical.
To  my  way  of  thinking  Barddas  postulates  a species
of  evolutionary  machine  in  which,  from  a low  form
of  existence,  the  soul  is  slowly  raised  to  the  heights
of  Gwynvyd , rather  than  a specific  scheme  to  which
the  conduct  of  man  is  chiefly  contributory.  Not  that
in  the  British. system  it  is  not  contributory,  but  rather
that  man  appears,  in  virtue  of  it,  to  receive  more
assistance  from  supernatural  powers.  It  is,  as  I have
said,  rather  that  he  seems  to  be  slowly  born  through
the  planes  of  being  into  the  light  of  Gwynvyd,  than
that  he  arrives  there  entirely  through  his  own
volition  and  conduct.

It  is  obvious,  too,  that  enormous  stress  is  laid
upon  the  value  to  the  soul  of  man  of  scientific  -know-
ledge in  this  development,  that  it  is  indeed  the  lever
by  which  he  raises  himself  from  one  plane  to  another.
This  alone  is  proof,  in  its  practical  thrust,  of  a


IP**1


184  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
Western  origin.  Good  deeds  doubtless  assist  man,
but  without  a knowledge  of  the  secret  sciences  he
may  be  retarded.  It  looks,  indeed,  as  if  the  process
were  hastened  through  such  knowledge,  and  therein
probably  lay  the  desire  for  initiation,  that  is,  it  would
appear  that,  given  this  initiation,  man  would  be
assured  of  entrance  into  the  plane  of  Gwynvyd,  and
that  without  it  he  might  possibly  fall  back  into  A bred.
This  scheme  of  things  notably  resembles  the
Egyptian  idea  that  without  a knowledge  of  The
Book  of  the  Dead  the  human  soul  could  not  hope  to
gain  paradise.

So  loosely  are  the  tenets  of  our  ancient  mysticism
set  down  that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  systematize
them.  They  are,  for  the  most  part,  cast  into  Triads
or  groups  of  three,  after  the  manner  of  the  Welsh
bards,  and  frequently  in  an  arbitrary  fashion  though
never  altogether  incoherently.  The  juxtaposition  of
some  of  these  aphorisms,  too,  is  often  irrelevant.  It
is  therefore  necessary  to  cull  from  the  mass  that
which  seems  important  and  to  the  point.

The  three  laws  of  man’s  actions  are  set  forth  as
necessity,  choice,  and  judgement,  according  to  what
is  possible,  for  ever  in  the  circle  of  Gwynvyd.  There
are  three  things,  we  are  told,  which  are  to  be  found
everywhere  : God,  truth,  and  the  Circle  of
Gwynvyd,  and  to  know  this  is  to  be  united  with
them  and  to  have  deliverance  from  Abred.  There
are  again  three  things  the  magnitude  of  which  cannot
be  known,  the  Circle  of  Ceugant , the  plane  of  the
existence  of  God  alone,  the  length  of  eternity,  and
the  love  of  God.

The  three  principal  vigours  of  man  are  set  forth
as  A wen,  affection,  and  intellect,  from  which  triad
all  goodness  proceeds.  All  the  efforts  of  man  should
be  in  unison  with  that  which  is  in  the  Circle  of


The  Higher  Philosophy  185
Gwynvyd.  There  are  three  grades  of  animation  :
God  in  Ceugant , spiritualities  in  Gwynvyd,  that  is
“Heaven”,  and  corporalities  in  Abred , that  is  an
water  and  earth.  Here  we  have  the  Circle  of
Gwynvyd  absolutely  identified  with  the  Christian
Heaven,  and  Abred  with  earth  rather  than  Annwn.
A note  to  this  passage  states  that : “ Some  persons
profess  to  discover  indications  of  the  doctrine  of
Abred  or  the  metempsychosis  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,
thus  they  say  that  the  passage  in  Job  (ch.  xxxiii,  v.
29-30)  : ‘Lo,  all  these  things  worketh  God  often-
times with  Man,  to  bring  back  his  soul  from  the  Pit,
to  be  enlightened  with  the  light  of  the  living’,  ought,
according  to  the  Hebrew,  to  be  rendered  : ‘Lo,  all
these  things  worketh  God  with  Man,  and  thrice  to
bring  back  his  soul  from  the  Pit’.”  This  may  be
so,  yet  still,  as  I have  said,  I find  nothing  of  the
doctrine  of  transmigration  in  our  ancient  mysticism,
rather  that  of  evolution,  or  psychic  development.

We  come  next  to  the  three  conditions  to  which
the  nature  of  existence  and  animation  is  subject :
efficient,  as  with  God  and  His  powers ; effected,  as
is  the  case  with  finite  vitalities  and  mixed  beings ;
and  non-effective,  that  is  what  was  not  made  “and
will  not  make”,  as  space,  absolute  time,  mortality,
and  darkness.  These  conditions  are  postulated  in
another  way  as  follows  : “ What  has  not  been  made,
that  is  God  ; what  has  been  made,  that  is  the  living
and  motion ; what  has  not  been  made,  that  is  the
motionless  dead.”  It  is  curious  to  find  the  theory  of
relativity  introduced  into  these  ancient  triads,  where
the  existence  of  absolute  time  and  space  are  denied
— another  instance  in  which,  I take  it,  the  Welsh
bards  were  greatly  in  advance  of  thought  of  con-
temporary Europe.

The  three  stabilities  of  oneness  are  given  as


186  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
universality,  for  there  can  be  no  two  kinds  of  one
universality,  infinity,  for  there  can  be  no  limits  to
one  whole,  nor  can  anything  be  whole  which  is  not
universal  nor  omnipresent,  for  that  is  not  one  whole
which  is  not  all-comprehensive ; and  immutability,
for  it  is  impossible  that  there  should  be  one  con-
junctive, universal,  entire  and  all-existent,  otherwise
than  they  are ; therefore  there  can  be  no  God  but
from  fundamental  and  universal  oneness.

The  manner  in  which  the  end  of  Abred  or  the
earth-plane  will  be  accelerated  is  set  forth  not  so
much  prophetically  as  with  an  air  of  scientific
exactitude.  Three  things,  we  are  told,  will
accelerate  its  conclusion:  diseases,  fighting,  and
becoming  eneidvaddeu,  which  has  already  been
explained  as  a state  of  being  legally  punished  for
offence.  But  “eneidvaddeu”  in  this  instance  implies
a state  of  punishment  which  has  been  justly  and
reasonably  brought  about,  for  example,  by  war  or
conflict  carried  out  in  a just  cause.  We  are  told  that
it  was  for  the  benefit  of  and  out  of  mercy  to  living
beings  that  God  ordained  the  mutual  fighting  and
slaughter  which  takes  place  among  them,  a doctrine
which,  we  will  remember,  was  stressed  with  no  little
weight  by  Wordsworth.  However  the  modern
mind  recoils  from  such  a belief,  it  seems  to  have
commended  itself  to  our  British  ancestors  as  a short
cut  from  the  miseries  of  the  plane  of  Abred,  and  this
strengthens  my  theory  that  the  philosophy  set  forth
in  Barddas  by  no  means  found  its  origin  in  any  of
the  Oriental  systems,  which  not  only  prohibit
slaughter  and  regard  the  taking  of  life  as  blasphemy,
but  rather  look  upon  life  as  a painful  experience  to
be  overcome  more  by  a good  train  of  thought  than
anything  else.  Moreover  the  doctrine  in  question
shows  most  distinctly  its  Druidic  origin,  for  the


The  Higher  Philosophy  187
Druids,  although  at  times  they  seem  to  have
intervened  in  tribal  wars,  at  others  certainly  inspired
their  people  to  combat.  But  before  we  blame  them
for  the  creation  of  a doctrine  which  appears  to  us
barbarous  and  inhuman,  let  us  remember  that  even
within  our  own  times  it  has  been  preached,  and  not
without  effect.

The  basic  foundations  of  Abred,  we  are  told,  are
the  predominance  of  opposition  and  Cythraul  over
prosperity  and  amendment,  necessary  lawlessness
and  death  ensuing  from  the  mastery  of  Cythraul  and
from  the  system  of  deliverance  which  is  according  to
the  love  and  mercy  of  God.  Here  we  find  the  state
of  Abred  set  forth  as  a dreadful  necessity,  a part  of
a psychic  evolution  which  must  be  borne.  It  is  clear
that  from  this  philosophy  man  is  expected  to  realise
that  life  on  the  earth-plane  can  never  be  a happy
experience,  that  he  must  be  resigned  to  it.  This
might  seem  at  the  first  glance  similar  to  the  Eastern
idea  of  bearing  existence  with  resignation,  but  this  is
rather  belied  by  the  preceding  statement  that  such  a
condition  may  be  shortened  by  strife  and  slaughter.

The  three  necessities  of  the  state  of  Gwynvyd ,
the  spiritual  plane,  are  the  predominance  of  good
over  evil,  memory  reaching  from  Annwn , and  hence
perfect  judgement  and  understanding  without  the
possibility  of  doubting  or  differing,  and  lastly
superiority  over  death.  This  consists  in  power
derived  from  knowing  the  whole  of  its  cause  and  the
means  of  escaping  it,  and  hence  everlasting  life.  It
has  often  seemed  strange  to  commentators  on  ancient
dogma  that  the  idea  of  the  survival  of  memory  in  the
last  phase  of  psychic  existence  should  be  so  greatly
stressed.  One  wonders  precisely  what  the  value  of
such  recollection  might  be,  unless  it  is  to  render  the
soul  more  perfect  by  providing  it  with  the  lessons  of


188  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
experience  in  full.  I am  inclined  to  think  that  it
signifies  that  there  can  be  no  real  happiness  without
perfect  knowledge  and  experience,  that  happiness  in
a higher  state  is  actually  relative  to  the  suffering
endured  in  lower  phases  of  existence.  Again,  the
spell,  so  to  speak,  by  aid  of  which  man  escapes  from
death,  triumphs  over  it,  consists  in  power  derived
from  knowing  the  whole  of  its  cause.  That  is,  the
secrets  of  death  must  be  plumbed  and  accurately
understood  before  the  soul  can  triumph  over  it.
This  throws  some  light  on  the  allegory  of  the  descent
of  Hu,  or  his  other  form  Arthur,  into  the  depths  of
Annum.  Not  only  did  he  penetrate  thither  for  the
purpose  of  seeking  the  cauldron  of  inspiration,  the
source  of  life,  which  was  naturally  located  in  the
gloomy  abyss  whence  life  in  its  early  forms  was
thought  to  have  sprung,  but  he  also  sought  to  gauge
the  secrets  and  mysteries  of  death,  the  opposite  of
life,  and  that  this  knowledge  was  part  of  the  initiation
of  the  brotherhood  of  the  Secret  Tradition  we  can
scarcely  doubt.

We  have  little  data  to  assure  us  that  the  belief
in  such  a secret  was  held  by  other  ancient  brother-
hoods. As  regards  the  Osirian  tradition,  Osiris  was
certainly  Lord  of  the  Dead,  but  that  the  priests  of  his
cult  regarded  it  as  essential  to  probe  into  the
mysteries  of  death  I can  discover  no  evidence.
The  same  holds  good  of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries
and  others.  The  place  of  death,  the  Underworld,
was  to  the  hierophants  of  these  cults  also  the  place
of  the  beginning  of  life,  at  least  of  cereal  life,  to
which  they  likened  that  of  mankind.  At  the  same
time  the  initiates  must  pass  through  the  place  of
death  to  reach  life.  The  embalmers  of  Egypt  were
wont  to  imitate  the  hues  and  colours  of  life  in  the
corpse  by  painting  its  face  red  and  by  giving  it


The  Higher  Philosophy  189
artificial  eyes.  However,  the  early  Osirian  alchemy
appears  to  have  excogitated  a system  of  thought  by
which  out  of  dead  metals  and  earths  a species  of
psychic  elixir  was  developed.  In  some  religions,
too,  we  observe  the  idea  that  life  may  emanate  from
death.  The  idea  of  resurrection  was  known  to  the
Egyptians  and  is  still  upheld  by  the  Christian
religion,  and  although  this  is  by  no  means  the  same
thing  as  the  conquest  of  death  by  the  discovery  of
its  secrets,  it  is  nevertheless  an  assertion  that  death
can  be  conquered.

But  we  find  in  both  the  Egyptian  and  Christian
religions  the  powers  of  death  definitely  overcome  by
Osiris  and  Christ,  and  in  at  least  one  Central
American  religion,  that  of  the  Quiches  of  Guatemala,
a similar  allegory  exists.  Death  and  Hell  are  over-
come by  these  champions,  it  is  implied,  either  by
material  or  spiritual  weapons.  In  the  allegory  of
Arthur’s  descent  into  Annwn  we  have  a similar
instance  of  the  Harrying  of  Hell.  The  heroes
descend  into  Annwn  and  some  even  do  not  return.
Annwn,  in  the  allegory,  was  therefore  conquered  by
force  of  arms,  material  or  spiritual,  and  this  also,  we
may  take  it,  formed  part  of  the  theatric  pantomime
of  initiation  through  which  the  neophyte  must  pass
when  he  became  a member  of  the  Brotherhood  of  the
Secret  Tradition.

On  the  whole,  then,  we  cannot  deny  a veridically
British  character  to  the  philosophy  set  forth  in
Barddas.  Although  certain  of  its  principles
appear  to  have  much  in  common  with  the  mystical
philosophies  of  the  East,  there  is  assuredly  contained
in  it  a strong  leaven  of  Western  thought  and
idealism,  which  renders  it  worthy  of  the  consideration
of  British  mystics  as  enshrining  much  that  is  of
extraordinary  value  to  the  race  from  a psychological


190  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

point  of  view,  and  which  should  not  be  lightly  cast

aside.

Why,  indeed,  should  we  not  strive  to  study  and
preserve  the  mysticism  of  our  early  ancestors  rather
than  seek  in  the  records  of  the  East  for  guidance  in
things  hidden  and  secret?  Are  the  tenets  set  forth
in  the  records  and  chronicles  of  our  own  island  less
lofty  or  less  worthy  of  consideration,  are  they  not
more  in  consonance  with  the  tendency  and  genius  of
British  mentality  than  the  mystic  systems  of  the
Orient  ? Are  we  not  carried  away  in  this  regard  by
the  hallucination  of  a specious  Oriental  glamour
heightened  by  spurious  imagination  and  sham
romance  ? The  attitude  is  on  the  same  plane  as  that
which  prefers  Continental  musical  talent  to  our  own,
and  which  has  resulted  in  the  decay  and  almost  the
death  of  British  music,  formerly  a flourishing  institu-
tion. Is  there  not  something  weakly,  supine,  and
unimaginative  in  the  fashion  which  strains  for  a
distant  enchantment  and  can  discover  none  at  its  own
portals  ? Wherefore  has  British  mysticism  been
permitted  to  languish  for  generations  to  the  behoof
of  an  exotic  tradition  which  is  not  superior  to  it  and
is  of  no  prior  authority?

Let  the  reproach  be  removed,  let  us  address
ourselves  to  the  serious  consideration  and  rehabilita-
tion, the  rescue  and  restoration  of  the  noble  Secret
Tradition  of  our  fathers.  I do  not  mean  to  infer
that  we  should  entirely  neglect  other  traditions.
That  would  be  as  foolish  as  to  despise  our  own.  But
I emphatically  believe  that  it  would  be  eminently  for
our  psychic  advantage  to  restore  and  rebuild  the
ruined  edifice  of  British  mysticism,  as  rendered
conformable  to  Christian  belief  by  the  bards,  who
were  the  conservators  of  the  ancient  Secret
Tradition.  In  its  tenets,  as  purified  by  them,  is


The  Higher  Philosophy  191
little  of  the  barbarous  which  only  too  plainly  reveals
itself  in  the  systems  of  the  East,  and  which  has,
therefore,  rendered  them  unacceptable  to  thousands
of  British  people  as  suspect  of  diabolism  and  the
horrors  of  the  lower  cultus  which  indubitably  cling  to
them.  As  set  forth  in  Barddas  there  is  nothing
in  our  native  mysticism  which  the  most  orthodox
Christian  could  not  accept.  It  is,  in  a word,  the
native  British  mystical  thought  applied  to  the
Christian  ideal.  The  scattered  stones  are  to  our
hands.  Some,  indeed,  are  lost,  but  search  can
assuredly  restore  them.  Let  them  be  unearthed,
and  the  Temple  of  the  British  Secret  Tradition  be
re-edificated.  These  are  days  of  restoration,  when
men  in  every  land,  tired  of  the  cosmopolitan  with
its  wearisome  affectations,  are  inquiring  into  the
foundations  and  origins  of  those  things  which  have
developed  their  own  particular  environment.  “Far
fowls  have  fair  feathers”,  says  the  old  proverb,
illustrating  a human  infirmity  which  enlightened  men
are  beginning  to  realize  only  too  well.

As  a patriotic  Scotsman  and  Briton,  I would
appeal  to  English,  Scottish  and  Welsh  mystics  not
to  let  that  die  easily  which  must  inevitably  be  to  us
all  of  the  utmost  value.  We  Britons  are  a “peculiar
people,”  rapt  and  divided  from  our  Continental
neighbours  by  tendencies  of  thought  exceptionally
remote  and  individual.  In  that  lies  our  greatness.
And  so  it  was  in  the  beginning.  This  sacred  isle
constituted  a laboratory  of  thought  and  mystery
recognized  by  the  races  of  the  Continent  as  unspeak-
ably hallowed  and  inscrutable.  Can  we,  if  we  admit
and  encourage  alien  and  by  no  means  harmless
esoteric  systems,  do  so  without  damage  unspeakable
to  the  psychical  integrity  of  our  island?  We
assuredly  cannot.  The  system  to  our  hands  is  not


192  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
only  of  British  origin,  but  it  is  more  susceptible  of
response  to  British  mentality  than  any  exotic  system,
it  is  capable  of  such  a degree  of  restoration  as  may
render  it  of  much  greater  opportunity  to  British
mystics  as  a gateway  to  the  universalities  by  reason
of  a more  native,  more  kindly  and  more  familiar
aspect  than  any  alien  portal  reveals.

It  may  be  that  in  the  higher  existence  there  is
neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  Syrian  nor  Ethiopian,  bond
nor  free.  But  in  this  of  Abred  we  are  so  much  the
creatures  of  our  immediate  environment,  that  only
by  a realization  of  and  agreement  with  its  properties
can  we  hope  to  accomplish  anything,  whether
material  or  spiritual.  And  surely  a system  which  has
already  sounded  and  comprehended  these  properties
is  of  all  systems  the  most  fitting  and  natural  for  us
to  adopt  as  a groundwork  of  psychic  advancement.

“ The  Secret  Tradition  of  Britain!”  Does  not
the  very  name  stir  the  heart  and  appeal  to  the
imagination  of  the  true  son  of  Albion  with  a thrill
more  mysterious  and  romantic  than  any  allusion  to
the  magics  of  Egypt  or  Hind  ? I need  no  Thebes
or  Benares,  no  Vedic  Hymns,  no  Book  of  the  Dead ,
for  I am  heir  to  a lore  as  exalted,  as  sublime  as  these,
inherited  from  Druid  sires,  and  in  the  main  restored
by  pious  searching.  And  in  this  Tradition  restored
I believe  the  future  germ  of  British  Mysticism  to
reside,  that  from  its  ash  and  cinder  the  phoenix  of
a marvellous  rebirth  shall  arise  on  invincible  wing :

Like  that  self-begotten  bird
In  the  Arabian  woods  embost,

That  no  second  knows,  nor  third,

And  lay  erewhile  a holocaust,

From  out  her  ashy  womb  now  teemed,

Revives,  reflourishes,  then  vigorous  most
When  most  unactive  deemed,

And  though  her  body  die,  her  fame  survives
A secular  bird,  ages  of  lives!


CHAPTER  IX

THE  WAY  OF  INITIATION


From  the  evidence  already  placed  before  the  reader
it  is  possible  in  some  measure  to  reconstruct  the  rites
of  initiation  of  the  Secret  Tradition.  It  is  not
claimed  that  it  is  here  competent  to  divulge  them  in
their  entirety,  as  the  gaps  and  lacunae  in  the  evidence
are  only  too  obvious,  but  an  outline  at  least  can  be  sup-
plied, and  there  is  no  doubt  in  the  mind  of  the  writer
that  adequate  research  would  succeed  in  the  recovery
of  still  further  evidence,  the  lost  links  of  the  chain.

Caesar  tells  us  that  the  Druids  were  in  the  habit
of  making  their  initiates  undergo  a very  long  course
of  preparation  before  they  reached  what  may  be
described  as  adeptship.  He  also  states  that  they
were  extremely  jealous  lest  their  rites  and  ceremonies
should  be  observed  or  overlooked  by  the  vulgar
herd.  Now  this  can  in  no  sense  apply  to  public
rites.  It  cannot  but  signify  those  more  secret
ceremonies  associated  with  magic  or  initiation.
That  an  arcane  brotherhood,  the  Pheryllt,  actually
existed  we  have  already  seen,  and  doubtless  it  was
to  them  that  the  business  of  initiation  was  entrusted.
That  this  was  associated  with  the  Cauldron  is
manifest  not  only  from  numerous  Welsh  poems,  but
also  from  the  allegory  itself,  which  makes  it  plain
that  the  draught  of  inspiration  was  the  last,  or  one  of
the  last,  steps  in  the  ceremony  of  initiation.

Now  we  have  the  authority  of  a poem  of  Taliesin
entitled  “The  Chair  of  Taliesin”,  for  describing
certain  of  the  apparatus  and  ceremonial  associated
with  initiation.  As  it  is  important,  I make  no


194  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
apology  for  quoting  it  in  full  after  the  translation  of
Davies  :

I am  he  who  animates  the  fire,  to  the  honour  of  the  god
Duvydd,  in  behalf  of  the  assembly  of  associates  qualified
to  treat  of  mysteries — a bard  with  the  knowledge  of  a
Sywedydd , when  he  deliberately  recites  the  inspired  song
of  the  Western  Cudd  on  a serene  night  amongst  the  stones.

As  to  loquacious,  glittering  bards,  their  encomium
attracts  me  not  when  moving  in  the  course;  admiration
is  their  great  object.

And  I am  a silent  proficient  who  address  the  bards  of
the  land;  it  is  mine  to  animate  the  hero;  to  persuade
the  unadvised;  to  awaken  the  silent  beholder— the  bold
illuminator  of  kings!

I am  no  shallow  artist,  greeting  the  Bards  of  a house-
hold like  a subtle  parasite — the  ocean  has  a due  profundity !

The  man  of  complete  discipline  has  obtained  the  meed
of  honour  in  every  knightly  celebration,  when  Dien  is
propitiated  with  an  offering  of  wheat,  and  the  suavity
of  bees,  and  incense  and  myrrh  and  aloes  from  beyond
the  seas,  and  the  golden  pipes  of  Lieu,  and  cheerful
precious  silver  and  the  ruddy  gem,  and  the  berries,  and
the  foam  of  the  ocean,  and  cresses  of  a purifying  quality,
laved  in  the  fountain,  and  a joint  contribution  of  wort,  the
founder  of  liquor,  supplied  by  the  assembly,  with  a raised
load,  secluded  from  the  moon,  of  placid,  cheerful  vervain.

With  priests  of  intelligence  to  officiate  on  behalf  of
the  moon,  and  the  concourse  of  associated  men  under  the
open  breeze  of  the  sky,  with  the  maceration  and  sprinkling
and  the  portion  after  the  sprinkling,  and  the  boat  of  glass
in  the  hand  of  the  stranger,  and  the  stout  youth  with
pitch,  and  the  honoured  Segyrffyg,  and  medical  plants
from  an  exorcised  spot.

And  Bards  with  flowers  and  perfect  convolutions,  and
primroses  and  leaves  of  the  Brim,  with  the  points  of  the  trees
of  purposes,  and  solution  of  doubts,  and  frequent  mutual
pledges;  and  with  wine  which  flows  to  the  brim,  from
Rome  to  Rosedd,  and  deep  standing  water,  a flood  which
has  the  gift  of  Dovydd,  on  the  tree  of  pure  gold,  which
becomes  of  a fructifying  quality  when  that  Brewer  gives
it  a boiling  who  presided  over  the  Cauldron  of  the  five  plants.

Hence  the  stream  of  Gwion  and  the  reign  of  serenity
and  honey  and  trefoil,  and  horns  flowing  with  mead —
Meet  for  a sovereign  is  the  lore  of  the  Druids.

Now  it  is  impossible  to  credit,  whatever  the  date
of  this  manuscript,  that  it  has  not  actually  come  down


The  Way  of  Initiation  195
to  us  as  evidence  of  the  former  existence  of  an  ancient
system  of  initiation.  For  what  possible  purpose,
indeed,  could  it  have  been  otherwise  invented?  Its
details  are  too  closely  associated  with  what  we  know
of  Druidical  practice  and,  indeed,  of  the  rituals  of
other  and  similar  mysteries  not  to  have  had  an  actual
background  in  reality.  Let  us  examine  them  a little
more  closely.  The  first  four  paragraphs  are
obviously  prefatory.  The  name  Sywedydd  is  the
first  hint  we  receive  that  we  are  dealing  with  some-
thing out  of  the  common,  something  occult  and
mysterious.  It  implies  mystagogue,  or  revealer  of
mysteries,  and  the  word  Cudd  which  follows  it
signifies  “the  Place  of  the  Dark  Repository”.

The  paragraph  which  follows  these  relates  to  the
herbs  and  other  materials  which  were  seethed
together  in  the  Cauldron  of  Inspiration.  The  “gold
pipes  of  Lieu”  obviously  allude  to  some  yellow
flower,  and  the  “cheerful  precious  silver”  seems  to
mean  the  fluxwort,  which  in  Wales  is  known  as
ariant  Gwion,  or  “ Gwion ’s  silver”,  which  in  itself
proves  that  it  was  associated  in  Cambrian  lore  with
the  mystical  cauldron.  The  “ruddy  gem”  is
perhaps  the  hedge-berry,  which  was  also  known  as
eirin  Gwion , the  Borues  of  Gwion.  The  cresses
allude  to  the  Fabaria,  called  berwr  Taliessin , or
“Taliessin’s  Cresses”,  and  on  vervain  the  Druids  set
particular  store,  casting  lots  by  its  use  and  employing
it  in  divination.  It  was  usually  gathered  at  the  rise
of  the  Dog-star  “Without  being  looked  upon  either
by  the  sun  or  moon”.  In  gathering  it  the  earth
was  propitiated  by  a libation  of  honey  and  it  was  dug
up  with  the  left  hand.

The  Boat  of  Glass  was  a crescent  shaped  like  a
half-moon  and  in  all  probability  was  the  vessel  from
which  the  draught  of  inspiration  was  quaffed.


196  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
Primroses  ranked  highly  among  the  mystical
apparatus  and  the  briw  was  probably  also  vervain,
which  was  known  by  the  name  of  briw’r  March.

The  poem  states  that  the  same  rite  of  libation
prevailed  from  Rome  to  Rosedd.  This  seems  to
point  to  a date  for  its  composition  when  the  Britons
were  acquainted  with  the  Romans,  but  while  Rome
itself  was  yet  pagan.  The  “deep  water’ ’ seems  to
signify  the  bath  for  the  immersion  of  the  neophyte,
and  the  gift  of  Duvydd  was  the  Selago  or  hedge-
hyssop,  which  in  modern  Welsh  is  known  as  gras
Duw.  Pliny  says  of  this  plant : “Similar  to  savin
is  the  plant  called  Selago.  It  is  gathered  without
using  iron  and  by  passing  the  right  hand  through  the
left  sleeve  of  the  tunic,  as  though  in  the  act  of
committing  a theft.  The  clothing  must  be  white,
the  feet  washed  and  bare  and  an  offering  of  wine  and
bread  made  before  the  gathering.  The  Druids  of
Gaul  say  that  the  plant  should  be  carried  as  a charm
against  every  kind  of  evil  and  that  the  smoke  of  it
is  good  for  diseases  of  the  eye.”

These,  then,  were  the  mystical  plants,  the
ingredients  of  the  Cauldron  of  Keridwen  which
produced  the  stream  of  Gwion,  to  which  is  ascribed
the  beginning  of  genius,  the  power  of  inspiration  and
the  reign  of  serenity.

Now  we  find  that  these  rites,  far  from  falling  into
desuetude,  were  actually  employed  so  late  as  the
twelfth  century,  when  Hywel,  Prince  of  North
Wales,  was  initiated  into  the  lesser  mysteries  of
Keridwen  in  1171,  and  that  he  longed  for  admittance
to  the  greater  mysteries  conducted  by  Gwyddnaw
and  his  son.  In  a song  supposed  to  be  sung  by
Hywel  he  addresses  Keridwen  as  the  moon,  lofty
and  fair,  slow  and  delicate  in  her  descending  course,
and  requests  her  to  attend  his  worship  in  the  mystical


(After  Springett)


The  Way  of  Initiation  197
grove.  ff  I love  the  place  of  the  illustrious  lady
near  the  pleasant  shore,”  sings  Hywel,  “ for  the
severe  discipline  which  I experienced  in  the  hall  of
the  mysterious  god,  I have  obtained  her  promise — a
treasure  of  high  privilege.  ...  I shall  long
for  the  proud-wrought  place  of  the  Gyvylchi  till  I
have  gained  admittance.  Renowned  and  enterpris-
ing is  the  man  who  enters  there.”  “ If  we  may
judge  from  these  strains  of  Hywel,”  says  Davies,

* * and  from  many  similar  passages  in  the  works  of  his
contemporaries,  the  Cambrian  bards  were  as  zeal-
ously devoted  to  the  worship  of  Keridwen  . . .

in  the  twelfth  century  as  they  had  been  in  the  sixth,
or  in  any  earlier  age  of  heathen  superstition.”

Now  “the  proud-wrought  enclosure  in  the
Gwvylchi,  in  the  desert  of  Arvon  in  Eryri,”  or
Snowdon,  and  near  the  shore,  was  the  Caer  or
sanctuary  of  Keridwen  and  her  daughter  Llywy.

The  topography  of  this  temple  is  so  minutely
pointed  out,”  says  Davies,  “that  the  spot  cannot
be  mistaken.  . . . Dwy-Gyvylchi  is  still  known

as  the  name  of  a parish  in  the  very  spot  where  the
Cambrian  prince  fixed  his  Caer  Wen  Glaer,  or
sanctuary  of  the  illustrious  lady,  in  the  deserts  of
Arvon  in  Eryri  and  towards  the  sea  : and  here  the
remains  of  the  Caer  are  still  to  be  found.”
Camden’s  annotator,  Gibson,  has  described  a strong
fortress  “seated  on  the  top  of  one  of  the  highest
mountains  which  lies  towards  the  sea” , and  gives  the
following  account  of  this  ancient  temple  : “ About  a
mile  from  this  fortification  stands  the  most  remarkable
monument  in  all  Snowdon,  called  Y Meineu  Hirion
upon  the  Plain  Mountain  within  the  parish  of  Dwy-
Gyvycheu,  above  Gwddw  Glas.  It  is  a circular
entrenchment  about  twenty-six  yards  diameter  ; on
the  outside  whereof  are  certain  rude  stone  pillars,  of


198  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
which  about  twelve  are  now  standing,  some  two
yards  and  others  five  foot  high  : and  these  are  again  ■

encompassed  with  a stone  wall.  It  stands  upon  the  j

Plain  Mountain  as  soon  as  we  come  to  the  height,  I

having  much  even  ground  about  it ; and  not  far  from  {

it  there  are  three  other  large  stones  pitched  on  end
in  a triangular  form.”

Gibson,  the  annotator  of  Camden,  also  informs
us  that  at  the  distance  of  about  three  furlongs  from
this  monument  are  several  huge  heaps  or  cairns
and  also  several  cells  constructed  of  huge  stones  fixed
in  the  ground,  each  cell  being  covered  with  one  or
two  stones  of  great  size.

Bearing  in  mind  the  words  of  Hy  wel  relative  to  the
locality,  there  can  surely  be  no  question  that  these
stones  are  the  remains  of  the  open-air  temple  of
Keridwen,  and  that  the  cells  alluded  to  by  Gibson
were  the  secret  places  in  which  the  neophyte  was
prepared  for  initiation.  I do  not  propose  to  enter
into  the  welter  of  controversy  concerning  the  question
as  to  whether  the  Druids  actually  employed  the  stone-  j

circles  of  this  island  for  purposes  of  worship  or  not.

That  they  did  not  raise  many  of  them  is  obvious,
but  it  is  odd  that  those  who  have  argued  so  fiercely  |

against  their  use  by  the  Druids  should  not  have  been  ;

able  to  discover  the  many  evidences  in  literature
where  they  are  spoken  of  as  using  them  for  that
purpose  and  of  which  I shall  give  some  account
towards  the  end  of  this  chapter.

The  reader  will  recollect  that  the  Pheryllt,  or
priests  of  the  Pharaon,  had  a city  or  temple  on
Snowdon  known  as  Dinas  Emrys,  which  has  already
been  described.  Now  it  seems  to  me  not  at  all
unlikely  that  this  Temple  of  Keridwen,  only  about  a
mile  away  from  the  site  of  Dinas  Emrys,  must  have
been  under  the  auspices  of  the  Pheryllt,  and  this


The  Way  of  Initiation  199

leads  to  the  supposition  that  they  were  flourishing  in
Hywel’s  time — that  is  in  the  twelfth  century.

An  ancient  poem  in  the  Welsh  Archaiology
supplies  us  with  an  old  formula  in  obscure  language
which  appears  to  have  been  employed  on  occasions
of  initiation  as  an  introduction  for  approaching  the
gate  of  the  sanctuary.  Arthur  and  Kai  are  repre-
sented as  coming  to  the  portal,  which  is  guarded  by
a hierophant,  and  the  following  dialogue  takes  place  :

Arthur  : What  man  is  he  that  guards  the  gate?

Hierophant : The  severe  hoary  one  with  the  wide  domin-
ion— who  is  the  man  that  demands  it?

Arthur : Arthur  and  the  Blessed  Kai.

Hierophant : What  good  attends  thee,  thou  blessed  one,
thou  best  man  in  the  world?  Into  my  house  thou  canst
not  enter  unless  thou  wilt  preserve.

Kai : I will  preserve  it  and  that  thou  shalt  behold ;
though  the  birds  of  wrath  should  go  forth  and  the  three
attendant  ministers  should  fall  asleep,  namely  the  son  of
the  Creator  Mabon,  the  son  of  Mydron,  attendant  upon
the  wonderful  supreme  Ruler,  and  Gwyn,  the  Lord  of
those  who  descend  from  above.

Hierophant:  Severe  have  my  servant's  been  in  preserv-
ing their  institutes.  Manawyddan,  the  son  of  Llyr,  was
grave  in  his  counsel,  Manawyd  truly  brought  a perforated
shield  from  Trevryd,  and  Mabon,  the  son  of  Lightning,
stained  the  straw  with  clotted  gore:  and  Anwas  the
winged  and  Llwch  Llawinawg  (the  ruler  of  the  lakes)
were  firm  guardians  of  the  encircled  mount.  Their  Lord
preserved  them  and  I rendered  them  complete.  Kai!  I
solemnly  announce  though  all  three  should  be  slain,  when
the  privilege  of  the  grove  is  violated,  danger  shall  be
found.

The  rest  of  this  obscure  dialogue  describes  the
adventures  of  Arthur  and  Kai  after  their  initiation,
but  it  is  clear  that  in  the  part  of  it  I have  quoted
the  neophyte  engaged  before  the  heirophant  to
preserve  the  laws  of  the  sanctuary,  even  though
assaulted  by  enemies  or  deserted  by  friends.  The
hierophant  in  his  turn  denounces  the  fate  of  those
who  violate  the  sacred  engagement.  It  is  plain,  too,


200  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
from  the  text  that  the  hierophant  was  attended  by
three  assistant  ministers,  each  of  whom  seems  to
have  impersonated  a god,  and  in  this  the  usage
seems  to  have  been  the  same  as  that  prevailing  in
the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  in  which  four  priests
officiated,  the  hierophant,  who  represented  the
Creator,  the  torch-bearer,  who  personated  the  sun,
the  herald,  who  took  the  part  of  Mercury,  and  the
minister  of  the  altar,  who  represented  the  moon.

We  must  now  return  for  enlightenment  to  the  myth
of  Keridwen  and  her  Cauldron.  This  Cauldron
cannot  but  have  been  one  and  the  same  with  the
Cauldron  of  Inspiration  alluded  to  in  the  myths  of
Annwn,  to  which  Arthur  or  Hu  penetrated.  It  has
precisely  the  same  character  and  is  described  in  the
same  manner  , and  when  we  learn  that  Keridwen  was
a goddess  of  the  Underworld,  the  identity  of  the
vessel  seems  complete.  She  is  also  styled  Ogyrven
Amhad,  “the  goddess  of  various  seeds”,  a statement
which  equates  her  with  Ceres,  and  indeed  she
appears  to  have  been  the  British  Ceres.

We  will  recollect  that  when  Gwion  unwittingly
tasted  the  virtue  of  her  Cauldron  of  Inspiration  she
pursued  him , that  he  transformed  himself  into  a hare,
when  she  became  a greyhound,  turned  him,  and
chased  him  toward  a river.  He  leapt  into  the  stream
and  became  a fish,  but  as  she  pursued  him  as  an
otter,  he  took  the  form  of  a bird.  Transforming
herself  into  the  guise  of  a sparrowhawk,  she  was
gaining  upon  him,  when  he  perceived  a heap  of  wheat
upon  a floor,  dropped  into  the  midst  of  it,  arid
assumed  the  form  of  a single  grain.  Keridwen  then
changed  herself  into  the  shape  of  a black,  high-crested
hen,  descended  into  the  wheat,  scratched  him  out,
and  swallowed  him,  and,  as  the  history  relates,  he
was  born  of  her  in  due  time  as  the  beautiful  babe


The  Way  of  Initiation  201

Taliesin,  who  was  found  in  the  fishing  weir  of  Elphin.

Now  the  whole  myth  certainly  bears  allusions  to
the  rite  of  initiation.  Keridwen  first  transforms
herself  into  a female  dog.  Virgil,  in  the  sixth  book
of  his  JEneid,  describing  all  that  it  was  lawful  to
reveal  of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  says  that  one  of
the  first  things  observed  by  his  hero  as  the  priestess
conducted  him  toward  the  mystic  river  were  a number
of  female  dogs,  and  Pletho  in  his  notes  upon  the
Magical  Oracles  of  Zoroaster,  remarks  that  it  is  the
custom  in  the  celebration  of  the  mysteries  to  exhibit
to  the  initiated  certain  phantoms  in  the  figures  of
dogs.  The  dog  was,  indeed,  the  guardian  of  the
Underworld,  and  it  seems  probable  that,  as  the
initiate  was  supposed  to  enter  this  gloomy  region
when  undergoing  his  ordeal,  the  presence  of  dogs
may  have  entered  symbolically  into  the  ceremony.
Indeed,  Diodorus,  dealing  with  the  mysteries  of  Isis,
mentions  that  the  whole  solemnity  was  preceded  by
the  presence  of  dogs,  and  he  even  terms  the  priests
of  mysteries  “dogs”,  although  he  believes  that  the
Greeks  mistook  the  Hebrew  word  cohen , a priest,
for  their  own  word  kune,  dog.  However,  the  dog  of
Gwyn  ap  Nudd,  the  British  Plato,  is  named  Dor-
marth,  “the  gate  of  sorrow”,  so  it  would  seem  that
the  animals  represented  in  the  British  mysteries
somewhat  resembled  the  classical  Cerberus,  and  that
they  had  a similar  significance — that  they  were,
indeed,  of  the  same  character  as  the  Proserpine
Limen  which  Apuleius  approached  in  the  course  of
his  initiation.

Then  we  find  that  the  aspirant  was  converted  into
a hare,  a sacred  animal  among  the  Britons,  as  we
learn  from  Caesar,  but  perhaps  here  symbolizing  the
great  timidity  of  the  novice.  This  hare  is  turned  and
driven  toward  a river.  The  first  ceremony  in  the


202  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
Greek  mysteries  was  that  of  purification,  which  was
celebrated  upon  the  banks  of  rivers.  The  Athenians,
for  example,  performed  this  ceremony  at  Agra  on
the  Ilissus,  a river  of  Attica,  whose  banks  were
called  “the  mystical”,  and  whose  stream  itself  was
named  “the  divine”.

According  to  the  myth,  the  aspirant  now  plunges
into  the  stream,  and  the  otter  here  seems  to
symbolize  the  priest  who  attended  to  his  lustrations.
His  form  then  changes  into  that  of  a bird,  probably
the  dryw , which  means  both  a wren  and  a Druid,
and,  indeed,  elsewhere  Taliesin  informs  us  that  he
had  once  taken  that  form.  His  adversary  becomes
a hawk,  reminiscent  of  Egyptian  mythology.  At
last  he  takes  the  shape  of  a grain  of  pure  wheat,
mixing  with  an  assemblage  of  the  same  species,  and
thus  assumes  a form  eminently  sacred  to  Ceres  or
Keridwen,  who  receives  him  into  her  bosom,  whence
he  is  re-born.  The  meaning  of  this  statement
probably  resides  in  the  fact  that  the  initiate  remained
for  a season  in  one  of  the  mysterious  cells  or  caves
of  the  Druidic  cult,  where  he  was  subjected  to  a rigid
course  of  discipline,  and  where  he  studied  the  rites
and  imbibed  the  secret  doctrines  of  Keridwen,  lastly
emerging  “re-born”  into  the  outer  world.

But  this  description  probably  applies  to  the  lesser
or  initial  mysteries  only.  The  greater  were  still  to
follow.  After  the  initiate  had  completed  his  course
of  discipline  in  the  cell  and  had  been  born  again  of
Keridwen,  the  goddess  enclosed  him  in  a coracle
covered  with  skin  and  cast  him  into  the  sea.  Now  if
we  compare  this  procedure  with  that  known  to  have
been  followed  in  the  Greek  mysteries,  we  discover
a close  resemblance  between  the  two.  After  passing
through  the  lesser  mysteries  the  herald  summoned  the
initiates  to  the  sea-shore.  The  name  of  the  day  on


The  Way  of  Initiation  203
which  this  took  place  was  entitled  “Novitiates  to  the
Sea”,  after  the  summons  of  the  herald.  The
aspirants  on  this  occasion  embarked  upon  the  sea  in
certain  vessels,  and  it  was  in  these  mysteries,  we  are
told,  that  the  whole  truth  was  to  be  revealed.  Now
we  will  recall  that  in  the  myth  of  Taliesin  he  was,
while  yet  a babe,  albeit  a learned  one,  launched  by
Keridwen  in  a coracle  which  took  him  to  the  weir  of
Gwyddno,  where  he  was  discovered  by  Gwyddno’s
son  Elphin.  He  prophesied  the  future  renown  of
Elphin  and  his  own  as  well.  Elphin  bore  the  babe
to  the  castle,  where  Gwyddno  demanded  of  Taliesin
whether  he  was  a human  being  or  a spirit.  The
infant  Taliesin  replied  in  a mystical  song,  in  which
he  described  himself  as  a general  primary  bard  who
had  existed  in  all  ages  and  was  in  some  measure
identified  with  the  sun.  ‘ ‘Thrice  have  I been  born, * *
sang  Taliesin,  the  Radiant  Fronted  one,  “ I know
how  to  meditate.  It  is  pitiful  that  men  will  not  come
to  seek  all  the  sciences  of  the  world  which  are
treasured  in  my  bosom,  for  I know  all  that  has  been
and  all  that  will  be  hereafter.”

Now  Davies  (whom  I have  closely  followed  as
regards  these  latter  passages,  and  who  was,  indeed,
very  much  more  competent  to  speak  on  these  matters
than  some  of  the  modern  mythologists  who  have
rather  cruelly  sneered  at  him,  owing  to  his  rather
tiresome  theory  that  the  whole  of  British  myth  is  to
be  referred  to  what  he  calls  “Arkite”  theology),
believed  that  Gwyddno  and  his  son  were  the
husband  and  son  of  Keridwen.  This  seems  not
improbable,  when  we  remember  that  Gwyddno  was
the  lord  and  Keridwen  lady  of  Annwn.  Gwyddno’s
surname  was  Garanhir,  or  the  “long,  or  high
crane”,  or  “Stalking  Person”,  to  which  allusion  has
already  been  made  in  the  chapter  on  the  Grail  and


204  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
elsewhere,  where  it  was  stated  that  the  bull  god  of
the  Continental  Kelts  was  styled  Trigaranos,  because
he  carried  three  cranes.  Elsewhere  Taliesin  alludes
to  Elphin  as  “The  sovereign  of  those  who  carry  ears
of  corn”,  and  later  in  his  life  he  was  to  liberate  him
from  a strong-stoned  tower  in  which  he  had  been
imprisoned  by  Maelgwn.  Elphin  has  certainly  some
solar  significance.

One  of  the  poems  attributed  to  Gwyddno  appears
to  have  an  application  to  the  enclosing  of  the  aspirant
in  the  coracle.  The  novice  is  about  to  be  plunged
into  the  waves  and  he  sings  : “ Though  I love  the
sea-beach  I dread  the  open  sea.  A billow  may  come
undulating  over  the  stone.”  To  this  the  hierophant
replies  : “ To  the  brave,  to  the  magnanimous,  to  the
amiable,  to  the  generous  who  boldly  embarks,  the
ascending  stones  of  the  Bards  will  prove  the  harbour
of  life.  It  has  asserted  the  praise  of  Heilyn,  the
mysterious  impeller  of  the  sky.  Until  the  doom  shall
its  symbol  be  continued.”  Still  the  novice  is  not
reassured.  “ Though  I love  the  strand,”  he  cries,
“ I dread  the  wave.  Great  has  been  its  violence — -
dismal  the  overwhelming  stroke.  Even  to  him  who
survives,  it  will  be  the  subject  of  lamentation.”
Once  more  endeavouring  to  reassure  him,  Gwyddno
says  : “ It  is  a pleasant  act,  to  wash  in  the  bosom
of  the  fair  water.  Though  it  fill  the  receptacle  it
will  not  disturb  the  heart.  My  associated  train
regard  not  its  overwhelming.  As  for  him  who
repented  of  his  enterprise,  the  lofty  wave  has  hurried
the  babbler  far  away  to  his  death  ; but  the  brave,  the
magnanimous,  will  find  his  compensation  in  arriving
safe  at  the  stones.  The  conduct  of  the  water  will
declare  thy  merit.”

But  to  the  timid  or  rejected  candidate  he  addressed
himself  thus  : * ‘ Thy  coming  without  external  purity


The  Way  of  Initiation  205
is  a pledge  that  I will  not  receive  thee.  Take  out  the
gloomy  one  ! From  my  territory  have  I alienated
the  rueful  steed.  My  revenge  upon  the  shoal  of
earth-worms  is  their  hopeless  longing  for  the  pleasant
place.  Out  of  the  receptacle  which  is  thy  aversion
did  I obtain  the  rainbow.”

Davies  believed  this  ceremony  to  have  taken
place  in  Cardigan  Bay,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Ystwyth.
The  ceremony  was  intended  to  test  the  constancy
and  purity  of  mind  of  the  neophyte.  “ The  old
bards,”  he  says,  “ speak  in  magnificent  terms  of  the
benefits  which  were  derived  from  these  mysterious
rites.  They  were  viewed  as  most  important  to  the
happiness  of  human  life.  They  imparted  sacred
science  in  its  greatest  purity  and  perfection  ; and  he
who  had  completed  his  probation  was  called
Dedwydd,  ‘one  who  has  recovered  intelligence’,  or
rather  has  been  brought  back  into  the  Presence.  It
is  nearly  equivalent  to  the  Greek  term  Epoptes,
which  describes  a person  who  had  been  initiated  into
the  greater  mysteries.”  By  the  course  of  the  tide
it  was  to  be  discovered  whether  or  no  the  initiate  was
worthy  to  survive,  as  in  the  case  of  Taliesin  himself.

Taliesin,  in  a poem  recited  immediately  after  he
had  gone  through  the  concluding  ceremony,  describes
himself  as  “thrice-born”,  that  is,  once  of  his  natural
mother,  once  of  Keridwen,  and  lastly  of  the  mystic
coracle.  As  a consequence  of  this  regeneration  he
tells  us  that  he  “knew  how  to  think  rightly  of  God”,
and  that  all  the  sacred  science  of  the  world  was
treasured  in  his  bosom.

In  a poem  immediately  following  this,  Taliesin
sings  : “1  was  first  modelled  into  the  form  of  a pure
man  in  the  hall  of  Keridwen,  who  subjected  me  to
penance.  Though  small  within  my  chest  and  modest
in  my  deportment,  I was  great.  A sanctuary  carried


206  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
me  above  the  surface  of  the  earth.  Whilst  I was
enclosed  within  its  ribs  the  sweet  A wen  rendered  me
complete,  and  my  law,  without  audible  language,  was
imparted  to  me  by  the  old  giantess,  darkly  smiling
in  her  wrath.”  In  the  concluding  verse  he  says  : “ I
fled  in  the  form  of  a fair  grain  of  pure  wheat.  Upon
the  edge  of  a covering  cloth  she  caught  me  in  her
fangs.  In  appearance  she  was  as  large  as  a proud
mare,  which  she  also  resembled — then  was  she
swelling  out  like  a ship  upon  the  waters.  Into  a
dark  receptacle  she  cast  me.  She  carried  me  back
into  the  sea  of  Dylan.  It  was  an  auspicious  omen
to  me  when  she  happily  suffocated  me.  God  the
Lord  freely  set  me  at  large.”  This  obviously
applied  to  a course  of  penance,  discipline  and  mystical
instruction  undergone  by  the  initiate,  and  must  have
consisted  in  scenic  or  symbolical  representation,  as
language  does  not  seem  to  have  been  employed.
It  appears  to  have  taken  place  in  the  Temple  of
Keridwen,  and  the  goddess  seems  to  have  taken
various  shapes,  just  as  did  Diana  in  the  mysteries
described  by  the  author  of  the  Orphic  Argonautics.
She  transformed  herself  into  the  shapes  of  a dog,  a
horse,  and  a lion,  according  to  the  particular
knowledge  she  desired  to  impart.

One  of  the  most  remarkable  poems  connected  with
Keridwen  is  that  in  which  her  priest  deals  with  certain
passages  in  her  history.  He  tells  us  that  in  the  dead
of  night  and  at  the  dawn,  the  lights  of  the  initiates
have  been  shining,  and  that  as  to  Avaggdu,  her  son,
the  correcting  god  has  formed  him  anew  for
happiness.  In  the  contention  of  the  mysteries,
indeed,  his  wisdom  has  exceeded  her  own,  and  he
has  become  the  most  accomplished  of  beings.  His
bride  is  a woman  composed  of  flowers,  whom,  by  his
exquisite  art,  Gwydion  created.


The  Way  of  Initiation  207

‘ ‘ When  the  merit  of  the  presidencies  shall  be
adjudged,”  says  Keridwen  through  the  mouth  of  her
priest,  “mine  will  be  found  the  superior  amongst
them — my  chair,  my  cauldron  and  my  laws  and  my
pervading  eloquence  meet  for  the  presidency.”
“This  poem,”  says  Davies,  “was  evidently
intended  to  be  sung  or  recited  by  a priest  or  priestess
who  personated  Keridwen.”

Davies  concludes  his  rather  rambling  criticisms  of
these  ceremonial  poems  by  certain  remarks  which,
whatever  one  may  think  of  his  general  method,  have
a good  deal  of  cogency  behind  them.  He  says  it  is
scarcely  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  ancient  Britons
should  have  pertinaciously  adhered  to  the  rites  of  the
British  Ceres  as  lately  as  the  sixth  century,  especially
during  the  period  between  the  dominion  of  the
Romans  and  the  coming  of  the  Saxons.  “ There
seems,”  he  says,  “ to  have  been  several  parts  of
Wales  into  which  Christianity  as  yet  had  scarcely
penetrated  ; or  where,  at  least,  it  had  not  prevailed.
Hence  Brychan  is  commended  ‘for  bringing  up  his
children  and  grand-children  in  learning,  so  as  to  be
able  to  show  the  faith  in  Christ  to  the  Cymry  where
they  were  without  the  faith’.”  He  goes  on  to  say
that  the  Welsh  princes,  to  the  latest  period  of  their
government,  not  only  tolerated  but  patronized  the
old  rites,  and  that  the  mysteries  of  Keridwen  were
celebrated  in  Wales  as  late  as  the  middle  of  the
twelfth  century.  They  influenced  the  writings  of  the
bards,  and  the  princes  were  induced  by  national
prejudice  to  regard  these  as  innocent  and  to  fancy
that  they  might  be  good  Christians  enough  without
wholly  relinquishing  their  heathenish  superstitions.
The  ministers  of  Christianity  thought  otherwise , and
sometimes  refused  Christian  burial  to  these  Gentile
priests,  and  there  are  numerous  instances  of  the  bards


208  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
themselves  promising  a kind  recantation  some  time
before  their  death.

We  must  now  turn  to  the  question  as  to  whether
the  stone  circles  commonly  attributed  to  the  Druids
were  ever  employed  by  them  for  religious  or  mystical
purposes.  That  they  were  first  raised  by  the  Druids,
as  Druids,  is,  as  we  have  seen,  out  of  the  question.
The  cult  which  was  responsible  for  them  may  have
been  proto-Druidic,  that  is,  it  may  have  held  the
early  germs  of  Druidism,  although  there  is  no
evidence  to  countenance  such  a theory.  But  that
they  were  actually  employed  by  the  later  Druids  is
undoubted,  whatever  recent  arguments  may  have
been  brought  against  this  belief.

In  the  first  place,  we  have  early  Christian  evidence
on  the  matter.  Pope  Gregory  in  his  famous  Bull,
and  in  his  instructions  to  the  Abbot  Melitus  when
he  dispatched  him  to  Britain,  advised  him  not  to
destroy  the  British  temples  or  fanes,  but  only  the
idols  they  contained,  as  they  might  be  suitable  to  the
worship  of  the  true  God.  William  Thorn,  the  monk
of,  Canterbury,  speaks  of  a fane  towards  the  east  of
that  city  where  King  Ethelbert  was  accustomed  to
celebrate  heathen  worship.1  This  fane,  was  are  told
by  another  chronicler,  was  built  “in  the  British
manner”.  The  twentieth  Canon  of  the  Council  of
Nantes,  promulgated  about  a.d.  658,  provides  that
stones  in  ruinous  places  and  woods  raised  to  the
worship  of  demons  shall  be  destroyed,  and  a similar
fulmination  against  standing  stones  is  given  in  the
Liber  P cenitentialis  of  Archbishop  Theodore,  of
Canterbury  (a.d.  602 — 690).  “ If  any  may  have

vowed  or  paid  a vow  at  trees,  or  at  fountains,  or  at
stones,  whether  at  the  balusters,  or  anywhere  else,

* According  to  accounts  received  while  this  volume  was  in  the
Press,  this  “fane”  has  only  recently  been  unearthed.


The  Way  of  Initiation  209
excepting  in  the  Church  of  God”.  The  word
"balusters”  here  means  "encompassing  rails”  or
stone  balustrade.  In  Ireland,  St.  Patrick  is  said  to
have  incised  the  name  of  Christ  on  three  lofty  stones
on  the  Plain  of  Magh  Slecht  which  were  associated
with  heathenish  rites.

We  know  that  St.  Samson,  Bishop  of  Dol  in
Brittany,  when  travelling  in  Britain  actually  surprised
certain  "Bacchanalians”  while  worshipping  an  idol
on  the  top  of  a mound  within  a stone  circle.  He
endeavoured  to  dissuade  them  from  the  practice,  and
they  were  disputing  him,  when  a certain  youth
passing  in  a chariot  was  thrown  therefrom  and  broke
his  neck.  This  was  taken  as  a sign  that  God  was
displeased  with  the  idolatry,  and  the  pagan  congrega-
tion broke  up.

There  is  plenty  of  evidence  that  in  Scotland  courts
were  held  at  stone  circles  as  late  as  the  fourteenth
century.  One  was  convened  in  1349  by  William,
Earl  of  Ross,  Justiciary  of  Scotland,  at  the  standing
stones  of  Rayne  in  Garioch,  and  another  by
Alexander  Stewart,  Lord  of  Badenoch,  the  King’s
Lieutenant,  in  the  year  1380  at  the  standing  stones  of
Easter  Kyngucy  in  Badenoch.  This  is  eloquent  of
very  ancient  custom.

Davies  provides  a lengthy  and  in  some  ways  a
useful  disquisition  on  the  question  of  Druidic  circles.
He  believes  that  the  circle  named  Caer  Sidi  was  the
Temple  of  Keridwen,  and  that  its  prototype  was  the
locality  of  Caer  Sidi  in  Annwn.  Of  this  Chair
Taliesin  was  the  president.  “Is  not  my  chair
protected  by  the  Cauldron  of  Keridwen?”  sings
Taliesin,  " therefore  let  my  tongue  be  free  in  the
sanctuary  of  the  praise  of  the  goddess”.  Davies
believed  that  this  sanctuary  was  modelled  on  the
great  circle  of  the  Zodiac.  " I have  presided  in  a


210  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
toilsome  Chair  over  the  circle  of  Sidin  whilst  that  is
continually  revolving  between  three  elements.  Is  it
not  a wonder  to  the  world  that  men  are  not
enlightened?”  These  words  of  Taliesin,  Davies
translates  as  signifying  that  the  sun  is  the  visible
president.  Taliesin,  or  “Radiant  Front”,  was  his
earthly  representative  in  that  sanctuary,  which
typified  the  abode  of  the  god.

Now  Davies  further  believed  that  these  “Caer
Sidis”  were  none  other  than  the  stone  circles.  He
drags  the  Ark  into  his  elucidations,  but  if  we  discount
this,  we  arrive  at  some  not  invaluable  conclusions,
for,  despite  his  notions  regarding  “Arkite
philosophy”,  Davies  was  logical  enough.

He  shows,  for  example,  that  when  the  mystical
Bards  treat  of  history  and  the  rites  of  Keridwen,  that
they  almost  invariably  allude  to  the  completion  of  the
year  and  the  return  of  a particular  day.  He  thought
that  the  stones  in  the  circles  represented  the  various
constellations,  with  the  sun  and  the  moon  in  the
centre.  Now  Caer  Sidi,  as  he  has  said,  means  the
Circle  of  Revolution,  and  he  notes  that  at  least  one
Druidic  grove,  the  Cylch  Balch  Nevwy,  was  known
as  the  “magnificent  celestial  circle”.  He  also
proves  that  Aneurin,  Taliesin  and  Merlin  in  their
mystical  poems  mention  the  particular  stones  which
composed  certain  circles.

Then  he  reverts  to  the  poem  of  Prince  Hywel  in
the  Desert  of  Arvon  in  Snowdon,  where  stood  the
sanctuary  of  Keridwen,  visited  by  the  prince  as  lately
as  the  twelfth  century.  This  was  composed  of  a
circle  of  twelve  stones,  and  like  other  circles  found
in  Britain,  was,  he  believed,  “constructed  upon
astronomical  principles.  In  short,  it  represented
either  the  Zodiac  itself,  or  certain  cycles  and  com-
putations deduced  from  the  study  of  astronomy.


The  Way  of  Initiation  211
Hence  the  frequent  repetition  of  twelve,  nineteen,
thirty,  or  sixty  stones  which  has  been  marked  in  the
circles  of  these  monuments.”  He  indicates  that  the
number  twelve  is  twice  repeated  in  the  circle  at
Avebury,  in  the  circle  of  Classernish,  in  the
western  islands  of  Scotland,  and  in  certain  Cornish
monuments.

Lastly,  after  a long  dissertation  on  Stonehenge,
which  has  been  superseded  by  recent  research,  he
states  that  the  personage  or  prince  known  as  Seithin
Saidi  is  called  “the  guardian  of' the  gate  of  Godo”
or  “the  uncovered  sanctuary”,  which  he  believes
alludes  to  the  typical  stone  circle.

Now  when  one  recalls  the  philosophy  set  forth  in
Barddas , with  its  cosmography  of  the  universe
described  in  circles,  it  does  not  seem  at  all  improbable
that  the  stone  circles  may  have  had  some  bearing
upon  it.  It  seems  likely  that  Druidism  in  these
islands  mingled  with  a much  older  religion,  which  had
as  its  basis  the  circular  cosmography  above  alluded
to.  On  the  other  hand,  it  may  have  adapted  the
stone  circles  to  this  cosmography,  likening  the  outer
circle  to  Abred  and  the  inner  to  Gwynvyd.  I
hasten  to  say  that  I do  not  dogmatize  on  the  subject,
for  where  all  is  so  vague  it  would,  indeed,  be  rash
to  do  so.  Moreover,  it  would  be  necessary  to  prove
that  a similar  course  was  adopted  in  Gaul  and  else-
where. We  know  that  other  cults  in  other  countries
employed  the  ancient  stone  circles  built  by  their
predecessors.  Thus  it  was  only  m the  age  of
Zoroaster,  some  five  hundred  years  before  our  era,
that  the  Persians  adopted  covered  temples,  having
formerly  worshipped  in  open-air  circular  structures,
and  even  the  Greeks  themselves,  according  to
Pausanius,  are  not  free  from  the  suspicion  of  having
done  so  in  the  early  days  of  the  Hellenic  religion.


212  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
We  know  that  the  Druids  worshipped  in  circular
groves.  What,  then,  is  more  likely  that,  finding
stone  groves  ready  erected  and  to  their  hand,  they
employed  these  for  a worship  which  had  probably
much  in  common  with  the  cult  which  had  originally
been  practised  within  them?  At  that  I leave  the
question.  A great  deal  more  requires  to  be  known
concerning  the  cult  of  those  who  raised  these  circles
before  we  can  speak  more  definitely  upon  it.  But
Mr.  Kendrick  has  given  it  as  his  opinion  that
although  the  Druids  certainly  did  not  build  Stone-
henge, they  employed  it  as  a temple,  and  on  the
whole  I also  conclude  that  this  was  actually  the  case.

One  of  the  most  pregnant  statements  on  the  use
to  which  certain  stone  monuments  were  put  is  that
of  Mr.  Bernard  H.  Springett  on  Traces  of  Mithraism
and  Early  Masonic  Resemblances  in  the  Stone
Remains  of  South  Brittany , a copy  of  which  he  was
kind  enough  to  send  me  in  1924.  The  remarks  in
it  might  with  equal  reason  apply  to  stone  remains  in
Britain.  Many  of  the  stone  monuments  in  Brittany
struck  Mr.  Springett  when  he  visited  them  as  having
been  erected  for  something  beyond  the  usual  reason
assigned,  that  of  sun  worship,  and  so  forth.  In
inspecting  the  dolmens,  by  which  name  the  Bretons
call  those  stones  covered  by  a large  slab,  he  noted
that  they  were  frequently  found  in  the  centre  of
a tumulus,  whereas  certain  stone  chambers  or  cells
were  invariably  underground.  In  describing  these
underground  chambers,  he  says  :

You  descend  a varying  number  of  steps  to  the  entrance
of  a passage,  the  steps  being  so  arranged,  with  a curve
or  an  angle  in  them,  that  it  is  impossible  from  the  first
step  to  look  along  the  passage.  This  is  roughly  lined
with  upright  slabs  like  the  chambers  themselves,  with
appearances  of  having  originally  had  the  interstices  filled
with  chips  of  stone,  or  merely  earth,  perhaps.  This


The  Way  of  Initiation  213

central  passage  . . . leads  direct'  to  the  largest

chamber  of  a series  of  three,  two  others  on  the  right  of
the  passage  having  entrances  from  it,  but  no  intercom-
munication. On  the  left  of  the  central  passage  is  a long,
somewhat  narrower  passage  running  right  alongside  it,
almost  to  the  end  chamber,  so  that  anyone  could  pass
direct  into  this  end  chamber  without  traversing,  except
at  each  end,  the  main  central  passage.

Mr.  Springett  asked  a Masonic  friend  who
accompanied  him  if  the  plan  of  these  chambers  had
suggested  anything  to  him,  and  he  replied  that  they*
reminded  him  of  the  rooms  used  by  Masons  in  the
Rose  Croix  Degree.  “ Then,”  writes  Mr.
Springett,  “we  pictured  together  the  whole
ceremony,  crude  enough,  no  doubt,  most  probably
terrifically . awe-inspiring  to  the  ancient  candidates,
conducted  by  a Deacon  down  the  steps,  along  the
central  passage,  first  into  one  side  chamber,  to  be
shown  some  terrible  and  fearsome  object,  perhaps ;
then  into  the  second  chamber ; finally  into  the  larger
chamber  at  the  end,  no  doubt  for  an  Obligation,  and
then  admission.  Meanwhile,  officiating  priests,  on
the  other  side  of  the  left  hand  wall  of  the  central
passage,  were  probably  producing  ‘stage  effects’.”

Mr.  Springett  believes  that  the  cult  which  made
use  of  these  underground  initiation  chambers  was
that  of  Mithraism.  There  are,  he  says,  two
legendary  periods  for  the  erection  of  these  stones  in
Brittany.  One  tradition  asserts  that  they  were
erected  by  Druids,  who  came  from  Britain  for  this
express  purpose  and  imitated  the  structures  used  by
them  for  religious  ceremonies  in  their  own  country.
The  other  is  that  they  were  erected  by  a people  who
came  from  the  East.

It  seems  to  me,  however,  that  these  cells  of
initiation  were  Druidic.  Mr.  Springett  gives  as  an
evidence  of  the  existence  of  Mithraism  in  Brittany


214  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
the  legend  of  St.  Comely,  the  patron  saint  of  Carnae,
who  is  always  represented  as  accompanied  by  two
bulls— the  symbolic  beast  of  Mithraism  ; but  this
animal,  as  we  have  seen,  was  also  symbolic  of
Druidism.  He  thinks  that  the  smaller  underground
chambers  were  used  for  outer  degrees,  while  the
interiors  of  the  tumuli  were  employed  for  the  more
arcane  rites  of  higher  degrees.  Many  of  these  latter
were  not  employed  for  sepulchral  purposes,  and  the
bones  of  burnt  cattle  were  discovered  within  them.
Moreover,  on  the  walls  of  these  chambers  are  rude
carvings  of  serpents  and  ears  of  corn,  both  accom-
paniments of  Druidism  as  well  as  of  Mithraism.  On
an  ancient  covering  stone  of  a tomb  reclining  against
the  south  wall  of  Plouharnel  Church  Mr.  Springett
observed  a carving  which  seemed  to  him  to  represent
an  initiate  before  an  altar  which  supports  a volume
and  a square.  Behind  the  altar  stands  the  Master’s
Light,  which,  like  the  chalice  behind  the  candidate,
springs  from  a base  supporting  cones  of  increasing
size,  symbolizing  the  three  stages  to  be  passed
through  before  reaching  the  vault  below,  from  which
the  cope-stone  is  removed.  Beneath  are  the  skull
and  cross-bones,  the  level  and  twenty-four  inch
gauge.  Mr.  Springett  takes  care  to  mention  that
certain  stones  in  Britain  gave  him  much  the  same
impression  as  these  Breton  monuments,  the  cells
associated  with  which  seem  to  me  to  be  similar  to,  if
not  identical  in  form  with,  those  alluded  to  by
Camden's  annotator  as  occurring  at  the  Circle  of
Keridwen  in  Arvon.  In  all  probability  they  were
the  ceils  in  which  the  lesser  mysteries  were  revealed
to  the  initiates,  a conclusion  which  it  will  be  seen
Mr.  Springett  shares  with  Davies  and  other  writers
on  the  subject.


CHAPTER  X


THE  WRITINGS  OF  “MORIEN”

Towards  the  end  of  last  century  Druidism  was
actually  revived  in  Wales  by  an  organization  known
as  “The  Druids  of  Pontypridd”,  which  claimed  a
fair  number  of  adherents  in  Wales,  but  a much
greater  following  in  America.  Myfyr  Morganwg,
the  Arch-Druid,  publicly  proclaimed  the  creed  of  his
forefathers  after  thirty  years’  preaching  of  Christian-
ity, and  James  Bonwick  in  his  Irish  Druids  states
that  he  was  an  absolute  believer  in  the  tenets  he
taught.  He  recognized  his  Druidic  principles  in  the
Jewish,  Hindu,  and  Buddhist  religions  as  well  as  in
classical  mythology.  He  was  followed  by  Owen
Morgan,  better  known  as  “Morien”,  whose  version
of  Welsh  Druidism  can  be  studied  in  The  Light  of
Britannia , published  in  1894.  He  believed  Druidism
to  be  prior  in  antiquity  to  any  of  the  world’s
religions.  His  work  and  that  which  followed  it,  The
Royal  Winged  Son  of  Stonehenge  and  Avebury,  are
certainly  extraordinary  storehouses  of  Druidic  lore,
but  the  facts  they  contain  are  so  inextricably  mingled
with  classical  and  Eastern  mysticism  that  it  is
frequently  difficult  to  disentangle  them.  Moreover,
the  sources  from  which  Morgan  drew  his  Druidic
material  are  only  occasionally  indicated  throughout
the  volumes,  and  although  the  origins  of  some  of
them  are  obvious,  we  are  left  absolutely  in  the  dark  as
to  the  source  of  others.  This  notwithstanding,  these
works  are  of  primary  importance  in  such  a quest  as


216  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
ours,  because  of  the  great  and  varied  acquaintance
they  reveal  with  the  faith  and  mythology  underlying
the  British  Secret  Tradition,  and  an  endeavour  will
be  made  in  these  pages  to  summarize  the  system  of
which  they  treat.

To  the  Creator  the  Druids  gave  the  name  Celi
(Concealing),  and  to  his  consort  the  name  of  Ced
(Aid)  or  Keridwen.  They  believed  that  the  firma-
ment was  one  vast  wheel,  in  which  wheel,  seated
in  a chair,  the  sun  made  his  daily  round.  Celi  and
Keridwen  are  incomprehensible  spirits,  but  are  the
originators  of  crude  matter,  which  came  in  an
embryonic  condition  from  across  the  ocean,  from  the
source  of  all  elements.  This  essence  is  feminine  and
passive  in  its  nature,  and  was  brought  every  spring
over  the  seas  in  a sacred  boat  shaped  like  the  crescent
moon  and  propelled  by  Keridwen,  who  applied
intense  heat  beneath  it,  so  that  it  also  became  a
cauldron.  Its  work  done,  it  returned  once  more  to
its  source  for  a fresh  cargo.

The  active  warmth  of  the  male  principle,  Celi,  the
Druids  personified  under  the  name  Gwion  Bach,  the
Keltic  Bacchus,  and  the  wine  of  which  he  is  god  is
simply  the  liquid  employed  in  their  mysteries  to
symbolize  the  fertilized  sap  of  fruit.  This  principle
was  introduced  into  the  cauldron  as  the  three  drops
mentioned  in  the  allegory  concerning  it.  The  Druids
believed  that  the  sun  and  the  earth  had  emanated
from  two  separate  eggs  in  the  Boat  of  Keridwen,
but  the  sun  was  believed  to  be  a later  product  than
the  earth.  He  was  known  as  Taliesin,  but  great
confusion  has  been  caused  by  the  fact  that  various
names  were  given  to  the  sun  at  different  stages  of
his  annual  progress,  such  as  Hu  Gadarn,  Arthur,
and  Taliesin.  Formerly  the  Druids  probably
symbolized  the  sun  as  a bull  and  the  earth  as  a cow,


The  Writings  of  “Morien”  217
but  in  bis  later  type  he  seems  mystically  to  have
been  known  as  Taliesin  or  the  High  Hesus.  As
Arthur,  he  was  the  cultivator  of  the  garden-earth.

All  titles  of  the  sun,  except  Hu  Gadarn,  are
comprehended  in  a Triad  known  as  Plennydd,
Alawn,  and  Gwron.  The  earth,  for  its  part,  was
known  as  the  three  queens  of  Arthur,  spring,
summer,  and  winter.  The  negative  or  evil  principles
were  three  males  Avagddu,  Cythraul,  and  Atrais,
which  signified  Darkness,  Pulverizer,  and  Soddener,
and  three  female  principles,  Annhras,  Malen,  and
Mailt,  or  Graceless,  Grinder,  and  Soddener.

In  the  system  of  Nature  the  Druids  regarded  the  space
traversed  by  the  sun  from  the  first  day  of  the  solar  new
year  (December  22nd)  to  the  equinoxial  line,  or  the  vernal
equinox  (March  21st)  as  the  kingdom  of  God’s  system  of
lives,  occupied  also,  the  Druidic  philosophers  thought,  by
evil  influences  until  chased  away  by  the  marching  up  of
the  sun’s  Divinity.  Man,  they  believed,  occupies  during
the  present  life  the  middle  line  of  that  system  (the  equi-
noxial line  of  the  moral  world).  He  is  entrusted  with
free-will,  and  is  a free  agent;  . . . the  space  from

the  equinoxial  line  of  the  moral  system  downwards  to
where  the  old  sun  disappears  on  December  20th  (25th)  is,
in  the  moral  world,  occupied  by  the  “lives”  of  the  animal
kingdom  in  their  tribes  or  divers  species,  in  the  moral
system  of  Nature.  They  cannot  innovate,  or  change,  or
improve  their  condition,  but  are  bound  by  the  rules  of  an
unerring  fate  or  law,  which  is  called  instinct,  and  Greddy
by  the  Druids.  But  the  nearer  certain  species  of  animals
are  to  the  “line  of  liberty”  occupied  in  that  system  by-
Man,  the  more  evidence  of  intelligence  they  manifest.  This
animal  space  is  called  in  Druidism,  CylcJiau  yr  Abred,
or,  in  classic  writings,  the  Circles  of  Transmigration.

It  was  thought  that  when  the  sun  was  “re-born”
as  a babe  from  Keridwen  on  December  22nd  myriads
of  lives  apart  from  physical  existence  emanated  at
the  same  time  from  Keridwen.  They  were  led  by.
the  sun  from  a district  of  Annwn  and  evolved  through
the  animal  creation  up  to  the  human . Intellectually,
they  were  inert  without  A wen,  inspiration,  or  the


218  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
reasoning  faculty,  imparted  to  them  direct  from  God
through  the  sun.  The  bottom  rung  of  the  circle  was
in  Annwn,  the  South,  from  which  all  development
arose.  An  evil  man  was  relegated  to  that  depth  in
the  circles  of  progress  for  which  he  himself  had
qualified  during  his  state  of  free-will  in  fife  which  was
regarded  as  a condition  of  probation.  On  the
northern  side  of  the  equinoctial  line  on  which  human
existence  is  stationed  was  Gwynvyd,  the  Heaven  of
the  Druids.  It  was  situated,  apparently,  at  the  point
attained  by  the  sun  at  the  summer  solstice,  or  in  the
Tropic  of  Cancer.

The  Druids  believed  in  the  eternity  of  matter  in
an  atomic  condition,  and  also  in  the  eternity  of  water,
and  further  that  the  passive  o$  feminine  principle  of
the  divine  nature  pervaded  both.  They  thought  that
at  some  inconceivably  distant  period  the  active
principle  of  Celi  concentrated  its  energy  in  the
passive  principle  of  Ced  or  Keridwen,  and  as  the
result  of  contact  the  sun  was  produced.  Under  its
influence  the  atomic  elements  took  solid  shape  and
became  a plastic  chaos  known  as  Calen.

The  Druids  had  a zodiac  of  their  own,  and  the
names  of  their  zodiacal  signs  are  those  of  the  deity’s
various  emanations  which  come  to  the  earth  through
the  sun.  Thus  they  named  the  vernal  equinox  Eilir
(second  generation),  the  summer  solstice  Havhin
(sunny  temperature),  the  autumnal  equinox  Elved
(harvest),  and  the  winter  solstice  Arthan  (Arthur’s
season)  when  Arthur  was  engaged  in  fighting  the
powers  of  darkness.  He  is  the  Sun  as  Archer,
armed  with  a bow  and  arrow,  combatting  the  dark-
ness of  winter.

The  whole  earth  was  known  as  Buarth  Beirdd,  or
the  Bovine  Bardic  Enclosure.  That  is,  the  earth’s
fertility  was  symbolized  by  a white  cow  and  the


The  Writings  of  “Morien”  219
generating  sun  by  a white  bull.  The  A vane  or
Beaver  is  said  to  have  been  drawn  ashore  by  Hu
Gadarn,  and  typified  the  sun  disappearing  every
evening  in  the  western  seas.  There  were  three  cows
and  three  bulls  employed  as  symbols  by  the  Druids
in  their  sacred  cattle-pen  or  circle.  The  three  bulls
are  the  aforesaid  Plennydd,  Alawn,  and  Gwron,  and
the  three  cows  Morwyn,  Blodwen,  and  Tynghedwen-
Dyrraith,  who  are  also  found  later  as  the  three
sister-spouses  of  Arthur,  personifications  of  the  earth
at  the  three  stages  of  the  year.

The  Druidic  trinity,  whose  operations  were  illus-
trated by  the  three  rays,  were  the  emanations  of  the
great  Creator  and  not  of  the  sun  itself.  The  sun
was  the  first  begotten  of  Keridwen,  the  feminine  or
passive  principle,  and  became  the  agent  of  the
Almighty  in  the  work  of  creation,  who  died
allegorically  on  every  20th  of  December,  falling  into
the  sea  at  St.  David’s  Head.  His  three  fertilizing
attributes  were  symbolized  by  three  apples  whose
juice  contained  the  divine  essence.  When  the  Druids
regarded  him  as  a beaver  drawn  out  of  the  lake  by
the  oxen  of  Hu  Gadarn,  it  was  implied  that  the
Creator  drew  him  forth  by  his  emanations  and  that
the  change  was  not  effected  by  the  sun’s  own  energy,
for  when  the  sun  grew  weak  the  Creator  had  to  come
to  its  aid.

The  divinity  of  the  sun  was  symbolized  among  the
Druids  by  the  wren.  A mode  of  levying  contribu-
tions at  Christmas  in  Wales  was  to  carry  a wren
through  the  village  in  a small  box  or  paper  house,
the  bearer  singing  a song  about  its  poverty.  In  the
Isle  of  Man  it  was  customary  to  hunt  the  wren  at
the  winter  solstice,  the  bird  being  fixed  to  a long
pole  with  its  wings  extended,  and  afterwards  buried.
The  symbol  really  refers  to  the  death  of  the  old  sun.


220  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
Taliesin,  in  one  of  his  poems,  alludes  to  himself  as
a wren,  and  that  the  Bard  represented  the  sun  seems
clear  enough.

Coming  to  the  legend  of  Taliesin  himself,  it  would
seem  that  the  seventh  century  bard  who  calls  himself
by  this  name  was  really  named  after  the  solar  deity
who  bore  the  same  title.  The  myth  of  his  being
placed  in  a coracle  alludes  to  the  vessel  of  the  sun,
which  was  believed  by  the  Druids  to  be  launched
in  St.  George’s  Channel  at  Arklow  on  the  Irish
coast  and  to  arrive  at  Borth  in  Cardigan  Bay.  On
the  east  side  of  Borth  is  a vast  morass,  on  the  edge
of  which  is  a spot  called  the  Grave  of  Taliesin,  and
a village  close  by  is  named  Taliesin.  This  morass
was  covered  by  high  tides  before  the  present  railway
bank  was  constructed.  This  inlet,  or  cove,  of
Cardigan  Bay  was  evidently  in  ancient  Druidic  times
sacred  to  the  mysteries  of  Taliesin,  or  the  sun,
exactly  as  Byblus  in  Phoenicia  was  to  the  death  and
restoration  as  a babe  of  Adonis,  who  reached  that
place  in  an  ark  of  bulrushes.  In  the  same  manner,
Taliesin  in  his  coracle  reached  the  Weir  of  Gwyddno.
The  coracle  is  one  of  the  symbols  of  Keridwen.

Dealing  with  the  myth  of  Keridwen,  “Morien”
goes  on  to  say  that  the  personages  in  it  represent  a
solar  and  cosmic  allegory,  the  dramatis  personae  of
the  ancient  solar  drama  of  the  Druids.  Avagddu
is  night,  Keridwen’ s first-born,  the  Sun,  Taliesin,
was  still  uncreated  and  the  Cauldron  which  was  to
assist  his  appearance  boiled  for  a year  and  a day —
that  is,  from  December  22nd  until  the  following
December  20th,  and  forty  hours  over.  The  circular
half  of  the  globe  above  the  rational  horizon,  the
receptacle  of  the  feminine  Divine  Essence,  is  the
Cauldron,  the  two  halves  of  which  are  the  northern
and  southern  hemispheres  above  the  rational  horizon,


The  Writings  of  “Morien”  221
with  the  equinoctial  line  dividing  the  earth  into  two
halves.  The  northern  half,  when  the  sun  is  between
the  east  and  the  northern  point  of  the  heavens,  is
under  the  dominion  of  Taliesin,  the  sun.  The
southern  half,  when  the  sun  is  between  the  east  point
and  the  shortest  day,  is  claimed  by  Avagddu.  It  is
a contest  between  summer  and  winter.

The  three  drops  which  inspired  Gwion  are  the
Triune  Word  or  Logos  of  the  Creator,  the  three
golden  apples  and  the  three  bulls.  Gwion  is  the
water  lord,  the  Druidic  title  of  the  Creator  in  the
work  of  making  order  out  of  chaos.  The  localities
between  Pontypridd  and  Tonyrefail  are  associated
with  the  allegory,  and  no  doubt  rites  associated  with
it  were  performed  on  Pontypridd  Common,  with  the
Rocking  Stone  as  the  symbolical  coracle  of  the
mysteries.

“Morien”  also  likens  Arthur  to  Osiris,  and  draws
several  parallels  between  Arthurian  and  Osirian
myth.  He  then  proceeds  to  deal  with  the  egg  as
the  symbol  of  the  earth  and  the  emblem  of  the  coracle
of  Keridwen.  The  earth’s  inertness  in  winter  and
that  of  the  sun  at  the  same  season  was  supposed  to
be  due  to  the  principle  of  Evil,  but  Keridwen  by
brooding  over  the  world-egg  was  supposed  to
reintroduce  its  vital  force.

In  Druidism  [says  Morien]  it  is  supposed  that  all  souls
have  had  their  generation  and  birth  from  Keridwen  and
Awen  in  Gwenydva  or  Elysium  and  that  to  come  from
thence  to  this  world  they  must  cross  Gwyllionwy  or  the
Keltic  Styx,  traverse  Annwn  and  ascend  in  the  train  of
the  sun  on  his  return  on  the  morning  of  the  solar  New
Year.  Inside  the  sun  is  the  Ancient  of  Days,  Hu  Gadarn,
and  the  luminary’s  body  is  his  and  Keridwen V offspring.
Hu  Gadarn  is  the  son  of  the  creator  Celi,  who  is  both
his  father  and  mother.  The  descent  is  where  the  sun
descends  on  the  shortest  day  of  winter,  and  the  left  and
right  of  his  descent  are  Annwn  and  Gwenydfa,  with  the


222  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

River  Gwyllionwy  flowing  between.  In  Druidism  souls
do  not  return  at  the  dissolution  of  their  bodies  either  to
Annwn  or  Gwenyddfa,  but  go  either  to  heaven,  or  return
to  the  animal  circles  of  transmigration.

Such,  in  effect,  is  the  general  trend  of  “MorienV’
writings,  which  are,  in  a measure,  valuable  so  far  as
his  great  knowledge  of  Druidism  is  concerned,  but
which  are  somewhat  diffuse  and  far  too  greatly
mingled  with  Biblical  and  classical  parallels  of
doubtful  value.  He  has  also  much  to  say  regarding
the  divine  name  and  the  resemblance  of  Hebrew  to
Welsh  mythology,  as  well  as  the  symbolism  of  the
stone  circles,  but  only  here  and  there  do  we  encounter
anything  of  value  in  respect  of  the  actual  theology
of  the  Druids,  although  their  mythology  is  copiously
enough  explained.


CHAPTER  XI


DRUIDISM  AND  THE  SECRET  TRADITION
IN  IRELAND

It  has  frequently  been  stated  that  Druidism  in
Ireland  had  not  the  same  official  sanction  as  in
Britain.  However  that  may  be,  there  can  be  no
question  that  it  flourished  there  exceedingly.  There
are  numerous  allusions  to  Druids  and  Druidism  in
Irish  literature,  and  at  these  we  may  perhaps  briefly
glance  in  the  first  place.

1 hree  Druids  are  said  to  have  accompanied
Partholan,  the  first  colonizer  of  Ireland,  and  the
Nemedians  and  Fomorians  are  also  said  to  have
brought  Druids  with  them  to  Ireland,  who  pitted
their  spells  against  those  of  the  original  inhabitants.
In  this  case  Druid  may  simply  mean  priest  or
medicine-man.  The  Nemedians  are  said  to  have
visited  the  northern  parts  of  Europe,  where  they
made  themselves  perfect  in  the  arts  of  divination,
Druidism,  and  philosophy,  returning  after  some
generations  to  Ireland  under  the  name  of  the  Tuatha
De  Danann.

The  chief  deity  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  was
Dagda,  who  is  believed  to  be  the  same  as  the  Cromm
Cruach,  the  great  idol  overthrown  by  St.  Patrick,
and  that  his  worship  was  Druidic  is  unquestioned.
He  possessed  a cauldron,  which  differed  somewhat
from,  that  of  Keridwen  in  that  it  was  the  source  of
a plentiful  food-supply.  The  Danann  people  had
three  chief  Druids,  Brian,  Iuchar,  and  Iucharba,  and

'■  233


224  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
two  chief  Druidesses,  Becuiii  and  Danann,  besides
a number  of  subsidiary  priests  and  priestesses.  End-
less tales  are  told  of  the  magical  contests  of  the
Danann  Druids  with  those  of  the  Firbolgs.  On  one
occasion  the  Danann  Druids  prepared  a magical  bath
at  the  battle  of  Magh  Tuiraidh,  which  seems  strongly
reminiscent  of  that  of  the  initiates.

We  also  read  of  Druids  accompanying  the
Milesian  colony,  who  are  said  to  have  come  from
Greece  and  to  have  passed  through  Scythia  and
Egypt  in  their  travels,  and  thence  into  Spain,  from
which  they  travelled  into  Ireland,  the  Druid  Caicher
leading  them  from  the  Iberian  peninsula  to  Erin.  On
their  arrival  the  Danann  Druids  raised  such  a
tempest  as  drove  them  out  to  sea  again,  but  a Druid
of  the  Milesians  chanted  a song  so  powerful  that  the
tempest  abated.

The  earliest  reference  to  a Druidic  ceremony  in
the  ancient  Irish  writings  is  that  which  tells  of  the
fire  lighted  by  Midhe  on  the  Hill  of  Uisnech  in  West
Meath,  which  continued  to  burn  for  seven  years.
The  Druids  of  Ireland,  however,  said  that  it  was  an
insult  to  them  to  have  this  fire  ignited  in  the  country,
whereupon  Midhe  had  ail  their  tongues  cut  out  and
buried  in  the  earth  of  Uisnech.  The  legend  of  Etain,
the  Queen  of  Eochidh,  who  was  spirited  away  by  a
mysterious  stranger  to  the  Land  of  Faery,  throws
some  light  on  Irish  Druidical  practice.  She  was
sought  by  the  King’s  chief  Druid,  Dalian,  who
wandered  throughout  Erin  for  a year  without  finding
her.  At  last  he  came  to  Slieve  Dalian,  where  he
cut  four  wands  of  yew  and  carved  an  ogham  on  them,
when  it  was  revealed  to  him  that  Etain  was  concealed
in  the  palace  of  the  Fairy  King  Midir,  in  the  Hill
of  Bri  Leith,  in  the  County  of  Longford.  Her
husband  had  the  hill  dug  open,  but  the  Fairy  King


Druidism  -in  Ireland  225
sent  forth  fifty  women  so  closely  resembling  her  that
Eochidh  could  not  recognize  his  wife  until  she  made
herself  known  to  him  personally.  The  tale  makes
it  plain  that  Irish  Druidism  employed  written  or
carved  magical  characters.

We  also  read  of  the  Druids  giving  draughts  of
oblivion  to  certain  heroes,  and  divining  dreams  by
holding  a bull-feast  and  eating  of  the  animals’  flesh
and  broth,  after  which  heavy  repast  divinatory  visions
were  vouchsafed  in  sleep.  A great  many  references
are  made  to  a certain  Cathbad,  an  Irish  Druid  of
celebrity,  who  kept  a school  or  college  for  instruction
in  Bardism  and  Druidism.  Equally  numerous  tales
are  told  of  the  arguments  and  magical  conflicts  of  the
Druids  with  Saint  Patrick,  who  converted  several  of
them,  and  it  is  strange  to  read  in  the  Leabher  Breac
that  a Druid  was  the  first  tutor  of  Saint  Columba.

The  rites  of  the  Irish  Druids  are  the  constant  topic
of  the  ancient  Hibernian  writings.  A method  of
producing  “illumination”  practised  by  them  was
known  as  the  Imhas  Forosnai,  or  “illumination  by
the  palms  of  the  hands”,  as  described  in  the  Glossary
of  Cormac  mac  Cullinan,  King  and  Bishop  of  Cashel,
compiled  about  a.d.  890.  He  who  wishes  to
discover  a truth  must  chew  raw  red  flesh  and  then
retire  with  it  to  his  bed,  where  he  shall  pronounce
an  oration  upon  it  and  offer  it  to  his  idol  gods.  If
he  does  not  receive  illumination  before  the  following
day  he  pronounces  incantations  upon  his  two  palms
and  takes  his  idols  into  his  bed  so  that  he  may  not
be  interrupted  in  his  sleep.  He  then  places  his  two
hands  upon  his  cheeks  and  falls  asleep.  The  object
of  this  ceremony  seems  to  have  been  to  have  turned
the  palms  of  the  hands  into  illuminating  agencies
which  would  permit  the  seer  to  have  anything
revealed  to  him  which  he  sought.


226  The  Mysteries  of  Britain

It  is  told  of  the  Druid  Ciothruadh  that  when  he
made  a Druidic  fire  against  the  men  of  Munster
his  enemies  retaliated  with  a similar  conflagration,
which  produced  a shower  of  blood.  Their  priest,
Moghruith,  called  for  his  “dark  grey,  hornless  bull-
hide  and  white-speckled  bird  head-piece”  and  other
Druidic  instruments,  and  flew  up  into  the  air  to  quell
the  flames.  Ciothruadh  also  ascended,  but  the  Druid
of  Munster  prevailed  and  he  fell  to  earth.
Moghruith  on  this  occasion  was  drawn  in  a chariot
by  wild  oxen,  and  turned  the  Druids  of  Cormac  into
stones,  “which  are  the  Flags  of  Raighne  to  this
day”.  This  particular  Druid,  Moghruith,  is  men-
tioned in  documents  known  to  be  historically
veracious,  and  is  said  to  be  the  ancestor  of  several  of
the  ancient  families  in  Cork,  the  O’ Dugans,
O’ Cronins,  and  others.

The  Irish  Druids  practised  augury  from  the  notes
of  birds,  the  croakings  of  ravens,  and  the  chirping
of  wrens.  They  observed  the  stars  and  clouds  for
omens,  and  also  practised  poetical  divination.  They
employed  the  yew  trees,  the  rowan,  and  the  black-
thorn as  sacred  wood  for  personal  ordeals.  They
appear  to  have  been  frequently  employed  as  tutors
to  princes,  and  frequently  as  law-givers.  But  their
organization  seems  never  to  have  been  so  thorough
or  so  orderly  as  that  of  the  Druids  of  Gaul  or
Britain.  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  borne  in  mind
that  practically  everything  we  know  of  them  comes
from  sources  subsequent  to  the  introduction  of
Christianity.

Several  ancient  nunneries  are  conjectured  to  have
been  the  retreats  of  Druidesses,  especially  that  of
St.  Bridgit  at  Kildare,  which  was  once  almost
certainly  a community  of  this  kind.  At  this  place  the
Ingheaw  Andagha,  or  “Daughters  of  Fire”,


Druidism  in  Ireland  227
ministered  to  the  sacred  conflagration  of  the  ancient
goddess  Briginda  or  Brigantia,  which  was  never
permitted  to  go  out,  and  which  was  surrounded  by  a
fence  or  stockade  over  which  no  man  might  climb,
or  through  the  bars  of  which  he  might  not  even  peep!
A ^similar  institution  may  have  existed  at  Tuam,  and
O Connor  mentions  the  Cluan-feart  or  sacred  retreat
for  Druidical  nuns.  The  Synod  of  Drumceat  in
a.d.  590  laid  certain  restrictions  on  the  Druids,  who
were  officially  abolished  after  the  Battle  of  Moyrath
in  637  So  many  Druidic  ornaments  and  instruments
have  been  discovered  in  Ireland  that  it  is  clear  the
number  of  priests  maintained  in  the  island  must  have
been  considerable.  Nothing,  however,  is  clearer
than  that  St.  Patrick  engrafted  Christianity  upon  the
pagan  superstition  then  prevalent  in  Ireland.
O’Brien,  in  his  book  on  the  Round  Towers  of
Ireland,  observes  :

The  church  festivals  themselves  in  our  Christian
Calendar  are  but  the  direct  transfers  from  the  Tuatha
De  Danann  ritual.  Their  very  names  in  Irish  are  ideriti-

by  that'earlier  race  y Wh‘Ch  they  we  dist!nSuished

. Massey  tells  us  that  “an  Irish  name  for  Druidism
lsMmthis,  and  that  includes  the  Egyptian  dual
Ihoth,  called  Mati,  which,  applied  to  time,  is  the
Term  or  Two  Times  at  the  base  of  all  reckoning”.
But  the  etymologies  advanced  in  his  interesting  Book
of  the  Beginnings  are  suspect,  to  say  the  least  of  it.

That,  as  in  Wales,  Druidism,  or  at  least  the
tradition  of  it,  was  preserved  in  Ireland  for  ages  is
obvious  enough.  Walker  in  his  Irish  Bards  affirms
that  the  “Order  of  the  Bards  continued  for
many  succeeding  ages  invariably  the  same”,  and
Buchanan,  the  Scots  historian  (ca.  1580),  found
many  of  their  ancient  customs  yet  remain ; yea,


228  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
there  is  almost  nothing  changed  of  them  in  Ireland,
but  only  ceremonies  and  rites  of  religion”.

But  in  Ireland,  as  in  Britain,  we  find  the  bull,  ox,
or  cow  the  symbol  of  worship.  The  ancient  camps
or  sites  of  the  Grey  Cow  of  the  Dananns  are  still
remembered  by  the  peasantry,  and  King  Diarmuid
Mac  Cearbhail,  who  is  described  as  “half  a Druid
and  half  a Christian”,  killed  his  son  for  destroying
a sacred  cow.  Owen  Connelan,  who  translated  “the
proceedings  of  the  great  Bardic  Institution”,  tells  of
a cow  which  supplied  the  daily  wants  of  nine  score
nuns  or  Druidesses,  concerning  which  story  Hackett
remarks  : ” The  probability  is  that  they  were  pagan
Druidesses,  and  that  the  cows  were  living  idols,  like
Apis,  or  in  some  sense  considered  sacred  animals.”
This  evidence  collates  Irish  Druidism  with  British,
and  seems  to  point  to  the  existence  of  some  such
ox-worship  in  Ireland  as  that  of  Hu.

That  Irish  Druidic  superstition  long  survived  and
is  by  no  means  yet  defunct  is  well  known.  There
are  numerous  instances  of  folk-beliefs  in  the  efficacy
of  certain  stones,  for  example  the  Stones  of  Specula-
tion, from  which  it  was  thought  fire  could  be  drawn.
The  Brash  or  Bullan  Stones  in  the  County  of  Cork
and  at  Glendalough  were  indented  with  hollows  in
which  the  devotee  placed  his  knees,  dropping  an
offering  into  a basin  in  the  front  of  the  stone,  for  the
cure  of  rheumatism.  Milligan  saw  women  at
Innismurray  kneeling  before  standing  stones  in
worship.  Spenser,  writing  in  the  time  of  Queen
Elizabeth,  states  that  he  saw  the  Irish  drink  blood
in  connection  with  certain  arcane  ceremonies.

These  are  all  the  remains  of  Druidic  belief,  or  at
least  of  that  lower  cultus  with  which  it  mingled.  In
many  parts  of  Ireland  it  is  only  recently  that  the
peasantry  ceased  to  believe  in  transformation  into


Druidism  in  Ireland  229

animal  form.  All  Saints’  Day  was  merely  a
perpetuation  of  the  pagan  Samhain , which  was
sacred  to  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  On  the  evening
of  this  festival  it  was  considered  dangerous  to  be  out
of  doors,  and  funeral  games,  the  remains  of  the  Cult
of  the  Dead,  were  held  in  the  houses.  The  Irish
practice  of  keening  has  frequently  been  considered
a survival  from  pagan  times.  Mrs.  Harrington,
writing  in  1818,  was  assured  that  the  keeners  were
descendants  of  pagan  performers.  As  in  other
countries,  well-worship  could  not  be  put  down  in
Ireland,  and  even  to  this  day  pilgrimages  to  wells
are  not  infrequent,  especially  to  such  fountains  as  are
presided  over  by  Saint  Brigit.  Within  these  wells
there  were  thought  to  reside  mystical  fishes,  probably
the  familiars  or  spirits  who  guarded  it.  Offerings
were  made  to  the  spirit  in  charge  of  the  well  and  to
the  priestess  thereof.  Now  this  custom  is  entirely
associated  with  districts  where  megalithic  monuments
prevail,  and  this  justifies  the  belief  that  it  was
certainly  Druidic.

As  in  Britain,  so  in  Ireland,  the  cult  of  the  Culdees
followed  that  of  Druidism.  The  early  Christian
priests  appear  to  have  vbeen  distinctly  “bad”
Christians.  In  the  manuscript  of  McFirbis  we  read
that : “ The  clergy  of  Erin  held  many  synods,  and
they  used  to  come  to  these  synods  with  weapons,
so  that  pitched  battles  used  to  be  fought  between
them,  and  many  used  to  be  slain.”  This  is
reminiscent  of  the  custom  of  the  Druids,  who  were,
as  Caesar  tells  us,  occasionally  wont  to  settle  their
disputes  by  the  sword.  In  Ireland  the  Culdees  wore
the  white  robes  associated  with  Druidism,  and
certainly  occupied  localities  which  had  a Druidical
reputation . As  Dr . J.  M oore  writes  : ‘ ‘ The
Culdees  seem  to  have  adopted  nearly  all  the  pagan


230  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
symbols  of  the  neighbourhood.”  They  are,  indeed,
mentioned  as  the  Ceile  De  in  the  Annals  of  the  Four
Masters , in  connection  with  events  in  the  year  a.d.
806.  The  Rev.  W.  G.  Todd,  in  his  volume  on
The  Church  of  St.  Patrick,  says  that:  “The
earliest  Christian  missionaries  found  the  native
religion  extinct,  and  themselves  took  the  name  of
Cuidees  from  inhabiting  the  Druids’  empty  cells.”
So  lately  as  1595  certain  friars  in  Sligo  were  alluded
to  as  Ceile-n-De,  and  there  is  frequent  mention  of
certain  Keledei  in  the  thirteenth  century.  They
upheld  the  institution  of  marriage  amongst  the  clergy
and  their  abbacies  were  frequently  hereditary.  That
they  were  suspect  of  paganism  is  clear  from  the
language  of  Bede,  who  says  of  them  that  they  would
“as  soon  communicate  with  pagans  as  with  Saxons”.
Archbishop  Ussher  asserted  that  the  Northern  Irish
“continued  in  their  old  tradition  in  spite  of  various
Papal  bulls”.

Archbishop  Lanfranc  of  Canterbury  was  horrified
on  hearing  that  they  did  not  pray  to  saints,  dedicate
churches  to  the  Virgin,  nor  use  the  Roman  service,
and  even  St.  Bernard  in  his  distant  retreat  was
greatly  distressed  at  what  he  heard  of  the  Irish
Cuidees.  In  his  righteous  wrath  he  stigmatized
them  as  “Beasts,  absolute  barbarians,  a stubborn,
stiff-necked,  and  ungovernable  generation  and
abominable  ; Christian  in  name,  hut  in  reality
pagan ”,  One  of  the  Papal  entreaties  by  which
Henry  II  was  induced  to  conquer  Ireland  related  to
the  possibility  of  bringing  the  Irish  into  the  Christian
Church.

Wild  stories  were  told  of  the  performance  of  secret
rites  by  the  Cuidees,  and  it  was  whispered  that,  like
their  Druidical  fathers,  they  buried  persons  alive
beneath  the  fanes  where  they  worshipped  in  order


Druidism  in  Ireland  231
to  propitiate  the  powers  of  darkness.  St.  Bernard,
in  his  Life  of  Malachy,  Archbishop  of  Armagh,
states  that  up  to  the  year  1130  there  was  none  worthy
of  being  called  a Christian  monk  in  the  whole  of
Ireland.  Two  islands  are  situated  in  the  bog  of
Monincha.  One  of  these  was  a monastery  for  men,
their  wives  occupying  the  neighbouring  women’s
island.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  writing  of  this  com-
munity in  the  twelfth  century,  called  it  “The  church
of  the  old  religion",  and  described  its  inhabitants  as
“demons”.

The  round  towers  of  Ireland  are  associated  by
tradition  with  the  Culdees.  That  they  are  not
“Christian”  in  the  modern  sense  is  sufficiently
proven  by  the  fact  that  only  in  three  out  of  sixty-
three  have  Christian  emblems  been  found,  and  even
these  have  been  regarded  as  modern  additions.  Nor
are  they  mentioned  in  Irish  hagiography.  They
appear  to  be  in  the  same  architectural  line  of  descent
as  the  nuraghi  of  Sardinia  and  the  brochs  of  Scotland,
although  probably  of  later  date  than  these.  That  is,
they  were  almost  certainly  referable  to  a more  or
less  distant  Mediterranean  origin.  That  they  may
have  been  of  late  Druidic — that  is,  of  Culdee  origin
—seems  not  at  all  improbable.

For  centuries  afterwards  the  medical  knowledge
of  the  Druids  survived  in  Ireland,  Druidic  medicine
is  chiefly  known  from  its  Irish  examples.  It  is
scarcely  surprising  to  find  that  the  ancient  Kelts  of
Ireland  regarded  all  medicinal  substances  as  the  gifts
of  the  gods.  In  early  Irish  literature  we  find  the
god  Diancecht  credited  with  all  the  potentialities  of
a Keltic  iFsculapius,  a reputation  he  continued  to
enjoy  well  into  Christian  times.  His  name  signifies
“Swift  in  Power”,  and  many  are  the  legends
recounted  of  his  healing  skill.  Incantations  penned


232  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
in  the  eighth  century  reveal  him  as  a god  who  had
long  been  regarded  as  a fount  of  medicinal  and  herbal
lore,  and  his  son  and  daughter,  Midoch  and  Airmida,
even  appear  to  have  excelled  him  in  the  leech’s  art.

But  the  jealousy  of  Diancecht  pursued  them,  and
he  slew  Midoch,  the  innovator.  From  the  younger
leech’s  grave;  however,  there  sprang  365  herbs  from
the  365  joints  and  sinews  of  his  body,  each
possessing  a mighty  virtue  to  heal  the  diseases  of
the  part  whence  it  grew.  His  sister  Airmida
gathered  the  herbs,  classified  them  and  concealed
them  in  her  mantle.  But  Diancecht  discovered  them
and  mixed  them  up  so  hopelessly  that  no  leech  might
henceforth  understand  their  peculiar  properties.

The  surgeon  figures  conspicuously  in  the  romantic
tales  of  the  Irish  Red  Branch  Knights.  In  time  of
war  an  entire  medical  corps  under  one  chief  physician
accompanied  each  Irish  army,  every  leech  bearing  a
les,  or  bag,  of  salves  and  herbs  at  his  girdle.

Although  the  craft  seems  to  have  been  recognized
in  Ireland  from  the  earliest  recorded  ages,  we
encounter  no  mention  of  any  individual  physician
until  the  death  of  Maelodar  O’Tinnri,  “the  best
leech  in  Ireland’’,  in  a.d.  860.  After  that  period,
however,  records  of  Irish  mediciners  and  surgeons
are  frequent,  and  not  a few  of  them  could  boast  of
Continental  as  well  as  national  reputations.

Van  Helmont,  a physician  of  Brussels,  writing  on
the  state  of  European  medicine  at  the  beginning  of
the  seventeenth  century,  remarked  that  the  Irish
nobility  had  each  their  domestic  physician  who  was
appointed  not  because  of  his  learning,  but  because
of  his  ability  to  cure  disorders.  These  doctors,  he
says,  received  their  instruction  chiefly  from  here-
ditary writings  bequeathed  to  them  by  their
ancestors,  and  employed  as  cures  the  productions  of


Druidism  in  Ireland  233
their  own  country.  “The  Irish,”  he  concludes,
“ are  better  managed  in  sickness  than  the  Italians,
who  have  a physician  in  every  village.”

A large  number  of  Irish  medical  manuscripts  are
still  preserved,  and  the  whole  body  of  ancient  medical
writing  in  Irish  is  probably  the  largest  in  existence  in
any  language.  The  Book  of  the  O’Tees , preserved
in  the  Royal  Irish  Academy,  was  written  in  1443,
partly  in  Latin,  and  partly  in  Irish.  The  Book  of
the  O’ Hickeys  is  even  more  venerable,  having  been
translated  into  Irish  in  1303  from  the  Latin  work  by
Bernard  Gordon.

In  these  and  other  books  practically  all  the
principal  diseases  and  epidemics  we  are  now
acquainted  with  are  described  and  specifics  for  their
cure  recommended.  Bubonic  plague,  phthisis,
alluded  to  as  serg , or  “withering”,  and  described  in
Cormac’s  glossary  as  the  disease  of  “those  without
fat”,  erysipelas,  or  the  teine-buirr , the  “fire  of
swelling”,  and  tuthle , or  cancer,  are  all  enumerated,
and  mention  is  also  made  of  palsy  and  ague.

Indeed,  the  training  of  a surgeon  in  ancient
Ireland  seems  to  have  been  a matter  of  prolonged
and  arduous  application.  He  had  perforce  to  go
through  a long  apprenticeship  with  a skilled
practitioner  before  he  was  licensed  to  “kill  or  cure”.

That  the  medical  system  of  ancient  Ireland  was
of  Druidic  origin  is  undoubted,  as  was  that  of  Wales,
and  its  continued  practice  must  have  served  to  keep
the  Secret  Tradition  alive,  as  we  may  be  sure  the
one  could  not  very  well  have  existed  without  a
modicum  of  the  other.


CHAPTER  XII

SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSIONS

We  have  now  reached  a stage  when  the  material  at
our  disposal  seems  to  lend  itself  to  the  process  of
being  summarized  in  such  a manner  that  we  can  draw
conclusions  therefrom.  Some  such  general  con-
densation of  the  facts  already  gathered  may  then  be
attempted,  and  such  deductions  made  therefrom  as  will
justify  the  hypothesis  not  only  that  a peculiarly  British
form  of  the  Secret  Tradition  actually  existed,  but  that
it  is  capable  of  reclamation  and  reconstruction.

In  the  beginning  we  observed  that  the  island  of
Britain  possessed  an  almost  unique  sanctity  for  the
peoples  of  the  ancient  world  as  a land  of  mystic  and
occult  tradition,  and  this  in  itself  tends  to  buttress
the  main  theory  set  forth  in  this  volume.  Surely
such  reverence  could  not  have  been  forthcoming  had
not  the  general  reputation  of  our  island  been  one
of  peculiar  sacredness.  That  the  tradition  thus
celebrated  was  of  almost  exclusively  native  origin,
in  respect  that  its  tenets  came  to  their  fullest  fruition
on  our  soil,  was  also  insisted  upon.

That  the  Iberian  race  from  North-West  Africa
were  the  original  disseminators  of  this  tradition,
carrying  it  to  Britain  on  the  one  hand  and  Egypt  to
the  other  in  the  guise  of  the  Cult  of  the  Dead  has,
I think,  been  demonstrated,  especially  in  its  historic
aspect  as  associated  with  “Iberian”  Neolithic  culture
and  its  introduction  to  the  British  Isles.  The
voyages  of  early  New  Stone  Age  and  Bronze  Age
men  to  our  shores,  and  the  erection  by  them  of  stone
monuments,  leads  to  the  assumption  that  they  must
also  have  imported  their  religious  and  occult  beliefs.

234


Summary  and  Conclusions  235
The  long  barrow  men  were  traders,  voyaging  from
Spain  to  Britain,  at  a period  generally  placed  at
about  2000  b.c.,  and  that  they  had  embraced  the
Cult  of  the  Dead  is  proved  by  their  burial  customs.
Other  races  followed  them,  but  although  their
religious  beliefs  have  left  certain  traces,  the  aboriginal
Cult  of  the  Dead  remained  the  official  faith,  and
absorbed  all  others  of  later  introduction,  the  Keltic
peoples  embracing  its  principles  and  grafting  their
mythology  upon  it  to  a great  extent.  This  it  was  which
rendered  the  faith  of  Britain  unique  in  Europe,  and
caused  the  peoples  of  the  Continent  to  regard  it  as  the
exemplar  and  prototype  of  the  ancient  faith  of  the  West.

The  argument  that  it  is  “absurd  to  argue  that  the
W estern  barbarians  taught  the  Egyptians  and  Cretans
the  Cult  of  the  Dead”  was  countered  by  the  theory
that  it  emanated  from  a common  centre  in  Iberian
North-West  Africa,  and  proofs  were  brought  to  bear
to  justify  this  contention,  especially  the  colonization
of  Egypt  by  people  of  Iberian  stock  and  the  existence
of  certain  survivals,  like  that  of  the  supposed  Keltic
rite  of  Bealtainn  in  Morocco  at  the  present  day.

The  theories  of  Mr.  T.  D.  Kendrick  relative  to
the  cult  of  Druidism  were  then  reviewed,  and  a
justification  of  the  theory  that  Druid  traditions  did
survive  was  attempted.  Moreover,  his  argument
that  no  official  caste  of  Druids  existed  in  Britain  was
contested.  At  the  same  time  it  was  agreed  that  the
circles  of  Britain  were  not  built  by  the  Druids,
although  the  development  of  Druidism  was  associated
with  them,  and  the  Druids  made  use  of  them.

Druidism,  it  was  concluded,  arose  out  of  a Cult  of
the  Dead  which  had  gradually  been  taking  form
during  the  Old  Stone  Age,  and  which  in  the  New
Stone  Age  had  been  disseminated  from  North-West
Africa  to  Britain  on  the  one  hand  and  Egypt  on  the


236  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
other.  At  the  commencement  of  the  Iron  Age  it
became  segregated  in  this  island  and  took  on  the
colours  of  its  environment.  Classical  passages  were
adduced  to  buttress  the  theory  that  Druidism  was
the  Cult  of  the  Dead  in  another  form,  and  instances
of  Keltic  beliefs  connected  with  the  Cult  were  also
brought  forward,  stress  being  laid  on  the  fact  that
it  did  not  so  much  embody  the  Pythagorean  doctrine
of  metempsychosis  or  the  transmigration  of  souls,  as
that  of  direct  rebirth  as  observed  in  the  ancient  belief
that  fairies  were  the  souls  of  the  dead  awaiting
re-introduction  into  a new  mortal  existence.

The  Druidic  Cult  of  the  Dead  arose  from  an
admixture  of  Keltic  religion  and  the  faith  of  the
older  cultus,  the  Iberian  religion  which  had  preceded
it  in  Britain.  It  was,  in  a word,  the  North  African
Cult  of  the  Dead  localized  and,  later,  'Kelticized.  It
passed  through  the  same  early  phases  as  in  Egypt,
but  later  began  to  take  on  the  hue  of  its  environment.

The  Druids  were  a well-defined  priestly  class  with
sub-divisions  having  different  functions,  magical,
administrative,  and  bardic,  but  that  the  cult  practised
by  these  ministers  was  fairly  high  in  the  scale  of
religions  is  indubitable.  They  possessed  a system  of
writing  which  they  appear  to  have  developed  of
themselves,  and  which  was  known  as  the  Ogham.
Under  Roman  persecution  they  only  seemed  to
disappear,  and  there  is  good  evidence  both  from
Wales,  Ireland,  and  Scotland  that  they  confronted
the  Christian  missionaries,  and  it  seems  not  at  all
improbable  that  they  flourished  for  centuries  after
that  under  the  name  of  Culdees.

Reviewing  the  material,  documentary  and  other-
wise, which  helps  us  to  a proper  understanding  of
the  mystical  literature  of  the  British  Kelts,  we  find
this,  so  far  as  the  Brythonic  Kelts  of  Wales  are


Summary  and  Conclusions  237
concerned,  derived  from  the  Mabinogion,  the  Welsh
triads,  dating  probably  from  the  twelfth  century,  but
containing  lore  greatly  more  ancient,  the  so-called
Book  of  Taliesin,  and  so  forth.  I think  I have
shown  that  the  criticism  directed  against  the  bona
fides  of  these  works  was  decidedly  strained,  and  that
there  was  nothing  inherently  impossible  in  the  idea  that
they  enshrined  fragments  of  the  ancient  British  mystic-
ism, Negative  criticism  has  to  explain  the  presence  of
hundreds  of  surviving  superstitions  in  Britain  at  the
present  time  which  are  known  to  be  of  Druidic  origin.

In  The  Book  of  Taliesin  we  encounter  the
mythological  group  Keridwen,  her  son  Avagddu,
and  her  servant  Gwion,  whose  allegory  has  been
mentioned  so  often  as  to  need  no  recapitulation  here.
The  Druidic  bards  who  lived  and  sang  under  the
Welsh  princes  unanimously  represent  Keridwen  as
presiding  over  the  mysteries  of  their  ancient  cult,
which  also  seems  to  be  associated  with  the  caste  of
the  Pheryllt,  who  dwelt  in  the  city  of  Emrys,  in  the
Snowdon  country.  The  rites  of  Keridwen  were
certainly  those  of  initiation,  and  her  myth  is  an
allegory  of  the  initiatory  ceremony,  of  which  there
are  many  notices  in  Welsh  literature  and  in  classical
writings  on  the  subject  of  the  Kelts.

We  next  come  to  the  consideration  of  the  volume
known  as  Barddas , collected  by  Iolo  Morganwg
and  published  by  the  Welsh  MSS.  Society  in  1862,
which  purports  to  be  a collection  of  original  docu-
ments illustrating  the  theology  of  the  Druids.  Its
editor,  the  Rev.  J.  Williams  ab  Ithel,  gives  it  as  his
opinion  that  the  bards  from  the  fourteenth  to  the
seventeenth  century  viewed  the  traditions  of  the
Gorsedd  as  the  genuine  remains  of  ancient  Druidism,
and  that  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  in  their
main  features  they  were  so.  The  material  of  Barddas,


238  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
its  editor  believed,  had  been  collected  chiefly  from
the  works  of  these  bards,  who  seem  to  have  regarded
Christianity  as  the  fulfilment  of  Druidism.

The  first  book  of  Barddas  deals  with  the  origin
of  letters  and  the  secret  writing  of  the  Bards  and
with  the  name  of  God.  The  second  book  bears  on
their  theological  ideas  and  mystical  teaching,  wherein
it  is  set  forth  that  God  or  goodness  is  opposed  to
Cythraul  or  darkness.  God  united  Himself  with
helplessness  with  the  intention  of  subduing  it  to  Life
or  Goodness,  which  began  in  the  depths  of  Annwn,
made  its  way  into  A bred,  from  which  it  was  possible
for  it  to  reach  the  circle  Gwynvyd,  the  cycle  of
immortal  beings,  the  still  higher  circle  of  Ceugant
being  reserved  for  God  alone.

Included  in  the  section  on  the  theology  of  the
Druids  is  the  ‘‘Book  of  Bardism”  by  the  Bard
Llywelyn  Sion  which  he  states  has  been  extracted
from  more  ancient  writings  which  he  specifies.  It
is  couched  in  the  form  of  question  and  answer
between  the  Bard  and  his  disciple,  and  contains  the
allegory  of  the  progress  of  Life  from  Annwn  upward.
Here  also  is  described  the  nature  of  awen  or  inspira-
tional vision  from  God.

In  the  third  book,  the  “Book  of  Wisdom”,  we
find  the  doctrines  of  the  elements,  the  parts  of  man,
the  cycles  of  the  years  and  months,  which  are
followed  by  the  “Book  of  Privilege  and  Usage”,
dealing  with  the  laws  and  regulations  of  Bardism.
The  superficial  resemblance  of  the  ideas  found  in
Barddas  to  certain  systems  of  Eastern  philosophy
and  theology  must  not,  however,  lead  us  to  suppose
that  it  had  in  reality  an  Oriental  origin.

Turning  now  for  the  evidences  of  the  survival  of
native  arcane  beliefs  to  the  mediaeval  literature  of
Britain,  we  find  in  the  work  of  Geoffrey  of


Summary  and  Conclusions  239
Monmouth  a certain  residuum  of  these.  He  mentions
not  a word  about  Druidical  training  or  practice,  but
there  are  references  to  pagan  priests  or  flamens  in
his  volume  which  appear  to  me  to  refer  to  the
Culdees.  It  is  also  of  interest  that  it  is  in  his  pages
that  we  first  meet  with  the  legend  that  the  building
materials  of  Stonehenge  were  brought  from  Africa
by  the  giants  of  old,  and  I think  his  account  is  a
distorted  memory  of  the  manner  in  which  they  were
conveyed  from  West  to  East.

Arthurian  literature  may  be  divided  into  two
sections,  that  which  was  the  work  of  Welsh  bards
and  arose  out  of  Welsh  tradition,  and  that  composed
in  English  and  Norman-French';  The  occult
traditions  which  it  enshrined  were  clearly  defined  in
the  literature  of  the  Grail.  Its  dramatis  personae  is
Keltic,  and  derives  both  from  Brythonic  and  Goidelic
sources.  That  Arthur  was  a god  of  the  culture-hero
type  is  obvious  enough.  Attempting  to  discover
remnants  of  the  mystical  tradition  relating  to  him  in
the  ancient  Welsh  poems,  we  find  him  mentioned  in
five  of  them  by  name,  and  especially  in  that  known
as  “The  Spoils  of  Annum*  * % which  is  a poem  of  the
type  of  the  “Harrying  of  FI  ell",  and  probably
constituted  a description  of  part  of  the  ritual  of  the
candidate  for  adeptship  into  the  mysteries.  The
cauldron  seized  by  the  expedition  to  Annwn  is
obviously  the  same  as  that  of  the  goddess  Keridwen
and  the  Grail  vessel.  It  is  plain  from  this  that
Arthur,  like  Osiris,  was  the  god  of  a mystical  cult
who  must  periodically  take  a journey  through  the
Underworld  for  the  purpose  of  subduing  its  evil
inhabitants  and  of  learning  their  secrets  and  magics.
Arthur,  indeed,  has  probably  a common  origin  with
Osiris.  In  British  myth  and  literature  there  are
evidences  of  the  survival  of  a belief  associated  with


240  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
rites  which  necessitated  a real  or  allegorical  passage
through  a lower  plane  from  which  mystical  secrets
and  treasures  might  be  reft.  Such  instances  may  be
found  in  the  legend  of  Thomas  the  Rymour,  Merlin
himself,  and  in  the  book  of  the  Rev.  Robert  Kirk,
Minister  of'Aberfoyle  in  1691.

The  literature  of  the  Grail  also  contains  certain
evidences  of  the  survival  and  continuance  of  this
tradition  in  Britain  for  centuries.  Its  dramatis
personae  are  merely  those  of  Keltic  myth  in  another
shape,  the  Cauldron  of  Annwn  is,  indeed,  the  Grail
itself.  The  whole  legend  of  the  Grail,  though
diverted  to  Christian  uses,  is  indeed  entirely  derived
from  sources  which  may  well  be  described  as
Druidical,  and  there  is  actual  traditional  continuity
between  the  poem  of  “The  Spoils  of  Annwn”  and  the
Grail  Legend,  which  also  contain  a large  number  of
references  to  the  personages  of  W elsh  myth . The  Grail
Castle  is  merely  the  Palace  of  Caer  Sidi  in  Annwn.

Examining  later  British  legend,  custom,  and
festival  for  evidences  of  the  survival  of  ancient  cult,
we  find  that  a good  deal  of  material  concerning  it
has  survived  through  these  media.  The  idea  of
Annwn , for  example,  still  survives  as  a part  of
modern  Welsh  folklore,  although  strangely  enough
that  contains  no  reminiscences  of  the  other  planes
in  the  mystic  circle.  There  is  considerable  evidence
that  Arthur  in  his  mythological  aspect  superseded
a certain  Hu  Gadarn,  the  hero  responsible  for
dragging  the  A vane  from  the  lake  by  means  of  his
oxen.  By  some  means  Arthur  became  confounded
with  this  Hu  and  took  over  his  attributes  and  adven-
tures ; both  were,  indeed,  phases  and  “names”  of  the
solar  deity,  and  it  is  clear  that  the  rites  associated
with  them  survived  until  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth
century,  the  image  of  Darvel  Gadarn  being  adored  in


sSwfea


ROUND


Summary  and  Conclusions  241
the  Diocese  of  St.  Asaph  so  lately  as  1538,  when  his
idol  and  priest  were  taken  to  Smithfield  in  London  and
burned.  In  the  superstition  concerning  fairy  change-
lings, too,  we  seem  to  find  a distinct  trace  of  a belief  in
the  return  of  the  soul  to  Annwn,  the  changelingbeinga
soul  struggling  to  get  a hold  on  A bred , the  earth -plane.

In  the  popular  superstitions,  too,  associated  with
sacred  wells  we  find  good  evidence  that  a recognized
caste  of  celebrants  or  priests  actually  existed  within
living  memory,  as  statements  by  Lewis,  Fulke,  and
Rhys  clearly  demonstrate,  and  it  seems,  too,  that  the
cult  of  witchcraft  retained  certain  associations  of  the
aboriginal  beliefs  with  which  the  Secret  Tradition  had
to  a certain  extent  become  interpenetrated.  There
is  also  a good  deal  of  evidence  that  a strong  leaven
of  the  ancient  cult  of  Hu  survived  in  certain  parts  of
Scotland  until  a relatively  late  period,  and  the
Cauldron  of  Keridwen  seems  to  have  been  known  in
the  same  localities  in  which  these  ideas  flourished.

Many  of  the  Druidic  rites,  the  details  of  which  are
known  to  us,  cast  light  upon  the  nature  of  the  Secret
Tradition.  It  seems  probable  that  Hu  was  the  god
of  the  oak  and  mistletoe  cult,  the  oak-tree  in'  an
anthropomorphic  or  man-like  shape,  as  the  idol  of
Darvel  Gadarn,  burned  at  Smithfield,  appears  to
have  been.  Bulls  were  sacrificed  to  the  mistletoe-
bearing  oak  in  Druidic  times,  and  these,  we  know,
were  symbolic  of  Hu,  It  seems  probable,  too,  that
the  mistletoe,  as  the  symbol  of  the  essence  of  life,  its
protoplasm,  so  to  speak,  was  introduced  into  the  ritual
of  initiation  of  the  Secret  Tradition,  just  as  wheat  was
into  that  of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  and  it  is  possible
that  the  “pearls”  on  the  rim  of  the  Cauldron  of
Inspiration  may  have  been  the  mistletoe  berries.
Thus  Hu  probably  brought  back  from  Annwn  the
Secret  of  Life  as  symbolized  by  the  mistletoe.


Q


242  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
We  find  in  the  rites  associated  with  the  festival  of
Gog  and  Magog  some  reminiscences  of  the  Secret
Tradition  and  also  in  those  of  Godiva  a certain  bearing
upon  them,  for  Ogmios  and  Briginda  were  deities  of
knowledge,  and  the  latter  may  have  presided  over  the
female  department  of  the  mysteries.

If  we  turn  now  to  the  higher  philosophy  of  British
mysticism  as  expressed  in  Bar  Adas , we  find  the
Supreme  Power  described  as  inconceivable  and
incomprehensible.  The  allusion  seems  to  be  to  Hu,
who  is  further  identified  with  the  Heus  and  Hesus  of
the  Gauls,  alluded  to  as  the  supreme  proprietor  of
the  Isle  of  Britain  in  Welsh  myth,  and  who  appears
to  have  been  symbolized  by  the  ox,  much  as  the  Apis
bull  represented  Osiris.  That  Heus  was  also
represented  in  ox  form  is  practically  certain,  and  a
number  of  Keltic  place-names  suggest  that  they  were
sites  of  a bull  cult.  His  abode  was  in  Ceugant,
which  was  probably  regarded  as  the  sun  itself.

The  necessary  obligations  of  man  are  set  forth  as
suffering,  change  and  choice,  and  his  equiportions  as
Abted  and  Givynvyd,  necessity  and  liberty,  evil  and
good,  to  which  he  has  the  power  of  attaching  himself
as  he  pleases.  This  assumes  a Western  doctrine  of
human  free-will,  although  there  seem  to  be  certain
associations  with  the  “doctrine  of  escape",  as
observed  in  Oriental  systems.  In  the  “Sentences
of  Bardism"  and  the  “Ten  Commandments  of  the
Bards"  in  the  Blue  Book  the  penetrations  of  Christian
thought  are  obvious,  but  at  the  same  time  there  is
certainly  a residuum  of  more  pristine  theology.  In
the  native  British  mysticism  the  idea  of  struggle,
of  evolution,  is  stressed  more  as  a natural  and
necessitous  course,  an  act  of  psychic  growth,  rather
than  a definite  philosophical  path,  such  as  is  set  forth
in'  the  Eastern  philosophies.  There  is  indeed  less


Summary  and  Conclusions  243
stress  of  choice  placed  on  Man  in  the  British  system,
the  entire  cosmic  machinery  appearing  to  be  more
imperative  or  arbitrary,  although  great  stress  is  laid
upon  the  value  to  the  soul  in  this  development  of
scientific  knowledge,  which  seems  to  hasten  the
process  of  psychic  growth,  and  it  was  probably  for
this  reason  that  the  desire  for  initiation  was  so  strong.

At  the  same  time  we  find  that  a certain  amount
of  contributory  action  is  essential  on  the  part  of  man,
and  that  his  efforts  must  be  in  unison  with  that  which
is  in  the  circle  of  Gwynvyd.

The  basic  foundations  of  A bred,  or  the  Earth-
plane,  are  the  predominance  of  opposition  in  Cythraul
over  prosperity  and  amendment,  necessary  lawless-
ness and  death  ensuing  from  the  mastery  of  Cythraul ,
showing  that  the  state  of  Abred  was  regarded  as  a
dreadful  necessity,  that  life  on  the  Earth-plane  could
never  be  a happy  experience.  In  Gwynvyd,  the
happier  plane  of  spirits,  good  predominates  over  evil
and  memory  reaches  from  the  beginning  of  the  soul’s
evolution  of  Annwn,  so  that  perfect  judgement  and
understanding  may  prevail.  That  is,  the  secrets  of
Death  must  be  plumbed  and  accurately  understood
before  the  soul  can  triumph  over  them.  This  casts
light  on  the  allegory  of  the  descent  of  Hu  or  Arthur
into  the  depths  of  Annwn , showing  that  not  only  did
he  seek  the  Cauldron  of  Inspiration,  but  sought  to
gauge  the  secrets  and  mysteries  of  death,  which
knowledge  was  part  of  the  initiation  of  the  brother-
hood of  the  Secret  Tradition.  In  both  the  Egyptian
and  Christian  religions  the  powers  of  death  are
definitely  overcome  by  Osiris  and  Christ,  and  in  all
probability  the  allegory  of  the  descent  of  Hu,  or
Arthur,  into  Annwn  was  enacted  by  the  neophyte
in  the  course  of  his  initiation.

An  attempt  was  then  made  to  reconstruct  the  rites


244  The  Mysteries  of  Britain'
of  initiation  of  the  Secret  Tradition.  Caesar  assures
us  that  Druidic  initiates  underwent  a very  long  course
of  preparation  before  they  reached  adeptship,  which
can  only  signify  that  the  rites  in  connection  with
this  were  secret.  An  arcane  brotherhood,  the
Pheryllt,  actually  existed,  and  that  this  was  associated
with  the  rites  of  the  Cauldron  is  clear.  The  poem
“The  Chair  of  Taliesin”  describes  the  apparatus  and
ceremonial  associated  with  initiation,  and  we  find  that
these  rites  were  actually  in  use  so  late  as  the  twelfth
century,  when  Hywel,  Prince  of  North  Wales,  under-
went initiation,  the  actual  site  of  the  ceremony  being
indicated  in  the  poem  which  speaks  of  the  event.

The  question  whether  the  Druids  actually  made
use  of  the  stone  circles  in  Britain  was  touched  upon,
after  which  an  ancient  poem  was  described  which
appears  to  have  been  used  on  occasions  of  initiation
as  a formula  of  introduction  for  approaching  the  gate
of  the  sanctuary,  and  which  has  a resemblance  to  the
usages  prevailing  in  the  Eleusinian  mysteries.  The
myth  of  the  Cauldron  of  Keridwen  was  then  dis-
sected, in  view  of  certain  passages  in  it  which  seem
to  have  reference  to  the  transformations  of  the  goddess
in  the  allegorical  portion  of  the  mysteries,  lesser  and
higher,  and  that  part  of  them  in  which  the  neophyte
was  plunged  into  the  waves  in  a coracle  was  further
described  as  revealing  the  last  ordeal  of  the  initiate.

With  regard  to  the  question  as  to  whether  the  stone
circles  commonly  attributed  to  the  Druids  were  ever
employed  by  them  for  religious  or  mystical  purposes,
we  found  that  though  they  were  certainly  not  built  in
what  we  now  call  Druidical  times,  that  they  may  have
been  proto- Druidic,  and  that  a good  deal  of  evidence
exists  that  they  were  made  use  of  at  a later  period
in  connection  with  the  Secret  Tradition.  Davies
believed  that  the  stone  circles  were  modelled  on  that


Summary  and  Conclusions  245
of  the  Zodiac  and  that  Taliesin  or  the  sun  was  repre-
sented by  the  stone  in  the  midst  of  them,  whilst  the
surrounding  monoliths  symbolized  the  constellations.
Caer  Sidi,  he  says,  means  the  Circle  of  Revolutions,
an  astrological  reference,  and  one  Druidic  grove  at
least  was  known  as  the  “magnificent  celestial  circle”.
It  is  also  clear  from  the  poem  of  Prince  Hywel  that  he
made  use  of  the  stone  circle  at  Arvon  which,  Davies
believed,  was  constructed  upon  astronomical  principles.

But  the  stone  circles  appear  to  have  some  bearing
upon  the  philosophy  set  forth  in  Barddas , with  its
cosmography  of  the  Universe  described  in  circles,
and  it  seems  likely  that  Druidism  mingled  with  an
older  religion  which  had  as  its  basis  this  circular
cosmography,  or,  alternatively,  it  may  have  adapted
the  stone  circles  to  this  cosmography,  likening  the
outer  circle  to  Abred,  and  the  inner  to  Gwynvyd.
In  any  case  we  know  that  the  Druids  worshipped  in
circular  groves,  and  finding  stone  groves  ready
erected  and  to  their  hands,  they  may  have  adapted
them  to  their  worship.

So  far  as  the  writings  of  Owen  Morgan  or
“Morien”  are  concerned  they  exhibit  an  extra-
ordinary knowledge  of  Druidic  lore,  but  are  almost
inextricably  mingled  with  classical  and  Eastern
mysticism.  He  tells  us  that  the  Druids  believed  the
firmament  to  be  one  vast  wheel,  in  a chair  in  which
Hu  Gadarn  was  seated,  but  that  the  principal  spirits
of  the  Universe  were  Celi  and  Keridwen.  Embryonic
matter  was  wafted  across  the  ocean  in  a sacred  boat
shaped  like  the  crescent  moon,  the  coracle  of
Keridwen.  The  sun  was  known  as  Taliesin,  but
confusion  has  been  caused  by  the  fact  that  various
names  were  given  him  at  different  stages  of  his  annual
progress.  Taliesin  implies  “High  Hesus”.  The
topography  of  Earth  and  Heaven  is  then  given  and


246  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
the  evolution  of  animal  species  commented  on.  The
Druids  had  a Zodiac  of  their  own  and  the  names  of
its  signs  are  those  of  the  deity’s  various  emanations.
The  whole  earth  was  known  as  the  “Bovine  Bardic
Enclosure”,  and  was  symbolized  by  a white  cow,  and
the  generating  sun  by  a white  bull.  The  Druidic
trinity,  whose' operations  were  illustrated  by  the  three
rays , were  the  emanations  of  the  Creator  and  not  of  the
sun,  itself,  who  was  supposed  to  die  allegorically  on
every  twentieth  (25th)  of  December.  His  three  fertili-
zing attributes  were  symbolized  by  three  apples,  whose
juice  contained  the  divine  essence.  The  divinity  of
the  sun  was  symbolized  among  the  Druids  by  the  wren.

The  myth  of  Keridwen,  says  “Morien”,
represents  a solar  and  cosmic  allegory,  and  the  three
drops  which  inspired  Gwion  are  the  triune  word  of
the  Creator,  the  three  golden  apples  and  the  three
bulls.  In  Druidism  all  souls  are  supposed  to  have
had  their  birth  from  Keridwen  and  Awen,  and  to
come  from  thence  to  this  world  they  must  cross  the
Keltic  Styx,  traverse  Annwn  and  descend  in  the  train
of  the  sun  on  his  return  on  the  morning  of  the  solar
new  year.  On  the  dissolution  of  their  bodies  souls
do  not  return  to  Annwn  or  Elysium,  but  go  either  to
heaven,  that  is  Gwynvyd,  or  return  to  the  animal
circles  of  transmigration.

If  now  we  attempt  to  draw  conclusions  from  the
mass  of  facts  brought  together  in  this  book,  we  will
hardly  be  able  to  refrain  from  the  admission  that  the
British  islands  have  been  the  home  of  a Secret
Tradition  originating  in  prehistoric  times  and
probably  in  North-East  Africa.  Probably  between
a.d.  200  and  about  a.d.  600  there  flourished  in
Britain  an  Iberian  religion  associated  with  a solar
cultus,  the  priests  of  which  raised  the  great  stone
circles  which  stand  in  the  more  deserted  portions  of


! Summary  and  Conclusions  247

j the  island.  On  the  invasion  of  the  Kelts  about

600  b.c.,  this  religion  was  to  a great  extent  adapted
to  their  peculiar  psychological  needs.

If  we  examine  the  pantheon  which  seems  to  have
been  more  peculiarly  sacred  to  the  initiated  Druids,
we  do  not  find  it  to  be  quite  the  same  as  that  more
generally  to  be  encountered  in  Brythonic  myth.  We
have,  indeed,  considerable  difficulty  in  tracing  its
origin.  In  this  peculiar  cultus  we  hear  little  or
nothing  of  the. Children  of  Don,  of  Llyr,  Manannan,
and  the  other  more  conspicuous  deities  of  the
Brythons,  many  of  whom  are  said  to  have  been  more
or  less  of  local  origin  only.  Hu  Gadarn  is
undoubtedly  one  and  the  same  with  the  Continental
god  Esus,  but  Keridwen,  Gwion  or  Taliesin,  Arthur,

Avagddu  and  the  rest  appear  to  have  no  Continental
affiliations.  Indeed  they,  too,  seem  to  be  localized
in  Wales,  though  we  certainly  find  strong  resem-
blances to  Keridwen  in  the  goddess  Brigantia  of  the
English  Midlands  and  North,  and  in  the  Irish  Danu.

But  the  pantheon  of  the  cult  appears  to  be  in  some
respects  equated  with  that  of  the  Irish  Dagda,  who
also  owned  a magic  cauldron,  and  whose  myth,  as
r well  as  that  of  Bran,  helped  to  the  making  of  the

j Grail  story.  Now  there  is  nothing  more  positive

| than  that  the  Grail  literature,  or  at  least  a consider-

able portion  of  it,  represents  the  allegorical
compositions  of  a body  of  poets  who  were  members
of  an  arcane  society.  These  must  have  had  sources
to  draw  upon  which  are  now  lost,  as  well  as  those  of
which  we  know,  and  that  the  cult  to  which  they
belonged  was  none  other  than  that  of  the  Druids,
altered  by  Christian  ideas,  seems  to  me  far  from
improbable  in  view  of  all  the  evidence.  1

I think  we  may  safely  conclude  that  the  matter  |

contained  in  Barddas  has  undoubtedly  been  handed  1

s

1

I


248  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
down  from  very  ancient  sources.  We  have  evidence
of  the  descent  of  manuscript  and  traditional  material
being  bequeathed  from  century  to  century  in  a
very  much  ruder  state  of  civilization  than  that  which
obtained  in  Wales  from  the  time  of  the  sixth  century
to  i860,  therefore  there  is  no  good  reason  for  regard-
ing the  material  of  Barddas  with  dubiety.  It  repre-
sents, indeed,  precisely  what  might  be  expected  from
a collection  of  manuscripts  dealing  with  a national  cult
and  handed  down  from  century  to  century,  that  is,  it
constitutes  a strange  blend  of  “period”  ideas.  The
marks  of  many  centuries  are  on  it,  and  the  acute
student  will  see  for  himself  the  evidences  it  bears  not
only  of  frequent  transcription,  but  of  epochal  fashion.

The  general  resemblance  of  the  philosophy  set
forth  in  Barddas  to  certain  systems  of  the  Orient  is
scarcely  to  be  accounted  for  by  any  far-fetched
theories  of  early  Eastern  influence  in  Britain.  We
certainly  do  hear  of  Mithraism  and  of  the  worship  of
Serapis  and  the  introduction  of  other  Oriental  cults
into  Roman  Britain,  and  it  is  not  at  all  improbable
that  Druidism  may  have  been  coloured  by  their  ideas.
Moreover,  the  Druids  of  Marseilles  were  certainly
closely  in  touch  with  Hellenic  thought,  which  they
must  have  passed  on  to  their  Gallic  and  British
brethren.  But  all  this  is  far  from  saying  that  these
cults  had  a powerful  or  lasting  effect  on  the  general
corpus  of  Druidic  belief.  The  Druids  were  by  no
means  barbarians,  and  were  probably  equally  well
versed  in  religious  lore  with  the  priests  of  Mithraism
or  any  of  the  other  contemporary  cults,  and,  judging
from  this,  it  seems  to  me  highly  improbable  that  they
would  embrace  the  tenets  of  a foreign  faith  in
preference  to  their  own.  There  were,  of  course,
points  of  resemblance,  but  I for  one  certainly  do  not
subscribe  to  the  notion  that  Druidic  religion  was  a


Summary  and  Conclusions  249
thing  of  flux,  unfixed  as  regards  its  ceremonial,  and
shadowy  in  its  mythology.  The  whole  evidence,
indeed,  points  in  the  other  direction.  The  entire
efficacy  of  a rite  resided  in  the  traditional  manner  in
which  it  was  carried  out,  and  that  the  Druids
deliberately  adopted  Mithraic,  Serapic  or  other  exotic
rituals  is,  to  me,  unthinkable.  The  “foreign”  intro-
duction had  taken  place  centuries  prior  to  the  coming
of  the  Romans,  and  the  resemblance  between
Druidism  and  some  other  systems  is  obviously  due
to  a much  more  early  common  origin.

Perhaps  a reconstruction  of  the  broader  aspects
of  the  ancient  British  mystical  cult  might  follow  some
such  lines  as  these  : The  sun  was  regarded  as  the  seat
and  centre  of  the  divinity,  Hu,  Hesus  or  Taliesin,
who,  it  was  believed,  occupied  a chair  or  throne  in
the  hub  of  its  golden  wheel.  His  demiurges,  Celi  and
Keridwen,  were  responsible  for  the  drudgery  of
material  creation.  The  earth  was  the  Cauldron  of
Keridwen,  the  matrix,  as  it  were,  of  the  divine
mother,  into  which  the  fecundating  essence  of  Celi
was  introduced.  In  its  other  aspects  this  cauldron
was  a sacred  coracle,  the  moon,  which  brought
embryonic  matter  to  the  earth  across  the  ocean.
Symbolically,  too,  the  sun  was  regarded  as  a white
bull  and  the  earth  as  a white  cow.  Now  these
several  ideas  make  it  plain  to  the  student  of
mythology  that  the  cult  which  embraced  them  all
must  have  done  so  at  rather  widely  different  periods,
that  they  are,  indeed,  myths  edited  so  as  to  fit  in  with
one  another  by  an  able  and  fully  conscious  priesthood.
The  same  phenomena  are  severally  to  be  found  in
nearly  all  mythologies.  The  myth  of  the  bull  and
cow  is  most  assuredly  North  African  or  Aurignacian,
and  of  very  primitive  character  indeed.  That  of  the
moon  as  a boat  has  affinities  both  in  Egyptian  and


250  The  Mysteries  of  Britain.
Anglo-Saxon  mythology,  but  that  is  not  to  say  that
it  arose  from  these  sources,  although  it  may  well  have
had  a common  origin  with  them.  The  beginnings  of
the  Cauldron  story  have  more  than  once  been
attributed  by  Keltic  scholars  to  Norse  influence  on  the
coasts  of  the  Principality.  But  there  is  more  than
one  serious  objection  to  the  acceptance  of  such  a
theory,  the  chief  being  that  it  does  not  at  all  account
for  the  existence  of  a similar  myth  on  the  Irish  side
of  St.  George’s  Channel,  which  is  authenticated  as
having  had  an  existence  long  before  the  Norse
invasions  of  Ireland  and  Wales.

So  far  as  the  “topography”  of  the  various  circles,
spheres  or  planes  alluded  to  in  the  Brythonic  mystical
writings  is  concerned,  we  must  imagine  this  to  have
been  modelled  in  the  first  instance  upon  the  line  of
the  sun’s  passage  through  the  heavens.  Man  was
thought  of  as  occupying  the  equinoctial  part  of  that
line  and  the  sun  appeared  to  rise  from  Annwn,  which
bears  a strong  resemblance  to  the  Egyptian  abyss
Nu,  through  which  Ra-Osiris,  the  sun-god,  passed
nightly.  He  traversed  Abred , or  the  physical
world,  and  sank  at  night  into  Gwynvyd.  This  was
possibly  the  earliest  and  most  materialistic  type  of  the
myth,  but  later  these  regions  or  planes  must  have
been  regarded  as  having  a less  positive  aspect.
Moreover  in  subsequent  centuries,  Annwn  appears
to  have  been  located  in  the  south  and  Gwynvyd  in
the  north.  This  is,  for  example,  the  exact  reverse  of
the  Norse  idea  of  the  places  of  reward  and  punish-
ment. At  a still  later  period,  however,  it  is  almost
certain  that  Annwn  and  Gwynvyd  were  not  localized
any  more  than  the  heaven  or  hell  of  Victorian
theology,  although  at  a decadent  period  later  folk-
lore placed  the  latter  in  various  Welsh  localities.

For  these  are  only  the  rude  beginnings  of  our


Summary  and  Conclusions  251
British  mystical  system,  as  is  the  conception  that  the
earth  was  a ‘ ‘ Bovine  Bardic  Enclosure’  ’ . The  learned
priests  of  the  Secret  Tradition  of  Druidism  had
undoubtedly  by  the  twelfth  century  soared  far  above
such  primitive  notions,  and  had  come  to  regard  the
entire  mystical  topography  of  their  predecessors  as
useful  only  from  the  point  of  view  of  allegory.  They
had  become  states  of  the  soul,  psychological  planes,
rather  than  precise  and  definite  regions.  Briefly,  life
was  regarded  as  evolving  in  its  lower  forms  from  the
plane  of  Annwn,  the  great  cauldron  or  abyss  of
unspecialized  soul-force,  and  as  materializing  on  the
world-plane  of  Abred , the  sphere  of  trial,  test,  and
experiment.  On  this  plane  the  whole  drama  of  material
evolution  was  worked  out,  from  animal  to  human  form.
If  found  worthy,  it  passed  on  to  Gwynvyd , the
sphere  of  the  conscious  and  wholly  developed  spirit.

The  scheme  underlying  the  whole  conception  is
thus  fully  apparent.  Annwn  is  the  sphere  in  which
crude  psychic  material  or  soul-force  is  stored  and
created,  Abred  that  in  which  it  takes  physical  form,
the  stage  in  which  it  is  rudely  hammered  into  shape,
and  Gwynvyd , the  plane  in  which  it  reaches
perfection.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  first  two
are  not  ends  in  themselves,  but  are  merely  con-
tributory to  the  last,  that  Druidic  philosophy  did  not
believe  that  man  was  an  end  in  himself,  but  that  he
was  only  a phase  in  the  work  of  psychic  production
and  perfection.  The  intention  of  the  Creator  was  to
shape  and  refine  the  spirit  of  man  in  various  crucibles.
It  was  a process  of  psychic  refinement  at  the  hands  of
a conscious  Artist-Creator,  to  which  Man  was  only
partly  contributory,  but  which  he  could  assist  by  the
acquisition  of  arcane  knowledge.

From  the  above,  it  is  plain  that  the  entire
significance  of  the  initiatory  ceremonies  of  our  British


252  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
forefathers  must  have  been  associated  with  the
endeavour  to  assist  the  soul  out  of  its  travail  on  the
earth-plane  of  Abred  into  that  of  Gwynvyd.  It  is
also  clear  that  the  intention  was  to  fit  the  human
spirit  for  passage  into  Gwynvyd  while  still  alive,
and  it  would  seem,  from  what  we  know  of  the  Druidic
course  of  tuition,  which  we  are  told  often  occupied
twenty  years,  that  this  initiation  may  have  frequently
taken  place  rather  late  in  life ; indeed  that,  just  as  a
bard  was  not  admitted  to  the  higher  circles  of  his
office  until  he  had  “grown  a long  beard”,  in  all
likelihood  religious  initiation  would  not  occur  until
he  was  of  fairly  mature  age.  The  initiatory
ceremony  was,  indeed,  the  end  of  a long  spiritual
course  of  instruction  and  meditation  which  prepared
the  neophyte  for  the  higher  soul-life.

As  we  have  seen,  the  allegory  of  the  descent  into
Annwn  was  certainly  enacted  during  the  celebration
of  the  lesser  mysteries,  and  it  is  only  reasonable  to
suppose,  although  we  have  no  proof  of  this,  that  the
higher  mysteries  opened  to  the  adept  the  spiritual
gates  of  Gwynvyd.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that
the  Cauldron  of  Inspiration,  although  situated  in
Annwn,  contained  the  three  drops  of  inspiration
which  had  fallen  from  the  creative  deity,  and  which
were  later,  through  skilful  priestly  mythical  inter-
pretation, defined  as  the  three  golden  apples  and  the
three  sacred  bulls.  These  drops  contained  the  logos
or  Word  of  God,  afterwards  translated  by  Christian
symbolism  into  the  rich  sacramental  pabulum  of  the
Grail.  It  was,  indeed,  the  mystical  influence  of  that
divine  essence  partaken  of  during  the  rite  of  initiation
which  made  the  initiate  free  of  the  higher  plane.

These  drops,  which,  I believe,  were  symbolized  by
the  mistletoe  berry,  were  regarded  not  so  much  as
the  essence  of  material  but  of  spiritual  life.  Once


Summary  and  Conclusions  253
only  had  they  fallen  from  the  sphere  of  Ceugant , and
then  into  Annwn,  the  Cauldron  of  soul-force,  where
alone  they  could  be  obtained.  Rescued  from  thence,
they  became  the  obvious  mystical  means  of  union
with  the  Creator,  for  to  partake  of  His  essence  was
to  be  of  His  train.  It  is  the  act  of  Sacrament  in
another  form,  the  idea  that  if  the  flesh  of  the  god  is
partaken  of  psychic  unity  with  him  is  attained.

Of  course,  it  is  obvious  that  there  has  been  a great
deal  of  confusion  as  regards  the  several  planes  of
Kymric  mysticism.  For  example  we  find  Annwn
in  some  places  regarded  as  a horrible  abyss,  a kind
of  Sheol,  at  other  times  as  a mere  germinating  place
for  life,  yet  again  as  a dim  territory  not  unlike  this
world  and  even  as  a species  of  Avallon.  These
different  phases  apply,  of  course,  to  different  periods
of  belief,  and  in  the  end  Annwn  has  become  the
abode  of  folklore  fairies.  But  its  real  character  is
as  a species  of  psychic  crucible,  a matrix  of  souls,  and
all  the  legends  which  have  clustered  round  it  are
merely  accretions  on  the  original  belief.  Annwn  is  the
Cauldron  of  Keridwen  itself.  In  short,  it  is  Keridwen
herself,  the  great  teeming  Mother  of  Nature.

Into  this  cauldron,  or  matrix,  the  three  fertilizing
drops  fall  from  Celi,  the  male  counterpart  of
Keridwen.  Now,  to  anyone  with  only  a ’prentice
knowledge  of  mythology  the  basic  nature  of  the  myth
we  have  here  becomes  perfectly  plain.  It  is  the
myth  of  Sky-Father  and  the  Earth-Mother  over
again,  the  self-same  myth  as  is  found  in  ancient
Egypt,  and  indeed  in  many  other  mythologies.  It
is,  indeed,  the  most  primitive  type  of  creation  myth
known  to  us.  In  many  cosmologies  the  earth  is
formed  out  of  the  remains  of  a giant  or  monster,  and
in  others  is  merely  an  “extension”  of  a god’s  soul-
force.  In  still  others,  the  earth  is  merely  raised  from


254  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
the  primeval  abyss.  The  cosmology  which  the
creation  story  of  the  Druids  most  resembles  is  that
of  the  Hindus  as  given  in  the  Rig- Veda,  in  which
Karma,  the  primal  germ  of  mind,  the  bond  between
entity  and  non-entity,  shot  its  kindling  ray  across  the
drear  abyss,  energy  or  desire  impinging  upon
chaotic  matter.  Just  as  the  learned  Hindu  pundits
very  speedily  embroidered  this  primitive  story  by
superimposing  upon  it  all  kinds  of  erudite  specula-
tions, so  did  the  Druids  in  the  case  of  their  own
particular  myth.  But  perhaps  the  best  reason  for
stating  that  they  owed  nothing  to  either  Egyptian  or
Hindu  sources  is  that  we  find  practically  the  same
story  in  the  Japanese  Nihongi,  where  the  egg  of
chaos  in  its  clearer  part  became  Heaven,  while  the
yoke  became  Earth,  an  object  like  a reed  shoot
appeared  between  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  life  began.
We  find  the  self-same  ideas  among  certain  American
tribes,  in  Peru,  among  the  Zuni  Indians  and  elsewhere,
proving  conclusively  that  it  is  a type  of  creation-myth
exceedingly  venerable.  There  is,  indeed,  nothing
so  dangerous  as  to  posit  relationships  and  borrowings
between  early  mythical  systems.  The  probability  is
that  they  sprang  from  a distant  and  common  origin.
As  I have  shown  elsewhere,  we  find  the  idea  of  a
primeval  abyss  common  to  Egypt,  Babylonia,  India,
Scandinavia,  the  Kelts  and  some  North  American
Indians,  and  the  creation  of  life  or  matter  either  by
spoken  word  or  the  dropping  of  the  fertilizing  agency
among  Egyptians,  Hebrews,  Kelts  and  Central
Americans.  But  there  is  always  a distinction,  and
the  Keltic  myth  bears  in  its  terms  an  individuality,
and  in  its  subsequent  elaborations  an  original  treat-
ment which  we  do  not  find  reproduced  elsewhere.

A study  of  the  material  preserved  in  Barddas  will
show  that  the  philosophy  set  forth  therein  must  have


Summary  and  Conclusions  255
developed  through  many  generations  and  centuries
on  peculiarly  Keltic  lines.  It  is  altogether  beside
the  point  to  say  that  here  and  there,  as  for  example
in  the  doctrines  of  the  Elements,  and  the  Materials
of  Man,  there  are  reminiscences  of  Egyptian  or
Oriental  thought.  One  might  as  well  say  that  Keltic
thought  obtrudes  itself  into  Egyptian  theology.
These  resemblances  merely  arise  from  the  circum~
stance  of  a common  origin  and  nothing  else  can
explain  them.  The  notion  that  Egyptian  thought
leavened  the  whole  earth  is  not  only  exceedingly
crude,  it  is  entirely  gratuitous.  No  doubt,  fragments
of  Egyptian  belief  found  their  way  to  Britain  as
elsewhere,  but  that  they  arrived  here  at  such  a period
as  seriously  to  affect  British  religious  thought  while
in  its  creative  phase  is  a little  bizarre.  That  a similiar
theory  of  Egyptian  influence  has  been  applied  to
American  religion  is  sufficient  to  prove  its  absurdity,
even  though  the  association  is  alleged  to  have  been
at  a relatively  late  period.  Not  only  would  Egyptian
philosophy  have  found  itself  faced  with  prejudices  of
the  most  powerful  kind,  but  as  it  could  only  have
penetrated  to  Britain  at  second  or  third  hand,  its
influences  must  have  fallen  harmlessly  against  the
defences  of  the  entrenched  native  faith.  Those
Druids  who  battled  so  strenuously  against  Roman
invasion  and  the  proto-Druids,  their  predecessors,
were  certainly  not  easily  amenable  to  novel  ideas.
Indeed,  everything  points  to  the  conclusion  that  they
met  the  Romans  as  intellectual  equals,  as  the  writings
of  Caesar,  Cicero  and  others  amply  bear  witness,
Abaris,  Priest  of  the  Hyperboreans,  mentioned  by
Diodorus  and  Hecateus,  who  travelled  to  Greece  and
became  the  friend  of  Pythagoras,  was  almost  certainly
a Druid,  and  it  is  very  much  more  probable,  as  Suidas
suggests  in  the  Pythagorean  Colloquies,  that  the


256  The  Mysteries  of  Britain
Greek  learned  more  from  the  Briton  than  the  reverse,
and  that  the  so-called  Pythagorean  Doctrine  was
neither  more  nor  less  than  an  adaptation  of  the
ancient  British  philosophy  instead  of  the  contrary.

We  Britons  are  much  too  prone  to  look  for
excellence  outside  of  the  boundaries  of  our  own
island,  and  to  impute  to  alien  sources  the  origins  of
our  own  palladia.  In  the  preceding  pages  I have
striven  to  put  the  case  for  the  native  evolution  of  a
very  original  and  individual  type  of  mysticism  as  well
as  the  extraordinary  difficulties  of  the  subject  permit,
and  I believe  that  even  the  most  biassed  protagonist
of  the  superiority  of  Oriental  and  other  mystical
systems  will  admit  that  there  is  much  to  be  said  for
the  thesis  I have  advanced.  I cannot  pretend  that
that  thesis  is  complete  in  all  its  parts,  but  I am  con-
vinced that  a sure  foundation  has  been  laid  and  that
subsequent  research  will  not  only  justify  the  methods
I have  pursued  but,  if  properly  directed,  will  succeed
in  the  restoration  of  the  entire  fabric  of  British  native
mysticism.  The  missing  stones  of  that  fabric  lie
directly  beneath  our  feet  in  the  soil  of  our  own  island,
and  it  depends  entirely  upon  our  patriotism  and  our
vigilance  whether  they  shall  be  recovered  and  once
more  fill  the  gaps  and  seams  in  the  ancient  edifice  of
British  arcane  wisdom.  That  we  should  so  weakly
rely  on  alien  systems  of  thought  while  it  is  possible
for  us  to  re-establish  our  own  is  surely  miserable.
In  no  individual  born  in  these  islands  does  there  not
flow  the  blood  of  the  Druid  priests  and  seers,  and  I
confidently  rely  on  British  mystics,  whatever  their
particular  predilections,  to  unite  in  this  greatest  of  all
possible  quests,  the  restoration  of  our  native  Secret
Tradition,  so  that  :

In  the  white  secret  island  the  Druid  shall  dwell  once  more,
And  the  Bard,  the  slave  of  the  harp,  utter  the  speech  of  the
Gods.
