THE PROBLEM OF ATLANTIS
by Lewis Spence
London: W. Rider & Son, Ltd., 1925 (revised edition; 1st ed. 1924)

[Transcribed from the Internet Archive scan (problemofatlanti0000lewi). Raw OCR, not proofread. Public domain: published 1925; author d. 1955.]

ahh:
RULER IY
eh

if
Lae

aot

it
eye sci SO
5 “abi eect “it
sey deve

Eiveioocen\ Warhea asatt
Re seea nn eta

Heit
pitts
Trad
ai

Peis ey
Madris

ay pirb'sps
eit a y
Sai Babee

Lestat

co

aut

PN

SE ethice
Rercee
es

shee
Ie ected
VAI

pees
se
eres

ie

Ae ay

a
bie

i

i


N
rote i : Resta atitt pei tous ay

ne iy te Rist is sieht i Hest Eta s Wardle Eee, ats

ie

ei
=
s

featBenr ir
ltint ia

ahah
ne
al

Hep oe
eee a

he

Hee)

ae Hi
py Cala
ae

iY f
ibe

Metropolitan..Borough of Chelsea

i

PUBLIC LIBRARY

LENDING DEPARTMENT

ay
Extracts from the Rules and Regulations

6.—No book shall be issued unless the Borrower produces his |
ticket. When a book is borrowed .the ticket must be left with the
Librarian. ‘The Librarian is authorised to refuse books to messengers
whom he may consider unfit to take proper care of them.

! 7.—Every book borrowed shall be returned within fourteen

days, and in default thereof the Borrower or his Guarantor shall
pay a fine of one halfpenny per day or portion of a day for the
period during which the book is detained beyond fourteen days.
Any book not returned within three calendar months will be
replaced and the Borrower or his Guarantor shall pay the cost of
such book together with all fines incurred. A book may be re-
borrowed upon application if not required by another reader ;
such application may be made by post. No book can be exchanged
on the day of issue.

e 9.—Every book on return shall be handed to the Librarian
Me or his Assistant, and if on examination it be found in any way
damaged the last Borrower or his Guarantor shall pay for the
pease done, or shall replace the book or set of books to which it

elongs.

[N.B.—This Rule also applies to damage to books by rain.]

12.—(a.) No person suffering from an infectious disease shall
borrow, read, or use any book from the Library, nor shall any person
having a book from the Library permit the same to be used by
anyone suffering from an infectious disease.

(b.) In cases where infectious disease has broken out in the
borrower’s house after the books have been borrowed, the books

must not be returned to the Library, but be handed over to the
Public Health Officers who are authorised to receive and deal with |
them. ns ee te

Borrowers returning books which have been exposed to i”
are liable under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, se~
penalty not exceeding Five Pounds. Le

*

Metropolitan Borough of Uandsworth.

WEST HILL PUBLIC LIBRARY, WANDSWORTH, |
LONDON, S.W.18.

METROPOLITAN SPECIAL COLLECTION
METROPOLITAN JOINT FICTION RESERVE

THIS BOOK SHOULD BE RETURNED ON OR BEFORE THE DATE
STAMPED BELOW. :

7\ié

148 785 cD

WiLL

TS/L. 1/51 tae

~ ATLANTIS

BY

LEWIS SPENCE

‘Author of ‘* The Myths of Mexico and Peru,” ’ Myths and Legends of

Ancient Egypt,” ‘* The Myths of the North American Indians,’’ etc.

. With Sixteen Full-page Plates.

CONTENTS. .
The Atlantis of Plato—Plato’s Account Examined—

The Evidence from Geology—The Biological Evidence
_—The Evidence from Pre-history—The Third Atlan- |

ean Invasion—The Evidence from European Tra-
jition—The Evidence from American Tradition—

~The Evidence from Central American Archaeology
~The Evidence from Central American Archaeology
| continued)—The Evidence from Egypt—Egyptian

‘and American Comparisons—The Evidence from —

Old Peru— The Geography and Topography of Atlan-
‘tis—The Flood—Atlantis Restored.

| ON | LONDON:

WILLIAM RIDER & SON, ‘LIMITED,
7S, PATERNOSTER ROW, E. C. 4, A

The Evidence from American Tradition (continued) ©

THE PROBLEM OF ATLANTIS

+. en i a
) Ode ae
ek Str ka ws

a Ba.
yi pi aaa” 4 Sar

Frontisptece

Lengitnde Uradentale div Merution dc Dares
SM : ,

SS
10

Conjecttiral Map of Atlantis.
(After Bory de St Vincent.)

THE PROBLEM
ATLANTIS

BY

LEWIS SPENCE

AUTHOR OF ‘‘ THE MYTHS OF MEXICO AND PERU”
”

REVISED EDITION

LONDON

OF

WILLIAM RIDER & SON, LIMITED

8 PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C. 4
1925
var

First Published, May 1924
Second Edition, February 1925

Printed in Great Britain by ;
Nuit & Co., Lap., EDINBURGH,

PREFACE TO THE SECOND
EDITION

THE publication of a second edition of The Problem of
Atlantis affords me the opportunity of thanking a very large
circle of correspondents for the kind expressions of apprecia-
tion they have been good enough to send me from all parts
of the world. I was, of course, well aware that the Atlantean
hypothesis had a very considerable body of adherents, but
I was quite unprepared for such a spontaneous and en-
thusiastic reception for my work as that which it has received.
I may, perhaps, be justified in regarding this widespread
response as still another manifestation of the existence of
that ‘‘ world-memory ” of the submerged continent to which
I have more than once alluded in these pages.

In the present edition I have made a number of emenda-
tions of phrase, but few of fact, the only outstanding
alteration in the latter category having reference to the
chronology of early Greek and Egyptian cultures. I should
also like to lay stress on the omission from the former edition
of the fact, brought to my notice by Mr Ralph Shirley,
that Poseidon was a god of earthquake as well as a purely
marine deity—a fact which gives to the Platonic account an
added significance.

In The Times Literary Supplement and elsewhere corre-
spondents suggested that the perusal of certain more or
less obscure papers might enable me to modify or correct

my hypothesis. But an examination of these has not altered
Vv

vi The Problem of Atlantis.

my original views, which were the outcome of prolonged
consideration and research.

Nor do I feel that my position has been weakened by the
criticisms of Professor Perry in The Nation, who very
naturally maintains that his own hypothesis of the Egyptian
penetration of Central American culture by a Pacific route
explains the resemblances between Egyptian and American
cultures in a more reasonable manner than my argument
for a diffusion of Atlantean civilisation in the Egyptian and
American areas. I do not deny that broken and fragmentary
Egyptian influences may have reached America by way of
the Pacific at a relatively late date, indeed I have always held
that they certainly did. But I find no intermediate links
in the vast distance traversed strong enough or clear enough
to account for such a large measure of Egyptian influence
as Professor Perry believes to have reached American soil
by that route. Moreover, the cultural formula which
Professor Perry associates with his ‘‘ Children of the Sun”
breaks down when applied to Mexico or Central America,
as I have shown elsewhere. The Asiatic penetration of
America by the Pacific route was late and _ relatively
feeble, and contained many influences other than the
Egyptian, and the hypothesis which pleads for it has
perforce to rely on a much more complicated argument
than that which holds that American civilisation directly
emanated from Atlantis.

Professor Perry alludes to what he believes to be my
sudden conversion to the fact of Egyptian influence in
America. But if in earlier works I had denied this, I had
made the alteration in my views clear as long ago as 1916,
although at no time have I given his particular theory of the
penetration of Egyptian influence into America more than

Preface to the Second Edition vii

a partial adherence—an adherence subject to those pro-
visions I have already mentioned.

Nor did any of those critics who sought to rebut my
arguments traverse my statements regarding the Aurignacian
or non-Egyptian origin of European civilisation and its
original progress from West to East, rather than the reverse,
as is usually inferred. Many reviewers accepted my presenta-
tion of the Atlantean hypothesis without cavil as being in line
with the proven facts of modern geological and anthropo-
logical research. Naturally, I am convinced that much
remains to be done before the Atlantean hypothesis comes
to be regarded by official archeologists more indulgently
than at present, and I am accordingly only too anxious for
the criticism of those whose special knowledge permits
them to indicate those weaknesses which I am conscious
some of my arguments must display.

LEWIS SPENCE.

PREFACE TO THE FIRST
EDITION

THE purpose of this book is not so much to demonstrate the
former existence of an Atlantean continent as to place the
study of the whole problem on a more accurate basis than
has yet been attempted in recent times. Where the weight
of proof has seemed to me to justify such a course I have not
hesitated to speak plainly and perhaps dogmatically, and
have even in places adopted the attitude of the ardent pro-
tagonist. But it is not my intention to leave the reader with
the impression that I am absolutely convinced of the
infallibility of every consideration I have brought forward.
Certain of my arguments may be traversed, but I hasten to
say that that will not in any way alter my belief in the basic
truth of my contention that the wreck of Atlantis sleeps
beneath the sea. A hypothesis must, in any case, stand or
fall by the nature of the proof brought to its support, and
this I have sought to make of a character as unimpeachable
as the very difficult circumstances admit of.

What I have written regarding the evidence for the
Atlantean origin of the civilisations of Central America and
Peru is the outcome of prolonged study of the problems
presented by the archeology of these areas. My prede-
cessors in this portion of the task, the Abbé Brasseur de
Bourbourg, and Dr Augustus le Plongeon, were certainly
precipitate, and I may have fallen into the same error.
But even when farthest astray, there is considerable method

in their madness. Brasseur tells us that “‘a city named
ix

x The Problem of Atlantis

Atlan existed, when the continent was discovered by
Columbus, at the entrance to the Gulf of Uraba, in Darien,
with a good harbour : it is now reduced to an unimportant
pueblo named Acla.”

What I have said regarding the movement of early civilisa-
tion from West to East may arouse opposition from the
upholders of that still unofficial theory that all culture
emanated from the Egypt of the Pyramid era. I do not
deny that during that era Egyptian civilisation progressed
slowly Westwards. But it was, as I believe, retracing its
steps towards regions whence it had originally come. So
far as is known, the earth’s earliest civilisation appeared in
the Biscayan and Pyrenean area, centuries before it took root
in Egypt, and all the arguments in the world cannot discredit
that fact. Nor can they alter the equally salient fact that
the Cré-Magnon civilisation alluded to contained the germs
of early Nilotic culture, and that it continued to flourish in
the Canary Islands until their discovery by the Spaniards.
These are, indeed, the most powerful arguments which the
opponents of the Atlantean hypothesis have to confront.

I have not, like some of my predecessors, attempted to
show that Atlantis must have flourished in the “ Bronze
Age.” The whole circumstances render such a theory
untenable. The possession of metal implements is, in my
view, not essential to a high standard of human culture.
The ancient Maya, Mexicans, and Peruvians were without
metal tools or weapons, but they were more truly “‘ civilised ”
than many peoples with higher pretensions existing at the
present time, who could not approach them in the spheres
of architecture or social polity.

I have left untouched the question of the Sargasso Sea,
as the result of recent researches by skilled investigators in

Preface to the First Edition xl

that Atlantic area has convinced me that most of the former
conclusions as to the possibility of its indicating the site of a
sunken land were based on mistaken and insufficient data.
- On the other hand, I think I have brought cogent arguments
against the now widely accepted theory that the idea of
Atlantis arose out of a memory of the former civilisation

of Crete.
LEWIS SPENCE.

CONTENTS

. Tue ATLANTIS OF PLATO . 2 A P 6
. Prato’s AccOUNT EXAMINED . 4 F z
. Tue EvIpENCE FROM GEOLOGY .

. THE BIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE

. THE EVIDENCE FROM PRE-HISTORY .

. THE THIRD ATLANTEAN INVASION. . ‘

. THE EVIDENCE FROM EUROPEAN ‘TRADITION S
. THE EVIDENCE FROM AMERICAN TRADITION :
.. THE EVIDENCE FROM AMERICAN 'TRADITION—conid.
. THE PopoL VUH AS AN ATLANTEAN RECORD .

THe EvIDENCE FROM CENTRAL AMERICAN ARCHE-
OLOGY — :

. THE EVIDENCE FROM CENTRAL AMERICAN ARCHZE-

OLOGY—contd. i A 2 , ; 3
THE EVIDENCE FROM EGYPT ‘
EGYPTIAN AND AMERICAN COMPARISONS IN THE

Licut OF ATLANTEAN RESEARCH . z ;

. THE EvIDENCE FROM OLD PERU
. THE GEOGRAPHY AND TOPOGRAPHY OF ATLANTIS .

Tue FLoop . ‘ ;
CONCLUSION . < . : : J 5

xiit

103

115

120

aT ee dal 9
BARN ae Oh yt

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Conjectural Map of Atlantis . : : Frontispiece

PLATE FACING PAGE

I. Restoration of Carthage . - : - : ear
Il; AtlantisumsWertiary: Tines-. 5 0 «eh es

III. Examples of Aurignacian Art (horses) . : S560
IV. sé ‘e 5 (buffalo) . : <i LOS.

V. Map of Andreas Bianca . : “ ; : . 88
VI. Atlas and Quetzalcoatl compared . : <i eOe

Vile Mexican Deities. 8. . pl: tee Osan
VIII. Maya Hieroglyphs . ‘ ° : ; : <8130
IX. Maya Symbols . : ‘ : - : eee

X. Maya Symbolism . : : : : <a 138
XI. Thoth and Quetzalcoatl oes : , ‘ E70
XII. Dun Aengusa, Aran Islands. ; Le) afm ee Oe
XIII. Mexico in the time of Montezuma . : : - 200
XIV. Aztlan. Ruinsin Colorado ., Sal OSS ten: aoe
XV. American Pyramids . : . ; ; RR AE 797

xV

THE
PROBLEM OF ATLANTIS

CHAPTER I
THe ATLANTIS. OF PLATO

THE student of tradition will not readily encounter in the
annals of his science a legend so persistent or so powerful
in the appeal it makes to human imagination as that which
tells of a great island-continent sunk fathoms deep beneath
the waves of the Atlantic Ocean. With the passing of
generations credence in the former existence of such a
region, instead of dwindling into a shadowy and inchoate
myth, has assumed an appearance of scientific probability
which compels the respectful attention of the serious geolo-
gist and folklorist. Within the past half-century a great
and growing body of proof has by degrees gathered round a
nucleus of conjecture. Expeditions fitted out by successive
governments, American and European, have dragged the
ocean-bed in search of the relics of a submerged land.
Learned biologists have assured us that it is impossible to
account for the similarities of certain forms of life in Western
Europe and Eastern America otherwise than by assuming
the existence of a former terrestrial connection between
these regions. The folklores of the opposing European
and American littorals are rich in memories of an ancient
cataclysm, which precipitated the wreck of an oceanic
culture from which their peoples believed themselves to

have drawn the elements of progress. Indeed the testimony
i:

2: The Problem of Atlantis

in favour of the existence of an Atlantean continent has now
assumed proportions so formidable as to give pause to even
the most dogmatic of those who once flatly rejected it as
fabulous.

The gradual growth of certainty in relation to the
Atiantean theory closely resembles the process by which the
existence of an American continent became increasingly
clear to European men of science. The opponents of the
belief in a western hemisphere laid stress upon the circum-
stance that the whole fabric of proof concerning it rested
upon a traditional basis. ‘They laughed to scorn the notion
that the tales of the Island of Brasil, or of St Brandan’s Isle
might have some foundation in fact. But with the passage
of time, and the gradual accumulation of evidence, actual
and analogical, a strong impression took hold upon the
imagination of scientific Europe that these venerable and
picturesque tales were not altogether mythical. Enlightened
and independent thinkers and geographers boldly announced
their belief in a new world across the ocean, and at last the
greatest of these, inspired as much by intuition as by his
perusal of the Icelandic sagas and the classics, and the
growth during his own lifetime of the geographical proof,
put his convictions to the test and demonstrated to the
astonishment of humanity that tradition is often but the
truth fossilised, the skeleton beneath the superincumbent
strata of history.

Just as a world-intuition regarding the existence of a
transatlantic continent prevailed in the time of Columbus,
so a similar instinct, overwhelming and ineradicable, is
being manifested in our own day regarding the existence of
a great continent in the Atlantic Ocean in times past. This
belief unquestionably has its origin in folk-memory, and is
thus safe from the assaults of that description of science
which has ever held tradition in disesteem. ‘The triumphant
vindication of the Atlantean hypothesis is merely a matter of

The Atlantis of Plato 3

time and opportunity. That hypothesis, I maintain, rests
not on Plato’s account alone, or indeed, on any one class of
evidence, but on the great mass of testimony, tradition, and
scientific argument which has accumulated throughout the
ages on its behalf.

But only one account which can be classed as strictly of
the nature of documentary evidence has come down to us
concerning Atlantis. This is the narrative of Plato alluded
to above, which has been retold so frequently of late years
that it must be fairly familiar to everyone in the least inter-
ested in the problem of the drowned continent. A brief
summary, then, from which no salient fact has been omitted,
is all that space can admit of in these pages.

In the dialogue known as The Timeus Plato makes a
certain Critias tell Timzeus and Socrates that Dropidas, his
great-grandfather, had handed down writings and traditions
concerning the Athenians of the early world. These he
had received from Solon, one of the wisest of the Greeks,
who had himself been apprised of them by an Egyptian
priest of the goddess Neith, or Net, at Sais, in Egypt.
This priest identified the goddess in question with the
Greek divinity Pallas Athene, and assured Solon that she
had founded Athens “ nine thousand years ago,” which,
as this conversation must have taken place about 600 B.c.,
throws back the date of Athenian origin to 9600 years before
the Christian era. A thousand years later, added Solon’s
informant, Neith or Athene founded Sais itself, as was
recorded in the sacred registers of the temple.

The Egyptian then proceeded to impart to Solon an
outline of early Athenian history. He told him that at a
date unspecified in this particular dialogue the Greek city
was attacked by a mighty power which had tried to fix the
yoke of empire upon the whole of Europe and Asia. ‘This
power came forth out of the Atlantic Ocean, from an island
situated in front of the Pillars of Hercules, otherwise the

4 The Problem of Atlantis

Straits of Gibraltar. The island in question was greater
than Libya or Northern Africa and Asia (Asia Minor) put
together, ‘‘ and was the way to other islands, and through the
islands you might pass through the whole of the opposite
continent which surrounded the true ocean.” The largest
body of land in this archipelago was, we gather, called
Atlantis, and sustained a great and wonderful empire,
“which had rule over the whole island and several others,
as well as over parts of the (opposite) continent.”” But its
inhabitants, not content with the territory which already
belonged to them, subjected the parts of Libya within the
Pillars of Hercules as far as Egypt, and those of Europe as
far as Tyrrhenia (Italy). Pressing eastward, they attacked
Greece itself. But through the courage and address of the
Athenians the invading Atlanteans were beaten off and
finally expelled from the whole of their possessions within
the Mediterranean area.

At a later period, continued Solon’s priestly informant,
violent earthquakes and floods occurred. In a single day
and night of heavy rains all the warlike men of Athens sank
into the earth, and the island of Atlantis “‘ in like manner ”
disappeared beneath the sea, “‘ and this is the reason why the
sea in those parts is impassable and impenetrable, because
there is such a quantity of shallow mud in the way, and this
was caused by the subsidence of the island.”

Further details of the story of Atlantis as told to Solon
by the priests of Sais are furnished by Plato in the dialogue
known as The Critias. From these we gather that the date
of the invasion of the Mediterranean basin by the Atlantean
kings took place about g600 B.c. Many great convulsions
of nature had occurred since then. Dropidas, the great-

grandfather of Critias, who preserved the tale, had received.

the facts in writing from Solon, who in turn had them from
the Egyptian priests of Sais. The manuscript at the time
the dialogue took place was still in the possession of Critias.

The Atlantis of Plato 5

Plato makes Critias say that the names of the Atlanteans
referred to in the account had been “ Egyptianised ” by the
priests, and later Hellenised by Solon himself.

The gods, remarks Critias paraphrasing this account, in
dividing the regions of the earth among themselves, appor-
tioned the island of Atlantis to Poseidon or Neptune. On
the side of it nearest the sea (the Atlantic Ocean) and in the
centre of the island was a fertile plain, at a distance of fifty
stadia 1 from which stood a low mountain where dwelt one
of the aborigines of the country, Evenor, who had a wife
Leucippe, and a daughter Cleito. Poseidon fell in love with
Cleito, and enclosed the hill where she dwelt with alternate
zones of sea and land encircling one another, so that no man
might reach this Eden. In this insular labyrinth he begat
and brought up five pairs of male twins, and divided the
island among them, the eldest, Atlas, receiving as his portion
his mother’s dwelling, the largest allotment, and the king-
ship. The others became rulers of the contiguous islands,
but the branch founded by Atlas always retained the central
or imperial power. From foreign countries much rich
merchandise was brought, and the Atlanteans, or the tribes
who owed their origin to Atlas, dug precious metals out of
the earth, including orichalcum, or copper. They had
abundance of timber for carpenter-work, and the animals
they made use of included the elephant. The fruits of the
island-continent, both wild and cultivated, were very
numerous. Vegetables, chestnuts, and a fruit with a hard
rind “affording drinks, and meats, and ointments ”’
_ flourished exceedingly.

The Atlanteans, we are informed, employed themselves
in constructing temples, palaces, and harbours. They laid
out the country in the following manner: they threw
bridges over the zones of sea which surrounded the central
height, and made a passage into the royal palace, which they

1 The Greek stadium was equal to 6023 English feet.

6 The Problem of Atlantis

increased in size and beauty with each successive reign.
They drove a canal through the zones of land three hundred
feet wide and about one hundred deep, and fifty stadia,
or about six miles in length, constructing a harbour at
the landward end of this waterway which was capable
of sheltering the largest vessels. “‘ They also divided
the zones of land which parted the zones of sea, erecting
bridges of such a width as would leave a passage for a
‘single trireme (or galley with three banks of oars) to pass
out of one into another, and roofed them over. Now the
largest of the zones into which a passage was cut from the
sea was three stadia in breadth, and the zone of land which
came next of equal breadth. But the next two zones, the
one of water, the other of land, were two stadia, and the one
which surrounded the central island was a stadium only in
width. The island in which the palace was situated had a
diameter of five stadia. All this, including the zones and the
bridge, which was the sixth part of a stadium in width, they
surrounded by a stone wall on all sides, placing towers and
gates on the bridges where the sea passed in.”’

The stones of which the Atlanteans constructed their
buildings were quarried from the native rocks, and were
white, black, and red in colour. In many of their houses
and temples these were intermingled for purposes of orna-
ment. The walls of the city were faced with brass, tin, and
orichalcum, which emitted a red light. In the centre of the
‘citadel was a temple dedicated to Cleito and Poseidon,
inaccessible and surrounded by a golden enclosure, as well
as another fane solely dedicated to Poseidon and built in
a style of ‘‘ barbaric splendour.’ Its walls were covered with
silver, and its pinnacles with gold. The interior was roofed
with ivory, gold, silver, and the brilliant orichalcum. Here
stood a golden statue of Poseidon erect in his chariot, to
which were harnessed six winged steeds. Golden statues of
his ten sons and their wives were placed at intervals around

The Atlantis of Plato 4

this glowing edifice. Fountains and baths leading from
hot and cold springs surrounded the temple site, and between
the Acropolis and the densely packed houses of the city lay
a racecourse which encircled the whole island. The great
docks sheltered numerous large ships and were frequented
by merchants from all parts, and the hum of human voices
and the din of commerce rose in the streets from sunrise to
sunset.

The country itself was lofty and precipitous “ on the side
of the sea,” but the city was built on a level plain, oblong in
shape, and surrounded by mountains. The whole region
of the island was open toward the south, but sheltered on
the northern side. The surrounding mountains were
celebrated for their height and beauty, and contained many
large villages, rivers, lakes, and woods. The plain was en-
compassed by a mighty ditch or fosse, which received the
mountain streams and the outflow of the canals. The island
was divided into sixty thousand lots, each of which was
ten stadia square. The owner of a lot was bound to furnish
the sixth part of a war-chariot, so as to make up ten thousand
chariots, two horses and riders upon them, a light chariot
without a seat, and an attendant and charioteer, two heavily
armed infantry-men, two archers, two slingers, three stone-
shooters, three javelin-men, and four sailors, to make up the
complement of twelve hundred ships.

Each of the twelve kings was absolute in his own island.
The laws of Poseidon governed the relations between the
various insular states, and these laws had been inscribed by
the first men on a pillar of orichalcum in the temple of
Poseidon, where the people were gathered together and held
festival every fifth and every sixth year. Near the temple
grazed the sacred bulls of Poseidon, and these the ten kings
of the islands periodically offered up in sacrifice, shedding
the blood of the victim over the inscription, and vowing not
to transgress the laws of Poseidon. When night fell they put

8 The Problem of Atlantis

on azure robes and judged offenders. Their laws did not
permit them to take up arms against one another, instructed
them to deliberate together, and gave no power of life and
death to the monarch over his kinsmen, unless he had the
assent of the majority.

For many generations the polity of Atlantis was undis-
turbed ; the people were gentle and obedient to the laws
and to the gods, and wise in their intercourse with one
another. Nor were they attracted by wealth. But gradually
the blood of the gods which flowed in their veins was diluted
with the mortal admixture, and they became degenerate.
Zeus regarded them with disfavour, and convening a council
of the gods, spoke as follows :—

Here Plato’s account ends abruptly. But, even so, it has
succeeded in awakening the imagination of successive
generations of readers as perhaps few passages in Hellenic
literature have done.

Other notices in classical authors which refer to Atlantis
are, for the most part, probably based on Plato’s account.
A fragment from a lost work of Theopompus of Chios, a
historian of the fourth century B.c., which is to be found in
the Varia Historia of A&lian, a compiler of the third century
A.D., purports to be told by the satyr Silenus to Midas,
king of Phrygia, and as here given is taken from the
English translation of Abraham Fleming, published in
London in 1576.

“ Silenus tolde Midas of certaine Islands, named Europa,
Asia, and Libia, which the Ocean. Sea circumscribeth and
compasseth round about. And that without this worlde
there is a continent or percell of dry lande, which in greatnesse
(as hee reported) was infinite and unmeasurable, that it
nourished and maintained by the benefite of the greene
medowes and pasture plots sundrye bigge and mighty
beastes ; that the men which inhabite the same climats

The Atlantis of Plato 9

exceede the stature of us twise, and yet the length of their
life is not equale to ours.”

He related many other wonders of the two cities,
Machimus the warlike and Euseues the peaceful, and how
the inhabitants of the former to the number of ten millions
once made an attack on Europe, coming first to the land
of the Hyperboreans. When they learnt that these were
people of peculiar sanctity, they abhorred them and held
them in contempt, and withdrew, supposing it to be a
worthless enterprise to annex their country. The conclud-
ing passage relates to the strange land of the Meropes, from
whose name later writers have called the country Meropian.

An account of the great continent of Saturnia from the
dialogue attributed to Plutarch, ‘‘ On the Face appearing in
the Orb of the Moon,” and printed with his Morals, tells us
that “‘ an isle, Ogygia, lies in Ocean’s arms, about five days’
sail west from Britain, and before it are three others of about
equal distance from one another, and also from that, bearing
north-west, where the sun sets in summer. In one of these
the barbarians feign that Saturn is detained in prison by
Zeus.” The neighbouring sea was known as the Saturnian,
and the continent by which the great sea was circularly
environed was distant from Ogygia about five thousand
stadia, but from the other islands not so far. A bay of this
continent in the latitude of the Caspian Sea, was inhabited
by Greeks, who once in thirty years sent certain of their
number to minister to the imprisoned Saturn. One of these
paid a visit to the great island, as they called Europe, and
from him the narrator learned many strange things, especi-
ally regarding the state of the soul after death.

Proclus reports that Marcellus, a writer of whom nothing
else is known, in a work entitled The Ethiopic History, speaks
of ten islands situated in the Atlantic Ocean, close to Europe.
He says that the inhabitants of these islands preserved the
memory of a much larger Atlantic island, Atlantis, which

10 The Problem of Atlantis

had for long exercised dominion over the other islands of
that ocean.

Strabo says that Poseidonius (151-135 B.c.) remarked that
as the land was known to have changed in elevation the
account of Plato ought not to be regarded as fiction, and
that such a continent as Atlantis might well have existed
and disappeared.

Such are the principal classical allusions to Atlantis.
If we direct the light of modern criticism upon them they
may not appear so destitute of probability as some authorities
believe them to be.

1 Didot-Miiller, Fragmenta Historium Grecorum, tom. iii, p. 281.

CHAPTER II
PLATO’s ACCOUNT EXAMINED

BEFORE proceeding further, it will be necessary to make a
careful and critical examination of Plato’s account of Atlantis.
This has, of course, been essayed by many writers, but,
unfortunately, much of the scrutiny was undertaken at a
period in literary history when it was a generally accepted
axiom that legend was seldom, if ever, founded on proba-
bility. Half a century ago the tale of Troy and the epic of
Arthur were regarded as so purely mythical in essence that
any writer who ventured to assert their historicity was
regarded with tolerant amusement. To-day no serious
student of these problems denies that Troy actually existed,
or that the Arthurian legend is based on the facts of Romano-
British history. The historical portions of the Old Testa-
ment itself were in the days of our grandfathers by no
means exempt from the suspicion of legendary connections.
But archzological proof from excavation in Egypt, Assyria,
and elsewhere has been forthcoming for the vindication of
‘such passages as that, for example, which deals with the
episode of Chedorlaomer, long declared by Biblical critics
to be legendary. Broadly speaking, it is now generally
accepted by critics of insight—the others do not matter
much—that when a large body of myth crystallises round
one central figure, race, or locality, it is almost certain to
enshrine a certain proportion of historical truth capable of
extraction from the mass of fabulous material which sur-
rounds it, and when so refined, is worthy of acceptance by
the most meticulous of historical purists.
II

12 The Problem of Atlantis

Plato, it seems to me, set down the story of Atlantis much
in the same spirit as Geoffrey of Monmouth set down the
tale of Arthur, or Homer that of Troy. For a long time
Geoffrey, as students of the Arthurian epic will recall, was
branded as the perpetrator of ‘‘ the greatest fraud in literary
history,” and the “ British book ” from which he stated he
had drawn his material was regarded as a mere figment of
his fraudulent imagination. But recent careful investigation
has made it evident that he undoubtedly drew upon Welsh,
and perhaps Breton manuscripts now lost to us. Unless
’T err greatly, Plato in his Critias and Timeus drew upon
similar sources. He makes Critias say that his great-
grandfather Dropidas “had the original writing,” which
Solon had set down after his conversation with the priests
of Sais, and a long experience in dealing with traditional
material leads me to the conclusion that the sneer of Jowett
_ in his commentaries on the Timeus and Critias 1 that Plato
invented “a noble lie,” is much more in keeping with the
fearful spirit of Victorian scholarship than with the more
liberal propensities of that of our own day, which are all
in favour of regarding the writers of antiquity as equally
worthy of credence with those of modern times, if ordinary
critical care be exercised in dealing with the material they
have handed down to us.

Nor do I believe that Plato in these extraordinary dialogues
intended to allegorise as did Sir Thomas More in his Utopia,
or Mr Wells in his Men Like Gods. He points no moral to
adorn his tale, but draws a fairly complete picture of a
civilisation which had as few points of resemblance with the
Greece of his day as it is possible to imagine. That he did
not invent Atlantis is obvious from the following con-
siderations :—

He makes Socrates declare that the tale is

‘

‘ suitable to

1 See the Introductions to his Dialogues of Plato, and especially vol. iii,
Pp. 684. ‘

~

Plato’s Account Examined 13

the festival of the goddess’ (Pallas Athene), and that it
has the very great advantage of being fact and not fiction. ©
Critias asserts that “ the sacred Egyptian record has rescued
from oblivion ” the circumstances of the story.t_ He further
states that it had made a wonderful impression on his mind
as a child, that he had heard it time and again, and that it
had been “ branded into his mind in ineffaceable letters.”
It is obvious that, as several commentators have admitted,
the Egyptian origin of the story is not far to seek. It is now
known that Neith, the goddess of Sais, or the city of Het-byati,
“‘ the House of the Bee-man ” (7.e. the king of Lower Egypt),
was, as the priest averred, no other than the goddess Pallas
Athene, the patroness of Athens, in another form. The names
have a similar provenance : both goddesses were virgins and
presided over war. The arrow with which Neith is in-
variably represented is but the spear of Athene in another
form. Neith was of Libyan origin, and her worship was
prevalent in that part of Egypt where the majority of the
population was of Libyan blood. Her worship had almost
certainly been introduced into the Nile Valley by Iberians
from the west, who also carried it to Greece. It is without
the bounds of possibility that a Greek of Plato’s period and
opportunities should have been aware of the resemblance
between the Egyptian and Hellenic forms of Neith-Athene
unless he had received the information through an Egyptian
source. He draws parallels between the castes who served
the goddess in Egypt and Greece which have been sub-
stantiated by modern research, resemblances which must

1 Proclus (fl. A.D. 412-485) reports that Crantor, the first commentator
on Plato (c. 300 B.c.), asserts that the Egyptian priests told Solon that
the story was written on pillars which were still preserved. This appears
to me as not at all improbable, and was certainly an Egyptian custom.
See The Commentaries of Proclus on the Timeus of Plato, translated by
Thomas Taylor, London, 1820. Martin, who was hostile to the
Atlantean theory, expresses his belief in his work on The Timeus of
Pilato (Paris, 1841) that Solon received his account of it from Egyptian
priests at first hand. |

14 The Problem of Atlantis

have remained unknown to any Greek unless he had them
at first or second-hand from a Nilotic source.

Plato’s statement that the Atlantic was not, in his time,
regarded as navigable is, as will be shown, strictly in accord-
ance with what is known of the maritime history of his day.
Had his account been of an allegorical character, like More’s
or Mr Wells’s, its fictional atmosphere would have been
obvious. He would have transported us as these masters
of fiction have done to the allegorical region and atmosphere,
to Atlantis itself, and would surely have feigned its con-
temporary existence. But he tells us that it has been sunken
in ocean these nine thousand years, and this at once differen-
tiates his story from all of those which speak of supernatural
lands. These, as all students of folklore are aware, are
invariably spoken of as still existing.

I will preserve the geological justification of Plato’s
account for the chapter in which it is dealt with in detail,
and will pass on to consider his chronology. Nine thousand
years, he tells us, had in his day elapsed since Atlantis
invaded the Mediterranean basin and was valiantly with-
stood by the Athenians. This places the date of that
invasion roughly at 9600 B.c. Here we are met by what at
first sight seems an insuperable obstacle to credence. We
are asked to believe that thousands of years prior to the
institution of the First Dynasty in Egypt the Athenian state
already existed in a condition of comparative enlightenment.
It is now generally admitted that Egypt had for many
centuries prior to the dynastic period enjoyed a certain
measure of civilisation. But is there reason for the inference
that Hellenic culture had at that period yet emerged from
barbarism ? The First Dynasty in Egypt (3500 B.c.) is now
known to be coeval with the very earliest and crudest mani-
festation of culture in the Grecian area, the Early Helladic
culture discovered by Wace on the mainland of Greece. All
that has been found at Athens of a prior date is a little

Plato’s Account Examined 5

Neolithic pottery. ‘The date g600 B.c. takes us back to the
early Neolithic or New Stone Age in Europe, when metals
were not as yet used by any race, and were not to be for
several thousand years, when agriculture was as yet almost
unknown, and even Egypt was in a condition of utter
barbarism.

There is, of course, not the slightest incumbency upon
the most meticulous or most irresponsible protagonist of
the Atlantean hypothesis to accept Plato’s chronology.
He evidently received it from Egyptian sources, and the
Egyptians, like the Chinese, were prone to refer great
events to an antiquity which connected them with the
deities of the national religion and appealed to their national
pride. And can we upbraid Plato for a lack of knowledge
of the circumstances of Hellenic prehistory ? If so, we must
arraign every historian who ever wielded pen for the crime
of dealing with such material as he had to his hand. History
is the art of arranging the writings and traditions which refer
to a nation or period in a consecutive narrative. The older
historians are too often called to account for embroidering
that narrative. But it is only from the modern viewpoint
that they can be accused of so doing. If they introduce
occurrences or episodes which appear to us as marvellous
or exaggerated, we must reflect that these did not so appear
to them. The same applies to their chronology. Only
fifty years ago many British historians were still employing
the chronological system of Archbishop Usher, which fixed
the commencement of the world about 4004 B.c. That
chronology was part of the theological belief of the genera-
tion immediately preceding our own, and those who first
infringed its principles were regarded as desperate atheists.
What then can we expect from a writer of twenty-three
centuries ago but a strict compliance with a chronology
which was part of the religious belief of his time ?

But this notwithstanding, I am prepared to show later that

16 The Problem of Atlantis

Plato’s chronology is substantially correct, so far at least as
that part of it which deals with the date of the Atlantean
invasion is concerned. For the present I must confine
myself to the criticism of the details of his narrative, which
constitutes the only strictly “documentary ” evidence of
the existence of Atlantis. That part of his account which
makes the Athenian state the successful upholder of European
freedom against the invading hordes of Atlantis must, it is
clear, go by the board, instigated as it probably was by
national pride or sheer ignorance. Solon, possessing as he
probably did an account of an Atlantean reverse in the
/Egean, concluded that it was inflicted by “ Greeks,”’ much
as a historian of the future cut off from the history of the past
by lack of documentary evidence might believe that the
conquest of Britain by Czesarshad been effected by modern
Italians.

Plato naturally treats of the ‘“‘ mythical” period of
Atlantean history as a Greek writer of his time might be
expected to do. Poseidon, its lord, is god of the sea, and the
maker of earthquakes—a significant fact. It was the custom
to refer to Hellenic gods as the patrons of foreign lands.
Atlas, the son of Poseidon, is mentioned by several Greek
writers as the founder of Mauretania, the land in the neigh-
bourhood of the Pillars of Hercules, and this may have
seemed to Plato good evidence of his Atlantean connec-
tion. Atlas had a fair territory in his island kingdom,
which was provided with all the materials required for the
growth of a civilised state. It had mines of silver, gold, and
orichalcum, this last mysterious metal being nothing more
nor less than the Greek word oreichalkos, ‘‘ mountain
copper.” ‘The word is used by Spenser to describe a gold-
coloured alloy resembling brass, a kind of pinchbeck.

The disposal of the zones of sea and land in Atlantis
might at first seem as reminiscent of the machinery of fable
as once did the famous Labyrinth at Thebes, or the Hanging

PLATE. I.

To face p. 16.

(aAeISe[aq a1IeAqry ayy Jo Asoj1n09 Aq)
¢

“PPP pur “sfoJAl 10 [BM -¥ag ‘INoqieHy AvpMoITD Surmoys ‘waIOAy Tavg

MI (unwisa) d
ee i
Japeyg ayy
JE Vaised Avg

Aq enbisojozyoie uoneineysox aseyyieg wo1y

EMELL
5 —— - wy 24n0ub s04 UPA vO ROME,
See Joy jDYoJauiuog — asi0s3u PRAMS EE)
-Sgvuny-go ayny- — de 9 Z FoDLY HOW»

FG [r

Plato’s Account Examined 17

Gardens at Babylon, since identified.1 But a perusal of a
recent plan of Carthage reconstructed by M. Paul Aucler
has led me to observe a marked resemblance between the
plan of that city and Plato’s description of Atlantis. Car-
thage resembled Atlantis in this, that her power lay to a
great extent in her secret situation. The low, walled hill of
the Byrsa or citadel on which stood the splendid temple of
/Esculapius at Carthage was strengthened on the mainland
side by three great ramparts which stretched across the
breadth of the peninsula, and which were fortified at intervals
by towers. Below the market-place and the Senate House
a vast waterway, 1066 feet wide, had been constructed round
a circular island on which stood the admiral’s headquarters.
The docks surrounding this waterway were roofed in by a
great circular colonnade supported by Ionic pillars, and
were capable of accommodating war-vessels of the largest
size. ‘The basin thus enclosed was known as the cothon or
drinking-cup, and from this a narrow channel ran south-
ward into a mercantile harbour 1396 feet long. ‘The sea-
entrance to this was only 76 feet broad, could be quickly
closed by chains, and was the only entrance to both harbours.
A great sea-wall masked this entrance and prevented attack
by a hostile fleet. Marshes surrounded the landward side,
and the water-supply was drawn from great cisterns on the
neighbouring hills, which seem also to have been used as
baths.

Both Atlantis and Carthage had thus a citadel hill encircled
by zones of land and water, a canal to the sea, penetrating
to the inmost zone, the zones were bridged over, and the
connecting bridges were fortified by towers. Moreover in
both cases the docks were roofed in, the cities were encircled
by three walls, both had great cisterns for the supply of drink-
ing-water and baths, and, finally, both were guarded by a
great sea-wall, masking the entrance to their harbours.

1 See the late Professor King’s Hist. of Babylon, p. 46 ff.
2

18 The Problem of Atlantis

I think that a comparison of these resemblances, which
include most unusual features, will leave no doubt in any
unbiassed mind that the plan of Carthage was substantially
the same as that of Atlantis. The inevitable question of
course arises, how is this to be accounted for ? We can only
do so either by the assumption that Carthage was herself
Atlantis, or that her plan was an architectural memory of
that city. The first hypothesis is untenable, as the date
at which Critias is said to have delivered his narrative was
prior to the building of Carthage in its modern aspect as
conceived by M. Aucler. I therefore incline to the view
that when Plato described Atlantis as he did, he was
naturally unaware that he was also practically describing
the more modern Carthage that was yet to be, even though
the general plan of that city had been laid down long before
his time.

If these conclusions be accurate, we are left face to face
with the assumption that Carthage was constructed in accord-
ance with a traditional scheme of “‘ town-planning ” which
had ancient local sanction, a plan not uncommon in the
Atlantic area of Western Africa. Aristotle and Strabo
state that the Phoenicians knew of a secret island in the
Atlantic to which they intended to fly in the event of disaster
overtaking them in Africa. I have, too, discovered proof
that the plan of surrounding a town or settlement by zones
of land and water was anciently in use in North-Western
and Western Africa, that an island within an island was there
regarded as a site of great natural strength, and this, as every
archeologist is aware, is nothing more or less than the
general idea carried out in many of the prehistoric island-
forts of Britain, which were indubitably of Mediterranean
origin, and are not to be distinguished in their architectural
features from the nuraghe or dry-stone towers of Sardinia.
But I will reserve this proof for future discussion, and will
content myself by remarking here that Carthage was situated

Plato’s Account Examined 19

in the territory of Atlas, and that no consideration of
Atlantean civilisation can, in my view, afford to dispense
with the substantial degree of proof afforded by the exist-
ence of a city of this architectural character so close to the
Atlantean scene.

To proceed with the task of criticism. We are told that
the stones employed for the building of the city of Atlantis
were quarried from underneath the central island, and the
inner and outer zones. They were of three colours, white,
black, and red—“ ancient rocks,” says M. Termier of the
Geological Survey of France, in describing the site of
Atlantis, “ bearing with some fragments of whitish calcareous
terranes, extinct volcanic mountains, and lava-flows, black
and red, long since grown cold.” 4

The descriptions of the temples of Atlantis appear to me
by no means fortuitous, or as efforts of the imagination.
Nor do they approximate to any architectural style to be
found in Greece in Plato’s time. Indeed they are as un-
like the stark purity of Hellenic architecture as could well
be imagined, and much more resemble the buildings of
Nineveh and Persepolis. Especially is this the case as
regards the construction of the roofs or ceilings, which
were of gold, silver, and bronze, like those of Assyria and
early Persia. —

I might also point out that the passage which speaks of the
existence of twenty golden statues of the kings of Atlantis
and their wives has a striking parallel in Peruvian history.
When the conquering Spaniards entered the golden-walled
Temple of the Sun, at Cuzco, they beheld the mummies of
the Incas seated within in an imposing semicircle. A
similar sight was encountered in the Temple of the Moon,
where the embalmed queens of the Incas were seated in all
the panoply of dead royalty.

1 See his address to the Institut Océanographique of Paris, 30th Nov.
1912, translated in the annual report of the Smithsonian Institution.

20 The Problem of Atlantis

The civil and religious details which conclude the
Critias will, in spite of their vagueness, furnish us with
interesting parallels at a later stage.

Enough has been said for the present to establish the
fact that Plato’s account of Atlantis was by no means an effort
of the imagination. To summarise :—

1. Modern research has justified the contention that all
legend is based on a substratum of truth.

2. Plato’s account of Atlantis is of the same class as that
of Geoffrey of Monmouth regarding Arthur, or that of Homer
regarding Troy—an admixture of partially authentic tradi-
tion and facts drawn from documentary evidence. He lays
stress on the strong impression the tale made upon Critias
as a boy, and emphasises the fact that he deals not with
fiction, but with reality.

3. Although the Atlantean hypothesis by no means rests
upon the account of Plato alone, still, as proof already
adduced and to be adduced shows and will show, there is
no good reason to doubt the substantial and general accuracy
and historicity of that account.

4. He could not have known of the resemblance of the
goddess Neith to Pallas Athene unless through Egyptian
sources, and this strengthens the assumption that documen-
tary evidence regarding Atlantis existed in Ancient Egypt,
as critics of standing admit.

5. Plato’s statement regarding a prehistoric Athens was
probably instigated by patriotic motives, and his statement
that the Athenians repulsed the invading Atlanteans pro-
bably preserves the memory of a foreign defeat in the
/Egean at an early date.

6. Plato gives the story of Atlantis an Hellenic setting as a
Greek of his period would naturally do, but he affords reasons
for his employment of Hellenic names for Atlantean per-
sonages. ‘These, he states, were translated from Atlantean
into Egyptian, and from Egyptian into Greek—a rather

Plato’s Account Examined 21

involved process, which would scarcely have occurred even
to the most imaginative of story-tellers.

7. His description of Atlantis bears a strong resemblance
to a recent “ restoration” of Carthage, the Atlantean con-
nection of which has frequently been stressed. Plato
could not have been aware that this description could apply
to a future Carthage, therefore it seems probable from this
and other considerations still to be brought forward that
Carthage was planned in accordance with an ancient Atlan-
tean design which had long been in vogue in North-Western
Africa and Western Europe.

8. The character of the stone of which Atlantis is said to
have been built has been recognised by a geologist of emin-
ence as such as would have existed in an oceanic area where
volcanic disturbances were of frequent occurrence.

It is manifest that these conclusions by no means exhaust
the inferences to be drawn from Plato’s account. But
they have at least the merit of novelty, and, I venture to
think, provide fresh material of considerable critical value
worthy the attention of future investigators, and go far to
confirm Plato’s honesty of purpose. It has been the mis-
fortune of the Atlantean hypothesis that in some quarters it
has not hitherto been approached in any logical or tolerable
manner. Analogies of the wildest description have all too
often alienated serious investigators and great disservice has
been done to the study by the wholesale manner in which ill-
equipped writers have drawn upon false and absurd archezo-
logical and philological resemblances to support the theory of
the Atlantean penetration of European and American regions.
The quest has, indeed, no need of such meretricious aids.
It rests on a foundation of scientific truth as well as upon a
great and well-defined world-memory, and that its legend is
capable of scientific demonstration I shall endeavour to make
abundantly clear. If the problem of Atlantis is at present
obscure, it is as the science of Egyptology, or the archeology

22 The Problem of Atlantis

of Central America was once obscure. Painful research,
patient endurance, have worked miracles of enlightenment
in these fields. So will they do in the field of Atlantean
study. But the same cautious and scientific spirit of inquiry
must prevail, the same critical attitude be maintained, if
success is one day to be accomplished and the wonders of
the island-continent which have haunted the dreams of
mankind for so long are ever to be unveiled.

As has already been remarked, no hypothesis of the former
existence of Atlantis can be built up on the Platonic account
alone. This has been the grand error of many of the former
protagonists of the theory. Plato’s account but furnishes
the clue. ‘To attempt to justify every one of its assertions
is as futile as to try to do so in the case of the Trojan or
Arthurian legends, and that is one of the reasons why I
have not attempted to draw from the Critias or the Timeus
any proof which would not commend itself to strict literary
or historical opinion.

Is it possible that the memory of a great world-catastrophe
which caused vast and far-reaching changes in human
history should persist for many thousands of years? The
reply, given out of a prolonged experience of the vitality of
tradition, is unhesitatingly in the affirmative. No man with
any real experience in dealing with traditional material can
doubt that Plato’s account of Atlantis is founded on sources
much more ancient, and that these again owed their origin
to a persistent folk-memory of a mighty series of upheavals,
the geological proof concerning which will be found in the
following chapter.

CHAPTER III
THE EVIDENCE FROM GEOLOGY

In order that the non-scientific reader may better be able to
follow the evidence placed before him in this chapter, I
have prefaced its consideration by a brief and simple outline
of geological time. The two great epochs of the earth’s
physical history which are connected with mankind are the
Tertiary and the Quaternary. The first of these is divided
into Early and Late Tertiary. The Early Tertiary period
is again subdivided into Paleocene, Eocene, and Oligocene,
the last of which is contemporary with the appearance of
the anthropoid apes. The Late Tertiary is subdivided into
Miocene and Pliocene, during the latter of which true man
first makes his appearance.

The great Quaternary epoch is divided into the Pleistocene
or Ice Age, and the Holocene or recent. The whole may
be tabulated as follows :—

TERTIARY PERIOD.

EARLY TERTIARY. LATE 'TERTIARY.
fee 7 Tee
Paleocene. Eocene. Oligocene. Miocene, Pliocene. \
(Early (Higher (Anthro- (Man.)
mammals.) mammals.) poids.)

QUATERNARY PERIOD.

Pleistocene or Ice Age. Holocene or recent.
Glacial. Post-glacial.
(Old Stone Age.) (New Stone Age.) (Metals.)

23

24 The Problem of Atlantis

The problem before us is, then, with what stage of the
earth’s and man’s history does the existence of such an
island-continent as that which has come to be known as
Atlantis coincide? That is the crux of the whole matter
from the geological point of view. Is it capable of proof
that such a continent or region existed at such a period as
would permit of its being peopled by the human species ?

It will be obvious from the foregoing that the only part
of the above human-geological table which concerns us is
that which deals with the Quaternary epoch as a whole.

Opinions differ considerably as to the length of time during
which the Pleistocene or Ice Age, with its recurrent periods
of inter-glacial warm conditions, lasted. Professor Sollas +
has estimated it at 400,000 years, Penck? at 520,000 to
840,000, and Professor James Geikie * at a minimum of
620,000 years.

The beginning of the Pleistocene Age is, for practical
purposes, generally reckoned at about 500,000 years ago,
and is subdivided into four glacial epochs and one post-
glacial epoch, and three inter-glacial stages.

Now it is only in the post-glacial or final stage, which,
according to a consensus of the best opinion, commenced
about 25,000 years ago, that any form approaching modern
man is to be found in Europe. Before that time the conti-
nent was inhabited by races of low physique and mentality,
one of which, known as Neanderthal Man,‘ was by no means
so far advanced on the road of evolution as present-day man.
His ape-like hand was incapable of grasping the clumsy
stone weapons he made use of in such a manner as to
permit him to undertake any finer work. With the advent
of newer races he seems to have vanished and no traces

1 Evolutional Geology, 1900.

* Die Alpen im Eiszeitalter, 1909.

3 The Antiquity of Man in Europe, 1914.

* See Osborn, Men of the Old Stone Age, p. 214 ff.

The Evidence from Geology 25

of him are to be found in the physiology of present-day
humanity.

If, then, we are to search for a lost Atlantis peopled by
types recognisable as modern, or semi-civilised, the period
in which we must do so is narrowed down to Post-glacial
time—that is, to the last 25,000 years of European history.
What has geology to tell us of the probability of the existence
of such a continent during this period ? We must remember
that it is not by any means incumbent upon us to attempt
to justify Plato’s account word for word. ‘That is the grand
error that has been made by nearly every one of our prede-
cessors in this quest. It is obvious that we are dealing
with a great world-memory, of which Plato’s story is merely
one of the broken and distorted fragments, and we must
seek to justify its broad contentions not by reference to any
solitary and possibly fallible account, but by all other
reasonable means as well.

Many of the older geologists were in favour of the idea of
an Atlantean continent. Lyell confessed to its likelihood,
though he could not see in the Atlantic islands traces of a
mid-Atlantic ridge. Buffon dated the separation of the
New and the Old Worlds from the catastrophe of Atlantis.
In 1846 Forbes declared his belief in the former existence
of a bridge of islands in the North Atlantic, and in 1856
Heer attempted to show the necessity of a similar connection
from the testimony of palzontological history. In 1860
Unger tried to explain the likeness between the fossil flora
of Europe and the living flora of Asia by virtue of the
Atlantean hypothesis, and Kuntze, who was struck with the
case of the tropical seedless banana occurring at once in
Asia and in America before the discovery of the latter
continent, saw in this a strong evidence of the truth of the
Atlantean theory.

I will summarise a number of recent accounts of the

1 Elements of Geology, London, 1841, p. 141.

26 The Problem of Atlantis

physiographical researches of geologists and others in the
bed of the Atlantic Ocean, and will begin this survey of
modern evidence for a sunken continent by a précis of the
very important paper, entitled “ Atlantis,” read by M.
Pierre Termier, Director of Science of the Geological
Chart of France, a geologist of the highest standing and
authority, before the Institut Océanographique of Paris on
30th November 1912.1

M. Termier first pictures the bed of the Atlantic as
emptied of its waters. According to soundings, he tells us,
we should, looking at it from above, behold two great
depressions or valleys extending north and south parallel
with the two shores, and separated one from the other by
a middle zone elevated above them. The western valley,
extending the length of the American coast, is the larger and
deeper, stretching to more than 6000 metres below the level
of theshore. The eastern, along the European coast, seems
narrower and more shallow, yet more hilly, with numerous
peaks resembling those of Madeira and the Canaries. The
middle zone or height between these is S-shaped, like
the valleys it divides. It commences at Greenland and
ends at the 7oth parallel of south latitude. The map of
the Azores shows that the nine islands of which the group
is composed cover a total length of about 500 miles, and this
_ distance is probably prolonged very far beneath the waves.

Now the eastern region of the Atlantic, says M. Termier,
is a great volcanic zone. In the European-African depres-
sion sea-volcanoes and insular volcanoes are abundant.
Most of the islands in this portion are largely formed of
lava. The same phenomenon occurs in the American or
western region of the Atlantic. This would seem to indicate
that in the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean there is a certain
mobility. It is, indeed, still in movement in the extreme

This will be found translated into English in the annual report of the
Smithsonian Institute for 1915.

The Evidence from Geology 27

eastern zone for a space of about 1875 miles in breadth,
which comprises Iceland, the Azores, Madeira, the Canaries,
and the Cape Verde Islands. It is the most unstable zone
on the earth’s surface, where at any moment unrecorded
submarine cataclysms may be taking place.

Great cataclysms certainly have occurred, and these,
geologically speaking, date only as from yesterday. In
the summer of 1898 a ship employed for the laying of the
cable from Brest to Cape Cod was trying to fish up a broken
strand at a point about 500 miles north of the Azores, and
at a depth of about 1700 fathoms. The grappling-irons
drew up soil and broken pieces of rock, which established
the fact that the bottom of the sea at this latitude presents
the characteristics of a mountainous country with high
summits, steep slopes, and deep valleys. They were
evidently being caught on hard rocks, and drew up coarse
strie and small mineral splinters, fragments of an actual
outcropping, sharp and irregular, a vitreous lava or
tachylyte, now preserved at the Musée de l’Ecole des
Mines at Paris. This species of lava, as is well known,
could solidify into such a condition only under atmospheric
pressure. If formed under 3000 metres of water it would have
become crystallised. M.'Termier then quotes M. Lacroix,
who examined the lava of Mont Pelée in Martinique, which
was vitreous when it congealed in the open air, but became
crystallised when cooled under a mass of previously solidified
rocks.1 Further, he infers that the surface which to-day

1 Dr Frederick Finch Strong, writing of the geological problems in-
volved in the Atlantean theory, says: ‘‘ It seems that geologists have
learned much from the phenomena that followed the eruption of Mont
Pelée in the island of Martinique, West Indies. It will be remembered
that the lava stream divided, part flowing into the sea and solidifying
suddenly, and part congealing slowly on land and requiring weeks to
cool. Microscopic studies of thin sections of the two lavas showed a
marked difference in their crystalline structure, and gave science the

data from which a water-cooled lava could invariably be distinguished
from one which cooled slowly on land. Some years ago on dragging

28 The Problem of Atlantis

constitutes the bottom of the Atlantic 562 miles north of the
Azores was, therefore, covered with lava which was once
above water, and the ruggedness of this shows that the
sinking of the land to 3000 metres below the sea followed
suddenly upon the emission of lava. Otherwise atmospheric
erosion would have levelled inequalities and planed down
the entire surface. This region is set in the zone of Atlantic
instability, therefore it is a fair conclusion that it was recently
submerged, probably during the epoch which the geologists
call the present because it-is so recent.

The Atlantic abyss, as a whole, seems to be of relatively
recent date. Other collapses occurred there, the size of
which staggers the imagination. Eduard Suess and Marcel
Bertrand have shown that an ancient continental band existed
between Northern Europe and North America, and another
between Africa and South America.

“There was,” says M. Termier, ‘a North Atlantic con-
tinent comprising Russia, Scandinavia, Great Britain, Green-
land, and Canada, to which was added later a southern band
made up of a large part of Central and Western Europe and
an immense portion of the United States. There was also
a South Atlantic, or African-Brazilian, continent, extending
northward to the southern border of the Atlas, eastward to
the Persian Gulf and Mozambique Channel, westward to

-the eastern border of the Andes and to the sierras of Colombia

the bed of the Atlantic for a lost cable, bits of rock, torn from jagged
submarine prominences, were brought to the surface. Microscopic
examination showed these to consist of lava. Now geologists have
learnt that lava exposed to sea-water will disintegrate to a known ex-
tent in about 15,000 years. This lava from the ocean bed proved
to be recent, i.e. undecomposed, and was evidently the result of an
eruption which occurred less than 15,000 years ago. But its micro-
scopic structure proved that it had cooled slowly above the surface,
exactly like the lava that had flowed on the land near Mont Pelée. The
inference is obvious—the eruption which ejected the lava must have
occurred above the surface of the ocean, and, therefore, what is now the
bed of the Atlantic Ocean must have been above sea-level less than
15,000 years ago.” —The Messenger, 1919.

The Evidence from Geology 29

and Venezuela. Between the two continents passed the
Mediterranean depression, that ancient maritime furrow
which has formed an escarp about the earth since the
beginning of geologic times, and which we see so deeply
marked in the present Mediterranean, the Caribbean Sea,
and the Sunda or Flores Sea. A chain of mountains
broader than the chain of the Alps, and perhaps in some
parts as high as the majestic Himalaya, once lifted itself on
the land-enclosed shore of the North Atlantic continent,
embracing the Vosges, the Central Plateau of France,
Brittany, the south of England and of Ireland, and also New-
foundland, Nova Scotia, and, in the United States, all the
Appalachian region. The two coasts which front each other
above the Atlantic waters, 1875 miles apart, that of Brittany,
Cornwall, and the south of Ireland on one side, that of New-
foundland and Nova Scotia on the other side, are among the
finest estuary shores in the world, and their estuaries are
face to face. In the one, as in the other, the folds of the
ancient chain are cut abruptly and often naturally by the
shore, and the dirigent lines of the European chain are
directly aligned with those of the American chain. Within
a few years it will be one of the pleasures of oceanographers,
by clearing up the detailed chart of the ocean beds between
Ireland and Newfoundland, to establish the persistence of
a fold, of oriented mountainous aspect, on the site of this
old engulfed mountain chain.”

The end of this continental era, thinks M. Termier, came
during the Tertiary period, when the mass, bounded on the
south by a chain of mountains, was submerged long before
the collapse of those volcanic lands of which the Azores
are the last vestiges. The South Atlantic Ocean was like-
wise occupied for many thousands of centuries by a great
continent now engulfed beneath the sea. ‘These movements
of depression probably occurred at several periods. In the
Europe of the Tertiary era the movement was developing

30 The Problem of Atlantis

which gave rise to the Alpine mountain chain. How far
did this chain extend into the Atlantic region? Did some
fragments of it rise high enough to lift themselves for some
centuries above the waters? ‘The West Indies, too, are but
a prolongation of the Andes chain. Was there a tectonic or
structural bond between these systems, as there is certainly
astratigraphic bond? Louis Gentil has followed the Western
Atlas Mountains in Africa, a branch of the great Tertiary
chain, into the ocean, so to speak, and this prolongation
would lead us to the Canaries.

“Summing up,” says M. Termier, “there are strong
reasons for believing in the Atlantic prolongation of the
Tertiary folds, those of the Atlas Mountains towards the
Canaries, those of the Alps towards the southern islands of
the Azores, but nothing yet permits of either extending
very far or limiting very narrowly this prolongation. The
sediments of Santa Maria prove only this, that at the
Miocene epoch—that is, when the great Alpine movements
were terminated in Europe—a Mediterranean shore ex-
tended not far from this region of the Azores, the shore of a
continent or of a large island. Another shore of the same
Miocene sea passed near the Canaries.”

The geology of the Atlantic region, remarks M.'Termier, has
singularly changed in the course of the later periods of the
earth’s history. During the secondary period there were
numerous depressions, the Tertiary period sawthe annihilation
of the continental areas, and subsequently there appeared a
new design the general direction of which was north and
south. Near the African continent there have certainly been
important movements during Quaternary times, when other
changes undoubtedly took place in the true oceanic region.

“* Geologically speaking, the Platonian history of the Atlantic
is highly probable. . . . It is entirely reasonable to believe
that long after the opening of the Strait of Gibraltar certain
of these emerged lands still existed, and among them a marvellous

The Evidence from Geology aye

tsland, separated from the African continent by a chain of other
smaller islands. One thing alone remains to be proved—
that the cataclysm which caused this island to disappear
was subsequent to the appearance of man in Western Europe.
The cataclysm is undoubted. Did men then live who could
withstand the reaction and transmit the memory of it?
That is the whole question. I do not believe it at all in-
soluble, though it seems to me that neither geology nor
zoology will solve it. These two sciences appear to have
told all that they can tell, and it is from anthropology, from
ethnography, and, lastly, from oceanography, that I am now
awaiting the final answer.”

Professor J. W. Gregory, Professor of Geology in the
University of Glasgow, in his valuable treatise Geography :
Structural, Physical, and Comparative (1908), makes it clear in
several passages that he does not reject the hypothesis of a
former Atlantean continent. In speaking of the islands of the
Atlantic, he observes that they “ are of the oceanic type, are
irregularly scattered, and are mostly piles of volcanic rocks
that have been raised above sea-level by volcanic eruptions,
such as the island of Teneriffe ; but others are fragments of
the ancient land known as Atlantis, and the St Paul’s Rocks
are reefs of ancient continental rocks that once belonged to a
land which has foundered beneath the sea. ‘The Azores are
a group of volcanoes built upon a foundation of limestones,
similar to those of the Mediterranean countries.” Again,
on pages 59-60, he states that “ the islands of the Atlantic
are irregularly arranged with the exception of those on the
Faroes ridge, which forms the northern boundary of the
Atlantic, and the islands of the West Indies. ‘The sinuous
shape of the Atlantic, moreover, has no relation to the
mountains or the geographical grain of the adjacent lands.
Thus it cuts abruptly across the old mountain line which
runs across southern Ireland, southern England, and northern
France, and also across the Cantabrian Mountains, which

@)

B2 The Problem of Atlantis

reach the Atlantic at the north-western corner of Spain.
There can be little doubt that both these mountain lines once
continued into the present site of the Atlantic. On the coast
of North America the Atlantic cuts with equal abruptness
across the remains of mountain lines in Nova Scotia and
Newfoundland, which must once have extended eastward
into the present ocean. They probably represent the former
continuation in America of the ancient mountain chains of
Europe. Similarly there are striking resemblances in
structure between Equatorial Africa and Brazil. The inter-
mediate basin of the Atlantic has probably been formed by
the foundering of the plateau land which once connected
South America and Africa.”

Professor Gregory also points out that the old highlands
of Brazil must once have extended eastward into the
Atlantic, and were built largely of materials derived from
the destruction of an old Atlantic land.

The famous geologist, Sir J. William Dawson, who did
so much for the elucidation of Canadian geology, in his
delightful book, Salient Points in the Science of the Earth
(1893), includes a chapter on the “ History of the North
Atlantic.” He writes of the great Pleistocene or Ice Age
submergence in an arresting manner. He remarks (p. 77):
“Tt was one of the most remarkable of all: one in which
nearly the whole northern hemisphere participated, and
which was probably separated from the present time by
only a few thousands of years... . The recent surveys of
the Falls of Niagara coincide with a great many evidences
to which I have elsewhere referred in proving that the
Pleistocene submergence of America and Europe came to an

end not more than ten thousand years ago.” He further states.

that all continents have been “ many times submerged.”
In his presidential address to the Geological Section of the
American Association in 1876, he asserted that ‘“‘ the
Hyrcanian Ocean had dried up, and Atlantis had gone down.”

é

OC

The Evidence from Geology 33

>

‘* Subsidence,” says Professor H. F. Osborn, ‘‘ was the
great feature of closing glacial times, both in Europe and
America.” +

One of the most important contributions to the literature
of Atlantean research from the geological and biological
points of view is the exhaustive paper of Professor R. F.
Scharff of Dublin, ‘‘ Some Remarks on the Atlantis Problem,”
read before the Royal Irish Academy in November 1902,
and published in the Proceedings of that body (vol. xxiv, 1902).
I must content myself with a summary of this valuable paper, -
giving here the geological findings of this brilliant scientist,
and dealing with the evidence he adduces regarding animal
and plant life in the chapter on that subject. Professor
Scharff summarises the history of the geological culture-war
which has raged round the subject of Atlantis, and as this
information is of value to students of the question, I will
include it in my précis of his excellent paper.

“Edward Forbes,” 2 he says, ‘‘ maintained that at the
close of the Miocene epoch a vast continent extended far
into the Atlantic from the coast of Portugal, past the Azores,
and bounded on the north by Ireland. While adopting
Forbes’s hypothesis, Murray * enlarged the area of this con-
tinent as far as Newfoundland, Greenland, and Spitzbergen.”’

_Dr Alfred Russel Wallace,* believing in the permanence
of the great ocean basins, founded his view on three impor-
tant statements. ‘“‘ He pointed out, in the first instance,
hat the Atlantic islands were entirely composed of volcanic
rocks ; secondly, that they were surrounded by great depths
of water; and, lastly, that they possessed no indigenous
land mammalia. As regards the fact that the Atlantic
islands are composed of volcanic rocks, it does not necessarily

1 Men of the Old Stone Age, p. 36.
2 Geological Memoirs, 1846, vol. i.

3 Geographical Distribution of Mammals, 1866, p. 37.
4 Studies Scientific and Social, 1900, vol. i, p. 250.

34. The Problem of Atlantis

imply that they could not, therefore, have formed part of
the continent of Europe in former times, for even Hartung,
who made a special study of the geology of Madeira, looked
upon the Atlantic islands as the summits of submerged
mountain chains, while two other geologists, Guppy and
Neumayr, maintain that these islands are the remnants of
a great continent which united the Old World with the New.
Lyell, on the other hand, arguing from the supposed great
depths separating the Atlantic islands from the Continent,
does not consider it possible that they could have been
connected with Europe. However, as Dr Blandford reminds
us in his interesting address to the Geological Society of
London,! ‘the occurrence of volcanic islands does not
prove that the area in which they occur is not a sunken
continent.’ ‘If,’ he continues, ‘ Africa south of the
Atlas subsided two thousand fathoms, what would remain
above water? So far as our present knowledge goes, the
remaining islands would consist of four volcanic peaks—
the Cameroons, Mount Kenia, Kilimanjaro, and Stanley’s
last discovery, Ruwenzori, together with an island, or more ©
than one, which, like the others, would be entirely composed
of volcanic rocks.’

‘*Dr Wallace’s second statement, that the Atlantic islands
were surrounded by great depths, is only partially correct.
On the little map he published in r900 Dr Wallace indicated
a depth of 12,000 feet between Madeira and Europe, though
it is now twenty-five years since Commander Gorringe of
the United States Navy discovered the Gettysburg Bank,
and demonstrated the undoubted fact that there are shallow
banks only a couple of hundred feet below the surface of
the sea in that area. He also suggested that a submarine
ridge probably connected the island of Madeira with the
coast of Portugal.

“The Azores seem to be separated by much greater

1 London, 1890.

-The Evidence from Geology 35

depths from the continent ; and Dr Wallace is so convinced
of the permanence of the great ocean basins that he will
not allow that any very great changes of level have taken
place in former times. But that Dr Wallace’s views are
not generally accepted may be gathered by the remark
made by Dr Blandford that ‘ not only is there clear proof
that some land-areas lying within continental limits have
within a comparatively recent date been submerged over a
thousand fathoms, whilst sea-bottoms now over a thousand
fathoms deep must have been land in part of the Tertiary
era, but there are a mass of facts, both geological and bio-
logical, in favour of land connection having formerly existed
in certain cases across what are now broad and deep oceans.’
Moreover, when asked to give his opinion on this important
question of ‘ permanence of ocean basins,’ Professor Suess 4
remarked that the geological evidence did not prove, nor
even point to, a permanence of the great depths—at least, in
oceans of the Atlantic type—and that he believed some kind |
of a coast-line stretched across the present Atlantic Ocean
during part of Tertiary times.”

Teneriffe, says Professor Scharff, covered as it is by
immense masses of recent lava, exhibits no ostensible traces
of older or fossiliferous rocks, but in the islands of Palma,
Fuerteventura, and Gomera, an older mountain chain con-
sisting of diabase—an eruptive rock—has been shown to
exist. On Grand Canary and Palma an upheaval of from
600-1000 feet can be demonstrated, and in Madeira one up
to nearly 1400 feet. Professor de Lapparent * favours the
view of the existence of a coast-line, or at least that of an
island-chain, during the Miocene period, connecting the West
Indies with southern Europe. The end of the Pliocene and
the whole of the Pleistocene period, he believes, were dis-

1 “ Are Great Ocean Depths Permanent?” Natural Science, 1893,
vol. ii, pp. 185, 186.
* Traité de Géologie, Paris, 1893, p. 193.

36 ‘The Problem of Atlantis

tinguished by a series of subsidences which resulted in
finally opening up the northern depression of the Atlantic
Ocean. Mr Haug,! too, has recently come to the con-
clusion that the convex arch formed by the Antilles and the
one found along the western border of the Mediterranean
were connected in the Tertiary era by tangential chains of
land. According to his view, a coast-line stretched across
the Atlantic from Venezuela to Morocco, and another
between the Lesser Antilles and Portugal, the intervening.
space being covered by the sea.

“From the facts quoted,” remarks Professor Scharff,
“IT conclude that Madeira and the Azores up to Miocene
times were connected with Portugal, and that from Morocco
to the Canary Islands, and from them to South America,
stretched a vast land which extended southward certainly as
far as St Helena. This great continent may have existed
already in Secondary times, as Dr Ihering suggested ; and
it probably began to subside in early Tertiary times. But
I think its northern portions persisted until the Miocene
Epoch, when the southern and northern Atlantic became
joined, and the Azores and Madeira became isolated from
Europe. This, however, does not explain the whole history
of the Atlantic islands. To account for the extraordinary
predominance of the Mediterranean element in their fauna,
they must have again united with the Old World in more
recent times. This took place, no doubt, in a precisely
similar manner as before, and I believe that they were still
connected in early Pleistocene times with the continents of
Europe and Africa, at a time when man had already made
his appearance in Western Europe, and was able to reach
the islands by land.”

Among those modern geologists who uphold the Atlantean
theory is Professor Edward Hull,? whose investigations have

1 Bull. Soc. Géol. de France, 1900, vol. xxviii, p. 635.
2 The Sub-Oceanic Physiography of the North Atlantic,

¥

To face p. 36. PLATE II.

CONTINENT 5 :
Pry hy

HY PER BOREEN

We
,
a

ay

Conjectural Map of Atlantis in Tertiary Times.
(After R. M. Gattefossé.)

The Evidence from Geology 37

led him to conclude that the Azores are the peaks of a sub-
merged continent which flourished in the Pleistocene period.
At this epoch the British and continental rivers flowed out
many miles beyond their present outlets, and this mid-
Atlantic island enjoyed an equable climate when the
temperature of the British Isles was, apparently, of a
semi-polar nature. ‘‘The flora and fauna of the two
hemispheres,”’ says Professor Hull, “support the geologi-
cal theory that there was a common centre in the Atlantic
where life began, and that during and prior to the glacial
epoch great land-bridges north and south spanned the
Atlantic Ocean.” He adds: “I have made this deduc-
tion by a careful study of the soundings as recorded on
the Admiralty charts.” Dr Hull also holds the view that
at the time this Atlantic continent existed there was also
a great Antillean continent or ridge shutting off the
Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico from what is called
the Gulf Stream.

Last century more than one Admiralty authority took
deep-sea soundings of the Atlantic, notably the British,
who dispatched the Hydra, Porcupine, and Challenger ;
the American, the Dolphin and Gettysburg ; and the German,
who commissioned the Gazelle for this especial purpose.
These expeditions resulted in the entire ocean-bed of the
Atlantic being carefully mapped out, and this process
revealed the existence of a great bank or elevation com-
mencing at a point not far from the coast of Ireland,
traversed by the 53rd parallel, and stretching in a southerly
direction, embracing the Azores, to the coast-line of South
America near French Guiana and the mouths of the Amazon
and Para Rivers. Thence this bank stretches in a south-
easterly direction towards the African coast, taking in the
rocky islands of St Paul. Changing its course again just
north of the island of Ascension, it stretches due south to
the island of Tristan d’Acunha, where it ends. ‘The general

38 The Problem of Atlantis

level of this great ridge or plateau is some gooo feet above
that of the Atlantic bed, and the islands connected with it
are obviously the mountain-peaks of this sunken continent.
The soundings of the United States expedition showed
that that part of the bank situated in the North Atlantic
between the 26th and 45th parallels of latitude measured at
its base a distance from east to west of about 1000 nautical
miles.

The results of the Challenger expedition brought to
light the fact that the ridge, throughout its entire length,
is covered with volcanic detritus, and there is every
evidence that the ocean-bed, particularly in the neighbour-
hood of the Azores, has been the scene of volcanic dis-
turbances on a large scale. Nor could the inequalities,
the mountains and valleys, so to speak, have been pro-
duced by submarine agencies such as deposit, but must
have received their present contour whilst still above
water. The commander of the Gettysburg found that
when about 150 miles from the Straits of Gibraltar the
soundings decreased from 2700 fathoms to 1600 in the
course of a few miles.

But, as will be shown later on, these conclusions have been
surpassed in an extraordinary manner by fresh and surprising
evidence collected by the agents of the Western Union Tele-
graph Company and others, which proves that the bed of
the Eastern Atlantic has altered greatly during the last
twenty-five years. ‘This would seem to sustain the con-
tention of certain geologists that the contour of the bed of
the Atlantic has undergone constant change, and that,
indeed, it may have risen and sunk many times since the
Pleistocene epoch. New and more reliable apparatus has
recently been available for purposes of sounding, and in
the course of the next few years the utilisation of this will
undoubtedly bring about a better comprehension of Atlantic
oceanography.

The Evidence from Geology 39

If we summarise the salient points of the evidence we
find :—

1. Termier believes the Atlantic to be a great volcanic
zone, an unstable portion of the earth, the eastern part of
which is still in movement, the bed of which resembles a
mountainous country. The lava with which it is covered
must have solidified under atmospheric pressure, and not
under water. ‘The conclusion is, therefore, that it was
recently submerged.

2. Land-connection between the Old and New Worlds
is agreed upon by all geologists of standing, the only variation
of opinion being as to the epoch to which this connection
must be assigned. Land depression appears to have
commenced in Tertiary times and to have continued to a
comparatively recent epoch. Important movements took
place in Quaternary times near the African continent.
Long after the opening of the strait of Gibraltar an island
existed, opposite the strait, but connected with the continent
by a chain of lesser islands.

3. Professor Gregory believes the Atlantic islands to be
fragments of the Atlantean continent, and that certain
European mountain chains were once prolonged into the
present site of the Atlantic... The South Atlantic, he says,
was formed by the foundering of the plateau land between
South America and Africa.

4. Sir William Dawson believed that extensive submer-
gences took place. at the end of the Great Ice Age, “ not
more than ten thousand years ago.” He was a firm
believer in the former existence and final submersion of
the Atlantean continent.

5. Professor Scharff, summarising the culture-war which
raged round the question of Atlantis, showed that because
the Atlantic islands are formed of volcanic rocks, that does
not imply that they could not once have formed part of the
continent of Europe. Hartung, Guppy, and Neumayr,

40 The Problem of Atlantis

believed them to be the remains of a continent which united
the New and the Old Worlds. Wallace’s statement that the
Atlantic islands were surrounded by great depths of sea is
only partly correct, some shallow banks existing at a depth
of only two hundred feet. Blandford stated that some
land-areas lying within continental limits have within a
comparatively recent date been submerged over a thousand
fathoms. Suess credits the existence of an Atlantean
continent in Tertiary, and Lapparent that of a coast-line
or insular chain in Miocene times, and the latter also believes
that the end of the Pliocene and the whole of the Pleistocene
era were distinguished by subsidences which resulted in
opening up the northern portion of the Atlantic Ocean.
Scharff concludes that the Azores and Madeira were con-
nected with Portugal up to Miocene times, and that from
Morocco to the Canaries a vast land stretched which extended
southward to South America. Its northern portion per-
sisted until the Miocene epoch, when the South and Northern
Atlantic became joined, and the Azores and Madeira became
isolated from Europe. He also believes that the Atlantic
islands must have been again united with the Old World
in more recent times, and that the connection still existed
in early Pleistocene times, when man had made his appear-
ance in Western Europe, and was able to reach the islands
by land. |

6. Professor Hull believes the Azores to be the peaks of a
submerged continent which flourished in the Pleistocene
period. He states that the flora and fauna of the two
hemispheres support the geological theory that there was a
common centre in the Atlantic where life began, and that
at the time this Atlantic continent existed there was also a
great Antillean continent or ridge in the neighbourhood of
the West Indies.

7. The soundings taken by the vessels dispatched by the
various European and American Admiralties served to map

¢
oe

The Evidence from Geology 41

out the ocean-bed of the Atlantic, and revealed the existence
of a great bank occupying the major portion of the whole
Atlantic basin. This is covered with volcanic detritus.
The irregularities of its surface could not have been pro-
duced by submarine agencies, but must have received their
present contour while still above water.

From such an array of geological evidence I think it will
be conceded that we are justified in concluding that the
hypothesis of a formerly existing land-mass in the Atlantic
Ocean is by no means based on mere surmise. ‘The fact
that geologists of distinction have risked their reputations
by testifying in no uncertain manner to the reality of a former
Atlantean continent should surely give pause to those who
impatiently refuse even to examine the probabilities of the
arguments they so ably uphold. But the most significant
consideration which emerges is that this expert evidence is
almost entirely in favour of the existence of a comparatively
recent land-mass, or masses, in the Atlantic, and taking into
consideration the whole of the evidence and the nature of its
sources, I fail to see how it can reasonably be disputed that
at a period probably no earlier than that mentioned by Plato
this ancient continent was still in existence, but in process
of disintegration— that an island of considerable size, the
remnant, perhaps, of the African “ shelf,” still lay opposite
the entrance to the Mediterranean, and that lesser islands
connected it with Europe, Africa, and another similar island-
continent which occupied the present site of the West Indian
Islands, the whole forming a continuous archipelagic chain
such as is described by Plato.

As I hope to prove, the evidences from ethnology,
tradition, and history strongly support such a view.
The persistent legends of a series of cataclysms, from the
horrors of which the inhabitants of this archipelago took
refuge in Europe and America, have, in my opinion, an
indubitable basis of certainty. The sudden appearance in

42 The Problem of Atlantis

Spain and France at an early period of races of comparatively
high culture whose original homes, as we shall see later,
cannot be traced even by the ingenuity of modern anthro-
pologists, the undoubted and now partially admitted
“ Atlantic” origin of civilisation, and its spread from
west to east rather than from east to west, as was
formerly held, all assist the conclusion that the Atlantean
hypothesis is based on evidence of the most irrefragable
character.

If modern thought refuses to entertain the idea of an
Atlantean continent as the early home of civilisation, it does
so at the risk of casting aside evidence which undoubtedly
throws a gleam of intelligence on the question of human
advancement, which at present it sadly needs. I venture,
then, to present my own conclusions, based on the geological
evidence, as follows :—

1. That a great continent formerly occupied the whole
or major part of the North Atlantic region, and a considerable
portion of its southern basin. Of early geological origin, it
must in the course of successive ages have experienced many
changes in contour and mass, probably undergoing frequent
submergence and emergence.

2. That in Miocene (late Tertiary) times it still retained
its continental character, but towards the end of that period
it began to disintegrate, owing to successive volcanic and
other causes.

3. That this disintegration resulted in the formation of
greater and lesser insular masses. ‘Two of these, consider-
ably larger in area than any of the others, were situated (a)
at a relatively short distance from the entrance to the
Mediterranean ; and (6) in the region of the West Indian
Islands. ‘These may be called respectively Atlantis and
Antilia. Communication was possible between them by
an insular chain.

4. That these two island-continents and the connecting

The Evidence from Geology 43

chain of islands persisted until late Pleistocene times, at
which epoch (about 25,000 years ago, or the beginning of
the Post-glacial epoch) Atlantis seems to have experienced
further disintegration. Final disaster seems to have over-
taken Atlantis about 10,000 B.c. Antilia, on the other hand,
seems to have survived until a much more recent period,
and still persists fragmentally in the Antillean group, or
West Indian Islands.

A theory which may, perhaps, be regarded as having a
bearing on the Atlantean hypothesis may briefly be alluded
to here. A certain school of geologists is of the opinion that
the Old and New Worlds have actually drifted more or less
slowly apart, and still continue to do so. The student of
geology will recognise in this argument an old theory the
recent consideration of which has had surprising develop-
ments as regards the internal constitution and condition of
our globe. The earth, as most of us know, is 8000 miles
thick, so that the nature of its inner constituents must
naturally remain matter of conjecture. But its weight
shows that it is at least twice as heavy as it ought to be
if it consisted throughout of matter of the same pondera-
bility as the rocks of its outer crust. The nucleus must,
therefore, be of much weightier matter than the crust,
and good reasons exist for the belief that it consists of
nickel and iron.

Many scientists believe that the earth is composed of three
concentric zones—the nucleus of nickel and iron alluded to,
and called, from the chemical symbols of these two elements
(Fe and Ni), the Nife. Regarding this nucleus little can
be posited, and whether it is solid, liquid, or gaseous is
unknown. The stratum superimposed upon it is, however,
in a liquid condition, and is thought to be composed of silica
and magnesia, the symbols of which confer upon it the
artificial name Sima. Above all is the outer crust, which is

a4 The Problem of Atlantis
made up af silica and alundaiua, aad & consequent sae
Qa

The more cnnservative schon! af genlegines balleve the QI
te bea tree crust, bat unequal a thickness, Ia these Paces
Where & is ERK continents aniee, while da the Chiner parte
we have ocean basag Bat mere daring qecwatars
believe that beneath the ocean gpaces ne sehd Gl axis at
al, and that the continental masses fat da the Rak’ Sar
mach as Redergs de the cena, If, Re aay reasea, a ae
Geveloys ia these hating masses the break may geowe Bast
at Rest two separate bodies appear, wht will a
Grit away from each other by degrees. Bwe® &@ cada
i WS thought, accounts fe the separation of the Amertian
Cantinent fram the Old Werkd, TO commence WRA de

- &gree af SPARTAN Bay have deen camparasivey Qe

Show that, after all possible errors da Ragitade have Rea
eiminated, the mas of Grecalaad & Axther dom Bares
by goo yards than It was at the begieaing af adar
pened,

Now, by means of a very stmple caloulation, we Gad het
the yearly rate of separation of the two COARIREAR aveRRgER,
TORE, about Go Her, that & about Goee Ree da a canta,
ef 30 miks in a thousand yearn. Te tea theasaad years,
then, the Lndimawes would dei ne Res thea geo mike
apart. The theory has been advanced that Adkate may
thus have been much closer to the Buropean aad Amentan
SOSSS at the date of Hts submergence tham the preaant
Gistance between these coasts would seam te mah, be &
Goes not appear te me that the Atlantean Aypethess has
snything to gain from such an admision. Protsser W. de
Sitter, af the University af Leyden, has recently pat Reward
the suggestion that the earth iS net rotating a8 a HARE heady,
but that same parts of its surface are mowing rekekely
other parts. It \ im Act, behaving as theagh compared ef

s

is

é

<

The Evidence from Geology 45

viscous elements. Wireless time-signals exchanged between
various observatories having shown discrepancies, reaching
on occasion several tenths of a second. Similar fluctuations
in recent years, says Professor de Sitter, have been observed
on the surface of the moon. See for this latter theory,
Nature, July 1923.

CHAPTER IV
THE BIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE

In this chapter I intend to use only such of the evidence
from biological sources as appears to me to afford actual
justification of the Atlantean hypothesis. I am aware that
a mass of material exists which purports to be evidence of
this kind. But I must frankly admit that much of it seems
to me of far too general and far-fetched a character to permit
of its acceptance by the serious student. The prolonged
controversy which raged round the question of the Atlantean
origin of the seedless banana, for example, seems to me
worse than futile considering the present stage of our
knowledge, so I propose to adhere to the conclusions of
tried modern scientists, and to disregard the gropings of
the older school as no longer of much avail in our quest.

As I indicated in the last chapter, the Atlantean hypothesis
has no more powerful advocate than Professor R. F. Scharff,
of Dublin, whose paper, ‘‘ Some Remarks on the Atlantis
Problem,” contains a wealth of reference to the biological
evidence of a sunken continent in the Atlantic. Criticising
the views of Dr A. R. Wallace on the theories of Heer,
Forbes, and Murray, which were favourable to the Atlantean
theory, he meets them with some trenchant arguments.

“Dr Wallace’s address,” he says, “ deals only with the
beetles of Madeira, one of the Atlantic islands ; but he main-
tains that the opinion he enunciates, and which is founded on
a study of these insects, explains the origin of the Madeiran
and of other insular faunas.”

Dr Wallace asks, if Madeira were the remains of a continent

46

The Biological Evidence 47

with a connection with Europe, how we are to explain the
absence of certain genera of beetles abundant in Southern
Europe, the wingless nature of which admirably suits them
for island life ? If Madeira had been connected with Europe,
replies Scharff, it must have been joined with Southern
Spain or Portugal, and Wallace should have drawn his
comparisons with these regions, and not with Southern
Europe as a whole. ‘The insects Wallace speaks of are far
more numerous in the east of Europe than in the west.
In Spain and Portugal their presence is negligible, so that
even had these countries been joined to a now sunken
continent, not one of the species alluded to would probably
have reached Madeira.

As for Dr Wallace’s statement that the Atlantic islands
possess no indigenous land mammalia, and that such animals
as are found there have been introduced since the discovery,
Professor Scharff can find no record of their artificial intro-
duction. ‘‘ The results of my endeavours,” he says, “ to
trace the history of their origin on the islands point rather
to some of them, at any rate, having reached the latter
in the normal way, which is by a land-connection with
Europe.”

In the case of the rabbit, for instance, the presence of
large hawks or buzzards observed by the discoverers of the
Azores in 1439 led to the islands receiving the name of
Agores, or Hawk Islands, and such birds usually live on
mice, rats, and young rabbits. Indeed it seems to be
substantiated that the existence of the Azores had already
been known to earlier navigators, for in a book published in
1345 by a Spanish friar the Azores are referred to, and the
names of the several islands given. On the atlas dated 1385,
and published at Venice, some of the islands are indicated
by name, as Capraria, or Isle of Goats, now San Miguel ;
Columbia, or Isle of Doves, now Pico; Li Congi, Rabbit
Island, now Flores ; and Corvi Marini, or Isle of Sea Crows,

48 The Problem of Atlantis

now Corvo. Drouet? has directed attention to the goat of
San Miguel, with its antelope-like horns. This nomen-
clature given prior to the discovery—the “ official’ dis-
covery, that is—seems to justify the assumption that mammals
such as the wild goat and rabbit reached the islands from
Europe by a land-connection.

The rabbit may, indeed, have reached the Azores and
Europe from America by way of the ancient land-connection.
Professor Osborn ? suggests the American origin of the rabbit
and hare. ‘“‘ I am not,” says Professor Scharff, “‘ advocating
a direct land-connection between Southern Europe and
America by way of the Atlantic islands. I think there was
only one land-bridge in southern latitudes between the Old
World and the New, which joined Africa and South America.
This must have lain farther south than the Atlantic islands.
But from North Africa there was frequent intercourse with
southern Europe—with which the Atlantic islands, I believe,
were connected ; and South American species would then
have been able to reach Madeira and the Azores indirectly.”
Dr Forsyth Major and Lydekker have shown the connection
between the rabbit-forms of Africa and America, and that
animal migration between these continents must have taken
place. Professor Howes has also indicated the presence in
the Argentine of a fossil mole like the golden mole of
South Africa. .

The carnivores of Tertiary times show a marked affinity
with those of the New World. ‘‘ Some of these cases, no
doubt, can be accounted for by the supposition that the
mammals migrated from or to Europe across Asia, where they
may have found a land-connection joining that continent to
America across the Bering Strait; but others seem to me

'. to have used a more direct route between our continent

and the New World. Messrs Sclater * recognise a distinct
1 Eléments de la faune agoréenne, Paris, 1861, p. 15.
* Ann. New York Acad. Science, 1900, vol. xiii, p. 58.
* The Geography of Mammals, London, 1899, p. 208.

The Biological Evidence 49

division of the marine area of the globe as consisting of the
middle portion of the Atlantic which they call “‘ Mesatlantic.”
Two genera of mammals are assigned as characteristic of
this region—viz. Monachus, the Monk Seal, and the
Sirenian Manatus. Now, neither of these animals frequent
the open ocean, being bound to the proximity of land.
Monachus albiventer inhabits the Mediterranean, and the
closely allied M. tropicalis, the West Indies, separated by
the enormous expanse of the Atlantic Ocean, where no
Monachus is known to exist. Manatus is still more per-
manently attached to the coast. One species, Manatus
inunguis, has even forsaken the sea, and now lives only
in fresh water. Of the two other species, M. senegalensis
inhabits the coasts and estuaries of West Africa, M. ameri-
canus being found along the South American coast and among
the West Indian Islands. The range of these marine
mammals appears to Messrs Sclater to imply that their.
ancestors have spread along some coast-line which probably
united the Old World and the New at no very distant period.”

“The reptilian fauna of the Atlantic islands,” continues
Professor Scharff, “is almost altogether European in its
character.” Among the Geckotidz, a lizard family, the
North African and Chilian species are allied. ‘‘ One species
inhabits the borders of the Mediterranean, while a closely
related one is found not only in South America, but also in
Madagascar and South Africa.”

Interesting from a geographical point of view are the
burrowing Amphisbenidz, which, generally limbless, often
spend their entire existence underground in ants’ nests.
“That such species,” says Scharff, ‘“‘ are not likely to be
conveyed across an ocean by accidental causes in the manner
described by Wallace and others is evident. Now this
large family of sixty-five species is quite confined to America,
Africa, and the Mediterranean region. As very few species
range into North America, while not a single one has been
4

50 The Problem of Atlantis

discovered in Asia, the hypothesis of a land-connection
across the Atlantic explains the geographical distribution of
this family better than any other theory.”

In his monograph of the mollusca of the Atlantic islands
Mr T. V. Wollaston! drew attention to the fact that the
Mediterranean element is much more traceable in the
Canaries than in the other groups of islands. “ Altogether
he believes that the Atlantic islands have originated from
the breaking up of a land which was once more or less
continuous, and which had been intercolonised along ridges
and tracts (now lost beneath the ocean), thus bringing into
comparatively intimate connection many of its parts;
whilst others were separated by channels which served
practically to keep them very decidedly asunder.”

Professor Simroth,? writing on the similarity between the
slugs of Spain, Portugal, North Africa, and the Canaries,
concludes that there was probably a broad land-connection
between these four countries, and that it must have persisted
until comparatively recent times.

Dr W. Kobelt, who formerly adhered to Wallace’s ideas
and ridiculed the Atlantean theory, after having inde-
pendently worked out the same problem more recently,
altered his views. Comparing the European with the
West Indian and Central American faunas, he points out
that the land-shells on the two opposite sides of the
Atlantic certainly imply that an ancient connection existed
between the Old World and the New, which only became
ruptured towards the close of the Miocene epoch of the
Tertiary period. Dr von Ihering * states that no mala-
cologist nowadays could explain the presence of these
continental molluscs on the islands in any other way but

1 Testacea Atlantica, London, 1878.

® Nova Acta d. d. Akad. d. Naturf, 1891, vol. lvi, p. 223.
8 Nachrichtsbl. d. d. malakozool. Gesellsch., 1887, p. 53.

* Englen’s Botanische Fahrbucher, 1893, vol. xvii, p. 51.

The Biological Evidence ee

by their progression on land. He is also strongly in favour
of the theory, on biological grounds, of a former land-
connection between Brazil and Africa.

As regards insect life, certain ants occur both in the Azores
and America. A species of the family Dorylide, which is
of African origin, is also found in South America. Sixty
per cent. of the butterflies and moths found in the Canaries
are of Mediterranean origin, and 20 per cent. of these are
to be found in America.

Some crustaceans afford excellent proof of the justice of
Professor Scharff’s hypothesis. The genus Platyarthus is
represented by three species in Western Europe and North
Africa, one in the Canaries, and one in Venezuela. Porcellio
is also found in all three regions, and other allied forms
occur widely in them. ‘ There is, however, another group
of crustacea which yields such decisive indications of the
former land-connection between Africa and South America
that scarcely anything else is needed to put that theory on
a firm basis. The group referred to is that of the fresh-water
decapods, the species on both sides of the Atlantic showing a
most remarkable affinity.”

- The occurrence of earth-worms is a peculiarly reliable
datum in fixing the former geographical relationship of any
given region. The ocean is an insuperable barrier to earth-
worms, and when it is found that those of the Atlantic
islands are identical with European and North African
forms, little more remains to be said as regards a former
land-connection.

Certain species, concludes Professor Scharff, are liable to
be accidentally carried away from their homes to distant
lands, but they have difficulty in maintaining a foothold in
their new quarters, and do not, as a rule, become established.
Experiments with certain snails seemed to show that it was
possible for those to withstand prolonged immersion in
sea-water. “In order to find out whether animals could

52 The Problem of Atlantis

traverse oceans and thus populate islands, Darwin and others
have attempted to determine experimentally how long
certain snails could stand immersion in sea-water. For one
of their experiments Cyclostoma elegans was taken, a snail
provided with a lid or operculum, which can be closed
over the mouth of the shell. This provision of nature
enabled the creature to withstand a fortnight’s immersion
in sea-water ; and one would imagine such a species to be
easily transported by sea to distant islands in that time.
C. elegans is common on the western border of France
and England; but though dead shells of the species have
been cast upon the shores of Ireland repeatedly, and pro-
bably living ones as well, it has never become established
on this island. If a species so particularly favoured by
nature to resist the deleterious influences of sea-water is
unable to establish itself in a neighbouring island, what
chances are there for less suitably endowed forms to cross
the ocean ?”

Sir William Dawson remarks in his Salient Points in the
Science of the Earth, p.86: “ ‘The late Mr Gywn Jeffreys, in
one of his latest communications on this subject, stated that
54 per cent. of the shallow-water molluscs of New England
and Canada are also European, and of the deep-sea forms,
30 out of 35; these last, of course, enjoying greater
facilities for migration than those which have to travel
slowly along the shallows of the coast in order to cross the
ocean and settle themselves on both sides. Many of these
animals, like the common mussel and sand-clam, are old
settlers, which came over in the Pleistocene period, or even
earlier. .. . The older immigrants may possibly have
taken advantage of lines of coast now submerged.”

M. Louis Germain, a French naturalist, was convinced of
the continental origin of the fauna of the Atlantic isles by a
study of its existing conditions. He even observed numerous
indications of an adaptation to desert life, a close resemblance

The Biological Evidence 53

between the insular mollusca and those of the Mediterranean,
and the existence in the Canaries of a fern found in Pliocene
strata in Portugal. He states that the Pulmonata Mollusca
called Oleacinide have a peculiar distribution, living only
in Central America, the West Indies, the Mediterranean
basin, and the Atlantic isles. In America they have pre-
served the large size that they had in Europe in the Miocene
epoch. In the Mediterranean and the Atlantic islands
they have become much smaller. This geographic distri-
bution of these molluscs implies the extension at the begin-
ning of Miocene times of the Atlantic continent to the
West Indies, and a separation during the Miocene, or toward
its close, between the West Indies and that continent.
“Two facts,” says M. Termier, writing a propos of M.
Germain’s deductions, ‘“‘ remain relative to the marine
animals, and both seem impossible of explanation, except
by the persistence up to very nearly the present times, of
a maritime shore extending from the West Indies to Senegal,
and even binding together Florida, the Bermudas, and the
bottom of the Gulf of Guinea. Fifteen species of marine
mollusca lived at the same time, both in the West Indies
and on the coast of Senegal, and nowhere else, unless this
co-existence can be explained by the transportation of the
‘embryos. On the other hand, the Madreporaria fauna of
the island of St Thomas, studied by M. Gravier, includes
Six species—one does not live outside of St Thomas, except
in the Florida reefs, and four others are known only from
the Bermudas. As the duration of the pelagic life of the
Madreporaria is only a few days, it is impossible to attribute
this surprising reappearance to the action of marine currents.
In taking all this into account, M. Germain is led to admit
the existence of an Atlantic continent connected with the
Iberian peninsula, and with Mauritania, and prolonging
itself far towards the south, so as to include some regions
of desert climate. During the Miocene period, again,

54 The Problem of Atlantis

this continent extends as far as the West Indies. It is then
portioned off, at first in the direction of the West Indies,
then in the south, by the establishment of a marine shore,
which extends as far as Senegal and to the depths of the
Gulf of Guinea, then at length in the east, probably during
the Pliocene epoch, along the coast of Africa. The last great
fragment, finally engulfed, and no longer having left any
other vestiges than the four archipelagoes, would be the
Atlantis of Plato.”

M. R. M. Gattefossé of Lyons, well known as mystic,
chemist, botanist, archeologist, and stout upholder of the
theory that an Atlantean civilisation flourished in the Tertiary
period, has made a special study of the botanical aspect of
the question. He tells us that the Canaries, Azores, and
Madeira have an existing flora comparable with that of
Western Europe in Tertiary times, and that from the moment
of rupture between these islands and the European continent
this flora has undergone a special and localised evolution.
It has also explicit relations with American flora.t Several
species of orchids flourish only in the Canaries, Madeira,
and America.

The evidence from animal and plant life in support of
the Atlantean theory is in consonance with that drawn from
geological sources, and assuredly defeats the well-worn
contention that no land-connection ever existed between
Europe, Africa, and America. But in dealing with-this evi-
dence, it seems to me that the main point has been missed.
Most floral and much faunal life unquestionably dates from
Tertiary times, and if the evidence capable of being adduced
from it does not, for this reason, much assist us in our
argument for the existence of a now submerged Atlantic
continent in late Quaternary times, on the other hand
it does not aid the presumption that this continent

1 See his Adam, Homme Tertiaire, Lyons, 1919, and La Vérité sur
L’ Atlantide, Lyons, 1923.

a

The Biological Evidence 5s

became submerged in Tertiary times. Quaternary forms
which are not of recent importation appear to-day in its
vestigial islands, as has been shown above. Thus the
comparatively recent existence of an Atlantean continent
is borne out by the biological evidence as well as by that
of geology.

It is extraordinary that men who will cheerfully admit
the fact of the subsidence of inhabited land in other regions,
whether in Japan, the West Indies, the English Channel, or
elsewhere, who will even support the hypothesis of a
Lemurian continent in the Pacific Ocean, the original
home of humanity, according to many, look askance at the
theory of lost Atlantis simply because it has a traditional
background. Such a standpoint is not only weak; it is
thoroughly unscientific, for, by a consensus of opinion
among the most advanced of living archzologists, tradition
is now regarded as supplying a horizon to the archeologist,
a clue, the proper apprehension of which has resulted in
the justification of scores of local legends, and the enrich-
ment of antiquarian science to a degree formerly undreamt of.
Happily the Victorian assumption that tradition, and all it
stood for, was of the nature of gibberish is now itself so
much discredited that he who still affects it is usually
regarded as a relic of an age when the credulity of incredulity
and the crude denial of all facts not capable of instant
and material proof were in fashion.

More than one acute observer of animal life has made
allusion to a strange and fatal habit of the lemmings of
Norway. The lemming, a small rodent, occasionally
receives a migratory impulse which sends it southward in
great numbers. Hosts of these animals annually leave the
Norwegian coast, and swim far out into the Atlantic. On
reaching the spot to which the migratory instinct has so
unerringly called them, they circle round for some consider-

56 The Problem of Atlantis

able time, as if in search of land, but, failing in their quest,
gradually sink exhausted into the depths. Similarly it is
well known that large flocks of birds annually fly to a part
of the Atlantic where no land is now visible, and after flutter-
ing about in dismay for some considerable time, fall exhausted
into the water.

CHAPTER V
THE EVIDENCE FROM PRE-HISTORY

IF we imagine the continental mass of Atlantis slowly
disintegrating during the Ice Age, we must admit that
its gradual break-up would have given rise to repeated
immigrations, or to invasions of Europe during a pro-
longed period of time. Plato gives the date of the
destruction of Atlantis at gooo years before Solon’s day,
or about 9600 B.c., but it is probable that men were
making their way from the partially wrecked continent
into Europe many thousands of years before that date,
although one of those migratory impulses chanced to
synchronise with the precise period he mentions.

But I shall try to adduce evidence that the first of these
migrations did not reach Europe by sea, but by dry land,
and that Europe at the time of its entrance was still in
places joined to the now sunken continent of Atlantis.
The migrating race I speak of is that known to archzologists
as the Cré-Magnon, or Aurignacian, from the circumstance
that one of the earliest discoveries of its peculiar culture
was made by M. E. Lartet, a French anthropologist, in a
grotto hard by the little hamlet of Crd-Magnon, near Les
Eyzies, on the Vezére, where he found five skeletons which
have come to be regarded as the type of the great Crd-
Magnon race. Prior to this, similar remains were discovered
in 1852 in the sepulchral grotto of Aurignac, from which
locality the especial culture of this people came to be known as
Aurignacian. Attempts have been made to differentiate

57

58 The Problem of Atlantis

between the racial character of these finds, but without
success."

Anthropologists at once remarked upon the extraordinary
height and brain-capacity of the newly found Cré-Magnon
race. Broca noted that the brain-content of the skull of a
Cré-Magnon woman surpassed that of the average male
of to-day. The average height of the men of this race was
6 feet 14 inches. The shoulders were exceedingly broad,
and the arms short as compared with the legs, an indication
of high racial development. The nose was thin, but pro-
minent, the cheek-bones high, the chin massive. Sir Arthur
Keith remarks that this race was one of the finest mentally
and physically the world has ever seen.?

When the Cré-Magnon race’ arrived in the Biscay region
of Europe at the close of the Ice Age (which came to an
end about 25,000 years ago), they found the continent
sparsely inhabited by a sub-variety of the human species
which did not at all approach it in physique or ability.
This was Neanderthal man, a creature almost human, who
had developed the art of making rough stone tools. But
he was of a low and plantigrade type, scarcely differentiated
in some ways from the higher apes, unable to grasp the tools
or weapons he fashioned as might modern man. Also he
was hampered by a relatively small brain capacity. He
speedily retreated before the superior skill and strength of
the Cro-Magnons, who, little by little, dispossessed him of
the soil of Europe, so that in the end he became extinct.

Now such burying-places of the Cré-Magnons as have been
discovered reveal new and extraordinary conditions. The.
graves of this race are full of flints, pebbles, perforated shells,
teeth, and other charms, and amulets. Shells are particu-

1 That both names are employed interchangeably by all anthropologists
of standing proves that the peoples of the two settlements had a common
origin, but “ Cré-Magnon ” is usually applied to the race and “ Aurig-
nacian ” to the culture it developed.

* Ancient Types of Man, New York, 1911, Diec7xe

The Evidence from Pre-History 59

larly numerous, and some of them seem to have been made
into mantles or gorgets, which had covered the whole or
part of the body. On the walls of the caverns where those
burials took place are imprints of human hands which had
been laid on the rock and then dusted round with coloured
earth. In many cases it is plain that one or more finger-
joints of the left hand had been cut off. The practice was
analogous to that of some present-day African Bushmen,
Australian Blackfellows, and some American-Indian tribes
who practice finger-mutilation. This is done on the death
of a relative, the intention being to “ cut off deaths”; that is,
to sacrifice a part of the body to save the whole. We shall
see later that the Aztecs of Mexico left the imprints of the
hands of their sacrificial victims on the door-jambs of the
heroes who had taken them prisoners in battle. In some
cases traces of red paint are found on the bones of the
Cré6-Magnon remains, and this implies that red ochre,
ruddle, or some other red earth was rubbed on the body
after death to give it the colour of blood, that is of life, to
restore to it the hues of life, to bestow these hues in
abundance, in the hope that one day it might resume
existence, and shake off the heavy sleep into which it
seemed to have fallen, or enjoy a healthy and natural life in
another sphere.

The industry and art of this primitive people who settled
on the Biscay coast, and in the Pyrenean region and Dordogne
were much more highly advanced than anything the world
has to show prior to their appearance in Europe. Indeed
their art has been lauded by competent critics as in many
respects equal to that of modern times. The technique of
their flint work is far superior to that seen in the clumsy
tools of Neanderthal man, and the great variety of graving-
tools or burins which they used for engraving on stone are
masterpieces of the flint-maker’s art. They also, unlike the
Neanderthals, used tools of bone and horn. Moreover, the

60 The Problem of Atlantis

inventive genius of the Cré-Magnons is well displayed in
the flint implements they fashioned for use in fishing.

The distribution of this race in Europe extended by
degrees along the Riviera into the Pyrenees, the Cantabrian
Alps, and along the Dordogne, and the Somme, the Meuse,
the Rhine, and the Danube. “ The strongest proof,” says
Professor H. F. Osborn, “of the unity of heredity as
displayed in the dominant Cré-Magnon race in Europe from
early Aurignacian until the close of Magdalenian times is
the unity of their art impulse. . . . These people were
the Palxolithic (Old Stone Age) Greeks ; artistic observa-
tion and representation and a true sense of proportion and
of beauty were instinctive with them from the beginning.
Their stone and bone industry may show vicissitudes and
the influence of invasion and of trade and the bringing in
of new inventions, but their art shows a continuous evolution
and development from the first, animated by a single motive,
namely, the appreciation of the beauty of form and the
realistic representation of it.” Elsewhere he says: 2
** Decorative art has now become a passion [with the Cré-
Magnons], and graving-tools of great variety and shape,
curved, straight, convex or concave—diversified both in size
and in style of technique—are very numerous. We may
imagine that the long periods of cold and inclement weather
were employed in these occupations. . . . Strong and very
sharp graving-tools were also needed for the sculpture out
of ivory and soapstone of such human figures and figurines
as the statuettes found in the Grottes de Grimaldi, and at
Willendorf, and still more powerful tools for such work as
the large stone bas-reliefs at Laussel. . . . As this indus-
trial evolution widens, it is apparent that we witness not the
local evolution of a single people but rather the influence and
collaboration of numerous colonies reacting more or less

1 Men of the Old Stone Age, 1915, pp. 315, 316.
2 Ibid., pp. 311, 312.

To face p. 60. PEALE SUIT.

'
Why)
tty

q
AMM

DANO By le

Figures of horses from Les Espélungues and Le Mas d’Azil.

(From L’ Anthropologie, vols, x, xvii.)

Aurignacian Art.

The Evidence from Pre-History 61

one upon the other and spreading their inventions and
discoveries.”

The wonderful art of the Cré-Magnons has been brought
to the gaze of an astonished world out of the caves which
they formerly inhabited in the Biscayan regions of France
and Spain. It consists chiefly of paintings, engravings, and
sculptures of animals, bears, mammoths, horses, deer, and
particularly the bison or aurochs, and not infrequent carvings,
bas-reliefs, or figurines of the human form. These are
chiefly female, and display an advanced knowledge of
anatomy. The smaller figures in the round are almost
certainly idols of goddesses, and, says Osborn, ‘‘ resemble the
work of modern Cubists.”” This Aurignacian art had many
phases over a period of about 15,000 years, or during the
period 25,000 to 10,000 years ago.

The Abbé Breuil, than whom no one has done so much
for the elucidation of the Aurignacian period, sees in this
art a certain similarity to that of North Africa. He believes
that the Cré-Magnons followed the southern shores of the
Mediterranean, and that the statuettes they made bear a
resemblance to those of baked clay found in the Nile Valley.
The head-dresses of some of them, he points out, bear a
marked likeness to those seen in the Egyptian figurines.
These statuettes of females represent the Great Mother,
the fertile, productive Goddess of Nature, as may be observed
from the exaggeration of the breasts and hips.

A glance at the accompanying reproductions of Cré-
Magnon pictures and sculptures will do more than pages
of description to demonstrate to the reader that the people
who painted and carved them cannot be classed as savages.
The horse’s head, from Mas d’Azil, is, it will readily be
conceded, worthy of an Athenian frieze, the reindeer
engraved on a piece of antler has all the flair and technical
completeness of modern French draughtsmanship, and the
bison from the ceiling of Altmira gives a marvellous impres-

62 The Problem of Atlantis

sion of life and force. Here is a masterly perfection to
which the art of Egypt is as the angular scratchings of a
child with slate and pencil. Such an art was not developed
in a few decades. As has been said, it persisted in early
South-Western Europe for many thousands of years before
it was ultimately destroyed, and zt must have persisted else-
where for nearly as many thousands of years—for as long, at
least, as it took for Egyptian art to develop, before it entered
Europe at all. But where? ‘The race who carved and
painted so wonderfully possessed a highly-strung zsthetic
sense, a cultivated taste, a sure touch. They were un-
questionably the parents of European civilisation. Whence
did they come ?

The Abbé Breuil, who occupies a position in prehistoric
studies at which none dare cavil, is strongly of opinion that
successive invasions of culture took place either from the
south or Mediterranean region, or from that part of Europe,
the Biscayan coasts of Spain and France, which he calls
the ‘ Atlantic.” ‘“‘ Certainly,” adds Professor Osborn,
‘the archezologic testimony strongly supports this culture-
invasion hypothesis, and it appears to be strengthened in a
measure by the study of the human types.” ‘“‘ We can
hardly contemplate an origin from the east,” says Breuil,?
“ because these earlier phases of the Aurignacian industry
have not as yet been met with in Central or Eastern Europe.
** A southerly origin,” says Osborn, ‘‘ seems more probable,
because the Aurignacian colonies appear to surround the
entire periphery of the Mediterranean, being found in
Northern Africa, Sicily, and the Italian and Iberian penin-
sulas, from which they extended over the larger part of
southern France. In Tunis we find a very primitive
Aurignacian, like that of the Abri Audit of Dordogne,

1 Op. cit., p. 277, and pp. 305, 306.
2 “ Les subdivisions du palzolithic supérieur,” Cong. Intern. a’ Anthrop,
Prehist., XIV session, Geneva, 1912, p. 175.

The Evidence from Pre-History 63

with implements undoubtedly similar to those of Chatel-
perron in France. Even far to the east, in the cave of
Antelias in Syria, as well as in certain stations of Pheenicia,
culture- deposits are found which are characteristically
Aurignacian”’ ; but “the pure early Aurignacian industry is
seen in the regions of Dordogne and the Pyrenees.”

The undoubted fact, then, is that Cré-Magnon man first
appeared in South-Western Europe at an epoch which is
universally dated at about 25,000 years ago, the end of the
Pleistocene or Ice Age, when widespread subsidences were
taking place in Europe and the Atlantic area. He brought
with him an art of high development, an art which had been
evolved elsewhere. ‘That he came from the East is highly
improbable, as the finds of Aurignacian culture in that
region are obviously of much later date than those of France
and Spain ; nor does the art preserved in them at all approach
that of the Biscayan or Pyrenean type. As for the conten-
tion that Aurignacian art is of African origin, it is certainly
found in Tunis in a primitive (or debased ?) form, probably
derived from that of Spain. But it is noteworthy that those
Aurignacian stations which have so far been discovered in
Spain and southern France are, without exception, situated
in the Biscayan district, and not on the southern coasts of the
peninsula. .

But another and evél'stronger proof of the Atlantic origin
of the Cré-Magnon race is forthcoming in the circumstance
that the culture of the Guanche aborigines of the Canary
Islands was undoubtedly of the Aurignacian type. Says
Professor Osborn (op. cit., pp. 454, 455): “‘ Our interest in
the fate of the Cré-Magnons is so great that the Guanche
theory may also be considered ; it is known to be favoured

1 Professor J. L. Myres draws a close parallel between the European
and African forms, and believes the latter to be older. It is a nice point,
and, even so, does not invalidate the Atlantean hypothesis, which regards
an African or Biscayan secondary origin for Aurignacian culture with
equal placidity. See Cambridge Ancient History, vol. i, p. 36.

*»

64 The Problem of Atlantis

by many anthropologists : von Behr, von Luschan, Mehlis,
and especially by Verneau. The Guanches were a race of
people who formerly spread all over the Canary Islands,
and who preserved their primitive characteristics even after
their conquest by Spain in the fifteenth century. The dif-
ferences from the supposed modern Cré-Magnon type may
be mentioned first. The skin of the Guanches is described
by the poet Viana as light coloured, and Verneau considers
that the hair was blond or light chestnut and the eyes blue ;
the colouring, however, is somewhat conjectural. The
features of resemblance to the ancient Cré-Magnons are
numerous. The minimum stature of the men was 5 feet
7 inches, and the maximum 6 feet 7 inches ; in one locality
the average male stature was over 6 feet. ‘The women were
comparatively small.1_ The most striking characters of the
head were the fine forehead, the extremely long skull, and
the pentagonal form of the cranium, when seen from above,
caused by the prominence of the parietals—a Cré-Magnon
characteristic. . . . The offensive weapons in warfare con-
sisted of three stones, a club, and several knives of obsidian ;
the defensive weapon was a simple lance. The Guanches
used wooden swords with great skill. The habitation of all
the people was in large, well-sheltered caverns, which
honeycombed the sides of the mountains; all the walls
of these caverns were decorated, the ceilings were covered
with a uniform coat of red ochre, while the walls were decor-
ated with various geometric designs in red, black, grey, and
white. Hollowed-out stones served as lamps. We may
conclude with Verneau that there is evidence, although not
of a very convincing kind, that the Guanches were related
to the Cré-Magnons.”

Dr René Verneau, a French anthropologist of large ex-
perience, who spent five years in the Canaries, says: 2

1 So were the Cr6-Magnon women.
* Cing années de séjour aux tiles Canaries, p. 47.

The Evidence from Pre-History 65

“The Guanches were above all troglodytes—that is to say
they lived in caves. There is no lack of large, well-sheltered
caves in the Canary Islands. ... Here is a description
of one of these caves, the Grotto of Goldar: The interior
is almost square, 16 feet 4 inches along the left side, 18 feet
along the right. The width at the back is 15 feet 6 inches.
A second cave much smaller, opens from the right wall.
All these walls are decorated with paintings. 'The ceiling is
covered with a uniform coat of red ochre, while the walls
are decorated with various geometric designs in red, black,
grey, or white. High up runs a sort of cornice painted red,”
which is decorated with white concentric circles.

The late Lord Abercromby, a sound authority on every-
thing pertaining to archeology, wrote :1 “‘ In the museums
of the Grand Canary, Teneriffe, and Palma a considerable
number of prehistoric vessels are preserved. Anthropologists
are agreed that the natives of the archipelago, at the time of
its conquest in the fifteenth century, were a composite
people, made up of at least three stocks: a Cré-Magnon
type, a Hamitic or Berber type, and a brachycephalic type
(t.e. round skulled). These natives were in a Neolithic
stage of civilisation. . . . Even the painted wares of the
Grand Canary appear to be of local origin and not due to
external influence; although undoubted Lybian inscrip-
tions in the Grand Canary and lava querns of Iron Age
type prove that the archipelago was visited before its con-
quest by the Spaniards without affecting the general civilisa-
tion of its inhabitants.”

All this proves, to my mind, that the Cré-Magnon race
was indigenous to the Canary Islands, the remnants of Atlantis,
and did not drift there from Europe. If it is implied that
they did, how, it may be asked, did they make their way
to the Canaries? My contention is that they made their

1 “« The Prehistoric Pottery of the Canary Islands,” Nature, 3rd Dec.
1914.
5

66 The Problem of Atlantis

way from Atlantis to Europe by way of an existing land-
connection, before the invention of boats. As I have
observed, we can scarcely credit that part of Plato’s narra-
tive which speaks of Atlantis as a port frequented by the
world’s shipping—at the date 9600 B.c., and a fortiori, not
at 25,000 B.c. That a third wave from Atlantis invaded
Europe by sea 10,000 years ago I will later endeavour to
prove. But that Cré-Magnon man came to Europe by
water is out of the question. Equally absurd is the notion
that he reached the Canaries by sea. Like many of the
animals and plants of these vestigial islands, he was cut off
and marooned on them by some great natural cataclysm.
Reason and fact strongly buttress this opinion. Indeed, I
can see no alternative to it that has any chance of acceptance
by unbiassed minds. Not a single boat or drawing of a
boat of the Aurignacian period has been found, and it is
a mere truism that not even the humblest kind of craft was
known to man for many thousands of years subsequent to
the arrival of the Cré-Magnon race in Europe. We find
this race in the Canaries, whence passage to or from Europe
by sea was impossible during Aurignacian times. In what
other way than by the hypothesis of the breaking down of a
former land-connection can the mystery of the isolation of
Cré-Magnon man on the Canaries be solved ?

But can we light upon any further evidence that the Cré-
Magnons were of Atlantic origin? The celebrated ethnolo-
gist, Ripley, in his Races of Europe (p. 38), gives it as his
considered opinion that the Basque people of the Pyrenees
speak a language inherited from the Cré-Magnons. ‘“ This
hypothesis,” remarks Osborn, “is well worth considering,
for it is not inconceivable that the ancestors of the Basques
conquered the Cré-Magnons and subsequently acquired
their language.” Now the Basque language has no linguistic
affinities with any European tongue, but it has strong
resemblances to certain American languages. ‘‘ The fact is

The Evidence from Pre-History 67

indisputable,” says Dr Farrar, in his Families of Speech
(p. 132), “and is eminently noteworthy, that while the
affinities of the Basque roots have never been conclusively
elucidated, there has never been any doubt that this isolated
language, preserving its identity in a western corner of
Europe between two mighty kingdoms, resembles in its
grammatical structure the aboriginal languages of the vast
opposite continent, and those alone.” Says Professor J. L.
Myres in The Cambridge Ancient History (p. 48): ‘The
similarity between Aurignacian skulls in Europe and the
pre-historic skulls in Lagoa Santa in Brazil and other
remote localities round the margins of South America,
suggests that this type had once almost as wide a distribu-
tion as that of the older types of implements.” 1

It has been noted, too, that the Cr6-Magnons, as befitted
a people of oceanic origin, practised fishing. Like the people
of Plato’s Atlantis, they seem to have had an especial rever-
ence for the bull, the figure of which is so frequently depicted
on the walls of their caverns. Sea-shells, too, appear to
have entered in some manner into the ritual of their faith.
Probably these symbolised the “ god-body,” or divine
essence, as in Japan, but in any case they are employed by
more than one sea-people (or by a race like the Mexicans,
who conserved a strong memory of the sea) as a species of
life-giving fetish.

Briefly, official anthropology has not as yet arrived at any
definite conclusion as to the place of origin of Cré-Magnon
man. He did not come from the East or the North, nor
can his first home be placed in the South with any degree of

» The Cambridge Ancient History, which has only come into my hands
while writing the above pages, and which, indeed, has just been pub-
lished, contains some passages corroborative of my conclusions, It
presumes the south-western origin of the Cré-Magnons, and speaks of
their culture (p. 50) as “‘ a well-marked regional culture of the Atlantic
coast plain.” It also corroborates other of my conclusions, as I will
show at a later stage.

¥

68 The Problem of Atlantis

certainty. There is only one supposition left. The map
shows that the greater number of his stations, especially
those of early date, were situated in the Biscay country and
in Dordogne. Does any good reason exist for believing
that he did not come from the Atlantic region ? I can per-
ceive none, but I do not expect to carry with me the great
body of official archeological opinion. The archeologist is
rightly cautious regarding his acceptance of what he would
probably describe as a daring hypothesis, but my charge
against him is that the mere habit of caution has bred within
him the “credulity of incredulity.”” I behold an art full-
fledged and having behind it many centuries of development
suddenly imported into a region to which it has hitherto
been foreign. Iask myself whence did it come? The facts
adduced before prove that the Aurignacian art of Cré-
Magnon man arrived in Biscay neither from the North nor
the East, nor did it originate in Africa. Only the West is
left as the place of its provenance. ‘‘ Ah, but you must not
look in that direction,” cries the official archeologist. I
reply that I look in the direction to which the facts point—
to the Atlantic region, where the Spaniards found the Cré-
Magnon race still in possession of the remnant of Atlantis.
If Cr6-Magnon man did not hail from that region, whence,
I ask, did he enter Europe? I consult the oracles, but, alas !
“the oracles are dumb.” They cannot answer me, and that
for the most excellent of reasons—because they do not know
themselves, or, if they do know, fear to speak.

It seems to me that the geological as well as the archzo-
logical evidence makes it more than clear that Cré-Magnon
man was the first of those immigrant waves which surged
over Europe as the great continent in the Atlantic experienced
cataclysm after cataclysm, partial submergence or volcanic

upheaval. In my view these catastrophes forced him east-

* Excepting those I have quoted, who are among the few with first-
hand knowledge of Cr6é-Magnon archeology.

PLATE IV.

To face p. 68

‘pry uepeUSsIINy
(Dae pp eudeaVvD YT Woy ‘[Ine1g 9qqy.I “W Aq dMeIq)

‘

“BIW

uosig Sursieyo

The Evidence from Pre-History 69

ward over a still existing land-connection into northern
Spain and southern France. I am well aware that this view
has been expressed in past years with more or less cogency,
but not, I think, with such an array of modern evidence as
I have brought to its support, and with only fragmentary
knowledge of the whole circumstances of Aurignacian
culture as recently brought to light.

After many thousands of years Cr6-Magnon man adopted
the later Solutrean flint culture, in which we find the flint
chipped by pressure in fine, thin flakes from the core. This
beautiful technique originally came from the East, probably
from Libya or Somaliland, but it never penetrated to the
south of the great barrier of the Pyrenees, and the Cré-
Magnons southward of that mountain chain were not
affected by it. This seems to me to prove conclusively
that it was of extraneous origin. Nor did it penetrate Italy.
Who its “ carriers ”’ were is at present unknown. Although
it affected Cré-Magnon tool-making, it had no influence on
Aurignacian art, which, however, languished somewhat at
this period. Soon, notwithstanding these new influences,
it underwent a renascence, which is generally described by
archeologists as the Magdalenian epoch. This Magdalenian
phase of Aurignacian art seems to have had its rise about
16,000 years ago, and exhibits the genius of the Crd-Magnon
race at its apogee, preceding its sudden decline and dis-
appearance as the dominant type in Europe. The Cré-
Magnons of this time, says Osborn, are commonly known as
Magdalenians, “‘ taking their name from the type station of
La Madeleine, as the Greeks in their highest stage took their
name from Athens and were known as Athenians.” He
shows elsewhere that the ultimate origin of this Magdalenian
culture is, like that ofits predecessor, unknown. “‘ It seems,”
he remarks, “like a technical invasion in the history of Western
Europe and not an inherent part of the main line of cultural
development.” Breuil observes that “it appears as if the

70 The Problem of Atlantis

fundamental elements of the superior Aurignacian culture
had been contributed by some unknown route to constitute
the kernel of the Magdalenian civilisation while the Solutrean
episode was going on elsewhere.”

This can only mean that the older Aurignacian art received
impetus and stimulation from its original and parent source.
“These Magdalenians were newcomers in western France,”
but undoubtedly of Cré-Magnon race. “ Breuil himself,” says
Osborn, ‘“‘has positively stated that the whole Upper
Paleolithic art development of Europe was the work of one
race ; if so, this race can be none other than the Cré-Magnon.”
I gather from this that at what is called the Magdalenian
period a further immigration set into Europe from disin-
tegrating Atlantis. Naturally these immigrants would bring
with them, coming from the hub and centre of the ancient
civilisation they represented, a higher culture than the older
settlers of their race had introduced into Europe. They
appear as from nowhere. Naturally it occurs to many
archeologists to refer their origin to the East. The East has
probably served official archeology much better as an imag-
inary oficina gentium than it ever did the world of reality.
It is a handy place from which to conjure up any race or
people the precise home of which is in any way conjectural.
_ Why the provenance of practically all the civilised peoples
who have ever contributed to the sum of human culture
should be located in the Orient has, I must say, been to me
an abiding mystery. This extraordinary bias in favour of
an Eastern origin for everything is a capital example of the
manner in which traditions may be abused. The golfer
gives an absurd waggle to his club simply because all other
golfers do ; the smith clinks on his anvil, between the heavier
strokes of his hammer, simply because all other smiths from
the beginning of time have done the same. The barber
keeps snipping his scissors when he is not cutting your hair ;
similarly the antiquary, quite as unthinkingly, or instinctively,

AP} wee
a

The Evidence from Pre-History 71

keeps looking eastward, because it is in his professional blood
to do so.

Archeologists of experience who have studied the Aurig-
nacian culture deny an Eastern origin to its early phases.
They assert that Magdalenian culture is but a later phase
of Aurignacian—and then go on to look for an Eastern origin
for Magdalenian !

It would seem then, so comparatively sudden is the change
in artistic standards of excellence, that at the Magdalenian
epoch the Cr6-Magnons of France and Spain were reinforced
by a second wave of immigrants from the old Atlantean home,
who had perfected the ancient and common art of both in a
different sphere. The climate of Europe was changing, and
the ice-cap was once more creeping southward, so that
France and Spain were cold and damp, and later experienced
tundra conditions. Nevertheless, prehistoric art was never
at such a height of excellence. The cave-shelters were once
more adorned with masterly representations of wild animals.
The use of colour became more complex, and was employed
with increasing skill and taste. Paint was mixed on palettes,
and placed on cavern walls by lamplight. The rich and
varied art of this period, its sculpture and carving, compares
well with those of Egypt and Babylon, says Osborn, who
continues (p. 358): “‘ There can be little doubt that such
diversities of temperament, of talent, and of predisposition
as obtain to-day also obtained then, and that they tended
to differentiate society into chieftains, priests, and medicine-
men, hunters of large game and fishermen, fashioners of
flints and dressers of hides, makers of clothing and footwear,
makers of ornaments, engravers, sculptors in wood, bone,
vory, and stone, and artists with colour and brush. In their
artistic work at least these people were animated with a com-
pelling sense of truth, and we cannot deny them a strong
appreciation of beauty.”

It is significant that these later Aurignacians introduced

72 The Problem of Atlantis

the harpoon of bone, which proves conclusively that they
were a fishing people. The Magdalenian culture, like its
predecessor, still centred round the Biscay-Pyrenean region
and the Dordogne, although it branched out later to Ger-
many and Austria and to Britain by way of the land-bridge
which connected our island with the European continent
untii as late as about 3000 B.c. But it never reached southern
Spain or Italy. Cré-Magnon man at this period travelled
far and wide ; there was an extensive system of barter, and
his progress north and south can readily be traced.

But this culture declined. The dry cold with its tundra
conditions, in which flourished the antelope and the
mammoth, turned once more to moistness, and these animals
disappeared. New conditions of life obtained, and the Cré-
Magnons lived mostly by fishing. Stagnation set in.
Another race was knocking at the door.

CHAPTER VI
THe THIRD ATLANTEAN INVASION

THE race which now challenged the supremacy of the Cré-
Magnons, and which appears in Spain and France at a date
generally fixed by archeologists at about 10,000 years ago,
was the Azilian-Tardenoisian, so called from the Pyrenean
locality in which their remains were first found. Once again
we have to look to the Pyrenees and Biscay for the first
traces in Europe of an invading race arriving at a period
long before that in- which European history begins. This
people brought with them a flint culture of their own.
They worked surprisingly small flints, especially in the form
of fish-hooks, of surprising smoothness and delicacy, and
possessed a geometric art which was undoubtedly the
parent of the arabesque. They painted strange symbols,
which have been described as alphabetic, on pebbles, and
introduced the bow and arrow. They spread round the
Mediterranean basin, pressing northward. The men were
dressed in short trousers and wore feather head-dresses ;
the women in short skirts and caps, and both were lavishly
covered with ornament. _

Whence came this people? ‘“‘ The Azilian bone-harpoon
industry, like the Tardenoisian microlithic flint industry,
was largely pursued by fisher-folk,” says Osborn. Breuil
believes the Azilian-Tardenoisians to be of Mediterranean
origin, and sees the gradual introduction of Azilian culture
in that area gradually mingling with the Aurignacian.
Similar industrial centres have been discovered in Tunis,
Portugal, and southern Spain. ‘That is, the Azilian culture

73

74 The Problem of Atlantis

is found in its earliest known stages in North Africa and
South-Western Europe.

The question which confronts us is: Did it develop in
these regions, or was it introduced there? Azilian burials
invariably show the face turned to the west. The body was
smothered in ochre. These Azilian-Tardenoisian people
were undoubtedly the parents of the great Mediterranean
or Iberian race, who spread over southern Europe and pene-
trated to Britain and Norway on the north and Egypt on
the east. They certainly introduced the Neolithic or New
Stone Age civilisation. “So striking,” says Professor Elliot
Smith, “is the family likeness between the early Neolithic
peoples of the British Isles and the Mediterranean and the
bulk of the population, both ancient and modern, of Egypt
and East Africa, that a description of the bones of an early
Briton of that remote epoch might apply in all essential
details to an inhabitant of Somaliland.” In passing, I
may mention as regards the view of the wide diffusion
of the Iberian people, that Professor Gregory of Glasgow
suggests that the Incas of Peru may have been of Iberian
or Berber stock, and crossed from Africa ‘“‘ by the
Canaries and the Azores, and possibly other islands now
non-existent.”

But much difference of opinion exists regarding the
origin of the Azilian-Tardenoisian stock and culture. It
invaded Europe and the Mediterranean basin at a date
which, broadly speaking, can well be collated with that given
by Plato in his Critias and Timeus. If the statements made
in these works arise out of a genuine folk-memory of such
an event (as, indeed, I am convinced is the case), we then
have before us one of the most remarkable survivals in the
records of folk-history. ‘The modern world possesses no
such records, because these are no longer handed down
from parent to child in the sanctity of a hushed wonder.
But that less sophisticated races cherish the memory of such

The Third Atlantean Invasion 75

events over very long spaces of time we have excellent proof.
Moreover, it is not improbable that, as has been shown,
Egyptian records may have helped to bridge the gulf over
several centuries. The Babylonians in the Gilgamesh epic
undoubtedly preserved the confused memory of events
which greatly antedated their own heyday, and the Maya of
Central America had folk-tales, oral and literary, like the
Popol Vuh, telling of early migrations which have been
proved by subsequent research to have taken place at least
fifteen to eighteen centuries before the Spanish conquest.
Chinese tradition covers a lapse of time which must be
counted in thousands rather than hundreds of years. But
I will not stress this point, weak as it must undoubtedly
seem to many, because, as I have already said, I do not
rest my hypothesis of the former existence of an Atlantic
continent on the tale of Plato alone. ‘The fact that the date
of the coming of the Azilian-Tardenoisians, as given by
the best authorities, synchronises generally with the date
Plato gives for the destruction of Atlantis may be purely
coincidental. I will leave this phase of my argument with
the observation that some coincidences are more extraordinary
than proven facts.

To return to the origin of the Azilian-Tardenoisian race
and culture. The Abbé Breuil believes them to have come
from “ circum-Mediterranean sources.”” Schmidt inclines
to the view that Azilian-Tardenoisian is merely a later
development of the Magdalenian. But both are vague
regarding origins, and disinclined to commit themselves in
view of what appears to them scanty evidence. It is signi-
ficant to the student of Atlantean archzology that official
archeologists should be unable or unwilling to venture more
than a passing expression of opinion regarding the origins
of the several races which entered Western Europe and the
Mediterranean area in prehistoric times. Why, it may well
be asked, should all these races appear suddenly in the same

76 The Problem of Atlantis

area? And why should men of science hold such extremely
vague views regarding their provenance ?

The Azilian-Tardenoisians were merely the first wave of
a better-known stock, the Iberian, or so-called Mediter-
ranean race. An equal difference of opinion on the part
of authorities is to be encountered as regards the original
home of this people. Sergi, than whom none made a
closer study of the problem, held at least three different
points of view at three different periods of his life on this
thorny subject. He says (Mediterranean Race, p. 39 ff.):
** But that original stock could not have its cradle in the basin
of the Mediterranean, a basin more fitted for the confluence
of peoples and for their active development; the cradle
whence they dispersed in many directions was more pro-
bably in Africa. The study of the fauna and flora of the
Mediterranean exhibits the same phenomenon and becomes
another argument in favour of the African origin of the
Mediterranean peoples.”

He proceeds to say that a study of the Hamitic race has
assisted him in arriving at a conclusion. In the description
“‘ Hamitic’ he includes ancient and modern Egyptians,
Nubians, Abyssinians, Gallas, Somalis, Berbers, Fulahs, and
the Guanches of the Canaries. The physical characteristics
of all these peoples he finds to be essentially the same, and
he looks for their place of origin in Africa. At first he did
so in East Africa, in the region of the great lakes, near the
sources of the Nile and in Somaliland, chiefly encouraged
in this by the fact that the race was so frequently and
anciently portrayed on the Egyptian monuments, and by
the presence of flint implements of the Palzolithic Age in
the Nile valley. But extensive finds of worked flints are
also found in North Africa and the Sahara. ‘“‘ The idea has
thus arisen that Western rather than Eastern Africa was the
original home of these peoples.” Later still, it seemed to
him more reasonable to look once more to the region of the

The Third Atlantean Invasion 77

great lakes as being more favourable to human existence.
All the same, he “‘ will not deny to the Sahara the possibility
of being the cradle ” of the Mediterranean race.

There is thus very good reason to suppose that the Iberian
race had a very early connection with the Atlas region of
North Africa. The Iberians of the Roman era were known
to the Italians as Atlanteans. ‘‘ The Atlanteans,” says Dr
Bodichon, who passed many years in Algeria, “ among the
ancients passed for the favourite children of Neptune.
They made known the worship of this god to other nations
—to the Egyptians, for example. In other words, the
Atlanteans were the first known navigators.”

That these Iberians of the Atlas, the descendants of the
_ Azilian-Tardenoisians, were a people with maritime pro-
clivities has now been well substantiated. Mr Donald A.
Mackenzie, summing up the proof of Azilian-Tardenoisian
and Iberian maritime knowledge in his interesting book,
Ancient Man in Britain (p. 68 ff.), says that the easiest
crossing to Britain from the continent was over the English
Channel land-bridge. This was ultimately cut through by
the sea, so that the Azilian-Tardenoisian people from
Central and Western Europe must have used boats to cross
with before polished stone implements came into use.
“It is possible,” he says, “‘ that the Azilian, Tardenoisian,
and Maglemosian peoples had made considerable progress
in the art of navigation. ... There were boats on the
Mediterranean at a very early period. One of the Clyde
canoes, found embedded in the Clyde silt twenty-five feet
above the present sea-level, was found to have a plug of cork
which could only have come from the area in which cork
trees grow—Spain, Southern France, or Italy. It may have
been manned by the Azilians of Spain.” He proceeds to
show that these Azilians were possibly the fathers of British
maritime skill.

Where, it may be asked, did these Azilian-Tardenoisians

78 The Problem of Atlantis

and their Iberian descendants learn the seaman’s art? Mr
Mackenzie believes that the boat was invented on the calm
waters of the Nile, where conditions were most favourable
to its development. But no data exists to show that the
Egyptians braved the terrors of the ocean prior to the period
5000 B.c. The flint fish-hooks of the early Azilians of 10,000
years ago or about 8000 B.c. must have undoubtedly been
employed not to catch the lesser species of river fish, for
which they would seem to be unfitted by their size, but for
deep-sea fishing, which must naturally have been pursued
from boats. The lesser fish in the rivers would, as in some
savage parts of the world at the present day, be speared with
harpoons or taken with nets. One must admit that the
later voyages to Britain and elsewhere were made within
the Egyptian maritime period. But that is not to say that
Azilian sailors never put to sea at a time considerably before
that period.

Osborn says that Tardenoisian stations are usually to be
found situated on ocean inlets or river-courses. He calls
this people “a population of fishermen.” Many of the
stations are situated on the Bay of Biscay. No population of
any size could long subsist on the finny spoil of one or more
rivers of ordinary size, which would speedily become fished
out, especially as it was not habitual among early peoples to
observe a close time. When a community of considerable
advancement makes its dwelling on the seashore, it may
safely be suggested that it is because it intends to live on
the harvest of the ocean, of whose plenty it has had experience
for generations, and this it can do with any degree of success
only by the use of sea-going craft of a fairly reliable character.
No remains of fish, so far as I can find, are to be discovered
in Azilian-Tardenoisian deposits, but this is readily to be
accounted for by the exceedingly perishable nature of such
remains and the great age of the deposits.

I can see no reason to deny a knowledge of primitive

The Third Atlantean Invasion 79

navigation to the late Azilian-Tardenoisians, and believe that
this was not derived from Egyptian sources. But, in any
case, proof of this is not strictly essential to our hypothesis, °
as in all probability they reached Africa, and later, Europe,
from their ancient home in Atlantis, by a land-bridge, or
by a closely knit insular chain.

We must regard the Atlantis of the period as resembling
the Europe of the same epoch—that is, as still in the Stone
Age. This is self-evident from the fact that the colonists it
sent out were still in the Stone Age culture. We need not
conclude, however, that that culture was a low one. The
civilisations of the Maya and Nahua of Mexico and the Incas
of Peru were Neolithic, but they were in no wise inferior to
those of Egypt or Babylon, or even to those of Greece and
Rome, save that their people made use of stone implements
instead of metals.

M. D’Arbois de Jubainville, in his Les premiers habitants
de l'Europe, says (pp. 24, 25): ‘‘ The Iberians seem to be
the descendants of those ten millions of legendary warriors
who, according to Theopompus, came from a continent
separated from ours by the ocean, and established them-
selves in the country of the Hyperboreans. These were
their ancestors, who, leaving Atlantis nine thousand years
before Plato, had impressed their domination on Western
Europe, Italy, and North Africa to the frontiers of Egypt.”
He concludes, too, that they entered Spain, Gaul, Britain,
Corsica, and Sardinia.

It is also not improbable that earlier human races
reached Europe from the Atlantean continent. Professor
Osborn, speaking of Chellean man, a type which entered
Europe about 100,000 years ago, says (op. cit., p. 126):
“So far as present evidence goes, it would appear that the
pre-Chellean culture did not enter Europe directly from
the East, or even along the northern coast of the Mediter-
ranean, but rather along the northern coast of Africa, where

80 The Problem of Atlantis

Chellean culture is recorded in association with mammalian
remains belonging to the Middle Pleistocene epoch.”

Summarising the ethnological evidence from pre-history,
we find :—

1. That the Cr6-Magnon or Aurignacian, one of the finest
races mentally and physically the world has ever seen,
entered South-Western Europe about 25,000 years ago,
at or about the close of the Great Ice Age.

2. They brought with them a highly developed art, such,
indeed, as has earned them the name of “ the Palzolithic
Greeks.” They were, indeed, passionately devoted to art
in all its forms, appear to have possessed a highly developed
social polity, and were by no means savages, or even
barbarians.

3. Their culture must have germinated and developed
elsewhere. It appears suddenly in South-Western Europe,
and there are no traces of its actual infancy in the known
world.

4. The Abbé Breuil, the highest authority on this civilisa-
tion, believes that it originated in that part of Europe,
Biscayan France and Spain, which he calls “ Atlantic.”
It certainly first appeared in Europe in that region, but it is
not possible that it originated there, as no early or evolu-
tionary traces of its infancy are to be discovered either in
Europe, Africa, or Asia. Moreover, all the early Aurig-
nacian stations are situated around the Biscay-Pyrenean
region, and not on the southern coasts of the peninsula.

5. The culture of the Guanches or pre-Spanish aborigines
of the Canary Islands has been recognised by the highest
authorities as Cré-Magnon. This conclusively proves that
the race was indigenous to Atlantis, of which the Canaries
are among the last remnants ; that it made its way thence to
Europe by a land-connection formerly existing, and did not
drift to the islands from Europe by sea, as communication
by sea was utterly unknown at the period of the first Cré-

The Third Atlantean Invasion 81

Magnon migration to Europe 25,000 years ago, and even at
a very much later period.

6. Remains strongly resembling those of Cré-Magnon
man have been discovered in Lagoa Santa in Brazil and in
other parts of South America. His facial contours strongly
resemble those of the Red Indian of North America, who
seems to employ many of his religious and social practices.

7. The Cré-Magnons had a special reverence for the
bull or bison, the salient animal in Atlantean worship
according to Plato’s account. Sea-shells entered largely
into their religious ritual. These phases are also found in
pre-Columbian America.

8. A second wave of the Cré-Magnon civilisation, the
Magdalenian, reached Europe from Atlantis about 16,000
years ago. A great renascence of Aurignacian art super-
vened. New inventions, such as the bone harpoon, suddenly
appear in the Biscay region.

g. Ten thousand years ago a third invasion of the Biscay
region occurred—that of the Azilian-Tardenoisian peoples,
the parents of the Iberian race. They were fishers, and buried
the heads of their dead facing westwards. Their culture
shows a connection with the Aurignacian, but judging from
its presently known manifestations, it would seem‘as if art,
and perhaps civilisation in general, had meanwhile experi-
enced a decline in the Atlantean sub-continent whence they
came.

10. The Iberians, or later Azilian-Tardenoisians, settled
first in the Atlas region, and were known to the Romans as
Atlanteans. They were a race with maritime proclivities, but
it is not necessary to suppose that they reached Europe by sea.

Nore.—In the chapter which deals with the Atlantean
affinities of Egypt, I shall bring evidence to bear that so far
from that country’s having been the original mother of

European culture, it actually received its early impetus to
6 ‘

82 The Problem of Atlantis

civilisation from the West, whatever later contributions it may
have made to Occidental culture. Here I shall only draw
attention to the remarks of Mr H. R. Hall in the Cambridge
Ancient History which assist belief in the western origin of
Egyptian culture of the earlier type. He says (vol. i, p.
264): ‘‘ We see Egypt originally inhabited by a stone-using
Hamitic race (the Iberians) related to the surrounding
Semites, Libyans, and Mediterraneans. . . . In the Delta
they (the Armenoids, a later invading race) probably found
a civilisation of a primitive Mediterranean type much more
advanced than in the Upper country. . . . The hiero-
glyphic system and all the accompanying culture that it
implies may have been theirs, but was more likely
Mediterranean.”

CHAPTER VII
THE EVIDENCE FROM EUROPEAN TRADITION

EvrRoPEAN traditions relating to lands which once existed in
the Atlantic are numerous. To include the whole body of
evidence afforded by these is impossible in a work of this
scope, and is, moreover, needless, as these tales and legends

‘have already been collected by numerous hands, notably
by Basset, Warren, D’Avezac, and others. Here I must
confine myself to the more important of these legends, and
attempt some criticism of their origins, and a justification of
their existence.

The Greeks, the world’s first true geographers, were
strong believers in the existence of large land-masses in the
Atlantic. There were situated the floating island of AKolus,
Ogygia, the navel of the sea, and the Elysian Fields. How
far these localities were the fruit of religious speculation
it is not my purpose to inquire. It is possible that the idéas
concerning them may have arisen out of some hazy knowledge
of the Canaries, or the Cape Verde Islands. In subsequent
chapters I shall deal with this part of the subject at greater
length, but at present I am concerned with the evidence
from tradition and nothing more.

In dealing with Plato’s account I have already outlined
that of Theopompus and the legend of Ogygia. The
Thessalian story of Deucalion is equally important to our
thesis. Zeus, displeased with the men of the Age of Bronze,
sent a deluge upon them. But one Deucalion, the son of
Prometheus, acting upon the advice of his father, constructed

83

84 The Problem of Atlantis

a coffer in which he took refuge along with his wife Pyrrha.
For nine days and nights the coffer floated on the waves
until it finally grounded on Mount Parnassus. Emerging,
the pair found the world uninhabited, and Zeus, desirous of
replenishing the earth, commanded them to effect this by
casting behind them “the bones of the earth,” otherwise
stones, which by this process were changed into men and
women.

Now we shall find in the following chapter abundant
evidence that this very myth was known to more than one
of the American peoples. Every modern student of myth
is aware that tales of this character do not arise independ-
ently or in a spontaneous manner, but that racial contact is
necessary to their dissemination. Moreover, in more than
one picture in the Mexican native paintings the story of
Deucalion and Pyrrha is told, especially in that in which
the goddess of water, Chalchihuitlicue, is shown precipitating
a flood, down the tumbling waters of which float a man and
woman, one of whom holds or tries to reach a large coffer
bursting with treasure.

More replete with interest are the medizval legends con-
nected with Atlantic localities. One of the most celebrated
of these is the legend of St Brandan’s Isle. St Brandan
(d. 577) was Abbot of Clonfert, in Ireland, according to
the legend, where he was visited by a friend, Barontus, who
told him that far in ocean lay the promised land of the Saints.
St Brandan, accompanied by seventy-five monks, sailed
thither, and, according to the Book of Lismore, spent seven
years upon the ocean in two separate voyages. Eventually
he discovered the island of his search. One authority
states that he travelled up and down the coast of Kerry,
“ inquiring as he went for traditions of the Western Continent.”
One of his disciples, St Malo or Maclovius, Bishop of Aleth

in Brittany, accompanied him, and it is said discovered still

other islands. Philoponus, in his Nova typis transacta

eS SE” S- =a. oe

Evidence from European Tradition 85

-navigatio (1621), gives an account of the voyages of St
Brandan, with a curious map, in which he places the
Saint’s island N.W. of Spain and N.E. of the Canaries.
After the discovery of the Azores, expeditions were
fitted out to search for it, and were continued till as late
as 1721. The island was reported as having been seen
in 1759.

Of more importance is the legend of Antilia or the Isle
of Seven Cities, which is described as the largest of the
islands of the medieval geographers, and as rectangular in
shape, extending from north to south, and lying in mid-
Atlantic about lat. 35° N. It appears again and again on
the maps of the fourteenth, fifteenth, and later centuries,
and it was thought before the discovery of America that it
might be found suitable as a kind of half-way house to the
Indies. The legend states that it was found and settled
by refugees from Spain in 714 after the defeat of King
Roderick by the Moors. There is also a story that the
island was rediscovered by a Portuguese mariner in 1447.
Legends survive too, of islands called Danmar or Tanmar,
Reillo or Rayllo, and Satanaxio. The latter is of special
interest. Formaleoni, an Italian writer, coming upon this
name in an ancient map of Bianco, dated 1436, saw it there
described as “‘ Y° laman Satanaxio.”’ The description per-
plexed him, until he chanced to stumble upon a reference
to a similar name in an old Italian romance. Ina certain
part of India, ran the story, a great hand rose every day
from the sea and carried off a number of the inhabitants
into the ocean. Adapting this tale to the west, he trans-
lated the name “‘ the hand of Satan”’; but D’Avezac believed
the words to be a corruption of Satanagio or St Atanaxio
(Athanasius).

Strangely enough, ‘“‘ the Great Hand” is a god of the
Mexicans and Maya. As Huemac (Great Hand) he was
regarded as first King of the Toltecs, and among the Maya

86 The Problem of Atlantis

as Hunab Ku, a kind of “‘ god behind the gods,” the first
cause of all being. He is the only god among the Maya
who can boast of a beard, and may be identified with the
moon, childbirth, and the healing art, but his personality
has many facets. To this venerable god human sacrifice
was rendered on a considerable scale. Ata certain season of
the year criminals were sacrificed to him by a method called
“* prinding between the stones.”

Now in one myth (found in the Codex Tellerio-Remensis)
this god, or his Mexican equivalent, is spoken of as having
“ breathed and divided the waters of the heavens and the
earth.” That he possessed volcanic propensities is also
clear from many passages.

I think, then, that it is this god, or his Antilian equivalent,
the memory of which has survived in the name ‘‘ Hand of
- Satan,” given to the island of the Antilian group mentioned
by Formaleoni. The tale of the hand rising. out of the
sea and dragging down a number of the inhabitants of the
island appears to me as an allegory descriptive of frequent
earthquakes, just as the Cretan story of the Minotaur who
devoured a yearly tribute of maidens is obviously allegorical
of the worship of some ancient bull-headed deity, resembling
Moloch, to whom maidens were occasionally sacrificed.
Formaleoni saw in Antilia a European foreknowledge of the
Antilles, which, indeed, were called after the ‘‘ mythical ”
continent, and to transfer the name to a new discovery was
easy and natural. Yet Peter Martyr, in 1493, states that
the geographers were assured that Hispaniola and the adjacent
islands were Antille insula, that is, they recognised them as
islands a vague and general knowledge of which had been
handed down from time immemorial.

For these and other reasons, as I have said before, I am of
the opinion that the great continent of Atlantis, in the course
of its age-long disintegration, broke up into two considerable
land-masses, the eastern portion of which retained the

Evidence from European Tradition 87

original name, while the western portion came to be known
by some such name as Antilia. The traditions respecting
these appear to me as perfectly distinct, and, as I have men-
tioned, I believe the island continent of Antilia, the remains
of which are the modern Antilles, or West Indies, to have
survived the submergence of Atlantis by many thousands
of years. For an elaboration of this theory the reader is
referred to the chapter on the Geography and Topography
of Atlantis : but I will say here that I believe Antilia to have
conserved the remains of Atlantean culture, and to have
been connected with the more easterly mass by an insular
chain until the final destruction of Atlantis. I am not the
first to identify the Antilles with Atlantis. This has already
been done by Brasseur de Bourbourg, Bancroft, and Le
Plongeon.! But I differ from them in that I see in the
Antilles the remains of a distinct and surviving western
portion of that continent, which remained above ocean long
subsequent to the submergence of Atlantis itself. That
Atlantis in later times (say gooo B.C.) could have stretched
from Europe to America and have been destroyed by the
agency of one single cataclysm, and that its inhabitants could
have colonised and civilised the American continent at that
early period, is opposed to all we know of Mexican and
Central American history. Indeed this view, rash and
unscientific in the extreme, has done more to discredit the
whole Atlantean hypothesis than anything else could
possibly have done, and the absurd contention of Le
Plongeon that Central America was colonised by Atlanteans
11,500 years ago is only paralleled by the rhetorical rubbish
Brasseur saw fit to publish, which, despite his great erudition
and the manifest knowledge he possessed of Central American
history and tradition, entirely stultified his labours. Apart
from the chronological and linguistic vagaries of these writers,

1 None of them authorities of any great weight, I fear, and all inclined
to rashness ; but so it is, and decency dictates acknowledgment,

88 The Problem of Atlantis

however, their remarks are full of suggestion to the careful
student.

The legendary island of Brazil is found on the Medicean
map of 1351, on the Pizigani map of 1367, and the Catalan
map of 1375, which is to say that traditions concerning its
existence must have been current for a very long period.
It also appears on many other maps ‘and globes dating
between this time and the epoch of the discovery of America.
The island of Brazil, or O’Brasile, plays a part as a vanishing
island in early Irish legend, although it cannot be traced to
its origin. It was first mentioned in modern literature by
William Bettover, called William of Worcester, who says
that on 15th July 1480 his brother-in-law, John Jay, began
a voyage from Bristol in search of the island, returning on
18th September without having found it. Pedro Ayala, the
Spanish ambassador to England, mentions in a letter dated
1498 that the mariners of Bristol had made a series of voyages
in search of the island, which goes to show that a persistent
tradition regarding it must assuredly have existed. Extra-
ordinary are the impulses which arise from tradition !
When the first Spanish expedition reached Florida in a
quest for the Fountain of Perpetual Youth, the Elixir of
Life, they encountered a band of Indians searching in these
regions for the self-same thing !

Hardiman, in his Irish Minstrelsy or Bardic Remains of
Ireland (London, 1831, vol. i, p. 368), which was written
about 1636, says that there is an “iland which lyeth far att
sea, on the west of Connaught, and sometimes is perceived
by the inhabitants of the Oules and Iris ... and from
Saint Helen’s Head. Likewise several seamen have dis-
covered it . . . one of whom, named Captain Rich, who
lives about Dublin, of late years had a view of the land, and
was so neare that he discovered a harbour . . . but could
never make to land, because of a mist which fell upon him.
Allsoe in many old mappes . . . you still find it by the

To face p. 88

Pe ARE ave

(Pas,
Pastore +,
Grbomanno aa
4
? Promise Ppsole
>
ma
cy
oe de San Lars
Be Pde Bertyly M4
a Coloabs sy" Brant
wan :
os

abet libn

L a Ziv
ay Ve ee :
yy Furvego F~
Fi acted “enn “oO of

Part of the Map of Andreas Bianca showing the Islands of Antilia
and Brazil.

Evidence from European Tradition 89

name of O’Brasile, under the longitude of 03° 00’, and the
latitude of 50° 20’.” In 1675 a pretended account of a
visit to this island was published in London, which is re-
printed by Hardiman. The position he gives it is very
nearly identical with that which it occupies in Dudley’s
Arcano del Mare (1646).

There are numerous other allusions to Brazil, as, for

example, in O’Flaherty’s Ogygia (London, 1685), in Jeremy
Taylor’s Dissuasive from Popery (1667), where it is mentioned
familiarly, and elsewhere. The ‘‘ conjectural map of Atlan-
tis”? which appears in his Essais sur les Iles Fortunées
(1803), and which forms the frontispiece to this volume,
illustrates the theory of Bory de St Vincent, that the Azores,
- Madeira, the Canaries, and the Cape Verde Islands were
the remains of a great island-continent known to the
ancients as the Hesperides, the country of Atlantis, the land
of the Amazons, and the home of the Gorgons, containing
each and all of these semi-fabulous regions.

If the reader desires to examine a map on which the islands
of the Atlantic, real and imaginary, have been charted
according to their most probable sites, he cannot do better
than consult that of Gaffarel, ‘‘ L’Océan Atlantique, et les
restes de l’Atlantide,” in the Revue de Géographie, vol. vi,
p: 400. It shows all rocks and islets which have from time
to time been reported as seen, or believed to have been seen,
and these Gaffarel views as vestiges of the lost continent.
But let us glance for a moment at some of the older maps
with a view to discovering the frequency with which they
charted the islands of which we have taken especial notice.

The map of Andreas Bianca (1436) shows Brazil as an
‘island north of Madeira, Satanaxio on a parallel with the
north of Spain, and Antilia as a large oblong mass opposite,
but a considerable distance from, the opening to the Medi-
terranean. That of Benincasa (1476) shows these islands
in almost the same position, while in the Laon globe

go The Problem of Atlantis

Antilia occupies the same latitude, and the others are not
represented. In the interesting map of Ortelius (1587) a
very large number of islands are charted. Brazil still
occupies its traditional latitude, as does Satanaxio, which is
here called ‘‘ The Isle of Demons,’”’ but Antilia is not to
be found.

Now I think that what I have written will suffice to show
that a very ancient and widespread tradition existed on the
western coasts of Europe regarding the former presence of
insular masses of considerable size in the Atlantic. Con-
siderations of space make it impossible for me to adduce
the whole of the evidence for this tradition, which, indeed, is
already to be found in several volumes of large content.
It seems to me impossible to believe that this considerable
body of legend was unsupported by earlier fact. Indeed,
I am convinced that more than one of the islands which so
plentifully besprinkle the maps of our ancestors remained
in existence until comparatively late times. The question
bristles with difficulties owing to the brief and meagre
character of the references to these insular localities. But
there seems to have been a consensus of opinion among the
geographers of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. that
they actually existed, and, as I have shown, the latitudes in
which they placed them on their charts are almost invariably
the same. The fact that they were not so scrupulous in
the indication of all localities assists the inference that they
were incorrect with regard to the islands in question.

These by no means exhaust the store of traditional tales
relative to lost islands and countries which were current
on the western coasts of Europe. The Roman historian
Timagenes, who flourished in the first century a.pD., pre-
served traditions of the Gauls which spoke of invaders from
a sunken island. Their descendants, especially those of
Brittany, still speak of the submerged land of Ys, which
lies deep-drowned beneath the cliffs of the Breton peninsula.

Evidence from European Tradition 91

Giraldus Cambrensis tells us that similar beliefs were once
current in Wales.

In this chapter I have merely tried to gather together a
few of the most outstanding traditions obtaining in Western
Europe regarding belief in former or actually existing island
localities in the Atlantic Ocean. In a later chapter I will
deal with those similarities between European and American
lore and custom, which point to a common centre of origin
for the early culture of the two continents. More than one
of the legends here alluded to are dealt with at greater
length in Chapter XVI.

CHAPTER VIII
Tue EVIDENCE FROM AMERICAN ‘TRADITION

Ir the memory of the disintegration of an Atlantic continent
by successive cataclysms of nature remained 80 strongly
imbedded in the recollection and imagination of the peoples
of Western Europe, it must have found a similar reminiscent
echo among the tribes of America. Indeed, as we shall
see, it gave rise to a much more extraordinary sequence of
confirmatory traditions.

I have already said that I believe the lost continent to have
broken up during the Pleistocene Age into two large land-
masses—Atlantis, situated in close contiguity to Europe and
Africa, and that which I shall call Antilia, which is repre-
sented by the Antilles group, just as Atlantis shows its last
confirmatory peaks in the Canaries, Madeira, and the Cape
Verde Islands. These two larger land-masses were, I be-
lieve, joined by an insular chain, of which the Azores and
the Bermudas are the remaining vestiges. But I have always
been of the opinion, and I think the geological and traditional
evidence justifies the view, that Antilia did not finally
disappear until long after Atlantis had finally. sunk beneath
the waves of the Atlantic Ocean. My chief reason for think-
ing so is that the American traditions of an oceanic cataclysm
are manifestly much later than those of Europe, and this
seems to be borne out by the fact that the civilisations of
America themselves cannot by any process of reasoning be
dated much before the beginning of the Christian era. This
is the generally accepted chronology in the case of the Maya
civilisation of Central America, but there is much more

92 \

ye

Evidence from American Tradition 93

dubiety regarding the megalithic culture of pre-Incan Peru,
which would seem to date from an earlier period. These
questions I will deal with in their proper place, but at present
I will content myself by saying that to the best of my belief
no American civilisation greatly antedated 100 B.C., that is so
far as its appearance on American soil is concerned.

Those American myths which preserve the memory of -
oceanic upheavals and Atlantean connections have not so far
been collected in such a manner as to be accessible to the
student of ‘Atlantean research, and I have attempted to gather
and describe them as succinctly and usefully as possible,
in order that the evidence they bring to the subject may be
readily available. ‘This has entailed many years of research
- throughout the entire corpus of that literature which deals
with American aboriginal tradition and history. I do not
claim that the result is exhaustive—indeed it could scarcely
be so; but that it is representative, I certainly maintain.
I will first of all summarise those traditions which deal with
the creative legends of those American-Indian tribes which
may be classed as uncivilised, retaining the more important
testimony to be gleaned from the myths of Central America,
Mexico, and Peru for later description.

Dealing first with the mythical and legendary tales of the
Indians of North America, let us briefly review those of the
Muskhogean stock, of which the Creeks, Choctaws, and
Seminoles, are the chief representatives.

In the Muskhogean conception of creation we find that
at the beginning the primeval waste of waters alone was
visible. Over this two pigeons or doves flew hither and
thither, and in time observed a single blade of grass spring
above the surface. The solid earth followed gradually,
and slowly took its present shape. A great hill, Nunne
Chaha, rose in the midst, and in the centre of this was the
house of the deity Esaugetuh Emissee, “‘ Master of Breath.”
He made men from clay, and built a great wall, on which

94 The Problem of Atlantis

he set clay men to dry. Gradually the soft mud dried into
bone and flesh. The god then directed the waters into
their proper channels, reserving the dry land for the men he
had made. :

The hill alluded to in this myth has to my mind a sus-
picious resemblance to the Atlantean eminence on which
we are told Poseidon built his dwelling. The encircling
wall also appears to me to be an Atlantean reminiscence, as
does the division of the sea and land into “ zones.”

The Iroquois tribes believe that their original female
ancestress fell from heaven into the waste of primeval waters.
But the land bubbled up beneath her feet, and quickly grew
to the proportions of a continent. Some of the Iroquois
tribes believe that the otter, beaver, and musk-rat, observing
the fall of the original mother from heaven, hastened to break
it by shovelling up the subaqueous mud so that she might
fall softly thereon. They point to a mountain near the
falls of the Oswego River as the locality where this took
place.

The Aschochimi Indians of California have a myth which
recounts the drowning of the world so that no man escaped.
- But by planting the feathers of divers birds, the Coyote
grew a crop of men of various tribes.

The Algonquians relate that on one occasion Manibozho
was hunting, and the wolves which he employed as hounds
entered a great lake and disappeared. He entered the
waters to effect their rescue, but they suddenly overflowed
and submerged the entire habitable world. ‘The musk-rat,
however, supplied sufficient earth to recreate the terrestrial
sphere. Manibozho married the musk-rat, and executed
summary vengeance upon the demons, the perpetrators
of the catastrophe. It is told of this god that he carved
and shaped the land and sea to his liking, just as another
Indian deity, Tawiscara, a god of the Hurons, “‘ guided the
torrents into smooth seas and lakes.”

Evidence from American Tradition 95

More important are the flood legends of the Indians of
South America. The Antis Indians of the Bolivian Alps,
north-western Brazil, the Ipurimas, Yurukares, etc., say that
the world was overtaken by a great flood and men were
imprisoned by this deluge in a large cave. Fiery cataclysms
followed, and humanity perished. The Arawaks of the
Guianas, northern Brazil, and Colombia say that the god
Makonaima created a marvellous tree, each branch of which
produced a different variety of fruit. A certain Sigu cut
down this tree, the stump of which was found to be full of
water, which began to flow, and a terrible flood ensued.
Sigu led all the animals to an eminence, and succeeded in
saving them during the period of submergence and darkness.
The Macusi tribe of this family of Indians assert that the
only people who survived the deluge repeopled the earth by
converting stones into human beings, as did Deucalion and
Pyrrha. ‘The Tamanacs say that one man and one woman
were saved by taking refuge on the lofty mountains of
Tamancu, and that they threw over their heads the fruits of
the Mauritius palm, from the kernels of which sprang men
and women. The Arawaks of Guiana had a myth to the
effect that Aimon Kondi, the Great Spirit, scourged the
world with fire, from which the survivors sought refuge in
underground caverns. A great flood followed, in which
Marerewana and his followers saved themselves in a canoe.

A most striking myth is that of the Tupi-Guarani Indians
of Brazil. Monan, the creator, they say, vexed with man-
kind, resolved to destroy the world by fire. But one, Irin
Magé, a magician of might, extinguished the conflagra-
tion by a heavy rainstorm. This caused the rivers and
lakes to overflow, and precipitated a flood. The Mundruku
possess a myth to the effect that a god Raimi formed the
world by placing it in the shape of a flat stone on the head of
another god. (Compare this with the myth of Atlas and
Hercules.) Another Tupi myth relates that the world was

96 The Problem of Atlantis

destroyed by a powerful supernatural agency called Maire,
who sent upon it an inundation from which but a few were
saved by climbing trees and hiding in caves.

The Tupuya or Ges Indians of eastern Brazil and Bolivia
tell how the god Anatiwa originated the deluge, and that the
water-hen fetched earth to the hills where those saved from
the flood congregated, so that the area of safety might be
enlarged. The Caribs believe that the ibis performed a like
office for their ancestors. They believe also that their
original ancestor sowed the soil with stones, which grew up
into men and women, another variant of the Greek myth.
The Chibchas of Colombia state that Bochica, a culture-
hero, carried the globe upon his shoulders like a second Atlas,
and that earthquakes were brought about by his changing
it from one shoulder to the other.

Other North and South American myths are eloquent of
Atlantean memories. Thus a legend of the Okanaguas
states that a great medicine-woman named Scomalt ruled
over a‘‘ lost island” (Bancroft’s Native Races, vol. iii, p. 149) ;
and the Delawares have legends telling of a mighty influx of
rushing waters, and a hasty folk-migration in consequence
(see Rafinesque, The American Nations, 1836).

Turning now to the more civilised nations of America,
we may first examine certain traditions of the Aztecs of
Mexico, which seem to conserve the memory of early con-
vulsions of nature. The Aztecs believed that humanity
had experienced a series of cataclysms or partial destruc-
tions of the earth. According to different authorities these
had been four or five in number, and the periods or “ suns ””
into which Mexican mythical history was divided were each
thought to have concluded with the destruction of that
luminary, which was again and again renewed.

The interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus, a manuscript-
painting made by Aztec natives under Spanish priestly
supervision, states that “in the first age (or sun) water

Evidence from American Tradition 97

reigned until at last it destroyed the world. . . . This age,
according to their computation, lasted 4008 years, and on the
occurrence of that great deluge they say that men were
changed into fish, named Tlacamichin, which signifies men-
fish.” The second age, he tells us, lasted for 4010 years,
and the world was ended by the force of violent winds,
the catastrophe concluding by the transformation of men
into apes. The third age endured for 4801 years, and ended
in a universal fire; and in the fourth, which occupied 5042
years, the human race, which had never ceased to transmit
survivors from one of these epochs to the next, was almost
destroyed by famine.

The Mexican native historian, Ixtlilxochitl, in his Historia
Chichimeca, or History of the Chichimecs (the Aztec race),
-alludes to the first of these ages or epochs as Atonatiuh, or
“Water Sun,” and states that during it all men perished
in a great inundation. The second epoch, Tlachitonatiuh
(Earth Sun), ended with violent earthquakes. In this age
lived the giants or Quinames, the Aztec Titans, who, like
the Greek or Scandinavian giants, appear to be connected
with cataclysm. The third age, according to Ixtlilxochitl,
was Ecatonatiuh, or Wind Sun, in which houses, trees, and
men were nearly all destroyed by terrific hurricanes, those
men who remained being changed into creatures of an in-
telligence so low as to. be almost indistinguishable from
monkeys. Ixtlilxochitl in his Relaciones manages to trans-
pose one of these ages, giving the second the third place.
There is, indeed, considerable dubiety regarding the proper
sequence of those epochs, some believing that five ‘“‘ suns ”
obtained.

It is probable that this cataclysmic theory was in vogue
among the Aztecs for ages, and, indeed, Veytia and
Ixtlilxochitl state that the number of suns was agreed upon
at a meeting of native astronomers within traditional
memory. We may rely, however, on the Calendar Stone of

698 The Problem of Atlantis

Mexico, now in the National Museum there, to supply those
capable of interpreting it with the “ official” version of the
myth. According to this sculpture there were four epochs,
the first ‘‘ Four Jaguar,” when the god Tezcatlipoca reigned
as the sun, and at the end of which both men and giants
were devoured by jaguars; “‘ Four Wind,” presided over by
the god Quetzalcoatl, ending in violent hurricanes and the
transformation of men into monkeys ; “‘ Four Rain,” during
which the god Tlaloc ruled, and the end of which was fire ;
and “‘ Four Water,” the deity of which was the goddess
Chalchihuitlicue, the catastrophe of which was deluge and
the metamorphosis of men into fishes.

Of late years my researches into the subject of Mexican
mythology have led me to the especial consideration of
several of those wonderful chronicles and annals which
detail both the actual and legendary sides of Mexican history,
and most of which were compiled by Europeanised natives
subsequent to the conquest of Mexico.

One of the most important of these extraordinary books,
and perhaps one of the richest in native lore, is the Historia
de los Mexicanos por sus Pinturas, or History of the Mexicans
according to their picture-manuscripts. I have myself trans-
lated this work, but an excellent rendition of it by Mr T.
Phillips will be found in vol. xxi of the Proceedings of the
American Philological Society. ‘That it was written by a
native, probably at the request of Europeans, as a kind of key
to the Mexican symbolical and hieroglyphical paintings, is
pretty clear. It commences with a description of the Creation,
and then proceeds to recount such cataclysmic happenings
as those to which we are presently confining our attention.
It says (I quote from my own translation) “ Tezcatlipoca
became the sun-bearer. And the gods created the giants,
who were very great men and of much strength.”” Quetzal-
coatl then became the sun, and was followed in this office

¥ See my Gods of Mexico, 1923, chapter on ** Cosmogony.”

To face p. 98. PLATE VI.

Quetzalcoatl as Atlas.

Small Figure of Atlas supporting the World on his
Shoulders, to compare with the above.

(From National Museum, Naples.)

Evidence from American Tradition 99

by Tlaloc, who held it for 364 years, during which time
“ Quetzalcoatl rained fire on the sun, and then created as
the sun his wife Chalchihuitlicue. In the last year in which
Chalchihuitlicue was the sun it rained so heavily that men
were turned into fishes. And when it had ceased to destroy,
the heavens fell upon the earth, and the great rain began.
And the gods ordered four roads to be made to the middle
of the earth for them.”

Before I proceed farther I should like to indicate several
points of resemblance between this chronicle and Plato’s nar-
rative, which are, to say the least, remarkable as coincidences,
if nothing more. In the first place, the god Quetzalcoatl,
although he had many guises, can be equated with Atlas
and Poseidon. He is, like the Greek god, represented in
architecture in caryatid form, as, for example, in a statuette
found in the Calle de Escalerillas in Mexico City in 1900,
and at Chichen Itza in Yucatan, and many other centres in
Mexico and Central America, and it is noteworthy that in
many of these he is represented as having a beard. These
figures Dr Herbert J. Spinden, a foremost authority on
Mexican and Central American archeology, calls “‘ Atlan-
tean,” because of their likeness to the Greek caryatids of
Atlas. Quetzalcoatl, moreover, is one of the four Mexican
world-supporters. He is represented in this form in the
Codex Borgia (sheets 49-52, upper half), and in Codex
Vaticanus B (sheets 19-23), where he is shown upholding
the firmament. That he was an oceanic god, too, is clear
from the Popol Vuh, the sacred book of the Quiches of
Guatemala, where he is spoken of as “‘ heart of the sea,” and
as dwelling in the great waters. It is thus clear that he is
the American equivalent of Poseidon. Chalchihuitlicue, his
wife, is goddess of water and of the sea. Like Atlas, too,
Quetzalcoatl, as his name implies, was a twin. The roads
he sets in the four corners of the earth remind one of the
division of Atlantis into zones. He is also an earthquake

I0O The Problem of Atlantis

god. The interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis says
of him: ‘“ They celebrated a festival on the sign of four
earthquakes to the destroyer with reference to the fate which
again waited the world. For they said that it had undergone
four destructions, and would again be destroyed.”

Now I would submit that these similarities can scarcely
be regarded as of the nature of coincidence. ‘They are much

‘too exact for anything of the kind. Moreover, the account
_ in the Historia de los Mexicanos has a reference to the Mexican
/time-cycle or chronology, and is undoubtedly an attempt to

date these cataclysmic occurrences. I will not here venture
an opinion as to the exactitude of this attempt. But it seems
to me to refer to a very explicit folk-memory to which the
writer was trying to give expression. ‘That it has a mythical
colouring does not, in my opinion, detract from the sub-
stantial basis of fact which it seems to enshrine, for, as I
have already shown, it is now generally agreed that most
mythical writings embody a certain amount of historical fact,
verifiable or otherwise. It would, however, be not a little
difficult to try to construct out of these conflicting details
something approaching an historical outline bearing upon the
circumstances of the Antilian-Atlantean overthrow. For the
present, I would point to the illustrations of Quetzalcoatl in
his Atlantean form, and ask the unbiassed reader if the like-
ness of this god to the Greek Atlas is not in itself sufficient
to dispel any doubts as to their ancient identity.

Let us now examine those Mexican legends which speak
of a great flood. These are fairly numerous, and quite
within the sphere of our researches. The first of those to
which I will draw attention is that taken from the Codex
Chimalpopoca, also known as the Anales de Quahtitlan.

“And this year was that of Ce-calli, and on the first day
all was lost. ‘The mountain itself was submerged in the
water and the water remained tranquil for fifty-two springs.
Now towards the end of the year Tezcatlipoca had fore-

Evidence from American Tradition 101

warned the man Nata and his wife Nena, saying: ‘ Make
no more pulque, but straightway hollow out a large cypress
and enter it when in the month of Tozoztli the water shall
approach the sky.’ They entered it, and when Tezcatlipoca
had closed the door, he said: ‘ Thou shalt eat but a single
ear of maize, and thy wife but on also.’ As soon as they
had finished eating they went forth and the water was
tranquil ; for the log did not move any more ; and opening
it they saw many fish. Then they built a fire, rubbing
together pieces of wood, and they roasted fish. ‘Then the
Old Gods, looking below, said: ‘ Divine lord, what means
that fire below? Why do they thus smoke the heavens ? ’
Straightway descended Tezcatlipoca and commenced to
scold, saying : ‘ What is this fire doing here ?’ . And seizing
the fishes, he moulded their hinder-parts and changed their
heads, and they were at once transformed into dogs.”

A flood-myth which has for its hero one of the giants who
were supposed to inhabit the earth in the first age, states that
Xelhua, the giant in question, escaped the deluge by ascend-
ing the mountain of Tlaloc, and afterwards built the pyramid
of Cholula. This he built in order that should a deluge
come again he might escape to it. ‘‘ When it had already
reached a great height lightning from heaven fell and
destroyed it. Those Indians who were under that chief
who had escaped from the deluge made bricks from a
mountain in Tlalmanalco, called Cocotle; and from Tlal-
manalco to Cholula Indians were placed to pass the bricks
and cement from hand to hand; and thus they built this
tower that was called Tulan Cholula, which was so high
that it appeared to reach heaven. And being content, since
it seemed to them that they had a place to escape from the
deluge if it should again happen, and from whence they
might ascend into heaven,” a precious stone fell from the
sky and struck the ground. The pyramid of Cholula still
remains.

102 The Problem of Atlantis

A flood-myth of the Mixtecs, an ancient civilised people
of south-western Mexico, has, for me, a very Atlantean
complexion. It is to be found in the Origin de los Indios
of Fray Gregorio Garcia, chap. 4, book iv. :—

“In the year and in the day of obscurity and darkness,
when there were as yet no days nor years, the world was a
chaos sunk in darkness, while the earth was covered with
water on which slime and scum floated. One day the deer-
god and goddess appeared. They had human form, and
out of their magic they raised a great mountain out of the
water and built on it beautiful palaces for their dwelling.
These buildings stood in Upper Mixteca, close to the place
Apoala (accumulation of water), and the mountain was called
‘Place where the heavens stood.’”” The gods had two
little boys, who appear to have been twins. All were skilled
in magic, and enjoyed the profoundest peace. They planted
gardens with flowers and trees, and made a grass-grown
level place for sacrifice to their ancestors. ‘“‘ The deer-gods
had more sons and daughters, but there came a flood in
which many of these perished. After the catastrophe was
over the god, who is called ‘ the creator of all things,’ formed
the heavens and the earth and restored the human race.”

CHAPTER IX
THE EVIDENCE FROM AMERICAN 'TRADITION—contd.

Let us glance at the descriptions of the Mexican gods of
water, which seem to me to retain reminiscences of a period
of cataclysmic deluge. The interpreter of the Codex
Vaticanus A says, regarding the god Tlaloc: ‘‘ On the 21st
of December they celebrated the festival of this god, through
whose instrumentality they say the earth became again
visible after it had been covered with the waters of the
deluge.” According to Boturini, Tlaloc was the deity who
raised the earth out of the waters of the flood and who
counselled men by his divine messages written in the light-
ning and the thunderbolt to live wisely and morally. The
Aztecs sacrificed children to him by drowning at the festival
of Quaitleloa. He is the god of moisture and water par
excellence, and possessed both beneficent and terrible
aspects, and the learned priests of Mexico undoubtedly
regarded him as the personification of the Tlequiauitl, or
fire-rain, the disaster which closed one of the epochs of the
ancient world. He wears Toltec dress, and this shows him
to be the god of the oldest settled people in Mexico, whose
history went back to a great antiquity.

Chalchihuitlicue, his wife, is pictured in the Aubin
tonalamatl, or calendar, as standing in water down which
switl away a jewel-box, an armed man, and a woman, the
picture of a catastrophic flood taking place in a region of
culture and civilisation.2, Her myth in the Codex Telleriano-

1 See my Gods of Mexico, section ‘‘ Tlaloc,”’ passim.

2 This is explained in the Interpretative Codices as “‘ loss of property,
death in war, emblem of the atocoa,” i.e. an expression meaning “ all
will be carried away by the water.”

103

104 The Problem of Atlantis

Remensis says that “‘ Chalchihuitlicue was the woman who
saved herself in the deluge. She is the woman who remained
after the deluge.” Everything seems to point to her as the
goddess of change in human affairs, of speedy ruin, says
Professor Seler.

It seems to me that if Quetzalcoatl can be equated with
Atlas, Tlaloc and his wife Chalchihuitlicue can almost as
readily be compared with Poseidon and Leucippe, the original
figures in Plato’s narrative. Tlaloc is god of water and the
sea. That he is a sea-god whose worship was adapted to
the needs of a landward people is plain. His mouth is
furnished with immense tusks, and these, I believe, retain
a memory of the walrus or some similar sea-form. Indeed

his resemblance to the walrus in some of his pictures is not _

ce

to be questioned. His shirt is known as the “ mist” or
** cloud-garment,”’ and his sandals symbolise the foam of
water. His abode was on a mountain on the road from
Texcuco to Huetzotzinca, and here, it was thought, the
drowned and dropsical—all those, in fact, who perished
through the agency of water—went after death. Tlalocan,
his paradise, is, in fact, of the same class as the Greek
Elysian Fields or the Celtic 'Tir-nan-ogue.

The number of deities in the Mexican pantheon connected
with fire seem also to point to the early influence of a volcanic
area. ‘The gods who are connected with fire are those of
entirely Aztec origin, and as these were brought into Mexico
by the Aztec people as late as the thirteenth century a.D.,
they could not have been of local origin, or influenced by
local volcanic conditions. Xiuhtecuhtli, the Lord of Fire,
was a god of exceedingly ancient origin. Although he un-
doubtedly appealed to the Mexican mind as the personifica-
tion of fire, it was more as that element in its primeval and
original form, its elemental shape. He is, indeed, the pre-
solar fire which existed before the creation of the sun or moon ;
and just as the gods of water ruled over moisture wherever

—-—

To face p. 104. PLATE

Sa
Ci fe

fhe WSeiicMaN

ies

1. Tlaloc, God of Water.
2. Chalchihuitlicue, Goddess of Water and Floods.

Mexican Deities.

Vaile

Evidence from American Tradition 105

it was to be found, so was Xiuhtecutli imagined as holding
sway over fire, whether it came from the heavens above or
the earth beneath. Thus we find him spoken of by Sahagun,
the most trustworthy of the early Spanish writers on Mexican
affairs, as dwelling in the navel of the earth, where the volcanic
fires have their origin, and as having his place above, in what
appears to be a species of cloud-castle, for the Mexican word
for ‘‘ embattlement ” is derived from that for “ cloud.” He
is also called ‘‘ He who entereth the blue stone pyramid,”
which is, of course, the sky. He corresponds to the hour
before sunrise, which makes it clear that his prehistoric
precedence to the sun was insisted on in the priestly list
of day-hours. The texts dwell upon his antiquity, for he is
indeed the “ Old God,” the god who existed before the
foundations of the world, father and mother of the gods, the
central volcanic, world-shaping, cataclysmic fire.

But these lesser myths pale into insignificance, regarded
as evidence of Atlantean influence, when compared with
those which deal with the extraordinary civilisation of the
‘Toltecs and its founder Quetzalcoatl, one of whose aspects
we have already briefly examined. ‘This myth, of primary
importance to the study of Atlantean origins, has been so
distorted by writers who had but a passing acquaintance with
Mexican and Central American aboriginal literature, that it
will be well to examine its sources with some care.

Quetzalcoatl, says Torquemada in his Monarquia Indiana,
was the leader of a body of men who entered Mexico from
the north by way of Panuco, dressed in long robes and black
linen cut low at the neck, with short sleeves. They came
to Tollan, but finding the country there too thickly peopled,
passed on to Cholula.. Quetzalcoatl was a man with ruddy
complexion and long beard. The Toltecs, his followers,
were’ cunning handicraftsmen, builders, sculptors, and
agriculturists.

Sahagun says that the arts had their inception with

106 The Problem of Atlantis

Quetzalcoatl, whose houses were made of precious stones,
silver, white, and red shells, and rich feathers. His folk
were nimble and swift in passage from one place to another,
and were known as “ the swift ones who serrate the teeth.”
He had wealth and provision in plenty, and in his time maize
was so large in the head that a man could not carry more
than one stalk in his clasped arms. Cotton grew in all
colours and did not require to be dyed. But sorcerers (the
gods Tezcatlipoca and Uitzilopochtli) came against Quet-
zalcoatl, and gave him a draught which caused him to
remember his ancient home with an intolerable longing.
So he rose, and burned his beautiful mansion, turned all
the coco-trees into mezquites, and dispatched the birds of
brilliant plumage, so that they flew to another land. Betak-
ing himself to the seashore with his followers, these nearly
all perished through the cold of the mountains. When he
reached the coast, he commanded that a raft of snakes should
be constructed for him. In this he seated himself as in a
canoe, put out to sea, and set out for the land of Tlapallan.

Where was this land of Tlapallan? When Tezcatlipoca
handed the magic draught to Quetzalcoatl he conjured him
to go to Tlillan-Tlapallan, “where another old man awaits
thee. He and you shall speak together, and on thy return
thou shalt be as a youth, yea, asa boy.” The interpreter of
the Codex Vaticanus says: “‘ Of Quetzalcoatl they relate
that proceeding on his journey, he arrived at the Red Sea,
which they named Tlapallan. . . . Quetzalcoatl was born
on the sign One Cane; and the year of the Spaniards’
arrival commenced on the sign One Cane, according to
their ancient computation; whence the occasion arose of
their believing that the Spaniards were their gods ; because
they say that he had foretold that a bearded nation would
arrive in those countries who would subject them.”

In Central America a number of myths circled round the
name of Quetzalcoatl. Nufiez de la Vega, Bishop of

Evidence from American Tradition 107

_ Chuapas, tells us that he discovered a book among those
Quiche manuscripts he had burned which purported to
have been written by Votan, which, like Kukulkan and
Gucumatz, is one of the Central American names for
Quetzalcoatl. In this book Votan declared himself “a
snake,” a descendant of Imos of the line of Chan, of the race
of Chivim. Proceeding to America by divine command,
his mission being to lay the foundations of civilisation there,
he departed from Valum Chivim (the Land of Chivim),
and, passing the dwelling of the Thirteen Snakes, arrived
in Valum Votan, whence, with some members of his family,
he set out to form a settlement, ascending the Usumacinta
_ River and ultimately founding the city of Palenque. By
reason of their peculiar dress the T'zendal Indians called
them Tzequitles, or ‘‘ men with shirts,” but consented to
amalgamate with them. Ordofiez, who also drew from
Votan’s book, states that when Votan had established
himself at Palenque, he made several visits to his original
home. On one of these he came to a tower, which had been
intended to reach the heavens, a project which had been
brought to naught by the linguistic confusion of those who
had conceived it. Finally, he was permitted to reach
“the rock of heaven ” by a subterranean passage. Return-
ing to Palenque, he found that others of his race had arrived
there. He built a temple by the Huehuetan River, known,
from its subterranean chambers, as “‘ the House of Darkness,”
and here he deposited the national records under the charge
of certain old men and priestesses. ‘‘ In the little history
written in the Indian language,” says Nufiez de la Vega, “all
the provinces and cities in which he tarried are mentioned.
. . . That he saw the great wall, namely the Tower of Babel,
which was built from earth to heaven at the bidding of his
grandfather Noah ; and that he tarried in Huehueta, which
is a city in Soconusco, and that there he placed a tapir
[¢lapiane, a guardian] and a great treasure in a subterranean

108 The Problem of Atlantis

house. . . . This treasure consisted of jars, which were
closed with covers of the same clay, and of a room in which
the picture of the ancient heathens who are in the calendar
are engraved in stone, together with jadeite and other
superstitious images; and the chieftainess herself and the
tlapianes, her guardians, surrendered all these things, which
were publicly burnt in the market-place of Huehueta when we
inspected the aforesaid province in 1691.”

Ixtlilxochitl has, naturally, much to say of the Toltecs,
and gives two separate accounts of their early migrations.
He describes Tlapallan as a region near the sea. The
Toltecs, he says, did not set out to colonise distant lands
from any impulse of their own, but were the victims of
internecine dissension in the homeland. Thrust forth from
their native soil, they reached. Tlapallan in the year Itecpatl
(A.D. 387)... They arrived on the coast of Mexico 104 years
after commencing their pilgrimage, stopping on the way at
various stations. In another and later account of the Toltec
migration, Ixtlilxochitl states that the chiefs of Tlapallan
revolted against the royal power, and were banished from
that region in A.D. 439. ‘They then journeyed to Tlapallant-
zinco, where they halted for three years before setting out
on a prolonged pilgrimage which occupied over a century.

Founding the magnificent city of Tollan in a.p. 566,
in the mountains north-west of the Mexican Valley, they
enriched it with every species of artistic effort. The temple
was a gem of architectural art and mural decoration.
Its shrines were inlaid with gold, precious stones, and sea-
shells, encrusted in bricks of silver. Some were formed of
a brilliant red stone ornamented with shells. This scheme
recalls the coloured masonry of Atlantis, with its white,
red, and black stones.

The history of Tollan is strongly reminiscent of that of
Atlantis. So profligate were kings and people, that the gods
grew greatly displeased with them, and resolved to punish

Evidence from American Tradition 109

them. It is evident that at the place where Plato’s
narrative breaks off he was about to tell us how Zeus first
warned the Atlanteans, and later punished them. First a
fierce frost visited the territory of the Toltecs, and this was
followed by a summer of torrid heat. Then heavy rain-
storms descended and terrible tempests swept through the
land. Frogs, locusts, drought in turn plagued the dis-
obedient 'Toltecs, and they were tormented by giants and
demons. Finally the people, broken and ruined, fled to
Guatemala and other parts of Central America.

There is now no question of the historical character of
the 'Toltec civilisation of Tollan, Teotihuacan, and Cholula,
- that strange, pre-Aztec culture of which Quetzalcoatl is
spoken of as the founder. The recent excavations of Sefior
Manuel Gamio and others have made it abundantly clear
that this civilisation stretched into Central America, affecting
that of Guatemala and Yucatan, to which it was allied.
The myths concerning him insist upon the alien origin of
Quetzalcoatl. He came, they say, from Tlillan-Tlapallan,
that is ‘‘ the Black and Red Land.”

Now I am well aware that most Americanists regard this
“ Black and Red Land ” as meaning “ the Land of Writing,”
that is of picture-writing, because red and black ink is usually
employed in the native manuscripts of the Nahua and the
Central American Maya, and that they believe it to be the
Huaxtec country on the east coast of Mexico, in the vicinity of
Vera Cruz. But two salient facts are to be reckoned with
in this regard. In the first place, the Huaxtec country,
which possesses many ruins which hitherto have not received
the attention they deserve from archzologists, has yielded,
so far as I am aware, very few manuscripts or inscriptions
of any sort, so that it can scarcely be identified as “ the
Land of Writing.” Again, it is not reached by sea from
Tollan. It seems to me that here, buried under the detritus
of myth, we have a nucleus of historic fact, relating to a

ILO The Problem of Atlantis

real personage, a culture-hero who came from a region
situated ‘‘ in the East,’ that is the Western Atlantic—in a
word, from that Antilia of which the Antilles are the sole
remaining vestiges.

That Quetzalcoatl was also regarded by the native Mexicans
as the Trade Wind I am well aware. Indeed I was among
the first to indicate his precise connection with the Trade
Wind. But he represents that aerial current in a secondary
and legendary sense only, just as the Scottish hero, William
Wallace, is connected with one of the Eildon Hills, or as any
other historical character comes in the course of generations
_ to be associated with natural phenomena. The fact of
Toltec culture remains. It is indissolubly associated with
Quetzalcoatl, it had a speedy rise and a comparatively
sudden downfall. Quetzalcoatl, the civiliser, the architect,
the craftsman in jewellery and dyestuffs, the agriculturist,
left behind him a very definite memory. A long line of
priest-kings, and a longer line of priests, were called by his
name. He introduced a religion totally at variance with
the sanguinary faith of Mexico. The later Mexicans and
Maya spoke of him as a priest quite as much as a god, and
the Zapotecs and Cholulans reverenced priests said to be
descended from him, and from these descent was assured
in the most positive and careful manner.

I shall have much to say of Quetzalcoatl and his religion
in the succeeding chapters, when I come to collate the less
obvious evidences of an Atlantean past. At present I am
dealing with the broader aspects of the question. We have
seen that he is connected with myths of cataclysm and
disaster, not as a destroyer, but as a reshaper of civilisation.
His appearance, and that of his followers, are minutely
described. They wore black, sleeveless tunics, and thus
they are represented in the Mexican paintings. The manner
in which they met and mingled with the natives in Central
America is explicitly detailed. Voyages to and from the

Evidence from American Tradition 111

Toltec homeland are recounted. On one occasion Quetzal-
coatl beholds the building of a tower like that of Babel and
its fall. The Mexican myth makes it plain that he must
periodically return to Tlapallan for his magic draught, and
there speak with ‘another old man” if he would return
refreshed and reinvigorated. Does this refer entirely in
terms of allegory to the Trade Wind departing in early
summer to seek for the rains with which it will return in
the following spring? In a mythical sense it certainly
does. But Sir James Fraser and others have shown us that
upon the personal strength of kings and rulers was thought
to depend the success of the community in agricultural
matters, and that agricultural failure formerly implied the
sacrifice of the aged and impotent monarch to the offended
gods, or his rejuvenation by a magical elixir. It would
seem to me, then, that the ancient ritual practice of
rejuvenation in the event of agricultural failure may have
obtained in Atlantis-Antilia, and that the myth of Quet-
zalcoatl, the Antilian culture-hero of Mexico and Central
America, arose in some such circumstances. We are told
that he searched for and discovered maize. I picture him
and his followers as partially isolated in the wild and bar-
barous land in which they have arrived as colonists, driven
thence by the dire necessities of disintegrating Antilia.
Twenty years pass, as the myth says, and he grows old.
The food-supply fails, a rainless season ruins the harvest.
Quetzalcoatl’s personal powers as a king-magician are
impugned. Colonial opinion insists upon his return to
Tlapallan or Antilia, to receive from its king the magical
draught which will rejuvenate him, as it has been thought to
rejuvenate the kings of Egypt, and render him once more
fitted to preside over an agricultural community. He
sails back to Antilia. The idea arises, fostered, no doubt,
by colonial fear of its own inadequacy, that it is necessary
for him to return annually to the homeland, as only there

II2 The Problem of Atlantis

can he receive the benefit of the true and official magic.
He does so, but on one occasion he does not return. And
from the circumstances of his going and coming the beautiful
allegory of the arrival and departure of the Trade Wind
coming and going to Tlapallan is woven.

I do not think the justice of this reasoning will be
questioned by those who have any acquaintance with the
science of comparative religion. If a careful study of the
circumstances of the myth be made it will be found to fit
in with the whole hypothesis of king-sacrifice and monar-
chical rejuvenation by magical elixirs—the true genesis,
indeed, of the search for the elixir of life. In one legend
Quetzalcoatl is spoken of as immolating himself on a funeral
pyre on the seashore, and we are told that his heart became
the planet Venus. This merely substantiates the point of
view stated above, which I will elaborate farther on.

I shall merely mention here the fact that Toltec and Maya
civilisation did not originate on American soil, and shall
retain the proofs of this for the chapter which deals with
the evidence from American archeology. This civilisation
first appears in America, like the Cré-Magnon in Europe,
as full-blown, with a ready-made art, a high condition of
ecclesiastical and social polity, and an advanced system of
hieroglyphic writing. These have no roots in the soil.
The language of the Maya of Central America has been
associated by the late Professor Beuchat and others with the
Antilles, and the vestiges of their early culture are to be

found in these islands.
The Aztecs of Mexico were but late-comers to that

country, arriving there about the eighth century of our
era. Nor did they settle in the Plateau of Mexico till the
thirteenth century. But they possessed many traditions of
dwelling “‘ on a great water ” in a region they called Aztlan,
or “ the Land of Flamingoes.”” A legend of their migrations
from that region, preserved in manuscript, tells us that

Evidence from American Tradition 113

“this is the beginning of the record of the coming of the
Mexicans from the place called Aztlan. It is by means of the
water that they came this way, being four tribes, and in
coming they rowed in boats.” ‘The picture facing page 202
shows the native Mexican idea of this homeland of Aztlan.
It will be seen that it bears a certain resemblance to
the description of Atlantis. When the Mexicans built
Mexico, they did so on the model and plan of Aztlan, and
that Mexico boasted a great pyramid-hill, rose from the
centre of a lake, and was divided into zones of land and
water, I shall show later in the chapter which deals with
Atlantean topography.

Summarising the evidence from American tradition,
we find :—

1. That it points to a later date for the Antilian than the
Atlantean final cataclysm.

2. That many myths of flood and upheaval existed among
the American races.

3. A number of these give prominence to a great hill
resembling that on which the Atlantean temple of Poseidon
was built.

4. There are reminiscences of the shaping of land and
water into zones.

5. Stones are spoken of as being converted by gods or
heroes into people, as in the Greek myth of Deucalion and
Pyrrha, and by the same process.

6. American gods are described as holding the world
on their heads, like Atlas, to whom the Mexican god Quetzal-
coatl bears a strong resemblance.

7. Mexican myth speaks of a sequence of catastrophes to
which ‘dates are affixed. These were actually discussed at
a meeting of native astrologers held within traditional memory.

8. The characteristics of the Mexican gods of fire and
water exhibit marked signs of cataclysmic antecedents, and
seem to show the early influence of a volcanic area.

tr4 The Problem of Atiantis

9. The legends of Quetzalcoatl and the Toltees are elo-
quent of the arrival in Mexico and Central America of a
civilised people coming from an insular area in the east.
The relics of their civilisation, their sacred books and
treasures, were actually given up by their hereditary guardians
te Bishop Nufiez de la Vega in 1691, and destroyed by him.

10. The history of Tollan is strongly reminiscent of that
of Atlantis as told by Plato.

11. Tlapallan, the homeland of Quetzalcoatl and the
Toltecs, was probably Antilia, the sister sub-continent or
western fragment of Atlantis,

12. Probably the legend of Quetzalcoatl conserves the
memory of an Antilian noble who, foreseeing the overthrow
of his country by cataclysm, led one of several colonial
expeditions to Mexico and Central America. The notion
(prevalent in Egypt) that an aged king was unable to assist
the growth of the crops magically was evidently an Antilian
belief, and forced Quetzalcoatl to return to Antilia to receive
rejuvenation by the medium of a magical elixir of life.

13. Toltec and Maya civilisation did not originate on
American soil, but appeared there full blown. The language
of the Maya has been classed as Antillean.

14. The Aztecs of Mexico possessed many traditions of
dwelling “‘ on a great water,” in a region they called Aztlan,
The native pictures of this resemble the Atlantean plan as
seen in Carthage and elsewhere, and this model was carried
out in the design of the native city of Mexico,

CHAPTER X
THE Popot VuH aS AN ATLANTEAN RECORD

WHEN, at the instance of the late Mr Alfred Nutt, I took
up the special study of the Popol Vuh some seventeen
years ago, I was extremely doubtful of the American pro-
venance of much of this body of Central American history
and myth. It seemed to me that traditions of undoubted
Americafi origin had been overlaid or mingled with scriptural
accounts and beliefs. I found that this view was adopted
by other students who had made an intensive examination
of the text, and thus felt myself justified in adhering to
the opinion I had formed of its partly alien character.
There remained, however, a residuum of folklore and myth
which I could not regard as being other than American,
and by degrees I came to see that those tales and events
which seemed to be borrowed from Biblical or other sources,
when collated with the narratives from which I believed
them to be drawn, had only a superficial similarity to
them. That they were not European—that is, that they
were not the result of contact with missionaries or other
European agents of Western thought—I was convinced.
Greatly puzzled, I asked myself, ‘‘ Where did these legends,
which seem neither of European nor American origin, have
their place of origin ? ”

The Popol Vuh was composed in the form in which we
now possess it by a native of Guatemala in the seventeenth
century, and translated from the Quiche language (a dialect
of Maya) into Spanish by Francisco Ximenes, a father of

the Church. The original text and translation were,
II5

16 The Problem of Atlantis

however, lost between the beginning of the nineteenth
century and the year 1854, when they were rediscovered by
Dr C. Scherzer, an Austrian, in the library of the University
of San Carlos in the city of Guatemala. The name Popol
Vuh means ‘“‘ the Collection of Written Leaves,’ and this
alone seems to prove that the work must have contained
traditional matter reduced to writing at a very early period.
Its contents deal with the mythology and history of the
Quiche people of Central America, from the time of their
origin to the period of the conquest of Central America by
the Spaniards.

Space will not permit me to outline the entire contents of
the work, and I must confine myself to those passages
which seem to me to justify the thesis that it preserves for
us a large measure of Atlantean-Antillean tradition—more
especially Antillean—as America undoubtedly owed much
more to the Western and more lately existing portion of
old Atlantis than to the Eastern.

The narrative commences with an account of the creation

of the world. First of all existed the Former, the Mother —

and Father of all living beings, the Cause of Existence, the
Maker of everything worthy. At first there was nothing.
No earth existed, only the silent sea, and the spaces of the
heavens, only the Old Ones, the Serpents covered with
Green Feathers and Blue Feathers—that is, the gods of sky
and sea. These took counsel with Hurakan, the Heart of
Heaven, the wind-god, the hurricane, and made the solid
land, filling it with trees, plants, and animals. Then they
made mannikins carved out of wood. But they were irrev-
erent and angered the gods, who resolved to bring about their
downfall. ‘Then Hurakan caused the waters to be swollen,
and a mighty flood came upon the mannikins accompanied
by a thick, resinous rain. Great birds appeared and tore
out their eyes and bit off their heads, their very domestic
animals and household utensils jeered at them and made

OO

The Popol Vuh 117

game of them. The unhappy mannikins ran hither and
thither in their despair. ‘They mounted upon the roofs of
their houses, but these crumbled beneath their feet. They
tried to climb to the tops of the trees, but the trees hurled
them down. Even the caves closed before them. So were
they almost utterly destroyed, and the remnant of them
became monkeys, dwelling in the woods.

Now, I ask, is it possible for this legend to have arisen
out of any other circumstances than those of cataclysm or
volcanic catastrophe? Flood, the appearance of a tidal
wave, the falling of fiery rain (a common phenomenon during
a volcanic eruption), the crashing of houses, the falling of
trees, the collapse of caverns, the last plight of the unhappy
. Survivors reduced to the wild life of the forest? If this
document is not a memory of terrestrial convulsion, I am at
a loss to account for it otherwise.

Then let us glance briefly at the character of the super-
natural beings who were the gods of the race so destroyed.
At first there dwelt only in the upper sky, the Mother and
the Father, who, we are informed later, were named Xpiyacoc
and Xmucane, and who may be described as Father Earth
and Mother Sky, male and female progenitors, such as we
know the Atlanteans adored. The Gucumatz, the serpents
covered with green and blue feathers, we are told, dwelt in
the deep, and seem to have been the gods of subterranean
disturbance. They are the same as Quetzalcoatl, their names
have precisely the same meaning, and we know already
that he was a god or hero who came from Tlapallan, a country
“ situated in the Atlantic Ocean, to civilise Mexico. Another
god, Hurakan, is, as his name shows, a god of tempest.
It is from his name, indeed, that the word “‘ hurricane ”’
has come into use.

But, these gods notwithstanding, we find that the Quiche
people who preserved the Popol Vuh had other deities of
earthquake and terrestrial disturbance.

118 The Problem of Atlantis

Ere the earth was quite recovered from the dreadful
catastrophe which had descended upon it, there lived a
proud and mischievous Titan named Vukub-Cakix (Seven
Times-the-Colour-of-Fire) the Quiche name for the Great
Macaw Bird. He shone with the brilliance of the sun and
moon, and his teeth were of emerald. His boasting angered
the gods, and they resolved to destroy him. His two sons
Zipacna (Earth-heaper) and Cabrakan (Earthquake) cast
the mountains about like toys and retarded the work of
terrestrial reformation on which the gods had embarked.
Two heroes were sent to earth to account for these disturbers.
These were called Hun-Apu (Hunter with Blowpipe), and
Xbalanque (Little Tiger). The former wounded Vukub-
Cakix with a dart from his weapon, and the Father and
Mother gods, masquerading as physicians, removed his
teeth and eyes, so that he succumbed. Next they turned
their attention to his sons, the maker of volcanoes and the
destroyer of mountains, whom they also succeeded in
accounting for.

But still other disturbing agencies remained—the sub-
terranean gods of evil propensity, who dwelt in a gloomy
realm named Xibalba, or Hades. The lords of this place,
Hun-Came and Vukub-Came, challenged Hun-Apu and
Xbalanque to a game of ball, and the brothers accepting this,
journeyed to the infernal regions to meet them in tournament.
Their adventures there, and those of their nephews and sons,
show clearly that they had to undergo the tests of a secret
society, and to this point I will return later, in the chapter
on Egypt.

The third book of the Popol Vuh discovers the gods once
more deliberating on the creation of man. Four men are
created out of a paste of yellow and white maize, and four
women are given them while they sleep. These were the
ancestors of the Quiche people. At this time there was no
sun, and comparative darkness lay upon the face of the earth.

The Popol Vuh 119

The Quiche journeyed to a place called Tulan-Zuiva, or
“The Seven Caves,” where gods were given to them.
This was a place of great misfortune to the Quiche, for here
the race suffered alienation in its different branches through
their speech being confounded, as at Babel. Separated from
the main body, one band followed the god Tohil over lofty
mountains, and on one occasion had to make a long detour
across the bed of the ocean, the waters of which were mir-
aculously divided to permit of their passage. At length
they arrived at a mountain called Hacavitz, where it was
foretold that they should see the sun. At last the luminary
appeared. Shortly afterwards the first men, overcome by
age, expired, or, rather, were translated to a higher sphere.

Now all this has little or no correspondence with the
circumstances of other American myths. Indeed the entire
atmosphere of the Popol Vuh seems to be American only in
the secondary sense, in the sense that it has absorbed an
American atmosphere, or been overlaid by American
colouring.

As I have shown, the beginnings of the Popol Vuh are
set in circumstances of catastrophe. The pantheon of gods it
describes practically all have their origin in tempest or
earthquake, some of them are even earthquake-makers, and
the enemies of man; others are the leaders of a secret
society, the ritual of which bears a strong resemblance to
that of the Egyptian Book of the Dead. The remainder of
the Quiche history is eloquent of migration in a world of
darkness “‘ where there was no sun,” and of passage over a
great sea, the waters of which were miraculously divided—
probably a reference to the upheaval, temporary or other-
wise, of a volcanic ridge raised above the sea, by which they
passed from Antilia to America—for from Antilia I believe
the ancestors of the Quiches and Maya to have come, as I
shall proceed to show in the following chapter.

CHAPTER XI

THE EVIDENCE FROM CENTRAL AMERICAN
ARCHAOLOGY

Ir is almost certainly from the strange culture of the Maya
of Central America that we obtain a picture of what civilisa-
tion in ancient Antilia, the last sub-continental fragment of
great Atlantis, was like. It is generally admitted that the
culture of Central America bears a close general resemblance
to that of Egypt. The school of Professor Elliot Smith
' accounts for the resemblance by postulating the slow spread
of the Egyptian civilisation of the Pyramid epoch across the
vast expanse of the Pacific. I will not endeavour within
the comparatively brief limits of space at my disposal to
combat this ingenious hypothesis in detail, but will only
venture to remark that it appears to me highly improbable
that the associated factors of culture which this school
recognises as the evidences of the presence of “‘ the Children
of the Sun,” the civilising race which originated in Egypt,
could have held together through so many centuries as to
have manifested themselves in times and places so widely
apart as they are considered to have done. For example,
the data regarding terrace-irrigation, pearl-fishing, metal-
working, and the rest which we are told to regard as constant
factors in the civilisation of the Children of the Sun, break
down when applied to Mexico, where practically none of
these obtained. It is clear, too, that the best authenticated
myths of the civilised peoples of Central America speak of
their culture as having arrived from the East and not from
the West.

120

EE —— =

Central American Archeology IZI

The civilised peoples of Central America occupied the
tract of the North American continent from the Tropic of
Cancer to Nicaragua. The beginnings of culture in this
tract are to be found about the head-waters of the Usuma-
cinta River and the Rio Grande in Guatemala, and that part
of Chiapas which slopes down from the steep Cordilleras.
This, by far the oldest district of Central American advance-
ment, was probably colonised about a century before the
commencement of the Christian era. The ruined sites of
scores of cities, chief among which are the famous centres
of Palenque, Piedras Negras, and Ocosingo, stretch eastward
into Belize and southward to Honduras. ‘The temples and
palaces of this region, although the oldest examples of Maya
architecture, bear the stamp of a dignity and a consciousness
of metropolitan power not to be mistaken, so free and
opulent is their ornamentation, so obvious the desire of
their builders to surpass.

But some time in the sixth century of our era disaster
overtook these communities. What the nature of it was we
can only guess, and in this instance guessing will not avail
us much. Whether because of pestilence or for religious
reasons—invasion seems unlikely, to judge from the almost
perfect condition of the buildings, which have not been
subjected to the action of fire—the Maya of Guatemala and
Chiapas journeyed. southward into the inhospitable and
almost waterless peninsula of Yucatan, where they once
more commenced the task of raising settlements similar to
those they had abandoned. Here we will not follow them
for the present, as it is much more essential to our thesis to
study them in their first American environment. Suffice it
to say, that in Yucatan their art became less free and more
conventional, and the political relations between the several
city-states probably much more tumultuous than formerly.

Now the fact which most closely concerns us here is that
when the Maya civilisation first manifests itself upon Central

122 The Problem of Atlantis

American soil, it does so not in any simple or elementary
manner, but as a full-blown culture, with a well-defined art,
architecture, religion, and system of hieroglyphic writing.
We find not a single trace of its evolution or development
upon American ground. Thus early relics like the Tuxtla
statuette and the Leiden Plate, which date respectively a
century before and after the opening of the Christian era,
display the same characteristics and the same script as
objects which are known to belong to the century before the
coming of the Spaniards—and nothing earlier has been dis-
covered on Maya soil.

If we confine ourselves—as we must in view of considera-
tions of space—to the discovery of Atlantean or Antillean
resemblances in Maya civilisation, we shall find them
sufficiently numerous. In the first place, Maya architecture,
although it certainly has links and affinities with that of
Egypt, preserves a striking character of its own which is
eloquent of an art long segregated in an oceanic environment.

Maya architecture bears all the signs of a system of
building evolved out of the most simple designs, but brought
to a high state of complexity by centuries of slow evolution
rather than by the introduction of novel ideas. It is clear
that it owed nothing to any other and alien system, as, for
example, Greek architecture did to that of Egypt and Baby-
lonia. In the view of the writer it was developed from the
idea of the oblong bamboo house. Many of the temples
still exhibit signs of evolution from such a structure. Their
walls are sculptured in the semblance of bamboo rods, just
as the earliest Egyptian temples were carved in the likeness
of wooden logs. ‘This box-like structure was unrelieved by
windows, and air and light entered it by the doorways only.
If a second story was desired a similar ‘“‘ box”’ was built
on the top of the original structure.

This applies only to such buildings as temples and palaces.
The dwellings of the people were merely huts constructed

Central American Archeology 123

of leaves and adobe—a certain sign that at one time the
populace had been habituated to an environment in which
earthquakes or volcanic disturbances had been frequent.

But one circumstance points very clearly to the fact that
the Maya had been used to build their larger structures
on plains surrounded by mountains—such a site, in short,
as Plato describes as that of Atlantis. Practically all the
principal sites in Guatemala and Chiapas are so situated.
Palenque, for example, is built in the form of an amphi-
theatre, and nestles on the slopes of the Cordilleras. Stand-
ing on the central pyramid, the eye is met by a ring of palaces
and temples raised upon artificial terraces. Why, it may be
asked, were its structures so elevated ? It seems to me that
this indicates a former architectural tradition which had in
view occasional floodings. The Persian palaces of Perse-
polis, for example, are so raised because of seasonal floods.
But there was no such risk in the situation in which Palenque
was built. Again, it may be that the elevation was dictated
by the tradition that similar buildings in an ancestral home
had stood upon a sacred hill, such as is commonly alluded
to in American legend, and which, we know, was the case
in Atlantis.

Again, the Maya and Mexicans both believed that in
building on the surface of the earth they were not con-
structing on any stable surface, but on the back of a great
sea-monster, a cayman, alligator, or, as the Book of the
Kakchiquels has it, “a whale with four feet,’’ a leviathan
which occasionally writhed and cast them into the ocean.
Prudence thus dictated that their buildings should not rest
entirely on the back of this monster, but should be founded
on something more stable. Thus were they haunted by
the notion or tradition of cataclysm. Probably their method
of building construction was dictated by all of these beliefs.

And what do we find on the walls of these extraordinary
structures? With the question of Maya symbol and hiero-

124. The Problem of Atlantis

glyphic writing we enter upon the consideration of a subject
so vitally bound up with the thesis of the Atlantean-Antillean
colonisation of Central America as to call for our most
anxious inquiry. In the first place, we must absolutely
cast behind us the wild and unscientific theories and alleged
** discoveries ”’ of Le Plongeon and his school. Regarding
the true character of the hieroglyphic system of the Maya
of Central America there is now no dubiety, but so that once
and for all the absurd speculations to which it has given rise
may be laid to rest, lam compelled at some length to outline
the results by which serious students of the system have
arrived at their present conclusions, and will later attempt
to deduce from these the evidences of the Atlantean origin
of this script, not by dint of mere asseveration but by aid of
more logical means.

The strange system of writing anciently in use among the
civilised peoples of Central America has not succeeded in
attracting the same degree of popular interest in this country
as the scripts of Egypt and Assyria, yet its claims upon the
imagination are, perhaps, no less strong than those of hiero-
glyphic or cuneiform. Our grandfathers waxed enthusiastic
over the amateur explorations of Stephens among the
crumbling cities of Yucatan and Chiapas, but although the
governments of the United States, France, and Germany
have freely encouraged research in American archeology,
and its cultivation flourishes abroad, it still languishes among
us. It is regrettable that British readers should remain
unfamiliar with results so surprising and so creditable to
human perseverance as those which have recently attended
the discovery of the general purport of the Maya glyphic
system. For the pursuit of this quest a far greater degree
of effort and a higher ingenuity have been needful than for
the unriddling of the ancient writings of Egypt or Sumeria.
That the quaint symbols of the ancient Maya have so far
met with only partial interpretation is, perhaps, one of the

Central American Archeology 125

reasons why they fail to excite more general interest. But
surely the privilege of watching the gradual revelation of
these obscure glyphs is one on which our generation should
place a higher value than it appears to think the opportunity
merits.

The localities of Central America in which monuments
bearing the involved and fantastic characters of this script
are most generally found are still inhabited by people of
that Maya stock who once employed it. ‘They embrace the
remote peninsula of Yucatan, the uplands of Guatemala,
and the districts of Tabasco, Chiapas, and even a portion
of Honduras. But by far the greater number of inscriptions
have been met with in the southern part of these provinces
where the older branch of the Maya civilisation originally
flourished. It is at such sites as Copan in Honduras,
Quirigua and Tikal in Guatemala, and Piedras Negras and
Palenque in Chiapas that important texts are found, rather
than in Yucatan proper, although inscriptions of moment
are not wanting at Uxmal, Chichen Itza, and elsewhere in
the northern spheres of Maya influence.

Just as the ancient writings of the Middle East are found
inscribed on a variety of objects, so the Maya script is not
only painted on paper or skin or carved on stone, but incised
on wood, bone, shell, metal, and modelled on pottery.
The mediums of stone and paper were the most popular
among the Maya scribes, and all others may be dismissed
from our consideration. The carven inscriptions usually
occur upon the sides of monoliths, known as stele-shafts,
which in shape, if not in their wealth of ornamental detail,
recall the menhirs of Brittany. On altars, staircases, and
frequently on the walls of temples and palaces, they are to
be found nestling among the florid reliefs typical of Maya
architecture. But the writing proper is confined to the few
manuscripts or codices rescued from the pious attentions
of the early Spanish ecclesiastical authorities and now in

126 The Problem of Atlantis

European museums or libraries—the Dresden, Paris, and
Madrid manuscripts.

The shape of the glyphs or symbols as they occur in the
carven examples differs somewhat from that employed in
the written characters, the former being adapted to the
restrictions of the sculptor’s chisel, the latter to the less
limited technique of the scribe’s brush. But the basic
likeness between the forms is plainly apparent. At first
sight the glyphs appear as a number of small squares rounded
at the corners, representing human faces and other objects,
highly conventionalised by generations of artistic usage.
They have been described as “ calculiform,” or pebble-
shaped, from the fact that the contour which encloses each
of them resembles that of a small pebble. In this they are
contained much as the hieroglyphs which make up the name
of an Egyptian king are enclosed in a “ cartouche ” or oval
contour. ‘They are arranged in parallel columns, which
are to be read two columns at a time, beginning with the
uppermost glyph in the left-hand division. The reader
must then work his way from left to right and top to bottom,
ending with the lowest glyph in the second column. But
should the glyphs be disposed in a horizontal band, the order
of reading is from left to right in pairs.

The history of the prolonged endeavour to discover the
hidden meaning of these characters so obstinately dumb,
although one of continuous and patient effort, is not devoid
of romantic quality and has, indeed, furnished more than
one novelist with material for a tale of absorbing interest.
In 1565 Landa, Bishop of Chiapas, who destroyed a large
number of manuscripts on the plea that they were “‘ the
devil’s picture-books,” seems to have been smitten with a
late compunction for his short-sighted policy, and addressed
himself to the task of collecting all available information
regarding the Maya writing from the native scribes who
still practised it. He brought together a number of charac-

Central American Archeology 127

ters representing twenty-seven sounds, and the essay in which
he preserved these was published by the enthusiastic but
visionary Abbé Brasseur de Bourbourg at Paris in 1864,
when French interest in Mexico was at its height. Landa’s
“ alphabet ” was at once hailed by Americanists as the key
which would unlock the secrets of the Maya writing, the
““ Rosetta Stone” of America. But it was soon found that
all attempts to decipher the glyphs by its agency were only
partially successful, and it has been conjectured that the
Indian scribes, who looked upon the bishop as the ruthless
destroyer of their ancient records, purposely misled him.
At the same time most of the names and symbols for the days
and months as furnished by him are known to be correct, as
is found by a comparison of them with the glyphs appearing
in certain native books known as the Books of Chilan Balam,
where they are shown with their phonetic equivalents in
European letters.

In 1876 the French-Americanist, Leon de Rosny, published
an alphabet of twenty-nine letters with numerous variants.
But neither this, nor the attempt of another French savant,
De Charency, can be taken seriously. Ten years later Dr
Augustus le Plongeon published ‘‘ An Ancient Mayan
Hieratic Alphabet according to Mural Inscriptions.” This,
the most fantastic of the attempts to probe the mystery of
the Maya symbols, compared and even identified them
with those of Egypt, and did incalculable mischief in spread-
ing the delusion that they had at last been deciphered, and
were to be regarded as the prototypes of the Egyptian
hieroglyphs. Most of Le. Plongeon’s “ characters”’ are
either symbolic details or bizarre inventions, unrepresented
among the Maya glyphs.

The first student to throw any light on the manner in which
the quest should be conducted, if final success were to be
hoped for, was Professor Ernst Férstemann, of Dresden,
who, about 1880, showed that the native records and

128 The Problem of Atlantis

inscriptions were chiefly concerned with the fixation of
calendric festivals and the dating of monuments. He
discovered and elucidated the elaborate and ingenious system
of numeration in use among the peoples of ancient Central
America, and showed how it was utilised to record astro-
nomical and chronological facts. In short, his pioneer
work made possible all subsequent progress in deciphering
the texts. Curiously enough, an American student of the
subject, Mr J. T. Goodman of Alameda, California, working
independently, arrived at conclusions similar to those reached
by Forstemann. Since that time the work has been carried
on by the late Professor D. G. Brinton of the University of
Pennsylvania, Professor Eduard Seler of Berlin, Mr S. G.
Morley, and, notably, by Mr C. P. Bowditch of Boston,
who, addressing himself to the task of placing the whole study
on a systematic basis, has made it possible to survey the
entire field of past endeavour, and has rendered further
progress practicable.

Judging from the complete state of davelopaaane at
which the system had arrived at the date of the discovery
of Central America by the Spaniards, there is every reason
to refer its origin to a past of considerable antiquity. As
Dr F. W. Hodges of the Bureau of American Ethnology
remarked: “ The earliest inscriptions now extant probably
date from about the beginning of the Christian era, but such
is the complexity of the glyphs and subject-matter, even at
this early period, that in order to estimate the age of the
system it is necessary to postulate a far greater antiquity
for its origin. Indeed, all that can be safely accepted in
this direction is that many centuries must have elapsed
before the Maya hieroglyphic writing could have been
developed to the highly complex stage where we first
encounter it.”

A brief examination of any Maya text reveals the presence
of certain elements which occur repeatedly in the glyphs,

Central American Archeology 129

but in varying combinations. Two or three small but
separate signs frequently go to the making of each glyph.
So numerous are the combinations and permutations of
these, however, that the student might at first sight suppose
that a great number of signs were employed in Maya writing.
But closer observation will convince him that these elemen-
tary symbols are in reality few in number. His difficulty
lies in identifying them and gaining experience of the
different forms they take. In Egyptian texts the simple
phonetic signs are unchanging under all circumstances of
composition. Like the letters of our alphabet, they never
vary, and may be recognised as unfailingly. But in the
Maya texts the normal form of the element may be altered
for reasons of space, individual peculiarities of style, or
artistic symmetry. It has been ascertained, however, that
each glyph holds one essential element, which was seldom
altered, and that it is only in the case of accessory or supple-
mentary elements that any great variation was permissible.
But it is rare to find two glyphs which have the same meaning
and the same elements precisely alike in drawing, contour,
and general appearance. It is as if the letters of our alphabet
were not standardised in form, but were subject to the caprice
of each individual writer or printer. Such dissimilarities are
often due to difference in the materials in which the glyphs
are delineated, as well as to careless drawing and actual
mistakes, for errors, and those not a few, have been encoun-
tered both in examples of the numeral system and the
writing proper. These conditions render progress slow and
results uncertain.

Sometimes the pebble-shaped outline or “‘ cartouche ” of
a glyph is altered to a “‘ head-shape ”’ ; that is, the customary
form is changed to the contour of a human head. The
symbols usually confined to the outline are transferred to
this ““ head-shape”’; or cunningly adapted to its physiog-
nomy, in a manner which speaks volumes for the artistic

9
&

130 The Problem of Atlantis

ability of the Maya sculptors and scribes. These “ head-
variants,” as they are called, are puzzling enough when the
meaning of a glyph in its original form is already known.
When it is unknown, they are baffling indeed.

The glyphs as a whole have been divided into two groups ;
astronomical, calendric, and numerical signs (that is, glyphs
used in counting time), and those having an explanatory
function of some sort. The great majority of the symbols
already deciphered belong to the first group. The second,
which is much the smaller, in all probability relates the facts
of Maya history.

As regards the question whether the system is phonetic
or pictorial in character, much difference of opinion exists.
Three principal theories have been advanced to account for
the nature of the Maya writing. Some authorities believe
the glyphs to be phonetic, each representing a fixed sound,
and entirely dissociated from the presentation of any thought
or idea. Others regard them as ideographic, each repre-
senting in itself some complete idea or conception ; while
a third school supposes them to partake of the nature of
both types. It is obvious that. the first theory cannot be
accepted in its entirety. The glyphs unquestionably show
traces of phoneticism, but all attempts to reduce them to a
phonetic system or alphabet have signally failed.

The theory that they are ideographic has a larger follow-
ing. But Brinton pointed out that a native writer was able
to give Landa a written character for an unfamiliaf sound
(as, for example, that of a Spanish letter), and that the
characters the Maya scribe employed for this purpose were
certainly used in the native writings. These facts led
Brinton to think that some sort of phonetic writing was not
unknown to the Maya; and, indeed, both the inscriptions
and the manuscripts establish the soundness of bcs con-
tention.

As we have seen, the phonetic sounds of certain glyphs

To face p. 130. PLATE VIII.

The sign for “* night’ and

The sign which means “sun.” The symbol for “moon.” “sky!The dots represent stars.

f >>) F 7 St);
aS, <p) s>.

oy Oe

we’

The sign for “‘ beginning.” ‘The end.” “Tying together,” ‘‘ union.”

z Division | i sya bolised The serpent symbol for
e.
“water.” Sacrificial victim.

: PZ)
' This symbol is read\‘ Day of wv
The sign for the year, the new year in the month.” “Wind.”

Maya Hieroglyphs.

Central American Archeology 131

relating to days and months are known from Landa’s work,
in which they are accompanied by their Maya names in
European letters. In these, at least, he was not mistaken,
as we glean from certain native manuscripts which record
the names of the glyphs for the days and months in the same
manner. One, for example, is known as yax, a picture of a
tree-stump, which means “ region ” or “ place.”” Another
is kin, “‘ sun,” and when these symbols are combined they
are known as yaxkin, “ sun-region or warm region ”’—
“the south.” Similarly, the character representing the
phonetic value kin is also found as an element for the words
likin, “‘ east,” and chikin, “‘ west,’’ each of which has kin as
its last syllable. These elements are thus manifestly
phonetic. But this notwithstanding, the glyphs alluded to
have meanings quite independent of their mere phonetic
values. Primarily, their function is to convey the ideas of
“sun” and “ region,”’ and they were used phonetically in
a secondary manner only.

Such glyphs as are phonetic, it must be clear, rank not as
letters, but as syllables. This kind of writing Brinton
called ikonomatic, or rebus-writing—a script in which the
characters do not indicate the meaning of the objects which
they portray, but only the sounds of their names. Let us
suppose, if the reader will pardon the homeliness of the
illustration, that we draw pictures of a human eye, a can, a
bear, a cobbler’s awl, the numeral 4, and a ewe, and translate
the rebus “I can bear all for you.” In such a system the
first picture is intended to recall not the idea “ eye ” but the
sound of the word denoting the object, which is also that
for the personal pronoun “I.” Again, the picture of a bear
does not represent the idea of that animal, but stands for the
sound of its name. Such a method is occasionally employed
in the Maya writing, especially, thinks Mr Bowditch, in
the case of common nouns and abstract ideas. The writing
in use among the Aztecs of Mexico was, indeed, entirely

De) cmb he Problenimor Atlantis

of this character, and it is believed that they drew inspira-
tion from Maya sources at an early period.

The crux of the whole question, indeed, is : How far do
phonetic elements enter into the composition of Maya glyphs?
It seems probable that as the decipherment of Maya writing
progresses an ever-increasing number of phonetic elements
will be identified, though the idea of a glyph will always be
found to overshadow its phonetic value. That is, in the
consciousness of those who employed it, the system would,
through generations of usage, come to possess a significance
chiefly ideographic, and it would not necessitate any such
effort of mental translation as a people unused to rebus-
writing would have to make to comprehend it readily.

At an early stage in his researches Férstemann discovered
the sign for zero or nought (a shell), which was derived from
the symbol for ‘‘ completeness,” zero being regarded as the
only complete or perfect number, incapable of division or
multiplication. He was also able to show that the symbol
for the moon (a cursive form of the head of the moon god),
represented the Maya “ month ” of twenty days, the period in
which the moon waxes and wanes, and therefore the number
twenty. It was readily found that a dot stood for the
numeral one, from the analogy of the Mexican manuscripts,
in which the days of the month are numbered in their proper
sequence by dots, and from the same source it was gleaned
that a bar or dash represented five, a bar and a dot, six,
two bars, ten, and so forth. But the manner in which the
“higher mathematics ” and system of dating of the Maya
were elucidated is much too involved a process to be described
in this place, and some account of the way in which a few
of the more useful glyphs were identified will, doubtless,
prove of greater interest to the reader.

Férstemann recognised from Landa’s work that one of
the signs for a certain day of the Maya month is called akbal,
which means “‘ night,” and that the sign had the same signifi-

Central American Archeology 133

cance and phonetic value as a glyph was suggested by the
star-like dots which surround it. Now akbal is used as a
day-sign because it also means “‘ the beginning of the month,”
the Maya month commencing immediately after midnight.
Therefore, when he found the sign akbal as an element of
a glyph, and observed footsteps painted beneath it, Férste-
mann translated it as ‘‘ beginning ”’ or “‘ forward movement.”
He found, too, that a glyph representing the number seven,
which in Maya has the significance of ‘‘ great ”’ or “ ultimate,”
means ‘“‘ the end.” From the frequent contrast of these
terms there can be little doubt that their significance is what
he assumed it to be.

“Union ” is denoted by the sting of a rattlesnake, the
coils of that reptile appearing to the Maya as symbolical of
“tying together.”” We have here the idea of representing
the whole by the part, which is also to be remarked in the
glyph for “ dog,” which is merely a drawing of the ear of
that animal. In contrast to the sign of ‘‘ union ”’ is that for
“division,” or “cutting,” which is represented by an
obsidian knife. A half-closed hand means “ to eat,”’ derived
from the action by which one raises food to the mouth.
Added to the kin or “sun” sign it denotes chikin, “ the
west,” probably from the circumstance that the Maya took
their principal meal at the hour of sunset. Lzkin, “ the
east,” is a combination of the sun-sign kin and the symbol
for “ king ” (ahau), which is derived from a root meaning
“to rise up,” “‘ to awake,” so that the whole implies ‘“ the
sun awakes,” “ the sun rises.”” Xaman, the north, is more
directly symbolised by the face of the devouring earth-
monster which was supposed to dwell in that region.

The figure denoting the spring equinox was traced because
of its obvious representation of a cloud from which three
streams of water are falling upon the earth. A square
portion at the top gepresents the sky. ‘The obsidian knife
underneath denotes a division or period of time cut off, as

134. The Problem of Atlantis

it were, from other periods of the year. That the sign
means “ spring ” is verified by its position among the other
signs of the seasons.

Water is depicted by the figure of a serpent, which typifies
the undulating nature of the element. The symbol known
as ‘‘ the sacrificial victim” is pictorially eloquent of its
subject. Its first element is the vulture or death-bird, and
the second shows a crouching and beaten captive, ready to —
be immolated to one of the terrible Maya deities whose
horrid rites included human sacrifice.

The symbol signifying “‘ the day of the new year,” which
occurred in the month Ceh, is composed of elements meaning
“sun ” or “‘ day,” “ year,” the sign for “ division,” and that
for the month Ceh, the whole thus signifying “‘ the day in
which the year is separated. in the month Ceh.”” The symbol
for ‘‘ wind ”’ has also been determined from its accompani-
ment by a figure known to be a deity of the four cardinal
points, whence all American tribes believed the wind to come.

Other glyphs identified relate to various colours, including
red, yellow, white, and black, the names of certain deities
and those of several planets, Venus and Mercury among them.

It is clear from what has been established that the texts
are chiefly concerned with the fixation of religious festivals.
But there is a residuum of matter which undoubtedly relates
to historical occurrences of outstanding importance, to
which the accompanying dates refer. What may these still
obscure symbols not conceal? So much can be said, that
what they have to disclose will make terse reading, for the
signs in which the precious information is latent are few.
But so highly concentrated is the syllabic script of the
ingenious Maya scribes, that such of it as remains dark to
us may contain more of value than we suspect.

Having outlined the system of writing employed by the
Maya, let us now look for any evidences we may be able to
find of its Atlantean origin.

Central American Archeology 135

In the first place it was certainly not developed on
American soil. There is not the slightest trace of its
gradual evolution anywhere in Central America. When we
are first able to trace it on the walls of the oldest temples in
Guatemala and Chiapas we find its form and character very
much the same as they were some twelve centuries later at
the period of the arrival of the Spaniards.

Again, it was supposed to be the joint invention of
Quetzalcoatl, the first Atlantean coloniser of Central America,
and the old gods Cipactonal and Oxomoco, who may be
equated with the “old, old ones,” the “‘ serpents covered
with green and blue feathers,” the oceanic deities, who
dwelt in the depths of the sea, and who are alluded to in the
Popol Vuh. Mendieta in his Historia Ecclesiastica relates
a Mexican myth which tells us that the gods thought it well
that the people should have some means of writing by which
they might direct themselves, and Oxomoco and Cipactonal,
who dwelt in a cave in Cuernavaca, especially considered the
matter. Cipactonal thought that her descendant Quetzal-
coatl should be consulted, and called him into council, and
among them they undertook the arrangement of the calendar
and its signs.

Thus it was those gods particularly associated with the
Atlantic Ocean and the mysterious, ancient land which once
existed there, whom the Mexicans and Maya regarded as
the inventors or innovators of the art of writing, developed
in Central America. ©

Some authorities are of the opinion that the name,
Tiapallan, the traditional Atlantic home of Quetzalcoatl,
should be translated “‘ Land of Writing.” As I have shown,
it would seem to imply, “ land of the black and red stones,”
still, it may have such a secondary meaning as the above.
The inks used by the Maya scribes in their manuscripts were
black and red in colour.

If we analyse the elements of the Maya hieroglyphs, we

136 The Problem of Atlantis

shall assuredly find in them pictorial reminiscences of the
environment whence their inventors came. What, then,
does such an intensive examination of these forms disclose ?
One of the most frequently encountered signs is that repre-
senting the human ear. In Maya “ear” is xicin, which
also means “‘ shell.’’ Although the resemblance is obvious,
I do not think that it would have been likely to occur
to other than a maritime people. ‘‘ Shells had a peculiar
sacredness in Maya symbolism,” says Brinton, and oyster-
shells occur again and again in the manuscripts, often in
conjunction with fish, the whole meaning “ the harvest of
the sea.’”’» Sometimes they are associated with the cormorant,
amaritime bird. The conch-shell is also frequently depicted.
The sign known as Ben-ik appeals to me as having a
cataclysmic significance. Brinton alludes to it as “a
worm-like figure,” and Seler describes it as a symbol of
‘“‘ mother-earth.” “It sometimes is drawn,” says the first
writer, ‘‘ to have a fish-like appearance, and may symbolise
the waters, the more so as it has occasionally as a superfix
the ‘ cloud-balls.’”’ I take it to be a highly-conventionalised
drawing of the earth-dragon which lies in the waters, and
whose body is the earth, with buildings or cities on its back.
Another version of it obviously represents a tower surrounded
by the sea, a symbol for a city or fortress encompassed by a
raging and agitated ocean. In Maya cosmology the earth
was known as “ the turreted castle,” and, as we will see later,
the entire architectural tradition of the Mediterranean-East
Atlantic area in early times was connected with the turret or
tower. Some authorities see in it the sign for ‘‘ rain” or
** flood,” and it is probable that it embodied the idea of deluge.
We come now to a glyph which undoubtedly depicts the
idea of deluge from above, accompanied by lightning.
This is frequently associated with symbols representing dates
or a time-count, and the whole seems to have reference to
some such catastrophe as is alluded to in the Popol Vuh.

To face p. 136. PLATE IX.

ZA

ce) )\ 3

Maya Symbols. (Taken from D. G. Brinton’s Maya Hieroglyphics.)

1. The Heavenly Shield. 3. The Sign Ben-ik.
2. The Sign for ‘‘ Deluge.” 4. The Sign for the East.
5. Humanity re-arising out of Deluge.

Central American Archeology 137

The design taken from the Paris Codex and reproduced
in the accompanying plate, has, I think, an even deeper
significance for us: I believe it to be an attempt to convey
the idea of humanity arising out of a sunken land lost in a
deluge of waters. The symbols at the base and on either side
undoubtedly stand for Atlantis, as has already been pointed
out by Mr M. A. Blackwell in his work on “‘ The Swastika
and Atlantis,”’ published in The Word, and that the curving
lines on which they appear represent engulfing waters is abun-
dantly plain. The headless figure which rises out of the
waves seems to represent mankind, unconquered and un-
conquerable, branching out east and west in new and glorious
growth. ‘This design is usually associated with Quetzalcoatl,
the god of Tlapallan, the Land in the Ocean.

Equally interesting for us is the picture of the so-called
heavenly shield. This appears to me to represent a city
on the Atlantean plan, surrounded by zones of land and
water, and having four roads leading to a central citadel,
set between the powers of light and darkness. That the
rather shapeless-looking masses between which it is situated
are intended for mummy-bundles (the method in which the
Maya disposed of their dead, mummified and bound up) no
student of Central American antiquities will deny, and the
fact that they are so represented shows them to be super-
natural beings, gods, of the nature of “the majesty
enveloped,” as the mummy-bundle which contained the
first four men alluded to in the Popul Vuh is called. Above
are the signs of storm and deluge. Here, I venture to say, is
a very real summary of the destruction of Atlantis, a veritable
symbol of the final catastrophe.

The symbol for “east” in the Maya hieroglyphical
system also commends itself to me as distinctively Atlantean.
Here we see, as in the preceding symbol, the city or sur-
rounded island, and the way to the sea, with the port gate
and flanking towers. That this group should stand for

138 The Problem of Atlantis

* east seems to show that it was a reminiscence of an
eastern locality.

It is manifestly impossible in a work of this scope to
attempt the elucidation of the entire range of the Maya
hieroglyphic system, which, indeed, would entail the repro-
duction of the manuscripts and carvings in which it appears
on an extensive scale, but perhaps what has been said here
will indicate to the student that Atlantean lore may be much
enriched by a faithful study of these sources. The researches
of Mr M. A. Blackwell, alluded to above, are significant and
ingenious. Some of the symbols and signs which he repro-
duces from the works of Brasseur and Le Plongeon are
not to be found in those of more authoritative writers on
the subject, nor can I identify them on the monuments
themselves.

The question now arises: Do we find in Maya art any
evidence of an oceanic and Antilian connection ?

Let us examine some of the most frequently encountered
motifs of Maya art. What has come to be known as the
“plant and fish motif’ is of common occurrence in many
of the ruined cities, especially at Copan, Palenque, and
Chichen Itza. The plant is described by Maudslay and
Spinden as a water-plant, and resembles a water-lily, and
in many cases a fish is shown, evidently feeding upon the
petals. “ The whole,” says Spinden, “ apparently carries
the idea of water.” It is attached as an ornamental detail
to the bodies of animals and to the heads of divinities that
are probably associated with water, as in the case of the god
known as “the long-nosed god,” probably Quetzalcoatl,
who is shown in the Dresden manuscripts walking into the
water and pulling up a water-plant. Fish and shells are
shown in the water, the lower depths of which are coloured
green, the shade of the tropical sea.

As I have already shown, what Spinden and others call
“* Atlantean ” figures are quite commonly encountered at

SO

ee — ————

To face p. 138. PEARE X..

From Spinden’s Maya Art.

1. Plant and Fish Symbol. 2. Quetzalcoatl wading in Water.
3. Two-headed Dragon.

Maya Symbolism.

Central American Archeology 139

Chichen Itza and elsewhere. These are usually bearded
and have a close resemblance to European figures of the
same class. ‘There is, indeed, nothing American about these
figures.

Costume, as represented in Maya art, was evidently the
outcome of centuries of development in an atmosphere of
high culture and mercantile advancement. Most of the
figures represented are arrayed in robes of rich texture
lavishly embroidered with silver and gold, the head-dresses
are composed of rare and brilliant plumes, and the personages
represented are loaded with jewellery, necklaces, belts,
inlaid arm and leg-pieces, and earrings. That all this
magnificence was evolved on American soil is simply un-
thinkable. It bespeaks centuries of patient endeavour in
the weaving of textiles and the cutting of gems before such
a height of excellence could have been arrived at. The
statues and stele which meet the eye in the depths of the
forests of Guatemala, and which have aroused the astonish-
ment and admiration of all beholders, are not the work of
a race newly sprung from barbarism. Indeed, they display
all the marks of an ancient and almost decadent civilisation,
a culture old and in its decline. Search for its beginnings
as we may on American soil we shall not find them there.
Those gorgeous temples and extraordinary statues, with all
their bewildering detail of ornament and an art which has
not its equal in the world for subtlety of expression or
involved richness, must have had behind them not centuries
but thousands of years of effort before such summits of
achievement could possibly have been reached. ‘To look on
a Maya stele is to find oneself face to face with the result of
countless ages of artistic endeavour and slow effort towards
perfection. One has only to compare it with the art of
‘races at the present time in a condition of barbarism to ob-
serve the profound gap that exists between them.

CHAPTER XII

THE EVIDENCE FROM CENTRAL AMERICAN
ARCHZOLOGY—continued

SEVERAL of the mythological figures portrayed in Maya
sculpture and painting are unquestionably connected either
with cataclysm or the ocean. That which Professor Maud-
slay calls the ‘“‘ Two-headed Dragon,” as seen at Copan,
for example, obviously typifies the earth in the form of a
ravenous, devouring monster. We observe that the face on
the left is disguised by a mask like the face of a beautiful
woman held between the jaws of the leviathan, and this in
my opinion is symbolic of the Maya idea that the earth was
deceitful, beguiling, and most attractive when about to
destroy. The opposite face gives the key to the true nature
of this behemoth, cruel, savage, insatiable. ‘‘ The lower
jaw,” says Spinden, “is represented as a bleached bone,
and sometimes the nose has a cavity that likewise indicates
death.”” On Stela M, at Copan, the monster’s face bears
the symbols of water and flood.

Sometimes, as at Quirigua and elsewhere, this dragon-
form is merged in that of a great turtle. ‘To several peoples,
notably the Hindoos and Chinese, the belief was common
that the earth rested on the carapace of aturtle. It is notice-
able that at Quirigua this figure also occurs as an Atlantean
or caryatid motif in low relief, therefore it must have been
associated in the mind of the architect with the idea of
Atlas, who, it has already been shown, is certainly portrayed
on the Maya monuments.

The Maya manuscripts—as apart from the carvings and

140

Central American Archeology 141

sculptures—are only three in number: the Dresden,
Paris, and Tro-Cortesianus. These are all obviously copies
of much older MSS. They are, for the most part, of the
nature of time-counts. At present I wish to examine them
for any remnants of Antilian connection they may exhibit.
The early writer Aguilar says that he learned from the
native books themselves that they recorded no fewer than
three cataclysms. The first was called Maya cimil, or
‘universal death,”’ the second Oc na Kuchil, ‘‘ the ravens
enter the houses,”’ an expression which explains itself, and
the third, Hun yecil, or “ universal deluge,” a term which a
Maya-Spanish dictionary explains by alluding to a tradition
that the water at the flood was so high “‘ that its surface was
within the distance of one stalk of maguey from the sky.”
Another term for this catastrophe was bulcahal, haycahol
or haycahil, or ‘“‘ universal earthquake and flood which
destroyed the world.”

“ Destroyed the world!” Not partially, but entirely—
that is, the old world, the Antilia from which the Maya
emigrated to Central America.

In the Codex Tro-Cortesianus we seem to have a picture
with a decidedly Atlantean appearance. ‘This picture, I -
take it, is a memory of the Atlantean story, much as told
by Plato. We see a male anda female figure which possibly
depict the ancestral Atlantean gods known as Poseidon and
Cleito, and these are surrounded by lines which may repre-
sent the zones of land and water mentioned in the myth.
In the Tro-Cortesianus and also in the Dresden codices are
many representations of Kukulkan or Quetzalcoatl, some of
which show him seated in a boat coming from Tlapallan, but
in all of which he is shown with the long proboscis of the tapir,
which, we may recall, was the title (T/apzanes) given to the
priests who guarded the remains of the Atlantean treasure and
manuscripts found and destroyed by the Spanish priesthood.

But one of the most important mythological figures for us

142. The Problem of Atlantis

is that of the serpent or water-goddess, which occurs in all
three manuscripts. She is represented as an old woman
with brown-stained body and claws in place of feet, and she
wears on her head a knotted serpent. From a great inverted
vase she pours down a flood of water upon the world.
* Evidently we have here,” says Firstemann, “a personifi-
cation of water in its form of destroyer, a goddess of floods
and cloud-bursts. . . . In the Dresden Codex, page 74,
where something resembling a flood is represented, she
wears the cross-bones of the death-god.”” “She was,” says
Brinton, “the personification of the thunderstorm. The
vase she empties is the descending torrent of rain, the
rattles she carries are the thunder-claps, her severe mien is
the terror inspired by the din of the elements.”

Now the important points here are that a hieroglyph
which frequently accompanies her is that which is usually
interpreted as the sign for “ evil days,” “ disaster,” and that
her place is the east. That she is the same as the goddess
whom I have already identified as the Atlantean mother-
goddess there can be no doubt, as both possess the glyphs
for thunder-clouds and water. Here, then, we have the
goddess of an eastern oceanic locality, flood-making, thunder-
sending, terrific, the dreaded deity of a people who lived in
terror of the periodical cataclysms with which she visited
them. If anything is clear in the religions of the Maya
and Mexican peoples of Central America, it is that they
believed themselves to be the creatures of heavenly sport,
a remnant to be sacrificed at the pleasure of their divine
masters. Tezcatlipoca (Hurakan, the storm-god in his
Maya equivalent) is spoken of as “ having his sport, his
amusement with the people, terrifying them as he pleased,”
and the other gods seem to have been similarly disposed.
“We are all the children of water,” says a prayer of
the inland Mexicans: “‘O Tlaloc, god of water, have
mercy on us, slay us not!’’ What are these things but

Central American Archeology 143

recollections of an era of recurrent doom during which
the behaviour of the elements reduced the race to a state
of servile terror ?

We have, then, traced the Poseidon, Cleito, and Atlas of
Plato’s story, or deities strongly resembling them, in Central
America. True, we can only infer that the old gods of
Atlantis came to be regarded after the catastrophe as gods of
destruction, but from the closing remarks of Plato’s account
it is safe to draw the inference that the Atlanteans had so
offended Zeus that he intended to destroy them. It is
not infrequently found that when a people is driven by
elemental catastrophes to quit a locality that the deities
of that region come to be regarded by them as malignant
and destructive in their tendencies. We should note, too,
that the Maya god of death and misfortune, Ah-puch, or
Kun-hau, is associated with the East. He wears the symbol
of the sea-snail, which is an invariable sign of a connection
with the ocean in Maya symbolism, the ruff of the vulture,
typical of death and disaster, and the symbol of the skull
and cross-bones. He is accompanied by the moan-bird,
a species of falcon, which, says Seler, typifies the thunder-
cloud. This bird is the same as the Maya demon Cosla-
huntox, “ the thirteen layers of clouds,” the terrific fiend of
the thunderstorm.

Certain circumstances regarding the Maya sun-god seem
to me of significance. Not only is he frequently represented
as wearing a beard, but on the monuments, as at Copan,
and on the pottery pipes of the Strebel collection, he is
shown as having filed teeth. Now the filing or serration of
the teeth was practised by the Toltecs, the followers of
Quetzalcoatl, the god or culture-hero from the land of
Tlapallan in the Atlantic. It is not an American practice,
but is to be found in Africa and alsewhere. Therefore it
would seem to have reached America and Africa from a
common centre,

144 The Problem of Atlantis

“‘ But,” says the sceptic, “if the Maya had a colonial
connection with Atlantis or Antilia, how comes it that they
had so entirely lost the art of seamanship ? They were not
a maritime people, and that being so, it is highly improbable
that they were ever acquainted with the seaman’s art, or
made long voyages.”

A more absurd assumption could scarcely be imagined.
That it has frequently been brought forward as a crushing
reply to the hypothesis of a Maya connection with Atlantis,
only proves a woeful lack of knowledge of Central American
conditions on the part of those who advanced it. As a
matter of fact the Maya were skilful sailors and made voyages
of very considerable extent in ships of fair tonnage. One of
them was sighted by Columbus during his third voyage.
It was a good-sized vessel with masts and sails, and carried
a crew of forty men, who assisted him in his sailing direc-
tions by signs. He speaks of houses, or cabins, fore and
aft, in which women and children were accommodated, so
that the voyages undertaken must have been of consider-
able extent.

When Cortes invaded Central America from Mexico, he
found that a regular maritime commerce was being carried
on by the Maya from the Laguna del Terminos. They
supplied him with accurate charts of the coast and its inlets,
which aided him in his endeavour. ‘That the Mexicans had
a very ancient memory of once having lived on the shores of
a great sea has already been indicated, and that certain of
the gods were worshipped in coastal areas because of their
ability to supply an unlimited harvest of fish from the sea
is clearly shown by one of their number being called “‘ old
fish-god of our flesh.”

A certain goddess is shown suckling a fish. The fish is
a constantly recurring factor in the ornamental designs on
the Maya monuments. Another god, Opochtli, is spoken
of as the inventor of the fishermen’s net. The great import-

Central American Archeology 145

ance of shells, both as an artistic motif and as charms and
amulets, clearly indicates a former oceanic connection.
Practically every god in the Mexican pantheon and many in
that of the Maya is liberally adorned with sea-shells. Quet-
zalcoatl wore on his breast the “sliced shell of the sea-
snail,” and the shell girdle was worn by most of the goddesses,
while shells also hung from their skirts.

We now return to the question, posed at the commence-
ment of this chapter and elsewhere: If the Maya civilisa-
tion did not develop on the soil where its remains are
found to-day, where are the evidences of its early evolu-
tion to be met with? So far I have given only a partial
reply to this problem, merely mentioning in passing
that the earlier developments of Maya art and culture as
well as Maya linguistic affinities were to be found in the
Antilles, the remnants of submerged Antilia.

Columbus, on his discovery of the Antilles, remarked
upon the peaceable and civilised character of their inhabi-
tants. ‘The greater islands, Cuba, Haiti, Jamaica, and Porto
Rico, were inhabited by people of the Arawak race, the lesser
islands by Caribs. The Tainos, or Arawaks of Cuba, had
founded a colony in Florida for the purpose of searching for
the Fountain of Perpetual Youth. This, we may recall, was
what Quetzalcoatl was advised to seek in the land of Tlapallan,
that mystical country in the Atlantic, if he would return to
‘Mexico “as a youth.” The peoples of the Antilles were
hardy sailors, who did not hesitate to attack the flotilla of
Ponce de Leon when it appeared on their coasts, and who
were quite capable of reaching the mainland in their large
canoes with sails. Those of the Bahamas had a regular
commerce with Havana. The Caribs who dwelt in the
Lesser Antilles penetrated to the very heart of Brazil, and
were, though given to cannibalism, like the Mexicans, the
carriers of culture to that region, and, I strongly suspect,
were the builders of the large ruined cities recently ares

146 The Problem of Atlantis

there, regarding the origin of which there is not yet a suffi-
ciency of data to speak with any degree of certainty.

The Caribs possessed two languages, one employed by
the male and the other by the female portions of the popula-
tien. This is, of course, clear evidence that they invaded
the Lesser Antilles as pirates or refugees, that they brought
no women of their own race with them, but slaughtered the
men of the islands and took their women, who spoke Arawak.
To enable them to make such a clean sweep of the males
they must have arrived in very large numbers, and it seems
to me that the expedition must have been of the nature of
a definite invasion by a well-equipped army. But why did -
that army not return to its base? The only inference is
that it had no base to return to—that it had disappeared
before the invaders came to the Lesser Antilles. The Caribs
were not natives of any of the Antilles group, and certainly
did not come originally from the American mainland, as
Von den Steinen, who found remnants of them in the far
interior of Brazil, says very definitely that they spoke the
same language as the Caribs of the islands, “‘ island Carib,”
as it is called, and not the Carib of the Guianas, the speech
of those who later settled on the north-west mainland of
South America.

But there was a still earlier race in the Antilles than either
Carib or Arawak. These were the Guacanabibes, some of
whom were still found surviving in the western part of Cuba
by the invading Spaniards. Their remains have been dis-
covered at Porto Rico by Mr J. W. Fewkes, and show them
to have been distinct from the later comers. They lived in
caves, and from the similarity in name and customs I take
them to have been the same as the Guanches of the Canaries.

Many of these tribes, especially the Caribs, flattened the
head, precisely as did the Maya of Guatemala, Chiapas, and
Yucatan. They built large wooden houses. The zemies
or gods of the Tainos of Cuba bore a strong resemblance,

Central American Archeology 147

says Beuchat, to the naguals, or spiritual beast-guardians of
the Maya. Their storm-goddess, Guabancex (who is, I
think, the Sycorax of Shakespeare’s Tempest, as Caliban is
merely an older word for Carib, or cannibal)! was the same
as the Maya goddess of flood and storm. Her ministers,
Guatauva and Coatrischie, were supposed to gather the
waters in the valleys between the mountains before the
occurrence of one of the floods which occasionally devastated
the islands.

The people of Hayti believed that the souls of the dead
joined their ancestors in a mythical island called Coaibai,
situated in the east. Like the Maya and Mexicans, they
practised the art of embalming the dead.

. A swarming population filled these islands. Their methods
of government, costume, implements, art, and general mode
of life show a strong resemblance to those of the Maya of
Central America. But the likeness is such as is to be found
between a people who have originally received a much
larger measure of culture and a partially civilised community,
for that the population of the Antilles were inferior in culture
to the Maya there can be no reasonable doubt. I believe,
then, that whereas the Maya were direct immigrants to
Central America from the sunken land of Antilia, the peoples
of the Antilles, with the exception of the Caribs, had always
inhabited these islands and had received only a measure
of the Antilian civilisation, which had filtered through to
this archipelago through the agency of commerce, and that
the Maya, on the final downfall of Antilia, had preferred,
instead of settling in these comparatively barbarous portions of
their domain, to push past them into the absolutely unknown
but much more hospitable regions of Guatemala and Chiapas.
The Caribs were, probably, bands of Antilians of the lower
orders, sailors, it may be, who, finding themselves leaderless

1“ My dam’s god, Setebos,” alluded to by Caliban, was in reality a
god of the Patagonian Indians mentioned by Magellan.

148 The Problem of Atlantis

and in extreme peril, seized upon shipping, and, sailing to
the Lesser Antilles, settled there. I do not, of course, mean
to say that only one migration took place from slowly dis-
integrating Antilia to Central America and the Antilles.
This is, in fact, disproved by the terms of the myth of
Quetzalcoatl, which informs us that more than one party of
immigrants arrived on American soil. And though Carib
and Maya strongly resembled each other, there were yet
such divergencies as can only be accounted for by a more or
less prolonged isolation.

CHAPTER XIII
THE EVIDENCE FROM EGYPT

Tue theory that Egyptian civilisation had an Atlantean
origin has been hotly debated. I do not intend to enter
into the welter of controversy, but to deal with the matter
from a strictly practical point of view. In the present
chapter I shall confine myself to those evidences which seem
to me to link Egypt with Atlantis, and in that which follows
shall point out the analogies between Egyptian and Central
American civilisation in the hope of demonstrating their
common origin.

In the chapters which deal with the anthropological
evidence the very considerable amount of proof which exists
that the dynastic population of Egypt was in large measure
drawn from the Azilian-Tardenoisian stock—the Iberians
of later times—has already been outlined. All authorities
are agreed that a large proportion of the stock which went to
make up the composite people known as the ancient Egyptians
had a western origin—that is, that their elements were the
same as those which first entered Spain about 10,000 B.c.,
and which are known as Azilian-Tardenoisian. ‘That the race
in question came from the disintegrating continent of Atlantis
has already been proved or otherwise to the satisfaction of
the reader according as he accepts or rejects the conclusions
advanced in the chapters referred to, and here it is only
necessary to bring evidence to bear that it continued its
advance along the southern littoral of the Mediterranean,
and entered Egypt, bringing with it a very considerable
body of Atlantean culture.

149

150 The Problem of Atlantis

No attempt will be made to deny that other and perhaps
equally powerful colonies were planted in Egypt at subse-
quent periods from Asia and elsewhere. ‘The evidence for
these is not to be gainsaid. This is tantamount to saying
that Egyptian dynastic culture was no more wholly Atlantean
than was Maya culture. But it is maintained, nevertheless,
that in the main the civilising influences which radiated from
Atlantis were instrumental in colouring Egyptian culture
more deeply than those which emanated from elsewhere.

The most satisfactory evidence which can be advanced
to prove that Atlantean influences entered Egypt at an early
period is that connected with the worship of Osiris. ‘That it
was not indigenous to the country is clear. The origins of
the worship of Osiris are indeed obscure. It is impossible
to glean from texts at what precise period in Egyptian
history his cult first began te gain a footing in the Nile
country, but that it is greatly more ancient than any text is
certain. The first dynastic centres of his worship were
Abydos and Mendes, and he may possibly be represented
on a mace-head of Nar-mer found at Hieraconpolis, and on
a wooden plaque of the reign of Udy-mu or Den (Hesepti),
the fifth king of the First Dynasty, who is represented as
dancing before him. ‘This shows that a centre of Osirian
worship existed at Abydos during the First Dynasty. But
allusions in the Pyramid Texts make it clear that prior to
this shrines to Osiris had been erectedsi dnyvatious parts of
Egypt. He is usually depicted as wrapped in mummy
bandages and wearing the white, cone-shaped crown of the
South, yet Dr Budge says of him: “ His home and origin
were possibly Libyan.”

The work which affords us the truest insight into the
character of Osiris is, of course, the so-called Book of the
Dead, the Pert-em-hru, or “'The Chapter of Coming Forth
by Day,” as it has been more literally translated, a subsidiary
title of one of the recensions or versions of which may be

The Evidence from Egypt 151

rendered ‘“‘ The Chapter of Making Perfect the Khu ” (or
spirit), that is to say, “The Book of the Perfect Way.”
Certain parts of it are known to have been in use among the
Egyptians at least four thousand years before our era, and
its crude prototypes are to be found in the Pyramid Texts.
With the introduction of mummification a more intricate
system of ritual came into vogue, based on the belief that
such ceremonies as it imposed would ensure the corpse
against corruption, preserve it for ever, and bring it at last
to a beatified existence with Osiris. Almost immediately
prior to the dynastic era a great stimulus appears to have
been given to the cult of Osiris throughout Egypt. He had
now primarily become the god of the dead, and his dogma
taught that from the preserved corpse would spring a
beautified astral body, the future home of the spirit of the
deceased.

But the greater number of the texts comprised in the Book
of the Dead are in one form or another of much higher
antiquity than the period of Mena, the first historical king
of Egypt. Internal evidence shows that many of these were
revised or edited long before the copies known to us were
made. Even at as early a date as 3300 B.c. the professional
writers who transcribed the ancient texts appear to have been
so puzzled by their contents that they scarcely understood
their purport. Dr Budge writes: ‘‘ We are in any case
justified in estimating the,earliest form of the work to be
contemporaneous with the foundation of the civilisation
which we call ‘ Egyptian’ in the valley of the Nile.”

So ancient -was: it, indeed, that it was certainly not .
“Egyptian.” A hieratic inscription upon the sarcophagus
of Queen Khnemnefert, wife of Mentu-hetep, a king of
the Eleventh Dynasty (c. 2500 B.c.), states that a certain
chapter of the Book of the Dead was discovered in the
reign of Hesep-ti, the fifth king of the First Dynasty, who
flourished about 4266 B.c. This sarcophagus affords us

152. The Problem of Atlantis

two copies of the said chapter. That as early as 2500 B.C.
a chapter of the Book of the Dead should be referred to
a date almost 2000 years before this period is astounding,
and the mind reels at the idea of a tradition which during
so many centuries could have preserved a religious for-
mula almost unimpaired. Thus, forty-four centuries ago a
chapter of this marvellous book was regarded as extremely
ancient, mysterious, and difficult of comprehension. It is
also to be noted that the inscription on the tomb of Queen
Khnemnefert states that the chapter in question was “ dis-
covered ” about 4266 B.c. If it was only discovered at that
far-distant era, what periods of remoteness lie between that
epoch and the time when it was first reduced to writing ?
If it was merely discovered then, it was certainly not a thing
Egyptian in its origin.

Whence did it come? I am of opinion that the ritual
described in the Book of the Dead, if not that of a mysti-
cal association or society, yet most strongly coloured the
rituals of all later mystical societies. It has frequently
been suggested that it constituted the ritual of a secret
brotherhood, and that the various halls and passages
mentioned in it symbolised the several stages of initiation
through which the members had to pass. It seems to have
powerfully influenced Greek mysteries, especially those of
the Cabiri and Eleusis. This would seem to point to the
probability that if the Book of the Dead did not contain
an early type of initiatory ceremonial, it may have powerfully
influenced the ceremonial of mysteries when they arose.
On the other hand, it may be that it represents the ceremonial
of an older mystery, which had been turned to other uses by
the dynastic Egyptians, and members of modern mystical
associations will readily recognise much of the ritual of these
in its pages.

Now we have seen that the cult of Osiris was probably an
importation from Libya to Egypt. Can we trace its begin-

The Evidence from Egypt 153

nings still further westward? It was connected with the
preservation of the body after death. We know that the
amulets found on remains of the Aurignacian period in
Spain are practically the prototypes of those encountered
upon the various parts of the Egyptian mummy, and the
universal use of the shell as the symbol of life among the
early peoples of Spain is paralleled in Egypt. The pre-
historic cave-paintings of the Pyrenees in some places seem
to portray a ritual which resembles that of the Pyramid
Texts with startling fidelity, and the primitive races of Spain
have assuredly an ethnic connection with those of ancient
Egypt.

The worship of Osiris, a cult of Libyan or Western origin,
thus entered Egypt at an early period, achieved a high degree
of popularity, and later merged with the cults of Ra and
Amen, religions of Asiatic provenance. But so powerful
was it that in due course the worship of Osiris triumphed
over every other element in the Egyptian faith, until at last
its chief god came to be recognised both at home and abroad
as the deity of Egypt par excellence.

Now, to whatever part of Western Europe or North Africa
we turn, we find reminiscences of this Osirian worship.
That it arrived at its apogee in Egypt is not denied. There
it came into contact with other cults, and borrowing and
amalgamation unquestionably resulted therefrom, so that
great complexity arose in the Osirian tradition. But in its
simple and less complicated forms it is to be found in every
country in Western Europe. The Scottish and Old English
ballads of ‘“‘ John Barleycorn,” for example, are nothing
more nor less than the myth of Osiris, the life and death
of the barley plant, in rural rhyme. Druidism is merely
the cult of Osiris in another form, and the menhirs and
dolmens of its architecture the rude parallels of the pyramid.

Recent investigators, among them Mr W. T. Perry of
Manchester, have sought to show that all ancient culture

154 The Problem of Atlantis

arose in Egypt, from which it was disseminated during the
Pyramid era. But this does not account for the entrance
into Egypt at a much earlier date of the Osirian worship,
a highly developed cult with ancient relationships in Spain
and Northern Africa, where we find at a date at least 12,000
years B.c. what are undoubtedly the beginnings of the
mummification of the human body, a practice inalienably
associated with the Osirian worship, and with that alone.
The Cré-Magnons of the Biscay region, as we have seen,

smeared the bodies of their dead with red oxide of iron.

This was done to give them the colours of life. The blood
was regarded as the true life-principle, and when the pale-
ness of death supervened the body was painted in the hues
of life, that when the soul once more awoke after its long
spell of sleep, its earthly semblance would rise reinvigorated
in all the glory of life. ‘The process was one connected with
sympathetic magic and the belief in resurrection and com-
plete restoration of all the bodily powers, including the fluidity
of the blood and the other bodily secretions. This idea evi-
dently lay at the root of Cré-Magnon belief and practice,
just as it lay at the root of the Osirian belief in bodily resur-
rection. Now precisely the same coloration of the corpse
is found in the earliest specimens of Egyptian mummies.
This, later, developed into the more artistic and realistic
presentation of the body in the colours of life on the mummy-
case, and we know that the Egyptians painted the statues of
their gods “to make them healthy.” But the earliest
examples of this body-painting are encountered in Cré-
Magnon graves and cave-tombs in Spain and France, and
not in Egypt, thus proving conclusively that the custom was
much older in Western Europe than in Egypt.

A Cré-Magnon burial in Wales, known as that of “ the
Red Lady of Paviland,” although the remains seem to be
those of a man, well illustrates such a burial, which must
have occurred several thousands of years prior to any

The Evidence from Egypt 155

interment of the kind in Egyptian soil. Says Dr Buckland,
who discovered the remains in 1823: ‘‘ They are all of them
stained superficially with a dark brick-red colour, and
enveloped by a coating of a kind of ruddle, composed of
red micaceous oxide of iron, which stained the earth, and
in some parts extended itself to the distance of about half
an inch around the surface of the bones. The body must
have been entirely surrounded or covered over at the time
of interment with this red substance.”

That this and other cases of the same kind in Europe and
America, in which the practice still lingers, were the first
steps in the complicated development of the cult of
mummification seems clear. Equally clear, too, is the

proof that in the latter region charms and amulets, which

the dynastic Egyptians placed on the various organs of
the corpse to give them magical stability, were derived
from the numerous amulets discovered in Cré-Magnon
burials. The object of these was to protect and prolong
life in this world andthe next. Shell necklaces, wild animals’
teeth, and ivory ornaments found in Cré-Magnon graves
were thought to contain the animating influence or “ life-
substance” of certain deities. Professor Elliot Smith has
shown that the beginnings of the ideas underlying magical
and religious practice in this respect were connected with
shells, which were used by the peoples of Upper Palzo-
lithic times in burial ceremonies, and these he connects
with later Egyptian and other amulets. ‘These are found in
the Grimaldi caves at Mentone and elsewhere, in circum-
stances which greatly antedate any Egyptian interment of
the kind.

Thus the whole tendency of those early burial practices,
which later developed into the cult of mummification, clearly
had their known origin in Western Europe and not in Egypt,
and among the peoples who appear to have an Atlantean
connection, and spread from west to east. That we find them

156 The Problem of Atlantis

in America in much the same form as in Egypt is proof
positive that they took similar shape in the western hemi-
sphere, as will be shown in the following chapter.

To return to the Osirian connections of Druidism. Many
authors lay stress upon the “ eastern ”’ character of Druidism,
simply because of its similarity to oriental religions. It
does not seem to have occurred to them that it may have
had a western origin. As we advance from west to east
we find the manifestations of this widespread cult growing
more and more complex, until it culminates in the subtleties
of Egyptian religious practice. But surely the region in
which it is to be found in its most unalloyed simplicity is
more probably the place of its beginnings than is the centre
where we behold it mingling with Asiatic thought, and
presenting an appearance of culture-mixing, as it undoubtedly
does, in the Nile land. \

What was Druidism? Of recent years the most extra-
ordinary efforts have been made to prove that it never had
any real existence. Notwithstanding the definite and clearly
expressed accounts of it which we have from Cesar, Pliny,
Tacitus, and other classical authors of repute, modern
writers, suffering from “the credulity of incredulity,”
have actually essayed to build up a mass of evidence proving
that it never existed save in later popular imagination and
folk-belief. ‘The attempt has signally failed. But it has
served one good purpose. The controversy which ensued
has greatly enlightened us upon the conditions and general
significance of this ancient faith.

In the first place, we are now justified in classing Druidism
as a religion of Iberian origin, having its European beginnings
in Spain, on which was later superimposed a mass of Celtic
belief. The Messrs Siret, the Belgian archzologists, are of
opinion that it was brought to the shores of the Iberian
peninsula by certain “ Easterners’ from Egypt or Syria,
who introduced among the nations the worship of Egyptian

The Evidence from Egypt 157

or Syrian deities and symbols, for example, the sacred palm-
tree, and worshipped a goddess resembling the Egyptian
Hathor, a form of Nut, the sky-goddess. Expelled from
Spain, these adventurers settled in Gaul, Italy, and North
Africa. The goddess Hathor or Nut was regarded as the
cow of the heavenly regions, and was, therefore, associated
with milk, and the milk-exuding fig of the sycamore. ‘This
lacteal fig, having no parallel in North-Western Europe,
was replaced there by the milk-bearing hazel-nut and similar
plants, which gave forth a like elixir symbolising the life-
principle. The mistletoe berry was also regarded as a bearer
of this magical milk. Messrs Siret have found evidence that

this cult was associated with the megalithic monuments
~ usually regarded as Druidic. Ina word, they have succeeded
in showing that there was unquestionably a very ancient
correspondence of belief between Egypt and Western Europe.

But these are by no means the only similarities between
the religions alluded to. A study of the Welsh triads and such
other Druidic documents as remain to us make it clear that
further correspondences existed. Chief among them is the
belief in metempsychosis or, as it is usually termed, “‘ the doc-
trine of the transmigration of souls.” This was not a Celtic,
but an Iberian belief. It is alluded to by Diodorus Siculus,
who flourished during the latter half of the first century
A.D., as being prevalent in Gaul. The Welsh bard Taliessin
is said to have inhabited the bodies of men and animals in
turn, and even to have existed in plant form. Mongan,
King of Ulster, underwent a similar experience. The ancient
Britons refused to partake of the flesh of certain animals
and birds, believing them to enshrine the souls of their
ancestors. ‘This idea is certainly found in Egypt, and is
mentioned in the Book of the Dead where the soul is
spoken of as taking various animal and floral forms. But it
is remarkable that it is only in connection with the cult of
Osiris, a cult certainly of western origin, that this idea

158 The Problem of Atlantis

obtains, and not in connection with those of the Asiatic
gods of Egypt. Its appearance in India and elsewhere is
infinitely later in historical time.

Now Osiris was the son of Nut, the divine cow, whose
distorted worship Messrs Siret find in Spain, Gaul, and
Britain. We are then justified in looking in these regions for
traces of her son. Are these to be found ?

Arthur—the King Arthur of a legend so widely diffused
throughout Britain, France, and Spain—is, I believe, Asar,
or Osiris.

At first sight this hypothesis may seem wildly improbable,
but a prolonged consideration of the question has led me to
believe in its substantial accuracy. I cannot elaborate it
here any further than may serve to illustrate my main con-
tention that the early elements of Osirian worship are to be
found in Western Europe, and are to be referred to an
Atlantean origin.

For generations the personality of Arthur was the subject
of fierce controversy. Was he king or god, real or apochry-
phal? We know that certain princes of Strathclyde, the
ancient ‘‘ Welsh” or Brythonic kingdom which stretched
from Lothian in Scotland through Clydesdale to Wales,
were called Arthur, and tradition in Britain associates him
with that region: But there is also good evidence to show
that if he were not at one time worshipped as a god, that
later romance associated the actual man with some deity
or other who had ceased to be worshipped, mingling the
myths of that god with the history of the hero of reality.
The process is one"weil!known to students of mythology.
Briefly, then, what Osirian elements do we find in the story
of Arthur ?

Slain in his last battle with his treacherous nephew,
Mordred, Arthur is carried off by his sisters in a barque to
the mysterious Isle of Avallon, an oversea, or underworld,
locality, “‘ the Place of Apples,” in the Western Sea. There

The Evidence from Egypt 159

he remains, neither dead nor alive, awaiting the fateful day
when Britain shall require his aid once more.

Slain by his treacherous brother Set, the body of Osiris
(as shown by Egyptian funerary practice and not by the
Greek myth concerning him) is ferried in the sacred barque
across the Nile, accompanied by his wailing sisters Isis
and Nephthys to the region of Aalu, in the west, a place of
plenteous fruits and grain. There Osiris rules as god of the
not-dead—that is, the neither dead nor alive—awaiting a
glorious resurrection.

The island paradise of Avallon to which Arthur was taken
was undoubtedly associated with Druidism. We find it
alluded to in such stories as that of Thomas the Rhymer, or

True (z.e. “ Druid ”) Thomas, Ogier the Dane, and several
old Breton tales. It is the same as the Anwynn of the Welsh
myths, the Tir-nan-ogue of Celtic tradition—a place of rest
and refreshment for the un-dead, ‘‘ the Place of Heart’s
Desire.”’ In some tales it is an island, in others a submarine
locality. ‘That it is one and the same as the Osirian Aalu
can hardly be doubted.

It is to be noted that this island-paradise of the Celtic
peoples was confounded with the “‘ mythical” islands of
the Middle Ages, Brazil (a Celtic name), St Brandan’s
Isle, and so forth. It is also to be observed that in more
than one of the Irish myths it was located at the bottom of
the sea.

The great body of mystical Celtic story known as the
Grail Legend, with which Arthur is so closely associated, is
undoubtedly connected with Osirian myth. The Fisher
King who lies in the Grail Castle in a wounded condition
has been identified with both Arthur and Osiris, and by
German scholarship with Orpheus, with whom the cele-
brated Orphic mysteries were connected. ‘The legend
teems with Oriental references, and Miss Margaret Murray,
Lecturer on Egyptian Language in University College,

160 The Problem of Atlantis

London, has identified many of the place-names in the
Grail story with actual localities in Egypt.

Horus, the son of Osiris, probably symbolises the re-
surrected form of that god. His myth strongly resembles
that of Arthur. Both gather around them a large body of
companions who devote themselves to the destruction of
evil monsters. The symbol of Horus is the sun. So is
that of Arthur, whose Round Table typifies the luminary
of day. In combat he and his knights wax stronger as
the sun rises to the zenith, and weaker as it nears its setting,
and his final discomfiture takes place as the planet of day
sinks beneath the horizon.

Most of Arthur’s ‘‘ knights ” are merely old British Celtic
gods disguised and distorted. King Loth of Lothian, his
brother-in-law, is Llud or Nud, or Lug of the Long Arm,
after whom Ludgate, the site of his ancient temple, is called.
He resembles the Egyptian god Aten, whose worship was
introduced into Egypt by King Akhen-aten, father-in-law of
Tut-ankh-amen. Both are described as having very long
arms—the rays of the sun, ending in human hands. Sir
Kay, the seneschal, is the British god Kai, who could walk
under water with a torch in either hand like the Maya
god Itzamna. Lancelot was brought up by the fairy Morgan
le Fay in a submarine paradise. Morgan is the Irish goddess
Morrigan, the raven, the same as the Roman fate, or fays.
Merlin, says Rhys, is the god of Stonehenge. The legendary
name of Britain in the Welsh triads is Plas Myrddin, “‘ the
enclosure of Merlin,” who was evidently a deity of the first
importance.

Arthur is thus clearly connected with the cult of Druidism,
and that Druidism and the cult of Osiris had a common
origin is equally plain. Druidism was not confined to Gaul
and Britain, but spread eastwards to Galatia, where it con-
stituted the religion of those “ foolish Galatians ”’ on whom
St Paul visited his scorn, and both Druidism and the Osiris

The Evidence from Egypt 161

cult were connected with megalithic building and monu-
mental architecture.

The adherents of Druidism and the Osirian religion both
looked to an island paradise in the west. Both believed that
a great monster lived in the ocean (apep in Egypt, addanc in
Wales, etin in Scotland) which was combated daily by Horus,
Arthur, or one of the latter’s knights. ‘This was, of course,
the earth-devouring dragon of the waters, which caused them
to overflow and drown the world in the cataclysm of Llyn-
Ilion. The heroes of both myths reside in an island paradise
awaiting return to the world of men. ‘They are conveyed
there in precisely the same manner. The worship of both
cults is connected with the sky-cow, therefore with milk and
milk-giving trees and plants. The serpent figures largely in
both religions.

The founders of the Osirian religion who came from the
west were Iberians. The founders of Druidism, according
to Rhys and many other competent scholars, were also
Iberians. The ancestors of those Iberians, as I have already
shown, were the Azilian-Tardenoisians, who arrived in
Spain about 10,000 years ago, bringing with them a culture
the beginnings of which are not to be found in Europe. To
me the chain of evidence appears as complete. ‘The Druidic
and Osirian cults, which resemble each other so strongly,
had a common origin in Atlantean religion.

That religion, we may remember from the account of
Plato, was connected with the bull. In Egypt the bull was
worshipped under the form of Apis. Apis was merely a
form of Osiris, the calf of the sky-goddess Nut, and to
the bull which represented him other cattle were sacrificed.
The cult of Serapis (Osiris-Apis) was of widespread distri-
bution, and was brought by the Romans to Britain, where it .
flourished chiefly at York.

The bull was also sacred to the Druids, and was sacrificed

at the ancient rite of Beltane (Bile’s Fire), when cattle were
11

162 The Problem of Atlantis

driven into the flames. The rite, in a distorted form, is
still celebrated in Scotland on May Day. As late as 1649
to 1678, according to the records of the Presbytery of Ding-
wall, bulls were sacrificed in the parish of Gairloch, in Ross-
shire, and oblations of milk poured on the hills. The sacred
bull is depicted on the Scottish Druidical standing-stones.
In Northamptonshire, says Kelly in his Folklore, a calf was
sacrificed by burning at Beltane. Bull-fighting, the popular
sport of the Spaniards—the purest Iberian race,—is un-
doubtedly a survival from bull-sacrifice.

It would thus seem that the known similarities between
theancient religions of Western Europe and Egypt are capable
of being referred to an Atlantean origin and root-religion,
with which both had resemblances. When we further recall
the many references which are found in Druidical legend to
floods and submerged islands, and the fact that Osiris was,
according to one myth, thought of as having been drowned
in a flood, the circle of proof seems complete.

CHAPTER XIV

EGYPTIAN AND AMERICAN COMPARISONS IN THE
LIGHT OF ATLANTEAN RESEARCH

RECENT research has made it abundantly clear that the
civilisation of Egypt and America sprang from one common
source. ‘The intimate resemblance between the two cultures
has led to the formation of an hypothesis on the part of the
school of Professor G. Elliot Smith that the Egyptian
influence of the Pyramid era circled the world by way of the
Pacific and thus reached America.

It seems much more likely, to my way of thinking, that,
if Egyptian civilisation reached America, it did so by a more
direct route than wa Asia. It is unlikely, too, that, as this
school holds, the Egyptian ideas to be observed in America
should have presented an appearance and spirit so purely
Egyptian had they come through an Asiatic filter. That
is, the hypothesis of their entrance by way of Asia sup-
poses a duration of time for their passage thence which
altogether precludes the possibility that they could have
reached American soil without much greater fundamental
alteration than they exhibit. This is not to say that Chinese
or Cambodian or Polynesian influences did not impinge upon
American civilisation. Iam convinced that they did; but I
am just as certain that the evidences of Egyptian culture in
Central America were as untouched by Asiatic influences in
their passage to the New World as was later European culture
on its way thence.

There is, says Brasseur de Bourbourg, a river Nil or Nile
in Guatemala which harbours many crocodiles, and on the .

163

164 The Problem of Atlantis

banks of which are to be seen the ruins of pyramids. I cannot
believe that such an association of ideas came together in
Guatemala after a filtration of thousands of years through
Asia and across the Pacific. Nor is the alleged route clearly
marked. Again, the pantheon of Mexican mythology is the
shadow of that of Egypt. Quetzalcoatl is Thoth, or Osiris,
Ciuacoatl is Isis, Piltzintecutli is Horus, Xochipilli is Bes.
The list might be extended ad infinitum. Such resemblances,
if they are to be found in India, are certainly not encountered
in China, and the surrogates of the Central American gods
in Japan are demonstrably of later origin. Actual mummifi-
cation is to be found in Mexico and Peru: only its memory
in China.

All this seems to go to prove that direct contact was at
one time achieved between Egypt and America. Egyptian
records speak of prolonged voyages. A people who could
round the Cape of Good Hope, as did the Egyptians in
the reign of Necho, were surely capable of making almost
any sea passage. Direct contact, I feel convinced, between
Egypt and America took place by way of Atlantis, the shorter
and more feasible route, rather than by the deserts and
boundless wastes of Asia, or via the Pacific, or more pro-
bably Atlantis was responsible for the civilisation of both.

Perhaps the outstanding similarity between the two cultures
is the manner in which they disposed of the dead. Mummi-
fication in America was evidently as much a system which
had been introduced as was the case in Egypt. The native
custom of disposing of the dead in Mexico and among the
Maya was by fire or burial. A compromise was arrived at
by which the embalmed bodies of chiefs and kings were
consumed by the flames of a funerary pyre. The mummy
thus disposed of was prepared in various ways according
to the traditions of the province where the rite took place.
In Michoacan and elsewhere it bore a striking resemblance
to the Egyptian mummy, swathed as it was in numerous

Egyptian and American Comparisons 165

wrappings. But on the Mexican plateau and in the south,
the corpse was bound up in a squatting posture and placed
in what is known as a “‘ mummy-bundle ” of stout cloth,
secured py a network of rope. ‘To this a false head was
affixed, and the whole was elaborately decorated with religious
symbols.

Our knowledge of the Mexican mummy is gleaned chiefly
from fugitive descriptions in native and colonial literature,
and from its pictured representation in the native paintings
or codices. In the Popol Vuh, the sacred book of the
Quiches of Guatemala, we are informed that on the death
of the first men their bodies were found to have been
miraculously placed in a bundle known as “‘ the majesty
enveloped.” ‘The region in which this occurrence was
supposed to have taken place boasted a culture greatly more
ancient than the Mexican proper, that of the Maya, who
practised several kinds of sepulture, but buried the bodies of
persons of importance in elaborate tombs. In more than
one of these have been found large vessels closely resembling
the canopic jars placed round the tombs of the Egyptian
kings and priests and having, like them, lids representing
the heads of the supporters or gods of the four points of the
compass. Certain colours were allotted by the Egyptians,
through the process of mummification, to the various organs
of the body as well as to the cardinal points : the north (red)
to the lungs, the south (white) to the liver, the east (yellow)
to the stomach, and the west (black) to the intestines ; so
that it is indeed startling to find that the colours and organs
associated by the Maya with these points are nearly identical
with those allotted to them by the Egyptians : north (white)
lungs, south (yellow) belly, east (red) larger intestines,
west (black) intestines. Thus the colours and organs for
the west agree absolutely, and the north agrees as to the organ
allotted. But more important still is the point that the
“‘ Canopic jars, which went out of fashion in Egypt, were

166 The Problem of Atlantis

continued in use by the Maya and placed under the protec-
tion of the Bacabs, their gods of the four coloured cardinal
points. Apparently the Egyptian system of mummification
which reached America was accompanied by the Egyptian
doctrines in less modified form than one might be led to
expect, especially when one considers how varied were the
cultural influences to which these doctrines must have been
subjected during the process of gradual transmission from
Egypt to the Far East, and across the Pacific to America ”’
(D. A. Mackenzie, in Folklore, June 1923). Nor does the
similarity end here, for these receptatles were intended for
the preservation of the eviscerated organs of the deceased.
Such a striking analogy, it has been argued, can scarcely be
due to fortuitous circumstances.

One of the most enlightening of the pictures of Mexican
mummies in the native paintings is that on sheet 60 of
the Codex Magliabecchiano, preserved in the Biblioteca
Nazionale in Florence. It represents the mummy-bundle
of a dead warrior. The swathed figure appears to stand
upright, in a manner reminiscent of the embalmed form of
the dead Osiris. It wears the insignia of the dead, the head-
band with a plate of torquoise-mosaic, blue ear and nose-
plugs, and the shoulder-band of paper. On its head is a
large drooping panache of feathers, and the banner of
Uitzilopochtli, the patron god of warriors. Its hair is
decorated with cotton-balls, the emblem of the deities of
the Underworld, to whom it is to be consigned, and beside
it is the blue hairless dog which preceded it to the Mexican
Hades, and which was sacrificed on the death of its master.
In front of it lie the gifts which it must present to Mictlan-
tecutli, Lord of the Dead, and these are accompanied by a
symbol bearing an extraordinary resemblance to the tat
sign which was buried with Egyptian mummies, and which
was thought to provide the deceased on his resurrection
with a new backbone.

Egyptian and American Comparisons 167

Above this is seen a severed hand, which had belonged to
a wizard or a woman who had died in childbed, and this was
supposed to give light to the dead man in the Underworld.
It is, in fact, the same as “‘ the hand of glory,” the hand of a
dead person, a symbol which was in use not so very long ago
among Irish burglars, in the belief that the weird light which
shone from it would paralyse the energies of those whom
they sought to rob. The mummy’s face-painting is that
of the god Uitzilopochtli, and represents the starry sky of
night.

The same codex provides us with yet another similar
painting. This shows us a mummy-bundle packed in
white cotton cloth and secured with stout ropes. Its
occupant wears the mantle of the dead, and is evidently
that of a telpochtli or young warrior who had not yet achieved
membership in one of the orders of knighthood. The banner
of the war-god springs from the back, and the head is
surmounted by the cotton-ball symbols. In front is the
sign resembling the tat, which is considered by some
Americanists to represent another mummy-bundle. Bundles
of this kind were certainly found in Mexico. The myth of
the creation of the sun and moon states that the gods who
killed themselves in terror at sight of the first sun left their

raiment to their personal servants, and that each retainer

made a bundle of this, wrapping his master’s clothing round
a stick, placing a chalchihuitl or jadeite stone inside to serve
as a heart, and naming the whole after the god to whom it
had belonged. The Franciscan priest Olmos found such a
relic in Tlalmanco, which showed evidences of very con-
siderable age. Obviously these sacred bundles are in the
same category with the ‘“‘ medicine-bundle”’ of the North
American Indian tribes, and it would seem that from such
a form certain of the Mexican gods were developed, notably
the deity of the planet Venus, who, like the Egyptian
Osiris, is represented as a mummy and wears the insignia

168 The Problem of Atlantis

of the warriors who died by sacrifice. For the Mexicans,
the recurring periods of the planet Venus were connected
with the return of the souls of the dead. At such times
_ they held a festival which somewhat resembled the “ Feast
of All Souls,” at which the people took hands and danced
round a sham mummy-bundle hoisted on the top of a pole.
A picture of the ceremony is given on sheet 28 of the Codex
Borbonicus, and another, in which the priests are seen
manufacturing the mock mummy, is to be found in the
Sahagun MS. housed in the Biblioteca del Palacio at Madrid.
Some carry the bundle with its false head daubed in the
crude likeness of life, others place it in position on the top
of the pole, and are seen in the act of affixing to it the paper
ornaments, banners, and other insignia with which it was
decorated.

Mention has already been made of the resemblance of
the mummies of Michoacan to those of the Egyptians.
In a Spanish manuscript of the sixteenth century known as
the “‘ Relacion de las ceremonios y ritos de Michoacan,” con-
siderable information is given regarding the funerary methods
of the inhabitants of this region. The pictures it contains
exhibit the whole process of funerary custom. In the first
of the series we see the dead chief lying on his couch covered
with a blanket ; in the next, priests blow on conch-shells and
beat drums to assemble the people to the funeral. The
third depicts the cortége en route to the funeral pyre. The
mummy, swathed in numerous rolls of cotton, is carried on
the heads of four bearers towards the blazing fire to which
it is about to be committed, priests and mourners gather
around it, and the disconsolate widow, her body blackened
in sign of mourning, grovels before the pyre.

Both in Mexico and Peru, as in Egypt, the pyramidal
erections were utilised for the burial of the distinguished
dead. Some years ago a tunnelling of the teocalli or great
pyramid of the Sacred City of Cholula, in Mexico, disclosed

A

Egyptian and American Comparisons 169

remains, probably royal, which had been buried there at a
comparatively early date. If somewhat exceptional in the
isthmian region, such a disposition of the dead was quite
common in the Yunca districts of Peru, where the mummy
(maiqui) was frequently deposited in small pyramidical
structures known as huacas. At Miraflores, Charrillos, and
elsewhere, tumuli of this description are found, built of
adobe or mud-brick, and in formation like a small stepped
pyramid, hollow in the centre, in which the mummy with its
funerary furniture was deposited. Many of these chambers
are found to contain layer upon layer of mummified bodies,
separated from each other by deposits of osier-reeds. Some
of these huaca-pyramids are not more than 10 or 12 feet
- in height, but others range from 40 to 60 metres, and have
foundations of cut stone. In the Quichua or Inca districts
of Peru the mummy was usually deposited in caves, which
are of such frequent occurrence in that mountainous region
as to render the building of huacas unnecessary.

The Peruvian process of mummification more closely
resembled the Egyptian than that employed by the Mexicans.
The body was carefully embalmed, and I am informed by
an expert anatomist who has examined many specimens,
both of Egyptian and Peruvian origin, that the process in
both cases was very nearly the same. The house of the
deceased was set apart for his mummy, a staff of servants
was appointed for it, and it was endowed with lands, so
that offerings might be constantly provided for it. ‘There
is evidence that in earlier times friends and dependents
immolated themselves at the funeral ceremony, but later a
llama, which was called by the name of the supposititious
human victim, was accepted as a substitute. The ancient
Temple of the Sun at Cuzco was found by the followers of
Pizarro to contain the mummies of thirteen deceased Incas,
seated round the altar of the Sun, the corresponding Temple of
the Moon containing the embalmed remains of their consorts.

170 The Problem of Atlantis

Pola de Ondegardo, a relentless hunter of treasure, ferreted
out practically every one of the royal mummies which had
been hidden by the faithful Peruvians, with one exception,
and these, like the embalmed corpses of the nobility, which
were buried in double-chambered caves (one for the mummy
and his ghost, and the other for his property), were stripped
of their jewellery by the insatiable conquistadors. ‘The
heights overlooking the valley of the river Yucay are honey-
combed with these burial caves, all of which have long
since been ransacked in the search for treasure.

In some cases the mummies of Mexico and Peru show
resemblances which would seem to point to an ancient
cultural connection between the two methods. Peruvian
mummies are found wrapped up in bundles, much in the
same manner as those found in Mexican tombs. We do
not find that the intestines were removed in the Peruvian
examples, as was the case in Mexico and among the Maya ;
and it is noticeable that as we proceed from Mexico to the
Maya country it is only in the border regions, where the
cultures of these countries mingle, that the Canopic jars are
first encountered in tombs. This would seem to show that
the inception of the practice in America was due to the
Maya, the older race. But that the practice of preserving
the dead had a wide distribution throughout America,
and particularly its northern part, is proved by the present-
day customs of many North American Indian tribes who
practise canoe and tree-burial. In Kentucky, for example,
the body was dried and filled with sand, then wrapped in
skins or matting, and placed in a cave or hut. In the Darien
peninsula, the viscera were removed and the trunk was
filled with resin, after which the corpse was smoked and
preserved in the house. The Aleutians embalmed the
bodies of their chiefs by similar methods, and the Virginian
Indians removed the entire skin, afterwards fitting it to the
skeleton again.

Egyptian and American Comparisons 171

In my view, closely as the funerary customs of Egypt,
Mexico, and Peru resemble each other, they do so not because
one was copied from the other, but because all sprang from
one common source—Atlantis. I have already shown that
the origins of Egyptian mummification were laid, centuries
before the civilising race entered Egypt, in Western Europe.
I have also made it clear that the race which practised
mummification in Central America was not indigenous to
that country, but came from an oceanic locality in the East.
On both hands, then, there seem to be good grounds for
believing that the originators of human mummification both
in Egypt and America came from an oceanic centre in the
Atlantic. In the case of America, tradition expressly states
this to be the fact, and in that of Egypt an irrefragable chain
of evidence proves it to be so.

But was mummification practised in Atlantis? The
process commenced there. When the Cré-Magnons and
Azilian-Tardenoisians quitted the sinking continent, they
carried the germ of the idea with them, as is proved by their
funerary remains in France, Spain, and elsewhere. At the
period when they arrived in Europe the custom of mummi-
fication in Atlantis was probably in a stage of early develop-
ment, such as we see it in the cave-burials of Western Europe
where as yet the actual process of preservation was only in
an embryonic condition, though the placing of amulets on the
corpse, much as in the later Egyptian mummy, had been in
use probably for ages. But the best proof exists that the
whole process was slowly evolving in the remains of Atlantis
itself, and was finally introduced in a more advanced form
into America.

The Guanches of the Canary Islands, the last remnant of
the Atlantean population, embalmed their dead. The
sandals upon the feet of the statue of the so-called Chac-mool
discovered at Chichen-Itza in Yucatan are “‘ exact representa-
tions of those found on the feet of the Guanches, the early

172 The Problem of Atlantis

inhabitants of the Canary Islands, whose mummies are
occasionally discovered in the caves of Teneriffe.”

These Guanche mummies, many of which have been dis-
covered in the Barranco de Fataga in Grand Canary, bear
a close resemblance to both those of Egypt and America.
They usually have a profusion of red hair, and are buried or
placed on the left side. The body is often in an advanced
state of dessication, wrapped in goatskin, with the hands
crossed over the breast in the manner of some of the Peruvian
mummies. They are, generally speaking, discovered in
caverns in the rock-face, in a crouching or sitting position,
like that of the mummies of Mexico or Peru and the earlier
interments in Egypt, rather than stretched out in the late
Egyptian manner. That the method of their embalmment
and the general manner of preserving them was fundamentally
the same in origin as obtained both in Egypt and America
no observer of experience can doubt.

I believe that further confirmation of the ancient con-
nection between America and Egypt by way of Atlantis is
to be found by a comparison of the sacred mysteries of these
countries. As has already been stated, the Egyptian Book
of the Dead is undoubtedly connected with certain ancient
mysteries, and is, indeed, the fount and source of all mystical
practice, ancient and modern. The Mexican Codex
Vaticanus A presents a close parallel to the Egyptian work,
so much so, in fact, that it has been called by Edward
James Payne, an Americanist of experience, ‘‘ the Mexican
Book of the Dead.” In its pages the corpse is depicted as
dressed for burial, the soul, like the Egyptian Ba, escaping
from the mouth. The spirit is ushered into the presence
of the god Tezcatlipoca, just as the Egyptian ghost is brought
before Osiris, by a priest dressed in an ocelot-skin (the
Egyptian high priest is dressed in a leopard-skin), and stands
naked with a wooden yoke round his neck to receive sentence.
He is then given over to the tests which precede entrance

Egyptian and American Comparisons 173

to the abode of the dead precisely as was the Egyptian
defunct.

As I have already indicated, certain passages in the
Popol Vuh assuredly describe initiatory tests into a secret
society, much after the manner of those which had to be
undergone by the Egyptian soul. When Hunhun-Apu and
Vukub-Hunapu descended into the gloomy region of Xibalba,
the Place of the Dead, at the invitation of its lords, they found
that every preparation had been made to “ hocus ”’ them,
just as is frequently done even to-day in the primary rites
of certain mystical or pseudo-mystical societies, such, for
example, as “ The Horsemen,” a body composed of agri-
cultural labourers in the North of Scotland which subjects
- its members to much rough usage and horseplay before
they are initiated and entrusted with the ‘‘ Horseman’s
Word.” On their entrance to the gloomy realm the brothers
beheld two seated figures whom they mistook for the Lords
of Xibalba, only to find that they were made of wood. Next
they were asked to sit on the seat of honour, which, to their
dismay, was a red-hot stone. Their sons and nephews
underwent a similar experience, but succeeded in outwitting
the Xibalbans. But they had first to face the ordeals of the
House of Lances, the House of Cold, the House of Pumas,
the House of Fire, and the House of Bats. These several
“houses ” forcibly recall the several halls through which
the Egyptian spirit had to pass.

Moreover, the deities who dwelt in this grim monarchy
had an agricultural connection, like Osiris and Isis in Egypt
and Demeter and Kore in Greece. Xquiq, the daughter of
one of the Lords of Xibalba, is probably the same as Kore
or Persephone. She was able to gather a basket of maize
where no maize grew. Plutonic deities are universally gods
of fruitfulness.

We find, too, that the North American Indians, Australian
Blackfellows, and other backward races, celebrate the self-

®

174 The Problem of Atlantis

same type of mystery as is connected with the worship of
Osiris and that of the Greek Demeter. Whence did this
likeness spring? These mysteries resemble each other too
closely not to have had a common origin. They have been
perpetuated to a certain extent in modern Freemasonry.
Where must we look for the region in which they had their
beginnings ?

We have already seen that the Osirian cult had its origin
in Western Europe or North-West Africa. Sanchoniathon,
the Carthaginian, tells us that the mysterious cult of the
Cabiri, which was of Carthaginian origin, was connected
with Osiris. ‘The Cabiri, he says, set down their records
of the past by command of the god Thoth, “ and they
delivered them to their successors and to foreigners, of
whom one was Isiris (Osiris), the inventor of the three
letters, the brother of Chua, who is called the first Pheenician.”’
Pheenician myth had it that the Titans (Rephaim), that is
Atlas and his kin, were their ancestors. ‘The worship of the
Cabiri seems to have been brought from the Pheenician
settlements in North-Western Africa to Greece. It has
been maintained that it was of Egyptian origin, but we have
seen that the myth records its delegation to Osiris. {The
Cabiri were, indeed, regarded by the nations of antiquity
as the most ancient of all gods of whose worship there was
any record. ‘The mysteries of Eleusis and Bacchus were
regarded as things of yesterday compared with these antique
rites, the beginnings of which were lost in the mists of time.
The Cabiri were represented to the profane in the guise of
powerful deities armed with darts, lances, or hammers,
sometimes as pygmies or dwarfs, and were distinguished by
wearing the apron of the smith or mason. They were con-
nected with the elements, particularly with fire and water, and
with Vulcan, the god of fire and metallurgy. They were
two in number, and were later reflected in the Dioscuri,
Castor and Pollux, the heavenly twins, who resemble the

Egyptian and American Comparisons 175

Atlantean offspring of Poseidon. Poseidon, indeed, was
worshipped along with the Cabiri at Berytus. The
mysteries connected with the Cabiri appear to have closely
resembled those of Osiris, Demeter, Orpheus, and the other
mystic rites of antiquity.

Now we encounter deities closely resembling the Cabiri
in Mexico—the twin brothers Uitzilopochtli and Tezcatli-
poca, who seem to be the same as the hero-twins of the
Popol Vuh. Like the Cabiri, they are armed with the
spear and are connected with the stars of the two hemispheres
of which they are the respective chiefs. In later times it
would seem that the images of the Cabiri grew in number,
and were placed outside their temples. We may recollect
that in Plato’s account of Atlantis ten golden statues of
the Atlantean gods or kings are spoken of as standing in
front of the Temple of Poseidon. This practice bears a
close resemblance to the ten images of the Tzitzimine or
elemental deities whose images were placed round the idol
of Uitzilopochtli in his temple at Mexico.

Just as the Dioscuri, Castor and Pollux, the later represen-
tations of the Cabiri, presided over war, so did the Mexican
gods alluded to above. Uilitzilopochtli was the chief oracle
of Mexico, and strange rites and mysteries were enacted in
connection with the worship of Tezcatlipoca, the patron of
Mexican witchcraft:and sorcery.

But these are by no means the only gods of the Old and
New World who closely resemble each other. Many of the
gods of Mexico bear a strong likeness to those of Egypt, and
this can scarcely have been due to mere chance.

Thus the Mexican Quetzalcoatl bears a close resemblance
to the Egyptian Thoth. Both are represented as having the
heads of birds with long beaks, both are the inventors of
writing, and are connected with the moon. In one of his
forms Thoth is represented as the dog-headed ape, Cyno-
cephalus, whilst Quetzalcoatl takes the guise of a dog

176 The-Problem of Atlantis

supposed to bring lightning from the sky. Both were
also deities of rain and wind, masters of magic and
medicine.

The dog-headed Anubis had also his counterpart in Mexico
in the dog-like god Xolotl, who is also represented with a
dog’s head in the Codex Borbonicus (sheet 16) and the Codex .
Vaticanus B. The dog in Mexico, like the dog in Egypt,
was supposed to accompany his master to the place of the
dead, and both of these gods appear to have originated from
this belief.

The Egyptian god, Bes, seems to be almost reflected in
the Mexican deity, Xochipilli. Bes is depicted as a huge
dwarf, with enormous stomach, bow-legs, thick lips, and
protruding tongue. His nose is flat, his eyebrows shaggy.
He wears a tiara of feathers, and a panther-skin with the tail
hanging behind. He was thought of as provider of amuse-
ments to the gods, as a grotesque dancer, and harp-player,
and came to be regarded as god of the dance, of music, and
joviality.

Like Bes, Xochipilli or Macuil Xochitl wears a panache
of brightly-coloured feathers, and a dress with an appendage
- like that of Bes. Sahagun calls him “ the god of those who
served for the amusement or pastime of the great.” He is,
indeed, the god of merriment, of dance and sport, the jester
or buffoon, the palace slave or entertainer.

The Egyptian Set and the Mexican Tezcatlipoca are also
extraordinarily akin in their attributes. Set is the deity of
night and darkness. He is represented with the head of
an animal which has been likened to that of the camel or
the okapi, but which seems to belong to neither. Storms,
earthquakes, and eclipses, were attributed to his agency.
He is identified with the constellation of the Great Bear, the
region of cold, darkness, and death. He is the mortal
enemy of Osiris and Horus, the sun-gods, even although
he is the blood-brother of the former. His hieroglyph is

To face p. 176. PEATE XY,

Quetzalcoatl.

Thoth and Quetzalcoatl compared.

Egyptian and American Comparisons 177

a stone which seems to symbolise the stony or desert country
on either side of the Nile.

Now practically every one of these associations is reflected
in the figure of Tezcatlipoca. He, too, presides over
darkness and the night, and is symbolised in certain of the
Mexican manuscripts by the head of an animal unknown in
Mexico, and seemingly also unknown in Egypt, which is
identical with that which represents Set. He was the deity
of storm, earthquake, and eclipse, and, like Set, we find
him identified in the Historia de las Mexicanos with the
Great Bear, from whence no good thing might come. He
typifies coldness, sereness, and sin. Although he is the
brother of the sun-god Uitzilopochtli, he is also his mortal
enemy. His names Yaotl and Yaomitl, indeed, signify
“Enemy ” and “ Dreaded Enemy.” He, too, is represented
by a stone, the tepochtli or “ wizard stone,” from which
tempests were believed to arise. He is the terrifying god,
the horror by night. Like Set, he is painted black.

It would, indeed, be difficult to find two mythological
figures which resemble each other more closely in the
majority of their attributes. ‘This resemblance cannot be
fortuitous. It must have behind it a common original,
whence both of these figures arose.

Compare, too, Isis with the Mexican goddess Ciuacoatl.
Isis is usually represented in her statues as carrying the
child Horus. As she seeks through the length and breadth
of Egypt for Osiris she grieves pitifully, moaning and
crying aloud in her woe. A pottery figure of Ciuacoatl
in the Uhde Collection in Berlin bears a close resem-
blance to Isis. She wears a head-dress strikingly remin-
iscent of that of Isis in her shape of Hathor, and
carries an infant. Like Isis, she wanders about crying and
moaning.

These by no means exhaust the resemblances between

the Egyptian and Mexican pantheons, but space forbids
12

178 The Problem of Atlantis

their more exhaustive comparison. Striking similarities also
present themselves between the mythical beliefs of the two
countries. One of such must suffice. The symbol of the
bird and serpent is common to both. Herodotus informs
us that the Egyptians believed that the sacred ibis destroyed
the serpent. With the Mexicans, as one of their most
famous myths alleges, that which relates to the founding of
the city of Mexico, the eagle performed a similar office.
The cult of the serpent was equally venerated by the
Egyptians, Druids, and Mexicans. In a Mexican manu-
script the gods are seen dragging the serpent of darkness
through the universe precisely as the genii of light towed
the serpent Ankh-neteru. But a comparison of Egyptian
and American serpent-cults would occupy a volume greatly
exceeding this in bulk.

Nor were the similarities between the art and architecture
of Mexico and Egypt any less remarkable. The likeness of
the Mexican teocalli to the Egyptian pyramid has frequently
been commented on. For long theS@teocallis or “‘ houses of
the gods’ were believed to have been “ high-places ”’ or
exaggerated altars only. But recent research has made it
clear that many of them were also designed, like the Egyptian
pyramids, as the last resting-places of kings. In the district
of the Totonacs, to the north of Vera Cruz, many architec-
tural remains of a highly interesting character are encoun-
tered. Here the teocalli or pyramidal typey’ of building is
frequently crowned by a covered-in temple with a massive
roof. The most striking examples found in Mexico
are the remains of Teotihuacan and Xochicalco. The
former was the religious Mecca of the Nahua or Mexican
races, and in its neighbourhood are still to be seen the
teocallis of the Sun and Moon, surrounded by extensive
burying-grounds where devout Mexicans were laid in the
hope that if interred there they would find entrance to the
paradise of the Sun. The pyramid of the Moon has a base

Egyptian and American Comparisons 179

covering 426 feet, and a height of 137 feet. That of the
Sun is of still greater dimensions, with a base of 735 feet,
and a height of 203 feet. The base of the pyramid of
Cholula, 45 acres, is considerably greater than that of any
of the Egyptian pyramids.

Let us compare the Egyptian and Mexican pyramidal
structures briefly. The Mexican pyramids, like those of
Egypt, had the same (inaccurate) orientation towards the
points of the compass, the line through the centres of the
structures is roughly that of the astronomical meridian ;
both were built in grades or “ steps,” the difference in the
case of the Egyptian being that the steps were filled in and
the sides rendered smooth, although this was also frequently

- effected in Mexico and Central America. Both were used
as places of sepulture, and their interior arrangements are
analogous. Waldeck found near Palenque two pyramids in
a perfect state of preservation, square at the base, pointed
at the top, their sides forming equilateral triangles. ‘The
pyramid of Teotihuacan has an opening 69 feet from its
base entering upon a gallery along which egress is only to
be had by crawling on hands and knees. This extends
inwards on an incline for a distance of 25 feet, and terminates
in two sepulchral chambers, each 5 feet square. Lowen-
stein describing this gallery states that it is “157 feet long,
increasing in height to over 6} feet as it penetrates the
pyramid, the well is over 6 feet square, extending apparently
to the base and up tothe summit. Other cross-galleries are
blocked by debris.” This arrangement is almost precisely
similar to that of the interior of the Egyptian pyramid of
Cheops.

Near Tezcuco is Xochicalco, the Hill of Flowers, a teocalli
which one writer at least believes to be a facsimile of the
temple hill of Atlantis. The porphyry quarries from which
its stones were taken—great blocks some 12 feet in length
—are many miles distant. The extraordinarily beautiful

180 The Problem of Atlantis

sculpture which adorns its sides has excited universal admira-
tion, but unfortunately it is now a ruin, mere fragments of
its massive stones remaining.

The question now arises, is it possible to associate these
structures with direct Egyptian influence? Assuredly it
is not. ‘They possess a character of their own which makes
it very certain that they were not the result of Egyptian
influence at first-hand. Moreover, it is clear that pyramid
building in Egypt was not originally a thing Egyptian.
Until the reign of King Zoser in the Third Dynasty the tombs
of the Egyptian kings were built of sun-dried bricks which
lined pits in the ground or sand. The stone or granite
pyramid was undoubtedly introduced by a stone-using
people from the West—the people who built cairns and
tumuli, menhirs and dolmens in Spain, France, and Britain.
Professor Elliot Smith shows clearly enough that the dolmen,
a large stone upheld by three other great stones and covered
with an earthen mound, was a burial chamber, and he
believes it to have been a degenerate form of the pyramid.
But if the theory of evolutionary processes is worth any-
thing, it is evidently the earliest form of the pyramid. The
early Egyptians were not a stone-using people to any great
extent, but confined themselves to brick. It was only when
the Iberians, descendants of the Atlanteans, entered Egypt
that stone-building had its rise in that country.

We see, then, that, like most resemblances between
Egyptian and Mexican civilisation, we must look to a common
centre for the origin of the pyramids of both countries
rather than to Egypt as the place of its genesis.

No one can compare Mexican and Egyptian architecture,
art, and social customs without being greatly struck by their
inherent similarities. But these are similarities arising not
from direct influence or immigration. That is, indeed, ob-
vious, not only because of the great lapse of time which
divides these cultures, but from the circumstance that both

Egyptian and American Comparisons 181

were the heirs of a much more ancient culture. The fact
that these related civilisations entered their respective
spheres one from the east and the other from the west is
itself sufficient to make it plain that the common centre
which was the parent of both must have had its rise either
in North-Western Africa, Western Europe, or in some
Atlantic continental area or related areas connected by land-
bridge with Europe or Africa, and now submerged. The
first hypotheses do not allow for the introduction of
the especial type of culture which we have been consider-
ing to the American continent. Their only alternative is the
Atlantean hypothesis, and when one alternative only remains
it must, according to reason, contain the answer to any given
problem. We do not know whether the Atlanteans built
pyramids or what their art was like. But if analogy—on
which the whole basis of archzology rests—is of any avail
in the reconstruction of vanished civilisations we can regard
their architecture and art as the prototypes of those of
Mexico and Egypt.

CHAPTER XV
Tue EvipENCE FROM OLD PERU

SCATTERED over the western slope of the Peruvian Andean
range are the architectural remains of a civilisation which
must be regarded as one of the most remarkable produced
by the aboriginal American race. For many centuries
mankind had gradually been advancing in this area to the
condition in which it was discovered by the invading
Spaniards in 1534, and many of the architectural remains
which still exist in Peru are of an antiquity far greater than
the foundation of the Incan dynasty which flourished at the
coming of Pizarro. Ruined edifices, built of gigantic
blocks of stone, and often described as ‘‘ Cyclopean,” must
undoubtedly be referred to a period in Peruvian development
of which we have not even any legendary knowledge. These
are met with throughout the length and breadth of the
country, and are known as the remains of the megalithic
or Andean period.

Legends relate that when the founders of Peruvian
civilisation left the island of Titicaca, the sun-god delivered
into their keeping a golden branch which would take root
in the earth at the spot where they were destined to d vell
and found a centre of enlightenment for the human race.
This marvel occurred at Cuzco, afterwards the capital of
the Incan dominions. Situated at an altitude of over eleven
thousand feet above the level of the sea, the ancient city
rose imposingly upon a series of artificial terraces, constructed
of immense masses of earth held together by Cyclopean

walls, built of extremely hard rocks of great size carried by
182

The Evidence from Old Peru 183

main force from the quarries of Anduhaylillas, twenty-two
miles distant. ‘The Peruvians possessed no draught animals,
except the llama, and the blocks must have been dragged
from the quarry to the plateau of Cuzco by gangs of
labourers. Authorities are agreed that all modern masonry
is inferior when compared with that seen in the edifices of
Cuzco. ‘The great blocks were first carefully squared, and
then joined together by means of a mortise about 1 foot
deep by 14 in diameter, into which a tenon of nearly the same
size, hewn out of the upper block, fitted securely. The
walls required no mortar to keep them together, for their
weight was so great that specific gravity took the place of
cement.

Over all towered the mighty Sacsahuaman, or fortress,
built on an airy rock which cleaves the meeting rivers of
Huatenay and Rodadero. From the town side one might
not ascend it, and the sole mode of access was a little path
cut in the living rock which overhangs the banks of the
Rodadero. The total length of the walls which enclose
it is one thousand eight hundred feet, disposed in three
great circles, and its bastions and angles of projection and
re-entrance resemble those of a modern fortress. It was
absolutely impregnable to a force not provided with artillery,
and the early Spaniards implicitly believed that the Peruvians
had been assisted in its construction by the Father of Evil.

Three entrances gave access to the outer enclosure, and
immense blocks of stone were held ever ready to close these
up at the first hint of danger. In a round tower in the
centre of the citadel were placed the treasures of the Incas,
and it was from this that the last descendant of that ill-fated
line hurled himself upon the failure of the last native insur-
rection against the cavaliers of Spain, in which Juan Pizarro
lost his life. The hill near this gigantic fortress, the interior
works of which are now a heap of ruins, is covered with richly
carved blocks of granite which evidently served the purpose

184. The Problem of Atlantis

of seats, and long galleries ornamented with descending
terraces and broken by sculptured niches run round its
slopes.

The Temple of the Sun, now converted into a Dominican
convent, was situated on a hill 80 feet above the river
Huatenay, and was reached by a series of enchanting garden-
terraces, filled with the most marvellous designs wrought in
solid silver and gold. The very garden implements—hoes,
spades, and mattocks—were of solid silver. These facts
are vouched for by numerous eye-witnesses, among them
Pedro Pizarro himself, and subsequent historians have seen
no reason to regard their descriptions as in any way untrust-
worthy. Models of animals and insects of gold and silver
adorned the spacious grounds, and such was the splendour
of the surroundings that the entire quarter was known as
Coricancha, or the City of Gold. The temple occupies
one side of a vast court, called Intipampa, or Field of the
Sun. The inner and outer walls, it is said, were covered
with sheets of gold, and as evidence of this Squier states
that he himself saw in various houses in Cuzco sheets of
gold which had been stripped from the gleaming walls of
the Temple of the Sun. These, he says, were of the thick-
ness of paper.

The exterior of this famous temple gave an impression of
massiveness rather than of grace, and the immense pylons
or monoliths which supported the doorway remind one of
the Egyptian type of masonry. The interior was profusely
ornamented with plates of gold, and in a suitably exalted
position was placed a huge plaque of the same precious metal
upon which were depicted the features of the deity to whom
the fane was dedicated. ‘This was so placed that the beams
of the rising sun fell upon it and bathed it in a flood of radiant -
light. The scintillation of the hundreds of precious stones
with which its surface was enriched, according to an eye-
witness, made its brilliance almost insupportable, and the

The Evidence from Old Peru 185.

atmosphere of mysterious splendour was heightened by the
presence of the magnificently attired mummies of the dead
Incas which were grouped around this dazzling object.
The roof was made from choice woods, but was covered
only by a thatching of maize straw.

The utensils in this temple were all of the most precious
metals. ‘Twelve large vases of silver held the sacred grain,
and even the pipes which conducted the water-supply
through the earth were of silver. The splendid altar-
Piece representing the sun-god fell as booty to one Mancio
Serra de Leguicano, a reckless gambler, who lost it on a
single throw of the dice. The walls of the Aclahuasi, or
House of the Virgins of the Sun, are still standing close at
‘hand for a length of 750 feet. Here the daughters of the
Incas were subjected for many years to a rigorous discipline.

Throughout the city of Cuzco extend long reaches of
walls of stone cut with a nicety and fitting together with a
precision unequalled in any of the ancient structures of
Europe or Asia. Many of these have been used as quarries
from which to erect more modern buildings, but a large
number form the bases upon which later dwellings have
arisen, and it is no uncommon thing to see a mansion, the
lower courses of which are composed of the original Incan
stone walls on which has been superimposed the rubble
walls faced with stucco of the modern Peruvian abode.
The centre of the aboriginal city was the Huacapata, or great
square, now occupied in part by the modern plaza, from
which most of the principal streets radiated. Cuzco, like
Rome, was built on a series of hills, so that the early archi-
tects were obliged to level the declivities, and to form ter-
races upon which their buildings might rest. These terraces
were confined by walls of the ‘“‘ Cyclopean”’ type—that
is, built of stones of irregular sizes, but all fitting into one
another with the greatest nicety. To relieve the monotony
of these long stretches of masonry the Peruvian builders

186 The Problem of Atlantis

introduced niches at regular intervals, not unlike the Egyptian
pylon doorway in shape—that is, narrower at the top than
at the base. The precision with which these stones are
fitted is beyond all praise. Those which bear up the terrace
of the palace of Rocca weigh, many of them, several tons
each, and are as hard as granite. Yet so finely are they
fitted that it is said a penknife-blade cannot be introduced
between them. One of them, the famous “‘ Stone of Twelve
Angles,” is met on each of its dozen sides by another stone,
into all of which this fits exactly. Inall of these massive
walls there is absolutely no cement, the stones holding
together by reason of the marvellous accuracy with which
their superficies meet one another. Some authorities give
it as their opinion that the Peruvian masonry is unequalled on
the face of the globe for finish, and that the finest needle
could not be introduced between the stones which compose
some of the walls at Cuzco.

The general design of the ancient Peruvian building was
that of a block built round a court, upon which most of the
apartments opened. Many of these were large, and a native
historian describes some, of which the remains exist to bear
out his statements, as being capable of containing 60 horse-
men with room enough to exercise with their lances. The
Huacapata, or great square, was surrounded on three sides
by great public buildings for the shelter of the inhabitants
in bad weather, each of which was capable of containing
several thousand people.

The Aclahuasi, or Convent of the Virgins of the Sun,
still exists in the convent of Santa Catalina. In this edifice
dwelt those maidens who were set apart for the service of
the sun god, and from whose ranks the brides of the Incas
were taken. If any of them were detected in a love-affair,
death instantly followed, and the youth who had rashly
disturbed the sanctity of the convent was also doomed to the

dreadful doom of being cast from the beetling crags of the -

SS ee

The Evidence from Old Peru 187

“Gate of Death” at Ollantay-Tampu. Nor did priestly
vengeance cease here, for the very village whence the Lothario
originated was levelled with the ground as being a nest
whence similar vipers might emanate. This conventual
establishment is now 750 feet long by from 20 to 25 feet high,
and its masonic and architectural finish closely resembles
that of the Temple of the Sun. The existing walls show
no entrance or opening.

A very fine remnant of Inca architecture is the wall
looking on to the square called Pampa Maroni. It has been
pierced here and there by modern doorways in its length
of 380 feet, and its joints are so smooth that if the faces of
the stones were dressed down flat they could hardly be seen
at all. In the street of San Agustin a portion of this wall
runs for a length of 800 feet, but it is broken at intervals
by modern structures. It formed the north-east side of
the palaces of the Yupanqui Incas.

Near the remains of the palace of the Inca Rocca were the
Yachahuasi, or schools, founded by that ruler. They were
plain, unadorned seminaries, and led down to the terraces
of the little river Rodadero. Here the amautes, or wise
men, taught the infant mind how to read the language of
quipus, or knotted cords, the tales of gods and heroes,
music, and native engineering, and astrology.

In the vicinity of Cuzco, and especially in that of the
Rodadero Hill, an eminence more than half a mile in circum-
ference, and at least 80 feet high, several notable terraces
exist. Here is to be seen the immense Piedra Causada,
or Tired Stone, of which the native historian Garcilasso
speaks as having required 20,000 men to move it, and which,
rolling over, killed 300 workmen. ‘This statement is of a
piece with much else in the chronicler’s rather mendacious
“history.” The stone weighs probably over 1000 tons,
and was certainly never moved by mere physical effort. Its
upper surface is cut into seats, reservoirs, niches, and

188 The Problem of Atlantis

staircases, the object of introducing which will always
remain a mystery. The Rodadero Hill itself was shored up
into terraces, and its grooved centre, or sunk pathway, was
a favourite resort of the Incan youth, who chased each other
through the depression on high days and holidays. Most
of the stones which faced this eminence have, however,
been carried to the town for modern building purposes. But
on the summit of this hill are ‘a number of broad stone seats
cut into the rock, and rising one above the other with the
precision of the benches in a Roman amphitheatre. These
are known as the Seat of the Inca, and tradition recoupts _
that the three Incas in whose reigns the mighty fortress-of
Sacsahuaman was constructed came to these thrones carved
in the rocky hillside and from that point of vantage were
enabled to watch and superintend the construction of the
great work of fortification which was gradually rising up on
the mountain-side beyond.

The rocks all over the plateau which stretches beyond the
fortress of Sacsahuaman are carved into a myriad shapes.
Seats and couches—veritable divans some of these—in
stone niches, flights of steps, basins for catching rain-water,
cut with the precision and accuracy of a sculptor, abound.
It would seem as if these Cyclopean masons, their vigour
unabated upon the completion of the great mountain citadel,
had rioted in their art, and had revelled in the execution of
countless tasks which might have appalled an army of skilled
European artificers equipped with the best and most modern
tools. There are traces of many small shrines on this
expanse, which probably served as oracles.

The great Incan fortress of Ollantay-Tampu, situated
some forty-five miles north of Cuzco, was built to defend the
Valley of the Yucay from the inroads of the ferocious
Chinchos Indians, who dwelt in the impenetrable forests
watered by the Amazon and its tributaries. The immensity
of the walls, which are built for the most part of red porphyry

The Evidence from Old Peru 189

and average 25 feet in height, render this ancient fortress
comparable to the mightiest structures of antiquity in the
Old World. Squier compared Ollantay-Tampu to the
castles of the Rhine. The comparison holds good only
inasmuch as the Peruvian fortress, like the more graceful
strongholds of Germany, is perched upon a dizzy height,
which on one side overhangs a deep and rapid river. Stupen-
dous walls zigzag from point to point, from angle to angle,
of a huge cliff, and seem more like the work of some modern
master of the art of fortification than the Cyclopean labour
of the countless throngs of dark-skinned toilers who reared
it long ago at the behest of their celestial ruler, the Inca.
The fortress proper is a long, low building of two stories in
height, loopholed and turreted. Above this tower the walls
of another fortress, or rather outwork, and at points above,
below, at every possible elevation, are placed round towers of
stone of varying sizes, all of which are provided with many
port-holes, so that a heavy flight of arrows might be brought
to bear upon an approaching enemy. This salient out-
work embraces a series of terraces, which, because of their
peculiar and gigantic structure, are world-famous. The
road to these leads through an ancient gateway grooved for
a portcullis. The terraces are ascended on one side by
steps, and on the other by an inclined plane over half a mile
in length, over which the gigantic stones of which the
fortress is composed were dragged by sweating bands of
conquered provincials. Many of the immense stones used
in the construction of the fortress still remain upon this road,
abandoned, perhaps, by reason of flaws or other unfitness.
This plane is guarded at intervals by square stone buildings,
like block-houses, and is supported by an embankment of
stone inclining inwards and more than 60 feet high.

The first line of defence climbs the mountain-side, zig-
zagging from point to point, until it meets a precipice with
a sheer fall of 1000 feet. This wall, about 25 feet in height,

190 The Problem of Atlantis

is built of unfaced stone, cemented on each side, and provided
with an inner shelf upon which the defenders might stand.
Within this wall is a concretion of huddled buildings,
doorways, isolated blocks of porphyry, terraces of vast
design, and several fine stairways, the stone for all of which
was quarried some seven miles away, in a spot upwards of
3000 feet above the valley, and dragged up the steep slopes
of Ollantay by sheer human force. A number of the stones
which lie scattered about are hewn into shape, and ready to
be fitted, and many are mortised and clamped to permit
them to be joined to others. Some of these blocks approach’
20 feet in length, by 5 feet broad and 4 feet deep, and are
perfectly squared and admirably polished, and the joints
where they meet one another are scarcely perceptible.
Six of these mighty blocks, which seem as if quarried by
Titans, support a terrace placed at an inclination against
it. The faces of these are imperfectly polished, and some
are not even properly hewn, showing that the work of
facing them was never completed, and probably hurriedly
abandoned. But the greatest of the monolithic marvels
which Ollantay has to show are the “ Tired Stones,”
enormous blocks, lying on the inclined plane leading to the
fortress, as if abandoned by the masons, who found it
impossible to drag such monstrous burdens up the face of
the hill. One of them is 21 feet 5 inches long, by 15 feet
broad, and is partially embedded in the soil, into which it
must have sunk by reason of its own weight.

I have described these remains of Peruvian grandeur at
some length, because in my estimation they preserve the
atmosphere of what I believe Atlantis to have resembled
better perhaps than any other remains, American, European,
or Asiatic. ‘These ruins are frequently of “ Cyclopean ”
character, especially those of the plateau of Lake Titicaca,
built, say archzologists, by the prehistoric ‘ Andeans,”
who developed their civilisation long before the days of the

The Evidence from Old Peru 191

Incan dynasties. On this plateau was situated the “ city ”
of Tiahuanaco, on the southern side of the lake, built at a
level 13,000 feet above the sea, occupying nearly half an acre
in extent, and constructed of enormous megalithic blocks of
trachytic rock. The great doorway, carved out of a single
block of rock, is 7 feet in height, by 134 feet wide, and 14 feet
thick. The upper part of this massive portal is carved with
symbolic figures. In the centre is a figure in high relief,
the head surrounded by solar rays, and in each hand a sceptre,
the end of which terminates in the head of a condor. ‘This
figure is flanked on either side by three tiers of kneeling
suppliants, each of whom is winged, and bears a similar
sceptre. Elsewhere are mighty blocks of stone, some
36 feet long, remains of enormous walls, standing monoliths,
and in earlier times colossal statues were seen on the site.
When the Spanish conquerors arrived no tradition remained
regarding the founders of these structures, and their origin
still remains a mystery, but that they represent the remains
of some mighty prehistoric kingdom is practically admitted.

The greatest mystery of all regarding the ruins at
Tiahuanaco is the selection of the site. For what reason
did the prehistoric Andeans build here? The surround-
ings are totally unsuited to the raising of such edifices, and
the tableland upon which they are placed is at once deso-
late and difficult of access. The snow-line is contiguous,
vegetation will not grow, and breathing at such a height is
no easy matter. There is, however, reason to believe that
the plateau has risen considerably since it was occupied by
the Andeans.

Now whence did the megalithic people who built Tia-
huanaco come? Brinton, Squier, and Markham believed
them to be»indigenous, but modern archzology will not
countenance a hypothesis so narrow and unlikely. Some
traditions state that they came from the south—that is, from
the direction of Bolivia; others say that they came from the

192 The Problem of Atlantis

north by sea. Probably both are correct. The present
Republic of Argentina was at a remote period covered by a
vast, partially land-locked sea, and beside the shores of this
the ancestors of the later Peruvians, the Quichua-Aymara,
probably dwelt as fishers or fowlers. But the earlier stock,
the Andeans, almost certainly arrived, after the fall of
Antilia, on the shores of Brazil, and working their way by
degrees up the Amazon, arrived at last in Peru. But has
Peru any “ Atlantean ” legends ?

Like other races, the Peruvians had their own version
of the Flood. A certain man took his llama to a-good
feeding-place, but the beast moaned and would not eat, and
on its master questioning it, assured him that in five days the
sea would rise and engulf the earth. The man, alarmed,
asked if there was no way of escape, and the animal advised
him to climb to the top of a high mountain, taking with
him food sufficient for five days. ‘The Flood came as pre-
dicted, and after another five days the water fell, leaving only
this one man alive.

This cataclysm was followed by a peculiar incident.
On a high mountain-top appeared five eggs, from one of
which a demi-god Paricaca emerged. Now, as all students
of symbolism know, the egg is the same as the fertility pot,
which in turn is the equivalent of the Ark in which the:
universal Noah embarks during the season of world-flood.
I believe these Peruvian “‘ eggs’ to symbolise the great
arks or ships of the Atlanteans washed up by the Flood
upon some mountain-top in Peru. From the ark of the
Flood humanity is, as it were, rehatched and born anew.
All races appear to have regarded the Blood as a re-
birth, as we shall see in the chapter which deals with that
phenomenon.

Now, as we saw in the chapter dealing with the geological
evidence, a theory exists which has for its basis the state-
ment that the Peruvians were Iberians who entered Peru

The Evidence from Old Peru 193

from North Africa by way of a still existing land-bridge.
It is, however, much more probable that their resemblance
to the Iberian peoples results from the common origin of
both from the Atlantean race. This is not to say that the
Peruvian people as a whole were Atlantean or Iberian any
more than were the races of Central America or Mexico.
But that the ruling class was Iberian or Atlantean in origin
admits of little question. The Quichuas, tradition tells us,
were originally “‘ fair,” that is, they were not so dark as the
native races, and had blue eyes, and sometimes auburn hair.
Even to-day their descendants are considerably lighter in
hue than the surrounding stocks. Moreover their archi-
tecture, as described above, bears the closest possible
‘resemblance to that of ancient Libya and Egypt. The
pylon doorways, the polygonal masonry observed in certain
examples, the entire form and structure of their mighty
megalithic monuments approximate so closely to the earlier
architecture of the Old World, te that of Crete and Carthage
as well as that of North Africa, as to leave no possibility
of doubt regarding the original relationship of their forms
with the structures of Peru.

Let us see how far Peruvian myth reveals an Atlantean
connection. We find that, as in the case of the story of
Deucalion and Pyrrha, the Greek Noah and his wife,
stones in Peru were capable of becoming men. We are
told that when Cuzco was attacked by the Chancas
Indians, one of its defenders erected stones to which he
attached shields and weapons so that they should appear to
represent so many warriors. The hero Pachacutic, hard
pressed for aid, cried to them with such vehemence to come
to his assistance that they became men and rushed to
help him.

The Peruvians had at least one tale referring to a sunken
island. The water-goddess, who presided over Lake Titicaca,

became angry with Huaina Ccapac, the eleventh Inca, who
13

194 The Problem of ‘Atlantis

had determined to build on an island in the lake a shrine
to the god Yatiri or Pachacamac. He accordingly raised a
temple on the island of Titicaca itself. But the deity in
whose honour it had been built refused to vouchsafe any
reply to his worshippers or priests. Huaina then commanded
that the shrine should be transferred to the island of
Apiuguela. But still there was no response. He then
inaugurated a temple on the island of Paopiti, and lavished
upon it many sacrifices. But the offended tutelary goddess
of the lake, irritated beyond endurance by this continued
invasion of her domain, lashed the waters into such a frenzy
of storm that the island and the shrine which covered it
disappeared beneath the waves, and were never thereafter
beheld by mortal eye.

The Peruvian god Pariacaca was a deity of cataclysm.
He formed the lake called after him in three days and
nights by hurling rain and hail at one of the local gods.
Another myth of the Peruvians speaks of twin-gods, Apocate-
quil and Pigueréo, the former of whom was said to have
brought the Peruvian race “‘ out of darkness into the light
of day.” He also was a deity of thunder. The statue of
Apocatequil, along with those of his mother and brother,
were erected on a mountain. Always we find in these myths
the mountain or hill, and the holy place on which statues
_ are raised, as in Plato’s story of Atlantis. Indeed there seems
to be no escape from it in America.

But the worship of the Peruvians shows very clearly that
at one time they must have dwelt in an oceanic area. It is
significant that the inland tribes looked upon the sea as a
menacing deity, whilst the people of the coast reverenced
it as a benevolent spirit, calling it Mama-cocha or ‘‘ Mother-
sea,” since it yielded them a prolific harvest of fish. They
worshipped the whale, fairly common on that coast, and
even the lesser fish were adored by them. It was be-
lieved that the prototype of each species of fish dwelt in

The Evidence from Old Peru 195

the upper world and sent his servants into the deep for the
use of man.

In the legends of Viracocha, a great culture-hero and rain-
god, who is similar to the Mexican Quetzalcoatl, we read
that again and again he sent terrible storms and cataclysms
upon mankind, for their sins against him. He finally for-
gave them, and taught them the arts of life, and in the end
disappeared into the ocean, like Quetzalcoatl, and, like him,
was thought of as coming from the region of the dawn.

The Canaris Indians of Canaribamba in Quito, had a
myth of deluge and destruction closely resembling those of
Central America and Mexico. They told how, when a
great flood evertook them, twin brothers fled to a very high
' mountain called Huacaquan, and as the waters rose the
hill ascended simultaneously, so that they escaped drowning.
When the flood had abated, they built a small house in a
valley and lived on herbs. Eventually they married “ bird-
women ’’—that is, women dressed in the plumage of birds.

Thonapa, a divine personage, was so badly treated by the
people of Yamquisapa in the province of Alla-suyu, that he
laid a curse upon them, and caused a lake to appear where
their town stood. The people of this locality worshipped
an idol in the form of a woman on the top of a high hill
Cachapucara. This idol Thonapa detested, so he burnt it
and destroyed the hill on which it stood. He changed an
entire concourse of Indians into stones because they refused
_ to hearken to his preaching. The people of Tuja-manacu
were so bent upon pleasure that he treated them in a similar
fashion. Like Quetzalcoatl he disappeared into the sea.

Pariacaca, the demi-god who had emerged from one of
the eggs or “‘ arks,”’ as related above, came, like Poseidon,
to a hill-country, where he was insulted by the people. In
wrath he sent a flood upon them so that their village was
destroyed. In the neighbourhood he met a very beautiful
girl, Choque Suso (the Cleito of Plato ?) weeping bitterly.

196 The Problem of Atlantis

He inquired of her why she wept, and she told him that the
maize-crop was dying for lack of water. He fell in love with
her, and assured her that if she would return his passion he
would provide the much needed water. She consented to
his suit, and he irrigated the whole land, as did Poseidon in
Atlantis. Pariacaca eventually turned his wife into a statue.

This myth agrees almost in every detail with that of Plato.
We have in both cases the hill, the finding of the beautiful
girl, the making of an irrigation zone, and finally the appear-
ance of the loved one as a stone image or idol. Could the
resemblance be closer? Note, too, that the cataclysms
alluded to in these myths are invariably brought about by
the wickedness or careless love of pleasure of the human
race.

A fish-god, Pachacamac, had a great temple built to him on
the right bank of the River Lurin, on the coast of the Chinca
country. Here a great mound of stone and adobe rises to a
height of 200 feet. This temple is built on three wide
terraces with a platform on the summit. Here the god
spoke oracularly to the people, who came from great dis-
tances to consult him. Miguel Astete, one of the Spanish
conquerors, says that in 1533 an idol of wood was found
here in a large, well-painted building, and was summarily
destroyed. As we shall see in the next chapter, this building
was undoubtedly of the Atlantean type.

CHAPTER XVI
THE GEOGRAPHY AND TOPOGRAPHY OF ATLANTIS

IN my remarks with reference to the plan of the city of
Carthage in Chapter II and its resemblance to that of
Atlantis as described by Plato, I have already alluded to
the circumstance that the design of the Atlantean capital
appears to have been copied far and wide. It is a fact
well known to archeologists that the plan and outline of
the great cities of antiquity were very frequently carried
out in their colonial settlements, and that the tendency
was to model them as closely as possible upon the mother-
city. ‘Thus more than one of the cities of Southern Yucatan
were modelled upon the older cities of Guatemala ; the cities
of southern Egypt bore a close resemblance to those of the
Delta; Rome is said to have been modelled upon Troy,
Corcyra upon Corinth, and so forth. It seems, then, not
at all improbable that many sites may have been erected
according to the plan of the Atlantean metropolis.

We may recollect that Atlantis was encircled by several
zones of land and water. Now one of the most common
plans of the early settlements in those Atlantic regions,
which were probably in touch with Atlantis in early times, is
that of the settlement located on an island within an island—
or when, owing to the situation, that was impossible, a
site enclosed by several zones of land and water. Hanno,
the Carthaginian voyager, when speaking of certain ape-
like people whom he encountered upon the west coast of
Africa during his famous voyage, states that they dwelt in
a village situated “ on an island within an island,” showing

197

198 The Problem of Atlantis

that this type of zone-surrounded site characterised an
early African community-plan.

Recent researches in connection with the ancient forts of
the Aran Islands, six miles from the coast of Galway, are
illuminating in an Atlantean connection. In the ancient
traditions of the people of the mainland they figure as the
home of giants and workers in magic, and in later legend
they are identified with the enchanted western isles of

Hy Brasil and Tir-nan-Og. Many ancient customs are |

preserved in the islands, the inhabitants still using the
coracle boat described by Himilco, another Carthaginian
traveller, 2400 years ago.

The salient thing regarding these island fortifications so
far as they concern us is that they were undoubtedly built
upon the Atlantean plan. . One of them, Dun Aengusa
or the Fort of Angus, on the island of Inismor, stands on
the edge of a cliff 300 feet above the Atlantic. Outward
from the centre the ruins consist of a strong oval enclosure
or citadel, measuring internally 150 by 130 feet, and two
concentric outer walls, which never formed a complete
circle, but ended on the edge of the cliff. On the tops of
these walls are terraces reached by flights of steps. The fort
is built of large blocks of local limestone from 3 to 7 feet
long.

Another similar structure, Dubh Cathan or the Black
Fort, also in Inismor, is situated on a promontory 400 feet
above the sea.

The most recent investigators are inclined to assign these

erections to the Bronze Age. ‘Tradition states that they
were inhabited by the Firbolgs, who, after being expelled -

by the Milesians, wandered in Scotland for many years,
eventually returning to Ireland. Now the Firbolgs were
the pre-Gaelic people of Ireland, the Iberians, that is
the same race as the Azilian-Tardenoisians who seem to
have come from Atlantis,

ee,

PLATE Xi.

To face p. 198.

(N'Y ‘Ayre80q “5 1g Aq 0,044)
und JO [PPpeiTD eqL,

Spurs] uely

‘

vsnsuqy

Ne

Shes
~ 2 eras =
Wit Fe st

Geography and Topography 199

The buildings in question are almost certainly debased

examples of the Atlantean style of architecture. This is
amply demonstrated by the two outer walls, the central
tower, and the height on which the whole is perched.
Atlantean town-planning appears to have insisted upon
three things—a citadel upon a lofty eminence, ring upon
ring of defending walls, and, lastly, alternate zones of land
and water. But it must be manifest that in the case of such
forts as those of the Aran Isles, standing as they did at a
great height above the wild Atlantic waste, the latter dis-
position was unnecessary. Or perhaps in the upheaval of
society which followed the break-up of Atlantis the engin-
eering knowledge essential to the making of great canals or
moats was lost, and only the recollection of the general plan
remained in the consciousness of the race.
' In any event the frequency with which buildings on this
plan occur in the Atlantic area renders it impossible that
the design could have been of purely fortuitous occurrence
there. Says Mr E. W. Lynam of the British Museum :
“The Aran forts form the western end of that long chain of
forts which has its other end in Thessaly and Mycene.”
Quite so: or rather I should regard their eastern and
northern examples as two arms of development radiating
from lost Atlantis.

Similar to these structures, indeed in many cases one
and the same with them, are the brochs of Scotland and the
nuraghe of Sardinia. Describing the latter, Mr T. Eric
Peet, the author of Rough Stone Monuments, writes: “ All
the nuraghi stand in commanding situations overlooking
large tracts of country, and the more important a position
is from a strategical point of view, the stronger will be the
nutaghe which defends it.” ‘In the Balearic Isles,” says
Mr Donald A. Mackenzie, “are towers called talayots
which ‘resemble rather closely,’ in Peet’s opinion, the
nuraghi of Sardinia. The architecture of the talayots,

200 #4The Problem of Atlantis.

the nuraghi, and the brochs resemble that of the beehive
tombs of Mycenz.”

Once more we must stress the racial origin of the people
who built these structures. The men who raised the
nuraghi and talayots were certainly Iberians, the ‘‘ Medi-
terranean race”? of Sergi. So were the Picts who built
the Scottish brochs. These latter are capacious, round
towers, and are usually erected on promontories jutting
into the sea. Many of them have or had surrounding
walls. All are of the debased type of Atlantean architecture.

Starting, then, from a knowledge of the Atlantean design
as described in Plato, we find that is reflected not only in
that of Carthage, but in numerous other ancient sites scat-
tered over the length and breadth of those areas where
we might expect to find architectural remains approxi-
mating to the Atlantean model—on the one hand along
the entire stretch of the Mediterranean, and on the
other along the sea-coasts of the Western Atlantic, to
Britain and Ireland. It will not serve to regard them as
arising in historical succession from east to west. The
Iberians, the builders of these venerable monuments, did
not originate in the eastern region of the Mediterannean,
so that it is impossible to regard that sphere as the starting-
point of their architectural history.

Nor is it contended that all of these structures approxi-
mate with exactitude to the original Atlantean model.
In certain cases only some of its tendencies appear, but, as
in the case of tradition, we can fill up the gaps by analogical
methods. For example, we find fragments of the legend
of Godiva in India which piece in so accurately with the
English version of the story that we know they must at one
time have belonged to it. The inference is that both
versions of the tale owe their origin to an older and more
complete version. So it is with the architectural model of
old Atlantis: we find its fragments and memories scattered

To face p. 200, PLATE XIii.

ANGI
Wes
2 AW ee) 4
Eeily7si"

Fahy

Mexico in the time of Montezuma.

Geography and Topography 201

over the coasts of the Mediterranean and the Atlantic for
thousands of miles. What one fragment lacks in certain
details the other exhibits, and the resemblance of all as well as
the fitting together of the broken pieces of the puzzle carry
us back with unerring precision to the original prototype as
described by Plato.

The question now arises: Do we find in America any
trace of this Atlantean style of architecture? Assuredly we
do. The plan of Mexico-Tenochtitlan, the Aztec prototype
of Mexico City which illustrates the Letters of Cortes to
the Emperor Charles V, bears a startling resemblance to
Plato’s description of Atlantis. Mexico was built in the
midst of a lake. Here we see the zones of land and water,
represented by the mainland, the causeways which cross and
-recross the lake, and the numerous canals which flow
round the great central pyramid of Uitzilopochtli, the high-
place, analogous to the Temple of Poseidon. The locality,
too, whence the Aztecs were believed to have come, and
known as Aztlan, “ Place of the Flamingo People,” was,
as depicted in the maps of the Aztecs, a place of similar
character, situated in a lake and surrounded by walls.

The description in the preceding chapter of the Cyclopean
structures of Peru undoubtedly assists the belief in the
Atlantean character of Incan architecture, with the use of
vast blocks of stone, its huge fortresses like those of Sacsa-
huaman and Ollantay, perched upon the almost inaccessible
crags of steep declivities. Moreover, these latter are built
of a red stone similar in character to that employed by the
Atlanteans. The plan of the Peruvian fortresses is un-
doubtedly based on the Atlantean model. Here we have the
circular or semi-circular walls, the central citadel, with the
high or holy place in the midst. Add to this the description
of such sites in numerous American myths and legends, and
little more evidence is required to assure us of the pre-
cision of this view.

202 The Problem of Atlantis

Again we have at least one instance of a Peruvian shrine
being built upon an island in the midst of a lake—that
referred to in the legend of Lake. Titicaca.

In Mexico and Central America we also find traces of
this particular type of architecture. The great generality of
the Kus or pyramid-temples found so frequently in the latter
region are built on artificial mounds of considerable height.
In Mexico certain hills and mountains were sacred to the
maize-goddess, Coatlicue, and that such a mountain actually
existed in the vicinity of 'Tollan, the city of the Toltecs, is
proved by the statement of Sahagun. The figure of the
goddess was placed on this height, and her son Uitzilopochtli,
who is in some of the manuscripts depicted as a species of
Atlas upholding one of the world-directions, was also wor-
shipped there. The situation is reminiscent of the Atlantean
tale regarding Cleito—to which the name Coatlicue bears a
suspicious resemblance—and Atlas, to whose name the
first portion of Uitzilopochtli’s name also bears a similarity.
Here we find Coatlicue=Cleito, and Uitzil—Atlas. The
degree and nature of the corruption is what might be
expected from those who spoke the Mexican tongue. Once
more we encounter the combination of the goddess, the
sacred mountain, and the sun. The mountain was with the
less civilised races of Mexico the natural pyramid, and the
farther north we penetrate in the American continent
the more universally does it take the place of the Maya
stone pyramid, until, when we enter the region of the less
sophisticated North American tribes in the comparatively
level Mississippi area, we find them making up for the lack
of natural eminences by raising pyramids of earth unfaced
with stone.

Was the pyramid in Egypt, Central America, and Mexico,
then, but a later reminiscence of the original Atlantean
sacred hill? Everything seems to point to this. It may be
objected that in some parts of Mexico and Egypt it was

To face p. 202. PLATE XIV.

Aztlan, the Original Home of the Aztecs.

(From a Mexican MS.)

Ruins in MacElmo’s Cafion, Colorado.

Geography and Topography 203

unaccompanied by the zones of land and water characteristic of
the Atlantean model. But this objection is readily overcome
when we recollect the waterless and arid conditions which
obtain in the countries in question, where the environment
rendered a faithful adherence to the Atlantean design out
of the question.

Pyramid, broch, and nuraghe, then, appear to be but
diverse manifestations of the one original model of the
Atlantean central height on which stood the Temple of
Poseidon. But it is to be remarked that wherever these are
found they are either erected on a natural height or else
such an acclivity is artificially provided. The pyramid is,
indeed, the sacred hill of Atlantis. That it is not sur-
_mounted by a temple in Egypt is explained by the circum-
stance that though in Central America we find shrines on
the summits of pyramids, in Mexico and Peru we find them
replaced by mere flimsy erections of timber. There is also
proof that on the earliest pyramids in Egypt such shrines were
superposed, but the comparative ease with which they were
reached by robbers occasioned their incorporation at a later
stage in the pyramid itself. Alternatively the broch or
nuraghe is merely a development of the Atlantean shrine
frequently situated on a natural height, which thus took
the place of the pyramid. We see, then, how in different
regions and under different condiiions the Atlantean hill
and shrine evolved into two quite separate but distinctly
traceable forms.

We may now pass on to the consideration of the latitude
of the continent of Atlantis. M. Termier says that we
“must not even consider” this problem. Doubtless he is
right, but little harm can be done if we debate its former
whereabouts in a spirit of such free controversy as is not in
any way hampered by dogmatic assertion.

I believe the main continental mass of Atlantis to have
occupied substantially the position claimed for the Eocene

204. The Problem of Atlantis

continent by Mr J. Starke Gardner in Popular Science of
July 1878. This location is still marked on maps and charts,
which show deep-sea soundings as “‘ Dolphin’s Ridge,”
after the findings of the U.S. ship Dolphin, which took
soundings in that locality.

This ridge, the last remaining portion of which is the
Azores group, is connected on its southern side by a longer
submarine spit or peninsula with South America, and this
may account for the presence of the Andean and Incan
civilisations there, and for their differentiation from those of
Mexico and Central America. From this submarine spit,
almost at the point of its connection with the South American
mass, there branches off another ridge connecting with the
West African island of St Paul’s. Between Dolphin’s Ridge
and Madeira there is no very vast distance, and the pro-
bability is that both were linked up at no very distant date,
geologically speaking, by a land-bridge, or by islands, with
Spain and Africa.

An American warship doing useful peace work has
recently made a journey from Newport, Rhode Island,
to Gibraltar, and as it passed over the sea it took soundings
of the depths, and was able to make an accurate chart of
3200 miles of the bed of the Atlantic.

This was done by means of a new sounding device known
as the tonic depth-finder, invented by Mr Harvey Hayes
of the United States Navy. It is a marvellous instrument,
and will in four minutes make a more accurate sounding
than has hitherto been possible in three hours.

A sound-impulse is sent out from a steel disc in the
bottom of the vessel, and this sound-wave is echoed back
from the bottom of the sea. By timing the journey of the
wave and its echo the depth can be exactly determined ;
and when a continuous series of soundings is taken as the
vessel passes across the sea, a chart of the ocean-bed can be
drawn, showing with minute accuracy its heights and depths.

To face p. 204. PLATE XV.

A Peruvian Pyramid or Huaca.

El Castillo, Chichen-Itza, a Central American Pyramid.

American Pyramids.

a ye 7,

Geography and Topography 205

So convinced was the American Government of the value
of the tonic depth-finder that they equipped the destroyer
Stewart with it, and sent it on a trial journey across the
Atlantic. The apparatus, says an official report, worked
perfectly throughout the trip. About goo soundings were
taken for depths varying between 9g and 3200 fathoms,
the greatest depth being nearly four miles. The expedition
revealed that directly off the Atlantic coast from Newport
the ocean bed dips practically straight down to a depth of
2750 fathoms, or over 3 miles, and at that depth it undulates
like a great plateau almost as far as the Azores.

Recent volcanic disturbances in the bed of the Atlantic
ocean have also given scientists food for furious thought.
The results of recent soundings taken by the Western Union
Telegraph Company have sent a thrill of surprise throughout
the civilised world. A vessel belonging to this company was
searching (August 1923) for a lost telegraph cable which had
been laid twenty-five years before, and the officers of the
company found to their astonishment in taking soundings
at the exact spot where it had been laid down that the surface
of the ocean-bed there had risen during that time by nearly
two and a quarter miles! In view of a fact so striking the
scoffer may perhaps find it necessary calmly to review his
repeated assertion that no movement has taken place in the
bed of the Atlantic Ocean, and it seems to me that this late
evidence fully upholds the contention of those eminent
geologists who have stated that the ocean-bed of the Atlantic
has risen and sunk not once but many times in the course
of geological history.

I will refrain from forcing or straining the natural con-
clusion. Such facts as I have laid before the reader are
far more eloquent than any halting advocacy of mine.

Dolphin’s Ridge, then, I accept as the site of lost Atlantis.
But, as I have said before, I also believe that it was con-
nected by an insular chain with Antilia, a mass similar in

206 The Problem of Atlantis

size, the remains of which are the Antilles group, where an
analogous civilisation flourished until a much later period.

The shape of Dolphin’s Ridge on the chart is a long
oval, having a considerable bulge on its north-western side.
The Azores are situated on its extreme eastern “ coast.”
Plato tells us that “‘ the whole country was very lofty and
precipitous on the side of the sea, but the country immediately
about, and surrounding the city, was a level plain, itself
surrounded by mountains which descended toward the sea.”
I agree with Donnelly that ‘“‘ one has but to look at the
profile of the Dolphin’s Ridge” as revealed by the deep-
sea soundings of the Challenger . . . to see that this is a
faithful description of that precipitous elevation. ‘“‘ The
surrounding mountains ” which sheltered the plain from
the north are represented in the present peaks of the Azores.

On 14th February 1909 a communication appeared in
The Times, pointing out that both in outline and detail the
prehistoric civilisation of Crete corresponded to Atlantis
as described by Plato. ‘“‘ The disappearance of the island
corresponds to what archzology tells us of the utter collapse
of the empire of Knossos, followed by the replacement
even of Cretan sailors by Pheenician at Egyptian ports,”
says Mr F. K. Hoare, writing in the Westminster Gazette of
11th October 1919. “ After all, in nine hundred years in
an unhistorical age a collapse so sensational might well have
been taken rather too literally.”

The facts of Cretan history, however, do not at all agree
with Plato’s story. In the first place, the downfall of
Cretan civilisation took place about 1200. B.c., or about the
period of the Twentieth Dynasty in Egypt, so that it is
unlikely that only 600 years later Egyptian priests should
have assured a Greek traveller that the epoch of the dis-
appearance of Atlantis (if Crete were Atlantis) went back
nine thousand years.

I rather tend to a conclusion which otherwise explains

Geography and Topography 207

the resemblances between Crete and Atlantis as set forth
by the writer in The Times. This conclusion is almost the
converse of his argument that Crete was the “fabled”
Atlantis, with the story of which it had become mythologi-
cally confused. It is that Cretan civilisation was modelled
upon that of Atlantis. The resemblances are strong. The
palace of Knossos stands like the city of Atlantis upon a
level plain, surrounded by mountains, but there are no
“zones of land and water ” in this instance, although the
vast and ingenious system of drainage unearthed at Knossos
might possibly approximate to these. The bull seems to
have been sacred as in Atlantis, and the large arena at Knossos
was almost certainly used for bull-fights. There was no
race-course as in Atlantis, the horse being unknown in
ancient Crete until near the conclusion of its existence.
But there is no doubt that after the downfall of their civilisa-
tion the Cretans, augmented by other racial elements, in-
vaded the mainland of Greece, and this may have given rise
to the idea in the Greek mind that Greece was invaded by
Atlanteans.

The theory that Crete was a colony of Atlantis is greatly
assisted by the circumstance that the Cretans were largely
of that Iberian race which undoubtedly emanated from
Atlantis. Here we find isolated in the Mediterranean a
civilisation which passed away about the time that Greece
began to awaken. It had trading relations with Egypt, to
which, however, it owed only small cultural debts. Its
people were of a race which, we have seen, was partly
Iberian. They worshipped a goddess who was con-
nected with the serpent, like the Mexican Coatlicue, whom
she markedly resembles in details of costume. Like
Coatlicue, too, she was closely connected with sea-shells,
many of which were offered up to her as votive objects.
Pottery figurines were made of both goddesses, and these
objects have a general likeness. Vast tanks were found |

208 The Problem of Atlantis

in the vicinity of the palace. Lastly, in the celebrated
labyrinth the rites of some secret religion like that of Osiris,
or the Cabiri, probably took place.

If we admit that Atlantean influence survived in the
building of Carthage, and in the much earlier Egyptian
forms of architecture, it is not surprising that we should
also find reminiscences of it in the remains of Cretan
culture.

The more likely hypothesis, then, would seem to be that
Crete was colonised by a people of Iberian stock deeply
imbued with Atlantean reminiscences. Early Minoan
civilisation dates roughly from about 3400 B.c. We have-
no Minoan legends to afford us a horizon as to where this
people had dwelt in the interval between the submergence
of the Atlantean continent and the date given above.
They were isolated, a civilised island contiguous to semi-
savage coasts. Egypt was the nearest cultured community.
They did not come thence. Whence they did come I am
not prepared to say ; nor in the present condition of archzo-
logical knowledge can any man venture an opinion. But
we know that the Iberian stock which colonised Crete,
bringing with it civilising influences, found there a race
approximating to the Hellenic Greeks, among which fair
and rufous types predominated. An ordinary female type
was that of a woman with dark reddish hair and sharp, fine
features, such as is often seen to-day in the north of Scotland.
The clothes worn by the Cretan ladies resembled very closely
those in fashion in Europe some years ago—a many-flounced,
bell-shaped skirt and a sort of jacquette. Over the upper
part of the skirt was worn on ceremonial occasions a short
apron like that used by Freemasons, on which similar
designs were sewn. The entire Cretan civilisation was
obviously a thing introduced from elsewhere, the fag-end of
an old and almost decadent culture. Can it be that a last
spur or island of the Atlantean continent survived until

Geography and Topography 209

about 3500 B.c., and that its inhabitants, sailing from catas-
trophe (ships had then been ploughing the Mediterranean
for 1500 years) and undesirous of settling on the savage and
1 <nitable coasts of Spain or Italy, held eastward until
they came upon the island of Crete, only partially occupied
by a people amenable to culture, where they could be safe
to carry on the civilisation of their ancestors without fear of ©
intrusion or invasion ?

Moreover, tradition, stronger than a thousand genera-
tions, has given its unanimous verdict in the legends of a
score of nations that the ancient land of Atlantis was, as
its very name implies, situated without the Pillars of Hercules,
and not within these mythical boundaries. This alone
_ disposes of the belief that Crete came in a later day to be
regarded as the Atlantis of Plato. Nor could the alleged
dimensions of the island-continent as described by him
have been in any way connected with a legend based on
such a belief. In my opinion Atlantis was credited with
such vast dimensions because of a confused folk-memory
that the insular chain which connected it with Antilia
stretched for thousands of miles across the Atlantic Ocean.

I would suggest that no city or civilised state of Atlantis
existed at the period alluded to by Plato—g6o0o0 B.c. ButI
do believe that the comparatively rude colonists who reached
Europe at that date, and which were represented by the
Azilian-Tardenoisians, were reinforced from the ancient
island-continent whence they came, so that when at last the
city of Atlantis did arise, the news of its foundation was
spread far and wide through uncivilised Europe. There |
were certainly cities in Egypt in pre-dynastic times about
6000 B.C., and if we allow a thousand years for the spread
of the Atlantean civilisation to the Nile-land, no great
stretching of the probabilities is required to date the found-
ing of Atlantis at not later than 7000 B.c.

This of course does not mean that there did not pre-
14

210 The Problem of Atlantis

viously exist on the same site a large settlement of Azilian-
Tardenoisian character by no means of .a backward or
barbarian character, so that the city of Atlantis may well
have had a background of antiquity extending into the
past for another two thousand years or more.

The memory of such a city as Atlantis may grow dim in
the human mind, but that our race could quite lose all
recollection of the earliest civic community in its history
is to ask too much from common intelligence. ‘The tale of
its pyramids and palaces must for thousands of years have
been handed down from generation to generation of the
rude peoples of Europe until it became at last a glowing
and golden legend, stimulating the imagination of thousands,
and remaining as a deathless if unwritten Iliad. Troy
vanished, and men in after ages thought it had never been,
until the vision and enthusiasm of a Schliemann brought
it to light once again. And let it be remembered that the
man who justified his dreams of Troy to the confusion of a
thousand scoffers entertained as firm a belief in the exist-
ence of a submerged Atlantis. Did Britain sink beneath
the waves, did London vanish in cataclysm, would not the
recollection of such a world-throe persist for untold ages
after the perishable records of the present day had long been
unavailable to men? Who can doubt it? Who can
question that the saga of London’s passing would give rise
to as great a future controversy as that which still rages around
the memory of Atlantis, that earliest metropolis of the
world ?

CHAPTER XVII
THE FLOOD

It has more than once been argued that the Biblical and
pagan accounts of the Deluge retain a memory of the great
cataclysm by which Atlantis perished. Before we venture
any opinion as to the probability of this, let us first briefly
examine the more important accounts which deal with what
is popularly known as “the Flood” with a view to finding
therein such evidence as would seem to connect them in
any way with the Atlantean catastrophe.

The account of the Deluge given in chapters vi to viii of
Genesis is too widely known to require description. It
tells us that the degeneracy and corruptness of the first
civilised race had so grieved the Creator that He had resolved
upon its total destruction by the agency of a deluge. That
the divine or heavenly race had become degenerate through
intermarriage with the earthly denizens of the world—that
“the sons of God (supernatural beings) saw the daughters
of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of
all which they chose,” precisely as did Poseidon and his
sons, and that “there were giants (Titans) in the earth in
those days ”—all circumstances absolutely paralleled in the
Atlantis legend.

Now it has been abundantly proved by Assyriologists of
experience that the Deluge story as given in Genesis has a
very intimate connection with that set forth at considerable
length in the Babylonian myth of Gilgamesh, deciphered
from the cuneiform text inscribed on tablets of clay found

air

O12 The Proplem of Atlantis

in the palace library of Assurbanipal at Nineveh. Gilgamesh,
a hero who resembles Hercules in his attributes, is smitten
by a fell disease, and is induced to seek his ancestor,
Ut-napishtim, the Babylonian Noah, in a distant and semi-
supernatural country with a view to being relieved of his
affliction. In the course of conversation the patriarch
acquaints him with the story of the Deluge. He tells
Gilgamesh how he constructed an ark at the behest of the
god Ea, the Lord of Waters, god of the primeval deep,
the founder of Babylonian culture, a figure almost identical
with Poseidon. A terrible account of the Flood follows,
and the work of the gods of thunder and storm is pic-
turesquely related. Even the divinities themselves are
alarmed. But the ark with its cargo of human beings and
animals survives the fury of the elements. Mountain and
plain were devastated, the archangels of the abyss wrought
destruction, the surface of the earth was broken up. Here
we do not find a mere flooding of the earth as in Genesis,
but—and the Babylonian is by far the older account—the
total destruction of a large portion of it. “ Humanity was
returned to the mud,” “‘ like to the race of fishes, men are
filling the sea”; “ water-spouts descend with frightful
violence from the heavens,” “ no continent appeared on the
waste of waters’’; such are the phrases we encounter. At
last the ark stranded on the mountain of Nizir. Ut-napishtim
then loosed a dove, which returned ; then a swallow, which
also came back; and, lastly, a raven, which did not. In
the end the god Bel released Ut-napishtim and his family
from the ark, and told him that he would “‘ reside afar at
the mouth of the river.”

This account tells us that Gilgamesh was ruler of Erech
in Babylonia and that other human beings were resident
there, so it is clear that the tale was not intended by
the Babylonian priests to apply to the destruction of the
whole earth, or to Babylonia, but to some distant portion of

The Flood 213

the world. In order to reach the home of Ut-napishtim
Gilgamesh has to undertake a long and arduous journey.
In the first place he has a nine days’ march to the sea, then
he takes ship and sails for fifteen days until he at last reaches
the home of Ut-napishtim.

There exists, however, another version of the Flood story
which has come down to us from Babylonian sources.
This is the account of the Chaldean priest Berosus, who says
of the hero Sisuthrus : “‘ The deity Cronus appeared to him
in a vision, and warned him that upon the fifteenth day of the
month Desius there would be a flood, which would destroy
mankind. He therefore enjoined him to write a history
of the beginning, procedure, and conclusion of all things,
and to bury it in the City of the Sun at Sippara ; to build a
vessel, and take with him into it his friends and relatives,
and convey on board everything necessary to sustain life,
together with all the different quadrupeds and birds, and
trust himself fearlessly to the deep. Having asked the
deity whither he was to sail, he was answered, ‘ To the gods !’
upon which he offered a prayer for the good of mankind.
He then obeyed the divine admonition, and built a vessel
five stadia in length and two in breadth, into which he put
everything he had prepared, and, last of all, his wife, children,
and friends. After the Flood had abated, Sisuthrus sent out
birds from the vessel, which, not finding any food nor any
place whereupon they might alight, returned to him again.
After an interval of some days he sent them forth a second
time, and they now returned with their feet tinged with
mud. He made a third trial with these birds, but they
returned to him no more, from which he judged that the
surface of the earth had appeared above the waters. He
therefore made an opening in the vessel, and on looking
out he found that it was stranded upon the side of a mountain,
upon which he immediately quitted it with his wife, his
daughter, and the pilot. Sisuthrus then paid his adoration

214 The Problem of Atlantis

to the earth, and having constructed an altar, offered
sacrifices to the gods, after which he and those who were
with him instantly disappeared. Those who remained
within, finding that their companions did not return,
quitted the vessel with many lamentations, and continually
called on Sisuthrus by name. Him they saw no more, but
they could distinguish his voice in the air, and could hear
him admonishing them to pay a due regard to religion, and
informing them that he and his friends, on account of their
piety, were translated to live with the gods. ‘The vessel was
stranded in Armenia. Some parts of it still remain on the
Corcyrean mountains, and the people scrape off the bitumen
with which it was outwardly coated and use it for amulets
and bracelets.”

There is little doubt that both of these Babylonian accounts
are of much older origin than at first sight would appear
probable. Indeed their provenance would seem to be
Sumerian, the gift of an older civilisation to the less cultured
Babylonians. A fragmentary version of the Flood story dis-
covered by American excavators at Nippur is couched in the
non-Semitic tongue of this ancient people, and was written,
it is estimated, about 2100 B.c. But by this epoch the
Sumerian tongue was practically a dead language, the sacred
or hieratic speech of Babylonia, so that the story it enshrined
was bound to be much more venerable than the date alluded
to would lead us to suppose. There is every reason to
believe that it is merely a copy from a much older tablet.
The presumption is strong that the Deluge legend dates
from a time anterior to the occupation of the country by
the Semites. The German Oriental Society in excavating
the site of Shurippak on the Euphrates discovered Sumerian
tablets believed to have been written not later than 3400 B.c.
It was at ‘Shurippak that the Deluge was thought of as
originating, and there are traces there which seem to imply
that the site was once destroyed by flooding. But the

The Flood 215

story must have been even more ancient than the date
mentioned above, perhaps not much later than the epoch
of the submergence of Atlantis. It bears every sign of a
hoary antiquity, and its circumstances were probably con-
founded at a later era with the local deluge at Shurippak.

It may be profitable to examine briefly such later traces
of the cataclysm story as remain to us in the traditions of the
more modern Semitic races. “ These,” says Parker in his
Legends and Traditions of the Old Testament, ‘ tell us some
curious stories relative to the fate of those old and extermi-
nated tribes, the origin of which is easily distinguished. The
tribe of Ad, descended from Ad, the son of Uz, the great-
grandson of Noah, after the confusion of tongues at the
Dispersion of Mankind, settled in the province of Hadra-
maut, in Arabia, in a district called Al Akkaf, or the Winding
Sands. The first king of this tribe was Shedad, the son of
Ad, of whom it is said that he finished a magnificent
city his father had begun, and built a fine palace in it,
adorned with delightful gardens, for which he spared neither
cost nor labour, because he wished to inculcate in his tribe
a superstitious veneration of himself as a deity. This garden
or paradise was called the Garden of Irem, and is specially
mentioned by Mohammed in the eighty-ninth chapter of the
Koran, entitled The Daybreak, revealed, as he pretends, at
Mecca. The city, with its gardens, the Arabian writers inform
us, is still standing in the deserts of Eden, and is preserved as
a monument of Divine justice, but never visible except to
those few who are the especial favourites of the Prophet.
It happened that a person named Colabah, who was searching
for a lost camel, found himself suddenly at the gates of this
city, and, finding no inhabitants in it, he speedily retreated
in terror. His adventures reached the ears of a certain
caliph, who sent for him and examined him on the subject.
The honest owner of the lost camel could tell the caliph no
more than the above, but as a proof that he had seen the

216 The Problem of Atlantis

city he produced some fine stones which he had picked up
during his short stay.

‘The legend assigns the cause of the desolation of this
city in the manner stated by the Moslem apostle himself.
The Adites, it appears, gradually became gross idolaters ;
God sent a prophet named Hud ? to reclaim them, but they
refused to listen to him, and therefore they were punished
by a hot and suffocating wind, which blew seven nights and
eight days without intermission, accompanied by a terrible
earthquake, which overthrew their idols and destroyed the
tribe, with the exception of a few who believed in the
announcements of Hud and returned with him to another
place. The traditionary legend states, that before the Adites
were thus punished they were afflicted by a severe drought,
which lasted for four years, and all their cattle perished.
They deputed a personage called Lokman to proceed to
Mecca with sixty attendants to beg rain, which not being
granted, the said Lokman, with some of his company,
remained at Mecca, and thereby escaped destruction.
These were the ancestors of a tribe called the Lesser Ad,
who were afterwards changed into monkeys! The Prophet
Hud, we are told, returned into Hadramaut, and was buried
near a place called Hesec, where, it seems, a small town still
standing is designated Kahr Hud, or the ‘Sepulchre
of Hud.’”

The strong resemblance of this legend to that given in
the Central American Popol Vuh will at once occur to
the reader. Here we find the hot fiery winds, the earth-
quake, and the metamorphosis of men into monkeys. Yet
the races who preserved their respective stories were separated
by more than half the circumference of the globe! Is it
not indulging the “ credulity of incredulity ” to assert that
these so strongly similar traditions are of independent

1 Otherwise Heber, whom the Jews acknowledge to have been a
prophet.

The Flood 217

origin, and that they did not spring from one common
source? Is it not, indeed, quite obvious that they did so?

But an even more extraordinary justification of the under-
lying truth of the circumstances of the Atlantean tradition is
to be encountered in the Oriental legends connected with
Enoch, the descendant of Adam in the fifth generation.
Eusebius maintains that he was acknowledged by the Baby-
lonians as the inventor of astrology, and that he 1s the Atlas of
the Greeks. Several of the Christian Fathers connect him
with the “angels,” or supernatural race who wed with the
daughters of men.

Several Greek legends relating to the Flood have already
been alluded to, but these may well be added to for the sake
of comparison. “‘ I have heard in Greece,” says Lucian,
“‘ what the Greeks say of Deucalion. The present race
of men, they allege, is not the first, for they totally perished,
but a second generation, who, being descended from Deu-
calion, increased to a great multitude. Of those former
men they thus speak—they were insolent, and addicted to
unjust actions ; they neither regarded oaths, nor were they
hospitable to strangers, nor listened to suppliants ; and this
complicated wickedness was the cause of their destruction.
On a sudden the earth poured forth a vast quantity of water,
great rains fell, the rivers overflowed, and the sea rose to a
prodigious height; all things became water, and all men
were destroyed ; only Deucalion was left for a second race
of men, on account of his prudence and piety. He was
saved in this manner: He went into a large ark or chest,
and when he was within, there entered swine, horses, lions,
serpents, and all other creatures which live on earth, by pairs.
He received them all, and they did him no hurt, for the gods
created a friendship among them, so that they all sailed in
one chest whilst the waters prevailed.”

That the Romans were conversant with the story of the
Deluge is plain from the passage in Ovid’s Metamorphoses,

218 The Problem of Atlantis

which so vividly describes it. That we have here a Roman
echo of the Hellenic legend of Atlantis who can doubt ?
The men of the Iron Age were so impious and degraded
that Jupiter resolved to destroy them at a blow. What
followed is given below as translated by the vivid pen of
Dryden :-—
“Thus ended he; the greater gods assent,

By clamours urging his severe intent ;

The less fill up the cry of punishment.

Yet still with pity they remember man,

And mourn as much as heavenly spirits can.

: —But Jove

Concludes to pour a watery deluge down,

And what he durst not burn resolves to drown.

The Northern breath that freezes blood he binds

With all the race of cloud-dispelling winds.

The South he loosed, who night and horror brings

And fogs are shaken from his flaggy wings.

With rain his robe and heaving mantle flow,

And lazy mists are lowering on his brow.

The skies from pole to pole with peals resound,

And showers enlarged come pouring on the ground.

Nor from his patrimonial heaven alone

Is Jove content to pour his vengeance down,

But from his brother of the seas he craves

To help him with auxiliary waves.

The watery tyrant calls his brooks and floods,

Who roll from mossy caves—their choice abodes—

The floods, by nature enemies to land,

And proudly swelling with their new command,

Remove the living stones that stopp’d their way

And gushing from their source augment the sea.

Then with his mace their monarch struck the ground,

With inward trembling Earth received the wound,

And rising streams a ready passage found.

Th’ expanded waters gather on the plain,

They float the fields, and overtop the grain,

The Flood 219

Then rushing onwards with a sweeping sway

Bear flocks, and folds, and lapouring hinds away.
Nor safe their dwellings were, for, sapp’d by floods,
Their houses fell upon their household gods.

The solid piles, too strongly built to fall,

High o’er their heads behold a watery wall.

Now seas and earth were in confusion lost,

A world of waters, and without a coast.

The most of mortals perish in the flood,

The small remainder die for want of food.

A mountain of stupendous height there stands
Betwixt the Athenian and Beeotian lands.
Parnassus is its name, whose forky rise
Mounts through the clouds and mates the lofty skies.
High on the summit of this dubious cliff,
Deucalion, wafting, moor’d his little skiff.

He with his wife were only left behind

Of perish’d man ; they two were human kind.
The mountain Nymphs and Thetis they adore,
And from her oracles relief implore.

The most upright of mortal men was he,

The most sincere and holy woman she.

When Jupiter, surveying earth from high,

Beheld it in a lake of water lie—

That where so many million lately lived,

But two, the best of either sex, survived,

He loos’d the Northern wind ; fierce Boreas flies
To puff away the clouds, and purge the skies.
Serenely, while he blows, the vapours driven,
Discover Heaven to Earth, and Earth to Heaven.”

The scene is completed by the deliverance of Deucalion
and Pyrrha from the shallop in which they had been tossed
to and fro over the tempestuous waste of waters.

The legend of Dardanus, whom the Flood overtook in
Samothrace, has a close resemblance in certain of its passages
to that of Atlantis. The natives of Samothrace, according
to Diodorus Siculus, averred that the sea rose and covered

220 The Problem of Atlantis

a great part of the level country in their island, and that the
survivors fled to the high mountainous land beyond. Asa
memorial of their salvation from the Deluge they raised
landmarks all round the island and built altars on which
they continued to sacrifice to the gods for many succeeding
generations. Centuries later, fishermen drew up in their
nets the stone capitals of pillars, the eloquent witnesses of
cities deep drowned in the surrounding sea.

It has generally been assumed that no vestige of Egyptian
tradition clings to the legend of the Flood. This is scarcely
correct, for Plutarch, Plato, and Diodorus Siculus all speak
of Osiris as connected in some manner with the idea of
deluge. Plutarch in his description of Osiris entering the
fatal chest at the behest of his treacherous brother Set,
places the date of that occurrence as in the very month and
the same day of the month as that on which Noah was under-
stood to enter the ark—the 17th of November, the second
month after the autumnal equinox, when the sun passes
through Scorpio.

The Hindus possess a similar flood legend to that found
in the Scriptures. “The demon Hayagiwa,” says Sir
William Jones in his translation, “ having purloined the
Vedas or sacred books from the custody of Brahma while
he was reposing, the whole race of men became corrupt,
except the seven Rishis and Satyavrata, who then reigned
in Dravira, a maritime region to the south of Carnata.
This prince was performing his ablutions in the river
Critimala when Vishnu appeared to him in the shape of a
small fish, and after several augmentations of bulk in dif-
ferent waters, Satyavrata was placed in the ocean, and was
thus addressed by the mysterious stranger: ‘ In seven days
all creatures who have offended me shall be destroyed by
a deluge, but thou shalt be preserved in a spacious vessel
miraculously formed. Take, therefore, all kinds of medicinal
herbs and grain for food, and, together with the seven holy

The Flood 227

men, your respective wives, and pairs of all animals, enter
the Ark without fear. There thou shalt know God face
to face, and all thy questions shall be answered.’ Saying
this he disappeared, and after seven days the ocean began
to overflow the coast, and the earth to be flooded by constant
showers, when Satyavrata, meditating on the deity, saw a
large vessel moving on the waters. It approached towards
him, and he entered it, in all respects conforming to the
instructions of Vishnu, who, in the form of a vast fish,
suffered the vessel to be tied with a great sea-serpent, as
with a cable, to his measureless horn. When the deluge
ceased Vishnu slew the demon and recovered the Vedas,
instructed Satyavrata in divine knowledge, and appointed
him the seventh Menu by the name of Vawaswata.” This
old tradition of the Deluge is also alluded to in an ode by
a Hindu poet named Jayadeva: ‘‘ Thou recoverest the
Veda in the waters of the ocean of destruction, placing it
joyfully in the bosom of the ark fabricated by thee, O Cesava,
assuming the body of a fish. Be victorious, O Heri, Lord
of the Universe.”

Several European myths of cataclysm have already been
alluded to, but in order that the evidence for the widespread
character of the Flood legend may be more complete, we
may, perhaps, briefly mention others. Perhaps the most
celebrated European Flood legend is that of the sunken city
of Ys, in Brittany. This picturesque legend tells us that
in the early days of the Christian epoch the city of Ys, or
Ker-is, was ruled by a prince called Gradlon, surnamed
Meur, which in Celtic means ‘‘ the Great.” Gradlon was
a saintly and pious man, and acted as patron to Gwennole,
founder and first abbé of the first monastery built in
Armorica. But besides being a religious man, Gradlon was
a prudent prince, and defended his capital of Ys from the
invasions of the sea by constructing an immense basin to
receive the overflow of the water at high tide. This basin

-

222 The Problem of Atlantis

had a secret gate, of which the king alone possessed the key,
and which he opened and closed at the necessary times.

Gradlon, as is so often the case with pious men, had a
wayward child, the princess Dahut, who, on one occasion,
while her father was sleeping, gave a secret banquet to her
lover, in which the pair, excited with wine, committed folly
after folly, until at last it occurred to the frivolous girl to
open the sluice-gate. Stealing noiselessly into her sleeping
father’s chamber she detached from his girdle the key he
guarded so jealously, and opened the gate. The water
immediately rushed in and submerged the entire city.

But, as usual, there is more than one version of this
interesting legend. The city of Ys, says another account,
was a place rich in commerce and the arts, but so given over
to luxury as to arouse the ire of St Gwennole, who, in the
manner of Jeremiah, foretold its ruin. It was situated
where now a piece of water, the Etang de Laval, washes the
desolate shores of the Bay of ‘T'répassés — though another
version of the tale has it that it stood in the vast basin which
now forms the Bay of Douarnenez. A strong dike pro-
tected it from the ocean, the sluices only admitting sufficient
water for the needs of the town. Gradlon constantly bore
round his neck a silver key which opened at the same time
the vast sluices and the city gates. He lived in great state
in a palace of marble, cedar, and gold, and his only grief was
the conduct of his daughter Dahut, who, it is said, “‘ had
made a crown of her vices and taken for her pages the seven
capital sins.” But retribution was at hand, and the wicked
city met with sudden destruction, for one night Dahut stole
the silver key for the purpose of opening the city gates to
admit her lover, and in the darkness by mistake opened the
sluices. King Gradlon was awakened by St Gwennole,
who commanded him to flee, as the torrent was reaching the
palace. He mounted his horse, and, taking his worthless
daughter behind him, set off at a gallop, the incoming flood

The Flood 22

seething and boiling at his steed’s fetlocks. The torrent was
about to overtake and submerge him when a voice from behind
called out: ‘‘ Throw the demon thou carriest into the sea
if thou dost not desire to perish.” Dahut at that moment
fell from the horse’s back into the water and the torrent
immediately stopped its course. Gradlon reached Quimper
safe and sound, but nothing is said as to his subsequent
career.

An ancient ballad on the subject, which, however, bears
marks of having been tampered with, states, on the other
hand, that Gradlon led his people into extravagances of
every kind, and that Dahut received the key from him,
the misuse of which precipitated the catastrophe. Dahut,
_the ballad continues, became a mermaid and haunted the
waters which roll over the site of the city where she loved
and feasted. “ Fisherman,” ends the ballad, “ have you
seen the daughter of the sea combing her golden hair in the
midday sun at the fringes of the beach?” “ Yes,” replies
the fisherman, ‘“‘ I have seen the white daughter of the sea,
and I have heard her sing, and her songs were plaintive as
the sound of the waves.”

The legend of Ys, of the town swallowed up by the sea,
is common to the several branches of the Celtic race. In
Wales the site of the submerged city is in Cardigan Bay,
and in Ireland it is Lough Neagh, as Tom Moore says :—

“On Lough Neagh’s bank as the fisherman strays,
When the clear, cold eve’s declining,
He sees the round towers of other days
In the wave beneath him shining.”

This legend had its rise in an extraordinary story which
was given currency to by Giraldus Cambrensis in his
Topography of Ireland, to the effect that a certain extremely
wicked tribe were punished for their sins by the inundation
of their territory.

224 The Problem of Atlantis

“* Now there was a common proverb,” says Gerald, “ in
the mouths of the tribe, that whenever the well-spring of
that country was left uncovered (for out of reverence shown
to it, from a barbarous superstition, the spring was kept
covered and sealed), it would immediately overflow and
inundate the whole province, drowning and destroying the
whole population. It happened, however, on some occasion
that a young woman, who had come to the spring to draw
water, after filling her pitcher, but before she had closed: the
well, ran in great haste to her little boy, whom she heard
crying at a spot not far from the spring where she had left
him. But the voice of the people is the voice of God ; and .
on her way back she met such a flood of water from the
spring that it swept off her and the boy, and the inundation
was so violent that they both, and the whole tribe, with
their cattle, were drowned in an hour in this partial and local
deluge. The waters, having covered the whole surface of
that fertile district, were converted into a permanent lake.
A not improbable confirmation of this occurrence is found
in the fact that the fishermen in that lake see distinctly under
the water, in calm weather, ecclesiastical towers, which,
according to the custom of the country, are slender and
lofty, and, moreover, round; and they frequently point
them out to strangers travelling through these parts, who
wonder what could have caused such a catastrophe.”

In the Welsh version of this fascinating legend it is the
bard Gwyddno, of the twelfth century, who tells of the
downfall of the submerged city, and two of the strophes which
occur in his poem are also found in the Breton poem. The
Welsh bard may have received the story from Breton
sources, or the converse may be the case.

The legend that Cardigan Bay contains a submerged terri-
tory is widely known, and strangely enough seems to be
corroborated by the shape of the coast-line, the contour of
which suggests the subsidence of a large body of land. Like

The Flood 225

their brothers of Ireland, the fishermen of Wales assert
that at low tide they can see the ruins of ancient edifices far
down beneata the clear waters of the bay.

Before the days of the French Revolution there was still to
be seen at Quimper, between the two towers of the cathedral,
a figure of King Gradlon mounted on his faithful courser,
but in the stormy year 1793 the name of king was in bad
odour and the ignorant populace deprived the statue of its
head. However, in 1859, it was restored. Legend attributes
the introduction of the vine into Brittany to King Gradlon,
and on St Cecilia’s Day a regular ritual was gone through in
Quimper in connection with his counterfeit presentment.
A company of singers mounted on a platform. While they
sang a hymn in praise of King Gradlon, one of the choristers,
provided with a flagon of wine, a napkin, and a golden hanap
(cr cup), mounted on the crupper of the king’s horse,
poured out a cup of wine, which he offered ceremoniously to
the lips of the statue and then drank himself, carefully wiped
with his napkin the moustache of the king, placed a branch
of laurel in his hand, and then threw down the hanap in the
midst of the crowd below, in honour of the first planter of
the grape in Brittany. To whoever caught the cup before
it fell, and presented it uninjured to. the chapter, was
adjudged a prize of two hundred crowns.

Now it seems to me that about these ceremonial acts there
is a distinct savour of traditional practice, that, indeed, a
strong background of legend might be discovered behind
these practices. Between the cathedral towers of Quimper
was placed what seems to have been nothing more or less
than an idol of Gradlon Meur, who introduced the vine into
Brittany. ‘That Gradlon Meur is the name of a god I have
no doubt. The title Meur, Mheur, or Mhor, “ great,” is
attached to several Celtic deities, especially in their later
and more modern significance, as, for example, the Cailleach
Mheur, or “ old-wife,” goddess of the Scottish Highlands.

15

226 ‘The Problem of Atlantis

And this Gradlon was obviously a deity of deluge, whose
strange rites linger in Brittany even to the present day.
Note the description of his palace. Does it not recall that
of Atlantis in some of its circumstances ? We are told that
““a strong dike protected it from the ocean,” “ an immense
basin ”’ was formed “to receive the overflow of the water
at high tide,” there were gates which opened and closed on
the sea-way, as in Atlantis and Carthage, and the palace of
Gradlon was of cedar, silver, and gold. The inhabitants of
the city were wicked, and retribution followed upon their
vices. If the legend of Ys is not a variant of that of
Atlantis I am greatly mistaken.

It is, then, pretty obvious from the terms of the legends
which have been summarised above, no less than from those
of America and elsewhere which were described in an earlier
chapter, that practically all of them are more or less distantly
connected with one and the same tradition, that, indeed, all
can be referred back to a common origin. ‘Time, environ-
ment, and other circumstances, have conspired to alter their
several details, but not their general tendency; but it is
remarkable that out of the whole mass of tradition thus
presented can be pieced together practically every single
detail as found in the accounts of Plato. This, as Gomme
and others have pointed out, is one of the true tests of myth,
and is known as “ the test of recurrence.” Do we find in a
number of myths dealing with one especial theme all the
elements of a more perfectly expressed story which we
possess in a literary form? If so we are justified in regard-
ing the literary form as. approximating to the original myth,
as a tradition crystallised in writing, and these portions of the
other legends which partially approximate to its circum-
stances as “‘ broken lights ” of the original, which through
the chances of time and environment have become altered
to chime in with local topography or religious prejudice.

CHAPTER XVIII
CONCLUSION

Ir may seem merely impertinent in the present fragmentary
condition of our knowledge to make any attempt to recon-
struct the conditions of life in Atlantis. But what has been
set down in these pages affords us more than a mere misty
vision of the island-continent, indeed the assemblage of the.
proof it contains would seem to go far to provide us with an
outline and summary of Atlantean life.

And first as regards the race itself. This appears to
have been composite, as was only natural in the case of
peoples spread over a broad oceanic belt. Thus the
Aurignacians or Cré-Magnons, the first Atlantean wave in
Europe, were exceptionally tall, sons of the gods indeed,
the male height averaging from 6 ft. 1 in. to 6 ft. 7 in.,
although the women were small, the proof of a mixed race.
They were fair or brunette in pigmentation, and probably
had blue or brown eyes, like the Guanches of the Canaries.
The second immigrant race, the Azilian-Tardenoisians,
were shorter in stature, and darker in colouring, and I
venture to deduce from their maritime habits that they
were originally an insular people, possibly inhabiting some
of the larger islands to the west of Atlantis, from which
Celtic tradition would seem to make them come. I allude,
of course, to the Fomorians, who are spoken of in Irish
legend as arriving in Erin from “ the West.”

It seems clear from the state of culture of these races
when they first arrived in the Biscay region that Atlantis,
at the date of their departure, was as yet in the Stone Age.

227

228 The Problem of Atlantis

But this by no means implies that the civilisation they had
was of a low degree. The cultures of ancient Mexico and
Central America were still in the Stone Age when dis-
covered by Europeans, but, nevertheless, displayed to their
conquerors a condition of life quite as advanced, as complex,
and as colourful as was that of China a generation ago.
They possessed a social system which was obviously the
result of ages of civilised usage, and a well-digested legal
code equal to any human emergency, with well-developed
arts and crafts.

We may, indeed, regard the Atlantis of the period ante-
dating the final catastrophe as enjoying a civilisation closely
akin to that of ancient Central America. Its architecture
we can envisage as of a type likely to hold in embryo the
architectural tendencies of both Egypt and Mexico—the
pyramid based on the conception of the sacred hill, and
crowned by a shrine or temple. Probably these structures
were of earth faced with stone, and not of stone alone, as
in Egypt, where the pyramid was obviously a memory of
the sacred hill, the abode of the god. We must also re-
gard the Babylonian or Sumerian Ziggurat, or temple, as
evolved from the idea of the hill crowned by the shrine, as
all Assyriologists admit. Atlantean dwelling-houses would
probably resemble those common in both Egypt and Mexico ;
that is, they would in all likelihood be constructed from brick
or adobe sun-dried from mud.

The religion of the Atlanteans must have approximated
to those of Egypt and Mexico—not that it was likely to
partake of the gloomy horrors of the latter, which were of
relatively late introduction. The spirit underlying both
Mexican and Egyptian religion was the same—the worship »
of nature and natural forces——as evinced in wind, water, and
growth. Doubtless the gods of Atlantis resembled those of
the other two countries alluded to, and their system of
religious polity or theology was probably the prototype of

Conclusion 229

those ancient mysteries which are found both in the East
and in America, and have so powerfully influenced the
practice of all mystical societies even to the present day.
We may regard the Osirian religion in Egypt and that
described in the Quiche Popol Vuh of Guatemala as
approximating to that of ancient Atlantis—that is a faith of
which the idea of resurrection after death was the very core
of belief, and which was in some manner connected with
the growth of the crops as symbolic of bodily resurrection.
There must also have been associated with it that cult of the
twin which is so widespread, and which has examples in
Asiatic, European, and American faiths.

The government of Atlantis appears to have been monar-
chical, yet this monarchy was limited so far as its dependence
upon the heavenly powers was concerned. It was, in fact,
a theocracy, precisely as were the Mexican and Egyptian
types of government. No measure of real national import-
ance could be initiated without first receiving full sanction
for it from the gods. So it was in Egypt, where the gods
were consulted on every possible occasion as regards matters
of government, and the same holds good of Mexico, whose
tlatoani, or king, was merely the mouthpiece of the holy
oracles.

It must be clear, then, to anyone of disciplined imagination,
if not to the pedant, that from some such centre as Atlantis
the seeds of civilisation were spread broadcast over Europe
and North Africa. - It is plain from what has gone before,
as from the admission of men of science, that the culture-
bed of the world’s civilisation is “ officially? unknown. In
some nucleus irretrievably lost so far as its material manifesta-
tions are concerned, and untraceable by ordinary means, the
knowledge of the arts and the refinements which differentiate
man from the lower races which preceded him had their
first inception. The races who found refuge in, European
soil from the wreck and catastrophe of this lost continent

a50°°. Fite Problem of Atlantis

have been proved by the labours of archeologists to have
been of a physical type superior to any at present existing,
to have possessed that greater cranial capacity which is the
undoubted mark of distinguished mental ability. A con-
sensus of opinion also exists among anthropologists that the
first wave of the Atlantean race, the Cré-Magnons, were
instrumental in bringing to European soil the seeds of its
present civilisation, and, as has been shown, this culture
progressed not from East to West, as has been asserted so
frequently and with such blind and positive dogmatism,
but from West to East. A soil more congenial to the
immediate incubation and flowering of Atlantean genius
may at first have been encountered by it in Egypt and the
East, where conditions probably approximated more closely
to those of the old island home. But in the event the
renaissance of the Cré-Magnon spirit as evinced in the rise
of the several British races in later times, once it had
been acclimatised to these regions, far outstripped Oriental
advancement. If a patriotic Scotsman may be pardoned
the boast, I may say that I devoutly believe that Scotland’s
admitted superiority in the mental and spiritual spheres
springs almost entirely from the preponderant degree of
Cré-Magnon blood which certainly runs in the veins of
her people, whose height and cranial capacity, as well as
other physical signs, show them to be mostly of Cré-Magnon
race. England, too, undoubtedly draws much of her sanity,
her physical prowess and marked superiority in the things of
the mind from the same source, and if much of her blood
be Iberian, is not that too Atlantean, and has that admixture
not pre-eminently endowed her with the greatest poets who
ever touched the harp? To an admixture of Cré-Magnon
and Iberian blood we owe the genius of Shakespeare and
Burns, Massinger and Ben Jonson. Milton, Scott, and, to
come to our own times, Mr H. G. Wells and Mr Galsworthy
are almost purely Cré-Magnon—indeed our literary types

Conclusion 231

strongly resemble the carefully designed bust of a Cré-
Magnon man executed under scientific supervision by a
distinguished Belgian sculptor.

The general inadequacy and tentative nature of this
essay will have made it plain to the discriminating reader
that we are only on the threshold of the great quest for the
bones of drowned Atlantis. Nothing is to be gained by
dogmatic assertion. In these pages enthusiasm has doubtless
frequently outstripped caution and even probability, but if
errors and false hypotheses are to be encountered therein,
I must plead that these are due to a spirit of experiment
and archeological enterprise, and that in any case they
should not be taken as stultifying future effort in the un-
ravelling of a great human problem, with which more
incisive minds will assuredly busy themselves in the
near future. My desire has been to clear the ground,
to provide a basis and outline in virtue of which other
students may proceed to a more worthy elaboration and
excogitation of what appears to me a vital chapter in human
origins and advancement. Perhaps many of the points I have
tried to make are worthless and merit the condemnation which
I doubt not they will receive. But I would plead that the
case I have so weakly endeavoured to set forth should not
be judged by the shortcomings of its advocate. Many more
worthy causes have found protagonists who were moved to
plead on their behalf by a feeling of inward certainty to
justify which they. could bring only inadequate proof and
expression, and among these I may be numbered. But
however poor my testimony, the intuition which inspired
it remains powerful and irrefragable, indestructible, indeed,
as the world-memory of that ancient and original culture I
have attempted to unveil.

Yes, there is more, much more, than mere material proof
to be considered in relation to such questions as that which
we have been discussing. Atlantis sleeps beneath the seas.

232 The Problem of Atlantis

But not reason alone, nor the apparatus of scholarship, will,
in the end, serve to probe her ancient mysteries. Men of
insight have written of strange visions, and of stranger super-
natural communications they have been vouchsafed regard-
ing her pristine life. In many quarters these have been
received with scorn. In some cases their content and testi-
mony appear to me as highly improbable, having regard to
the proven facts of science. But for my own part I would
hasten to say that I am too ignorant of the powers of the
human soul to weigh the evidence they present with justice
and impartiality. Imagination, vision, if rightly interpreted
and utilised, is one of the most powerful aids to historical
and archeological unde ing; and the ability to cast
the ‘avenues of the ages is, it seems
to me, but one of t! hevfirst steps in psychic progress.
ie) CHELSEA)? ji :

THE END
