The Man versus the State (Herbert Spencer, 1884)
==========================================================
The classic libertarian polemic against state overreach; the right's Mill. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (manversusstatec00spengoog).

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



■i*^ "*^ 


^3 




Wu 


Vl?.. VWc 'Xsta.W. 


E9 


^^^H B 921.685 ^^^^^^^ 

1 


n 



r»f*^»:S!it!y«<J*!»«>5SK^*« 



g TIIK 

PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY 



OF 



PROFESSOR GEORGE S. MORRIS, 

Professor in the university, 



FreNeiited to the University of MicliiMn* 



r 



\ 



c 



ii 



4 



i 



Spencer's Syntlietic Pbilosopby. 




a.) FIEBT PBINGIFLES 


. 18.00 


L The Unknowablb. 
II. Laws of thb Knowablb. 


• V ^" ^* ^^ 


(2.) THB PEINOIPT.Efl OF BIOLOGY. VoL I. . . . 


. 12.00 


I. Thb Data or Biology. 
II. Thb Indttotionb of Bioloot. 
m. Thb Eyoltjtion of Lifb. 




(8.) THB PBl^OIPLEB OF BIOLOGY. VoL H. . . 


. $2.00 


lY. Mobphologioal Dbyblopioekt. 
V. Phtsiologioal Dbvblopmbnt. 

YI. La WD OF MULTIPLIGATlOir. 




(4) THB PEINOIPLES OF PSYCHOLOGY. Yol L . . 


. $2.00 


I. Thb Data of Pbtchologt. 
II. Thb iNDTTonoKB of Pbyohologt. 




III. Gehbbal dynthbbib. 
lY. Spboial Stnthbbib. 
Y. Physical Btnthbsib. 


(6.) THB PEIN01PLE8 OF PSYCHOLOGY. YoL IL . 


. $2.00 


Yl. HPBCIAL AKALY8IB. 

YIL Gbmebal Analysis. 
Vill. Oobollabibs. 




(6.) PSINCIPLES OF SOCIOLOGY. Yol. I 


. 12.00 


L Thb Data of Sociology. 
II. Thb Indttotionb of Sociology. 
III. Tub Dombbtio Bblationb. 




(7.) PEINCIPLE8 OF SOCIOLOGY. YoL H. . . . 


. $2.00 


Y. PoLxnoAL Inbtxtutiohb. 




(8.) PEDTOIPLEB OF SOCIOLOGY. YoL in. . . . 


• 


« * * * 




(9.) PEmCIPLEB OF MOBATJTY. YoL I 


• 


I. Thb Data of Ethios 

* * « * 


. $1.25 


(10.) PRINCIPLES OF MOEALITY. Yol. n. . . . 

« * « * 


• 


D. APPLETON & CO., Publibhbbb, Nbw Yoek. 



\ 



\ 

\ 



.^A 



\ 



y 



) "Nj ia-L t 1 > 



THE MAN 



YERSUa 

THE STATE: 

GONTAINIKa / i C«V* O 

" THE NEW TOEYISM," « THE COMmG SLAVERY," 

"THE SINS OF LEGISLATORS," 

AND 

"THE GREAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION.',' 



(_■. V w -H*- ■'- *• 






■" ■ f ) 

BY 

HEEBEET SPENCEE. 



REPRINTED FROM " THE POPULAR 8CIENCE MONTHLTy^* 

WITH A POSTBOBIPT. 



NEW YORK: 
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, 

1, 8, AiCD BOND STBEET. 
1884. 



•^ ' fi 



I L 







:-.il^-. .'-■■'■ 



PREFACE. 



The Westminster Bemew for April 1860, contained an article 
entitled "Parliamentary Eeform: the Dangers and the Safe- 
guards." In that article I ventured to predict some results of 
political changes then proposed. 

Eeduced to its simplest expression, the thesis maintained 
was that, unless due precautions were taken, increase of freedom 
in form would be followed by decrease of freedom in fact. 
Nothing 1ms occurred to alter the belief I then expressed. The 
drift of legislation since that time has been of the kind antici- 
pated. Dictatorial measures, rapidly multiplied, have tended 
continually to narrow the liberties of individuals; and have 
done this in a double way. Regulations have been made in 
yearly-growing numbers, restraining the citizen in directions 
where his actions were previously unchecked, and compelling 
actions which previously he might perform or not as he liked ; 
and at the same time heavier public burdens, chiefly local, have 
further restricted his freedom, by lessening that portion of 
his earnings which he can spend as he pleases, and augmenting 
the portion taken from him to be spent as public agents please. 

The causes of these foretold effects, then in operation, con- 
tinue in operation — are, indeed, likely to be strengthened ; and 
finding that the conclusions drawn respecting these causes and 
effects have proved true, I have been prompted to set forth and 



u 



PKEFACE. 



emphasize kindred conclusions respecting the future, and do 
what little may be done towards awakening attention to 
threatened evils. 

For this purpose were written the four foUowing articles, 
originally published in the Contemporary Review for February, 
April, May, June and July of this year. To meet certain 
criticisms and to remove some of the objections likely to be 
raised, I have now added a postscript 



Bayswater, July^ 1884, 



CONTENTS. 



I. The New Tobtism 



II. The Coming Slavbbt 18 



in. The Sms of Lbgislatoes 44 



IV. The Great Political Superstition 78 



V. Postscript 



108 



THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 



THE NEW TORYISM. 



Most of those who now pass as Liberals, are TorieR of a new type. 
This is a paradox which I propose to justify. That I may justify 
it, I must first point out what the two political parties originally 
were ; and I must then ask the reader to bear with me while I 
remind him of facts he is familiar with, that I may impress on him 
the intrinsic natures of Toryism and Liberalism properly so called. 
Dating back to an earlier period than their names, the two 
political parties at first stood respectively for two opposed types 
of social organization, broadly distinguishable as the militant and 
the industrial — ^types which are characterized, the one by the 
regime ot status, almost universal in ancient days, and the other 
by the regime of contract, which has become general in modem 
days, chiefly among the Western nations, and especially among 
ourselves and the Americans. If, instead of using ihe word 
** co-operation" in a limited sense, we use it in its widest sense, as 
signifying the combined activities of citizens under whatever 
systiem of regulation ; then these two are definable as the system 
of compulsory co-operatiou and the system of voluntary co-opera- 
tion. The typical structure of the one we see in an army formed 
of conscripts, in which the units in their several grades have to 
fulfil commands under pain of death, and receive food and clothmg 
and pay, arbitrarily apportioned; while the typical structure of 
the other we see in a body of producers or distributors, who seve- 



2 THE MAN VERSUa THE STATE. 

rally agree to specified payments in return for specified services, 
and may at will, after due notice, leave the organization if they 
do not like it. 

During social evolution in England, tho distinction between 
these two fundamentally-opposed forms of co-operation, made its 
appearance gradually ; but long before the names Tory and Whig 
came into use, the parties were becoming traceable, and their con- 
nexions with militancy and industrialism respectively, were vaguely 
shown. The truth is familiar that, here as elsewhere, it was 
habitually by town-populations, formed of workers and traders 
accustomed to co-operate under contract, that resistances were 
made to that coercive rule which characterizes Qo-operation xmder 
status. While, conversely, co-operation under status, arising from, 
and adjusted to, chronic warfare, was supported in rural districts, 
originally peopled by military chiefs and their dependents, where 
the primitive ideas and traditions survived. Moreover, this 
contrast in political leanings, shown before Whig and Tory prin- 
ciples became clearly distinguished, continued to be shown after- 
wards. At the period of the Bevolution, " while the villages and 
smaller towns were monopolized by Tories, the larger cities, the 
manufacturing districts, and the ports of commerce, formed the 
strongholds of the Whigs." And that, spite of exceptions, the like 
general relation still exists, needs no proving. 

Such were the natures of the two parties as indicated by their 
origins. Observe, now, how their natures were indicated by their 
early doctrines and deeds. Whiggism began with resistance to 
Charles II. and his cabal, in their efforts to re-establish unchecked 
monarchical power. The Whigs " regarded the monarchy as a civil 
institution, established by the nation for the benefit of all its 
members ;" while with the Tories " the monarch was the delegate 
of heaven." And these doctrines involved the beliefs, the one 
that subjection of citizen to ruler was conditional, and the other 
that it was unconditional. Describing Whig and Tory as conceived 
at the end of the seventeenth century, some fifty years before he 
wrote his Dissertation on Fariies^ Bolingbroke says :— 

"The power and majesty of the people, an original contract, the 
authority and independency of Parliaments, liberty, resistance, exclusion, 
abdication, deposition ; these were ideas associated, at that time, to the 
idea of a Whig, and supposed by every Whig to be incommunicable, and 
inconsistent with the idea of a Tory. 



THE NEW TORYISM. 3 

'^ Divine, hereditary^ indefeasible right, lineal succeseion, passive- 
obedience, prerogative, non-resistance, slavery, nay, and sometimes popery 
too, were associated in many minds to the idea of a Tory, and deemed 
incommunicable and inconsistent, in the same manner, with the idea of a 
Whig." — Dissertation on Parties^ p. 5. 

And if we compare these descriptions, we see that in the one party 
there was a desire to resist and decrease the coercive power of the 
Tuler over the subject, and in the otheit party to maintain or increase 
his coercive power. This distinction in their aims — a distinction 
which transcends in meaning and importance ^11 other political 
distinctions — ^was displayed in their early doings. Whig principles 
were exemplified in the Habeas Corpus Act, and in the measure by 
which judges were made independant of the Crown ; in defeat of 
the Non-Besisting Test Bill, which proposed for legislators and 
officials a compulsory oath that they would in no case resist the 
king by arms; and, later, they were exemplified in the Bill of 
Bights, framed to secure subjects against monarchical aggressions. 
These Acts had the same intrinsic nature. The principle of com- 
pulsory co-operation throughout social life was weakened by them, 
and the principle of volunte.ry co-operation strengthened. That at 
at a subsequent period the policy of the party had the same general 
tendency, is well shown by a remark of Mr. Green concerning the 
period of Whig power after the death of Anne : — 

" Before the fifty years of their rule had passed. Englishmen bad for- 
gotten that it was possible to persecute for differences of religion, or to put 
down the liberty of the press, or to tamper with the administration of 
justice, or to rule without a Parliament." — Short Hixtory^ p. 705. 

And now, passing over the war-period which closed the last 
century and began this, during which that extension of individual 
freedom previously gained was lost, and the retrograde movement 
towards the social type proper to militancy was shown by all kinds 
of coercive measures, from those which took by force the persons 
and property of citizens for war-purposes to those which suppressed 
public meetings and sought to gag the piress, let us recall the general 
characters of those changes effected by Whigs or Liberals after the 
re-establishment of peace permitted revival of the industrial regime 
and return to its appropriate type of structure. Under growing 
Whig influence there came repeal of the laws forbidding combina- 
tions among artisans, as well as of those which interfered with their 
freedom of travelling. There was the measure by which, under 



4 THE ICAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

Whig pressnre, Dissenters were allowed to believe as they pleased 
without suffering certain civil penalties ; and there was the Whig 
measure, carried by Tories under compulsion, which enabled Ca- 
tholics to profess their religion without losing part of their free- 
dom. The area of liberty was extended by Acts which forbad the 
buying of negroes and the holding of them in bondage. The East 
India Company's monopoly was abolished, and trade with the East 
made open to all. The political serfdom of the unrepresented 
was narrowed in area, both by the Reform Bill and the Municipal 
Bef orm Bill ; so that alike generally and locally, the many were 
less under the coercion of the few. Dissenters, no longer obliged 
to submit to the ecclesiastical form of marriage, were made free to 
wed by a purely civil rite. Later came diminution and removal of 
restraints on the buying of foreign commodities and the employ- 
ment of foreign vessels and foreign sailors; and later still the 
removal of those burdens on the press, which were originally 
imposed to hinder the diffusion of opinion. And of all these 
changes it is unquestionable that, whether made or not by Liberals 
themselves, they were made in conformity with principles professed 
and urged by Liberals. 

But why do I enumerate facts so well known to all ? Simply 
because, as intimated at the outset, it seems needful to remind 
everybody what Liberalism was in the past, that they may perceive 
its unlikeness to the so-called Liberalism of the present. It would 
be inexcusable to name these various measures for the purpose of 
pointing out the character common to them, were it not that in 
our day men have forgotten their common character. They do not 
remember that^ in one or other way, all these truly Liberal changes 
diminished compulsory co-operation throughout social life and in- 
creased voluntary co-operation. They have forgotten that, in one 
direction or other, they diminished the range of governmental 
authority, and increased the area within which each citizen may 
act unchecked. They have lost sight of the truth that in past 
times Liberalism habitually stood for individual freedom versus 
State-coercion. 

And now comes the inquiry — How is it that Liberals have lost 
sight of this P How is it that Liberalism, getting more and more 
into power, has grown more and more coercive in its legislation P 
How is it that, either directly through its own majorities or in- 
directly through aid given in such cases to the majorities of its 







THE NEW TORYISM. 5 

opponents, Liberalism lias to an increasing extent adopted the 
policy of dictating the actions of citizens, and, by consequence, 
diminishing the range throughout which their actions remain free ? 
How are we to explain this spreading confusion of thought which 
has led it, in pursuit of what appears to be public good, to invert 
the method by which in earlier days it achieyed public good ? 

Unaccountable as at first sight this unconscious change of policy 
seems, we shall find that it has arisen quite naturally. Given the 
unanalytical thought ordinarily brought to bear on political matters, 
and, under existing conditions, nothing else was to be expected. 
To make this clear some parenthetic explanations are needful. 

From the lowest to the highest creatures, intelligence progresses 
by acts of discrimination ; and it continues so to progress among 
men, from the most ignorant to thei most cultured. To class 
rightly — ^to put in the same group things which are of essentially 
the same natures, and in other groups things of natures essentially 
different — is the fundamental condition to right guidance of actions. 
Beginning with rudimentary vision, which gives warning that some 
large opaque body is passing near (just as closed eyes tamed to the 
window, perceiving the shade caused by a hand put before them, 
tell us of something moving in front), the advance is to developed 
vision, which, by exactly-appreciated combinations of forms, 
colours, and motions, identifies objects at great distances as prey or 
enemies, and so makes it possible to improve the adjustments of 
conduct for securing food or evading death. That progressing 
perception of differences and consequent greater correctness of 
classing, constitutes, under one of its chief aspects, the growth of 
intelligence, is equally seen when we pass from the relatively simple 
physical vision to the relatively complex intellectual vision — the 
vision through the agency of which, things previously grouped by 
certain external resemblances or by certain extrinsic circumstances, 
come to be more truly grouped in conformity with their intrinsic 
structures or natures. Undeveloped intellectual vision is just as 
indiscriminating and erroneous in its classings as undeveloped 
physical vision. Instance the early arrangement of plants into 
the groups, trees, shrubs, and herbs: size, the most conspicuous 
trait, being the ground of distinction ; and the assemblages formed 
being such as united many plants extremely unlike in their natures, 
luid separated others that are near aJdn. Or still better, take the 



6 THE MAN VERSVa THE STATE. 

popular classification which puts together nnder the same general 
name, fish and shell-'fish, and nnder the snb-name, shell-fish, puts 
together crnstaceans and moUnscs ; nay, -which goes farther, and 
regards as fish the cetacean mammals. Partly because of the like- 
ness in their modes of life as inhabiting the water, and partly becanse 
of some general resemblance in their flavonrs, creatures that are in 
their essential natures far more widely separated than a fish is 
from a bird, are associated in the same class and in the same sub- 
class. 

Now the general truth thus exemplified, holds throughout 
those higher ranges of intellectual vision concerned with things 
not presentable to the senses, and, among others, such things as 
political institutions and political measures. For when thinking 
of these, too, the results of inadequate intellectual faculty, or 
inadequate culture of it, or both, are erroneous classings and con- 
sequent erroneous conclusions. Indeed, the liability to error is 
here much greater; since the things with which the intellect is 
concerned do not admit of examination in the same easy way. 
You cannot touch or see a political institution : it can be known 
only by an effort of constructive imagination. Neither can you 
apprehend by physical perception a political measure : this no less 
requires a process of mental representation by which its elements 
are put together in thought, and the essential nature of the com- 
bination conceived. Here, therefore, still more than in the cases 
above named, defective intellectual vision is shown in grpuping by 
external characters, or extrinsic circumstances. How institutions 
are wrongly classed from this cause, we see in the common notion 
that the Roman Republic was a popular form of government. 
Look into the early ideas of the French revolutionists who aimed 
at an ideal state of freedom, and you find that the political forms 
and deeds of the Romans were their models; and even now a 
historian might be named who instances the corruptions of the 
Roman Republic as showing us what popular government leads to. 
Yet the resemblance between the institutions of the Romans and 
free institutions properly so-called, was less than that between a 
shark and a porpoise — a resemblance of general external form 
accompanying widely different internal structures. For the 
Roman Government was that of a small oligarchy within a larger 
>^ligarchy : the members of each being unchecked autocrats. A 
society in which the relatively feiiv men who had political power, 



fTS 



I 

I 



THE NEW 1:0RYISM. 7 

and were in a qnalified sense free, were so many petty despots, 
holding not only slaves and dependents but even cliildren in a 
bondage no less absolute than that in which they held their cattle, 
was, by its intrinsic nature, more nearly allied to an ordinary 
despotism than to a society of citizens politically equal. 

Passing now to our special question, we may understand the 
kind of confusion in which Liberalism has lost itself; and the 
origin of those mistaken classings of political measures which have 
misled it-^classings, as we shall see, by conspicuous external traits 
instead of by internal natures. For what, in the popular appre- 
hension and in the apprehension of those' who efEected them, were 
the changes made by Liberals in the past ? They were abolitions 
of grievances suffered by the people, or by portions of them : this 
was the common trait they had which most impressed itself on 
men's minds. They were mitigations of evils which had directly 
or indirectly been felt by large classes of citizens, as causes of 
misery or as hindrances to happiness. And since, in the minds of 
most, a rectified evil is equivalent to an achieved good, these 
measures came to be thought of as so many positive benefits ; and 
the welfare of the many came to be conceived alike by Liberal 
statesmen and Liberal voters as the aim of Liberalism. Hence 
the confusion. The gaining of a popular good, being the external 
conspicuous trait common to Liberal measures in earlier days 
(then in each case gained by a relaxation of restraints), it has 
happened that popular good has come to be sought by Liberals, 
not as an end to be indirectly gained by relaxations of restraints, 
but as the end to be directly gained. And seeking to gain it 
directly, they have used methods intrinsically opposed to those 
originally used. 

And now, having seen how this reversal of policy has arisen (or 
partial reversal, I should say, for the recent Burials Act and the 
efforts to remove all remaining religious inequalities, show con- 
tinuance of the original policy in certain directions), let us proceed 
to contemplate the extent to which it has been carried during 
recent times, and the still greater extent to which the future 
will see it carried if current ideas and feelings continue to pre- 
dominate. 

Before proceeding, it may be well to say that no reflections 
are intended on the motives which prompted one after another 



. \ 



8 THE W^ VERSV8 THE STATE. 

of these yariona restraints and dictations. These motives were 
doubtless in nearly all cases good. It mast be admitted that the 
restrictions placed by an Act of 1870, on the employment of women 
and children in Tnrkey-red dyeing works, were, in intention, no 
less philanthropic than those oi Edward VI., which prescribed the 
minimum time for which a journeyman should be retained. 
Without question, the Seed Supply (Ireland) Act of 1880, whioh 
empowered guardians to buy seed for poor tenants, and then to 
see it properly planted, was moved by a desire for public welfare 
no less great than that which in 1533 prescribed the number of 
sheep a tenant might keep, or that of 1597, which commanded that 
decayed houses of husbandry should be rebuilt. Nobody will dis- 
pute that the various measures of late years taken for restricting 
the sale of intoxicating liquors, have been taken as much with a 
view to public morals as were the measures taken of old for 
ohecking the evils of luxury; as, for instance, in the fourteenth 
century, when diet as well as dress was restricted. Everyone 
must see that the edicts issued by Henry YIII. to prevent the 
lower classes from playing dice, cards, bowls, &c., were not more 
prompted by desire for popular welfare than were the Acts passed 
of late to check gambling. 

Further, I do not intend here to question the wisdom of these 
modern interferences, which Conservatives and Liberals vie with 
one another in multiplying, any more than to question the wisdom 
of those ancient ones which they in many cases resemble. We will 
not now consider whether the plans of late adopted for preserving 
the lives of sailors, are or are not more judicious than that sweeping 
Scotch measure which, in the middle of the fifteenth century, pro- 
hibited captains from leaving harbour during the winter. Fop 
the present, it shall remain undebated whether there is a better 
warrant for giving sanitary officers powers to search certain pre- 
mises for unfit food, than there was for the law of Edward III., 
under which innkeepers at seaports were sworn to search their 
guests to prevent the exportation of money or plate. We will 
assume that there is no less sense in that clause of the Canal-boat 
Act, which forbids an owner to board gratuitously the children of 
the boatmen, than there was in the Spitalfields Acts, which, up to 
1824i, for the benefit of the artisans, forbade the manufacturers to 
fix their factories more than ten miles from the Boyal Exchange. 

We exclude, then, these questions of philanthropic motive and 



THE NEW TORYISM. 9 

wise judgment, taking both of them for granted ; and have here 
to concern ourselves solely with the compulsory nature of the 
measures which, for good or evil as the case may be, have been put 
in force during periods of Liberal ascendancy. 

To bring the illustrations within compass, let us commence 
with 1860, under the second administration of Lord Palmerston. 
In that year, the restrictions of the Factories Act were extended 
to bleaching and dyeing works; authoriiy was given to provide 
analysts of food and drink^ to be paid out of local rates ; there was 
an Act providing for inspection of gas-works, as well as for fixing 
quality of gas and limiting price; there was the act which, in addi- 
tion to further mine-inspection, made it penal to employ boys under 
twelve not attending school and unable to read and write. In 1861 
occurred an extension of the compulsory provisions of the Factories 
Act to lace- works ; power was given to poor-law guardians, Ac, to 
enforce vaccination; local boards were authorized to fix rates of 
hire for horses, ponies, mules, asses, and boats; and certain locally- 
formed bodies had given to them powers of taxing the locality 
for rural drainage and irrigation works, and for supplying water to 
cattle. In 1862, an Act was passed for restricting the employment 
of women and children in open-air bleaching; and an Act for 
making illegal a coal-mine with a single shaft, or with shafts sepa- 
rated by less than a specified space ; as well as an Act giving the 
Counci] of Medical Education the exclusive right to publish a 
Pharmacopoeia, the price of which is to be fixed by the Treasury. 
In 1863 came the extension of compulsory vaccination to Scotland, 
and also to Ireland ; there came the empowering of certain boards 
to borrow money repayable from the local rates, to employ and pay 
those out of work ; there came the authorizing of town-authorities 
to take possession of neglected ornamental spaces, and rate the 
inhabitants for their support ; there came the Bakehouses Begula- 
tion Act, which, besides specifying minimum age of employes 
occupied between certain hours, prescribed periodical lime- washing, 
three coats of paint when painted, and cleaning with hot water 
and soap at least once in six months ; and there came also an Act 
giving a magistrate authority to decide on the wholesomeness or 
unwholesomeness of food brought before him by an inspector. Of 
compulsory legislation dating from 1864, may be named an exten- 
sion of the Factories Act to various additional trades, including 
regulations for cleansing and ventilation, and specifying of certain 

2 



10 THE HAN VERSOb THE STATE. 

employes in inatcIi-i77orks, that they might not take meals on the 
premises except in the wood-cutting places. Also there were 
passed a Chimnej-Sweepers Act, an Act for further regulating 
the sale of beer in Ireland, an Act for compulsory testing of cables 
and anchors, an Act extending the PubHc Works Act of 1863, 
and the Contagious Diseases Act : which last gave the police, in 
specified places, powers which, in respect of certain classes of women, 
abolished sundry of those safeguards to individual freedom estab- 
lished in past times. The year 1865 witnessed further provision 
for the reception and temporary relief of wanderers at the cost of 
ratepayers ; another public-house closing Act ; and an Act making 
compulsory regulations for extingpiishiug fires in London. Then, 
under the Ministry of Lord John Russell, in 1866, have to be named 
an act to regulate cattle-sheds, &c., in Scotland, giving local 
authorities powers to inspect sanitary conditions and fix the numbers 
of cattle ; an Act forcing hop-growers to label their bags with the 
year and place of growth and the true weighty and giving police 
powers of search ; an Act to facilitate the building of lodging- 
houses in Ireland, and providing for regulation of the inmates ; a 
Public Health Act, under which there is registration of lodging- 
houses and limitation of occupants, with inspection and directions 
for lime-washing, &c. ; and a Public Libraries Act, giving local 
powers by which a majority can tax a minority for their books. 

Passing now to the legislation under the first Ministry of Mr. 
Gladstone, we have, in 1869, the establishment of State-telegraphy, 
with the accompanying interdict on telegraphing through any other 
agency ; we have the empowering a Secretary of State to regulate 
hired conveyances in London ; we have further and more stringent 
regulations to prevent cattle-diseases from spreading, another Beer- 
house Begulation Act, and a Sea-birds Preservation Act (ensuring 
greater mortality of fish). In 1870 we have a law .authorizing the 
Board of Public Works to make advances for landlords' improve- 
ments and for purchase by tenants ; we have the Act which enables 
the Education Department to form school-boards which shall pur- 
chase sites for schools, and may provide free schools supported by 
local rates, and enabling school-boards to pay a child's fees, to 
compel parents to send their children, &c. &c. ; we have a further 
Factories and Workshops Act, making, among other restrictions, 
some on the employment of women and children in fruit-preserving 
and fish-coring works. In 1871 we meet with an amended Mer- 



■N 



THE NEW TORYISM. 11 

cliant Shipping Act, directing officers of tlie Board of Trade to 
record the dranght of sea-going vessels leaving port; there is 
another Factory and Workshops Act, making further restrictions ; 
there is a Pedlar's Act, inflicting penalties for hawking without 
a certificate, and limiting the district within which the certifi- 
cate holds, as well as giving the police power to search pedlars' 
packs ; and there are further measures for enforcing vaccination. 
The year 1872 had, among other Acts, one which makes it illegal 
to take for hire more than one child to nurse, unless in a house 
registered by the authorities, who prescribe the number of infants 
to be received ; it had a Licensing Act, interdicting sale of spirits to 
those apparently under sixteen ; and it had another Merchant Ship, 
ping Act, establishing an annual survey of passenger steamers. Then 
in 1873 was passed the Agricultural Children's Act, which makes it 
penal for a farmer to employ a child who has neither certificate of 
elementary education nor of certain prescribed school-attendances ; 
and there was passed a Merchant Shipping Act, requiring on each 
vessel a scale showing draught and giving the Board of Trade power 
to fix the numbers of boats and life-saving appliances to be carried. 
Turn now to Liberal law-making under the present Ministry. 
We have, in 1880, a law which forbids conditional advance-notes 
in payment of sailors' wages; also a law which dictates certain 
arrangements for the safe carriage of grain-cargoes; also a law 
increasing local coercion over parents to send their children to 
school. In 1881 comes legislation to prevent trawling over clam- 
beds and bait-beds, and an interdict making it impossible to buy 
a glass of beer on Sunday in Wales. In 1882 the Board of Trade 
was authorised to grant licences to generate and sell electricity, 
and municipal bodies were enabled to levy rates for electric-h'ghting ; 
further exactions from ratepayers were authorized for facilitating 
more accessible *baths and washhouses ; and local authorities were 
empowered to make bye-laws . for securing the decent lodging 
of persons engaged in picking fruit and vegetables. Of such 
legislation during 1883 may be named the Cheap Trains Act, 
which, partly by taxing the nation to .the extent of £^0,000 
a year (in th& shape of relinquished passenger duiy), and 
partly at the cost of railway-proprietors, still further cheapens 
travelling for workmen : the Board of Trade, through the Bailway 
Commissioners, being empowered to ensure sufficiently good and 
frequent accommodation. Again, there is the Act which, under 



12 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

penalty of £10 for disobedience, forbids tbe payment of wages to 
workmen at or within pnblic-honses ; there is another Factory and 
Workshops Act, commanding inspection of white lead works (to 
see that there are provided overalls, respirators, baths, acidulated 
drinks, &c.) and of bake-houses, regulating times of employment 
in both, and prescribing in detail some constructions for the last, 
which are to be kept in a condition satisfactory to the inspectors. 

But we are fur from forming an adequate conception if we look 
only at the compulsory legislation which has actually been estab* 
blished of late years. We must look also at that which is advo- 
cated, and which threatens to be far more sweeping in range and 
stringent in character. We have lately had a Cabinet Minister, one 
of the most advanced Liberals, so-called, who pooh-poohs the plans 
of the late Government for improving industrial dwellings as so 
much 'tinkering ;'' and contends for effectual coercion to be exer- 
cised over owners of small houses, over land-owners, and over rate- 
payers. Here is another Cabinet Minister who, addressing his 
constituents, speaks slightingly of the doings of philanthropic 
societies and religious bodies to help the poor, and says that '^ the 
whole of the people of this country ought to look upon this work 
as being their own work :" that is to say, some extensive Grovern- 
ment measure is called for. Again, we have a Badical member of 
Parliament who leads a large and powerful body, aiming with 
annually-increasing promise of success, to enforce sobriety by 
giving to local majorities powers to prevent freedom of exchange 
in respect of certain commodities. Regulation of the hours of 
labour for certain classes, which has been made more and more 
general by successive extensions of the Factories Acts, is likely 
now to be made still more general : a measure is to be proposed 
bringing the employes in all shops under such regulation. There 
is a rising demand, too, that education shall be made gratis for 
all. The payment of school-fees is beginning to be denounced as a 
wrong : the State must take the whole burden. Moreover, it is 
proposed by many that the State, regarded as an undoubtedly com- 
petent judge of what constitutes good education for the poor, shall 
undertake also to prescribe good education for the middle classes — 
shall stamp the children of these, too, after a State pattern, con- 
cermng the goodness of which they have no more doubt than the 
Chinese had when they fixed theirs. Then there is the " endow- 
ment of research," of late energetically urged. Already the 



-n 



\ 



'*^'^->">V>fefi*i.-> 



THE NEW TOBYISM. 13 

Government gives eveiy year the sum of £4,000 for this purpose, 
to be distributed through the Boyal Society ; and in the absence 
of those who have strong motives for resisting the pressure of the 
interested backed by those they easily persuade, .it may by-and-by 
establish that paid " priesthood of science " long ago advocated by 
Sir David Brewster. Once more, plausible proposals are made 
that there should be organized a system of compulsory insurance, 
by which men during their early lives shall be forced to provide 
for the time when they will be incapacitated. 

Nor does enumeration of these further measures of coercive 
rule, looming on us near .at hand or in the distance, complete the 
account. Nothing more than cursory allusion has yet been made 
to that accompanying compulsion which takes the form of increased 
taxation, general and local. Partly for defraying the costs of 
carrying out these ever-multiplying coercive measures, each of 
which requires an additional stafE of officers, and partly to meet 
the outlay for new public institutions, such as board-schools, free 
libraries, public museums, baths and washhouses, recreation 
grounds, &c., &c., local rates are year afber year increased ; as the 
general taxation is increased by grants for education and to the 
departments of science and art, &c. Every one of these involves 
further coercion — ^restricts still more the freedom of the citizen. 
For the implied address accompanying every additional exaction is 
—"Hitherto you have been free to spend this portion of your 
earnings in any way which pleased you ; hereafter you shall not be 
free so to spend it, but we will spend it for the general benefit." 
Thus, either directly or indirectly, and in most cases both at once, 
the citizen is at each further stage in the growth of this compulsory 
legislation, deprived of some liberty which he previously had. 

Such, then, are the doings of the party which claims the name 
of Liberal ; and whigh calls itself Liberal as being the advocate of 
extended freedom. 

I doubt not that many a member of the party has read the 
preceding section with impatience ; wanting, as he does, to point 
out an immense oversight which he thinks destroys the validity of 
the argument. "You forget," he wishes to say, ** the fundamental 
difference between the power which, in the past, established those 
restraints that Liberalism abolished, and the power which, in the 
present, establishes tho restraints yoa call anti-Liberal. You. 



■ 



14 THE MAN VUBSUS THS STAT^^^e tlio other is 

^t legislation 
forget that the one was an irresponsible power, wh v- y^ regu- 

a responsible power. Ton forget that if by the recei^^Qp ^j^ 
of Liberals, people are variously regulated, the body 
lates them is of their own creating, and has their warra^ 
acts." 

My answer is, that I have not forgotten this difEerence, but ai^ 
prepared to contend that the difEerence is in large measure irrele- 
vant to the issue. 

In the first place, the real issue is whether the lives of citizens 
-^ are more interfered with than they were; not the nature of the 
agency which interferes with them. Take a simpler case. A \ 
member of a trades' union has joined others in establishing N 

an organization of a purely representative character. By it ^ 

he is compelled to strike if a majority so decide; he is for- 
bidden to accept work save under the conditions they dictate ; he 
is prevented from profiting by his superior ability or energy to the 
extent he might do were it not for their interdict. He cannot dis- 
obey, without abandoning those pecuniary benefits of the organi- 
zation for which he has subscribed, and bringing on himself the 
persecution, and perhaps violence, of his fellows. Is he any the . 
less coerced because the body coercing him is one which he had an 
equal voice with the rest in forming ? 

In the second place, if it be objected that the analogy is faulty, 
since the governing body of a nation, to which, as protector of the 
national life and interests, all must submit under penalty of social 
disorganization, has a far higher authority over citizens than the 
government of any private organization can have over its members ; 
then the reply is that, granting the difference, the answer made 
7 continues valid. If men use their liberty in such a way as to sur- 
render their liberty, are they thereafter any the less slaves P If 
people by B^pWnsoUe elect a man despot over them, do they remain 
free because the despotism was of their own making P Are the 
coercive edicts issued by him to be regarded as legitimate because 
they are the ultimate outcome. of their own votes P As well might 
it be argued that the East African, who breaks a spear in another'is 
presence that he may so become bondsman to him, still retains his 
liberty because he freely chose his master. 

Finally if any, not without marks of irritation as I can imagine, 
repudiate this reasoning, and say that there is no true parallelism 
between the relation of peoplo to government where an irresponsible 



'i ..■ •-fwj... 'mI 



* r. It.. 



THE NEW TOBTISH. 16 

singlo ruldr has been permanently elected, and tlie relation where a 
responsible representative body is maintained, and from time to 
time re-elected; then there comes the nltimate reply — ^an altogether 
heterodox reply — ^by which most will be greatly astonished. This 
reply is, that these mnltitadinons restraining acts are not defensible 
on the groand that they proceed from a popularly-chosen body; for 
that the authority of a popularly-chosen body is no more to be 
regarded as an unlimited authority than the authority of a monarch ; 
and that as true Liberalism in the past disputed the assumption of 
a monarch's unlimited authority, so true Liberalism in the present 
will dispute the assumption of unlimited parliamentary authority. 
Of this, however, more anon. Here I merely indicate it as an 
nltimate answer. 

Meanwhile it sufl^es to point out that until recently, just as of 
old, true Liberalism was shown by its acts to be moving towards 
the theory of a limited parliamentary authority. All these aboli- 
tions of restraints over religious beliefs and observances, over 
exchange and transit, over trade-combinations and the travelling of 
artisans, over the publication of opinions, theological or political, 
&c., &c., were tacit assertions of the desirableness of limitation. 
Li the same way that the abandonment of sumptuary laws, of 
laws forbidding this or that kind of amusement, of laws dictating 
modes of farming, and many others of like meddling nature, which 
took place in early days, was an implied admission that the Stato 
ought not to interfere in such matt^ers; so those removals of 
hindrances to individual activities of one pr other kind, which the 
Liberalism of the last generation effected, were practical confes- 
sions that in these directions, fcoo, the sphere of governmental 
action should be narrowed. And this recognition of the propriety 
of restricting governmental action was a preparation for restricting 
it in theory. One of the most familiar political truths is that, in 
the course of social evolution, usage precedes law ; and that when 
usage has been well established it becomes law by receiving autho- 
ritative endorsement and defined form. Manifestly then, Liberalism 
in the past, by its practice of limitation, was preparing the way for 
the principle of limitation. 

But returning from these more general considerations to the 
special question, 1 emphasize the reply that the liberty which a 
citizen enjoys is to be measured, not by the nature of the govern^ 
mental machinery he lives under, whether representative oi other. 






16 THE ICAK VEBSUS THB 8TATEL 

bat by tbe relative pancity of tbe r egtramts i t imposes on bim; 
and thaty wbetber tbis macbinery is or is not one ibat be bas 
sbared in making, its actions are not of the kind pniper to 
Liberalism if tbej increase sacb restraints beyond tbose wbicb are 
needful for preventing bim from directly or indirectly aggressing 
on bis fellows — needful, that is, for maintaining tbe liberties of bis 
fellows against bis invasions of them : restraints wbicb are, there- 
fore, to be distinguished as negatively coercive, not positively 
coercive. ' "~ 



\ Probably, however, tbe liberal, and still more tbe sub-species 

'; Badical, who more than any other in these latter days seems under 

j tbe impression that so long as be bas a good end in view be is 

warranted in exercising over men all tbe coercion be is able, wiU 

■ continue to protest. Knowing that bis aim is popular benefit of 

some kind, to be achieved in some way, and believing that the Tory 

is, contrariwise, prompted by class-interest and the desire to mun- 

tain class-power, be will regard it as palpably absurd to group bim 

as one of tbe same genus, and will scorn tbe reasoning used to 

prove that be belongs to it. 

Perhaps an analogy will help bim to see its validity. If, away 
in tbe far East, where personal government is tbe only form of 
government known, be beard from tbe inhabitants an account of a 
struggle by wbicb tbey bad deposed a cruel and vicious despot, and 
put in bis place one wbose acts proved bis desire for tbeir welfare — 
if, after listening to tbeir self-gratulatious, be told them that they 
bad not essentially changed tbe nature of tbeir government, be 
would greatly astonish them; and probably be would have diffi- 
. culty in making them understand that tbe substitution of a bene- 
volent despot for a malevolent despot, still left tbe government a 
despotism* Similarly witb Toryism as rightly conceived. Standing 
as it does for coercion by tbe State versus the freedom of tbe indi- 
vidual, Toryism remains Toryism, wbetber it extends tbis coercion 
for selfish or unselfisb reasons. As certainly as the despot is still 
a despot, wbetber bis motives for arbitrary rule are good or bad ; 
so certainly is the Tory still a Tory, wbetiier be bas egoistic or al- 
truistic motives for using State-power to restrict tbe liberty of tbe 
citizen, beyond tbe degree required for maintaining the liberties of 
other citizens. Tbe altruistic Tory as well as tbe egoistic Tory 
belongs to tbe genos Tory ; thougb be forms a new species of tbe 



THE NEW TORYISM. 17 

genus. And botli stand in distinct contrast vnth the Liberal as 
defined in the days when Liberals were rightly so called, and when 
the definition was — " one who advocates greater freedom from 
restraint^ especially in political institntions." 

Thns, then, is justified the paradox I set out with. As we have 
seen, Toryism and Liberalism originally emerged, the one from 
militancy and the other from industrialism. The one stood for the 
regime of status and the other for the regime of contract — the one 
for that system of compulsory co-operation which accompanies the 
legal inequality of classes, and the other for that voluntary co- 
operation which accompanies their legal equality ; and beyond all 
question the early acts of the two parties were respectively for the 
maintenance of agencies which effect this compulsory co-operation, 
and for the weakening or curbing of them. Manifestly the 
implication is that, in so far as it has been extending the system 
of compulsion, what is now called Liberalism is a new form of 
Toryism. 

How truly this is so, we shall see still more clearly on looking 
at the facts the other side upwards^ which we will presently do. 



Note. — By sundry newspapers which noticed this article when 
it was originally published, the meaning of the above paragraphs 
was supposed to be that Liberals and Tories have changed places. 
This, however, is by no means the implication. A new species of 
Tory may arise without disappearance of the original species. 
When saying, as on 'p&ge 8, that in our days " Conservatives and 
Liberals vie with one another in multiplying" interferences, I 
clearly implied the belief that while Liberals have taken to coercive 
legislation. Conservatives have not abandoned it. Nevertheless, it 
is true that the laws made by Liberals are so greatly increasing 
the compulsions and restraints exercised over citizens, that among 
Conservatives who suffer from this aggressiveness there is growing 
up a tendency to resist it. Proof is furnished by the fact that 
the " Liberty and Property Defence League," largely consisting 
of CoDservatives, has taken for its motto *' Individualism veratu 
Socialism." So that if the present drift of things continues, it 
may by and by really happen that the Tories will be defenders 
of liberties which the Liberals, in pursuit of what they think 
popular welfare, trample under foot. 



u • 



\ • 



THE COMING SLAVERY. 



The kinsliip of pity to love is shown among other ways in this, 
that it idealizes its object. Sympathy with one in suffering 
suppresses, for the time being, remembrance of his transgressions. 
The feeling which vents itself in " poor follow ! " on seeing one in 
agony, excludes the thought of "bad fellow," which might at 
another time arise. Naturally, then, if the wretched are unknown 
or but vaguely known, all the demerits they may have are 
ignored; and thus it happens that when, as just now, the miseries 
of the poor are depicted, they are thought of as the miseries of the 
deserving poor, instead of being thought of, as in large measure 
they should be, as the miseries of the undeserving poor. Those 
whose hardships are set forth in pamphlets and proclaimed in 
sermons and speeches which echo throughout society, are assumed 
to be all worthy souls, grievously wronged ; and none of them are 
thought of as bearing the penalties of their own misdeeds. 

On hailing a cab in a London street, it is surprising how 
frequently the door is officiously opened by one who expects to get 
something for his trouble. The surprise lessens after counting 
the many loungers about tavern-doors, or after observing the 
quickness with which a street-performance, or procession, draws 
from neighbouring slums and stable-yards a group of idlers. 
Seeing how numerous they are in every small area, it becomes 
manifest that tens of thousands of such swarm through London. 
"They have no work," you say. Say rather that they either 
refuse work or quickly turn themselves out of it. They are 
simply good-for-nothings, who in one way or other live on the 
good-for-somethings — ^vagrants and sots, criminals and those on 
the way to crime, youths who are burdens on hard-worked parents, 



T^E COMIMG SLAYEBT. 19 

men who appropriate the wages of their wives, fellows who share 
the gains of prostitates ; and then, less visible and less nnmeronS| 
there is a corresponding class of women. 

Is it natural that happiness should be the lot of such p or is it 
natural that they should bring nnhappiness on themselves and 
those connected with them P Is it not manifest that there must 
exist in our midst an immense amount of misery which is a normal 
result of misconduct, and ought not to be dissociated from it ? 
There is a notion, always more or less prevalent and just now 
vociferously expressed, that all social sufEering is removable, and 
that it is the duty of somebody or other to remove it. Both these 
beliefs are false. To separate pain from ill-doing is to fight against 
the constitution of things, and will be followed by fsur more pain. 
Saving men from the natural penalties of dissolute living, even- 
tually necessitates the infliction of artificial penalties in solitary 
cells, on tread-wheels, and by the lash. I suppose a dictum, on 
which the current creed and the creed of science are at one, may 
be considered to have as high an authority as can be found. Well, 
the command " if any would not work neither should he eat," is 
simply a Christian enuncination of that universal law of Nature 
under which life has reached its present height — ^the law thafc a 
creature not energetic enough to maintain itself must die : the sole 
dilEerence being that the law which in the one case is to be arti- 
ficially enforced, is, in the other case, a natural necessity. And yet 
this particular tenet of their religion which science so manifestly 
justifies, is the one which Christians seem least inclined to accept. 
The current assumption is that there should be no suffering, and 
that society is to blame for that which exists. 

. " Bat surely we are not without responsibilities, even when the 
Buffering is that of the unworthy ? " 

If the meaning of the word ''we" be so expanded as to 
include with ourselves our ancestors, and especially our ancestral 
legislators, I agree. I admit that those who made, and modified, 
and administered, the old Poor Law, were responsible for pro- 
ducing an appalling amount of demoralization, which it will take 
more than one generation to remove. I admit, too, the partial 
responsibility of recent and present law-makers for regulations 
which have brought into being a permanent body of tramps, 
who ramble from union to union ; and also their responsibility for 
maintaining a constant suoply ai felons by sending back convicts 



20 THE ICAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

into society nnder such conditions that they are almost compelled 
again to commit crimes. Moreoyer, I admit that the philanthropic 
are not without their share of responsihility ; since, that they may 
aid the ofiEspring of the nnworthy, they disadvantage the ofEspring 
of the worthy through burdening their parents by increased local 
rates* Nay, I eyen admit that these swarms of good-for-nothings, 
fostered and multiplied by public and private agencies, have, by 
sundry mischievous meddlings, been made to suffer more than 
they would otherwise have suffered. Are these the responsibilities 
meant P I suspect not. 

But now, leaving the question of responsibilities, however con- 
ceived, and considering only the evil itself, what shall we say of its 
treatment P Let me begin with a fact, 

A late uncle of mine, the Rev. Thomas Spencer, for some 
twenty years incumbent of Hinton Charterhouse, near Bath, no 
sooner entered on his parish duties than he proved himself anxious 
for the welfare of the poor, by establishing a school, a library, a 
clothing club, and land-allotments, besides building some model 
cottages. Moreover, up to 1883 he was a pauper's friend — always 
for .the pauper against the overseer. There presently came, however, 
the debates on the Poor Law, which impressed him with the evils 
of the system then in force. Though an ardent philanthropist he 
was not a timid sentimentalist. The result was that, immediately 
the new Poor Law was passed, he proceeded to carry out its 
provisions in his parish. Almost universal opposition was 
encountered by him : not the poor only being his opponents, but 
even the farmers on whom came the burden of heavy poor-rates. 
For, strange to say, their interests had become apparently identified 
with the maintenance of this system which taxed them so largely. 
The explanation is that there had grown up the practice of paying 
out of the rates a part of the wages of each farm-servant — *' make- 
wages," as the sum was called. And though the farmers contri- 
buted most of the fund from which '' make-wages " were paid, 
yet, since all other ratepayers contributed, the farmers seemed 
to gain by the arrangement. My uncle, however, not easily 
deterred, faced all this opposition and enforced the law. The 
result was that in two years the rates were reduced from £700 a 
year to £200 a year ; while the condition of the parish was greatly 
improved. ''Those who had hitherto loitered at the corners of 



I * 



THE COMING SLAYIOtT. ' 21 

the streets, or at the doors of the beer-shops, had something else 
to do, and one after another thej obtained employment ; ** so that 
out of a population of 800, only 15 had to be sent as incapable 
paupers to the Bath Union (when that wieui formed), in place of 
the 100 who received out-door relief a short time before. If it be 
said that the £20 telescope which, a few years af fcer, his parishioners 
preisenied to my uncle, marked only the gratitude of the rate- 
payers ; then my reply is the fact that when, some years later still, 
having killed himself by overwork in pursuit of popular welfare, 
he was taken to Hinton to be buried, the procession which followed 
him to the grave included not the well-to-do only but the poor. 

Several motives have prompted this brief narrative. One is the 
wish to prove that sympathy with the people and self-sacrificing 
efforts on their behalf, do not necessarily imply approval of 
gratuitous aids. Another is the desire to show that benefit may 
result, not from multiplication of artificial appliances to mitiga,te 
distress, but, contrariwise, from diminution of them. And a 
further purpose I have in view is that of preparing the way for an 
analogy. 

Under another form and in a different sphere, we are now 
yearly extending a system which is identical in nature with the 
system of " make- wages *' under the old Poor Law. Little as 
politicians recognize the fact, it is nevertheless demomstrable that 
these various public appliances for working-class comfort, which 
they are supplying at the cost of ratepayers, are intrinsically of the 
same nature as those which, in past times, treated the farmer's man 
as half-labourer and half-pauper. In either case the worker 
receives in return for what he does, money wherewith to buy 
certain of the things he wants ; while, to procure the rest of them 
for him, money is furnished out of a common fund raised by taxes. 
What matters it whether the things supplied by ratepayers for 
nothing, insiead of by the employer in payment, are of this kind 
or that kind ? the principle is the same. For sums received let us 
substitute the commodities and benefits purchased; and then see 
how the matter stands. In old Poor- Law times, the farmer gave 
for work done the equivalent, say of house-rent, bread, clothes, and 
fire; while the ratepayers practically supplied the man and his 
family with their shoes, tea, sugar, candles, a little bacon, &o. The 
division is, of course, arbitrary ; but unquestionably the farmer and 
the ratopapers furnished these things between them. At the 



22 THE MAN VERSUS tHE STATU 

present time tlie artisan receives from his employer in wages, the 
eqnivalent of the consumable commodities he wants ; while from 
the public comes satisfaction for others of his needs and desires. 
At the cost of ratepayers he has in some cases, and will presently 
have in more, a house at less than its comihercial value ; for of 
course when, as in Liverpool, a municipality spends nearly 
£200,000 in pulling down and reconstructing low-clasd dwellings, 
and is about to spend as much again, the implication is that in 
some way the ratepayers supply the poor with more accommo- 
dation than the rents they pay would otherwise have brought. 
The artisan further receives from them, in schooling for his 
children, much more than he pays for; and there is every pro- 
bability that he will presently receive it from them gratis. The 
ratepayers also satisfy what desire he may have for books and 
newspapers, and comfortable places to read them in. In some 
cases too, as in Manchester, gymnasia for his children of both 
sexes, as well as recreation grounds, are provided. That is to say, 
he obtains from a fund raised by local taxes, certain benefits beyond 
those which the sum received for his labour Enables him to 
purchase. The sole difEerence, then, between this system and the 
old system of *' make- wages/' is between the kinds of satisfactions 
obtained; and this difference does not in the least afEect the 
nature of thS arrangement. 

Moreover, the two are pervaded by substantially the same 
illusion. In the one case, as in the other, what looks like a gratis 
benefit is not a gratis benefit. The amount which, under the old Poor 
Law, the half-pauperized labourer received from the parish to eke 
out his weekly income, was not really, as it appeared, a bonus ; for 
it was accompanied by a substantially-equivalent decrease of his 
wages, as was quickly proved when the system was abolished and 
the wages rose. Just so is it with these seeming boons received 
by working people in towns. I do not refer only to the fact that 
they unawares pay in part through the raised rents of their dwells 
ings (when they are not actual ratepayers) ; but I refer to the fact 
that the wages received by them are, like the wages of the farm- 
labourer, diminished by these public burdens falling on employers. 
Bead the accounts coming of late from Lancashire concerning the 
cotton-strike, containing proofs, given by artisans themselves, that 
the margin of profit is so narrow that the less skilful manufacturerSi 
as well as those with deficient capital, fail, and that the companies 



/ 



THE COMING SLAVERY. 28 

of co-operators wlio compete with them can rarely hold their own ; 
and then consider what ia the implication respecting wages. Among 
the costs of production have to be reckoned taxes, general and 
local. If, as in our large towns, the local rates now amount to 
one-third of the rental or more — if the employer has to pay this, 
not on his private dwelling only, bi;t on his business-premises, 
factories, warehouses, or the like ; it results that the interest on 
his capital must be diminished by that amount, or the amount must 
be taken from the wages-fund, or partly one and partly the other. " 
And if competition among capitalists in the same business and in 
other businesses, has the effect of so keeping down interest that 
while some gain others lose, and not a few are ruijaed — if capital, 
not getting adequate interest, flows elsewhere and leaves labour 
unemployed; then it is manifest that the choice for the artisan 
under such conditions, lies between diminished amount of work or 
diminished rate of payment for it. Moreover, for kindred reasons 
these local burdens raise the costs of the things he consumes. The 
charges made by distributors are, on the average, determined 
by the current rates of interest on capital used in distributing 
busii;iesses ; and the extra costs of carrying on such businesses have 
to be paid for by extra prices. So that as in the past the rural 
worker lost in one way what he gained in another, so in the present 
does the urban worker: there being, too, in both cases, the loss 
entailed on him by the cost of administration and the waste ac- 
companying it. 

" But what has alJ this to do with * the coming slavery ' ? " will 
perhaps be asked. Nothing directly, but a good deal indirectly, as 
we shall see after yet another preliminary section. 

It is said that when railways were first opened in Spain, peasants 
standing on the tracks were not unfrequently run over ; and that 
the blame fell on the engine-drivers for not stopping : rarai ex- 
periences having yielded no conception of the momentum of a large 
mass moving at a high velocity. 

The incident is recalled to me on contemplating the ideas of the 
so-called " practical " politician, into whose mind there enters no 
thought of such a thing as political momentum, still less of a political 
momentum which, instead of dimiaishing or remaining constant, 
increases. The theory on which he daily proceeds is that the 
change caused by his measure will stop where he intends it to 



24 THE MAN VER8V3 THE STATE. 

stop. He contemplates intently tlie things his act will acaieve, bnt 
thinks little of the remoter issues of tha movement his act sets np, 
and still less its collateral issues. When, in war-time, " food for 
powder " was to be provided by encouraging population — ^when Mr. 
Pitt said, " Let us make relief in cases where there are a number of 
children a matter of right and honour, instead of a ground for 
opprobrium and contempt ; "* it was not expected that the poor-rates 
would he quadrupled in fifty years, that women with many bastards 
would be preferred as wives to modest women, because of their 
incomes from the parish, and that hosts of ratepayers would be 
pulled down into the ranks of pauperisiii. Legislators who in 1833 
voted £20,000 a year to aid in building school-houses, never sup- 
posed that the step they then took would lead to forced contribu- 
tions, local and general, now amounting to £6,000,000; they did 
not intend to establish the principle that A should be made re- 
sponsible for educating B's offspring; they did not dream of a 
compulsion which would deprive poor widows of the help of their 
elder children ; and still less did they dream that their successors, 
by requiring impoverished parents to apply to Boards of Guardians 
to pay the fees which School Boards would not remit, would initiate 
a habit of applying to Boards of Guardians and so cause pauperiza- 
tion, f Neither did those who in 1834 passed an Act regulating the 
labour of women and children in certain factories, imagine that the 
system they were beginning would end in the restriction and in- 
spection of labour in all kinds of producing establishments where 
more than fifty people are employed ; nor did they conceive that 
the inspection provided would grow to the extent of requiring that 
before a " young person " is employed in a factory, authority must 
be given by a certifying surgeon, who, by personal examination (to 
which no limit is placed) has satisfied himself that there is no in- 
capacitating disease or bodily infirmity : his verdict determining 
whether the " young person *' shall earn wages or not. J Even less, 
as I say, does the politician who plumes himself on the practical- 
ness of his aims, conceive the indirect results which will follow 
the direct results of his measures. Thus, to take a case connected 
with one named above, it was not intended through the system of 
" payment by results," to do anything more than give teachers aU 

• Hansard's ParUameniary RUtory^ 32, p. 710. 

t Fortnightly Revieto^ January, 1884, p. 17. 

X Factories and Workshops Act, 41 and 42 Yio. cap. 16. 



THBS COMING SLAVERY. 25 

efficient stimnlns: it was not 'supposed that in numerous cases 
their healtli would give way nnder the stimnlns ; it was not 
expected that they would be led to adopt a cramming system and 
to put undue pressure on dull and weak children, often to their 
great injury ; it was not foreseen that in many cases a bodily en- 
feeblement would be caused which no amount of grammar and 
geography can compensate for. The licensing of public-houses 
was simply for maintaining public order : those who dievised it 
never imagined that there would result an organized interest 
powerfully influencing elections in an unwholesome way. Nor 
did it occur to the " practical " politicians who provided a com- 
pulsory load-line for merchant vessels, that the pressure of ship- 
owners* interests would habitually cause the putting of the 
load-line at the very highest limit, and that from precedent to 
precedent, tending ever in the same direction, the load-line would 
gradually rise in the better class of ships ; as from good authority 
I learn that it has already done« Legislators who, some forty 
years ago, by Act of Parliament compelled railway-companies to 
supply cheap locomotion, would have ridiculed the belief, had it 
been expressed, that eventually their Act would punish the com- 
panies which improved the supply ; and yet this was the result to 
companies which began to carry third-class passengers by fast 
trains ; since a penalty to the amount of the passenger-duty was 
inJBicted on them for every third-class passenger so carried. To 
which instance concerning railways, add a far more striking one 
disclosed by comparing the railway policies of England and France. 
The law-makers who provided for the ultimate lapsing of French 
railways to the State, never conceived the possibility that inferior 
travelling facilities would result — did not foresee that reluctance 
to depreciate the value of property eventually coming to the State, 
would negative the authorization of competing lines, and that in 
the absence of competing lines locomotion would be relatively 
costly, slow, and infrequent ; for, as Sir Thomas Farrer has lately 
shown, the traveller in England has great advantages over the 
French traveller in the economy, swiftness, and frequency with 
which his journeys can be made. 

But the "practical "politician who, in spite of such experiences 
repeated generation after generation, goes on thinking only of 
proximate results, naturally never thinks of results still more 

remote, still more general, and still more important than those just 

8 



26 THE MAN VERSUa^^S^ STATE. 

exemplified. To repeat the metaptor d^4^4^v®— ^® ^^T®' ^^« 
whether the political momentnm set up hfWiiS^'^^; ^^ ^"?® 
cases decreasing but in other cases greatly increariq^s^ ^^ ^"^^ 
not have the same general direction with other like jdmSS^ ' ^ 
whether it may not join them in presently producing an AggS^^ 
energy working changes never thought of. Dwelling only ob 4k 
effects of his particular stream of legislation, and not observing 
how other such streams already existing, and still other streams 
which will follow his initiative, pursue the same average course, 
it never occui*s to him that they may presently unite into a volu- 
minous flood utterly changing the face of things. Or to leave 
figures for a more literal statement, he is unconscious of the truth 
that he is helping to form a certain type of social organization, 
and that kindred measures, effecting kindred changes of organiza- 
,tion, tend with ever-increasing force to make that type general ; 
until, passing a certain point, the proclivity towards it becomes 
irresistible. Just as each society aims when possible to produce in 
other societies a structure akin to its own — just as among the 
Greeks, the Spartans and the Athenians struggled to spread their 
respective political institutions, or as, at the time of the French 
Bevolution, the European absolute monarchies aimed to re-establish 
absolute monarchy in France while the Bepublic encouraged the 
formation of other republics ; so within every society, each species 
of structure tends to propagate itself. Just as the system of 
voluntary co-operation by companies, associations, unions, to 
achieve business ends and other ends, spreads throughout a com- 
munity ; so does the antagonistic system of compulsory co-opera- 
tion- under State-agencies spread; and the larger becomes its 
extension the more power of spreading it gets. The question of 
questions for the politician should ever be—** What type of social 
structure am I tending to produce ? " But this is a question he 
never entertains. 

Here we will entertain it for him. Let us now observe the 
general course of recent changes, with the accompanying current 
of ideas, and see whither they are carrying us. 

The blank form of a question daily asked is — " We have already 
done this ; why should we not do that ? *' And the regard for pre- 
cedent suggested by it, is ever pushing on regulative legislation. 
Having had brought within their sphere of operation more and 



THE COMING SLAVERY, 27 

more immerotis businesses, the Acts restricting honrs of employ- 
ment and dictating the treatment of workers are now to be made 
applicable to shops. From inspecting lodging-honses to limit the 
nnmbers of occupants and enforce sanitary conditions, we have 
passed to inspecting all houses below a certain rent in which there 
are members of more than one family, and are now passing to a 
kindred inspection of all small houses.* The buying and working 
of telegraphs by the State is made a reason for urging that the 
State should buy and work the railways. Supplying children with 
food for their minds by public agency is being followed in some 
cases by supplying food for their bodies ; and after the practice 
has been made gradually more general, we may anticipate that the 
supply, now proposed to be made gratis in the one case, will 
eventually be proposed to be made gratis in the other : the argu- 
ment that good bodies as well as good minds are needful to make 
good citizens, being logically urged as a reason for the extension.t 
And then, avowedly proceeding on the precedents furnished by the 
church, the school, and the reading-room, all publicly provided, it 
is contended that ** pleasure, in the sense it is now generally 
admitted, needs legislating for and organizing at least as much 
as work."J 

Not precedent only prompts this spread, but also the necessity 
which arises for supplementing ineffective measures, and for 
dealing with the artificial evils continually caused. Failure does 
not destroy faith in the agencies employed, but merely suggests 
acre stringent use of such agencies or wider ramifications of them, 
laws to check intemperance, beginning in early times and coming 
cDwn to our own times, when further restraints on the sale of 
intoxicating liquors occupy nights every session, not having done 
what was expected, there come demands for more thorough-going 
laws, locally preventing the sale altogether; and here, as in 
America, these will doubtless be followed by demands that pre* 
vention shall be made universal. All the many appliances for 

^ See letter of Local Gk)yenmient Board, Times, Janimiy 2, 1884. 

t Verification comes more promptly than I expected. This article has been 
standing in type since January 80, and in the interval, namely on March 18 
[the article was pablished on April 1], the London School Board resolTod to 
apply for authorify to use local charitable funds for supplying gratis m.eals 
and clothing to indigent children. Presently the definition of ''indigent" will 
be widened ; more children will be included, and more funds asked for. 

X Fwrtnightty Seview, January, 1884, p. 21. 



28 THE liAK VERSUS THE STATE. 

"stamping out" epidemic diseases not having sncoeeded in 
preyentiug outbreaks of small-pox, feyers, and the like, a further 
remedy is appHed for in the shape of police-power to search houses 
for diseased persons, and authority for medical officers to examine 
any one they think fit, to see whether he or she is suffering from 
an infectious or contagious malady. Habits of improvidence 
having for generations been cultivated by the Poor-Law, and the 
improvident enabled to multiply, the evils produced by compulsory 
charity are now proposed to be met by compulsory insurance. 

The extension of this policy, causing extension of corresponding 

ideas, fosters everywhere the tacit assumption that Government 

should step in whenever anything is not going right, " Surely you 

would not have this misery continue ! '* exclaims some one, if you 

. hint a demurrer to much that is now being said and done. 

Observe what is implied by this exclamation. It takes for granted, 

} first, that all suffering ought to be prevented, which is not true : 

"f* much suffering is curative, and prevention of it is prevention of a 

] remedy. In the second place, it takes for granted that every evil 

, can be removed : the truth being that with the existing defects of 

^ human nature, many evils can only be thrust out of one place or 

' form into another place or form — often being increased by the 

change. The exclamation also implies the unhesitating belief, 

here especially concerning us, that evils of all kinds should be dealt 

with by the State. There does not occur the inquiry whether 

there are at work other agencies capable of dealing with evils, and 

whether the evils in question may not be among those which are 

best dealt with by these other agencies. And obviously, the more 

numerous governmental interventions become, the more confirmed 

does this habit of thought grow, and the more loud and perpetual 

the demands for intervention. 

Every extension of the regulative policy involves an addition to 
the regulative agents — a further growth of officialism and an 
increasing power of the organization formed of officials. Take a 
pair of scales with many shot in the one and a few in the other. 
Lift shot after shot out of the loaded scale and put it into the 
tmloaded scale. Presently you will produce a balance ; and if you 
go on, the position of the scales will be reversed. Suppose the 
beam to be unequally divided, and let the lightly loaded scale be at 
the end of a very long arm ; then the transfer of each shot, pro- 
ducing a much greater effect, will far sooner bring about a change 




THE COMING SLAVEKY, 29 

of position. I use tlie figure to illustrate what results from trans- 
ferring one individual after another from the regulated mass of the 
community to the regulating structures. The transfer weakens 
the one and strengthens the other in a far greater degree than is 
implied by the relative change of numbers. A comparf^tively 
small body of officials, coherent, having common interests, and 
acting under central authority, has an immense advantage over an 
incoherent public which has no settled policy, and can be brought 
to act unitedly only under strong provocation. !Qence an organiza- 
tion of officials, once x>8>ssing a certain stage of growth, becomes 
less and less resistible; as we see in the bureaucracies of the 
Continent. 

Not only does the power of resistance of the regulated part 
decrease in a geometrical ratio as the regulating part increases, but 
the private interests of many in the regulated part itself, make the 
change of ratio still more rapid. In every circle conversations show 
that now, when the passing of competitive examinations renders 
them eligible for the public service, youths are being educated in 
such ways that they may pass them and get employment under 
Government. One consequence is that men who might otherwise 
reprobate some further growth of officialism, are led to look on it 
with tolerance, if not favourably, as offering possible careers for'' 
those dependent on them and those related to them. Any one 
who remembers the numbers of upper-class and middle-class 
families anxious to place their children, will see that no small 
encouragement to the spread of legislative control is now coming 
from those who, but for the personal interests thus arising, would 
be hostile to it. 

This pressiDg desire for careers is enforced by the preference for 
careers which are thought respectable. " Even if his salary is 
small, his occupation will be that of a gentleman," thinks the 
father, who wants to get a Government-clerkship for his son. And 
this relative dignity of State-servants as compared with those 
occupied in business, increases as the administrative organization 
becomes a larger and more powerful element in society, and tends 
more and more to fix the standard of honour. The prevalent 
ambition with a young Frenchman is to get some small official post 
in his locality, to rise thence to a place in the local centre of 
government, and finally to reach some head office in Paris. And 
in Russia, where that universality of State-iegulation which charac- 



80 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

terizes the militant type of society has been carried furthest, we 
see this ambition pushed to its extreme. Says Mr. Wallace, 
quoting a passage from a play :*-" All men, even shopkeepers and 
cobblers, aim at becoming officers, and the man who has passed his 
whole life without official rank seems to be not a human being."* 

These various influences working from above downwards meet 
with an increasing response of expectations and solicitations pro* 
ceeding from below upwards. The hard* worked and over-burdened 
who form the great majority, and still more the incapables per- 
petually helped who are ever led to look for more help, are ready 
supporters of schemes which promise them this or the other benefit 
by State agency, and ready believers of those who tell them that 
such benefits can be given, and ought to be given. They listen 
with eager faith to all builders of political air-castles, from Oxford 
gradaates down to Irish irreconcilables ; and every additional 
tax-sapported appliance for their welfare raises hopes of further 
ones. Indeed the more numerous public instrumentalities be- 
come, tho more is there generated in citizens the notion that 
everything is to be done for them, and nothing by them. Each 
generation is made less familiar with the attainment of desired 
ends by individual actions or private combinations, and more 
&miliar with the attainment of them by governmental agencies ; 
nntil, eventually, governmental agencies come to be thought of 
as the only available agencies. This result was well shown in the 
recent Trades-Unions Congress at Paris. The English delegates, 
reporting to their constituents, said that between themselves and 
their foreign colleagues "the point of difference was the extent to 
which the State should be asked to protect laboar:" reference 
being thus made to the fact, conspicuous in the reports of the 
proceedings, that the French delegates always invoked govern- 
mental power as the only means of satisfying their wishes. 

The diffusion of education has worked, and will work still more, 
in the same direction. "We must educate our masters," is the 
well-known saying of a Liberal who opposed the last extension of 
the franchise. Yes, if the education were worthy to be so called, 
and were relevant to the political enlightenment needed, much 
might be hoped from it. But knowing rules of syntax, being able 
to add up correctly, having geographical information, and a 
memory stocked with the dates of kings' accessions and generals' 

• Ru98ia, L 422. 



THE COMING SLAVERY. 31 

yictories, no more implies fitness to form political conclusions than 
acquirement of skill in drawing implies ezpertness in telegraphing, 
or tlian ability to play cricket implies proficiency on the violin. 
" Surely,** rejoins some one, " facility in reading opens the way to 
political knowledge." Doubtless ; but will the way be followed P 
Table-talk proves that nine out of ten people read what amuses 
them or interests them rather than what instructs them ; and 
that the last thing they read is something which tells them disa- 
greeable truths or dispels groundless hopes. That poptdar edu- 
cation results in an extensive reading of publications which foster 
pleasant illusions rather than of those which insist on hard reali- 
ties, is beyond question. Says *' A Mechanic," writing in the Pall 
Mall Chaette of December 3, 1883 : — 

''Improved education Instils the desire for culture— culture instils the 
desire for many things as yet quite beyond working men's reach .... in 
the furious* competition to which the present age is given up they are 
utterly impossible to the poorer classes ; hence they are discontented with 
things as they are, and the more educated the more discontented. Hence, 
too, Mr. Buskin and Mr. Morris are regarded as true prophets by many 
of us." 

And that the connexion of cause and effect here alleged is a "real 
one, we may see clearly enough in the present state of Germany. 

Being possessed of electoral power, as are now the mass of those 
who are thus led to nurture sanguine anticipations of benefits to be 
obtained by social reorganization, it results that whoever seeks 
their votes must at least refrain from exposing their mistaken 
beliefs; even if he does not yield to the temptation to express 
agreement with them. Every candidate for Parliament is prompted 
to propose or support some new piece of ad captandum legislation. 
Nay, even the chiefs of parties — these anxious to retain office and 
those to wrest it from them- — severally aim to get adherents by 
outbidding one another. . Each seeks popularity by promising 
more than his opponent has promised, as we have lately seen. And 
then, as divisions in Parliament show us, the traditional loyalty 
to leaders overrides questions concerning the intrinsic propriety of 
proposed measures. Representatives are unconscientious enough 
to vote for Bills which they believe to be wrong in principle, be- 
cause party-needs and regard for the next election demand it. And 
thus a vicious policy is strengthened even by those who see its 
viciousness. 



32 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

, MeanwUle there goes on out-of-doors an actire propaganda to 
which all these influences are ancillary. Commnnistio theories, 
partially indorsed by one Act of Parliament after another, and 
tacitly if not avowedly jforvoured by numerous publio men seeking 
supporters, are being advocated more and more vociferously under 
one or other form by popular leaders, and urged on by organized 
societies. There is the movement for land-nationalization which, 
aiming at a system of land-tenure equitable in the abstract, is, as all 
the world knows, pressed by Mr. George and his friends with avowed 
disregard for the just claims of existing owners, and as the basis of a 
scheme going more than half-way to State-socialism. And then 
there is the thorough-going Democratic Federation of Mr. Hyndman 
and his adherents. We are told by them that " the handful of 
marauders who now hold possession [of the land] have and can 
have no right save brute force against the tens of millions whom 
they wrong.** They exclaim against " the shareholders who have 
been allowed to lay hands upon (!) our great railway communica- 
tions." They condemn " above all, the active capitalist class, the 
loan-mongers, the farmers, the mine exploiters, the contractors, the 
middle-men, the factory-lords — ^these, the modem slave drivers** 
who exact *' more and yet more surplus value out of the wage- 
slaves whom they employ." And they think it " high time " that 
trade should be " removed from the control of individual greed."* 
It remains to point out that the tendencies thus variously 
displayed, are being strengthened by pre^-advocacy, daily more 
pronounced. Journalists, always chary of saying that which is 
distasteful to their readers, are some of them going with the stream 
and adding to its force. Legislative meddlings which they would 
once have condemned they now pass in silence, if they do not 
advocate tbem; and they speak of laissez-faire as an exploded 
doctrine. "People are no longer frightened at the thought of 
socialism," is the statement which meets us one day. On another 
day, a town which does not adopt the Free Libraries Act is sneered 
at as being alarmed by a measure so moderately communistic. And 
then, along with editorial assertions that this economic evolution is 
coming and must be accepted, there is prominence given to the 
contributions of its advocates. Meanwhile those who regard the 
recent course of legislation as disastrous, and S0c that its future 

* Socialism made Flain, Beeres, 185, Fleet Street. 



THE COMING SLAVEEY. 3S 

course is likely to be still more disastrous, are being reduced to 
silence by the belief that it is useless to reason with people in a 
state of political intoxication. 

See, then, the many concurrent causes which threaten continually 
to accelerate the transformation now going on. There is that 
spread of regulation caused by following precedents, which become' 
the more authoritative the further the policy is carried. There is 
that increasing need for administrative compulsions and restraints, 
which results from the unforeseen evils and shortcomings of pre- 
ceding compulsions and restraints. Moreover, every additional 
State-interference strengthens the tacit assumption that it is the 
duty of the State to deal with all evils and secure all benefits. 
Increasing power of a growing administrative organization is 
accompanied by decreasing power of the rest of the society to resist 
its further growth and control. The multiplication of careers 
opened by a developing bureaucracy, tempts members of the classes 
regulated by it to favour its extension, as adding to the chances of 
safe and respectable places for their relatives. The people at large, 
led to look on benefits received through public agencies as gratis 
benefits, have their hopes continually excited by the prospects of 
more. A spreading education, furthering the difEusion of pleasing 
errors rather than of stem truths, renders such hopes both stronger 
and more general. Worse still, such hopes are ministered to by 
candidates for public choice, to augment their chances of success ; 
and leading statesmen, in pursuit of party ends, bid for popular 
favour by countenancing them. Getting repeated justifications 
from new laws harmonizing with their doctrines, political 
enthusiasts and unwise philanthropists push their agitations with^ 
growing confidence and success. Journalism, ever responsive to 
popular opinion, daily strengthens it by giving it voice; while 
counter-opinion, more and more discouraged, finds little utterance. 

Thus influences of various kinds conspire to increase corporate 
action and decrease individual action. And the change is being on 
all sides aided by schemers, each of whom thinks only of his pet 
project and not at all of the general re-organization which his, joined 
with others such, are working out. It is said that the French 
Revolution devoured its own children. Here an analogous catas- 
trophe seems not unlikely. The numerous socialistic changes 
made by Act of Parliament, joined with the numerous others 
presently to be made, will by-and-by be all merged in State- 



34 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

Socialism- — swallowed in the vast wave whioli they liave little by 
little raised. 

"But why is this change described as * the coming slavery* ? " 
is a question which many will still ask. The reply is simple. All 
'socialism involves slavery. 

What is essential to the idea of a slave ? We primarily think 
of him as one who is owned by another. To be more than nominal, 
however, the ownership must be shown by control of the slave's 
actions — a control which is habitually for the benefit of the con- 
troller. That which fundamentally distinguishes the slave is that he 
labours under coercion to satisfy another's desires. The relation 
admits of sundry gradations. Remembering that originally the 
slave is a prisoner whose life is at the mercy of his captor, it 
suffices here to note that there is a harsh form of slavery in which, 
treated as an animal, he has to expend his entire effort for his 
owner's advantage. Under a system less harsh, though occupied 
chiefly in working for his owner, he is allowed a short time in 
which to work for himself, and some ground on which to grow 
extra food. A further amelioration gives him power to sell the 
produce of his plot and keep the proceeds. Then we come to 
the still more moderated form which commonly arises where, 
having been a free man working on his own land, conquest turns 
him into what we distinguish as a serf; and he has to give to his 
owner each year a fixed amount of labour or produce, or both: 
retaining the rest himself. Finally, in some cases, as in Russia 
until recently, he is allowed to leave his owner's estate and work 
or trade for himself elsewhere, under the condition that he shall 
pay an annual sum. What is it which, in these cases, leads us to 
qualify our conception of the slavery as more or less severe? 
Evidently the greater or smaller extent to which effort is com- 
pulsorily expended for the benefit of another instead of for self- 
benefit. If all the slave's labour is for his owner the slavery is 
heavy, and if but little it is light. Take now a further step. 
Suppose an owner dies, and his estate with its slaves comes into 
the hands of trustees ; or suppose the estate and everything on it to 
be bought by a company ; is the condition of the slave any the better 
if the amount of his compulsory labour remains the same P Sup- 
pose that for a company we substitute the community; does it 
make any difference to the slave if the time he has to work for 



THE COMING SLAVEBT. 35 

others is as great, and the time left for himself is as small, as 
before P The essential question is — How much is he compelled to 
labour for other benefit than his own, and how muoh can he labour 
for his own benefit P The degree of his slavery varies according 
to the ratio between that which he is forced to yield up and that 
which he is allowed to retain ; and it matters not whether his 
master is a single person or a society. If, without option, he has 
to labour for the society, and receives from the general stock such 
portion as the society awards him, he becomes a slave to the 
society. Socialistio arrangements necessitate an enslavement of 
this kind; and towards such an enslavement many recent mea- 
sures, and still more the measures advocated, are carrying us. 
Let us observe, first, their proximate effects, and then their 
ultimate effects. 

The policy initiated by the Industrial Dwellings Acts admits of 
development, and will develop. Where municipal bodies turn 
house-builders, they inevitably lower the values of houses other- 
wise built, and check the supply of more. Every dictation re- 
specting modes of building and conveniences to be provided, 
diminishes the builder's profit, and prompts him to use his capital 
where the profit is not thus diminished. . So, too, the owner, 
already finding that small houses entail much labour and many 
losses — ^already subject to troubles of inspection and interference, 
and to consequent costs, and having his property daily rendered a 
more undesirable investment, is prompted to sell ; and as buyers 
are for like reasons deterred, he has to sell at a loss. And now 
these still-multiplying regulations, ending, it may be, as Lord Grey 
proposes, in one requiring the owner to maintain the salubrity of 
his houses by evicting dirty tenants, and thus adding to his other 
responsibilities that of inspector of nuisances, must further prompt 
sales and further deter purchasers : so necessitating greater depre- 
ciation. What must happen P The multiplication of houses, and 
especially small houses, being increasingly checked, there must 
come an increasing demand upon the local authority to make up 
for the deficient supply. More and more the municipal or kindred 
body will have to build houses, or to purchase houses rendered 
unsaleable to private persons in the way shown — houses which, 
greatly lowered in valtie as they must become, it will, in many 
cases, pay to buy rather than to build new ones. Nay, this process 
must work in a double way ; since every entailed increase of local 



^ 



36 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

iAxataon still farther depreciates property.* And then, yfhen. in 
towns this process has gone ^so far as to make the local authority 
the chief owner of houses, there will be a good precedent for 
publicly providing houses for the rural population, as proposed in 
the Badical progranime,t and as urged by the Democratic Federa- 
tion ; which insists on " the compulsory construction of healthy 
artisans' and agricultural labourers' dwellings in proportion to the 
population." Manifestly, the tendency of that which has been 
done, is being done, and is presently to be done, is to approach the 
socialistic ideal in which the community is sole house-proprietor. 

Such, too, must be the effect of the daily-growing policy on 
the tenure and utilization of the land. More numerous public 
benefits, to be achieved by more numerous public agencies, at 
the cost of augmented public burdens, must increasingly deduct 
from the returns on land; until, as the depreciation in value 
becomes greater and greater, the resistance to change of tenure 
becomes less and less. Already, as every one knows, there is 
in many places difficulty in obtaining tenants, even at greatly 
reduced rents; and land of inferior fertility in some cases lies 
idle, or when farmed by the owner is ofben farmed at a 
loss. Clearly the profit on capital invested in land is not such 
that taxes, local and general, can be greatly raised to support 
extended public administrations, without an absorption of it 
wjiich will prompt owners to sell, and make the best of what 
reduced ^rice they can get by emigrating and buying land not 
subject to heavy burdens ; as, indeed, some are now doing. This 
process, carried far, must have the result of throwing inferior land 
out of cultivation ; after which there will be raised more generally 

* If any one thinks Buch fears are groundless, let him contemplate the fact 
that from 1867-8 to 1880-1, our annual local expenditure for the United 
Kingdom has grown from £36,132,834 to £63,276,283 ; and that during the 
same 13 years, the municipal expenditure in England and Wales alone, has 
grown from 13 millions to 30 millions a yearl How the increase of public 
burdens will join with other causes in bringing about public ownership, is shown 
by a statement made by Mr. W. Bathbone, M.P., to which my attention has 
been drawn since the above paragraph was in type. He says, " within my own 
experience, local taxation in New York has risen from 12«. Qd, per cent, to 
£2 12«. 6(2. per cent, on the capital of its citizens — a charge which would more 
than absorb the whole income of an ayerage English landlord." — Nineteenth 
CetUur^t February, 1883. 

t Fortnightly Review, Noyember, 1883, pp. 619-20. 



THB COMING SLAVERY. 37 

the demand inade by Mr. Arch, who, addressing tlie Radical 
Association of Brighton lately, and contending that existing landlords 
do not make their land adequately productive for the public benefit, 
said *^ he should like the present Government to pass a Compulsory 
Cultivation Bill : " an- applauded proposal which he justified by 
instancing compulsory vaccination (thus illustrating the influence 
of precedent). And this demand will be pressed, not only by the 
need for making the land productive, but also by the need for 
employing the rural population. After the Government has 
extended the practice of hiring the unemployed to work on deserted 
lands, or lands acquired at nominal prices, there will be reached a 
stage whence there is but a small further step to that arrangement 
which, in the programme of the Democratic Federation, is to follow 
nationalization of the land — ^the " organization of agricultural and 
industrial armies under State control on co-operative principles." 

To one who doubts whether such a revolution may be so reached, 
facts may be cited showing its likelihood. In Gaul, during the decline 
of the Roman Empire, " so numeroujs ^ere the receivers in com- 
parison with the payers, and so enormous the weight of taxation, that 
the labourer broke down, the plains became deserts, and woods grew 
where the plough had been."* In like manner, when the French 
Revolution was approaching, the public burdens had become such, 
that many farms remained uncultivated and many were deserted : 
one quarter of the soil was absolutely lying waste; and in son)p 
provinces one-half was in heath.t Nor have we beett without 
incidents of a kindred nature at home. Besides the facts that under 
the old Poor Law the rates had in some parishes risen to half the 
rental, and that in various places farms were lying idle, there is 
the fact that in one case the rates had absorbed the whole proceeds 
of the soil. 

At Cholesbury, in Buckinghamshire, in 1832, the poor-rate '* suddenly 
ceased in consequence of the impossibiHty to continue its collection, the 
landlords having given up their rents, the farmers their tenancies, and the 
clergyman his glebe and his tithes. The clergyman, Mr. Jeston, states that 
in October, 1832, the parish ofSicers threw up their books, and the poor 
assembled in a body before his door whUe he was in bed, asking for advice 
aad food. Partly from his own small means, partly from the charity of 

• '* Lactant. De M, Persecute cc. 7, 23. y^ 

t Taine, VAncien Eigime, pp. 837-8 (in the English Translation)* 



38 THE MAN VERSUa THE STATE. 

neighbours, and partly by rates in aid, imposed on the neighbouring 
parishes, they were for some time supported."* 

And the Commissioliers add that 'Hhe benevolent rector recommends 
that the whole of the land should be divided among the able-bodied 
paupers : " hoping that after help afforded for two years, they might 
be able to maintain themselves. These facts, giving colour to the 
prophecy made in Parliament that continuance of the old Poor Law 
for another thirty years would throw the land out of cultivation, 
clearly show that increase of public burdens may end in forced 
cultivation under pubHo control. 

Then, again, comes State-ownership of railways. Already this 
exists to a large extent on the Continent. Already we have had here 
a few years ago loud advocacy of it. And now the cry, which was 
raised by sundry politicians and publicists, is taken up afresh by the 
Democratic Federation ; which proposes " State-appropriation of 
railways, with or without compensation.** Evidently, pressure 
from above joined by pressure from below, is likely to effect this 
change dictated by the policy everywhere spreading ; and with it 
must come many attendant changes. For railway-proprietors, at 
first owners and workers of railways only, have become masters of 
numerous businesses directly or indirectly connected with railways ; 
and these will have to be purchased by Government when the rail- 
ways are purchased. Already exclusive letter-carrier, exclusive 
transmitter of telegrams, and on the way to become exclusive 
carrier of parcels, the State will not only be exclusive carrier of 
passengers, goods, and minerals, but will add to its present 
various trades many other trades. Even now, besides erecting its 
naval and military establishments and building harbours, docks, 
breakwaters, &c., it does the work of shipbuilder, cannon-founder, 
small-arms maker, manu&cturer of ammunition, army-clothier and 
bootmaker; and when the railways have been appropriated "with or 
without compensation," as the Democratic Federationists say, it will 
have to become locomotive-engine-builder, carriage-maker, i»«rpaulin 
and grease manufacturer, passenger- vessel owner, coal-miner, stone- 
quarrier, onmibus propietor, &c. Meanwhile its local lieutenants, the 
municipal governments, already in many places suppliers of water, 
gas-makers, owners and workers of tramways, proprietors ol baths, 
will doubtless have undertaken various other businesses. And when 

* Seport of Commitnonert far Inquiry into the Adminiitration and Practie<U 
Operation of the Foor JLawe, p. 87. February 20, 1834. 






■*^ ■ 1 



THE COMING SLAVEEY. 39 

the State, directly or by proxy, lias thus come into possession of, op 
Has established, numerons concerns for wholesale production and for 
wholesale distribution, there will be good precedents for extending 
its function to retail distribution : following such an example, say, 
as is offered by the French Government, which has long been a retail 
tobacconist. 

Evidently then, the changes made, the changes in progress, and 
the changes urged, will carry us not only towards State-ownershi • 
of land and dwellings and means of communication, all to be adminis- 
tered and worked by State-agents, but towards State-usnrpation of 
all industries : the private forms of which, disadvantaged more and 
more in competition with the State, which can arrange everything 
for its own convenience, will more and more die away ; just as many 
voluntary schools h^ve, in presence of Board-schools. And so will 
be brought about the desired ideal of the socialists. 

And now when there has been compassed this desired ideal, which 
** practical " politicians are helping socialists to reach, and which is 
so tempting on that bright side which socialists contemplate, what 
must be the accompanying shady side which they do not con- 
template P It is a matter of common remark, often made when a 
marriage is impending, that those possessed by strong hopes habi- 
tually dwell on the promised pleasures and think nothing of the 
accompanying pains. A farther exemplification of this truth is 
supplied by these political enthusiasts and fanatical revolutionists. 
Impressed with the miseries existing under our present social 
arrangements, and not regarding these miseries as caused by the 
ill-working of a human nature but partially adapted to the social - 
state, they imagine them to be forthwith curable by this or that re- 
' arrangement. Yet, even did their plans succeed it could only be 
by substituting one kind of evil for another. A little deliberate 
thought would show that under their proposed arrangements, their 
liberties must be surrendered in proportion as their material wel- 
fares were cared for. 

For no form of co-operation, small or great, can be carried on 
without regulation, and an implied submission to the regulating 
agencies. Even one of their own organizations for effecting social 
changes yields them proof. It is compelled to have its councils, its 
local and general officers, its authoritative leaders, who must be 
obeyed under penalty of confusion and failure. And the experience 



40 THE MAN VERSUS THB STATE, 

of tliose wlio are loudest in their advocacy of a new social order 
nnder the pateroifil control of a Oovemment, shows that even in 
private voluntarily-formed societies, the power of the regulative 
organization becomes great, if not irresistible : often, indeed, causing 
grumbling, and restiveness among those controlled. Trades Unions' 
which carry on a kind of industrial war in defence of workers* in- 
terests versus employers' interests, find that subordination almost 
military in its strictness is needful to secure efficient action ; for 
divided councils prove fatal to success. And even in bodies of co- 
operators, formed for carrying on manufacturing or distributing 
businesses, and not needing that obedience to leaders which is 
required where the aims are offensive or defensive, it is still 
found that the administrative agency gains such supremacy that 
there arise complaints about " the tyranny of organization." Judge 
then what must happen when, instead of relatively small combina- 
tions, to which men may belong or not as they please, we have 
a national combination in which each citizen finds himself incor- 
porated, and &om which he cannot separate himself without leaving 
the country. Judge what must under such conditions become the 
despotism of a graduated and centralized officialism, holding in its 
hands the resources of the community, and having behind it what- 
ever amount of force it finds requisite to carry out its decrees and 
maintain what it calls order. Well may Prince Bismai'ck display 
leanings towards State-socialism. 

And then after recognizing, as they must if they think out their 
scheme, the power possessed by the regulative agency in the new 
social system so temptingly pictured, let its advocates ask them- 
selves to what end this power must be used. Not dwelling exclu- 
sively, as they habitually do, on the material well-being and the 
mental gratifications to be provided for them by a beneficent 
administration, let them dwell a little on the price to be paid. The 
officials cannot create the needful supplies : they can but distribute 
among individuals that which the individuals have joined to pro- 
duce. K the public agency is required to provide for them, it must 
reciprocally require them to furnish the means. There cannot be, 
as under our existing system, agreement between employer and 
employed — this the scheme excludes. There must in place of it 
be command by local authorities over workers, and acceptance by the 
workers of that wftch the authorities assign to them. And this, in- 
deed, is the arrangement distinctly, but as it would seem inadvertently, 



\ 



THE COMING SLAVERY. 41 

pointed to by the members of the Democratic Federation. For 
they propose that production should be carried on by " agricultural 
and industrial armies under State-control : '' apparently not re- 
membering that armies pre-suppose grades of officers, by whom 
obedience would have to be insisted upon ; since otherwise neither 
order nor efficient work could be ensured. So that each would 
stand toward the governing agency in the relation of slave to 
master. 

" But the governing agfncy wonld be a master which he and 
others made and kept constantly in check ; and one which therefore ' 
would not control him or others more than was needful for the 
benefit of each and all." 

To which reply the first rejoinder is that, even if so, each 
member of the community as an individual would be a slave to the 
community as a whole. Such a relation has habitually existed in 
militant communities, even under quasi-popular forms of govern- 
ment. In ancient Greece the accepted principle was that the 
citizen belonged neither to himself nor to his family, but belonged 
to his city — ^the city being with the Greek equivalent to the com- 
munity. And this doctrine, proper to a state of constant warfare, 
is a doctrine which socialism unawares re-introduces into a state 
intended to be purely industrial. The services of each will belong 
to the aggregate of all ; and for these services, such returns will be • 
given as the authorities think proper. So that even if the adminis- 
tration is of the beneficent kind intended to be secured, slavery, 
however mild, must be the outcome of the arrangement. 

A second rejoinder is that the administration will presently 
become not of the intended kind, and that the slavery will not be 
mild. The socialist speculation is vitiated by an assumption like 
that which vitiates the speculations of the " practical " politician. 
It is assumed that officialism will work as it is intended to work, 
which it never does. The machinery of Communism, like existing 
social machinery, has to be framed out of existing human nature ; 
and the defects of existing human nature will generate in the one 
the same evils as in the other. The love of power, the selfishness, 
the injustice, the untruthfulness, which often in comparatively 
short times bring private organisations to disaster, will inevitably, 
where their effects accumulate from generation to generation, work 
evils far greater and less remediable ; since, vast and complex and 

possessed of all the resources, the administrative organization once 

4 



42 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

developed and consolidated, mnst become irresistible. And ^^}^^^f 
needs proof that the periodic exercise of electoral power would fail 
to prevent this, it suffices to instance tbe French Government, 
which, pureljr pepulax in origin, and subject at short intervals to 
popular iadgment^^;^^i?l^s>sfc^ on the freedom of citizena 

to an extent which the EngHsh d^^^^ ^ t^« ^^^^ trades Unions 
Congress say " is a disgrace to, andNlie^omaly in, a Republican 
nation." ^^^ . a j« • r aiI 

The final result would be a revival of desptjj^ ^ • i!'^ ' ves 
army of civil officials, like an army of milita^^i^?—^^ ' ^ 
supreme power to its head — ft power which had often I«^ ^^ 
tion, as in mediasval Europe and still more in Japan — ^^^|L i. 

so led among our neighbours, within our own times. Tn^L .. 
confessions of M. de Maupas have shown how readily a coi^ ., 
tional head, elected and trusted by the whole people, may, wit&. 
aid of a few unscrupulous confederates, paralyze the representaW 
body and make himsqjf autocrat. That those who rose to powT 
in a socialistic organization would not scruple to carry out the] 
aims at all costs, we have good reason for conclading. When w< 
find that shareholders who, sometimes gaining but often losing, have 
made that railway-system by which national prosperity has been so 
greatly increased, are spoken of by the council of the Democratic 
Federation as having ^* laid hands " on the means of communica- 
tion, we may infer that those who directed a socialistic administration 
might interpret with extreme perversity the claims of individuals and 
classes under their control. And when, further, we find members 
of this same council urging that the State should take possession 
of the railways, " with or without compensation," we may suspect 
that the heads of the ideal society desired, would be but little 
deterred by considerations of equity from pursuing whatever policy 
they thought needful : a policy which would always be one identi- 
fied with their own supremacy. It would need but a war with an 
adjacent society, or some internal discontent demanding forcible 
suppression, to at once transform a socialistic administration into a 
grinding tyranny like that of ancient Peru ; under which the mass 
of the people, controlled by grades of officials, and leading lives 
that were inspected out-of-doors and in-doors, laboured for the 
support of the organisation which regulated them, and were left 
with but a bare subsistence for themselves. And then would be 
completely- revived, under a different form, that rSgime of status — 



i 



V 




r .1^ I ■ i^aa 



.: ^^^s^^j^^!^^i%#;:!!S9tt 



THE COMma SLAVERY. 43 

that system of compulsory co-operation, the decapng tradition of 
which is represented by the old Toryism, and towards which the 
new Toryism is carrying us back. 

" But we shall be on our guard against all that — we shall take 
precautions to ward off such disasters," will doubtless say the 
enthusiasts. Be they " practical" politicians with their new regu- 
lative measures, or communists with their schemes for re-organizing 
labour, their reply is ever the same: — "It is true that plans of 
kindred nature have, from unforeseen causes or adverse accidents, 
or the misdeeds of those concerned, been brought to failure ; but . 
this time we shall profit by past experiences and succeed." There / : 
seems no getting people to accept the truth, which nevertheless is. \ 
conspicuous enough, that the welfare of a society and the justice of 1 
its arrangements are at bottom dependent on the characters of its 
members ; and that improvement in neither can take place with- ; 
out that improvement in character which results from carrying on \ 
peaceful industry under the restraints imposed by an orderly social - 
life. The belief, not only of the socialists but also of those so-called • 
liberals who are diligently preparing the way for them, is that by ^ 
due skill an ill- working humanity may be framed into well- working | 
institutions. It is a delusion. The defective natures of citizens \ 
will show themselves in the bad acting of whatever social structure \ 
they are arranged into. There js no politj ^l alchemy by which '■ 
you can get golden conduct out of leaden insfiStrts*^ ^^ / 



'tM- ■WtWWfc*""'*****^'' *• 



Note. — Two replies by socialists to the foregoing article have 
appeared since its publication — Socialism and Slavery by H. M. 
Hyndman and Herbert Spencer on Socialism by Frank Fairman. 
Notice of them here must be limited to saying that, as usual with 
antagonists, they ascribe to me opinions which I do not hold. 
Disapproval of Socialism does not, as Mr. Hyndman assumes, 
necessitate approval of existing arrangements. Many things he 
reprobates I reprobate quite as much; but I dissent from his 
remedy. The gentleman who writes under the pseudonym of 
'* Frank Fairman," reproaches me with having receded from that 
sympathetic defence of the labouring-classes which he finds in 
Social Statics ; but I am quite unconscious of any such change as 
he alleges. Looking with a lenient eye upon the irregularities of 
those whose lives are hard, by no means involves tolerance of good- 
for-nothings. 



i 



/ 



, H^- 



"I 






1 



1 t. 



\ 



THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 



' / Be it or be it not true that Man is sliapen in iniquity and con- 
ceived in sin, it is nnjjnestionablj tme that Qp}r^l3)jQg^6QjiJs begotten 
of aggression and by aggression. In small nndeveloped societies 
wEere for ages complete' plS&6e~ has continued, there exists nothing 
like what we call Goven^nent Z^^ ^^o^ISiX? ^ftg!§Bcy, but mere 
honorary headship, if any headship at all. In these exceptional 
communities, unaggressive and from special causes unaggressed 
upon, there is so little deviation from the virt ues of tr uthfulness, 
honesfyt justice, and ge]iero.sityj, that nothing beyond an occstaciLal 
expression of public opinion by informally-assembled elders is 
needful.* Conversely, we find proofs that, at first recognized but 
temporarily during leadership in war, the authority of a chief is 
permanently established by continuity of war; and grows strong 
where successful aggression ends in subjection of neighbouring 
tribes. And thence onwards, examples furnished by all races put 
beyond doubt the truth, that the coercive power of the chief, deve- 
loping into king, and king of kings (a frequent UUe in the ancient 
East), becomes great in proportion as conquest becomes habitual 
and the union of subdued nations extensivcf Comparisons dis- 
close a further truth which should be ever present to us — ^the 
truth that the aggressiveness of the ruling power inside a society 
increases with its aggressiveness outside the society. As, to make 
an efficient army, the soldiers in their several grades must be 
subordinate to the commander; so, to make an efficient fighting 
community, must the citizens be subordinate to the ruling power. 

• Poliiieai TmsHimtions, §§ 437, 573. f Ihd., §§ ^H-S. 



. -V 



-V 



THE SINS OF LEGISIATORS. 45 

They mtist famish recruits to the extent demanded, and yield up 
whatever property is required. 

An obvious implication igl that the ethics of QoveiijiUQQA^) origi- 
nally identical with the ethics of waiTmSst long remain akin io 
them ; and can diverge from them only as warlike activities and 
preparations become less. Current evidence shows this. At pre- 
sent on the Continent, the citizen is free only when his services as 
a soldier are not demanded ; and during the rest of his life he is 
largely enslaved in supporting the military organization. Even 
among ourselves, a serious war would, by the necessitated con- 
scription, suspend the liberties of large numbers and trench on the "*^ 
liberties of the rest, by taking from them through taxes whatever 
supplies were needed — that is, forcing them to labour so many days 
more for the State. Inevitably the established code of conduct in . 
the dealings of Governments with citizens, must be allied to their 
code of conduct in their dealings with one another. 

I am not, under the title of this article, about to treat of the 
trespasses and the revenges for trespasses, accounts of which consti- 
tute the great mass of history ; nor to trace the internal inequities 
which have ever accompanied the external inequities. I do not 
propose here to catalogue the crimes of irresponsible legislators ; 
beginning with that of King Khuf u, the stones of whose vast tomb 
were laid in the bloody sweat of tens of thousands of slaves toiling 
through long years under the lash ; going on to those committed 
by conquerors, Egyptian, Assyrian, Persian, Macedonian, Boman 
and the rest ; and ending with those of Napoleon, whose ambition 
to set his foot on the neck of the civilized world, cost not less than 
two million lives.* Nor do I propose here to enumerate those sins 
of responsible legislators seen in the long list of laws made in the 
interests of dominant classes — a list coming down in our own 
country to those under which there were long maintained slavery 
and the slave-trade, torturing nearly 40,000 negroes annually by 
close packing during a tropical voyage, and killing a large per- 
centage of them, and ending with that of the corn-laws, by which, 
says Sir Erskine May, " to ensure high rents, it had been decreed 
that multitudes should hunger.^f 

Not, indeed, that a presentation of the conspicuous misdeeds of 
legislators, responsible and irresponsible, would be useless. It would 

* Lanfrey. See also Study of Sociology, p. 42, and Appendix, 
t Constitutional Mistory of Stiff land, ii. p. 617. 



. 46 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

have several uses — one of them relevant to the truth above pointed 
out. Sach a presentation would make clear how that' identity of 
governmental ethics with military ethics which necessarily exists 
, 4 during primitive times, when the army is simply the mobilized 
^ i society and the society is the quiescent army, continues through 

long stages, and even now afEects in great degrees our law-pro- 
ceedings and our daily lives. Having, for instance, shown that in 
numerous savage tribes the judicial function of the chief does not 
exist, or is nominal, and that very generally during early stages of 
European civilization, each man had to defend himself and rectify 
his private wrongs as best he might — having shown that in mediaoval 
times the right of private war among members of the military 
order was brought to an end, not because the head ruler thought 
it his duty to arbitrate, but because private wars interfered with 
the efficiency of his army in pubHc wars— having shown that the 
administration of justice displayed through subsequent ages a 
large amount of its primitive nature, in trial by battle carried on 
before the king or his deputy as umpire, and which, among our- 
selves, continued nominally to be an alternative form of trial down 
to 1819 ; it might then be pointed out that even now there survives 

f trial by battle under another form : counsel being the champions 

and purses the weapons. In civil cases, the ruling agency cares 

scarcely more than of old about rectifying the wrongs of the injured ; 

but, practically, its deputy does little else than to enforce the rules 

,v of the fight: the result being less a question of equity than a 

] question of pecuniary ability and forensic skill. N'ay, so little 
concern for the administration of justice is shown by the ruling 
agency, that when, by legal conflict carried on in the presence of 
its deputy, the combatants have been pecuniarily bled even to the 
extent of producing prostration, and when an appeal being made 
by one of them the decision is reversed, the beaten combatant is 
made to pay for the blunders of the deputy, or of a preceding 
deputy ; and not unf requently the wronged man, who sought pro- 
tection or restitution, is taken out of court pecuniarily dead. 

Adequately done, such a portrayal of governmental misdeeds of 
commission and omission, proving that the partially-surviving code 
of ethics arising in, and proper to, a state of war, still vitiates 
governmental action, might greatly moderate the hopes of those 
who are anxious to extend governmental control. After observing 
that along with the still-manifest traits of that primitive political 



•^,> f 



THE SINS OF LEGISLATOBS. 47 

strncture wHcli clironio militancy pi:oduces, there goes a still- 
manifest survival of its primitive principles ; tlie reformer and the 
philanthropist might be less sanguine in their anticipations of good 
from its all-pervading agency, and might be more inclined to trust 
agencies of a non-governmental kind. 

But leaving out the greater part of the large topic comprehended 
under the title of this article, I propose here to deal only with a ' 
comparatively small remaining part — those sins of legislators 
which are not generated by their personal ambitions or class in- 
terests, but result from a lack of the study by which they are 
morally bound to prepare themselves. 

A druggist's assistant who, after listening to the description of 
pains which he mistakes for those of colic, but which are really 
caused by inflammation of the cadcum, prescribes a sharp purgative 
and kills the patient, is found guilty of manslaughter. He is not 
allowed to excuse himself on the ground that he did not intend 
harm but hoped for good. The plea that he simply made a mis- 
take in his diagnosis is not entertained. He is told that he had no 
right to risk disastrous consequences by meddling in a matter con- 
cerning which his knowledge was so inadequate. The fact that he 
was igpiorant how great was his ignorance is not accepted in bar of 
judgment. It is tacitly assumed that the experience common to 
all should have taught him that even the skilled, and much more 
the unskilled, make mistakes in the identification of disorders and 
in the appropriate treatment ; and that having disregarded the 
warning derivable from common experience, he was answerable 
for the consequences. 

We measure the responsibilities of legislators for mischiefs 
they may do, in a much more lenient fashion. In most cases, so 
far from thinking of them as deserving punishment for causing 
disasters by laws ignorantly enacted, we scarcely think of them as' 
deserving reprobation. It is held that common experience should 
have taught the druggist's assistant, untrained as he is, not to inter- 
fere ; but it is not held that common experience should have taught 
the legislator not to interfere till he has trained himself. Though 
multitudinous facts are before him in the recorded legislation of 
our own country and of other countries, which should impress on 
him the immense evils caused by wrong treatment, he is not con- 
demned for disregarding these warnings against rash meddling. 



y 



f 



48 TUE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

Cont^rM'iwise, it is thonglit meritorious in him when — ^perhaps 
liktoly from college, perhaps fresh from keeping a pack of hounds 
which made liim popular in his county, perhaps emerging from a 
proviuoial town where he acquired a fortune, perhaps rising from 
tlio bar at which ho has gained a name as an advocate — ^he enters 
l\\rliament ; and forthwitli, in quite a light-hearted waj, begins to 
aid or hindor this or that means of operating on the bodj politic. 
In this case thoro is no occasion even to make for him tho excuse 
that he diHvsi not know how little he knows ; for the public at large 
ap\H» with him in thinking it needless that he should know anj- 
tiling mon> than what the debates on the proposed measorea i^ 
him« 

And jet the mischiefs wrought hj uninstnicted law-makings 
«normv>tts in their amount as compared with those caused bj nn- 
ii»tructiKl medical txiMtmenl^ are conspicuous to all who dk> bat 
Ijrbuic^ OTvr its his^MTT* The reader must pardon me while I recall 
a f^w familiar instanvvs. Centurr after centurv, statesmen went 
on <^naotin^ usunr law$ which made worse the condidonof the 
dtfbK^r — ¥ai;^r^ the rati^ of intemt ^from five to six when in- 
tiMidin^ tv^ K\iuc«^ it to f>ur«*** as mnder Louis XV. ; and indiECctly 
prvvlucin^ nndwamt v>f erils of maar kinds* such as prercmm^ tlie 
T^YvsiifeCfxvi^ u^ of span^ capital^ and ^^baideiung the small pio- 
^MTtiMon witli a muhitude of perpetval smrfiMs.**! Ss^ too^ dm 
«a^liNitvsxr$ w&k^ in England continued throog^i fire kumired 
Yyt»r$ li> $tcp 1^>cr«tsi^ll:;:^« and wkac& in Fcasice« as Art&nr Toodb^ 
wtt«fe«»i^L pc^T^Nxted anj ooe fccoi bayrs:^ *"mof« tfrtmt — nfwrlfirli 
WT w^i^tiit at vsar^xit,.'^ ;( w^nrt e& giK&e?atsc& after 
iK^Ni$£:r.^ t^^ rj:^?^ asd ssorOL^rr diae to dourth : £ar. 
Kvir ^"w k^'^vsv tlkt^ wbiowi^afie «iaft^sr. w^ w:u m «h» saaaxse 
*^IV r^$nc«r{iw* "* T*:«5^rpKeii as *aa cpea cp^reswr e£ poop 
j«^'^i«v.'* I T* ji^jsLrN- cttie w^\» fxBictQcir £3 » tc <irBa!ia» ^b? a m^uB i- 
c^ a vVKft:tt!Cwl:tT ^r cftieckxTzrc Tca£x!'r rar^i eeusQacnianL Of 
k^%kS^(^ ^9stf;L?9 wiB^ ^3^ its<efe«r^ w^-a«. rx l$Ix s> iJfTMTwfr v&e^ 
;tt^M»tl::^r >Mf fu3:x:£!>f . nrt^scH^if^ ^ae 7cw» df 5»ai;. hts w%ae& was 
W^Cy- r<^i?«HkJj^ af^:tK^ n laki ouzsed «d:3Z¥ riaa?ci»»3i» ^ 'vazanns; 






i 



THE SmS OF LEGISLATOBS. 49 

foods from the markets ; and also such measures, more contintLonsly 
operating, as those whicli settled hy magisterial order 'Hhe 
reasonable gains " of victuallers.* Of like spirit and followed by 
allied mischiefs hare been the many endeavours to fix wages, which 
began with the Statute of Labourers under Edward III., and 
ceased only sixty years ago; when, having long galvanized in 
Spitalfields a decaying industry, and fostered there a miserable 
population, Lords and Commons finally gave up fixing silk- weavers' 
earnings by the decisions of magistrates. 

Here I imagine an impatient interruption. ^*We know all 
that ; the story is stale. The mischiefs of interfering with trade 
have been dinned in our ears till we are weary ; and no one needs 
to be taught the lesson afresh." My first reply is that by the great 
majority the lesson was never properly learnt at all, and that many - 
of those who did learn it have forgotten it. For just the same- 
pleas which of old were put in for these dictations, are again put 
in. Li the statute 35 of Edward III., which aimed to keep down 
the price of herrings (but was soon repealed because it raised the 
price), it was complained that people " coming to the fair ... do 
bargain for herring, and every of them, by malice and envy, 
increase upon other, and, if one proffer forty shillings, another will 
proffer ten shillings more, and the third sixty shillings, and so . 
every one surmounteth other in the bargain." f And now the / 
'* higgling of the market," here condemned and ascribed to " malice [ 
and envy," is being again condemned. The evils of competition • 
have all along been the stock cry of the Socialists ; and the council ; 
of the Democratic Federation denounces the carrying on of • 
exchange under '' the control of individual greed and profit." My 
second reply is that interferences with the law of supply and 
demand, which a generation ago were admitted to be habitually i 
mischievous, are now being daily made by Acts of Parliament in ] 
new fields ; and that, as I shall presently show, they are in these i 
fields increasing the evils to be cured and producing fresh ones, as i 
of old they did in fields no longer intruded upon. 

Returning from this parenthesis, I go on to explain that the 
above Acts are named to remind the reader that iminstructed 
legislators have in past times continually increased human suffering '^ 
in their endeavours to mitigate it ; and I have now to add that if 
these erils, shown to be legislatively intensified or produced, 

• Craik*8 Eiatorif of British Commerce^ L 136-7. t Craik, loc, dt, 1. 137. 



60 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

be multiplied by ten or more, a conception will be formed of 
the aggregate evils cansed by law-making nnguided by social 
science. In a paper read to the Statistical Society in May, 1873, 
Mr. Janson, vice-president of the Law Society, stated that from the 
Statute of Merton (20 Henry III.) to the end of 1872, there had 
been passed 18,110 public Acts; of which he estimated that four- 
fifths had been wholly or partially repealed. He also stated that 
the number of public Acts repealed wholly or in part, or amended, 
during the three years 1870-71-72 had been 3,532, of which 2,759 
had been totally repealed. To see whether this rate of repeal has 
continued, I have referred to the annually-issued volumes of '* The 
Public General Statutes" for the last three sessions. Saying 
nothing of the numerous amended Acts, the result is that in the 
last three sessions there have been totally repealed, separately or 
in groups, 650 Acts, belonging to the pre*.ent reign, besides many of 
preceding reigns. This, of course, is gr'atly above the average 
rate ; for there has of late been an active purgation of the statute- 
book. But making eveiy allowance, we must infer that within 
our own times, repeals have mounted some distance into the 
thousands. Doubtless a number of them have been of laws that 
were obsolete ; others have been demanded by changes of circun^- 
stances (though seeing how many of them are of quite recent 
Acts, this has not been a large cause) ; others simply because they 
were inoperative; and others have been consequent on the con- 
solidations of numerous Acts into single Acts. But unques- 
tionably in multitudinous cases, repeals came because the Acts 
had proved injurious. We talk glibly of such changes — we think 
of cancelled legislation with indifference. We forget that before 
laws are abolished they have generally been inflicting evils 
more or less serious ; some for a few years, some for tens of years, 
some for centuries. Change your vague idea of a bad law into a 
deflnite idea of it as an agency operating on people's lives, and 
you see that it means so much of pain, so much of illness, so 
much of mortality. A vicious form of legal procedure, for example, 
either enacted or tolerated, entails on suitors, costs, or delays, or 
defeats. What do these imply ? Loss of money, often ill-spared ; 
great and prolonged anxiety ; frequently consequent illness ; unhap- 
ness of family and dependents; children stinted in food and 
clothing — all of them miseries which bring after then^ multi- 
plied remoter miseries. Add to which there are the far more 



S 



« THE SINS OF LEGISLATOBS. 61 

nnmerons cases of those who, lacking the means or the courage to 
enter on law-suits, and therefore submitting to fi*auds, are im- 
poverished ; and hare similarly to bear the pains of body and mind 
which ensue. Even to say that a law has been simply a hindrance, 
is to say that it has caused needless loss of time, extra trouble, and 
additional worry ; and annong over-burdened people extra trouble 
and worry imply, here and there, break-downs in health with their 
entailed direct and indirect sufferings. Seeing, then, that bad 
legislation means injury to men's lives, jadge what must be the 
total amount of mental distress, physical pain, and raised mortality, 
which these thousands of repealed Acts of Parliament represent ! 
Fully to bring home the truth that law-making unguided by ade- 
quate knowledge brings immense evils, let me take a special case 
which a question of the day recaUs. 

Already I have hinted that interferences with the connexion be- 
tween snpply and demand, given up in certain fields after immense 
mischiefs had been done during many centuries, are now taking 
place in other fields. This connexion is supposed to hold only 
where it has been proved to hold by the evils of disregarding it : 
BO feeble is men's belief in it. There seems no suspicion that in 
cases where it seems to fail, natural causation has been traversed by 
artificial hindrances. And yet in the case to which I now refer- 
that of the supply of houses for the poor — it needs but to ask what 
laws have been fioing for a long time past, to see that the terrible 
evils complained of are mostly law-made. 

A generation ago discussion was taking place concerning the in- 
adequacy and badness of industrial dwellings, and I had occasion 
to deal with the question. Here is a passage then written : — 

" An architect and surveyor describes it [the Building Act] as having 
worked after the following manner. In those districts of Loudon consist- 
ing of inferior houses built in that unsubstantial fashion which the New 
Building Act was to mend, there obtains an average rent, sufficiently re- 
munerative to landlords whose houses were rim up economically before 
the New Building Act passed. This existing average rent fixes the rent 
that must be charged in these districts for new houses of the same accom- 
modation — that is the same number of rooms, for the people they are built 
for do not appreciate the extra safety of living within walls strengthened 
with hoop-iron bond. Now it turns out upon trial, that houses built in 
accordance with the present regulations, and let at this established rate, 
bring in nothing like a reasonable return. Builders have consequently 



62 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

confined themselves to erecting houses in better districts (where the possi- 
bility of a profitable competition with pre-existing houses shows that those 
pre-existing houses were tolerably aubstantial), and have ceased to erect 
dwellings for the masses, except in the suburbs where no pressing sanitary 
evils exist. Meanwhile, in the inferior districts above described, has re- 
sulted an increase of overcrowding — ^half-a-dozen families in a house, a 
score lodgers to a room. Nay, more than this has resulted. That state of 
miserable dilapidation into which these abodes of the poor are allowed to 
fall, is due to the absence of competition from new houses. Landlords do 
not find their tenants tempted away by the offer of better accommodation. 
Bepairs, being imnecessary for securing the largest amount of profit, 

are not made In fact for a large percentage of the very 

horrors which our sanitary agitators are trying to cure by law, we have to 
thank previous agitators of the same school 1 " — Social Statics^ p. 384 
(edition of 1851). 

These were not the only law-made causes of such evils. As shown 
in the following further passage, sundry others were recognized : — 

** Writing before the repeal of the brick-duty, the Builder says : — *It is 
supposed that one-fourth of the cost of a dwelling which lets for 2«. Qd. or 
Zs, a week is caused by the expense of the title-deeds and the tax on wood 
and bricks used in its construction. Of course, the owner of such property 
must be remunerated, and he therefore charges 7^. or 9dL a week to cover 
these burdens.' Mr. C. G^tlifiT, secretary to the Society for Improving the 
Dwellings of the Working Glacises, describing the effect of the window-tax, 
says : — 'They are now paying upon their institution in St Pancras the sum 
of £162 16«. in window-duties, or 1 per cent, per annum upon the original 
outlay. The average rental paid by the Society's tenants is 5«. 6(i. per 
week, and the window-duty deducts from this 7Jc?. per week.'" — Tinies^ 
January 31, 1850. — Social Statics^ p. 385 (edition of 1851). 

Neither is this all the evidence which the press of those days 
afforded. There was published in the Times of December 7, 1850 
(too late to be used in the above-named work, which I issued in 
the last week of 1850), a letter dated from the Reform Club, and 
signed " Architect," which contained the following passages : — 

> Lord Kinnaird recommends in your paper of yesterday the construc- 
tion of model lodging-houses by throwing two or three houses into one. 

'' Allow me to suggest to his Lordship, and to his friend Lord Ashley 
to whom he refers, that if, — 

" 1. The window-tax were repealed, 

'* 2. The Building Act repealed (excepting the clauses enacting that 
party and external walls shall be fireproof), 

^ 3. The timber duties either equalized or repealed, and, 



V 



THE SINS OF LEGISLATORS. 53 

'^4. An Act passed to facilitate the transfer of property, 
"There would be no more necessity for model lodging-houses than 
there is for model ships, model cotton-mills, or model steam-engines. 
" The first limits the poor man's house to seven windows, 
''The second limits the size of the poor man's house to 25 feet by 18 
(about the size of a gentleman's dining-room), into which space the builder 
has to cram a staircase, an entrance-passage, a parlour, and a kitchen 
(walls and partitions included). 

'' The third induces the builder to erect the poor man's house of timber 
unfit for building purposes, the duty on the good material (Baltic) being 
fifteen times more than the duty on the bad or injurious article (Cana- 
dian). The Government, even, exclude the latter from all their contracts. 
" The fourth would have considerable influence upon the present miser- 
able state of the dwellings of the poor. Small freeholds might then be 
transferred as easily as leaseholds. The effect of building leases has 
been a direct inducement to bad building.'' 

To guard against mis-statement or over-statement, I have taken 
the precaution to consult a large East-end builder and contractor 
of forty years* experience, Mr. 0. Forrest, Mnseum Works, 17, 
Victoria Park Square, Bethnal Ghreen, who, being churchwarden, 
member of the vestry, and of the board of guardians, adds exten- 
sive knowledge of local public affairs to his extensive knowledge of 
the building business. Mr. Forrest, who authorizes me to give his 
name, vectifie s the foregoing statements with the exception of one 
which ^ / ^ngthens. He says that ** Architect " understates the 
evil enii / v the definition of " a fourth-rate house ; " since the 
dimenm^ . much less than those he gives (perhaps in con- 

formity provisions of a more recent Building Act). Mr. 

Forrest i^ more than this. Besides illustrating the bad 

effects of greai. >ase in ground-rents (in sixty years from £1 to 
£8 10a. for a four^ **ate house) which, joined with other causes, 
had obliged him to abandon plans for industrial dwellings he had 
intended to build — ^besides agreeing with "Architect" that this 
evil has been greatly increased by the difficulties of land- transfer due 
to the law-established system of trusts and entails ;. he pointed out 
that a further penalty on the building of small houses is inflicted 
by additions to local burdens (*' prohibitory imposts" he called 
them) : one of the instances he named being that to the cost of each 
new house has to be added the cost of pavement, roadway and 
sewerage, which is charged according to length of frontage, and 



64 . THE MAN VERSUS THfi STATE. , 

-wliicli, consequently, bears a far larger ratio to the valne of a small 
house than to the value of a large one. 

From these law-produced mischiefs, "which were great a gene- 
ration ago and have since been increasing, let us pass to more recent 
law-produced mischiefs. The misery, the disease, the mortality in 
'' rookeries,'' made continually worse by artificial impediments to 
the increase of fourth-rate houses, and by the necessitated greater 
crowding of those which existed, having become a scandal, G-ovem- 
ment was invoked to remove the evil. It responded by Artisans' 
£}wellings Acts ; giving to local authorities powers to pull down bad 
houses and provide for the building of good ones. "What have been 
the results P A summary of the operations of the Metropolitan 
Board of Works, dated December 21, 1883, shows that up to last 
September it had, at a cost of a million and a quarter to ratepayers, 
unhoused 21,000 persons and provided houses for 12,000 — the " 
remaining 9,000 to be hereafter provided for, being, meanwhile, left 
houseless. This is not all. Another local lieutenant of the Govern- 
ment, the Commission of Sewers for the City, working on the same 
lines, has, under legislative compulsion, pulled down in Golden Lane 
and Petticoat Square, masses of condemned small houses, which, 
together, accommodated 1,734 poor people ; and of the spaces thus 
cleared five years ago, one has, by State-authority, been sold for a 
railway station, and the other Is only now being covered with 
industrial dwellings which will eventually accommodate one-half of 
the expelled population : the result up to the present time being that, 
added to those displaced by the Metropolitan Board of Works, these 
1,734 displaced five years ago, form a total of nearly 11,000 arti- 
ficially made homeless, who have had to find comers for themselves 
in miserable places that were already overflowing ! 

See then what legislation has done. By ill-imposed taxes, 
raising the prices of bricks and timber, it added to the costs of 
houses ; and prompted, for economy's sake, the use of bad materials 
in scanty quantities. To check the consequent production of 
wretched dwellings, it established regpilations which, in mediaeval 
fashion, dictated the quality of the commodity produced : there being 
no perception that by insisting on a higher quality and therefore 
higher price, it would limit the demand and eventually diminish the 
supply. By additional local burdens, legislation has of late still 
further hindered the building of small houses. Finally, having, by 
successive measures, produced first bad houses and then a deficiency 




THE SINS OF LEGISLATORS. 65 

of better ones, it has at length provided for the artificiallj-increased 
overflow of poor people by diminishing the house-capacitj which 
already conld not contain them ! 

Where then lies the blame for the miseries of the East-end P 
Against whom should be raised ''the bitter cry of outcast 
London P " 

The German anthropologist Bastian, tells us that a sick 'native 
of Guinea who causes the fetish to lie by not recovering, is 
strangled ;* and we may reasonably suppose that among the Guinea 
people, any one audacious enough to call in question the power of 
the fetish wbuld be promptly sacrificed. In days when govern- 
mental authority was enforced by strong measures, there was a 
kindred danger in saying anything disrespectful of the political 
fetish. Nowadays, however, the worst punishment to be looked for 
by one who questions its omnipotence, is that he will be reviled as a 
reactionary who talks laissez-faire. That any facts he may bring 
forward will appreciably decrease the established faith is not to be 
expected ; for we are daily shown that this faith is proof against all 
adverse evidence. Let us contemplate a small part of that vast 
mass of it which passes unheeded. 

" A Government-office is like an inverted filter : you send in 
accounts clear and they come out muddy.'' Such was the com- 
parison I heard made many years ago by the late Sir Charles Fox, 
who, in the conduct of his business, had considerable experience of 
public departments. That his opinion was not a singular one, 
though his comparison was, all men know. Exposures by the press 
and criticisms in Parliament, leave no one in ignorance of the 
vices of red-tape routine. Its delays, perpetually complained of, 
and which in the time of Mr. Fox Maule went to the extent that 
" the commissions of officers in the army '* were generally " about 
two years in arrear," is afresh illustrated by the issue of the first 
volume of the detailed census of 1881, more than two years after 
the information was collected. If we seek explanations of such 
delays, we find one origin to be a scarcely credible confusion. In 
the case of the census returns, the Registrar- General tells us that 
" the difficulty consists not merely in the vast multitude of diBEerent 
areas that have to be taken into account, but still more in the 
bewildering complexity of their boundaries : " there being 39,000 

* Menschf iii. p. 225. 



56 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

administrative areas of twenty-two different kinds whicli overlap 
one another — ^hundreds, parishes, boroughs, wards, petty sessional 
divisions, lieutenancy divisions, urban and rural sanitary districts, 
dioceses, registration districts, &c. And then, as Mr. Bathbone, 
M.P., points out,* these many superposed sets of areas with inter- 
secting boundaries, have their respective governing bodies with 
authorities running into one another's districts. Does any one ask 
why for each additional administration Parliament has established 
a fresh set of divisions P The reply which suggests itself is — To 
preserve consistency of method. For this organized confusion cor- 
responds completely with that organized confusion which Parlia- 
ment each year increases by throwing on to the heap of its old Acts 
a hundred new Acts, the provisions of which traverse and qualify 
in all kinds of ways the provisions of multitudinous Acts on to 
which they are thrown : the onus of settling what is the law being 
left to private persons, who lose their property in getting judges' 
interpretations. And again, this system of putting networks of 
districts over other networks, with their conflicting authorities, is 
quite consistent with the method under which the reader of the 
Public Health Act of 1872, who wishes to know what are the 
powers exercised over him, is referred to 26 preceding Acts of 
several classes and numerous dates. f So, too, with administrative 
inertia. Continually there occur cases showing the resistance of 
officialism to improvements ; as by the Admiralty when use of the 
electric telegraph was proposed, and the reply was — " We have a 
very good semaphore system ; " or as by the Post Office, which the 
late Sir Charles Siemens years ago said had obstructed the em- 
ployment of improved methods of telegraphing, and which since 
then has impeded the use of the telephone. Other cases akin to the 
case of industrial dwellings, now and then show how the State 
with one hand increases evils which with the other hand it tries to 
diminish ; as when it puts a duty on fire-insurances and then makes 
regulations for the better putting out of fires : dictating, too, cer- 
tain modes of construction, which, as Captain Shaw shows, entail 
additional dangers.^ Again, the absurdities of official routine, rigid 

• The Nineteenth Century ^ February, 1883. 

t "The Statistics of Legislation." By F. H. Janson, Esq., F.L.S., Vice- 
president of the Incorporated Law Society. [Bead before the Statistical Society, 
May, 1873.] 

{ Fire Surveys ; or, a Summary of the Frincijples to he observed in Esti- 
mating the Bisk of Buildings, 




THE SINS OF LEGISLATOBS. 57 

where it need not be and lax where it should be rigid, occasionally 
become glaring enough to cause scandals ; as when a secret State- 
document of importance, put into the hands of an ill-paid copying 
clerk who was not even in permanent Government employ, was maile 
public by him ; or as when the mode of making the Moorsom fuse, 
which was kept secret even from our highest artillery officers, was 
taught to them by the Bussians, who had been allowed to learn it ; 
or as when a diagram showing the " distances at which British and 
foreign iron-clads could be perforated by our large guns," communi- 
cated by an enterprising cUtachS to his own Gt)vemment, then 
became known ** to all the Governments of Europe," while English 
officers remained ignorant of the facts.* So, too, with State-super- 
vision. Guaranteeing of quality by inspection has been shown, in 
the hall-marking of silver, to be superfluous, while the silver trade 
has been decreased by it ; f and in other cases it has lowered the 
quality by establishiug a standard which it is useless to exceed : 
instance the case of the Cork butter-market, where the higher 
kinds are disadvantaged in not adequately profiting by their better 
repute ; X or, instance the case of herring-branding (now optional) 
the effect of which is to put the many inferior curers who just 
reach the level of official approval, on a par with the few better 
ones who rise above it, and so to discourage these. But such 
lessons pass unlearned. Even where the failure of inspection is 
most glaring, no notice is taken of it; as instance the terrible 
catastrophe by which a train full of people was destroyed along 
with the Tay bridge. Countless denunciations, loud and unsparing, 
were vented against engineer and contractor ; but little, if any- 
thing, was said about the Gt)vernment officer from whom the bridge 
received State-approval. So, too, with prevention of disease. It 
matters not that under the management or dictation of State- 
agents some of the worst evils occur ; as when the lives of 87 wives 
and children of soldiers are sacrificed in the ship Accrington;^ 
or as when typhoid fever and diphtheria are diffused by a State- 
ordered drainage system, as in Edinburgh ; || or as when officially- 

• See Times, October 6, 1874, where other instances are giren. 

t The State in its delation to Trade, by Sir Thomas Farrer, p. 147. 

J Ibid., p. 149. § Hansard, vol. clvi. p. 718, and vol. olvii. p. 4464. 

II Letter of an Edinburgh M.D. in Times of 17th January, 1876, verifying 

other testimonies ; one of "which I had previously cited concerning Windsor, 

where, as in Edinburgh, there was absolutely no typhoid in the undrained parts, 

while it was very fatal in the drained parts. — Studif of Sociology ^ chap, i., notes. 

6 



58 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

enforced sanitary appliances, ever getting ont of order, increase 
the evils thej were to decrease.* Masses of sncli evidence leave 
unabated the confidence with which sanitary inspection is invoked 
— ^invoked, indeed, more than ever; as is shown in the recent 
suggestion that all public schools should be under the supervision 
of health-officers. Nay, even when the State has manifestly caused 
the mischief complained of, faith in its beneficent agency is not at 
all diminished ; as we see in the fact that, having a generation ago 
authorized, or rather required, towns to establish drainage systems 
which delivered sewage into the rivers, and having thus polluted 
the sources of water- supply, an outcry was raised against the 
water-companies for the impurities of their water — an outcry 
which continued after these towns had been compelled, at vast 
extra cost, to revolutionize their drainage systems. And now, as the 
only remedy, there follows the demand that the State, by its local 
proxies, shall undertake the whole business. The State's 
misdoings become, as in the case of industrial dwellings, reasons 
for praying it to do more. 

This worship of the legislature is, in one respect, indeed, less 
excusable than the fetish- worship to which I have tacitly compared 
it. The savage has the defence that his fetish is silent — does not 
confess its inability. But the civilized man persists in ascribing to 
this idol made with his own hands, powers which in one way or 
other it confesses it has not got. I do not mean merely that the 
debates daily tell us of legislative measures which have done evil 
instead of good ; nor do I mean merely that the thousands of Acts 
of Parliament which repeal preceding Acts, are so many tacit 
admissions of failure. Neither do I refer only to such quasi- 
governmental confessions as that contained in the report of the 
Poor Law CommissionerR, who said that — " We find, on the one 
hand, that there is scarcely one statute connected with the adminis- 
tration of public relief which has produced the efEect designed by 
the legislature, and that the majority of them have created new 
evils, and aggravated those which they were intended to prevent, "t 
I refer rather to confessions made by statesmen, and by State-depart- 

* I say this partly from personal knowledge; haying now before me 
memoranda made 25 yei(rs ago concerning such results produced under my own 
observation. Verifying facts have recently been given by Sir Richard Gross in 
the Nineteenth Century for January, 1884i, p. 155. 

t Nicholl's History of Ungluh Poor Law, ii p. 252. 



THE SINS OF LEGISLATORS. 59 

xnents. Here, for example, in a memorial addressed to Mr. G^lad- 
stone, and adopted by a highly-inflnential meeting lield nnder the 
chairmansliip of the late Lord Lyttelton, I read : — 

''We, the nndersigned, Peers, Members of the House of Commons, 
Batepayers, and Inhabitants of the Metropolis, feeling strongly the truth 
and force of your statement made in the House of Commons, in 1866, 
that, ' there is still a lamentable and deplorable state of our whole arrange- 
ments, with regard to public works — vacillation, uncertainty, costliness, 
extravagance, meanness, and all the conflicting vices that could be 
enumerated, are united in our present system,' '' &c., &c* 

Here, again, is an example furnished by a recent minute of the 
Board of Trade (November, 1883), in which it is said that since 
" the Shipwreck Committee of 1836 scarcely a session has passed 
without some Act being passed or some step being taken by the 
legislature or the Government with this object *' [prevention of 
shipwrecks] ; and that " the multiplicity of statutes, which were 
all consolidated into one Act in 1854, has again become a scandal 
and a reproach : " each measnre being passed becanse previous ones 
had failed. And then comes presently the confession that ** the 
loss of life and of ships has been greater since 1876 than it ever 
was before." Meanwhile, the cost of administration has been 
raised from £17,000 a year to £73,000 a year.f 

It is surprising how, spite of better knowledge, the imagination 
is excited by artificial appliances used in particular ways. We see 
it all through human history, from the war-paint with which the 
savage frightens his adversary, down through religions ceremonies 
and regal processions, to the robes of a Speaker and the wand of 
an officially-dressed usher. I remember a child who, able to look 
with tolerable composure on a horrible cadaverous mask while it 
was held in the hand, ran away shrieking when his father put it 
on. A kindred change of feeling comes over constituencies when, 
from boroughs and counties, their members pass to the Legislative 
Chamber. While before them as candidates, they are, by one or 
other party, jeered at, lampooned, "heckled," and in all ways 

* See Times, March 81, 1873. 

t In these paragraphs are contained jost a few additional examples. Nnm* 
ben which I have before given in books and essays, will be found in Social 
Statien (1851); *' Over-Legislation " (1853)} "Representative Oovemment" 
(1857) ; ** Specialized Administration" (1871) ; 8tud^ of Sociology (1873), and 
Postscript to ditto (1880) ; besides cases in smaller essays. 



J 



60 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

treated with utter disrespect. Bat as soon as they assemble at 
Westminster, those against whom taunts and invectives, charges 
of incompetence and folly, had been showered from press and 
platform, excite unlimited faith. Judging from the prayers made 
to them, there is nothing which their wisdom and their power 
cannot compass. 

The reply to all this will doubtless be that nothing better than 
guidance by " collective wisdom " can be had — ^that the select men 
of the nation, led by a re-selected few, bring their best powers, 
enlightened by all the knowledge of the time, to bear on the matters 
before them. " What more would you have ? " will be the question 
asked by most. 

My answer is that this best knowledge of the time with which 
legislators are said to come prepared for their duties, is a know- 
ledge of which the greater part is obviously irrelevant, and that 
they are blameworthy for not seeing what is the relevant know- 
ledge. No amount of the linguistic acquirements by which many 
of them are distinguished will help their judgments in the least ; 
nor will they be appreciably helped by the literatures these acquire- 
ments open to them. Political experiences and speculations coming 
from small ancient societies, through philosophers who assume that 
war is the normal state, that slavery is alike needful and just, and 
that women must remain in perpetual tutelage, can yield them but 
small aid in judging how Acts of Parliament will work in great 
nations of modem types. They may ponder on the doings of all 
the great men by whom, according to the Carlylean theory, society 
is framed, and they may spend years over those accounts of inter- 
national conflicts, and treacheries, and intrigues, and treaties, which 
fill historical works, without being much nearer understanding the 
how and the why of social structures and actions, and the ways in 
which laws aflectthem. Nor does such information as is picked up 
at the factory, on 'Change, or in the justice room, go far towards 
the required preparation. 

That which is really needed is a systematic study of natural 
causation as displayed among human beings socially aggregated. 
Though a distinct consciousness of causation is the last trait which 
intellectual progress brings — though with the savage a simple 
mechanical cause is not conceived as such — ^though even among the 
Greeks the flight of a spear was thought of as guided by a god — 




THE SIKS OF LEGISLATORS. 61 

though from their times down almost to oar own, epidemics 
have been habitually regarded as of Bapematnral origin — and 
thongh among social phenomena, the most complex of all, cansal 
relations may be expected to continue longest unrecognized ; yet in 
our days, the existence of such causal relations has become clear 
enough to force on all who think, the inference that before meddling 
with them they should be diligently studied. The mere facts, now 
familiar, that there is a connexion between the numbers of births, 
deaths, and marriages, and the price of com, and that in the same 
society during the same generation, the ratio of crime to popula- 
tion varies within narrow limits, should be sufficient to make all see 
that human desires, using as guide such intellect as is joined with 
them, act with approximate uniformity. It should be inferred that 
among social causes, those initiated by legislation, similarly 
operating with an average regularity, must not only change men's 
actions, but, by consequence, change their natures — probably in 
ways not intended. There should be recognition of the fact that 
social causation, more than all other causation, is a fructifying 
causation ; and it should be seen that indirect and remote effects are 
no less inevitable than proximate effects. I do not mean that there 
is denial of these statements and inferences. But there are beliefs 
and beliefs — some which are held nominally, some which influence 
conduct in small degrees, some which sway it irresistibly under all 
circumstances ; and unhappily the beliefs of law-makers respecting 
causation in social affairs, are of the superficial sort. Let us look 
at some of the truths which all tacitly admit, but which scarcely 
any take deliberate account of in legislation. 

There is the indisputable fact that each human being is in a 
certain degree modifiable both physically and mentally. Every 
theory of education, every discipline, from that of the arithmetician 
to that of the prize-fighter, every proposed reward for virtue or 
punishment for vice, implies the belief, embodied in sundry proverbs, 
that the use or disuse of each faculty, bodily or mental, is followed 
by an adaptive change in it — loss of power or gain of power, accord- 
ing to demand. 

There is the fact, also in its broader manifestations universally 
recognized,that modifications of Nature in one way or other produced, 
are inheritable. No one denies that by the accumulation of small 
changes^ generation after generation, constitution fits itself to condi- 
tions ; so iihata climate which is fatal to other races is innocuous to 



62 THE ICAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

the adapted race. No one denies that peoples who belong to the 
same original stock but have spread into different habitats where 
they have led different lives, have acquired in course of time 
different aptitudes and different tendencies. No one denies that 
under new conditions new national characters are even now being 
moulded ; as witness the Americans. And if no one denies a 
process of adaptation everywhere and always going on, it is a 
manifest implication that adaptive modifications must be set up by 
eveiy change of social conditions. 

To which there comes the undeniable corollary that every law 
which serves to alter men's modes of action — compelling, or restrain- 
ing, or aiding, in new ways — so affects them as to cause in course 
of time adjustments of their natures. Beyond any immediate 
effect wrought, there is the remote effect, wholly ignored by most — 
a re-moulding of the average character: a re-moulding which may 
be of a desirable kind or of an undesirable kind, but which in any 
case is the most important of the results to be considered. 

Other general truths which the citizen, and still more the 
legislator, ought to contemplate until they become wrought into his 
intellectual fabric, are disclosed when we ask how social activities 
are produced ; and when we recognize the obvious answer that they 
are the aggregate results of the desires of individuals who are 
severally seeking satisfactions, and ordinarily pursuing the ways 
which, with their pre-existing habits and thoughts, seem the 
easiest — ^foJlQ^ng the lines of least resistance: the truths of 
political economy being soman^'idijuences. It needs no proving 
that social structures and social actions must in some way or other 
be the outcome of human emotions guided by ideas — either those 
of ancestors or those of Hving men. And that the right interpre- 
tation of social phenomena is to be found in the co-operation of 
these factors from generation to generation, follows inevitably. 

Such an interpretation soon brings us to the inference that of 
\ the aggregate results of men's desires seeking their gratifications, 
I those which have prompted their private activities and their spon- 
; taneous co-operations, have done much more towards social 
development than those which have worked through governmental 
agencies. That abundant crops now grow where once only wild 
i berries could be gathered, is due to the pursuit of individual satis- 
• fibctioDS through many centuries. The progress from wigwams to 
good houses has resulted from wishes to increase personal welfare ; 




THE SINS OF LEGISLATOBS. 63 

and towns have arisen under the like promptings. Beginning with 
traffic at gatherings on occasions of religions festivals, the trading 
organization, now so extensive and complex, has been produced 
entirely hy men's efforts to achieve their private ends. Perpetuallj 
Governments have thwarted and deranged the growth, but have in 
no way furthered it; save by partially discharging their proper 
function and maintaining social order. So, too, with those advances 
of knowledge and those improvements of appliances, by which 
these structural changes and these increasing activities have been 
made possible. It is not to the State that we owe the multitudinous 
useful inventions from the spade to the telephone ; it was not the 
State which made possible exteoded navigation by a developed 
astronomy; it was not the State which made the discoveries in 
physics, chemistry, and the rest, which guide modem manufacturers ; 
it was not the State which devised the machinery for producing 
fabrics of every kind, for transferring men and things from place to 
place, and for ministering in a thousand ways to our comforts. The 
world-wide transactions conducted in merchant's offices, the rush 
of traffic filling our streets, the retail distributing system which 
brings everything within easy reach and delivers the necessaries of 
life daily at our doors, are not of governmental origin. All these 
are results of the spontaneous activities of citizenis, separate or 
grouped. Nay, to these spontaneous activities Governments owe 
the very means of performing their duties. Divest the political 
machinery of all those aids which Science and Art have yielded 
it — leave it with those only which State-officials have invented; 
and its functions would cease. The very language in which its 
laws are registered and the orders of its agents daily given, is 
an instrument not in the remotest degree due to the legislator ; 
but is one which has unawares grown up during men's inter- 
course while pursuing their personal satisfactions. 

And then a truth to which the foregoing one introduces us, is 
that this spontaneously-formed social organization is so bound 
together that you cannot act on one part without acting more or 
less on all parts. We see this unmistakably when a cotton-famine, 
first paralyzing certain manufacturing districts and then afiecting 
the doings of wholesale and retail distributora throughout the 
kingdom, as well as the people they supply, goes on to afEect the 
makers and distributors, as well as the wearers, of other fabrics-— 
woollen, linen, &o. Or we see it when a rise in the price of 



64 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

coal, besides influencing domestic life everywhere, hinders the 
greater part of our industries, raises the prices of the commodities 
produced, alters the consumption of them, and changes the habits 
of consumers. What we see clearly in these marked cases happens 
in every case, in sensible or in insensible ways. And manifestly. 
Acts of Parliament are among those factors which, beyond the 
effects directly produced, have countless other effects of multi- 
tudinous kinds. As I heard remarked by a distinguished professor, 
whose studies give ample means of judging — "When once you 
begin to interfere with the order of Nature there is no knowing 
where the results will end." And if this is true of that sub- 
human order of Nature to which he referred, still more is it true 
of that order of Nature existing in the social arrangements pro- 
duced by aggregated human beings. 

And now to carry home the conclusion that the legislator should 
bring to his business a vivid consciousness of these and other such 
broad truths concerning the human society with which he proposes 
to deal, let me present somewhat more fully one of them not yet 
mentioned. 

The continuance of every higher species of creature depends on 
conformity, now to one, now to the other, of two radically-opposed 
principles. The early lives of its members, and the adult lives of 
its members, have to be dealt with in contrary ways. We will 
contemplate them in their natural order. 

One of the most familiar facts is that animals of superior types, 
comparatively slow in reaching maturity, are enabled when they 
have reached it^ to give more aid to their offspring than animals of 
inferior types. The adults foster their young during periods more 
or less prolonged, while yet the young are unable to provide for 
themselves ; and it is obvious that maintenance of the species can 
be secured only by a parental care adjusted to the need consequent 
on imperfection. It requires no proving that the blind unfledged 
hedge-bird, or the young puppy even after it has acquired sight, 
would forthwith die if it had to keep itself warm and obtain its' 
own food. The gratuitous parental aid must be great in propor- 
tion as the young one is of little worth, either to itself or to others; 
and it may diminish as fast as, by increasing development, the 
young one acquires worth, at first for self-sustentatioii, and by-aad- 
by for sustentation of others. That is to say, during immaturity, 




/ 



-J 



^ 



THE SINS OF LEGISIATOBS. 65 

benefits received must be inversely as the power or ability of the 
receiver. Clearly if during this first part of life benefits were 
proportioned to merits, or rewards to deserts, the species would 
disappear in a generation. 

Prom this regime of the family-group, let us turn to the regime 
of that larger group formed by the adult members of the species. 
Ask what happens when the new individual, acquiring complete 
use of its powers and ceasing to have parental aid, is left to itself. 
Now there comes into play a principle just the reverse of that 
above described. Throughout the rest of its life, each adult gets 
benefit in proportion to merit — ^reward in proportion to desert: 
merit and desert in each case being understood as ability to fulfil 
all the requirements of life — ^to get food, to secure shelter, to 
escape enemies. Placed in competition with members of its own 
species and in antagonism with members of other species, it 
dwindles and gets killed off, or thrives and propagates, according 
as it is ni-endowed or well-endowed. Manifestly an opposite 
regime^ could it be maintained, would, in course of time, be fatal 
to the species. If the benefits received by each individual were 
proportionate to its inferiority — ^if, as a consequence, multiplica- 
tion of the inferior was furthered and multiplication of the supe- 
rior hindered, progressive degradation would result; and eventually 
the degenerate species would fail to hold its ground in presence 
of antagonistic species and competing species. 

The broad fact then, here to be noted, is that Nature's modes 
of treatment inside the family-group and outside the family-group, 
are diametrically opposed to one another ; and that the intrusion 
of either mode into the sphere of the other, would be fatal to the 
species either immediately or remotely. 

Does any one think that the like does not hold of the human 
species? He cannot deny that within the human family, as within 
any inferior family, it would be fatal to proportion benefits to 
merits. Can he assert that outside the family, among adults, there 
should not be a proportioning of benefits to merits ? Will he con- 
tend that no mischief will result if the lowly endowed are enabled 
to thrive and multiply as much as, or more than, the highly 
endowed ? A society of men, standing towards other societies in 
relations of either antagonism or competition, may be considered 
as a species, or, more litei*ally, as a variety of a species ; and it must 
be true of it as of otner species or varieties, that it will be unable 



•66 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

to hold its own in the struggle with other societies, if it disad- 
vantages its superior units that it may advantage its inferior units. 
Surely none can fail to see that were the principle of family life to 
be adopted and fully carried out in social life — were reward always 
great in proportion as desert was small, fatal results to the society 
would quickly follow ; and if so, then even a partial intrusion of 
the family rSgitne into the regime of the State, will be slowly fol- 
lowed by fatal results. Society in its corporate capacity, cannot 
without immediate or remoter disaster interfere with the play of 
these opposed principles under which every species has reached 
such fitness for its mode of life as it possesses, and under which it 
maintains that fitness. 

I say advisedly — society in its corporate capacity: not intending 
to exclude or condemn aid given to the inferior by the superior in 
their individual capacities. Though when given so indiscriminately 
as to enable the inferior to multiply, such aid entails mischief ; yet 
in the absence of aid given by society, individual aid, more gene- 
rally demanded than now, and associated with a greater sense of 
responsibility, would, on the average, be given with the effect of 
fostering the unfortunate worthy rather than the innately un- 
worthy: there being always, too, the concomitant social benefit 
arising from culture of the sympathies. But all this may be 
admitted while asserting that the radical distinction between 
family-ethics and State-ethics must be maintained ; and that while 
generosity must be the essential principle of the one, justice must 
be the essential principle of the other — ^a rigorous maintenance of 
those normal relations among citizens under which each gets in 
return for his labour, skilled or unskilled, bodily or mental, as 
much as is proved to be its value by the demand for it: such 
return, therefore, as will enable him to thrive and rear offspring in 
proportion to the superiorities which make him valuable to himself 
and others. 

And yet, notwithstanding the conspicuousness of these truths, 
which should strike every one who leaves his lexicons, and his law- 
deeds, and his ledgers, and looks abroad into that natural order of 
things under which we exist, and to which we must conform, there 
is continual advocacy of paternal government. The intrusion of 
family-ethics into the ethics of the State, instead of being regarded 
as socially injurious, is more and more demanded as the only 
efficient means to social benefit. So for has this delusion now gone, 




THE SINS OF LEGISIATOBS. 67 

that it vitiates tbe beliefs of those who might, more than all others, 
be thought safe from it. In the essay to which the Cobden Glnb 
awarded its prize in 1880, there occurs the assertion that "the 
truth of Free Trade is clouded over by the laissez'faire fallacy ;" 
and we are told that *' we need a great deal more paternal govern- 
ment — ^that bugbear of the old economists."* 

Vitally important as is thie truth above insisted upon, since 
acceptance or rejection of it affects the entire fabric of political 
conclusions formed, I may be excused if I emphasize it by here 
quoting certain passages contained in a work I published in 1851 : 
premising, only, that^tibie reader must not hold me committed to 
such teleological implications as they contain. After describing 
"that state of Universal warlare maintained throughout the lower 
creation," and showing that an average of benefit results from it, I 
have continued thus : — 

"Note further, that their camiyorous enemies not only remove from 
herbivorous herds individuals past their prime, but also weed out the 
sickly, the malformed, and the least feet or powerful By the aid of 
which purifying process, as well as by the fighting so universal in the 
pairing season, all vitiation of the race through the multiplication of its 
inferior samples is prevented ; and the maintenance of a constitution com- 
pletely adapted to surrounding conditions, and therefore most productive 
of happiness, is ensured. 

" The development of the higher creation is a progress towards a form 
of being capable of a happiness undiminished by these drawbacks. It is 
in the human race that the consummation is to be accomplished. Civili- 
zation is the last stage of its accomplishment. And the ideal man is the 
man in whom all the conditions of that accomplishment are fulfilled. 
Meanwhile, the well-being of existing humanity, and the unfolding of it 
into this ultimate perfection, are both secured by that same beneficient, 
though severe discipline, to which the animate creation at large is subject : 
a discipline which is pitiless in the working out of good : a felicity-pursuing 
law which never swerves for the avoidance of partial and temporary suf- 
fering. The poverty of the incapable, the distresses that come upon the 
imprudent, the starvation of the idle, and those shoulderings aside of the 
weak by the strong, which leave so many ' in shallows and in miseries,' are 
the decrees of a large, far-seeing benevolence." 

• • • • • •.. • 

" To become fit for the social state, man has not only to lose his savageness, 

* On the Value of PoUiieal Sooiwmy to Mankind, By A N. CummiDg, 
pp. 47, 48. 



68 THE MAN VER&V8 THE STATE. 

but he Laa to acquire the capacities needfal for civilized life. Power of 
application must be developed ; such modification of the intellect as shall 
qualify it for its new tasks must take place ; and, above all, there must 
be gained the ability to sacrifice a small immediate gratification for a 
future great one. The state of transition will of course be an unhappy 
state. Misery inevitably results from incongruity between constitution 
and conditions. All these evils which afflict us, and seem to the uninitiated 
the obvious consequences of this or that removable cause, are unavoidable 
attendants on the adaptation now in progress. Humanity is being pressed 
agaiost the inexorable necessities of its new position — is being moulded 
into harmony with them, and has to bear the resulting unhappiness as 
best it can. The process rnnut be imdergone, and the sufferings must be 
endured. No power on earth, no cunningly-devised laws of statesmen, no 
world-rectifying schemes of the humane, no commimist panaceas, no 
reforms that men ever did broach or ever will broach, can diminish them 
one jot. Intensified they may be, and are; and in preventing their inten- 
sification, the philanthropic will find ample scope for exertion. But there 
is bound up with the change a normal amount of suffering, which cannot 
be lessened without altering the very laws of life.^ 

• •••••• 

'' Of course, in so far as the severity of this process is mitigated by the 
spontaneous sympathy of men for each other, it is proper that it should be 
mitigated : albeit there is imquestionably harm done when sympathy is 
shown, without any regard to ultimate results. But the drawbacks hence 
arising are nothing like commensurate with the benefits otherwise con- 
ferred. Only when this sympathy prompts to a breach of equity-— only 
when it originates an interference forbidden by the law of equal freedom 
-only when, by 80 doing, it suspends in some particular department of 
life the relationship between constitution and conditions, does it work 
pure eviL Then, however, it defeats its own end. Instead of diminishing 
suffering, it eventually increases it. It favours the multiplication of those 
worst fitted for existence, and, by consequence, hinders the multiplication 
of those best fitted for existence — leaving, as it does, less room for them. 
It tends to fill the \(orld with those to whom life will bring most pain, and 
tends to keep out of it those to whom life will bring most pleasure. It 
inflicts positive misery, and prevents positive happiness." — Social Statics^ 
pp. 322-5 and pp. 380-1 (edition of 1851). 

The lapse of a third of a century since these passages were pub- 
lished, has brought me no reason for retreating from the position 
taken up in them. Contrariwise, it has brought a vast amount of 
evidence strengthening that position. The beneficial results of the 
survival of the fittest, prove to be immeasurably greater than those 
above indicated. The process of "natural selection/' as Mr. Darwin 




THE SINS OF LEGISIATOBS. 69 

called it) co-operating witli a tendency to variation and to inheri- 
tance of variations, lie has shown to be a chief cause (though not^ 
I believe, the sole cause) of that evolution through which all living 
things, beginning with the lowest and diverging and re-diverging 
aib they evolved, have reached their present degrees of organization 
and adaptation to their modes of life. So familiar has this truth 
become that some apology seems needed for naming it. And yet, 
strange to say, now that this truth is recognized by most cultivated 
people — now that the beneficent working of the survival of the 
fittest has been so impressed on them that, much more than people 
in past times, they might be expected to hesitate before neutralizing 
its action — now more than ever before in the history of the world, 

are they doing all they can to further survival of the unliitestT ■■ 

■^ Jj^ut tiie postulate that men are rationalberngs, continually leads / 
one to draw inferences which prove to be extremely wide of the / 
mark.* / 

/ 

" Yes truly ; your principle is derived from the lives of brutes, 
and is a brutal principle. You will not persuade me that men are 
to be under the discipline which animals are under; I care nothing 
for your natural-history arguments. My conscience shows me that 
the feeble and the suffering must be helped ; and if selfish people 
won't help them, they must be forced by law to help them. Don't 
tell me that the milk of human kindness is to be reserved for the 
relations between individuals, and that Governments must be the 
administrators of nothing but hard justice. Every man with 

* The saying of Emerson that most people can nnderstand a principle only 
when its light falls on a fact, induces me here to cite a fact which may carry 
home the above principle to those on whom, in its abstract form, it will produce no 
effect. It rarely happens that the amount of evil caused by fostering the yicious 
and good-for-nothing can be estimated. But in America, at a meeting of the 
States Charities Aid Association, held on December 18, 1874, a startling instance 
was giyen in detail by Dr. Harris. It was furnished by a county on the Upper 
Hudson, remarkable for the ratio of crime and poverty to population. G-ene- 
rations ago there had existed a certain '' gatter-child," as she would be here called, 
known as " Margaret/' who proved to be the prolific mother of a prolific race. 
Besides great numbers of idiots, imbeciles, drunkards, lunatics, paupers, and pros- 
titutes, ** the county records show two hundred of her descendants who have 
been criminals." Was it kindness or cruelty which, generation after generation, 
enabled these to muliply and become an increasing curse to the society around 
them ? [For particulars see I%e Jukes : a Study in Crimea Pauperism, DiS' 
ease and Seredity, By B. L. Dugdale. New York : Futnams.] 



70 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

sympatbj in him must feel that hunger and pain and sqnalor must 
be' prevented ; and that if private agencies do not Bnf&ce^ then pnblio 
agencies mnst be established." 

Such is the kind of response which I expect to be made by nine 
out of ten. In some of them it will doubtless result from a fellow- 
feeling so acute that they cannot contemplate human misery 
without an impatience which excludes all thought of remote 
results. Concerning the susceptibilities of the rest, we may, how- 
ever, be somewhat sceptical. Persons who, now in this case and 
now in that, are angry if, to maintain our supposed national " in- 
terests " or national ** prestige,** those in authority do not promptly 
send out some thousands of men to be partially destroyed while 
destroying other thousands of men whose intentions we suspect, or 
whose institutions we think dangerous to us, or whose territory our 
colonists want, cannot after all be so tender in feeling that contem- 
plating the hardships of the poor is intolerable to them. Little 
ad^niration need be felt for the professed sympathies of people who 
urge on a policy which breaks up progressing societies ; and who 
then look on with cynical indifference at the weltering confusion 
left behind, with all its entailed suffering and death. Those who, 
when Boers asserting their independence successfully resisted us, 
were angry because British "honour " was not maintained by fight- 
ing to avenge a defeat, at the cost, of more mortality and misery to 
our own soldiers and their antagonists, cannot have so much '' en- 
thusiasm of humanity " as protests like that indicated above would 
' lead one to expect. Indeed, along with this sensitiveness which they 
profess will not let them look with patience on the pains of *' the 
battle of life " as it quietly goes on around, they appear to have a 
callousness which not only tolerates but enjoys contemplating the 
pains of battles of the literal kind ; as one sees in the demand for 
illustrated papers containing scenes of carnage, and in the greedi- 
ness with which detailed accounts of bloody engagements are read. 
. ^ We may reasonably have our doubts about men whose feelings are 
' i such that they cannot bear the thought of hardships borne, mostly 
by the idle and the improvident, and who, nevertheless, have de- 
manded thirty-one editions of *' The Fifteen Decisive Battles of the 
World," in which they may revel in accounts of slaughter. Nay, even 
still more remarkable is the contrast between the professed tender- 
heartedness and the actual hard-heartedness of those who would 
reverse the normal course of things that immediate miseries may 




THE SINS OF LEGISLATOBS. . 71 

be preyented, eyen at the cost of greater miseries hereafter pro- / 
duced. For on other occasions you may hear them, with utter dis- 
regard of bloodshed and death, contend that in the interests of ; 
humanity at large it is well that the inferior races shonld be ex- [ 
terminated and their places occupied by the superior races. So 
that, marvellous to relate, though they cannot think with calmness I 
of the evils accompanying the struggle for existence as it is carried I 
on without violence among individuals in their own society, they / 
contemplate with contented equanimity such evils in their intense f 
and wholesale forms, when inflicted by fire and sword on entire f 
communities. Not worthy of much respect then, as it seems to me, I 
is this generous consideration of the inferior at home which is/ 
accompanied by unscrupulous sacrifice of the inferior abroad. 

Still less respectable appears this extreme concern for those of 
our own blood which goes along with utter unconcern for those 
^ of other blood, when we observe its methods. Did it prompt per- 
sonal effort to relieve the sufEering, it would rightly receive approv* 
ing recognition. Were the many who express this cheap pity like 
the few who patiently, week after week and year after year, devote 
large parts of their time to helping and encouraging, and occasion- 
ally amusing, those who, in some cases by ill-fortune and in other 
cases by incapacity or misconduct, are brought to lives of 
hardship, they would be worthy of unqualified admiration. The 
more there are of men and women who help the poor to help 
themselves — the more there are of those whose sympathy is 
exhibited directly and not by proxy, the more we may rejoice. 
But the immense majority of the persons who wish to mitigate by 
law the miseries of the unsuccessful and the reckless, propose to 
do this in small measure at their own cost and mainly at the cost 
of others — sometimes with their assent but mostly without. 
More than this is true ; for those who are to be forced to do so 
much for the distressed, often equally or more require something 
doing for them. The deserving poor are among those who are 
burdened to pay the costs of caring for the undeserving poor. As, 
under the old Poor Law, the diligent and provident labourer had 
to pay that the good-for-nothings might not suffer, until 
frequently under this extra burden he broke down and himself 
took refuge in the workhouse — as, at present, it is admitted that 
the total rates levied in large towns for all public purposes, have 
now reached such a height that they *' cannot be exceeded 



72 THE ICAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

withont inflicting great hardship on the small shopkeepers and 
artisans, who already find it difficult enough to keep themselves 
free from the pauper taint;"* so in all cases, the policy is one 
which intensifies the pains of those most deserving of pity, that 
the pains of those least deserving of pity may be mitigated. In 
short, men who are so sympathetic that they cannot allow the 
struggle for existence to bring on the unworthy the sufferings 
consequent on their incapacity or misconduct, are so un- 
sympathetic that they can, without hesitation, make the struggle 
for existence haider for the worthy, and inflict on them and their 
children artificial evils in addition to the natural evils they have 
to bear I 

And here we are brought round to our original topic— the sins 
of legislators. Here there comes clearly before us the commonest of 
the transgressions which rulers commit— a transgression so common, 
and so sanctified by custom, that no one imagines it to be a trans- 
gression. Here we see that, as indicated at the outset. Government, 
begotten of aggression and by aggression, ever continues to betray 
its original nature by its aggressiveness ; and that even what on 
its nearer face seems beneficence only, shows, on its remoter face, 
not a little maleficence — ^kindness at the cost of cruelty. For is it 
not cruel to increase the sufferings of the better that the sufferings 
of the worse may be decreased ? 

It is, indeed, marvellous how readily we let ourselves be deceived 
by words and phrases which suggest one aspect of the facts while 
leaving the opposite aspect unsuggested. A good illustration of 
this, and one germane to the immediate question, is seen in the use 
of the words " protection " and " protectionist " by the antagonists 
of free-trade, and in the tacit admission of its propriety by free- 
traders. While the one party has habitually ignored, the other 
party has habitually failed to emphasize, the truth that this so- 
called protection always involves aggression ; and that the name 
aggfressionist ought to be substituted for the name protectionist. 
For nothi dg can be more certain than that if, to maintain A's 
profit, B is forbidden to buy of C, or is fined to the extent of the 
duty if he buys of C, B is aggresssed upon that A may be 
" proteclred." Nay, " aggressionists " is a title doubly more 
applicable to the anti-free-traders than is the eaphemistic title 
* Mr. Chamberlain in Fortnightly Review, December, 1883, p. 772. 



,v 



THE SINS OF LEGISLATOBS. 73 

^' protectionists ; " since, tbat one producer may gain, ten con- 
sumers are fleeced. 

Now just the like confusion of ideas, caused by looking at one 
face only of the transaction, may be traced throughout all the 
legislation which forcibly takes the property of this man for the 
purpose of giving gratis benefits to that man. Habitually when 
one of the numerous measures thus characterized is discussed, the 
dominant thought is concerning the pitiable Jones who is to be 
protected against some evil ; while no thought is given to the 
hard-working Brown who is aggressed upon, often much more to 
be pitied. Money is exacted (either directly or through raised 
rent) from the huckster who only by extreme pinching can pay 
her way, from the mason thrown out of work by a strike, from 
the mechanic whose savings are melting away during an ilMess, 
from the widow who washes or sews from dawn to dark to feed 
her ftttherless little ones ; and ^11 that the dissolute may be saved 
from hunger, that the children of less impoverished neighbours 
may have cheap lessons, and that various people, mostly better ofP, 
may read newspapers and novels for nothing! The error of 
nomenclature is, in one respect, more misleading than that which 
allows aggressionists to be called protectionists; for, as just 
shown, protection of the vicious poor involves aggression on the 
virtuous poor. Doubtless it is true that the greater part of the 
money exacted comes from those who are relatively well-ofE. But 
this is no consolation to the ill-off from whom the rest is exacted. 
Nay, if the comparison be made between the pressures borne by 
the two classes respectively, it becomes manifest that the case is 
even worse than at first appears; for while to the well-off the 
exaction means loss of luxuries^ to the ill-off it means loss of 
necessaries. 

And now see the Nemesis which is threatening to follow this 
chronic sin of legislators. They and their class, in common with 
all owners of property, are in danger of suffering from a sweeping 
application of that general principle practically asserted by each 
of these confiscating Acts of Parliament. For what is the tacit 
assumption on which such Acts proceed ? It is the assumption 
that no man has any claim to his property, not even to that which 
he has earned by the sweat of his brow, save by permission of the 
community ; and that the community may cancel the claim to any 

extent it thinks fit. No defence can be made for this appropria- 

6 



74 THE MAN VESSUa THE STATE. 

tion of , A's possessions for tlie benefit of B, save one wbich sets 
out with the postulate that society as a whole has an absolute 
right over the possessions of each member. And now this 
doctrine, which has been tacitly assumed, is being openly pro- 
claimed. Mr. George and his friends, Mr. Hyndman and his 
supporters, are pushing the theory to its logical issue. They have 
been instructed by examples, yearly increasing in number, that 
the individual has no rights but what the community may 
equitably over-ride ; and they are now saying — " It shall go hard 
but we will better the instruction/' and over-ride individual rights 
altogether. 

Legislative misdeeds of the classes above indicated are in 
large measure explained, and reprobation of them mitigated, when 
we look at the matter from afar oSt, They have their root in the 
error that society is a manuf actiy*e ; whereas it is a growth. 
^Neither the culture of past times nor the culture of the present 
time, has given to any considerable number of people a scientific 
conception of a society — a conception of it as having a natural 
structure in which all its institutions, governmental, religious, 
industrial, commercial, &c. <&c., are inter-dependently bound — a 
structure which is in a sense organic. Or if such a conception is 
nominally entertained, it is not entertained in such way as to be 
operative on conduct. Contrariwise, incorporated humanity is 
Tery commonly thought of as though it were like so much dough 
which the cook can mould as she pleases into pie-crusi^ or puff, or 
tartlet. The communist shows us unmistakably that he thinks of 
the body politic as admitting of being shaped thus or thus at will ; 
and the tacit implication of many Acts of Parliament is that 
aggregated men, twisted into this or that arrangement^ will 
remain as intended. 

It may indeed be said that even irrespective of this erroneous 
conception of a society as a plastic mass instead of as an organized 
body, facts forced on his attention hour by hour should make 
every one sceptical as to the success of this or that proposed way 
of changing a people's actions. Alike to the citizen and to the 
legislator, home-experiences daily supply proofs that the conduct 
of human beings baulks calculation. He has given up the thought 
of managing his wife and lets her manage him. Children on 
whom he has tried now reprimand, now punishment, now suasion, 




THE SINS OF LEGISLATORS. 75 

now reward, do not respond satisfactorily to any method ; and no 
expostulation prevents their mother from treating them in ways 
he thinks mischievons. So, too, his dealings with his servants, 
whether by reasoning or by scolding, rarely succeed for long: 
the falling short of attention, or punctuality, or cleanliness, or 
sobriety, leads to constant changes. Yet, difficult as he finds it to 
deal with humanity in detail, he is confident of his ability to deal 
with embodied humanity. Citizens, not one-thousandth of whom 
he knows, not one-hundredth of whom he ever saw, and the great 
mass of whom belong to classes having habits and modes of 
thought of which he has but dim notions, he feels sure will act 
in certain ways he foresees, and fulfil ends he wishes.. Is there 
not a marvellous incongruity between premises and conclusion ? 

One might have expected that whether they observed the 
implications of these domestic failures, or whether they con- 
templated in every newspaper the indications of a social life too 
vast, too varied, too involved, to be even vaguely pictured in 
thought, men would have entered on the business of law-making 
with the greatest hesitation. Yet in this more than in anything 
else do they show a confident readiness. Nowhere is there so 
astounding a contrast between the difficulty of the task and the 
unpreparedness of those who undertake it. Unquestionably 
among monstrous beliefs one of the most monstrous is that while 
for a simple handicraft, such as shoe-making, a long apprenticeship 
is needful, the sole thing which needs no apprenticeship is making 
a nation's laws ! 

Summing up the results of the discussion, may we not reason- 
ably say that there lie before the legislator several open secrets, 
which yet are so open that they ought not to remain secrets to one 
who undertakes the vast and terrible responsibility of dealing 
with millions upon millions of human beings by measures which, 
if they do not conduce to their happiness, will increase their 
miseried and accelerate their deaths P 

There is first of all the undeniable truth, conspicuous and yet 
absolutely ignored, that there are no phenomena which a society 
presents but what have their origins in the phenomena of indi- 
vidual human life, which again have their roots in vital phe- 
nomena at large. And there is the inevitable implication that 
unless these vital phenomena, bodily and mental, are chaotic in 



76 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

their relations (a supposition excluded by the very maintenance of 
life) the resulting phenomena cannot be wholly chaotic: there 
must be some kind of order in the phenomena which grow out of 
them when associated human beings have to co-operate. Evidently, 
then, when one who has not studied such resulting phenomena of 
social order, undertakes to regulate society, he is pretty certain to 
work mischiefs. 

In the second place, apart from h 'priori reasoning, this con- 
clusion should be forced on the legislator by comparisons of 
societies. It ought to be sufficiently manifest that before med- 
dling with the details of social organization, inquiry should be 
made whe^ther social organization has a natural history ; and that 
to answer this inquiry, it would be well, setting out with the 
simplest societies, to see in what respects social structures agree. 
Such comparative spciology, pursued to a very small extent, shows 
a substantial uniformity of genesis. The habitual existence of 
chieftainship, and the establishment of chiefly authority by war ; 
the rise everywhere of the medicine man and priest ; the presence 
of a cult having in all places the same fundamental traits; the 
traces of division of labour, 6arly displayed, which gradually 
become more marked; and the various complications, political, 
ecclesiastical, industrial, which arise as groups ara compounded 
and re-compounded by war ; quickly prove to any who compares 
them that, apart from all their special differences, societies have 
general resemblances in their modes of origin and development. 
They present traits of structure showing that social organization 
has laws which over-ride .individual wills ; and laws the disregard 
of which must be fraught with disaster* 

And then, in the third place, there is that mass of guiding 
information yielded by the records of legislation in our own 
country and in other countries, which still more obviously demands 
attention. Here and elsewhere, attempts of multitudinous kinds, 
made by kings and statesmen, have failed to do the good intended 
and have worked unexpected evils. Century after century new 
measures like the old ones, and other measures akin in principle, 
have again disappointed hopes and again brought disaster. And 
yet it is thought neither by electors nor by those they elect, that 
there is any need for systematic study of that law-making which 
in bygone ages went on working the ill-being of the people when 
it tried to achieve their well-being. Surely there can be no fitness 




THE SINS OF LEGISLATOKS. 77 

for legislative functions without wide knowledge of those legislative 
experiences which the past has hequeathed. 

Reverting, then, to the analogy drawn at the outset, we must 
say that the legislator is fuorally blameless or morally blameworthy, 
according as he has or has not acquainted himself with these 
several classes of facts. A physician who, after years of study, 
has gained a competent knowledge of physiology, pathology and 
therapeutics, is not held criminally responsible if a man dies under 
his treatment : he has prepared himself as well as he can, and has 
acted to the best of his judgment. Similarly the legislator whose 
measures produce evil instead of good, notwithstanding the exten- 
sive and methodic inquiries which helped him to decide, cannot be 
held to have committed more than an error of reasoning. Contra<ri- 
wise, the legislator who is wholly or in great part uninformed 
concerning these masses of facts which he must examine before his 
opii^ion on a proposed law can be of any value, and who nevertheless 
helps to pass that law, can no more be absolved if misery and 
mortality result, than the journeyman druggist can be absolved 
w^hen death is caused by the medicine he ignorantly prescribes* 



THE GREAT POLITICAL SUPEBSTITION. 



The great political superstition of tlie past was tlie divine right 
of kings. The great political superstition of the present is the 
divine righ t of _ parliament s. The oil of anointing seems nnawares 

Lave dnpped from the head of the one on to the heads of the 
many, and given sacredness to them also and to their decrees. 

However irrational we may think the earlier of these belief s, 
we must admit that it was more consistent than is the latter. 
Whether we go back to times when the king was a god, or to 
times when he was a descendant of a god, or to times when he 
was god-appointed, we see good reason for passive obedience to his 
will. When, as under Loois XIY., theologians like Bossuet taught 
that kings " are gods, and share in a manner the Divine indepen- 
dence," or when it was thought, as by our own Tory party in old 
days, that " the monarch was the delegate of heaven ;" it is clear 
that, given the premise, the inevitable conclasion was that no 
bounds could be set to governmental commands. But for tbe 
modem belief such a warrant does not exist. Making no preten** 
sion to divine descent or divine appointment, a legislative body 
can show no supernatural justification for its claim to unlimited 
authority ; and no natural justification has ever been attempted. 
Hence, belief in its unlimited authority is without that consistency 
which of old characterized belief in a king's unlimited authority. 

It is curious how commonly men continue to hold in fact, 
doctrines which they have rejected in name — ^retaining the substance 
after they have abandoned the form. In Theology an illustration 
is supplied by Carlyle, who, in his student days, giving up, as he 
thought, the creed of his fathers, rejected its shell only, keeping 
the contents; and was proved by his conceptions of the world, 
and man, and conduct, to be still among the sternest of Scotch 




THE GREAT POLmCAL SUPERSTITION. 79 

Galvmists. Similarly, Science fnmislies an instance in one who 
nnited natnralism in Geology with Bupematnralism in Biology — 
Sir Charles Lyell. While, as the leading expositor of the nnif ormi- 
tarian theory in Geology, he ignored wholly the Mosaic cosmogony, 
he long defended that belief in special creations of organic types, 
for which no other source than the Mosaic cosmogony conld be 
assigned ; and only in the latter part of his life surrendered to the 
arguments of Mr. Darwin. In Politics, as above implied, we have 
an analogous case. The tacitly-asserted doctrine, common to 
Tories, Whigs, and Radicals, that governmental authority is 
unlimited, dates back to times when the law-giver was supposed to 
have a warrant from God ; and it survives still, though the belief 
that the law-giver has God's warrant has died out. " Oh, an Act 
of Parliament can do anything," is the reply made to a citizen who 
questions the legitimacy of some arbitrary State-interference ; and 
the citizen stands paralyzed. It does not occur to him to ask the 
how, and the when, and the whence, of this asserted omnipotence^ 
bounded only by physical impossibilities. 

Here we will take leave to question it. In default of the justi- 
fication, once logically valid, that the ruler on Earth being a deputy 
of the ruler in Heaven, submission to him in all things is a duty, 
let us ask what reason there is for asserting the duty of submission 
in all things to a ruling power, constitutional or republican, which 
has no Heaven-derived supremacy. Evidently this inquiry com- 
mits us to a criticism of past and present theories concerning 
political authority. To revive questions supposed to be long since 
settled, may be thought to need some apology; but there is a 
sufficient apology in the implication above made clear, that the 
theory commonly accepted is ill-based or unbased. 

The notion of sovereignty is that which first presents itself ; 
and a critical examination of this notion, as entertained by those 
who do not postulate the supernatural origin of sovereignty, carries 
us back to the arguments of Hobbes. 

Let us grant Hobbes's postulate that, " during the time men 
live without a common power to keep them all in awe, they are in ; 
that condition which is called war .... of every man against 
every man ;"• though this is not true, since there are some small 
uncivilized societies in which, without any " common power to keep 

• Hobbes, Colleeied Works, vol. iii. pp. 112^13. 



80 THE MAN VERSUS THE StATE. 

tHem all in awe," men maintain peace and harmony better tlian if 
is maintained in societieB where snch a power exists. Let ns snp- 
pose him to be right, too, in assuming that the rise of a ruling 
power over associated men, results from their desires to preserve 
order among themselves ; though, in fact, it habitually arises from 
the need for subordination to a leader in war, defensive or offensive, 
and has originally no necessary, and often no actual, relation to 
the preservation of order among the combined individuals. Once 
more, let us admit the indefensible assumption that to escape the 
evils of chronic conflicts, which must otherwise continue among 
them, the members of a community enter into a " pact or covenant," 
by which they all bind themselves to surrender their primitive 
freedom of action, and subordinate themselves to the will of a ruHng 
power agreed upon:* accepting, also, the implication that their 
descendants for ever are bound by the covenant which remote 
ancestors made for them. Let us, I say, not object to these data, 
but pass to the conclusions Hobbes draws. He says :^ 

** For where no covenant hath preceded, there hath no right been trans- 
ferred, and every man has right to every thing ; and consequently, no action 
can be unjust. Bat when a covenant is made, then to break it is unjust : 
and the definition of injustice, is no other than the not performance of 
covenant, • • • • Therefore before the names of just and unjust can have 
place, there must be some coercive power, to compel men equally to the 
performance of their covenants, by the terror of some punishment^ greater 
than the benefit they expect by the breach of their covenant.'^t 

Were people's characters in Hobbes's day really so bad as to 
warrant his assumption that none would perform their covenants 
in the absence of a coercive power and threatened penalties ? Li 
our ^ay "the names of just and unjust can have place" quite 
apart from recognition of any coercive power. Among my friends 
I could name half a dozen whom I would implicitly trust to per- 
form their covenants without any " terror of some punishment ;** 
and over whom the requirements of justice would be as imperative 
in the absence of a coercive power as in its presence. Merely 
noting, however, that this unwarranted assumption vitiates Hobbes's 
argument for State-authority, and accepting both his premises and 
conclusion, we have to observe two significant implications* One is 
that State-authority as thus derived, is a means to an end, and has 
no validily save as subserving that end : if the end is not subserved, 

• Hobbes, Collected Works, voL iu. p. 169, t If>id. pp. 130-1. 



THE GREAT POUTIOAL SUPERSTITION. 81 

tlie authority, by the hypothesis, does not exist; The other is that 
the end for which the authority exists, as thus specified, is the en- 
foroement of justice — the maintenance of equitable relations. The 
reasoning yields no warrant for other coercion over citizens than 
that which is required for preventing direct aggressions, and those 
indirect aggressions constituted by breaches of contract ; to which, 
if we add protection against external enemies, the entire function 
implied by Hobbes's derivation of sovereign authority is compre- 
hended. 

Hobbes argued in the interests of absolute monarchy. His 
modern admirer, Austin, had for his aim to derive the authority 
of law from the unlimited sovereignty of one man, or of a number 
of men, small or large compared with the whole community. 
Aiistin was originally in the army ; and it has been truly remarked 
that " the permanent traces left " may be seen in his Province of 
Jurisprudence, When, undeterred by the exasperating pedan- 
tries — the endless distinctions and definitions and repetitions — 
which serve but to hide his essential doctrines, we ascertain what 
these are, it becomes manifest that he assimilates civil authority to 
military authority : taking for granted that the one, as the other, 
is above question in respect of both origin and range. To get 
justification for positive law, he takes us back to the absolute 
sovereignty of the power imposing it — a monarch, an aristocracy, 
or that larger body of men who have votes in a democracy; for 
such a body also, he styles the sovereign, in contrast with the 
remaining portion of the community which, from incapacity or 
other cause, remains' subject. And having affirmed, or, rather, 
taken for granted, the unlimited authority of the body, simple or 
compound, small or large, which he styles sovereign, he, of course, 
has no difficulty in deducing the legal validity of its edicts, which 
he calls positive law. Bat the problem is simply moved a step 
further back and there left unsolved. The true question is — 
Whence the sovereignty p What is the assignable warrant for 
this unqualified supremacy assumed by one, or by a small number, 
or by a large number, over the rest P A critic might fitly say — 
" We will dispense with your process of deriving positive law from 
unlimited sovereignty : the sequence is obvious enough. But first 
prove your unlimited sovereignty." 

To this demand there is no response. Analyze his assumption, 
and the doctrine of Austin proves to have no better basis than that 



/ 



82 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

of Hobbes. In tlie absence of admitted divine descent or appoint- 
ment, neither single-beaded mler nor manj-headed ruler can . 
produce such credentialB as the claim to unlimited sovereignty 
implies. 

" But surely," "will come in deafening chorus the reply, ** there 
is the unquestionable right of the majority, which gives un- 
questionable right to the parliament it elects." 

Yes, now we are coming down to the root of the matter. The 
divine right of parliaments means the divine right of majorities. 
The fundamental assumption made by legislators and people alike, 
is that a majority has powers to which no limits can be put. This 
is the current theory which all accept without proof as a self- 
evident truth. Nevertheless, criticism will, I think, show that 
this current theory requires a radical modification. 

In an essay on "Railway Morals and Bailway Policy," pub- 
lished in the Edinburgh Review for October, 1854, I had occasion 
to deal with the question of a majority's powers as exemplified in 
the conduct of public companies ; and I cannot better prepare the 
way for conclusions presently to be drawn, than by quoting a 
passage from it:^ 

" Under whatever circumstances, or for whatever ends, a number of 
men co-operate, it is held that if difference of opinion arises among them, 
justice requires that the will of the greater number shall be executed 
rather than that of the smaller number ; and this rule is supposed to be 
uniformly applicable, be the question at issue what it may. So confirmed 
is this conviction, and so little have the ethics of the matter been con- 
sidered, that to most this mere suggestion of a doubt will cause some 
astonishment. Yet it needs but a brief analysis to show that the opinion 
is httle better than a political superstition. Instances may readily be 
selected which prove, by reductio ad ahsurdum, that the right of a 
majority is a purely conditional right, valid only within specific limits. 
Let us take a few. Suppose that at the general meeting of some philan- 
thropic association, it was resolved that in addition to relieving distress 
the association should employ home-missionaries to preach down popery. 
Might the subscriptions of Catholics, who had joined the body with 
charitable views, be rightfully used for this end ? Suppose that of the 
members of a book-club, the greater number, thinking that under existing 
circumstances rifle-practice was more important than reading, should 
decide to change the purpose of their union, and to apply the funds in 
hand for the purchase of powder, ball, and targets. Would the rest be 
bound by this decision ? Suppose that imder the excitement of news from 




THE GBEAT POLITICAL SUPEBSJITION. 83 

Australia, the majority of a Freehold Land Society should determine, not 
simply to start in a body for the gold-diggings, but to use their accumulated 
capital to provide outfits. Would this appropriation of property be just 
to the minority ? and must these join the expedition ? Scarcely anyone 
would venture an affirmative answer even to the first of these questions ; 
much less to the others. And why? Because everyone must perceive 
that by xmiting himself with others, no man can equitably be betrayed 
into acts utterly foreign to the purpose for which he joined them. Each 
of these supposed minorities would properly reply to those seeking to 
coerce them : — * We combined with you for a defined object ; we gave 
money and time for the furtherance of that object ; on all questions thence 
arising we tacitly agreed to conform to the will of the greater number ; but 
we did not agree to conform on any other questions. If you induce us to 
join you by professing a certain end, and then undertake some other end 
of which we were not apprised, you obtain our support under false pre- 
tences; you exceed the expressed or understood compact to which we 
committed ourselves; and we are no longer bound by your decisions.' 
dearly this is the only rational interpretation of the matter. The general 
principle underlying the right government of every incorporated body, is, 
that its members contract with each other severally to submit to the will 
of the majority in all matters concerning the fulfilment of the objects for 
which they are incorporated ; but in no others. To this extent only can 
the contract hold. For as it is implied in the very nature of a contract, 
that those entering into it must know what they contract to do ; and as 
those who unite with others for a specified object, cannot contemplate all 
the unspecified objects which it is hypothetically possible for the union to 
xmdertake ; it foUows that the contract entered into cannot extend to such 
unspecified objects. And if there exists no expressed or understood 
contract between the union and its members respecting unspecified objects, 
then for the majority to coerce the minority into undertaking them, is 
nothing less than gross tyranny." 

Naturally, if such a confusion of ideas eidsis in respect of the 
powers of a majority where the deed of incorporation tacitly 
limits those powers, still more must there exist sucli a confusion 
where there has been no deed of incorporation. Nevertheless the 
same principle holds. I again emphasize the proposition that the 
members of an incorporated body are bound " severally to submit 
to the will of the majority in all matters concerning the fulfilment of 
the ohjectsfor which they a/re incorporated; hut in no others.^* And 
I contend that this holds of an incorporated nation as much as of 
an incorporated company, 

" Yes, but," comes the obvious rejoinder, " as there is no deed 
by which the members of a nation are incorporated — as there 



.-' 



84 THE MAN VERSUS THti STATE. 

iieitlier is, nor ever was, a specification of purposes for wliicli the 
nnion was formed, there exist no limits ; and, consequently, the 
power of the majority is unlimited." 

' Evidently it must be admitted that the hypothesis of a social 
contract, either under the shape assumed by Hobbes or under the 
shape assumed by Rousseau, is baseless. Nay more, it must be 
admitted that even had such a contract once been formed, it could 
not be binding on the posterity of those who formed it. Moreover, 
if any say that in the absence of those limitations to its powers 
which a deed of incorporation might imply, there is nothing to 
prevent a majority from imposing its will on a minority by force, 
assent must be given — ^an assent, however, joined with the com- 
ment that if the superior force of the majoriiy is its justification, 
then the superior force of a despot backed by an adequate army, 
is also justified : the problem lapses. What we here seek is some 
higher warrant for the subordination of minority to majority than 
that arising from inability to resist physical coercion. Even 
Austin, anxious as he is to establish the unquestionable authority 
of positive law, and assuming, as he does, an absolute sovereignty 
of some kind, monarchic, aristocratic, constitutional, or popular, as 
the source of its unquestionable authority, is obliged, in the last 
resort, to admit a moral limit to its action over the community. 
While insisting, in pursuance of his rigid theory of sovereignty, 
that a sovereign body originating from the people " is legally free 
to abridge their political liberty*, at its own pleasure or discre- 
tion," ha allows that '' a government may be hindered hy positive 
morality from abridging the political liberty which it leaves or 
grants to its subjects."* Hence, we have to find, not a physical 
justification, but a moral justification, for the supposed absolute 
power of the majority. 

This will at once draw forth the rejoinder — " Of course, in the 
absence of any agreement, with its implied limitations, the rule.af 
the majority is unlimited ; because it is more just that the majority 
should have its way than that the minority should have its way." 
A very reasonable rejoinder this seems until there comes the 
re-rejoinder. We may oppose to it the equally tenable proposition 
that, in the absence of an agreement, the supremacy of a majority 
over a minority does not exist at all. It is co-operation of some 
kind, from which there arise these powers and obligations of 

H The Province of Jurisprudence Determined (second edition), p. 241. 



■ 



THE GREAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITIOK. 85 

majority and minority ; and in the abseAce of any agreement to 
co-operat«, such powers and obligations are also absent. 

Here the argument apparently ends in a dead lock. Under the 
existing condition of things, no moral origin seems assignable 
either for the sovereignty of the majority or for the limitation of 
its sovereignty. But further consideration reveals a solution of 
the difficulty. For if, dismissing all thought of any hypothe- 
tical agreement to co-operate heretofore made, we ask what 
would be the agreement into which citizens would now enter 
with practical unanimity, we get a sufficiently clear answer; 
and with it a sufficiently clear justification for the rule of the 
majority inside a certain sphere, but not outside that sphere. Let 
us first observe a few of the limitations which at once become 
apparent. 

Were all Englishmen now asked if they would agree to 
co-operate for the teaching of religion, and would give the majority 
power to fix the creed and the forms of worship, there would como 
a very emphatic " No '* from a large part of them. If, in pursuance 
of a proposal to revive sumptuary laws, the inquiry were made 
whether they would bind themselves to abide by the will of the 
majority in respect of the fashions and qualities of their clothes, 
nearly all of them would refuse. In like manner if (to take an 
actual question of the day) people were polled to ascertain whether, 
in respect of the beverages they drank, they would accept the 
decision of the greater number, certainly half, and probably 
more than half, would be unwilling. Similarly with respect to 
many other actions which most men now-a-days regard as of 
purely private concern. Whatever desire there might be to co» 
operate for carrying on, or regulating, such actions, would bd far 
from a unanimous desire. Manifestly, then, had social co-opera- 
tion to be commenced by ourselves, and had its purposes to be 
specified before consent to co-operate could be obtained, there 
would be large parts of human conduct in respect of which co- 
operation would be declined ; and in respect of which, consequently, 
no authority by the majority over the minority could be rightfully 
exercised. 

Turn now to the converse question — ^For what ends would all 
men agree to co-operate ? None will deny that for resisting invasion 
the agreement would be practically unanimous. Excepting only the 
Quakers, who, having done highly useful work in their time, are 



86 



THE MAN VERSVJ3 THE STATE, 



now dying out, all would xinite for defensive war (not, however, for 
offensive war) ; and tbej would, bj so doing, tacitly bind themselves 
to conform to the will of the majority in respect of measures directed 
to that end. There would be practical unanimity, also, in the agree- 
ment to co-operate for defence against internal enemies as against 
external enemies. Omitting criminals, all must wish to have person 
and property adequately protected. In short, each citizen desires 
to preserve his life, to preserve those things which conduce to 
maintenance of his life and enjoyment of it, and to preserve intact 
his liberties both of using these things and getting further such. 
It is obvious to him that he cannot do all this if he acts alone. 
Against foreign invaders he is powerless unless he combines with 
his fellows ; and the business of protecting himself against domestic 
invaders, if he did not similarly combine, would be alike onerous, 
dangerous, and inefficient. In one other co-operation all are 
interested — use of the territory they inhabit. Did the primitive 
communal ownership survive, there would survive the primitive 
communal control of the uses to be made of land by individuals or 
by groups of them ; and decisions of the majority would rightly 
prevail respecting the terms i oi\ which portions of it might be 
employed for raising food, for making means of communication, 
and for other purposes. Even at present, though the matter has 
been complicated by the growth of private lando wnership, yet, since 
the State is still supreme owner (every landowner being in law a 
tenant of the Crown) able to resume possession, or authorize com- 
pulsory purchase, at a fair price ; the implication is that the will 
of the majority is valid respecting the modes in which, and con- 
ditions under which, parts of the surface or sub-surface, may be 
utilized: involving certain agreements made on behalf of the 
public with private persons and companies. 

Details are not needful here ; nor is it needful to discuss that 
border region lying, between these classes of cases, and to say how 
much is included in the last and how much is excluded with the 
first. For present purposes, it is sufficient to recognize the un- 
deniable truth that there are numerous kinds of actions in respect 
of which men would not, if they were asked, agree with anything 
like unanimity to be bound by the will of the majority ; while 
there are some kinds of actions in respect of which they would 
almost unanimously agree to be thus bound. Here, then, we find a 
definite warrant for enforcing the will of the majority within cer« 




THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEESTITIOK. 87 

tain limits, and a definite warrant for denying the authority of its 
will beyond those limits. 

But evidently, when analyzed, the question resolves itself into 
the further question — What are the relative claims of the aggre- 
gate and of its units ? Are the rights of the community univer- 
sally valid against the individual P or has the individual some 
rights which are valid against the community ? The judgment 
given on this point underlies the entire fabric of political con- 
victions formed, and more especially those convictions which 
concern the proper sphere of government. Here, then, I propose 
to revive a dormant controversy, with the expectation of reaching 
a difEerent conclusion from that which is fashionable. 

Says Professor Jevons, in his work, The State in Belation to 
Lahov/Ty — " The first step must be to rid our minds of the idea 
that there are any such things in social matters as abstract rights.*' 
Of like character is the belief expressed by Mr. Matthew Arnold, 
in his article on copyright : — '' An author has no natural right to a 
property in his production. But then neither has he a natural 
right to anything whatever which he may produce or acquire."* 
So, too, I recently read in a weekly journal of high repute, that 
" to explain once more that there is no such thing as ' natural 
right * would be a waste of philosophy." And the view expressed 
in these extracts is commonly uttered by statesmen and lawyers 
in a way implying that only the unthinking masses hold any 
other. 

One might have expected that utterances to this effect would 
have been rendered less dogmatic by the knowledge that a whole 
school of legists on the Continent, maintains a belief diametrically 
opposed to that maintained by the English school. The idea of 
Natur-recht is the root-idea of German jurisprudence. Kow what- 
\ ever may be ' the opinion held respecting German philosophy at 
\ large, it cannot be characterized as shallow. A doctrine current 
among a people distinguished above all others as laborious in- 
quirers, and certainly not to be classed with superficial thinkers, 
should not be dismissed as though it were nothing more than a 
popular delusion. This, however, by the way. Along with the 
proposition denied in the above quotations, there goes a counter- 

* Fortnightly Seview in 1880, ToL xxvii. p* 822. 



\ 



88 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

proposition affirmed. Let us see what it is ; and what results when 
we go behind it and seek its warrant. 

On reverting to Bentham, we find this counter-proposition 
overtly expressed. He tells us that government fulfils its office 
" by creating rights which it confers upon individuals 2 rights of 
personal security ; rights of protection for honour ; rights of pro- 
perty ; " <fec.* Were this doctrine asserted as following from the 
divine right of kings, there would be nothing in it manifestly in- 
congruous. Did it come to us from ancient Peru, where the Ynca 
" was the source from which everything flowed ;"t or from Shoa 
(Abyssinia), where " of their persons and worldly substance he 
[the king] is absolute master ;"^ or from Dahome, where '* all men 
are slaves to the king ; '*§ it would be consistent enough. But 
Bentham, far from being an absolutist like Hobbes, wrote in the 
interests of popular rule. In his Constitutional Code || he fixes 
the sovereignty in the whole people; arguing that it is best 
" to give the sovereign power to the largest possible portion of 
those whose greatest happiness is the proper and chosen object," 
because '* this proportion is more apt than any other that can be 
proposed " for achievement of that object. 

Mark, now, what happens when we put these two doctrines 
together. The sovereign people jointly appoint representatives, 
and so create a government ; the government thus created, creates 
' rights ; and then, having created rights, \t confers them on the 
separate members of the sovereign people by which it was itself 
created. Here is a marvellous piece of political legerdemain! 
Mr. Matthew Arnold, contending, in tibe article above quoted, that 
"property is the creation of law," tells us to beware of the 
** metaphysical phantom of property in itself." Surely, among 
metaphysical phantoms the most shadowy is this which supposes a 
thing to be obtained by creating an agent, which creates the 
thing, and then confers the thing on its own creator ! 

From whatever point of view we consider it, Bentham's pro- 
position proves to be unthinkable. Government, he says, fulfils 
itsoffice " by creating rights," Two meanings may be given to 

• Bentham^B Works (Bowring*» edition) , vol. i. p. 301, 

t Prescott, Conquest ofPerUy bk. i. ch. i. 

} H&rris, Highlands of JEthiopiaf ii. 94. 

§ Burton, Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome^ L p. 226. 

[| Bentham's Works, toI. ix. p. 97. 




THE GREAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 89 

the word " creating." It may be supposed to mean the production 
of something, out of nothing ; or it may be supposed to mean the 
giving form and structure to something -which abeadj exists. 
There are many who think that the production of something out 
of nothing cannot be conceived as e£fected even by omnipotence ; 
and probably none wiU assert that the production of something 
out of nothing is within the competence of a human government. 
The alternative conception is that a human government creates 
only in the sense that it shapes something pre-existing. In that 
case, the question arises — "What is the something pre-existing 
which it shapes ? " Clearly the word " creating " begs fche whole 
question — ^passes off an illusion on the unwary reader. Bentham 
was a stickler for definiteness of expression, and in his Book of 
Fallacies has a chapter on " Impostor-terms." It is curious that 
he should have furnished so striking an illustration of the per- 
verted belief which an impostor-term may generate. 

But now let us overlook these various impossibilities of thought, 
and seek the most defensible interpretation of Bentham's view. 

It may be said that the totality of all powers and rights, 
originally existed as an undivided whole in the sovereign people ; 
and that this undivided whole is given in trust (as Austin would 
say) to a ruling power, appointed by the sovereign people, for the 
purpose of distribution. If, as we have seen, the proposition that 
rights are created is simply a figure of speech ; then the only 
intelligible construction of Bentham's view is that a multitude of 
individuals, who severally wish to satisfy their desires, and have, 
as an aggregate, possession of all the sources of satisfaction, as 
well as power over all individual actions, appoint a government, 
which declares the ways in which, and the conditions under which, 
individual actions may be carried on and the satisfactions obtained. 
Let us observe the implications. Each man exists in two capacities. 
In his private capacity he is subject to the government. In his 
public capacity he is one of the sovereign people who appoint the 
government. That is to say, in his private capacity he is one 
of those to whom rights are given; and in his public capacity 
he is one of those who, through the government they appoint, give 
the rights. Turn this abstract statement into a concrete state- 
ment, and see what it means. Let the community consist of a 
million men, who, by the hypothesis, are not only joint possessors 

of the inhabited region, but joint possessors of all liberties of 

1 



i 



1 



90 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

action and appropriation : the only right recognized being that of 
the aggregate to everything. What follows ? Each person, while 
not owning any product of his own labour, has, as a unit in the 
sovereign body, a miUionth part of the ownership of the products 
of all others' labour. This is an unavoidable implication. As the 
government, in Bentham's view, is but an agent; the rights it 
confers are rights given to it in trust by the sovereign people. If 
BO, such rights must be possessed en hloc by the sovereign people 
before the government, in fulfilment of its trust, confers them on 
individuals ; and, if so, each individual has a millionth portion of 
these rights in his public capacity, while he has no rights in his 
private capacity. These he gets only when all the rest of the 
million join to endow him with them; while he joins to endow 
with them every other member of the milKon ! 

Thus, in whatever way we interpret it, Bentham's proposition 
leaves us in a plexus of absurdities. 

Even though ignoring the opposite opinion of German writers 
on jurisprudence, and even without an analysis which proves their 
own opinion to be untenable, Bentham's disciples might have been 
led to treat less cavalierly the doctrine of natural rights. For 
sundry groups of social phenomena unite to prove that this 
doctrine is well warranted, and the doctrine they set against it 
unwarranted. 

Tribes in various parts of the world show us that before definite 
government arises, conduct is regulated by customs. The 
Bechuanas are controlled by " long-acknowledged customs."* 
Among the Koranna Hottentots, who only '' tolerate their chiefs 
rather than obey them,"t " when ancient usages are not in the 
way, every man seems to act as is right in his own eyes." J The 
Araucanians are guided by " nothing more than primordial usages 
or tacit conventions."§ Among the Kirghizes the judgments of 
the elders are based on " universally-recognized customs." j| So, 

• Burchell, W. J., Traveh into thd Interior qf Southern Africa^ vol. i. 
p. 544 

t Arbousset aod Damnas, Voyage of Exploration, p. 27. 

X Thompson, G-., Travels and Adtfentures in Southern Africa, vol. ii., p. 80. 

§ Thompson, G-. A., Alcedo'i Geographical and Siitorical Dictionary qf, 
America^ yoL i. p. 405. 

II Mitchell, Alex., Siberian Overland JRoute, p. 248. 



k 



THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEKSTITION. 



91 



too, of tlie Dyaks, Bajah Brooke tells us that ''cnstom seems 
simply to have become the law ; and breaking custom leads to a 
fine."* So sacred are immemorial customs with the primitive 
man, that he never dreams of questioning their authority ; and 
when government arises, its power is limited by them. In Mada- 
gascar the king's word suffices only "where there is no law, 
custom, or precedent."f Baffles tells us that in Java "the 
customs of the country"} restrain the will of the ruler. In 
Sumatra, too, the people do not allow their chiefs to " alter their 
ancient usages."§ Nay, occasionally, as in Ashantee, " the 
attempt to change some customs " has caused a king's dethronor 
ment.jl Now, among the customs which we thus find to be pre- 
govemmental, and which subordinate governmental power when 
it is established, are those which recognize certain individual 
rights — ^rights to act in certain ways and possess certain things. 
Even where the recognition of property is least developed, there 
is proprietorship of weapons, tools, and personal ornaments ; and, 
generally, the recognition goes far beyond this. Among such 
North- American Indians as the Snakes, who are without govern- 
ment, there is private ownership of horses. By the Ghippewayans, 
** who have no regular government," game taken in private traps 
" is considered as private property."^ Kindred facts concerning 
huts, utensils, and other personal belongings, nught be brought in 
evidence from accounts of the Ahts, the Comanches, the Esqui- 
maux, and the Brazilian Indians. Among various uncivilized 
peoples, custom has established the claim to the crop grown on a 
cleared plot of ground, though not to the ground itself ; and the 
Todas, who are wholly without political organization, make a like 
distinction between ownership of cattle and of land. Kolff's 
statement respecting " the peaceful Araf uras " well sums up the 
evidence. They " recognize the right of property, in the fullest 
sense of the word, without there being any [other] authority 
among them than the decisions of their elders, according to the 



* Brooke's, C, Ten Tears in Sardwah, toL i. p. 129. 
t Ellis, SUtory of Madagcucarj yoL i. p. 377. 

I Baffles, Sir T. S., SUtory of Java, i. 274. 
§ Marsden, W., History of Sumaira, p. 217. 

II Beecham, J., Ashantee a/nd the Ghld Coast, p. 90. 

*!r Schoolcraft, H. B., Expedition to the Sources of the Mississippi Biver, 
T. 177. 



■ 







92' 



THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 



cnstoms bf^their forefathers."* But even without seeking proofs 
among the miOv^lized, sufficient proofs are furnished by early 
stages of the oiyiUzl^ Bentham and his followers seem to have 
forgotten that our own ct>Hmion law is mainly an embodiment 
of " thecustoms oftherealm" It did but give definite shape to 
that whicii it tound existing. Thus, the fact and the fiction are 
exactly opposite to what they allege. The fact is that property 
was well recognized before law existed ; the fiction is that " pro- 
perty is the creation of law." 

Considerations of another class might alone have led them to 
pause had they duly considered their meanings. Were it true, as 
alleged by Bentham, that Government fulfils its office " by creating 
rights which it confers on individuals ; " then, the implication 
would be, that there should be nothing approaching to uniformity 
in the rights conferred by different governments. In the absence 
of a determining cause over-ruling their decisions, the probabilities 
would be many to one against considerable correspondence among 
their decisions. But there is very great correspondence. Look 
where we may, we find that governments interdict the same kinds 
of aggressions ; and, by implication, recognize the same kinds of 
claims. They habitually forbid homicide, theft, adultery: thus* 
asserting that citizens may not be trespassed against in certain 
ways. And as society advances, minor individual claims are 
protected by giving remedies for breach of contract, libel, false 
witness, &c. In a wo rd, co mparisons show that though codes of 1 
law differ in Iheir details as they become elaborated, they'Sgreel 
in their fundamentals. What does this prove P It cannot be by 
chance that they thus agree. They agree because the alleged) 
creating of rights was nothing else than giving formal sanction - 
and better definition to those assertions of claims and recognitions! 
of claims which naturally originate from the individual desires of: 
men who have to live in presence of one another. 

Comparative Sociology discloses another group of facts having 
the same implication. Along with social progress it becomes in 
an increasing degree the business of the State, not only to give 
formal sanction to men's rights, but also to defend them against 
aggressors. Before permanent government exists, and in many 
cases after it is considerably developed, the rights of each individual 

• Earl's Kolff*9 Voyage of the Domga, p. 161. 




THE GREAT POLITICAL SUPEBSflTION. 93 

are asserted and maintained by himself, or by bis family. Alike 
among savage tribes at present, among civilized peoples in the 
past, and even now in unsettled parts of Europe, tbe pnnisbment 
for murder is a matter of private concern : " tbe sacred duty of 
blood revenge " devolves on some one of a cluster of relatives. 
Similarly, compensations for aggressions on property and for in>. 
juries of other kinds, are in early states of society independently 
sought by each man or family. But as social organization 
advances, the central ruling power undertakes more and more to 
secure to individuals their personal safety, the safety of their 
possessions, and, to some extent, the enforcement of their claims 
established by contract. Originally concerned almost exclusively 
with defence of the society as a whole against other societies, 
or with conducting its attacks on other societies, G-ovemment has 
come more and jxLore. to. discharge, the function of^def ending in- 
dividuals against one another. It needs but to recall the days 
when men habitually carried weApcmSy QCJta. bear m. mind the 
greater safety to person and property achieved by improved police* 
administrafioh during^'"Dur~'Owa- timej -or-to noter the increased 
facilities now given for recovering small debts, to see that the 
insuring to each individual the unhindered pursuit of the objects 
of life, within limits set by others' like pursuits, is more and more 
recognized as a duty of the State. In other words, along with social 
progress, there goes not only a fuller recognition of these which 
we call natural rights, but also a better enforcement of them by 
Government : Government becomes more and more the. servant to 
thesa essential pre-requisites for individual welfare. 

An allied and still more significant changie has accompanied 
this. In early stages, at the same time that the State failed to 
protect the individual against aggression, it was itself an aggressor 
in multitudinous ways. Those ancient societies which progressed 
enough to leave records, having all been conquering societies, show 
us everywhere the traits of the militant regime. As, for the effec- 
tual organization of fighting bodies, the soldiers, absolutely obedient, 
must act independently only when commanded to do it ; so, for the 
effectual organization of fighting societies, citizens must have their 
individualities subordinated. Private claims are over-ridden by 
public claims ; and the subject loses much of his freedom of action. 
One result is that the system of regimentation, pervading the 
society as well as the army, causes detailed regulation of conduct. 



/ 



94 THP MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

The dictates of the raler, sanctified by ascription of them to his 
divine ancestor, are unrestrained by aliy conception of indiridual 
liberty ; and they specify men's actions to an unlimited extent — 
down to kinds of food eaten, modes of preparing them, shaping of 
beards, fringing of dresses, sowing of grain, &c. This omnipresent 
control, which the ancient Eastern nations in general exhibited, 
was exhibited also in large measure by the G-reeks ; and was carried 
to its greatest pitch in the most militant city, Sparta. Similarly 
during mediadYal days throughout Europe, characterized by chronic 
war&ire with its appropriate political forms and ideas, there were 
scarcely any bounds to Governmental interference : agriculture, 
manufactures, trade, were regulated in detail ; religious beliefs and 
observances were imposed; -and rulers said by whom alone fars 
might be worn, silver used, books issued, pigeons kept, &c. Sdo, 
But along with increase of industrial activities, and implied substit- 
tution of the rSgimeoi contract for the r^^ima of status, and growth ^ 
of associated sentiments, there went (until the recent reaction 
accompanying reversion to militant activity) a decrease of meddling^ 
with people's doings. Legislation gradually ceased to regulate the 
cropping of fields, or dictate the ratio of cattle to acreage, or 
specify modes of manufacture and materials to be used, or fix 
wages and prices, pr interfere with dresses and games (except 
where there was gambling), or put bounties and penalties on im- 
ports or exports, or prescribe men's beliefs, religious or poetical, or 
prevent them from combining as they pleased, or travelling where ^ 
they liked. That is to say, throughout a large range of co\duct,\ ^' 
the right of the citizen to uncontrolled action has been made g^ood > ^ 

against the pretensions of the State to control him. While the; 
ruling agency has increasingly helped him to exclude intruders : 
from that private sphere in which he pursues the objects of lifei» it 
has itself retreated from that sphere ; or, in other words— decreasipd 
ita intrusions. i 

Not even yet have we noted all the classes of facts which teJl 
the same story. It is told afresh in the improvements and reforms of 
law itself; as well as in the admissions and assertions of those whot 
have effected them^ " So early as the fifteenth century,"^ says y 
Professor Pollock, " we find a common-law judge declaring that, V 
as in a case unprovided for by known rules the civilians and \ 
canonists devise a new rule according to ' the law of nature which \ 
ift.the ground. ol al). laws,! the Courts of Westminster can and will 



I 



THE GREAT POLITIOAL SUPERSTITION. 95 

do the like.'** Again, onr system of Equity, introduced and deve- 
loped as it was to make up for the shortcomings of Common-law, 
or rectify its inequities, proceeded throughout on a recognition of 
men's claims considered as existing apart from legal warrant. And 
the changes of law now from time to time made after resistance, 
are similarly made in pursuance of current ideas concerning the 
requirements of justice : ideas which, instead of being derived from 
the law, are opposed to the law. For example, that recent Act 
wHch gives to a married woman a right of property in her own 
earnings, evidently originated in the consciousness that the natural 
connexion between labour expended and benefit enjoyed, is one 
which should be maintained in all cases. The reformed law did 
not create the right, but recognition of the right created tho | 
reformed law. ^ 

Thus, historical evidences of five difierent kinds unite in teaching 
that, confused as are the popular notions concerning rights, and 
including, as they do, a great deal which should be excluded, yet 
they shadow forth a truth. 

It remains now to consider the original source of this truth. 
In a previous paper I have spoken of the open secret, that there 
can be no social phenomena but what, if we analyze them to 
the bottom, bring us down to the laws of life ; and that there can 
be no true understanding of them without reference to the laws of 
life. Let us, then, transfer this question of natural rights from the 
court of politics to the court of science — the science of life. The 
reader need feel no alarm : its simplest and most obvious facts will 
suffice. We will contemplate first the general conditions to indi- 
vidual life ; and then the general conditions to social Hf e. We shall 
find that both yield the same verdict. 

Animal life involves waste ; waste must be met by repair ; re- 
pair implies nutrition. Again, nutrition presupposes obtainment of 
food ; food cannot be got without powers of prehension, and, usually, 
of locomotion ; and that these powers may achieve their ends, there 
must be freedom to move about. If you shut up a mammal in a 
small space, or tie its limbs together, or take from it the food it has 
procured, you eventually, by persistence in one or other of these 
courses, cause its death. Passing a certain point, hindrance to the 

* *' The Methods of Jurisprudence : an Introductory Lecture at UniTersity 
College, London," October 31, 1882. 



96 



THE MAN VEBSUS THE STATE. 



fulfilment of these requirements is fatal. And all this, whicQi holds 
of the higher animals at large, of course holds of man. 

If we adopt pessimism as a creed, and with it accept the impli- 
cation that life in general being an evil should be put an end to, 
then there is no ethical warrant for these actions by which life is 
maintained : the whole question drops. But if we adopt either the 
optimist view or the meliorist view — ^if we say that life on the 
whole brings more pleasure than pain ; or that it is on the way 
to become such that it will yield more pleasure than pain ; then 
these actions by which life is maintained are justified, and there 
results a warrant for the freedom to perform them. Those who 
hold that life is valuable, hold, by implication, that men ought not 
to be prevented from carrying on life-sustaining activities. In 
other words, if it is said to be ** right " that they should carry them 
// on, then, by permutation, we get the assertion that they " have ^ 
I right" to carry them on. Clearly the conception of " natural rights " 
originates in recognition of the truth that if life is justifiable, there - 
must be a justification for the performance of acts essential to its *" 
preservation; and, therefore, a justification for those liberties and 
claims which make such acts possible. 

But being true of other creatures as of man, this is a proposi- 
tion lacking ethical character. Ethical character arises only with 
the distinction between what the individual Tnay do in carrying on 
his life-sustaining activities, and what he may not do. This dis- 
tinction obviously results from the presence of his fellows. Among 
those who are in close proximity, or even at some distance apart, the 
doings of each are apt to interfere with the doings of others ; and 
in the absencQ of proof that some may do what they will without 
limit, while others niay not, mutual limitation is necessitated. The ' 
non-ethical form of the right to pursue ends, passes into the ethical - 
form, when there is recognized the difference between acts which 
can be performed without transgressing the limits,jand others which 
cannot be so performed. ' ' '" 

This, which is the d priori conclusion, is the conclusion yielded 
d posteriori^ when we study the doings of the uncivilized. In its 
vaguest form, mutual limitation of spheres of action, and the ideas 
and sentiments associated with it, are seen in the relations of groups 
to one another. Habitually there come to be established, certain 
bounds to the territories within which each tribe obtains its liveli- 
hood ; and these bounds, when not respected, are defended. Among 



THE GREAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 97 

the Wood-Veddalis, who have no political organization, the small 
clans have their respective portions of forest ; and " these conven- 
tional allotments are always honourably recognized."* Of the 
nngovemed tribes of Tasmania, we are told that " their hunting 
grounds were all determined, and trespassers were liable to 
attack."t And, manifestly, the quarrels caused among tribes by 
intrusions on one another's territories, tend, in the long run, to fix 
bounds and to give a certain sanction to them. As with each in- 
habited area, so with each inhabiting group. A death in one, 
rightly or wrongly ascribed to somebody in another, prompts 
" the sacred duty of blood-revenge ; " and though retaliations are 
thus made chronic, some restraint is put on new aggressions. 
Like causes worked like effects in those early stages ol civilized 
societies, during which families or clans, rather than individuals, 
were the political units ; and during which each family or clan had 
to maintain itself and its possessions against others such. This 
mutual restraint, which in the nature of things arises between small 
communities, similarly arises between individuals in each com- 
munity ; and the ideas and usages appropriate to the one are more 
or less appropriate to the other. Though within each group there 
is ever a tendency for the stronger to aggress on the weaker ; yet, 
in most cases, consciousness of the evils resulting from aggressive 
conduct serves to restrain. Everywhere among primitive peoples, 
trespasses are followed by counter-trespasses. Says Turner of the 
Tannese, ** adultery and some other crimes are kept in check by the 
fear of club-law. "{ Fitzroy tells us that the Patagonian, " if he 
does not injure or offend his neighbour, is not interfered with by 
others : "§ personal vengeance being the penalty for injury. We 
read of the Uaup6s that " they have very little law of any kind ; 
but what they have is of strict retaliation, — an eye for an eye and 
a tooth for a tooth." || And that the lex talionis tends to establish 
a distinction between what each member of the community may 
safely do and what he may not safely do, and consequently to give 
sanctions to actions within a certain range but not beyond that 
range, is obvious. Though, says Schoolcraft of the Chippewayans, 
they "have no regular government, as every man is lord in his 

* Texinant, Ceylon ; an Account of the Island, ^c,, ii. 440. 
f Bonwick, J., Daily Life and Origin of the Tatmanians^ 83* 
X Polynesia, p. 86. 

§ Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle, ii. 167. 
Wallace, A. B., Travels on Amazon and Rio Negro, p. 499. 



~ i 



\ 



98 THE BCAK VEB8US THE STATS. 

own family, they are influenced more or less by certain principles 
wMcli conduce to their general benefit:"* one of the principles 
named being recognition of private property. 

How mutual limitation of activities originates the ideas and 
sentiments implied by the phrase " natural rights," we are shown 
most distinctly by the few peaceful tribes which have either 
nominal governments or none at all. Beyond those facts which 
illustrate scrupulous regard for one another's claims among the 
Todas, Santals, Lepchas, Bodo, Ghakmas, Jakuns, Arafuras, &q.^ 
we have the fact that the utterly uncivilized Wood-Yeddahs, 
without any social organization at all, " think it perfectly incon- 
ceivable that any person should ever take that which does not 
belong to him, or strike his fellow, or say anything that is 
untrue."t Thus it becomes clear, alike from analysis of causes and * 
observation of facts, that while the positive element in the right . 
to carry on life-sustaining activities, originates from the laws of 
life, that negative element which gives ethical character to it, 
originates from the conditions produced by social aggregation. 

So alien to the truth, indeed, is the alleged creation of rights 
by government, that, contrariwise, rights having been established 
more or less clearly before government arises, become obscured as 
government develops along with that militant activity which, both 
by the taking of slaves and the establishment of ranks, produces 
stcUus; and the recognition of rights begins again to get definite- 
ness only as fast as militancy ceases to be chronic and govern- 
mental power declines. 

When we turn from the life of the individual to the life of the 
society, the same lesson is taught us. \ 

Though mere love of companionship prompts primitive men to 
live in groups, yet the chief prompter is experience of the advan- 
tages to be derived from co-operation. On what condition only 
can co-operation arise? Evidently on condition that those who 
join their efEorts severally gain by doing so. If , as in the simplest 
cases, they unite to achieve something which each by himself can- 
not achieve, or can achieve less readily, it must be on the tacit 
understanding, either that they shall share the benefit (as when 

* Schoolcraffc. JSxpediHon to the Souree9 of the MufUsytpi, t. 177> 
t B. F. Hartsbome, Fortm^htly Beview, March 187S. See also H. C. Sirr, 
Cejflon and the Ceyloneee^ li 219* 



TH£ OBEAT POLITICAL SUPEBSTITION. 99 

^me is canght by a "pBxisy of them) or tliat if one reaps all the 
benefit now (as in building a hut or clearing a plot) the others 
shall severally reap equivalent benefits in their turns. When, 
instead of efforts joined in doing the same thing, different things 
are effected by them — ^when division of labour arises, with accom- 
panying barter of products, theL^a^orongemeat^plies tixat each, in 
return for something which he has in superfluous quantity,, gets 
an approximate equivalent of something. which, -he wants. If he 
hands over the one and does not get the other, future proposals to 
exchange will meet with no response. There will be a reversion 
to that rudest condition in which each makes everything for him- 
self. H.§[ncethe possibility of oo-operation depends on fulfilment 
of .contract, tacit or overt. 

Now this which we see must hold of the very first step towards 
that industrial organization by which the life of a society is main- 
tained, must hold more or less fully throughout its development. 
Though the militant type of organization, with its system of status 
produced by chronic war, greatly obscures these relations of con- 
tract, yet they remain partially in force. They still hold between 
freemen, and between the heads of those small groups which form 
the units of early societies ; and, in a measure, they still hold within 
these small groups themselves ; since survival of them as groups, 
implies such recognition of the claims of their members, even 
when slaves, that in return for their labours they get sufficiencies 
of food, clothing, and protection. And when, with diminution of 
warfare and growth of trade, voluntaiy co-operation more and 
more replaces compulsory co-operation, and the carrying on of 
social life by exchange under agreement, partially suspended for a 
time, gradually re-establishes itself; its re -establishment makes 
possible that vast elaborate industrial organization by which a 
great nation is sustained. 

For in proportion as contracts are unhindered and the perform-* 
ance of them certain, the growth is great and the social life 
active. It is not now by one or other of two individuals who con- 
tract, that the evil effects of breach of contract are experienced. 
In an advanced society, they are experienced by entire classes of 
producers and distributors, which have arisen through division of 
labour ; and, eventually, they are experienced by everybody. Ask 
on what condition it is that Birmingham devotes itself to manu- 
facturing hardware, or part of Staffordshire to making pottery, or 



itf;T»f'- 



« 



100 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

Lancashire to weaving cotton. Ask how the rural people who here ^J*) 

grow wheat and there pasture cattle, find it possible to occupy ^y'' 
themselves in their special businesses. These gronps can severally] ^^^^ 
thus act only if each gets from the others in exchange for its own} 
snrplns prodnct, due shares of their snrplns products. No longer 
directly effected by barter, this obtainment of their respective 
shares of one another's products is indirectly efEected by money ; 
and if we ask how each division of producers gets its due amount 
of the required money, the answer is — by fulfilment of contract. 
If Leeds makes woollens and does not, by fulfilment of contract, 
receive the means of obtaining from agricultural districts the 
needful quantity of food, it must starve, and stop producing 
woolleos. If South Wales smelts iron and there comes no equi- 
valent agreed upon, enabling it to get fabrics for clothing, its 
industry must cease. And so throughout, in general and in 
detail. That mutual dependence of parts which we see in socic^ 
organization, as in individual organization, is possible only on con* 
dition that while each part does the particular kind of work it has 
become adjusted to, it receives its proportion of those materials -^ 
required for repair and growth, which all the other parts have 
joined to produce : such proportion being settled by bargaining. 
Moreover, it is by fulfilment of contract that there is effected a 
balancing of all the various products to the various needs — ^the 
large manufacture of knives and the small manufacture of lancets ; 
the great growth of wheat and the little growth of mustard-seed. 
The check on undue production of each commodity, results from 
finding that after a certain quantity, no one will agree to take any 
further quantity on terms that yield an adequate money equivalent. 
And so there is prevented a useless expenditure of labour in pro- 
ducing that which society does not want. 

Lastly, we have to note the still more significant fact that the 
condition under which only, any specialized group of workers can \ 

grow when the community needs more of its particular kind of I 

work, is that contracts shall be free and fulfilment of them \ 

enforced. If when, from lack of material, Lancashire failed to 
supply the usual quantity of cotton-goods, there had been such 
interference with contracts as prevented Yorkshire from asking 
a greater price for its woollens, which it was enabled to do by the 
greater demand for them, there would have been no temptation to 
put more capital into the woollen manufacture, no increase in the 



V 



\ 



THE GBEAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 



101 



amount of macliinery and number of artizans employed, and ho 
increase of woollens : the consequence being that the whole com- 
munity would have suffered from not having deficient cottons 
replaced by extra woollens. What serious injury may result to a 
nation if its members are hindered from contracting with one 
another, was well shown in the contrast between England and 
France in respect of railways. Here, though obstacles were at 
first raised by classes predominant in the legislature, the obstacles 
were not such as prevented capitalists from investing, engineers 
from furnishing directive skill, or contractors from undertaking 
works ; and the high interest originally obtained on investments, 
the great profits made by contractors, and the large payments 
received by eng^eers, led to that drafting of money, energy, and 
ability, into railway-making, which rapidly developed our railway- 
system, to the enormous increase of our national prosperity. But 
when M. Thiers, then Minister of Public Works, came over to 
inspect, and having been taken about by Mr. Yignoles, said to him 
when leaving : — ** I do not think railways are suited to France,"* 
there resulted, from the consequent policy of hindering free contract, 
a delay of " eight or ten years " in that material progress which 
France experienced when railways were made. 

What do all these facts means? They mean that for the 
healthful activity and due proportioning of those industries, 
occupations, professions, which maintain and aid the life of a 
society, there must, in the first place, be few restrictions on men's 
liberties to make agreements with one another, and there must, in 
the second place, be an enforcement of the agreements which they 
do make. As we have seen, the checks naturally arising to each 
man's actions when men become associated, are those only which 
result from mutual limitation ; and there consequently can be no 
resulting check to the contracts they voluntarily make : inter- 
ference with these is interference with those rights to free actioii 
which remain to each when the rights of others are fully recognized. 
And then, as we have seen, enforcement of their rights implies 
enforcement of contracts made ; since breach of contract is indirect 
aggression. K, when a customer on one side of the counter asks 
a shopkeeper on the other for a shilling's worth of his goods, and, 
while the shopkeeper's back is turned, walks off with the goods 

• Address of 0. B, Vignoles, Esq., F.R.S., on his Election as President of the 
Institution of Ciyil Engineers, Session 1869-70, p. 53. 



1 



•X 



^' 



■X, 



102 . THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

withont leaving the sMlling he tacitly contracted to give, his act 
differs in no essential way from robbery. In each such case the 
indiyidnal injured is deprived of something he possessed, without 
receiving the equivalent something bargained for ; and is in the 
state of having expended his labour without getting benefit— *has 
had an essential condition to the maintenance of life infringed. 

Thus, then,, it results that to recognize and enforce the rights 
of individuals, is at the same time to recognize and enforce the 
conditions to a normal social life. There is one vital requirement 
for both. 

Before turning to those corollaries which have practical applica- 
tions, let us observe how the special conclusions drawn converge 
to the one general conclusion originally foreshadowed — glancing at 
them in reversed order. 

We have just found that the pre-requisite to individual life is 
in a double sense the pre-requisite to social life. The life of a 
society, in whichever of two senses conceived, depends on mainten* 
ance of individual rights. If it is nothing more than the sum o^ 
the lives of citizens, this implication is obvious. If it consists of/ 
those many unlike activities which citizens carry on in mutuaT. 
dependence, still this aggregate impersonal life rises or falls \ 
according as the rights of individuals are enforced or denied. 

Study of men's politico-ethical ideas and sentimeints, leads to. 
allied conclusions. Primitive peoples of various types show ^s|/ 
that before governments exist, immemorial customs recognizej 
private claims and justify maintenance of theml Codes of law 
independently evolved by different nations, agree in forbidding 
certain trespasses on the persons, properties, and liberties of 
citizens ; and their correspondences imply, not an artificial source 
for individual rights, but a natural source. Along with social\ -' 
development, the formulating in law of the rights pre-established > 
by custom, becomes more definite and elaborate.^ At the sam^ 
time, Government undertakes to an increasing extent the business 
of enforcing them. While it has been becoming a b^er protector, 
Government has been becoming less aggressive — ^has more and' 
more diminished its intrusions on men's spheres of private action. 
And, lastly, as in past times laws were avowedly modified to fit 
better lyith current ideas of equity; so now, law-reformers are 



THE GREAT POLITIOAL SUPERSTITION. 103 

guided by ideas of equity which are not derived from law but to 
which law has to conform. 

Here, then, we have a politico-ethical theory justified alike by 
analysis and by history. What have we against it ? A fashionable 
counter-theory which proves to be unjustifiable. On the one hand, 
while we find that individual life and social life both imply main- 
tenance of the natural relation between efibrts and benefits; we 
also find that this natural relation, recognized before G-ovemment 
existed, has been all along asserting and re-asserting itself, and 
obtaining better recognition in codes of law and systems of ethics. 
On the other hand, those who, denying natural rights, commit 
themselves to the assertion that rights are artificially created by 
law, are not only flatly contradicted by facts, but their assertion is 
self-destructive : the endeavour to substantiate it, when challenged, 
involves them in manifold absurdities. 

Nor is this all. The re-institution of a vague popular concep- 
tion in a definite form on a scientific basis, leads us to a rational 
view of the relation between the wills of majorities and minorities. 
It turns out that those co-operations in which all can voluntarily 
unite, and in the carrying on of which the will of the majority is 
rightly supreme, are co-operations for maintaining the conditions 
Requisite to individual and social life. Defence of the society as a 
whole against external invaders, has for its remote end to preserve i 
each dtizen in possession of such means m lie has for satisfying ^ 
his desires, and in possession of such liberty as he has for getting 
further means. And defence of each citizen against internal 
invaders, from murderers down to those who inflict nuisances on j 
their neighbours, has obviously the like end — an end desired by / 
every one save the criminal and disorderly. Hence it follows that / 
for maintenance of this vital principle, alike of individual life and | 
social life, subordination of minority to majority is legitimate ; as j 
implying only such a trenching on the freedom and property of I 

' each, as is requisite for the better protecting of his freedom and \ 
properiy. At the same time it follows that such subordination is \ 
V not legitimate beyond this; since, implying as it does a greater \ 

X^ggr^ion upon the individual than is requisite for protecting him, \ 

lit involves a breach of the vital principle which is to be main j 

tajned. I 

Thus we come round again to the proposition that the assumed 






w 



104 THE BiAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

divina right of parliamentSi and tHe implied divine right of 
majorities, are superstitions. While men have abandoned the old 
theory respecting the source of State-authority, they have retained 
a belief in that unlimited extent of State-authority which rightly 
accompanied the old theory, but does not rightly accompany the 
new one. Unrestricted power over subjects, rationally ascribed to 
the ruling man when he was held to be a deputy-god, is now 
ascribed to the ruling body, the deputy-godhood of which nobody 
asserts. 

Opponents will, possibly, contend that discussions about the 
origin and limits of governmental authority are mere pedantries. 
" Government," they may perhaps say, " is bound to use all the 
means it has, or can get, for furthering the general happiness. Its 
aim must be utility ; and it is warranted in employing whatever 
measures are needful for achieving useful ends. The welfare 
of the people is the supreme law; and legislators are not 
to be deterred from obeying that law by questions concerning the 
source and range of their power." Is there really an escape here ? 
or may this opening be effectually closed ? 

The essential question raised is the truth of the utilitarian 
theory as commonly held ; and the answer here to be given is that, 
as commonly held, it is not true. Alike by the statements of 
utilitarian moralists, and by the acts of politicians knowingly or 
unknowingly following their lead, it is impHed that utiHty is to be 
directly determined by simple inspection of the immediate facts 
and estimation of probable results. Whereas, utilitarianism as 
rightly understood, implies guidance by the general conclusions 
which analysis of experience yields. '* Good and bad results can- 
not be accidental, but must be necessary consequences of the 
constitution of things ; " and it is " the business of Moral Science 
to deduce, from the laws of life and the conditions of existence, 
what kinds of action necessarily tend to produce happiness, and 
what kinds to produce unhappiness."* Current utilitarian specula- 
tion, like current practical politics, shows inadequate consciousness 
of natural causation. The habitual thought is that, in the absence 
of some obvious impediment, things can be done this way or that 
way ; and no question is put whether there is either agreement or 
conflict with the normal working of things. 

The foregoing discussions have, I think, shown that the dictates 

• Data ofJSthies, § 21. See abo §§ 56-62. 



THE GEBAT POLITIOAL SUPERSTITION. 105 

of utility, and, consequently, the proper actions of goverments, are 
not to be settled by inspection of facts on the surface, and accept- 
ance of their primd facie meanings; but are to be settled bj 
reference to, and deduction from, fundamental facts. The f unc 
mental &cts to which all rational judgments of utility must g( 
back, are the facts that life consists in, and is maintained byl 
certain activities ; and that among men in a society, these activities] / 
necessarily becoming mutually limited, are to be carried on by ead 
within the limits thence arising, and not carried on beyond thos( 
limits : the maintenance of the limits becoming, by consequence, 
the function of the agency which regulates society. If each, having 
freedom to use his powers up to the bounds fixed by the like freedom 
of others, obtains from his fellow-men as much for his services as 
they find them worth in comparison with the services of others — ^if 
contracts uniformly fulfilled bring to each the share thus deter- 
mined, and he is left secure in person and possessions to satisfy his 
wants with the> proceeds ; then there is maintained the vital prin- 
ciple alike of individual life and of social life. Further, there is 
maintained the vital principle of social progress ; inasmuch as, 
under such conditions, the individuals of most worth will prosper / 
and multiply more than those of less worth.. So that utility, not sk/ 
empirically estimated but as rationally determined, enjoins this\ 
maintenance of individual rights ; and, by implication, negatives any \ 
course which traverses them. 

Here, then, we reach the ultimate interdict against meddling / 
legislation. Reduced to its lowest terms, every proposal to inter- j 
fere with citizens' activities further than by enforcing their mutual I 
limitations, is a proposal to improve life by breaking through the / 
fundamental conditions to life! When some are prevented from' 
buying beer that others may oe prevented from getting drunk, 
those who make the law assume that more good than evil will result 
from interference with the normal relation between conduct and 
consequences, alike in the few ill-regulated and the many well- 
regulated. A government which takes fractions of the incomes of 
multitudinous people, for the purpose of sending to the colonies 
some who have not prospered here, or for building better industrial 
dwellings, or for making public libraries and public museums, 
&c., takes for granted that, not only proximately but ultimately, 
increased general happiness will result £rom transgressing the 

essential requirement to general happiness — ^the requirement that 

8 



106 



THE MAN VJSSSUS THE STATE. 



/ 



eacli shall enjoy all those means to happiness which his actions, 
carried on without aggression, have brought him. In other cases 
we do not thus let the immediate blind ns to the remote. Whe 
asserting the sacredness of property against private transgresso 
we do not ask whether the benefit to a hungry man who take 
bread from a baker's shop, is or is not greater than the inju 
inflicted on the baker : we consider, not the special effects, but th 
general efEects which arise if property is insecure. But when the 
State exacts further amounts from citizens, or further restrains 
their liberties, we consider only the direct and proximate effects, 
an^ ignore the indirect and distant effects which are caused when ' 
these invasions of individual rights are continually multiplied. We ^ 
do not see that by accumulated small infractions of them, the vitall 
conditions to life, individual and social, come to be so imperfectly! 
fulfilled that the life decays. 

Yet the decay thus caused becomes manifest where the policy is 
pushed to an extreme. Any one who studies, in the writings of 
MM. Taine and de Tocqueville, the state of things which preceded 
the French Revolution, will see that that tremendous catastropha 
came about from so excessive a regulation of men's actions in allV/^ 
their details, and such an enormous drafting away of the products) 
of their actions to maintain the regulating organization, that life I 
was fast becoming impracticable. The empirical utilitarianism 
of that day, like the empirical utilitarianism of our day, differed 
from rational utilitarianism in this, that in each successive case it 
contemplated only the effects of particular interferences on the 
actions of particular classes of men, and ignored the effects prod uced^ 
by a multiplicity of such interf^ens^^s on the lives of nagn at larg^ I 
Ajid" if we ask wh at-^iilgnlbaade, and what now makes, this error I 
possible, we find it to be the political superstition that governmental 
power is subject to no restraints. 

When that " divinity " which " doth hedge a king," and which 
has left a glamour around the body inheriting liis power, has 
quite died away — when it begins to be seen clearly that, in a 
popularly-governed nation, the government is simply a committee 
of management ; it will also be seen that~tEis committee of manage- 
ment has no intrinsic authority. The inevitable conclusion will b 
that its authority is given by those appointing it ;. and has jus 
such bounds as they choose to impose. Along with this will go th 
further conclusion that the laws it passes are not in themselves 



^ 



I 
/ 



THE GREAT POHTIOAL SUPERSTITION. 



107 



Bacred; but that whatever sacredness they have, it is entirely 
due to the ethical sanction — an ethical sanction which, as we find, 
is derivable from the laws of human life as carried on under social 
conditions. And there will come the corollary that when they 
have not this ethical sanction they have no sacredness, and may 
rightly be challenged. 

The function of Liberalism in the past was that of putting a ; 
limit to the powers of kings. The function of true Liberalism in s 
the future will be that of putting a limit to the powers of Parlia- 1 
ments. i 

j 



/ 

/ 



/ 



/ 



/ 



POSTSCRIPT. 



\ 



\ 

" Do I expect this doctrine to meet witli anyvconsiderable accept- 
ance P " I wish I could say, yes ; but unhappily various reasons 
oblige me to conclude that only here and there 8^ solitary citizen 
may have his political creed modified. Of these r^sons there is 
one from which all the others originate. ^\ 

This essential reason is that the restriction of gcVemmental 
power within the limits assigned, is appropriate to the ^dustrial 
type of society only; and, while wholly incongruous With the 
militant type of society, is partially incongruous with tM.t semi- 
militant semi-industrial type, which now characfcerizes aolvanced 
nations. At every stage of social evolution there mus& exist 
substantial agreement between practices and beliefs — ^real beeliefs 
I mean, not nominal ones. Life can be carried on only byVthe 
harmonizing of thoughts and acts. Either the conduct requitred 
by circumstances must modify the beliefs to fit it; or else l|he 
changed beliefs must eventually modify the conduct. 

Hence if the maintenance of social life under one set of condli- 
tions, necessitates extreme subordination to a ruler and entire faijth 
in him, there will be established a theory that the subordinati< on 
and the faith are proper — ^nay imperative. Conversely if, undJ ar 
other conditions, great subjection of citizens to government is n^3 
longer needful for preservation of the national life — if, contrari\ 
wise, the national life becomes larger in amount and higher in \ 
quality as fast as citizens gain increased freedom of action ; there 
comes a progressive modification of their political theory, having 
the result of diminishing their faith in governmental action, 
increasing their tendency to question governmental authority, and 
leading them in more numerous cases to resist governmental 
power: involving, eventually, an established doctrine of limitation. 




POSTSCRIPT. 109 

Thns it is not to be expected that current opinion respecting 
governmental authority, can at present be modified to any great 
extent. But . let us look at the necessities of the case more 
closely. 

Manifestly the success of an army depends very much on the 
faith of the soldiers in their general : disbelief in his ability will 
go far towards paralyzing them in battle ; while absolute confi- 
dence in him will make them fulfil their respective parts with 
courage and energy. If, as in the normally-developed militant 
type of society, the ruler in peace and the leader in war are one 
and the same, this confidence in him extends from military action 
to civil action; and the society, in large measure identical with 
the army, willingly accepts his judgments as law-giver. Even 
where the civil head, ceasing to be the military head, does his 
generalship by deputy, there still clings to him the traditional 
faith. 

Similarly with the willingness to obey. Other things equal an 
army of insubordinate soldiers fails before an army of subordinate 
soldiers. Those whose obedience to their leader is perfect and 
prompt, are obviously more likely to succeed in battle than are 
those who disregard the commands issued to them. And as with 
the army so with the society as a whole ; success in war must 
largely depend on that conformity to the ruler's will which brings 
men and money when wanted, and adjusts all conduct to his 
needs. 

Thus by survival of the fittest, the militant type of society 
becomes characterized by profound faith in the governing power, 
joined with a loyalty causing submission to it in all matters what- 
ever. And there must tend to be established among those who 
speculate about political affairs in a militant socieiy, a theory 
giving form to the needful ideas and feelings; accompanied by 
assertions that the law-giver if not divine in nature is divinely 
directed, and that unlimited obedience to him is divinely ordered. 

Change in the ideas and feelings which thus become charac- 
terestic of the militant form of organisation, can take place only 
where circumstances favour development of the industrial form of 
organization. Being carried on by voluntary co-operation instead 
of by compulsory co-operation, industrial life as we now know it, 
habituiites men to independent activities, leads them to enforce 



r 



110 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

their own claims while respecting the claims of others, strengthens 
the consciousness of personal rights, and prompts them to resist 
excesses of governmental control. Bat since the circumstances 
which render war less frequent arise but slowly, and since the 
modifications of nature caused by the transition from a life pre- 
dominantly militant to a life predominantly industrial can there- 
fore go on only little by little, it happens that the old sentiments 
and ideas give place to new ones, by small degrees only. And 
there are several reasons why the transition not only is, but 
ought to be, gradual. Here are some of them. 

In the primitive man and in man but little civilized, there does 
not exist the nature required for extensive voluntary co-operations. 
Efforts willingly united with those of others for a common advan- 
tage, imply, if the undertaking is large, a perseverance he does not 
possess. Moreover, where the benefits to be achieved are distant 
and unfamiliar, as are many for which men now-a-days combine, 
there needs a strength of constructive imagination not to be found 
in the minds of the uncivilized. And yet again, great combina- 
tions of a private kind for wholesale production, for large enterprises, 
and for other purposes, require a graduated subordination of the 
united workers — ^a graduated subordination such as that which 
militancy produces. In other words, the way to the developed 
industrial type as we now know it, is through the militant type ; 
which, by discipline generates in long ages the power of con- 
tinuous application, the willingness to act under direction (now no 
longer coercive but agreed to under contract) and the habit of 
achieving large results by organizations. 

Consequently, during long stages of social evolution there needs, 
for the management of all matters but the simplest, a govern- 
mental power great in degree and wide in range, with a correlative 
faith in it and obedience to it. Hence the fact that, as the records 
of early civilizations show us, and as we are shown in the East at 
present, large undertakings can be achieved only by State-action. 
And hence the fact that only little by little can voluntary co-opera- 
tion replace compulsory co-operation, and rightly bring about a 
correlative decrease of faith in governmental ability and authority. 

Chiefly, however, the maintenance of this faith is necessitated by 
the maintenance of fitness for war. This involves continuance of 
such confidence in the ruling agency, and such subordination to it, 



POSTSCRIPT. Ill 

as may enable it to wield all the forces of the society on occasions 
of attack or defence; and there mnst survive a political theory 
justifying the faith and the obedience. While their sentiments and 
ideas are of kinds which perpetually endanger peace, it is requisite 
that men should have such belief in the authority of government 
as shall give it adequate coercive power over them for war pur- 
poses — a belief in its authority which inevitably, at the same time, 
gives it coercive power over them for other purposes. 

Thus, as said at first, the fundamental reason for not expecting 
much acceptjQbtice of the doctrine set forth, is that we have at 
present buji^ partially emerged from the militant regime and have 
but partimly entered on that industrial rSgime to which this 
doctrina is proper. 

So/ long as the religion of enmity predominates over the 
religibn of amity, the current political superstition must hold its 
groctnd. While throughout Europe, the early culture of the 
ruliftig classes is one which every day of the week holds np for 
adjmiration those who in ancient times achieved the greatest feats 

battle, and only on Sunday repeats the injunction to put up the 
rord — while these ruling classes are subject to a moral discipline 
>nsisting of six-sevenths pagan example and one-seventh 
iphiistian precept ; there is no likelihood that there will arise such 
international relations as may make a decline in governmental 
power practicable, and a corresponding modification of political 
theory acceptable. While among ourselves the administration of 
colonial affairs is such that native tribes who retaliate on English- 
men by whom they have been injured, are punished, not on their 
own savage principle of life for life, but on the improved civilized 
principle of wholesale massacre in return for single murder, there 
is little chance that a political doctrine consistent only with 
unaggressive conduct will gain currency. While the creed men 
profess is so interpreted that one of them who at home addresses 
missionary meetings, seeks, when abroad, to foment a quarrel with 
an adjacent people whom he wishes to subjugate, and then 
receives public honours after his death, it is not likely that the 
relations of our society to other societies will become such that 
there can spread to any extent that doctrine of limited govern- 
mental functions accompanying the diminished governmental 
authority proper to a peaceful state. A nation which, interested 



112 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

in ecclesiastical squabbles about tbe ceremonies of its Immane onlt, 
cares so little about the essence of that colt that fillibustering in its 
colonics receives applause rather than reprobation, and is not 
denounced even by the priests of its religion of love, is a nation 
which must continue to suffer from iutemal aggressions, alike of 
individuals on one another and of the St^ite on individuals. It is 
impossible to unite the blessings of equity at home with the 
commission of inequities abroad. 

Of course there will arise the question — ^Why, then, emmciate 
and emphasize a theory at variance with the theory t^^pted to our 
present state ? 

Beyond the general reply that it is the duty of ever^ Que who 
regards a doctrine as true and important, to do what ^^e can 
towards diffusing it, leaving the result to bo what it may be,, there 
are several more special replies, each of which is sufficient. 

In the first place an ideal, far in advance of practicab^a^ty 
though it may be, is always needful for right guidance. If, 8'^d 
all those compromises which the circumstances of the tini.Q3 
necessitate, or are thought to necessitate, there exist no tri^^^ 
conceptions of better and worse in social organization — if nothin^ 
beyond the exigencies of the moment are attended to, and th^ , 
proximately best is habitually identified with the ultimately best i , 
there cannot be any true progress. However distant may be theS 
goal, and however often intervening obstacles may necessitate 
deviation in our course towards it, it is obviously requisite to know 
whereabouts it lies. 

Again, while something like the present degree of subjection 
of the individual to the State, and something like the current 
political theory adapted to it, may remain needful in presence of 
existing international relations ; it is by no means needful that this 
subjection should be made greater and the adapted theory 
strengthened. In our days of active philanthropy, hosts of people 
eager to achieve benefits for their less fortunate fellows by the 
shortest methods, are busily occupied in developing administrative 
arrangements of a kind proper to a lower type of society — are 
bringing about retrogression while aiming at progression. The 
normal difficulties in the way of advance are sufficiently great, and 
it is lamentable that they should be made greater. Hence, something 
well worth doing may be doncy if philanthropists can be shown 




... - - "". i? 

' " II I II II ""ir~i ~\\ •.:«.- 7v 



POSTSORIFr. 



113 



that they are in many cases insuring the future ill-being of men 
while eagerly pursuing their present well-being. 

Chiefly, however, it is important to impress on all the great 
truth, at present but little recognized, that a society's internal and 
external policies are so bound together, that there cannot be an 
essential improvement of the one without an essential improvement 
of the other. A higher standard of international justice must be 
habitually acted upon, before there can be conformity to a higher 
standard of justice in our national arrangements. The conviction 
that a dependence of this kind exists, could it be diffused among 
civilized peoples, would greatly check aggressive behaviour towards 
one another ; and, by doing this, would diminish the coerciveness of 
their governmental systems while appropriately changing their 
political theories. 



Thb End. 




THE SYNTHETIC PHILOSOPHY 



OF 



HERBERT SPENCER. 



FIRST PRINCIPLES, 

1 YoL 12.00. 

coifTmrTs. 

Past L — ^The Unknowabli. 



1. Religion and Science. 

2. Ultimate Religious Ideas. 
8. Ultimate Scientific Ideas. 



4. The Relativity of all Knowl- 

edge. 

5. The Reconciliation. 



Pabt II. — ^Thk Enowablx. 

1. Philosophy defined. 13. Simple and Compound Evolu- 

2. The Data of Philosophy. tion. 

8. Space, Time, Matter, Motion, 14. The Law of Evolution. 

and Force. 16. The Law of Evolution (con- 

4. The Indestructibility of Matter. tinued). 

5. The Continuity of Motion. 16. The Law of Evolution (con- 

6. The Persistence of Force. tinued). 

7. The Persistence of Relations 17. The Law of Evolution (con- 

among Forces. eluded). 

8. The Transformation and Equiv- 1 8. The Interpretation of Evolution. 

alence of Forces. 19. The Instability of the Homoge- 

9. The Direction of Motion. neous. 

10. The Rhythm of Motion. 20. The Multiplication of Effects. 

11. Recapitulation, Criticism, and 21. Segregation. 

Recommencement. 22. Equilibration. 

12. Evolution and Dissolution. 23. Dissolution. 

24. Sunmiary and Conclusion. 

THE PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOOT. 

2 vols. $4.00. 

CONTENTS OF VOL. L 

Part I. — ^Thk Data of Biologt. 

1. Organic Matter. 4. Proximate Definition of Life. 

2. The Action of Forces on Or- 6. The Correspondence between 

ganic Matter. lafe and its Circumstances. 

8. The Reactions of Organic Mat- 6. The Degree of Life varies as the 

ter on Forces. Degree ojf Correspondence. 

7. The Scope of Biology. 



2 SPBNCEB^B STNTHETIO PHILOSOPHY. 

Past IL — ^Tmc Inductions of Biology. 

1. Growth. 1, Genesis. 

2. Deyelopment. 8. Heredity. 

3. Function. 9. Variation. 

4. Waste and Repair. 10. Genesis, Heredity, and Yaria- 

5. Adaptation. tion. 

6. Individuality. 11. Classification. 

12. Distribution. 

Past m — ^The Evolution oi Life. 

1. Preliminary. 7. The Ai^guments from Distribu- 

2. General Aspects of the Special- tion. 

Creation Hypothesis. 8. How is Organic Evolution 

3. General Aspects of the Evolu- caused? 

tion Hypothesis. 9. External Factors. 

4. The Arguments from Classifica- 10. Internal Factors. 

tion. 11. Direct Equilibration. 

5. The Arguments from Embryol- 12. Indirect Equilibration. 

ogy. 13. The Cooperation of the Factors. 

6. The Arguments from Morphol- 14. The Convergence of the Evi- 

ogy. dences. 

CONTENTS OF VOL, iZ 
Part IV. — ^MoaPHOLoaiCAL Detelopmint. 

1. The Problems of Morphology. 9. The Shapes of Leaves. 

2. The Morphological Composition 10. The Shapes of Flowers. 

of Plants. 11. The Shapes of Vegetal Cells. 

8. The Morphological Composition 12. Changes of Shape otherwise 
of Plants (continued). caused. 

4. The Morphological Composition 18. Morphological Differentiation in 

of Animals. Animals4 

5. The Morphological Composition 14. The General Shapes of Animals. 

of Animals (continued). 16. The Shapes of Vertebrate Skele- 

6. Morphological Differentiation in tons. 

Plants. 16. The Shapes of Animal Cells. 

7. The General Shapes of Plants. 17. Summary of Morphological De- 

8. The Shapes of Branches. velopment 

Part V. — ^Phtsiological Development. 

1. The Problems of Physiology. 6. Differentiations between the 

2. Differentiations among the Out- Outer and Inner Tissues of 

er and Inner Tissues of Plants. Animals. 

8. Differentiations among the Out- 7. Differentiations among the Out- 

^ er Tissues of Plants. er Tissues of Animals. 

4. Differentiations among the In- 8. Differentiations among the In- 
ner Tissues of Plants. ner Tissues of AninuJs. 

6. Physiological Integration in 9. Physiological Integration in Ani- 
Plants. mals. 

10. Summary of Physiological Development 



% 



BPENCEB'b SYNTHEnO PHILOSOPHY. 8 

Part YL — ^Laws of Multiflioation. 

1. The Factors. 8. Antagonism between Expendi- 

2. A priori Principle. tore and Genesis. 

8. Obverse a ptiori Principle. 9. Coincidence between High Nu> 

4. Difficulties of Inductive Verifi- trition and Genesis. 

cation. 10. Specialties of these Bela- 

6. Antagonism between Growth tions. 

and Asexual Genesis. 11. Interpretation and Qualified^ 

6. Antagonism between Growth tion. 

and Sexual Genesis. 12. Multiplication of the Human 

7. Antagonism between Develop- Race. 

ment and Genesis, Asexual 18. Human Evolution in the Fu- 
and Sexual. ture. 

Appendix." 

A Criticism on Professor Owen's The- On Circulation and the Formation 
ory of the Vertebrate Skeleton. of Wood in Plants. 

THE PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOLOGY. 

2 vols. $4.00. 
CONTENTS OF VOL. L 
Part I. — ^The Data of Psychology. 

1. The Nervous System. 4. The Conditions essential to Ker-' 

2. The Structure of the Nervous vous Action. 

System. 6. Nervous Stimulation and Ner- 

8. The Functions of the Nervous vous Discharge. 

System. 6. .fistho-Physiology. 

Part II. — The Inductions of Psychology. 

1. The Substance of Mind. 6. The Revivability of Relations 

2. The Composition of Mind. between Feelings. 

8. The Relativity of Feelings. 7. The Assodability of Feelings. 

4. The Relativity of Relations be- 8. The Associability of Relations 

tween Feelings. between Feelings. 

6. The Revivability of Feelings. 9. Pleasures and Pains. 

Part III. — General Synthesis. • 

1. Life 'and Mind as Correspon- 6. The Correspondence as increas- 

dence. ing in Specialty. 

2. The Correspondence as t)irect 7. The Correspondence as increas- 

and Homogeneous. ing in Generality. 

8. The Correspondence as Direct 8. The Correspondence as increas- 
but Heterogeneous. ing in Complexity. 

4. The Correspondence as extend- 9. The Coordination of Correspon- 

ing in Space. dences. 

5. The Correspondence as extend- 10. The Integration of Correspon* 

ing in Time. dences. 

11. The Correspondences in their Totality. 



spbnoeb's synthetio philosopht. 



Pabt IV. — Special Synthesis. 

1. The Nature of Intelligence. 5. Instinct. 

2. The Law of Intelligence. 6. Memory. 
8. The Growth of Intelligence. 7. Reason. 

4. Beflex Action. 8. The Feelings. 

9. The Will. 

Part V. — ^Physical Synthesis. 



1. A Further Interpretation need- 

ed. 

2. The (Genesis of Nerves. 

8. The Genesis of Simple Nervous 
Systems. 

4. The Genesis of Compound Ner- 

vous Systems. 

5. The Genesis of Doubly Com- 

pound Nervous Systems. 



6. Functions <is related to these 

Structures. 
^. Physical Laws as thus inter- 

preted. 

8. Evidence from Normal Varia- 

tions. 

9. Evidence from Abnormal Va- 

riations. 
10. Results. 



Appendix. 
On the Action of Anaesthetics and Narcotics. 

CONTENTS OF VOL. U, 
Pabt VI. — Special Analysis. 



1. Limitation of the Subject. 

2. Compound Quantitative Reason- 

ing. 
8. Compound Quantitative Reason- 
ing (continued). 

4. Impeif ect and Simple Quantita- 

tive Reasoning. 

5. Quantitative R^oning in gen- 

eral. 

6. Perfect Qualitative Reasoning. 
*l. Imperfect Qualitative Reason- 

ing.i 

Reasoning in general. 

Classification, Naming, and Rec- 
ognition. 

The Perception of Special Ob- 
jects. 

11. The Perception of Body as pre- 

senting Dynamical, Statico- 
Dynamical, and Statical Attri- 
butes. 

12. The Perception of Body as pre- 

senting Statico-Dynamical and 
Statical Attributes. 



8. 
9 

10 



13. The Perception of Body as 

presenting Statical Attri- 
butes. 

14. The Perception of Space. 
16. The Perception of Time. 

16. The Perception of Motion. 

17. The Perception of Resist- 

ance. 

18. Perception in general. 

19. The Relations, of Similarity and 

Dissimilarity. 

20. The Relations of Cointension 

and Non-Cointension. . 

21. The Relations of Coextension 

and Non-Coertension. 

22. The Relations of Coexistence 

and Non-Coexistence. 

23. The Relations of Connature and 

Non-Connature. 

24. The Relations of Likeness and 

Unlikeness. 

25. The Relation of Sequence. 

26. Consciousness in general. 

27. Results. 



spbncee's synthetio philosophy, 5 

i 

Fabt YIL — Gemxral Analysis. 

1. The Fiaal Question. 11. The Universal Postulate. 

2. The Assumption of Metaphysi- 12. The Test of Relative Yaliditj. 

cians. 18. Its Corollaries. 

8. The Words of Metaphysicians. 14. Positive Justification of Beal- 

4. The Reasonings of Metaphysi- ism. 

cians. [ism. 15. The Dynamics of Consciousness. 

5. Negative Justification of Keal- 16. Partial Differentiation of Sub- 

6. The Argument from Priority. ject and Object. 

7. The Argument from Simplicity. 17. Completed Differentiation of 

8. The Argument from Distinct- Subject and Object 

9. A Criterion wanted. [ness. 18. Developed Conception of the 
10. Propositions qualitatively dis- Object. 

tinguished. 19. Transfigured Realism. 

Part YIIL — Corollaries. 

1. Special Psychology. 5. Sociality and Sympathy. 

2. Classification. 6. Egoistic Sentiments. 

8. Development of Conceptions. 7. Ego-Altruistic Sentiments. 

4. Language of the Emotions. 8. Altruistic Sentiments. 

9. Esthetic Sentiments. 

THE PRINCIPLES OF SOCIOLOGY. 

VoLL $2.00. 

CONTENTS. 

Part I. — ^Thb Data of Sociology. 

1. Super-Organic Evolution. 16. The Ideas of Another World. 

2. The Factors of Soeial Phenom- 16. The Ideas of Supernatural 

ena. Agents. 

8. Original External Factors. 17. Supernatural Agents as causing 

4. Original Internal Factors. Epilepsy and Convulsive Ac- 

6. The Primitive Man — ^Physical. tions, Delirium and Insanity. 

6. The Primitive Man — ^Emotional. Disease and Death. 

7. The Primitive Man — Intellect- 18. Inspiration, Divination, Exor. 

ual. cism, and Sorcery. 

8. Primitive Ideas. 19. Sacred Places, Temples, and 

9. The Ideas of the Animate and Altars ; Sacrifice, Fasting, and 

the Inanimate. Propitiation ; Praise, Prayer. 

10. The Ideas of Sleep and Dreams. 20. Ancestor- Worship in general. 

11. The Ideas of Swoon, Apoplexy, 21. Idol-Worship and Fetich-Wor« 

Catalepsy, Ecstasy, and other ship. 

Forms of Insensibility. 22. Animal-Worship. 

12. The Ideas of Death and Resur- 23. Plant-Worship. 

rection. 24. Nature- Worship. 

13. The Ideas of Souls, Ghosts, 25. Deities. 

Spirits, Demons. 26. The Primitive Theory of Things. 

14. The Ideas of Another Life. 27. The Scope of Sociology. 



6 spenoee's synthetio philosophy. 

Pabt n. — Tbe Inductions or Socioloot. 

1. What is a Society ? *!. The Sustaining System. 

2. A Society is an Organism. 8. The Distributing Systenu 
8. Social Growth. 9. The Ululating System. 

4. Social Structures. 10. Social Types and ConstitutionB. 

5. Social Functions. 11. Social Metamorphoses. . 

6. Systems of Organs. 12. Qualifications and Summary. 

Part III. — ^Thx Domestic Rklationb. 

1. The Maintenance of Species. 6. Polyandiy. 

2. The Diverse Interests of the 7. Polygyny. 

. Species, of the Parents, and 8. Monogamy, 

of the Offspring. 9. The Family. 

8. Primitive Relations of the Sexes. 10. The Status of Women. 

4. Exogamy and Endogamy. 11. The Status of Children. 

5. Promiscuity. 12. Domestic Retrospect and Pros- 

pect. 

Vol. n. 

Pabt IY. — Ckbemonial Institutions. $1.25. 

CONTENTS, 

1. Ceremony in general. 7. Forms of Address. 

2. Trophies. 8. Titles. 

8. Mutilations. 9. Badges and Costumes. 

4. Presents. 10. Further Class-Distinctions. 

6. Visits. 11. Fashion. 

6. Obeisances. 12. Ceremonial Retrospect and 

Prospect. 

Vol a 

Part V. — ^Political Institutions. $ 

CONTENTS, 

m 

1. PrelimfaiaTy. 10. Ministries. 

2. Political Organization in gen- 11. Local Governing Agencies. 

eral. 12. Military Systems. 

8. Political Integration. 13. JudiciaJ and Executive Systems. 

4. Political Differentiation. 14. Laws. 

6. Political Forms and Forces. 15. Property. 

6. Political Heads— Chiefs, Kings, 16. Revenue. 

etc. 17. The Militant Type of Society. 

Y. Compound Political Heads. 18. The Industrial Type of Society. 

8. Consultative Bodies. 19. Political Retrospect and Pros- 

9. Representative Bodies. pect. 

Vol. m. 

In preparation. 




bpenoeb's synthbtio philobopht. 7 

THE PRINCIPLES OF MORALITY. 

Vol. I. 

Pabt I. — ^Thb Data or Ethics. $1.26. 
CONTENTS, 

1. Conduct in general. 10. The Relatirity of Pains and 

2. The Eyolution of Conduct. . Pleasures. 

8. Good and Bad Conduct 11. Egoism versus Altruism. 

4. Ways of judging Conduct. 12. Altruism versus Egoism. 

5. The Physical View. 13. Trial and Compromise. 

6. The Biological View. 14. Conciliation. 

7. The Psychological View. 15. Absolute Ethics and Relatiye 

8. The Sodologl^ View. Ethics. 

9. Criticisms and Explanations. 16. The Scope of Ethics. 

Vol. II. 
In preparation. 



This philosophical system differs from all its predecessors in being 
solidly based on the sciences of observation and induction; in repre- 
senting the order and course of Nature ; in bringing Nature and man, 
life, mind, and society, under one great law of action ; and in developing 
a method of thought which may serve for practical guidance in dealing 
with the affairs of life. 

'*The only complete and systema,tic statement of the doctrine of 
evolution with which I am acquainted is that contained in Mr. Herbert 
Spencer's 'System of Philosophy,* a work which should be carefully 
studied by all who desire to know whither scientific thought is tending." 

— T. H. HUZLIET. 

*' Mr. Spencer is one of the most vigorous as well as boldest thinkers 
that English speculation has yet produced." — John Stuart Mill. 



New York: D. APPLETON & 00., 1, 8, & 6 Bond St. 



THE MISCELLANEOUS WORKS 



OF 



HERBERT SPENCER. 



EDUCATION: 

INTELLECTUAL, MORAL, AND PHYSICAL. 

1 ToL $1.26. 

CONTENTS, 

1. What Knowledge is of most 2. Intellectual Education. 
Worth? 8. Moral Education. 

4. Physical Education. 



SOCIAL STATICS; 

OR, 

THE CONDITIONS ESSENTIAL TO HUMAN HAPPINESS SPECL 
FIED, AND THE FIRST OF THEM DEVELOPED.* 

1 vol. $2.00. 

CONTENTS. 
Introduction. 

The Doctrine of Expediency. Lemma I.' 
The Doctrine of the Moral Sense. Lemma II. 



Part I. 



1. Definition of Morality. 

2. The Evanescence of Evil. 



8. The Divine Idea, and the Con- 
ditions of its Realization. 



Part IL 



4. Derivation of a First Principle. 10. The Right of Property. 

5. Secondary Derivation of a First 11. The Right of Property in Ideas. 

Principle. 12. The Right of Property in Char^ 

6. First Principle. [ciple. acter. 

7. Application of this First Prin- 13. The Right of Exchange. 

8. The Rights of Life and Per- 14. The Right of Free Speech. 

sonal Liberty. 16. Further Rights. 

9. The Right to the Use of the 16. The Rights of Women. 

Earth. 17. The Rights of Children. 



spencer's miscellaneous works. 9 

Part III. 

18. Political Rights. 24. Religious Establishment. 

19. The Right to ignore the State. 26. Poor-Laws. 

20. The Constitution of the State. 26. National Education. 

21. The Duty of the State. 27. Government Colonization. 

22. The Limit of State-Duty. 28. Sanitaiy Supervision. [etc. 

23. The Regulation of Commerce. 29. Currency, Postal Arrangements, 

Part IV. 

80. General Considerations. 31. Summary. 

32. Conclusion. 

THE STUDY OF SOCIOLOGY. 

1 vol. $1.60. 
CONTENTS, 

1. Our Need of it. 8. The Educational Bias. 

2. Is there a Social Science ? 9. The Bias of Patriotism. 

3. Nature of the Social Science. 10. The Class-Bias. 

4. Difficulties of the Social Science. 11. The Political Bias. 

6. Objective Difficulties. 12. The Theological Bias. 

6. Subjective Difficulties — Intel- 13. Discipline. 

lectual. 14. Preparation in Biology. 

7. Subjective Difficulties — Emo- 16. Preparation in Psychology. 

tional 16. Conclusion. 

ILLUSTRATIONS OF UNIVERSAL PROG- 
RESS. 

1 voL $2.00. 
CONTENTS, 

1. Progress : its Law and Cause. 8. Illogical Geology. 

2. Manners and Fashion. 9. Development Hypothesis. 

3. The Genesis of Science. 10. The Social Organism. 

4. The Physiology of Laughter. 11. Use and Beauty. 

5. The Origin and Function of Mu- 12. The Sources of Architectural 

6. The Nebular Hypothesis, [sic. Types. 

7. Bain on the Emotions and the 13. The Use of Anthropomor- 

Will. phism. 

ESSAYS : 

MORAL, POLITICAL, AND iESTHETIC. 
1 vol. $2.00. 
CONTENTS, 

1. The Philosophy of Style. 3. The Morals of Trade. 

2. Our Legislation. . 4. Personal Beauty. 



10 



BFENOEB'S MISCELLAI^nEOnS WOBEB. 



5. Representatiye Goyemment 9. State Tamperings with Money 

6. Prison Ethics. and Banks. 

7. Railway Morals and Railway 10. Parliamentary Reforms: the 

Policies. Dangers and the lifeguards. 

8. Gracefulness. 11. Mill vernts Hamilton — ^the Test 

of Truth. 



BBOBBTT DISOTTSSIONS 

In Schncs, Pbilosopht, and Morale 1 vol 

COIfTSirTS. 



$2.00. 



1. Morals and Moral Sentiments. 

2. Origin of Animal- Worship. 

a. The Classification of the Sci- 
ences. 

4. Postscript: Replying to Criti- 

cisms. 

5. Reasons for dissenting from 

the Philosophy of Comte. 



6. Of Laws in general and the Or- 

der of their Discovery. 

7. The Genesis of Sdence. 

8. Specialized Administrations. 

9. What is Electricity? 

10. The Constitution of the Sun. 

11. The Collective Wisdom. 

12. PoUtical Fetichism. 



18. Mr. Martineau on Evolution. 



DBSOBIFTIVE SOOIOLOGT: 

A Cyclopaedia of Social Facts ; representing the Constitution of Every 
Type and Grade of Human Society. Classified and arranged by 
Herbert Spencer. Compiled and abstracted by David Duncan, M. A., 
Professor of Logic, eta, in the Presidency College, Madras ; Richard 
Scheppig, Ph. D. ; and James Collier. Royal folio. Parts I to VII, 
$4.00 each; No. Vm (Double Number), $7.00. 

No. 1. English. Compiled and abstracted by James Collier. 

No. 2. Anciknt Mexicans, Central Americans, Chibchas, and An- 
cient Peruvians. Compiled and abstracted by Richard 
Scheppig, Ph.D. 

No. 3. Types or the Lovn»T Races. Negrito Races. Malato- 
PoLTNBsiAN Races. Compiled and abstracted by Professor 
David Duncan, M. A. 

No. 4. African Races. Compiled and abstracted by Professor David 
Duncan, M. A. 

No. 6. AsuLTic Races. Compiled and abstracted by Professor David 
Duncan, M. A. 

No. 6. North and South American Races. Compiled and abstracted 
by Professor David Duncan, M. A. 

No. 7. Hebrews and Phoenicians. Compiled and abstracted by lUch- 
ard Scheppig, Ph. D. 

No. 8. French. Compiled and abstracted by James Collier. 



New York: D. APPLETON <& CO., 1, 8, & 6 Bond Street 



Herbert Spencer's Synthetic PMlosopIiy. 



(1.) 

Part L The Unknowable. 



( Part II. The KnowaUe. 
1 vol., 12xno, $2.00. 



(2.) THE PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY* 



VoLL 

Part L The Data of Biology. 
"• U. The Inductions of Biology. 
*" III. The Evolution of Life. 



Voin. 

Part rV. Morphological Development 
** y. Physiological Development 
'' YI. LawBofMultipUoation. 



2 vols., 12mo. $4.00. 



(8.) THE PRINCIPLES OF PS7CH0L067. 



VoLL 

Part I. The Data of Psychology. 
" IL The Inductions of Psychology. 
** IIL G^eral Synthesis. 
** lY. Special Synthesis. 



Yol. IL 

Part Y. Physical Synthesis. 
** YL Special Analysis. 
'* YII. General Analysis. 
"YIII.- Corollaries. 



2 vols., 12mo, $4.00. 

(4.) THE PRINCIPLES OF S0CI0L067. 

Y0I.L $2.00. Yo1.il 

Part I. The Data of Sociology. Part lY. Geremonial Institutions. . $1.2& 

*" IL The Inductions of Sociology. ** Y. Political Institutions LdO' 

*^ in. The Domestic Belations. 

YoLIII. ISmo. In pr^KtrcUion. 



(5.) 

YoL I. 

Part L The Data of Ethics $1.25. 

Cheap edition, paper. . . 50. 
** II. Inpreparatiotk 



OF MORALITT. 

YoLH. 
InprgxtraUon, 



Far tale by all hookseUen ; or sent by maUy post-paid^ an receipt af prices 



New York: D. APPLETON & CO., 1, 8, & 6 Bond Street. 



Herbert Spencer's Hiscellaneons Works. 



SOdAI. STATICS; 

Or, the Conditions essential to Haman Happiness Specified^ and the First of Them Be- 
Teloped. With a Notice of the Aathor. 12mo. Cloth, $2.00. 

** The present volnme, the first and most popularly written of all the anthor^s works, 
has an interest not only for the intrinsic yame and importance of its discossions, bat 
as foreshadowing the philosophical scheme which it has become the business of his 
life to unfold. With various things, perhaps, that he can not accept, the reader will 
find the great subjects of society, the laws of social growth and improvement, the 
rights, cMms, and duties of various classes of the communit|r, and the philosophy of 
education, government, and human progress considered as problems of science, and 
with the author's usual affluence of illustration and remarkable powers of reasoning. 
But he will ftirther find that the work involves a fundamental organizing thought, that 
of EvolfUioii, which has become the central and governing idea of all his phllosophioU 
labors.'*— Jin^rican IrUroductory Notice, 

ILLUSTRATIONS OF UNIVEBSAL PROGRESS. 

12mo. Cloth, $2.00. 

^* Those who have read the work on Education will remember the analytic tendency 
of the author's mind— his clear perception and admirable exposition of first principles 
— his wide grasp of fhcts — ^his hicid and vigorous style, and the constant and controlling 
bearing of the cuscussion on practical results. These traits characterize all Mr. Spen- 
cer's \n:itings, and mark in an eminent degree the present volume." — iV. Y. Tribune, 

ESSAYS, MORAL, POLITICAL, AND iESTHETIC. 

- 12mo. Cloth, $2.00. 

"These essays form a new and. If we are not mistaken, a most popular installment 
of the intellectual benefitctions of that earnest writer and profound philosopher, Her- 
bert Spencer. There is a remarkable union of the speculative and practical in these 
papers. They are the firait of studies alike economical and psychological ; they touch 
the problems of the passing hour, and thev grasp truths of universal application; they 
will be found as instructive to the general reader as interesting to political and socied 
sradents."— jBcwton TroMcript. 

THE STUDY OF S0CI0L067. 

12mo. Cbth, $1.60. 

RECENT DISCUSSIONS IN SCIENCE, PHILOSOPH7, 

AND MORALS. 

12mo. Cloth, $2.00. 

EDUCATION : InteUectaal, Moral, and PhysicaL 

12mo. Cloth, $1.25; cheap edition, paper, 60 cents. 

PHUiOSOPHT OF STYLE. 

12mo. Flexible doth, 60 cento. 



For tale by aU bookseUert; or sent by maU^ pott-paid^ on receipt qf price, , 



New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 1, 8, & 6 Bond Street. 



( 



i 



Herbert Spencer's Descriptive Sociology. 

A CYCLOPiEDIA OF SOCIAL FACTS; 

Representing the Constitution of Every Type and Grade of Human Soci- 
ety, Fast and Present, Stationary and Progressive : 

Classifiid Aino Tabulated fob East Compakison aitd CoNVBimcMT Stuot 
or THB Kklationb of Social Phxkomena. 

Eiclit numbers, Boyal Folio. 



No. I.— Price, $4.00. 

ENGLISH. Ciompiled and Abstracted by Jambs Collibb; 

No. II.— Price, |»4.00. 

MEXICANS, CENTBAL AMEBICAHS, CHIBCHAS, and FEBUVIAKS. 

Compiled and Abstracted by Kiohabd Sohbppxg, Ph. D. 

No. III.— Price, $4.00. 

LOWEST BACES, NEGBITO BACES, and XALATO-FOLTNESIAN 
BACES. Compiled and Abstracted by Professor Dttnoan, M. A. 



Types (^ Lowest 

Races. 
Faegians. 
Andamanese. 
Veddahs. 
Australians. 



Negrito Races, 
Tasmanians. 
New Caledoni- 
ans, eta 
NewGuineaPeo- 
Fgians. [pie. 

No. IT.— Price, $4.00. 

AFBICAN BACES. Compiled and Abstracted by Professor Dttnoan, M. A. 



Maiayo-Polyne- 

sian Races. 
Sandwich Island- 
ers. 
Tahitians. 
Tongans. 



Samoans. 

New Zealanders. 

Dyaks. 

Javans. 

Bumatrans. 

Malagasy. 



Bnshmen. 
Hottentots. 
Damaras. 
Bechuanas. 



Kaffirs. 
East Africans. 
Congo People. 



Coast Negroes. 
Inluid Negroes. 
Dahomans. 



Ashantis. 

Fulahs. 

Abyssinians. 



No. T.- Price, $4.00. 
ASIATIC BACES. Compiled and Abstracted by Professor Duhcak, M. A. 



Arabs. 
Todas. 
Kbonds. 
Oonds. 



Bhils. 
Santals. 
Karens. 
Kukis. 



Nagas. 

Bodo and Dhimals. 

Mishmis. 

Kirghiz. 



Kalmucks. 

Ostyaks. 

Kamtschadales. 



No. n.— Price, $4.00. 

AMERICAN BACES. Compiled and Abstracted by Professor Dttnoait, M. A. 



Chippewayans. 
Chippewas. 
Dakotas. 
Mandans. 



Creeks. 

Guiana Tribes. 
Caribs. 
Brazilians. 



Uaup^s. 
Abipones. 
PatagoDians. 
Araucanians. 



Esquimaux. 

Cbinooks. 

Snakes. 

Comanches. 

Iroquois. 

No. Til.— Price, $4.00. 

EESBEWSand FHCENICIANS. Compiled and Abstracted by Richabd Scubp- 
PIG, Ph. D. 

No. Till.— Price, $7.00. (Double Number.) 

HEIENCH. Compiled and Abstracted by Jambs Collibb. 



New York: D. APPLETON & CO., 1, 8, & 5 Bond Street. 



DYNAMIC SOCIOLOGY, 

OB 

APPLIED SOCIAL SCIENCE, AS BASED UPON STATICAL 
SOCIOLOGY AND THE LESS COMPLEX SCIENCES 

By LESTEB F. WABD, A.M. 
Two yoli., 12mo. doth, t5.00. 



" In hlB two Tolnmes, ooDtaioing npward of 1,800 pages, Mr. Ward takes us 
ftom the primordial atom, throoj^ the three stages ox aunnic aegregation indi- 
cated by H^mogeDj,* * Blogeny/ and * Sodogeny,* to the consicteraaonof some 
of the most complex problems presented to tiie student of life, mind, morals, 
and society. Especially interesting are Mr. Ward's reflections npon the Be- 
prodoctiye Forces, which he very sensibly and snccessftally vindicates ttom the 
opprobriam with which saperfidal prejodice has sorronndsid them, and we wonld 
particnlarly recommend to all those who talu Interest in social qnestions, and 
who are capable of free and onbiased thooght, his remarks npon Maxriage Insti- 
tutions. 

** We are glad to And that Mr. Ward strongly dleBents from the riews ex- 
pressed with such carious emphasis bv Mr. Herbert Spencer upon the subject of 
compulsory state education. A consideration of the matter, means, and method 
of education brinn to its condusion a work from wtiich all readers, whether or 
not they agree with the doctrines therein expounded, can not fail to deiire bene- 
fit, more especially if ther are capable of bringing to its consideration a mind 
divested of prejudice, and only desirous of the truu."— 7A« WtstmintUr RetUw, 

** An ambitions but Uleo an important work. There is much acute psycho- 
logical observation to be found at different stages of the argument in both vol- 
umes, and the properlv sociological views are marked by great vigor and inde- 
pendence of spirit."— Ifliui. 

" Mr. Ward^s presentation of the sutject is simple, dear, systematic, and 
courageous. For its preparation he has explored vast fields of ibonght ; and hia 
conclusions, however they may be questioned, can not be ignored 1^ those who 
are interested in modem philosophy. Ward*s * Dynamic Sodology * is Americans 
greatest contribution to scientific philosophy."— iSd«nc«. 

" Mr. Ward has evidently put great labor and thought into his two volumes, 
and has produced a work of interest and importance. He does not limit his 
effort to a contribution to the science of sodology. He believes that he has con- 
tributed something to that science, but thepurpose of his book is something very 
distinct and someuiing more than that. He believes that sodologv has already 
reached the point at which it can be and ought to be applied, treated as an arL 
and he urges that * the state ^ or government now has a new, legitimate, and 

Seculiar field for the exercise of intelligence to promote the welfare of men."— 
Tew York Times. 

** This is an elaborate undertaking, conceived in a praiseworthy spirit. It is 
the latest effort to open a pathway ror the world'p true advance— a pmpose that 
has inspired the noblest minds in every age of the world.'*— TA« American, 

** Mr. Ward makes a valiant assault upon the doctrine of kUssez-fcAre^ and in- 
Biets upon the enlargement of state functions, believing that there is more dan- 
ger that the world will not be governed enough than that it will be governed too 
much. Mr. Ward maintains bis position wiin cogent logic and a powerful array 
of pertinent facts."— CAi«a^ JrUer- Ocean. 



New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 1, 8, & 5 Bond Street 









PRICE, 30 CENTS. 



THE MAX unn. THE STATE: 



I'UN'TAININO 



a fr> 



Tim .New Toryi^m^'' 
" Tha ('otning Staccrtf^- 



a ^r 



The Sins of Leyislatom:^^'' 



AND 



• The Great PoUtkal SaperstiUonP 



BY 



HERBERT SPENCER. 



Kepkinijei. KiK.M "TIIK I'OITI.AU SOIEXCK .MONTIU.y,'' with a l'..smiiHT 



ITeto ilorb: 

D. AI»PLI:T()N A>'1) CO.NrPANV, 
1, 3, & 5 IJOXD ^^■nu•;K■|•. 



