Atlantis in America
===================
Lewis Spence — Atlantis in America (London: Ernest Benn, 1925), public domain. The key statement of the New World Atlantis case, pairing Plato with Mesoamerican archaeology. Scan via Internet Archive.

————— € a T € € À— RARE AN .


T te,


i


H


ME uan


— S - - — -— 3 PP Pura: eA © vi ———— " "
- (qne m uie E mme ek: ke = E
EL u am ne re eh ` 1 |


ATLANTIS IN AMERICA


e Pg
WF
.
yu we e
s .
. . t .
-. a
SM dw =” $
e ^
e “we.
*.
209
“ie
.


5 “SVAN DAIA VAREN AEE SN SEM LEON AR SBDACL cree AVN F AA


4


- PS wey! -
. a ha a


ATLANTIS | l
AMERICA


By LEWIS SPENCE


Author of “The Problem of Atlantis,"

* The Gods of Mexico," “ The Myths of
Mexico and Peru,” “ The Civilisation of
Ancient Mexico,” “The Popol Vuh,” etc.


LONDON: ERNEST BENN LIMITED
8 BOUVERIE STREET, E.C.4


1925


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


a"
-
uU


uN


+p
ES


The Mayflower Press, Plymouth, England. William Brendon & Son, Ltd.


PREFACE A


HAT time has for ever- departed when a farrago
of myths collected at random, interspersed with
wild etymologies and buttressed by dogmatic

ıssertions passed for a justification of the Atlantean
iypothesis. The older protagonists of Atlantis were
lelightful, but it was as Madame D’Aulnoy and Perrot
ire delightful. Brasseur de Bourbourg, Le Plongeon and
he rest enchanted us, they led us like little children
hrough the mazes of a country of fascination which
Maeterlinck might cudgel his fancy in vain to produce,
ind hard must be his heart and thankless his spirit who
loes not look back upon their fantasies with gratitude and
\ffection. For the man who can transform history into a
rlittering fable is as much a poet as he who reverses the
»roeess and makes the divine shapes of myth act and live

m the stage of human story. l

But to-day, when everyone is something of an archeolo-
nist, when nearly every page of the world’s story has been
ranslated into the vulgar tongue, so to speak, in countless
rolumes which place the essence and synopsis of archzo-
ogical effort within the reach of all, the wayfaring man is
10 longer to be beguiled. True, he values a good yarn as
nuch as ever. But if it be an archeological yarn, it must
»e based on fact, for he will tell you that not only does he
ack the leisure to listen to fairy tales, and that these, in
he main, are unprofitable in a hard world, but that he
ias discovered that after all there is no such legend as the
egend which turns out to be true, and that the whole
rey-golden limbo of wonderland can produce no such
vealth of marvel and miracle as the heights and depths,
he hidden profundities and shadowy abysses of our own
vonderful star.

In a manner I agree with him, for fairy gold is only too
pt to turn to leaves, whereas the more ponderable
narvels abide as a joy and a prodigy for ever. But is the
aaterially marvellous different in kind from the spiritually
emote ? I doubtit. In any case, the first holds elements
f wonder more immediately satisfying to most of us. The
ilded treasures of a long-lost Pharaoh, the epic of a world-
light, the elfin voices of wireless, the plunging reality of
he ocean leviathans dredged up by Mr. Mitchell Hedges,


5


69733


Preface 6


the actuality of those Isthmian savages who trembled at
the name of magic, discovered by Lady Richmond Brown,
the strange new dimensional phases and loops of Relativity,
the unplumbed ocean of the subconscious mind, the glan-
dular Elixir of Youth, the invasion of the atom’s integrity
—are these not as rare, as full of gramarye to the imagin-
ation as a whole ocean of Fortunate Isles peopled by syren’
shadows ? Science is daily raising the morocco covers of
The Thousand and One Nights to an ever more inac-
cessible shelf in the dusty library of Lord Rosebery’s dead
and forgotten books. |
So it is both by predilection and under force of popular
opinion that I write of Atlantis in the plain language of
fact, assured that in the process I do not cast marvel.
behind me, but merely enter a new and more spacious
satrapy of that wonderland, to gain which the dreary.
deserts of common sense have had to be traversed by many
a hardy but patient pilgrim wandering from the beaten /
track of erudition. So far as my judgment serves me, I:
shall set down nothing in these pages of the illogical or
the far-fetched, but shall endeavour to proceed to my |
conclusions by the paths.of ascertained fact and rational ,
argument. Doubtless prejudices and prepossessions will .
beset my way, and the value of my premises will be |
denied by those of clearer vision, just as others may, by `
virtue of a higher gift of dialectic, succeed in overturning '
my general thesis, and rank me with Brasseur, Le Plongeon :
and the rest of my predecessors in the Atlantean argument. |
As that argument unfolds, the reader will discover that |
it pivots upon what I call the Atlantis culture-complex. |
'I hold that the occurrence on either side of the Atlantic `:
! of a civilisation having certain salient cultural character- |
istics proves that Europe and Africa on the one hand and -
America on the other must have received it from a common
source—Atlantis. The chief components of this complex |
are a common tradition of cataclysm, mummification, |
witchcraft, and certain art-forms and distinctive cus- |
toms. These have, as will be seen, many inter-relations, ,
and all of them appear to me to find a nucleus |
in the symbol of the thunder-stone, the fetish of the
Atlantean and European Poseidon and the Mexican
Quetzalcoatl alike. Whether I am right or wrong in my’.


p fn VJ s


Preface


ferences, I believe it will still be granted that I have at
ast established the facts that such a culture-complex
isted in both the Western Old World and the New, and
at it did not exist in Asia, in its primal integrity at least,
ithe traces of it in that continent are few, vague and
attered. I hold, then, that the evidence justifies me in
oking for the place of its original development in an
tlantic area midway between the regions where its most
lient manifestations are to be found.
As this book deals mainly with the evidence for the
rvival of Atlantean civilisation in the American conti-
int, I have, through considerations of space, been com-
led somewhat to abridge the proof which deals with the
rger question of the former existence of Atlantis itself.
his proof I have already presented in The Problem of
llantis, but the reader will find it carefully summarised
these pages, in which, however, it will be found that my
def object has been to demonstrate the existence of
llantean culture on American soil and to compare its
anifestations there with those shoots it put forth in
arope.

L. S.
EDINBURGH, May, 1925.


CHAPTER


I.
II.
III.
IV.


VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.
X.
XI.
XII.
XIII.


CONTENTS


PREFACE : E s :

ATLANTIS AND ANTILLIA : . : :
THE Crô-MAGNONS OF AMERICA . : 5
QUETZALCOATL THE ATLANTEAN. .
ATLANTIS IN AMERICAN TRADITION


THE ATLANTEAN TRADITION IN AMERICAN
RELIGION . : 1 : . :


THE EVIDENCE FROM THE MUMMY

THE EVIDENCE FROM WITCHCRAFT : 5
ETHNOLOGICAL EVIDENCE ; : ; :
THE EVIDENCE FROM ART AND ARCHITECTURE
FoLk-MEMORIES OF AN ATLANTIC CONTINENT.
THE ANALOGY OF LEMURIA . : : ;
THE SARGASSO SEA : N : à :
ATLANTIS IN AMERICA . ; i :
CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE . i i ;


INDEX . " , : ; : : :


PAGE
5


13


131
149
166
176
186
194
205


207


LIST OF PLATES


NO. Frontispice


1. Maya-Toltec type of architecture at Chichen-Itzá Yucatan


FACING PAGI


2. Maya hieroglyphic script. simi ai on the tablet of the
Cross, Palenque :


3. House of the Governor, Uxmal, Yücatán


4. Twin form of Zemis or idols from the Antilles (after
Fewkes) i à


5. “Canopic ” jars from a grave at Zaachilla, Mexico


6. Zemi from the Antilles showing reminiscence of mummy
form in cotton wrappings and eviscerated abdomen .

7. Mexican goddess Coatlicue as mummy-bundle

8. Maya sculpture of à mummy : E :

9. Dance of witches round idol. Aurignacian art, Cogul


10. Statue showing Maya type of face. Copan .


11. (1) Aurignacian figure from VERMES FREUE Eu
likeness to Maya type :


(2) Terra-cotta mask from Sesal, Central OTN p
ing likeness to European type .


12. Pure Aztec type, showing head- Herne by the ie


board
13. Design on a vase Chama, irá es: owie
Maya types . $ ; E


14. American pyramids. (1) Plan of Peruvian Byres:
(2) Maya form of pyramid ;


15. Burial mound in Caldwell iin North Gasoline (after
C. Thomas) ;


16. Three-pointed stones from the Antilles (after Fewkes)


ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT


Map of Andreas Bianco, 1436, showing Island of Antillia

Outline map showing probable relative positions of Atlantis
(a) and Antillia (b) with adjacent islands ;

Quetzalcoatl, from the Mexican Codex Borgia

Quetzalcoatl upholding the heavens


Mexican deity Tlaloc in walrus form from Castillo de Teayo,
Moxico A : ‘ $ :


Mexican god Uitzilopochtli ; ; i


Outline sketches of (top) American Indian id (bekam)
Aurignacian drawings of bisons, showing similar tectiform
or tent-shaped devices j : ‘ :


IO


50


90
104


108
110
112
122
138


144
144
146
148
156


162
198


PAGE


35
53
60


82
89


97


II Illustrations in the Text


One of the Ciuateteó, or Mexican witches, from the Codex Borgia


Tlazolteoth, an of the Mexican Witches, name on 8 broom-
stick . : ‘ . .


The elephant konied dod
The mammoth or elephant at Copan


The Sargasso Sea. The shaded Pau indicates here the
weed is thickest


Itzlacoliuhqui, the planet Venus showing bandaged eyes


PAGE


124


129
153
153


187
196


Atlantis in America


CHAPTER I


ATLANTIS AND ANTILLIA


HE tradition that the Atlantic Ocean holds in its

depths the wreck of a great island-continent

which once boasted a flourishing civilisation is
deeply rooted in the minds of thousands. No amount of
scientific protestation seems capable of shaking the world-
wide conviction in the former existence of Atlantis. I
hold this belief to be a natural and almost instinctive
one, but I do not regard so favourably the widespread
notion that Atlantis was the mother of all civilisation. Such
an attitude is, of course, quite as unscientific as that
which regards Egypt as the fons et origo of all culture.
Culture must undoubtedly have had its birthplace in some
one region of the earth’s surface. But to infer from such
an obvious fact that the entire apparatus of civilisation
was’ evolved from an Atlantean, Egyptian or any other
single source is wilfully to close one’s eyes to those special
and separate manifestations of it which arise out of the
necessities of environment.

When I say, therefore, that I believe civilisation was
carried to Europe from the now sunken continent of:
Atlantis, I must be understood as implying not that all
civilisation, but a certain type of it alone was brought to
early Europe from Atlantis. The Atlantean hypothesis
will gain nothing by being pushed to extremes, or from
the attentions of cranks. If it is worth examining at all,
it is worth examining sanely.

Did the Atlantean type of culture succeed in reaching
the shores of America as well as those of Kurope in early
times? I believe that it did. But I cannot credit the
statements of some enthusiastic antiquaries that it reached
American soil thousands of years prior to the Christian
era. Ifa prolonged study of the conditions of civilisation
in pre-Columbian America has made one thing more
clear to me than another, it is that the culture of the
Maya people of Central America, which was probably


13


Atlantis in America x4


the most venerable on American soil, cannot be assigned
to an antiquity in the region of its earliest settlemer
there greater than the second century prior to the Christiag
era.

To substantiate such a theory as that which relates
the penetration of Atlantean culture to the Ameri
continent is naturally a matter of surpassing difficulty
In the first place, we are dealing with a culture no ponde
able or material monuments or relies of which remain
Again and again we must have recourse to analogy ang
assumption. A whole literature, remarkable for it
interest, erudition and ingenuity has crystallised round
the subject. Much of it has been condemned, and with
reason, as the fantastic outpourings of erudite irrespon+
sibles. On the other hand, those who have criticised tl i ag
hypothesis most unmercifully have too often evinced thi
credulity of incredulity which has left its mark so in:
delibly on Victorian science. T

In these pages I have endeavoured to collect the proofs;
and evidences of the theory that from the now submerged:
Atlantic land-mass which is known both to tradition and?
geology as Atlantis the beginnings of a certain type ofi
culture were conveyed to American as well as to Europeanj
soil. In the present state of our knowledge the precise’
value of the cultural debt which pre-Columbian America;
owed to Atlantis cannot well be estimated. But it is:
surely needless to say that the belief in such a transference.
would scarcely commend itself to any rational mind unless-
very obvious and striking evidential material already:
existed to compel attention to it. Such material exists,
but our knowledge of aboriginal American civilisation is.
presently so imperfect that we can only grope our way,
rather painfully by the light of a few well-ascertained?
facts through a gloaming of probabilities, where much of
the scenery is a little unreal. But as our vision grows more’
accustomed to the twilight of this obscure atmosphere,
the shapes of things discerned take on a sharper outline,.
and in due time, perhaps, may be fully revealed to us.

The tradition of Atlantis has become part of the world’s’
literature. Our first authentic notice of it is toebe found
in the writings of Plato, who in his Timeus preserves a tale |
told by a.certain Critias to Timeeus and Socrates, based on


mii is ue


T Atlantis and Antillia


writings and traditions which Dropidas, the great-grand-
'ather of Critias, had handed down. This information
Dropidas had received from Solon, who on his part had
it at first hand from an Egyptian priest of Sais, about
800 &.c. Atlantis, said this hierophant, was a great con-
cinent situated in the Atlantic Ocean, over against the
Strait of Gibraltar. About 9000 years before his time
'9600 B.c.) its people swarmed into the Mediterranean
“= and invaded Greece. The Athenians attacked and
lefeated them, and were saved from further invasion
by the sudden disappearance beneath the sea of the land
whence their enemies had emerged. This catastrophe, it
would appear from the context, was brought upon Atlantis
by the will of the gods, whom its inhabitants had offended
by their wickedness. All that remained of Atlantis in
Plato’s time were vast mud-banks, which made it difficult
for vessels to negotiate the passage from the Mediterranean
into the Atlantic.

At first sight the account of Plato has all the appearance
of a legendary tale. But a careful examination of its text
furnishes data for a reasonable case in favour of its
authenticity. Again, practically all geological authorities
are in agreement that such a continent once actually
existed, and that the Canary Islands, the Azores and the
Cape Verde Islands are the last vestiges of this land-mass.
They also agree that it slowly disintegrated during a period
of many thousands of years. The point on which they are
chiefly at issue is that which has reference to the probable
date of the final disappearance of its main portion.

"The chief modern protagonists of the theory that Atlantis
existed at a period in geological time when it was possible
for it to have supported human life are Professor R. F.
Scharff of Dublin ‘and M. Pierre Termier, Director of
Science of the Geological Chart of France. These authori-
ties affirm that it is by no means improbable that such a
continent as Plato described continued to exist in the
Atlantic area until some nine or ten thousand years prior
to the Christian era. They bring to bear upon the ques-
tion a mass of corroborative evidence which is as staggering
as it is mgeniously employed and arranged. Evidence
from plant and ariimal life in the Atlantic islands isadduced
fo demonstrate the long, isolation and development of the


Atlantis in America


fauna and flora of these archipelagoes, and in some c
their European or American origin. These forms, it.
believed, reached the islands via land-bridges w
stretched on either hand to the European and Ameri
continents. The deep-sea soundings made by expeditio
sent out by various European Governments undoubte
assist the argument that the remains of sunken Atlanti
occupy some portions of the bed of the Atlantic at no
very great depths from its surface.!

As regards the existence of man on this Atlantic conti:
nent, now submerged, I believe the successive races whieh
appeared in the Biscayan and Pyrenean regions of Spain
and France during what is known as the Aurignacian and
Azilian Periods of the Paleolithic Age (Old Stone Age) to
have been immigrants from the slowly disintegrating
continent of Atlantis. The first of these was the Crê
Magnon race, which arrived in Europe about 25,000 year
ago. This was a tall people with large brain-case, posses
ing a stone culture and highly developed art which is
known as Aurignacian, and was manifested in stone, bone
and painting. Its beginnings cannot be traced anywhere
in the known world. This race was succeeded about
14,000 B.c. by a second wave of similar type, whose art,
known as Magdalenian, was more highly developed, and’
likewise has no known origin. A third race of immigrants,
the Azilian-Tardenoisian, who arrived in Europe about.
10,000 B.c., were the ancestors of the Iberian peoples, and
no satisfactory origin has so far been accredited to them.

An important point for students of the Atlantis theory
is that the Crö-Magnon remains show them to have been,
a people practically identical with the Guanche race which
formerly peopled the Canary Islands, the last existing
remnants of the sunken continent. The Guanches were
isolated for countless centuries from Europe before their
discovery by the Spaniards. Their customs and art,
carving and cave-painting are practically identical, say
Professor Osborn, Dr. Réné Verneau and the late Lord:
Abercromby, with those of the Cró-Magnons. The latter,
at the epoch of their first arrival in Europe, were certainly
without the means of navigation, and must have arrived


1 Further evidence in favour of the former existence of an Atlantean
continent will be found in Chapter II.


17 Atlantis and Antillia


on European soil by means of a land-bridge. Nor were
boats or ships yet invented at the era when they might
have reached the Canaries by sea.

In a former work I arrived at the following conclusions,
based on the geological proof for the existence of Atlantis
at a period approximate to that mentioned by Plato:


(1) That a great continent formerly occupied the whole
or major portion of the North Atlantic region, and a con-
siderable portion of its southern basin. Of early geological
origin, it must, in the course of successive ages, have
experienced many changes in contour and mass, probably
undergoing frequent submergence and emergence.


(2) That in Miocene (Late Tertiary) times it still retained
its continental character, but towards the end of that
period it began to disintegrate, owing to successive volcanic
and other causes.


(3) That this disintegration resulted in the formation
of greater and lesser insular masses. Two of these, con-
siderably larger in area than any of the others, were
situated (a) at a relatively short distance from the entrance
to the Mediterranean ; and (b) in the region of the present
West India Islands. These may respectively be called
Atlantis and Antillia. Communication was possible
between them by an insular chain.


(4) That these two island-continents and the connecting
chain of islands persisted until late Pleistocene times, at
which epoch (about 25,000 years ago, or the beginning of
the Post-Glacial epoch) Atlantis seems to have experienced
further disintegration. Final disaster appears to have
overtaken Atlantis about 10,000 B.c. Antillia, on the other
hand, seems to have survived until a much more recent
period, and still persists fragmentally in the Antillean?
group, or West India Islands.


It would seem then that if Atlantean culture reached
America it must have done so by way of the Antillian
continent. Believing these conclusions to be well founded,
I shall attempt to prove :

1 Further proof of the identification of the Guanches with the Cré-

on race will be found in Chapter II.


è Throughout I employ the adjective “ Antillean ” to describe the


Antilles or West India Islands, and “ Antillian ” to designate the continent
of Antillia.


Atlantis in America


(1) That an ancient tradition referring to Antillia, a
similar to that of Atlantis, formerly received widespre
credence.

(2) That the Antilles are the remains of the ancie
continent of Antillia. E

(3) That this continent formerly had terrestrial a
cultural connections with Atlantis.

(4) That it was the stepping-stone by which Atlante
culture reached the American mainland.


(1) That an ancient tradition referring to Antillia and
similar to that of Atlantis, had formerly u pEcAd
credence : Ä

References to the continent or island of Antillia are
found in the maps, globes and geographical works of the
pre-Columbian Period. These are so numerous and im-:
portant as to give the impression that something more
tangible than tradition lay behind them. It is essentigl
to our proof to review these references and to see how far
they justify such a tradition or belief.

One of the most striking of them is the reference to
Antillia in a letter of Toscanelli to Columbus, dated 1474.!
In this letter Toscanelli recommends the island of Antillia
as a convenient half-way house on the voyage to Cathay.
Behaim, on his globe of 1492, wrote under the outline of
Antillia: “ In 1414 a ship from Spain came nearest to it
without danger." On the map of Ruysch (1508) it is stated
‚that Antillia was discovered by the Spaniards “‘ long ago,”
and he refers to the legend that King Roderick, the last of.
the Gothic kings of Spain, flying from the Moors, found ar
asylum in the eighth century. :

Both globe and map depict Antillia as lying far west
in the Atlantic, and quite apart from any other land, but
in Peter Martyr’s Decades of the New World or West Indies
(ca. 1510) we find Antillia explicitly described as a welk.
known archipelago. At that period confusion existed
between the West India Islands (the present Antilles) and.
Antillia, which certainly suggests. that for generations!
Antillia had been traditionally recognised as an island-
continent, and that the idea that the Antilles or West


1 See Harisse, Bibliotheca Americana Vetustissima, XVI-XVIII. `


I9 Atlantis and Antillia


India Islands were the remains of such a continent had
not yet become general.

Still there were signs that such an idea was gaining
ground. Nicolo de Canerio's map (1502 ?) describes the
West India Islands as “ Antilhas del Rey de Castilla,” and
an anonymous map of about the same date gives them the
collective name of “ Antilie.”

, But the tradition that Antillia was indecd a continent
finds justification from other quarters. Long after the South
American coast had bcen sufficiently explored to demon-
strate its existence as a continental arca it was identificd
with Antillia, as two maps in the Egerton MS.! distinctly
prove. Here the name Antiglia is given to the mainland.

Later still, however, the conviction grew that the site
of the true Antillia was that of the groups of islands since
known as the Antilles, and this, 1 venture to suggest,
proves almost conclusively that tradition, as is her wont,
unerringly fixed upon a correct location. Scores of in-
stances of this instinctive but nevertheless precise fixation
of locality by tradition are known to every working
student of folklore. Explorers in the realms of traditional
lore, indeed, are becoming more and more accustomed to
look for the horizon of actual sites in formerly discredited
rural legends. And if this traditional memory be success-


fully applied to the discovery of the sites of buried cities -


and buildings, may it not also be employed with equal
‚reason in the case of sunken continents ?

- Certain writers have proclaimed their belief in the
original unity of the names Antillia and Atlantis, and have
held that the elongated quadrilateral shape of Antillia on
ancient maps resembled that of Atlantis as described by
Plato. But Humboldt pointed out that Plato ascribed
this form to a particular district in Atlantis and not to
the island-continent as a whole.? He believed the name
to be derived from the Arabic Al-tin, signifying “ the
dragon.” The Arabs were certainly among the early
navigators of the Atlantic, and more than one Arabic
romance places a dragon-like monster on a desolate

the rept


Atlantic isle. But utation of Antillia as the sup-
1 2803 in the British Museum list.


. 2 Examen critique de l'histoire de la geographie du nouveau continent,
Vol. I, P. 193. Í


\


Atlantis in America | 20


posed asylum of a Christian monarch is perhaps sufficient
to discredit this etymology. The two old Portugu
words ante and illa (pronounced illia), that is “the op
site island,” the island opposing the Portuguese coast;
seem to provide a natural interpretation.

But a large group of islands roughly corresponding
the West Indies is found on the fifteenth-century maps of


Yad Sen lon


» AA E
Le ^4 Clesh zy” dh Mol


y n un 1A "T
aa
4 a Pis


g^ len fo


Perte


^ Map of. of Andreas Bianco, 1436, showing Island of Antillia. '


Beccario, Bianco, Pareto, Roselli and Benineasa, all d
which antedate the discovery of America. In Beccarios
map of 1435 Antillia is clearly marked, and extends on
the American side from the latitude of Morocco, a little
south of the Strait of Gibraltar, to that of Northern Portu
gal. The last instance of a map in which the name Antillis
is preserved is the Laon globe of 1493, the year succeeding
the discovery. Mr. W. H. Babcock, a distinguished
authority, identifies Antillia with the Antilles, and more
Ing with Cuba.! |


1 Legendary Islands of the Atlantic, p. 144 ff.


21 | Atlantis and Antillia


Sufficient proof has, I venture to think, been adduced
to show that an ancient tradition referring to an Antillian
continent had formerly widespread credence in Europe
and North-western Africa before the time of Columbus.
‘The natural inference is that it could only have found its
way to these regions via Atlantis, and during the era
prior to the submergence of that continent.

We may now pass on to a consideration of the question
that the Antilles are the remains of the ancient continent
of Antilia. This makes it necessary to examine the
geological evidence for the possible former existence of an
Antillian continent.!

Professor E. Suess in his Antilitz der Erde regards North
and South America as two essentially distinct land-masses,
and classifies the area of Central America and the Antilles
as a third and entirely separate quantity.? ‘‘ Almost
everyone," says Scharff, * who has dealt with the flora
and fauna of the West India Islands expresses his surprise
at this fact.”® An important point is the absence in the
West Indies of the higher vertebrates in any appreciable
number, and that although the soil and climate are most
favourable to their presence in these islands. Thus Cuba
has not half a dozen land mammals. This implies that
the islands have not been connected with the mainland
since early Tertiary times, or that their fauna must have
been almost obliterated subsequently to its insular isola-
tion. That fauna, such as it is, is markedly dissimilar to
those of North and South America. But if its higher levels
be impoverished, its humbler divisions are almost embar-
rassingly numerous, and we find in especial that its molluses


1 In order that the non-scientific reader may better be able to follow
the evidence placed before him in this chapter, I have here appended a
brief and simple outline of geological time :

PRIMARY OR PALAOZOIO PERIOD—(Earliest forms of life).

SECONDARY OR MESOzOIC PERIOD—(Reptilia, birds).

TERTIARY PERIOD— Early Tertiary, divided into: Paleocene (mammals);
Eocene (higher mammals); and Oligocene (Anthropoids). Late
Tertiary, divided into: Miocene; and Pliocene (Man).

QUATERNARY PERIOD—Pleistocene or Ice Age, divided into: Glacial
and Post-Glacial. The beginning of the Pleistocene Age is, for practical
purposes, generally reckoned at about 500,000 years ago. It is only
in the last 25,000 years of this period that any form approaching
modern man is to be found in Europe. The second division of the
Quaternary is the Holocene, or *' recent."

2 P. 700. 3 Distribution and Origin of Life in America, p. 261.


af


Atlantis in America 22


are capable of throwing much light on the whole question
of how life made its way to the West India Islands.

If we cast a glance at any trustworthy map of the
Antilles we observe at once that they are divided into two
distinet groups, the Greater (Cuba, Haiti, Jamaica and
Porto Rico) lying from west to east, and the Lesser
(Guadeloupe, Dominiea, Martinique, Barbadoes and the
rest) extending in a semicircle from north to south.
Suess believes the mountain system of the Greater Antilles
to be merely a continuation of those of Yucatan and
Guatemala, and the Greater Antilles as a whole are known
to be composed of sedimentary rocks of the Mesozoic and
First Tertiary Periods. On the other hand, the Lesser
Antilles appear to be of recent and volcanic origin.

Professor R. T. Hill believes the Lesser Antilles to be
the remains of an early isthmus connecting the North and
South American continents, but there is certainly little or
no faunistie evidence to support such a theory. He thinks
that during part of the Eocene and Oligocene epochs of
the Tertiary Period extensive subsidences submerged the
Antilles, so that only the higher summits of Cuba, Haiti
and Jamaica remained above water as small insular peaks. |
The West India Islands were later raised into one con |
nected continental mass, which once more suffered gradual |
dismemberment, but at a still later period a second eleva- |
tion took place, which, however, did not suffice to establish
a united, Antillean continent once again. Schuchert seems
to be of the opinion that after a submergence in the |
Oligocene epoch all the islands disappeared, and that.
subsequently the Greater Antilles took their present shape. |
There thus seems to be a general consensus of opinion that :
at some time in the earlier part of the* Tertiary era prae
tically the whole of the Antillean area underwent a pro-
found subsidence.

“The facts adduced by Dr. Simpson,” says Scharf,
“that the operculate species form so large a proportion |
of the Antillean land-snail fauna, that a majority of the
genera is found on two or more of the islands and the
mainland, while nearly every species is restricted to 8
single island, is a strong testimony to a former general
land connection in this area. Dr. Simpson very carefully |
compared the molluscan fauna of the various islands with |


23. Atlantis and Antillia


one another and with that of the mainland, and bases his
conception of the geological history of the Antilles mainly
on the results so derived. He believes a considcrable
portion of the species inhabiting the Greater Antilles to
be ancient, and to have developed on the islands where
they are now found. Probably at some time during the
Eocene Period the Greater Antilles were at a higher level,
so that the islands were united with one another and with
Central America, This resulted in an exchange of species
between the two regions. A land connection is also indi-
cated between Cuba, the Bahamas and Florida. At this
time he thinks that the more northern isles of the Lesser
Antilles were not yet elevated above the sea, or, if so, they
have since probably been submerged. After this period
of elevation there followed one of general subsidence.
During it Jamaica was the first island to be separated,
then followed Cuba, and afterwards Haiti and Porto Rico.
The connection between the Antilles and the mainland
was broken, while the subsidence continued until only the
summits of the mountains of the four greater Antillean
islands remained above watcr. Eventually there was
another period of elevation which lasted, no doubt, until
the present time. The Bahamas gradually emerged and
were populated by forms drifted from Cuba and Haiti."!

Moreover, it has been proved that the centre of distri-
bution of the Urocoptidz, a family of small snails with a
fusiform shell, lies in the West Indies. Dr. Pilsbry in his
Manual of Conchology gives it as his opinion that there is
but scanty evidence of any direct land connection between
the Greater Antilles and the mainland of Central America
during the Tertiary Period. His researches confirm his
view and that of many geologists that originally there
was a large area of land of which the Antilles were the last
remnants, and that at some time during the Tertiary era
almost the whole of this ancient land was submerged,
gradually regaining its continental state.?

The close affinity between European and West Indian
molluses has been remarked upon by several naturalists.
One carnivorous snail in especial, the Glandina, which has
its headquarters in the Antilles, is also found in the Medi-


1 Op. cit., pp. 265-6.
2 Manual of Conchology, XVI, pp. xx-xxiv,


Atlantis in America 24


terranean. It is impossible to regard it as a newcomer to.


Europe, as it can be traced in disconnected patches
between the Caucasus and Algeria. 'Two other varieties


of molluses found in the Mediterranean area, Leonia and.
Tudorella, are also related to West Indian forms. This,


along with other considerations, has led Dr. Kobelt to the
conclusion that a land connection between the Antilles and
Europe persisted until Miocene times, and Boettger and
Andreae support the same theory.

The relationship of the animals of the Antilles has been
investigated by Scharff, who believes them to consist of
an admixture of“exceedingly ancient with much more
modern types. All of them are distinct enough from the


forms of life on the mainland to make it certain, he thinks,


that the Greater Antilles had no recent land connection
either with Central America or the two neighbouring sub-
continents. The most ancient mammal found in the
West Indies is the curious snouted insect-eating Solenodon,


whose nearest relatives are the Centetide of Madagascar.


and West Africa. It has two forms in the Antilles, the


Solenodon paradoxus, confined to Haiti, and the Solenodon :
cubanus, native to Cuba. . These differ somewhat in size, :


colour and shape of skull, and thus constitute distinct
species. Professor Leche believes them to have passed by
a land-bridge from Madagascar to Brazil or the West Indies.


T wo varieties of hutia, a rat-like rodent, are also entirely


confined to the West Indies, and Mr. Scharff thinks they


may have a remote Patagonian origin. "There are in
Venezuela forms of this animal which might lead us to


think that it had gained admittance to the Antilles by an .


old land-bridge across the Lesser Antilles. But no traces
of such à mammal exist there, and as a species of hutia is
found on Swan Island, it seems likely that the ancestors
of these animals reached the West Indies directly from
some western region.

“The main conclusion," writes Professor Scharff,


“ which this brief study of the mammalian fauna of the ©


Antilles has revealed, is that the largerislands were formerly
united with one another, and with the Bahamas by land.


How far eastward this land extended cannot be determined |
by the mammals, but it certainly must have reached .
beyond the Virgin Islands to Anguilla, one of the most |


|
|


25 Atlantis and Antillia


! northerly islands of the Lesser Antilles. Many islands of
¡the Lesser Antilles may have been completely submerged
' at that time. Later on, Cuba, the Bahamas and Jamaica
were connected with the mainland after the other islands
had already been separated from the Antillean land-
mass, and lastly, Cuba and Jamaica were independently
joined to Central America before the existing physical
features were brought about.”!

In his work on Mexican Amphibians and Reptiles
(pp. 284—7) Dr. H. Gadow concluded from a comparison of
the evidence from natural history and geology that the
Antilles had not been directly connected with the main
continent of North America since the Cretaceous Period.
Antillia, he believes, had only one continental connection,
namely, during the Miocene Period, and that by way of
Central America. This would make the whole of the flora
and fauna of the Antilles of Miocene origin at the least.

The Antilles seem to be little influenced by accidental
introductions. This is shown by the fact that few North
American butterflies, dragon-flies and moths are found
there, the great majority of these being Central American.
As regards the birds of the Antilles, Dr. Chapman makes
the suggestive statement that if it could be shown that
Central America was cut off from both continents at the
time when it was joined to the West Indies, the origin of
the insular fauna could. be explained in a satisfactory
manner.

Dr. Ortmann is of the opinion that Central America,
the West Indies and the northern margin of South America
formed in the Mesozoic Period and certainly during the
Jurassic and Cretaceous Periods, a continental mass, the
Antillean continent, which was bounded by the sea on the
north and south. This continent broke up at the end of
the Cretaceous, the chief factor in its destruction being the
Caribbean Sea. The northern remnant of this mass,
consisting of the Greater Antilles and parts of the present
Central America, probably remained a unit up to the
Eocene Period. At the conclusion of the Eocene, he thinks,
and during the Oligocene and Miocene Periods, the con-
nection between the Greater Antilles and the mainland
- was severed, being subsequently re-established toward
1 Origin of Life in America, pp. 286-7.


Atlantis in America


the end of the Tertiary era, and again destroyed in re

times. 4
Criticising this statement, Scharff gives it as his opinit
that in Cretaceous times South America was submergeg
and could not have formed part of an Antillean continent
“Towards the end of the Cretaceous Period all the
Antilles except the Bahamas, were entirely covered by
the sea, according to Professor Schuchert’s maps. Yet,
although the Peninsula of Yucatan was then submerged,
no deposits of this age are known from Guatemala og
Honduras, nor have any Mesozoic or Tertiary beds beer
discovered in those countries. . . . Possibly the Greate
Antilles were not so completely covered by sea as i
assumed. They may have been represented by small
islands, and these would have possessed fragments of ar
ancient fauna and flora... . Some time during th
Oligocene Period, Professor Schuchert again records ¢
complete submergence of all the West Indian islands
except the Bahamas. . . . A much more probable ex
planation is that the Antilles were reduced to small islands,
and retained their own animals and plants. In early
Miocene times all the Greater Antilles were certainly
raised above the sea, and must have been then connected |
with one another. Jamaica was joined to Guatemala
and Cuba to Mexico, but Jamaica must have been separated |
early from Haiti. While the islands were joined to one
another, an intermingling of the more active ancient
types occurred, the less progressive ones being forced to
the higher altitudes by the new arrivals from Mexico and
Central America. During the whole of Miocene times
Yucatan was apparently below sea-level. When it rose
in the Pliocene Period, it may have had a short land |
connection with the Antilles by way of Western Cuba
. . . Central America, during the existence of this Yucatan :
land-bridge, may still have been separated from North.
and South America. At this time the Lesser Antilles '
probably had an independent land connection with.
Venezuela; but that there was an Antillean continent
connected with the mainland in Pleistocene times, 8
suggested by Dr. Spencer, when Central America had |
already been invaded by the North and South American |
1 Distribution of Freshwater Decapods, p. 344 ff, |


4


27 Atlantis and Antillia


immigrants, is entirely opposed to the results derived from
a study of the fauna and flora."
t Elsewhere in his most interesting work Professor
‘Scharff remarks on the subject of an Antillean continent :
t“ Central America and the Antilles, which are collectively
ispoken of sometimes as the remnants of an ancient
(“ Antillean Continent,’ possess a distinct and peculiar
fauna quite apart from the South Amcrican one which
¡has invaded this arca. Towards the end of the Mesozoic
Period parts of this Antillean continent must have begun
¡to subside. About that time signs of the coming volcanic
‚activity appeared all along the Central American region.
| During the successive igneous eruptions in early Tertiary
| times, which have been continued with varied intensity to
i the present day, the Atlantic Ocean seems to have invaded
the existing area of Central America and submerged
| portions of it. . . . The movement of species scems to
| have taken place from the West Indian area towards the
Pacific Ocean, thus implying the existence of a strong
, current in that direction. Speaking of the Tertiary de-
| posits of Tehuantepec, Dr. Böse remarks that the main mass
Of the species contained therein are related to Atlantic
: forms. Only very few show affinities with Pacific types.
Similar views were expressed by Professor Jordan and Dr.
. Ortmann in regard to the recent marine fauna."

To sum up: Suess believes that North and South
America were formerly two different land-masses, and he
elasses the Antilles and Central America as a third and
separate land-mass. In the Antilles there is an absence
of the higher vertebrates in any appreciable numbers.
This would seem to imply that the Antilles have not been
connected with the mainland since early Tertiary times.
The distribution of their mollusca seems to show, accord-
ing to Scharff and others, that a land connection existed
between the Antilles and Europe until Miocene times.
Hill believes the Antilles were submerged during the
Eocene and Oligocene Periods, and that only their summits
remained above water. They were later raised into a
connected continental mass, which was once more dis-
membered, but at a later period still a second elevation
took place, which, however, failed to unite them entirely.
Schuchert thinks that after an Oligocene submergence the


ird
"y


F


Atlantis in America


Antilles disappeared, and that later the Greater Antilles
took their present form. The consensus of opinion i$
that at some time in the Early Tertiary era practically
the whole of the Antillean area underwent subsidence,
The fact that certain genera of molluscs are found on certain
of the islands and on the mainland, while nearly every
species is restricted to a single island is strong testimony
of a former general land connection in the Antillean ares,
and from this Simpson argues that during the Eocene,
Period the Greater Antilles were united with each other
and with Central America, but underwent several alternate
subsidences and elevations. Pilsbry thinks there is but
scanty evidence for any direct land connection between
the Antilles and the mainland during the Tertiary Period. |
He believes that there was formerly a large area of land,
of which the Antilles are the last remnants, and that
during the Tertiary era this land was submerged, latet.
gradually regaining its continental position.

Scharff thinks the Antillean mammalia distinct enough
from mainland forms to exclude the idea of recent land
connections with the mainland. His main conclusion is.
that the Antilles were formerly united with one another
and with the Bahamas, the Antillean continent stretching :
beyond the Virgin Islands to Anguilla. Later Cuba, the |
Bahamas and Jamaica were connected with the mainland
after the other islands had already been separated from,
the Antillean land-mass, and Cuba and Jamaica were
independently joined to Central America before the present |
disposition of land and water obtained.

Gadow believes in a continental connection during the -
Miocene. Ortmann is of opinion that Central America |
and the Antilles formed a continental mass during the |
Mesozoie Period, but that it broke up at the end of the, 7
Cretaceous, its northern remnant remaining a unit up to*
the Eocene. Land connection with the mainland was,
however, re-established towards the end of the Tertiary '
Period, and destroyed in recent times only. Scharff,
criticising these statements, believes that all the Greater
Antilles were raised above the sea during the Miocene,
and were then connected with each other. That, as
suggested by Spencer, there was an Antillean continent —
connected with the mainland in Pleistocene times, he thinks .


29 Atlantis and Antillia


‘improbable. Towards the end of the Mesozoic Period parts
[Of the Antillean continent must have begun to subside.
: Movements of species seem to have taken place from the
 Antillean area towards the Pacific Ocean, thus implying
' the existence of a strong current in that direction.
| From the consensus of geological opinion we seem
. therefore to be justified in saying that an Antillean con-
. tinent formerly existed. The general view seems to be
' that it was partially submerged in Tertiary times, later
| rising to its present position as an archipelago. But there
: is plenty of good evidence that it retained its continental
form until a relatively late date, and to this I prefer to
i adhere. I also believe that it had intercourse with Atlantis
long before the disappearance of the latter continent, and
that its people drew the seeds of their culture therefrom.
This brings us to the third of our propositions: That
Antillia formerly had terrestrial and cultural relations
with Atlantis, which must form the subject of another
| chapter.


ÁS -— -
a


CHAPTER II
THE CRO-MAGNONS OF AMERICA


N approaching our third proposition that Antillig
had a terrestrial and cultural connection with Atlant
at a period prior to the submergence of the li
vestiges of that continent, we find that it naturally divides
itself into two heads: (a) that which requires proof of a.
terrestrial connection, and (b) that which demands evidens,
of a cultural connection.

As regards its terrestrial connection with Atlantis, it
will be necessary briefly to retrace our steps for a moment;
and review the evidence in favour of the possible existeneg
of a great continent of which both Atlantis and Antillia
were the last remaining fragments.

M. Termier, whom we have already quoted, believed,
that “a North Atlantic continent comprising Russiag
Scandinavia, Great Britain, Greenland and Canada,
which was added later a southern band made up of a large
part of Central and Western Europe and an immense
portion of the United States ” formerly existed. “* There
was also," he says, “‘ a South Atlantic, or African-Brazilian
continent, extending northward to the southern border of
the Atlas, eastward to the Persian Gulf and Mozambique -
Channel, westward to the eastern border of the Andes,
and to the sierras of Colombia and Venezuela. Between
the two continents passed the Mediterranean depression,&
that ancient maritime furrow which has formed an escarp”
about the earth since the beginning of geologic time, and :
which we see so deeply marked in the present Mediterranean,
the Caribbean Sea and the Sunda or Flores Sea. A chain
of mountains broader than the chain of the Alps, and}.
perhaps in some parts as high as the majestic Himalayas,
once lifted itself on the land-enclosed shore of the North
Atlantic continent, embracing the Vosges, the Central
Plateau of France, Brittany, the south of England and of |
Ireland, and also Newfoundland, Nova Scotia and, in the( `
United States, all the Appalachian region."

The end of this continental era, thinks M. Termier,
came during the Tertiary Period, when the mass, bounded
on the south by a chain of mountains, was submerged long
before the collapse of those volcanic lands of which the:
Azores are the last vestiges. The South Atlantic ocean was


30


‚I The Crö-Magnons of America


ikewise occupied for many thousands of centuries by a
sreat continent now engulfed beneath the sea. These
novements of depression probably occurred at several
eriods. In the Europe of the Tertiary cra the movement
was developing which gave rise to the Alpine mountain
shain. How far did this chain extend into the Atlantic
'egion ? Did some fragments of it rise high enough to
ift themselves for some centuries above the waters ?
This question M. Termier answers in the affirmative.

He believes that the geology of the whole Atlantic
region has singularly changed in the course of the later
eriods of the earth’s history. During the Secondary
Period there were numerous depressions, the Tertiary
Period saw the annihilation of the continental areas, and
subsequently there appeared a new design, the general
direction of which was north and south. Near the African
:ontinentz he holds, there have certainly been important
movements during Quaternary times, when other changes
undoubtedly took place in the true oceanic region.
"^ Geologically speaking," he says, “ Plato’s account of
Atlantis is highly probable. . . . It is entirely reason-
able to believe that long after the opening of the
Strait of Gibraltar certain of these emerged lands still
existed, and among them a marvellous island, separated
from the African continent by a chain of other smaller


| Prot


Professor R. F. Scharff of Dublin concludes that Madeira
nd the Ázores were connected with Portugal in Miocene
times, when Man had already appeared in Europe, and that
from Morocco to the Canary Islands and thence to South
America stretched a vast land which extended southward
as far as St. Helena. This great continent, he believes,
began to subside before the Miocene or Late Tertiary
Period.

Professor Edward Hull is of the opinion that “‘ the flora
and fauna of the two hemispheres support the geological
theory that there was a common centre in the Atlantic
where life began and that during and prior to the glacial
epoch great land-bridges north and south spanned the
Atlantic Ocean." He adds: “I have made this deduction
by a careful study of the soundings as recorded in the
Admiralty Charts." Dr. Hull also holds the view that at the


Atlantis in America


time this Atlantic continent existed there was also a
Antillean continent or ridge shutting off the Caribbi
Sea and the Gulf of Mexico from the Gulf Stream.

These comprise the most modern conclusions on fj
subject of Atlantean geology. An equal wealth of biologie
evidence regarding a former land connection betwee
European and American soil also exists. The Europea
carnivorous animals of Tertiary times show a marked
affinity with those of America. The burrowing Amplis
beenide, or lizard-snakes, are confined, sixty-four speda
of them, to America, Africa and the Mediterranean region
Kobelt shows conclusively that the land shells on the two
opposite sides of the Atlantic imply an ancient connection
having subsisted between the Old World and the New
which became ruptured only during the Miocene epoch |
the Tertiary Period. Certain ants occur both in th
Azores and America. Sixty per cent of the buttertflied
and moths found in the Canaries are of Mediterranean
origin, and twenty per cent of these are to be found in
America. Some crustaceans afford the best proof of an
ancient connection between Europe and America.

M. Louis Germain has discovered numerous indications
of a close resemblance between the mollusca of Europe,
the Canaries and America. He believes that their distri-
bution implies the extension of the Atlantic continent to
the West Indies in Miocene times, and a separation during
the Miocene or near its close, between the West Indian
and the Atlantic continents. Says Termier, writing o
Germain's deductions: “Two facts remain relative to
the marine animals and both seem impossible of explana
tion, except by the persistence up to very nearly the present
times, of a maritime shore extending from the West Indies
to Senegal and even binding together Florida, tht
Bermudas, and the bottom of the Gulf of Guinea. .::
During the Miocene Period, this continent extends as fat
as the West Indies. It is then portioned off, at first in the
direction of the West Indies, then in the south, by tht
establishment of a marine shore which extends as far 8
Senegal and to the depths of the Gulf of Guinea, then 4
length in the east, probably during the Pliocene epoch,
along the coast of Africa. The last great fragment, finally
engulfed, and no longer having left any other vestige


33 The Crö-Magnons of America


han the four archipelagoes, would be the Atlantis of
Plato.”1

Summing up the evidence for the former existence of a
eat continent in the Atlantic stretching from Europe
0 America, we find that so many geologists and biologists
f experience support this theory as to leave practically
10t a doubt of its authenticity.

The final vestiges of the Atlantean continent would seem
o have disappeared, according to the most trustworthy
reological opinion at some time not far distant from
.0,000 B.c. But what proof have we that Antillia maintained
| terrestrial connection with it either by land-bridge or
in insular chain at that late date, or at any date when
nan inhabited the Antillean land-mass ?

We have already seen that geological opinion supports
che belief in an Atlantean-Antillean connection in Tertiary
limes, and that “a maritime shore" or land-bridge per-
sisted * up to very nearly the present time ” between the
land-masses. This in itself is sufficient to prove our case.
The soundings taken in the Atlantic by various Admiralty
authorities have revealed the existence of a great bank
or elevation. commencing near the coast of Ireland,
traversed by the fifty-third parallel, and extending in a
southerly direction embracing the Azores, to the neigh-
bourhood of French Guiana and the mouths of the Amazon
and Para Rivers. The level of this great ridge is some 9000
feet above the bed of the Atlantic. "This is, of course,
part of the remains of the sunken continent of Atlantis.
We have also seen that Scharff believes the Antillean
continent to have extended eastward at least as far as the
island of Anguilla. This would mean that at the period
of their earliest separation Atlantis and Antillia could not
have been sundered by any appreciable distance.

It would also seem reasonable to infer from the parallel
arrangement and easterly trend of the West India Islands
that other islands now submerged formed “ stepping-
stones" from Antilia to disintegrating Atlantis. The
“remote Bermudas " are obviously the remains of con-
tinental land. The Antilles notoriously constitute a region
of seismic instability, and numerous insular prolongations
of the mass of Central America must have risen and become

1 * Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institute for 1915.”
C


Atlantis in America 24.


submerged at intervals throughout all geological time |
as the result of seismic disturbance. 3

We can imagine the slow crumbling of Atlantis, its
gradual disappearance, the equally gradual migration to `
Europe on the east and to Antillia on the west, at first
by land-bridge, and in a later era by boat and, centuries
later, the eventual exodus from Antillian soil to the
American mainland after some more than usually disastrous |
upheaval. |

This brings us to the consideration of the question as to-
whether Atlantis and Antillia had a cultural connection.
We can at present speak of Atlantean culture only from
what we know of its European manifestations. It is only
by employing this evidence in a comparative manner that |
we can hope to demonstrate that a similar culture existed
in Antillia and America. We are already aware that certain
plants, animals and mollusca are common to Europe and
America, and imply an ancient connection between these
continents. We find also that the vestigial traces of Atlan- -
tis, the Canary Islands, were peopled at the time of their
discovery by the relics of the Cró-Magnon race, a people
who invaded Northern Spain and Southern France about
23,000 B.c., the place of whose origin is unknown to modern,
archeologists, and who, along with subsequent immigrant
races to this sphere I believe to have had an Atlantean
provenance.

The Cró-Magnons arrived in Europe towards the end of
the great Ice Age, and have left fairly plentiful records
of their presence in the Biscayan, Pyrenean and Dordogne
regions of Spain and France. Their height averaged
6 feet 13 inches, and the capacity of the brain-case is much
superior to that of any known race of man at the present
time. The walls of the caverns which they occupied are
in many cases covered with drawings of animals and men
which, for accuracy of design and modelling have never
been surpassed, and which have nothing of the stiffness
of Egyptian or Babylonian art in their freedom and spirit.
On the walls of these caverns, too, are imprints of human
hands which had been placed against the rock and then
dusted round with red earth. Similar hand-markings are
found in American caves, and were known in ancient
Mexico.


Outline map showing probable relative positions of Atlantis (A) and
Antillia (B) with adjacent islands.


Atlantis in America 36


“These people," says Professor Osborn, ‘ were the
Paleolithic Greeks. Artistic observation and representa-
tion and a true sense of proportion and of beauty were
instinctive with them from the beginning."! Not only
did they draw the mammoth, the bison and the deer on the
walls of their caverns, but in bas-reliefs and statuettes
they showed a high appreciation of anatomical form.
Professor Osborn further remarks that their smaller
figures in the round ‘“‘resemble the work of modem
Cubists.” This art, which had several phases, is known


as Aurignacian,? from the French district of Aurignac, :


where it was first discovered. It flourished from about
23,000 B.c. to 8000 B.c.

Now it is obvious that an art so excellent and highly
developed as to have drawn encomiums from all who have
examined it cannot have developed in the region where
its manifestations are found, for the simple reason that
none of its evolutionary phases are encountered there.
It is observed in France and Spain in a fully developed
state, and it is clear that it must have grown up and per-
sisted elsewhere for thousands of years prior to its first
appearance in Europe. Its authors were undoubtedly
the parents of European civilisation. Whence did they
come ?

The Abbé Breuil, the premier authority on Aurignacian
culture, is of opinion that its successive invasions took
place either from the south or Mediterranean direction 0!
from the Atlantie coasts of Spain and France. He refuses
to contemplate an eastern origin for it.? Most authorities
are agreed that its earliest signs are to be found in the
Dordogne and the Pyrenees, though others uphold an
African genesis for it. It is to be observed, however, that
Cró-Magnon man first appeared in South-western Europe
at a period when widespread subsidences were undoubtedly
taking place in the Atlantic area, and that the roots of his
culture are not to be discovered on European soil. Its
African origin is practically placed out of court by the fact
that the earliest Aurignacian stations in Spain and Franc


1 Men of the Old Stone Age, 1915, pp. 315, 316.
* The name Aurignacian has become practically interchangeable with


that of Cró-Magnon, just as “ French " and “ Gallic ” are interchangeable. :


3 Les subdivisions du palwolithie supérieur, Cong. Intern. d'AnihroP
Prehist., XIVth session, Geneva, 1912, p. 175.


1
a


37 The Crö-Magnons of America


are without exception situated in the Biscayan region,
and not on the southern coasts of the peninsula, where
one would naturally look for them had they had an
African origin.

Professor Osborn reviews the possible relationships
between the Cré-Magnon race and the isolated Guanches
of the Canary Islands. ‘ Our interest in the fate of the
Crö-Magnons is so great that the Guanche theory may also
be considered. It is known to be favoured by many
anthropologists: von Behr, von Luschan, Melılis, and
especially by Verneau. The Guanches were a race of
people who formerly spread all over the Canary Islands,
and who preserved their primitive characteristics even

after their conquest by Spain in the fifteenth century.
The differences from the supposed modern Cró-Magnon
man may be mentioned first. The skin of the Guanches
is described by the poet Viana as light coloured, and
Verneau considers that the hair was blond or light chestnut
and the eyes blue. The colouring, however, is somewhat
conjectural. The features of resemblance to the ancient
Cró-Magnons are numerous. The minimum stature of the
men was 5 feet 7 inches, and the maximum 6 feet 7 inches.
In one locality the average male stature was over 6 feet.
The women were comparatively small. (The Cró-Magnon
woman was petite.—Author.) The most striking characters
of the head were the fine forehead, the extremely long skull
and the pentagonal form of the cranium, when seen from
above, caused by the prominence of the parietals—a Cró-
Magnon characteristic. . . . The offensive weapons in
warfare consisted of three stones, a club and several knives
of obsidian. The defensive weapon was a simple lance.
The Guanches used wooden swords with great skill. The
habitation of all the people was in large well-sheltered
caverns, which honeycombed the sides of the mountains.
All the walls of these caverns were decorated, the ceilings
were covered with a uniform coat of red ochre, while the
walls were decorated with various geometric designs in
red, black, grey and white. Hollowed-out stones served
as lamps, We may conclude with Verneau that there is
evidence, although not of a very convincing kind, that
the Guanches were related to the Cró-Magnons.”1

1 Op. cit., pp. 454, 455.


Atlantis in America 38


Dr. Réné Verneau, a skilled French anthropologist, well
acquainted with the archeology of the Canaries, states
that the Guanches were above all troglodytes. Their
caves, he says, were painted like those of the Cró-Magnons.
The late Lord Abercromby wrote: “In the museums of |
the Grand Canary, Teneriffe and Palma a considerable '
number of prehistoric vessels are preserved. Anthropolo- :
gists are agreed that the natives of the archipelago at the
time of its conquest in the fifteenth century were a com-
posite people, made up of at least three stocks: a Cré-
Magnon type, à Hamitie or Berber type and a brachy-
cephalic type. These natives were in a Neolithic state of
civilisation."!

It is impossible for Cró-Magnon man to have made his
way from Europe to the Canaries, both because he pos-
sessed no means of navigation and for the simple reason
that he was by common consent an immigrant to Europe.
Like many of the animals and plants of these vestigial
islands, he was cut off and marooned on them by some
great natural cataclysm. He must have found his way to
Europe by a still existing land-bridge some 25,000 years
ago. Says Professor J. L. Myres in The Cambridge Ancient
History (p. 48): “The similarity between Aurignacian
(i.e. Cró-Magnon) skulls in Europe and the prehistoric
skulls in Lagoa Santa in Brazil and other remote localities
round the margins of South America, suggests that this
type had once almost as wide a distribution as that of the
older types of implements." Elsewhere in the same volume
we encounter the statement that Cró-Magnon culture was
“a well-marked regional culture of the Atlantic coast
plain."

About 14,000 B.c., as nearly as can be estimated, Cré-
Magnon art took a new phase, which is known as the
Magdalenian. This phase exhibits the genius of the Cré-
Magnon race at its height, and preceded its sudden decline
and disappearance as the dominant type in Europe. “It
seems," says Osborn, “like a technical invasion in the
history of Western Europe."  Breuil observes that “ it
appears as if the fundamental elements of the superior
Aurignacian culture had been contributed by some un-
known route to constitute the kernel of the Magdalenian

1 ** Prehistoric Pottery of the Canary Islands," Nature, 3rd Dec., 1914.


39 The Cré-Magnons of America


civilisation." “ The Magdalenians," says Osborn, ‘ were
newcomers in Western France, but were undoubtedly of
Cró-Magnon race." This can only imply that the older
Aurignacian art received a stimulus from its original and
parent source. “ Breuil himself," says Osborn, “ has
positively stated that the whole Upper Paleolithic art-
development of Europe was the work of one race. If so,
this race can be none other than the Cró-Magnon.”

From this it seems to be clear that the Magdalenian
invasion was a further emigration from disintegrating
Atlantis. The Magdalenians were of the same ethnological
stock as the Cró-Magnons, and introduced an even higher
culture than theirs—the “ official” culture of Atlantis,
from which they had newly come. The Crö-Magnons of
France and Spain were thus reinforced by a second wave
of immigrants from the old Atlantic home, who had per-
fected the ancient art common to both in a different sphere.
Osborn remarks that this Magdalenian art is at its best
equal to that of Egypt and Babylon. An extensive system
of trade was in vogue among them. Their civilisation was
greatly in advance of that of any presently existing bar-
barous people.

At a still later epoch, roughly about 8000 B.c., a third
race, the Azilian-Tardenoisian, entered Spain and France
by precisely the same route as its predecessors had done. They
had a curious and almost elfin touch in their working of
flint implements, and possessed a geometric art which was
the prototype of the arabesque. They introduced the bow
and arrow into Europe, and painted strange symbols on
pebbles. These people were the parents of the great
Iberian race and brought with them the culture known as
Neolithic or New Stone Age. They invaded Europe at an
epoch which synchronises with that given by Plato for the
fall of Atlantis. Official archeeologists are vague in their
statements regarding the place of origin of this race.
M.D’ Arbois de Jubainville, the well-known Celtic authority,
says: “ The Iberians seem to be the descendants of those
ten millions of legendary warriors who, according to
Theopompus, came from a continent separated from ours
by the ocean, and established themselves in the country
of the Hyperboreans. These were their ancestors, who,
leaving Atlantis nine thousand years before Plato, had


Atlantis in America 40


impressed their domination on Western Europe, Italy and
North Africa to the frontiers of Egypt.”*

If we summarise the foregoing statements we find that
the Cré-Magnon, a highly developed race mentally and
physically, entered South-western Europe about 25,000
years ago at the close of the Great Ice Age, and during a
period of subsidence in the Atlantic. They brought with
them an art which must have required centuries of develop-
ment, and must have been accompanied by a social polity
of a high standard. This implies the evolution of their
culture elsewhere. There are, indeed, no traces of its
infancy in the known world. All the early Aurignacian or
Cró-Magnon stations were situated around the Biscayan-
Pyrenean region. Their physical constitution and art have
been linked by the highest authorities with those of the
Guanches of the Canary Islands, the remnant of a sunken
continent in the Atlantic, and this suggests that they came
from that region at a period of disintegration by way of a
land-bridge. Remains strongly resembling those of Cré-
Magnon man have been discovered at Lagoa Santa in Brazil
and elsewhere in South America. His facial structure
closely resembles that of the Red Indians of North America,
who, as will be seen later, retains many of his religious and
social customs. A second wave of Aurignacian civilisation,
the Magdalenian, reached Europe about 14,000 B.c.
About 10,000 B.c. a third wave of immigrants appeared in
the Biscay region, the Azilian-Tardenoisians, forerunners
of the Iberian race. These settled also in North Africa.

Now do we find a similar invasion of American soil by
a highly cultured race at such a period as we might well
connect with the later submergence of the Antillian portion
of the Atlantean continent in which many of the Atlanteans
would undoubtedly have taken refuge ? It may well have
happened that Antillia, as a sub-continent, was not finally
submerged until some 2100 years ago. The last vestiges
of the last land-bridge which connected Britain with
Europe existed until 3000 years ago, or, more properly
speaking, its main mass then underwent submergence, the
Frisian Islands constituting its last remains. As has been
said, the Antillean region is one of notorious seismic in-
stability. Be that as it may, we find about the year 200 B.c.

1 Les premiers habitants de l Europe, pp. 24, 25.


41 The Crö-Magnons of America


or 2100 years ago, abundant traces of the invasion of
American soil by a race possessing the highest artistic
capacities of a culture which can in many ways be linked
with the Aurignacian. In a word, the phenomenon of the
Aurignacian invasion of Europe was repeated on American
soil at a later date, and accompanied by the manifesta-
tions of an Aurignacian art which had developed during
the intervening centuries, as might be expected, but which *
had never lost its basic resemblance to original forms.
Such sudden appearances in Europe and America of cul-
tures so closely allied, though divided by many centuries
of time, cannot be fortuitous.

The carriers of the culture in question were the Maya,
the origin of whom is, according to archeologists, shrouded
in a mystery quite as dense as that which surrounds the
provenance of the Aurignacians. That they were Aurig-
nacians, that is Atlanteans, in culture and origin I shall
try to demonstrate later. At present it is necessary to
furnish some account of their peculiar type of civilisation.

The clearest proof of the Atlantean-Antillian origin of
Ameriean civilisation is to be found in the culture and
traditions of the Maya race of Guatemala, Chiapas and
Yucatan. This great and truly advanced people appear
suddenly in Central America With a culture fully developed,
an elaborate hieroglyphic system, a religion eloquent of
high theological concepts, and an architecture which rivals,
if it does not surpass, that of Egypt or Sumeria.

The roots of Maya civilisation are not to be encountered '
on Ameriean soil. No steps in the evolution of their writ-
ing, religion or architecture can be traced in the regions in
which their monuments are found, and though competent
authorities recognise new phases and aspects in their art-
forms subsequent to their entrance to Central America,
the complete absence of all primary evolutionary forms
proves conclusively that Maya art was not originally
conceived on American soil. Where not a link with the
humbler forms of art, handieraft or custom is to be found,
it seems only rational to look for the beginnings of their
culture and art elsewhere.

Indeed, the very earliest specimens of Maya art, archi-
tecture and handieraft known to us exhibit the sure traces
of degeneration. Here is an art and a philosophy so rich,


Atlantis in America 42


so overripe, as to approach senility and disintegration.
Its forms were stereotyped, its ideas rooted in convention.
Its society resembled that of the China of half a century
ago, a community passionately conservative in its ideals,
hastening to decay.

Maya civilisation makes its first appearance in Central
America in the centuries immediately preceding the
Christian era, roughly about 200 s.c. Its earliest dated
monuments cannot with safety be ascribed to a more |
remote period. No sooner did it take root in Central
American soil than it began to send forth vigorous shoots. -
Regarding the precise place of its first settlement, authori-
tative opinion is practically agreed. The general character
of the architectural remains in the region lying between
the Bay of Tabasco and the foot of the Cordilleras, and
watered by the River Usumacinta and the Rio de la Pasion
in the modern state of Chiapas, points almost conclusively
to this district as the cradle of Central American culture,
and the relatively archaic type of the hieroglyphs found
upon its monuments as well as the early dates these con-
tain, give to this theory something of finality. The oldest:
known centres of Maya life are probably Tikal and Peten
in Eastern Guatemala. It is believed that the development’
of the Maya states in Chiapas and Guatemala continued
for seven or eight hundred years, or until the close of the `
sixth century A.D., about which time disaster seems to
have come upon them with tragic suddenness.

We do not know the cause of the downfall of what must
have been a complex and highly developed civilisation.
Possibly a horde of barbarians from the North swept down
upon these settled communities. But even to-day its
gorgeous temples and palaces show no signs of deliberate
destruction such as surely would have been evident had
they fallen into the hands of savages. More probably these
cities were emptied of their inhabitants by one of the
migratory impulses which so frequently reappear in
American aboriginal history. In all likehhood their gods
ordained an exodus. The theory of a wholesale migration
is rendered probable by the fact that the period of desertion
synehronises with that of the discovery of the Maya of the
peninsula of Yucatan, a region whose wealth in stone must
have attracted a nation of stone builders. But Yucatan


13 The Crö-Magnons of America


is on the whole an arid country, and it is likely that the
retreat of the Maya thence was dictated by the imperative
reason of self-preservation.

The most important of the older city-states were
Palenque, Piedras Negras, Ocosingo, Tikal, Yaxchilan and
Quirigua, sites which are scattered over Southern Mexico
and Guatemala, while Copan, perhaps the greatest of all,
is situated in Honduras, the southern limit of Maya culture,
SO far asis presently known. Ofthe later sites in Yucatan,
Chichen Itzá was by far the most famous, Mayapan,
Uxmal and Labna barely approaching it in celebrity.

With the discovery of Yucatan a new era opened up for
Maya art and social activity. At first the bare struggle
for existence on the inhospitable and poorly irrigated
plateau was probably intense. But the ingenious immi-
grants triumphed over conditions of the most formidable
kind, and by degrees improved their architectural know-
ledge and astronomical science, fixing the revolutionary
period of the planets with accuracy, and developing the
solar calendar. A Maya Renaissance was fully under way
by the end of the tenth century, and edifices which recall
the palmy days of Palenque and Copan were once more
rising over all Yucatan. About the year A.D. 1000 Chichen
Itzá, Uxmal and Copan formed a political confederacy, and
under the pacific conditions which followed the institution
of this league, art and science blossomed forth anew.
Cities multiplied with astonishing rapidity, and the art of
sculpture, which had now become merely an adjunct to
architecture, achieved an elaboration and intricacy of
design unsurpassed, perhaps, by any people in any age.

With the disruption of what may be called the Triple
Alliance, about the year 1200, an event precipitated by the
conspiracy of the ruler of Chichen Itza against his colleague
of Mayapan, a series of disastrous wars ensued which lasted
until the country was discovered by the Spaniards. These
endless internecine struggles led to the employment of
mercenaries from the ruder tribes of Mexico, whose presence
set an indelible stamp upon Maya art and manners, and we
find the Maya sculptors forced to carry out the designs of
a Mexican military aristocracy, even accompanying them
with the completely different hieroglyphical inscriptions
of the usurpers. Had they placed side by side with them


Atlantis in America Ad


the equivalent Maya characters, modern science wo
have been equipped with an American Rosetta Stone,
the Mexican glyphs, unlike those of the Maya, can now
be deciphered with a reasonable degree of exactitude.

This brings us to the problem of Maya writing, th
precise character of which has not as yet been definitely
arrived at. For the pursuit of this quest a far greater
degree of industry and ingenuity has been needful than for
the decipherment of the ancient writings of Egypt or
Sumeria. Certain of the “ caleuliform ” or pebble-shaped |
characters found on stele and the walls of temples have
been unriddled, especially those which apply to the sun,
moon and planets, those for ** beginning ” and “ ending,"
the symbols for the year, “ night," and some others. The
most important texts, strangely enough, are connected
with the regions of the older settlements in Guatemala and.
Chiapas rather than with Yucatan, and in the three Maya
manuscripts which remain to us—the Dresden, Paris and
Madrid MSS.—the glyphs appear as a number of small
squares rounded at the corners and representing human
faces and other objects highly conventionalised by genere-
tions of artistic usage and development. They are arranged,
as a rule, in two parallel columns and are read two columns
at a time, from left to right and from top to bottom. For
a long time it was believed that the work of Landa, Bishop
of Yucatan, contained the key to the script. But it is now
known that the natives, exasperated by his destruction of
their manuscripts, deliberately deceived him, and that
with the exception of the symbols for the days and
“ months ” his key is quite misleading.

Much difference of opinion exists as to whether the
system is phonetic or ideographic in character. It i
probably both phonetic and pictorial to some extent, but
for the most part it appears to be of the nature of rebus
writing, in which the characters do not indicate the mean-
ing of the objects which they portray, but only the sounds
of their names. Thus, if English were written in this
manner, the picture of a human eye might stand for the
first personal pronoun, a drawing of a bee for the verb
* to be," and so forth. But it seems probable that an in-
ereasing number of phonetie elements will be identified,
though the idea of a glyph will always be found to over


S


5 The Crö-Magnons of America


1adow its phonetic value. Through generations of use
1e system came to possess a significance entirely ideo-
'aphic, and would not necessitate any such effort of mental
'anslation as a people unused to rebus writing would have
» make to comprehend it readily.

The manner in which the arithmetical and chronological
rstem of the Maya was discovered is decidedly the greatest
iumph of American archeology within recent years. A
ot stood for one, and a baror line for five. By various com-
inations of these the Maya expressed all the numerals
‘om 1 to 19 inclusive. Twenty was denoted by the moon,
s indicating the number of days in which the moon waxes
nd wanes. But the manner in which the “‘ higher mathe-
iaties ”” of the Maya was evolved is much too intricate a
rocess to be described in this place. Some of the periods
f time in use among the Maya were based upon the period
f revolution of the planet Venus, and were represented
y an appropriate hieroglyph, and when a date was
culptured on à monument, the number of periods con-
ained, years, months or moons, and days, were set forth
n the glyph which denoted them. These dates can be
ollated with European chronology through the agency of
nanuscripts known as “ The Books of Chilan Balam,” or
‘The Tiger Priesthood,” native annals of the priestly
iierarchy of Yucatan, in which the ancient system of
'hronology is preserved. These annals were fortunately
'ontinued into the post-Conquest Period, so that some of
he events they date in the native manner have known
European equivalents. By the aid of these we can reduce
che Maya system of computing time to the terms of our
own, and it becomes possible to interpret the dates on the
monuments with only a small margin of probable error.
Thus the period of the foundation of the city of Palenque
has been fixed at 15 B.c., that of Yaxchilan at 75 B.C.,
Copan A.D. 84, Piedras Negras A.D. 109, and the abandon-
ment of Copan and Quirigua at A.D. 231 and A.D. 292
respectively.

The Antillean origin of the Maya civilisation has been
stressed by many authorities, who believed their culture
to have had its beginnings in the West Indies. Columbus
alludes to the peaceable and civilised character of the
inhabitants of these islands. They possessed very con-


Atlantis in America 4


siderable maritime skill, and those of the Bahamas had a
regular commerce with Florida. The Caribs of the Lesser
Antilles penetrated to the heart of Brazil and strongly
resembled the Maya in appearance and culture. Both
flattened the skull in infancy, had the same burial customs,
and some of the gods of the Antilles strongly resemble
those of the Maya. The Maya language, too, has been
classified by Beuchat and others as of Antillean origin.

But perhaps the best and most sufficient test of the
relationship of the Maya and Mexicans with the Antillean
region is to be discovered in the surprising traditions they
have left us which refer to their colonisation of Central
America and Mexico.

A wealth of tradition regarding a westerly and trans-
oceanic connection existed in ancient Mexico and Central
America. This centred round the great mythic figure of
the culture-hero Quetzalcoatl (Feathered-snake) and his
people the Toltecs, the civilising race who are believed to
have entered Mexico in peaceful invasion, and to have
sown the seeds of culture among its barbarous peoples.

The Toltec race appear to have formed the nucleus of a
civilised state in Mexico, and while we encounter Quet-
zalcoat] as a divinity among the Maya under the names
Gucumatz and Kukulkan, which are merely trans-
lations of his Mexican appellation, we find the Toltecs
occasionally identified by native chroniclers with the
populations of Guatemala or Yucatan. We find that
Mexican mercenarics attained in the eleventh century A.D.
to much the same degree of power in the Yucatec state of
Chichen Itzá as the alien Janissaries in Constantinople or
the stranger Mamelukes in seventeenth-century Egypt.
Toltec art, too, is found invading the Maya sphere about
the same period. But that Toltec and Maya were originally
one and the same admits of little dubiety. The differences
between their beliefs, arts and social customs were merely
such as might have arisen out of a few centuries of
separation.

We see then:

(1) That many geologists of standing credit the existence
of a former Atlantean continent. Others do not, but, in
the main, offer no good reasons against the hypothesis.

(2) That Atlantis and Antillia must have been at one


7 The Crö-Magnons of America


‚eriod joined in one land-mass, and at a later period by
and-bridge or by an insular chain, which permitted the
pread of culture from one to the other.

(3) That just as the Atlanteans settled in Europe, they
ikewise settled in America. The sudden appearance of
he Maya people in Central America from the East with
, ready-made culture shows conclusively that they were
‚ot of mainland stock. Indeed, authorities are at one in
ittributing an Antillean origin to them.


CHAPTER III
QUETZALCOATL THE ATLANTEAN
Wer then, were the Toltecs? Whence did they


come? What answers have archeology and
tradition to give to these questions ?

Brinton and the older writers believed them to be wholly
fabulous. But recent research has put this theory quite
out of court, and a reaction in favour of Toltec authen-
ticity has set in. The monumental and other remains of a
race boasting a high standard of culture have been dis-
covered in certain parts of Mexico. Tradition and early
written history persistently ascribe these to the Toltecs..
The word “ Toltee” means “the cultured" or the
* civilised people," the builders, the makers of things.
Their very name, then, associates them with the pre-Aztec
ruins and antiquities of Mexico.

Formerly, I admit, I fully believed that the Toltecs were
mythical. But as time progressed and the spade unearthed
proof after proof of the presence of a civilised pre-Aztec
race in Mexico at sites which early local tradition associated
with the Toltec name, I was forced into acceptance of the
conclusions of Manuel Gamio and others that a definite
historical basis underlay the Toltec “ fable.” To Professor
Eduard Seler, the foremost among Americanists, the
Toltees were a Mexican race who arrived in Mexico during.
the seventh century of our era, pushing their way up the
coast from Yucatan or Guatemala, where they had already
exercised & civilising influence. For Lehmann, another
careful authority, Toltec chronicle was a melange of myth
and history, but he did not believe that “‘ the question of
the difficult problem of the origin of the Toltecs >° was
actually solved.

But the later researches of Manuel Gamio and others
have made it clear enough that we must allow the Toltecs
a local habitation and a name. It has been shown that the
sites of Tollan, Cholula and Teotihuacan are undoubtedly
of Toltec origin. Mr. T. Athol Joyce in his Mexican
Archeology cannot see why the name Toltec should be
refused to this culture, and indeed there is no good reason
to refuse it. E. J. Payne in his monumental History of the
New World gives it as his opinion that “ the accounts of
Toltec history current at the Conquest contain a nucleus

48


49 Quetzalcoatl the Atlantean


of substantial truth," and concludes that ** to doubt that
there once existed in Tollan an advancement superior to
that which prevailed among the Nahuatlaca (that is the
pre-Aztec tribes) generally at the Conquest, and that its
people spread their advancement throughout Anahuac
(Mexico) and into the districts eastward and southward,
would be to reject a belief universally entertained, and
confirmed rather than shaken by the efforts made in later
times to construct for the Pueblo something in the nature
Of a history."

If, then, we grant an actual existence to the Toltecs on
archeological grounds, we shall find these greatly strength-
ened by the traditions associated with these people.
Ixtlilxochitl, a native chronicler who lived shortly after
the Conquest of Mexico by Cortes, and who had exceptional
opportunities for obtaining good information, states in
his Historia Chichimeca that the Toltecs did not set out
to colonise distant countries from any impulse of their
own, but were the victims of internecine dissension in the
homeland, and had perforce to seek their fortunes else-
where. Thus thrust forth, they set their faces southward,
and reached a place called Tlapallan in the year A.D. 387.
Passing the country of Xalisco, they effected a landing at
Huatulco, and journeyed down the coast of Mexico until
they reached Tochtepec, whence they pushed inland
toward Tollan. It took them no less than 104 years to
make this journey. In another work, the Relaciones, he
gives a totally different account of the Toltec migrations.
He tells us that the chiefs of Tlapallan had revolted against
the royal authority and were banished from that region in
A.D. 439.1 Lingering near their ancient territory for the
space of eight years, they then journeyed to Tlapallant-
zinco, where they halted for three hundred years before
setting out on a prolonged pilgrimage which occupied the
tribe for more than a century.

In his Monarquia Indiana Torquemada says of the
Toltecs that they were a body of men who came from the
north by way of Panuco, dressed in robes of black linen,
cut low at the neck, and with short sleeves. They came to
Tollan, but finding the country there too thickly peopled,

1 These dates cannot be accepted as trustworthy. Veytia believes
Tollan to have been founded in A.D. 713.

D


|
Atlantis in America 50 |
passed on to Cholula, where they were well received. Their |
chief was Quetzalcoatl, a man with ruddy complexion and ;
long beard. They multiplied, and sent colonies to the |
Mixtec and Zapotec countries, in the south-west, raising
the great buildings at Mitla. They were cunning handi-
craftsmen, not so good at masonry as at jeweller’s work, :
sculpture and agriculture.

Here it should be remarked that the history of Tollan,
the city founded on Mexican soil by the Toltecs, bears a
close resemblance to that of Atlantis. Ixtlilxochitl says
that it was founded by the Toltecs in the year A.D. 566.
This city, the site of which is now occupied by the modern
town of Tula, was situated north-west of the mountains
which bound the Mexican valley. It required six years
to erect the magnificent palaces and temples of which it
was composed. The valley in which it stood was known as -
“The Place of Fruits " because of its surprising fertility.
The Toltecs made rapid progress in the various arts, and
their settlement came to be celebrated far and wide for
the excellence of its craftsmen and the beauty of its
architecture and pottery. The very walls were encrusted
with rare red and black stones, and their masonry was so
beautifully chiselled and laid as to resemble the choicest
mosaic.

A line of able kings succeeded the founder of the Toltec
monarchy, until in A.D. 994, according to Ixtlilxochitl, the
degenerate Huemac II ascended the throne of Tollan. At
first he ruled with wisdom, but later he fell from the high
place he had made for himself in the regard of the people
by reason of his faithless deception of them and his licen-
tious habits. The provinces rose in revolt, and many signs
and gloomy omens foretold the downfall of the city. As
in the case of Atlantis, its inhabitants had incurred the
wrath of the gods by their love of pleasure and selfishness,
and a similar fate befell them. In the winter which ensued
such a severe frost visited the land that all crops and plants
were killed. A summer of torrid heat followed, so intense |
in its suffocating fierceness that the streams were dried up
and the very rocks melted. Plagues completed the ruin.
In the event the degenerate Toltecs were driven out of the
land by the warlike Chichimec tribes of the northern
steppes. Mexico knew them no more, and their name and


IL: YUCATAN.


P


OVERNOK, TAM


f Mava architecture.


`
5


Prate Mi HOUSE OF THE 4


-


pecimen o


S


ewe é


~ Dd


ru...


a


51 Quetzalcoatl the Atlantean


culture lingered only as a legend in the vicinity of the
proud cities they had raised.!

Now it is obvious that these occurrences did not happen
on Mexiean soil. Frost seldom visits these latitudes, and
never with such severity as this legend relates. It is at
least equally true that rocks do not melt, even in the
torrid sun of Mexico. But they do under the influence of
earthquake or other seismic disturbance or volcanic agency,
of which I believe this tale to be a reminiscence, adapted
to the circumstances of the Toltec political break-up under
the pressure of the more virile northern tribes. In fact it
is pretty clear from this account that a much more vener-
able myth of catastrophe in another land has been con-
founded with the history of the Toltec downfall. The
experiences of the defeated and scattered Toltecs, who
appear to have betaken themselves to Yucatan and
Guatemala on the destruction of their city, became
entangled with another and older story which they re-
counted of their evacuation of another region. That to
me seems very clear. The tale of the downfall of Tollan
has become interwoven with that of the cataclysm of
Tlapallan, or as some writers actually call it, Tollan-
Tlapallan, the place whence they originally came, and
Tollan the First and Tollan the Second were, in the circum-
stances of their destruction at least, confused in the
Toltec mind, or, perhaps in the minds of later Mexican
chroniclers.

As I have said, one personage is associated with the
Toltecs who undoubtedly links them with Atlantis-Antillia.
This is the culture-hero Quetzalcoatl, who first led them
into the country, and who finally returned to the homeland
whence he had come. A bewildering array of myths
cluster around his personality, and in dealing with them
we must exercise selection very carefully if we are to
combine them into such a reasoned narrative as will prove
useful in our investigation. I shall, in the first place,
summarise these important myths, and at a later stage try
to glean from them their real significance. The myth of
Quetzalcoatl has been handled (mishandled would be the


1 No good modern résumé of the Toltec question exists; but see
Brinton, “Were the Toltecs an Historic Nationality ?" (Proc. Am. Phil.
Soc., XXIV, pp. 229-41, 1887).


Atlantis in America 52


better term) by generations of writers on the subject of |


Atlantis. But perhaps the thirty years of study I have
devoted to it will assist me to excogitate its true relation-
ship to the Atlantean hypothesis.

We will see that Quetzalcoatl was regarded as the leader
of the immigrant Maya into Central America about 200 B.c.
and as the chief of the Toltecs who invaded Mexico some
eight hundred years later. But this merely implies that
the myth was carried into Mexico by Maya-Toltees who


naturalised it there, just as the myth of Arthur was carried -


from one centre into all the Celtic countries.

The “standard ” account of Quetzalcoatl is that given
by Sahagun, a careful and painstaking clerical writer who
flourished in Mexico about the middle of the sixteenth
century, who deals with the nature of this god or culture-
hero in the Third Book of his Historia Universal de Nueva
España. Quetzalcoatl, says Sahagun, was the father of
the arts. His houses were made of native jadeite, silver,
white and red shells and feathers. His servants were known
as *“ the Swift Ones who serrate the teeth." The land was
wealthy in his time, and a head of maize was a bvrden for
a strong man. He did penance by drawing blood with the
Spines of the maguey plant, and by bathing at midnight.
But the native sorcerers, Tezcatlipoca and Uitzilopochtli,
were jealous of him and minded to destroy him. Tezcatli-
poca came to his palace disguised as a physician, and,
hearing that he was sick, proffered him a magical draught
which, he assured Quetzalcoatl, would make him forget
his sorrows and his strong desire to leave Mexico. Quet-


zalcoatl, seeing that his secret had been probed, asked |


the mysterious visitant where he must betake himself.
“To Tollan-Tlapallan,” was the reply, * where another
old man awaits thee. He and you shall speak together,
and on thy return thou shalt be as a youth, yes, even as
a boy.”

Quetzalcoatl drank the medicine, though doubtfully,
and in time became intoxicated. So great a longing to
depart came upon him that at length he arose and went
from Tollan. Arrived at the coast, he commanded that a
raft of serpents should be constructed for him, and in this


1 A fuller dissertation of the Quetzalcoatl myth will be found in my
Gods of Mexico, pp. 117—465.


53 Quetzalcoatl the Atlantean


he seated himself as in a canoe, put out to sea, and set out
on his voyage to Tollan-Tlapallan.

Torquemada, another monkish writer, in his account of
the myth of Quetzalcoatl borrows largely from Sahagun,
but states that Sahagun, when at Xochimilco, was asked
by the natives, who were keenly desirous of knowledge on
the point, where Tlapallan was. He rcplied that he did
not know, as he had not then been long among them.
Torquemada proceeds to say that when Quetzalcoatl
departed, he assured his disciples that at a future time
there would come by the way of the sea, where the sun


A


UN Em 0 S
CH
a GR


Quetzalcoatl, from the Mexican Codex Borgia.


=
A
e


rises, certain white men with black beards, like him, and
that these would be his brothers and would rule the land.

The interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis, a
document painted by Aztec scribes at the request of certain
Spanish priests, says of Quetzalcoatl, ** Quetzalcoatl, they
say, was he who created the world. And they bestowed
upon him the appellation of Lord of the Wind, because
they say that Tonacatecutli, when it appeared good to
him, breathed and begat Quetzalcoatl. . . . They cele-
brated a festival on the sign of the four earthquakes to the
destroyer, with reference to the fate which again waited
the world: for they said that it had undergone four
destructions and would again be destroyed. He alone


—


Atlantis in America 54 |


had a human body like that of men. The other gods were .
of an incorporeal nature. After the deluge the custom
of sacrificing commenced. ... They name him ‘One
Cane,’ which is the star Venus, of which they tell the
fable accredited among them. Tlauizcalpan Tecutli is the
star Venus, the first created light before the deluge. This
star is Quetzalcoatl.’’!

The interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus A., a similar,
document, says: “He it was, as they say, who caused
hurricanes, and in my opinion was the god who was called
Citaladuali, and it was he who destroyed the world by
winds. . . . The son of the virgin, Quetzalcoatl, knowing
that the vices of men were necessarily the cause of the
troubles of the world, determined on asking the goddess
Chalchihuitlicue who is she who remained after the deluge
with the man in the tree (ark), and is the mother of the
god Tlaloc, whom they have made goddess of water, that
they might obtain rain when they stood in need of it. ...
Of Quetzalcoatl they relate that, proceeding on his journey,
he arrived at the Red Sea, which is here painted, and which
they named Tlapallan, and that on entering into it they
saw no more of him nor knew what became of him. ... —
They say that it was he who effected the reformation of .
the world by penance, since as, according to his account,
his father had created the world and men had given i
themselves up to vice, on which account it had frequently |
been destroyed, Citinatonali sent/ his son into the world
to reform it. . . . They celebrated a great festival on this
sign, as we shall sce on the sign of four earthquakes, because
they feared that the world .would be destroyed in that
sign (or date) as he had foretold them when he disappeared
in the Red Sea, which event occurred on the same sign.”?

As I will try to show later, we have here a number of
allusions to a condition closely resembling the groundwork |
of the Atlantis myth. But resemblances even more start- |
ling come to light when we examine those myths regarding
Quetzalcoatl which were current in Guatemala and
Yucatan.


1 This Codex is reproduced in Kingsborough’s Antiquities of Mexico,
Vol. VI, pp. 95-153.

2 Reproduced in Kingsborough’s Antiquities of Mexico, Vol. VI,
pp. 155-420.


55 Quetzalcoatl the Atlantean


A book in the language of the Quiche Indians of Guate-
mala, said to have been written by Votan, a local name
for Quetzalcoatl, was at one time in the possession of
Nufiez de la Vega, Bishop of Chiapas, who introduced
: portions of it into his Constituciones Diocesianos de Chiapas,
yet, with the intolerance of his age, destroyed the priceless
original in his holocaust of manuscripts and paintings of
native origin at Huehuetlan in 1691. A certain Ordoñez de
Aguilar had, however, made a copy of it before its destruc-
tion, and incorporated it in his Historia de Cielo MS. In
this work Votan declares himself “a snake," the descen-
dant of Imos, of the line of Chan, a tribe of Lacandone
Indians situated near Palenque, who, he says, were of the
race of Chivim. Taking Aguilar's account along with that
of de la Vega, as both rely on the same authority, we find
that Votan (that is Quetzalcoatl) proceeded to America
by divine command, his mission being to lay the founda-
tions of civilisation in that land. With this object in view,
he left the land of Valum Chivim, passed the dwelling of
the Thirteen Snakes, and arrived in Valum Votan, whence,
with several members of his family, he set out to form a
settlement, ascending the Usumacinta River and ulti-
mately founding Palenque. Because of the strange dress
they wore, the Tzendal Indians whom they encountered
called the colonists Tzequitles, or “ Men with Shirts," but
agreed to form a pact with them. Votan, having estab-
lished himself at Palenque, made several visits to his
original home. On one of these he came to a tower which
had been intended to reach the heavens, a project which
had been confounded by the diversity of language among
those who conceived it. He was permitted to reach “ the
rock of heaven ” by a subterranean passage, and returning
to Palenque, discovered that others of his race had arrived
there with whom he made an amicable agreement. He
built à temple by the Huehuetan River, known from its
subterranean chambers as ** The House of Darkness," and
here he deposited the national records in the care of
certain old men called ¿lapianes, or guardians, and an
order of priestesses. Nuñez de la Vega’s work contains
the following illuminating passage on this most interesting
retreat :

* Votan is the third heathen in the calendar (that is,


Atlantis in America 56


the deity who is ascribed to the third division of the Maya
calendar), and in the little history written in the Indian
‘language all the provinces and cities in which he tarried
are mentioned ; and to this day there is always a clan in
the city of Teopisa which they call the Votans. They say


that he saw the great wall, namely, the Tower of Babel, .


which was built from earth to heaven at the bidding of e


his grandfather Noah; and that he was the first man


whom God sent to divide and apportion this country, of


India, and that there, where he saw the great wall, he gave
to every nation its special language. It is related that he
tarried in Huehueta (which is a city in Soconusco) and
that there he placed a tapir and a great treasure in a sub-
terranean house, which he built by the breath of his
nostrils, and he appointed a woman as chieftain, with
tapianes to guard her. This treasure consisted of jars
which were closed with covers of the same clay, and of a
room in which the picture of the ancient heathens who
are in the calendar were engraved in stone, together with
chalchiuites (which are small, heavy, green stones) and
other superstitious images; and the chieftainess herself
and the tapianes, her guardians, surrendered all these
things, which were publicly burned in the market-place at
Huehueta when we inspected the aforesaid province in
1691.”

I believe that a careful perusal and criticism of the cycle
of myths associated with Quetzalcoatl will greatly assist
us to a better comprehension of the American relationships
of the Atlantean tradition. We observe in them the per-
sistent memory of the arrival of a civilised race from the
east, led by a chieftain of striking personality. Doubtless
much of pure myth has in the course of centuries attached
itself to them with that barnacle-like affinity it possesses
for all historic fact—witness the myths which have
accreted round the personality of the late Lord Kitchener
_ —but the substratum of reality survives, and is capable of
disentanglement from the superincumbent mass of fictional
detail. That such a civilised race as these legends speak
of actually did arrive on American soil we know. The
Maya appear in Central America about 200 B.c. in posses-
sion of a fully developed civilisation, a system of writing,
a knowledge of masonry, a close acquaintance with the


57 Quetzalcoatl the Atlantean


forms of art which it is ridiculous to refer to a social evolu-
tion of less than a score of centuries.

We know nothing of the geological history of the West
Indian area of 2100 years ago. The occurrence of such
terrific cataclysms as that of Mont Pelée, which took place
in that region in our own time, illustrates the possibility
of similar seismic disturbances on a large scale having
occurred at any epoch in the past history of a locality so
notoriously unstable. It is highly improbable that a myth
like that of Quetzalcoatl, eloquent as it is of the cireum-
stances of forced departure from an eastern oceanic area,
should coincide so exactly with the sudden appearance of
the Maya in Central America unless some basis of fact
underlay it. The Maya themselves spoke of Quetzalcoatl
as the founder of their civilisation, calling him Gucumatz,
Kukulkan and Votan, and that they drew the greater part
of their religious tradition from the faith which he intro-
duced, no student of Maya archeology would deny.

Moreover, as has been said, the resemblance between
the tale of the destruction of Tollan, that city connected
with Quetzalcoatl and the Toltecs, is more than suspicious.
Plato says of Atlantis that gradually the blood of the gods
which flowed in the veins of the Atlanteans was diluted
with the mortal admixture, and that thereby they grew
degenerate. Zeus regarded them with disfavour. Plato’s
account concludes with the statement that the god was
. about to gather them together to reproach them with their
worldly selfishness and love of pleasure. The sequel in his
Timeus shows that the divine counsel had not been
accepted, and that Zeus had been compelled to destroy
them in their wickedness by sending upon them earth-
quakes, floods and rains, which brought about the complete
destruction of their country. In like manner disaster
comes upon the Toltecs, but, as I have shown, the circum-
stances of the myth do not square with what we know of
the actual downfall of Tollan, which succumbed to the
attacks of the Chichimec Indians of the northern steppes.
This implies that that part of the myth which obviously
relates to seismic disturbance, should be referred back to
a still older legend current in Tollan of disaster in an earlier
home, with which it became confused. The very fact that
the Toltec called the eastern oceanic country from which


Atlantis in America 58


Quetzalcoatl came Tollan-Tlapallan, shows that they had
either called their city by the name of the older settlement-
or that it had in some way become confounded with the
maritime country alluded to.

The description of Toltec architecture in these legends |
bears a striking similarity to what Plato has to say of the
Atlantean masonry. The stones of which the Atlanteans
constructed their buildings were, he says, white, black and
red in colour, and in many of their houses and temples -
these were intermingled in a striking decorative scheme. |
They also employed for building a substance known as
orichaleum (copper), which emitted red light. If this
account be compared with the statements of Ixtlilxochitl
and others regarding the colour-schemes of Toltec archi-
tecture, the resemblance between the edifices of Atlantis
and Tollan is not far to seek.

Let us note, too, that the priestly interpreters of the
Mexican Codex Vaticanus A. and the Codex Telleriano-
Remensis lay stress upon the relationship of Quetzalcoatl
with earthquakes, rains and deluge. The first-mentione
writer states that he caused hurricanes and destroyed the
world by winds, and that in his “sign” the Mexicans
celebrated the feast of the Four Earthquakes. The inter-
preter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis repeats this latter
statement, and adds that Quetzalcoatl was connected with
the idea of the deluge. Now the power to cause seismic -
disturbances is regarded by some peoples as residing in
the person of the priest-king or chief. Professor J.
Macmillan Brown of Christchurch, New Zealand, in his
recent fascinating volume The Riddle of the Pacific,* says
that “on the east coast of the island of Yap there is a
village called Gatsepar, and its chief, though of no sig-
nificance or power in his own island, has canoes come over
hundreds of miles of sea to pay him annual tribute ; when
the tributaries are asked why they do so to so powerless a
chief, they say that if they did not keep paying the tribute
he would shake their island with his earthquakes and the
sea with his tempests. The meaning seems to be that his
ancestors built an island-empire to the east of Yap, and
when some intermediate islets had gone down the others
continued to look still to the ruler in the west as the holder

1 P. 53.


59 Quetzalcoatl the Atlantean


of all power, natural and supernatural.” This illustration
of a custom still obtaining appears to throw a flood of light
not only on the reason for Quetzalcoatl’s connection with
earthquakes and tempests but on the Atlantean-Antillian
connection of the Maya civilisation, which evidently, like
its Pacific parallel, looked back to an older culture in a
sunken land.

Quetzalcoatl, then, may have been an Antillian chief
who was regarded as having the power to create seismic
disturbances, and in the passage of time this magical power
to destroy may naturally have come to be confused with
the circumstances of the destruction of Antillia itself.
Quetzalcoatl, it will be noted, is also mentioned by the
interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus A. as having “ destroyed
the world by wind."!

Although worshipped by the Mexicans and the Maya
of Central America, Quetzalcoatl was still regarded by
them not only as a god but as a man. The whole of his
myth, indeed, is eloquent of his humanity. “ He alone,"
says the Codex Telleriano-Remensis, ‘‘ had a human body
like that of men. The other gods were of an incorporeal
nature." "The details of his legend are, indeed, much too
precise for reference to any mere shadowy divinity. He
was, we are told, sent by his father Citinatonali to reform
the world by penance. Such a task might well have been
_ laid upon an Antillian chief or leader by an offended god,
"whose votary might equally readily conceive the notion of
placating him in such a way.

Let us glance for a moment at this god, the father of
Quetzalcoatl, Citinatonali or  Citallatonali. He was
regarded by the Mexicans as the creator of heaven and
earth and of mankind. “They painted him alone with
a crown as lord of all" He is in Mexican mythology
“* the Very Old One." An ancient Mexican song says that
Quetzalcoatl dedicated a special cult to him. He was un-
questionably a god of the Toltecs, accepted at a later period
by the Mexicans. He is represented by the sign cipactli,
the dragon or whale from which the earth was made, and
which rose out of the sea. In Maya myth he is called *' the
Old Serpent who is covered with green feathers and who


1 As I show later, the symbol, of Quetzalcoatl was the thunder-stone,
the symbol of seismic disturbance.


Atlantis in America s


lies in the ocean." "That is, he is the Maya form of a god
of the sea like Poseidon, the mythical founder of Atlantis,
according to Plato, and father of Atlas. Citallatonalı’s
wife was Citlallinicue or Coatlicue, a name which, it may
be observed in passing, looks very like à Mexican attempt
to pronounce the name of Cleito, the name of the maiden
of Atlantis whom Poseidon wooed and married, and who
bore him Atlas and other twin sons.

With almost equal certainty Quetzalcoatl can be
collated with Atlas himself. In architecture he is repre-
sented in caryatid form, for example in a statuette found
in Mexico City in 1900, at Chichen Itzá and elsewhere in


E e i TE. O ub


Quetzalcoatl upholding the heavens.


Mexico and Central America, and in many Mexiean MSS.
In these, it is especially to be remarked, he is represented,
like Atlas, as bearing the world or the sky on his head.
Dr. H. J. Spinden, an eminent authority on Maya arche-
ology, calls these figures ‘‘ Atlantean " because of their
resemblance to the Greek caryatids of Atlas. Quetzalcoatl
is also one of the four Mexican world-supporters, and is
represented in this form in the Aztec Codex Borgia and the
Codex Vaticanus B. Itis clear, too, from his name, ** Heart
of the Sea," that he was in some way connected with the
ocean, and this is strengthened by the fact that Chalchi-
huitlicue, his wife, is goddess of the sea. Like Atlas, too,
Quetzalcoatl was a twin.

But Quetzalcoatl bequeathed more than a memory to


61 Quetzalcoatl the Atlantean


posterity. We are informed that he was the progenitor
of the clan or sect of Votan, the Votanides, to whom Nufiez
alludes. He was also the founder of Palenque. The date
of the foundation of Palenque has recently been fixed by
a competent scholar at 15 B.c., and by another at A.D. 73,
from a reading of the calendar dates on the stele there.
This gives us a more or less definite date to found upon.
Palenque may, indeed, be described as the city of Quet-
zalcoatl, for not only is the feathered serpent, his symbol,
ubiquitous there, but the site was assuredly one of the
ehief centres of his cult in Central Amcrica. Tradition,
therefore, was surely not at fault in attributing its founda-
tion to him. That part of his legend which alludes to his
meeting with the Tzendal Indians, who described his
followers as ““ the Men with Shirts," bears the impress of
reality. Once established at Palenque, we are informed
that he made several visits to his original home. This
would seem to imply that at this period the country of
Tollan-Tlapallan had not altogether been submerged, or
at least that Quetzalooatl was compelled to return thither
for some more or less powerful reason. His wanderings
and voyages are described, and we learn that after his
return to Palenque he found other colonists of his own race
awaiting him. Finally he deposited his books and other
treasures in a subterranean chamber in Huehuetenango in
the Quiche country, where they were actually discovered
by Bishop Nufiez de la Vega, who, after copying the MSS.,
destroyed them, along with the images and other insignia
which had been treasured there, the last vestiges of
Atlantean civilisation.

One of the outstanding diseoveries in connection with
primitive religion which has been made in recent times is
that of Sir James Frazer regarding the magical significance
ofearly kingship. Inthe personality of the king, it has been
found, resided those magical virtues of vitality and virility
which were thought to cause the crops to flourish, and the
lack of which in a monarch meant agricultural failure.
This, of course, dated from a period when the king and the
rain-making priest were one and the sameindividual. Aged
and impotent monarchs in an early stage of society, and
especially in Egypt and Polynesia, were immolated for the
twofold reason that the gods might be placated and a


Atlantis in America 62 `


more vigorous successor fulfil their functions. Failing
sacrifice, they must be rejuvenated by a magical elixir.

Some such process, I believe, is involved in the myth of
Quetzalcoatl. Indeed, in one of the myths which allude
to him he is spoken of as being immolated on a funeral
pyre. In his time the maize crop was so large and fruitful
that only a strong man might carry a head of the cereal
of which Quetzalcoatl was the original discoverer. His
powers diminish through age, and he conceives the idea
of obtaining magical assistance from the fatherland, where,
he is assured, ** another old man ? awaits him, perhaps the
high priest of his cult. The expression “ another ” makes
it clear that Quetzalcoatl was at that time regarded as old,
but he is assured that he will return “as a youth, yea as
a boy " if he will seek aid in the homeland, the one locality
where he can obtain the elixir of youth. In the nature-
allegory which has been woven out of Quetzalcoatl’s
history he is thought of as the trade wind which, after
bearing the fertilising rains to Mexico, returns to its home
in the east to seek new showers to continue its mission in
the ensuing spring. But, if I am not in error, the myth
contains also a human and historical element, the story
of a priest-king forced to return to his ancestral home,
partially ruined as that may have been, to seek the aid
of its official magies. There are records, as we have seen,
of occasional voyages eastward in the myths of Quet-
zalcoatl to Tollan-Tlapallan. On one of these, prompted,
perhaps, by the fear of the unpromising political con-
ditions he had left behind him, he did not return to
American soil.

A former and more brief presentation by me of this
hypothesis has since received affirmation of a rather sur-
prising character. Professor J. Macmillan Brown, in his
Riddle of the Pacific, a work already alluded to, and pub-
lished some nine months later than mine, supplies an
extraordinary analogy drawn from the mythology of
Easter Island. Thus, two independent workers have
discovered illustrations of fertility myths of similar
character in connection with sunken areas.

Professor Brown’s conclusions regarding Easter Island,
the myths and customs of which he has studied closely,
are that it was formerly the centre of a vast Pacific


«te -~a - ne —


63 Quetzalcoatl the Atlantean


archipelagic civilisation of Polynesian origin, and that its
present isolated position is due to the fact that the archi-
pelago of which it was formerly a part underwent sub-
mergence. From the collected legends of the island he
describes how Hotu Matua, the culture-hero, the Quet-
zalcoatl of this submerged empire, marooned on Easter
Island with a small band of civilised followers, set himself
to the task of reconstructing society on his restricted retreat.

‘ Assuming," says Professor Brown, “that the island
was full of toilers at the great works of art, subjects of
the powers in the archipelagoes and dependent on them
for organisation and sustenance, we can imagine what a
chaos it would be when the source of authority and of
food had gone down; we can imagine what a task lay in
front of Hotu Matua, the only representative of the
vanished government. What could he do with his three
hundred against the thousands who felt that their chains
were broken, and that if organised and led they could do
what they liked with the island and the officials of their
old masters ? ^

Consequently Hotu Matua “ set himself deliberately to
assume the character and direct the old veneration of
royalty towards himself" as the only remaining official
of the submerged imperial government. He therefore
developed the use of the Polynesian taboos to secure the
influence of himself and his clan and descendants. The
Miru or religion he inculcated was “an honoured name
in the Polynesian fatherland amongst a lighter-coloured
race.” “No decree or command of his was efficient with-
out some taboo,” and these taboos extended to marriage
and food. He also inculcated the idea that his head pos-


. sessed a marvellous fertilising power. “If it came near


S|. >. > —— 08 ROS


= =


any crop it would double or treble the growth." But what
if he or his descendants fell into senility or decay? “To
prevent this he arranged that when the eldest son of a king
married, his father should resign and retire into private life."

Now Quetzalcoatl was faced with practically the same
conditions. He and his band of nobles must assert them-
selves or perish in the strange land which they had been
compelled to seek by reason of the submergence, total or
partial, of their fatherland. Like Hotu Matua, he set him-
self the task of strengthening the ancient religion. That


E


Atlantis in America 64 ;


the pontificate of this faith was sedulously handed down
from father to son is shown by the careful provisions
effected to ensure this by the Zapotec priests of Quetzal-


coat] at Mitla, one of the earliest localities where his religion '


took root. These, when an heir was needed, reduced their


high priest to a state of intoxication, and presented him ©


with a noble virgin, with whose assistance he carried on
the divine line. Certain foods and beverages, too, both in
Mexieo and Central America, were inalienable from the
royal and priestly caste. Like Hotu Matua, Quetzalcoatl
founded a special caste, the Votanides. The fertilising
power of the head of Quetzalcoatl is also to be observed
in the symbol for maize, in which the plant is seen growing
out of the head of the Maya god Ghanan, who is probably
a surrogate of Quetzalcoatl. Moreover, as in the case of


Hotu Matua, there was scarcely a single cultural or social .


custom among the Maya which was not either held to have


been organised by Quetzalcoatl or in some manner referred .


to him.

Thus the circumstances of the legends of Hotu Matua
and Quetzalcoatl are analogous, and we see that two
culture-heroes, both emanating from submerged localities,
evolved very similar religious ideas, and a similar social
system under pressure of like circumstances.

Summarising the evidence adduced in this chapter, we
find :

(1) That the Toltecs were an actual historical people
who arrived in Mexico at some time in the seventh
century A.D.

(2) That the tradition of the destruction of their city
of Tollan is probably a reminiscence of, or in some manner
became confused with, that of the destruetion of Atlantis.

(8) That Quetzalcoatl, their first king, was an historical
personage, and the leader of a migration from Antillia.
He was also regarded as the leader of the Maya migration,
which reached Central America eight centuries before the
settlement of the Toltees in Mexico. This implies that
the myth was brought to Mexico by Maya-Toltees, who
naturalised it there.

(4) That a tradition similar to that of Quetzalcoatl is
associated with Easter Island in the Pacific, in a region
known once to have been occupied by land now submerged.

/


CHAPTER IV
ATLANTIS IN AMERICAN TRADITION


Atlantean influence penetrated to Amcrican soil, its

remains should surely be manifest in the myths, tales
and traditions of the Indian races which inhabit the con-
tinent. Do these exhibit traces of the Atlantean story,
and do such fragmentary memories find their counterparts
in the Platonic description of Atlantis, in the circumstances
of its civilisation and its destruction ? Assuredly they do.
Let us examine those American myths and legends which
reveal Atlantean connections.

And first those which seem to preserve a more or less
fragmentary memory of certain circumstances alluded to
in Plato’s account. In his Critias Plato tells us that the
gods, dividing the regions of the earth among themselves,
apportioned the island of Atlantis to Poseidon or Neptune.
On that side of it which overlooked the sea was a fertile
plain, at a distance of fifty stadia, from which rose a low
mountain inhabited by a native of the country, Evenor,
along with his wife Leucippe and his daughter Cleito.
Poseidon fell in love with the maiden, and so that no man
might reach her, he enclosed the hill where she dwelt with
alternate zones of sea and land. In this enclosure he begat
five pairs of twin boys, among whom he divided the island.
Of these the eldest was Atlas, who retained the paramount
power, the others being rulers of neighbouring islands.
The later Atlanteans built on the summit of the hill a
temple dedicated to Poseidon and Cleito, surrounded by
a golden enclosure, containing golden statues of Poseidon,
his wife and ten sons.

The Creek Indians, the Choctaws and Seminoles, preserve
a myth which has more than a superficial resemblance to
the above. They say that when the earth rose out of the
waste of waters a great hill known as Nunne Chaha stood
in the midst, and in the centre of it was the house of
Esaugetuh Emissee, “ The Master of Breath." He formed
men from clay and erected a great encircling wall, upon
which he placed the clay men to dry. He then took upon
himself the task of directing the waters into channels,
reserving the dry land for the men he had created.

Manibozho, the great god of the Algonquin Indians, is


E 65


[- there be any justification for the theory that


Atlantis in America 66 |


said to have '* carved the land and sea to his liking," just '
as the Huron deity Tawiscara ‘“ guided the waters into
smooth channels." The Peruvian god Pariacaca arrived,
as Poseidon had done, in a hilly country. But the people
reviled him, and he sent a great flood upon them, so that
their village was destroyed. Meeting a beautiful maiden, .
Choque Suso, who was weeping bitterly, he inquired the |
cause of her grief, and she informed him that the maize _
crop was dying for lack of water. He assured her that he
would revive the maize if she would bestow her affections _
on him, and when she consented to his suit, he irrigated the
land by canals. Eventually he turned his wife intoastatue.

Another Peruvian myth recounts that the god Thonapa,
angered at the people of Yamquisapa in the province of
Alla-suyu because they were so bent on pleasure, drowned '
their city in a great lake. The people of this region wor-
shipped a statue in the form of a woman which stood on
the summit of the hill Cachapucara. Thonapa destroyed
both hill and image and disappeared into the sea.

Here we have what students of Folklore call ** the test
of recurrence." "These Peruvian myths have a close agree-
ment with the details of Plato's account which deal with |
the wooing of Cleito and the enclosure of the hill and the
making of an irrigation zone. Here, too, we find mention
in one case of a statue of the wife of the god, while in the
other the statue is alluded to, and the deity is described as
disappearing into the sea. As in Plato’s Critias, the flood
was precipitated by the wickedness or love of pleasure of
the human race.

So much then for the fact that we discover what seem
to be definite fragments in American myth of that part
of the Atlantean tradition which related to the settlement
of Poseidon in the island-continent. Let us now examine
the legends of the New World which describe earthquakes .
or great cataclysms of nature, such as Plato tells us over-
took Atlantis, and see whether such as we find appear in
any way to corroborate the Platonic account. Atlantis,
Plato tells us, disappeared beneath the sea after a visitation -
of earthquake and flood.

We find, perhaps, the most striking analogy in that
ancient book of the Quiche Indians of Guatemala known .
as the Popol Vuh. For generations antiquaries interested


wa


VS TA. u X vu OOO


+


Tr


y
/


CERO VA


Wo YT TR S


wae


sb


-——


67 Atlantis in American Tradition


mis > Of Central America believed that this wonderful
ipis by existed somewhere in Guatemala. They were
it eani 1at a certain Don Felix Cabrera had made use of
arty In the nineteenth century, but the whercabouts of
Sehe he had seen could not be discovered. Dr. C.
E Tzer, an Austrian scholar, resolved to trace it if
Possible, and proceeded to Guatemala in 1854 for this
Pl After a diligent search he succeeded in finding the
s: a nuscript in the University of San Carlos in the city
uatemala, where it had been conveyed from the library
of a convent in 1880.1

he name “ Popol Vuh” means “ The Collection of
Written Leaves,” which in itself shows that the book must
have been reduced to writing at an early period. It is,
Indeed, a traditional and historical compilation. The lan-
guage in which it was written is the Quiche, a dialect of

the Maya, still spoken in Guatemala and San Salvador.
€ beginning of this interesting book is occupied with
the story of the creation, and what occurred subsequently
to that event. Experimenting in the making of human
beings, the gods created mannikins of wood. But these
Were irreverent and moved them to wrath. The deities
resolved to destroy them, and Hurakan, the Heart
of Heaven, caused the waters to be swollen so that a


: Mighty flood came upon the mannikins. A thick resinous


Tain was cast down upon them. The bird Xecotcovatch
tore out their eyes, the bird Camulatz cut off their heads,
the bird Cotzbalam devoured their flesh, the bird Tecum-
balam broke their bones and sinews and ground them into
powder. Then all sorts of beings great and small abused
the mannikins. The household utensils and domestic
animals jeered at them and made game of them in their
plight. In their despair the unfortunate mannikins ran


; hither and thither. They mounted upon the roofs of the


houses, but the houses crumbled beneath their feet. They
tried to climb to the tops of the trees, but the trees hurled
them down. Even the caves closed before them. Thus
this ill-starred race was finally destroyed and overthrown,


. and “the only vestiges of them which remain are certain


of their progeny, the little monkeys which dwell in the
woods."


1 See my essay, T'he Popol Vuh, London, 1908.


d


Atlantis in America 68


It does not appear to me to be possible for a tradition
so striking as the above to have originated otherwise than
out of a very powerful and persistent folk-memory of
cataclysm and catastrophe. We have here a vivid descrip-
tion of the approach of a mighty flood, the descent of a
fiery volcanic rain, the destruction of dwellings, the crash-
ing of trees, and the ultimate plight of the wretched
survivors, reduced to the condition of forest-dwellers. I
believe the Popol Vuh to contain a residuum of tradition
neither American nor European, but Atlantean.

Many of the legends of the South American tribes recount
similar disasters. The Tupi-Guarani of Brazil have a tra-
dition of cataclysm almost as striking as that detailed in
the Popol Vuh. Says Thevet, who collected their myths :
“ Monan, the Maker, the Begctter, without beginning or
end, author of all that is, seeing the ingratitude of men
and their contempt for him that had made them thus
joyous, withdrew from them, and sent upon them tata, the
divine fire, which burned all that was on the surface of
the earth. He swept about the fire in such a way that in
. places he raised mountains and in others deep valleys.
Of all men, one alone, Irin Magé (the One who Sees), was
saved, whom Monan carried into the heaven. He, seeing
all things destroyed, spoke thus to Monan: ‘ Wilt thou
also destroy all the heavens and their garniture? Alas !
henceforth where will be our home ? Why should I live,
since there is none other of my kind ?’ Then Monan was
so filled with pity that he poured a deluging rain on the
earth, which quenched the fire, and flowing from all sides,
formed the ocean which we call partana, the great waters.”

The Guaymis of Costa Rica, a tribe with South American
affinities, told the story thus: ““ Angered with the world,
the mighty Noncomala poured over it a flood of water,
killing every man and woman. But the kindly god Nubu
had preserved the seed of a man, and when the waters had
dried up he sowed it upon the moist earth. From the best
of it rose the race of men, and from that which was im-
perfect came the monkeys.” 1

To summarise other striking American myths of cata-
clysm : The Algonquin Indians told how Manibozho, their
god, was once engaged in hunting, when the wolves he

1 Melendez, Tesoros Verdaderos de lae Yndias, I, p. 4.


69 Atlantis in American Tradition


used as dogs entered a lake and disappeared. He followed
them into its depths, but it suddenly overflowed and sub-
merged the entire world. The god, desirous of recon-
structing the earth, dispatched a raven to seek for a piece
of soil, but it returned without fulfilling its mission. In
the end the musk-rat succeeded in obtaining sufficient
earth to recreate the terrestrial spherc.

An Arawak legend told how the Great Spirit, Aimon
,Kondi, seourged the world by fire, from which the sur-
\vivors ‘sought refuge in caverns. A great flood followed, in
which Marerewana and his followers saved themselves in
acanoe.! A Carib deluge myth tells how an extraordinary
rainfall precipitated a great flood, from which mankind was
saved by the ibis, which scraped up sufficient earth with
its beak to form the dry land and the mountains. The
Muyseas of Bogota attributed the deluge to the overflowing
of a lake through the spite or treachery of Chia, the moon
goddess. The flood-myth of the Karaya of Brazil relates
that the malevolent agency Anatiwa originated the deluge,
and sent fish to pull down those who had taken flight to
the hill Tupimare.

On the subject of the American tradition of a deluge
Brinton says: “How familiar such speculations were to
the aborigines of America there is abundance evidence
to show. The early Algonkin legends do not speak of an
antediluvian race, nor any family who escaped the waters.
. . . Nor did their neighbours, the Dakotas, though firm
in the belief that the globe had once been destroyed by
the waters, suppose that any had escaped. The same view
was entertained by the Nicaraguas and the Botocudos of
Brazil. ... The Aschochimi of California told of the
drowning of the world so that no man escaped. . . . Much


1 W.H. Brett, Indian Tribes of Guiana, p. 378 ff. Brinton in a valuable
note to a series of flood myths in his Myths of the New World (p. 245),
remarks: “The American nations among whom a distinct and well.
authenticated myth of the deluge was found are the Athapascas, Algonkins,
Iroquois, Cherokees, Chicasaws, Caddos, Caraxas, Guaymis, Pumarys,
Pawnees, Natchas, Dakotas, Apaches, Navahoes, Mandans, Pueblo
Indians, Aztecs, Mixtecs, Zapotecs, Tlascalans, Mechoacans, Toltecs,
Nahuas, Maya, Quiches, Haitians, natives of Darien and Popoyan,
Muyscas, Quichuas, Tupinambas, Achaguas, Araucanians amd many
others. . . . Andree’s Fluthsagen quotes a number." I have quoted
American flood myths extensively in my Dictionary of Non-Classical
Mythology, pp. 42-54.


Atlantis in America 70 |


the most gencral opinion, however, was that some few
escaped the desolating element . . . by ascending some
mountain, on a raft or canoe, in a cave, or even by climbing
atrec. No doubt some of these legends have been modified
by Christian teachings, but many of them are so connected
with local peculiarities and ancient religious ceremonies
that no unbiassed student can assign them wholly to that
source. . . . There are no more common heirlooms in the
traditional lore of the red race. Nearly every old author
quotes one or more of them. They present great uniformity
of outline, and rather than engage in repetitions of little
interest they can more profitably be studied in the aggre-
gate than in detail. By far the greater number represent
the last destruction of the world to have been by water.
A few, however . . . attribute it to a general conflagration
which swept over the earth, consuming every living thing
except a few who took refuge in a deep cave. . . . There
are, indeed, some points of striking similarity between the
deluge myths of Asia and America. It has been called a
peculiarity of the latter that in them the person saved is
always the first man. This, though not without exception,
is certainly the general rule. But these first men were
usually the highest deities known to their nations, the only
creators of the world, and the guardians of the race."
They were, in fact, such figures as Poseidon and his son
Atlas.

The Codex Chimalpopoca, a work in the ancient Nahuatl
language of Mexico, written about half a century after the
Conquest, contains the following flood myth :

“ And this year was that of Ce-calli, and on the first
day all was lost. The mountain itself was submerged in
the water, and the water itself remained tranquil for
fifty-two springs. Now towards the close of the year
Titlacahuan had forewarned the man named Nata and
his wife named Nena, saying, Make no more pulque, but
straightway hollow out a large cypress, and enter it when
in the month Tozoztli the water shall approach the sky.”
They entered it, and when Titlacahuan had closed the
door he said, ‘ Thou shalt eat but a single ear of maize,
and thy wife but one also.’

“ As soon as they had finished eating they went forth
and the water was tranquil, for the log did not move any


Por


71 Atlantis in American Tradition


more, and opening it, they saw many fish. Then they
built a fire, rubbing together pieces of wood, and they
roasted the fish. The gods Citlallinicue and Citlallatonac,
looking down below, exclaimed, ‘Divine Lord, what
means that fire below? Why do they thus smoke the
heavens ? "

“ Straightway descended Titlacahuan Tezcatlipoca and
commenced to rate them, saying, * What is this fire doing
here?’ And seizing the fishes, he moulded their hinder
parts and changed their heads, and they were at once
transformed into dogs."

This curious myth is more than a mere account of flood,
for it illustrates a new type of sacrifice on the part of the
Mexican people, the change from the fish sacrifice or fish
pabulum to the dog sacrifice or pabulum which is his-
torieally known to have taken place at some remote
period when the Mexican tribes ceased to be a people
dwelling on ‘‘a great water," and became an inland and
agricultural folk. But it is only one of a number of extra-
ordinary cataclysmic myths enshrined in the traditions
of the Aztec and other Indian races of Mexico. The Aztecs
believed that the earth had been destroyed on several
occasions, by the agency of fire, tempest and water. They
thought that the various *' suns," as they called the epochs
into which their traditional time-periods were divided, had
each been terminated by some awful convulsion of nature.
Humboldt suggested that these “ suns ” were “ fictions of
mythological astronomy, modified either by obscure
reminiscences of some great revolution suffered by our
planet, or by physical hypotheses, suggested by the sight
of marine petrifactions and fossil remains." The Abbé
Brasseur, in his works on ancient Mexico, interpreted them
as exaggerated references to historical events.

The Mexicans believed that the earth was not destined
to receive its present inhabitants, although occupied by
man-like beings, until it had undergone a series of cata-
clysms or partial destructions, regarding the precise
incidence and even the number of which there is a marked
difference of opinion on the part of the older authorities.
The interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus states that “in
the first age” (or sun) ** water reigned until at last it
destroyed the world. . . . This age, according to their


Atlantis in America 72.


computation, lasted 4008 years, and on the occurrence of
that great deluge they say that men were changed into
fish named Tlacamichin, which signifies men-fish.” The
second age, he tells us, lasted for 4010 years, and the world
was destroyed by the force of violent tempests, the catas-
trophe concluding by the transformation of men into
monkeys. The third age endured for 4801 years, and ended
in à universal fire, and in the fourth, which occupied
5042 years, the human race, which had never ceased to
transmit a few survivors from one of these epochs to the
next, was almost destroyed by famine.

The native historian Ixtlilxochitl in his History of the
Chichimecs calls the first of these epochs Atonatiuh, or the
Water Sun, because it was ended by a great inundation.
The second epoch, Tlachitonatiuh, or Earth Sun, closed
with violent earthquakes. In this age flourished the
Quinames, or giants. The third epoch was Ecatonatiuh,
or the ** Wind Sun," in which houses, trees and men were
nearly all destroyed by hurricanes, those who remained
being changed into creatures of an intelligence so low as
to be almost indistinguishable from monkeys. He does
not furnish us with the name of the present age.

Another historian of Mexico, Camargo, seems to have
been indebted to Ixtlilxochitl for his version of the creation
myth, but he seems to have been under the impression
that only two of the epochs were ended. "That three past
cataclysms had taken place and that four ages in all had
occurred is, indeed, the most generally favoured version
of the story, but some authorities seem to have been of
the opinion that a myth was current among the Mexican
people which stated that no less than five epochs had taken
place in the history of the world. Gama, Gomara and
Humboldt share this view, while Mendieta held that the
Aztecs believed 1n the existence of five past suns.

It is probable, however, that this cataclysmie theory
was in vogue among the Nahua peoples for generations
before it received a more or less definite “ literary ” form,
and indeed Veytia and Ixtlilxochitl both state that the
number of suns was agreed upon at a meeting of native
astronomers within traditional memory. We are probably
following the official version of the myth if we accept that
to which the so-called Calendar Stone of Mexico, now in


73 Atlantis in American Tradition


the Museo Nacional in Mexico City, gives sculptured form,
and which may be interpreted as follows: While the
world was wrapped in primeval gloom, the god Tezeatli-
poca transformed himself into the sun. This epoch, which
was known as “ Four Jaguar," ended in the destruction
of humanity and the race of giants who then inhabited
the world by fierce jaguars. The god Quetzalcoatl became
the second sun, and the age of “* Four Wind ” ended in
violent hurricanes, during which men were transformed
into monkeys. The god Tlaloc then took upon himself
the task of providing the world with light, and his epoch
of “Four Rain" came to an end by means of a deluge
of fire. ‘The goddess Chalchihuitlicue represented the
sun of the age of “ Four Water," at the end of which
there descended a deluge in which men were changed
into fishes. Later appeared the present sun, “Four
Motions," which, it was believed, would terminate in
earthquakes.

One of the flood myths of Mexico has a close resemblance
to the Biblical account of the fall of the Tower of Babel.
The story is to be found in the Codex Vaticanus. “In
this first age," it says, ‘‘ giants existed in that country
(Mexico). They relate of one of the seven whom they
mention as having escaped from the deluge that, the earth
becoming populous, he went to Cholula, and there began
to build a tower which is that of which the brick base is
still visible. The name of that chief was Xelhua. He
built it in order that should a deluge come again he might
escape to it. Its base is 1800 feet in circumference. When
it had already reached a great height lightning from heaven
fell and destroyed it. Those Indians who were under that
chief who had escaped from the deluge, named Xelhua,
made bricks out of a mountain in Tlalmanalco called
Cocotle, and from Tlalmanaleo to Cholula Indians were
placed to pass the bricks from hand to hand. And thus
they built this tower that was named Tulan Cholula,
Which was so high that it appeared to reach heaven. And
being content, since it seemed to them that they had a
place to escape from the deluge if it should again happen,
and from which they might ascend into heaven, a Chal-
chiuitl, which is a precious stone, fell from thence and
Struck it to the ground. Others say that the Chalchiuitl


Atlantis in America 74.


was in the shape of a toad, and that whilst destroying the
tower it reprimanded them, inquiring of them their reason .
for wishing to ascend into heaven, since it was sufficient _
for them to see what was on the earth."

In passing, I may observe that this myth, in common
with several other legends already described, alludes to a
sacred hill, as does that in Plato’s Critias, and it is to
be noted that, like the story of Plato, it refers to the
race of Titans or giants who occupied the earth in early
times.

The Mixtecs, a highly civilised race dwelling in South-
western Mexico, had a tradition of flood which appears to
me to enshrine Atlantean reminiscences. It tells us that
** In the day of obscurity and darkness, when there were
as yet no days nor years, the world was a chaos sunk in
darkness, while the earth was covered with water on which
slime and scum floated. One day the deer-god and goddess
appeared. They had human form, and out of their magic .
they raised a great mountain out of the water and built
on it beautiful palaces for their dwelling. These buildings
stood in Upper Mixteca, close to the place Apoala (Accu-
mulation of Water) and the mountain which was called
‘Place Where the Heavens Stood.’” These deities had
twin sons, and all four were skilled in magic. ‘The deer-
gods had more sons and daughters, but there came a flood
in which many of these perished. After the catastrophe
was over the god who is called the creator of all things
formed the heavens and earth and restored the human
race."

Here once again we encounter the mountain, the twins,
the * accumulation of water ” or canals, and the male and
female deity dwelling in an enclosed place in undisturbed
peace, as did Poseidon and Cleito. It is significant that the
deities mentioned in the Mixtec myth were deer-gods, for
the deer in Mexico is the symbol of water.

In the preface to his Creation Myths of Primitive
America, Mr. Jeremiah Curtin includes a tradition the
importance of which, from the viewpoint of the student
of the Atlantean theory, demands quotation.

“The creation myths of America,” he says, “form a
complete system. They give a detailed and circumstantial
account of the origin of this world and of all things and


75 Atlantis in American Tradition


creatures contained in it. In the course of the various
narratives which compose this myth system an earlier
world is described to us, with an order of existence and a
method of conduct on which the life of primitive man in
America was patterned.

“That earlier world had two periods of duration—one
of complete and perfect harmony; another of violence,
collision and conflict. . . . Described briefly and by an
Indian, the American myth system is as follows: ‘ There
was a world before this one in which we are living at
present. That was the world of the first people, who were
different from us altogether. Those people were very
numerous, so numerous that if a count could be made of
all the stars in the sky, all the feathers on birds, all the
hair and fur on animals they would not be so numerous as
the first people.

** * These people lived very long in peace, in concord, in
harmony, in happiness. No man knows, no man can tell,
how long they lived in that way. At last the minds of
all except a very small number were changed. They fell
into conflict—one offended another, consciously or uncon-
sciously, one injured another with or without intention,
one wanted some special thing, another wanted that very
thing also. Conflict set in, and because of this came a time
of activity and struggle, to which there was no end or stop
till the great majority of the first people—that is all
except a small number—were turned into the various
kinds of living creatures that are on earth now or have
ever been on earth, except man—that is, all kinds of beasts,
birds, reptiles, fish, worms and insects, as well as trees,
plants, grasses, rocks and some mountains. They were
turned into everything that we see on the earth or in the
sky.

** < The small number of the former people who did not
quarrel, those great first people of the old time who re-
mained of one mind and harmonious, left the earth, sailed
away westward, passed that line where the sky comes down
to the earth and touches it, sailed to places beyond ; stayed
there or withdrew to upper regions and lived in them
happily, lived in agreement, live so to-day, and will live
in the same way hereafter.’ ”

This description of the ancient world by an Indian


Atlantis in America 76


might well have been drawn from Plato’s account of Atlan-
tis. It speaks of a teeming and civilised country which
must have been situated in the ocean and east of America,
as its survivors “‘ sailed away westward " from its shores.
It describes almost exactly the alteration in the mental
attitude of the people of Atlantis of which Plato speaks.
He says that for generations the polity of the first divine
Atlanteans, the civilisers, remained undisturbed. The
people were gentle and obedient to the laws and to the
gods, and wise and charitable in their intercourse with
one another. But gradually the blood of the gods which
flowed in their veins became diluted with the mortal
admixture, and they grew degenerate, so that Zeus
regarded them with disfavour. The native Indian whom
Curtin quotes says that these “ first people ” were ** dif-
ferent from us altogether." “ They lived long in peace,
in concord and in happiness," for * no man knows how
long." At last “ their minds were changed." Only a few
retained the ancient worthiness. "They offended each
other. They became like animals in their selfishness and
their desires.

But the worthy remnant, “those great first people of
the old time who remained of one mind and harmonious,”’
the civilised few who jealously retained the tradition of
culture and propriety, “‘sailed away westward . . . to
places beyond."

If the above is not a true reminiscence of the Atlantis
myth, Iam much at fault. To be sure, the final catastrophe
is not alluded to. But is it not mentioned in other accounts,
as we have seen? This naif Indian story speaks of unrest
and rebellion and the final break-up of a social system.
It is at such a crisis that Plato’s account of the affairs of
Atlantis breaks off short. Zeus is about to rebuke the
Atlanteans. After that we know nothing. But that a
certain number left Atlantis after the final catastrophe is
one of the most certain things in tradition.

Let us examine the possible relationship of these Ameri-
can myths to the Atlantean tradition a little more closely.
As the annexed table shows, the ** test of recurrence," as
it is called by students of Folklore, is readily observed in
those of them which resemble the account of Plato, or at
least its first part, in their general circumstances.


77 Atlantis in American Tradition


Sacred Zone- God and Sacred
Hill. making. maiden. Twins. image. Flood.


Plato’s Myth
Creek Myth

Peruvian (1)
Peruvian (2)


22 99 3 93 29 29
> 99
35 99 29 99


> 99 99


In the Creek legend we find mention both of the sacred
hill and the zones of land and water alluded to in Plato’s
account. In the first Peruvian example we have the
zones, or their equivalent, the amour of a god with a
maiden, the image of the beloved set up as a statue or idol,
and the flood, this account omitting the episodes of the
sacred hill and the twin offspring only. The second
Peruvian example gives us the hill, the image and the
. flood, but omits the other three episodes. The recurrence
of the Atlantean myth in America is thus clear enough,
for every episode of its first portion reappears in one or
other of these tales, save that relating to the twin offspring.
It may be remarked in passing, however, that sacred twins
are more commonly encountered in American mythology
than in any other.

The late Sir George Lawrence Gomme was among the
first to show that if one part of a myth were found in one
part of the world and another section of it in another part,
that these were demonstrably floating portions of a for-
merly homogeneous myth, and were supplementary to
each other. He demonstrated that if we possessed the
original myth—as we happily do in this case—and could
build up its parts from scattered fragments, that that
original must formerly have had a wide acceptance. He
also made it clear that if a myth had no significance of
itself, but could be proved to fit in with the details of
another myth, that it must be a missing portion of it.! It
seems to me that from the examples I have adduced in
these pages one can say without dubiety that the circum-
stances of Plato’s myth are clearly duplicated and supple-
mented.

But we must now turn to those American myths which
reveal a close connection with other Atlantean traditions.
We find the Greek myth of Atlas duplicated in America.


1 See his Ethnology in Folklore, passim.


Atlantis in America 78


Atlas, the Greek story says, supported the world on his
shoulders. The Mundruku Indians of Brazil have a myth


|


which tells how a god Raimi made the world and places |


it in the shape of a flat stone on the head of another god.
The Muyseas of Colombia say that Bochica or N emque- |
teba, the god of day, like another Atlas bore the earth upon
his shoulders.

A myth found in the eloquent pages of Ovid is duplicated
in American tradition. The tale in question is that of
Deucalion, the son of Prometheus the Titan, who has been
connected by certain writers with Atlantis. According to
Lucian, Deucalion was the Noah of the Greek world. “I
have heard in Greece,” says Lucian, “ what the Greeks say
of Deucalion. The present race of men, they allege, is not
the first, for they totally perished, but a second generation,
who, being descended from Deucalion, increased to a great
multitude. Of those former men they thus speak—they
were insolent and addicted to unjust actions ; they neither
regarded oaths, nor were they hospitable to strangers, nor
listened to suppliants; and this complicated wickedness
was the cause of their destruction. On a sudden the earth
poured forth a vast quantity of water, great rains fell, the
rivers overflowed, and the sea rose to a prodigious height.
All things became water, ànd all men were destroyed.
Only Deucalion was left, for a second race of men, on
account of his prudence and piety. He was saved in this
manner. He went into a large ark or chest, and when he
was within, there entered swine, horses, lions, serpents,
and all other creatures which live on earth, by pairs. He
received them all, and they did him no hurt, for the gods
created a friendship among them, so that they all sailed
in one chest whilst the waters prevailed.”

To discover what occurred when they had subsided we
must return to Ovid. He tells us that Deucalion and his
wife Pyrrha escaped the flood in “‘ a little barque,” and that
when they gained the shore Deucalion turned to his wife
Pyrrha and addressed her in what, considering all the cir-
cumstances, seems rather a lengthy speech.

“ They agree to address the heavenly powers in pious
prayers and seek relief from the sacred oracles. They
repair, therefore, without delay to the banks of Cephisus,
whose waters, though troubled, were yet gliding along


79 Atlantis in American Tradition


their wonted channel, and directed their steps toward the
temple of the sacred goddess.

" She was softened by their pious prayers, and thus
graciously answered : * Depart from the temple, veil your
heads, and loosening your garments, throw behind you
the bones of your mighty mother.’ Long they stood
amazed, till Pyrrha first breaks silence and refuses to obey
the dire commands of the goddess. . . . At length the son
of Prometheus thus, with mild benevolence, addresses his
spouse: ' Either my discernment fails or the oracles are
just, and advise no sacrilege. Our mighty mother is the
earth, and the stones in the body of the earth are, as I
imagine, called her bones. These we are commanded to
throw behind us. Pyrrha, though pleased with the solu-
tion of her spouse, yet fluctuates between hope and fear,
so much do both distrust the commands of heaven. But
where is the harm to make the attempt ? They descend
from the mount, veil their heads, unbind their veils, and,
as commanded, throw stones behind them. The stones
(who could believe it, did not antiquity bear witness to
the tradition ?) began to lay aside their hardness and
natural rigour, and, softening by degrees, to assume a
new shape—the forms of men and women."

I have quoted from this myth directly, because it has
been so frequently alluded to in Atlantean literature with
scant reference to its actual terms, and for the more
pressing reason that it has its precise counterparts in
American myth. Humboldt informs us that the Tamanacs,
a Central American tribe, believe that in the great deluge
a man and a woman saved themselves on a high mountain
called Tamanacu, and casting behind them and over their
heads the fruits of the Mauritius palm tree, the seeds in
these produced men and women. The Macusi tribe of the
Arawak Indians believed that the one man who survived
the deluge replenished the earth by changing stones into
human beings.

It is thus very plain indeed that the whole cireumstances,
not only of the original Atlantean myth but of its affluents
as well, are reproduced in America, where almost absolute
identity with their terms is encountered. That such iden-
tity cannot be fortuitous is obvious. I shall return later
to this subject when I come to deal with the resemblances


Atlantis in America 80


between those mythological figures of the Old and New
Worlds which have a bearing on Atlantean tradition, but
for the present I believe that I have adduced sufficient -
evidence for the appearance of the Atlantean tradition on
American soil to uphold the general hypothesis I have
advanced.


w


CHAPTER V


THE ATLANTEAN TRADITION IN AMERICAN
RELIGION


Y X TE have seen that the myths and traditions of


America preserve a very definite memory of

Atlantis and of the great upheavals which
culminated in its destruction. What we must now ask is :
do the religious ideas of America and the god-like figures
round which they cluster show any resemblance to what
we know of Atlantean religion or any connection with its
tradition ?

The principal mythological figures alluded to in Plato's
story of Atlantis are Poseidon, Cleito and Atlas. As
regards the Atlantean religion, Plato informs us that in
the centre of the city was a temple dedicated to Cleito and
Poseidon, surrounded by a golden enclosure. He also
observes that a religion seems to have centred round the
rite of bull sacrifice.

The figure of Poseidon is too well known to require much
deseription. Among the Greeks he was the god of the sea,
who lived in the depths of the ocean, and he had an added
significance as lord of the earthquake and all subterranean
disturbance. Do we encounter in the religions of America
any divine figures approaching closely to this conception ?

As has already been said, those ancient deities of the
ocean, the Gucumatz, alluded to in the Popol Vuh, closely
resemble this marine and earthquake deity. In that work
they are alluded to as “ the old serpents covered with green
and blue feathers (or scales) who live in the depths of the
ocean." These are associated with Quetzalcoatl, whose
parents they seem to have been. He was indeed one of


. the Gucumatz or marine deities, and was closely connected


with water, and it was these Gucumatz or Old Ones who
brought floods and disaster on the first men mentioned in
the Popol Vuh.

Another Mexican god, Tlaloc, the god of water, closely


, resembles Poseidon. He appears to have a head evolved


from that of a walrus, with large tusks, and an early sculp-
ture shows, I think, the process of development from that
form. He possessed, like Poseidon, both beneficent and
terrible aspects, and was the striker and the slayer, as well
as the god of all moisture and the sea. Sometimes he is


F 8I


p i} 2
Atlantis in America 82


depicted as a monstrous serpent or dragon, as in page 74
of the Maya Dresden Codex, vomiting forth water upon
the earth. In an ancient hymn addressed to him, he is
alluded to as having come out of “the Tlalocan, the blue
house," that is, the sea. According to Boturini, quoting
Gemelli Carreri (tom. 6, p. 83), Tlaloc was the deity who |
at the behest of Tezcatlipoca raised the earth out of the
waters of the universal flood, and who counsels men by


« "C8 ; O
ok. dub


AK | ad

“fi EH ARET E "PD

AUF T EXC id.
Á i sl
» Lp.

. A dc T ^


TE


f


Mexican deity Tlaloc in walrus form from
Castillo de Teayo, Mexico.


his divine messages, written in the lightning and the
thunderbolt, to live wisely and morally. He was also
known as the Pearl Serpent, a name frequently given in
mythology to the dragons which haunt the depths of the
sea.

Just as the Greek gods divided the world among them-
selves and the sea fell to the lot of Poseidon, as Plato tells
us, so did the sea-god of Peru apportion the world among
his three sons. To Viracocha was given the rule of the
sea. The Aymara-Quichua race worshipped Viracocha as
a great culture hero. They did not offer him sacrifices or
tribute, as they thought that he, being creator and pos-


83 Atlantean Tradition in American Religion


sessor of all things, needed nothing from men, so they only
gave him worship. After him they idolised the sun. They
believed, indeed, that Viracocha had both made sun and
moon, after emerging from Lake Titicaca, and that then
he made the earth and peopled it. On his travels westward
from the lake he was sometimes assailed by men, but he
revenged himself by sending terrible storms upon them
and destroying their property, so they humbled themselves
and acknowledged him as their lord. He forgave them
and taught them everything, obtaining from them the
name of Pachayachachic. In the end he disappeared in
the western ocean.

I have before mentioned the circumstance that Quet-
zalcoatl, the son of the Gucumatz, who resembled Poseidon,
is himself very similar to Atlas the son of Poseidon. Both
are twins, are bearded, and both are represented as bearing
the world on their heads. Both also are mentioned as
having their place of abode on the summit of a mountain,
and there are still other points of resemblance between them.

We will observe, too, that Cleito, the beloved of Poseidon,
is connected with irrigation. Her statue or idol was repre-
sented in the temple of Poseidon on a sacred hill at Atlantis.
This looks to me as if she were one of those deities associated
with the fertility of the earth. America, and especially
Mexico, is rich in such deities. There is a distinct group of
these, which clusters round the goddess Coatlicue. Now
much as I dislike etymological comparisons, this name
seems to me to present a curious resemblance to that
of Cleito, just as the syllable Uitzil in the name of Uitzilo-
pochtli, the Mexican war-god, seems to me a reminiscence
of Atlas. At least it is strange enough to find deities
possessing names and myths so curiously similar. Let us
summarise the resemblance in a few lines.

Cleito, the spouse of Poseidon, is connected with irriga-
tion. Her idol was worshipped in Atlantis on a sacred
mountain or hill.

Coatlicue was the personification of a mountain near
Tollan, the streams of which flowed down to irrigate the

fields. She was the mother of the war-god Uitzilopochtli,
by Mixcoatl, the god of the thunder-cloud.

Atlas is the twin son of Cleito, and supports the world
on his back.


Atlantis in America 84


Uitzilopochtli, the son of Coatlicue, is also shown sup-
porting the world on his back, or as one of the world-
bearers. In some myths he is spoken of as the twin of
Quetzalcoatl, who likewise is a world- or heaven-bearer.

Moreover, the worship of all these deities was connected :
with mountains. However these parallels may commend
themselves to others, they appear to me as very clear.
Nor are there mythological resemblances to them else-|
where. The complex of the mountain, the mother and the
twin son is not to be paralleled in the world’s mythology,
so far as I am aware.

We must also consider the last phase of Atlantean
worship—the cult of the twin, for that twins were wor-
shipped in Atlantis is clear from the fact that the idols of
Poseidon’s ten twin sons were associated with those of
himself and his wife in the temple ritual. Now if there is
one region of the world more than any other in which the
cult of the twin is universal, it is America. The cult is
certainly to be encountered elsewhere, but nowhere is it‘
so commonly found as on American soil. In Peru the
statue of the god Apocatequil was erected on the moun-
tains with that of his mother on one hand and his twin
brother on the other. In memory of these brothers, twins
in Peru were deemed sacred to the lightning, and when a
woman or even a llama brought them forth, a fast was held
and sacrifices offered to the two pristine brothers, with a |
chant commencing ** O thou who causest twins." Brebeuf,
a Jesuit missionary who resided among the Hurons in
1626, states that they possessed two gods—Joskeha and ;
Tawiscara, twin-born of a virgin mother. Brinton says:
** The brothers quarrelled, and finally came to blows; the
former using the horns of a stag, the latter the wild rose.
He of the weaker weapon was very naturally discomfited
and sorely wounded. Fleeing for life, the blood gushed
from him at every step, and as it fell turned into flint-
stones. The victor returned to his grandmother, and
established his lodge in the far east, on the borders of the
great ocean, whence the sun comes. In time he became the
father of mankind, and special guardian of the Iroquois.

“ The earth was at first arid and sterile, but he destroyed
the gigantic frog which had swallowed all the waters, and
guided the torrents into smooth streams and lakes. The


85 Atlantean Tradition in American Religion


woods he stocked with game; and having learned from
the great tortoise, who supports the world, how to make
fire, taught his children, the Indians, this indispensable art.
He it was who watched and watered their crops; and,
indeed, without his aid, says the old missionary, quite out
of patience with these puerilities, ‘they think they could
not boil a pot. Sometimes they spoke of him as the sun,
but this only figuratively. . . .

** Both these heroes, let it be observed, live in the utter-
most east; both are the mythical fathers of the race.
To the east, therefore, should these nations have pointed
as their original dwelling-place. This they did, in spite of
history. Cusic (a Tuscarora chief), who takes up the story
of the Iroquois a thousand years before the Christian era,
locates them first in the most eastern region they ever
possessed, while the Algonkins with one voice called those

of their tribes living nearest the rising sun Abnakis, * our
ancestors at the east,’ or at the dawn ; literally ‘ our white
ancestors.’ "!

The creation myth of the Guaymis of Costa Rica related
that the mysterious being Noncomala formed the world
and the waters, but they were in darkness and clouds.
Wading into the river, he met and fecundated the water-
sprite Rutbe, who bore him twins, brothers, who lived and
throve with their mother for twelve years. Then they
left her, one becoming the sun, the other the moon, the
twin lights of the world. In Central America twins were
slain from religious motives.

Hun-Apu and Xbalanque, the hero-gods of the Popol :
Vuh, were twins, and appear to me clearly to resemble
the Mexican gods Tezcatlipoca and Uitzilopochtli, who,
like them, made a journey through the Country of the
Dead. These deities are chiefs of the stars of the Northern
and Southern hemispheres respectively, and in this they
resemble the divinities of à curious European cult which
has long been suspect of an Atlantean connection. This
was the cult of the heavenly twins, the Cabiri, the first

. recorded mystery-cult in history.

What precisely was this cult of the Cabiri? Itis by no
means easy to disentangle its significance from the enor-
. mous mass of detail concerning it in the writings of the
1 Myths of the New World, p. 202 ff.


Atlantis in America 86


ancient mystics of the classical age. But as I am con-
vinced that it has a real bearing on the question of Atlan-
tean origins, I shall examine it briefly here, believing, too,
that it throws light on the Atlantean connection of the
twin cult in America. |

Pherecides, Herodotus and Nonnus speak of the Cabiri |
as sons of Vulcan, Cicero calls them sons of Proserpine, |
and Jupiter is often named as their father. Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, Macrobius, Varro and others consider them
the same as the Penates of the Romans, in which, however,
the Venetian Altori is opposed to them. According to his
opinion and that of Vossius, the Cabiri were nothing more
than the ministers of the gods, who were deified after their
death, and the Dactyli, the Curetes, and the Corybantes
were other names by which they were known. Strabo
regards them as the ministers of Hecate. Bochart recog-
nises in them the three principal infernal deities, Pluto,
Proserpine and Mercury.

The worship of the Cabiri, if the general belief is to be
credited, was originally derived from Egypt, where we
find the ancient temple of Memphis consecrated to them.
Herodotus supposes that the Pelasgians, the first inhabi-
tants of the Peloponnessus, dwelt first in the isle of Samo-
thrace, where they introduced this worship, and estab-
lished the famous mysteries, into which such heroes as
Cadmus, Orpheus, Hercules, Castor, Pollux, Ulysses,
Agamemnon, Æneas and Philip, the father of Alexander,
had the honour of being initiated. From their abode in.
Samothrace the Pelasgi carried these mysteries to Athens, |
whence they were conveyed to Thebes.

The Cabiri seem to have been worshipped at Memphis
in à pigmy form, and are thus represented in the coins of
Thessaloniea, along with the insignia of Vulcan. "They
also appear in the mythology of the Phoenicians. In the
isle of Lemnos and in Tenebros their mystic rites were
celebrated. Authorities differ as regards their number,
but it is generally accepted that they were twain. In later
times they were identified with the twin Dioscuri, Castor
and Pollux. Dionysius of Halicarnassus states that they
were two “ youths armed with spears.”

Kenrick, a good authority, in his Egypt before Herodotus,
stated that the countries in which the Samothracian and


87 Atlantean Tradition in American Religion


Cabiriac worship prevailed were peopled either by the
Pelasgi or by the ZEolians, who of all the tribes compre-
hended under the general name of Hellenes approach most
nearly in antiquity and language to the Pelasgi. ‘‘ We
seem warranted, then," he says, “in two conclusions:
first, that the Pelasgian tribes in Italy, Grecce and Asia
were united in times reaching high above the commence-
ment of history by community of religious ideas and rites,
as well as letters, arts and language; and secondly, that
large portions of what is called the heroic history of Greece,
are nothing else than fictions devised to account for the
traces of this affinity, when time and the ascendancy of
other nations had destroyed the primitive connection, and
rendered the cause of the similarity obscure. The original
derivation of the Cabiriac system from Phoenicia and
Egypt is a less certain, though stil highly probable,
conclusion.”

The name “ Cabiri ” has been very generally deduced
from the Phoenician “‘ mighty," and this etymology is in
accordance with the fact that the gods of Samothrace were
called “ Divi potes.” Kenrick believed, however, that the
Phoenicians used some other name which the Greeks
translated “ Kabeiros," and that it denoted the two
elements of fire and wind.

Sanconiathon, the Carthaginian writer, tells us that the
cult of the Cabiri was of Carthaginian origin, and was
associated with Osiris. The god Thoth ordained that the .
Cabiri should set down their records of the past. The cult
of the Cabiri, indeed, appears to have been brought from
North Africa to Egypt and Greece, and it is expressly
stated that it was delivered among others to the Egyptian
Osiris. The Cabiri are said by Sanconiathon to have been
the inventors of boats, of the arts of hunting and fishing,
and of building and husbandry. They also invented the
art of writing, the use of salt and of medicines. Finally,
this writer tells us that Poseidon and the Cabiri were settled
at Berytus, but not till human sacrifice had been intro-
duced. The Cabiri are in this passage alluded to as hus-
bandmen and fishermen, and the name in this connection
seems rather to apply to a race than to a cult.

I cannot cast aside the notion—for the lack of proof
does not permit that it should receive the name of theory—


Atlantis in America 88


that the myth of the Cabiri retains a tradition of the entry
into the Mediterranean area of a civilised race at a period
when that region was plunged in barbarism. We are in-
formed that the cult of the Cabiri originated in Phoenicia. '
It is much more likely that it originated in the new
Phoenicia that was Carthage than in the old that was Tyre.
If “ Osiris ” was one of its apostles, then it must have
come from North-west Africa, for it is clear that his :
religion was carried to Egypt from that quarter. But we
cannot regard North-west Africa at any time in its history
as the home of a civilisation such as that which various
ancient authors attribute to the Cabirian cult or race.

The fact that they are mentioned as having been Pelas-
gians and the inventors of boats and as a race of fishermen
indicates, I think, that they were none other than those
Azilian-Tardenoisians who entered Europe some 8000 or
9000 years before our era, who were the prototypes of the
Iberian race, and, as I have said before, constituted the
last wave of immigrants from Atlantis. We have here a
race, the Cabiri, who suddenly invade Europe, bringing
with them a culture entirely alien to its rude peoples,
and whose origin is lost in the vague of antiquity. Is
it altogether unwise to associate it with the Azilian-
Tardenoisian stock when it is admitted to have brought
with it those very inventions which were the especial
marks of that stock ? The Azilian-Tardenoisians were the
world's earliest agriculturists, sailors and fishermen. So
were the Cabiri. The Cabirian cult seems to have originated
in the west. So did that of the Azilian-Tardenoisians, the
immigrants from Atlantis.

The Azilian-Tardenoisian people introduced the bow
and arrow into Europe. They were the bow-and-arrow
folk. The arrow, the dart, the lance is the special attribute
of the Cabiri. Like the Cabiri, too, they introduced the
art of writing, or rather the germs of that art. Their
“letters ? were painted on pebbles, and bore a close resem-
blance to some of the Maya symbols of Central America,
which Americanists have named calculiform or ‘ pebble-
shaped."

But I must not permit myself to be drawn by an interest-
ing side issue from the main point, which this diversion is
after all intended to illustrate, that the worship of the


im reo PT oo.


89 Atlantean Tradition in American Religion


Cabiri can be traced to American soil, and that this alone
1s acceptable proof of its Atlantean origin.

We undoubtedly find a cult closely similar to that of
the Cabiri in ancient Mexico. The gods Uitzilopochtli


. and Tezcatlipoca display in their worship, single and dual,


all the signs familiar in that of the Cabiri.

In the first place we have the best evidence that these
gods are brothers. “They (the Mexicans) say that the
two are brothers," says Bernal Diaz (Historia Verdadera,
Bk. VI, C. 91). Now let us glance at their insignia. Tez-


Q NS
ESO AV i>
b: pA S A KD AR
VAS O YES SS SS
se. == NO ¿ON
RS NN e NS s
RNO RIS >
Se SES rrr ri
a Ñ ANS SY >
Lry PTR
-0 Ny
x AN (DN
SS d N
> E n dm N
=> N Q a iN
Ñ EN SN iz Sa
xe SD:
Cy e n
N


e oui ub c
CAES SS

N: N oN

M N


N


Wy; an SS
NEN NS
\


Mexican god Uitzilopochtli.


catlipoca invariably carries either the spear or the atlatl,
the spear-thrower. He is the god of the spear par excellence.
The Cabiri bear the insignia of Vulcan. Now Tezcatlipoca,
like Vulcan, is lame. His myth, similar to that of Vulcan,
tells us how he was east out of heaven and became a cripple.
Uitzilopochtli also carries the spear. Like the Cabiri or
Dioscuri, each of these gods is connected with the stars,
Tezcatlipoca presiding over the constellations of the North
and Uitzilopochtli over those of the South. As the Cabiri
were the gods of fire and wind so were Uitzilopochtli and
Tezcatlipoca respectively, and the former was, like the
Cabiri, associated with sundry pigmy figures which were
placed round his idol in the great teocalli or temple of
Mexico, Lastly, these Mexican gods were connected with


Atlantis in America go


the serpent, as were the twin Cabirian deities. They had


also a mystic society of their own, the Warriors’ House, in -


which strange rites were celebrated, and human sacrifice
was offered to both.!

These numerous points of coincidence make it impossible
that the resemblance between the cults could have been a


fortuitous one. We find in both Europe and America a -


cult of which the deities are war-like twins armed with
the lance, and connected with wind, fire, the stars and
a definite mystical society. They are also associated with
a myth strongly resembling that of Vulcan, and with pigmy
images. That they are merely an American version of the
Cabiri there can be no question. The Roman Castor and
Pollux, the “ heavenly twins," were merely a later Italian
form of the Cabiri, and closely resemble the Mexican twin
gods. In both cases these deities lead the warriors into
battle and flourish the heavenly spear.

I believe that the cult of the Cabiri, European and
American, emanated from Atlantis, that eastward it spread
to North Africa and thence by Carthaginian agency to
Greece and Asia Minor, and westward, by way of the
Antilles, to Mexico and the American mainland in general.

If this be so, the worship of the aborigines of the
Antilles will display signs of a similar cult. It does not
fail to do so. We find that there existed in these islands
zemis, or gods, known as Baidrama, or twins, also called


Bugid y Aiba. Pane says that the natives believed that |


their strength could be augmented by these beings (which
signifies that they were war-like), and that when they
smoked in honour of them their arms increased in size.
Professor Mason in his edition of Irving’s Columbus (Vol. I,
p. 383) states that a wooden image from the West Indies
“ represents two individuals seated on a canopied chair.”
Fewkes remarks that: ''These figures were undoubtedly
idols worshipped by the aborigines of the island upon
which they were found. They probably stood in niches
in caves or in special houses dedicated to them. The
twinning of idols in one figure recalls statements of early
authors that the great deity of the Haitians had two
attendants to do her bidding. The author of this paper
has referred to a twin amulet from Santo Domingo and has
1 For a full description of these rites see my Gods of Mexico, pp. 66-116,


PrATE IV.— TWIN FORM OF ZEMIS.
Or idols from Antilles (after Fewkes).


enaa e


oot c
e


9I Atlantean Tradition in American Religion


heard of an image of clay composed of two united idols.
AM these figurines evidently represent the same or a very
similar conception of Antillean mythology.” 1

"These gods were associated with the serpent, as were
the Cabiri. The priests of the West India Islanders, like
the Pythoness of the Greeks and the Chilan of the Maya,
were known as Boii, or serpents. Like the Cabiri and their
Mexican analogues, too, the West Indian zemis were
associated with the winds. They were also the centres
of an elaborate secret ceremonial worship. This took the
form of elaborate dances and dramatic representations,
the same type of ceremony, in fact, as is found in the
ancient Egyptian and Hellenic mysteries.

North of Mexico the Pueblo Indians of the South-western
United States stil preserve much of their prehistoric
religious ceremony and culture. The Hopi in especial
possess a most complicated system of priestly rite and
tradition, most of which is associated with secret societies.
One of these bodies, for example, specialises in snake-
worship, another in ritual connected with the deer, and so
forth. These rituals are predominantly religious and
mystical, still they enshrine much practical knowledge
regarding the care of seed, the proper season for planting
and reaping. Anciently, it would seem, from the tradi-
tions of these people, they were in the habit of sacrificing
newly born children to the serpent gods. We find almost
the selfsame ritual occurring among the maize-growing
tribes of the Central and Eastern United States. The
Pawnees had a human sacrifice and an annual cycle of
ceremonies centring in the cultivation of the maize plant.
These mystical priesthoods naturally attracted to them-
selves every description of magical rite, as such bodies
never fail to do, and some of them have developed into
societies greatly at variance with their original form and
intent.

There can be little doubt that a definite ritual connection
exists between the secret and mystical societies of America
and those of Europe and North Africa. The subject is a
vast one, and it is impossible to do more than outline
it here. There is, however, abundant evidence to prove
that from Egypt to Mexico all such mysteries were

1 Aborigines of Porto Rico, p. 201.


Atlantis in America 92 |


associated with one and the same complex, that all sprang |


from one and the same idea. That was the idea associated
with the growth of grain. The several Egyptian mysteries,
those strange secret societies of the ancient world, the rites
of the Cabiri, of Eleusis, of Ceres, of Samothrace—all were
connected with the growth of the grain. All growth is
mysterious, and primitive man probably regarded it as in
some manner magical. It is also noticeable that those
mysteries, in the Old World at least, took place under-
ground, in darkness, and that there was enacted the
symbolism of the growth of grain, probably for the purpose
of inciting the powers of growth to greater activity by dint
of sympathetic magic.

In the first chapter of The Book of the Dead, the great
compendium of Egyptian religious dogma, we encounter
the phrase “I look upon the hidden things in Re-stau,"
an allusion to the ceremonies which were performed in the
sanctuary of Seker, the god of death at Saqqara. These
typified the birth and death of the sun-god, and were
celebrated betwixt midnight and dawn. Again, in the
one hundred and twenty-fifth chapter, we read, “I have
entered into Re-stau, and I have seen the Hidden One
who is therein." Herodotus, who is supposed to have
been initiated into these mysteries, is rightly cryptic con-
cerning them, and just as he has aroused our interest to
fever-heat, he invariably sees fit to remark that his lips
are sealed on the subject.

The mysteries connected with the worship of Osiris in
Egypt arose out of the idea that the growth of the corn
plant was a sacred and magical thing. In one of the
chambers dedicated to Osiris in the great Temple of Isis
at Phile, the dead body of Osiris is represented with stalks
of corn springing from it. The accompanying inscription
tells us that “ this is the form of him whom one may not
name, Osiris of the mysteries, who springs from the return-
ing waters.” “It would be impossible," says Sir James
Frazer, * to devise a more graphic way of depicting Osiris
as a personification of the corn, while the inscription
attached to the picture proves that this personification
was the kernel of the mysteries of the god, the innermost
secret that was only revealed to the initiated.” We seem
to observe references to a mystical society connected with


93 Atlantean Tradition in American Religion


the growth of corn in The Book of the Dead, which certainly
dates from prehistoric times, and is most probably the
developed ritual of a cult connected with the phenomena
of growth. In its pages we find password and countersign,
and all the magical material necessary to the ritual of such
a secret cult as that we have been discussing.

In Greece the most important of the mysteries was
perhaps the Eleusinian, and, indeed, we may take it as
typical of the Hellenic mysteries as a whole. The chief
figures in the cult of Eleusis were Demeter and Kore (or
Persephone) and Pluto. All these are deities of the
Underworld, and, like many other gods of that sphere,
all the world over, they are also deities possessing an
agricultural significance. Much remains uncertain regard-
ing the actual ritual in the hall of the Myst, but one thing
is certain, and that is that the ceremony was of the nature
of a religious drama or passion-play, in which were enacted
the adventures of Demeter and Kore, symbolic of the
growth of the corn, the mother representing the old and
the daughter the new plant. Hippolytus states that a
cornstalk was shown to the worshippers at these mysteries.
That in itself is sufficient to reveal their true character.

The mysteries of the Cabiriac worship were celebrated
at Thebes and Lemnos, but especially in the isle of Samo-
thrace. The time chosen was night. The candidate for
initiation was crowned with a garland of olive, and wore
a purple band round his loins. Thus attired, and prepared
by secret ceremonies, perhaps mesmeric, he was seated on
a throne brilliantly lighted, and the other initiates danced
round him in slow and solemn measure.

As we have seen, we find mysteries of the same character
in the New World. But in Asia, when found, and that
scantily, they are obviously of late introduction. In
America, however, they were of precisely the same nature
as in ancient Greece and Egypt.

In the first place, the corn (in America, maize) ceremony
is to be found in the West Indies. Gomara, writing of the
principal ceremony of the Haitians, says: “They ap-
proached dancing, and singing to the sound of the shells.
. . . They seated themselves like tailors, and prayed with
- alow voice. Then there approached many women bearing
baskets of cakes on their heads and many roses, flowers


Atlantis in America 94.
and sacred herbs. They formed a circle as they prayed,


and began to chant something like an old ballad in praise


of the god. All rose to respond at the close of the ballad. |


They changed their tone and sang another song in praise


of the cacique, after which they offered the bread to the:
idol, kneeling. The priests took the gift, blessed and


divided it, and so the feast ended, but the recipients of the
bread preserved it all the year, and held that house


unfortunate and liable to many dangers which was without
it."

It is in connection with the gods Uitzilopochtli and
Tezcatlipoca, the Cabiri of Mexico, that the chief maize
festivals of ancient Mexico were celebrated. At the feast
of Tezcatlipoca, known as the Toxcatl, the priests made
an image of his brother Uitzilopochtli in dough. This was
placed on a litter decorated with wooden serpents and was
divided among the people. The virgins who carried it
wore wreaths of maize, and a great heap of maize flour
was placed in the temple in which the footprints of the
returning god were thought to be descried.

The occurrence of these grain mysteries in America
thus affords further proof that the cult of the Cabiri, or
some cult which had had a common origin with it, had been
widely disseminated in the Western continent. We thus
discover all the cireumstances connected with a supposedly


European cult in Mexico and elsewhere in America, and


are forced to the conclusion that both emanated from a
third and medial region.

But space is altogether lacking in which to draw further
parallels between the mystical systems of the Old World
and the New. There is, however, one circumstance relating
to these which may briefly be touched upon. Plato, in his
account of Atlantis, mentions that the Atlanteans indulged
in bull sacrifice. The sacred bulls, he says, grazed near
the Temple of Poseidon, and these the ten kings of the


a


islands periodically offered up in sacrifice. From Egypt -


to the bison area of North America we find the cult of the
bull flourishing. To be sure, several of the links are missing,
and I do not desire to lay undue stress on such resemblances


as exist. The bull was, perhaps, Europe’s earliest symbol .


of godhead. On the walls of the caverns of Altamira and
other caves in Northern Spain and in the Dordogne


295 Atlantean Tradition in American Religion


district of Southern France once inhabited by Crö-Magnon
man, the bull is depicted with a liveliness and fidelity
which the painters of Egypt and Assyria never approached.
These caverns were, indeed, centres of a bull-worshipping
cult. The Egyptian Serapeum or Temple of Apis is merely
an architectural elaboration of the cave-shrines of the
Dordogne. It was in early Spain and France, then, that
the cult of the bull had its origin, spreading along the
shores of the Mediterranean till it reached the Nile Valley,
and carrying with it the rite of * taking the bull by the
horns," or, as we should call it to-day, “the Rodeo."
This rite was preparatory to the animal’s sacrifice.

The practice spread to Crete. The art of Crete con-
clusively shows that '* steer-wrestling " there was not only
a, recognised national sport but was attended by large
crowds of fashionably attired spectators. So that there is
really nothing new under the sun. The event took place
jin an area specially designed for the purpose. One of the
(most remarkable frescoes at Gnossos is that which por-
trays a crowd of Cretan notables looking on at a bout
of bull-grappling. A fair, curly-headed Cretan youth is
represented as gripping the bull by the horns and striving
with all the might of his muscular arms to throw him,
precisely as does the modern cowboy. To anyone who

has seen a Rodeo, the resemblance is not to be mistaken.
But the most convincing proof that the ancient Cretans
celebrated the Rodeo with all the tireless zest of a Mediter-
ranean people in such a sport is the great bull-ring which
was discovered at Gnossos during its excavation. This
resembles so much a modern Spanish bull-ring that no
doubts can be entertained as to its former use for a similar
purpose.

The Minotaur, the bull-headed god, is famous in legend
as the deity of Crete. An annual tribute of maidens was
delivered up to him for sacrifice in his labyrinthine retreat,
which, like the Egyptian Serapeum, was evidently a remin-
iscence of the Pyrenean caves in which the bull was
originally worshipped by Aurignacian man. That a very
definite tradition of bull-wrestling and sacrifice obtained
throughout the Mediterranean area cannot be gainsaid.
From Crete it spread to Greece and Italy. It penetrated
to ancient Palestine, where it was adopted by both Hebrew


Atlantis in America 96


and Philistine. It has been advanced as a not impossible |
theory that those Philistines who were destroyed by
Samson had gathered to amuse themselves with a display
of bull-wrestling, and that, tired of their favourite sport,
they had demanded that the blind champion of Israel be
brought before them to exhibit his strength. Lastly it
became the national sport of Spain, and still flourishes
exceedingly in those parts of France formerly inhabited
by Crö-Magnon man.

It is found in a weaker but none the less remarkable
form among those Indians of the American plains whose
livelihood was so closely associated with the bison. At
certain festivals these dress as buffaloes, and go through
an extraordinary and complex ritual reminiscent of Cretan,
Egyptian and perhaps Aurignacian practice. But as I
have said, the links are weak, and I do not care to press
the analogy further, merely posing it as a remarkable but
scarcely demonstrable evidence of what may have been
an Atlantean rite in America.

These far-flung evidences may appear at first sight much
too slender and scattered for serious recognition. Indeed
they did to the writer until he discovered that certain
identical markings, doubtless magical, and described as
** tectiform,” or “roof-formed,”” by some anthropologists
occur on the painted representations of buffaloes, both in the
Aurignacian caves and in the drawings of the Plains Indians
of America. That these have no mere fortuitous resem-
blancewill immediately be granted by any unbiassed person
who chooses to give the designs a moment’s comparative
examination. They are practically identical, and must
have originated in a common source. It will be observed
that they occupy the selfsame position on the body of the
animal. So far as I am aware, they do not occur in Asiatic
art, late or primitive. To suggest that they are mere
freaks of similarity is to expect too much of credence.
They constitute merely one of the many resemblances
between Red Indian and Aurignacian art.

We have seen, then, that American religion, in some of
its phases at least, exhibits a connection with certain Old
World forms the Atlantean origin of which is more than
Suspect, that a chain of associated customs with one
missing oceanic link stretches from Egypt to America, and


97 Atlantean Tradition in American Religion


that Atlantean tradition appears to provide the missing
connection; also that it is idle to look for traces of a
Kuropean-American connection in Asia or Polynesia, as
some modern authorities believe, not only because of the
vast distances and natural obstacles which would have
had to be traversed and overcome, but also because of the
existence of complex social and religious conditions which
would have swallowed up or altered out of all knowledge


Outline sketches of (top) American Indian and (bottom) Aurignacian


drawings of bisons, showing similar tectiform or tent-shaped devices.


such migrant cultural influences as essayed the long route
. from Spain to Central America by way of Asia. Surely it


is much more scientific to suppose a single submerged
stepping-stone in the Atlantic than to erect a hypothesis
of tedious migration from Aurignacian Spain to North
America ; for not only do chronological conditions belie


_ the possibility of such a pilgrimage, but the nature of the


. Swarming cultural complexes to be traversed and pene-


G


Atlantis in America 98


trated render it well-nigh impossible that Aurignacian or

Egyptian influences could have reached the American
continent by the Asian route without undergoing a

metamorphosis which would have rendered them unrecog-

nisable on their arrival. The evidence shows that such

Old World influences as reached America always did so in |
quite a recognisable shape, and frequently in their original
form. That mummification or Crö-Magnon art reached

America almost unaffected, and after countless centuries

of pilgrimage, through the mesh and moil of Asiatic:
culture, is a theory, I think I will be able to prove, which |
is rendered none the less pathetically bankrupt because of
its reiteration. Even if we suppose for the dissemination

of Egyptian or European culture a race of missionary

bearers, and designate them “ The Children of the Sun,”

we must own that it is the most improbable thing in the

world that a caste bearing even the entire knowledge of

Egyptian civilisation could have penetrated the vast

spaces of Asia or the Pacific to reach America at last,

retaining the cultural complex it carried almost unaltered

—which is, of course, not at all the same thing as saying

that many Asiatic customs did actually find their way to!
America by devious routes and in altered forms.


CHAPTER VI
THE EVIDENCE FROM THE MUMMY


WISH in this chapter to adopt the natural science

method, to try to prove that the seeds of the art of

mummification came from Atlantis and were broad-
cast to Europe and America, precisely as others have
demonstrated the former existence of a land connection
between the two continents through the resemblance of
their flora and fauna. If this hypothesis be correct, we
will find mummification, or the artificial preservation of
the dead, occurring in its earlier forms in Spain and France,
in the Canaries, the Antilles and the American mainland.
As a matter of fact we do so most definitely, whereas those
who seek to show that the custom spread from Egypt to
America via Asia or Polynesia can point to no such con-
tinuous traces of it along these routes as it shows via the
Atlantic route.

We certainly find the germs of these funerary practices
which later developed into the elaborate rites of mummi-
fication in the burials of the Aurignacians in France and
Spain. The bones, says Macalister, were frequently
removed from the flesh, as is the case among certain
American-Indian tribes. “ The deposition," he says, “ of
offerings with the dead is quite sufficient to indicate a
belief in a life after death, in which the dead will have need
of the gifts placed in the tomb. Women, equally with
men, shared in its privileges. The remarkable rite of
painting the bones red should be especially noticed. . . .
The purpose of the rite is perfectly clear. Red is the colour
of living health. The dead man was to live again in his
own body, of which the bones were the framework. To
paint it with the colour of life was the nearest thing to mum-
mification that the Paleolithic people knew; it was an
attempt to make the body again serviceable for its owner's
use. In this connection it is instructive to recall a familiar
incident in folk tales, in which the hero having come to
grief, the flesh of his body is restored from the bones, or
even from a small splinter of bone, and then resuscitated.
. . . Already in 1877 Dr. Heinrich Wankel, speaking of
the cave of Byéiskála in Moravia, where human remains
were found along with bones of the cave bear, described it
as ‘the great cave where once the reindeer man lived,


99


Atlantis in America 100


whose antechamber was the scene of a cult of the dead,
where at a chieftain’s grave human sacrifices were offered.
. . . It well expresses the feelings which these ancient
caverns naturally excite, even in one who lives in tht
sceptical atmosphere of modern science. Later, Dr.
Marett, in his essay on the cave of Niaux, quoted above,
does not hesitate to call it a ‘sanctuary,’ and to treat it
as such. The existence of fine paintings at the farthest
ends of these great and complicated caverns ; the presence
of the two splendid statuettes of bisons in the remotest
recesses of Tuc d'Audoubert, are facts certainly suggestive:
of animal gods in their ‘ chambers of imagery.’ ”1 E

We may infer from this, then, that a cult of the dead:
obtained among the Aurignacian immigrants to Europe
from Atlantis, that they practised “ the nearest thing to
mummification ” they knew, that the conception of the
preservation of a part of the body to render it serviceable |
for the owner's use was in vogue among the Cró-Magnons.
This is the whole purpose and significance of mummifica- |
tion as found in Egypt and elsewhere. In early Egyptian.
essays at mummification the corpse is painted red as in
the examples of the Aurignacian bones, and the Egyptians |
painted the statues of their gods red in order to endow
them with life.

Nor do the Cró-Magnons of the Canary Islands, who, as
we have seen, possessed the Aurignacian civilisation, dis-
appoint us, for the art of mummification was found to be
flourishing among them even at the period of their dis-
covery by the Spaniards. Alonzo de Espinosa, a friar of
the sixteenth century, tells us that the office of the em-
balmer in these islands was, as in Egypt, confined to a
certain caste of men and women to whom the preservation
of the dead of their respective sexes was entrusted. These
people, as in the Nile country, were regarded as pariahs,
and were abhorred by the rest of the population. After
washing the corpse, they forced down the throat a mixture
composed of melted mutton grease, * powder of heath”
(grass seed ?), stones and the bark of pine trees, cramming
down the preparation for the space of fifteen days, and
placing the body in the sun, first on one side and then on '
the other, until it was dried. This process they called

1 Teat-book of European Archeology, pp. 502-3.


[OI The Evidence from the: Müsnins: Wr


vazo, Or jarco, “the deceased," and the period during
which it was carried out was one of mourning among the
relatives, and was followed by no other rites or ceremonies.
The corpse was then sewn up and enveloped in hides taken
from certain sheep or goats selected and set apart for the
purpose, and so marked that the mummy could afterwards
be clearly recognised. These skins were tanned to the
colour of chamois, and were sewn over with pine bark by
means of thongs of the same material, and so skilfully that
the seams were scarcely visible. Some of the more distin-
guished dead were placed in sarcophagi of à hard wood,
carved in one piece, and in the shape of the body, precisely
as were the Egyptian sarcophagi, and the corpse was then
carried to some almost inaccessible cavern approached by
a rude staircase cut in the face of the rock.

M. R. M. Gattefossé in his suggestive book Adam:
L'Homme Tertiare (pp. 92-95) says that the dead among
the Guanches were embalmed with care. The aaxos, or
mummies, resembled those of Egypt in all particulars,
except that the linen bands securing the latter were
replaced by dressed skins. This treatment, he proceeds to
say, has been found in many Neolithic tombs. The de-
seription which we possess of the Canarese method of
embalmment appears so like that given by Herodotus of
the Egyptian method as to be almost identical. The
xaxos of the nobles were enclosed in sarcophagi of wood
and placed in rows in artificial grottoes. In the Canaries,
and without doubt anciently in Atlantis, he says, if the
dead belonged to a family capable of bearing the expense,
operations were commenced by laying the body on a great
stone slab. An incision was then made in the stomach
with a stone knife, and other operators removed the
intestines, which were washed and cleansed. The body
was also washed, especially the eyes, the interior of the
mouth, the ears and the fingers, with water in which salt
had been melted. Aromatic plants were then placed in
the cavity of the trunk and the corpse was exposed to the
sun. During this period of desiccation they treated the
body with a kind of unguent made of grease and powdered
aromatic plants, pine, resin and other absorbent essences,
and it was also rubbed with antiseptic gums. On the fif-
teenth day the embalmment was regarded as complete


| Atlantis in America 102
and the corpse was returned to the relatives, sewn up in
skins which had been prepared during the deceased's life-
time. It was then placed in the sarcophagus and disposed.
in the mortuary cave. Frequently this took the form of a
tumulus or pyramid. |

These Guanche mummies, many of which have been '
discovered in the Barranco de Fatago in Grand Canary,
are usually found lying on the left side, wrapped in goat-
skin, with the hands crossed over the breast in the manner
of some of the Peruvian mummies. They are, as a rule,
placed in a crouching or sitting posture like that of the
mummies of Mexico or Peru rather than stretched out in
the Egyptian manner. Indeed the Guanche mummy in
1ts general appearance and arrangement appears to re-
semble the American ‘‘ mummy-bundle * much more than
the elaborate examples of Egyptian funerary practice.
Mexican mummies, as depicted in manuscripts and re-
covered from tombs, are usually sewn up in cotton sacks,
and the more numerous embalmed bodies encountered in
Peruvian graves and rock tombs are almost invariably
found in a sitting posture.

In the view of Professor Elliot Smith “the technical
procedures of embalming in West Africa and the Canary
Islands were not adopted in Egypt until the XXIst
Dynasty," or about 1000 5.c. We are thus left to draw.
the inference that they found their way from Egypt to the '
Canaries after 1000 B.c. But we have already seen that the
germs of the art of embalming are to be observed in Cró-
Magnon practice as Macalister states, and that, as Gatte-
fossé remarks, the prototypes of Canarese mummies are to
be found in Neolithic tombs which greatly antedate the
XXIst Dynasty.

Mummification in Egypt was connected with ancestor |
worship, and was certainly developed out of the same ideas
as that which prompted Cró-Magnon man to preserve the
bones of his dead. The Osirian priesthood taught the
sacredness of the human body, and believed that from it
would re-arise the regenerated and purified spirit. The
first forms of mummification in the Nile country, so far
as it is possible to identify these-as of early date, consist in
merely drying the corpse in the sun, or treating it with a
resinous preparation. As time progressed, this primitive


103 The Evidence from the Mummy


treatment developed gradually into the elaborate rite and
art of embalming, with its picturesque and long-drawn-out
ceremonial. The graves of Beni Hassan show that by the
time of the Middle Kingdom the internal organs had come
to receive separate and special treatment, being placed in
a box divided into four compartments inscribed with the
sacred names of the four deities known as Canopic, who
presided over them. But burials of this period are found
in which the work has been “‘ scamped,”” and it is apparent
that the embalmers, instead of removing the intestines,
made up parcels inscribed with their names, believing
probably that a written statement that these bundles
contained the heart, lungs and the rest was magically
efficacious and quite as satisfactory as their presence in
the receptacle prepared for them.

It is not until the period of the New Kingdom, that is, the
XVIIIth to the XXVIth Dynasties, that the art of mum-
mification reached any degree of elaboration. At first it
was only the bodies of the Pharaohs, who were identified
with Osiris, which received this elaborate treatment, but
the need of a court in the Otherworld made it incumbent
that the bodies of the nobility should also be preserved.
Persons of wealth and rank took up the custom, and at
last the corpses of even the poorest Egyptians were sub-
jected to one or another process of embalming, of which
pickling in a bath of natron was the most popular. By the
time of the XXIst Dynasty the process had reached the
height of its development, and a mummification of an
elaborate kind cost about £700 in modern money. When
the relations of the deceased consulted the professional
‘embalmers they were shown models of mummies, one of
which they selected. The corpse was then placed in the
hands of the embalmers. First of all a corrosive was in-
jected into the brain cavity, after which its almost liquid
contents were removed through the nostrils. An em-
balmer, whose office rendered him a pariah, so sacred was
the human body considered, made an incision in the corpse
with a flint knife, an instrument connected with pre-
historic practice. The intestines and principal organs
were then removed, washed and steeped in palm wine.
' The body then underwent a drying process, and was
stripped of its flesh, only the skin remaining, or was

™


Atlantis in America 104
stuffed with sawdust skilfully introduced n |


cisions, so that the natural form was comple ely |
The cavity occupied by the organs might oa
myrrh, cassia or other spices. After being $
corpse was pickled in a bath of natron for s
and then carefully bandaged with linen treated wi
adhesive substance. A coffin was built for i it Mc.
tained the shape of the human form, and whick wi |
and elaborately painted with figures of divinities, -" nul
symbols and sometimes burial scenes. H.
The canopic jars in which the intestines were p E. .hac
lids carved in the shape of human heads, but 4 fter the
XVIIIth Dynasty the heads of the four sons of E dora us, the
Canopic deities so called, the man-headed Mesti, tk es
Tuamutef, the ape-headed Hapi and the falcon Qebi hs
nuf, the genii who guarded the north, east, south and wes
respectively-were represented upon their covers. n tl t
respective jars were placed the lungs and heart, the la
intestines, the Jiver, the lesser intestines. These jar;
placed in the tomb beside the mummy. Te |
The treatment of the mummy and the various cere mor es
in connection with its embalmment were undoub ti e tly
magical in origin. As cach bandage was laid in itsiie
position certain words of power were uttered which i ere
supposed to be efficacious in the preservation of the f par
swathed. After consecration the priest uttered an inv
tion to the deceased and then took a vase of liquid có; ra
ing ten perfumes, with which he smeared the body jt ty
from head to foot, taking especial care to anoint the he
thoroughly. The internal organs were at this jun ctu
placed on the body and the backbone immersed in}


—


Geb. Certain precious stones were then laid on the nm.
each of which had its magical significance. Thus cn a
lightened his face, and carnelian strengthened his . ster S
A priest who personified the jackal-headed god Anubis
the sacred dog which led the deceased to the Otherworlé
then performed certain magical ceremonies on the he
of the mummy, and laid certain bandages on it. After
further anointing with oil the deceased was declared
have “ received his head." His hand was then filled with
the thirty-six substances used in embalming, symbolical


'OMXIJN enydeez Je 9AVIS Y wol]


SEL QMdONYO., A SIVE


Xos The Evidence from the Mummy


Of the thirty-six forms of the god Osiris, and he was rubbed
wvith holy oil. Lastly, the toes were wrapped in linen, and
after an appropriate address the ceremony came to a
conclusion.

The point is that all this elaborate ceremonial had the
Significance not only of preserving the body but of render-
ing it as lifelike as possible. Thus while magic played its
part in the maintenance of the corpse’s fabric and every-
thing possible was done to preserve it for ages, realism was
Observed in such details as the eyes, which were often
made of ivory and obsidian, to seem as lifelike as possible,
and even the body moisture was imitated in unguents and
essences. Incense gave breath, and rouge or red paint
the hues of life. The whole was a mere elaboration of the
Aurignacian practice of painting the bones red, and that the
flesh was removed from them, as among the Crö-Magnons,
we have seen. The Book of the Dead and The Book of the
Opening of the Mouth, which prescribe these rites, were so
ancient that they well might have had their unwritten
origins in Aurignacian times. A hieratic inscription upon
the sarcophagus of Queen Khem-nefert, wife of Mentu-
hetep, a king of the XIth Dynasty (ca. 2500 B.c.), states
that a certain chapter of The Book of the Dead was dis-
covered in the reign of Hesep-ti, the fifth king of the Ist
Dynasty, who flourished about 4266 B.c. That as early as
2500 B.c. a chapter of The Book of the Dead should be
referred to a date almost 2000 years before that is astound-
ing, and the mind reels before the idea of a tradition which,
during comparatively unlettered centuries, could have
preserved a religious formula almost unimpaired. Mark,
too, that the chapter in question was ** discovered ” about
4266 B.c. If it was only discovered then, it must have
been in existence for countless centuries before that in a
spoken and traditional form, and indeed the epoch of its
discovery is less than four thousand years in time from the
latest dated Aurignacian remains, or two thousand years
less than the lapse of time between the record of its
discovery and the present day. In all probability it was
brought eastwards with Aurignacian civilisation when
that culture took an Oriental trend.

The embalmer’s art, or its beginning, was disseminated
throughout the Canaries and through Western Europe and


Atlantis in America 106


Africa until it finally reached Egypt. It has already been |
shown that the seeds of the art of mummification were |
spread broadcast from the Aurignacian area in France and |
Spain, that indeed the painting of the bones of the dead -
which obtained there was, as Macalister says, “‘ the nearest :
thing to mummification ” the Cró-Magnons knew. Doubt-
less the practice was quickened too by the adoption in
that region in Neolithic times of binding the body with
Jeather bands in order that its ghost should not walk.
This practice seems to have spread to North Africa, and
thence to Egypt, where it was greatly elaborated. Some
such process of development too must have taken place
in the West Indies and the American mainland. In all
probability the Aurignacian corpses were, like those of the
Guanches of the Canaries, wrapped up in skins, which
could scarcely be expected to survive the many centuries
between burial and the discovery of the interments. If
we now cross the ocean to America, we find almost pre-
cisely similar rites obtaining. The Mexicans, Maya and
Peruvians all embalmed the dead. But just as the earliest
attempts at the preservation of the dead are naturally
found in Aurignacian sites, so the last decadent vestiges of
the practice are encountered in the Antilles or West India
Islands. Writing on the mortuary customs of the aborigines
of Porto Rico, Mr. J. H. Fewkes says: “ The skull and
other bones of the dead were wrapped in cotton cloth or
basketry and preserved for worship. The crania were
sometimes attached to bodies made of cotton in human
form, and were kept in a certain house, generally that of
the cacique. Human bones were treated as zemis (gods),
and preserved for religious purposes. The Carib also made
cotton images which contained human bones, which are
thus referred to by Davies : ‘ They expect in their sickness
the sentence of their life or death from those detestable
oracles, which they receive by the means of these puppets
of cotton, wherein they wrap up the worm-eaten bones of
some wretched carcass, taken out of the grave. . . . They
- burn in honour of them the leaves of tobacco, and some-
times they paint their ugly shapes in the most considerable
place of their vessels, which they call piraguas, or they
wear hanging about their necks a little image representing
some one of these cursed spirits. Peter Martyr mentions


107 The Evidence from the Mummy


seated Zemis made of cotton, but as objects of this kind
are naturally perishable, few specimens have been pre-
served to the present time. One of these found in Santo
Domingo, formerly owned by Señor Rodriguez, consisted
of a skull inclosed in a cotton covering and mounted on a
body stuffed with the same material. Apparently artificial
eyes were inserted in the eye-sockets and cotton or other
fabrics were tied about the legs and arms.” Fewkes
further states, quoting Oviedo, that at the burial of a
Haitian cacique two wives were voluntarily buried alive
with him. “ Wife burial was not always practised, the
customary method of interment being to bind the body
with bandages of woven cloth and to place it in a grave
along with the jewels and treasures most prized by the
cacique in life." A crypt of sticks was built over the
corpse in order that the earth should not touch it, and
among the Haitians the dead were inhumed, mounds of
earth being raised over the graves.

In an illuminating passage Mr. Fewkes says: “ The
Guarano, commonly called the Warraus, who live on the
many islands of the delta of the Orinoco, according to
Gumilla, place their dead in the water and allow fishes to
strip the corpse of the flesh and soft parts. The skull and
other bones are then preserved in a decorated basket which
is hung from the roof of the house. Considering the rela- :
tionship between the prehistoric peoples of the West Indies
and the Orinoco tribes, this custom among the Guarano is
highly significant. The mortuary customs of the Indians
of the Orinoco vary greatly, and probably the same state-
ment is applicable to the customs of the different West
Indian Islands. . . . Throughout the West Indies, as
among the tribes of the Orinoco, especial care seems to
have been taken to preserve the skeletons of the deceased.
There is evidence that the Carib of the Lesser Antilles
sometimes place their dead in earthen jars, as recorded by
im Thurn in speaking of a small island called Ballineux
that was used as a cemetery. The Jamaicans placed their
dead in eaves or sometimes interred the bones, deposited
in urns.”!

According to Sir Hans Sloane, a native of Jamaica saw
in the woods in the year 1677 “ a cave in which lay human

1 Report of Bureau of Ethnology, pp. 58, 71-2.


Atlantis in America 108


bones, all in order, also pots and urns wherein were bones
of men and children." These pots were large and oval and
of a dirty reddish colour. ‘‘ On the upper part of the rim
or ledge there stood out an ear, on which were made some
lines.” “The dead," writes Charlevoix, “ were treated by
the use of fire but were not interred until they were thought
thoroughly emptied and dried by the fire."

The Orinoco Carib, according to Gumilla, exhume the
dead at the beginning of the year, place the remains in a
basket, and hang it from the roof of the house. The habit
of preserving the skulls, bones and other parts of the body
as objects of reverence seems to have been universal among
the West Indians.

Las Casas says that the Indians of Haiti had certain
statues made of wood which Columbus described in a letter
to his sovereign, and adds that they placed in them the
bones of relatives, giving the statues the names of the
people to whom the bones belonged. A zemi or idol
Faraguvaol was, like the mummied Osiris, found in the
trunk of a tree and carried to a chief. He was able to
escape from sacks, as the Egyptian ba or soul could escape
from the mummy swathings. |

Elsewhere Mr. Fewkes remarks: “The dead were
sometimes wrapped in cotton cloth, and cotton puppets or
effigies of stuffed cotton cloth in which the bones of the
dead were wrapped are mentioned in early writings. One
of the best of these is figured in an article by the author in
his pamphlet on zemis from Santo Domingo. . . . The
figure, which was found, according to Dr. Cronau, in a cave
in the neighbourhood of Maniel, west of the capital,
measures 75 centimeters in height. According to the same
author the head of this specimen was a skull with artificial
eyes and covered with woven cotton. About the upper
arms and thighs are found woven fabries, probably of
cotton, following a custom to which attention has been
already called. There is à representation of bands over
the forehead." Here we see a distinct reminiscence of
mummy bandaging, and a great gap in the abdomen of
the figure conclusively shows that the intention of the
maker was to represent an eviscerated corpse.

On the mainland of America there is abundance of
evidence that the practice of embalming the dead obtained,


4 10)


PLATE VI.—ZEMI FROM ANTILLES.


Showing reminiscence of mummy form in cotton wrappings and
eviscerated abdomen.


.
“a


109 The Evidence from the Mummy


especially in the more highly civilised centres, Mexico,
Central America and Peru. In the two first-mentioned
countries the custom of disposing of the dead by fire was
associated with mummification, the body being first em-
balmed and then consumed on a funeral pyre. The method
of preparing the mummy differed somewhat according to
regional practice. In the Mexican Valley and the more
southerly districts it was placed in a hunched-up position
inside a much ornamented ‘‘ mummy-bundle,” the paint-
ings and decorations on which took the place of those on
the Egyptian coffin. This was covered by a network of
rope, and on the top was placed a false head or mask,
which connects these bundles with the zemis of the
Antilles. In the province of Michoacan the body was
disposed after embalmment in a recumbent attitude and
swathed in many bandages, almost precisely as in Egypt.

We gain our knowledge of Mexican and Maya mummies
principally from passing references in aboriginal and
Spanish colonial manuscripts and histories, and from
pictures in the native lienzas or paintings. In the case of
the Maya of Central America, the bodies of chiefs and
kings were buried in elaborate stone tombs and sarcophagi,
accompanying which are canopic vessels closely resembling
those of Egypt,.and having lids representing, like them,
the gods or Bacabs of the four parts of the compass.

The Egyptians associated certain colours with the several
organs of the body and with the cardinal points. Thus
red was associated with the north and the lungs, white
with the south and the liver, yellow with the east and the
stomach, and black with the west and the intestines.
Among the Maya these colours and compass-directions
were associated with the bodily organs in a strikingly
similar manner, white being allotted to the north and the
lungs, yellow to the south and the belly, red to the east
and the larger intestines, and black to the west and lesser
intestines. It will thus be seen that the colours and organs
for the west agree precisely, and that the north agrees as
to the organ associated with it. The organs in question
were, as has been said, placed by the Maya in canopic jars
bearing a close resemblance to those of Egypt. '' Ap-
parently,” remarks Mr. D. A. Mackenzie in an essay on
the subject in Folklore for June, 1923, “the Egyptian


Atlantis in America IIO


system of mummification which reached America was
accompanicd by the Egyptian doctrine in less modified
form than one might be led to expect, especially when one
considers how varied were the cultural influences to which
these doctrines must have been subjected during the
process of gradual transmission from Egypt and across
the Pacific to America." But surely it is more credible
that a resemblance so striking arose out of dissemination
from a common centre now submerged in the Atlantic than
that it slowly and painfully communicated itself by a
devious Asiatic or Polynesian route from Egypt to
America. I confess that to me it seems much more un-
scientific to believe that Egyptian theological ideas reached
America practically unaltered after traversing the great
welter of Asia than that both Egypt and America drew
their beliefs from a common Atlantic source. The pro-
tagonists of this theory also hold that Buddhistic beliefs
reached America via Asia. That they did so is very
obvious. But there is a world of difference between the |
two theories. Buddhism, pure or alloyed, may well have
penetrated America, indeed did so, at a period when it was
practically a new faith, strong and living. But to infer
that the dogmas of the Egypt of the XXIst Dynasty
reached Central America in what was practically an un-
altered etate after a lapse of eight hundred years, and by
way of Asiatic or Polynesian regions teeming with opposing
beliefs, is to ask too much even of credulity. The school
which supports this thesis presupposes an ubiquitous caste
of Egyptian origin which it describes as ** The Children of
the Sun." It might find a more fitting title for this
nebulous and universal fraternity in “ The Children of
the Moon."

The Mexican Codex Magliabecchiano, preserved in the
Biblioteca Nazionale in Florence, shows on sheet 60 the
mummy-bundle of a Mexican warrior. The resemblance
to the swathed upright figure of the dead Osiris in the
Egyptian papyri is striking. Its symbolical insignia
include a head-band or fillet bound in front with a clasp
of turquoise mosaic, blue nose- and ear-plugs, and a fan
or shoulder-band of paper. The head is decorated by an
elaborate plume and the pennant of the war-god, its patron,
and the hair is ornamented with balls of cotton, symbol of


vn “= mm


”


— ur


a o T-3


E mu C wee „ww De ww am AT


a


"PM TEE ee


"Wet


2
259
29239 ,


5
23299
2
y


PLATE VII.—STATUETTE OF THE MEXICAN
GODDESS COATLICUE.


Represented as a mummy-bundle. In the Calle del Coliseo, Mexico.


2222


^


“111 The Evidence from the Mummy


the deities of the Underworld, and reminiscent of the
cotton make-up of the zemis of the Antilles. Accompany-
ing it is the blue hairless dog which preceded it to the
Mexican Hades, much as did the dog Anubis in the case of
the dead Egyptian. It is also associated with a symbol
which is similar to the fat sign interred with the Egyptian
dead, and which was believed to provide them with a new
backbone on resurrection.

In the same codex we find a somewhat similar painting
—a mummy-bundle wrapped up in plain cotton cloth and
secured by a net. The mummy itself wears the mantle
dedicated to the departed, and the symbolism which
accompanies it is practically the same as that observed in
the former example. There also occurs in Mexico a sym-
bolical form of the mummy-bundle which seems to have
been a reminiscence of mummification. The clothing of
the deceased was wrapped round a stick, a piece of jadeite
was inclosed to represent a heart, along with a lock of
the deceased’s hair, which probably stood in lieu of the
body itself. The whole evidently represents a late phase
which aimed at dispensing with the long and troublesome
process of embalming and at achieving a similar end—the
preservation of the body of the dead—by magical means
alone.

That certain Mexican gods were developed from the
idea of the mummy is obvious enough from their pictured
representations. For example, Tlauizcalpan-tecutli, the
deity who represents the planet Venus, is pictured in the
Codex Borbonicus and the Codex Borgia as a mummy,
accompanied by the insignia of those warriors who died by
sacrifice, and by the small blue dog, the companion of the
dead. At the period of his festival a sham mummy-bundle
was hoisted upon a pole, and around this the celebrants
danced, as may be seen from the picture of the ceremony
on page 28 of the Codex Borbonicus. In another picture
in the Sahagun MS., now in the Biblioteca del Palacio at
Madrid, priests are seen in the act of making the mock
mummy, the head-mask, the paper ornaments and banners
which accompanied it, and this seems to me to link up the
process with the manufacture of cotton mummies in the
Antilles, to which reference has been made.

In a manuscript entitled “* Relacion de las ceremonios y


Atlantis in America . 12


ritos de Michoacan ” a good deal of information is supplied
with reference to the funerary customs of the people of
that Mexican province. It contains several pictures
relative to the process of mummification, in which we see
the deceased chieftain laid out for evisceration. A repre-
sentation of the funeral procession shows the mummy
swathed in cotton bands on its way to the funeral pyre
which is to consume it, and surrounded by mourners, the
widow abasing herself precisely as did the women mourners
in Egypt, and blackening her brow and head with ashes.
Similar scenes are represented in wall-paintings in a tomb
at Chichen Itza in Yucatan. Describing one of these,
Le Plongeon says: “ Coh is now laid out, being prepared
for cremation. His body has been opened at the ribs to
extract the viscera and heart, which, after being charred,
are to be preserved in a stone urn with cinnabar, where the
writer found them in 1875."! Throughout Central America
many tombs have been discovered which in all their details
made it plain that a method of mummification similar to
that which obtained in ancient Egypt was in vogue in
these regions, but had been mingled with and somewhat
overlaid by native rites for the disposal of the body by
fire. On the cement floor of Tomb I, Mound 7, at Xoxo,
Oaxaca, Mexico, was found a remarkable set of funerary
urns, markedly resembling the canopic jars of Egypt.
These represent the four Bacabs or genii of the Maya
quarters of the compass, and contained the viscera of the
deceased.

In Peru the art of mummification was almost universal,
and was not associated with the disposal of the body by
fire. Mummies are to be encountered at apparently all
stages of the history of the native race. Megalithic tombs
and monuments contain them in the doubled-up posture
so common among early peoples all the world over. These
megalithic tombs, or chulpas as they are termed, are com-
posed of a mass of rough stones and clay, faced with huge
blocks of trachyte or basalt, so put together as to form a
cyst, in which the mummy was placed. The door invari-
ably faces the east, so that it may catch the gleams of the
rising sun—a proof of the prevalence of sun-worship.
Squier alludes to one more than 24 feet high. An opening

1 Queen Móo and the Sphinx.


PrATE VIII.—SCULPTURE REPRESENTING MAYA MUMMY.


From Stela P. Copan. The body is decorated with symbols
resembling those placed on Egyptian mummies.


ee e. as
>... e +.
9 9 ...
© . o e
eec o ee o
9 ec». e le
> La ME
. 9 = 9*4. .
e^ vy" «ao


cen o


113 The Evidence from the Mummy


18 inches square gave access to the sepulchral chamber,
which was 11 feet square by 18 feet high.

Many of these chulpas are circular, and painted in gay
primary colours. They are very numerous in Bolivia, an
old Peruvian province, and in the basin of Lake Titicaca,
a sacred region, they abound. The dead were wrapped in
llama skins, on which the outline of the eyes and mouth
were carefully marked. The corpse was then arrayed in
other garments, and the door of the tomb walled up. In
some parts of Peru the dead were mummified and placed
in the dwelling-houses beside the living. In the rarefied
air of the plateaus the bodies rapidly become innocuous.

On the Pacific coast the method of mummification was
somewhat different. The body was reduced to a complete
state of desiccation and was deposited in a tomb con-
structed of stone or adobe. Vases intended to hold maize
or chicha liquor were placed beside the corpse, and copper
hatchets, mirrors of polished stone, earrings and bracelets
have been discovered in these burial-places. Some of the
remains are wrapped in rich cloth, and vases of gold and
silver were placed beside them. Golden plaques are often
found in the mouths, symbolic of the sun. The bodies
exhibit no traces of embalming, and are usually in a sitting
posture. Some of them have evidently been dried before
inhumation, whilst others are covered with a resinous sub-
stance. They are generally accompanied by the articles
used in life; the men have their weapons and ornaments,
women their household implements, and children their
toys. The dryness of the climate, as in Egypt, keeps these
relics in a wonderful state of preservation. In the grave
of a woman were found not only vases of every shape, but
also some cloth she had commenced to weave, which her
death had perhaps prevented her from completing. Her
light brown hair was carefully combed and plaited, and the
legs from the ankle to the knee were painted red, after the
fashion in vogue among Peruvian beauties, while little
bladders of toilet powder and gum were thoughtfully placed
beside her for use in the life to come.

In the ancient Temple of the Sun at Cuzco, the capital
of old Peru, the mummies of thirteen royal Incas were
found by the invading Spaniards seated around the altar
of the sun, and in the Temple of the Moon, hard by, the


H


Atlantis in America 114


embalmcd remains of their queens were discovered similarly
disposed.

Skinner in his State of Peru affords us a glimpse of the
methods of embalming still in vogue among the people of |
the Peruvian Andes in the early part of the nineteenth
century. He says: “ On the day of decease they put the
body, with its insignia, into a large earthen vessel or painted
jar, which they bury in one of the angles of the quarter,
laying over it a covering of potter’s clay, and throwing in
carth until the grave is on a level with the surface of the
ground. When the obsequies are over they forbear to pay
a visit to it, and lose every recollection of the name of the
warrior. The Roamaynas disinter their dead as soon as
they think the fleshy parts have been consumed, and
having washed the bones of the skeleton, they place it ina
coffin of potter’s clay, adorned with various symbols of
death, like the hieroglyphies on the wrappers of the
Egyptian mummies. In this state the skeleton is carried
home, to the end that the survivors may bear the deceased
in respectful memory, and not in imitation of those extra-
ordinary voluptuaries of antiquity, who introduced into |
their most splendid festivals a spectacle of this nature,
which, by reminding them of their dissolution, might
stimulate them to taste, before it should overtake them,
all the impure passions the human pleasures could afford
them. A space of about a year being elapsed, the bones :
are once more inhumed, and the individual to whom they
belonged forgotten for ever."

Later I will adduce evidence to show that, like the
pyramids of Egypt, those of Mexico and Peru were the last
resting-places of kings and priests. That some American
mummies at least were the objects of ritual for generations
subsequent to their embalmment is proved by the state-
ment of Mr. W. H. Holmes, who says that: '' An extra-
ordinary example of objective mnemonic record is furnished
by the practice of the Incas of Peru. The mummied bodies-
of the earlier rulers were brought at stated periods and
awarded the same daily service by their descendants as
when living. By this practice a body of memories relating |
to the most important personages and events relating to
the history of the nation, extending over a period of several -
hundred years, was preserved; yet the record thus kept |


IIS The Evidence from the Mummy


alive was necessarily restricted in scope and in a few
generations must have become in large part vague and
merged with myth."

Plenty of evidence is forthcoming to show that the art
of mummification existed in other parts of North and South
America in a more or less debased form. The Indians of
Kentucky dried the body and filled it with sand, wrapping
it in skins or matting, and placing it in a hut or cavern.
In the Darien region the dead were eviscerated and the
body was filled with resin, after which the corpse was
smoked for preservation and kept in the ancestral hut.
The Indians of Virginia removed the skin, and at a later
stage restored it to the skeleton. In the island of Marajo in
the Amazon delta large buried vases are discovered 2e-
sembling the sarcophagi of Egypt in their symbolic orna-
mentation. Says Holmes: “ Many of the Marajo vases
are of large size and are tastefully embellished with human
and animal features in relief, the relief motifs being
elaborated in complicated and often formal designs in
colour. Other vases of varied shape and size are em-
bellished with incised and carved geometrical patterns,
often labyrinthine, showing excellent taste. These em-
bellishments are distinct from those of the more southern
regions as well as those of the western highlands, but
appear to resemble the decorative art of the Guianas and
the West Indies. A number of very striking and hand-
some vessels obtained from graves and caverns in the valley
of the Couanani are manifestly the work of related peoples."

According to Pinkerton, the Indians of Maryland and
‚Virginia preserved their dead as follows: “ Their bodies
are first bowelled, then dried upon hurdles till they be
very dry, and so about the most of their joints and neck
they hang bracelets and chains of copper, pearl and such-
like as they used to wear. "Their inwards they stuff with
copper beads, hatchets and such trash. "Then lap they
them very carefully in white skins, and so roll them in
mats for their winding-sheets. And in the tomb, which is
an arch made of mats, they lay them orderly.” 1

The Congaree or Santee Indians of South Carolina,
according to Lawson, used a process of partial embalm-
ment. Schoolcraft, in his History of the Indian Tribes,

1 Collection of Voyages, Vol. XIII, p. 39.


u


Atlantis in America 116


quotes him as follows: ““ As soon as the party is dead
they lay the corpse upon a piece of bark in the sun,
seasoning or embalming it with a small root beaten. to
powder, which looks as red as vermilion. The same is
mixed with bear’s oil to beautify the hair. After the
carcass has laid a day or two in the sun they remove it
and lay it upon crotches cut in purpose for the support
thereof from the earth. Then they anoint it all over with
the aforementioned ingredients of the powder of this root
and bear’s oil. When it is so done, they cover it over very
exactly with the bark of the pine or cypress tree to prevent
any rain to fall upon it. . . . As soon as the flesh grows
mellow and will cleave from the bone they get it off and

Mm it, making the bones very clean, then anoint them with
the ingredients aforesaid, wrapping up the skull very care-
fully in a cloth artificially woven in opposum’s hair. The
bones they preserve in a wooden box, every year oiling and
cleansing them. . . . The Indians make a roof of light
wood or pitch-pine over the graves of the more distin-
guished, covering it with bark and then with earth, leaving
the body thus in a subterranean vault until the flesh quits
the bones. The bones are then taken up, cleaned, jointed,
clad in white-dressed deer skins, and laid away in the
Quiogozon, which is the royal tomb or burial-place of their
kings and war-captains, being a more magnificent cabin
reared at the public expense. This Quiogozon is an object
of veneration, in which the writer says he has known the
king, old men and conjurors to spend several days with
their idols and dead kings, and into which he could never
gain admittance.”

W. H. Dall, writing of the mortuary customs of the
Indians of the North-west coast, says: ““ The bodies were
eviscerated, cleansed from fatty matters in running water,
dried, and usually placed in suitable cases in wrappings of
fur and fine grass matting. The body was usually doubled
up in the smallest compass, and the mummy-case, espe-
cially in the case of children, was usually suspended (so as
not to touch the ground) in some convenient rock shelter.
Sometimes, however, the prepared body was placed in a
life-like position, dressed and armed. . . . The hunter was
dressed in his wooden armour, and provided with an enor-
mous mask, all ornamented with feathers, and a countless


117 The Evidence from the Mummy


variety of wooden pendants, coloured in gay patterns.
. . . Amongst the articles represented were drums, rattles,
dishes, weapons, effigies of men, birds, fish and animals,
wooden armour of rods, scales of wood and remarkable
masks, so arranged that the wearer when erect could only
see the ground at his feet." A treasure almost as various
as that found in the mausoleum of Tutankhamen !

Sauer, who accompanied Billings’s expedition in 1802,
mentions that the Aleutian Islanders embalmed their dead,
and an article in the San Francisco Bulletin speaks of the
discovery of a cave full of Aleutian mummies by a certain
Captain Hemming.

That preservation of the bones was practised in lieu of
mummification by many American tribes who had not the
means for embalmment at their disposal is made clear by
Brinton, who remarks: “ They thought the soul would
return to the bones, that these would clothe themselves with
flesh, and that the man would rejoin his tribe. That this
was the real, though often doubtless the dimly understood
reason of the custom of preserving the bones of the deceased,
can be shown by various arguments.* This practice was
almost universal. East of the Mississippi nearly every
nation was accustomed at stated periods—usually once in
eight or ten years—to collect and clean the osseous remains
of those of its number who had died in the intervening
time, and inter them in one common sepulchre, lined with
choice furs, and marked with a mound of wood, stone and
earth. Such is the origin of those immense tumuli filled
with the mortal remains of nations and generations which
the antiquary, with irreverent curiosity, has so frequently
chanced upon in all portions of our territory."

He proceeds to say that ‘“‘ A widow among the Takhalis
was obliged to carry the bones of her deceased husband
wherever she went for four years, preserving them in a
casket handsomely decorated with feathers." “So great
was the filial respect for these remains by the Indians that
on the Mississippi, in Peru and elsewhere, no tyranny, no
cruelty, so embittered the indigenes against the white
explorers as the sacrilegious search for treasures perpe-
trated among the sepulchres of past generations.”

Farther on he remarks: ‘‘In some of the gentes in

1 Italics are mine.


Atlantis in America 118


various parts of the continent there prevailed a belief that
the soul would somehow return to the eponymous an-
cestor. . . . The question has been debated and variously
answered whether the art of mummifieation was known
and practised in America. Without entering into the
discussion, it is certain that the preservation of.the corpse
by a long and thorough process of exsiccation over a slow
fire was nothing unusual, not only in Peru, Popoyan, the
Carib countries and Nicaragua, but among many of the
tribes north of the Gulf of Mexico. . . . The object was
essentially the same as when the bones were preserved, and in
the case of rulers the same homage was often paid to their
corpses as had been the just due of their living bodies.
The opinion underlying all these customs was that a part
of the soul, or one of the souls, dwelt in the bones, that these
were the seeds which, planted in the earth, or preserved
unbroken in safe places, would, in time, put on once again
a garb of flesh and germinate into living human beings.”!

That the bones so preserved were frequently painted
red, as in the case of Cró-Magnon remains, proof is also
forthcoming. Holmes states that in ancient burials in
Maine “the occurrence of red oxides . . . has led to the
use of the designation ‘ the red paint people.’ ”

It would seem then that, just as it has been possible to
demonstrate the former existence of a land connection
between Europe and America through the presence of
similar plants and animals in both of these now separated
areas, it is also possible to prove it by the persistence of
similar vestiges of ancient culture in both continents. The
custom of mummification can be traced in the Canary
Islands and the Antilles. On the west it penetrated the
interior through Central America to Mexico and the North,
‘and on the south-west to Bolivia and Peru, and vestiges
of it are to be found in Brazil. On the east it spreads from
the Canaries and North Africa to Egypt, and its earliest
manifestation, the preservation of the bones of the dead,
is apparent in the Aurignacian regions of Spain and France.
Thus it is perfectly reasonable to infer that the two great
areas where it most generally flourished, and whose insular
outposts are rich in its manifestations, must have drawn
their original knowledge of mummification from one

1 Myths of the New World, pp. 298 ff.


IIO The Evidence from the Mummy


common centre. Where we find two broken pieces of a
chain with isolated links lying in between, it is surely not
unreasonable to suppose that all once belonged to one
unbroken chain. One or two of the links, perhaps, are
lost, but no sane man will doubt that they once actually
existed.

Nor will it serve to advance the theory that the cult of
mummification may have originated independently in the
Old World and in the New. There is no cultural analogy
for crediting the manifold origin of any custom so definite
in its ritual and so well-marked in its minor details. The
art of embalming arose out of the belief that the bones,
and at a later date the body, must be rendered immortal
in order to subserve the purposes of an immortal soul.
This is not among those beliefs which can be classed as
* natural" or primitive, but presupposes a cult not only
of distinctly local and tribal but of very gradual develop-
ment. A thousand circumstances, logical as well as
fortuitous, must have gone to the making of what was a
highly developed art as well as a religious creed rich in
observances of quite extraordinary minuteness, and
specialised as perhaps no other cult ever has been, and
when we observe the minutiz of the rites of mummification
approaching each other so closely as they do in the Old
World and the New, there appears to be little else to do
than accept them as having arisen from a common source.
The Old and New World systems arose on slightly different
lines out of the Aurignacian, that is Atlantean, practice of
preserving and painting the bones of the dead in the hope
that these would once again be clothed in flesh and provide
a house for the spirit. Such a custom was bound to
develop into the more elaborate system of mummifieation.
Indeed we have seen that it actually did so in Neolithie
times. The preservation and painting of the bones was
not only the germ-custom of mummification. It contained
the spirit of its development as well, as all embryos do. It
was this custom, this germ, which sprang from Atlantis,
and which developed in the eastern and western continents
on slightly different but inevitable lines.

Equally fatuous is it to try to demonstrate the intro-
duction of mummification into America from Asia. It
would be absurd, of course, to say that no customs con-


Atlantis in America 120


nected with the art or ritual of embalming reached America
from Egypt by way of Asia. But the evidence that the
main current of the art reached America from Asia is

much more slender than that which proves its Atlantean

provenance. The links provided by Asiatic embalming

are few and widely scattered, and have all the signs of late

origin. Nor are the resemblances they display to African

and American examples nearly so precise as the likenesses

between these systems. Had mummification been con-

veyed from Asia to America it would have left traces much

more definite and profound in the Far East than it has

done. The same reasons preclude the possibility of its

having reached America by way of Polynesia.

If it be maintained that the art of mummification
originated in Egypt, in what manner, it may be asked,
did it find its way thence to the Canary Islands? It may
be said that Phoenician voyagers found their way to the
Canaries at an early date, and that they conveyed there
men of Egyptian race. But even if they had done so, it is
highly improbable that these were of the pariah caste who
alone possessed the secret of the process of embalming, or
of the priestly caste who had the necessary ritual knowledge
to instruct the natives in the ceremonies of embalming as
carried out in the period of the XXIst Dynasty. The
contention for a direct Egyptian introduction is absurd,
and if it be argued that the practice in Egypt and the
Canaries arose from a common source in North Africa,
that source has yet to be discovered. It seems much more
logical to infer that it was oceanic, especially as the entire
process is reflected on the other side of the Atlantic, and
has well-defined links in its islands, both European and
American. |

We may conclude then that :

(1) The burial customs of the Cró-Magnons of Spain and
France provide the first signs of the growth of the art of
preserving the dead.

(2) That the art of mummification was practised in the
Canary Islands, where the Cró-Magnons of Atlantis were
marooned.

(8) That the remains of the process are discovered in the
West India Islands.

(4) That it was practised elaborately, and much in the


-


I2I | The Evidence from the Mummy


same manner as in Egypt and the Canary Islands, in
Mexico and Peru.

(5) That it could not have reached America by way of
Asia in early times, all evidence that it did so being lacking.

(6) That only one link in the progression of the practice
of embalmment is missing between Europe and America
and the insular archipelagoes thereof, and that this link
must formerly have been supplied by Atlantis.


EN


CHAPTER VII
THE EVIDENCE FROM WITCHCRAFT


found both in Europe and America more saliently |


N NOTHER manifestation of Aurignacian culture


than elsewhere is the strange cult known as
witchcraft, with its host of rites and subsidiary super-
stitions. It is indeed quite a simple matter to prove that
witcheraft, as discovered in America, is much nearer in its
relationship to the witchcraft of Western Europe than to
any similar system in Asia. Also it is demonstrable
that in Asia the cult has taken a form strongly dissimilar
from that in which it is found in Europe.

Witchcraft may be generally, if not particularly, de-
scribed as a female magical cult, probably originating in a
very early worship of the bull or the goat as a symbol of
fertility by women who hoped for offspring. In the course
of ages there grew up around it accretions of feminine lore,
magical and medicinal, which survived well into modern
times. But the point of most immediate importance in
this place is that it was found in its most salient aspects in
precisely those regions which must have been affected by
immigration from Atlantis—in France, Spain and Mexico
—and in the Aurignacian area of the two former countries.
In fact its range is much the same as that of the early
customs which later developed into mummification.

We must sharply discriminate between witchcraft and
mere sorcery or shamanism. The former displays very
special attributes and tendencies which the latter systems
do not possess. For example, it is almost exclusively
female, it is corybantic, or connected with the dance, it is
associational, not individual, as are sorcery and shamanism,
the ministers of which work alone. Let us see, then, what
evidence we have of its existence in Aurignacian times,
and what proof we have that the witchcraft of America is
one and the same as that of Europe.

In a rock-shelter on a hillside at the village of Cogul,
near Lerida, in Spain, several remarkable paintings have
been discovered which were executed by Aurignacian or
Crö-Magnon man. One of these depicts a number of women
wearing skirts and peaked hats, precisely like those of the
witches of later times, dancing round a male idol or priest
who is painted black. The whole scene might well refer


122


[1307 wos pe uviovuSLIn y


SOOT ALN NORD. SOLA HO SION VOL u SE Ry


a


123 The Evidence from Witchcraft


to a sabbatic dance of witches in the fifteenth or sixteenth
century. It shows conclusively that the cult of witchcraft
was practised among the Aurignacians at an age immensely
remote—ten thousand years ago, at the least computation.

The witch-cult in Mexico circulated round the idea of
the Ciuateteö or Ciuapipiltin. Of these Sahagun says:
“ The Ciuapipiltin, the noble women, were those who had
died in childbed. They were supposed to wander through
the air, descending when they wished to the earth to
afflict children with paralysis and other maladies. They
haunted cross-roads to practise their maleficent deeds, and
they had temples built at these places, where bread offer-
ings in the shape of butterflies were made to them, also
the thunder-stones which fall from the sky. Their faces
were white, and their arms, hands and legs were coloured
with a white powder. Their ears were gilded and their
hair done in the manner of the great Jadies. Their clothes
were striped with black, their skirts barred in different
colours, and their sandals were white.” He further men-
tions that when a woman who had died in her first childbed
was buried in the temple-court of the Ciuateteó her husband
and his friends watched the body all night in case young
soldiers or magicians should seek to obtain the hair or
fingers as protective talismans.

Numerous chroniclers testify that the witches’ sabbath
was quite as notorious an institution in ancient Mexico as
in medieval Europe. But in the days prior to the coming
of the Spaniards it was thought of as being celebrated by
the dead rather than by the living. The Ciuateteö, or
haunting mothers, out of envy for their more fortunate
sisters and their offspring, continued to haunt the world
at certain fixed periods, wreaking their spite upon all who
were so unlucky as to cross their path. "They are repre-
sented in the ancient Aztec paintings as dressed in the
garments and insignia of the goddess Tlazolteotl, the witch
par excellence, with a fillet and ear-plug of unspun cotton,
a golden crescent-shaped nasal ornament, empty eye-
sockets, and the heron-feather headdress of the warrior
caste, for the woman who died in childbed was regarded
as equally heroic with the man who perished in battle.
The upper parts of their bodies were nude, and round the
hips they wore a skirt on which cross-bones were painted.


Atlantis in America 124


They carried the witch’s broom of malinalli grass, a
symbol of death, and they are sometimes associated with
the serpent, the screech-owl, and other animals and birds
of ill-omen. These furies were supposed to dwell in the
region of the west, and as some compensation for their
early detachment from the earth-life, were permitted to
accompany the sun in his course from noon to sunset, just


One of the Ciuateteó, or Mexican witches, from the Codex Borgia.
She is about to sacrifice a child, and stands before an urn filled with human hearts, She
wears the cotton spindle of the earth goddess, her skirt is decorated with lunar emblems and
8he is adorned by the lunar nose plate.


as the dead warriors did from sunrise to noon. At night
they quitted their occidental abode, the Ciutlampa, or
“Place of Women," and revisited the glimpses of the
moon in search of the feminine gear they had left behind
them—the spindles, work-baskets and other articles -used
by Mexican women. The Ciuateteö were especially potent
for evil in the third quarter of the astrological year, and


I25 The Evidence from Witchcraft


those who were so luckless as to meet them during that
season became crippled or epileptic. The fingers and
hands of women who had died in bringing forth were
believed by magicians, soldiers and thieves to have the
property of crippling or paralysing their enemies or those
who sought to hinder their nefarious calling, precisely as
Irish burglars formerly believed that the hand of a corpse
grasping a candle, which they called ‘‘ the hand of glory,”
could ensure sound sleep in the inmates of any house they
might enter.
Sahagun says: “It was said that they vented their
wrath on people and bewitched them. When anyone is
possessed by the demons with a wry mouth and disturbed
eyes, with clenched hands and inturned feet, wringing his
hands and foaming at the mouth, they say that he has
linked himself to a demon. The Ciuateteó, housed by the
crossways, have taken his form." From this and other
passages we may be justified in thinking that these dead
women were also regarded as succubi, haunters of men,
lamias, compelling them to dreadful amours, and that they
were credited with the evil eye is evident from the state-
ment that their glances caused helpless terror and brought
‘convulsions upon children, and that their jealousy of the
handsome was proverbial. We see, too, that like the
witches of Europe, they were associated with the ** thunder-
stone," or elf-bolt, the prehistoric flint arrow which was
supposed to fall from the sky. .
' ‘The divine patroness of these witches—for witches they
| are called by the old friar who interprets the Aztec Codex
Telleriano-Remensis—who flew through the air on their
broomsticks and met at cross-roads, was Tlazolteotl, a
divinity who, like all deities of growth, possessed a plutonic
! significance. The broom is her especial symbol, and in the
‚native Aztec MS. known as the Codex Fejérvary-Mayer
(sheet 17) we have a picture of her which represents her
. as the traditional witch, naked, wearing a peaked hat, and
“ mounted upon a broomstick. In other places she is seen
standing beside a house accompanied by an owl, the whole
| representing the witch’s dwelling, with medicinal herbs
* drying beneath the eaves. Thus the evidence that the
A haunting mothers and their patroness present an exact
parallel with the witches of Europe seems complete. The


Atlantis in America 126


cult of the Mexican Nagualists of post-Columbian times
was also permeated with practices similar to those of
European witchcraft, and we read of its adherents smearing
themselves with ointment to induce levitation, flying |
through the air, and engaging in wild and lascivious dances, |
precisely as did the adherents of Vaulderie or the wor-
shippers of the Italian witch-mother Aradia, or, indeed, as |
the witches of our own island. |

It is also clear that living women of evil reputation
desired to associate themselves with the Ciuateteó. Says
the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus A.: “ The first of
the fourteen day-signs, the house, they considered unfor-
tunate, because they said that demons came through the
air on that sign in the figures of women, such as we designate
witches, who usually went to the highways, where they met
in the form of a cross, and to solitary places, and that when
any bad woman wished to absolve herself of her sins she
went alone by night to these places and took off her
garments and sacrificed there with her tongue (that is.
drew blood from her tongue) and left the clothes which
she had carried and returned naked as the sign of the
confession of her sins."

Acosta says: “Some of these sorcerers take any shape
they choose, and fly through the air with wonderful
rapidity and for long distances. They will tell what is
taking place in remote localities long before the news could |
possibly arrive. . . . To practise this art the sorcerers,
usually old women, shut themselves in a house, and in- |
toxicate themselves to the degree of losing their reason.
The next day they are ready to reply to questions.”

But we have further evidence from Mexico that an
entire college of witches existed in the Huaxtec region
near the coast, and that it was at one time sufficiently
powerful to invade the Valley of Mexico in Toltec times.
These witches appear to have succeeded in establishing |
superiority at Tollan, the capital, and in order to celebrate
their victory, resolved to sacrifice a large number of
prisoners to their patron goddess. Addressing their cap-
tives, they said : ‘‘ We desire to drench the earth with you,
to hold a feast with you, for till now no battle-offerings
have been held with men." The Huaxtec country, whence
they came, was a rich and closely settled agricultural area, _


127 The Evidence from Witchcraft


its people were of Maya or Central American stock, and its
chief goddess, Tlazolteotl, whose priestesses these women
were, represented the earth-mother, the bounteous giver
of all fruits and grain. But they believed that this Mexican
Ceres, worn-out by the production of foodstuffs, required
occasional refreshment. This had formerly been ad-
ministered by pouring libations of the blood of animals on
the hard, cracked tropical soil, which appeared to absorb
them thirstily. But, flushed with triumph, these Amazons
resolved to offer up a sacrifice which should outvie all
former oblations. It is also clear from their menacing
speech that the festival was intended to take the form of
a cannibal feast, a thing until then unheard of in Mexico,
as their own statement seems to make plain. The native
records insist upon the fact that the institution of cere-
monial cannibalism was due to these witches, for such
there is abundant evidence they were. Like the Hexen,
or witches of ancient Germany, they seem to have had a
penchant for human flesh, and further resembled that cult
in their tendency to vampirism.

That mummification and witchcraft originally belonged
to one and the same culture-complex seems fairly clear
from the curious circumstance that the witches of Europe
prized above all things a piece of Egyptian mummy-flesh
as a vehicle for their magical operations. Throughout the
witch-literature of Europe the mummy is constantly
alluded to as part of the magical apparatus of the witch.
When she failed to obtain it she had recourse to using
earth taken from a newly made grave as a substitute. So
far as I am aware, we do not find this practice in Eastern
Asia, but that it was in vogue in America is substantiated
by more than one instance. Allusion has already been made
to the magical employment of the hands and fingers of
dead women in Mexico, and Dawson, in his Rites and
Observations on the Kwakiool People of Vancouver, alludes
to an interesting case of it in that part of America. He
says that when a Kwakiutl wizard desired to bewitch
anyone, he tried to procure a lock of his hair, or a part of
his clothing. *' These are placed with a small piece of the
skin and flesh of a dead man, dried and roasted before the
fire, and rubbed and pounded together. The mixture is
then tied up in a piece of skin or cloth, which is covered


Atlantis in America 128


over with spruce gum. The little package is next Haced
in a human bone, which is broken for the purpose and after-
wards carefully tied together and put within a human
skull. This again is placed in a box, which is tied up and.
gummed over and then buried in the ground in such a

way as to be barely covered. . . . This is done at night
or the early morning and in secret, and is frequently re-

peated until the enemy dies." "The drying of the human

remains over a fire shows quite clearly that what was

desired was & piece of flesh capable of desiccation and

admixture with other elements, as in the operations of

European witches. Benzoni tells us that the medicine men

among the Borenqueños of the West Indies took some

small bones and a little flesh and powdered them together

as a purgative for the sick.

I think I have adduced sufficient and novel evidence to
prove that the relationship between European and Ameri-
can witchcraft was much more intimate than that between
cither of these systems and any other sorcery cult. Most
of the sorcery cults of the Far East are male organizations,
whereas the essentially feminine character of witchcraft,
both in its European and American manifestations, is clear.
It is also obvious that it was known among the Cró-
Magnons, the first immigrants from Atlantis to Europe,
and this, indeed, is the very earliest proof we have of its
existence anywhere. These similarities, when taken into
consideration along with the geographical occurrence of
the cult, seem to me much too powerful to be ignored,
especially when we remember that the ancient Aurignacian
area was, in later times, the very headquarters of Vaulderie
or witchcraft in Europe. We find in ancient Mexico, as in
Europe, a feminine cult connected with the worship of a
fertility deity, whose ministers fly through the air on
broomsticks, and, like the witches of Europe, smear them-
selves with ointments to assist levitation. Their queen,
or tutelary deity, is depicted as nude, and bestriding a
broom, and as wearing the traditional hat of bark. "They
are associated with the owl, and have skill in the herbalist’s
art. They induce falling sickness, as did the witches of
France and Britain. They meet at cross-roads, where they
celebrate their dreadful orgies, dancing to the flute of
Tezcatlipoca, the demon-god, who bears a strong resem-


129 The Evidence from Witchcraft


blance to the “big black man," the satanic figure of

Scottish witch-tradition, and who is obviously one and the

ris as the sable figure portrayed in the Cogul Aurignacian
ance.

I might draw many other parallels between the witch-
cults of Europe and America, but these are the broad
essentials, and must suffice for the illustration of my
theory. But did witchcraft, or any similar feminine cult,
flourish in Atlantis itself? Persistent notices of it recur
in Greek mythological tales of the Gardens of the Hes-


Tlazolteotl, Queen of the Mexican witches, riding on a broomstick.


perides, situated in the Fortunate Isles of the Atlantic
area which, if they refer to any locality there, must surely
have done so to Atlantis. We also find a well-marked
female cult flourishing among the Guanches of the Canary
Islands, the last remnants of Atlantis.

Perusing the traditions which refer to the Hesperides or
Fortunate Islands, which are identified by many writers
with Atlantis, we find them associated with two distinct
female cults, the war-like Amazons and those strange
sorceresses, the Gorgons. The Amazons, says Diodorus
Siculus, dwelt on the island Hesperia, between Mount
Atlas in Africa and the ocean, and invaded the territory


I


Atlantis in America 130


of the inland mountaineers and their coastal neighbours,
the Gorgons, whom they subjugated, until the latter rose
to power again under their great queen Medusa, who was!
finally slain and conquered by Perseus. Says Mr. W. H.
Babcock: “‘ Both the Gorgons and the Western Amazons
seem to have had their abodes on the shores of the Atlantic
Ocean south of the Strait of Gibraltar, along the front of
what we now call Morocco and the region south of it. We
cannot say how much of these tales belong to Diodorus;
but he certainly did not invent the whole of them, and is not-
likely to have contrived their most distinctive features.
The myth of Perseus, like that of Theseus and the Minotaur,
meant something dimly and distantly historie. We think
we partly understand the latter after the excavations in.
Crete. Similarly the flights and feats of Perseus, as given
in mythology, may be another way of saying that he made
swift voyages far afield, and descended on his enemies with
deadly execution.” 1
The Amazonian armies were composed entirely of virgins,
who married when their military service was completed.
This is no improbable circumstance, for the same practice
obtained in early Spain and North Africa in Hannibal’s
time, also in Dahomey before the break-up of that kingdom,
with its cannibalistic rites, in the last century. Under
their chieftainess Mirina, they attacked the region of Atlas
in Africa with 30,000 infantry and 2000 cavalry. It was
precisely from this region that Hannibal in later times
drew the bulk of his Amazonian cavalry-women. Their
shields were made of serpent skin, their offensive weapons
were the lance and the bow. They passed into the territory
of the Gorgons, on whom they inflicted immense slaughter,
and pursued their conquering careers into Egypt and
Syria. >
E Am Azon,” remarks that most interesting of all French
writers on Atlantis, M. R. M. Gattefossé, of Lyons, ‘‘ is in
modern Berber Al Azoun, and signifies ‘the people of
Azoun ’ in Algiers.” He proceeds to draw the conclusion -
that this Azoun was the mother-goddess worshipped after
the disappearance of Atlantis, in Ireland and among the
Celts, under the name of Ana or Danu, who, he thinks, was
one and the same with Neith, Athena and Urania. All
1 Legendary Islands, pp. 16-17.


131 The Evidence from Witcheraft


these goddesses had certainly attributes in common. The
nations abutting on the region of the sunken Atlantis were,
he states, addicted to the feminine cult rather than the
male. In the rites of the people of Ouargia, the most
ancient city of the desert, inhabited by the descendants
of the Amazons, a dance was performed in which the
young women of the town imitated the undulations of
the serpent, and this he compares with the similar dances
of the Nahuatls and Hiuchols of Mexico.!

Now, as we have seen, a similar Amazonian tribe
flourished in Mexico, the sorceresses who invaded the in-
terior from the coast, who were known as Ixcuiname,
“the Four-Faced,” the worshippers of Tlazolteotl. Their
chief weapon, like that of the Amazons, was the bow, and
they sacrificed their war captives to the goddess by shoot-
ing them with arrows. These women were assuredly
witches as well as Amazons or warrior-women, for their
patroness was Tlazolteotl, the chief of the dead witch-
women, the Ciuateteö, alluded to above, and was also
worshipped as a war-goddess. She was, moreover, “ the
woman who sinned before the deluge, the cause of all evil,
of all deceit," says one of the old Spanish friars, and who,
according to Camargo in his Historia de Tlazcalla, ** dwells
above the nine heavens in a very pleasant and delectable
place, accompanied and guarded by many people, and
waited on by other women of the rank of goddesses, where
are many delights of fountains, brooks, flower-gardens and
without her wanting for anything. . . . But the place
where she dwelt was called Tamoanchan, that is, the place
where are the flowers the ninefold enchained, the place of
the fresh, cool winds." Surely this is the Garden of the
Hesperides. The phrase “‘ the ninefold enchained " would
seem to point to Atlantis, which, we will recollect, was
safeguarded by Poseidon, who constructed round it
alternate zones of sea and land. This connects the Ixcui-
name not only with the Amazons, but with the Gardens
of Hesperides or Atlantis myth, and with the Gorgons,
for whoever they looked upon with the evil eye they
destroyed. The circumstance that the Ixcuiname came
from the coast, and that they introduced a completely
new and alien religion into Mexico should not be lost

1 La Verité sur V Atlantide, pp. 119-20.


Atlantis in America 132


sight of. That they, like the Amazons, were associated
with the serpent is also significant.


But if our theory is to hold water we must also be able |


to prove the existence of a similar female cult among the
Guanches of the Canary Islands. Among these there
flourished a sect called the Effenecs, who worshipped in
stone circles like the Druids, whose priestesses spoke
oracularly in trance and under hypnotic influence, like the
pythonesses of Greece. These were virgins, and were called
Magades, or Harimagades, over whom presided a high
priest known zs Faycan. On the barranco of Valeron the
circle or temple in which they celebrated their peculiar
rites still survives. Like the worshippers of Tlazolteotl,
they engaged in symbolic dances, and in times of national
danger cast themselves into the sea as & sacrifice to the
ocean, which they believed would one day submerge their
islands. Like the priestesses of Tlazolteotl, too, they were
charged with the baptism of infants. Among the Guanches
polyandry was in vogue, and it is clear from their legal
system that a gyneocracy or matriarchal rule obtained
amongst them.

Here then, as in the case of mummification, we have the
clearest evidence of a feminine cult on either side of the


Atlantic, with vestigial traces in the history and traditions.


of its islands, both submerged and surviving. If I have
said nothing of witchcraft in the Antilles it is because it
has not yet been proven how much of the great cult of


Obeah which now exists there is African in origin and how.


much American. But that powerful American elements |


have intermingled with and sophisticated it there can be


no question. In any case, the “ bridge " between Europe
and America, so far as the witch or feminine cult is con-
cerned, is obvious enough. It might be formulated:


Aurignacian witcheraft—(Vaulderie or witchcraft, its off.


shoot, in Southern France and Northern Spain during the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries)—the Magades of the
Canaries—the Amazons of Africa and the Atlantic island
Hesperia—the Ixcuiname and Ciuateteó of Mexico. The
apostles of what we may, perhaps, call “the Pacific
Route ” cannot, I venture to say, bring to the aid of their
fascinating theory—a theory quite legitimate so long as
it does not seek world-wide dominion—any such evidence


133 The Evidence from Witchcraft


as would seem to substantiate the introduction of witch-
eraft from Asia, where shamanism is almost entirely a
masculine institution.

Summarising the evidence, we find that :

(1) A cult of female sorcerers (witchcraft) obtained
among the Crö-Magnons, precisely similar to that which
existed later in the same era in France and Spain.

(2) That this cult was reflected among the Guanches of
the Canary Islands.

(3) That it is to be found in its entirety in Mexico.

(4) That it did not reach America by way of Asia.

(5) That other female cults of the kind (Amazons, Gor-
gons) are associated with the traditions of the mythical
islands of the Atlantic.

(6) That these conclusions traverse the opinions of those
who hold that witchcraft is a thing wholly European.


CHAPTER VIII


ETHNOLOGICAL EVIDENCE

N extraordinary lack of material evidence not-
A withstanding, little or no dubiety now exists in
the minds of the official anthropologists of the
United States that the American continent received the

greater part of its aboriginal human stock from N.E. Asia,
although it is not disputed that throughout the ages
emigrants from other sources may have landed on its
shores. Not only does America furnish no tangible evi-
dence of antiquity so great as to support the theory of an
independent origin for Ámerican man, but it has failed so
far to afford satisfactory evidence of the arrival of man on
the coast in remote geologic times. All American aboriginal
culture is classed as Neolithic, and there appears to be no
evidence of Palzolithic life from Bering Strait to Tierra

del Fuego.

It is assumed that to reach the New World from the
Old cultureless man, devoid of fire and clothing, would
have required a climate at the point of entrance which
would compare with that of Southern California to-day,
and even if it could be shown that climatic conditions were |
favourable at a given period, it would still be necessary
to prove that representatives of human stock actually
reached and passed the gateway at that period, no matter |
what other species of mammals accomplished the feat.
As will be shown, the failure to discover decidedly early
forms of crania in America must be regarded as strong |
evidence against the arrival of man in the continent in
Tertiary or Quaternary time. |

Assuming a common place of origin for man in some .
part of the Old World, America would naturally be the
last of the great areas to be reached. If man did reach
the American continent by way of Bering Strait it must |
have been at a comparatively recent period, geologically
speaking, for the ice sheet in these regions persisted until
an epoch which is variously estimated at from 7000 to
20,000 years ago, and indeed still persists there. His arrival
in N.W. America may date from one of the recurring inter-
vals of climatic mildness which intervened during the long
and rigorous conditions imposed by the Ice Age. Tribes
acclimatised in Siberia would readily make a home in the


134


138 Ethnological Evidence


Valley of the Yukon, but intervening conditions must have
made it difficult for them to reach the Valley of the
Columbia, or the St. Lawrence, for many centuries. But
migration southward would present no such difficulties,
and their spread over the Mississippi Valley to the south
would be quickly accomplished, nor would the passage
from North to South America present any insuperable
obstacles.

In all probability the first settlement of America did not
begin until the peoples of Northern Asia had acquired a
degree of cultural development somewhat analogous to
that of the more primitive hunting, fishing, fire-using tribes
of the far north in recent times. Arriving in small groups,
the movement would be hesitating and slow. The pioneers
would camp along the ocean shores and river courses, and
only after a considerable lapse of time would they negotiate
the mountain ranges and ice-clad areas. The culture of
those who went southward would alter insensibly according
to needs and environment, and in time far-reaching
changes would be initiated.

After carefully weighing the evidence collected by him
in Alaska, Dall reached the conclusion that the earliest
midden deposits on the Aleutian Islands are probably
about 3000 years old. Indeed the testimony of racial and
cultural phenomena when studied apart from geological
evidence does not seem to indicate clearly an antiquity
for the presence of man in America beyond a few thousand
years. On the other hand, the geological evidence of man’s
presence there would seem to point to occupation towards
the close of the last glacial period in middle N. America.
This geological evidence is extensive but by no means
satisfactory, and in the present state of knowledge it is
impossible to accept it as final. Everything points, then, to
the conclusion that in all probability America was first
peopled by way of Bering Strait at an epoch not less than
7000 and not more than 20,000 years ago.

Since geologic observations were first set on foot a vast
body of testimony has been collected regarding man’s
presence on the continent, and here it is only possible to
summarise this rather scantily. South America seems to
furnish the most primitive data, and Sefior Ameghino and
others have sought to push man’s antiquity in that sub-


Atlantis in America 136
continent back to the early Tertiary Period of the Eocene, -


a time when as yet even the anthropoids were not de-
veloped. An exhaustive examination of the claims of the
South American School by Dr. Ales Hrdlitka of the U.S.
National Museum and Dr. Bailey Willis of the U.S. Geo-


logical Survey left little doubt as to the true character of
its assumptions, which were found to be based on “ very
imperfect and incorrectly interpreted data, and in many


instances on false premises.””? The geologic determinations,
no less than the faulty consideration of the circumstances


relating to the human remains discovered in South America, |


particularly as to the possibility of their accidental] intro-
duction into older strata, and the lack of anatomical know-
ledge displayed by the finders, made it clear that even the
best authenticated of their discoveries must be classed as
* doubtful.” In the words of Holmes “ there appears to
be no very cogent reason for assigning any of the cultural
traces to sources other than tribes occupying the region
in comparatively recent times.”

In North America from 1880 onwards a most imposing
body of evidence was gathered to substantiate the claim
for the presence of Tertiary Man, especially in California,
where mining operations resulted in numerous discoveries.
But practically the same disabilities attach to it as to the
South American data. Most of these discoveries were
made by inexpert observers, and it has been demonstrated
that the antiquity claimed for them “required a human
race older by at least one-half than the Pithecanthropus
erectus of Dubois." Moreover, they were associated with
artifacts which could certainly not be assigned to the
Tertiary Period, and the knowledge that the western half
of the North American coast has been completely re-
modelled, geologically speaking, twice or three times since
that period at once disabuses such claims of all authenticity.
Still, as Holmes admits, “certain portions of the deep
gravels appear to have yielded traces of human occupancy
of the region during the formation of these deposits."
This partial admission does not, however, extend to such
vaunted relies of the Tertiary Period as the famous
Calaveras skull, the Lansing skull and the Nampa image, a


1 1 “ Early Man in South America,” Bulletin 52, Bureau of U.S. Ethno-
ogy.


137 Ethnological Evidence


terra-cotta figurine in human form, taken from early


. Quaternary deposits in Idaho. The crania in question


exhibit such striking analogies with those of the historic


Indians as to render their ethnological association with


these a matter of small dubiety.

The greater number of observations relating to the
geological antiquity of man in America are associated with
the closing stages of the Glacial Period in the Northern
United States. The Glacial Period in America did not
close until the retreat of the main body of the ice-sheet
beyond the Arctic shores. That retreat was necessarily
gradual, so that the terms ** Glacial ” and ** Post-Glacial ””
apply to different epochs in different American localities.
Thus the former nomenclature might be applied to a
period in the Ohio or Delaware Valleys estimated at some
20,000 years ago, whilst in the region of the Great Lakes
it refers to an antiquity only half as extensive. The con-
fused and unconsolidated nature of Post-Glacial deposits
in North America adds enormously to the difficulties
attending an estimate of their age. Man and beast, no less


. than the forces of nature, have been continuously active


in disturbing the superficial strata nor can the geological
chronology of the Old World be accepted as a trustworthy
guide in any estimate of American geology. In the case
ofthe Tertiary gravels in the Delaware Valley it was proved
that the Lenni Lenape Indians had worked certain sites
as lately as 1700. This notwithstanding, there can be no
question that men have dwelt in the Delaware Valley


» probably from the closing period of the American Ice Age,


but the collection of evidence of their presence there is


sadly hampered by the recent existence of the Stone Age


in America.
“ Thus far," remarks Holmes, “ the testimony brought


. forward is scattered, disconnected and contradictory, and
. tells no consistent story.”! He adds that in his view man
. did not reach American soil “ until after the first retreat
, of the glacial ice from middle North America." So far no


definite evidence has been gathered which seriously
militates against this conclusion, and until archeological


, data of a thoroughly trustworthy nature is forthcoming it


m


1 See Dr. H. Holmes, ‘‘ Handbook of Aboriginal Antiquities,” Bulletin
60, U.S. Bureau of Ethnology, pt. I, passim.


Atlantis in America 138


must serve as a basis for all estimates of the first presence
of man in America.

These views have naturally been combated, chiefly by
Mr. Franz Boas, who formulated the dissenting opinion
that man reached the American North-west during an
Inter-Glacial Period. The 10,000 or 20,000 years which
Holmes permits seemed to him sufficient for the growth
of American culture, but he pointed out that the ice
retreated very gradually from the connecting bridge across
the Bering Sea. In fact it still lingers there, so that a much
more recent date must be found for the opening of com-
munication by that route. This leaves a very narrow
margin for the development of aboriginal culture, and
Boas and his supporters assume that the peopling of the
New World was contemporaneous with that of Western
Europe, and that the subsequent return of the ice practi-
cally isolated the two hemispheres, leaving each to develop
as it might. They point to a certain parallelism between
Western Europe and Eastern North America, and to the
fact that European Cró-Magnon man bears in his dis-
harmonic face one of the most prominent of New World
characteristics. ‘‘ More than once," says Clark Wissler,
* attention has been called to certain vague similarities
between certain Paleolithic races and the Eskimo, and in
the New World certain older skulls from the remoter parts
of South America are not far removed from this same
Eskimo type. Incidentally, we may note that the Chancel-
ade skeleton in Western Europe, belonging to Magdalenian
time, is quite similar to the modern Eskimo. The earlier
races appearing in Europe tend to be long-headed, and
we have noted a less marked but still noticeable tendency
for the long-heads in the New World to cluster in the
extreme margins. That this is rather fundamental appears
when we regard mammals as a whole, for we read thati
* when the parallel series in Europe and North America
are sufficiently complete, they are seen to be not parallel
phyla of local evolution, but periodically recruited by
more progressive new stages, apparently from a common
centre of dispersal. The relations are like those of one
side and the other of a branching tree whose trunk-region
is unknown to us.’ The human phenomena we have been
considering appear, therefore, as but an integral part of


E.


PLATE X —STATU


Copan.


)


ya type of face


Maya t


Showing


tec a
e


139 Ethnological Evidence


mammalian expansion, and, for that reason, become more
evident.” 1

Other writers believe that future archæological research
in Asia will provide grounds for the assumption that Crô-
Magnon man and contemporaneous New World peoples
were collateral branches springing from a Central Asian
type. Mr. Wissler sums up by inferring that “‘ suggestive
parallels between earlier types of Western Europe and
America arise in a much earlier period of man’s history.
That the New World native is a direct descendant of the
Asiatie Mongolian is not to be inferred, for the differentia-
tion is evidently remote; what is implied is that some-
where in the distant past the Asiatic wing of the generalised
type diverged into strains, one of which we now know as
Mongolian and another as American.”

On the other hand some of the younger anthropologists
have sought to treat the whole matter independently and
de novo. Nelson, working in the Mammoth Cave district
of Kentucky, found two cultures, the earlier of which is
without pottery and with very little polished stone.
Spier, making an independent study of conditions at
Trenton, New Jersey, found conclusive evidence of the
existence of an earlier culture, also without pottery or
polished stone. Both of these sites are east of the Missis-
sippi River, and it may therefore be concluded that the
existence of two cultural periods in the Eastern United
States is extremely probable. *'* This treatment of remains
and artifacts by objective comparison," says Wissler,
* permits of chronological distinctions with time-relations
being arrived at by analysis, and is, in effect, the soundest
of archeeological methods, even if it has no starting-point
and does not admit of chronological comparison with Old
World remains.”’

Archeological evidence for early European penetration
is not lacking, according to Holmes. In New England
and farther north is found a highly specialised form of
the stone adze known as the gouge, which is abundant in
the region mentioned, but disappears as we approach the
Carolinas and the Ohio Valley. It is to be found in


1 The American Indian, p. 319. See also Boas, “ The History of
the American Race," Annals, New York Academy of Science, Vol. 21,
pp. 177-183.


Atlantis in America 140


Northern Europe, where the Atlantic is narrowest and most
nearly bridged by intervening islands. Within the same
area in North-east America, and thinning out, as does the
gouge, to the South and West, is to be found an object of
rare and highly specialised form, an axe-like implement
known as the hammer-stone, with a perforation for haft-
ing, and wing-like blades. In Northern Europe is found a
drilled axe of similar type. It is, says Nilsson, exactly like
the axe which the Amazons are represented as carrying in
many friezes and statues, and resembles the **4mazonia
securis " of Horace, which is also mentioned by Xenophon
in the “‘ Anabasis.” Its American homologue, says Holmes,
had no other than sacred and ceremonial functions. “It
may not be amiss to suggest that possibly in prehistoric
times examples of this type of implement were carried by
some voyager across the intervening seas, and that being
regarded by the natives as possessed of supernatural
attributes these were adopted as ‘great medicine."
Holmes also indicates Mediterranean cultural affinities in
America. “ Along the middle Atlantic shores of America,”
he says, “certain forms of artifact are found which
resemble more closely the corresponding fabrications of
the Mediterranean region than do those of other parts of
America. The round-sectioned, petaloid polished celt is
found in highest perfection in Western Europe, and in
the West Indies and neighbouring American areas, It
is absent or rare on the opposite shores of the Pacific. In
the Isthmian region we find works in gold and silver and
their alloys which display technical skill of exceptional,
even remarkable, kind, and it is noteworthy that the
method of manufacture employed, as well as some of the
forms produced, suggest strongly the wonderful metal-
craft of the Nigerian tribes of old Benin ; and, as possibly
bearing on this occurrence, we observe that the trade
winds and currents of the Atlantic are ever ready to carry
voyagers from the African shores in the direction of the
Caribbean Sea."

Again the close resemblance between the architectural
and sculptural remains of Middle America and South
eastern Asia invite comparison. In both regions the salient
structures are pyramids ascended by four steep stairways’
of stone, bordered by serpent balustrades, and surmounted


141 Ethnological Evidence


by temples. The walls of temples are embellished with a
profusion of carved ornaments and surrounded by roof-
combs of very similar design, and the caryatid is common
to both environments. It does not seem impossible that

the energetic builders of Cambodia and Java of 2000
years ago should have had sea-going craft capable of the
voyage to America. That they had in the sixth century
A.D. we know. But by that era Central American civilisa-
‘tion was already on the wane. The polished bronze axes

of Cochin China and Cambodia have their exact counter-

parts in South America, and the stone adzes and pestles

‘of the North-west coast resemble those of the Pacific

Islands more closely than they do the corresponding tools

‚of the eastern shores of America. The peculiar flat-bodied
‚stone club or mere of Samoa is distributed along the
, American Pacific coast, and Professor J. Macmillan Brown
‚of Christchurch has recently indicated the basic resem-
‚blance between the masonry of Easter Island and that of
; the Incan Peruvians.

; That American civilisation owed its inception to Poly-
. hesian immigration is a theory which recommends itself
‚to a growing number of adherents. Perhaps its most
' direct advocate is Professor J. Macmillan Brown,! who
; Sees in the architectural and other manifestations of the
' Incan culture of Peru a close resemblance to the megalithic
¡culture of Easter Island, and this again he connects with
, Polynesia, seeing in the hermit isle of the Pacific a stepping-
; stone by way of which Polynesian arts and beliefs were

' introduced to American soil. He indicates that the

; Cyclopean work of some of the burial platforms in Easter

‚Island is precisely the same in character as that to be

| found at Cuzco in Peru. On the brick-building civilisation

, of the early Andeans, Professor Brown believes, a stone-

! building culture borrowed from the Pacific was superim-

, posed by the Incas, who improved and refined it. Pro-

fessor Brown shows that certain plants which had been

acclimatised in Polynesia, the banana and the plantain,

, the leaves of which are found in Peruvian graves, flourished

i in South America, and from the presence of the sweet
_ potato he assumes Polynesian influence on the Pacific coast

y of South America, where the tuber flourished exceedingly.


y 1 Riddle of the Pacific, passim.


-= u... m e


Atlantis in America 142


In certain South American customs and forms of artistic
endeavour, too, Professor Brown discerns evidences of
Polynesian influence. The tiputa or poncho, the mantle
with a single hole for the head, which is so generally worn
from Mexico to the Argentine, he believes to be of western
insular origin. The salivary ferments common to both
areas, chicha and kava, he compares as having a unity of
origin in Polynesian practice, and the chewing of the
Andean coca with lime he likens to the practice of masti-
cating the areca nut, which is also chewed with lime in
the Pacific. Moreover, the Peruvian quipos or system of
knotted cords, the purpose of which was to serve as a
mnemonic register for facts and numbers and even to
supply the first words of songs and chants, he likens to
the mnemonic sticks used in Tahiti and among the Maori,
who also possessed knotted cords somewhat resembling
those in use in Peru. The umu or earth-oven of the
Pacific also penetrated South America by way of the west
coast, and the stone axe or adze of the western insular
arca was also adopted in the Pacific regions of South
America,

Lastly, he infers the arrival of a considerable body of
Polynesians on South American soil. Assisted by the
Humboldt current, these adventurers landed on the coast
near the site of Truxillo, and founded the now ruined city
of Grand Chimu, where still stand three doubled-walled
enclosures, each covering more than a hundred acres.
Within that nearest to the coast are the foundations of
many large edifices in front of hundreds of small cubicles,
entered only from the roof. These, he believes, were
barracks for the soldicry of the conquering intruders, who
reserved them as a fortified retreat in the last resort.
From the gateway there stretches into the sea about a mile
off a weir containing in the middle a dock large enough to
accommodate an ocean-going craft, by the aid of which
the garrison could if necessary make its escape. But the
evidence from which he chiefly identifies the invaders as
of Polynesian race is to be found in the cemetery outside
the northern wall, in which not a single shard of pottery
has been found—for of all the Pacific peoples the Poly-
nesians alone made no pottery, while the native Peruvians
lavishly furnished the graves of their dead with ceramic


[43 Ethnological Evidence


nementoes. A tradition from Lambayeque, an ancient
"ity farther to the north, has it that across the sea came
ı band of naked warriors who worshipped a god of green
stone and who ruled for a time in the neighbourhood and
ater disappeared.

From what part of Polynesia did these conquering immi-
zrants come ? Professor Brown believes that the settlers
in Grand Chimu were no mere haphazard adventurers, but
came to Peru as the result of a definite quest for a new
home. Searching for other land more or less known, they
got into the track of the trades, and were unavoidably
blown on to the Pacific coast of South America. He thinks
it not improbable that these voyagers came from the
Marquesas, where alone in the Pacific area is to be found
the combination of megalithic work and statuary repro-
duced in Incan Peru.

Setting aside the indirect character of much of Professor
Brown's evidence, it is obvious that such incursions as he
describes could have had but a slight influence on American
race and culture. The evidences of Polynesian influence in
America are slender, and probably arose out of sporadic
visitations such as he describes, visitations which, by reason
of the very hostility of the race which made them, could
leave but little traces on native art and custom. At the
same time it must be admitted that salient and striking
customs and artifacts when introduced are usually per-
sistent in character, and to find a highly involved and
elaborate form of architecture such as the megalithic in
Peru justifies a respectful consideration of the assumption
that it emanated from one or other of the Pacific regions
where it is to be found.

The argument that America was not only peopled from
Polynesia but also drew the seeds of her culture from that
region is ably summarised by Mr. Clark Wissler, who says :!
* Repeated efforts have been made to show that all the
higher culture-complexes of the New World were brought
over from the Old, particularly from China or the Pacific
Islands. Most of these writings are merely speculative or
may be ignored, but some of the facts we have cited for
correspondences to Pacific Island culture have not been
satisfactorily explained. Dixon has carefully reviewed this

1 Op. cit., 356.


Atlantis in America 144


subject, asserting in general that &mong such traits as
blowguns, plank canoes, lime-chewing, head-hunting cults,
the man’s house and certain masked dances common to
the New World and the Pacific Islands, there appears a
tendency to mass upon the Pacific side of the New World.
This gives these traits a semblance of continuous distribu-
tion with the Island culture. Yet it should be noted that
these traits, as enumerated above, have in reality a spor-
adic distribution in the New World, and that there are
exceptions. On the other hand, there is no great a priori
improbability that some of these traits did reach the New
World from the Pacific Islands."

The several routes possible to immigrants are the Bering
approach, that by way of the mid-Atlantic currents, setting
from the African coast to the shores of South America, the
middle and South Pacific currents traversing the ocean
which separates Polynesia from South America, the Japan
currents setting to the north-east, and the chain of islands
connecting Europe with Labrador. The majority of these
are certainly not very practicable for primitive voyagers,
but there are numerous instances on record of Polynesian
canoes drifting for six or eight hundred miles from their
point of departure, and of Japanese junks stranded on the
Pacific coast. Such voyagers as these carried, however,
can scarcely have affected blood and culture to any great
extent in regions already occupied, though there seems to
be good evidence that they did so in some degree.

But even the Bering route has its difficulties. There is
an interval of forty miles across a tempestuous sea, and it
does not seem probable that a primitive type of man could
have negotiated such a passage.

We have seen that Boas, and to some extent Wissler ar 1
even Holmes admit a certain cultural if not racial connec-
tion between European and American man, and that some
of these writers even hint at a definite racial relationship
between Cró-Magnon and American man. But it is no part
of my thesis to attempt to show that the American race
came exclusively from Asia, Europe, or anywhere else.
From what has gone before, I think I have made it plain
that I regard the Atlantean-Antillian influence which
reached the American continent as having been brought
thither by a relatively small number of refugees from sub-


PLATE XI.—Top. AURIGNACIAN FIGURE.
From wall-painting, Alpera, showing likeness to Maya type.


Bottom. TERRA COTTA MASK.
From Sesal, Central America, showing likeness to European type.


`


. r
a

y e

E ;

š ”
*
t


-


I45 Ethnological Evidence


merging Antillia—a cultural aristocracy rather than a
horde of immigrants.

Many circumstances support this view. The sudden and }
unheralded appearance of Maya civilisation, a culture |
without roots in the soil of America, the physical type of |
the Maya themselves, the persistence of the legends |
attached to their coming, all serve to show that a com-
paratively small but enlightened wedge of newcomers was
abruptly introduced into Guatemala from some oceanic
region to the east of that country.

The non-American character of the art, architecture and
science of this people, their non-American physical appear-
ance and the insistence of native tradition that they arrived
in the country as strangers and culture-bringers provide
the best of proof that the Maya were not only the heirs of
Atlantean culture, but that they introduced its arts and
customs into the American continent. In another chapter
I have dealt with the question of art and architecture and
their inter-relations in Europe and America, and the tra-
ditions connected with the arrival of the Maya have been
exhaustively reviewed. Let us now briefly examine the
physiological evidence.

** Briefly," because I do not place such a degree of confi-
dence in it as in the cultural and traditional evidence.
Experience has led me to be wary in drawing conclusions
as to racial relationships even from data seemingly the
most trustworthy. Generally speaking, however, the Maya
bear little or no resemblance to the other American Indian
tribes. The homogeneity of these from Alaska to Tierra
del Fuego is striking, and numerous trusted observers have
given it as their opinion that the type of American man,
from the far North to the almost Antarctie South, is one
and the same. But the Maya Indian of the pre-Columbian
period, and even the Maya of to-day, mixed though the
stock has been with Carib, negro and white, shows but
little physieal resemblance to the remainder of the
American race.

It is from the numerous sculptures of Guatemala and
Yucatan and from the native manuscripts that we obtain
the most authentic portraits of the Maya race. In these
we observe the following general physical characteristics :
flattening of the head by the application during infancy of


K


Atlantis in America 146


the cradle-board, so that in later life it slopes backward
and exhibits a high and receding forchead ; face oval, with
high cheek-bones, nose salient, occasionally almost
“ Semitic ” in shape, in other examples definitely Roman;
eye large and not Mongolian in shape; body full and
bulky; thighs stout, and in many cases almost exag.
gerated in appearance; hair thick on the scalp, and
scanty beard not uncommon. In height and weight the
Maya probably head the list among the aboriginal peoples
of America.

If one compares this with the typical Red Man—and,
from the homogeneity of the race, we may fairly assume a
typical Red Man—the basic difference between the races
will at once become apparent. In the Maya there is a lack
of the sinewy development of the Indian. The eye-orbits
are considerably larger, and the osseous structure has
marked points of dissimilarity to that of the Red Man.

Again, there is little or no resemblance between the
historic costumes of the types. The Maya feather head-
dress is nothing more or less than the panache of the
ancient Aurignacian of Spain, as seen in a painting from
Alpera. The men depicted in the cave-painting in question
might well pass for typical Maya, judging from their head-
gear. 'This implies that a definite type of head-dress or
feather-plume pass^d from Europe to America. That the
Maya feather head-dress was distributed from Central
America throughout North America is known. Indian
types are never depicted in early European pictures of
American aborigines as wearing elaborate feather head-
dresses, but a single feather only. The elaborate panache
is of late introduction from Central America. The feather
panache was distinctly a Maya thing, that is to say, an
Aurignacian thing, as were Maya art, Maya symbolism and
hieroglyphs and Maya customs.

The cranial distortion or head-flattening practised by
the Maya race seems to have been a part of the specific
culture which spread from Atlantis to Biscay on one hand
and on the other to America. At least we find it among
the Basques of Biscay in France and Spain, in the Antilles
and on the American mainland, though I cannot trace it
in the Canary Islands. Sir Daniel Wilson says that Dr.
Foville, ** a distinguished French physician at the head of


E.
bo


RE AZTEC TYP
ening by the cradle


AII.—PU


PLATE


ard.


g head-flatt


Showin


147 Ethnological Evidence


the Asylum for the Insane in the department: of Seine-
Inférieure and Charenton, has brought to light the remark-
able fact that the practice of distorting the skull in infancy
still prevails in France, by means of a peculiar head-dress
and bandages; and in his large work on the Anatomy of
the Nervous System, he has engraved examples of such
compressed heads, one of which might be mistaken for a
Peruvian sepulchral relic. The practice is probably one
inherited from times of remote antiquity, and is found
chiefly to characterise certain districts. Normandy, Gas-
cony, Limousin and Brittany are specially noted for its
prevalence, with some local variations as to its method and
results." It is also well known that deformation of the
cranium is to-day widely practised by the Basques who
occupy almost the same territory as did the Crö-Magnons
in Aurignacian times.

As regards cranial deformation among the Indian popu-
lation of the West Indies, Charlevoix says of the Haitians
in his Histoire de Isle Espagnole, ‘“ They flattened their
heads by art, thus reducing the size of their forehead,
which pleased them greatly. To do this their mothers
took care to hold them tightly pressed between their
hands or between two little boards, which, by degrees,
flattened the head, whereby the skull hardened in a
moulded shape.”

Francisco Thamara mentions that “they have narrow
foreheads, made so artificially by pressure on the sides of
the head." This is corroborated by Professor W. K.
Brooks and other writers.

A vase from Chama in Central America depicts several
Maya types which closely resemble Cró-Magnon man both
in face and figure—the large eye orbits, the high degree of
cranial capacity, the salient nose, the heavy and bulky
frame. These Maya faces strikingly resemble the “ restora-
tions ”? of Cré-Magnon man’s features made by modern
sculptors taking as the basis of their work crania found in
Aurignacian sites.

Thus in art, beliefs, custom and race we find close analo-
gies between Cr6-Magnon man, the Man of Atlantis and the
Maya of Central America. The latter, in short, appear to
be merely a later form of the Cró-Magnon type, which,
during the many centuries which intervened between


Atlantis in America 148


Aurignacian and Maya times had undergone special racial
and social development, and had after its entrance to
America become more or less mingled with the aboriginal
races. At the same time certain early South American
crania appear to indicate very definitely that bodies of
immigrants with Cró-Magnon affinities had entered the
American continent ages before the Maya set foot on it,
and that this Cró-Magnon blood is largely displayed in the
Red Man of North America few candid anthropologists ı or
anatomists will deny.


'sodA3 BART Surmoys ‘eonowy [EU zweyy wolf
movi Y NO NOISHOF MHIX 14117


ni ege


YEAR


CHAPTER IX
THE EVIDENCE FROM ART AND ARCHITECTURE


F, as I have attempted to show in the previous chapter,
the Maya were of Cró-Magnon or allied race, one would
expect to find their art-forms, although greatly de-

veloped because of the lapse of time separating them from
Aurignacian types, still bearing the basic resemblance to
those types by which it would be possible to trace both to
a common source. It is, of course, necessary to realise that
artistic developments did not proceed in the ancient world
with the rapidity which has marked the evolution of
painting in recent centuries. Those developed at no
greater rate than did mechanical and scientific processes
until the beginning of last century. But I have already
laid stress on the point that all trustworthy crities of
Aurignacian art have perceived in it no mere crude essay-
ing of savage draughtsmen or sculptors, but a highly
developed system of craftsmanship which approaches very
nearly to the excellences of the world's greatest artistic
triumphs, and as greatly surpasses the flat and spiritless
work of the Egyptian and Babylonian schools as it is
obvious that a free and untrammelled school of idealists
gifted with vision and acute observation must surpass a
merely conventional cult trudging along the beaten paths
of base imitation—or, shall we say, as a school of archeeolo-
gists, each member of which is capable of thinking for
himself, is bound in the end to outstrip the efforts of official
orthodoxy which pins its faith to the tape-measure and
eschews all empiricism.

We have already seen that Osborn alludes to the makers
of Aurignacian art as “the Paleolithic Greeks." “Artistic
observation and representation and a true sense of pro-
portion and beauty were instinctive with them from the
beginning . . . their art shows a continuous evolution and
development from the first, animated by a single motive,
namely the appreciation of beauty of form and the realistic
representation of it." Some of it “ resembles the work of
modern Cubists ? ?

Let us briefly examine Aurignacian sculpture, painting
and engraving, and the corresponding examples in Maya
art, and see how far these bear any resemblances as regards
their basic qualities. Aurignacian sculpture is confined to


149


Atlantis in America 150


the human form, usually the female form undraped. Ana-
tomical details are usually exaggerated in the early stages,
and exhibit cleverness, if not finish. In this class may be
placed the female figure from Le Mas d’Azil sculptured
from the tooth of a horse (the face is distinctly ** Maya"
in type) and the statuette in ivory from Brassempouy,
depicting a woman with exaggerated female characteristics.
The farthest eastern example of this class comes from
Willendorf, 1s carved in limestone, and the treatment of
the pendant breasts strongly resembles those seen in the
statue of a goddess found in Mexico City.

At Laussel in the Dordogne several remarkable sculp-
tures in relief have been discovered. One representing a
man might well be the prototype of many early Maya
forms.

In early Aurignacian painting, says Macalister, ** the
oldest remains are not human figures, but human hands,
which are traced upon the walls of certain caves by the
following method: a hand was pressed against the wall
and colouring matter projected upon it, either with the
other hand or by expulsion from the mouth of the artist.
The process finished, the hand would be left silhouetted,
or rather stencilled, upon the wall. The most remarkable
series of such hands exists in the cave of Gargas, Hautes-
Pyrenees. . . . A very curious feature of the Gargas hands
is the mutilation of the fingers which they display. In
many of them the fingers have almost disappeared. "This
has been explained as (a) evidence for the prevalence of a
mutilating disease, such as leprosy; (b) evidence for a
custom of finger-lopping, a form of mutilation found among
nature-folk in several quarters of the modern world ; and
(c) as merely the result of bending the fingers in the process
of stencilling. The third hypothesis may be excluded, as
the flexibility of & pianist's fingers would be needed in
some cases, and in others the bending postulated is impos-
sible. The first is improbable. There are sufficient
analogies for the second to make it the most likely explana-
tion. It is to be noticed that the hands at Castillo and at
Font-de-Gaume do not display these mutilations.” 2

Now this practice we find duplicated in many parts of


1 A Tezt-book of European Archeology, p. 455.
* Ibid., p. 458.


I 5I The Evidence from Art and Architecture


America. During the period of mourning among the

Crow Indians, says Beckworth, “ fingers were dismem-
 bered as readily as twigs.” Slaves in Mexico before
Sacrifice stencilled their hands on the door-posts of their
captors.

During the Magdalenian or middle stage of Aurignacian

art human gave place to animal sculpture. The Espelun-
gues horse and the superb head of a horse from Mas d’Azil

are worthy of Athens in her prime, as is the marvellous
series of relief sculptures discovered in the rock-shelter at
Cap Blanc, near Laussel, which depict a procession of
horses. Detail now begins to show itself in engraving,
the first signs of that luxuriance which was to flower so
superabundantly in Maya sculpture. Animal forms
‘became increasingly numerous. Among these the bison
wellnigh predominates, just as he does in the art of the
Plains Indians. Says Macalister (p. 479): ‘‘ Some of these
marks or groups of marks have been claimed as proving
the astonishing theory that Magdalenian man had evolved
a form of writing by symbolic signs. But such a thesis
cannot be sustained. The records of hunting expeditions
.and of similar events found among American Indians and
other nature-folk, which have been adduced in corrobora-
tion, tend rather to disprove than to support it." The
general resemblance between what may be called the
“* animal ” stage in Aurignacian art and that of the North
American Indian hunting tribes is indeed much too close
to be fortuitous. Compare the pictures of a stag and
buffalo hunt from Cogul with the drawing taken from the
book of an Indian prisoner at St. Augustine, representing
the same thing, or the Aurignacian wall-painting at Alpera
depicting a great hunt with the petroglyph at Millsboro,
Pennsylvania. If these do not spring from the same artistic
sources then there is no resemblance between any two forms
in the whole range of art.

To come now to Maya art and its associations with
Aurignacian forms. It is of course essential to turn to
motifs. The most important is the mammoth motif.

The mammoth is very frequently pictured in Aurig-
nacian art, as in the statuette found at Predmost and else-


1 See Macalister, op. cit., pp. 495 and 497, and Dellenbaugh, The North
American Indians of Yesterday, pp. 43 and 61.


Atlantis in America 152


where. And as the accompanying illustrations show,
mammoths, and art-forms derivative of them, are frequent
enough in Maya art. The theory that the form of the
prehistoric elephant is reflected in Maya art differs from
that of Professor Elliot Smith! (who believes the Asian
elephant to be depicted in certain sculptures at Copan), in
that it supposes such representations in Central America
to be memories of the Atlantic elephant. Plato says most
emphatically that the elephant was a native of Atlantis,
and doubtless the ancient Maya sculptors had handed
down to them the memory of these Atlantean elephants.
The so-called elephant gods with mammoth characteristics
were invariably associated with the eastern point of the com-
pass, and not with the west. Thus God B, as he is usually
called, an “'elephant-headed ” god, who is probably
Quetzalcoatl, is associated, says Schellhas, with the signs
of the east, and as Quetzalcoatl is, of course, also associated
with the mystic western land of Tlapallan in the Atlantic.
He carries Quetzalcoatl’s peculiar perforated staff, the
Caluac, and is connected with the Tree of Life, another
Atlantean or Hesperidean symbol. God K, another deity
with an elephant-like head, is regent or lord of the Ben
group of years belonging to the east, and has rightly been
identified by Fórstemann as a deity of the storm, and by
Seler as a god of water and the ocean. So it is self-evident
that these elephant-like divinities were associated in the.
minds of the Maya with the east and the Atlantic rather
than with the west and the Pacific. It seems to me much
more reasonable to conjecture that they are the memories
of Atlantean mammoths rather than of Asiatic elephants.
The elephant or mammoth motif has abundant illustration
in the architecture of Central America.

Another Aurignacian memory seems to be exhibited in
the frequent representation of human bones in Maya
sculpture and drawing, both as ear ornaments and textile
patterns. These recall the preservation and painting of
the bones of Crö-Magnon man, a custom which we have
seen spread widely throughout the American continent,
Spinden comments on the extraordinary figuring of the
bone motif in Maya art.?

If we pass to a consideration of the shell ornaments of


1 See his Elephants and Hthnologists, 1924. * Maya Art, p. 85.


The elephant-headed god.
The mammoth or elephant at Copan. .


E


Atlantis in America 154


the American races we will find some curious parallels with


Aurignacian practice.

Macalister tells us that Aurignacian Man was buried
** possibly in wrappings of hides, and certainly in elaborate
ornaments, presumably of leather, into which devices of
shells had been sewn. "These shells covered the heads and
the breasts. In addition there were necklets, armlets,
anklets, and girdles of shells, fish vertebre and teeth of
animals."! Most of the shells he says were “ perforated
for suspension as ornaments, either singly or grouped in
collars or similar decorations. The holes were made in


different ways. Sometimes a saw-cut was made in the


shell surface, by means of a flint flake, to reduce the
shell wall to perforable dimensions, a flint needle being
then thrust through the remainder. Sometimes the saw-
cut was absent, the hole being drilled from the first ; and
sometimes the face of the shell was ground flat by being
rubbed over a rough surface, the perforation being then
drilled through the wall of the shell, thus reduced to a
convenient thinness.” ?


Now this is precisely the manner in which American


wampum was manufactured. Wampum, as its name
implies, is manufactured from beads laboriously ground
from various species of shells, either clam, periwinkle or
whelk, though beads made from other and fresh-water
species are to be found in collections.

The process of manufacture was involved, and demanded
careful manipulation and long practice. The wampum
made on the Atlantic seaboard was either white or purple,
the white manufactured from the periwinkle shell being
the more common, and the darker shade, which was more
esteemed, from the blue portion of the clam shell. First
the thin portions of the shell were removed with a light
hammer, then the tougher remaining portion was clamped
in a split stick and ground into an octagonal shape. It
was then firmly secured to a bench by a heavy weight,
and then drilled lengthwise by a bow-drill braced against
a plate held on the operator’s chest. From a vessel sus-
pended over the drill drops of water fell to lessen the
friction, which otherwise would have caused the shell to


1 Macalister, A T'ezt-book of European Archeology, p. 512.
* Ibid., p. 526.


155 The Evidence from Art and Architecture


‘split. The beads were then polished and hung on hempen


strands or twine made of gut, about a foot in length.
Beverley, in his History of the Indians, says that those
of the Virginia and Carolina seaboard had two varieties of


 wampum, peak and roanoke. The peak was of two colours,


dark purple and white, which were alike in size and made


: from different parts of the same shell. They also manu-
. factured from the same substance what he calls runtees.
"These were either large, like an oval bead, drilled through


the length of the oval, or they were flat and circular,


. nearly an inch in width and one-third of an inch thick, and
drilled edgewise. Roanoke was made from the cockle-
' Shell, which was broken into small fragments with the
edges left rough, and drilled through it in the same manner


as the other shell beads.
But wampum was also made by the prehistoric men of
America. For this statement we have the authority of


the late M. H. Beuchat, who writes: “ L’usage de la


. coquille de grands univalves (Busycon perversum) comme


coupes à boire parait avoir été général dans les regions du


Sud. Peut-être les nombreuses coquilles de cette espèce


trouvées dans les mounds ont-elles servi à cet usage, et il


. est probable que les restes trés nombreux d’Unio qu'on y
trouve étaient des cuillers. Mais les objets de coquille
- travaillés sont presque tous des ornements. Les perles y


sont trés abondantes. Les plus simples sont faites de


petites coquilles d'univalves (marginella, oliva, cypres)


perforées. Une autre variété trés commune est la perle
en forme de bouton, plaque circulaire découpée dans un
test de coquille et percée d'un trou au centre. Ilexiste aussi
en quantites considérables des perles cylindriques, faites de
la columelle de certains mollusques univalves ; ces cylindres,
de coleur blanche, pourpre ou noire, ressemblent compléte-
ment à ceux dont les Indiens du Canada et de la Nouvelle-
Angleterre faisaient leurs wampums."

It would seem then that the manufacture of this
* wampum " was an art which Aurignacian Man had in
common with prehistoric and historic American Man.
Shell ornaments are found elsewhere, but not wampum.

The architectural form by which the art of Africa is
chiefly linked to that of America is the pyramid. Where
did the pyramid originate, and what is its signifi-


Atlantis in America 156


eance—and is that significance the same in America as
in Africa ?

That the pyramid was evolved out of the idea of the
sacred hill appears as the most probable solution of the
mystery underlying its origin. In early Egypt, Mexico
and Peru certain hills and mountains were regarded as
especially sacred, and were even regarded as totemic or
tribal lodges. These eminences were looked upon as the
homes of powerful supernatural beings, and sometimes as
the places of origin of the clan or tribe. We have seen
that the mountain is clearly associated with the tradition
of Atlantis, both in Plato’s account and in those American
legends which seem to refer to Atlantean circumstances.
The mountain in Mexico is in many cases a kind of natural
pyramid, the dwelling of the goddess of fertility, just as it
was her altar. In the more civilised portions of the
western continent it was faced with stone, like the Egyp-
tian pyramid, but in what is known as the region of the
Mound-Builders it is constructed from earth alone. The
link between the Mexican pyramid constructed from
masonry and the simple earthen hill is provided by the
earthen mound sacred to the goddess Coatlicue close to the |
teocalli or pyramid of her son Uitzilopochtli at Mexico,
and intended to represent the sacred hill near Tollan |
where she was supposed to dwell.

Persons of importance were buried in these hills, the
act, it was believed, placing their remains under the
especial protection of the genius or divinity of the height.
From the mountains it was thought, both in America and
Egypt, the sun proceeded on his rising. Thus from the
mountain near Tollan which was identified with Coatlicue
it was thought her son Uitzilopochtli was reborn each day
as the sun, and certain Egyptian pyramids are alluded to
in some texts as “‘ the mountain of Ra," the height from
which the sungod rose every morning.

The earliest Mexican pyramids were mere masses of
earth or adobe raised in imitation of the sacred hill. The
first Egyptian pyramids were likewise built of earth, for
the Nile mud from which they were constructed bakes so
naturally into brick by the heat of the sun alone that it
can scarcely be regarded as other than the natural soil.
American and Egyptian pyramids have thus a common |


PLATE XIV.—AMERICAN PYRAMIDS.
Top. Plan of Peruvian pyramid.


Bottom. Maya form of pyramid.


[57 The Evidence from Art and Architecture


"volutionary history. Both would appear to trace their
lescent to the sacred hill of Atlantis mentioned by Plato,
v hich, according to Mrs. M. A. Blackwell, has similar dimen-
ions to those of the pyramid of Xochicalco in Mexico.

Plato tells us that this sacred hill was a ** low mountain ”
ıt a distance of fifty stadia from the centre of the island.
Chis height the god Poseidon enclosed with zones of sea
and land to ensure its sanctity. This “low mountain ”
[ take to be the prototype of both the American and the
Egyptian pyramid. I may once more be permitted to
draw attention to the extraordinary resemblance between
the names of the goddesses who presided over the Atlan-
Lean and Mexican sacred hills respectively—Cleito and
Coatlicue—whose respective sons were Atlas and Uitzil,
both twin brothers, both mountain-born, both the sup-
porters of the world, and with many other points of
contact and resemblance.

Do we find similar mythic circumstances connected with
the pyramid in Egypt ? The goddess Isis, wife of Osiris,
is, like Coatlicue, a goddess of fertility. On her head she
wears the ideogram of her name (explained as meaning
** the House of Osiris ””), which is obviously a pictograph
of a hill or high place crowned by a shrine. “ The House
of Osiris " can mean little else than “ pyramid," for Osiris
was a “dead ” god, and was thought of as reclining in his
pyramid tomb. Horus, the son of Osiris and Isis, is a
figure almost identical with the Mexican Uitzilopochtli.
Like him, Horus is a sun-god, he is depicted as having a
bird's head, he is a mighty warrior, and, like Uitzilopochtli,
the avenger of his mother. Like the Cabiri, he is connected
with smith-work and the lance. Moreover, human sacri-
fiee was associated with the early phases of the cult of
Horus, as it was with the cult of the Mexican Uitzilopochtli,
for when he took prisoner the followers of his enemy Set,
he bound them with chains and slaughtered them one by
one on a later occasion. The followers of Horus were a
caste of sun-worshippers, and human blood was as neces-
sary to the sustenance of the sun in early Egypt as it was
in ancient Mexico, where the military caste, living under
the patronage of the sun, always refrained from slaying an
enemy in battle if they could make him prisoner, to be
sacrificed at leisure. We seem then to have in Egypt a


Atlantis in America 158


counterpart of what may be called the ** pyramid complex”
in Mexico—a mother goddess and son, typifying the moun-
tain and the sun which arises therefrom, and associated
with the pyramid and burial of the mummified dead.

It is also not a little remarkable that Set is placed in
the North in opposition to Horus in the South, just as
Tezcatlipoca is to Uitzilopochtli. Set and Tezcatlipoca
are both associated with the North, with the constellation
of the Great Bear, and with darkness, cold and death, and
both are alike the deities of the darker side of magic and
necromancy.

Now if our theory of a pyramid culture-complex in the
region of Atlantean culture be correct we shall find
pyramids in the Canaries and the Antilles. According to
M. Gattefossé, we do find them in the Canaries. He says:
* Quelquefois aussi, des tumult en forme de pyramide
étaient formés au-dessus du cadavre placé sur des tréteaux,
la tête dirigée vers le Nord. D'autres pyramides paraissent
étre des exvotos des temples ou des figurations divines ou
astronomiques, peut-étre à la fois l'un et l'autre, comme
chez les Egyptiens ou les Rouges du Mexique. Les cata-
combes du Baranco de Herquo, decouvertes au temps de
Clavija, et celles de Laguna sont bien connues ; les zax0s
qui en ont été retirées figurent à l'Escurial et dans divers
musées.” 1

Moreover, we encounter the pyramid or its prototype in
the Antilles, the other insular link between Europe and
America. Says Fewkes:? “Just outside the boundary
wall of every one of the inclosures studied by the author
there were found one or more low mounds which bear
superficial evidences of having been made by human hands.
Excavations near one of these mounds near Utuado were
made by the writer in 1903, and a brief reference to the
result of his work appears in the following quotation from
his account of Porto Rican pictography: In my studies
of one of these inclosures at Utuado I found that the main
road from that town to Adjuntas had cut through the edge
of one of the mounds, revealing, a few feet below the
surface, a layer of soil containing fragments of pottery, a
few broken celts, and the long bones of an adult. This


1 Adam, p. 94.
2 Aborigines of Porto Rico, p. 82 fi.


59 The Evidence from Art and Architecture


liscovery induced me to extend a trench diametrically
hrough the mound, parallel with the sides of the inclosure.
Che depth of this trench, at the middle of the mound, was
‘bout 9 feet. The excavation revealed that the mound
‘ested on a hard gravel base and was composed of soil so
ich that some of it was carried away by the neighbouring
armer for use as fertilizer. This earth was very moist and
ll-adapted to the preservation of bones or other fibrous
naterial. Nevertheless, we found ten skeletons of adults
und infants, with mortuary objects so distributed as to
ndicate that they had been placed there as offerings. One
>f the best preserved of these skeletons was found in a
sitting posture with its legs drawn to its chest and with
ceramic objects lying at one side. The frontal bases of the
skulls were abnormally flattened, as in those from the
caves from the northern part of Santo Domingo, described
by Dr. Llenas. The discovery that these mounds are
Indian cemeteries sheds light on the nature and use of the
neighbouring enclosures. The conclusions drawn from my
excavations of the Utuado mounds are that large numbers
of the dead were buried just outside the dance courts and
that the elaborate areitos, or mortuary dances, were held
in the latter. There is evidence also of the interment of
the dead in caves, human skeletons from the cave at Jobo,
near the road from Arecibo to Utuado having been given
to me by Dr. Cabello. But the majority of the prehistoric
Porto Rican dead were undoubtedly buried in the ceme-
teries above referred to." We thus find prototypal pyra-
mids in the Antilles associated with the burial of the dead,
mortuary dances, the Maya custom of flattening the skull,
and, as Fewkes states on a later page, with ancestor-worship.
From Egypt to Peru, then, we find the pyramid associated
with the embalmed body. In Mexico and Peru pyramids
were employed as burial sites. Near Palenque, in Chiapas,
the city of Quetzalcoatl, Waldeck found two pyramids,
almost perfectly preserved, pointed at the apex, like
those of Egypt, their sides forming equilateral triangles.
The Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan, which is alluded
to further on, has an opening 69 feet from its base, entering
upon a gallery in which it is possible to make progress on
hands and knees only. This inclines gently for a distance
of 25 feet, ending in two chambers each 5 feet square,


Atlantis in America 160


obviously intended for the reception of mummies. Ir
describing this gallery Lowenstein remarks that it is
** 157 feet long, increasing in height to over 64 feet as it
penetrates the pyramid; the well is over 6 feet square,
extending apparently to the base and up to the summit,
Other cross-galleries are blocked by debris." This state-
ment is curiously reminiscent of the description of thé
interior of the Egyptian Pyramid of Cheops.

It is obvious that these structures and many others to
be found over the length and breadth of Mexico and Central
America cannot be directly associated with Egyptian in-
fluence. It is known that pyramid building did not
originate in Egypt, that, indeed, it was not initiated in the
Nile country until the period of the IIIrd Dynasty, or
about 3000 s.c. Prior to that epoch the graves of the
Egyptian kings were mere sand-pits lined with bricks made
from Nile mud. The stone or granite pyramid was as-
suredly introduced by a race from the west who had had
experience of the mason's craft elsewhere, the same people
who raised the menhirs and dolmens and vast stone circles
of Brittany and Britain—the Iberians, the descendants of
the Azilian-Tardenoisians, the third wave of Atlantean
immigrants to Europe. They have left à clearly defined
record of their eastward progress in the monuments they
raised en route, and it 1s clear that in the more favourable
environment of Egypt their craft took on a form and finish
reminiscent of a former type which had been evolved in
an eqtally favourable atmosphere. As in the case of
mummification, with which it was associated, the same
phenomenon took place in America. Indeed, the early
efforts of these wandering stone-masons are to be descried
in American dolmens, and the Maya stele is nothing but a
highly elaborate development of the more humble menhir
or stone shaft which marked the grave of the king or tribal
chieftain.

The dolmen, as is generally known, is a large stone
upheld by three other great stones and covered with an
earthen mound. It is a step either in the evolution or
degeneracy of the pyramid. It, too, was employed asa
burial chamber, and may, indeed, have been a degenerate
form of the original Atlantean pyramid or sacred hill, the
memory of which had grown dim among a people who had


Or The Evidence from Art and Architecture


‚een separated from the fatherland for generations, and
vho had lost the mechanical knowledge essential to the
aising of great masses of stone—if, indeed, they had ever
»ossessed it. For the Egyptian and Maya pyramids may
1ave been nothing but attempts to reproduce artificially
he great traditional sacred hill of their Atlantean father-
and.

Around this sacred hill the entire traditions of the
Atlantean emigrants must have clustered. It was their
„ebanon, their Sinai, on which stood the temple of their
rods, and in the caverns of which, doubtless, the em-
;almed bodies of the founders of their civilisation, their
zings and priests, were preserved.

The area of funerary mounds and pyramids in North
America is immense. It extends from the Red River on
she North to the Gulf of Mexico in the South, and from the
Middle West to the Atlantic. The majority of the mounds
; Ohio, Kentucky, Tennessee and elsewhere consist of
»onical earthen structures of a greater or less altitude. In
¿hese funerary mounds, which occur near the north-western
imits of the area alluded to, bodies are deposited in a
shallow grave, in Ohio and Virginia burial is associated
with burning, while in W. Tennessee there exists a peculiar
method of mound sepulture, the bodies resting on a floor

of half-fired brick and being surrounded by votive objects.

Many of these funerary mounds have been found! “to
“over a single skeleton: though in one or two exceptional
instances in other localities, of which the Grave Creek
‘Mound of Virginia is the most remarkable, more than one
‘body has been deposited under the mound. Numerous as
monuments of this class are, their relative numbers, when
¿compared with the sacred and civic works of the same
‘districts, abundantly prove that they are not the common
places of sepulture, but monumental memorials of the dis-
‘tinguished dead. They vary in size from 6 to 80 feet in
height, but the greater number range from 15 to 25 feet,
‘and frequently occur in groups, where smaller mounds are
ranged round one of considerable dimensions.” In one
„of these mounds in the Scioto Valley “traces of a rude
(sarcophagus or framework of unhewn logs were found, the
¡cast of which still remained in the compacted earth. The


Ü


1 Sir Daniel Wilson, Prehistoric Man, pp. 358-9, Vol. II.
L


Atlantis in America 162


bottom had been laid with matting or wood, the only
remains of which were a whitish stratum of decomposed
vegetable matter; and the timbers once covering the
simple sarcophagus had in like manner decayed and
allowed the superincumbent earth to fall on the enclosed
skeleton."!

The majority of these mounds, then, contained but a
single corpse, and in this they resemble the Egyptian
pyramid and the Mexican teocalli.

In North Carolina the system of inhumation was to
make an excavation in triangular form 2 or 8 feet deep,
in which the corpse was deposited. Over this was raised
a small pyramid of earth. In Ohio and Western Virginia
skeletons have been found buried in coffins of wood or
stone covered by heaped stones. In Illinois, Kentucky
and Tennessee stone cists or coffins are numerous. Some
of the bodies were placed on stone slabs or tables, reminis-
cent of the slab of the mummifier, and others were disposed
round a given centre in a radiating manner. Many of these
bear traces of having been partially consumed by fire, so
that embalmment must have been followed by partis!
cremation as a concession to local religious practice and
belief—a strange mingling of the two processes of mummi-
fication and cremation, exhibiting a very marked con
dition of culture-mixing, or the opposition and subsequent
blending of two distinct racial cultures, immigrant and
native.

In the Mississippi region two types of funerary mound are
met with—one a simple tumulus of earth mingled with
stones or composed entirely of stone, thus exhibiting stages
in the development or degeneration of the idea of the pyra-
mid or sacred hill. In the stone mounds the bodies are
found enclosed in stone coffins, while in those composed of
soil alone they have been cremated. The latter examples
are probably those of a race of less culture, who copied in
earth the stone erections of a people of higher advancement.

Literally thousands of pyramids or earthen mounds not
employed for funerary purposes are also to be found on


1 For a general discussion of the pyramidal mounds of North America,
see W. H. Holmes, ** Aboriginal Pottery of the United States," Bulletin 20
of the U.S. Bureau of Ethnology, and Cyrus Thomas, Introduction to th
Study of North American Archeology.


rather ht th UT
sn Hh Ms Megat | i e Jm
itis d As Be NAA NN

fs S en ANS


Ih y Nn)


i N 0) ^ h
VAL VT SN cy
14 D RA) Ws T STI
Mpa 3, * aa vi "
CR kon MT
j ) JH 4 f


n VARY N t


a
A oo ps ie 7 N I


Jf i
[thy JAN
A yi la


j


ue Biff : ^N
Bot P ci pop:
aul pp DI iE UP Fs M MM A

NOD hr HEINE
: kt i Mo, ER
MN / m e "rm k “igi Pru) pem


| t: y v
Bal 4 : d "i , y oy
t, - >
^ ^ ©


ND.


-
)


PLATE XV.—BURIAL MOU
In Caldwell County, N. Carolina (after C. Thomas, ''* Mound Explorations.’’)


——


tb...


63 The Evidence from Art and Architecture


‘Orth American soil. These are the erections of a race
alled by archeologists “the Mound Builders." The
>al home of the Mound Builders was the basin of the
2ntral and upper Mississippi and its eastern affluents,
specially the Ohio, the groups of such erections lying out-
ide this area being classed as radiations from it. The
Iound Builders have long provided Americanists with an
rcheeological problem of extraordinary complexity. In-
eed the pyramids they built have been associated with
early every race, civilised and savage, under the sun.
"heir erections stretch into the north near the Great Lakes
nd far into the territory of Canada.

** Unquestionably," says Professor Konrad Haebler,
* the artificial mounds were the work of a sedentary race,
or the Indian who roamed about in the state of a nomad
‘ould not possibly have had time, power or inclination to
'rect even the most insignificant of these earthworks, not
:O speak of the structures—not very numerous, but of
mposing dimensions—of Etowah, Cahokia, etc., the largest
of which had a content of 3,000,000 to 4,000,000 cubic feet.
To erect such structures required a population of far
greater density than had ever been found anywhere on the
North American continent, but one that must have been
excellently organised to be able to subject such labour as
those gigantic works entailed to a common will. But what
a race, what a state must that have been which not only
produced those structures but protected the banks of the
chief river courses for many miles with extensive fortifi-
cations such as would seem in early times to have accom-
panied the Mississippi in an almost uninterrupted chain
from the mouth of the Arkansas up to the Illinois. And
an almost incredible range of territory is given to this
state if, instead of merely taking into account the region
most thickly covered with such earthworks, we extend its
boundaries as far as the earthworks can be found."

À population of such density as the presence of these
mounds implies must naturally have depended upon an
agricultural mode of life. Indeed this was demonstrated
on the excavation of the mounds, as was the fact that their
builders possessed high skill in the making of pottery and
objects in eopper. That they must have had a special
knowledge of architecture was also proved beyond all


Atlantis in America I


doubt by the almost incredible number of earthwor
erected by them, for structures were found which repr
duced the mathematical figures of the polygon, circ,
rectangle and square with an accuracy which investigates
pronounced to be quite inconceivable without the use d
instruments.

The general opinion is that these vast structures wet
raised by the ancestors of the present Indians. De Soto
indeed, in the sixteenth century, observed several of then
in the occupation of Indian tribes, who employed them u
fortresses or places of refuge. This, no doubt, was a legacy
to the native tribes from some race of higher culture, but
that the Indians of North America conceived the idea of
these massive structures in the first instance, or that they
developed the architectural skill or invented the instru:
ments necessary to their erection is a notion too grotesque
for acceptance.

I believe the Mound Builders of North America to have
been the cultured descendants of those Maya-Toltecs who
found their way from Guatemala to Mexico, and who,
quite conceivably, may have pushed much farther north.
Indeed this view is accepted by many authorities of
weight. Their structures, indeed, are much too similar
to the teocalli pyramids of Mexico not to have had?
common origin with these, and when we learn that human
sacrifice was occasionally celebrated on their summits,
little more proof is required to make it clear that the race
which introduced them into the Mississippi region was ont
and the same with that which raised the horrid pyramids
of slaughter to Uitzilopochtli and his brother in Mexico.
Like the Mexican and Maya pyramids, the erections of the
Mound Builders can scarcely be anything else than remins
cences of the sacred hill of Atlantis. Moreover, just 5i
that eminence was associated with the sacrifice of the
sacred bull, so were the pyramids of the Mound Builder
associated with the ceremonial slaughter of the buffalo.

At Teotihuacan, in Mexico, the teocallis or pyramids 0
the sun and moon still stand. The teocalli of the moo
has a base covering 426 feet and a height of 187 fed.
That of the sun is of greater dimensions, with a base?
785 feet and a height of 208 feet. These pyramids wert
divided into four stories, three of which remain. On tht


65 The Evidence from Art and Architecture


ummit of that of the sun stood a temple containing a
‘reat image of that luminary carved from a rough block
f stone. In the breast was inlaid a star of the purest gold,
eized afterwards as loot by the insatiable followers of
‚ortes. From the teocalli of the moon a path runs to where
v little rivulet flanks the ** Citadel.” This path is known
is **'The Path of the Dead,” from the circumstance that
t is surrounded by some nine square miles of tombs and
‚umuli, and, indeed, forms a road through the great
:emetery. The literature of the subject is extensive—
quite as extensive in fact as that of the Egyptian pyramid.
lhere is thus no gap in pyramidical construction between
Egypt and America save that of the Atlantic abyss.

The pyramid is thus as much a thing American as a
ching Egyptian, which implies that, occurring so far apart
as they do, neither form can have originated in the area
in which it is found, and that the place of origin must be
sought in an intermediate (oceanic) area.


CHAPTER X
FOLK-MEMORIES OF AN ATLANTIC CONTINENT


HAVE already made it clear that a very definite

traditional memory of Atlantis-Antillia lingered

among the peoples of Europe until a comparatively
recent period, and that the name Antillia was bestowed
by them upon the present West India Islands naturally,
and as if in the full knowledge that such a locality had
always been known to them. Nothing, indeed, is more
clear from medieval maps and traditions than that our
forefathers were convinced that certain land-masses
occupied the mid-Atlantic. But the idea they entertained
regarding these must not in all cases be confounded with
the notion of a great western continent. When the con-
tinental character of the mainland of America was at last
realised, it came to everyone in Europe, learned and un-
learned, as à surprise. But the tradition of islands or
island-continents lying in the Atlantic had for centuries
been current and can only have arisen out of a most
ancient certainty that such lands actually existed. In
reality, many well-authenticated expeditions set sail with
the intention not of discovering but rediscovering these
Atlantic localities.

During the Victorian Age the former existence of these
mythical islands, or their identification with one region or
another, was officially scouted, but of late years much has
been done to show that many localities which our grand-
fathers firmly believed to be fabulous were actually known |
to European geographers before the dates generally
accepted as those of their several discoveries. Many an
ancient voyage which was formerly classed with the
Odyssey and the cruise of the Argo, has recently been
verified by research as having had a well-authenticated
existence.

During the nineteenth century the venerable legend of-
the voyage of St. Brandan was believed to enshrine quite
as much of the essence of legend as any other of the Irish
sagas of seafaring. The Norse tales of discovery in
America were credible enough, but this Celtic epic of the :
earthly paradise was, of course, much too rich in matter |
of faery to carry conviction. Perhaps its most acceptable |
version is that to be found in the fifteenth-century Book |


166


4


167 Folk-Memories of an Atlantic Continent


Of Lismore, compiled from much older materials, from
which we learn that St. Brandan, the founder of the
monastery of Clonfert, who flourished in the seventh
century, prayed strenuously that a secret and hidden land
might be shown him where he could dwell in hermitage
secure from men. An ancient tradition assures us that he
wandered up and down the coast of Kerry “ seeking for
traditions of the western continent.” At first he set sail
in search of his earthly paradise in a ship made of the hides
Of beasts, but later in a large wooden vessel built in Con-
naught, which required a crew of sixty monks to navigate
her. Success crowned his quest, and he came at last to
an island “under the lee of Mount Atlas," a balmy and
delectable region, where he dwelt in peace and security
‘Many years.

The first appearance of St. Brandan’s Isle in cartography
‚is in the Hereford map of 1275, where it occupies the
latitude of the Canary group. Indeed in the Canary Isles
.& tradition still survives that St. Brandan and his com-
| panions spent several years in the archipelago. Even as
‚late as the eighteenth century an expedition sailed from
‚the Canaries in search of an island believed to be outside
of those already known in the group, and to be that on
which St. Brandan had settled. “ It appears likely," says
Mr. W. H. Babcock, *that St. Brandan in the sixth
century wandered widely over the seas in quest of some
warm island concerning which wonderful accounts had
been brought to him, and found several such isles, the
Madeira group receiving his especial approval, according
to the prevailing opinion of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries."

But evidence of the most interesting kind is accumulating
that the legendary island of Brazil, once thought of as
lying in the Atlantic, may actually have been the present
Newfoundland, which seems to have been visited at an
early period by Irish-speaking people. The name Brazil
is probably composed of two Celtic syllables, ** breas ”
and “ail,” each highly commendatory in implication. In
all probability the Irish monks whom early Norse settlers
found in Ireland formed part of a great Celtic and mis-
sionary “ push,” which was pressing northwards and
eastwards in the latter part of the eighth century, and the


Atlantis in America | 168


Irish who reached Newfoundland may have formed its
westward wing. Irish vessels at that period were of a
tonnage sufficiently large to negotiate such a voyage with
safety and success. Indeed they were much better
equipped in every respect than the vessels of Columbus.
It is well known that the Norse discoverers of America
conferred the name of Mikla Irlant, or Great Ireland, on a
region not far distant from one of the coasts where they
settled. The territory which has Cape Race for its apex,
and which includes Newfoundland and Cape Breton Island,
occupies the precise latitude of the island of Brazil in many
of the ancient maps. The name Brazil was given to the
South American country now so called in quite a hap-
hazard manner, and in the vague belief that the legendary
locality of that name had been rediscovered after the lapse
of centuries.

Brazil is first mentioned in modern literature by William |
Bettover, called William of Worcester, who says that on
July 15th, 1480, his brother-in-law, John Jay, began a
voyage from Bristol in search of the island, returning on
September 18th without having found it. Pedro Ayala,
the Spanish Ambassador to England, mentions in a letter
dated 1498 that the mariners of Bristol had made a series
of voyages in search of the island, which goes to show that
a persistent tradition regarding it must surely have
existed.

Hardiman, in his Irish Minstrelsy or Bardic Remains of
Ireland, which was written about 1636, says that there is

n “ iland which lyeth far att sea on the west of Connaught,
and sometimes is perceived by the inhabitants of the
Oules and Iris . . . and from St. Helen’s Head. Likewise
several seamen have discovered it... one of whom,
Captain Rich, who lives about Dublin, of late years had a
view of the land, and was so neare that he discovered a
harbour . . . but could never make to land, because of a
mist which fell upon him. Allsoe in many old mappes

. you still find it by the name of O*Brasile.” In 1675
a pretended account of a visit to this island was published
in London, which is reprinted by Hardiman.

Of equal importance is the legendary Isle of Seven Cities, |
which is described as the largest of the islands of the
medizval geographers, and as rectangular in shape, extend-


169 Folk-Memories of an Atlantic Continent


ing from north to south, and lying in mid-Atlantic about
latitude 35 degrees north. It appears again and again in
the maps of the fourteenth, fifteenth and later centuries,
and it was thought before the discovery of America that
it might be found suitable as a kind of half-way house to
the Indies. The legend states that it was discovered and
settled by refugees from Spain in a.p. 714, after the defeat
of King Roderic by the Moors. There is also a story that
the island was rediscovered by a Portuguese mariner in
1447. Says Ferdinand Columbus, son of the discoverer,
** It is not above 200 leagues west of the Canaries and the
Azores, and was peopled by the Portuguese at the time
when Spain was conquered by the Moors in the year 714.
At which time they say seven bishops, with their people,
embarked and sailed to this island, where each of them
built à city ; and to the end, none of their people might


- think of returning to Spain they burnt the ships, tackle,


and all things necessary for sailing. Some Portuguese
discoursing about this island, there were those that affirmed
several Portuguese had been to it who could not find the
way to it again."

Galvano tells of a still later visit to the Isle of the Seven
Cities in 1447. But the main point regarding it is that its


- name is to be found in the Azores at the present time.
. The island of St. Michael's has still its Valley of the Seven


Cities. Formerly some ruins were to be seen at this spot,
but only fragments of them are now visible.

There is the best of evidence that the island of Buss,
another insular locality which achieved legendary fame at
a later date, was actually discovered by English sailors in
1578. Best, writing of Frobisher's third voyage in that
year, says that one of his vessels, a buss, or small fishing
craft, of Bridgewater, called the Emmanuel, made the dis-
covery. Hesays: “ The Buss of Bridgewater, as she came
homeward, to the south-eastward of Frisland, discovered
a great island in the latitude of 57 degrees and a half,
which was never yet found before, and sailed three days
along the coast, the land seeming to be fruitful, full of
woods and a champaign country." Later, Thomas Wiars,
a passenger in the Emmanuel, published an aecount of
the discovery. Buss was duly placed on the maps, but
the efforts of reliable searchers failed to locate it again.


a


Atlantis in America 170


It came to be known as “ the sunken land of Buss,” and
was thus noted on charts up to the middle of the nine-
teenth century. Was Buss submerged? It seems to be
the only acceptable solution of not the least intriguing
mystery known to the folklore of the sea.

The discovery of the American mainland by the Norse
settlers in Greenland scarcely calls for comment here,
unless as another instance of the ancient European folk-
memory of land in the Atlantic. But much more valuable
testimony to this tradition is to be gleaned from the litera-
ture connected with the voyages of the Zeno family of
Venice. In 1558 a volume on this subject was printed at
Venice which purported to give an account of certain
Atlantic islands discovered by Nicolo and Antonio Zeno,
two mariners of the city about 1880, and compiled by their
descendant, Nicolo Zeno. As given by Major! and some-
what abbreviated, the account is as follows:

* Six-and-twenty years ago four fishing boats put out to
sea, and, encountering a heavy storm, were driven over the
sea in utter helplessness for many days; . . . the tempest
abating, they discovered an island called Estotiland, lying
to the westwards above one thousand miles from Fris-
landa. One of the boats was wrecked, and six men that
were in it were taken by the inhabitants . . . into a fair
and populous city, where the king of the place sent for
many interpreters, but there were none‘. . . understood
the language of the fishermen, except one that spoke
Latin, and who had also been cast by chance upon the
same island. . . . They . . . remained five years on the |
island, and learned the language. One of them... '
visited different parts of the island, and reports that it is
a very rich country, abounding in all good things. It is a
little smaller than Iceland, but more fertile ; in the middle
of it is à very high mountain, in which rise four rivers
which water the whole country. |

“ The inhabitants are a very intelligent people, and pos- |
sess all the arts like ourselves ; and it is to be believed that
in time past they have had intercourse with our people,
for he said that he saw Latin books in the king's library,
which they at this present time do not understand. They


1 The Voyages of the Brothers Zeno in the Northern Seas in the Fourth
Century, Hakluyt Soc. Publ., Ist Series, Vol. 50.


171 Folk-Memories of an Atlantic Continent


have their own language and letters . . . all kinds of
metals, but especially they abound with gold. Their
foreign intercourse is with Greenland, whence they import
furs, brimstone and pitch. . . . They have woods of im-
mense extent . . . make their buildings with walls, and
there are many towns and villages. They make small
boats and sail them, but they have not the loadstone, nor
do they know the north by the compass. For this reason
these fishermen were held in great esteem . . . the king
sent them with twelve small boats . . . southwards to a
country which they call Drogio; but in their voyage they had
“such contrary weather that they were in fear of their lives.

. - . They were taken into the country, and the greater
number of them were eaten by savages. . . . But as that
fisherman and his remaining companions were able to show
them the way of taking fish with nets, their lives were
saved. . . . As this man's fame spread . . . there was a
neighbouring chief . . . very anxious to have him with
him . . . he made war on the chief with whom the fisher-
man then was, and... at length overcame him, and so the
fisherman was sent over to him with the rest of his com-
pany. During the . . . thirteen years . . . he dwelt in
those parts, he says that he was sent . . . to more than
five-and-twenty chiefs . . . wandering up and down...
he became acquainted with almost all those parts. He
| says ... it is a very great country, and as it were a new
 .world; the people are . . . rude and uncultivated...
go naked and suffer cruelly from the cold, nor have they
the sense to clothe themselves with the skins of the animals
which they take in hunting. They have no kind of metal.
They live by hunting, carry lances of wood, sharpened at
the point . . . have bows, the strings of which are made
of beasts! skins . . . are very fierce, and have deadly fights
amongst each other, and eat one another's flesh. . . . The
farther you go southwards . . . the more refinement you
meet . . . the climate is more temperate . . . they have
cities and temples dedicated to their idols, in which they
sacrifice men and afterwards eat them.

** Hisfellow-captives having decided to remain where they
were, he bade them farewell, and made his escape through
the woods in the direction of Drogio . . . where he spent
three years. (One day) some boats had arrived. He...


af?


Atlantis in America 172


found they had come from Estotiland. (They took him
aboard as interpreter.) He afterwards traded in their
company . . . became very rich, and, fitting out a vessel,
returned to Frislanda.”

The elder Zeno heard this story in “ Frisland,” another
* fabulous " Atlantic isle. We observe that the narrator
believes that the Estotilanders formerly had intercourse
with Europe. Estotiland seems to have been within sail-
ing distance of America, here called Drogio, for the part
of the account which deals with Drogio describes a country
too closely resembling the east coast of America to present
a similarity to any other part of the world. That part of
it which deals with human sacrifice seems to point clearly
enough to Mexico. In any case, if the account is not a
forgery—and good arguments have been advanced for and
against its authenticity—it proves that a very definite
memory of Atlantic lands was current during the four-
teenth century.

That the people of Wales possessed such a tradition is
plain from the Welsh legends which cluster round the
name of Madoc, Prince of Wales.

This venerable tradition, which has, indeed, given rise
to an extensive literature, assures us that on the death of
Owen Gwynedd, Prince of North Wales in A.D. 1170, his
sons became embroiled in civil strife, and one of them,
Madoc, a man experienced in seamanship, disgusted with
the unstable condition of the country, resolved to lead a
colony to those Western lands of which he had heard his
seafaring acquaintances speak. Accordingly, in the year
of his father's death, he collected several hundreds of his
followers, steered westwards, and eventually established &
pioneer colony “in a fertile land." Leaving here one
hundred and twenty persons, he returned to Wales, and
fitted out a larger expedition of ten ships, with which he
once more put to sea, this time passing completely out of
human ken.

The evidence in support of this story is that it is men-
tioned in early Welsh annals, and that numerous travellers
have discovered traces of the Welsh language among the
lighter-coloured tribes of American Indians, to say nothing
of manifold legends among the Indians themselves of a
white people coming from afar towards the north-east.


Ts mir =


173 Folk-Memories of an Atlantic Continent


It cannot be said that there is anything wildly improb-
able about the story. The people of North Wales had been
daring seamen for centuries before the reign of Owen
Gwynedd, and the vessels of his son, which appear to have
sailed from the place now known as Port Madoc, were
probably quite as seaworthy and better fitted to stand the
buffetings of the Atlantic than those of Columbus.
Meredith, a Welsh bard, scems to have celebrated the
voyage in some verses composed, according to Hakluyt,
in the year 1477, or fifteen years before the Columbian
discovery; but the original printed source of the legend is
Humphrey Lloyd’s History of Cambria, now called Wales,
which was published at London in 1584. The book was
edited and added to by a certain David Powell, and it is
in his additions that passages of importance were found.
The supposition of Humboldt and others was that Madoc's
colony lay near the Gulf of Mexico. Richard Hakluyt in
his Principell Navigatines, took the story from Powell and
connected the discovery with Mexico in his edition of 1589,
and with the West Indies in that of 1600. But the Nieuwe
en Onbekende Weereld of Montanus (Amsterdam, 1671)
made the story more familiar. It necessarily entered into
the discussions of the learned men who, in the seventeenth
century, were busied with the question of the origin of the
American races, and among these De Laet and Hornius
gave credit to its reality.

The linguistic evidences, however, were not brought into
prominence until after one Morgan Jones, a Welsh pastor
or missionary, had fallen among the Tuscarora Indians in
1660, and found, as he asserted, that they could under-
stand his Welsh. He wrote an account of his experiences
in 1685-6, which was not published until 1740. He is most
explicit regarding the ability of his Indian captors to speak
the purest Welsh, and states that they perfectly under-
stood those passages of Scripture which he read to them
from his Welsh Bible.

It was reported in 1764 that a Welshman of the name of
Griffeth had been taken by the Shawnee Indians to visit
another tribe who spoke Welsh. An account of his adven-
tures is given in Warren’s Recherches and Amos Stoddard’s
Sketches of Louisiana. In 1772-8 David Jones, another
Welshman, wandered among the tribes west of the Ohio, and


e


Atlantis in America 174


in 1774 published at Burlington his Journal of Two Visits,
in which he indicates the correspondence of words which
he found in their tongues with his native Welsh.

The renewed interest in the subject seems to have
prompted Southey to the writing of his poem “ Madoc,” |
though he refrained from publishing it for some years. If |
one may judge from his introductory note, Southey held .
to the historical basis of the narrative. Meanwhile persis-
tent reports were published of the discovery of tribes of
Indians who spoke Welsh. In 1816 Henry Kerr printed
at Elizabethtown, New Jersey, his Travels Through the
Western Interior of the United States, with some account of
a tribe whose customs are similar to those of the ancient Welsh.
Some years later the publication of Catlin’s American
Indians probably gave more conviction than had pre-
viously been felt as regards the actuality of the tradition
because of his statements of positive linguistic correspond-
ences in the language of the so-called white Mandans of
the Missouri, the similarity of their boats to the old Welsh
coracles, and other parallels of custom. He believed that
Madoc landed in Florida, or perhaps passed up the Missis-
sippi. The opinion of Major in his Columbus’ Letters (1847)
that the Welsh discovery was quite possible, while it was
by no means probable is, with little doubt, the view most:
generally accepted. |

If one thing is more clear than another in connection |
with the legend of Madoc it is that it enshrines a very |
ancient British tradition concerning the existence of coun-
tries in the Atlantic. Did Madoc actually sail? He
cannot have done so unless he had an almost certain
knowledge of the existence of territory somewhere in the
Atlantic. And if his voyage is the veriest myth, it still
shows that his countrymen retained the recollection of
such territory.

But if Europeans possessed traditions of an Atlantic
continent, did the American races not share that tradition ?
We have already seen that they did, but I should like to
add in this place one or two extraordinary evidences of
historical, as apart from traditional, allusions to the exist-
ence of lands and races overseas among the American
peoples. When Hernando de Soto, on landing in Peru,
first met the Inca Huascar, the latter related an ancient


175 Folk-Memories of an Atlantic Continent


prophecy which his father, Huaina Ceapac, had repeated
on his death-bed, that in the reign of the thirteenth Inca
white men of surpassing strength and valour would come
from their father the Sun and subject the Peruvians to
their rule. “I command you,” said the dying king, “ to
yield them homage and obedience, for they will be of a
nature superior to ours.” 1

But the most interesting of American legends connected
with the discovery is that in which the prophecy of the
Maya priest Chilan Balam is described. Father Lizana, a
venerable Spanish author, records the prophecy, which he
states was very well known throughout Yucatan, as does
Villagutierre, who quotes it.

Part of this strange prophecy runs as follows: ** At the
end of the thirteenth age, when Itza is at the height of its
power, as also the city called Tancah, the signal of God
will appear on the heights, and the Cross with which the
world was enlightened will be manifested. "There will be
variance of men's will in future times, when this signal
shall be brought. . . . Receive your barbarous bearded
guests from the east, who bring the signal of God, who
comes to us in mercy and pity. The time of our life is
coming. . . ."

The story of Princess Papantzin, sister of Montezuma
the Emperor of Mexico, who had a strange vision of white
men coming from across the sea, also seems to show that
a powerful tradition respecting white races which had
formerly visited the American continent existed so late as
the sixteenth century. The royal lady's vision so strongly
affected her imperial brother that he refused to consider
the possibility of opposing the Spaniards, designating
them “Sons of Quetzalcoatl,” whom he believed to be of
divine or superior origin, and who, he thought, were the
servants of the god, returning according to his long-stand-
ing promise. Surely these promises and visions are elo-
quent of the memory of a civilizing race which formerly
landed on American shores, from whom the native peoples
had imbibed their culture and whose former presence was
regarded not as legendary but historical.


1 Garcilasso el Inca de la Vega, Hist. des Incas, lib. ix, cap. 16.


S


CHAPTER XI
THE ANALOGY OF LEMURIA


CONSIDERATION of the allied problem of the |
A sunken continent of Lemuria in the Pacific area |


greatly illuminates the problems attending the
theory of Atlantis, for it has been proved almost beyond


the possibility of doubt that many presently existing |
populations of the Pacific Islands once occupied land areas
now submerged, it has been proved that Pacific islands -


have disappeared within living memory, and that land-
masses of comparatively large area have been drowned


beneath Pacific waters within the last few centuries. More- —


over, a mass of tradition far too widespread to be void of
significance, much too clamorous and important to be dis-
missed by the wave of a conservative hand, renders it


abundantly clear that the peoples of the Pacific possess '
the irrefragable historical memory of not one but several |


masses of sunken land which were probably the decaying
remnants of one or more far-flung continents.


The theory of a former mid-Atlantic continent has at |


least as many opponents as it can boast supporters. But,


paradoxically enough, the belief that a great land-mass .


once occupied the basin of the Pacific is accepted by the


majority of modern geologists, even the most conservative ©


agreeing that from the Primary to the Secondary geological |


period an immense continent, ringed round with an ocean
which communicated with the Arctic, occupied the greater
part of the present Pacific area. At the end of the Primary
Period this ocean flowed over what is now the region of
the Andes and the present Rocky Mountains on the east,
and above New Zealand, Melanesia and Papuasia, the


Phillipines and Japan on the west. By the end of the :


Secondary Period the Pacific continent had begun to


founder, and the west coast of South America to rise |
correspondingly. So much is generally conceded. It is .


only regarding the approximate period of the ultimate
disappearance of the last vestiges of this continent that
debate arises, and if it arises at all it is because the data
in favour of the quite recent existence of numerous large
island-groups in the Pacific has only recently been collected
and published.


The hypothesis of a great Pacific continent was first -


176


177 The Analogy of Lemuria


mooted by Dr. Augustus Gould in 1854 in a striking paper,
“ Remarks on Mollusks and Shells,” published in The,
Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal. Charles Darwin i in


his Journal of Researches (1889) demonstrated that the
formation of coral reefs and atolls demanded a long- '


continued subsidence of the Pacific region, and acting on


his suggestion, Professors Sollas and David undertook the


boring of the atoll of Funafuti to a depth of 1114 feet,
where cores were obtained which showed that the whole
mass of rock was composed of pure coral. Asthe organisms


which form coral reefs cannot live at a depth of more than :


150 feet, it was manifest that the ocean floor must slowly
and continuously have subsided.

In 1884 Hutton, in his Origin of Flora and Fauna of New
Zealand, advanced the theory that New Zealand, Eastern
Australia and India formed one biological region in the
Secondary Period, and that in Lower Cretaceous times a
large Pacific continent extended from Lower Guinea to
Chile. Later on, he thought, New Zealand became
separated and this continent broke up.

Von Ihering believed the Pacific land-mass to have
gradually subsided during the Secondary Period, and
Dr. Pilsbry was of opinion that it was finally separated
from other lands as early as the middle of that period,
and that the northern portion became disconnected when
the remainder was still joined to the mainland. A careful
review of some of the lesser fauna, especially of ants and
lizards, led Professor Baur to formulate the theory of a
former Indo-Pacific continent extending from Malaysia to
the west coast of America. He looked upon the Pacific
islands as the last remnants of this continent, which still
existed, he thought, until the commencement of the
Miocene Period in Tertiary times.

Mr. Speight in his Petrological Notes from the Kermadec
Islands presents geological evidence of the former exten-
sion of continental conditions over a large area of the mid-
Pacific region. Many volcanic islands, he remarks, now
classified as oceanic, will ultimately have to be regarded
as having been built up out of the remnants of a conti-
nental area. He believes that a continent covered the
greater part of the Pacific Ocean in Primary and early .
Secondary times, and that a subsidence occurred during

M


y


Atlantis in America 179


later Secondary and Tertiary times with more recent local
elevations.

The well-known parallelism of the several groups of the
Pacific islands has been advanced as an argument in
favour of a formerly existing Pacific continent. It seems
possible to explain this “lay of the land" by the
supposition that these islands are the remains of a series
of mountain-chains, as has been suggested by Herr T.
Arldt.

Professor Francis Scharff in his Origin of Life in America
remarks: “If a Pacific continent existed, and I quite
concur with those who are of that opinion, it must have
largely subsided before the Tertiary era. It seems to me
as if the central part of it had broken down gradually, the
margins slowly following suit, both on the eastern and
western Pacific, only leaving here and there a few remnants .
which either remain as isolated pillars far out in the ocean
or have become joined to more recent land-masses. I
imagine that the latest pre-Pliocene land connection
between North America and Asia was not the Pacific
continent but merely its margin, which persisted probably
until Oligocene or Miocene times. . . . I suggest that in
Tertiary times a belt of land, possibly representing the
margin of the more ancient Pacific continent, extended
from the south-west coast to North America in a great
curve to Japan and further south."

There is, however, Professor Scharff admits, an extra- |
ordinary amount of evidence that an ancient land occupied |
that portion of the Pacific contiguous to the west coast of
Guatemala. The present Central America is, he thinks, —
* partly formed of the remnants of that land having
eventually become moulded together by geologically recent
voleanie deposits." Mr. O. H. Hershey is of opinion that
this ancient land lay mainly south of the present isthmus
of Panama, and that it was a land-mass of considerable
extent is indicated by the heavy beds of conglomerate
formed from it.

'There seems to be good reason for the inference that this
Pacific land persisted until comparatively recent geological
times. Agassiz found that not a single station between
Acapulco on the west coast of Mexico and the Galapagos
Islands could be characterised as strictly oceanic. The


179 The Analogy of Lemuria


trawl brought up a sticky mud containing logs of wood,
branches, twigs and decayed vegetable matter.

Dr. Burckhardt argued from the enormously thick de-
posits of porphyrite conglomerates in Western Chile that
these were laid down on the ancient shore-line of a vast
western land-mass of which the existing coast cordillera of
Chile is the last remnant. Says Scharff, dealing with
Burckhardt’s theory: ‘‘ He advocates, in fact, nothing
short of what we might call a Pacific continent which lay
mainly to the westward of Chile. "That land formerly
extended in that direction I have endeavoured to demon-
strate from purely faunistic evidence, but I believe that it
was part of a great circum-Pacific belt of land which
stretched mainly northward, communicating from time to
time with Central America and the Antilles, and also with
Mexico and Western California, and then eventually bend-
ing across to Eastern Asia in a great loop and thus joining
New Guinea, Australia and New Zealand.”

A more recent protagonist of the theory of a great Pacific
continent from the fragments of which Polynesian civilisa-
tion emerged is Professor J. Macmillan Brown of Christ-
church, New Zealand, who, in his recent remarkable work,
The Riddle of the Pacific, has reviewed the whole subject
with impartiality and a marked capacity for dealing with
a problem of such complexity in a simple manner. In a
passage which will certainly become memorable in the
annals of the controversy which has raged so long around
the subject of sunken land-areas, he says: “‘ Whether we
assume a continental area in the central region of the Pacific
or not, there must have been enormously more land than
there is now, if not some land connection between the
Hawaiian Archipelago and the south-west of Polynesia ;
for the American scientists, working from the former, find
a close affinity between its flora and fauna and those of the
latter, whilst there is no evidence of connection with the
American continent. In the flora, for example, the only
great genera of the south-west that are absent in the
north-east are the aroids, ficoids and pines. The affinity
of the land-shells is even more convincing. But the north
and south connection was the first to disappear, leaving
traces in scattered coral islands like Washington, Fanning,
Christmas, Malden, Manihiki. The trend of the ancient


|


Atlantis in America 180 |


high land was from north-west to south-east. And as the '
archipelagoes from New Zealand through Melanesia, —
Papuasia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Japan rose,
Micronesia and Southern Polynesia sank; and from the
Mariannes down to Mangareva and Easter Island there |
arc more coral islands than in any other region of the
world. . . . In the Pacific Ocean, at least, wherever there
is a coral island there has been subsidence, even if followed
by elevation. And it is to be granted that along with
subsidence in the coral ares of the Pacific there is sporadic -
elevation. For the volcanic activity that raised the high
land primevally becomes not suddenly but slowly quiescent.
In some coral groups there arc volcanic islands, as the Ton-
gan, Samoan, Socicty and Marquesan groups; and raised
coral islands like Niue and Rimatara are not infrequent.
In fact there is clear evidence of alternate subsidences and
elevations ; the phosphate jslands, Makatea in the north-
west of the Paumotus and Ocean Island and Nauru in the
west of the Gilberts, have gone down to leach out the
nitrates of their blanket of bird manure and come up to
have a new blanket several times. And away in the south-
east of the Pacific the rise of the two Cordilleras of the
Andes along the coast of South America must have had
full compensation in subsidence; and this is apparent in
the long stretch of the Paumotus and the almost islandless
seas to the south of them. Nor has this rise of the South
Amcrican coast ceased. The great earthquakes and tidal
waves that have devastated portions of it in historical
times make it patent, and the elevation of the coast is
measurable within brief periods.”

But we have more than mere geological surmise to go
upon in discussing the possibility of the existence of very
considerable land-areas in the Pacific only a few centuries
ago and which must have undergone submergence. The


' logs of the navigators of the seventeenth century contain


, more than one allusion to Pacific land-masses of large extent
now no longer visible. In his Description of the Isthmus of -
Darien, published at London in 1688, Wafer describes how
when sailing in the ship The Bachelor's Delight in lat.
27° 20’ south, ** to the westward, about twelve leagues by
judgment, we saw a range of high land which we took to:
be islands. . . . This land seemed to reach about fourteen


181 The Analogy of Lemuria


or fifteen leagues in a range, and there came thence great
flocks of fowls." The Bachelor's Delight was commanded
by John Davis, a Dutchman in spite of his English name,
and had just experienced a severe submarine shock which
proved to be the earthquake of Callao of 1687.

Thirty-five years later the Dutch Admiral Ruggewein
sailed along the same latitude in search of * Davis Land,"
but could not locate it or discover any signs of it. But to
compensate for his disappointment he discovered Easter
Island on Easter Day. In 1771 Gonzalez, a Spanish navi-
gator, likewise sailed in search of Davis Land, and, like
his predecessor, came upon Easter Island. This island
resembles not at all the land which Davis and Wafer saw,
as Beechy, who visited the island in 1825, declares, so
that it is positively certain that an island or archipelago
of considerable extent foundered in this area of the Pacific
at some time between 1687 and 1722. ^

But there is evidence forthcoming long before the date
of Davis's discovery that land had vanished in this region.
Juan Fernandez in 1576 went out of his course when
sailing between Callao and Valparaiso, and encountered
what he believed to be the coast of that great southern
continent which so many of the seamen of his day dreamed
of. He saw “the mouths of very large rivers . . . and
people so white and so well clad and in everything different
from those of Chile and Peru ” that he was amazed. His
ship was small and ill-found, and he resolved to return,
meanwhile keeping what he had seen secret. But he died
without fulfilling his purpose. As late as 1909 the ship
Guinevere reported a reef in about 95 long. east and 35 lat.
south, which may be the remains of the land Fernandez
saw.

There are several well-authenticated instances of the
entire submergence of islands in the Pacific during last
century. In 1886 the island of Tuanaki, to the south of
the Cook group, disappeared. Two natives of the Man-
gaian group had landed there and remained for some time,
and reported to the missionaries at Mangaia that its people
were anxious to embrace Christianity. The missionary
schooner was dispatched to the island under the guidance
of these native sailors, ** but it never found the island, and
no one has seen it since, although up till recently there


pi


Atlantis in America 182


was at least one native living in Rarotonga who had lived
in it and one who had visited it. Had the two Mangaians
not landed on it and reported it to the missionaries, would
anyone ever have known of the submergence of it and its
people ? There might have been a vague rumour, easily
believed and easily discounted, and that would have been
all the record," remarks Professor Brown.

The traditions of Easter Island maintain that it was
once the hub or centre of a large, scattered archipelago.
The culture-hero Hotu Matua was forced to land on its
shores, says legend, because of the submergence of his own
island, Marae Ronga, to the west, where “the sea came
up and drowned all the people." "There are numerous
reefs round Sala-y-Gomez, a rocky islet about three hun-
dred miles east of Easter Island, and the natives tell how
this islet was once a large archipelago, of which a certain
Makemake was the prince. When Hotu Matua came to
his death-day he ascended a volcano in Easter Island and
looked out towards the west, calling to the spirits who
hovered over his submerged home. The legends of Easter
Island are full of reminiscences of other neighbouring
islands now drowned beneath the surface of the Pacific.
The immense dry-stone monuments of Easter Island, says
Professor Brown, could not have been raised by an insular
people, but must have taxed the capacity of a great con-
tiguous archipelagic empire, maintaining thousands of
people of Polynesian stock.

But other mysterious cyclopean ruins besides those of
Easter Island are to be encountered in the widely scattered
archipelagoes of the Pacific, and equally important are
the theories of submergence associated with them. By
far the most important and perplexing of these sites is that
at Ponape in the Caroline Islands, lying between the
equator and the eleventh north parallel, some two thousand
three hundred miles from the coast of Japan. The deserted
city of Metalanim, the ruins of which cover eleven square
miles, stands on the south-eastern shore of Ponape. The
site is covered by massive walls, stupendous earthworks
and great temples, intersected by miles of artificial water-
ways, from which circumstance it has received the name
of ** The Venice of the Pacific.”

The entire island of Ponape is littered with huge basaltic


183 The Analogy of Lemuria


blocks which must have been brought by raft from a dis-
tance of thirty miles, and from similar blocks have been
built stupendous walls of the harbour and the embank-
ments of the winding canals, many of which are from 80
to 100 feet in breadth. The outer cincture which surrounds
the city is partially submerged, and this has given rise to
the idea that the land on which Metalanim was built has
subsided in later times. It is clear that the waterways
were constructed to enable rafts laden with stone to be
brought close up to the artificial islands on which the larger
buildings were raised.

The city of Metalanim was enclosed on one side by the
land and on its maritime side by three extensive break-
waters of basalt, the whole occupying an almost rectangular
area. Atthe north-west corner a sea-gate gave entrance to
vessels and rafts of considerable dimensions, and this was
carefully guarded by a large breakwater consisting of im-
mense courses of the basalt characteristic of the site. The
water front to the east is faced by a terrace built of massive
blocks about 7 feet in width, above which frowns the vast
retaining wall of the enclosure of Nan Tanach, “ The Place
of Lofty Walls." A colossal staircase leads to a courtyard
littered with the fragments of fallen pillars which encircle
a second terraced enclosure with a projecting frieze or
cornice. Here lies the great central vault or “ treasure-
chamber ” of a legendary dynasty known to local tradition
as the Chanteleur, or * Kings of the Sun.”

The reader who has perused Plato’s account of Atlantis
will not fail to remark upon the likeness between the general
plan of Metalanim and the city of Atlas. Both were inter-
sected with canals, both had great sea-gates and sea-walls,
and two or three rows of walls encircling the city proper.
Had Atlantean and Lemurian civilisation and culture any-
thing in common? A future comparative study of the
conditions obtaining in both may cast more light on this
phase of the subject, to which I hope to return at another
time.

Nan Tanach, the hub of the city, seems to have been
the nucleus whence the numerous canals radiated through-
out the whole ghostly length of the place. It is surmised
that the great blocks of which it is built were put in posi-
tion by means of an inclined plane—a slope of tree-trunks,


"


Atlantis in America 184


greased with coconut oil. The process of hoisting may have
been assisted by the use of ropes made of the green hibiscus
bark and levers of hardwood.

It is obvious that the Caroline Islands at the period of
the occupation of this site must have supported a very
much larger population than they do at the present time.
At a conservative estimate, tens of thousands of labourers
must have been engaged in thé work of building-construc-
tion at Metalanim. The island, at its best could never have
supported more than twenty thousand people, and of these
not more than one-fifth would be able-bodied men, there-
fore it is only reasonable to suppose that labour must
have been recruited from outside areas. Professor Mac-
millan Brown suggests as a solution to this difficulty that
the Caroline archipelago is the remains of a vast island-
empire, the greater part of which has subsided beneath
the waves of the Pacific centuries ago. Yet within a
radius of fifteen hundred miles from this as a centre there
are not more than fifty thousand people to-day.

A thousand miles to the west of Ponape Professor
Brown found on the little coral island of Oleai, with six
hundred inhabitants, a written script still in use, quite
unlike any in the world. It is still used by the chief of
the island, and was formerly employed on Faraulep, an


' islet about one hundred miles to the north-east. On the
‚east coast of the island of Yap there is a village called
;Gatsepar, the chief of which still levies tribute annually


on islands hundreds of miles away. When Professor
Brown asked the natives who brought the tribute why


‚they continued to do so, they replied that if they neglected


this duty the chief of Gatsepar would shake their island
with his earthquakes and the sea with his tempests. "This
would seem to imply, thinks Professor Brown, that the


' chief's ancestors built “‘ an empire to the east of Yap, and


when some intermediate islands had gone down, the others
continued still to look to the ruler in the west as the holder
of all power, natural and supernatural."


Is there any evidence of similar submersion of organised


archipelagoes farther east? Polynesia covers a greater
space than most of the larger empires of the world have
covered, and is occupied by a people more homogeneous in
physique, culture and language than the people of any one


185 The Analogy of Lemuria


of the great empires. In handicraft, social and political
organisation and religious belief they exhibit the remains
of a very high type of civilisation, and it is obvious that
they have been segregated from other races for a space
of time so prolonged that an indelible and easily distin-
guishable mark has been set upon them. “We can
searcely avoid the conclusion," says Professor Brown,
* that they have lived unitedly under one government
and under one social system for a long period ; and that
the slow submergence of their fatherland has driven them
off, migration after migration, to seek other lands to dwell
upon, each marked by some new habit into which they were
driven by the gradual narrowing of their cultivable area.
. . . All the indieations point to an empire in the east-
Central Pacific having gone down.”

And if such a phenomenon occurred in the Pacific area,
- Why not in the Atlantic also? Do not all the indications
point to the former existence of an empire in the Atlantic
region, and to the subsequent diffusion of its culture ? In
my view the light which Professor Macmillan Brown has
cast upon the problem of the Pacific throws also not a
few vivid gleams upon the problem of Atlantis, and it now
remains by closer study to so collate the parallel cireum-
stances of the two problems that the lessons of Pacifie
archeology may be adequately applied to the Atlantean
question.


yi


CHAPTER XII
THE SARGASSO SEA


HE Arcturus expedition, which is at present in- |
| vestigating the mysterious Sargasso Sea, in the
Atlantic, has at the time of writing sent a wireless
message to the New York press reporting the discovery of
glass, volcanic rock and sponge deposits from the bed of
the Sargasso. The chief purpose of the expedition, which -
has been conveyed to the weed-covered wastes of the
Sargasso in the converted yacht Arcturus, is to explore
this little-known region of the Atlantic, to determine
whether the weed of which it is composed is blown out
from the land or propagates itself, and to photograph the
strange forms of life which infest the area. |
The Sargasso Sea is traditionally associated with the :
sunken continent of Atlantis. Many writers have asserted
their belief that in its area the site of Plato’s submerged
island is to be found, and extraordinary reports have for
years been in circulation regarding the imprisonment in
its enormous fields of floating weed of flotillas of sea-going |
vessels ancient and modern, from the triremes of Tyre to
the modern steamship. This latter notion is, of course,
a gross exaggeration, arising out of the persistent tradi-
tions of centuries. There is, however, good ground for the
opinion that if the weed of the Sargasso does not constitute
the last visible remnant of Atlantis that its site is probably :
identical with that of the lost island-continent.

Perhaps the most surprising thing about the Sargasso
is that so much dubiety should exist concerning its actual
character in an age when almost every square mile of the
earth's surface has been traversed and mapped out by |
travellers and navigators. For it is one of the permanent
and conspicuous features of the earth's surface, a floating
continent of weed, shifting its borders with the seasons,
although in some parts it is constant in its characteristics.
A writer in the Encyclopedia Britannica describes it as |
nearly equal to Europe in area, but this statement is
certainly incorrect. Otto Krümmel in his Die Nordatlan- —
tische Sargassosee! suggests that the name should be
applied to the area only which is limited by the occurrence
of 5 per cent of weed. This area is 4,500,000 kilometres

1 Pethermann's “* Mitt.," Vol. 37, pp. 129-41, 1891,
186


*JS9HITY) st poom OY} oroya sejeorpur uorjiod popeus oy], “Bog osseZieg oyy,


yor


B


Atlantis in America 188


square, or somewhat less than half the continent of Europe,
and would embrace a tract extending from the 80th
parallel of longitude to the Antilles, and from the 40th
to the 20th parallel of latitude. Schott estimates the ex-
tent of the natural region of the Sargasso Sea at 8,685,000
square kilometres, and this estimate is based not only on
the occurrence of gulf weed, but also on the prevailing
absence of currents and on the relatively high temperature.
of the water in all depths. |
Regarding the weed which characterises this part of the
Atlantic, Sir John Murray says: |
“The famous Gulf Weed characteristic of the Sargasso
Sea in the North Atlantic belongs to the brown alge.
It is named Sargassum bacciferum, and is easily recognised
by its small berry-like bladders. . . . It is supposed that
the older patches gradually lose their power of floating |
and perish by sinking in deep water. . . . The floating |
masses of Gulf Weed are believed to be continually
replenished by additional supplies torn from the coast by
waves and carried by currents until they accumulate in
the great Atlantie whirl which surrounds the Sargasso
Sea. They become covered with white patches of polyzoa |
and serpul®, and quite a large number of other animals
(small fishes, crabs, prawns, molluses, etc.) live on these
masses of weed in the Sargasso Sea, all exhibiting remark-
able adaptive colouring, although none of them belong
properly to the open ocean." |
Lieut. J. C. Soley of the U.S. Navy in his Circulation of
the North Atlantic states that the south-east branch of the
Gulf Stream “ runs in the direction of the Azores, where
it is deflected by the cold, upwelling stream from the
north, and runs into the centre of the Atlantic Basin,
where it is lost in the dead waters of the Sargasso Sea.”
Commenting on this, the U.S. Hydrographic Office
observes: “Through the dynamical forces arising from
the earth’s rotation which cause moving masses in the
northern hemisphere to be deflected toward the right-hand |
side of their path, the alge that are borne by the Gulf
Stream from the tropical seas find their way towards the
inner edge of the circulatory drift which moves in a clock- |
wise direction around the central part of the North Atlantic |
Ocean. In this central part the flow of the surface waters |


189 The Sargasso Sea


is not steady in any direction, and hence the floating sea-
"weed tends to accumulate there. This accumulation is
perhaps most observable in the triangular region marked
out by the Azores, the Canaries and the Cape Verde
Islands, but much seaweed is also found to the westward
of the middle part of this region in an elongated area
extending to the 70th meridian.

‘<The abundance of seaweed in the Sargasso Sea fluctuates
much with the variation of the agencies which account for
its presence, but this office does not possess any authentic
records to show that it has ever matcrially impeded
vessels."

With reference to this passage Mr. W. H. Babcock
remarks in his Legendary Islands of the Atlantic :

““ Perhaps these statements are influenced by present
or recent conditions. It is obvious that giant rope-like
seaweeds in masses would more than materially impede
the action of the galley oars, which were the main reliance
in time of calm of the ancient and medieval navigators.
Also it is hardly to be believed that small sailing vessels
could freely drive through them with an ordinary wind.
If the weeds were so unobstructive, why all these com-
plaints and warnings out of remote centuries? In the
days of powerful steamships, and when the skippers of
sailing vessels have learned what area of sea it is best to
avoid, there may well be a lack of formal reports of
impediment; but it certainly looks as though there were
some basis for the long-established ill repute of the
Sargasso Sea."

As Mr. Babcock states, there is a large body of testimony
that in ancient times the Atlantic was unnavigable, and
that the Sargasso Sea formerly occupied a much larger

. area. The first hint of this is to be found in Plato’s Critias,
_which embodies the original account of the sunken con-
tinent of Atlantis beneath the waves. Since the founding
of Atlantis, says Plato, “‘the sea in these quarters has
become unnavigable; vessels cannot pass there because
of the sands which extend over the buried isle." In this
passage the Greek philosopher is not alluding to past but
present conditions, conditions which any of his contem-
poraries could verify for themselves by applying to any
of the numerous Greek or Phoenician mariners who had


„or


Atlantis in America 190


experience of those waters. “ It must be evident," says
Mr. Babcock, “that Plato would not have written thus
unless he relied on the established general repute of that
part of the ocean for difficulty of navigation.”

But Plato’s account is buttressed by those of other
writers of antiquity. Scylax of Caryanda, who wrote prior
to the time of Alexander the Great, and was approximately
a contemporary of Plato, states in his Periplus that Cerne,
an island on the African Atlantic coast, “ is twelve days
coasting beyond the Pillars of Hercules, where the parts
are no longer navigable because of shoals, of mud and of
seaweed. . . . The seaweed has the width of a palm, and
is sharp towards the points so as to prick.”

When Himilco parted from Hanno in the course of their
memorable dual voyage from Carthage in quest of lands
unknown about 500 B.C., he encountered, according to the
poet Festus Avienus, ** weeds, shallows, calms and dangers”
in the Atlantic. Avienus wrote about the fourth century
A.D., but professes to repeat Himilco’s account. He says:
** No breeze drives the ship forward, so dead is the sluggish
wind of this idle sea. He (Himilco) also adds that there is
much seaweed among the waves, and that it often holds
the ship back like bushes. Nevertheless he says that the
sea has no great depth, and that the surface of the earth.
is barely covered by a little water. The monsters of the
sea move continually hither and thither, and the wild
beasts swim among the sluggish and slowly creeping ships.”
Avienus also says elsewhere: ** Farther to the west from
these Pillars there is boundless sea. Himilco relates that
...none has sailed ships over these waters, because
propelling winds are lacking . . . likewise because dark-
ness screens the light of day with a sort of clothing, and
because a fog always conceals the sea."

Aristotle, too, says in his Meteorologica that the sea
beyond the Pillars of Hercules was muddy and shallow and
almost unstirred by the winds. Aristotle was at one time
a pupil of Plato, and this would seem to afford good proof
that the latter's statement was founded on the best avail-
able information, and was probably acquired from
Phoenician or Greek seamen. |

But we have other than classical evidence for the un-
navigable character of the Atlantic, evidence dating from


IQI The Sargasso Sea


2 considerably later period. Edrisi, the Arabie writer,
says that the Magrurin, certain Moorish sailors of Lisbon
who set sail thence in quest of an Atlantic island at some
undefined period between the eighth and twelfth centuries,
encountered an impassable tract of ocean, and were forced
to alter their course, apparently reaching one of the
Canaries. The Pizagani map of 1367, too, has a rubric
containing a solemn protest against attempting to sail the
unnavigable ocean tract beyond the Azores, in the neigh-
bourhood of which the Sargasso Sea begins.

Maury in his Physical Geography of the Sca says: ** Mid-
way the Atlantic, in the triangular space between the
Azores, Canaries and the Cape de Verd Islands, is the
Sargasso Sea. Covering an area equal in extent to the
Mississippi Valley, it is so thickly matted over with Gulf
Weeds (Fucus natans) that the speed of vessels passing
through it is often much retarded. When the companions
of Columbus saw it they thought it marked the limits of
navigation, and became alarmed. To the eye, at a little
distance, it seems substantial enough to walk upon.
Patehes of the weed are always to be seen floating along
the outer edge of the Gulf Stream. Now, if bits of cork,
or chaff, or any floating substance be put in a basin and a
circular motion be given to the water, all the light sub-
stances will be found crowding together near the centre of
the pool where there is the least motion. Just such a basin
is the Atlantie Ocean to the Gulf Stream ; and the Sar-
gasso Sea is the centre of the whirl. Columbus first found
this weedy sea in his voyage of discovery ; there it has
remained to this day, moving up and down, and changing
its position like the calms of Cancer according to the
seasons, the storms and the winds. Exact observations
as to its limits and their range, extending back for fifty
years, assure us that its mean position has not been

altered since that time."

The notion that the Sargasso weed is a collection of the
floating detritus of the Atlantie is by no means justified by
the related facts. In the first place Sir John Murray
admits that the shell-fish and other animals which live
amongst the weed “all exhibit adaptive colouring,
although none of them belong properly to the open ocean."
Adaptive colouring, as in the Arctic hare and ptarmigan,


E


Atlantis in America 192,


requires countless centuries for its development, and is an
especial trait evolved out of long-continued adaptation to|
local conditions. This fact alone, coupled with the classical,
evidence, would seem to show that the Sargasso weed
must have persisted for thousands of years. Again, it is
most improbable that these forms of coastal life could
have reached the Sargasso by an open ocean route. Is ài
not more reasonable to infer that they are the survivors
of forms which once occupied a coast-line, now submerged;
in the same locality where they now appear? _

Weed of the same species as is found in the Sargasso
occurs in the Pacific Ocean, west of California, which is
undoubtedly another area where land was formerly sub-
merged. But the main point is that this Sargasso accumu-
lation undoubtedly occupies part of the same area as did
the now sunken mass of Atlantis. The argument in favour
of the former existence of Atlantis is, however, not de-
pendent upon the identification of these sites.

“ Another remarkable feature of the North Atlantic is

the series of submerged cones or oceanic shoals made
known off the north-west coast of Africa between the
Canary Islands and the Spanish peninsula," says Sir John
Murray. But, important as these seem to be to an elucida-
tion of the Atlantean theory in the opinion of Mr. W. H.
Babcock, I believe the great bank mapped out by the
several expeditions which undertook the survey of the
Atlantic towards the latter part of last century in the
Hydra, Porcupine, Challenger and Dolphin to be more
“Important still. This bánk commences at a point south of
the coast of Ireland, is traversed by the 53rd parallel, and
stretches in a direction which embraces the Azores toward
the African coast. The general level of this great ridge
or plateau is some 9000 feet above that of the bed of the
Atlantic. Other immense banks stretch from Iceland
almost to the South American coast, where they adjoin the
old sunken land of Antillia. It is precisely above the area
where the great sunken plateaus converge, that is between
the 40th and 60th parallels of longitude and the 20th
and 40th parallels of latitude, that the Sargasso weed is
thickest.

Thus reliable evidence exists for the assumption that

the area of the Sargasso Sea coincides with that of sunken


y TEE uer


\j i


193 The Sargasso Sea


Atlantis. A much greater amount of proof that the weed
' of which it is composed is in some manner connected with
| the detritus of the sunken continent is certainly desirable.
' The accounts of Plato and others suggest that the weed
is the vegetable flotsam of Atlantis. Not only does the

coincidence of areas between the Sargasso and the site of

Atlantis assist such a hypothesis. The antiquity of the
' classical allusions to the Sargasso accumulation and the
' obviously wider area it occupied in ancient times appear

to strengthen it. But undoubtedly further research into
; the biological character of the Sargasso alge and its inci-
: dence elsewhere is essential before anything approaching
a final decision as to its connection with Atlantis can be
. arrived at.


" d


CHAPTER XIII
ATLANTIS IN AMERICA


ITH the proof of the dissemination of Atlantean |
civilisation in America furnished by the fore- |


going chapters it may not be regarded as an
extravagance of nomenclature if I allude to the wonderful
culture of the Maya as constituting “* Atlantis in America.”


I have concluded that the Maya civilisation was an
Atlantean offshoot because I do not see from what other |
part of the world it could have emanated. That it did not
germinate of itself on American soil is clear from the fact


that its roots are not to be found there. Its traditions are
eloquent of its eastern and Atlantic origin. To argue that


it was conveyed in its completeness and entirety from Asia
across more than five thousand miles of ocean at a period |


some two centuries before the Christian era is to speak
à l'amateur. I agree, then, with Professor J. Macmillan


Brown that if you cannot find a neighbouring locus for -
the cultural origins of an isolated people, that there is


nothing unreasonable in seeking for it in a submerged area.
The notions regarding the exclusively American or Asiatic


origin of the Maya culture are demonstrably illogical: |
that concerning its Atlantean-Antillian origin is more in


consonance with proven facts, and is reinforced by proof |
of cultural connection with lands which shared equally


with America in the benefits of Atlantean civilisation.
I believe that the Maya, on the submergence of their


original home in Antillia, temporarily occupied some of


the more westerly of the West Indian Islands, the Greater
Antilles, from which they withdrew to the Central Ameri-


‚can mainland at some time about 200 B.c.* That they were.


more or less prone to sudden migratory impulses we know |


from the fact that later they quitted Guatemala for Yuca-


tan in the sixth century of our era. Probably they found


the rude inhabitants of the Greater Antilles but little |


amenable to the influences of civilisation, and resolved to
push onward to the isthmian regions beyond. More prob-
ably still they were harassed by the barbarous Carib.


There remains also the likelihood that they were, through


1 I believe the Lesser Antilles to be the last westerly fragment of the


Antillian land-mass. The Maya would naturally vacate or pass these and |


Bettle in the more stable western islands.
194


!


195 . Atlantis in America


sad experience, dubious of the stability of the insular
. regions they occupied, or, again, as on the occasion of their
- migration to Yucatan, they may have believed themselves
. to be called to another territory by the divine behest of
their national gods.

. Contemporaneously with their arrival in America, we
find this strange and interesting people utilising with a
certainty and directness eloquent of age-long experience
a system of astrological and astronomical science on a
much higher plane than was known to the nations of
antiquity in the Old World. They computed time in
zons of centuries by means of a system scarcely credible
except by students who have devoted themselves to its
diligent study. As a check upon their calculations, they
used the recurring periods of the planet Venus with a
nicety of mathematical accuracy which fixed the reappear-
“ance of that luminary within a few hours of its actual
visibility. The dates on their very earliest known monu-
ments display the use of the “ Venus periods," as they
have come to be known to Americanists. A similar but
much less elaborate system of computation by the aid of
this planet was known in Peru, but not in Asia, either
anciently or in times contemporary with the period of
Maya civilisation in its heyday.

Where, then, originated this most aceurate and advanced
astronomical science, which, all those who have examined
it are at one in saying, was greatly superior to that in use
among the Spanish discoverers and conquerors of the
Maya? To say that it was developed upon American soil
is equally fatuous with the declaration that it was brought
. from Asia, where there are no signs of its existence. The
planet Venus was, in Mexico, inseparably connected with
the witch-cult. It was known in that country as Itzla-
. eoliuhqui, “the star that proceeds in a reverse course with
its eyes bandaged." It was identified with Cinteotl, the
son of the witch-queen Tlazolteotl. Its identification with
. the Atlantis culture-complex as demonstrated in these
pages is therefore complete, especially when we find it
. represented in the Codex Borgia and elsewhere as à mummy
bandaged and swathed for burial. It was during the aspects
of Venus, which were regarded as astrologically unfavour-
able, that the dead witch-women, the Ciuateteó, came down


P"


Atlantis in America 196


to wreak their spite on the living. The planet Venus
affords yet another link between the witch-cult and .
mummy phases of the peculiar Atlantean culture-complex.
In some places, too, it is represented in the form of
Itzlacoliuhqui as the thunder-stone, the witch’s bolt or
arrow. The thunder-stone is in many American and West
European localities carefully wrapped in swathings of
cloth or hide, precisely as is the mummy.

Now this thunder-stone is universally feared by primi-
tive peoples as the source of all tempests, earthquakes and


KOCHT


Airrotuirmnimuo


Em |


E. INNEN)
| rag} | i\


uuu d TA
A e Efe f AUS DAES 117
Xo ge SES
EIERN: EN: Wanne ae:


Itzlacoliuhqui, the planet Venus, showing bandaged eyes.


voleanic phenomena. It was the bolt of Vulcan, the
dreaded elf-arrow of Scotland, the tempest-raising Nee-
vougi of the Atlantic Irish isles, the weapon of the Phoeni-
cian Cabiri and the Mexican Tezcatlipoca alike. In
Europe it seems to have been identified with the volcanic
scoriz belched from the erupting jaws of Mount Etna.
For this and other reasons, therefore, I believe the super-
natural ideas associated with it to have originated in some


region prone to seismic activity. In any case it connects


and links up the witch and mummy cults with the notion
of seismic instability. In the western Irish isle of Fladda-
huan if you unwound its many linen bandages you pre-
cipitated a tempest. In Mexico the god Hurakan, “ the.


197 Atlantis in America


. hurricane," was the Central American equivalent of the
. Stone god Itzlacoliuhqui, the knife of sacrifice wrapped in

mummy bandages, the god of the planet Venus. Like
Vulean, too, as his myth records, he was lamed through
being cast from heaven, so that he had obviously a voleanie
significance like the god of Etna.

Behind such a tangle of similarities there must surely
be some common original conception. It seems to me that
the idea of the thunder-stone arose out of the conception
that it was the germ, essence, or principle of the tempest,
the thing that caused violent conditions in nature, winds
or earthquakes, or eruptions. As we shall see, it was the
implement with which the gods shaped the earth and was
therefore of itself à magical tool, which on occasion might
automatically undertake the functions of earth-heaping or
mountain-carving with disastrous results. But if you
wrapped it up in bandages, that is, made a mummy of it,
it was temporarily dead, and powerless for evil. If you
unwound its wrappings you let loose its *' soul," with all
its potentialities for destruction. If you were a witch you
could with impunity handle this magical implement, full
of a divine virtue from its contact with the creating god.
At least the fishermen of Ireland believed that you could.
It is less than fifty years ago that a supernatural being
known as Brounger, who was “a flint and the son of a
. flint," was credited by the fishermen of Granton, a fishing
village near Edinburgh, with strange powers. The local
tradition goes that they paid him tribute of soles and
flounders, and the saying “* Brounger’s in your head-
sheets? was tantamount to calling down a storm upon
the boat of a rival. Brounger, the flint, was, indeed, a
god of the storm.

As evidently bearing a relationship to this hypothesis,
mention may be made of the curious three-pointed stones
which are found in some parts of the Antilles. The geo-
graphical distribution of these is confined to Porto Rico
and the adjacent eastern end of Santo Domingo, that is, to
that part of the Antilles which must either have formed
a portion of the submerged Antillia or have been nearest
to it. These stones are usually carved in the shape of a
mountain beneath which the head and legs of a buried
recumbent figure is to be seen, Professor Mason hints


Atlantis in America 198


that they may be connected with the volcanic histo
the island. “The Antilles," he writes, “ are all of vol RA
origin, as the material of our stone implements plain
shows. I am indebted to Professor S. F. Baird for-thé
suggestion that, from the sea, the island of Porto Rigo
rises in an abrupt and symmetrical manner, highly sugges-
tive of the mound in the mammiform stones, so that with
the aid of a little imagination we may see in these objects
the genius of Porto Rico in the figure of a man, a parrot,
an alligator, an albatross, or some other animal precíéüs
to these regions where larger animals are not ERA cia
supporting the island on its back."

Elsewhere, dealing with the legend of Typhceus, slain
by Jupiter and buried under Mount Etna, he remarks
" A similar myth may have been devised in various p. ales
to account for volcanic or mountainous phenomena." 4$;

According to Agustin Navarette, Dr. Calixto Ro = E
Cantero recognised in these three-pointed figures the geyiits
of evil weighed down by the god Borinquen, represedf
by the mountain Lucuo or Luquillo, and symboliseg WU


e


the conoid prominence on the stones. Navarette bel
these stones to be cosmo-theogonie symbols sngehath a


creator, perfectly defined, cite by the head, c |
Tepapa, the inert, unformed matter, represented. byy AE


Indo-Borinqueno idol, in which is symbolised the crei
and inert matter on two sides of chaos, which extends, 3
the firmament.” 1 Y
This explanation errs, perhaps, too much on the sig
symbolism. Fewkes believes these stones to have VW
zemis or idols, and takes exception to the views of Mason,
Navarette and others that they represent volcanic agencies.
But he does so evidently without being aware of Maya |
myths which, by analogy, greatly strengthen the supposi-
tions of these writers. I refer to the Maya conception of
the cosmos, which speaks of the earth as being supported


1 * Estudios de arqueologia de Puerto Rico,” article in EL Noticio, |
May, 1896. Reprinted in Aguila, Ponce, April and May, 1904, according
to Fewkes.


STONES:


-POINTED


]


Antilles


MT AR
From the


PLATE


(after Fewkes)


@roe


199 Atlantis in America


on the back of a great dragon (the Gucumatz 1), four-
footed whale, or other monster. Certain myths, too, in the
, Popol Vuh allude to gods known as Zipacna and Cabrakan,
"volcanie deities who heaped up the mountains and bore
them on their backs. But, above all, we have the myth of
Atlas itself, the story of the world-bearer, associated with
Atlantis, and reflected in Quetzaleoatl, who is merely
another form of Gucumatz, the dragon or serpent who
dwelt in the sea. That these three-pointed stones refer
to some such figure who can doubt ? They seem to me a
reminiscence of a volcanic deity, a deity whose duty it
was to uphold the earth, but who, on occasion, cast his
burden from him, causing universal destruction and cata-
clysm.!

In these three-pointed stones, then, it seems to me we
have Atlas represented in the shape of the symbolic pick
as well as the world-bearer. In the thunder-stone seems
to centre the whole significance of what I call the Atlantean
culture-complex, which embraced the practice of mummi-
fication, witchcraft, the mysteries and the art of building
in stone. It is the hub of à wheel of which they are the
spokes. The flint or thunder-stone was the chisel of the
Maya masons and sculptors, the magical implement that
shaped the idol and the pyramid. The hammer of the
thunder-god or the creative deity with which he carved
and shaped the mountains and valleys was the selfsame
implement as that with which the early sculptor carved
the idol by what is known as “the crumbling process."
The Algonquin Indian myths of Manibozho tell how he
shaped the hills and dales with the hammer, constructing
great beaver-dams and moles across the lakes—that *' he
carved the land and sea to his liking." Do we find any
similar legend associated with Atlantis ? We do. Poseidon,
we are told, earved the island of Atlantis into alternate
zones of land and water. We are not informed with what
implement he effected this. But, as he was indubitably a
god of earthquake as well as a deity of the sea, it is a fair
inference that he employed the thunder-stone or thunder-
hammer, the shaping tool of the early mason, the great
primeval pick, which consisted of a sharp flint beak set in
a wooden haft, the hammer of Thor, the hammer of Ptah.

1 See my essay on the Popol Vuh, 1908.


Atlantis in America 200 |


The operation of land-moulding in all mythologies is under-
taken by the aid of this implement, and there is no reason
to suppose that Atlantean myth differed from others in this
respect.

The implement of the god is, of course, as sacred as the |
god himself, for the simple reason that it has absorbed his
virtue. It is his fetish, his symbol, it comes in time to
represent him, to act as his surrogate, so to speak. So, it
would seem, was the case in Atlantis. The sacred flint —
pick-hammer of Poseidon became symbolic of him in the
island-continent, it was probably kept wrapped up in
linen, in his temple, as the black stone of Jupiter—the
stone into which the god had been turned when an infant
—was kept in his shrine at Pergamos, or the arrows of 7
Uitzilopochtli in his teocalli at Mexico. A similar stone |
fetish is that enshrined in the Kaaba at Mecca, where it is ©
wrapped up in silks. From Atlantis this idea of godhead -
may have spread to America on the one hand and to Spain -
and Europe generally on the other, eventually reaching
localities so widely apart as Egypt and Scandinavia.

We find in the myths of the Toltecs of Mexico mention
of a certain Huemac, or “ Great Hand,” associated with
Quetzalcoatl, the culture-hero from the east, and perhaps
identieal with him, and in those of the Maya & Kab-ul, or
* Working Hand." This is, of course, a deification of the
hand which wields the craftsman’s tool, as is obvious from
its representations in the native manuscripts. Quetzal-
coatl was the craftsman, the mason, the artificer cunning |
in the making of jewellery and beautiful things, who came
out of the Atlantic. In his Maya-Quiche form of Tohil he
is represented by a flint stone. Here, then, we have the
culture-bringer who came out of the sea actually repre-
sented by what seems to be the central symbol and nucleus
of the Atlantean culture-complex. Moreover, he is asso-
ciated with the planet Venus. Indeed, he is that planet.
We will remember that the interpreter of the Aztec Codex,
Telleriano-Remensis, says of him: “They name him
“one Cane,’ which is the star Venus, of which they tell
the fable accredited among them. Tlauizcalpan Tecutli |
is the star Venus, the first created light before the deluge.
This star is Quetzalcoatl.” This identification, of course, |
binds the various parts of the Atlantis complex together


201 Atlantis in America


with double strength. Quetzalcoatl, it is also to be noted,
“ caused hurricanes ” and ‘‘ destroyed the world by wind,"
as the god of the flint stone well might have done.

But we find this Great Hand even more closely
identified with Atlantis in the medieval legends associated
‘with the Atlantic Ocean. In the map of Bianco, dated
1486, is to be observed an island having the strange
legend underneath it “‘Yd laman Satanaxio," generally
translated “‘ The Hand of Satan." Formaleoni, an Italian
writer, noticed it, and failed to understand the allusion
until he chanced quite fortuitously to stumble on a
reference to a similar name in an old Italian romance,
which told how, in a certain part of “* India," a great hand
rose every day from the sea and carried off a number of
the inhabitants into the ocean. The tale is evidently
eloquent of earthquake or similar catastrophe, of which
it seems to be a memory. It seems pretty clear that the
“Great Hand ” was the deity of this Atlantic island,
precisely as he was of the Mexicans and Maya, a god who
took tribute of human lives by earthquake, and that some
Atlantean memory of him must have drifted to Europe.
In Central America maidens were sacrificed to Quetzalcoatl
by drowning, and, as we have seen, the same procedure
was followed in the Canary Islands, where the sacred
virgins cast themselves into the sea as an offering to the
god of ocean. The Maya were not resident on the coast,
so it is clear that they must have retained the ceremony as
a memorial of a period when they did live in an oceanic
. environment.

Quetzalcoatl was, moreover, the magician par excellence,
and was especially worshipped by those tribes who prac-
tised mummification. He was also, we will recall, a twin
as well as an earth-bearer, as was Atlas, and he it was
who brought with him to Mexico from his Atlantic home
the mysterious books which Nufiez de la Vega found at
Huehuetenango in Soconusco in 1691. In Quetzalcoatl,
then, centres every phase and aspect of the great Atlantean
culture-complex.

In the account of Plato, brief as it is, most of the details
of that complex will be found. In Central America and
Mexico all of them centre in the figure of Quetzalcoatl. In

Europe and Egypt their association with one figure is not


Atlantis in America 20


so clearly revealed, which shows that the appearance
the complex in those regions must have taken place at
much earlier date, and when they were still in the sta
of development. And, surely, if we find the whole circum
stances of Plato’s myth of Atlantis reproduced in Ameri
we are justified in speaking of “* Atlantis in America.”
But in North Africa, on the other side of the Atlantic,
the Atlas-Quetzalcoatl myth is practically reproduced in
its entirety. We find there the twin-god and world-beare
(Atlas), his sacred mountain (the Atlas range), the art of
mummification, witches or weird sorceresses in the Gor4
gons, the worship of flint stones or hammers as fetishes, the
shaping of localities into land and water. Indeed, M. A.
Rutot in his pamphlet Z’Atlantide, published in Brussels
in 1920, goes so far as to assume that Atlantis is identical:
with the regions now known as Morocco, Algeria and Tunis,
which about 1200 B.c., he says, were cut off from the main-
land of Africa by an earthquake. This caused a subsidence:
and flooded what is now the chain of lakes between the‘
Gulf of Kabes on the east and the Wady Draa on the west.
It thus became isolated from the rest of the civilised world
for a prolonged period. |
This and similar theories seem to me to fall to the'
ground when the extraordinary corroboration of the
American evidence is kept in view. Is it possible for cir-
cumstances to be more positively paralleled than those
of the Atlantic-American tradition in the west and the
Atlantic-Euro-African tradition in the east ? |
Finally, does not this complex with all its distinctive
associations show a clearly defined bond of connection
from Egypt to Mexico? Do not the traditions of the
sunken continent cluster more vividly round the coastal.
fringes of Western Europe and Eastern America than else- -
where in these areas ? Are not the advanced island-groups :
of these two continents replete with proofs of their former :
occupation by this complex ? If these things are not so, :
my contention is futile. But as they are certainly so, that
contention deserves rational consideration. |
I might easily have laboured my advocacy of these
arguments in a much longer treatise than the present.
This might have lent it greater weight, for undue com-
pression is often fatal to demonstration. But I trust to |


103 Atlantis in America


he very clear, obvious and striking nature of the facts
ind proofs, the illustrations and resemblances I have
drin together in these pages to convince my readers of

e soundness of my theory that Atlantean civilisation
eached America rather than to the implications or pro-
ixities of argument which are so frequently encountered


vhen the justification of a hypothesis is attempted.


CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE


SHOWING APPROXIMATE DATES IN ATLANTEAN-ANTILLIAN
HISTORY


ró-Magnon race, or first Atlantean wave, arrives
. in Europe at close of the Ice Age, about . . 28,000 B.C.


fagdalenian race, or second Atlantean wave,


arrives in Europe, about : : : . 14,000 ,,
izilian-Tardenoisian race, or third Atlantean
wave, arrives in Europe, about . : . 10,000 ,,
"nal submergence of Atlantis, according to


Plato . : ; : : ‘ E : 9,600 ,,
intillia partly or finally submerged, and arrival

of the Maya, an Antillian race, in America,

about. ; 200 ,,


Jesertion of the cities of Guatemala by the Maya,
and settlement of the Maya-Toltec in Mexico
and Yucatan, about . ‘ ; ‘ ; 600 A.D.


. Note.—There is a consensus of opinion as regards all of these
lates excepting that given by Plato, which it is naturally
mpossible to verify absolutely. At the same time, the arrival
f the Azilian-Tardenoisians in Europe approximately at that,
period seems to support the strong likelihood of contemporary
submergence in the Atlantic area, especially as the region of
their origin has not as yet been agreed upon by archeologists.
The same remark applies to the entrance into Europe of the
Cró-Magnon and Magdalenian waves of immigration, which
probably took place subsequent to profound seismic disturb-
ances or partial submergence in the Atlantic. A similar de-
duction may be arrived at in the case of the submergence of
Antillia, the date of which is unknown, but may be inferred
from the sudden appearance of the Maya in Central America
from a region unknown. These conclusions are also sub-
stantiated by the proved analogy of arrivals in Easter Island
from a submerged locality.


205


1 DEX


»ercromby, Lord, quoted, 16; on
the Guanches, 38
‚osta, quoted, 126
-tin, supposed Arabic name of
Antillia, 19
mazons,ei29-31; suggested ety-
mology of the name, 131; of
Mexico, 132; sacred axe of the,
140
meghino, his theories of man's
antiquity in America, 135-6
merica, invasion of by Atlantean-
Antillian race, 40; traditions of
Atlantis in, 65-80; myth of
compared with Atlantean myth,
77; bull sacrifice in, 96; mum-
mification in, 99-122; antiquity
of man in, 134-40; European
influence in, 139-40; Asiatic
influence in, 140-1; Polyncsian
influence in, 141-4; routes of
migration to, 144; immigration
from Atlantis to, 144-5; pyra-
mids of, 157-65; mounds in,
161-4 ; traditions of white men
in, 174-6
merican religion, Atlantean tradi-
tion in, 81-98; ritual connection
between and those of Europe and
‚North Africa, 91-2
ntillean archipelago, a fragment of
Atlantis, 17
mtillean continent, Spencer on
geology of, 26; Scharff on, 27;
Bóse on, 27; summary of geo-
logical evidence on, 27-9; ter-
restrial and culturalrelations with
Atlantis, 30-4, 33-40; Cro-
Magnons enter, 40
intilles, as remains of ancient con-
tinent of Antillia, 20-9 ; Suess on
geology of, 21 ; Scharff on, 21-2 ;
.Hill on, 22; Schuchert on, 22-6 ;
Simpson on, 22; fauna of the,
.22-7; Gadow on,25; Ortmann
On, 25;  pyramids in, 158-9;
Maya in, 194; insects of, 25;
birds of, 25; seismic disturb-
 ancesin, 57; pyramids in, 158-9;
the Maya race in, 194; three-
pointed stones of the, 197—200
intillias confused with West Indian
Islands, 18; traditions referring
to, 18-21 ; in Canerio's map, 19;
in Egerton MS. maps, 19; sup-
posed to be one with Atlantis,
19; supposed Arabic name of,


I9; maps of, antedating dis-
covery of America, 20 ; identified
with Cuba, 20-9

Architecture, evidence from, 155-


65

Aristotle, on the Atlantic, 190

Art, evidence from, 149-55

Asia, error of searching for all
American origins in, 97-8, 110;
mummification not introduced
into America from, 120

Asiatic influences in American cul-
ture, 140-1

Atlantean theory, modern protago-
nists of, 15; culture, route of
its introduction into America,


17
Atlantic, Admiralty soundings in
the, 33, 192; great ridge of the,


33
Atlantis, Plato’s account of, 14-15;


~ existence of man on, 16; former


conclusions upon, 17 ; disintegra-
tion of, 17; former existence of,
30-4 ; Termier on, 30-1 ; Scharff
on, 31 ; biology of, 32 ; maritime
shores as remains of, 32; prob-
able date of final submergence of,
33; Cró-Magnon race as emi-
grants from, 34-40; myths re-
lating to in America, 65-80;
account of in Plato’s Critias, 65 ;
myth of compared with American
traditions, 77; traditions of in
American religions, 81-98; bull
sacrifice in, 94; witchcraft in,
129-33; elephant a native of,
152; sacred hill of, 157-61 ;
tradition of Lemuria compared
with that of, 176-85; resemb-
lance of the ruins of Metalanim to,
183; Maya a race from, 194-6 ;
culture-complex of, 200-2 ; Rutot
on, 202


Atlas, myth of, 77-8 ; three-pointed
~ stones associated with, 199—202
Aurignacian culture, 36;


Breuil
on, 36; theory of African origin
of, 36; new phase of, 38; in-
vasion of America by, 40-I;
germs of mummification in, 99—
I00; Maya art-forms developed
from, 149; art, 149-55; hand-
stencilling, 150-1; resemblance
of to American-Indian art, 151;
use of shell ornaments, 154-5


Avienus, on the Atlantic, 190


207


Atlantis in America


Azilian-Tardenoisian race, 16; cul-
ture, 39-40

Azores, Valley of Seven Cities in,

a 169

Aztec, myths of cataclysm, 71-4;

~ literary form of, 72-3; cult re-
sembling that of the Cabiri, 89-
90; mummification among the,
109-12


Babcock, W. H., identifies Antillia
with Cuba, 20; on the Gorgons
and Amazons, 30; on St. Bran-
= 167; on the Sargasso Sea,
I

Babel, Tower of, Votan visits, 56

“Behaim, Antilles charted on his
globe, 18

Bettover, William, 168

Beuchat, M. H., quoted, 155

Bianco, "Andreas, his map of An-
tillia, 20

Biological links between Europe
and America, 32

Boas, Franz, on antiquity of man
in America, 138

Bones, preservation of among
Indian races, 117-18; representa-
tion of in Maya art, 152

Book of the Dead, 92, 105

Book of the Opening of the Mouth,
105

Books of Chilan Balam, the, 45

Borgia, the Codex, 60, 195

Bóse, Dr., on geology of the Antil-
lean continent, 27

Bourbourg, Brasseur de, on Aztec
myths of cataclysm, 71

Brazil, island of, 167-9

Breuil, the Abbé, on Aurignacian
culture, 36 ; on itslater phase, 38


Brinton, D. G., on American deluge |”


Naa 68-70 ; on American man,

II

Brounger, a storm god, 197

Brown, Prof. J. Macmillan, his
Riddle of the Pacific, 58; on
beliefs in the island of Yap, 58;
on myth of Hotua Matua, 63-4;


on Polynesian influence in
America, 141-4; on a Pacific
continent, 179-80; on Easter


Island, 182; on Cyclopean ruins
in the Pacific, 182-5, 194
Bull, sacrifice in Atlantis, 94;
Crete, 95-6 ;

symbols of, 96


in
in America, 96;


20!
Burckhardt, his theory of a Faan


land-mass, 179
Buss, the sunken land of, 169—70


Cabiri, cult of the, a ae it
probable origin, 86; a
cult, 87; possible Azilian mim
of, 88; Mexican cult resemblin
that of the, 89—90
Camargo on Aztec creation myths


¡Canary Islands, Atlantean race ii
” the, 34, 37-8; mummification in
100-2 ; pyramids i in, 158; tradi
tion of St. Brandan's Isle i in, 16
Canerio, Nicolo de, his map, 19
Canopic jars, 104, 109—IO
Caribs, relationship of to the Maya
46
Chalchihuitlicue, Aztec goddess, 7;
Chama, Maya vase from, 147 |
Chimalpopoca, the Codex, 70—1
Cholula, city of the Toltecs, 50 .
Chronological system of the Maya,


45
Chronological table of approximats
dates in Atlantean history, 205 |
Cinteotl, 195
Citallatonali, father of Quetzal:


coatl, 59-60; his resemblance te
Poseidon, 60, 71
Ciuateteó, or Mexican witches,


123-7; 195-6 |
Cleito, Poseidon's wife, 65, 74, 83 |
Coatlicue, a Toltec goddess, 60, 83


157
Cogul, wall-painting at, 122-3
Columbus, Ferdinand, 169 |
Copan, elephant sculpture at, 152 |
"Cranial deformation among =


Maya, 146-7; in France an
Spain, 146-7; in the W
Indies, 147


Creation myth cited by Curtin, 74
Creek Indians, myth of the, 65
Crete, steer-wrestling in, 95-6
Crö-Magnon race, 16, 34-8; arriva
in Europe, 34; art of, 34-6
theory of African origin of, 36;
marooned in the Canary Islanda
38; Myres on similarity between
the skulls of and those of ancient
Brazil, 38; later culture of, 38;
summary of the relationships of
40; invasion of America by, 40;
bull-worship of the, 94-5; germi


9

the art of mummification
among, 99-100; type in America,
13

Cultural connections between An-
tillia and Atlantis, 34-40

Curtin, Jeremiah, creation myth

| collected by, 74-6

|

Darwin, Charles, and the Pacific

, region, 177

Davis Land, 181

Deucalion, myth of, 78-80

‘Dolmen, the, 160-1


Earthquake myth in America, 66-9

Easter Island? traditions of, 63-4,
1827

Egypt, unlikelihood that its civilisa-
tión r€ached America via Asia, 98,

'—. 119-20; mummification in com-
pared with that of the Guanches,
IOI; mummification in during
the XXIst Dynasty, 102; pro-
cesses of embalmment in, 103-4 ;
pyramids in, 157 ; pyramid build-
ing did not originate in, 160

Elephants in American art, 151-2

Eleusis, mysteries of, 93

Elixir of youth, 62

‘Eskimos, their relationship to Palæ-
olithic race of Europe, 138

Estotiland, 170-2

Ethnological evidence regarding
Atlantean man in America, 136-9

European influences in American
culture, 139-40


Fauna of the Antilles, its relation-
ships, 22-7

Feather headdress of the Maya and

| the Aurignacians, 146

Fej érvary-Mayer, the Codex, 125

Fernandez, Juan, his discovery of
unknown land in the Pacific, 181

Fewkes on Antillean twin cults,
99-1; on Antillean mummies,
106-7; on Antillean three-
pointed stones, 198-9

Flood, myths of the, in America,

67-74

Folk-memories of an Atlantic con-
tinent, 166—75

Frazer, Sir James, on the magical
significance of early kingship,
61—2, 92


O


Index


Gadow, Dr. H., on the geology oí
the Antilles, 25

Gamio, Manuel, his researches, 48

Gattefossé, R. M., on mummifica-
tion in the Canary Islands, 101-2 ;
on the name '' Amazon,” 130

Germain, Louis, on resemblances
between European and American
molluscs, 32

Glacial Period in the United States,


137

God B, an elephant-headed god,

^ 152;

God K, an elephant-headed god,
152

Gomme, Sir G. L., on test of re-
currence in myth, 77-8

Gorgons, the, 129-30

Grain, its magical significance, 62-4;
ritual significance of, 91-4

Grand Chimu, Peru, possible Poly-
nesian origin of, 142-3

Guanche race of the Canary Islands
as Atlanteans, 16, 37; mum-
mification practised by, 100-2 ;
witchcraft among the, 132


Haebler, Prof. K., on American
mounds, 163

Haiti, grain ceremony in,
funerary customs of, 108

Hand - stencilling, Aurignacian,
150—I

Hardiman, on the island of O'Bra-
sile, 168

Hesperides, witch-cult in the, 129-


93-4 ;


32
Hieroglyphical system of the Maya,


44-5

Hill, Prof. R. T., on geology of
Lesser Antilles, 22

Holmes, W. D., on antiquity of
man in America, 136-8; on
European resemblances in Ameri-
can culture, 139-40

Horus, 157-8

Hotu Matua, myth of, 63-4, 182

Hrdlicka, Dr. A., his criticism of
Ameghino’s theory, 136

Huaxtecs, witchcraft „mong the,
126-7

Huemac, the “ Great Hand," 200-1

Hull, Prof. E., on former existence
of Atlantis, 31-2

Hutia, the, a West Indian rodent, 24

Hutton, on a Pacific continent, 177


Atlantis in America


Iberian race, Azilian origin of, 39-
40; D’Arbois de Jubainville on
Atlantean origin of, 39

Isis, 157

Islands, legendary, 166-70;
merged in the Pacific, 181-2

Isle of the Seven Cities, 168

Itzlacoliuhqui, 195-6

Ixcuiname, Mexican witches, 131

Ixtlilxochitl, on the Toltecs, 49; on
Aztec myths, 72


sub-


Jay, John, 168

Joyce, T. Athol, on the Toltecs, 48

Jubainville, D'Arbois de, on Atlan-
tean origin of the Iberians, 39


Khem-nefert, inscription of, 105

Kingship, magical significance of
early, 61-2

Kobelt, on land shells of the At-
lantic coasts, 32

Kwakiutl wizards, rite of the, 127-8


Land-bridges to Atlantis, 16, 17, 23,
24, 32, 38


= Lemuria, 176-85


Macalister, on germs of art of
mummification in Aurignacian
times, 99-100

Madoc, Prince of Wales, tradition
of, 172-4

Magdalenian race, an Atlantean
stock, 16; in America, 138;
culture, 38; immigration of the
race from Atlantis, 39; art, 151 ;
symbols, 151

Magliabecchiano, Codex, 110

Major, on Estotiland, 170

Mammoth in Aurignacian art, 151-
2; in American art, 152

Man, antiquity of in America,
134-40

Manibozho, myth of, 65-6

Maritime shores, remains of At-
lantis in, 32

Marquesas, Polynesian immigrants
to Peru from the, 143

Martyr, Peter, refers to Antillia,
18


Mas d'Azil, sculpture from, 150-1
Maury, on the Sargasso Sea, 191


0


210


ya race, an Atlantean-Antillian
stock, 41; its culture not Ameri-
can, 4I ; its appearance in Central
America, 42; first settlements
there, 42-3 ; its migrations, 42—3;
its discovery of Yucatan, 43; the
Maya renaissance, 43 ;
military aristocracy among the,
43; hieroglyphical system of the,
44; arithmetical and chrono-
logical system of the, 45; pos-
sible relationship of with the
Carib, 46; carries myth of
Quetzalcoatl into Mexico, 52; as
immigrants from Antillia, I44—5;
non-American character of, 45;
racial characteristics of the, 145- |
7; art-forms of the, developed
from Aurignacian types, 149-55 ;
mammoth in Maya art, 151-2;
an Atlantean race, 194-6 ; astro-
nomical science of the, 195
Metalanim, ruins of, 183-4 |
Mexican military aristocracy among
the Maya, 43
Mikla Irlant, 168 |
Minotaur, the, 95
Mixtecs, flood myth of the, 74 |
Molluscs, affinity between European
and American, 23-4 |
Moorish sailors' cruise in the At-
lantic, 191 |
Mortuary customs, see Mummifica- |
tion
Mounds, funerary, of America, 161-
4; theory of their construction
by Indians, 164 ; associated with
the sacrifice of the sacred bull, 164
Mound Builders, the, 163—4; as
descendants of the Toltecs, 164 |
Mummification, origin of the art in
Atlantis, 99; germs of in Aurig-
nacian culture, 99-100; in the
Canary Islands, 100-102; among
the Egyptians, 102-5; magical
origin of, 104-5; Egyptian, an
elaboration of the Aurignacian
custom of painting the bones red,
105; dissemination of, 106; in
the Antilles, 106-8 ; vestiges of
among the Carib, 106-8; in,
Santo Domingo, 107; among the |
Warraus, 107; in Jamaica, 108;
in Mexico, 109-12; among the
Maya, 109-10; in Michoacan,
112; in Yucatan, 112; in Peru,
112-14; in the Peruvian Andes,


E


ZII


214; ritual of in Peru, 114-15;
in Kentucky, 115; in Darien,
II5; in Virginia, 115; in the
Amazon delta, 115; in Mary-
land, 115; in S. Carolina, 115-16;
among the Indians of the North-
west, 116-17; in the Aleutian
Islands, 117; Brinton on, 118;
separate origins of in Europe and
America improbable, 119; or-
iginal introduction of from Asia

', into America unlikely, 119-20;
theory of introduction of from
Egypt into the Canary Islands
absurd, 120; associations with
witchcraft, 127-8; associated
with stones, 197-200

Mummy, the, 99-121

Murray, Sir John, on the Sargasso
Sea, 188

Myres, Prof. J. L., on the similarity
between Cró-Magnon and Brazi-
lian skulls, 38

Mysteries, cults of the, 87-95


Nagualists, a Mexican secret society,
126

Nelson, his finds in Kentucky, 139

Newfoundland, early Irish in, 168

Nufiez de la Vega, Bishop of
Chiapas, on Quetzalcoatl, 55-6


Ortmann, Dr., on the geology of the
Antilles, 25-6

Osborn, Prof., quoted, 16; on
Aurignacian art, 36; on the
relationship between the Guan-
ches and the Cró-Magnons, 37;
on Magdalenian culture, 38-9

Osiris, 92-3


Pacific, sunken continent in the,
176; submerged islands in the,
181-2

Palenque, the city of Quetzalcoatl,
55, 61

Papantzin, Princess, 175

Pariacaca, myth of, 66

Payne, E. J., on the Toltecs, 48-9

Peru, Polynesian influence in, 141—
4; mummification in, II2-14

Pilsbry, Dr., on land connection be-
‘tween Antilles and the mainland,


23

Plato, his account of Atlantis, 14-15;
Termier on, 30-1 ; his Critias, 65,
74, 76, 94 ; on the Atlantic, 190


Index


Polynesian influence on American
culture, 141-4

Ponape, ruins in, 182-3; 184

Popol Vuh, the, 66-8, 81, 86, 199

Poseidon, myth of, 65, 74, 81, 84;
hammer or pick of, 200

Pueblo Indians, secret cult of, 91

Pyramid, idea of evolved out of


^ sacred hill, 156; common evolu-


tionary history of Egyptian and
Mexican, 156-7 ; in Egypt, 157-
65 ; in Mexico, 157-65; in the
Canary Islands, 158; in the
Antilles, 158-9; universally as-


sociated with the embalmed
body, 159; of the Sun, at
Teotihuacan, 159-60; building


oí did not originate in Egypt,
160; Iberians as builders of the,
160; in North America, 161-4


Quetzalcoatl, leader of the Toltecs,
46; his Central American names,
46; his history, 48-64; myths
relating to, 51-57; Sahagun’s
account of, 52-3; in the Codex
Telleriano- Remensis, 53-4; Nufiez
de la Vega on, 55; Quiche myth
Of, 55-6; his travels, 56; de-
struction of his relics and records,
56 ; criticism of his myth, 56-64 ;
as a god of seismic disturbance,
58; his myth compared with
Pacific myths, 59; as a mortal
man, 59; as a heaven-supporter,
60; asa twin, 60; and magical
significance of kingship, 62-4 ;
as the trade wind, 62; human
elements in his myth, 62; con-
firmation of these by comparison
with Easter Island myth, 62-4 ;
fertilising power in his head, 64 ;
summary of his traditions, 64—5 ;
as Gucumatz, 81; resemblance
to Atlas, 83; as twin of Uit-
zilopochtli, 84; as God B, 152;
and the legend of Huemac, 200-1


Races of Atlantis, 16, 34-40

Recurrence, the test of, in myth, 66;
77-8

Routes of migration to America, 144

Rutot, on Atlantis in North Africa,
202

Ruysch, Antillia in his map, 18


Atlantis in America


Sahagun, on Quetzalcoatl, 52-3;
on Mexican witches, 125

St. Brandan, island of, 166-7

Sanconiathon, on the cult of the


Cabiri, 87
Sargasso Sea, the, 186-93; expedi-
tion to, 186; area of, 188; an-


cient traditions of the, 189-91 ;
weed in, 192

Satanaxio, the Isle of, 201

Scharff, Prof. R. F., on the geology
of the Antilles, 21-2; on fauna
of the Antilles, 24-5; criticises
Ortmann's conclusions, 26-7 ; on
the former existence of Atlantis,
31; on a Pacific continent,


178—9

Schuchert, Prof., on the submer-
gence of the West Indian Islands,
26

Set, an Egyptian deity, 158

Shell ornaments, arrangements
Aurignacians use of, 154-5;
American Indian use of, 154-5

Simpson, Dr., on the geology of the
Antilles, 22

Smith, Prof. G. Elliot, on mum-
mification in Egypt, 102; on the
elephant in Maya art, 152

Solenodon, the insect-eating, 24

Soley, J. C., on the Sargasso Sea,
183-9

Soundings in the Atlantic, 33

Southey, his poem ‘‘ Madoc,” 174

Speight, on a Pacific land-mass,
177

Spencer, Dr., on Pleistocene con-
nection of the Antillean continent,
26

Spier, his discoveries in New Jersey,


139

Spinden, Dr. H. J., on “Atlantean ”
figures in Central America, 60

Stones, three-pointed, of the An-
tilles, 197-200; Romero on the
significance of, 198

Suess, Prof. E., on the geology of
the Antilles, 21

Summaries, of the geological evi-
dence for an Antillean continent,
27-9, 33; of Cró-Magnon re-
lationship, 40; of evidence for
Cró-Magnon influence in America,
46-7; of Toltec myths, 64-5;
of evidence that mummification
originated in Atlantis, 120-1


212


Tawiscara, myth of, 66

** Tectiform ” devices, 96

Telleriano- Remensis, the Codex, on
Quetzalcoatl, 53-4, 125, 200

Teotihuacan, pyramid of, 164—5

Termier, on former existence of
Atlantis, 30-1;
deductions, 32

Tezcatlipoca, Mexican deity, 71i;


as a twin, 85; maize festival of, |


94, 158
Thonapa, myth of, 66
Thunder-stone, the, 196-203 ;
a magical implement, 197
Tlaloc, Mexican deity, as a walrus,
81-2 ; Boturini on, 82
Tlapallan, the Toltec fatherland,


as


on Germain's |


49, 61
Tlauizcalpan-tecutli, Mexican deity, :


as a Mummy, III, 200—I


Tlazolteotl, Mexican goddess, 123, |


127, 131, 195

Tollan or Tula, city of the Toltecs,
49; resemblance of to Atlantis,
50; myth of downfall of, similar
to that of the destruction of
Atlantis, 51; criticism of myths
relating to, 57-8, 126

Toltecs, a Mexican race, 46, 48-64 ;
meaning of the name, 48; his-
torical reality of the, 48; T.
Athol Joyce on the, 48; E. J.
Payne on the, 48-9;  Ixtlilxo-
chitl on the, 49; migrations of
the, 49-50; Torquemada on the,
49-50;
downfall, 50-1; its myth re-
sembles that of Atlantis, 51;
their architecture, 58; their
deities, 59-60 ; summary of their
traditions, 64-5; the Mound
Builders the descendants of the,
164; myth of the, 199

Torquemada, on Toltec migrations,
49-50; his account of Quetzal-
coatl, 53

Toscanelli, his letter to Columbus,


18
Twins, cult of the, 84-90 ; in Peru,


84; among the Hurons, 84-5;
in the Popol Vuh, 85; in the
Antilles, 90-1 |


Typhoeus, myth of, 198


Uitzilopochtli, 84 ;
maize festival of, 94, 158


their masonry, 50; their


À \
as a twin, 85; |


213


Vaticanus A, the Codex, on Quet-

nme Por DE myth, 54, 71-2, 73-4,
12

W'aticanus B, the Codex, on Quet-

i zalcoatl’s myth, 60

Venus, the planet, its connection
with the witch-cult in Mexico,
195—6, 200

Verneau, Dr. Rene, quoted, 16; on
the Cró-Magnon race, 36, 37, 38

Viracocha, myth of, 82-3

Votan, Quiche name of Quetzal-
coatl, 55; myth of, 55-6

Votanides, the clan of Quetzal-
coatl, 61, 64


Wafer, his description of uncharted
land in the Pacific, 180-1

Wampum, 154-5

Wankel, Dr. H., quoted, 99-100

Welsh Indians, traditions of, 172-4

West Indian Islands, see Antilles

Willendorf, sculpture from, 150


Witchcraft, 122-33;


Index


Wilson, Sir Daniel, quoted, 146—7
Wissler, Clark, on American Man,


138-9, 143-4 s
origins of,
I22; painting at Cogul, Spain,


associated with, 122-3; in
Mexico, 123-7; among the
Huaxtecs, 126-7; relationship


between European and American,
128-33 ; Scottish, 129; in
Atlantis, 129-33; in the Hes-
perides, 129-32


Xelhua, myth of the giant, 73-4


Yap, island of, Prof. J. M. Brown,


on beliefs in, 58


Zemis, Antillean idols, 91
Zeno, family of, their voyages,


170-2


BOOKS ON ANTHROPOLOGY & FOLKLOR


STORIES FROM THE EARLY WORLD.
R. M. FLEMING.


A collection of thirty-six folk tales from all corners of the wor
retold for children.


Medium 8vo. With 4 plates in colour and 8 in half-tone. Ne
and cheaper edition. Price ros. 6d. net.


** A charming book which we cordially recommend." —English Review,
** No more fascinating volume has been published on this attractive iod ed
Boo


ANCIENT TALES FROM MANY LANDS.
R. M. FLEMING, with an Introduction by PROFESSO
H. J. FLEURE.

A collection of thirty-three folk tales, with chapters on theif


historical and geographical background and a bibliography. Con?
taining 9 full-page plates in half-tone. |


Demy 8vo. Second edition. Price ros, 6d. net. |


“ Fascinating book... . Adult readers as well as children will be charmed by
the stories.” —The Spectator. |
““ All lovers of primitive stories . . . will welcome this collection of fo


tales.”—Contemporary Review.


THE RACES OF ENGLAND AND WALES. 8
H. J. FLEURE, D.SC., Professor of Geography and Anthr
pology at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth.


Crown 8vo. Illustrated. Price 5s. net.


** Of very real importance as a contribution to the ethnology of England and
Wales."—Nature.


** Fascinating.” —Saturday Review.


THE BRONZE AGE & THE CELTIC WORLD.
By HAROLD PEAKE, F.S.A., Ex-President of the Anthro-
pological Section of the British Association.

«Demy 4to. 14 Maps. Numerous Illustrations. Price 42s. net.


“To the student of the Celts Mr. Peake’s book is indispensable ; it marshals all
the old evidence and presents much that ts new.”—Dublin Review.


ERNEST BENN LTD., 8 BOUVERIE ST., LONDON, E.C.4


JOOKS ON ANTHROPOLOGY & GEOLOGY


"HE ENGLISH VILLAGE. The Origin and Decay
f its Community : An Anthropological Interpretation. By
JAROLD PEAKE, F.S.A.


Demy 8vo. Fully illustrated, with 15 maps. Price r5s. net.


‘© Tells the story of our rural life with a range of vision and in a manner
hich make it serviceable and attractive to many people in the country who have
iven no special attention to anthropology, archeology and history.”

Manchester Guardian.


[HE EVOLUTION OF CLIMATE. By C. E. P.
3ROOKS, M.SC., with a Preface by G. C. SIMPSON, Director
f the Meteorological Office.


Demy 8vo. Second Edition. Price 8s. 6d. net.


“ Mr. C. E. P. Brooks, in his admirable study of ** The Evolution of Climate,”
las given a review of the various causes to which changes of climate in the
tological past have been attributed." —The Times.


Published by
ERNEST BENN Lip., 8 BOUVERIE ST., LONDON, E.C.4


DISCOVERY


THE PAPER FOR THE EDUCATED MAN


TRUSTEES:


Sir J. J. THOMSON, o.M., Pror. A. C. SEWARD,
F.R.S. SC.D., F.R.S.


Sır F. J. KENYON, K.C.B., Pror. R. S. CONWAY,
F.B.A. L.H.D., F.B.A.


If you want to keep in touch with developments in every

branch of science and knowledge, read Discovery It is non-

technical, up-to-date and accurate. A free specimen copy
^ will be sent to anyone on request.


Monthly is. Annual Subscription 12s. 6d.
Post free anywhere in the World.


——— BENN BROTHERS LTD., 8 Bouverie Street, E.C. 4


“ap


di


LS
i
abe


T DAXZUSE
RETURN TO


ANTHROPOLOGY LIBRARY X


This publication is due on the LAST DA


and HOUR stamped below.
. MAR 2119/5 | gor a
JUN 18 1976 N12204
— —JUN 18 1981
SEP 51980
DEC 1 0 1980


DEC 20 1903
DEC ERD 199


MAY 2 1 1986
DEC YOU


MAY 24 1989


SUN Ae 10


MAY 17 199,
SEP UB 199
A ER RDIT 304:7-1010,71 General Library
(S16 611. ) AIRS University of California


erkeley


e.
ME y


= 2” aw, << -
Dt ctt
