================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: The Chief Works of Benedict de Spinoza, Vol. I
Creator: Benedict de Spinoza (R. H. M. Elwes, trans.)
Translator: R. H. M. Elwes
Edition: London: George Bell & Sons (Bohn's Philosophical Library), 1883; revised edition reprinted 1891 (scanned copy)
Source: Internet Archive (chiefworksbened00elwegoog), Google Books scan of the 1891 reprint of the revised edition
Public domain: Translation first published 1883; public domain.
Artifact ID: spinoza-chief-works-elwes-vol-1-1883
================================================================================

SPINOZA'S WORKS.

Vol. L


1


. \


!'


THE CHIEF WORKS


OP


. BENEDICT DE SPINOZA,

TRANSLATED FROM THE LATIN, WITH AN

INTRODUCTION — -^—


BY


Ifl^S-t


R. H. M. ELWES.


Felix quipotuit rerum cognoscere cattsas,
Atque mettts omnes, et inexorabile fatum,
Subjecit jpedibtcs, strepitumqtte Acherontis avari.

Georffic. 2. 490-2.


Vol. I.

Introduction, Tractatxjs Theologico-Politicxjs,

Teactatits Politicus.


BEVI8ED EDITION.


■ LONDON: GEORGE BELL AND SONS, YORK STREET,
I COYENT GARDEN.

1891.


/
/


•First Edition, 1884.

Second Edition, revised, 1887,

Eeprinted, 1889, 1891.


CONTENTS OF VOL. I.


PAGE

Introduction • . v

Original unpopularity of Spinoza's writings, their gradually ^

increasing influence in Germany^ France, Holland, and "

England . . . , v

Authorities for the life of Spinoza : Colerus, &c. . . • ix

Birth, 1634, and education of Spinoza . . • . • x

His breach with the synagogue, 1656 xii

Life near Amsterdam and at Khijnsburg . • • • xiii

Friendship with Simon de Vries xiv

Removal to Voorburg and the Hague xv

Correspondence with Oldenburg, Leibnitz, Tschirnhausen, and

others. Publication of Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, 1670. xvi
Massacre of the De Witts, 1672. Indignation and danger of

Spinoza xvii

Completion of the Ethics, 1674 xviii

Later life of Spinoza xviii

Death and burial, February, 1677 . • • • • . xx

Opera Posthuma published 1677 xxi

Sketch of Spinoza's philosophy xxi

Scope of the present work •••••.. xxxii

Theologico-Political Treatise 1

Preface .,3

Origin and consequences of superstition 3

Causes that have led the author to write .... 6

Course of his investigation 8

For what readers the treatise is designed. Submission of

author to the rulers of his country 11

Chap. I. — Of Prophecy 13

Definition of prophecy 13

Distinction between revelation to Moses and to the other

prophets 15

Between Christ and all other recipients of revelation . . 19

Ambiguity of the word " Spirit " 19

The different senses in which things may be referred to Grod. 20

Different senses of" Spirit of God'* 22

Prophets perceived revelation by imagination .... 24


/


CONTENTS.

PAGB

Chap,IL— Of Prophets 27

A mistake to suppose that prophecj can give knowledge of

phenomena 27

Certainty of prophecy based on (1) Vividness of Imagination,

(2) A Sign, (3) Goodness of the Prophet .... 29
Variation of prophecy with the temperament and opinions of

the individual 30

Chap. III. — Of the Vocation of the Hebrews^ and whether the

Gift of Prophecy was peculiar to them 43

Happiness of Hebrews did not consist in the inferiority of the
Gentiles 43

Nor in philosophic knowledge or virtue 45

But in their conduct of affairs of state and escape from poli-
tical dangers 46

Even this mstinction did not exist in the time of Abraham . 48

Testimony from the Old Testament itself to the share of the
Grentiles in the law and favour of God .... 49

Explanation of apparent discrepancy of the Epistle to the
Bomans .......... 53

Answer to the arguments for the eternal election of the Jews. 54

Chap. IV. — Of the Divine Law , 57

Laws either depend on natural necessity or on human decree.

The existence of the latter not inconsistent with the former

class of laws 57

Divine law a kind of law founded on human decree : called

Divine from its object 59

Divine law (1) universal ; (2) independent of the truth of any

historical narrative ; (3) independent of rites and ceremonies ;

(4) its own reward 61

Reason does not present God as a law-giver for men . . 62
Such a conception a proof of ignorance — in Adam — in the

Israelites — in Christians 63

Testimony of the Scriptures in favour of reason and the

rational view of the Divine law . . . * . .65

Chap. V. — Of the CeremonialLaw 69

Ceremonial law of the Old Testament no part of the Divine
universal law, but partial and temporary. Testimony of

the prophets themselves to this 69

Testimony of the New Testament 72

How the ceremonial law tended to preserve the Hebrew kingdom 73

Christian rites on a similar footing 76

What part of the Scripture narratives is one bound to believe ? 76

Chap. VI. — Of Miracles 81

Confused ideas of the vulgar on the subject . . . .SI
A miracle in the sense of a contravention of natural laws an

absurdity 82

In the sense of an event, whose cause is unknown, less edify-

ing than an event better understood 84


A


CONTENTS.

PAGE
God's providence identical with the course of nature • • 89
How Scripture miracles may be interpreted . ... 92

Chap. Vn. — Of the Interpreiatian of Scripture , , . .98
Current systems of interpretation erroneous . . . .98
Only true system to interpret it by itself .... 100
^Reasons why this system cannot now be carried out in its

entirety 108

Yet these difficulties do not interfere with our understanding

the plainest and most important passages . . . .113
Eival systems examined — that of a supernatural faculty being

necessary — refuted . 114

That of Maimonides .114

Befuted 116

Traditions of the Pharisees and the Papists rejected . . 118

Chap. VIII. — Of the authorship of the Pentateuch, and the other

historical books of the Old Testament 120

The Pentateuch not written by Moses 120

His actual writings distinct 124

Traces of late authorship in the other historical books . .127
All the historical books the work of one man . . .129

Probably Ezra 130

Who compiled first the book of Deuteronomy . . .131
And then a history, distinguishing the books by the names of
their subjects 132

Chap. IX. — Other questions about these books . . . .133
That these books have not been thoroughly revised and made

to agree 133

That there are many doubtful readings 139

That the existing marginal notes are often such . . .140
The other explanations of these notes refuted . . . 141
The hiatus 145

Chap. X. — An Examination of the remaining books of the Old

Testament according to the preceding method . . . 146

Chronicles, Psalms, Proverbs 146

Isaiah, Jeremiah 147

Ezekiel, Hosea 148

Other prophets, Jonah, Job . . . • • . .149

Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther 150

The author declines to undertake a similar detailed examina-
tion of the New Testament 156

Chap. XI. — An Liquiry whether the Apostles wrote their Epistles
as Apostles and Prophets, or merely as Teachers, and an Ex-
plancution of what is meant by an Apostle . . . .157
The epistles not in the prophetic style . . . . . 157
The Apostles not commanded to write nor to preach in parti-
cular places 159

Different methods of teaching adopted by the Apostles . . 163


CONTENTS.

PJLGB

Chap. XII. — Of ike true Orwinal of the Divine Law, and where'
fore Scripture is called Sacred y and the Word of God. How
that, in so far as it contains the Word of God, it has come
down to us uncorrupted 165

Chap. XIII. — It is shoum, that Scripture teaches only very Simple

Doctrines, such as suffice for right conduct . . • .175
Error in speculative doctrine not impious — nor knowledge
pious. Pietj consists in obedience 180

Chap. XIV. — Definitions of Faith, the True Faith, and the
Foundations of Faith, which is once for all separated from

Philosophy 182

Danger resulting from the vulgar idea of faith . , . 1 82
The only test of faith obedience and good works . . . 1 84
As diflPerent men are disposed to obedience by different
opinions, universal faith can contain only the simplest

doctrines 186

Fundamental distinction between faith and philosophy — the
key-stone of the present treatise . . . . .189

Chap. XV. — Theoloay is shown not to he subservient to Beason,

nor Beason to ilieology: a Definition of the reason which

enables us io accept the Authority of the Bible . . .190

Theory that Scripture must be accommodated to Reason —

maintained by Maimonides — already refuted in Chapter

VII 190

Theory that Reason must be accommodated to Scripture
— ^maintained by A Ipakhar — examined . . . .191

And refuted 194

Scripture and Iteason independent of one another . .195
Certainty of fundamental faith not mathematical but moral . 196
Great utility of Revelation 198

Chap. XVI. — Of the Foundations of a State; of the NaturaZ
and Civil Bights of Individuals; and of the Bights of the

Sovereign Power 20(S*

In Nature right co-extensive with power .... 200
This principle applies to mankind in the state of Nature , 201
How a transition from this state to a civil state is possible . 203

Subjects not slaves 206

Detinitionof private civil right — and wrong . • , . 207

Of alliance . 208

Of treason 209

In what sense sovereigns are bound by Divine law • .210
Civil government not inconsistent with religion . . .211

Chap. XVII. — It is shown, that no one can or need transfer all
his Bights to the Sovereign Power. Of the Hebrew Bepublic,
as it was during the lifetime of Moses, and after his death
till the foundation of the Monarchy ; and of its Excellence.
Lastly, of the Causes why the Theocratic Bepublic fell, and
why it could hardly have continued without Dissension . 214


CONTENTS.

FAQB

The absolute theory of Sovereignty ideal — No one can in
fact transfer all his rights to the Sovereign power. Evi-
dence of this 214

The greatest danger in all States from within, not without . 216
Original independence of the Jews after the Exodus . .218
Changed first to a pure democratic Theocracy . . .219

Then to subjection to Moses. . . 1 . . . 220
Then to a Theocracy with the power divided between the

high priest and the captains 221

The tribes confederate States 224

Bestraints on the civil power 226

Restraints on the people 228

Causes of decay involved in the constitution of the Levitical

priesthood 232

Chap. XVIII. — From the Commonwealth of the Hehrevoa and their

History certain Lessons are dedv>ced 237

The Hebrew constitution no longer possible or desirable, yet
lessons may be derived from its history .... 237

As the danger of entrusting any authority in politics to
ecclesiastics — the danger of identifying religion with
dogma 241

The necessity of keeping all judicial power with the sovereign
— the danger of changes in the form of a State . . . 242

This last danger illustrated from the history of England — of
Home 243

And of Holland 244

Chap. XIX. It is shown that the Bight over Matters Spiritual lies
wholly with the Sovereign, arid that the Outward Farrm of
Beliaion should be in accordance with Public Peace, if we

would worship God aright 245

Difference between external and inward religion • . . 245
Positive law established only by agreement . • • • 246
Piety furthered by peace and obedience . • • .249

Position of the Apostles exceptional 250

Why Christian States, unlike the Hebrew, suffer from dis-
putes between the civil and ecclesiastical powers . .254
Absolute power in things spiritual of modern rulers . . 256

Chap. XX. That in a Free State every man may Think what

he Likes, and Say what he Thinks 257

The mind not subject to State authority . . . .257
Therefore in general language should not be . . . .258
A man who disapproving of a law, submits his adverse opinion
to the judgment of the authorities, while acting in accor-
dance with the law, deserves well of the State . . .259
That liberty of opinion is beneficial, shown from the history

of Amsterdam

Danger to the State of withholding it. — Submission of the
Author to the judgment of his country's rulers • . 265


cosTEsnrs.


AUTBOK'8 KOTCS TO TBB TSEATUB .

A FoLincAi* Trejltise


Extract from the Pre&oe to Opera Posthmiia

Contents

Cbap. I. Introdoction

IL Ot' Namral Right ....
ITI. Of the Right of Supreme Authorities .
IV. Of the Functions of Supreme Authorities
V. Of the Best State of a Dominioa ,
VI. Of Monarchy


VII. Of Monarchy. Continuation
VIII. Of Aristocracy .
IX. Of Aristocracy.
X. Of Aristocracy.
XL Of Democracy


CantinMoiiom
Conclusion


/


> ■


INTRODUCTION.

** Konstatiert ist es, das der Lebenswandel des Spinoza frei von allem
Tadel war,iind rein und makellos wie das Leben seines gottlichen Tetters,
Jesu Christi. Auch wie Dieser litt er fiir seine Lehre. wie Dieser trug er
die Domenkrone. UeberalJ, wo ein grosser Geist seine GedAiken aus* ^
spricht, ist Golgotha," — Heine.

A VERT few years ago the writings of Spinoza were
•^^^ almost unknown in this country. The only authorities
to which the English reader could be referred were the
brilliant essays of Mr. Eroude ^ and Mr. Matthew Arnold,*
the graphic but somewhat misleading sketch ia Lewes's
" History of Philosophy," and the unsatisfactory volume of
Dr. E. WiUis.' But in 1880 -Mr. Pollock brought out his
most valuable " Spinoza, his Life and Philosophy," * likely
long to remain the standard work on the subject; Dr.
Martineau has followed with a sympathetic and gracefully
written " Study of Spinoza ; " Professor Kjiight has edited
a volume of Spinozistic Essays by Continental Philoso-

* ** Short Studies in Great Subjects," first series, art. " Spinoza."

* ** Essays in Criticism," art. " Spinoza and the Bible.'*

' ''Benedict de Spinoza; his Life, Correspondence, and Ethics."
1870.

* I take this early opportunity of recording my deep obligations to
Mr. Pollock's book. I hare made free use of it, together with Dr.
Martineau's, in compiling this introduction. In the passages which
Mr. Pollock has incidentally translated, I have been glad to be abjc to
refer to the versions of so distinguished a scholar.


VI


INTBODTTCTION.


phers ; Auerbacli's biographical noveP lias been translated,
and many writers have made contributions to the subjeetj
in magazines and reviews.

At first sight this stir of tardy recognition may seem
surprising than the preceding apathy, for history can shoi
few figures more remarkable than the solitary thinker
Amsterdam. But the causes which kept Spinoza in coi
parative obscurity are not very far to seek. Personally
shrank with almost womanly sensitiveness from an]
like notoriety : his chief work was withheld till after
death, and then published anonymously ; his treatise
Beligion was also put forth in secret, and he disclaimi
with evident sincerity all desire to f oimd a school, or gii
his name to a sect.

Again, the form in which his principal work is cast u\
such as to repel those dilettante readers, whose si
is necessary for a widely-extended reputation ; none bi
genuine students would care to grapple with the serri<
array of definitions, axioms, and propositions, of which
Ethics is composed, while the display of geometric acci
flatters the careless into supposing, that the whole sti
ture is interdependent, and that, when a single breach
been effected, the entire fabric has been demolished.

The matter, no less than the manner, of Spinoza's wiii
ings was such as to preclude popularity. He genuine
shocked his contemporaries. Advances in thought ai
tolerated in proportion as they respond to and, as it wei%|
kindle into flame ideas which are already smouldering ol
scurely in many minds. A teacher may deepen, modii
transfigure what he finds, but he must not attempt radi(
reconstruction. In the seventeenth century all inen^
deepest convictions were inseparably boimd up with ant]
pomorphic notions of the Deity; Spinoza, in attacl
these latter and endeavouring to substitute the concepts

^ '' Spinoza : ein Denkerleben." 1855.


INTBODUOTION. Vll

of eternal and necessary law, seemed to be striMng at tlie
very roots of moral order : hence with carious irony hid
works, which few read and still fewer understood, became
associated with notions of monstrous impiety, and their
author, who loved virtue with single-hearted and saintly
devotion, was branded as a railer against God and a sub-
verter of morality, whom it was a shame even to speak of.
Those from whom juster views might have been expected
swelled the popular cry. The Cartesians sought to confirm
their own precarious reputation for orthodoxy by emphatic
disavowals of their more daring associate. Leibnitz, who
had known Spinoza personally, speaks of him, whether
from jealousy or some more avowable motive, in tones of
consistent depreciation.

The torrent of abuse, which poured forth from the
theologians and their allies, served to overwhelm the
ethical and metaphysical aspect of Spinoza's teaching. The
philosopher was hidden behind the arch-heretic. Through-
out ahnost the whole of the century following his death,
he is spoken of in terms displaying complete misappre-
hension of his importance and scope. The grossly inaccu-
rate account given by Bayle in the '' Dictionnaire Philoso-
phique" was accepted as sufi&dent. The only symptom of a
following is found in the religious sect of Hattemists, which
based some of its doctrines on an imperfect imderstanding
of the so-caJled mystic passages in the Ethics. The first
real recognition came from Lessing, who found in Spinoza
a strength and solace he sought in vain elsewhere, though
he never accepted the system as a whole. His conversa-
tion with Jacobi (1780), a diligent though hostile student
of the Ethics, may be said to mark the beginning of a new
epoch in the history of Spinozism. Attention once at-
tracted was never again withdrawn, and received a powerful
impulse from Goethe, who more than once confessed his
indebtedness to the Ethics, which indeed is abundantly


nu INTBODUOTION.

evident throughout his writings. Schleiermacher paid an
eloquent tribute to "the holy, the rejected Spinoza."*
Kovalis celebrated him as "the man intoxicated wiA
Deity" (der OoUvertrunkene Mann), and Heine for once
forgot to sneer, as he recounted his life. The bnlliaiit
novelist, Auerbach, has not only translated his complete
works, but has also made his history the subject of a
biographical romance. Amoi^ Grerman philosophers Kant
is, perhaps, the last, who shows no traces of Spinozism.
Hegel has declared, that " to be a philosopher one must first
be a Spinozist." In recent years a new impulse has been
given to the study of the Ethics by their curious hanuony
with the last results of physiological research.

In France Spinoza has till lately been viewed as a dis-
ciple and perverter of Descartes. M. Emile Saisset pre-
fixed to his translation of the philosopher's chief works a
critical introduction written from this standpoint. Since
the scientific study of philosophic systems has b^im
among the French, M. Paul Janet has written on Spinoza
as a link in the chain of the history of thought ; a new
translation of his complete works has been started, and
M. Eenan has delivered a discoiirse on him at the bicen-
tenary of his death celebrated at the Ha^e.

In Holland there has also been a revival of interest in
the illustrious Dutch thinker. Professors Van Vloten and
Land were mainly instrumental in procuring the erection^
of a statue to his memory, and are now engaged in a fine^
edition of his works, of which the first volume has appeared.*
In England, as before said, the interest in Spinoza has till
recently been slight. The controversialists of the eighteenth
century, with the exception of Toland, passed him by as-
unworthy of serious study. The first recognition of his true
character came probably from Grermany through Coleridge,
who in his desultory way expressed enthusiastic admiration,
^ « B. de Spinoza, Opera. I." The Hague, 1882.


r


INTBODUGTIOir. IX

E and recorded his opinion (in a pencil note to a passage in
I Schelling), tliat the Ethics, the Kovtun Organnm, and the
I Critique of Pore Season were the three greatest works
f written since the introduction of Ohristianitj. The in-
i fluence of Spinoza has heen traced by Mr. Pollock in
i Wordsworth, and it is on record that Shelley not only
contemplated but began a translation of the Tractatus
Theologico-Politicus, to be published with a preface by
ij Lord Byron, but the project was cut short by his death.
{ It is said that George Eliot left behind her at her decease

a MS. translation of the Ethics.
( It may strike those who are strangers to Spinoza as
curious, that, notwithstanding the severely abstract nature
^ of his method, so many poets and imaginative writers
should be foimd among his adherents. Lessing, Gt)ethe,
I Heine, Auerbach, Coleridge, Shelley, George Eliot ; most
\ of these not only admired him, but studied him deeply.
I On closer approach the apparent anomaly vanishes. There
is about Spinoza a power and a charm, which appeals
strongly to the poetic sense. He seems to dwell among
heights, which most men see only in far off, momentary
glimpses. The world of men is spread out before him,
the workings of the human heart lie bared to his gaze, but
he does not faU to weeping, or to laughter, or to reviling :
his thoughts are ever with the eternal, and something of
the beauty and calm of eternal things has passed into his
teaching. If we may, as he himself was wont to do, in-
terpret spiritually a Bible legend, we may say of him that,
like Moses returning from Sinai, he bears in his presence
the witness that he has held communion with the Most
High.

The main authority for the facts of Spinoza's life is a

short biography by Johannes Colerus ^ (Kohler), Lutheran

* Originally written in Dutch (1706). Translated the same year into


X INTBODTTCTIOK.

pastor at the Hague, who occupied the lodgings formerly
tenanted bj the philosopher. The orthodox Christian febb
a genuine abhorrence for the doctrines, which he regarded as
atheistic, but was honest enough to recognize the stainless
puritj of their author's character. He sets forth what lie
has to say with a quaint directness in admirable keeping
with the outward simplicity of the life he depicts.

Further authentic information is obtainable from passing
notices in the works of Leibnitz, and from Spinoza's pub-
lished correspondence, though the editors of the latter havQ
suppressed all that appeared to them of merely personal '
interest. There is also a biography attributed to Lucas,
physician at the Hague (1712), but this is merely a con*
fused panegyric, and is often at variance with more trust-
worthy records. Additional details^^may be gleaned from
Bayle's hostile and inaccurate article in the '' Dictionnaiie
Philosophique ; " from S. Kortholt's preface to the second
edition (1700) of his father's book " De tribus impostoribtig
magnis:" and, lastly, from the recollections of Colonel
Stoupe (1673), an officer in the Swiss service, who had met
the philosopher at Utrecht, but does not contribute much
to our knowledge.

Baruch de Spinoza was bom in Amsterdam Nov. 24^
1634. His parents were Portuguese, or possibly Spanisk^
Jews, who had sought a refuge in the Netherlands front
the rigours of the Inquisition in the Peninsula. Though
nothing positive is known of them, they appear to hav«
been in easy circumstances, and certainly bestowed on theif
only son — ^their other two children being girls — a thorougli
education according to the notions of their time and secb
At the Jewish High School, imder the guidance of Moiw
teira, a learned Talmudist, and pos&ibly of the brilliant

French and English, and afterwards (1723) into German. The Englidi
version is reprinted in Mr. Pollock's book as an appendix.


It

r


INTEODUCTION, 11


j Manasseli Ben Israel, who afterwards (1655) was employed

i to petition from Cromwell the re-admission of the Jews to

g England, the yoimg Spinoza was instructed in the leam-

E ing of the Hebrews, the mysteries of the Talmud and the

c Cabbala, the text of the Old Testament, and the commen-

£ taries of Ibn Ezra and Maimonides. Eeaders of the

Tractatus Theologico^Politicus will be able to appreciate the

a use made of this early training. Besides such severer

v; studies, Spinoza was, in obedience to Eabbinical tradition,

t made acquainted with a manual trade, that of lens polish-

L ing, and gained a knowledge of French, Italian, and Ger-

i man ; Spanish, Portuguese, and Hebrew were almost his

u native tongues, but curiously enough, as we learn from

;. one of his lately discovered letters,^ he wrote Dutch with

I difficulty. Latin was not included in the Jewish curricu-

I lum, being tainted with the suspicion of heterodoxy, but

Spinoza, feeling probably that it was the key to much of

the world's best knowledge, set himself to learn it ; * first,

with the aid of a German master, afterwards at the house

of Francis Van den Ende, a physician. It is probably

from the latter that he gained the soimd knowledge of

physical science, which so largely leavened his philosophy ;

and, no doubt, he at this time began the study of Descartes,

whose reputation towered above the learned world of the

period.

Golems relates that Van den Ende had a daughter,
Clara Maria, who instructed her father's pupils in Latin
and music during his absence. " She was none of the

> Letter XXXIT. See toI. ii.

* A translator has special opportunities for observing the extent of
Spinoza's knowledge of Latin. His sentences are grammatical and his
meaning almost always clear. But his vocabulary is restricted; his
style is wanting in flexibility, and seldom idiomatic; in fact, the niceties
of scholarship are wanting. He reminds one of a clever workman who
accomplishes much with simple tools.

a


XU INTEODUCTION,

most beautiful, but she bad a great deal of wit/' and as tbe
story runs displayed her sagacity by rejecting the proffered
love of Spinoza for the sake of his fellow-pupil Kerkering,
who was able to enhance his attractions by the gift of a
costly pearl necklace. It is certain that Van den Ende's
daughter and Kerkering were married in 1671, but the
tradition of the previous love affair accords ill with ascer-
tained dates. Clara Maria was only seven years old when
Spinoza left her father's house, and sixteen when he left
the neighbourhood.

Meanwhile the brilliant Jewish student was overtaken by
that mental crisis,^which has come over so many lesser men
before and since. The creed of his fathers was f oimd un-
equal to the strain of his own wider knowledge and changed
spiritual needs. The Hebrew faith with its immemorial
antiquity, its imbroken traditions, its myriads of martyrs,
could appeal to an authority which no other religion has
equalled, and Spinoza, as we know from a passage in one
of his letters,! felt the claim to the fuU. \ We may be sure
that the gentle and reserved youth was in no haste to
obtrude his altered views, but the time arrived when they .
could no longer be with honesty concealed. The Jewish
doctors were exasperated at the defection of their most
promising pupil, and endeavoured to retain him in their
communion by the offer of a yearly pension of 1,000
florins. Such overtiires were of course rejected. Sterner
measTires were then resorted to. It is even related, on ex-
cellent authority, that Spinoza's life was attempted as he
was comiog out of the Portuguese synagogue. Be this as
it may, he fled from Amsterdam, and was (1656) formally
excommum'cated and anathematized according to the rites
of the Jewish church.

Thus isolated from his kindred, he sought more con-
genial society among the dissenting community of Colle-

1 Letter LXXIV.


INTEODirCTION. XIU

t

giants, a\ body of men who without priests or set forms
of worship carried out the precepts of simple piety. He
passed some time in the house of one of that body, not far
from Amsterdam, on the Ouwerkerk road, and in 1660 or
the following year removed with his friend to the head-
quarters of the sect at Rhijnsburg, near Leyden, where the
memory of his sojourn is still preserved in the name
"Spinoza Lane." His separation from Judaism was
marked by his substituting for his name Baruch the Latin
equivalent Benedict, but he never received baptism or for-
mally joined any Christian sect. Only once again does his
family come into the record of his life. On the death of
his father, his sisters endeavoured to deprive him of his
share of the inheritance on the ground that he was an out-
cast and heretic. Spinoza resisted their claim by law, but
on gaining Ms suit yielded np to them aU they had de-
manded except one bed.

Skill in polishing lenses gave him sufficient money for
his scanty needs, and he acquired a reputation as an opti-
cian before he became known as a philosopher. It was in
this capacity that he was consulted by Leibnitz.^ His only
contribution to the science was a short treatise on the
rainbow, printed posthumously in 1687. This was long
regarded as lost, but has, in our own time, been recovered
and reprinted by Dr. Van Vloten.

Spinoza also drew, for amusement, portraits of his friends
with ink or charcoal. Colerus possessed " a whole book of
such draughts, amongst which there were some heads of
several considerable persons, who were known to him, or
had occasion to visit him," and also a portrait of the phi-
losopher himself in the costume of Masaniello.

So remarkable a man could hardly remain obsciire, and
we have no reason to suppose that Spinoza shrank from
social intercourse. Though in the last years of his life his

' Letters LI., LII.


I

r

I


XIV INTEODUCTION.

habits were somewhat solitary, this may be set down to
failing health, poverty, and the pressure of imcompleted
work. He was never a professed ascetic, and probably, in
the earlier years of his separation from Judaism, was the
centre of an admiring and affectionate circle of friends. la
his letters he frequently states that visitors leave him no
time for correspondence, and the tone, in which he was ad-
dressed by comparative strangers, shows that he enjoyed
considerable reputation and respect. Before the appearance
of the Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, he had published
nothing which could shock the susceptibilities of Christians^
and he was known to be a complete master of Cartesianism,
then regarded as the consummation and crown of learning.
It is recorded that a society of young men used to hold
meetings in Amsterdam for the discussion of philosophical
problems, and that Spinoza contributed papers as material
for their debates.^ Possibly the MS. treatise "On Gk)d,
Man, and his Blessedness," which has been re-discovered in
two Dutch copies during our own time, may be referred
to this period. It is of no philosophic value compared
with the Ethics, but is interesting historically as throwing
light on the growth of Spinoza's mind and his early rela-
tions to Cartesianism.

Oblivion has long since settled down over this little band
of questioners, but a touching record has been preserved
of one of their number, Simon de Vries, who figures in
Spinoza's correspondence. He had often, we are told,
wished to bestow gifts of money on his friend and master,
but these had always been declined. During the illness
which preceded his early death, he expressed a desire to
make the philosopher his heir. This again was declined,
and he was prevailed on by Spinoza to reduce the bequest
to a small annuity, and to leave the bulk of his property

» Letters XXVI., XXVII., according to the corrected text of Dr.
ITan Vloten, herein adopted*


INTEODUCTION. TV

to Ms family. When lie had passed away his brother
fixed the pension at 600 florins, but Spinoza declared the
stun excessive, and refused to accept more than 300 florins,
which were punctually paid him till his death.

Besides this instruction by correspondence, for which he
seems to have demanded no payment (" mischief," as one
of his biographers puts it, " could be had from him for
nothing "), Spinoza at least in one instance received into
his house a private pupil, ^ generally identified with one
Albert Burgh, who became a convert to Eome in 1675, and
took that occasion to admonish his ex-tutor in a strain of
contemptuous pity.^ Probably to this youth were dictated
" The principles of Cartesianism geometrically demon-
strated," which Spinoza was induced by his friends to
publish, with the addition of some metaphysical reflections,
in 1663.* Lewis Meyer, a physician of Amsterdam, and
one of Spinoza's intimates, saw the book through the press,
and supplied a preface. Its author does not appear to
have attached any importance to the treatise, which he
regarded merely as likely to pave the way for the reception
of more original work. It is interesting as an example of
the method afterwards employed in the Ethics, used to
support propositions not accepted by their expounder. It
also shows that Spinoza thoroughly understood the system
he rejected.

In the same year the philosopher removed from Rhijns-
burg to Voorburg, a subiirb of the Hague, and in 1670 to
the Hague itself, where he lived till his death in 1677,
lodging first in the house (afterwards tenanted by Colerus)
of the widow Van Velden, and subsequently with Van der

• Letters XXVI., XXVII. » 1^^^^^ LXXIII.

* The full title is, " Henati des Cartes Principionim partes I. et II.
more geometrico demonstratse per Benedictum de Spinoza Amsteloda-
mensem. Accesseront ejusdem cogitata metapbysica. Amsterdam,
1663."


XVI INTEODUCTIOy,

Spijk, a painter. He was very likely led to leave Bhijiuh
burg by his increasing reputation and a desire for educated
society. By this time he was well known in Holland, and
count^ among his friends. John de Witt, who is said to
have consulted him on affairs of state. Nor was his fame
confined to his native country. Henry Oldenburg, the first
secretary of the newly-established Eoyal Society of Engwj
land, had visited him at Ehijnsburg. introduced possibly^
by Hi^j^gheAsr &Jid had invited him to carry on a corze^
spondence,^ in terms of affectionate intimacy. Oldenburg^
was rather active-minded than able, never really xmderstood
or sympathized with Spinoza's standpoint, and was
thoroughly shocked* at the appearance of the Tractatos
Theologico-Politicus, but he was the intimate friend of
Robert Boyle, and kept his correspondent acquainted with
the progress of science in England. Later on (1671%
Leibnitz consulted Spinoza on a question of practical optics/
and in 1676, Ludwig von Tschimhausen, a Bohemian
nobleman, known in the history of mathematical science,
contributed some pertinent criticisms on the Ethics, then
circulated in MS.*

Amusing testimonies to Spinoza's reputation are afforded
by the volimteered effusions of Blyenbergh,* and the artless
questionings of the believer ia ghosts.®

In 1670, the Tractatus TJieologico-Politicus was pub-
lished anonymously, with the name of a fictitious printer at
Hamburg. It naturally produced a storm of angry contro-
versy. It was, in 1674, formally prohibited by the States-
General, and, as a matter of course, was placed on the Index
by the Romish Chiirch. Perhaps few books have been

* Letter I., sqg,

^ But Tschirnhausen seems to have brought Oldenburg and Bojle to
a better mind. Letter LXV.

^ Letter LI. ♦ Letter LXL sqq,

• Letter XXXL sqq. • Letter LV. sqq.


INTBODTJCTION. XVU

1^ more often "refuted," or less seriously damaged by the
i oxdeal. Its author displayed his disincHnation to disturb
i the faith of the unlearned by preventing during his lifetime
^ the appearance of the book in the yemacidar.

Lin 1672, men's thoughts were for a time diverted from
theolc^cal controversy by the French invasion of the
Netherlands, and the consequent outbreak of domestic
k faction. The shameful massacre of the brothers De Witt
I bya^jx^kijtttated mob brought Spinoza into close and pain-
""TSTcontact with the passions seething round him. For
once his philosophic cabn was broken: he was only by
force prevented from rushing forth into the streets at the
peril of his life, iind proclaiming his abhorrence of the
crime.

Shortly afterwards, when the head-quarters of the French
army were at Utrecht, Spinoza was sent for by the Prince
de Oond^, who wished to make his acquaintance. On his
arrival at the camp, however, he found that the Prince was
absent; and, after waiting a few days, returned home
without having seen him. The philosopher's French enter-
tainers held out hopes of a pension from Louis XIV., if a
book were dedicated to that monarch ; but these overtures
were declined.

On his arrival at the Hague, Spinoza was exposed to
considerable danger from the excited populace, who sus-
pected him of being a spy. The calm, which had failed him
on the murder of his friend, remained unruffled by the
peril threatening himself. He told his landlord, who was
in dread of the house being sacked, that, if the mob showed
any signs of violence, he would go out and speak to them
in person, though they should serve him as they had served
the unhappy De Witts. " I am a good republican," he
added, " and have never had any aim but the welfare and
good of the State."

In 1673, Spinoza was offered by the Elector Palatine,

r. h


XVm INTBODTJOTIOlf.

Cliarles Lewis,* a professorship of pliilosophj at Heidelberg^
but declined it,' on tlie plea tliat teaching would interfere
with his original work, and that doctrinal restrictionfl»
however slight, would prove irksome.

In the following year, the Ethics were finished and cir-
culated in MS. among their author's friends. Spinoza
made a joumej to Amsterdam for the purpose of publisk-
ing them, but changed his intention on learning that thej
would probably meet with a stormy reception. Ferhapi
failing health strengthened his natural desire for peaoe^
and considerations of personal renown never had any weight
with him.

To this closing period belong the details as to Spinoza's
manner of life collected by Colerus. They are best given
in the biographer's simple words, as rendered in the con-
temporary English version: "It is scarce credible how
sober and fn^al he was. Kot that he was reduced to ao
great a poverty, as not to be able to spend more, if he bad
been willing. He had friends enough, who offered him
their purses, and all manner of assistance; but he was
naturally very sober, and would be satisfied with littte.**
His food apparently cost him but a few pence a day, and
he drank hardly any wine. " He was often invited to eat
with his friends, but chose rather to live upon what he had
at home, though it were never so little, than to sit down to
a good table at the expense of another man. . • • He waa
very careful to cast up his accounts every quarter ; whieli
he did, that he might spend neither more nor less than
what he could spend every year. And he would say soma*
times to the j)eople of the house, that he was like the 8Q^i
pent, who forms a circle with his tail in his mouth, to
denote that he had nothing left at the year's end. BEb
added, that he designed to lay up no more money than whafc
would be necessary for him to have a decent burying. , , ,
> Letter LIIL « Letter HV.


IKTBODUCTIOW. ''" xix

,:, He was of a middle size ; lie liad good features in his face,
^ the skin somewhat black; black curled hair; long eje-
1^ brows, and of the same colour, so that one might easily
know by his looks that he was descended from Portuguese
.^ Jews. ... If he was yerj frugal in his way of Hving, his
I conversation was also very sweet and easy. He knew ad-
^ mirably well how to be master of his passions : he was
p.' never seen very melancholy, nor very merry. . . . He was
^ besides very courteous and obliging. He would very often
^ discourse with his landlady, especially when she lay in, and
^ with the people of the house, when they happened to be
sick or afflicted : he never failed, then, to comfort them,
^.. and exhort them to bear with patience those evils which
.. Ood assigned to them as a lot. He put the children in
mind of going often to church, and taught them to be
obedient and dutiful to their parents. When the people of
the house came from church, he would often ask them what
they had learned, and what they remembered of the
sermon. He had a great esteem for Dr. Gordes, my pre-
decessor, who was a learned and good-natured man, and of
an exemplary life, which gave occasion to Spinoza to praise
him very often: nay, he went sometimes to hear him
preach. • • • It happened one day that his landlady asked
him whether he believed she could be saved in the religion
she professed. He answered : Your religion is a very good
one; you need not look for another ^ nor dovht that you may
he sa/ved in it, provided, whiUt you apply yourself to piety,
you live at the same tim£ a peaceable and quiet Ufe"

His amusements were very simple : talking on ordinary
matters with the people of the house ; smoking now and
again a pipe of tobacco ; watching the habits and quarrels
of insects ; Tna.kiug observations with a microscope — such
were his pastimes in the hours which he could spare from
his philosophy. But the greater part of his day was taken
up with Bevere mental work in his own room. Sometimes


XX INTBODUCTIOW.

he would become so absorbed, tbat lie would remain alone
for two or three days together, his meals being carried nf
to him.

Spinoza had never been robust, and had for more thas
twenty years been suffering from phthisis, a malady- whichy
at any rate in those days, never allowed its victims ti^
escape. The end came quite suddenly and quietlj, is
February, 1677. On Saturday, the 20th, after the landlord
and his wife had returned from church, Spinoza spent
some time with them in conversation, and smoked a pipe
of tobacco, but went to bed early. Apparently, he had
previously sent for his friend and physician, Lewis Meyer^
who arrived on Sunday morning. On the 21st, Spinoa
came down as usual, and partook of some food at the micU
day meal. In the afternoon, the physician stayed alom
with his patient, the rest going to church. But when tbv
landlord and his wife returned, they were startled with tb»
news that the philosopher had expired about three o'dodL
Lewis Meyer returned to Amsterdam that same evening.

Thus passed away all that was mortal of Spinoza, If
have read his character aright, his last hours were
f orted with the thought, not so much that he had raised
for himself an imperishable monument, as that he hat
pointed out to mankind a sure path to happiness and
peace. Perhaps, with this glorious vision, there Tn^^gM
the more tender feeling, that, among the simple folk wilik
whom he lived, his memory would for a few brief years h^
cherished with reverence and love.

The funeral took place on the 25th February, " being
attended by many illustrious persons, and followed by inc
coaches." The estate left behind h\m by the plulosophef
was very scanty. Eebekah de Spinoza, sister of th#
deceased, put in a claim as his heir; but abandoned it ott
finding that, after the payment of expenses, little or nothipj^
would remain.


i

J nrTBODUCTiON. xxi

' . The lfSS.,a, wlucli were found in Spinoza's desk, were, in
^ accordanoe with his wishes, forwarded to John Eieuwertz,
; a publisher of Amsterdam, and were that same year brought
^ out by Lewis Meyer, and another of the philosopher's
^ friends, under the title, " B. D. S. Opera Posthuma." They
\ <K)nsisted of the Ethics, a selection of letters, a compendium
^ of Hebrew grammar, and two uncompleted treatises, one
' on politics, the other (styled " An Essay on the Improve-
■ ment of the Understanding") on logical method. The
F last-named had been begun several years previously, but
' had apparently been added to from time to time. It
' develops some of the doctrines indicated in the Ethics,
' and serves in some sort as an introduction to the larger
work.

In considering Spinoza's system of philosophy, it must
not be forgotten that the problem of the universe seemed
much simpler in his day, than it does in our own. Men
had not then recognized, that knowledge is '' a world whose
margin fades for ever and for ever as we move." They
believed that truth was something definite, which might
be grasped by the aid of a clear head, diligence, and a
sound method. Hence a tone of confidence breathed
through their inquiriea. which has since died away, and a
completeness was aimed at, which is now seen to be un-
attainable. But the products of human thought are often
valuable in ways undreamt of by those who fashioned
them, and long after their original use has become obso-
lete. A system, obviously inadequate and defective as a
whole, may yet enshiine ideas which the world is the richer
for possessing.

This distinction between the framework and the central
thoughts is especially necessary in the study of Spinoza ;
{or the form in which his work is cast would seem to lay
stress on their interdependence. It has often been said,
ihat the geometrical method was adopted, because it was


1301 INTBODXJCTIOlf.

belieyed to insure absolute freedom from error. But ezami-
nation sliows this to be a misconception. Spinoza» wlio
bad purged bis mind of so many illusions, can bardly IiaT»
succumbed to tbe notion, tbat bis Etbics was a fiawlect
mass of irrefragable trutb. He adopted bis metbod b^
cause be believed, tbat be tbus reduced argument to its
simplest terms, and laid bimself least open to tbe sedno*
tions of rbetoric or passion. ''It is tbe part of a wise
man," be says, ** not to bewail nor to deride, but to tinder-
stand.'' Human nature obeys fixed laws no less than do
tbe figures of geometry. ** I will, therefore, write about
human beings, as though I were concerned with lines, and
planes, and solids."

As no system is entirely true, so also no system is en-
tirely original. ,Each must in great measure be the reoom--
bination of elements supplied by its predecessors. Spinozism
forms no exception to this rule ; many of its leading oon*
ceptions may be traced in the writings of Jewish Babbis
and of Descartes.

The biography of the philosopher supplies us in some
sort with the genesis of his system. His youth had beeox
passed in the study of Hebrew learning, of metaphysical
speculations on tbe nature of the Deity. He was thea
confronted with the scientific aspect of tbe world as re*^
vealed by Descartes. At first the two visions seemed
antagonistic, but, as he gazed, their outlines blended and
commingled, he found himself in the presence not of two^
but of one; the universe unfolded itself to him as -fhe-
necessary result of tbe Perfect and Eternal God.

Other influences, no doubt, played a part in shaping bis*
convictions ; we know, for instance, that he was a student
of Bacon and of Hobbes, and almost certainly of Giordano
Bruno, but these two elements, the Jewish and the Carte*
sian, are the main sources of bis system, though it cannot
properly be called the mere development of either* Frosik


INTRODUCTION. XXIU

Descartes, as Mr. Pollock points out, lie derived his notions
of physical science and his doctrine of the conservation of
motion.

In the fragment on the Improvement of the Under-
standing, Spinoza sets forth the causes which prompted
him to turn to philosophy.^ It is worthy of note that they
are not speculative but practical. He did not seek, like
Descartes, " to walk with certainty," but to find a happi-
ness beyond the reach of change for himself and his f eUow-
men. With a fervour that reminds one of Christian flee-
ing from the City of Destruction, he dilates on the vanity
of men's ordinary ambitions, riches, fame, and the plea-
sures of sense, and on the necessity of looking for some
more worthy object for their desires. Such an object he
finds in the knowledge of truth, as obtainable through
clear and distinct ideas, bearing in themselves the evidence
of their own veracity.

Spinoza conceived as a vast unity all existence actual
and possible ; indeed, between actual and possible he re-
cognizes no distinction, for, if a thing does not exist, there
must be some cause which prevents its existing, or in other
words renders it impossible. This unity he terms indiffe-
rently Substance or Qod, and the first part of the Ethics
is devoted to expounding its nature.

Being the sum of existence, it is necessarily infinite (for
there is nothing external to itself to make it finite), and it
can be the cause of an infinite number of results. It must
necessarily operate in absolute freedom, for there is nothing
by which it can be controlled; but none the less neces-
sarily it must operate in accordance with eternal and im-
mutable laws, fulfilling the perfection of its own nature.

Substance consists in, or rather displays itself through
an infinite number of Attributes, but of these only two,

* These obsenrations are not ofiPered as a complete exposition of
BpinotiBm, but merely as an indication of its general drifU


XXIV INTBODUCTION.

Extension and Thouglit, are knowable by ns ; therefore, the
rest may be left out of account in our inquiries. These
Attributes are not different things, but different aspectB of
the same thing (Spinoza does not make it dear, whetiier the
difference is intrinsic or due to the percipient) ; thus Exten-
sion and Thought are not parallel and interacting, bat
identical, and both acting in one order and connection.
Hence all questions of the dependence of mind on body, or
body on mind, are done away with at a stroke. Eveiy
manifestation of either is but a manifestation of the other,
seen under a different aspect.

Attributes are again subdivided, or rather display them-
selves through an infinite number of Modes ; some eternal
and universal in respect of each Attribute (such as motion
and the sum of all psychical facts); others having no
eternal and necessary existence, but acting and reacting on
one another in ceaseless flux, according to fixed and defi-
nite laws. These latter have been compared in relation to
their Attributes to waves in relation to the sea ; or again
they may be hkened to the myriad hues which play over
the iridescent surface of a bubble ; each is the neoessaEj
result of that which went before, and is the necessary pre-
cursor of that which wiU come after ; all are modifications *
of the underlying film. The phenomenal world is made'
up of an infinite number of these Modes. It is manifest
that the Modes of one Attribute cannot be acted upon by
the Modes of another Attribute, for each may be expressed
in terms of the other ; within the limits of each Attribute
the variation in the Modes f oUows an absolutely necessary
order. When the first is given, the rest f oUow as inevit-
ably, as from the nature of a triangle it foUows, that its
three angles are equal to two right angles. Nature is
imiform, and no infringement of her laws is conceivable
without a reduction to chaos.

Hence it follows, that a thing can only be called contin-


INTBODUCTION. XXV

gent in relation to our knowledge. To an infinite intelli-
gence sucli a term would be unmeaning.

Hence also it follows, that tlie world cannot have been
created for anj purpose other than that wbicli it fulfils bj
being what it is. To say that it has been created for the
good of man, or for any similar end, is to indulge in gro-
tesque anthropomorphism.

Among the Modes of thought may be reckoned the
human mind, among the Modes of extension may be
reckoned the human body ; taken together they constitute
the Mode man.

The nature of mind forms the subject of the second part
of the Ethics. Man's mind is the idea of man's body,
the consciousness of bodily states. Now bodily states are
the result, not only of the body itself, but also of all
things afEecting the body ; hence the human mind takes
cognizance, not only of the human body, but also of the
external wld, in so far as it afEects the human body.
Its capacity for varied perceptions is in proportion to the
body's capacity for receiving impressions.

The succession of ideas of bodily states cannot be arbi-
trarily controlled by the mind taken as a power apart,
though the mind, as the aggregate of past states, may be a

rxnore or less important factor in the direction of its course.
We can, in popular phrase, direct our thoughts at wiU, but
N the will, which we speak of as spontaneous, is really deter-
mined by laws as fixed and necessary, as those which regu-
late the properties of a triangle or a circle. The illusion of
freedom, in the sense of uncaused volition, results from
the fact, that men are conscious of their actions, but un-
conscious of the causes whereby those actions have been>
determined. The chain of causes becomes, so to speak, in-
candescent at a particular point, and men assume that only
at that point does it start into existence. They ignore the
links which still remain in obscurity.


XXVI INTBODUCTIOX.

If mind be simply the mirror of bodily states, liow can
we accoTint for memory P When the mind has been affected
by two things in close conjnnctioii, the recnrrence of one
re-awakens into life the idea of the other. To take an ilhu-
tration, mind is like a traveller rervisiting his former home,
for whom each feature of the landscape recalls associations
of the past. From the interplay of associations are woren
memory and imagination.

Ideas may be either adequate or inadequate, in other
words either distinct or confused ; both kinds are subject to
the law of causation. Falsity is merely a negative concep-
tion. All adequate ideas are necessarily true, and bear in
themselves the evidence of their own veracity. The mind
accurately reflects existence, and if an idea be due to the
mental association of two different factors, the joining, so to
speak, may, with due care, be discerned. General notions
and abstract terms arise from the incapacity of the mind
to retain in completeness more than a certain number of
mental images ; it therefore groups together points of re-
semblance, and considers the abstractions thus formed as
units.

There are three kinds of knowledge: opinion, rational
knowledge, and intuitive knowledge. The first alone is the
cause of error ; the second consists in adequate ideas of
particular properties of things, and in general notions ; the
third proceeds from an adequate idea of some attribute of
God to the adequate knowledge of particular things.

The reason does not regard things as contingent, but as
necessary, considering them under the form of eternity, as
part of the nature of God. The will has no existence apart
from particular acts of volition, and since acts of volition
are ideas, the will is identical with the understanding.

The third part of the Ethics is devoted to the considera-
tion of the emotions.

In so far as it has adequate ideas, i.e., is purely rational^


INTBODUCTIOH. XXVU

the mind may be said to be active ; in so far as it has inade-
quate ideas, it is passive, and therefore subject to emotions^

Nothing can be destroyed from -within, for all change
must come from without. In other words, everything
endeavours to persist in its own being. This endeavour must
not be associated with the '* struggle for existence " familiar
to stud6^ts of evolutionary theories, though the suggestion
is tempting ; it is simply the result of a thing being what,
it is. When it is spoken of in reference to the human
mind only, it is equivalent to the will; in reference to-
the whole man, it may be called appetite. Appetite is thus,
identified with life ; desire is defined as appetite, with con-
sciousness thereof. All objects of our desire owe their
choioeworthiness simply to the fact that we desire them :
we do not desire a thing, because it is intrinsically good,
but we deem a thing good, because we desire it. Every-
thing which adds to the bodily or mental powers of activity
is pleasure ; everything which detracts from them is pain.

From these three fundamentals— desire, pleasure, pain
— Spinoza deduces the entire list of human emotions.
Love is pleasure, accompanied by the idea of an external
cause; hatred is pain» accompanied by the idea of an ex-
ternal cause. Pleasure or pain may be excited by anything^
incidentally, if not directly. There is no need to proceed
further with the working out of the theory, but we may
remark, in passing, the extraordinary fineness of percep-
tion and sureness of touch, with which it is accomplished ;
here, if nowhere else, Spinoza remains unsurpassed.^ Almost

^ It may be worth while to cite the often-quoted testimony of th&
distinguished pbysiolog^t, Johannes Muller: — *'With regard to the-
relations of the passions to one another apart from their physiological
conditions, it is impossible to give any better account than that which
Spinoza has laid down with unsurpassed mastery." — JPhysiologie de»
Menscken, ii. 543. He follows up this praise by quoting the propo-
sitions in question in extmtOm


XXVUl INTBODUCTIOK'.

all the emotions arise from the passive condition of the
mind, but there is also a pleasure arising from the mind's
contemplation of its own power. This is the source of
virtue, and is purely active.

In the fourth part of the Ethics, Spinoza treats of man.
in so far as he is subject to the emotions, prefixing a few
remarks on the meaning of the terms perfect and imperfect,
good and eviL A thing can only be called perfect in re-
ference to the known intention of its author. We style
" good " that which we know with certainty to be useful to
us : we style " evil " that which we know will hinder us in
the attainment of good. By "useful," we mean that which
will aid us to approach gradually the ideal we have set
before ourselves. Man> being a part only of nature, must
be subject to emotions, because he must encounter drcum-
«tances of which he is not the sole and sufficient cause.
Emotion can only be conquered by another emotion stronger
than itself, hence knowledge will only lift us above the
sway of passions, in so far as it is itself " touched with
emotion." Every man necessarily, and therefore rightly,
seeks his own interest, which is thus identical with virtue ;
but his own interest does not lie in selfishness, for man is
always in need of external help, and nothing is more useful
to him than his f eUow-men ; hence individual well-being is
best promoted by harmonious social effort. The reasonable
man will desire nothing for himself, which he does not desire
for other men; therefore he will be just, faithful, and
honourable.

The code of morals worked out on these lines bears
many resemblances to Stoicism, though it is improbable
that Spinoza was consciously imitating. The doctrine that
rational emotion, rather than pure reason, is necessary for
subduing the evil passions, is entirely his own.

The means whereby man may gain mastery over his
passions, are set forth in the first portion of the fifth part


INTBODUCTION. XXIX

of the Etliics. They depend on the definition of passion
as a confused idea. As soon as we form a clear and dis-
tinct idea of a passion, it changes its character, and ceases
to be a passion. Now it is possible, with due care, to form
a distinct idea of every bodily state ; hence a true know-
ledge of the passions is the best remedy against them.
While we contemplate the world as a necessary result of
the perfect nature of God, a feeling of joy wiU arise in our
hearts, accompanied by the idea of God as its cause. This
is the intellectual love of God, which is the highest happi-
ness man can know. It seeks for no special love from God
in return, for such would imply a change in the nature of
the Deity. It. rises above all fear of change through envy '
or jealousy, and increases in proportion as it is seen to be
participated in by our fellow-men.

The concluding propositions of the Ethics have given
rise to more controversy than any other part of the sys-
tem. Some critics have mamtained that Spinoza is in-
dulging in vague generalities without any definite megbn-
ing, others have supposed that the language is inten-
tionally obscure. Others, again, see in then;i a doctrine of
personal immortaHty, and, taking them in conjunction with
the somewhat transcendental form of the expressions con-
cemiii^ the love of God, have claimed the author of the
Ethics as a Mystic. All these suggestions are reductions
to the absurd, the last not least so. Spinoza may have
been not unwilling |o show that his creed could be expressed
in exalted language as well as the current theology, but his
"intellectual love " has no more in common with the ecstatic
enthusiasm of cloistered saints, than his ''God" has in
common with the Divinity of Eomanist peasants, or his
" eternity " with the paradise of Mahomet. But to return
to the doctrine in dispute.^ "The human mind," says
Spinoza, " cannot be wholly destroyed with the body, but

^ Th« explanation here indicated is based on that given by Mr.


2XX INTBODUCTIOV.

«omewliat of it remains, whicli is eternal." The etemitj
iihuQ predicated cannot mean indefinite pendstence in time,
for etemitj is not commensurable with time. It must
mean some special kind of existence ; it is, in fact, defined
^s a mode of thinking. Now, the mind consists of ade-
•qnate and inadequate ideas ; in so far as it is composed of
the former, it is part of the infinite mind of Qod, which
broods, as it were, over the extended universe as its ex-
pression in terms of thought. As such, it is necessaiilj
eternal, and, since knowledge implies seK-consdousness, it
knows that it is so. Inadequate ideas will pass awaj with
the body, because thej are the result of conditions, wluek
^re merely temporary, and inseparably connected with the
•body, but adequate ideas wiU not pass away, inasmuch as
they are part of the mind of the Eternal. Knowledge of
the third or intuitive kind is the source of our highest per-
fection and blessedness ; even as it forms part of the infi-
:3iite mind of God, so also does the joy with which it
is accompanied — ^the intellectual love of God — ^form part
•of the infinite intellectual love, wherewith God regards
-Himself.

Spinoza concludes with the admonition, that morality
rests on a basis quite independent of the acceptance of
the mind's Eternity. Virtue is its own reward, and needs
no other. This doctrine, which appears, as it were, per-
functorily in so many systems of morals, is by Spinoza
insisted on with almost passionate earnestness ; few things
seem to have moved him to more scornful denial than the
popular creed, that supernatural rewards and punishments
■are necessary as incentives to virtue. " I see in what mnd
this man sticks," he exclaims in answer to some such state-
ments ** He is one of those who would follow after his own
lusts, if he were not restrained by the fear of heU. He ab-

Follock, " Spinoza," &c., ch. ix., to which the reader is referred for a
miasterly exposition of the question.


iNTBODUCTiow. xxxiii

istains from evil actions and fulfils God's commands -tence
slaye against his will, and for his bondage he expects to j
rewarded by God with gifts far more to his taste thai.
Divine love, and great in proportion to his original dislike
of virtue." ^ Again, at the close of the Ethics, he draws an
ironical picture of the pious coming before God at the
Judgment, and looking to be endowed with incalculable
blessings in recompense for the grievous burden of their
piety. For him, who is truly wise. Blessedness is not the
reward of virtue, but virtue itself. " And though the way
thereto be steep, yet it may be found — ^aU things excellent
are as difficult, as they are rare."

Such, in rough outline, is the philosophy of Spinoza ; few
cystems have been more variously interpreted. Its author
has been reviled or exalted as Atheist, Pantheist, Mono-
theist. Materialist, Mystic, in fact, under almost every name
in the philosophic vocabulary. But such ofE-hand classifi-
cation is based on hasty reading of isolated passages,
rather than on sound knowledge of the whole. We shall
act more wisely, and more in the spirit of the master, if,
as Professor Land advises, '' we call him simply Spinoza,
and endeavour to learn from himself what he sought and
what he found."

The two remaining works, translated in these volumes,
may be yet more briefly considered. They present no
special difficulties, and are easily read in their entirety.

The Tractatus Theologico-Politicus is an eloquent plea
for religious liberty. True religion is shown to consist in
the practice of simple piety, and to be quite independent of
philosophical speculations. The elaborate systems of dog-
mas framed by theologians are based on superstition, result-
ing from fear.

The Bible is examined by a method, which anticipates
in great measure the procedure of modem rationalists, and

> Letter XLIX.


I

I

f


2XX

INTEODUCTION.

, .theory of its verbal inspiration is shown to be Tin-

« Jaable. fThe Hebrew prophets were distinguisbed not by

y s tt^rior wisdom , but by Qjiggnorji^jg, and they set forth

their higher moral ideals in language, which they thought

' . would best commend it to the multitude whom they ad-

%. dressed. J For anthropomorphic notions of the Deity as a

. heavenly King and Judge, who displays His power by

miraculous interventions, is substituted the conception set

forth in the Ethics of an Infinite Being, fulfilling in the

imiformity of natural law the perfection of His own

Nature. Men's thoughts cannot really be constrained by

commands ; therefore, it is wisest, so long as their actions

conform to morality, to allow them absolute liberty to

think what they like, and say what they think.

The Political Treatise was the latest work of Spinoza's

life, and. remains unfinished. Though it bears abundant

evidence of the influence of Hobbes, it differs from him in

several important points. The theory of sovereignty is the

same in both writers, but Spinoza introduces considerable

qualifications. Supreme power is ideally absolute, but its

"rights must, in practice, be limited by the endurance of its

, subjects. Thus governments are founded on the common

i consent, and for the convenience of the governed, who

, are, in the last resort, the arbiters of their continuance.

Spinoza, like Hobbes, peremptorily sets aside aU claims

of religious organizations to act independently of, or as

superior to the civil power. Both reject as outside the

■ sphere of practical politics the case of a special revelation

^ an individual. In all matters affecting conduct the State

must be supreme.

It remains to say a few words about the present version.
I alone am responsible for the contents of these volumes,
with the exception of the Political Treatise, which lias
been translated for me by my friend Mr. A. H. Gosset,


INTRODUCTION. XXXIU

Fellow of New College, Oxford, who lias also, in my absence
from England, kindly seen the work throngli the press. I
have throughout followed Bruder's text,^ correcting a few
obvious misprints. The additional letters given in Pro-
fessor Yan Vloten's Supplement,* have been inserted in
their due order.

This may claim to be the first version' of Spinoza's
works offered to the English reader ; for, though Dr. E.
WilHs has gone over most of the ground before, he laboured
under the disadvantages of a very imperfect acquaintance
with Latin, and very loose notions of accuracy. The Trac-
tatus Theologico-Politicus had been previously translated
in 1689. Mr. Pollock describes this early version as
** pretty accurate, but of no great literary merit."

Whatever my own shortcomings, I have never con-
sciously eluded a difficulty by a paraphrase. Clearness has
throughout been aimed at in preference to elegance. Though
the precise meaning of some of the philosophical terms
(e.g. idea) varies in different passages, I have, as far as
possible, given a uniform rendering, not venturing to
attempt greater subtlety than I found. I have abstained
from notes ; for, if given on an adequate scale, they would
have unduly swelled the bulk of the work. Moreover,
excellent commentaries are readily accessible. •

E. H. M. Elwes.

* ** B. de Spinosa Opera qusB Supersunt Omnia," ed. C. H. Bruder.
Leipzig {Tauchnitz), 1843.

* "Ad B. D. S. Opera quae Supersunt Omnia Supplementum."
Amsterdam, 1862.

^ While these volumes were passing through the press, a translation
of the Ethics appeared by Mr. Hale White (Triibner and Co.). The
Tractatus Politicus was translated in 1854 by W. MaccaU, but the book
has become so rare as to be practically inaccessible.


Mjl


/


A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE

CONTAINING CERTAIN DISCUSSIONS

WHEBEIN IS SET FOBTH, THAT FBEEDOM OF THOUGHT
AyP SPEECH NOT ONLY MAY, WITHOUT PBEJUDICB
TO PIETY AND THE PUBLIC PEACE, BE GBANTED ;
BUT ALSO MAY NOT, WITHOUT DANGEB
TO PIETY AND THE PUBLIC
PEACE, BE WITH-
HELD.


«* Hereby know ve that we dwell in Him, and He in u§, becaoee He hath given ns

of His Spirit."—! JoHic ir. 13.


#


B


PREFACE.


MEN would never be superstitioTis, if they could govern
all their circumstances by set rules, or if they were
always favoured by fortune : but being frequently driven
into straits where rules are useless, and being often kept fluc-
tuating pitiably between hope and fear by the uncertainty of
fortune's greedily coveted favours, they are consequently,
for the most part, very prone to credulity. The human
mind is readily swayed this way or that in times of
doubt, especially when hope and fear are struggling for the
mastery, though usually it is boastful, over-confident, and
vain.

This as a general fact I suppose everyone knows, though
few, I believe, know their own nature ; no one can have
lived in the world without observing that most people,
when in prosperity, are so over-brimming with wisdom
(however inexperienced they may be), that they take every
offer of advice as a personal insult, whereas in adversity
they know not where to turn, but beg and pray for counsel
from every passer-by. No plan is then too futile, too
absurd, or too fatuous for their adoption ; the most frivo-
lous causes will raise them to hope, or plunge them into de-
spair — ^if anything happens during their fright which
reminds them of some past good or ill, they thmk it por-
tends a happy or unhappy issue, and therefore (though it
may have proved abortive a hundred times before) style it
a lucky or unlucky omen. Anything which excites their
astonishment they believe to be a portent signifying the
anger of the gods or of the Supreme Being, and, mis-
taMng superstition for religion, account it impious not to
avert the evil with prayer and sacrifice. Signs and wonders


4 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE.

of this sort they conjure up perpetually, till one might
think Nature as mad as themselves, they interpret her so
fantastically.

Thus it is brought prominently before us, that super-
stition's chief victims are those persons who greedily covet
temporal advantages ; they it is, who (especially when they
are in danger, and cannot help themselves) are wont with
prayers and womanish tears to implore help from God:
upbraiding Reason as blind, because she cannot show a sure
path to the shadows they pursue, and rejecting human
wisdom as vain ; but believing the phantoms of imagination,
dreams, and other childish absurdities, to be the very oracles
of Heaven. As though God had turned away from the wise,
and written His decrees, not in the mind of man but in
the entrails of beasts, or left them to be proclaimed by the
inspiration and instinct of fools, madmen, and birds. Such
is the unreason to which terror can drive mankind !
/ Superstition, then, is engendered, preserved, and fostered
by fear. If anyone desire an example, let him take Alex-
ander, who only began superstitiously to seek guidance
from seers, when he first learnt to fear fortune in the passes
of Sysis (Curtius, v. 4) ; whereas after he had conquered
Darius he consulted prophets no more, till a second time
frightened by reverses. When the Bcythians were pro-
voking a battle, the Bactrians had deserted, and he him-
self was lying sick of his wounds, " he once more turned to
superstition, the mockery of human wisdom, and bade
• Aristander, to whom he confided his credidity, inquire the
issue of affairs with sacrificed victims." Very numerous
examples of a like nature might be cited, clearly showing-
the fact, that only while under the dominion of fear da
men fall a prey to superstition ; that all the portents ever
invested with the reverence of misguided religion are mere
phantoms of dejected and fearful minds ; and lastly, that
prophets have most power among the people, and are most
formidable to rulers, precisely at those times when the
state is in most peril. I think this is sufficiently plain to
all, and will therefore say no more on the subject.
/ The origin of superstition above given affords us a clear
; reason for the fact, that it comes to all men naturally,
though some refer its rise to a dim notion of God, uni-


THE PBEFACE. O

versal to mankind, and also tends to show, tliat it is no lessj
inconsistent and variable than other mental hallucinationslj
and emotional impulses, and further that it can only be
maintained by hope, hatred, anger, and deceit; since ii^
springs, not from reason, but solely from the more powerful
phases of emotion. Furthermore, we may readily under-
stand how difficult it is, to maintain in the same course men
prone to every form of credulity. For, as the mass of
manMnd remains always at about the same pitch of misery,
it never assents long to any one remedy, but is always best
pleased by a novelty which has not yet proved illusive.

This element of inconsistency has been the cause of
many terrible wars and revolutions ; for, as Curtius well
says (lib. iv. chap. 10): "The mob has no ruler more
potent than superstition," and is easily led, on the plea of
religion, at one moment to adore its kiii^s as gods, and
anon to execrate and abjure them as humanity's common
bane. Immense pains have therefore been taken to counter-
act this evil by investing religion, whether true or false,
with such pomp and ceremony, that it may rise superior to
every shock, and be always observed with studious reve-
rence by the whole people — a system which has been
brought to great perfection by the Turks, for they consider
even controversy impious, and so clog men's minds with
dogmatic formulas, that they leave no room for sound
reason, not even enough to doubt with.

But if, in despotic statecraft, the supreme and essential
mystery be to hoodwink the subjects, and to mask the fear,
which keeps them down, with the specious garb of religion,
so that men may fight as bravely for slavery as for safety,
ajid count it not shame but highest honour to risk their
blood and their lives for the vainglory of a tyrant ; yet in
a free state no more mischievous expedient coiQd be planned
or attempted. Wholly repugnant to the general freedom
are such devices as enthralling men's minds with preju-
dices, forcing their judgment, or employing any of the
weapons of quasi-religious sedition ; indeed, such seditions
only spring up, when law enters the domain of speculative
thought, and opinions are put on trial and condemned on
the same footing as crimes, while those who defend and
follow them are sacrificed, not to public safety, but to their


6 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE.

*• opponents* hatred and cruelty. If deeds only could be
made the grounds of criminal chaiiges, and words were
always allowed to pass free, such seditions would be divested
of eyery semblance of justification, and would be separated
from mere controversiis by a haid and fast line.

Now, seeingthatwehavetheraxehappineBBof Uvingin a
republic, where everyone's judgment is free and unshackled^
where each may worship God as his conscience dictates,
and where freedom is esteemed before all things dear and
precious, I have believed that I should be undertaking no
ungrateful or unprofitable task, in demonstrating that not
only can such fr^dom be granted without prejudice to the
public peace, but also, that without such freedom, piety
cannot flourish nor the public peace be secure.

Such is the chief conclusion I seek to establish in this
treatise ; but^ in order to reach it, I must first point out
the misconceptions which, like scars of our former bondage,
still disfigure our notion of religion, and must expose the
false views about the civil authority which many have
most impudently advocated, endeavouring to turn the mind
of the people, still prone to heathen superstition, away from
its legSte rulers, and so bring us again into slaveiy.
[ As to the order of my treatise I will speak presently, but
first I will recount the causes which led me to write.

I have often wondered, that persons who make a boast of
professing the Christian religion, namely, love, joy, peace,
temperance, and charity to all men, should quarrel with
such rancorous animosity, and display daily towards one
another such bitter hatred, that this, rather than the vir-
tues they claim, is the readiest criterion of their faith.
Matters have long since come to such a pass, that one can
only pronounce a man Christian, Turk, Jew, or Heathen, by
his general appearance and attire, by his frequenting this
or that place of worship, or employing the phraseology of
a particular sect — as for manner of Gf e, it is in all cases
the same. Inquiry into the cause of this anomaly leads
me unhesitatingly to ascribe it to the fact, that the minis-
tries of the Churdi are regarded by the masses merely as dig-
nities, her offices as posts of emolument — ^in short, popular
religion may be summed up as respect for ecclesiastics.
The spread of this misconception inflamed every worthless


THE PBEFACE. 7

fellow with an intense desire to enter holy orders, and thus
the love of diffusing Qod's religion degenerated into sordid
avarice and ambition. Every church became a theatre,
where orators, instead of church teachers, harangued,
caring not to instruct the people, but striving to attract
admiration, to bring opponents to public scorn, and to
preach only novelties and paradoxes, such as would tickle
the ears of their congregation. This state of things neces-
sarily stirred up an amoimt of controversy, envy, and hatred,
which no lapse of time could appease; so that we can
scarcely wonder that of the old religion nothing survives
but its outward forms (even these, in the mouth of the
multitude, seem rather adulation than adoration of the
Deity), and' that faith has become a mere coinpound of
credulity and prejudices — aye, prejudices too, which de-
grade man from rational being to beast, which completely
stifle the power of judgment between true and false, which
seem, in fact, carefully fostered for the purpose of extin-
guishing the last spark of reason ! Piety, great God ! and
religion are become a tissue of ridiculous nfysteries ; men,
who flatly despise reason, who reject and turn away from
understanding as naturally corrupt, these, I say, these
of all men, are thought, O lie most horrible ! to possess
light from on High. Verily, if they had but one spark of
light from on High, they would not insolently rave, but
would learn to worship Grod more wisely, and would be
as marked among their fellows for mercy as they now are
for malice; if they were concerned for their opponents'
souls, instead of for their own reputations, they would no
longer fiercely persecute, but rather be filled with pity and
compassion.

Furthermore, if any Divine light were in them, it would
appear from their doctrine. I grant that they are never
tired of professing their wonder at the profound mysteries
of Holy Writ; still I cannot discover that they teach
anything but speculations of Platonists and Aristotelians,
to which (in order to save their credit for Christianity)
they have made Holy Writ conform ; not content to rave
with the Greeks themselves, they want to make the pro-
phets rave also ; showing conclusively, that never even in
Bleep have they caught a glimpse of Scripture's Divine


\


8 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE.

nature. The very vehemence of their admiration for the
mysteries plainly attests, that their belief in the Bible is a
formal assent rather than a living faith : and the fact is
made still more apparent by their laying down beforehand,
as a foundation for the study and true interpretation of
Scripture, the principle that it is in every passage true and
divine. Such a doctrine should be reached only after strict
scrutiny and thorough comprehension of the Sacred Books
(which would teach it much better, for they stand in need
of no human fictions), and not be set up on the threshold,
as it were, of inquiry.

As I pondered over the facts that the light of reason is
not only despised, but by many even execrated as a source of
impiety, that human commentaries are accep ted as divine
I records, and that credu lity is extolledjB,s faith ; as I niarked
the fierce controversies of philosoj^hers raging in Church
and State, the source of bitter hatred and dissension, the
ready instruments of sedition and other ills innumerable, I
determined to examine the Bible afresh in a careful, im-
partial, and utlfettered spirit, making no assumptions con-
cerning it, and attributing to it no doctrines, which I do
not find clearly therein set down. With these precautions
I constructed a method of Scriptural interpretation, and
■thus equipped proceeded to inquire — ^What is prophecy?
in what sense did Grod reveal Himself to the prophets, and
why were these particular men chosen by Him ? "Was it
on account of the sublimity of their thoughts about the
Deity and nature, or was it solely on account of their piety ?
These questions being answered, I was easily able to con-
clude, that the authority of the prophets has weight only in
matters of morality, and that their speculative doctrines
affect us little.

Next I inquired, why the Hebrews were called God's
1 chosen people, and discovering that it was only because
IGod had chosen for them a certain strip of territory, where
"they might live peaceably and at ease, I learnt that the Law
revealed by God to Moses was merely the law of the indi-
vidual Hebrew state, therefore that it was binding on none
but Hebrews, and not even on Hebrews after the downfall
of their nation. Further, in order to ascertain, whether it
could be concluded from Scripture, that the human under-


THE PBEFACE.


standing is naturally corrupt, I inquired whether the Uni-
yersal Religion, the Mvine Law revealed through the Pro-
phets and Apostles to the whole human race, differs from
that which is taught by the light of natural reason, whether
miracles can take place in violation of the laws of nature,
and if so, whether they imply the existence of Grod more
surely and clearly than events, which we understand plainly
and distinctly through their immediate natural causes.

Now, as in the whole course of my investigation I found
nothing taught expressly by Scripture, which does not
agreg with our understanding, or which is repugnant
{hereto, and as I saw that the prophets taught nothing,
which is not very simple and easily to be grasped by all, and
further, that they clothed tHeir teaching in the style, and
confirmed it with the reasons, which would most deeply
move the mind of the masses to devotion towards God, I
became thoroughly convinced, that the Bible leaves reason /
absolutely free, that it has nothing in common with philo- 1
fiophy, in fact, that Revelation and Philosophy stand on \
totally different footings. In order to set this forth categori- /
cally and exhaust the whole question, I point out the way in
which the Bible should be interpreted, and show that all
knowledge of spiritual questions should be sought from it
alone, and 'not from the objects of ordinary knowledge.
Thence I pass on to indicate the false notions, which have
arisen from the fact that the multitude— ever prone to
superstition, and caring more for the shreds of antiquity
than for eternal truths — ^pays homage to the Books of the
Bible, rather than to the Word of Gk>d. I show that the Word
of God has not been revealed as a certain number of books,
but was displayed to the prophets as a simple idea of the
Divine mind, namely, obedience to Grod in singleness of
heart, and in the practice of justice and charity; and I
further point out, that this doctrine is set forth in Scrip- 1
ture in accordance with the opinions and understandings of
those, among whom the Apostles and Prophets preached,
to the end that men might receive it willingly, and with
their whole heart.

Having thus laid bare the bases of belief, I draw the
•conclusion that Revelation has obedience for its sole object,
and therefore, in purpose no less than in foundation and


10 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE.

method, stands entirely aloof from ordinary knowledge;
each has its separate province, neither can be caUed the .
handmaid of the other.

Furthermore, as men's habits of mind differ, so that
^ some more readily embrace one form of faith, some another,
for what moves one to pray may move another only to scoffs
J '*''^.' , I conclude, in accordance with what has gone before, that
•.\ everyone should be free to choose for himself the founda-
:\\ • f tions of his creed, and that faith should be judged only by-
its fruits ; each would then obey Grod freely with his whole
\heart, while nothing would be publicly honoured save
Justice and charity.

Having thus drawn attention to the liberty conceded to
' everyone by the revealed law of Gk>d, I pass on to another

part of my subject, and prove that this same liberty can and
] should be accorded with safety to the state and the magis-
|terial authority — ^ui fact, that it cannot be withheld without
great danger to peace and detriment to the commimity.
f' In order to establish my point, I start from the natural
rights of the individual, which are co-extensive with his
desires and power, and from the fact that no one is bound
to live as another pleases, but is the guardian of his own
liberty. I show that these rights can only be transferred
to those whom we depute to defend us, who acquire with
the duties of defence the power of ordering our lives, and
I thence infer that rulers possess rights only limited by
their power, that they are the sole guardians of justice and
liberty, and that their subjects should act in all things as
they dictate: nevertheless, since no one can so utterly
abdicate his own power of self-defence as to cease to be a
man, I conclude that no one can be deprived of his natural
rights absolutely, but that subjects, either by tacit agree-
ment, or by social contract, retaiQ a certain number, which
cannot be taken from them without great danger to the state.
From these considerations I pass on to the Hebrew State,
which I describe at some length, in order to trace the
manner in which Religion acquired the force of law, aad.,,,^^
to touch on other noteworthy points. I then prove, that*^
the holders of sovereign power are the depositaries and
.interpreters of religious no less than of civil ordinances,
' and that they alone have the right to decide what is just or


THE PBEFACE. 11^

imjast, pious or impious ; lastly, I conclude by showing,..
that they best retain this right and secure safety to theirj
state by allowing every man to think what he likes, and j
say what he thinks. '

Such, Philosophical Eeader, are the questions I submit
to your notice, coimting on your approval, for the subject
matter of the whole book and of the several chapters is im-
portant and profitable. I would say more, but I do not want
my preface to extend to a volume, especially as I know that
its leading propositions are to Philosophers but common-
places. To the rest of mankind I care not to commend my
treatise, for I cannot expect that it contains anything to-
please them : I know how deeply rooted are the prejudices
embraced under the name of religion ; I am aware that in
the mind of the masses superstition is no less deeply rooted
than fear ; I recognize that their constancy is mere obsti-
nacy, and that they are led to praise or blame by impulse^
rather than reason. Therefore the multitude, and those-
of like passions with the multitude, ' I ask not to read
my book; nay, I would rather that they should utterly
neglect it, than that they should misinterpret it after their
wont. They would gain no good themselves, and might
prove a stumbling-block to others, whose philosophy is
hampered by the belief that Eeason is a mere handmaid
to Theology, and whom I seek in this work especially to-
benefit. But as there will be many who have neither the-
leisure, nor, perhaps, the inclination to read through all I
have written, I feel bound here, as at the end of my
treatise, to declare that I have written nothing, which I do-
not most willingly submit to the examination and judgment
of my country's rulers, and that I am ready to retract any-
thing, which they shall decide to be repugnant to the laws
or prejudicial to the public good. I know that I am a^
man and, as a man, liable to error, but against error I
have taken scrupulous care, and striven to keep in entire
accordance with the laws of my country, with loyalty, and
with morality.


/

t


19

\word8


THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE,


CHAPTEE L

OF PBOPHECY.

PEOPHECT, or revelation, is sure knowledge revealed
by Q-od to man. A prophet is one who interprets the
revelations of Gk)d to those who are unable to attain to sure
knowledge of the matters revealed, and therefore can only
apprehend them by simple faith. i

The Hebrew word for prophet is " nahi" ^ i.e. speaker or
interpreter, but in Scripture its meaning is restricted to in-
terpreter of Otod, as we may learn from Exodus vii. 1, where
Gbd says to Moses, " See, I have made thee a god to Pha-
raoh, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet ; " im-
plying that, since in interpreting Moses' words to Pharaoh,
Aaron acted the part of a prophet, Moses would be to
Pharaoh as a god, or in the attitude of a god.

Prophets I will treat of in the next chapter, and at pre-
sent consider prophecy.

Now it is evident, from the definition above given, that
prophecy really includes ordinary knowledge ; for the know-
ledge which we acquire by our natural faculties depends on
our knowledge of Otod and His eternal laws ; but ordinary
knowledge is common to aU men as men, and rests on foun-
dations which aU share, whereas the' multitude always
strains after rarities and exceptions, and thinks little of the
gifts of nature ; so that, when prophecy is talked of, ordi- \
nary knowledge is not supposed to be included. Neverthe- ■

^ See Notes, p. 269, Note 1.


/


THEOLOGICO-POLiriCAL TBBATISE. [CHAP. 1#


yiias as mucli right as any other to be called Divine,
l-od's nature, in so far as we share therein, and G-od's
l^ws, dictate it to us ; nor does it suffer from that to which
we give the pre-eminence, except in so far as the latter trans-
cends its limits and i imiiiil liii U|KX'| ^' for by natural
laws taken in themselves. ^^^^ a certainty it

involves, and the source frc "^-""^^f^ «

ordinary knowledge is no m
indeed we believe, or .rather cUv
human bodies but superhuman Tniu
their sensations and consciousness weru'
from our own.

But, although ordinary knowledge is Divine, its p.
cannot be called prophets,^ for they teach what the rete.
mankind could perceive and apprehend, not merely by
simple faith, but as surely and honourably as themselves.

Seeing then that our mind subjectively contains in itself
and partakes of the nature of Gk)d, and solely from this
cause is enabled to form notions explaining natural pheno-
mena and inciQcating morality, it follows that we may
rightly assert the nature of the human mind (in so far as
it is thus conceived) to be a primary cause of Divine reve-
lation. All that we clearly and distinctly understand is
dictated to us, as I have just pointed out, by the idea and
nature of G-od ; not indeed through words, but in a way far
more excellent and agreeing perfectly with the nature of the
mind, as all who have enjoyed intellectual certainty will
doubtless attest. Here, however, my chief purpose is to
speak of matters having reference to Scripture, so these few
words on the light of reason will suffice.

I will now pass on to, and treat more fully, the other
ways and means by which Gk>d makes revelations to man-
kind, both of that which transcends ordinary knowledge,
and of that within its scope; for there is no reason why
Ood should not employ other means to communicate what
wo know already by the power of reason.

Our conclusions on the subject must be drawn solely
from Scripture; for what can we affirm about matters
transcending our knowledge except what is told us by the
words or writings of prophets ? And since there are, so far
■as I know, no prophets now aHve, we have no alternative but

1 See Note 2.


CHAP. I.] OP PROPHECY, v 1^

yfo read tlie books of prophets departed, taking c^^^^^^s
'^wliile not to reason from metaphor or to ascribe any^te^
to our authors which they do not themselves distinctly stalfi^,
I must further premise that the Jews never make any men- ^ y
tion or accoimt of secondary, or particular causes, but in a
spirit of religion, piety, and what is commonly called godli-
ness, refer all things directly to the Deity. For instance,
if they make money by a transaction, they say God gave it
to them ; if they desire anything, they say God has disposed
their hearts towards it ; if they think anything, they say
God told them. Hence we must not suppose that every-
thing is prophecy or revelation which is described in
Scripture as told by God to anyone, but only such things
as are expressly announced as prophecy or revelation, or are
plainly pointed to as such by the context.

A perusal of the sacred books will show us that all God's
revelations to the prophets were made through words or
appearances, or a combination of the two. These words
and appearances were of two kinds ; (1) real when external
to the mind of the prophet who heard or saw them, (2)
imaginary when the imagination of the prophet was in a
state which led him distinctly to suppose that he heard or
fiaw them.

With a real voice God revealed to Moses the laws which
He wished to be transmitted to the Hebrews, as we may
see from Exodus xxv. 22, where God says, "And there I
will meet with thee and I will commune with thee from the
mercy seat which is between the Cherubim." Some sort of
real voice must necessarily have been employed, for Moses
found God ready to commune with him at any time. This,
as I shaU shortly show, is the only instance of a real voice.

We might, perhaps, suppose that the voice with which
God called Samuel was real, for in 1 Sam. iii. 21, we read,
" And the Lord appeared again in Shiloh, for the Lord re-
vealed Himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the
Lord ; " implying that the appearajiceof the Lord consisted in
His Tnaking Himself known to Samuel through a voice ; in
other words, that Samuel heard the Lord speaking. But
we are compelled to distinguish between the prophecies of \
Moses and those of other prophets, and therefore must de-
cide that this voice was imaginary, a conclusion further


/


J


yA THEOLOOICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. I.

i*ted by tlie voice's resemblance to the voice of Eli,

*ch Samuel was in the habit of hearing, and therefore
alight easily imagine; when thrice called by the Lord,
Samuel supposed it to have been Eli.

The voice which Abimelech heard was imaginary, for it
is written, Q«n. xx. 6, " And Gk)d said unto him in a dream."
So that the will of God was manifest to him, not in waking,
but only in sleep, that is, when the imagination is most
active and uncontrolled. Some of the Jews believe that the
actual words of the Decalogue were not spoken by Gk)d, but
that the Israelites heard a noise only, without any distinct
words, and during its continuance apprehended the Ten
Commandments by pure intuition ; to this opinion I myself
once inclined, seeing that the words of the Decalogue in
Exodus are different from the words of the Decalogue in
Deuteronomy, for the discrepancy seemed to imply (since
Gk)d only spoke once) that the Ten Commandments were
not intended to convey the actual words of the Lord, but
only His meaning. However, unless we would do violence
to Scripture, we must certainly admit that the Israelites
heard a real voice, for Scripture expressly says, Deut. v. 4,
" God spake with you face to face," i.e. as two men ordinarily
interchange ideas through the instrumentality of their two
bodies ; and therefore it seems more consonant with Holy
Writ to suppose that God really did create a voice of some
kind with which the Decalogue was revealed. The discre-
pancy of the two versions is treated of in Chap. VilJ.

Yet not even thus is all difGiciilty removed, for it seems
scarcely reasonable to aflten that a created thing, depend-
ing on God in the same manner as other created things,
would 'be able to express or explain the nature of God either
verbally or really by means of its individual organism : for
instance, by declaring in the first person, " I am the Lord
your God."

Certainly when anyone says with his mouth, " I under-
stand," we do not attribute the understanding to the mouth,
but to the mind of the speaker; yet this is because the
mouth is the natural organ of a man speaking, and the
hearer, knowing what understanding is, easily comprehends,
by a comparison with himself, that the speaker's mind is
meant ; but i£ we knew nothing of God beyond the mere


CHAP. I.] OF PBOPHECY. 19

name and wished to conmiTine with Him, and be ast words
His existence, I fail to see how our wish would be sa^stlea
by the declaration of a created thing (depending on ^§ies
neither more nor less than ourselves), "I am the Lord.^
If Qod contorted the lips of Moses, or, I will not say Moses,
but some beast, till they pronounced the words, " I am the
Lord," should we apprehend the Lord's existence therefrom?

Scripture seems clearly to point to the belief that God
spoke Himself, having descended from heaven to Moimt
Sinai for the purpose — and not only that the Israelites
heard Him speaking, but that their chief men beheld Him
(Ex. xxiv.) Further the law of Moses, which might neither
be added to nor curtailed, and which was set up as a national
standard of right, nowhere prescribed the belief that God
is without body, or even without form or figure, but only
ordained that the Jews should believe in His existence and
worship Him alone : it forbade them to invent or fashion
any likeness of the Deity, but this was to insure purity of
service ; because, never having seen God, they could not by
means of images recall the l&eness of God, but only th*e
likeness of some created thing which might thus gradually
take the place of God as 'die object of their adoration.
Nevertheless, the Bible clearly implies that God has a form,
and that Moses when he heard God speaking was permitted
to behold it, or at least its hinder parts.

Doubtless some mystery lurks in this question which we
will discuss more fuUy below. For the present I will call
attention to the passages in Scripture indicating the means
by which God has revealed His laws to man.

Eevelation may be through figures only, as in 1 Chron.
xxii., where God displays his anger to David by means of
an angel bearing a sword, and also in the story of Balaam.

Maunonides and others do indeed maintain that these and
every other instance of angelic apparitions (e,g. to Manoah
and to Abraham offering up Isaac) occurred during sleep,
for that no one with his eyes open ever could see an angel,
but this is mere nonsense. The sole object of such com-
mentators seems to be to extort from Scripture confirmations
of Aristotelian quibbles and their own inventions, a pro-
ceeding which I regard as the acme of absurdity.

In figures, not real but existing only in the prophet's


^ITHEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. I.

^on, God revealed to Josepli his future lordship,
words and %ures He reveled to Joshua that He
fight for the Hebrews, causing to appear an angel, as
'were the Captain of the Lord's host, bearing a sword,
and by this means communicating verbally. The forsaking
of Israel by Providence was portrayed to Isaiah by a vision
of the Lord, the thrice Holy, sitting on a very lofty throne,
and the Hebrews, stained ktV the mire of tW sins, sunk
as it were in uncleanness, and thus as far as possible dis-
tant from Gk)d. The wretchedness of the people at the time
was thus revealed, while future calamities were foretold in
words. I could cite from Holy Writ many similar examples,
but I think they are sufficiently well known already.

However, we get a still more clear confirmation of our
position in Num. xii. 6, 7, as follows : " If there be any
prophet amonff you, I the Lord will make myself known
Lto Mm in a 4ion'' (i.«. by appearances and signs, for God
says of the prophecy of Moses that it was a vision without
signs), " and wiU speak unto him in a dream " (i.e. not with
actual words and an actual voice). " My servant Moses is
not so; with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even
apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the similitude of
the Lord he shall behold," t.e. looking on me as a friend
and not afraid, he speaks with me (cf. Ex. xxxiii. 17).
/ This makes it indisputable that the other prophets did
not hear a real voice, and we gather as much from Deut.
xxiy. 10 : " And there arose not a prophet since in Israel
like imto Moses whom the Lord knew face to face," which
must mean that the Lord spoke with none other ; for not
even Moses saw the Lord's face. These are the only media
of communication between Gk>d and man which I find
mentioned in Scripture, and therefore the only ones which
may be supposed or invented. We may be able quite to
comprehend that God can communicate immediately with
man, for without the intervention of bodily means He com-
municates to our minds His essence ; still, a man who can by
pure intuition comprehend ideas which are neither contained
in nor deducible from the foundations of our natural know-
ledge, must necessarily possess a mind far superior to those
of his fellow men, nor do I believe that any have been so
endowed save Christ. To Him the ordinances of God lead-


CHAP. I.] OP PBOPHECY. 19

ing men to salvation were revealed directly without words
or visions, so that God manifested Himself to the Apostles
^TQTigh thft zoind oTCIhrist as He ^tmerlj did to Moses
throngh the supernatural voice. In this sense the voice of
Ohrist, like the voice which Moses heard, may be called the /
voice of Gk)d, and it may be said that the wisdom of God^
{i,e, wisdom more than human) took upon itself in Christ'
human nature, and that Christ was the way of salvation*
I must at this juncture declare that those doctrines which '
certain churches put forward concerning Christ, I neither ■
affirm nor deny, for I freely confess that I do not under-
stand them. What I have just stated I gather from Scrip-
ture, where I never read that God appeared to Christ, or
spoke to Christ, but that God was revealed to the Apostles
through Christ ; that Christ was the Way of Life, and that
the old law was given through an angel, and not imme-
diately by God ; whence it follows that if Moses spoke with
<3k)d face to face as a man speaks with his friend (i.e. by
means of their two bodies) Christ commimed with God
mind to mind.

Thus we may conclude that no one except Christ re-
<5eived the revelations of God without the aid of imagina-
tion, whether in words or vision. Therefore the power of
prophecy implies not a peculiarly perfect mind, but a
pecxdiarly vivid imagination, as I will show more clearly
in the next chapter. We will now inquire what is meant
in the Bible by the Spirit of God breathed into the pro-
phets, or by the prophets speaking with the Spirit of God ;
to that end we must determine the exact signification of
the Hebrew word ruagh, commonly translated spirit.

The word ruagh literally means a wind, e,g. the south
wind, but it is frequently employed in other derivative
significations. It is used as equivalent to,

(1.) Breath: "Neither is there any spirit in his mouth,"
Ps. cxxxv. 17.

(2.) Life, or breathing: " And his spirit returned to him,"
1 Sam. XXX. 12 ; i,e. he breathed again.

(8.) Courage and strength: "Neither did there remain
any more spirit in any man," Josh. ii. 11 ; " And the spirit
entered into me, and made me stand on my feet," Ezek. ii. 2.

(4.) Virtue and fitness : " Days should speak, and multi-


t9
If-


20 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. !•

tudes of years should teacli wisdom ; but there is a spirit
in man," J ob xxxii. 7 ; i.e. wisdom is not always f oimd among:
old men, for I now discover that it depends on individual
virtue and capacity. So, " A man in whom is the Spirit,""
Numbers xxvii. 18.

(5.) Habit of mind: "Because he had another spirit with
him," Numbers xiv. 24 ; i,e. another habit of mind. " Be-
hold I will pour out My Spirit unto you," Prov. i, 23.

(6.) WiU, purpose, desire, impulse : " Whither the spirit,
was to go, they went," Ezek. i. 12 ; " That cover with su
covering, but not of My Spirit," Is. xxx. 1 ; " For the Lord
hath poured out on you "flie spirit of deep sleep," Is. xxix.
10 ; " Then was their spirit softened," Judges viii. 3 ; " He^
that ruleth his spirit, is better than he that taketh a city,
Prov. xvi. 32 ; " He that hath no rule over his own spirit,
Prov. XXV, 28; "Your spirit as fire shall devour you,
Isaiah xxxiii. 1.

From the meaning of disposition we get —

(7.) Passions and faculties. A lofty spirit means pride,,
a lowly spirit humility, an evil spirit hatred and melan-
choly. So, too, the expressions spirits of jealousy, fornica-
tion, wisdom, counsel, bravery, stand for a jealous, lasci-
vious, wise, prudent, or brave mind (for we Hebrews use-
substantives in preference to adjectives), or these various-
qualities.

(8.) The mind itself, or the life : " Yea, they have aU one
spirit," Ecdes. iii. 19 j " The spirit shall return to God Who*
gave it."

(9.) The quarters of the world (from the winds which
blow thence), or even the side of anything turned towards-
a particular quarter — ^Ezek. xxxvii. 9 ; xlii. 16, 17, 18,
19, &c.

I have already alluded to the way in which things are^
referred to God, and said to be of Orod,

(1.) As belonging to His nature, and being, as it were^
part of Him ; e,g, the power of God, the eyes of God.

(2.) As imder His dominion, and depending on His.
pleasure ; thus the heavens are called the heavens of the
Lord, as being His chariot and habitation. So Nebuchad*
nezzar is called the servant of Qoi, Assyria the scoxirge of
God, <&c


CHAP. I.] OF FBOPHECT. 21

(3.) Ab dedicated to Him, e,g, tlie Temple of God, a
Nazarene of Qod, tlie Bread of God.

(4.) Ab revealed through the prophets and not through
our natural faculties. In this sense the Mosaic law is called
the law of God.

(6.) Ab being in the superlative degree. Very high moun-
tains are styled the mountains of God, a very deep sleep,
the sleep of God, &c. In this sense we must explam
Amos iv. 11 : "I have overthrown you as the overthrow of
the Lord came upon Sodom and Goniorrah," t.e. that me-
morable overthrow, for since God Himself is the Speaker,
the passage cannot well be taken otherwise. The wisdom
■of Solomon is called the wisdom of God, or extraordinary.
TThe size of the cedars of Lebanon is alluded to in the
Psahnist's expression, " the cedars of the Lord."

Similarly, if the Jews were at a loss to imderstand any
phenomenon, or were ignorant of its cause, they referred it
to God. Thus a storm was termed the chiding of God,
thunder and lightning the arrows of God, for it was thought
that God kept the winds confined in caves, His treasuries;
thus differing merely in name from the Greek wind-god
Eolus. In like manner miracles were called works of God,
as being especially marvellous ; though in reality, of course,
all^ natural events are the works of God, and take place
solely by His power. The Psalmist calls the miracles in
Egypt the works of God, because the Hebrews found in
them a way of safety which they had not looked for, and
therefore especially marvelled at.

As, then, unusual natural phenomena are called works
of God, and trees of unusual size are called trees of God,
we cannot wonder that very strong and tall men, though
impious robbers and whoremongers, are in Genesis called
fions of God.

This reference of things wonderful to God was not
peciiliar to the Jews. Pharaoh, on hearing the interpreta-
tion of his dream, exclaimed that the mind of the gods was
in Joseph. Nebuchadnezzar told Daniel that he possessed
the mind of the holy gods ; so also in Latin an3rtJiing well
made is often said to be wrought with Divine hands, which
is equivalent to the Hebrew phrase, wrought with the hand
of God.


22 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICiLXi TBEATISE. [CHAP. U

We can now yery easily understand and explain thosd-
passages of Scripture whicb speak of tlie Spirit of Qod. 1st
some places tlie expression merely means a very strong,
and deadly wind, as in Isaiah xl. 7, " The grass withe
the flower f adeth, because the Spirit of the Lord bl
upon it.'* Similarly in Qen. i. 2 : " The Spirit of the
moved over the face of the waters." At other tunes it
used as equivalent tp a high courage, thus the spirit
Gideon and of Samson is c^ed the Spirit of the Latd«
being very bold, and prepared for any emergency',
unusual virtue or power is called the Spirit or Yirtne
the Lord, Ex. xxxi. 3: ''I will fill him (Bezaleel) with
Spirit of the Lord," t.e., as the Bible itself explains,
talent above man's usual endowment. So Isa. zL 2 : ''
the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him," is exp!
afterwards in the text to mean the spirit of wisdom
understanding, of counsel and might.

The melancholy of Said is call^ the melancholy of tli»
Lord, or a very deep melancholy, the persons who applied
the term showing that they understood by it nothing supeiw
natural, in that they sent for a musician to assuage it by
harp-playing. Again, the '' Spirit of the Lord " is used aa
equivalent to the mind of man, for instance, Job xxvii. 8 :
" And the Spirit of the Lord in my nostrils," the allusion
being to Gen. ii. 7 : *' And God breathed into man's nostrihk
the breath of life." Ezekiel also, prophesying to the dead«
says (xxvii. 14), " And I will give to you My Spirit, and ye
shall live ;" i.e. I will restore you to life. ^ In Job xxxiv. 14,
we read: "If He gather unto Himself His Spirit and breath;"
in G^n. vi. 3 : " My Spirit shall not always strive with man,
for that he also is flesh," i.e. since man acts on the dictates
of his body, and not the spirit which I gave him to discern
the good, I will let him alone. So, too, Ps. li. 12 : "Create
in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within
me ; cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not
Thy Holy Spirit from me." It was supposed that sin origi-
nated only from the body, and that good impulses come
from the mind ; therefore the Psalmist invokes the aid of
God against the bodily appetites, but prays that the spirit
which the Lord, the Holy One, had given him might be re-
newed. Again, inasmuch as the Bible, in concession to


CHAP. 1.1 OF FBOPHSCT.

^ ^ 81

popular ignorance, describes Qoi aa having a mina,,
emotions — ^naj, even a body and breath — the expSrrible
Spirit of the Lord is nsed for God's mind, disposi^en-
)tion, strength, or breath. Thus, Isa. xL 13: *'Wi>
the Spirit of the Lord? " %.e. who, save Him-
cansed the mind of the Lord to will anything?
10: "But they rebelled, and vexed the Holy


rjlirase comes to be used of the law of Moses, which
^1^ \ae ezponnds God's will. Is, bdii. 11, '' Where is He

It His Holy Spirit within himP" meaning, as we
/gather from the context, the law of Moses. Nehe-
/speaJdng of the giving of the law, says, L 20, " Thou
jit also thy good Spirit to instruct them." This is
ffied to in Deut. iv. 6, "This is your wisdom and
ifanrtftDding," and in Ps. cxliii 10, "Thy good Spirit
\' i3I lead me into the land of uprightness." The Spirit of
Jibb Lord may mean the breath of the Lord, for breath, no
J^Ibss than a mind, a heart, and a body are attributed to
rf -God in Scripture, as in Ps. xxxiii. 6. Hence it gets to
mean the power^ strength, or faculty of. God, as in Job
TTTiii- 4, " The Spirit of the Lord made me," i.e, the power,
or, if you prefer, the decree of the Lord. So the Psalmist
in poetic language declares, xxxiii. 6, " By the word of the
Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by
the breath of His mouth," i.e, by a mandate issued, as it
were, in one breath. Also Ps. cxxxix. 7, " Whither shall I
go from Thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from Thy pre-
sence?" i,e. whither shall I go so as to be beyond Thy
power and Thy presence ?

Lastly, the Spirit of the Lord is used in Scripture to
express the emotions of God, e,g. His kindness and mercy,
Micah ii. 7, "Is the Spirit [i.e. the mercy] of the Lord
straitened ? Are these cruelties His doings ? " Zech. iv.
6, "Not by might or by power, but My Spirit [i.e. mercy],
saith the Lord of hosts." The twelfth verse of the
seventh chapter of the same prophet must, I think, be
interpreted in like manner : " Yea, they made their hearts
as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and
the words which the Lord of hosts hath sent in His Spirit
\i.e. in His mercy] by the former prophets." So also


22 ^ THEOLOGICO-FOLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. I.

/

y^QjA* 5: "So My Spirit remainetli among you: fear

g^y^e passage in Isaiah xlviii. 16, "And now tlie Lord
^iK>d and His Spirit hatli sent me," may be taken to refer
feither to God's mercy or His revealed law ; for the prophet
says, " From the beginning " (i.e. from the time when I
first came to yon, to preach Gk>d's anger and His sentence
gone forth against you) " I spoke not in secret ; from the
time that it was, there am I," and now I am sent by the
mercy of God as a joyful messenger to preach your resto-
ration. Or we may imderstand him to mean by the re-
vealed law that he had before come to warn them by the
command of the law (Levit. xix. 17) in the same manner
and under the same conditions as Moses had warned them,
and that now, like Moses, he ends by preaching their resto-
ration. But the first explanation seems to me the best.

Eetuming, then, to the main object of our discussion,
we find that the Scriptural phrases, "The Spirit of the
Lord was upon a prophet," " The Lord breathed His Spirit
into men," " Men were fiJled with the Spirit of God, with
the Holy Spirit," &c., are quite clear to us, and mean that
the prophets were endowed with a peculiar and extraordi-
nary power, and devoted themselves to piety with especial
constancy;^ that thus they perceived the mind or the
thought of God, for we have shown that God's Spirit
signifies in Hebrew God's mind or thought, and that the
law which shows His mind and thought is called His
Spirit ; hence that the imagination of the prophets, inas-
much as through it were revealed the decrees of God, may
equally be called the mind of God, and the prophets be
said to have possessed the mind of Gk)d. On our minds
also the mind of God and His eternal thoughts are im-
pressed ; but this being the same for all men is less taken
into account, especially by the Hebrews, who claimed a
pre-eminence, and despised other men and other men's
knowledge.

Lastly, the prophets were said to possess the Spirit of
God because men knew not the cause of prophetic know-
ledge, and in their wonder referred it wiii other marvels
directly to the Deity, styling it Divine knowledge.

We need no longer scruple to affirm that the prophets

1 See Note 3.


CHAP. I.] OF PBOPHECT.


81


only perceived Qod.*B revelation by the aid of imagu^.|^|
tliat is, hj words and figures either real or imaginary,
find no other means mentioned in Scripture, and therofc^*
must not invent any. As to the particular law of Nature
by which the communications took place, I confess my
ignorance. I might, indeed, say as others do, that they
took place by the power of God ; but this would be mere \ /
trifling, and no better than explaining some unique speci-
men by a transcendental term. Everything takes place
by the power of God. Nature herself is the power of God
under another name, and our ignorance of the power of
God is co-extensive with our ignorance of Nature. It is
absolute f oUy, therefore, to ascribe an event to the power
of God when we know not its natural cause, which is the
power of God.

However, we are not now inquiring into the causes of
prophetic knowledge. We are only attempting, as I have
said, to examine the Scriptural documents, and to draw
our conclusions from them as from iQtimate natural facts ;
the causes of the documents do not concern us. ^

As the prophets perceived the revelations of God by the
aid of imagination, they could indisputably perceive much
that is beyond the boimdary of the intellect, for many
more ideas can be constructed from words and figures than
from the principles and notions on which the whole fabric
of reasoned knowledge is reared.

Thus we have a clue to the fact that the prophets per-
ceived nearly everything in parables and aUegories, and
clothed spiritual truths in bodily forms, for such is tl^^^
usual method of imagination. We need no longer wonder
that Scripture and the prophets speak so strangely and
obscurely of God's Spirit or Mind (cf. Numbers xi. 17,
1 Eings xxii. 21, <Sbc.), that the Lord was seen by Micah as
sitting, by Daniel as an old man clothed in white, by
Ezekiel as a fire, that the Holy Spirit appeared to those
with Christ as a descending dove, to the apostles as fiery
tongues, to Paul on his conversion as a great light. All
these expressions are plainly in harmony with the current
ideas of God and spirits.

Inasmuch as imagination is fleeting and inconstant, we
find that the power of prophecy did not remain with a


/


"^ /a theologico-political tebatise. [chap. I.

^®>CT for long, nor manifest itself frequently, but was
pass^ rare ; manifesting itself only in a few men, and in
®^m not often.

/ We must necessarily inquire how the prophets became
y assured of the truth of what they perceived by imagina*
tion, and not by stire mental laws ; but our investigation
must be confined to Scripture, for the subject is one on
which we cannot acquire certain knowledge, and which we
cannot explam by the immediate causes. Scripture teach-
ing about the assurance of prophets I will treat of in the
next chapter.


CHAP. U.] or PB0PHET8, 81

Jerrible

4to

>^

CHAPTER IL

OF PBOFHBTS.

IT follows fr^m. the last chapter that, as I have said, the-
prophe ^?® kre endowed with Tinusiially vivid imagina-
tions, an&. '^^ with unusually perfect minds. This conclu*
sion is ampij^^iustained by Scaipture, for we are told that.
Solomon was \ \e wisest of men, but had no special faculty
of prophecy. '?Ieman, Calcol, and Dara, though men of
great talent, were not prophets, whereas uneducated
countrymen, nay, even women, such as Hagar, Abraham'^
handmaid, were thus gifted. Nor is this contrary to ordi-
nary experience and reason. Men of great imaginative
power are less fitted for abstract reasoning, whereas those
who excel in intellect and its use keep their imagination
more restrained and controlled, holding it in subjection, so
to speak, lest it should usurp the place of reason.

Thus to suppose that knowledge of natural and spiritual
phenomena can be gained from the prophetic books, is an
utter mistake, which I shall endeavour to expose, as I think
philosophy, the age, and the question itself demand. I
care not for the girdings of superstition, for superstition ia
the bitter enemy of all true Imowledge and true moraUty..
Yes ; it has come to this ! Men who openly confess that
they can form no idea of Gtod., and only Imow Him through
created things, of which they know not the causes, can
unblushingly accuse philosophers of Atheism.

Treating the question methodically, I will show that pro-^
phedes^ed. not only according t^ the imagination Ld
physical temperament of the prophet, but also according
to his particular opinions ; and further that prophecy never
rendered the prophet wiser than he was before. But I will
first discuss the assurance of truth which the prophets re-^
ceived, for this is akin to the subject-matter of the chapter^
and will serve to elucidate somewhat our present point.


!/


22


/i THEOLOaiCO-POLinCAL TEBATISE. [CHAP. II.

^^^ination does not, in its own nature, involve any cer-

* .^/ of truth, sucli as is implied in every clear and

^/'^fnct idea, but requires some extrinsic reason to assure

/ A of its objective reality : hence prophecy cannot afford

^ /'certainty, and the prophets were assured of Good's revela-


y


tion by some sign, and not by the fact of revelation, as we
may see from Abraham, who, when he had heard the pro-
mise of Ood, demanded a sign, not because he did not
believe in G-od, but because he wished to be sure that it was
God Who made the promise. The fact is st*^^ more evident
in the case of G-ideon : " Show me," he says ^^k>d, " show
me a sign, that I may know that it is IDl ^.jat talkest
with me." Gk)d also says to Moses: "A Clet this be a
sign that I have sent thee." Hezeldah, tho' gh he had long
known Isaiah to be a prophet, none the 'ess demanded a
sign of the cure which he predicted. It is thus quite
evident that the prophets always receired some sign to
certify them of their prophetic imaginings; and for this
reason Moses bids the Jews (Deut. xviii.) ask of the pro-
phets a sign, namely, the prediction of some coining event.
In this respect, prophetic knowledge is inferior to natural
knowledge, which needs no sign, and in itself impHes certi-
tude. Moreover, Scripture warrants the statement that
the certitude of the prophets was not mathematical, but
moral. Moses lays down the punishment of death for the
prophet who preaches new gods, even though he confirm his
doctrine by signs and wonders (Deut. xiii.) ; " For," he
says, " the Lord also worketh signs and wonders to try His
people." And Jesus Christ warns His disciples of the same
thing (Matt. xxiv. 24). Furthermore, Ezekiel (xiv. 9)
plainly states that Gk)d sometimes deceives men with false
revelations ; and Micaiah bears like witness in the case of
the prophets of Ahab.
I Although these instances go to prove that revelation is
I open to doubt, it nevertheless contains, as we have said, a
; considerable element of certainty, for Gk)d ne ver decfiisBS-
' thft goad, nor His chosen, but (according to t£e ancient
proverb, and as appears in the history of Abigail and her
speech), God uses the good as instruments of goodness, and
the wicked as means to execute His wrath. This may be
seen from the case of Micaiah above quoted ; for although


CHAP. II.] OF PBOPHETS. -.•

God had determined to deceive Ahab, througli i. . ., ,
He made use of lying prophets; to the good propP"^
revealed the truth, and did not forbid his proclaiming^^^"

Still the certitude of prophecy remains, as I have saL
merely moral ; for no one can justify himself before Go^
nor boast that he is an instrument for God's goodness. '
Scripture itself teaches and shows that God led away David
to number the people, though it bears ample witness to
David's piety.

The whole question of the certitude of prophecy was based
on these three considerations : —

1. That the things revealed were imagined very vividly,
affecting the prophets in the same way as things seen when
awake;

2. The presence of a sign ;

3. Lastly and chiefly, that the mind of the prophet was
given wholly to what was r^ht and g6od.

Although Scripture does not always make mention of a
sign, we must nevertheless suppose tkt a sign was always
vouchsafed; for Scripture does not always relate every
condition and circumstance (as many have remarked), but
rather takes them for granted. We may, however, admit
that no sign was needed when the prophecy declared
nothing that was not already contained in the law of
Moses, because it was confirmed by that law. For instance,
Jeremiah's prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem was
confirmed by the prophecies of other prophets, and by the
threats in the law, and, therefore, it needed no sign;
whereas Hananiah, who, contrary to all the prophets, fore«
told the speedy restoration of the state, stood in need of a
sign, or he woidd have been in doubt as to the truth of his
prophecy, until it was confirmed by facts. " The prophet
which prophesieth of peace, when the word of the prophet
shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known that
the Lord hath truly sent him."

As, then, the certitude afforded to the prophet by signs was
not mathematical (i,e. did not necessanly follow from the per-
ception of the thing perceived or seen), but only moral, and
as the signs were only given to convince the prophet, it
follows tl^t such signs were given according to the opinions
and capacity of each prophet, so that a sign which would


22 >^THBOLOOICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. II.

Wo^^one prophet would fall far abort of convincing
pass^^ who was imbued with different opinions. There-
lie signs varied according to the individual prophet,
also did the revelation vary, as we have stated,

cording to individual disposition and temperament, and
according to the opinions previously held.

It varied according to disposition, in this way: if a
prophet was cheerful, victories, peace, and events which
make men glad, were revealed to him; in that he was
aiaturaUy more likely to imagine such things. If, on the
•contrary, he was melancholy, wars, massacres, and calami-
ties were revealed; and so, according as a prophet was
merciful, gentle, quick to anger, or severe, he was more
fitted for one kind of revelation than another. It varied
•according to the temper of imagination in this way: if a
prophet was cultivated he perceived the mind of Gk)d in a
cultivated way, if he was confused he perceived it con-
fusedly. And so with revelations perceived through visions.
If a prophet was a countryman he saw visions of oxen, cows,
and the like; if he was a soldier, he saw generals and
armies ; if a courtier, a royal throne, and so on.

Lastly, prophecy varied according to the opinions held
by the prophets ; for instance, to the Magi, who believed
in the follies of astrology, the birth of Christ was revealed
through the vision of a, star in the East. To the augurs of
Nebuchadnezzar the destruction of Jerusalem was. revealed
through entrails, whereas the king himself inferred it from
oracles and the direction of arrows which he shot into the
air. To prophets who believed that man acts from free
choice and by his own power, God was revealed as standing
^part from and ignorant of future human actions. All of
which we will illustrate from Scripture.

The first point is proved from the case of Elisha, who, in
order to prophecy to Jehoram, asked for a harp, and was
unable to perceive the Divine purpose till he had been re-
•created by its music ; then, indeed, he prophesied to Jeho-
ram and to his allies glad tidings, which previously he had
been unable to attain to because he was angry with the
king, and those who are angry with anyone can imagine
«vil of him, but not good. The theory that God does not
reveal Himself to the angry or the sad, is a mere dream :


CHAP. II.] OP PBOPHETS. 81

for God revealed to Moses wliile angry, the terrible
slaughter of the firstborn, and did so without the interven-
tion of a harp. To Cain in his ra^e, God was revealed, aM to
Ezekiel, impatient with anger, waa revealed the contumk^i
and wretchedness of the Jews. Jeremiah, miserable ani
weary of life, prophesied the disasters of the Hebrews, so
that Josiah would not consult him, but inquired of a
woman, inasmuch as it was more in accordance
womanly nature that God should reveal His mercj th^eto.
So, Micaiah never prophesied good to Ahab, -^though other
true prophets had done so, but invariably evil. Thus we
aee that individual prophets were by temperament more
fitted for one sort of revelation than another.

The style of the prophecy also varied according to the
eloquence of the individual prophet. The prophecies of
Ezekiel and Amos are not written in a cultivated style like
those of Isaiah and Nahum, but more rudely. Any Hebrew
scholar who wishes to inquire into this point more closely,
and compares chapters of the different prophets treating of
the same subject, will find great dissimilarity of style.
Compare, for instance, chap. i. of the courtly Isaiah, verse
11 to verse 20, with chap. v. of the countryman Amos,
verses 21-24. Compare also the order and reasoning of
the prophecies of Jeremiah, written in Idumsea (chap. xHx.),
with the order and reasoning of Obadiah. Compare, lastly,
Isa. xl. 19, 20, and xHv. 8, with Hosea viii. 6, and xiii. 2.
And so on.

A due consideration of these passage will clearly show us
that God has no particular style in speaking, but, accord-
ing to the learning and capacity of the prophet, is cultivated,
compressed, severe, untutored, prolix, or obscure.

There was, moreover, a certain variation in the visions
vouchsafed to the prophets, and in the symbols by which
they expressed them, for Isaiah saw the glory of the Lord
departing from the Temple in a different form from that
presented to Ezekiel. The Babbis, indeed, maintain that
both visions were really the same, but that Ezekiel, being
a countryman, was above measure impressed by it, and
therefore set it forth in full detail ; but unless there is a
trustworthy tradition on the subject, which I do not for a
moment believe, this theory is plainly an invention. Isaiah


82 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. Il«

saw serapldm mth six wings, Ezekiel beasts with four
wings; Isaiak saw God clothed and sitting on a royal
throne, Ezekiel saw Him in the likeness of a fire; each
doubtless saw God under the form in which he usually
imagined Him.

Further, the Tisjons varied in clearness as well as in de-
tails ; for the revelations of Zechariah were too obscure to

understood by the prophet without explanation, as ap-
pears ^om his/narration of them; the visions of Daniel
could not be. linderstood by him even after they had been
explained, and this obscurity did not arise from the diffi-
culty of the matter revealed (for being merely human
affairs, these only transcended human capacity in being
future), but solely in the fact that Daniel's imagination was
not so capable for prophecy while he was awake as while
he was asleep ; and this is further evident from the fact
that at the very b^inning of the vision he was so terrified
that he almost despaired of his strength. Thus, on account
of the inadequacy of his imagination and his strength, the
things revealed were so obscure to him that he could not
understand them even after they had been explained.
Here we may note that the words heard by Daniel, were,
as we have shown above, simply imagioary, so that it is
hardly wonderful that in his lightened state he imagined
them so confusedly and obscurely that afterwards he coxdd
make nothing of them. Those who say that God did not
wish to make a clear revelation, do not seem to have read
the words of the angel, who expressly says that he came to
make the prophet understand what should befall his people
in the latter days (Dan. x. 14).

The revelation remained obscure because no one was
found, at that time, with imagination sufficiently strong to
conceive it more clearly.

Lastly, the prophets, to whom it was revealed that God
\^uld take away Elijah, wished to persuade Elisha that he
had been taken somewhere where they would find him;
showing sufficiently clearly that they had not understood
God's revelation aright.

There is no need to set this out more amply, for nothing

j/ is more plain in the Bible than that God endowed some

prophets with far greater gifts of prophecy than others.


CHAP. II.] OP PEOPHETS. 33

But I will show in greater detail and length, for I consider
the point more important, that the prophecies varied accord-
ing to the opinions previously embraced by the propjjets,
and that the prophets held diverse and even-^5ontrary opin-
ions and prejudices. (I speak, be it understood, solely o
matters speculative, for in regard to uprightness and mora-
lity the case is widely different.) From thence I shall con-
clude that prophecy never rendered the prophets more
learned, but left them with their former opinions, and that
we are, therefore, not at all bound to trust them in matters
of intellect.

Everyone has been strangely hasty in afl&rming that the
prophets knew everything within the scope of human Intel-
lect ; and. althoTagh certain passages of Scripture plainly
affirm that the prophets were in certain respects ignorant,
such persons would rather say that they do not understand
the passages than admit that there was anything which the
prophets did not know ; or else they try to wrest the Scrip-
tural words away from their evident meaning.

If either of these proceedings is allowable we may as well
shut our Bibles, for vainly shall we attempt to prove any-
thing from them if their plainest passages may be classed
among obscure and impenetrable mysteries, or if we may
put any interpretation on them which we fancy. For
instance, nothing is more clear in the Bible than that
Joshua, and perhaps also the author who wrote his history,
thought that the sun revolves round the earth, and that the
earth is fixed, and further that the sun for a certain period
remained still. Many, who wOl not admit any movement
in the heavenly bodies, explain away the passage till it seems
to mean something quite different ; others, who have learned
to philosophize more correctly, and understand that the
earth moves while the sun is still, or at any rate does not
revolve round the earth, try with all their might to wrest
this meaning from Scripture, though plainly nothing of the
sort is intended. Such quibblers excite my wonder ! Are
we, forsooth, bound to believe that Joshua the soldier was
a learned astronomer ? or that a miracle could not be re-
vealed to him, or that the Hght of the sun coxdd not remain
longer than usual above the horizon, without his knowing
the cause ? To me both alternatives appear ridiculous, and

D


34 A THEOLOOICO-POLITICAL TKEATISE. [CHAP. IJ.

therefore I would rather say that Joshua was ignorant of
the true cause of the lengthened day, and that he and the
whd^ host with him thought that the sun moved round the
tff^gyei T d ayTsafift^ that on that particular occasion it
:ood sffuior a time, thus causing the light to remain
longer ; and I would say that they did not conjecture that,
from the amount of snow in the air (see Josh. x. 11), the
refraction may have been greater than usual, or that there
may have been some other cause which we will not now in-
quire into.

So also the sign of the shadow going back was revealed
to Isaiah according to his understandmg ; that is, as pro-
ceeding from a going backwards of the sun ; for he, too,
thought that the sun moves and that the earth is still ; of
parhelia he perhaps never even dreamed. We may arrive at
this conclusion without any scruple, for the sign could
really have come to pass, and have been predicted by Isaiah
to the king, without the prophet being aware of the real
cause.

With regard to the building of the Temple by Solomon,
if it was really dictated by God we must maintain the same
doctrine : namely, that all the measurements were revealed
according to the opinions and understanding of the king ;
for as we are not bound to believe that Solomon was a
mathematician, we may affirm that he was ignorant of the
true ratio between the circumference and the diameter of a
circle, and that, like the generality of workmen, he thought
that it was as three to one. But if it is allowable to declare
that we do not understand the passage, in good sooth I
know nothing in the Bible that we can understand ; for the
process of building is there narrated simply and as a mere
matter of history. If, again, it is permitted to pretend that
the passage has another meaning, and was written as it is
from some reason unknown to us, this is no less than
a complete subversal of the Bible ; for every absurd and
evil invention of human perversity coxdd thus, without
detriment to Scriptural authority, be defended and fostered.
Our conclusion is in no wise impious, for though Solomon,
Isaiah, Joshua, <fcc. were prophets, they were none the less
men, and as such not exempt from human shortcomings.

According to the understanding of Noah it was revealed


CHAP. II.] OF PROPHETS. 35

to him that God was about to destroy the whole human
race, for Noah thought that beyond the limits of Palestine
the world was not inhabited.

Not only in matters of this kind, but in others more
important, the prophets could be, and in fact were, igno-
rarit; for they taught nothing special about the Divine
attributes, but held quite ordinary notions about Gk)d, and
to these notions the^ r9Telations were adapted, as I will
demonstrate by ample Scriptural testimony; from all which
one may easily see that they were praised and commended, .
not so much for the sublimity and eminence of their intel-
lect as for their piety and faithfulness.

Adam, the first man to whom Gk)d was revealed, did not
know that He is omnipotent and omniscient; for he hid
himself from Him, and attempted to make excuses for his
fault before Q-od, as though he had had to do with a man ;
therefore to him also was Q-od revealed according to his under-
standing — ^that is, as being unaware of his situation or his
sin, for Adam heard, or seemed to hear, the Lord walking
in the garden, calling him and asking him where he was ;
and then, on seeing his shamef acedness, asking him whether
he had eaten of the forbidden fruit. Adam evidently only
knew the Deity as the Creator of aU things. To Cain also
God was revealed, according to his understanding, as igno-
rant of human affairs, nor was a higher conception of the
Deity required for repentance of his sin.

To Laban the Lord revealed Himself as the God of
Abraham, because Laban believed that each nation had its
own special divinity (see Gren, xxxi. 29). Abraham also
knew not that God is omnipresent, and has foreknowledge of
all things ; for when he heard the sentence against the in-
habitants of Sodom, h^ prayed that the Lord should not
execute it till He had ascertained whether they all merited
such punishment ; for he said (see G^n. xviii. 24), " Perad-
venture there be fifty righteous within the city,'' and in
accordance with this belief God was revealed to him ; as
Abraham imagined. He spake thus : " I wiU go down now,
and see whether they have done altogether according to the
cry of it which is come unto Me ; and, if not, I will know."
Further, the Divine testimony concerning Abraham asserts
nothing but that he was obedient, and that he " commanded


36 A THEOLOOICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. II.

his houseliold after him that they should keep the way of
the Lord " (Gten. xviii. 19) ; it does not state that he held
sublime conceptions of the Deity.

Moses, also, was not sufficiently aware that God is om-
niscient, and directs human actions by His sole decree, for
although God Himself says that the Israelites should
hearken to Him, Moses still considered the matter doubtf \il
and repeated, " But if they will not believe me, nor hearken
unto my voice." To him in like manner God was revealed
as taking no part in, and as being ignorant of, future human
actions : the Lord gave him two signs and said, ** And it
shall come to pass that if they will not believe thee, neither
hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe
the voice of the latter sign ; but 3 not, thou shalt take of
the water of the river," &c. Lideed, if any one considers
without prejudice the recorded opinions of Moses, he will
plainly see tiat Moses conceived the Deity as a Being Who
has always existed, does exist, and always wiQ exist, and
for this cause he calls Him by the name Jehovah, which
in Hebrew signifies these three phases of existence : as to
His nature, Moses only taught that He is merciful, gracious^
and exceeding jealous, as appears from many passages in
the Pentateuch. Lastly, he believed and taught that this
Being was so different &om all other beings, that He could
not be expressed by the image of any visible thing ; also>
that He could not be looked upon, and that not so much
from inherent impossibility as from human infirmity;
further,* that by reason of E&s power He was without equal
and imique. Moses admitted, indeed, that there were
beings (doubtless by the plan and command of the Lord)
who acted as God's vicegerents — ^that is, beings to whom
God had given the right, authority, and power to direct
nations, and to provide and care for them ; but he taught
that this Being Whom they were bound to obey was the
highest and Supreme God, or (to use the Hebrew phrase)
God of gods, and thus in the song (Exod. xv. 11) he ex-
claims, " Who is like imto Thee, Lord, among the gods ? "
and Jethro says (Exod. xviii. 11), "Now I know that the
Lord is greater than all gods." That is to say, " 1 am at
length compelled to admit to Moses that Jehovah is greater
than all gods, and that His power is unrivalled." We must


CHAP. II.] OF PBOPHETS. 37

remain in doubfc whether Moses thought that these beings
whoacted as Gk)d's vicegerents were created by Him, for he has
stated nothing, so far as we know, about their creation and
origin. He further taught that this Being had brought the
visible world into order from Chaos, and had given Natui'e
her germs, and therefore that He possesses supreme right
and power over all things ; further, that by reason of this
supreme right and power He had chosen for Himself alone
the Hebrew nation and a certain strip of territory, and had
handed over to the care of other gods substituted by Him-
self the rest of the nations and territories, and that therefore
He was called the God of Israel and the God of Jerusalem,
whereas the other gods were called the gods of the Gentiles.
Eor this reason the Jews believed that the strip of territory
which God had chosen for HimseK, demanded a Divine
worship quite apart and different from the worship which
obtained elsewhere, and that the Lord would not suffer the
worship of other gods adapted to other countries. Thus
they thought that the people whom the king of Assyria had
brought into Judsea were torn in pieces by lions because
they knew not the worship of the National Divinity
(2 Kings xvii. 25).

Jacob, according to Aben Ezra's opinion, therefore ad-
monished his sons when he wished them to seek out a new
country, that they should prepare themselves for a new
worship, and lay aside the worship of strange gods-^that is,
of the gods of the land where they were (Gen. xxxv. 2, 3).

David, in telling Saul that he was compelled by the
king's persecution to live away from his country, said that
he was driven out from the heritage of the Lord, and sent to
worship other gods (1 Sam. xxvi. 19). Lastly, he believed that
this Being or Deity had His habitation in the heavens (Deut.
xxxiii. 27), an opinion very common among the Gentiles.

If we now examine the revelations to Moses, we shall
find that they were accommodated to these opinions ; as
he believed that the Divine Nature was subject to the con-
ditions of mercy, gradousness, &c., so God was revealed
to him in accordance with his idea and under these attri-
butes (see Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7, and the second command-
ment). Further it is related (Ex. xxxiii. 18) that Moses
asked of God that he might behold Him, but as Moses (as


38 A THEOLOGICO-POLITIOAL TKEATISE; [CHAP. II.

we have said) had £ormed no mental image of God, and
Q-od (as I have shown) only revealed HimseK to the pro-
phets in accordance with the disposition of their imagi-
nation. He did not reveal Himself in any form. This, I
repeat, was because the imagination of Moses was unsuit-
able, for other prophets bear witness that they saw the
Lord ; for instance, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, &c. For this
reason God answered Moses, "Thou canst not see My
face;" and inasmuch as Moses believed that God can be
looked upon — ^that is, that no contradiction of the Divine
nature is therein involved (for otherwise he would never
have preferred his request) — ^it is added, " For no one shall
look on Me and live," thus giving a reason in accordance
with Moses' idea, for it is not stated that a contradiction
of the Divine nature woxdd be involved, as was really the
case, but that the thing woxdd not come to pass because
of human infirmity.

When God would reveal to Moses that the Israelites,
because they worshipped the calf, were to be placed in the
same category as other nations. He said (ch. xxxiii. 2, 3),
that He would send an angel (that is, a being who should
have charge of the Israelites, instead of the Supreme Being),
and that He Himself would no longer remain among them ;
thus leaving Moses no ground for supposing that the
Israelites were more beloved by God than the other nations
whose guardianship He had entrusted to other beings or
angels (vide verse 16).

Lastly, as Moses believed that Gtod. dwelt in the heavens,
God was revealed to him as coining down from heaven
on to a mountain, and in order to talk with the Lord
Moses went up the mountain, which he certainly need
not have done if he could have conceived of God as omni-
present.

The Israelites knew scarcely anything of God, although
He was revealed to them ; and this is abundantly evident
from their transferring, a few days afterwards, the honour
and worship due to Him to a calf, which they believed to
be the god who had brought them out of Egypt. In
truth, it is hardly likely that men accustomed to the super-
stitions of Egypt, uncultivated and sunk in most abject
slavery, should have held any sound notions about the


CHAP. II.] OP PBOPHETS. 39

Deity, or that Moses should have taught them anything
beyond a rule of right living; inculcating it not like a
philosopher, as the result of freedom, but like a lawgiver
compelling them to be moral by legal authority. Thus the
ride of right living, the worship and love of Gk>d, was to
them rather a bondage than the true liberty, the gift and
grace of the Deity. Moses bid them love God and keep
His law, because they had in the past received benefits
from Him (such as the deliverance from slavery in Egypt),
and further terrified them with threats if they transgressed
His commands, holding out many promises of good if they
shoxdd observe them ; thus treating them as parents treat
irrational children. It is, therefore, certain that they knew
not the excellence of virtue and the true happiness.

Jonah thought that he was fleeing from the sight of
God, which seems to show that he too held that Gk)d had
entrusted the care of the nations outside Judaea to other
substituted powers. No one in the whole of the Old Testa-
ment speaks more rationally of God than Solomon, who in
fact surpassed all the men of his time in natural abihty.
Yet he considered himself above the law (esteeming it only
to have been given for men without reasonable and intel-
lectual grounds for their actions), and made small account
of the laws concerning kings, which are mainly three : nay,
he openly violated them (in this he did wrong, and acted
in a maimer unworthy of a philosopher, by indulging in sen-
sual pleasure), and taught that all Fortune's favours to
mankind are vanity, that humanity has no nobler gift than
wisdom, and no greater punishment than folly. See Pro-
verbs xvi. 22, 23.

But let us return to the prophets whose conflicting
opinions we have undertaken to note.

The expressed ideas of Ezekiel seemed so diverse from
those of Moses to the Babbis who have left us the extant
prophetic books (as is told in the treatise of Sabbathus, i.
13, 2), that they had serious thoughts of omitting his pro-
phecy from the canon, and would doubtless have thus
excluded it if a certain Hananiah had not -undertaken to
explain it; a task which (as is there narrated) he with
great zeal and labour accomplished. How he did so does
not sufficiently appear, whether it was by writing a com-


40 A THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. II.

mentary wliich has now perislied, or by altering Ezeldel's
words and audaciously striking out phrases according to
liis fancy. However this may be, chapter xviiL certainly
does not seem to agree with Exodus irdy. 7, Jeremiah
xxxii. 18, &c.

Samuel believed that the Lord never repented of any-
thing He had decreed (1 Sam. xv. 29), for when Saul was
sorry for his sin, and wished to worship God and ask for
forgiveness, Samuel said that the Lord would not go back
from his decree.

To Jeremiah, on the other hand, it was revealed that,
**If that nation against whom I (the Lord) have pro-
nounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that
I thought to do unto them. K it do evil in my sight, that
it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good where-
with I said I would benefit them" (Jer. xviiL 8-10). Joel
(iL 13) taught that the Lord repented Him only of evil.
Lastly, it is clear from Gen. iv. 7 that a man can over-
come the temptations of sin, and act righteously ; for this
doctrine is told to Gain, though, as we learn from Josephus
and the Scriptures, he never did so overcome them. And
this agrees with the chapter of Jeremiah just cited, for it
is there said that the Lord repents of the good or the evil
pronounced, if the men in question change their ways and
manner of life. But, on the other hand, Paul (Eom. ix.
10) teaches as plainly as possible that men have no control
over the temptations of the flesh save by the special voca-
tion and grace of God. And when (Bom. iiL 5 and vi. 19)
he attributes righteousness to man, he corrects himself as
speaking merely humanly and through the infirmity of the
flesh.

We have now more than sufficiently proved our point,
*that God adapted revelations to the understanding and
opinions of the prophets, and that in matters of theory
without bearing on charity oj morality the prophets could
be, and, in fact, were, ignorant, and held conflicting opinions.
It therefore follows that we must by no means go to the
prophets for knowledge, either of natural or of spiritual
phenomena.

1^ We have determined, then, that we are only bound to
l>elieve in the prophetic writings, the object and substance


V %


CHAP. II.] OP PBOPHETS. 41

of the revelation ; with regard to the details, every one may
believe or qgfc, ashgjikes. \ • ,

For instance, the revelaxioij to Cain only te%6he^ ns that
God admonished him to lead the true life, for such alone is
the object and substance of the revelation, not doctrines
concerning free wiU and philosophy. Hence, though the
freedom of the will is clearly implied in the words of the ♦
admonition, we are at liberty to hold a contrary opinion,
since the words and reasons were adapted to the under-
standing of Cain.

So, too, the revelation to Micaiah would only teach that '
God revealed to him the true issue of the battle between
Ahab and Aram ; and this is all we are bound to believe.
Whatever else is contained in the revelation concerning the
true and the false Spirit of God, the army of heaven stand-
ing on the right hand and on the left, and all the other \
details, does not afEect us at all. Every one may believe as '\
much of it as his reason allows. •

The reasonings by which the Lord displayed His power
to Job (if they really were a. revelation, and the author of
the history is narrating, and not merely, as some suppose,
rhetorically adorning his own conceptions), would come
under the same category — ^that is, they were adapted to
Job's understanding, for the purpose of convincing him,
and are not universal, or for the convincing of all men.

We can come to no different conclusion with respect to
the reasonings of Christ, by which He convicted the Phari-
sees of pride and ignorance, and exhorted His disciples to
lead the true life. He adapted them to each man's opinions
and principles. For instance, when He said to the Phari-
sees (Matt. xii. 26), "And if Satan cast out devils, his
house is divided against itself, how then shall his kingdom
stand ? " He only wished to convince the Pharisees according *
to their own principles, not to teach that there are devils,
or any kingdom of devils. So, too, when He said to His
disciples (Matt. viii. 10), " See that ye despise not one of
these little ones, for I say unto you that their angels," &c.,
He merely desired to warn them against pride and despising
any of their fellows, not to insist on the actual reason
given, which was simply adopted in order to persuade them
more easily.


42 A THBOLOOICO-POLITICAL TKEATISE. [CHAP. II.

Lastly, we should say exactly the same of the apostolic
signs and reasonings, but there is no need to go further
into the subject, fi I were to enumerate all the passages
of ScriptureUdressedoxdy toindividuals,ortoapLii
man's understanding, and which cannot, without great
danger to philosophy, be defended as Divine doctrines, I
should go far beyond the brevity at which I aim. Let it
suffice, then, to have indicated a few instances of general
application, and let the curious reader consider others by
himself. Although the points we have just raised concern-
ing prophets and prophecy are the only ones which have
any direct bearing on the end in view, namely, the separa-
tion of Philosophy from Theology, still, as I have touched
on the general question, I may here inquire whether the
gift of prophecy was peculiar to the Hebrews, or whether it
was common to all nations. I must then come to a conclu-
sion about the vocation of the Hebrews, all of which I shall
do in the ensuing chapter.


CHAP. III.] 01* THB VOCATION OF THE HEBBEWS. 43"


y


CHAPTEE m.

OP THE VOCATION OP THE HEBBEWS, AND WHETHEB THE:
GIPT OP PBOPHECT WAS PECTJLIAB TO THEM.

EVEEY man's true happiness and blessedness consist
solely in the enjoyment of what is good, not in the
pride that he alone is enjoying it, to the exclusion of others^
He who thinks himself the more blessed because he is en*-
joying benefits which others are not, or because he is more
blessed or more fortunate than his fellows, is ignorant of
true happiness and blessedness, and the joy which he feels
is either childish or envious and malicious. For instance,
a man's true happiness consists only in wisdom, and the
knowledge of the truth, not at all in the fact that he is
wiser than others, or that others lack such knowledge : such
considerations do not increase his wisdom or true happiness.

Whoever, therefore, rejoices for such reasons, rejoices in
another's misfortune, and is, so far, malicious and bad,
knowing neither true happiness nor the peace of the true
life.

When Scripture, therefore, in exhorting the Hebrews to
obey the law, says that the Lord has chosen them for Him-
seK before other nations (Deut. x. 15) ; that He is near
them, but not near others fDeut. iv. 7) ; that to them alone
He has given just laws (Deut. iv. 8) ; and, lastly, that He
has marked them out before others (Deut. iv. 32) ; it
speaks only according to the understanding of its hearers,
who, as we have shown in the last chapter, and as Moses
also testifies (Deut. ix. 6, 7), knew not true blessedness.
For in good sooth they would have been no less blessed if
God had called all men equally to salvation, nor would
God have been less present to them for being equally pre-
sent to others ; their laws would have been no less just if
they had been ordained for all, and they themselves would
have been no less wise. The miracles would have ak<y«\5L


44 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. III.

God's power no less by being wroi^lit for other nations
also ; lastly, the Hebrews would have been just as much
bound to worship Gk)d if He had bestowed all these gifts
equally on all men.

When God tells Solomon (1 Kings iii. 12) that no one
shall be as wise as he in time to come, it seems to be only
a manner of expressing surpassing wisdom; it is little
to be believed that Gk)d would have promised Solomon, for
his greater happiness, that He would never endow anyone
with so much wisdom in time to come ; this would in no
wise have increased Solomon's intellect, and the wise king
would have given equal thanks to the Lord if everyone had
been gifted with the same faculties.

Still, though we assert that Moses, in the passages of the
Pentateuch just cited, spoke only according to the under-
standing of the Hebrews, we have no wish to deny that
God ordained the Mosaic law for them alone, nor that He
spoke to them alone, nor that they witnessed marvels
beyond those which happened to any other nation ; but we
wish to emphasize that Moses desired to admonish the
Hebrews in such a manner, and with such reasonings as
would appeal most forcibly to their childish understanding,
and constrain them to worship the Deity. Further, we
wished to show that the Hebrews did not surpass other
nations in knowledge, or in piety, but evidently in some
attribute different from these ; or (to speak Uke the Scrip-
tures, according to their understanding), that the Hebrews
were not chosen by God before others for the sake of the
true life and sublime ideas, though they were often thereto
admonished, but with some other object. What that object
was, I win duly show.

But before I begin, I wish in a few words to explain
what I mean by the guidance of God, by the help of God,
external and inward, and, lastly, what I understand by
fortune.

By the help of God, I mean the fixed and unchangeable
N\ order of nature or the chain of natural events : for I have
said before and shown elsewhere that the universal laws of
nature, according to which all things exist and are deter-
mined, are only another name for the eternal decrees of
God, which always involve eternal truth and necessity.


CHAP. III.] OP THE VOCATION OP THE HEBBEWS. 45

So that to say that everything happens according to natural
laws, and to say that everything is ordained by the decree
and ordinance of God, is the same thing. Now since the
power in nature is identical with the power of G-od, by
which alone all things happen and are determined, it follows
that whatsoever man, as a part of nature, provides himself
with to aid and preserve his existence, or whatsoever nature
affords him without his help, is given to him solely by the
Divine power, acting either tliough human nature or
through external circumstance. So whatever human nature
can furnish itself with by its own efforts to preserve its
existence, may be fitly called the inward aid of God, whereas
whatever else accrues to man's profit from outward causes
may be called the external aid of Grod,

We can now easily understand what is meant by the
election of God. For since no one can do anything save by
the predetermined order of nature, that is by God's eternal
ordinance and decree, it follows that no one can choose a
plan of life for himself, or accomplish any work save by
G^'s vocation choosing him for the work or the plan of life
in question, rather than any other. Lastly, by fortune, I
mean the ordinance of God in so far as it directs human
life through external and unexpected means. With these
preliminaries I return to my purpose of discovering the
reason why the Hebrews were said to be elected by God
before other nations, and with the demonstration I thus
proceed.

All objects of legitimate desire fall, generally speaking,
under one of these three categories : —

1. The knowledge of things through their primary causes.

2. The government of the passions, or the acquirement
of the habit of virtue.

3. Secure and healthy life.

The means which most directly conduce towards the first
two of these ends, and which may be considered their
proximate and efficient causes are contained in human
nature itself, so that their acquisition hinges only on our
own power, and on the laws of human nature. It may be
concluded that these gifts are not peculiar to any nation, but
have always been shared by the whole human race, unless,
indeed, w:e would indulge the dream that nature formerly


46 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBBATISE. [cHAP. III.

♦created men of different kinds. But the means wHcli conduce
to security and health are chieflj in external circumstance,
.and are called the gifts of fortune because they depend
•chiefly on objective causes of which we are ignorant ; for a
fool may be almost as liable to happiness or unhappiness
*as a wise man. Nevertheless, human management and
watchfulness can greatly assist towards living in security
And warding off the injuries of our fellow-men, and even of
beasts. Reason and experience show no more certain means
'Of attaining this object than the formation of a society with
fixed laws, the occupation of a strip of territory, and the
•concentration of all forces, as it were, into one body, that is
the social body. Now for forming and preserving a society,
no ordinary ability and care is required : that society will
be most secure, most stable, and least liable to reverses,
-which is founded and directed by far-seeing and careful
men ; while, on the other hand, a society constituted by
men without trained skill, depends in a great measure on
ifortune, and is less constant. If, in spite of all, such a
society lasts a long time, it is owing to some other directing
influence than its own ; if it overcomes great perils and its
affairs prosper, it will perforce marvel at and adore the
guiding Spirit of God (in so far, that is, as God works
through hidden means, and not through the nature and
mind of man), for everything happens to it unexpectedly
•and contrary to anticipation, it may even be said and
thought to be by miracle. Nations, then, are distinguished
^rom one another in respect to the social organization and
the laws under which they live and are governed ; the He-
brew nation was not chosen by God in respect to its wisdom
nor its tranquillity of mind, but in respect to its social or-
iganization and the good fortune with which it obtained
supremacy and kept it so many years. This is abundantly
clear from Scripture. Even a cursory perusal will show
us that the only respects in which the Hebrews surpassed
other nations, are in their successful conduct of matters re-
lating to government, and in their surmounting great perils
.solely by God*s external aid; in other ways they were on a
par with their fellows, and God was equally gracious to all.
Tor in respect to intellect (as we have shown in the last
•chapter) they held very ordinary ideas about God and


CHAP. III.] OP THE VOCATION OF THE HEBBEWS. 47

nature, so that they cannot have been Gk)d's chosen in this
respect ; nor were they so chosen in respect of virtue and
the true life, for here again they, with the exception of a
very few elect, were on an equality with other nations :
therefore their choice and vocation consisted only in the
temporal happiness and advantages of independent rule.
In fact, we do not see that God promised anything beyond
this to the patriarchs^ or their successors ; in the law no
other reward is offered for obedience thaii the continual
happiness of an independent commonwealth and other
goods of this life ; while, on the other hand, against contu-
macy and the breaking of the covenant is tlureatened the
downfall of the commonwealth and great hardships. Nor
is this to be wondered at ; for the ends of every social or-
ganization and commonwealth are (as appears from what
we have said, and as we will explain more at length here-
after) security and comfort ; a commonwealth can only exist
by the laws being binding on all. If all the members of a
state wish to disregard the law, by that very fact they dis-
solve the state and destroy the commonwealth. Thus, the
only reward which could be promised to the Hebrews for
continued obedience to the law was security* and its atten-
dant advantages, while no surer punishment could be
threatened for disobedience, than the ruin of the state and
the evils which generally follow therefrom, in addition to
such further consequences as might accrue to the Jews in
particular from the ruin of their especial state. But there
is no need here to go into this point at more length. I wiU
only add that the laws of the Old Testament were revealed
and ordained to the Jews only, for as God chose them in
respect to the special constitution of their society and go-
vernment, they must, of course, have had special laws.
Whether God ordained special laws for other nations also,
and revealed Himself to their lawgivers prophetically, that
is, under the attributes by which the latter were accustomed
to imagine Him, I cannot sufficiently determine. It is evi-
dent from Scripture itself that other nations acquired
supremacy and particular laws by the external aid of God ;
witness only the two following passages : —

In Gonesis xiv. 18, 19, 20, it is related that Melchisedek
was king of Jerusalem and priest of the Most High God,

» See Note 4. •» 'S^ee^c^^^.


48 A THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. III.

that in exercise of his priestly functions he blessed Abra-
ham, and that Abraham the beloved of the Lord gate to
this priest of God a tithe of all his spoils. This sufficiently
shows that before He founded the Israelitish nation God
constituted kings and priests in Jerusalem, and ordained
for them rites and laws. Whether He did so prophetically
is, as I have said, not sufficiently clear ; but I am sure of
this, that Abraham, whilst he sojourned in the city, lived
scrupulously according to these laws, for Abraham had re-
ceived no special rites from God ; and yet it is stated (Gen.
xxvi. 5), that he observed the worship, the precepts, the
statutes, and the laws of God, which must be interpreted
to mean the worship, the statutes, the precepts, and the
laws of king Melchisedek, Malachi chides the Jews as
follows (i. 10-11.) : — " Who is there among you that will
shut the doors ? [of the Temple] ; neither do ye kindle
fire on mine altar for nought. I have no pleasure in you,
saith the Lord of Hosts. For from the rising of the sun,
even until the going down of the same My Name shall be
great among the Gentiles ; and in every place incense shall
be offered in My Name, and a pure offering; for My Name
is great among the heathen, saith the Lord of Hosts.**
These words, which, unless we do violence to them, could
only refer to the current period, abundantly testify that
the Jews of that time were not more beloved by God than
, other nations, that God then favoured other nations with
more miracles than He vouchsafed to the Jews, who had
then partly recovered their empire without miraculous aid ;
and, lastly, that the Gentiles possessed rites and ceremonies
acceptable to God. But I pass over these points lightly : it
is enough for my purpose to have shown that the election
of the Jews had regard to nothing but temporal physical
/happiness and freedom, in other words, autonomous govem-
; ment, and to the manner and means by which they obtained
; it ; consequently to the laws in so far as they were neces-
; sary to the preservation of that special government ; and,
lastly, to the manner in which they were revealed. In re-
, gard to other matters, wherein man's true happiness con-
sists, they were on a par with the rest of the nations.

When, therefore, it is said in Scripture (Deut. iv. 7) that
the Lord is not so nigh to any other nation as He is to the


CHAP. III.] OF THE VOCATION OP THE HEBREWS. 49

Jews, reference is only made to their government, and to
the i)eriod when so many miracles happened to them, for in
respect of intellect and virtne — that is, in respect of blessed-
ness — Grod was, as we have said already, and are now de-
monstrating, equally gracious to all. Scripture itself bears
testimony to this fact, for the Psalmist says (cxlv. 18),
" The Lord is near xmto aU them that call upon Him, to
all that caU upon Him in truth.'' So in the same Psalm,
verse 9, " The Lord is good to all, and His tender mercies
are over all IQs works." Li Ps. xxxiii. 16, it is clearly
stated that God has granted to all men the same intellect,
in these words, " He f ashioneth their hearts alike." The
heart was considered by the Hebrews, as I suppose every-
one knows, to be the seat of the soul and the intellect.

Lastly, from Job xxxviii. 28, it is plain that God had or-
dained for the whole human race the law to reverence God,
to keep from evil doing, or to do well, and that Job,
although a Gentile, was of all men most acceptable to God,
because he ei^celled all in piety and religion. Lastly, from
Jonah iv. 2, it is very evident that, not only to the Jews
but to all men, God was gracious, merciful, long-suffering,
and of great goodness, and repented Him of the evil, for
Jonah says : " Therefore I determined to flee before unto
Tarshish, for I know that Thou art a gracious God, and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness," &c., and
that, therefore, God would pardon the Ninevites. We
condude, therefore (inasmuch as God is to all men equally
gracious, and the Hebrews were only chosen by Him in re-
spect to their social organization and government), that the
individual Jew, taken apart from his social organization
and government, possessed no gift of God above other men,
and that there was no difference between Jew and Gentile.
As it is a fact that God is equally gracious, merciful, and
the rest, to all men ; and as the function of the prophet
was to teach men not so much the laws of their country, as
true virtue, and to exhort them thereto, it is not to be
doubted that all nations possessed prophets, and that the
prophetio gift was not pecxdiar to ^e Jews. Indeed, his-
tory, both profane and sacred, bears witness to the fact.
Although, foom the sacred histories of the Old Testament,
it is not evident that the other nations had as many pro-

B


60 A THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TEEATI8E. [cHAP. III.

phets as tlie Hebrews, or tliat any Gentile prophet was ex-
pressly sent by God to tbe nations, this does not affect the
question, for the Hebrews were careful to record their own
affairs, not those of other nations. It suffices, then, that
we find in the Old Testament Gentiles, and uncircumcised,
as Noah, Enoch, Abimelech, Balaam, <&c., exercising pro-
phetic gifts ; further, that Hebrew prophets were sent by
God, not only to their own nation but to many others also.
Ezekiel prophesied to all the nations then known ; Obadiah
to none, that we are aware of, save the Idumeans; and
Jonah was chiefly the prophet to the Ninevites. Isaiah
bewails and predicts the calamities, and hails the restora-
tion not only of the Jews but also of other nations, for he
says (chap. xvi. 9), "Therefore I will bewail Jazer with
weeping ;" and in chap. xix. he foretells flrst the calamities
and then the restoration of the Egyptians (see verses 19,
20, 21, 25), saying that God shall send them a Saviour to
free them, that the Lord shall be known in Egypt, and,
further, that the Egyptians shall worship God with sacri-
fice and oblation; and, at last, he calls that nation the
blessed Egyptian people of God ; all of which particulars
are specially noteworthy.

Jeremiah is called, not the prophet of the Hebrew nation,
but simply the prophet of the nations (see Jer. i. 5)* , He
also mournfully foretells the calamities of the nations, and
predicts their restoration, for he says (xlviii. 31) of the
Moabites, " Therefore will I howl for Moab, and I will cry
out for all Moab" (verse 36), " and therefore mine heart shall
sound for Moab lie pipes ;" in the end he prophesies their
restoration, as also the restoration of the Egyptians, Am-
monites, and Elamites. Wherefore it is beyond doubt that
other nations also, like the Jews, had their prophets, who
prophesied to them.

Although Scripture only makes mention of one man,
Balaam, to whom the future of the Jews and the other
nations was revealed, we must not suppose that Balaam
prophesied only that once, for from the narrative itself it is
abundantly clear that he had long previously been famous
for prophecy and other Divine gifts. For when Balak bade
him come to him, he said (Num. xxii. 6), " For I wot that
he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest


CHAP. III.] OF THE YOOATION OF THE HEBREWS. 51

is cursed." Thus we see tliat lie possessed the gift which
God had. bestowed on Abraham. Further, as accust )med
to prophesy, Balaam bade the messengers wait for him ^ill
the will of the Lord was revealed to him. When he pro-
phesied, that is, when he interpreted the true mind of Gk)d,
he was wont to say this of himself : " He hath said, which
heard the words of Qtod and knew the knowledge of the
Most High, which saw the vision of the Almighty falling
into a trance, but having his eyes open." Further, after
he had blessed the Hebrews by the command of God, he
began (as was his custom) to prophesy to other nations,
and to predict their future ; all of which abundantly shows
that he had always been a prophet, or had often prophesied,
and (as we may also remark here) possessed that which
afforded the chief certainty to prophets of the truth of
their prophecy, namely, a mind turned wholly to what is
right and good, for he did not bless those whom he wished
to bless, nor curse those whom he wished to curse, as
Balak supposed, but only those whom Otod wished to be
blessed or cursed. Thus he answered Balak: ''If Balak
should give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot
go beyond the commandment of the Lord to do either good
or bad of my own mind ; but what the Lord saith, that
will I speak." As for God. being angry with him in the
way, the same happened to Moses when he set out to
Egypt by the command of the Lord ; and as to his receiving
money for prophesying, Samuel did the same (1 Sam. ix.
7,8); if in any way he sinned, " there is not a just man upon
earth that doeth good and sinneth not," Eccles. vii. 20.
(Vide 2 Epist. Peter ii. 15, 16, and Jude 5, 11.)

His speeches must certauily have had much weight with
Gt)d, and His power for cursing must assuredly have been
very great from the number of times that we fiitd stated in
Scripture, in proof of God's great mercy to the Jews, that
God would not hear Balaam, and that He changed the
cursing to blessing (see Deut. xxiii. 6, Josh. xxiv. 10, Neh.
xiii. 2). Wherefore he was without doubt most acceptable
to God, for the speeches and cursings of the wicked move
God not at all. As then he was a true prophet, and never-
theless Joshua calls him a soothsayer or augur, it is certain
that this title had an honourable signification, and that


52 ▲ THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAIi TREATISE. [CHAP. III.

thoii^ whom the Gentiles called augurs and soothsayers
were ■ true prophets, while those whom Scripture often
accuses and condemns were false soothsayers, who deceived
the Gentiles as false prophets deceived the Jews ; indeed,
I this is made evident from other passages in the Bible,
J^whence we conclude that the gift of prophecy was not
I)eculiar to the Jews, but common to all nations. The
Pharisees, however, vehemently contend that this Divine
gift was peculiar to their nation, and that the other nations
foretold the future (what will superstition invent next?)
by some unexplained diabolical faculty. The principal pas-
sage of Scripture which they cite, by way of confirming
their theory with its authority, is Exodus xxxiii. 16, where
Moses says to God, " For wherein shall it be known her©
that I and Thy people have found grace in Thy sight ? is.
it not in that Thou goest with us ? so shall we be separated,.
I and Thy people, from all the people that are upon the
face of the earth." From this they would infer that Moses
asked of God that He should be present to the Jews, and
should reveal Himself to them prophetically ; further, that
He should grant this favour to no other nation. It is
. surely absurd that Moses should have been jealous of
Gk)d's presence among the Gentiles, or that he should have
dared to ask any such thing. The fact is, as Moses knew
that the disposition and spirit of his nation was rebellious,,
he clearly saw that they could not carry out what they had
begun without very great miracles and special external aid
from Gk)d ; nay, that without such aid they must necessarily
perish : as it was evident that G^ wished them to be pre-
served, He asked for this special external aid. Thus he-
says (Ex. xxxiv. 9), "If now I have found grace in Thy
sight, Lord, Ipt my Lord, I pray Thee, go among us ; for
it is a stiffnecked people." The reason, therefore, for his
seeking special external aid from God was the stifEnecked-
ness of the x>eople, and it is made still more plain, that he-
asked for nothing beyond this special external aid by God's
answer — ^for God answered at once (verse 10 of the same
chapter) — "Behold, I make a covenant : before all Thy people
I will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the
earth, nor in any nation." Therefore Moses had in view
nothing beyond the special election of the Jews, as I have


€HAF. III.] OF THE VOCATION OF THE HEBREWS. 53

explained it, and made no other request to God. I confess
that in Paul's Epistle to the Boinans, I find another text
which carries more weight, namely, where Paul seopLS to
teach a different doctrine from that here set down, for he
there says (Eom. iii. 1) : " "What advantage then hath the
Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision? Much every
way: chiefly, because that unto them were committed the^
oracles of God."

But if we look to the doctrine which Paul especially
desired to teach, we shall find nothing repugnant to our
present contention; on the contrary, his doctrine is the same
as ours, for he says (Eom. iii. 29) " that God is the God
of the Jews and of the Gentiles, and" (ch. ii. 25, 26)
^* But, if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is
made uncircumcision. Therefore if the uncircumcision keep
the righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision
be counted for circumcision ? " Further, in chap. iv. verse 9,
he says that all alike, Jew and Gentile, were under sin,
and that without commandment and law there is no sin.
"Wherefore it is most evident that to all men absolutely
was revealed the law under which all lived — ^namely, the
law which has regard only to true virtue, not the law
established in respect to, and in the formation of, a par-
ticular state and suiapted to the disposition of a particular
people. Lastly, Paul concludes that since God is the Gk>T)
of aU nations, that is, is equally gracious to all, and since
all men equaUy Hve under the law and under sin, so also
to all nations did G^ send His Christ, to .free all men
equally from the bondage of the law, that they should no
more do right by the command of the law, but by the con-
stant determination of their hearts. So that Paul teache^
exactly the same as ourselves. When, therefore, he says,
^*To the Jews only were entrusted the oracles of God,"
we must either understand that to them only were the
laws entrusted in writing, while they were given to other
nations merely in revelation and conception, or else (as
none but Jews would object to the doctrine he desired to
advance) that Paul was answering only in accordance with
the understanding and current ideas of the Jews, for in
respect to teaching things which he had partly seen, partly
heard, he was to the Greeks a Greek, and to the Jews a Jew.


^ ^ IraEOLOaiGO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. III.

fh^^^^i^^J remains to us to answer the arguments of

the Jr-^V^^ would persuade themselves that the election of

oonr^^^^l^^ '^'^s not temporal, and merely in respect of their

afttie/monwealth, but eternal ; for, they say, we see the Jews

the loss of their commonwealth, and after heing scat-

)red so many years and separated £rom all other nations,

still surviving, which is without parallel among other

peoples, and further the Scriptures seem to teach that God

has chosen for Himself the Jews for ever, so that though

they have lost their commonwealth, they still nevertheless

remain God's elect.

The passages which they think teach most clearly this
eternal election, are chiefly : —

(1.) Jer. xm. 36, where the prophet testifies that the seed
of Isra/el shall for ever remain the nation of Qx)d, com-
paring them with the stabiUty of the heavens and nature ;

(2.) Ezek. XX. 32, where the prophet seems to intend that
though the Jews wanted after the help afforded them to
turn their backs on the worship of the Lord, that God
would nevertheless gather them together again from all the
lands in which they were dispersed, and lead them to the
wilderness of the i)eoples — ^as He had led their fathers to
the wilderness of the land of Egypt — and would at length,
after purging out from among them the rebels and trans-
gressors, bring them thence to his Holy mountain, where the
whole house of Israel should worship Him. Other passages
are also cited, especially by the Pharisees, but I think I shall
satisfy everyone if I answer these two, and this I shall
easily accomplish after showing from Scripture itself that
God chose not the Hebrews for ever, but only on the con-
dition under which He had formerly chosen the Canaanites,
for these last, as we have shown, had priests who religiously
worshipped God, and whom God at length rejected because
of their luxury, pride, and corrupt worship.

Moses (Lev. xviii. 27) warned the Israelites that they be
not polluted with whoredoms, lest the land spue them out
as it had spued out the nations who had dwelt there before,
and in Deut. viii. 19, 20, in the plainest terms He threatens
their total ruin, for He says, " I testify against you that ye
shall surely perish. As the nations which the Lord de-
stroyeth before your face, so shall ye perish." In like


CHAP. III.] OP THE VOCATION OF THE HEBBEWS. 55

manner many other passages are found in the law which
expressly show that God chose the Hebrews neither abso-
lutely nor for ever. If, then, the prophets foretold for
them a new covenant of the knowledge of Qod, love, and
grace, such a promise is easily proved to be only made to the
elect, for Ezelael in the chapter which we have jnst quoted
expressly says that God will separate from them the rebel-
UoL sA trWessors. and ZeplwnaJi (iii. 12. 13), says
that "God will take away the proud from the midst of
them, and leave the poor." Now, inasmuch as their election
has regard to true virtue, it is not to be thought that it
was promised to the Jews alone to the exclusion of others,
but we must evidently believe that the true Gentile pro-
phets (and every nation, as we have shown, possessed such)
promised the same to the faithful of their own people, who
were thereby comforted. Wherefore this eternal covenant
of the knowledge of God and love is universal, as is clear,
moreover, from Zeph. iii. 10, 11 : no difference in this re-
spect can be admitted between Jew and Gentile, nor did
the former enjoy any special election beyond that which we
have pointed out.

When the prophets, in speaking of this election which re-
gards only true virtue, mixed up much concerning sacri-
fices and ceremonies, and the rebuilding of the temple and
city, they wished by such figurative expressions, after the
manner and nature of prophecy, to expound matters spiri-
tual, so as at the same time to show to the Jews, whose
prophets they were, the true restoration of the state and of
the temple to be expected about the time of Cyrus.

At the present time, therefore, there is absolutely nothing
which the Jews can arrogate to themselves beyond other
people.

As to their continuance so long after dispersion and the
loss of empire, there is nothing marvellous in it, for they so
separated themselves from every other nation as to draw
down upon themselves universal hate, not only by their
outward rites, rites conflicting with those of other nations,
but also by the sign of circumcision wluch they most scrupu-
lously observe.

That they have been preserved in great measure by
Gentile hatred, experience demonstrates. When the king


66 ▲ THEOLOGIOO-POLITICAIi TBEATISE. [CHAF. in.

of Spain formerly compelled tlie Jews to embrace the State
religion or to go into exile, a large number of Jews accepted
Catholicism. Now, as these renegades were admitted to all
the native privileges of Spaniards, and deemed worthy of
filling all honourable offices, it came to pass that they
straightway became so intermingled with the Spaniards as
to leave of themselves no relic or remembrance. But
exactly the opposite happened to those whom the king of
Portugal compelled to become Christians, for they always,
though converted, lived apart, inasmuch as they were con-
j ! sidered unworthy of any civic honours.
j The sign of circumcision is, as I think, so important,

; I that I could persuade myself that it alone would preserve
the nation for ever. Nay, I would go so far as to believe
that if the foundations of their religion have not emascu-
lated their minds they may even, if occasion offers, so
changeable are human affairs, raise up their empire afresh,
and that G-od may a second time elect them.

Of such a possibility we have a very famous example in
the Chinese. They, too, have some distinctive mark on
their heads which they most scrupulously observe, and by
which they keep themselves apart from everyone else, and
have thus kept themselves during so many thousand years
that they far surpass aU other nations in antiquity. They
have not always retained empire, but they have recovered
it when lost, and doubtless will do so again after the spirit
of the Tartars becomes relaxed through the luxury of
riches and pride.

Lastly, if any one wishes to maintain that the Jews, from
this or from any other cause, have been chosen by God for
ever, I will not gainsay him if he will admit that this choice,
whether temporary or eternal, has no regard, in so far as it
is peculiar to the Jews, to aught but dominion and physical
advantages (for by such alone can one nation be distin-
guished from another), whereas^ in regard to intellect and
true virtue, every nation is on a par with the rest, and God
has not in these respects chosen one people rather than
another.


CHAP. IV.] OP THE DIVIKS UlW, 57


CHAFIEE IV.

OP THE DIVINE LAW.

T hf! word law, taken in the abstract, means that by \
which an iadividnal, or all things, or as many things as
belong to a particular species, act in one and the same fixed I
and definite manner, which maimer depends either on natural /
necessity or on human decree. A law which depends on/
natural necessity is one which necessarily follows from the
nature, or from the definition of the thing in question; a
law which depends on human decree, and which is more
correctly called an ordinance, is one which men have laid
down for themselves and others in order to live more safely or
conveniently, or from some similar reason.

For example, the law that all bodies impinging on lesser
bodies, lose as much of their own motion as they commu-
nicate to the latter is a universal law of all bodies, and de-
pends on natural necessity. So, too, the law that a man in
remembering one thing, straightway remembers another
either like it, or which he had perceived simultaneously
with it, is a law which necessarily f oUows from the nature
of man. But the law that men must yield, or be compelled
to yield, somewhat of their natural right, and that they bind
themselves to live in a certaia way, depends on human
decree. Now, though I freely admit that all things are
predetemuned by universal natural laws to exist and operate ^
in a given, fixed, and definite manner, I stiU assert that the
laws I have just mentioned depend on human decree.

(1.) Because man, in so far as he is apart of nature, con-
stitutes a part of the power of nature. Whatever, therefore,
foUows necessarily from the necessity of himian nature
(that is, from nature herself, in so far as we conceive of her
as acting through man) follows, even though it be neces-
sarily, from human power. Hence the sanction of such
laws may very well be said to depend on man's decree, for
it principally depends on the powa: of the human mind ; so


\J


58 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. IV.

that the human mind in respect to its perception of thinga
as true and false, can readily be conceived as without such
laws, but not without necessary law as we have just defined it.

(2.) I have stated that these laws depend on human decree
because it is well to define and explain things by their proxi«
mate causes. The general consideration of fate and the
concatenation of causes would aid us very little in forming
and arranging our ideas concerning particular questions.
Let us add that as to the actual co-ordination and concate-
nation of things, that is how things are ordained and linked
together, we are obviously ignorant ; therefore, it is more
profitable for right living, nay, it is necessary for us to con-
sider things as contingent. So much about law in the
abstract.

Now the word law seems to be only applied to natural
phenomena by analogy, and is commonly taken to signify
a command which men can either obey or neglect, inasmuch
as it restrains human nature within certain originally ex-
ceeded limits, and therefore lays down no rule beyond human
\ E^trength. Th.us it is expedient to define law more particu-
larly as a plan of life laid down by man for himseK or
/others with a certain object.

However, as the true object of legislation is only per-
ceived by a few, and most men are almost incapable of
grasping it, though they live under its conditions, legis-
lators, with a view to exacting general obedience, have- wisely
put forward another object, very different from that which
necessarily f oUows from the nature of law : they promise to
the observers of the law that which the masses chiefly de-
sire, and threaten its violators with that which they chiefly
fear : thus endeavouring to restrain the masses, as far as
may be, like a horse with a curb ; whence it f oUows that
the word law is chiefly applied to the modes of life enjoined
on men by the sway of others ; hence those who obey the
law are said to live under it and to be under compulsion.
In truth, a man who renders everyone their due because
he fears the gaUows, acts under the sway and compulsion
of others, and cannot be called just. But a man who does
the same from a knowledge of the true reason for laws and
their necessity, acts from a firm purpose and of his own
accord, and is therefore properly called just. This, I take


CHAP, rv.] OP THE DIVINE LAW. 59

it, is Paul's meaning when lie says, tliat those who live
tinder the law cannot be justified through the law, for jus-
tice, as commonly define^, is the constant and perpetual
will to render every man his due. Thus Solomon says
(Prov. xxi. 16), " It is a joy to the just to do judgment,'*
but the wicked fear.

Law, then, being a plan of living which men have for a
certain object laid down for themselves or others, may, as-
it seems, be divided mto human law and Divine law.

By human law I mean a plan of living which serves only
to render life and the state secure.

By Divine law I mean that which only regards the highest
good, in other words, the true knowledge of Otod and love.

I caU this law Divine because of the nature of the highest
good, which I will here shortly explain as clearly as I can.

Inasmuch as the intellect is the best part of our being, it
is evident that we should make every effort to perfect it as /
far as possible if we desire to search for what is really pro- y
fitable to us. For in intellectual perfection the h^hest
good should consist*. Now, since all our knowledge, and the
certainty which removes every doubt, depend solely on the
knowledge of Q-od ; — firstly, because without God nothing
can exist or be conceived ; secondly, because so long as we
have no clear and distinct idea of God we may remain in
universal doubt — ^it foUows that our highest good and per-
fection also depend solely on the knowledge of God. Fur-
ther, since without God nothing can exist or be con-
ceived, it is evident that all natural phenomena involve
and express the conception of God as far as their essence
and perfection extend, so that we have greater and more
perfect knowledge of God in proportion to our knowledge
of natural phenomena: conversely (since the knowledge oii4' .^
an effect through its cause is the same thing as the know-*/*^'
ledge of a particular property of a cause) the greater our
knowledge of natural phenomena, the more perfect is our
knowledge of the essence of God (which is the cause of aU
things). So, then, our highest good not only depends on
the knowledge of God, but wholly consists therein ; and it
further f oUows that man is perfect or the reverse in propor-
tion to the nature and perfection of the object of his special
desire ; hence the most perfect and the cluef sharer in the


60 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBKATISB. [cHAP. IV.

liigliest blessedness is lie wlio prizes above all else, and takes
especial delight in, the intellectual knowledge of God, the
* most perfect Being.
/ Hither, then, our highest good and our highest blessed-

ness aim — namely, to the knowledge and love of Qrod ; there-
fore the means demanded by this aim of all human actions,
that is, by G-od in so far as the idea of him is in us, may be
/ called the commands of God, because they proceed, as it

were, from God Himself, inasmuch as He exists in our minds,
and the plan of life which has regard to this aim may be
fitly called the law of God.

The nature of the means, and the plan of life which this
aim demands, how the foundations of the best states follow
r • its lines, and how men's life is conducted, are questions per-
taining to general ethics. Here I only proceed to treat of
the Divine law in a particular application.

As the love of God is man's highest happiness and blessed-
ness, and the ultimate end and aim of all human actions,
it follows that he alone lives by the Divine law who loves
God not from fear of punishment, or from love of any other
object, such as sensual pleasure, fame, or the like; but
solely because he has knowledge of God, or is convinced that
the knowledge and love of God is the highest good. The
sum and chief precept, then, of the Divine law is to love God^
as the highest good, namely, as we have said, not from fear
of any pains and penalties, or from the love of any other
object in which we desire to take pleasure. The idea of
. God lays down the rule that God is our highest good — in
other words, that the knowledge and love of Gk)d is the ulti-
mate aim to which all our actions should be directed. The
worldling cannot understand these things, they appear
foolishness to him, because he has too meagre a Imowledge
of God, and also because in this highest good he can dis-
cover nothing which he can handle or eat, or which affects
the fleshly appetites wherein he chiefly delights, for it con-
sists solely in thought and the pure reason. They, on the other
hand, who know that they possess no greater gift than in-
tellect and sound reason, will doubtless accept what I have
said without question.

We have now explained that wherein the Divine law chiefly
consists, and what are human laws, namely, all those which


CHAP. IV.] OF THE DIVINE LAW. 61

i

have a different aim unless they have been ratified by
revelation, for in this respect also things are referred to
God (as we have shown above) and in this sense the law of
Moses, although it was not universal, but entirely adapted
to .the disposition and particular preservation of a single
people, may yet be called a law of God or Divine law, inas-
much as we believe that it was ratified by prophetic insight. 1
If we consider the nature of natural ifevine law as we |
have just explained it, we shall see

I. That it is imiversal or common to all men, for we
have deduced it from imiversal human nature.

n. That it does not depend on the truth of any historical
narrative whatsoever, for inasmuch as this natural Divine
law is comprehended solely by the consideration of human
nature, it is plain that we can conceive it as existing as
well in Adam as in any other man, as well in a man living
among his fellows, as in a man who lives by himself.

The truth of a historical narrative, however assured, can-
not give us the knowledge nor consequently the love of
God, for love of God springs from knowledge of Him, and
knowledge of Him should be derived from general ideas, in
themselves certain and known, so that the truth of a his-
torical narrative is very far from being a necessary requisite
for our attaining our highest good.

Still, though the truth of histories cannot give us the
knowledge and love of God, I do not deny that reading
them is very useful with a view to life in the world, for
the more we have observed and known of men's customs ^
and circumstances, which are best revealed by their actions,
the more warily we shaU be able to order our lives among
them, and so far as reason dictates to adapt our actions to
their dispositions.

m. We see that this natural Divine law does not demand
the performance of ceremonies — that is, actions in themselves
indifferent, wjnch are called good from the fact of their
institution, or actions symboli^ng something profitable for
salvation, or (if one prefers this definition) actions of which
the meaning surpasses human understanding. The natural
light of reason does not demand anything which it is itself
unable to supply, but only such as it can very clearly show
to be good, or a means to our blessedness. Such things as


62 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. IV.

are good simply because thej have been commanded or
instituted, or as being symbols of something good, are mere
shadows which cannot be reckoned among actions that are
the offspring, as it were, or fruit of a sound mind and
of intellect. There is no need for me to go into this now
in more detail.

rV. Lastly, we see that the highest reward of the Divine
law is the law itself, namely, to know God and to love
TTiTTi of our free choice, and with an undivided and fruitful
48pirit ; while its penalty is the absence of these things, and
being in bondage to the flesh — ^that is, having an inconstant
^nd wavering spirit.

These points being noted, I must now inquire
I. "Whether by the natural light of reason we can con-
•ceive of God as a law-giver or potentate ordaining laws for
aoaen?

n. What is the teaching of Holy Writ concerning this
jaatural light of reason and natural law ?

HX With what objects were ceremonies formerly insti-
tuted?

IV. Lastly, what is the good gained by knowing the
•sacred histories and believing them ?

Of the first two I will treat in this chapter, of the re-
maining two in the following one.

Our conclusion about the first is easily deduced from the
aiature of God*s will, which is only distinguished from His
understanding in relation to our intellect — ^that is, the will
and the understanding of God are in reality one and the
same, and are only distinguished in relation to our thoughts
which we form concerning God's understanding. For
instance, if we are only looking to the fact that the nature
of a triangle is from eternity contained in the Divine
nature as an eternal verity, we say that God possesses the
idea of a triangle, or that He understands the nature of a
triangle ; but if afterwards we look to theb fact that the
nature of a triangle is thus contained in the Divine nature,
solely by the necessity of the Divine nature, and not by the
necessity of the nature and essence of a triangle — in fact,
that the necessity of a triangle's essence and nature, in so
far as they are conceived of as eternal verities, depends
jsolely on the necessity of the Divine nature and intellect,


CHAP. IV.] OF THE DIVINE LAW. 63

we then style God's will or decree, that which before we
styled His intellect. "Wherefore we make one and the same
afltenation concerning God when we say that He has from
eternity decreed thart three angles of a triangle are equal
to two right angles, as when we say that He has nnder-
fitood it.

Hence the affirmations and the negations of Qod always
involve necessity or truth; so that, for example, if God
said to Adam that He did not wish him to eat of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, it would have involved a
contradiction that Adam should have been able to eat of it,
and would therefore have been impossible that he should
have so eaten, for the Divine command would have involved
an eternal necessity and truth. But since Scripture never-
theless narrates that God did give this command to Adam,
and yet that none the less Adam ate of the tree, we must
perforce say that God revealed to Adam the evil which
would surely follow if he should eat of the tree, but did
not disclose that such evil would of necessity come to pass.
Thus it was that Adam took the revelation to be not an
eternal and necessary truth, but a law — that is, an ordinance
followed by ^ain or loss, not depending necessarily on the
nature of the act performed, but solely on the will and
absolute power of some potentate, so that the revelation in
question was solely in relation to Adam, and solely through
his lack of knowledge a law, and Gk>d was, as it were, a law-
giver and potentate. Prom the same cause, namely, from
lack of knowledge, the Decalogue in relation to the Hebrews
was a law, for since they knew not the existence of God as
an eternal truth, they must have taken as a law that which
was revealed to them in the De«alogue, namely, that God
exists, and that God only should be worshipped. But if
God had spoken to them without the intervention of any
bodily means, immediately they would have perceived it
not as a law, but as an eternal truth.

What we have said about the Israelites and Adam,
applies also to all the prophets who wrote laws in God's
name — ^they did not adequately conceive God's decrees as
eternal truths. For instance, we must say of Moses that
from revelation, from the basis of what was revealed to
him, he perceived the method by which the Israelitish nation


64 ▲ THEOLOGICO-FOLITICAL TREATISE. fCHAP. IV.

could best be Tinited in a particular territory, and could
form a body politic or state, and further that he perceived
the method by which that nation could best be constrained
to obedience ; but he did not perceive, nor was it revealed
to him, that this method was absolutely the best, nor that
the obedience of the people in a certain strip of territory
would necessarily imply the end he had in view. Where-
fore he perceived these things not as eternal truths, but as
precepts and ordinances, and he ordained them as laws of
God, and thus it came to be that he conceived G-od as a
ruler, a legislator, a king, as merciful, just, &c., whereas
such qualities are simply attributes of human nature, and
utterly aHen from the nature of the Deity. Thus much
we may affirm of the prophets who wrote laws in the name
of God ; but we must not affirm it of Christ, for Christ,
although He too seems to have written laws in the name of
God, must be taken to have had a clear and adequate per-
ception, for Christ was not so much a prophet as the
mouthpiece of God. Por God made revelations to mankind
through Christ as He had before done through angels — that
is, a created voice, visions, <fec. It would be as unreasonable
to say that God had accommodated his revelations to the
opinions of Christ as that He had before accommodated them
to the opinions of angels (that is, of a created voice or visions)
as matters to be revealed to the prophets, a wholly absurd
hypothesis. Moreover, Christ was sent to teach not only
the Jews but the whole human race, and therefore it was
not enough that His mind should be accommodated to the
opinions of the Jews alone, but also to the opinion and
fundamental teaching common to the whole human race —
in other words, to ideas universal and true. Inasmuch as
God revealed Himself to Christ, or to Christ's mind imme<r
diately, and not as to the prophets through words and
symbols, we must needs suppose that Christ perceived truly
what was revealed, in other words, He understood it, for a
matter is understood when it is perceived simply by the
mind without words or symbols.

Christ, then, perceived (truly and adequately) what was
revealed, and if He ever proclaimed such revelations as
laws, He did so because of the ignorance and obstinacy of
the people, acting in this respect the part of God ; inas-


CHAP. IV.] OF THE DIVINE LAW. 65

mucli as He accommodated Himself to tlie comprehension
of the people, and though He spoke somewhat more clearly
than the other prophets, yet He taught what was revealed
obscurely, and generally through parables, especially when
He was speaking to those to whom it was not yet given to
understand the kin^om of heaven. (See Matt. xiii. 10, <&c.)
To those to whom it was given to understand the mysteries
of heaven. He doubtless taught His doctrines as eternal
truths, and did not lay them down as laws, thus freeing
the minds of His hearers from the bondage of that law
which He further confirmed and established. Paul appa-
rently points to this more than once (e,g. Bom. vii. 6, and
iii. 28), though he never himself seems to wish to speak
openly, but, to quote his own words (Eom. iii. 6, and vi. 19),
" merely humanly." This he expressly states when he calls
Qod just, and it was doubtless in concession to human
weakness that he attributes mercy, grace, anger, and
similar qualities to God, adapting his language to the
popular mind, or, as he puts it (1 Cor. iii. 1, 2), to carnal
men. In Bom. ix. 18, he teaches undisguisedly that God's
anger and mercy depend not on the actions of men, but on
God's own nature or will ; further, that no one is justified
by the works of the law, but only by faith, which he seems
to identify with the fuU assent of iiie soul ; lastly, that no
one is blessed unless' he htive in him the mind of Christ
(Bom. viii. 9), whereby he perceives the laws of Gk)d as
eternal truths. We conclude, therefore, that God is de-
scribed as a lawgiver or prince, and styled just, merciful,
<&c., merely in concession to popular understanding, and
the imperfection of popular knowledge; that in reality
God acts and directs all things simply by the necessity of
His nature and perfection, and that His decrees and voli-
tions are eternal truths, and always involve necessity. So
much for the first point which I wished to explain and de-
monstrate.

Passing on to the second point, let us search the sacred
pages for their teaching concerning the light of nature and
this Divine law. The first doctrine we find in the history
of the first man, where it is narrated that Qod commanded
Adam not to eat of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil ; this seems to mean that God commanded

F


66 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAXi TREATISE. [cHAP. IV.

Adam to do and to seek after rigliteoiisness because it was
good, not because tbe contrary was evil : that is, to seek tbe
good for its own sake, not from f eajr of evil. We have seen
that he who acts rightly from the true knowledge and love
of right, acts with freedom and constancy, whereas he who
acts from fear of evil, is under the constraint of evil, and
acts in bondage under external control. So that this com-
mandment of Grod to Adam comprehends the whole Divine
natural law, and absolutely agrees with the dictates of the
light of nature ; nay, it would be easy to explain on this
basis the whole history or allegory of the first man. But I
prefer to pass over the subject in silence, because, in the
first place, I cannot be absolutely certain that my explana-
tion would be in accordance with the intention of the
\ sacred writer ; and, secondly, because many do not admit

\ that this Ustory is an Jegorj. mamtai^ig it to be a
simple narrative of facts. It wiU be better, therefore, to
adduce other passages of Scripture, especially such as were
written by him, who speaks with all the strength of his
natural imderstanding, in which tie surpassed aU his con-
temporaries, and whose sayings are accepted by the people
as of equal weight with those of the prophets. I mean Solo-
mon, whose prudence and wisdom are commended in Scrip-
ture rather than his piety and gift of prophecy. He, in
his proverbs calls the human intellect the well-spring of
true life, and declares that misfortune is made up of folly.
" Understanding is a well-spring of life to him that hath it ;
but the instruction of fools is folly," Prov. xvi. 22. Life
being taken to mean the true life (as is evident from
Deut. XXX. 19), the fruit of the understanding consists
only in the true life, and its absence constitutes punish-
ment. All this absolutely agrees with what was set out in
our fourth point concerning natural law. Moreover our
position that it is the well-spring of life, and that the in-
tellect alone lays down laws for the wise, is plainly taught
by the sage, for he says (Prov. xiii. 14) : " The law of the
wise is a fountain of life " — ^that is, as we gather from the
preceding text, the understanding. In chap. iii. 13, he ex-
pressly teaches that the understanding renders man blessed
and happy, and gives him true peace of mind. " Happy is
the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth


CHAP. IV.] OP THE DIVINE LAW. 67

understanding," for "Wisdom gives length of days, and
riches and honour ; her ways are ways of pleasantness, and
all her paths peace" (xiii. 16, 17). According to Solomon,
therefore, it is only the wise who live in peace and equa-
nimity, not like the wicked whose minds drift hither and
thither, and (as Isaiah says, chap. Ivii. 20) " are like the
troubled sea, for them there is no peace."

Lastly, we should especially note the passage in chap. ii.
of Solomon's proverbs which most clearly conlrms our con-
tention : " K thou.criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy
voice for understanding . . • then shalt thou understand the
fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God ; for the
Lord giveth wisdom ; out of His mouth cometh knowledge
and understanding." These words clearly enunciate (1),
that wisdom or intellect alone teaches us to fear Ckxi wisely
— ^that is, to worship Him truly ; (2), that wisdom and know-
ledge flow from God's mouth, and that God bestows on us
this gift ; this we have already shown in proving that our
understajidin^ and our knowledge depend on, spring from,
and are perfected by the idea or knowledge of God, and
nothing else. Solomon goes on to say in so many words
that this knowle^e contains and involves the true prin-
ciples of ethics and politics : " When wisdom entereth into
thy heart, and knowledge is pleasant to thy soul, discretion
«hall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee, then
shalt thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and
•equity, yea every good path." All of which is in obvious
agreement with natural knowledge : for after we have come
to the understanding of things, and have tasted the excel-
lence of knowledge, she teaches us ethics and true virtue.

Thus the happiness and the peace of him who cultivates
his natural understanding Hes, according to Solomon also,
not so much under the dominion of fortune (or Good's ex-
ternal aid) as in inward personal virtue (or God's internal
aid), for the latter can to a great extent be preserved by
vi^lance, right action, and thought.

Lastly, we must by no means pass over the passage in
Paul's Epistle to the Bomans, i. 20, in. which he says :
"" For the invisible things of God from the creation of the
world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even His eternal power and Godhead ; so that


/


68 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. lY.

they are without excuse, because, when they knew God,
they glorified Him not as Grod, neither were they thankful.**
These words clearly show that everyone can by the light of
nature clearly understand the goodness and the eternal
divinity of Gfod, and can thence know and deduce what
they should seek for and what avoid ; wherefore the Apostle
says that they are without excuse and cannot plead igno-
rance, as they certainly might if it were a question of
supe^atural Ught and the incarnation, passion, and resur.
rection of Christ. " Wherefore," he goes on to say (ib, 24),
** Gtod. gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of
their own hearts;" and so on, through the rest of the
chapter, he describes the vices of ignorance, and sets them
forth as the punishment of ignorance. This obviously
agrees with the verse of Solomon, already quoted, " The
instruction of fools is folly," so that it is easy to understand
why Paul says that the wicked are without excuse. A»
every man sows so shall he reap : out of evil, evils neces-
sarily spring, unless they be wisely counteracted.

Thus we see that Scripture literally approves of the light
of natural reason and tiiie natural Divine law, and I have
fulfilled the promises made at the b^inning of this chapter*


\


CHAP, y.] OV THE CEBEMONIAL LAW, 69


I


CHAPTER V.

07 THE CEBEMONIAL LAW.

N the foregoing chapter we liave shown that the Divine
law, which renders men truly blessed, and teaches them


the true life, is universal to all men ; nay, we have so inti- . /
matelj deduced it from hximan nature that it mnst be es- 1/
teemed innate, and, as it were, ingrained in the human mind.
But with regard to the ceremonial observances which
were ordained in the Old Testament for the Hebrews only,
and were so adapted to their state that they could for the
most part only be observed by the society as a whole and /
not by each individual, it is evident that they formed no*^
part of the Divine law, and had nothing to do with blessed-
ness and virtue, but had reference only to the election of
the Hebrews, that is (as I have shown in Chap. HI.), to
their temporal bodily happiness and the tranquillity of
their kingdom, and that therefore they were only valid
while that kingdom lasted. If in the Old Testament they
are spoken of as the law of Otod, it is only because they
were founded on revelation, or a basis of revelation. Still
as reason, however soxmd, has little weight with ordinary
theologians, I will adduce the authority of Scripture for
what I here assert, and will further show, for the sake of
greater clearness, why and how these ceremonials served
to establish and preserve the Jewish kingdom. Isaiah
teaches most plainly that the Divine law in its strict sense
signifies that universal law which consists in a true manner
of life, and does not signify ceremonial observances. In
chapter i., verse 10, the prophet calls on his countrymen
to hearken to the Divine law as he delivers it, and first
excluding all kinds of sacrifices and all feasts, he at length
sums up the law in these few words, " Cease to do evil,
learn to do well: seek judgment, relieve the oppressed."


70 A theologico-political tbbatiss. [chap. V,

Not less strikiiig testimony is given in Psahn xl. 7-9, where
the Psalmist addresses GkSd : " Sacrifice and offering Thou
didst not desire ; mine ears hast Thou opened ; burnt offer-
ing and sin-offering hast Thon not required ; I delight to-
do Thy will, O my Gk)d ; yea, Thy law is within my heart.'*
Here the Psalmist reckons as the law of G-od only that
which is inscribed in his heart, and excludes ceremonies
therefrom, for the latter are good and inscribed on the
heart only from the fact of their institution, and not
because of their intrinsic value.

Other passages of Scripture testify to the same truth,
but these two will suf&ce. We may also learn from the
Bible that ceremonies are no aid to blessedness, but only
have reference to the temporal prosperity of the kingdom ;
for the rewards promised for their observance are merely
temporal advantages and delights, blessedness being re-
served for the universal Divine law. In all the five books
commonly attributed to Moses nothing is promised, as I
have said, beyond temporal benefits, such as honours, fame,,
victories, riches, enjoyments, and health. Though many
moral precepts besides ceremonies are contained in these
five books, they appear not as moral doctrines universal to
all men, but as commands especially adapted to the under-
standing and character of the Hebrew people, and as
having reference only to the weKare of the kingdom. For
instance, Moses does not teach the Jews as a prophet not
to kill or to steal, but gives these commandments solely
as a lawgiver and judge ; he does not reason out the doc-
trine, but affixes for its non-observance a penalty which
may and very properly does vary in different nations. So,
too, the command not to commit adultery is given merely
with reference to the welfare of the state ; for if the moral
doctrine had been intended, with reference not only to the
weKare of the state, but also to the tranquillity and
blessedness of the individual, Moses woiiLd have condemned
not merely the outward act, but also the mental acquies-
cence, as is done by Christ, "Who taught only universal
moral precepts, and for this cause promises a spiritual
instead of a temporal reward. Christ, as I have said, was
sent into the world, not to preserve the state nor to lay
down laws, but solely to teach the universal moral law, so


CHAP, v.] OF THE CEREMONIAL LAW. 71

we can easily understand that He wished in nowise to do
away with the law of Moses, inasmuch as He introduced
no new laws of His own — ^His sole care was to teach moral
doctrines, and distinguish them from the laws of the
state ; for the Pharisees, in their ignorance, thoi^ht that
the observance of the state law and the Mosaic law was
the sum total of morality ; whereas such laws merely had
reference to the public welfare, and aimed not so much at
instructing the Jews as at keeping them under constraint.
But let us return to our subject,' and cite other passages
of Scripture which set forth temporal benefits as rewards
for observing the ceremonial law, and blessedness as reward
for the universal law.

None of the prophets puts the point more clearly than
Isaiah. After oondemning hypocrisy, he commends Uberty
and charity towards one's self and one's neighbours, and
promises as a reward : " Then shall thy light break forth
as the morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily,
thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the
Lord shall be thy rereward " (chap. Iviii. 8). Shortly after-
wards he commends the Sabbath, and for a due observance
of it, promises : " Then shaJt thou delight thyself in the
Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of
the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy
father ; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it." Thus
the prophet for liberty bestowed, and charitable works,
promises a healthy mind in a healthy body, and the glory
of the Lord even after death; whereas, for ceremonial
exactitude, he only promises security of rule, prosperity,
and temporal happiness. • i* 1- J'

Li Psalms xv. and xxiv. no mention is made of ceremo-
nies, but only of moral doctrines, inasmuch as there is no
question of anything but blessedness, and blessedness is
symbolically promised : it is quite certain that the expres-
sions, " the lull of God," and " His tents and the dwellers
therein," refer to blessedness and security of soul, not to
the actual mount of Jerusalem and the tabernacle of Moses,
for these latter were not dwelt in by anyone, and only the
sons of Levi ministered there. Further, all those sentences
of Solomon to which I referred in the last chapter, for the
cultivation of the intellect and wisdom, promise true


72 A THBOLOOICO-POLITICAL TBBJLTISB. [CHAP. V.

blessedness, for by wisdom is the fear of God at length
understood, and the knowledge of Gk>d found.

That the Jews themselves were not bound to practise
their ceremonial observances after the destruction of their
kingdom is evident from Jeremiah. For when the prophet
saw and foretold that the desolation of the citj was at hand,
he said that God only delights in those who know and un-
derstand that He exercises loving-kindness, judgment, and
righteousness in the earth, and that such persons only are
worthy of praise. (Jer. ix. 23.) As though Gk)d had said
that, after the desolation of the city. He would require no-
thing special from the Jews beyond the natural law by
which all men are bound.

The New Testament also confirms this view, for only
moral doctrines are therein taught, and the kingdom of
heaven is promis^ as a reward, whereas ceremonial obser-
vances are not touched on by the Apostles, after they began
to preach the Gospel to the Gtentiles. The Pharisees cer-
tainly continued to practise these rites after the destruction
of the kingdom, but more with a view of- opposing the
Christians than of pleasing God: for after the first de-
struction of the city, when they were led captive to Baby-
lon, not being then, so far as I am aware, split up into
sects, they straightway neglected their rites, bid farewell to
the Mosaic law, buried their national customs in oblivion
as being plainly superfluous, and began to mingle with
other nations, as we may abxmdantly learn from Ezra and
Nehemiah. We cannot, therefore, doubt that they were no
more bound by the law of Moses, after the destruction of
their kingdom, than they had been before it had been
begun, while they were still living among other peoples
before the exodus from Egypt, and were subject to no
special law beyond the natural law, and also, doubtless, the
law of the state in which they were living, in so far as it
was consonant with the Divine natural law.

As to the fact that the patriarchs offered sacrifices, I
think they did so for the purpose of stimulating their piety,
for their minds had been accustomed from childhood to
the idea of sacrifice, which we know had been universal
from the time of Enoch ; and thus they found in sacrifice
their most powerful incentive.


CHAP, v.] OF THE GEBEMONIAL LAW. 73

The patriarclis, then, did not sacrifice to God at the
bidding of a Divine right, or as taught bj the basis of the
Divine law, but simply in accordance with the custom of
the time ; and, if in so doing they followed any ordinance,
it was siApIy the ordinance of the country the/ were Uvin^
in, by which (as we have seen before in the case of Mel-
chisedek) they were bound.

I think that I have now given Scriptural authority for
my view : it remains to show why and how the ceremonial
observances tended to preserve and confirm the Hebrew
kingdom; and this I can very briefly do on grounds
universally accepted.

The formation of society serves not only for defensive
purposes, but is also very useful, and, indeed, absolutely
necessary, as rendering possible the division of labour. If
men did not render mutual assistance to each other, no one
would have either the skill or the time to provide for his
own sustenance and preservation: for all men are not
equally apt for all work, and no one would be capable of
preparing all that he individually stood in need of.
Strength and time, I repeat, would fail, if every one had
in person to plough, to sow, to reap, to grind com, to cook,
to weave, to stitch, and perform the other numerous func-
tions required to keep life going; to say nothing of the arts
and sciences which are also entirely necessary to the per-
fection and blessedness of human nature. We see that
peoples living in uncivilized barbarism lead a wretched and
almost animal life, and even they would not be able to ac-
quire their few rude necessaries without assisting one
another to a certain extent.

Now if men were so constituted by nature that they de-
sired nothing but what is designated by true reason, society /
would obviously have no need of laws : it would be suffi- v
cient to inculcate true moral doctrines; and men would
freely, without hesitation, act in accordance with their true
interests. But human nature is framed in a different
fashion : every one, indeed, seeks his own interest, but does
not do so in accordance with the dictates of sound reason,
for most men's ideas of desirability and usefulness are
guided by their fleshly instincts and emotions, which take
no thought beyond the present and the immediate object.


74j a theologico-folitical teeatise. [chap. v.

/ Therefore, no society can exist witliout government, and
force, and laws to restrain and repress men's desires and
immoderate impulses. Still human nature will not submit
to absolute repression. Violent governments, as Seneca
says, never last long ; the moderate governments endure.

So long as men act simply from fear they act contrary to-
their inclinations, taking no thoug ht for the advantages or
necessity of their actions, but simply endeavouring to
escape punishment or loss of life. They must needs rejoice
in any evil which befalls their ruler, even if it should in-
volve themselves ; and must long for and bring about such
evil by every means in their power. Again, men are espe-
cially intolerant of serving and being ruled by their equals.
Lastly, it is exceedingly difficult to revoke liberties once
granted.

From these considerations it follows, firstly, that autho-
rity should either be vested in the hands of the whole state
in common, so that everyone should be bound to serve,
and yet not be in subjection to his equals; or else, if power
be in the hands of a few, or one man, that one man should
be something above average hxmianity, or should strive to
get himself accepted as such. Secondly, laws should in
every government be so arranged that people should be
kept in bounds by the hope of some greatly-desired good,
rather than by fear, for then everyone wHl do his duty
willingly.

Lastly, as obedience consists in acting at the bidding of
external authority, it would have no place in a state where
the government is vested in the whole people, and where
laws are made by common consent. In such a society the
people would remain free, whether the laws were added to
or diminished, inasmuch as it would not be done on exter-
nal authority, but their own free consent. The reverse
happens when the sovereign power is vested in one man,
for all act at his bidding ; and, therefore, unless they had
been trained from the first to depend on the words of
their ruler, the latter would find it difficult, in case of
need, to abrogate liberties once conceded, and impose new
laws.

From these universal considerations, let us pass on to the
kingdom of the Jews. The Jews when they first came out


CHAP, v.] OF THE CBBEMONIAL LAW. ^^

of Egypt were not bound by any national laws, ands con-
therefore free to ratify any laws they liked, or to makeY ^7
ones, and were at liberty to set up a government and occuj^s
a territory wherever they chose. However, they were en-
tirely unfit to frame a wise code of laws and to keep the
sovereign power vested in the commimity ; they were all- v
uncultivated and sxmk in a wretched slavery, therefore the
sovereignty was bound to remain vested in the hands of
one man who would rule the rest and keep them under
constraint, make laws and interpret them. This sove-
reignty was easily retained by Moses, because he surpassed
the rest in virtue and persuaded the people of the fact,
proving it by many testimonies (see Exod. chap, xiv., last,
verse, and chap, six., verse 9). He then, by the Divine virtue
he possessed, made laws and ordained them for the people,,
talang the greatest care that they should be obeyed wiUingly .
and not through fear, being specially induced to adopt this. (/
course by the obstinate nature of the Jews, who would not
have submitted to be ruled solely by constraint ; and also-
by the imminence of war, for it is always better to inspire-
soldiers with a thirst for glory than to terrify them with
threats ; each man will then strive to distinguish himself
by valour and courage, instead of merely trying to escape
punishment. Moses, therefore, by his virtue and the Divine-
command, introduced a religion, so that the people might
do their duty from devotion rather than fear. Further, he-
bound them over by benefits, and prophesied many advan-
tages in the future ; nor were his laws very severe, as anyone-
may see for himself, especially if he remarks the number
of circumstances necessary in order to procure the convic-
tion of an accused person.

Lastly, in order that the people which could not govern
itself should be entirely dependent on its ruler, he left
notl)i)ig to the free choice of individuals (who had hithertoi
been slaves) ; the people could do nothing but remember the
law, and follow the ordinances laid down at the good plea-
sure of their ruler ; they were not allowed to plough, ta
sow, to reap, nor even to eat ; to clothe themselves, to shave,
to rejoice, or in fact to do anything whatever as they liked,
but were bound to follow the directions given in the law ;.
and not only this, but they were obliged to have marks on


7^ A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TEBATISE. [cHAP. V.

[ Therjoor-posts, on their hands, and between their eyes to
^<>fibmsh them to perpetual obedience.
^TPhis, then, was the object of the ceremonial law, that
men should do nothing of their own free wiU, but should
always act under external authority, and should continually
confess by their actions and thoughts that they were not
their own masters, but were entirely under the control of
others.

From all these considerations it is clearer than day that
ceremonies have nothing to do with a state of blessedness,
and that those mentioned in the Old Testament, i.e. the
whole Mosaic Law, had reference merely to the government
of the Jews, and merely temporal advantages.

As for the Christian rites, such as baptism, the Lord's
Supper, festivals, public prayers, and any other observances
which are, and always have been, common to all Christen-
dom, if they were instituted by Christ or His Apostles
(which is open to doubt), they were instituted as external
signs of the^niyersal churcCand not as haying anything
to do with blessedness, or possessing any saactity in them-
selves. Therefore, though such ceremonies were not or-
dained for the sake of upholding a government, they were
ordained for the preservation of a society, and accordingly he
who lives alone is not bound by them : nay, those who live
in a country where the Christian religion is forbidden, are
bound to abstain from such rites, and can none the less
live in a state of blessedness. We have an example of this
in Japan, where the Christian religion is forbidden, and the
Dutch who live there are enjoined by their East India
Company not to practise any outward rites of religion. I
need not cite other examples, though it would be easy to
prove my point from the fundamental principles of the New
Testament, and to adduce many confirmatory instances;
but I pass on the more willingly, as I am anxious to pro-
ceed to my next proposition. I will now, therefore, pass on
to what I proposed to treat of in the second part of this
•chapter, namely, what persons are bound to believe in the
narratives contained in Scripture, and how far they are so
bound. Examining this question by the aid of natural
i^ason, I will proceed as follows.

If anyone wishes to persuade his fellows for or against


CHAP, v.] OP THE CBBEMONIAL LAW. 77

anything whicli is not self-evident, lie must deduce his con-
tention from their admissions, and convince them either by
experience or by ratiocination; either by appealing to facts
of natural experience, or to self-evident intellectual axioms.
Now unless the experience be of such a kind as to be
clearly and distinctly understood, though it may convince a
man, it will not have the same efEect on his mind and dis-
perse the clouds of his doubt so completely as when the
doctrine taught is deduced entirely from intellectual axioms
— ^that is, by the mere power of the understanding and logical
order, and this is especially the case in spiritual matters
which have nothing to do with the senses.

But the deduction of conclusions from general truths
a priori, usually requires a long chain of arguments, and,
moreover, very great caution, acuteness, and seK-restraint —
qualities which are not often met with; therefore people
prefer to be taught by experience rather than deduce their
conclusion from a few axioms, and set them out in logical
order. Whence it follows, that if anyone wishes to teach a
doctrine to a whole nation (not to speak of the whole human
race), and to be understood by all men in every particular,
he will seek to support his teaching with experience, and
will endeavoxir to suit his reasonings and the definitions of
his doctrines as far as possible to tibe understanding of the
common people, who form the majority of mankind, and
he will not set them forth in logical sequence nor adduce the
definitions which serve to establish them. Otherwise he
writes only for the learned — ^that is, he will be understood
by only a small proportion of the human race.

All Scripture was written primarily for an entire people,
and secondarily for the whole human race ; therefore its
contents must necessarily be adapted as far as possible to
the understanding of the masses, and proved only by ex-
amples drawn from experience. We will explain ourselves
more clearly. The duef speculative doctrines taught in
Scripture are the existence of GK)d, or a Being Who made
all things, and Who directs and sustains the world with
consummate wisdom; furthermore, that Qod takes the
greatest thought for men, or such of them as live piously
and honourably, while He pimishes, with various penalties,
those who do evil, separating them from the good. All


78 A THEOLOOICO-POtilTICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. T.

tliis is proved in Scripture entirely tlirough experience — ^tliat
is, tlirough the narratives there related. No definitions of
•doctrine are given, but all the sayings and reasonings are
^apted to the understanding of the masses. Although
experience can give no clear knowledge of these things, nor
•explain the nature of God, nor how He directs and sustains
all things, it can nevertheless teach and enlighten men
sufficiently to impress obedience and devotion on their
minds.

It is now, I think, sufficiently clear whatpersons are bound
ix) believe in the Scripture narratives, and in what degree
they are so bound, for it evidently follows from what has
been said that the knowledge of and belief in them is particu-
larly necessary to the masses whose intellect is not capable
of perceiving things clearly and distinctly. Further, he
who denies them because he does not believe that Gk)d exists
•or takes thought for men and the world, may be accounted
impious ; but a man who is ignorant of them, and neverthe-
less knows by natxiral reason that Gtod exists, as we have
.said, and has a true plan of life, is altogether blessed — ^yes,
more blessed than the common herd of believers, because
besides true opinions he possesses also a true and distinct
•conception. Lastly, he who is ignorant of the Scriptures
and Imows nothing by the light of reason, though he may
not be impious or rebellious, is yet less than himian and
almost brutal, having none of GkJd's gifts.

We must here remark that when we say that the know-
ledge of the sacred narrative is particularly necessary to the
masses, we do not mean the knowledge of absolutely all the
narratives in the Bible, but only of the principal ones, those
which, taken by themselves, plainly display the doctrine we
•have just stated, and have most effect over men's minds.

If all the narratives in Scripture were necessary for the
.l)roof of this doctrine, and if no conclusion could be drawn
•without the general consideration of every one of the his-
tories contained in the sacred writings, truly the conclusion
and demonstration of such doctrine would overtask the
-understanding and strength not only of the masses, but of
iiumanity ; who is there who could give attention to all the
narratives at once, and to all the circumstances, and all the
-scraps of doctrine to be elicited from such a host of diverse


CHAP, v.] OF THE CEBEMONIAL LAW. 79

liistories? I cannot believe that tlie men who have left
us the Bible as we have it were so abounding in talent that
they attempted setting about such a method of demonstra-
tion, still less can I suppose that we cannot understand
^riptural doctrine till we have given heed to the quarrels of
Isaac, the advice of Achitophel to Absalom, the civil war
between Jews and Israelites, and other similar chronicles ;
nor can I think that it was more difficult to teach such
doctrine by means of history to the Jews of early times, the
contemporaries of Moses, than it was to the contemporaries
of Esdras. But more will be said on this point hereafter,
we may now only note that the masses are only bound to
know those histories which can most powerfrdly dispose
their mind to obedience and devotion. However, the masses
are not sufficiently skiUed to draw conclusions from what
they read, they take more delight in the actual stories, and
in the strange and unlooked-for issues of events than in
the doctrines implied ; therefore, besides reading these nar-
ratives, they are always in need of pastors or church ministers
to explain them to their feeble intelligence.

But not to wander from our point, let us conclude with
what has been our principal object — ^namely, that the truth
of narratives, be they what they may, has nothing to do
with the Divine law, and serves for nothing except in respect
of doctrine, the sole element which makes one history better
than another. The narratives in the Old and New Testa-
ments surpass profane history, and differ among themselves
in merit simply by reason of the salutary doctrines which
they inculcate. Therefore, if a man were to read the Scrip-
ture narratives believing the whole of them, but were to
give no heed to the doctrines they contain, and make no
amendment in his life, he might employ himself just as
profitably in reading the Koran or the poetic drama, or or-
dinary chronicles, with the attention usually given to such
writings ; on the other hand, if a man is absolutely ignorant
of the Scriptures, and none the less has r^ht opinions and
a true plan of life, he is absolutely blessed and truly pos-
sesses in himself the spirit of Christ.

The Jews are of a directly contrary way of thinking, for
they hold that true opinions and a true plan of life are of
no service in attaining blessedness, if their possessors have


80 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. V.

arrived at them by the light of reason only, and not like
the documents prophetically revealed to Moses. Maimo-
nides ventures opeidy to make this assertion : " Every man
•who takes to heart the seven precepts and diligently follows
them, is counted with the pious among the nations, and an
heir of the world to come ; that is to say, if he takes to
heart and follows them because Grod ordained them in the
law, and revealed them to us by Moses, because they were
of aforetime precepts to the sons of Noah: but he who
follows them as led thereto by reason, is not counted as a
dweller among the pious, nor among the wise of the nations."
Such are the words of Maimonides, to which E. Joseph, the
son of Shem Job, adds in his book which he calls *' Kebod
Elohim, or God's Glory," that although Aristotle (whom he
considers to have written the best ethics and to be above
everyone else) has not omitted anything that concerns true
ethics, and which he has adopted in his own book, caref lilly
following the lines laid down, yet this was not able to suffice
for his salvation, inasmuch as he embraced his doctrines
in accordance with the dictates of reason and not as Divine
documents prophetically revealed.

However, that these are mere figments, and are not sup-
ported by Scriptural authority will, I think, be sufficiently
evident to the attentive reader, so that an examination of the
theory will be sufficient for its refutation. It is not my pur-
pose here to refute the assertions of those who assert that
the natural Ught of reason can teach nothing of any value
concerning the true way of salvation. People who lay no
claims to reason for themselves, are not able to prove by
reason this their assertion ; and if they hawk about some-
thing superior to reason, it is a mere figment, and far below
reason, as their general method of life sufficiently shows.
But there is no need to dwell upon such persons. I will
merely add that we can only judge of a man by his works.
If a man abounds in the fruits of the Spirit, charity, joy,
peace, long-sulEering, kindness, goodness, faith, gentleness,
chastity, against which, as Paul says (G^ v. 22), there is
no law, such an one, whether he be taught by reason only
or by the Scripture only, has been in very truth taught by
God, and is .altogether blessed. Thus have I said aU that
I undertook to say concerning Divine law.


CHAP. YI.] 07 MIBACLES. 81


CHAPTEE VL

OF MIBAGLBS.

AS men are accustomed to call Divine the knowledge
wbicli transcends human understanding, so also do
they style Divine, or the work of Gk)d, aaything of which
the cause is not generally known : for the masses think that
the power and providence of Ck)d are most clearly dis-
played hy events that are extraordinary and contrary to the
conception they have formed of nature, especially if such
events bring them any profit or convenience : they think
that the clearest possible proof of God's existence is afEorded
when nature, as they suppose, breaks her accustomed order,
and consequently they believe that those who explain or
endeavour to understand phenomena or miracles through
their natural causes are doing away with Grod and His pro-
vidence. They suppose, forsooth, that God is inactive so
long as nature works in her accustomed order, and vice
versd, that the power of nature and natural causes are idle
so long as God is acting : thus they imagine two powers
distinct one from the other, the power of G^ and the
power of nature, though the latter is in a sense determined
by God, or (as most people believe now) created by Him.
What liiey mean by either, and what they understand by
G^ and nature they do not know, except that they imagine
the power of God to be like that of some royal potentate,
and nature's power to consist in force and energy.

The masses then style unusual phenomena " miracles,"
and partly from piety, partly for the sake of opposing
the students of science, prefer to remain in ignorance of
nattiral causes, and only to hear of those things which they
know least, and consequently admire most. In fact, the
common people can only adore God, and refer all things to
His power by removing natural causes, and conceiving
things happening out of their due course, and only admires

o


^


82 A THEOLOOICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [cHAP. VI.

the power of God when the power of nature is conceived of
as in subjection to it.

This idea seems to have taken its rise among the early
Jews who saw the Gentiles round them worshipping visible
gods such as the sun, the moon, the earth, water, air, &c.,
and in order to inspire the conviction that such divinities
were weak and inconstant, or changeable, told how they
themselves were under the sway of an invisible God, and
-^ _ • narrated their miracles, trying further to show that the
God whom they worshipped arranged the whole of nature
for their sole benefit : this idea was so pleasing to humanity
that men go on to this day imagining miracles, so that they
may believe themselves God's favourites, and the final
cause for which God created and directs all things.

What pretension will not people in their folly advance !
They have no single sound idea concerning either God or
nature, they confound God's decrees with human decrees,
they conceive nature as so limited that they believe man to
be its chief part ! I have spent enough space in setting
forth these common ideas and prejudices concerning nature
and miracles, but in order to afford a regular demonstration
I will show —

I. That nature cannot be contravened, but that she pre-
serves a fixed and immutable order, aiid at the same time I
will explain what is meant by a miracle.

n. That God's nature and existence, and consequently
His providence cannot be known from miracles, but that
they can all be much better perceived from the fixed and
immutable order of nature.

m. That by the decrees and volitions, and consequently
the providence of Gk)d, Scripture (as I will prove by Scrip-
tural examples) means nothing but nature's order following
necessarily from her eternal laws.

rV. Lastly, I will treat of the method of interpreting
Scriptural miracles, and the chief points to be noted con-
cerning the narratives of them.

Such are the principal subjects which will be discussed
in this chapter, and which will serve, I think, not a little to
further the object of this treatise.

Our first point is easily proved from what we showed in
Chap. rV. about Divine law — ^namely, that all that God


CHAP. YI.] or MIBACLES. 83

■wishes or determines involves eternal necessity and truth,
for we demonstrated that Gk)d's understanding is identical
-with His will, and that it is the same thing to say that
•God wills a thing, as to say that He understands it ; hence,
AS it follows necessarily from the Divine nature and per-
fection that God understands a thing as it is, it follows no
less necessarily that He wills it as it is. Now, as nothing
is necessarily true save only by Divine decree, it is plain
that the universal laws of nature are decrees of God follow-
ing from the necessity and perfection of the Divine nature.
Hence, any event happening in nature which contravened
nature's universal laws, would necessarily also contravene
the Divine decree, natxire, and understanding ; or if any-
one asserted that God acts in contravention to the laws of
nature, he, ipso facto, would be compelled to assert that
God acted against His own nature — an evident absurdity.
One might easily show from the same premises that the
power and efficiency of nature are in themselves the Divine
power and efficiency, and that the Divine power is the very
-essence of God, but this I gladly pass over for the present.
Nothing, then, comes to pass in nature ^ in contraven-
tion to her universal laws, nay, everythmg agrees with
them and follows from them, for whatsoever comes to
pass, comes to pass by the will and eternal decree of God ;
that is, as we have just pointed out, whatever comes to pass,
•comes to pass according to laws and rules which involve
eternal necessity and truth; nature, therefore, always ob-
serves laws and rules which involve eternal necessity and
truth, although they may not all be known to us, and
therefore she keeps a fixed and immutable order, Nor is
there any sound reason for limiting the power and efficacy
of nature, and asserting that her laws are fit for certain
purposes, but not for all ; for as the efficacy and power of
nature, are the very efficacy and power of God, and as the
laws and rules of nature are the decrees of God, it is in every
way to be believed that the power of nature is infinite, and
that her laws are broad enough to embrace everything con-
ceived by the Divine intellect ; the only alternative is to
assert that God has created nature so weak, and has

^ K.B. I do not mean here by '* nature," merely matter and its modi-
fications, bat infinite other things besides matter.


^


84j a THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISG. [chap. VI,

ordained for her laws so "barren, tliat He is repeatedly
compelled to come afresh to her aid if He wishes that she
shoTdd be preserved, and that things should happen as He
desires: a conclusion, in my opinion, very far removed
from reason. Further, as nothing happens in nature which
does not follow from her laws, and as her laws embrace
everything conceived by the Divine intellect, and lastly, aa
nature preserves a fixed and immutable order; it most
clearly follows that miracles are only intelligible as in rela-
tion to human opinions, and merely mean events of which
the natural cause cannot be explained by a reference to
any ordinary occTirrence, either by us, or at any rate, by
the writer and narrator of the miracle.

We may, in fact, say that a miracle is an event of which
the causes cannot be explained by the natural reason
through a reference to ascertained workings of nature;
but since miracles were wrought according to the under-
standing of the masses, who are wholly ignorant of the
workings of natxire, it is certain that the ancients took for
a miracle whatever they could not explain by the method
adopted by the unlearned in such cases, namely, an appeal
to the memory, a recalling of something similar, which i»
ordinarily regarded without wonder ; for most people think
they sufficiently understand a thing when they have ceased
to wonder at it. The ancients, then, and indeed most men.
up to the present day, had no other criterion for a miracle ;,
hence we cannot doubt that many things are narrated in.
Scripture as miracles of which the causes could easily be ex-
plained by reference to ascertaiaed workings of natiure. We
have hinted as much in Chap. 11., in speaking of the sun
standing still in the time of Joshua, and going backwards-
in the time of Ahaz ; but we shall soon have more to say
on the subject when we come to treat of the interpre-
tation of miracles later on in this chapter.

It is now time to pass on to the second point, and show^
that we cannot gain an understanding of God's essence,,
existence, or providence by means of miracles, but that
these truths are much better perceived through the fixed
and immutable order of nature.

I thus proceed with the demonstration. As GK)d's exis-^
tence is not self-evidenVit must necessarily be inferred from

* See Note 6.


CHAP. VI.] OP MIBACLES. 85

ideas so firmly and incontrovertibly true, that no power can
be postulated or conceived sufficient to impugn them. They
ought certainly so to appear to us when we infer from them
Ood's existence, if we wish to place our conclusion beyond
the reach of doubt ; for if we could conceive that such ideas -
could be impugned by any power whatsoever, we should
doubt of their truth, we should doubt of our conclusion,
namely, of God's existence, and should never be able to be
certain of anything. Further, we know that nothing either
agrees with or is contrary to nature, unless it agrees with
or is contrary to these primary ideas ; wherefore if we would
conceive that anythii^ could be done in nature by any
power whatsoever which would be contrary to the laws of
nature, it would also be contrary to our primary ideas, and
we should have either to reject it as absurd, or else to cast
doubt (as just shown) on our primary ideas, and conse-
queiitly on the existence of Gk>d, and on everything how-
soever perceived. Therefore miracles, in the sense of events
contrary to the laws of nature, so far from demonstrating
to us the existence of Gk)d, would, on the contrary, lead us
to doubt it, where, otherwise, we might have been abso-
lutely certain of it, as knowing that nature follows a fixed
and immutable order.

Let us take miracle as meaning that which cannot be ex-
plained through natural causes. This may be interpreted
in two senses : either as that which has natural causes, but
cannot be examined by the human intellect; or as that
which has no cause save Gtod and God's will. But as all
things which come to pass through natxiral causes, come to
pass also solely through the will and power of God, it comes
to this, that a miracle, whether it has natural causes or not,
is a result which cannot be explained by its cause, that is a
phenomenon which surpasses human understanding ; but
from such a phenomenon, and certainly from a result sur-
passing our understanding, we can gain no knowledge. For \ • ^l^
whatsoever we understand clearly and distinctly should be t5; j \.
plain to us either in itself or by means of something else ' o^^
clearly and distinctly understood ; wherefore from a miracle
or a phenomenon which we cannot understand, we can gain
no knowledge of God's essence, or existence, or indeed any-
thing about Otod or nature 5 whereas when we know that


86 A THEOLOaiCO-POLinCAL TREATISE. [cHAP. VI.

all things axe ordained and ratified by God, tliat tlie opera-
tions of nature follow from the essence of Ck)d, and that
the laws of nature are eternal decrees and volitions of God,,
we must perforce conclude that our knowledge of Gk)d and
of God's will increases in proportion to our Imowledge and
clear understanding of nature, as we see how she depends
on her primal cause, and how she works according to eter-
nal law. Wherefore so far as our understandmg goes,,
those phenomena which we clearly and distinctly under-
, stand have much better r^ht to be called works of Orod^
^ and to be referred to the will of God than those about
which we are entirely ignorant, although they appeal power-
fully to the imagination, and compel men's admiration.
It is only phenomena that we clearly and distinctly under-
W stand, which heighten our kng gXadge-of God, and most
' clearly indicate His w^l and decrees. Plainly, they are
but triflers who, when they cannot explain a thing, run
I back to the wiU of God ; this is, truly, a ridiculous way of
'expressing ignorance. Again, even supposing that some
' conclusion could be drawn from miracles, we could not
possibly infer from them the existence of God: for a-
miracle being an event under limitations is the expression
of a fixed and limited power ; therefore we could not possibly
infer from an efEect of this kind the existence of a cause
whose power is infinite, but at the utmost only of a cause
whose power is greater than that of the said efEect. I say
at the utmost, for a phenomenon may be the result of many
concurrent causes, and its power may be less than the power
of the sum of such causes, but far greater than that of any
one of them taken individually. On the other hand, the
laws of nature, as we have shown, extend over infinity, and
are conceived by us as, after a fashion, eternal, and nature
works in accordance with them in a fixed and immutable
order ; therefore, such laws indicate to us in a certain degree
the infinity, the eternity, and the immutability of God.

We may conclude, then, that we cannot gain knowledge
of the existence and providence of God by means of mira-
cles, but that we can far better infer them from the fixed
and immutable order of nature. By miracle, I here mean
an event which surpasses, or is thought to surpass, human
comprehension : for in so far as it is supposed to destroy or


CHAP. VI.] OP MIBACLES. 87

interrupt the order of nature or her laws, it not only can
give us no knowledge of God, but, contrariwise, takes away
that which we naturally have, and makes us doubt of God
and everything else.

Neither do I recognize any difference between an event
against the laws of nature and an event beyond the laws of
nature (that is, according to some, an event which does not
contravene nature, though she is inadequate to produce or
effect it) — ^for a miracle is wrought in, and not beyond
natxire, though it may be said in itself to be above nature,
and, therefore, must necessarily interrupt the order of
nature, which otherwise we conceive of as fixed and un-
changeable, according to God's decrees. If, therefore, any-
thing should come to pass in nature which does not follow
from her laws, it would also be in contravention to the
order which Gk)d has established in nature for ever through
universal natural laws : it would, therefore, be in contraven-
tion to Grod's nature and laws, and, consequently, belief in
it would throw doubt upon everything, and lead to Atheism.

I think I have now sufficiently established my second
point, so that we can again conclude that a miracle, whether "L
in contravention to, or beyond, nature, is a mere absurdity ; '
and, therefore, that what is meant in Scripture by a miracle
can only be a work of nature, which surpasses, or is be-
lieved to surpass, human comprehension. Before passing
on to my third point, I wiU adduce Scriptural authority for
my assertion that God cannot be known from miracles.
Scripture nowhere states the doctrine openly, but it can
readily be inferred from several passages. Firstly, that in
which Moses commands (Deut. xiii.) that a false prophet
should be put to death, even though he work miracles :
" If there arise a prophet among you, and giveth thee a
sign or wonder, and the sign or wonder come to pass, say-
ing. Let us go after other gods . . . thou shalt not hearken
unto the voice of that prophet ; for the Lord your God
proveth you, and that prophet shall be put to death."
From this it clearly follows that miracles could be wrought
even by false prophets ; and that, unlels men are honestly
endowed with the true knowledge and love of God, they
may be as easily led by miracles to follow false gods as to
follow the true God ; for these words are added : " For the


88 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. YI.

Lord your Otod. tempts you, tliat He may know whether
you love Him with aU your heart and with all your mind."

Further, the Israelites, from all their miracles, were un-
able to form a sound conception of Qtod, as their experience
testified: for when they had persuaded themselves that
Moses had departed from among them, they petitioned
Aaron to give them visible gods ; and the idea of God they
had formed as the result of all their miracles was — a calf !

Asaph, though he had heard of so many miracles, yet
doubted of the providence of Gtod, and would have turned
himself from the true way, if he had not at last come to
understand true blessedness. (See Ps. Ixxxiii.) Solomon,
too, at a time when the Jewish nation was at the he^ht of
its prosperity, suspects that all things happen by chance.
(See Eccles. iii. 19, 20, 21 ; and chap. ix. 2, 3, <&c.)

Lastly, nearly all the prophets found it very hard to re-
concile the order of nature and human afEaors with the
conception they had formed of God's providence, whereas
philosophers who endeavour to understand things by clear
conceptions of them, rather than by miracles, have always
found the task extremely easy — at least, such of them as
place true happiness solely in virtue and peace of mind,
and who aim at obeying nature, rather than being obeyed
£ (. 1 »>Y ^y ^®^* Such persons rest assured that God directs nature
h^ I rk according to the requirements of imiversal laws, not accord-
^ " '^ng to the requirements of the particular laws of human
nature, and that, therefore, God's scheme comprehends, not
only the human race, but the whole of nature.

It is plain, then, from Scripture itself, that miracles can
give no knowledge of G^, nor clearly teach us the provi-
dence of God. As to the frequent statements in Scripture,
that God wrought miracles to make Himself plain to man
— as in Exodus x. 2, where He deceived the Egyptians, and
gave signs of Himself, that the Israelites might know that
He was God, — it does not, therefore, follow that miracles
really taught this truth, but only that the Jews held
opinions which laid them easily open to conviction by
miracles. We have shown in Chap. II. that the reasons as-
signed by the prophets, or those which are formed from reve-
lation, are not assigned in accordance with ideas universal
and common to all, but in accordance with the accepted


i


A^


CHAP. VI.] or MIBACLBS. 89

doctrines, however absurd, and with the opinions of those
to whom the revelation was given, or those whom the Holy
Spirit wished to convince.

This we have illustrated hy many Scriptural instances,
and can further cite Paul, who to the Greeks was a Greek,
and to the Jews a Jew. But although these miracles could
convince the Egyptians and Jews from their standpoint,
they could not give a true idea and knowledge of God, but
only cause them to admit that there was a Deity more
powerful than anything known to them, and that this Deity
took special care of the Jews, who had just then an unex-
pectedly happy issue of all their affairs. They could not
teach them that G^ cares equally for all, for this can be
taught only by philosophy: the Jews, and all who took
their knowledge of God's providence from the dissimilarity
of human conditions of life and the inequalities of fortune,
persuaded themselves that God loved the Jews above all
men, though they did not surpass their fellows in true
human perfection.

I now go on to my third point, and show from Scripture
that the decrees and mandates of God, and consequently
His providence, are merely the order of nature — ^that is,
when Scripture describes an event as accomplished by God
or God's will, we must understand merely that it was in
accordance with the law and order of nature, not, as most
people believe, that nature had for a season ceased to act,
or that her order was temporarily interrupted. But Scrip-
ture does not directly teach matters unconnected with its
doctrine, wherefore it has no care to explain things by their
natural causes, nor to expound matters merely speculative.
Wherefore our conclusion must be gathered by inference
from those Scriptural narratives which happen to be written
more at length and circimistantially than usual. Of these
I will cite a few.

In the first book of Samuel, ix. 15, 16, it is related that
God revealed to Samuel that He would send Saul to him,
yet God did not send Saul to Samuel as people are wont
to send one man to another. His " sending " was merely
the ordinary course of nature. Saul was looking for the
asses he had lost, and was meditating a return home with-i
out them, when, at the suggestion of his servant, he went


90 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [cHAP. VI.

to the prophet Samuel, to learn from him where he might
find them. From no part of the narrative does it appear
that Saul had any command from God to visit Samuel
beyond this natuJ motive.

In Psalm cv. 24 it is said that G-od changed the hearts
of the Egyptians, so that they hated the Israelites. This
was evidently a natural change, as appears from Exodus^
chap, i., where we find no slight reason for the Egyptians-
reducing the Isra^Utes to slavery.

In Genesis ix. 13, God tells 'Noah that He will set His
bow in the cloud ; this action of God's is but another way
of expressing the refraction and reflection which the rays
of the sun are subjected to in drops of water.

In Psahn cxlvii. 18, the natural action and warmth of
the wind, by which hoar frost and snow are melted, are
styled the word of the Lord, and in verse 15 wind and
cold are called the commandment and word of God.

In Psalm civ. 4, wind and fire are called the angels and
ministers of God, and various other passages of the same
sort are found in Scripture, clearly showing that the decree,
commandment, fiat, and word of God are merely expres-
sions for the action and order of nature.

Thus it is plain that all the events narrated in Scripture
came to pass naturally, and are referred directly to Gk)d
because Scripture, as we have shown, does not aim at
explaining things by their natural causes, but only at
narrating what appeals to the popular imagination, and
doing so in the manner best calculated to excite wonder,
and consequently to impress the minds of the masses with
devotion. If, therefore, events are found in the Bible
which we cannot refer to their causes, nay, which seem
entirely to contradict the order of nature, we must not
come to a stand, but assuredly believe that whatever did
really happen happened naturally. This view is confirmed
by the fact that in the case of every miracle there were
many attendant circumstances, though these were not
always related, especially where the narrative was of a
poetic character.

The circumstances of the miracles clearly show, I main-
tain, that natural causes were needed. For instance, in
order to infect the Egyptians with blains, it was necessary


CHAP. TI.] OP MIRACLES, 9t

tliat Moses should scatter ashes in the air (Exod. ix. 10) ;;
the locusts also came upon the land of Egypt by a com-
mand of Gk)d in accordance with nature, namely, by an.
east wind blowing for a whole day and night ; and they
departed by a very strong west wind (Exod. x. 14, 19). By
a similar Divine mandate the sea opened a way for the-
Jews (Exod. xiv. 21), namely, by an east wind which blew
very strongly all night.

So, too, when Elisha would revive the boy who was.
believed to be dead, he was obliged to bend over him.
several times imtil the flesh of the child waxed warm, and
at last he opened his eyes (2 Kings iv. 34, 35).

Again, in John's G-ospel (chap, ix.) certain acts are men-
tioned as performed by Christ preparatory to healing the-
blind man, and there are numerous other instances show-
ing that somethii^ further than the absolute fiat of Gk)d.
is required for working a miracle.

Wherefore we may believe that, although the circum-
stances attending miracles are not related always or in.
full detail, yet a miracle was never performed without them.-

This is confirmed by Exodus xiv. 27, where it is simply
stated that "Moses stretched forth his hand, and the'
waters of the sea returned to their strength in the morn-
ing," no mention being made of a wind ; but in the song-
of Moses (Exod. xv. 10) we read, " Thou didst blow with
Thy wind (i.e. with a very strong wind), and the sea.
covered them." Thus the attendant circumstance is omitted
in the history, and the miracle is thereby enhanced.

But perhaps someone wiU insist that we find many
things in Scripture which seem in nowise explicable by
natural causes, as for instance, that the sins of men and
their prayers can be the cause of rain and of the earth's,
fertility, or that faith can heal the blind, and so on. But
I think I have already made sufficient answer: I have-
shown that Scripture does not explain things by their,
secondary causes, but only narrates them in the order and
the style which has most power to move men, and espe-^
cially uneducated men, to devotion ; and therefore it speaks;
inaccurately of God and of events, seeing that its object ia
not to convince the reason, but to attract and lay hold of
the imagination. If the Bible were to describe the destruc*


\


■'^,


92 A THEOLOGICO-POLITIOAL TREATISE. [CHAP. VI.

tion of an empire in the style of political historians, the
masses would remain unstirred, whereas the contrary is the
case when it adopts the method of poetic description, and
refers all things immediately to Gk)d. When, therefore, the
Bible says that the earth is barren because of men's sins,
or that the blind were healed by faith, we ought to take no
more notice than when it says that God is angry at men's
sins, that He is sad, that He repents of the good He has
promised and done ; or that on seeing a sign he remembers
something He had promised, and other similar expressions,
which are either thrown out poetically or related according
to the opinion and prejudices of the writer.

We may, then, be absolutely certain that every event
which is tnily described in Scripture necessarily happened,
like everything else, accordmg to natural laws ; and if any-
thing is there set down which can be proved in set terms
to contravene the order of nature, or not to be deducible
therefrom, we must believe it to have been foisted into
the sacred writings by irreligious hands ; for whatsoever is
•contrary to nature is also contrary to reason, and whatsoever
is contrary to reason is absurd, and, ipso facto, to be
rejected.

There remain some points concerning the interpretation
of miracles to be noted, or rather to be recapitulated, for
most of them have been already stated. These I proceed
to discuss in the fourth division of my subject, and I am
led to do so lest anyone should, by wrongly interpreting a
miracle, rashly suspect that he has foimd something in
Scripture contrary to human reason.

It is very rare for men to relate an event simply as it
happened, without adding any element of their own judg-
, ment. When they see or hear anything new, they are,
f imless strictly on their guard, so occupied with their own
preconceived opinions that they perceive something quite
different from the plain facts seen or heard, especially if
such facts surpass the comprehension of the beholder or
hearer, and, most of all, if he is interested in their happen-
ing in a given way.

Thus men relate in chronicles and histories their own

(. opinions rather than actual events, so that one and the

same event is so differently related by two men of different


CHAP. TI.] OF MIRACLES. 93

opinions, that it seems like two separate occurrences ; and,
farther, it is very easy from historical chronicles to gather
the personal opinions of the historian.

I could dte many instances in proof of this from the
writings both of natural philosophers and historians, but
I will content myself with one only from Scripture, and
leave the reader to judge of the rest.

In the time of Joshua the Hebrews held the ordinary
opinion that the sun moves with a daily motion, and that
the earth remains at rest; to this preconceived opinion they
adapted the miracle which occurred during their battle with
the five kings. They did not simply relate that that day
was longer than usual, but asserted that the sun and moon
stood still, or ceased from their motion — a statement which
would be of great service to them at that time in convinc-
ing and proving by experience to the Gentiles, who wor-
shipped the sun, that the sun was under the control of
another deity who could compel it to change its daily
course. Thus, partly through religious motives, partly
through preconceived opinions, they conceived of and re-
lated the occurrence as something quite difierent from what
really happened.

Thus in order to interpret the Scriptural miracles and
understand from the narration of them how they really
happened, it is necessary to know the opinions of those who
first related them, and have recorded them for us in writing,
and to distinguish such opinions from the actual impres-
sion made upon their senses, otherwise we shall confound
opinions and judgments with the actual miracle as it really
occurred: nay, further, we shall confoimd actual events
with symbolical and imaginary ones. Eor many things are
narrated in Scripture as real, and were believed to be real,
which were in fact only symbolical and imaginary. As,
for instance, that God came down from heaven (Exod. xix.
28, Deut. V. 28), and that Mount Sinai smoked because
God descended upon it surrounded with fire; or, again,
that Elijah ascended into heaven in a chariot of fire, with
horses of fire ; all these things were assuredly merely sym-
bols adapted to the opinions of those who have handed
them down to us as they were represented to them, namely,
as reaL All who have any education know that God hae


^4 A THBOLOGICO-POLITICAI. TBEATISE. [cHAP. VI.

HO right liand nor left ; that He is not moved nor at rest,
nor in a particular place, but that He is absolutely infinite
.and contains in Himself all perfections.

These things, I repeat, are known to whoever judges of
thills by the perception of pure reason, and not according
as his imagination is affected by his outward senses. Fol-
lowing the example of the masses who imagine a bodily
Deity, holding a royal court with a throne on the convexity
of heaven, above the stars, which are believed to be not
very far off from the earth.

To these and similar opinions very many narrations in
^ripture are adapted, and should not, therefore, be mis-
Ttaken by philosophers for realities.

Lastly, in order to understand, in the case of miracles,
w^hat actually took place, we ought to be familiar with
Jewish phrases and metaphors ; anyone who did not make
sufficient allowance for these, would be continually seeing
miracles in Scripture where nothing of the kind is intended
by the writer ; he would thus miss the knowledge not only
•of what actually happened, but also of the mind of the
writers of the sacred text. For instance, Zechariah speak-
ing of some future war says (chap. xiv. verse 7) : "It shall
be one day which shall be known to the Lord, not day nor
night ; but at even time it shall be light." Li these words
he seems to predict a great miracle, yet he only means that
the battle will be doubtful the whole day, that the issue
will be known only to God, but that in the evening they
will gain the victory : the prophets frequently used to pre-
*dict victories and defeats of the nations in similar phrases.
'^Thus Isaiah, describing the destruction .of Babylon, says
(chap, xiii.) : " The stars of heaven, and the constellations
thereof, shall not give their light; the sun shall be dar-
kened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause
her light to shine." Now I suppose no one imagines that
at the destruction of Babylon these phenomena actually
•occurred any more than that which the prophet adds,
" For I will make the heavens to tremble, and remove the
earth out of her place."

So, too, Isaiah in foretelling to the Jews that they would
return from Babylon to Jerusalem in safety, and would not
i«uffer from thirst on their journey, says : " And they thirsted


CHAP. YI.] OF MIBACLES. 95

not when He led them tlirough the deserts ; He caused the
ivaters to flow out of the rocks for them; He clave the
rocks, and the waters gushed out." These words merely
mean that the Jews, like other people, found springs in the
desert, at which they quenched their thirst; for when the
Jews returned to Jerusalem with the consent of Cyrus, it is
Emitted that no similar miracles befell them.

In this way many occurrences in the Bible are to be re-
:garded merely as Jewish expressions. There is no need
for me to go through them in detail ; but I will call atten-
tion generally to the fact that the Jews employed such
phrases not only rhetorically, but also, and indeed chiefly,
from devotional motives. Such is the reason for the sub-
stitution of " bless Q-od " for " curse God " in 1 Kings xxi.
10, and Job ii. 9, and for all things being referred to God,
whence it appears that the Bible seems to relate nothing
but miracles, even when speaking of the most ordinary oc-
currences, as in the examples given above.

Hence we must believe that when the Bible says that
the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart, it only means that
Pharaoh was obstinate ; when it says that God opened the
windows of heaven, it only means that it rained very hard,
and so on. When we reflect on these peculiarities, and also
on the fact that most thii^s are related very shortly, with
very little detail, and abnost in abridgments, we shall see
that there is hardly anythii^ in Scripture which can be

Cred contrary to natural reason, while, on the other
d, many things which before seemed obscure, will after
Sb little consideration be understood and easily explained.

I think I have now very clearly explained all that I pro-
posed to explain, but before I finish this chapter I would
call attention to the fact that I have adopted a different
method in speaking of miracles to that which I employed
in treating of prophecy. Of prophecy I have asserted
nothing which could not be inferred from promises revealed
in Scripture, whereas in this chapter I have deduced my
conclusions solely from the principles ascertained by the
natural light of reason. I have proceeded in this way ad-
visedly, for prophecy, in that it surpasses human Imow-
ledge, is a purely theological question ; therefore, I knew
that I could not make any assertions about it^ T^sst Vasra.


96 ▲ THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAF. YI.

wherein it consists, except tlirough deductions from pre-
mises that liave been revealed ; therefore I was compelled
to collate the history of prophecy, and to draw therefrom
certain conclusions which would teach me, in so far as such
teaching is possible, the nature and properties of the gift.
But in the case of miracles, as our inquiry is a question
purely philosophical (namely, whether anything can happen
which contravenes, or does not follow from the laws of
nature), I was not under any such necessity : I therefore
thought it wiser to unravel the difficulty through premises
ascertained and thoroughly known by the natural light of
reason. I say I thought it wiser, for I could also easily
have solved the problem merely from the doctrines and
fundamental principles of Scripture : in order that every-
one may acknowledge this, I will briefly show how it could
be done.

Scripture makes the general assertion in several passages
tliat nature's course is fixed and unchangeable. In Ps.
cxlviii. 6, for instance, and Jer. xxxi. 35. The wise man
also, in Eccles. i. 10, distinctly teaches that " there is no-
thing new under the sun," and m verses 11, 12, illustrating
the same idea, he adds that although something occasionally
happens which seems new, it is not really new, but " hath
been already of old time, which was before us, whereof there
is no remembrance, neither shall there be any remembrance
of things that are to come with those that come after.'*
Again in chap. iii. 11, he says, " Gtod hath made everything
beautiful in his time," and immediately afterwards adds,
" I know that whatsoever God doeth, it shaU be for ever ;
nothmg can be put to it, nor anything taken from it."

Now all these texts teach most distinctly that nature
preserves a fixed and unchangeable order, and that God in
all ages, known and unknown, has been the same ; further,
that the laws of nature are so perfect, that nothing can be
added thereto nor taken therefrom ; and, lastly, that miracles
only appear as something new because of mln's ignorance.

Such is the express teaching of Scripture : nowhere does
Scripture assert that anything happens which contradicts,
or cannot follow from the laws of nature ; and, therefore^
we should not attribute to it such a doctrine.

To these considerations we must add, that miracles re-


\


CHAP. VI.] OP MIEACLB8. 97

quire causes aaid attendant circumstances, and that they
follow, not from some mysterious royal power which the
masses attribute to God, but from the Divine rule and de-
cree, that is (as we have shown from Scripture itself) from
the laws and order of nature ; lastly, that miracles can be
wrought even by false prophets, as is proved from Deut. xiii.
and Matt. xxiv. 24.

The conclusion, then, that is most plainly put before us
is, that miracles were natural occurrences, and must there-
fore be so explained as to appear neither new (in the words
of Solomon) nor contrary to nature, but, as far as possible,
in complete agreement with ordinary events. This can
easily be done by anyone, now that I have set forth the
rules drawn from Scripture. Nevertheless, though I maia-
tain that Scripture teaches this doctrine, I do not assert
that it teaches it as a truth necessary to salvation, but only
that the prophets were in agreement with ourselves on the
point ; therefore everyone is free to think on the subject as
he likes, according as he thinks it best for himself, and
most likely to conduce to the worship of Qod arid to single-
hearted religion.

This is also the opinion of Josephus, for at the conclusion
of the second book of his " Antiquities," he writes : " Let
no man think this story incredible of the sea's dividing to
save these people, for we find it in ancient records that
this hath been seen before, whether by God's extraordinary
will or by the course of nature it is indifferent. The same
thing happened one time to the Macedonians^ imder the
command of Akasander, when for want of another passage
the Pamjphylian Sea divided to make them way; Good's
Providence making use of Alexander at that time as His
instrument for destroying the Persian Empire. This is
attested by all the historians who have pretended to write
the life of that Prince. But people are at liberty to think
what they please."

Such are the words of Josephus, and such is his opinion
on faith in miracles.


98 A THEOLOGICO-FOLITICAL TEBATISB. [CHAP. VII.


CHAPTER Vn.

OF THE INTESPBETATION OF SCEIPTFRE.

WHEN people declare, as all are ready to do, that the
Bible is the Word of God teachii^ man true blessed-
ness and the way of salvation, they evidently do not mean
what they say ; for the masses take no pains at all to live
according to Scripture, and we see most people endeavouring
to hawk about their own commentaries as the word of God,
and giving their best efforts, under the guise of religion,
to compelling others to think as they do : we generally see,
I say, theologians anxious to learn how to wring their in-
ventions and sayings out of the sacred text, and to fortify
them with Divine authority. Such persons never display
less scruple or more zeal than when they are interpreting
Scripture or the mind of the Holy Q-host ; if we ever see
them perturbed, it is not that they fear to attribute some
error to the Holy Spirit, and to stray from the right path,
but that they are a&aid to be convicted of error by others,
and thus to overthrow and bring into contempt their own
authority. But if men really believed what they verbally
testify of Scripture, they would adopt quite a different plan
of life : their minds would not be agitated by so many con-
tentions, nor so many hatreds, and they would cease to be
excited by such a blind and rash passion for interpreting
the sacred writings, and excogitating novelties in religion.
On the contrary, they would not dare to adopt, as the
teaching of Scripture, anything which they could not plainly
deduce therefrom : lastly, those sacrilegious persons who
have -dared, in several passages, to interpolate the Bible,
would have shrunk from so great a crime, and would have
stayed their sacrilegious hands.

Ambition and unscrupulousness have waxed so powerful,
that religion is thought to consist, not so much in respect-


CHAP. YII.] OF THE IKTSBPBETATIOIT OF SCBIPTFBE. 99

ing the writings of the Holy Ghost, as in defending hmnan- l^^^ ' ^
commentaries, so that religion is no longer identified with/
charitj, but with spreading discord and propagating insen4
sate hatred disguised under the name of zeal for the Lord,
and eager ardour.

To these evils we must add superstition, which teaches
men to despise reason and nature, and only to admire and
venerate that which is repugnant to both : whence it is not
wonderful that for the sake of increasing the admiration
and veneration felt for Scripture, men strive to explain it
80 as to make it appear to contradict, as far as possible,
both one and the other : thus thej dream that most pro-
found mysteries He hid in the Bible, and weary themselves
out in the investigation of these absurdities, to the neglect
of what is useful. Every result of their diseased imagina-
tion they attribute to the Holy Ghost, and strive to defend
mth the utmost zeal and passion ; for it is an observed
fact that men employ their reason to defend conclusions
arrived at by reason, but conclusions arrived at by the
passions are defended by the passions.

If we would separate ourselves from the crowd and escape
from theological prejudices, instead of rashly accepting
human commentaries for Divine documents, we must con-
sider the true method of interpreting Scripture and dwell
upon it at some length : for if we remain in ignorance of
this we cannot know, certainly, what the Bible and the
Holy Spirit wish to teach.

I may sum up the matter by saying that the method of
interpreting Scripture does not widely differ from the
method of interpreting nature — ^in fact, it is almost the
same. For as the interpretation of nature consists in the
examination of the history of nature, and therefrom de-
ducing definitions of natural phenomena on certain fixed
axioms, so Scriptural interpretation proceeds by the exami-
nation of Scripture, and inferring the intention of its
authors as a legitimate conclusion from its fundamental
principles. By working in this manner everyone will
always advance without danger of error — ^that is, if they
admit no principles for interpreting Scripture, and dis-
cussing its contents save such as they find in Scripture
itself — and will be able with equal security to dkc\s&'&^\^sb^


100 ▲ THEOLOGIGO-POLinOAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. YII.

surpasses our understaiiding» and wliat is known by the
natural light of reason.

In order to make clear that such a method is not onlj
correct, but is also the only one advisable, and that it agrees,
with that employed in interpreting nature, I must remark
that Scripture very often treats of matters which cannot
be deduced from principles known to reason: for it i»
chiefly made up of narratives and revelation : the narratives
generally contain miracles — ^that is, as we have shown in the
last chapter, relations of extraordinary natural occurrences,
adapted to the opinions and judgment of the historians
who recorded them : the revelations also were adapted to-
the opinions of the prophets, as we showed in Chiap. IL».
and in themselves surpassed human comprehension. There-
fore the knowledge of all these — ^that is, of nearly the whole
contents of Scripture, must be sought from Scripture alone^
even as the knowledge of nature is sought from nature.
As for the moral doctrines which are also contained in the
Bible, they may be demonstrated from received axioms^
but we cannot prove in the same manner that Scripture
intended to teach them, this can only be learned from Scrips
ture itself.

If we would bear unprejudiced witness to the Divine
origin of Scripture, we must prove solely on its own autho*
rity that it te^hes true moral doctrines, for by such means
alone can its Divine origin be demonstrated : we have shown
that the certitude of the prophets depended chiefly on their
having minds turned towards what is just and good, there-
fore we ought to have proof of their possessing this quality
before we reposef aith in them. From miracles God's divinity^
cannot be proved, as I have already shown, and need not
now repeat, for miracles could be wrought by false prophets.
Wherefore the Divine origin of Scripture must consist
solely in its teaching true virtue. But we must come to-
our conclusion simply on Scriptural grounds, for if we
were unable to do so we could not, imless strongly pre-
judiced, accept the Bible and bear witness to its Divine
origin.

Our knowledge of Scripture must then be looked for m.
Scripture only.

Lastly, Scripture does not give us definitions of things


■'•„ *■


CHAP. YII.] OF THE Iin?EBPBETATION OF BCBIPTXTBE. 101

any more than nature does: therefore, such definitions must
be sought in the latter case from the diverse workings of
nature; in the former case, from the various narratives
about the given subject which occur in the Bible.

The universal rule, then, in interpreting Scripture is to
accept nothing as an authoritative Scriptural statement
which we do not perceive very clearly when we examine it
in the light of its history. What I mean by its history,
and what should be the chief points elucidated, I will now
explain.

The history of a Scriptural statement comprises —

L The nature and properties of the language in which
the books of the Bible were written, and in which their
authors were accustomed to speak. We shall thus be able
to investigate every expression by comparison with common
conversational usages.

Now all the writers both of the Old Testament and the
New were Hebrews : therefore, a knowledge of the Hebrew
language is before aJl things necessary, not only for the
comprehension of the Old Testament, which was written in
that tongue, but also of the New : for although the latter
was published in other languages, yet its characteristics
are Hebrew.

n. An analysis of each book and arrangement of its
contents under heads ; so that we may have at hand the
various texts which treat of a given subject. Lastly, a note
of all the passages which are ambiguous or obscure, or
which seem mutually contradictory.

I call passages clear or obscure according as their mean-
ing is inferred easily or with difficulty in relation to the
context, not according as their truth is perceived easily or
the reverse by reason. We are at work not on the truth of
passages, but solely on their meaning. We must take
especial care, when we are in search of the meaning of a
text, not to be led away by our reason in so far as it is
founded on principles of natural knowledge (to say nothing
of prejudices) : in order not to confoimd the meaning of
a passage with its truth, we must examine it solely by
means of the signification of the words, or by a reason
acknowledging no foundation but Scripture.

I will illustrate my meaning by an example. The words


(


102 ▲ THEOLOGICO-POLITIOAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. YIT.

of Moses, " God is a fire " and " God is jealous," are per-
fectly clear so long as we regard merely tHe signification of
the words, and I therefore reckon them among the clear
passages, though in relation to reason and truth thej are
most obscure : still, although the literal meaning is repug-
nant to the natural light of reason, nevertheless, if it cannot
be clearly overruled on grounds and principles derived
from its Scriptural " history," it, that is, the literal meanings
must be the one retained: and contrariwise if these pas-
sages literally interpreted are found to clash with principles,
derived from Scripture, though such literal interpretation
were in absolute harmony with reason, they must be inter-
preted in a different manner, i.e. metaphorically.

If we would know whether Moses believed God to be a
fire or not, we must on no account decide the question on
grounds of the reasonableness or the reverse of such an
opinion, but must judge solely by the other opinions of
Moses which are on record.

In the present instance, as Moses says in several other
passages that God has no likeness to any visible thing,
whether in heaven or in earth, or in the water, either all
such passages must be taken metaphorically, or else the
one before us must be so explained. However, as we should
depart as little as possible &om the literal sense, we must
first ask whether this text, God is a fire, admits of any but
the literal meaning — ^that is, whether the word fire ever
means anythii^ besides ordinary natural fire. If no such
second meaning can be found, the text must be taken
literally, however repugnant to reason it may be : and all
the other passages, though in complete accordance with
reason, must be brought into harmony with it. If the
verbal expressions would not admit of being thus har-
monized, we should have to set them down as irreconcilable^
and suspend our judgment concerning them. However, as
we find the name fire applied to anger and jealousy (see
Job xxxi. 12) we can thus easily reconcile the words of
Moses, and legitimately conclude that the two propositions
God is a fire, and God is jealous, are in meaning identical.

Further, as Moses clearly teaches that God is jealous,
and nowhere states that God is without passions or
emotions, we must evidently infer that Moses held this


CHAP. VII.] OF THE INTEEPBETATION OF SCEIPTTJBE. 103

doctrine himself, or at any rate, that he wished to teach it,
nor must we refrain because such a belief seems contrary
to reason: for as we have shown, we cannot wrest the
meaning of texts to stiit the dictates of our reason, or our
preconceived opinions. The whole knowledge of the Bible
must be sought solely from itself.

m. Lastly, such a history should relate the environment
of all the prophetic books extant ; that is, the life, the con-
duct, and the studies of the author of each book, who he
was, what was the occasion, and the epoch of his writing,
whom did he write for, and in what language. Further, it
should inquire into the fate of each book : how it was first
received, into whose hands it fell, how many different ver-
sions there were of it, by whose advice was it received into
the Bible, and, lastly, how all the books now universally
accepted as sacred, were united into a single whole.

All such information should, as I have said, be contained
in the " history " of Scripture. For, in order to know what
statements are set forth as laws, and what as moral prei>
cepts, it is important to be acquabited with the life, the
conduct, and the pursuits of their author: moreover, it
becomes easier to explain a man's writings in proportion as
we have more intimate knowledge of his genius and tem-
perament.

Further, that we may not confound precepts which are
eternal with those which served only a temporary purpose, V
or were only meant for a few, we should know what was
the occasion, the time, the age, in which each book was
written, and to what nation it was addressed.

Lastly, we should have knowledge on the other points I
have mentioned, in order to be sure, ia addition to the
authenticity of the work, that it has not been tampered
with by sacrilegious hands, or whether errors can have
crept in, and, if so, whether they have been corrected by
men sufficiently skilled and worthy of credence. All these
things should be known, that we may not be led away by
blind impulse to accept whatever is thrust on our notice,
instead of only that which is sure and indisputable.

Now, when we are in possession of this history of Scrip-
ture, and have finally decided that we assert nothing as
prophetic doctrine winch does not directly follow from such


X


104( A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBBATISE. [CHAP. YII.

history, or which is not clearly dedudble from it, then, I
say, it will be time to gird ourselves for the task of investi-
gating the mind of the prophets and of the Holy Spirit.
But in this further arguing, also, we shall require a method
very Kke that employed in interpreting nature from her
history. As in the examination of natural phenomena we
try first to investigate what is most imiversal and common
to aU nature — such, for instance, as motion and rest, and
their laws and rules, which nature always observes, and
through which she continually works — and then we proceed
to what is less imiversal ; so, too, in the history of Scrip-
ture, we seek first for that which is most imiversal, and
serves for the basis and foundation of all Scripture, a doc-
trine, in fa^ that ia commended by aU the prophets as
eternal and most profitable to all men. For example, that
G-od is one, and that He is omnipotent, that He alone
should be worshipped, that He has a care for all men, and
that He especially loves those who adore Him and love
their neighbour as themselves, &c. These and similar doc-
trines, I repeat. Scripture everywhere so clearly and ex-
pressly teaches, that no one was ever in doubt of its mean-
ing concerning them.

The nature of God, His manner of regarding and pro-
viding for things, and similar doctrines. Scripture nowhere
teaches professedly, and as eternal doctrine; on the con-
trary, we have shown that the prophets themselves did not
agree on the subject ; therefore, we must not lay down any
doctrine as Scriptural on such subjects, though it may
appear perfectly clear on rational grounds.

From a proper knowledge of this universal doctrine of
Scripture, we must then proceed to other doctrines less
universal, but which, nevertheless, have regard to the
general conduct of Hfe, and flow from the universal doc-
trine like rivulets from a source ; such are all particular
external manifestations of true virtue, which need a given
occasion for their exercise; whatever is obscure or am-
biguous on such points in Scripture must be explained and
defined by its universal doctrine ; with regard to contradic-
tory instances, we must observe the occasion and the time
in which they were written. For instance, when Christ
says, " Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be com-


CHAP. YII.] OF THB INTEBPBETATIOK OF SCBIPTXJBE. 105

forted/' we do not know, from the actual passage, what
eort of mourners are meant ; as, however, Christ afterwards
teaches that we should have care for nothing, save only for
the kingdom of God and His righteousness, which is com-
mended as the highest good (see Matt. vi. 33), it follows
that by mourners He only meant those who mourn for the
kingdom of God and righteousness neglected by man : for
this would be the only cause of mourning to those who love
nothing but the Divine kingdom and justice, and who
evidently despise the gifts of fortune. So, too, when
Christ says: " But if a man strike you on the right cheek,
turn to him the left also," and the words which follow.

If He had given such a command, as a lawgiver, to
judges, He would thereby have abrogated the law of Moses,
but this He expressly says He did not do (Matt. v. 17).
Wherefore we must consider who was the speaker, what
was the occasion, and to whom were the words addressed.
Now Christ said that He did not ordain laws as a legislator,
but inculcated precepts as a teacher : inasmuch as He did
not aim at correcting outward actions so much as the frame
of mind. Further, these words were spoken to men who
were oppressed, who lived in a corrupt commonwealth on
the brink of ruin, where justice was utterly neglected. The
very doctrine inculcated here by Christ just before the de-
struction of the dty was also taught by Jeremiah before
the first destruction of Jerusalem, that is, in similar circum-
stances, as we see from Lamentations iii. 25-30.

Now as such teaching was only set forth by the prophets
in times of oppression, and was even then never laid down
as a law ; and as, on the other hand, Moses (who did not
write in times of oppression, but — mark this — strove to
found a well-ordered commonwealth), while condemning
envy and hatred of one's neighbour, yet ordained that an
eye should be given for an eye, it follows most clearly from
these purely Scriptural grounds that this precept of Christ
and Jeremmh concerning submission to injuries was only
vaUd in places where justice is neglected, and in a time of
oppression, but does not hold good in a well-ordered state.

In a well-ordered state where justice is administered
every one is bound, if he would be accounted just, to de-
mand penalties before the judge (see Lev. v. 1), not for the


106 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATI8E. [CHAP. VII.

sake of vengeance (Lev. xix. 17, 18), but in order to defend
justice and his country's laws, and to prevent the wicked
rejoidng in their wickedness. All this is plainly in accor*
dance with reason. I might cite many other examples in
the same manner, but I think the foregoing are suificient
to explain my meaning and the utility of this method, and
this is all my present purpose. Hitherto we have only
shown how to investigate those passages of Scripture which
treat of practical conduct, and which, therefore, are more
easily examined, for on such subjects there was never really
any controversy among the writers of the Bible.

The purely speculative passages cannot be so easily
traced to their real meaning : the way becomes narrower,
for as the prophets differed in matters speculative among^
themselves, and the narratives are in great measure adapted
to the prejudices of each age, we must not, on any account,,
infer the intention of one prophet from clearer passages in
the writings of another ; nor must we so explain his mean*
ing, unless it is perfectly plain that the two prophets were
at one in the matter.

How we are to arrive at the intention of the prophets in
such cases I will briefly explain. Here, too, we must begin
from the most universal proposition, inquiring first from
the most clear Scriptural statements what is the nature of
prophecy or revelation, and wherein does it consist ; then
we must proceed to miracles, and so on to whatever is most
general till we come to the opinions of a particular prophet,
and, at last, to the meaning of a particular revelation,
prophecy, history, or miracle. We have already pointed
out that great caution is necessary not to confound the
mind of a prophet or historian with the mind of the Holy
Spirit and the truth of the matter ; therefore I need not
dwell further on the subject. I would, however, here re-
mark concerning the meaning of revelation, that the present
method only teaches us what the prophets really saw or
heard, not what they desired to signify or represent by
sjmbols. The latter may be guessed at but cannot be in-
ferred with certainty from Scriptural premises.

We have thus shown the plan for interpreting Scripture,
and have, at the same time, demonstrated that it is the one
and surest way of investigating its true meaning. I am


CHAP. VII.] OF THE INTEBPBETATIOIT OF SCBIPTTTRE. 107

willing indeed to admit tliat those persons (if any such
there be) would be more absolutely certainly right, who-
have received either a trustworthy tradition or an assurance
from the prophets themselves, such as is claimed by the
Pharisees ; or who have a pontifE gifted with inf aUibility in
the interpretation of Scripture, such as the Eoman Catholics
boast. But as we can never be perfectly sure, either of
such a tradition or of the authority of the pontiff, we can-
not found any certain conclusion on either : the one is de-
nied by the oldest sect of Christians, the other by the
oldest sect of Jews. Indeed, if we consider the series of
years (to mention no other point) a.ccepted by the Pharisees
from their Babbis, during which time they say they have-
handed down the tradition from Moses, we shall find that
it is not correct, as I show elsewhere. Therefore such a.
tradition should be received with extreme suspicion ; and
although, according to our method, we are bound to con>
sider as uncorrupted the tradition of the Jews, namely, the
meaning of the Hebrew words which we received from
them, we may accept the latter while retaining our doubts,
about the former.

No one has ever been able to change the meaning of a.
word inordinary use, though many have changed the mean-
ing of a particular sentence. Such a proceeding would be
most difficult ; for whoever attempted to change the meaning
of a word, would be compelled, at the same time, to explain
all the authors who employed it, each according to his tem-
perament and intention, or else, with consummate cunnings
to falsify them.

Further, the masses and the learned alike preserve lan>
guage, but it is only the learned who preserve the meaning'
of particular sentences and books: thus, we may easily
imagine that the learned having a very rare book in their
power, might change or corrupt the meaning of a sentence
in it, but they could not alter tiie signification of the words;,
moreover, if anyone wanted to change the meaning of a.
common word he would not be able to keep up the change
among posterity, or in common parlance or writing.

For these and such-like reasons we may readily conclude
that it would never enter into the mind of anyone to
corrupt a language, though the intention of a writer may


103 A THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. VII.

often have been falsified bj changing bis phrases or intei'-
preting them amiss. As then onr method (based on the
principle that the knowledge of Scripture must be sought
from itseK alone) is the sole true one, we must evidently
renounce any knowledge which it cannot furnish for the
complete understanding of Scripture. I will now point out
its difficulties and shortcomings, which prevent our gaining
a complete and assured knowlege of the Sacred Text.

Its first great difficulty consists in its requiring a
thorough knowledge of the Hebrew language. Where is
such knowledge to be obtained? The men of old who
employed the Hebrew tonsfue have left none of the prin-
dpfesW bases of theirl^^ge to posterity; we We
from them absolutely nothing in the way of dictionary,
grammar, or rhetoric.

Now the Hebrew nation has lost all its grace and beauty
(as one would expect after the defeats and persecutions it
has gone through), and has only retained certain fragments
of its language and of a few books. Nearly all the names
of fruits, birds, and fishes, and many other words have
perished in the wear and tear of time. Further, the mean-
ing of many nouns and verbs which occur in the Bible are
either utterly lost, or are subjects of dispute. And not
only are these gone, but we are lacking in a knowledge of
Hebrew phraseology. The devouring tooth of time has de-
stroyed nearly aU the phrases and turns of expression
peculiar to the Hebrews, so that we know them no more.
Therefore we cannot investigate as we would all the mean-
ings of a sentence by the uses of the language; and there
are many phrases of which the meaning is most obscure or
altogether inexplicable, though the component words are
perfectly plain.

To this impossibility of tracing the history of the Hebrew
language must be added its particular nature and c^ompo-
sition : these give rise to so many ambiguities that it is im-
possible to find a method which woiild enable us to gain a
certain knowledge of all the statements in Scripture.^ In
addition to the sources of ambiguities common to all lan-
guages, there are many peculiar to Hebrew. These, I think,
it worth while to mention.

Firstly, an ambiguity often arises in the Bible from our

* See Note 7.


CHAP. YII.] OF THE UTTEBPSETATION OF SCSIPTUBE. 109

mistaking one letter for another similar one. The Hebrews
divide the letters of the alphabet into five classes, according
to the five organs of the mouth employed in pronouncing
them, namely, the Ups, the tongue, the teeth, the palate,
and the throat. For instance. Alpha, GJiet, Hgain, He, are
caUed gutturals, and are barely distinguishable, by any sign
that we know, one from the other. JEl, which signifies to,
is often taken for Jigal, which signifies above, and vice versa.
Hence sentences are often rendered rather ambiguous or
meaningless.

A second difficulty arises from the multiplied meaning
of conjunctions and adverbs. For instance, vau serves
promiscuously for a particle of union or of separation, mean-
ing, and, hut, hecauae, however, then : hi, has seven or eight
meanings, namely, wherefore, although, if, when, inasmuch
as, because, a burning, &c., and so on with almost all
particles.

The third very fertile source of doubt is the fact that
Hebrew verbs in the indicative mood lack the present, the
past imperfect, the pluperfect, the future perfect, and other
tenses most frequently employed in other languages ; in the
imperative and infinitive moods they are wanting in all ex-
cept the present, and a subjunctive mood does not exist.
Now, although all these defects in moods and tenses may
be suppUed by certain fundamental rules of the language
with ease and even elegance, the ancient writers evidently-
neglected such rules altogether, and employed indifferently
future for present and past, and vice versa past for future,
and also indicative for imperative and subjunctive, with the
result of considerable confusion.

Besides these sources of ambiguity there are two others,
one very important. Firstly, there are in Hebrew no
vowels ; secondly, the sentences are not separated by any
marks elucidating the meaning or separating the clauses.
Though the want of these two has generally been supphed
by points and accents, such substitutes cannot be accepted
by us, inasmuch as they were invented and designed by
men of an after age whose authority should carry no
weight. The ancients wrote without points (that is, with-
out vowels and accents), as is abundantly testified ; their
descendants added what was lacking, according to their own


110 A THBOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [cHAP. Til.

ideas of Scriptural interpretation ; wherefore the existing
accents and points are simply current interpretations, and
are no more authoritative than anj other commentaries.

Those who are ignorant of this fact cannot justify the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews for interpreting
(chap. xi. 21) Genesis (xlvii. 31) very differently from the
version given in our Hebrew text as at present pointed,
as though the Apostle had been obliged to learn the mean-
ing of Scripture from those who added the points. In my
opinion the latter are clearly wrong. In order that every-
one may judge for himself, and also see how the discre-
pancy arose simply from the want of vowels, I will give
both interpretations. Those who pointed our version read,
'" And Israel bent himseK over, or (changing Hgain into
Aleph, a siniilar letter) towards, the head of the bed." The
.author of the Epistle reads, " And Israel bent himself over
the head of his staff," substituting mate for mita, from
•which it only differs in respect of vowels. Now as in this
narrative it is Jacob's age only that is in question, and not
his illness, which is not touched on till the next chapter,
it seems more likely that the historian intended to say
that Jacob bent over the head of his staff (a thing com-
monly used by men of advanced age for their support)
than that he bowed himself at the head of his bed, espe-
cially as for the former reading no substitution of letters
:is required. In this example I have desired not only to
reconcile the passage in the Epistle with the passage in
'Genesis, but also and chiefly to illustrate how little trust
.should be placed in the points and accents which are found
in our present Bible, and so to prove that he who would
be without bias in interpreting Scripture should hesitate
: about accepting them, and inquire afresh for himself.
Such being the nature and structure of the Hebrew lan-
guage, one may easily understand that many difficulties
are likely to arise, and that no possible method could solve
all of them. It is useless to hope for a way out of our
difficulties in the comparison of various parallel passages
(we have shown that the only method of discovering the
true sense of a passage out of many alternative ones is to
see what are the usages of the language), for this com-
j)arison of parallel passages can only accidentally throw


CHAP. VII.] OF THE INTEBPBETATION OP SCBIPTITBE. Ill

light on a difficult point, seeing that the prophets never
-wrote with the express object of explaining their own
phrases or those of other people, and also because we
cannot infer the meaning of one prophet or apostle by the
meaning of another, unless on a purely practical question,
not when the matter is speculative, or if a miracle, or his-
tory is being narrated. I might illustrate my point with in-
staiices, for there are many inexplicable phrases in Scrip-
ture, but I would rather pass on to consider the difficulties
and imperfections of the method under discussion.

A fruitier difficulty attends the method, from the fact
that it requires the history of all that has happened to
every book in the Bible ; such a history we are often quite
unable to furnish. Of the authors, or (if the expression
be preferred), the writers of many of the books, we are
-either in 'complete ignorance, or at any rate in doubt, as I
will point out at length. Further, we do not know either
the occasions or the epochs when these books of unknown
«,uthorship were written ; we cannot say into what hands
they fell, nor how the numerous varying versions origi-
nated ; nor, lastly, whether there were not other versions,
now lost. I have briefly shown that such knowledge is
necessary, but I passed over certain considerations which I
will now draw attention to.

If we read a book which contains incredible or impos-
sible narratives, or is written in a very obscure style, and
if we know nothing of its author, nor of the time or occa-
sion of its being written, we shall vainly endeavour to
gain any certain knowledge of its true meaning. For being
in ignorance on these points we cannot possibly know the
aim or intended aim of the author ; if we are fully in-
formed, we so order our thoughts as not to be in any way
prejudiced either in ascribing to the author or him for
-whom the author wrote either more or less than his mean-
ing, and we only take into consideration what the author
may have had in his mind, or what the time and occasion
•demanded. I think this must be tolerably evident to all.

It often happens that in different books we read his-
tories in themselves similar, but which we judge very
•differently, according to the opinions we have formed of
the authors. I remember once to have read in some book


\


112 A THBOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBBATISB. [CHAP. VII.

that a man named Orlando Furioso used to drive a Mnd of
winged monster through the air, fly over any coimtries he
liked, Trill unaided vast numbers of men and giants, and
such like fancies, which from the point of view of reason
are obviously absurd. A very similar story I read in Ovid
of Perseus, and also in the books of Judges and Kings of
Samson, who alone and unarmed killed thousands of men,
and of Elijah, who flew through the air, and at last went
up to heaven in a chariot of flre, with horses of Are. All
these stories are obviously alike, but we judge them very
differently. The first only sought to amuse, the second had
a political object, the third a religious object. We gather
this simply from the opinions we had previously formed of
the authors. Thus it is evidently necessary to know some-
thing of the authors of writings which are obscujre or un-
inteUigible, if we would interpret their meaning ; and for
Hhe same reason, in order to choose the proper reading from
among a great variety, we ought to have information as to
the versions in which the differences are found, and as to
the possibility of other readings having been discovered by
persons of greater authority.

A further difficulty attends this method in the case of
some of the books of Scripture, namely, that they are no
longer extant in their original language. The Gospel
according to Matthew, and certainly the Epistle to the
Hebrews, were written, it is thought, in Hebrew, though
they no longer exist in that form. Aben Ezra affirms in
his commentaries that the book of Job was translated into
Hebrew out of another language, and that its obscurity
arises from this fact. I say nothing of the apocryphal
books, for their authority stands on very inferior ground.

The foregoing difficulties in this method of interpreting-
Scripture from its own history, I conceive to be so great
that I do not hesitate to say that the true meaning of
Scripture is in many places inexplicable, or at best mere
subject for guesswork ; but I must again point out, on the
other hand, that such difficulties only arise when we en-
deavour to follow the meaning of a prophet in matters
which cannot be perceived, but only imagined, not in things^
whereof the understanding can give a clear and distinct idea,
and which are conceivable through themselves : ^ matters

^ See Note 8.


CHAP. Til.] OF THB INTBSPSBTATIOK OV SCBIPTUSE. 113

wliich by their nature are easily perceived cannot be ex-
pressed so obscurely as to be unintelligible ; as the proverb
says, '' a word is enough to the wise.'' Euclid, who only
wrote of matters very simple and easily understood, can
easily be comprehended by anyone in any language ; we can
follow his intention perfectly, and be certain of his true
meaning, without having a thorough knowledge of the lan-
guage in which he wrote ; in fact, a quite rudimentary ac-
quaintance is sufficient. We need msblie no researches con-
cerning the life, the pursuits, or the habits of the author ;
nor need we inquire in what language, nor when he wrote,
nor the vicissitudes of his book, nor its various readings,
nor how, nor by whose advice it has been received.

What we here say of Euclid might equally be said of any
book which treats of things by their nature perceptible :
thus we conclude that we can easily follow the intention of
Scripture in moral questions, from the history we possess
of it, and we can be sure of its true meaning.

The precepts of true piety are expressed in very ordinary
language, and are equally simple and easily understood.
Further, as true salvation and blessedness consist in a
true assent of the soul — and we truly assent only to
what we clearly understand — ^it is most plain that we can
follow with certainty the intention of Scripture in matters
relatii^ to salvation and necessary to blessedness ; there-
fore, we need not be much troubled about what remains :
such matters, inasmuch as we generally cannot grasp them
with our reason and understanding, are more curious than
profitable.

I think I have now set forth the true method of Scrip-
tural interpretation, and have sufficiently explained my
own opinion thereon. Besides, I do not doubt that every-
one will see that such a method only requires the aid of
natural reason. The nature and efficacy of the natural
reason consists in deducing and proving the unknown from
the known, or in carrying premises to their legitimate con-
clusions; and these are the very processes which our
method desiderates. Though we must admit that it does
not suffice to explain everything in the Bible, such imper-
fection does not spring from its own nature, but from the
fact that the path which it teaches us, as the true one, has

I


114i A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [cHAP. YII.

never been tended or trodden by men, and has thus, by the
lapse of time, become very difficult, and almost impass-
able, as, indeed, I have shown in the difficulties I draw
attention to.

There only remains to examine the opinions of those who
differ from me.

The first which comes under our notice is, that the light
of nature has no power to interpret Scripture, but that a
supernatural facility is required for the task. What is
meant by this supernatural faculty I will leave to its pro-
pounders to explain. Personally, I can only suppose that
they have adopted a very obscure way of stating their com-
plete uncertainty about the true meaning of Scripture. If
we look at their interpretations, they contaiQ nothing
supernatural, at least nothing but the merest conjectures.
' Let them be placed side by side with the interpretations
of those who frankly confess that they have no faculty
beyond their natural ones ; we shall see that the two are
just alike — ^both human, both long pondered over, both
laboriously invented. To say that the natural reason is in-
sufficient for such results is plainly untrue, firstly, for the
reasons above stated, namely, that the difficulty of inter-
preting Scripture arises from no defect in human reason,
but simply from the carelessness (not to say maUce) of men
who neglected the history of the Bible while there were
still materials for inquiry; secondly, from the fact (ad-
mitted, I think, by all) that the supernatural faculty is a
Divine gift granted only to the faithful. But the prophets
and apostles did not preach to the faithful only, but chiefly
to the unfaithful and wicked. Such persons, therefore, were
able to understand the intention of the prophets and
apostles, otherwise the prophets and apostles would have
seemed to be preaching to Httle boys and infants, not to
men endowed with reason. Moses, too, would have given
his laws in vain, if they could only be comprehended by the
faithful, who need no law. Indeed, those who demand
supernatural faculties for comprehending the meaning of
the prophets and apostles seem truly lacking in natural
faculties, so that we should hardly suppose such persons the
possessors of a Divine supernatural gift.

The opinion of Maimonides was widely different. He


CHAP. YII.] OF THE INTEBPBETATIOir OF SCSIPTXmE. 115

asserted that eacli passage in Scripture admits of various,
naj, contrary, meanings ; but that we could never be cer-
tain of any particular one till we knew that the passage, as
we interpreted it, contained nothing contrary or repugnant
to reason. If the literal meaning clashes with reason,
though the passage seems in itself perfectly clear, it must
be interpreted in some metaphorical sense. This doctrine
he lays down very plainly in chap. xxv. part ii. of his book,
^ More Kebuchim," for he says : " Kiiow that we shrink
not from affirming that the world hath existed from eter-
nity, because of what Scripture saith concerning the world's
creation. For the texts which teach that the world was
created are not more in number than those which teach
that Qod hath a body ; neither are the approaches in this
matter of the world's creation closed, or even made hard to
us: so that we should not be able to explain what is
written, as we did when we showed that God hath no body,
nay, peradventure, we could explain and make fast the doc-
trine of the world's eternity more easily than we did away
with the doctrines that God hath a beatified body. Tet
two things hinder me from doing as I have said, and
believing that the world is eternal. As it hath been
clearly shown that Qod hath not a body, we must per-
force explain all those passages whereof the literal sense
4greeth not with the demonstration, for sure it is that they
can be so explained. But the eternity of the world hath
not been so demonstrated, therefore it is not necessary to do
violence to Scripture in support of some common opinion,
whereof we might, at the bidding of reason, embrace the
contrary."

Such are the words of Maimonides, and they are evidently
sufficient to establish our point : for if he had been con-
vinced by reason that the world is eternal, he would not
have hesitated to twist and explain away the words of
Scripture till he made them appear to teach this doc-
trine. He would have felt quite sure that Scripture, though
everywhere plainly denying the eternity of the world, really
intends to teach it. So that, however clear the meaning of
Scripture may be, he would not feel certain of having
grasped it, so long as he remained doubtful of the truth of
what was written. For we are in doubt whether a thing is


116 A. IHEOLOGIGO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. Til.

in conformity with reason, or contrary thereto, so long as
we are uncertain of its truth, and, consequently, we cannot
. be sure whether the literal meaning of a passage be true or
false.

If such a theory as this were sound, I would certainly
grant that some faculty beyond the natural reason is re-
quired for interpreting Scripture. For nearly all tlungs.
that we find in Scripture cannot be inferred from known
principles of the natural reason, and, therefore, we should
be unable to come to any conclusion about their truth, or
about the real meaning and intention of Scripture, but
should stand in need of some further assistance.

Further, the truth of this theory would involve that the
masses, having generally no comprehension of, nor leisure
for, detailed proofs, would be reduced to receiving all their
knowledge of Scripture on the authority and testimony of
philosophers, and, consequently, would be compelled to-
suppose that the interpretations given by philosophers were
infallible.

Truly this would be a new form of ecclesiastical autho-
rity, and a new sort of priests or pontifEs, more likely to-
excite men's ridicule than their veneration. Certainly
our method demands a knowledge of Hebrew for which the
masses have no leisure ; but no such objection as the fore-
going can be brought against us. For the ordinary Jews,
or GentUes, to whom the prophets and apostles preached
and wrote, understood the language, and, consequently, the
intention of the prophet or apostle addressing them ; but
they did not grasp the intrinsic reason of what was preached,,
which, according to Maimonides, would be necessary for an
understanding of it.

There is nothing, then, in our method which renders it
necessary that the masses should f oUow the testimony of
commentators, for I point to a set of unlearned people who-
understood the language of the pi'0])hets and apostles;
whereas Maimonides could not point to any such who
could arrive at the prophetic or apostolic meaning through
their knowledge of the causes of things.

As to the multitude of our own time, we have shown
that whatsoever is necessary to salvation, though its reasons
may be unknown, can easily be understood in any language^ i


CHAP. YII.] OF THE IKTEBPRETATIOK OF SOBIPTIJBE. 117

l)6cause it is tliorotighlj ordinary and usual; it is in such^
understanding as this that the masses acquiesce, not in the
testimonj of commentators ; with regard to other questions,
the ignorant and the learned fare alike.

But let us return to the opinion of Maimonides, and exa-
mine it more closely. In the first place, he supposes that the
prophets were in entire agreement one with another, and
that thej were consummate philosophers and theologians ;
for he would have them to have based their conclusions on
the absolute truth. Further, he supposes that the sense of
Scripture cannot be made plain fiom Scripture itself, for
the truth of things is not made plain therein (in that it
•does not prove any thing, nor teach the matters of which
it speaks through their definitions and first causes), there-
fore, according to Maimonides, the true sense of Scripture
•cannot be made plain from itself, and must not be there

430Ught.

^e falsity of such a doctrine is shown in this very chap-
ter, for we have shown both by reason and examples that
the meaning of Scripture is only made plain through Scrip-
ture itself, and even in questions dedudble from ordinary
knowledge should be looked for from no other source.

Lastly, such a theory supposes that we may explain the
words of Scripture according to our preconceived opinions,
twisting them about, and reversing or completely changing
the literal sense, however plain it may be. Such licence is
utterly opposed to the teaching of this and the preceding
chapters, and, moreover, will be evident to everyone as rash
and excessive.

But if we grant all this licence, what can it effect after
all? Absolutely nothing. Those things which cannot be
•demonstrated, and which make up the greater part of
^ripture, cannot be examined by reason, and cannot there-
fore be explained or interpreted by this rule ; whereas, on
the contrary, by following our own method, we can explain
many questions of this nature, and discuss them on a sure
basis, as we have already shown, by reason and example.
Those matters which are by their nature comprehensible
we can easily explain, as has been pointed out, simply by
■means of the context.

Therefore, the method of Maimonides is clearly useless :


118 ▲ THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. YII*

to whicli we maj add, tliat it does awaj with all the cer-
tainty which the masses acquire by candid reading, or
whii is gained by mj oth^ persolas in any o^eTway.
^sJ[II conclusion, then, we dismiss Maimonides' theory as-
' narmful, useless, and absurd.

As to the tradition of the Pharisees, we have abeady
shown that it is not consistent, while the authority of the
popes of Bome stands in need of more credible evidence ;.
the latter, indeed, I reject simply on this ground, for if the
popes could point out to us the meaning of Scripture as.
surely as did the high priests of the Jews, I should not be
deterred by the fact tlmt there have been heretic and im-
pious Boman pontiffs ; for among the Hebrew high-priests,
of old there were also heretics and impious men who gained
the high-priesthood by improper means, but who, neverthe-
less, had Scriptural sanction for their supreme power of in-
terpreting the law. (See Deut. xvii. 11, 12, and xxxiii. 10,.
also Malachi ii. 8.)

However, as the popes can show no such sanction, their
authority remains open to very grave doubt, nor should any-
one be deceived by the example of the Jewish high-priest»
and think that the Catholic religion also stands in need of
a pontifE ; he should bear in mind that the laws of Mose&
being also the ordinary laws of the country, necessarily re-
quired some pubHc authority to insure their observance ;
for, if everyone were free to interpret the laws of his coun-
try as he pleased, no state could stand, but would for that
very reason be dissolved at once, and public rights would
become private rights.

With religion the case is widely different. Inasmuch as it
consists not so much in outward actions as in simpUcity
and truth of character, it stands outside the sphere of law
and public authority. SimpHdty and truth of character are
V not produced by the constraint of laws, nor by the autho-
rity of the state, no one the whole world over can be forced
or legislated into a state of blessedness; the means re-
quired for such a consummation are faithful and brotherly
admonition, sound education, and, above all, free use of the
individual judgment.

Therefore, as the supreme right of free thinking, even on
,\ religion, is in every man's power, and as it is inconceivable


CHAP. YII.] OF THE INTESPBETATION OF SCBIPTXTBE. 119

tliat such power could be alienated, it is also in every man's
power to wield the supreme right and authority of free

Judgment in this behaK, and to explain and interpret re-
igion for himself. The only reason for vestii^ the supreme
authority in the interpretation of law, and judgment on
public aftairs in the hands of the magistrates, is that it
concerns questions of public right. Similarly the supreme
authority in explaining religion, and in passing judgment
thereon, is lodged with the individual because it concerns
questions of individual right. So far, then, from the autho-
rity of the Hebrew high-priests telling in confirmation of
the authority of the Boman pontiffs to interpret religion,
it would rather tend to establish individual freedom of
judgment. Thus in this way also, we have shown that our
method of interpreting Scripture is the best. For as the
highest power of Scriptural interpretation belongs to every
man, the rule for such interpretation should be nothing but
the natural light of reason which is common to all — ^not
any supematiu*al light nor any external authority ; more-
over, such a rule ought not to be so difficult that it can
only be applied by very skilful philosophers, but should be
adapted to the natural and ordinary faculties and capacity
of mankind. And such I have shown our method to be,
for such difficulties as it has arise from men's carelessness,
and are no part of its nature.


120 ▲ THEOLOGICO-POLITIGAL TBEATI8E. [CHAP. Till.


CHAPTEE VnL

07 THE AXTTHOBSHIP OF THE PENTATEUCH AND THE OTHEB
HISTORICAL BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.

IN the former cliapter we treated of tlie f oTmdations and
principles of Scriptural knowledge, and showed that
it consists solely in a trustworthy history of the sacred
writings ; such a history, in spite of its indispensability,
the ancients neglected, or at any rate, whatever they may
have written or handed down has perished in the lapse of
time, consequently the groimdwork for such an investiga-
tion is to a great extent, cut from under us. This might
be put up with if succeeding generations had confined
themselves within the limits of truth, and had handed
down conscientiously what few particulars they had re-
ceived or discovered without any additions from their own
brains : as it is, the history of the Bible is not so much
imperfect as untrustworthy : the f oimdations are not only
too scanty for building upon, but are also unsoimd. It is
part of my purpose to remedy these defects, and to remove
common theological prejudices. But I fear that I am
attempting my task too late, for men have arrived at the pitch
of not sufiEering contradiction, but defending obstinately
whatever they have adopted under the name of religion.
So widely have these prejudices taken possession of men's
minds, that very few, comparatively speaking, will listen to
reason. However, I will make the attempt, and spare no
efforts, for there is no positive reason for despairing of
success.

In order to treat the subject methodically, I will begin
with the received opinions concerning the true authors of
the sacred books, and in the first place, speak of the author
of the Pentateuch, who is almost universally supposed to
have been Moses. The Pharisees are so firmly convinced
of his identity, that they accoimt as a heretic anyone who
differs from them on the subject. Wherefore, Aben Ezra,


CHAP. VIII.] THB ATTTHOBSHIP OF THE PENTATEUCH. 121

a man of enlightened intelligence, and no smaU learning,
who was the first, so far as I know, to treat of this opinion,
dared not express his meaning openly, but confined him-
self to dark hints which I shall not scruple to elucidate,
thus throwing full light on the subject.

The words of Aben Ezra which occur in his commentary
on Deuteronomy are as follows: — "Beyond Jordan, &c.
. ... If so be that thou understandest the mystery of the
twelve .... moreover Moses wrote the law. . • • • The
Canaanite was then in the land • • . • it shall be revealed
on the mount of God • • • • then also behold his bed, his
iron bed, then shalt thou know the truth." In these few
words he hints, and also shows that it was not Moses who
wrote the Pentateuch, but someone who lived long after
him, and further, that the book which Moses wrote was
something different from any now extant.

To prove this, I say, he draws attention to the facts —

L That the preface to Deuteronomy could not have
been written by Moses, inasmuch as he had never crossed
the Jordan.

n. That the whole book of Moses was written at full
length on the circumference of a single altar (Deut. xxvii. and
Josh, viii.37), whichaltar, according to the Eabbis, consisted
of only twelve stones : therefore the book of Moses must
have been of far less extent than the Pentateuch. This is
what our author means, I think, by the mystery of the
twelve, unless he is referring to the twelve curses contained
in the chapter of Deuteronomy above cited, which he
thought coiQd not have been contained in the law, because
Moses bade the Levites read them after the recital of the
law, and so bind the people to its observance. Or again,
he may have had in lus mind the last chapter of Deutero-
nomy which treats of the death of Moses, and which con-
tains twelve verses. But there is no need to dwell further
on these and similar conjectures.

TTT. That in Deut. xxxi. 9, the expression occurs, " and
Moses wrote the law : " words that cannot be ascribed to
Moses, but must be those of some other writer narrating
the deeds and writings of Moses.

rV. That in Genesis xii. 6, the historian, after naiTating
that Abraham journeyed through the land of Canaan, adds,


122 ▲ THEOLOaiGO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. YIII»

"and the Canaanite was then in the land/' thus clearly ex*
eluding the time at which he wrote. So that this passage
must have been written after the death of Moses, when the
Canaanites had been driven out, and no longer possessed
the land.

Aben Ezra, in his commentary on the passage, alludes to*
the difficulty as follows: — ''And the Canaanite was then
in the land : it appears that Canaan, the grandson of Noah,
took from another the land which bears his name ; if this be
not the true meaning, there lurks some mystery in the pas-
sage, and let him who understands it keep silence." That
is, i£ Canaan invaded those regions, the sense will be, the
Canaanite was then in the land, in contradistinction to the
time when it had been held by another : but if, as follows
from Gen. chap. x. Canaan was the first to inhabit the land,
the text must mean to exclude the time present, that is the
time at which it was written ; therefore it cannot be the
work of Moses, in whose time the Canaanites still possessed
those territories: this is the mystery concerning which
silence is recommended.

V. That in Genesis xxii. 14 Mount Moriah is called
the moimt of Qod,^ a name which it did not acquire till after
the building of the Temple ; the choice of the mountain
was not made in the time of Moses, for Moses does not
point out any spot as chosen by Gtod ; on the contrary, he
foretells that God will at some future time choose a spot
to which his name will be given.

"VL Lastly, that in Deut. chap, iii., in the passage re-
lating to Og, king of Bashan, these words are inserted:
" For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of
giants : behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron : is it
not in Babbath of the children of Ammon? nine cubits
was the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it,
after the cubit of a man." This parenthesis most plainly
shows that its writer lived long after Moses; for this
mode of speaking is only employed by one treating of
things long past, and pointing to relics for the sake of
gaining credence : moreover, this bed was almost certainly
first £scovered by David, who conquered the city of
Kabbath (2 Sam. xii. 30.) Again, the historian a Httle
further on inserts after the words of Moses, " Jair, the son

» See Note 9.


CHAP. VIII.] THE AUTHOB8HIP OF THE PEKTATEITCH. 123^

of Manasseli, took all the country of Argob unto the coasts.
of G-eshnri and Maachathi ; and called them after his own
name, Bashan-hayoth-jair, tmto this day." This passage^
I say, is inserted to explain the words of Moses wluch pre-^
cede it. " And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, being
the kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half tribe of Manasseh ;
all the region of Argob, with all Bashan, which is called
the land of the giants." The Hebrews in the time of the
writer indisputably knew what territories belonged to the-
tribe of Judah, but did not know them under the name of
the jurisdiction of Argob, or the land of the giants. There-
fore the writer is compelled to explain what these places
were which were anciently so styled, and at the same time
to point out why they were at the time of his writing
known by the name of Jair, who was of the tribe of
Manasseh, not of Judah. We haye thus made clear the
meaning of Aben Ezra and also the passages of the Penta*
touch which he dtes in proof of his contention. However,
Aben Ezra does not call attention to every instance, or
even the chief ones; there remain many of greater im-
portance, which may be cited. Namely (I.), that the writer
of the books in question not only speaks of Moses in the
third person, but also bears witness to many details con-
cerning him; for instance, "Moses talked with God;'"
" The Lord spoke with Moses face to face ; " " Moses was^
the meekest of men " (Numb. xii. 3) ; " Moses was wrath
with the captains of the host ; " Moses, the man of God ; "^
"Moses, the servant of the Lord, died;" "There was
never a prophet in Israel like imto Moses," &c. On the-
other hand, in Deuteronomy, where the law which Moses-
had expounded to the people and written is set forth,.
Moses speaks and declares what he has done in the first
person: "God. spake with me" (Deut. ii. 1, 17, &c.),
" I prayed to the Lord," &c. Except at the end of the-
book, when the historian, after relating the words of
Moses, begins again to speak in the third person, and
to tell how Moses handed over the law which he had
expoimded to the people in writing, again admonishing-
them, and further, how Moses ended his life. All theso
details, the manner of narration, the testim.ony, and the
context of the whole storj' lead to the plain conclusion.


124 A THEOLOaiOO-POLITIOAL TBEATISB. [CHAF. TTU.

that these books were written by another, and not hy
Moses in person.

IL We must also remark that the history relates not
only the manner of Moses' death and burial, and the
thirty days' mourning of the Hebrews, but further com-
pares him with all the prophets who came after him, and
states that he surpassed them all. *' There was never a
prophet in Israel like imto Moses, whom the Lord knew
face to face." Such testimony cannot have been given of
Moses by himself, nor by any who immediately succeeded
him, but it must come foom someone who lived centuries
afterwards, especially as the historian speaks of past
times. " There was never a prophet," Ac. And of the
place of burial, " No one knows it to tliis day."

m. We must note that some places are not styled by
the names they bore during Moses' lifetime, but by others
which they obtained subsequently. For instance, Abraham
is said to have pursued his enemies even unto Dan, a name
not bestowed on the city till long after the death of Joshua
(Gen. xiv. 14, Ju^es xviii. 29).

rV. The narrative is prolonged after the death of Moses,
for in Exodus xvi. 34 we read that ** the children of Israel
did eat manna forty years imtil they came to a land in-
habited, tmtil they came imto the borders of the land of
Canaan." In other words, imtil the time alluded to in
Joshua vi. 12.

So, too, in Genesis zxxvi. 81 it is stated, ** These are the
kings that reigned in Edom before there reigned any king
over the children of Israel" The historian, doubtless, here
relates the kings of Idumsea before that territorv was con-
quered by David^ and garrisoned, as we read in 2 Sam.
viii. 14.

From what has been said, it is thus clearer than the sun
at noonday that the Pentateuch was not written by Moses,
but by someone who lived long after Moses. Let us now
turn our attention to the books which Moses actually did
write, and which are cited in the Pentateuch ; thus, also,
shall we see that they were different from the Pentateuch.
Firstly, it appears from Exodus xvii. 14 that Moses, by
the command of God, wrote an accoimt of the war against
Amalek. The book in which he did so is not named in

^ See ^otft 10.


CHAP. Yin.] THE JLITTHOBSHIP OF THE PENTATEUCH. 125

the cliapter just quoted, but in Numb. xxi. 12 a book is
referred to under the title of the wars of Gk>d, and doubt-
less this war against Amalek and the castrametations said
in Numb, xxziii. 2 to have been written bj Moses are
therein described. We hear also in Exod. xxiv. 4 of
another book called the Book of the Covenant, which
Moses read before the Israelites when they first made a
covenant with God. But this book or this writing con-
tained very little, namely, the laws or commandments of
€k>d which we find in Exodus xx. 22 to the end of chap.
xxiv., and this no one will deny who reads the aforesaid
chapter rationally and impartially. It is there stated that
as soon as Moses had learnt the feeling of the people on
the subject of ma,Tring a covenant with Qod, he immediately
wrote down God's laws and utterances, and in the morn-
ing, after some ceremonies had been performed, read out
the conditions of the covenant to an assembly of the whole
people. When these had been gone through, and doubt-
less understood by all, the whole people gave their assent.

Now from the shortness of the time taJken in its perusal
and also from its nature as a compact, this document evi-
dently contained nothing more than that which we have
just described. Further, it is clear that Moses explained
all the laws which he had received in the fortieth year
after the exodus from Egypt ; also that he bound over the
people a second time to observe them, and that finally he
committed them to writing (Deut. i. 5 ; xxix. 14 ; xxxi. 9),
in a book which contained these laws explained, and the
new covenant, and this book was therefore called the book
of the law of God : the same which was afterwards added
to by Joshua when he set forth the fresh covenant with
whidi he boimd over the people and which he entered into
with God (Josh. xxiv. 26, 26).

Now, as we have extant no book containing this covenant
of Moses and also the covenant of Joshua, we must perforce
conclude that it has perished, imless, indeed, we adopt the
wild conjecture of the Chaldean paraphrast Jonathan, and
twist about the words of Scripture to our heart's content.
This commentator, in the face of our present difficulty, pre-
ferred corrupting the sacred text to confessing his own
ignorance. The passage in the book of Joshua which run&^


126 A THEOLOOICO-POLITICAL TBEATI8E. [CHAP. VIII.

" and Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of
God," he changes into ** and Joshua wrote these words and
kept them with the book of the law of God." What is to
be done with persons who will only see what pleases them ?
What is such a proceeding if it is not denying Scripture,
And inventing another Bible out of our own heads ? We
may therefore conclude that the book of the law of God
which Moses wrote was not the Pentateuch, but something
•quite different, which the author of the Pentateuch duly
inserted into his book. So much is abundantly plain both
from what I have said and from what I am about to add.
For in the passage of Deuteronomy above quoted, where it
ds related that Moses wrote the book of the law, the histo-
rian adds that he handed it over to the priests and bade
"them read it out at a stated time to the whole people.
This shows that the work was of much less length than
the Pentateuch, inasmuch as it could be read through at
one sitting so as to be understood by all ; further, we must
not omit to notice that out of all the books which Moses
wrote, this one book of the second covenant and the song
(which latter he wrote afterwards so that all the people
might learn it), was the only one which he caused to be re-
ligiously guarded and preserved. In the first covenant he
had only bound over those who were present, but in the
.second covenant he bound over all their descendants also
'(Deut. xxix. 14), and therefore ordered this covenant with
future ages to be religiously preserved, together with the
Song, which was especially addressed to posterity : as, then,
^e have no proof that Moses wrote any book save this of
the covenant, and as he committed no other to the care of
posterity ; and, lastly, as there are many passages in the
Pentateuch which Moses could not have written, it follows
'that the belief that Moses was the author of the Pentateuch
is ungroTmded and even irrational.

Someone will perhaps ask whether Moses did not also
write down other laws when they were first revealed to him
— ^in other words, whether, during the course of forty years,
he did not write down any of the laws which he promul-
Lgated, save only those few which I have stated to be
•contained in the book of the first covenant. To this I
^ould answer, that although it seems reasonable to suppose


CHAP. Till.] THB JLirrHOSSHIP 07 THE PBKTATEITCH. 127

that Moses wrote down tlie laws at tlie time wlien lie
wished to communicate them to the people, yet we are not
i^rarranted to take it as proved, for I have shown above
that we must make no assertions in such matters which we
do not gather from Scripture, or which do not flow as
legitimate consequences from its fundamental principles.
We must not accept whatever is reasonably probable.
However, even reason in this case would not force such a
'Conclusion upon us: for it may be that the assembly of
•elders wrote down the decrees of Moses and communicated
them to the people, and the historian collected them, and
-duly set th^ forth in his narrative of the life of Moses.
80 much for the Ave books of Moses : it is now time for us
to turn to the other sacred writings.

The book of Joshua may be proved not to be an auto-
graph by reasons similar to those we have just employed :
for it must be some other than Joshua who testifies that
the fame of Joshua was spread over the whole world; that
he omitted nothing of what Moses had taught (Josh. vi. 27;
viii. last verse ; xi. 15) ; that he grew old and summoned
an assembly of the whole people, and finally that he de-
parted this life. Furthermore, events are related which =
took place after Joshua's death. For instance, that the
Israelites worshipped Gk>d, after his death, so long as there
were any old men alive who remembered him; and in
chap. xvi. 10, we read that ** Ephraim and Manasseh did
not drive out the Canaanites which dwelt in Gezer,but the
Oanaanite dwelt in the land of Ephraim unto this day, and
was tributary to him." This is the same statement as that
in Judges, chap, i., and the phrase ** unto this day " shows
that the writer was speaking of ancient times. With these
texts we may compare the last verse of chap, zv., concern-
ing the sons of Judah, and also the history of Caleb in the
same chap. v. 14. Further, the building of an altar beyond
Jordan by the two tribes and a half, chap. xxii. 10, sqq,,
seems to have taken place after the death of Joshua, for in
the whole narrative his name is never mentioned, but the
people alone held coimcil as to waging war, sent out legates,
waited for their return, and finally approved of their
answer.

Lastly, from chap. x. verse 14, it is clear that t\\& \^<^


128 A THEOLOGICO-POLITIGAL TBEATI8E. [CHAP. VIII.

was written many generations after the death of Joshna^
for it bears witness " there was never any day like nnto
that day, either before or after, that the Lord hear-
kened to the voice of a man," &c. If, therefore, Joshua
wrote any book at all, it was that which is quoted in the
work now before us, chap. x. 13.

With regard to the book of Judges, I suppose no rational
person persuades himself that it was written by the actual
V Judges. For the conclusion of the whole history contained
in chap. ii. clearly shows that it is all the work of a single
historian. Further, inasmuch as the writer frequently tells
us that there was then no king in Israel, it is evident that
the book was written after the establishment of the
monarchy.

The books of Samuel need not detain us long, inasmuch
as the narrative in them is continued long after Samuel's
death ; but I should like to draw attention to the fact that
it was written many generations after Samuel's death. For
in book i. chap. ix. verse 9, the historian jremarks in a»
parenthesis, " Bef oretime, in Israel, when a man went to
inquire of God, thus he spake : Come, and let us go to the
seer ; for he that is now called a prophet was bef oretime
called a seer."

Lastly, the books of Kings, as we gather from internal

evidence, were compiled from the books of King Solomon

(1 Kings xi. 41), from the chronicles of the kings of Judah

(1 Kings xiv. 19, 29), and the chronicles of the kings of

Israel.

J We may, therefore, conclude that all the books we have

• - considered hitherto are compilations, and that the events

therein are recorded as having happened in old time.

Now, if we turn our attention to the connection and

\ argument of all these books, we shall easily see that they

A,.^^were all written by a single historian, who wished to relate

\1 the antiquities of the Jews from their first beginning down

to the first destruction of the dty. h The way in which the

several books are connected one with the other is alone

enough to show us that they form the narrative of one and

the same writer. For as soon as he has related the life of

Moses, the historian thus passes on to the story of Joshua:

" And it came to pass after that Moses the servant of the


CHAP. VIII.] TEB ▲XJTH0B8HIP 07 THE PENTATEUCH. 129

Lord was dead, tliat God spake unto Joslma/' <&c., so in the
same way, after the death of Joshua was concluded, he
passes with identically the same transition and connection
to the history of the Judges : ** And it came to pass after
that Joshua was dead, that the children of Israel sought
from God," &c. To the book of Judges he adds the story
of Buth, as a sort of appendix, in these words : *' Now it
came to pass in the days that the judges ruled, that thero
was a famine in the land/'

The first book of Samuel is introduced with a similar
phrase ; and so is the second book of Samuel. Then, before
the history of David is concluded, the historian passes in
the same way to the first book of Kings, and, after David's
death, to the second book of Eongs.

^\ The putting together, and the order of the narratives,
show that they are all the work of one man, writing with a
definite aim ; for the historian begins with relating the first
origin of the Hebrew nation, and then sets forth in order
the times and the occasions in which Moses put forth his
laws, and made his predictions. He then proceeds to relate
how the Israelites invaded the promised land in accordance
with Moses' prophecy (Deut. vii.) ; and how, when the land
was subdued, they turned their backs on their laws, and
thereby incurred many misfortunes (Deut. xxxi. 16, 17).
He teUs how they wished to elect rulers, and how, accord-
ing as these rulers observed the law, the people flourished
or suffered (Deut. xxviii. 36); finally, how destruction
came upon the nation, even as Moses had foretold. In re-
gard to other matters, which do not serve to confirm the
law, the writer either passes over them in silence, or refers
the reader to other books for information.' All that is set .
down in the books we have conduces to the sole object of /
setting forth the words and laws of Moses, and proving
them by subsequent events.

When we put together these three considerations, namely,
the unity of the subject of all the books, the connection
between them, and the fact that they are compilations
made many generations after the events they relate had
taken place, we come to the conclusion, as I have just
stated, that they are all the work of a single historian.
Who this historian was, it is not so easy to «JMy« % \rQ^^


130 ▲ THEOLOOICO-POLITIOAL TREATISE. [CHAP. VIII.

r^ suspect that lie was Ezra, and there are several strong
reasons for adopting tEishypothesis.

The historiagi whom we already know to be but one
indiTidual brings Ms history doTO to the Uberation of
Jehoiakun, and adds that he himself sat at the king s table
all his life — ^that is, at the table either of Jehoiakun, or of
the son of Nebuchadnezzar, for the sense of the passage is
ambiguous : hence it follows that he did not live before the
time of Ezra. But Scripture does not testify of any except
of Ezra (Ezra vii. 10), that he ** prepared ids heart to seek
the law of the Lord, and to set it forth, and further that he
was a ready scribe in the law of Moses." Therefore, I
cannot find anyone, save Ezra, to whom to attribute the
sacred books.

Further, from this testimony concerning Ezra, we see
that he prepared his heart, not only to seek the law of the
Lord, but also to set it forth ; and, in Nehemiah viii. 8,
we read that *' they read in the book of the law of Gk>d
distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to under-
stand the reading."

As, then, in Deuteronomy, we find not only the book of
the law of Moses, or the greater part of it, but also many
things inserted for its better explanation, I conjecture that
this Deuteronomy is the book of the law of Cfod, written,
set forth, and explained by Ezra, which is referred to in the
text above quoted. Two examples of the way matters were
inserted parenthetically in the text of Deuteronomy, with a
view to its fuller explanation, we have already given, in
speaking of Aben Ezra's opinion. Many others are found
in the course of the work : for instance, in chap. ii. verse 12 :
** The Horims dwelt also in Seir bef orethne ; but the children
of Esau succeeded them, when they had destroyed them
from before them, and dwelt in their stead ; as Israel did
unto the land of his possession, which the Lord gave unto
them." This explains verses 3 and 4 of the same chapter,
where it is stated that Mount Seir, which had come to the
children of Esau for a possession, did not fall into their
hands uninhabited ; but that they invaded it, and turned
out and destroyed the Horims, who formerly dwelt therein,
even as the children of Israel had done unto the Canaanitea
after the death of Moses.


CHAP. YIII.] THE AUTHOBSHIP 07 THE PENTATEUCH. 181

So, also, verses 6, 7, 8, 9, of tlie tenth cliapter are in-
serted parenthetically among the words of Moses. Every-
one must see that verse 8, which begins, ''At that time the
Lord separated the tribe of Levi," necessarily refers to
verse 5, and not to the death of Aaron, which is only men-
tioned here by Ezra because Moses, in telling of the golden
calf worshipped by the people, stated that he had prayed
for Aaron.

He then explains that at the time at which Moses spoke,
Ood had chosen for Himself the tribe of Levi in order that
He may point out the reason for their election, and for the
fact of their not sharing in the inheritance; after this
digression, he resumes the thread of Moses' speech. To
these parentheses we must add the preface to the book, and
all the passages in which Moses is spoken of in the third
person, besides many which we cannot now distinguish,
though, doubtless, they would have been plainly recognized
by the writer's contemporaries.

If, I say, we were in possession of the book of the law as
Moses wrote it, I do not doubt that we should find a
great difference in the words of the precepts, the order in
which they are given, and the reasons by which they are
supported.

A comparison of the decalogue in Deuteronomy with the
decalogue in Exodus, where its history is explicitly set
forth, wiU be sufficient to show us a wide discrepancy in
all these three particulars, for the fourth commandment is
given not only in a different form, but at much greater
length, while the reason for its observance differs wholly
from that stated in Exodus. Again, the order in which
the tenth commandment is explained differs in the two
versions. I think that the differences here as elsewhere
are the work of Ezra, who explained the law of God to his
contemporaries, and who wrote this book of the law of God,
before anything else ; this I gather from the fact that it
contains the laws of the coimtry, of which the people stood
in most need, and also because it is not joined to the book
which precedes it by any connecting phrase, but begins with
the independent statement, " these are the words of Moses."
After this task was completed, I think Ezra set himself to
give a complete account of the history of the Ha\st«^ TsaS^^-^


132 ▲ THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBSATI8E. [CHAP. YUI,

from tlie creation of tlie world to the entire destruction of
the city, and in this account he inserted the book of Deute-
ronomy, and, possibly, he called the first five books by the
name of Moses, because his life is chiefly contained therein,
and forms their principal subject ; for the same reason he
called the sixth Joshua, the seventh Judges, the eighth
Buth, the niTith, and perhaps the tenth, Samuel, and»
lastly, the eleventh and twelfUi £ings. Whether Ezra put
the finishing touches to this work and finished it as he in-
tendedy we will discuss in the next chapter.


CHAP« IX.] THE LAST BEYISEB 07 HI8T0BIC BOOKS. 133


CHAPTEE IX.

OTHEB QITESTIOKS CONCEBNING THE SAME BOOKS : NAMELY,
WHETHEB THEY WEBE COMPLETELY FINISHED BY EZBA,
AND, FUBTHEB, WHETHEB THE MABGINAL NOTES WHICH
ABE FOUND IN THE HEBBEW TEXTS WEBE YABIOTTS
BEADINGS.

HOW greatly the inqtiiry we have just made conceming
the real writer of the twelve books aids us in attain-
ing a complete understanding of them, may be easily
gathered solely from the passages which we have adduced
in confirmation of our opinion, and which would be most
obscure without it. But besides the question of the writer,
there are other points to notice which common superstition
forbids the multitude to apprehend. Of these the chief is,
that Ezra (whom I will ta]k:e to be the author of the afore-
said books until some more likely person be suggested) did
not put the finishing touches to the narratives contained
therein, but merely collected the histories from various
writers, and sometimes simply set them down, leaving
their examination and arrangement to posterity.

The cause (if it were not untimely death) which pre-
vented him from completing his work in all its portions, I
cannot conjecture, but the fact remains most clear, although
we have lost the writings of the ancient Hebrew historians,
and can only judge from the few fragments which are still
extant. For the history of Hezekiah (2 Kings xviii. 17), as
written in the vision of Isaiah, is related as it is found in
the chronicles of the kings of Judah. We read the same
story, told with few exceptions ^ in the same words, in the
book of Isaiah which was contained in the chronicles of the
kings of Judah (2 Chron. xxxii. 32). From this we must
conclude that there were various versions of this narrative
of Isaiah's, unless, indeed, anyone would dream that in this,
too, there lurks a mystery. Further, the last cha.T^tist ^^

* See "Note U.


134 A THXOLOGICO-POLinOAL TBSATISE. [CHAF. IZ.

2 Kings 27-30 is repeated in the last chapter of Jere-
miah, T. 31-34.

Again, we find 2 Sam. Tii. repeated in 1 Chron. xvii.,.
but the expressions in the two passages are so curiously
varied,^ that we can very easily see that these two chapters
were taken from two different versions of the history of
Nathan.

Lastly, the genealogy of the kings of Idnmaea contained
in Genesis xxxvi. 31, is repeated in the same words in
1 Chron. i., though we know that the author of the latter
work took his materials from other historians, not fron^
the twelve books we have ascribed to Ezra. We may
therefore" be sure that if we still possessed the writings of
the historians, the matter would be made clear ; however,,
as we have lost them, we can only examine the writings
still extant, and from their order and connection, their
various repetitions, and, lastly, the contradictions in dates
which they contain, judge of the rest.

These, ^en, or the chief of them, we will now go through.
First, in the story of Judah and Tamar (G^en. xxxviii.)
the historian thus begins: ''And it came to pass at that
time that Judah went down from his brethren." This time
cannot refer to what immediately precedes^^but must neces-
sarily refer to something else, for from the time when
Joseph was sold into Egypt to the time when the patriarch
Jacob, with all his family, set out thither, cannot be
reckoned as more than twenty-two years, for Joseph, when
he was sold by his brethren, was seventeen years old, and
when he was summoned by Pharaoh from prison was
thirty ; if to this we add the seven years of plenty and
two of famine, the total amounts to twenty-two years.
Now, in so short a period, no one can suppose that so
many things happened as are described ; that Judah had
three children, one after the other, from one wife, whom
he married at the beginning of the period; that the
eldest of these, when he was old enough, married Tamar,
and that after he died his next brother succeeded to her ;
that, after all this, Judah, without knowing it, had inter-
course with his daughter-in-law, and that she bore him
twins, and, finally, that the eldest of these twins became a
father within the aforesaid period. As all these events

' See Note 12. • See Note 13.


CHAP, n.] THB LAST BBVISEB OF HI8T0BIC BOOKS. 135

cannot have taken place within the period mentioned in
Genesis, the reference must necessanlj be to something
treated of in another book: and Ezra in this instance
simply related the story, and inserted it without examina-
tion among his other writings.

However, not only this chapter but the whole narrative
of Joseph and Jacob is collected and set forth from various
histories, inasmuch as it is quite inconsistent with itself.
For in Qen, xlvii. we are told that Jacob, when he came at
Joseph's bidding to salute Pharaoh, was 130 years old.
If from this we deduct the twenty-two years which he
passed sorrowing for the absence of Joseph and the seven-
teen years forming Joseph's age when he was. sold, and,
lastly, the seven years for which Jacob served for Bachel,
we &id that he was very advanced in life, namely, eighty-
four, when he took Leah to wife, whereas Dinah was
scarcely seven years old when she was violated by Shechem.^
Simeon and Levi were aged respectively eleven and twelve
when they spoiled the city and slew aU the males therein
with the sword.

There is no need that I should go through the whole
Pentateuch. If anyone pays attention to the way in
which all the histories and precepts in these five books are
set down promiscuously and without order, with no regard
for dates ; and further, how the same story is often re-
peated, sometimes in a different version, he will easily, I
say, discern that all the materials were promiscuously col-
lected and heaped together, in order that they might at
some subsequent time be more readily examined and
reduced to order. Not only these five books, but also the
narratives contained in the remaining seven, going down
to the destruction of the city, are compiled in the same
way. For who does not see that in Judges ii. 6 a new
historian is being quoted, who had also written of the
deeds of Joshua, and that his words are simply copied ?
For after our historian has stated in the last chapter of
the book of Joshua that Joshua died and was buried, and
has promised, in the first chapter of Judges, to relate what
happened after Ms death, in what way, if he wished to con-
l^ue the thread of his history, could he connect the state-
ment here made about Joshua with what had gone before ?

^ SeeNo\«\4.


136 A THBOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. IX*

So, too, 1 Sam. 17, 18, are taken from another his-
torian, who assigns a cause for David's first frequenting
Saul's court very different from that given in jchap. xvi.
of the same book. For he did not think that David came
to Saul in consequence of the advice of Saul's servants, as
is narrated in chap, xvi., but that being sent by chance to
the camp by his father on a message to his brothers, he
was for the first time remarked by Saul on the occasion of
his victory over Goliath the Philistine, and was retained
at his court.

I suspect the same thing has taken place in chap. xxvi.
of the same book, for the historian there seems to repeat
the narrative given in chap. xxiv. according to another
man's version. But I pass over this, and go on to the
computation of dates.

In 1 "Kings, chap, vi., it is said that Solomon built the
Temple in the four hundred and eightieth year after the
exodus from Egypt; but from the historians themselves
we get a much longer period, for

Years.

Moses governed the people in the desert . . 40
Joshua, who lived 110 years, did not, according to

Josephus and others' opinion rule more thaji . 26
Cushan Eishathaim held the people in subjection . 8
Othniel, son of Kenag, was judge for . . . 4tf
Eglon, King of Moab, governed the people . . 18
Ehud and Shamgar were judges .... 80
Jachin, "King of Canaan, held the people in sub-
jection 20

The people was at peace subsequently for . . 40

It was under subjection to Mi^n .... 7

It obtained freedom under Gideon for ... 40

It fell under the rule of Abimelech . • • 3

Tola, son of Puah, was judge 23

Jair was judge 22

The people was in subjection to the Philistines and

Ammonites 18

Jephthah was judge 6

Ibzan, the Bethlehemite, was judge ... 7

Elon, the Zabulonite 10

Abdon, the Pirathonite 8

1 See Note 15.


CHAP. IX.] THE LAST BEYISEB 07 HISTOBIO BOOKS. 137

Years.

The people was again subject to the Philistines . 40

Samson was judge 20'

Eli was judge 40

The people again fell into subjection to the Philis-
tines, till they were delivered by Samuel . . 20

David reigned 40

Solomon reigned before he built the temple . . 4

All these periods added together make a total of 580 years.
But to these must be added the years during which the
Hebrew republic flourished after the death of Joshua,
until it was conquered by Cushan Mshathaim, which I
take to be very numerous, for I cannot bring myself to
beHeve that immediately after the death of Joshua all
those who had witnessed his miracles died simultaneously,
nor that their successors at one stroke bid farewell to their
laws, and plunged from the highest virtue into the depth
of wickedness and obstinacy.

Kor, lastly, that Cushan Bishathaim subdued them on
the instant; each one of these circumstances requires
almost a generation, and there is no doubt that Judges
ii. 7, 9, 10, comprehends a great many years which it
passes over in silence. We must also add the years during
which Samuel was judge, the number of which is not
stated in Scripture, and also the years during which Saul
reigned, which are not clearly shown from his history. It is,
indeed, stated in 1 Sam. xiii. 1, that he reigned two years,
but the text in that passage is mutilated, and the records
of his reign lead us to suppose a longer period. That the
text is mutilated I suppose no one will doubt who has
ever advanced so far as the threshold of the Hebrew lan-
guage, for it runs as follows : " Saul was in his year,

when he began to reign, and he reigned two years over
Israel." Who, I say, does not see that the number of the
years of Saul's age when he began to reign has been omitted?
That the record of the reign presupposes a greater number
of years is equally beyond doubt, for in the same book,
chap, xxvii. 7, it is stated that David sojourned among the
Philistines, to whom he had fled on account of Saul, a year
and four months j thus the rest of the reign must ha»"^^\ifeK3a.

* See Note 1^.


138 ▲ THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TBBATISE. [CHAP. IX.

comprised in a space of eight montlis, which I think no one
•will credit. Josephus, at the end of the sixth book of his
antiquities, thus corrects the text : Saul reigned eighteen
years while Samuel was alive, and two years after his
death. However, all the narrative in chap. xiii. is in
complete disagreement with what goes before. At the
end of chap. vii. it is narrated that ^e Fhihstines were so
crushed by the Hebrews that they did not venture, during
Samuel's life, to invade the borders of Israel; but in
chap. xiii. we are told that the Hebrews were invaded
during the life of Samuel by the Philistines, and reduced
by them to such a state of wretchedness and poverty that
they were deprived not only of weapons with which to
defend themselves, but also of the means of making more.
I should be at pains enough if I were to try and harmo-
nize all the narratives contained in this first book of
Samuel so that they should seem to be all written and
arranged by a singl/historian. Bnt I return to my object.
The years, then, during which Saul reigned must be added
to the above computation ; and, lastly, I have not counted
the years of the Hebrew a^hy, for I cannot from Scrip,
ture gather their number. I cannot, I say, be certain as
to the period occupied by the events related in Judges
chap. xvii. on till the end of the book.

It is thus abundantly evident that we cannot arrive at a
true computation of years from the histories, and, further,
that the histories are inconsistent themselves on the sub-
ject. We are compelled to confess that these histories were
compiled from various writers without previous arrange-
ment and examination. Not less discrepancy is found
between the dates given in the Chronicles of the Kings of
Judah, and those in the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel ;
in the latter, it is stated that Jehoram, the son of Ahab,
began to reign in the second year of the reign of Jehoram,
the son of Jehoshaphat (2 Kings i. 17), but in the former we
read that Jehoram, the son of Jehoshaphat, began to reign
in the fifth year of Jehoram, the son of Ahab (2 Kings viii.
16). Anyone who compares the narratives in Chronicles
with the narratives in the books of Kings, will find many
similar discrepancies. These there is no need for me to
examine here, and still less am I called upon to treat of the


CHAP. IX.] THB LAST BEYISEB OF HISTORIC BOOKS. ] 3^

commentaries of those wlio endeavour to harmonize them.
The Eabbis evidently let their fancy run wild. Such com*
mentators as I have read, dream, invent, and as a last
resort, play fast and loose with the language. For instance,
when it is said in 2 Chronicles, that Ahab was forty-two-
years old when he began to reign, they pretend that these
years are computed from the reign of Omri, not from the
birth of Ahab. K this can be shown to be the real mean-
ing of the writer of the book of Chronicles, all I can say is,
that he did not know how to state a fact. The commen-
tators make many other assertions of this kind, which if
true, would prove that the ancient Hebrews were ignorant
both of their own language, and of the way to relate a plain
narrative. I should in such case recognize no rule or reason
in interpreting Scripture, but it would be permissible to-
hypothesize to one's heart's content.

If anyone thinks that I am speaking too generally, and
without sufficient warrant, I would ask him to set himself
to showing us some fixed plan in these histories which might
be follow^ without blame by other writers of chronicles,
and in his efforts at harmonizing and interpretation, so*
strictly to observe and explain the phrases and expressions,.
the order and the connections, that we may be able to imi-^
tate these also in our writings.^ If he succeeds, I will at.
once give him my hand, and he shall be to me as great
Apollo ; for I confess that after long endeavours I have-
been unable to discover anything of ^e kind. I may add
that I set down nothing here which I have not long reflected
upon, and that, though I was imbued from, my boyhood
up with the ordinary opinions about the Scriptures, I have-
been unable to withstand the force of what I have urged.

However, there is no need to detain the reader with thi»
question, and drive him to attempt an impossible task ; I ;^
merely mentioned the fact in order to throw light on my
intention.

I now pass on to other points concerning the treatment .
of these books. "For we must remark, in addition to what
has been shown, that these books were not guarded by pos-
terity with such care that no faults crept in. The ancient
scribes draw attention to many doubtful readings, and some
mutilated passages, but not to all that exist : whetk<^i^ t]&L^

» See Note n.


140 A THEOLOOIOO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. IX.

faults are of sufficient importance to greatly embarrass the
reader I will not now discuss. I am inclined to think that
thej are of minor moment to those, at any rate, who read
the Scriptures with enlightenment: and I can positively
affirm that I have not noticed any fault or various reading
in doctrinal passages sufficient to render them obscure or
doubtful.

There are some people, however, who will not admit that
there is any corruption, even in other passages, but main-
tain that by some unique exercise of providence God has
preserved from corruption every word in the Bible : they
say that the various readings are the symbols of pro-
foundest mysteries, and that mighty secrets lie hid in the
twenty-eight hiatus which occur, nay, even in the very form
of the letters.

Whether they are actuated by folly and anile devotion,
or whether by arrogance and malice so that they alone may
be held to possess the secrets of God, I know not: this
much I do know, that I find in their writings nothing which
has the air of a Divine secret, but only childish lucubrations.
I have read and known certain Eiibbalistic triflers, whose
insanity provokes my unceasing astonishment. That faults
have crept in will, I think, be denied by no sensible person
who reads the passage about Saul, above quoted (1 Sam.
xiii. 1) and also 2 Sam. vi. 2: "And David arose and
went with all the people that were with him from Judah,
to bring up from thence the ark of God."

No one can fail to remark that the name of their destina-
tion, viz., Kirjath-jearim,^ has been omitted: nor can we
deny that 2 Sam. xiii. 37, has been tampered with and
mutilated. " And Absalom fled, and went to Talmai, the
son of Ammihud, king of Q^shur. And he mourned for his
son every day. So Absalom fled, and went to Q^shur, and
was there three years." I know that I have remarked other
passages of the same kind, but I cannot recall them at the
moment.

That the marginal notes which are found continually in
the Hebrew Codices are doubtful readings will, I think, be
evident to everyone who has noticed that they often arise
from the great similarity of some of the Hebrew letters,
.such for instance, as the similarity between Kaph and

^ See "Note IS.


CHAP. IX.] THE LAST BETISEB OF HISTOBIC BOOKS. 141

Beth, Jod and Van, Daleth and Eeth, Ac. For example,
the text in 2 Sam. v. 24, runs ''in the time when thou
hearest,'' and similarly in Judges xxi. 22, "And it shall
be when their fathers or their brothers come unto us often,"
the marginal version is " come unto us to complain.'*

So also many various readings have arisen &om the use
of the letters named mutes, which are generaUy not sounded
in pronunciation, and are taken promiscuously, one for the
other. For example, in Levit. xxv. 29, it is written, " The
house shall be established which is not in the walled city,"
but the margin has it, " which is in a walled city."

Though these matters are self-evident, it is necessary to
answer the reasonings of certain Pharisees, by which they
endeavour to convince us that the marginal notes serve to
indicate some mystery and were added or pointed out by
the writers of the sacred books. The first of these reasons,
which, in my opinion, carries little weight, is taken from
the practice of reading the Scriptures aloud.

If, it is nrged, these notes were added to show various
readings whidi could not be decided upon by posterity, why
has custom prevailed that the mar^nal readings should
always be retained? Why has the meaning which is pre-
ferred been set down in the margin when it ought to have
been incorporated in the text, and not relegat^ to a side
note?

The second reason is more specious, and is taken from
the nature of the case. It is admitted that faults have
crept into the sacred writings by chance and not by design;
but they say that in the five books the word for a girl is,
with one exception, written without the letter " he," con-
trary to all grammatical rules, whereas in the margin it is
written correctly according to the universal rule of grammar.
Can this have happened by mistake? Is it possible to
imagine a clerical error to have been committed every time
the word occurs ? Moreover, it would have been easy to
supply the emendation. Hence, when these readings are
not accidental or corrections of manifest mistakes, it is sup-
posed that they must have been set down on purpose by
the original writers, and have a meaning. However, it is
easy to answer such arguments ; as to the question of cus-
tom having prevailedin the reading of the niarginal ver^^orc^^


' 142 A THBOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. IX.

I will not spare much time for its consideration : I know
not the promptings of superstition, and perhaps the prac-
tice may have arisen from the idea that both readings were
deemed equally good or tolerable, and therefore, lest either
should be neglected, one was appointed to be written, and
the other to be read. They feared to pronounce judgment in so
weighty a matter lest they should mistake the false for the
true, and therefore they would give preference to neither, as
•they must necessarily have done if they had commanded one
only to be both read and written. This would be especially
the case where the marginal readings were not written down
in the sacred books: or the custom may have originated be-
'Cause some things though rightly written down were desired
<to be read otherwise according to the marginal version, and
therefore the general rule was made that the marginal ver-
sion should be followed in reading the Scriptures. The
cause which induced the scribes to expressly prescribe
certain passages to be read in the marginal version, I will
now touch on, for not all the marginal notes are various
readings, but some mark expressions which have passed
out of common use, obsolete words and terms which current
decency did not allow to be read in a public assembly.
The ancient writers, without any evil intention, employed
no courtly paraphrase, but called things by their plain
names. Afterwards, through the spread of evil thoughts
^nd luxury, words which could be used by the ancients
without o^ence, came to be considered obscene. There was
mo need for this cause to change the text of Scripture.
Still, as a concession to the popular weakness, it became the
•custom to substitute more decent terms for words denoting
43exual intercourse, excreta, &c., and to read them as they
-were given in the margin.

At any rate, whatever may have been the origin of the
■practice of reading Scripture according to the marginal
version, it was not that the true interpretation is contained
^therein. For besides that, the Babbins in the Talmud often
difEer from the Massoretes, and give other readings which
ithey approve of, as I will shortly show, certain things are
'found in the margin which appear less warranted by the
Hises of the Hebrew language. For example, in 2 Samuel
Txiv. 22, we read, ** In that the king hath fulfilled the re-


CHAP. IX.] THE LAST BEYISEB OF HISTORIC BOOKS. 143

quest of liis servant," a construction plainly regular, and
agreeing with that in chap. xvi. But the margin has it "of
thy servant," which does not agree with the person of the
verb. So, too, chap, xvi 25 of the same book, we find,
** As if one had inquired at the oracle of God," the margin
adding " someone " to stand as a nominative to the verb.
But the correction is not apparently warranted, for it is a
•common practice, well known to grammarians in the He-
brew language, to use the third person singular of the active
Terb impersonally.

The second argument advanced by the Pharisees is easily
answered from what has just been said, namely, that the
■scribes besides the various readings called attention to ob-
solete words. For there is no doubt thai in Hebrew as in
other languages, changes of use made many words obsolete
and antiquated, and such were found by the later scribes
in the sacred books and noted by them with a view to the
books being publicly read according to custom. For this
reason the word nahgar is always found marked because its
^gender was originally common, and it had the same mean-
ing as the Latin juvenis (a young person). So also the
Hebrew capital was anciently called Jerusalem, not Jerusa-
laim. As to the pronouns himself and herself, I think that
the later scribes changed van into jod (a very frequent
change in Hebrew) when they wished to express the femi-
nine gender, but that the ancients only distinguished the
two genders by a jchange of vowels. I may also remark
that the irregular tenses of certain verbs differ in the
ancient and modem forms, it being formerly considered a
mark of elegance to employ certain letters agreeable to the
ear.

In a word, I could easily multiply proofs of this kind if
I were not afraid of abusing the patience of the reader.
Perhaps I shall be asked how I became acquainted with the
fact that all these expressions are obsolete. I reply that I
have found them in the most ancient Hebrew writers in the
Bible itself, and that they have not been imitated by sub-
isequent authors, and thus they are recognized as antiquated,
though the language in which they occur is dead. But
perhaps someone may press the question why, if it be true,
as I say, that the marginal notes of the Bible generally


144} ▲ THBOLOGICO-POLITICAL TEEATISE. [CHAP. IX.

mark vaaious readings, there are never more tlian two
readings of a passage, that in the text and that in the
margin, instead of three or more; and further, how the
scribes can have hesitated between two readings, one of
which is evidently contrary to grammar, and the other a
plain correction.

The answer to these questions also is easy : I will pre-
mise that it is almost certain that there once were more
various readings than those now recorded. For instance,
one finds many in the Talmud which the Massoretes have
neglected, and are so different one from the other that even
the superstitious editor of the Bomberg Bible confesses that
he cannot harmonize them. " We cannot say anything," he
writes, " except what we have said above, namely, that the
Talmud is generally in contradiction to the Massoretes."
So that we are not bound to hold that there never were
more than two readings of any passage, yet I am willing to
admit, and indeed I believe that more than two readings
are never found : and for the following reasons : — (L) The
cause of the difEerences of reading only admits of two, being
generally the similarity of certaia letters, so that the ques-
tion resolved itself into which should be written Beth, or
Kaf, Jod or Vau, Daleth or Beth: cases which are con-
stantly occurring, and frequently yielding a fairly good
meaning whichever alternative be adopted. Sometimes,
too, it is a question whether a syllable be long or short,
quantity being determined by the letters called mutes.
Moreover, we never asserted that all the marginal versions,
without exception, marked various readings ; on the con-
trary, we have stated that many were due to motives of
decency or a desire to explain obsolete words. (11.) I am in-
clined to attribute the fact that more than two readings are
never found to the paucity of exemplars, perhaps not more
than two or three, found by the scribes. In the treatise
of the scribes, chap, vi., mention is made of three only, pre-
tended to have been found in the time of Ezra, in order that
the marginal versions might be attributed to him.

However that may be, if the scribes only had three codices
we may easily imagine that in a given passage two of them
would be in accord, for it would be extraordinary if each
one of the three gave a different reading of the same text.


CHAP. rC.] THE LAST BETISEB OF HISTORIC BOOKS. 145

The dearth of copies after the time of Ezra will surprise
no one who has read the 1st chapter of Maccabees, or
Josephns's " Antiquities," Bk. 12, chap. 5. Nay, it appears
wonderful considering the fierce and daily persecution, that
even these few should have been preserved. This will,
I think, be plain to even a cursory reader of the history
of those times.

We have thus discovered the reasons why there are never
more than two readings of a passage in the Bible, but this
is a long way from supposing that we may therefore con-
clude that the Bible was purposely written incorrectly in
such passages in order to signify some mystery. As to the
second argument, that some passages are so faultily written
that they are at plain variance with all grammar, and
should have been corrected in the text and not in the
margin, I attach little weight to it, for I am not concerned
to say what religious motive the scribes may have had for
acting as they did: possibly they did so from candour,
wishing to transmit the few exemplars of the Bible which
they had found exactly in their original state, marking the
difEerences they discovered in the margin, not as doubtful
readings, but as simple variants. I have myself called
them doubtful readings, because it would be generally im-
possible to say which of the two versions is preferable.

Lastly, besides these doubtful readings the scribes
have (by leaving a hiatus in the middle of a paragraph)
marked several passages as mutilated. The Massoretes
have counted up such instances, and they amount to eight-
and-twenty. I do not know whether any mystery is thought
to lurk in the number, at any rate the Pharisees religiously
preserve a certain amount of empty space.

One of such hiatus occurs (to give an instance) in G-en.
iv. 8, where it is written, " And Cain said to his brother
.... and it came to pass while they were in the field, &c.,"
a space being left in which we should expect to hear what
it was that Cain said.

Similarly there are (besides those points we have noticed)
eight-and-twenty hiatus left by the scribes. Many of
these would not be recognized as mutilated if it were not
for the empty space left. But I have said enough on this
subject.


146 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISB. [CHAP. X.


CHAPTEE X.

AST EXAMINATION OF THE BEMAINING BOOEiS OF THE OLD
TESTAMENT ACCOBDING TO THE PBECEDINa METHOD.

I NOW pass on to the remaining books of the Old Tes-
tament. Concerning the two books of Chronicles I have
nothing particular or important to remark, except that
they were certainly written after the time of Ezra, and pos-
sibly after the restoration of the Temple by Judas Macca-
bseus.^ For in chap. ix. of the first book we find a reckon-
ing of the famihes who were the first to live in Jerusalem,
and in verse 17 the names of the porters, of which two
recur in Nehemiah. This shows that the books were cer-
J tainly compiled after the rebuilding of the city. As to
their actual writer, their authority, utility, and doctrine, I
come to no conclusion. I have always been astonished
that they have been included in the Bible by men who
shut out from the canon the books of Wisdom, Tobit, and
the others styled apocryphal. I do not aim at disparaging
their authority, but as they are Tiniversally received I will
leave them as they are.

The Psalms were collected and divided into five books in
the time of the second temple, for Ps. Ixxxviii. was published,
according to Philo- Judseus, while king Jehoiachin was still
a prisoner in Babylon ; and Ps. Ixxxk. when the same king
obtained his liberty : I do not think Philo would have
made the statement unless either it had been the received
opinion in his time, or else had been told him by trust-
worthy persons.

The Proverbs of Solomon were, I believe, collected at the
same time, or at least in the time of King Josiah ; for in
chap. XXV. 1, it is written, " These are also proverbs of Solo-
mon which the men of Hezekiah, king of Judah, copied out.''
I cannot here pass over in silence the audacity of the
Eabbis who wished to exclude &om the sacred canon both

» See Note \^.


CHAP. X.] OP THE PBOPHBTIC BOOKS. 147

the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, and to put them both in the
Apocrypha. In fact, they would actiially have done so, if
they had not lighted on certain passages in which the law
of Moses is extolled. It is, indeed, grievous to think that
the settling of the sacred canon lay in the hands of such
men; howerer. I congratulate tW, in this instance, on
their sufEering us to see these books in question, though I
cannot refrain from doubting whether they have trans-
mitted them in absolute good faith; but I will not now
linger on this point.

I pass on, then, to the prophetic books. An examination
of these assures me that the prophecies therein contained
have been compiled from other books, and are not always
set down in the exact order in which they were spoken or
written by the prophets, but are only such as were collected
here and there, so that they are but fragmentary.

Isaiah began to prophecy in the reign of XJzziah, as the
writer himself testifies in the first verse. He not only
prophesied at that time, but furthermore wrote the his-
tory of that king (see 2 Chron. xxvi. 22) in a volume
now lost. That which we possess, we have shown to have
been taken from the chronicles of the kings of Judah and
Israel. .

We may add that the Babbis assert that this prophet
prophesied in the reign of Manasseh, by whom he was
eventually put to death, and, although this seems to be a
myth, it yet shows that they did not think that all Isaiah's
prophecies are extant.

^e prophecies of Jeremiah, which are related historically
are also taken from various chronicles; for not only are
they heaped together confusedly, without any account being
taken of dates, but also the same story is told in them dif-
ferently in difEerent passages. For instance, in chap. xxi.
we are told that the cause of Jeremiah's arrestwas that he
had prophesied the destruction of the city to Zedekiah who
consulted him. This narrative suddenly passes, in chap xxii.,
to the prophet's remonstrances to Jehoiakim (Zedekiah's
predecessor), and the prediction he made of that king's cap-
tivity ; then, in chap, xxv., come the revelations granted to
the prophet previously, that. is in the fourth year of Je-
hoiakim, and, further on still, the revelatiQns received ixL


148 A THEOLOGIOO-FOLITICAL TEEATISE. [CHAP. X.

the first year of the same reign. The continuator of Jere-
miah goes on heaping prophecy upon prophecy without any
regard to dates, until at last, in chap, xxxviii. (as if the in-
tervening chapters had been a parenthesis), he takes up the
thread dropped in chap. xxi.

In fact, the conjunction with which chap, xxxviii. begins,
refers to the 8th, 9th, and 10th verses of chap. xxi. Jere-
miah's last arrest is then very differently described, and a
totally separate cause is given for his daily retention in the
court of the prison.

We may thus clearly see that these portions of the book
have been compiled from various sources, and are only from
this point of view comprehensible. The prophecies con-
tained in the remaining chapters, where Jeremiah speaks
in the first person, seem to be taken from a book written
by Baruch, at Jeremiah's dictation. These, however, only
comprise (as appears from chap, xxxvi. 2) the prophecies
revealed to the prophet from the time of Josiah to the fourth
year of JehoiaMm, at which period the book begins. The
contents of chap. xlv. 2, on to chap. li. 59, seem taken from
the same volume.

That the book of Ezekiel is only a fragment, is clearly
indicated by the fibrst verse. For anyone may see that the
conjunction with which it begins, refers to something al-
ready said, and connects what follows therewith. However,
not only this conjunction, but the whole text of the discourse
implies other writings. The fact of the present work be-
ginning in the thirtieth year shows that the prophet is con-
tinuing, not commencing a discourse ; and this is confirmed
by the writer, who parenthetically states in verse 3, " The
word of the Lord came often unto Ezekiel the priest, the
son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans," as if to say that
the prophecies which he is about to relate are the sequel to
revelations formerly received by Ezekiel from God. Further-
more, Josephus, " Antiq." x. 9, says that Ezekiel prophesied
that Zedekiah should not see Babylon, whereas the book
we now have not only contains no such statement, but con-
trariwise asserts in chap. xvii. that he should be taken to
Babylon as a captive.*

Of Hosea I cannot positively state that he wrote more
than is now ei^tant in the book bearing his name, but I am

1 See Note 20.


OHAF. X.] OF THE PEOPHETIC BOOKS. 149

astonislied at the smallness of tlie quantity we possess, for
the sacred writer asserts that the prophet prophesied for
more than eighty years.

- W^ may assert, speaking generally, that the compiler of
the prophetic books neither collected all the prophets, nor
all the writings of those we have ; for of the prophets who
are said to have prophesied in the reign of Manasseh and of
whom general mention is made in 2 Chron. xxxiii. 10, 18,
we have, evidently, no prophecies extant ; neither have we
all the prophecies of the twelve who give their names to
books. Of Jonah we have only the prophecy concerning
the Ninevites, though he also prophesied to the children of
Israel, as we learn in 2 "Kings xiv. 25.

The book and the personality of Job have caused much
controversy. Some think that the book is the work of
Moses, and the whole narrative merely allegorical. Such
is the opinion of the Eabbins recorded in the Talmud, and
they are supported by Maunonides in his " More Nebuchim."
Others believe it to be a true history, and some suppose that
Job lived in the time of Jacob, and was married to his
daughter Dinah. Aben Ezra, however, as I have already
stated, affirms, in his commentaries, that the work is a
translation into Hebrew from some other language : I could
wish that he could advance more cogent argimients than
he does, for we might then conclude that the Gentiles also
had sacred books. I myself leave the matter undecided,
but I conjecture Job to have been a G-entile, and a man of
very stable character, who at first prospered, then was as-
sailed with terrible calamities, and finally was restored to
great happiness. (He is thus named, among others, by
Ezekiel, xiv. 12.) I take it that the constancy of his mind
amid the vicissitudes of his fortune occasioned many men to
dispute about G-od's providence, or at least caused the writer
of the book in question to compose his dialogues ; for the
contents, and also the style, seem to emanate far less from
a man wretchedly ill and lying among ashes, than from one
reflecting at ease in his study. I should also be inclined
to agree with Aben Ezra that the book is a translation, for
its poetry seems akin to that of the Gentiles ; thus the
Father of Gtods summons a council, and Momus, here called
Satan, criticizes the Divine decrees with the utmost freedom.


150 A THEOLOGIOO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. X.

But these are mere conjectures witliout any solid foun-
dation.

I pass on to tlie book of Daniel, wliicli, from chap. viii.
onwards, imdoiibtedly contains the writing of Daniel him-
self. "Whence the first seven chapters are derived I cannot
say ; we may, however, conjecture that, as they were first
written in Chaldean, they are taken from Chaldean
chronicles. If this could be proved, it would form a very
striking proof of the fact that the sacredness of Scripture
depends on our understanding of the doctrines therein sig-
nified, and not on the words, the language, and the phrases
in which these doctrines are conveyed to us ; and it would
further show us that books which teach and speak of what-
ever is highest and best are equally sacred, whatever be the
tongue in which they are written, or the nation to which
they beloi^.

We can, however, in this case only remark that the
chapters in question were written in Chaldee, and yet are
as sacred as the rest of the Bible.

The first book of Ezra is so intimately connected with
the book of Daniel that both are plainly recognizable as the
work of the same author, writing of Jewish history from
the time of the first captivity onwards. I have no hesita-
tion in joining to this the book of Esther, for the conjunc-
tion with which it begins can refer to nothing else. It
cannot be the same work as that written by Mordecai, for,
in chap. ix. 20-22, another person relates that Mordecai
wrote letters, and tells us their contents; further, that
Queen Esther confirmed the days of Purim in their times
appointed, and that the decree was written in the book —
that is (by a Hebraism), in a book known to all then living,
which, as Aben Ezra and the rest confess, has now perished.
Lastly, for the rest of the acts of Mordecai, the historian
refers us to the chronicles of the kings of Persia. Thus
there is no doubt that this book was written by the same
person as he who recounted the history of Daniel and Ezra,
and who wrote Nehemiah,^ sometimes called the second
book of Ezra. We may, then, affirm that all these books
are from one hand ; but we have no clue whatever to the
personality of the author. However, in order to determine
whence he, whoever he was» had gained a knowledge of

I See Note 21.


CHAP. X.] OF THE FBOPHBTIC BOOKS. 151

the liistories wMcli lie Imd, perchance, in great measure
himself written, we may remark that the governors or
chiefs of the Jews, after the lestoration of the Temple, kept
scribes or historiographers, who wrote annals or chronicles
of them. The chronicles of the kings are often quoted in
the books of Eongs, but the chronicles of the chiefs and
priests are quoted for the first time in Nehemiah xii. 23,
and again in 1 Mace. zvi. 24. This is undoubtedly the
book referred to as containing the decree of Esther and the
acts of Mordecai ; and which, as we said with Aben Ezra,
is now lost. From it were taken the whole contents of
these four books, for no other authority is quoted by their
writer, or is known to us.

That these books were not written by either Ezra or
Nehemiah is plain from Nehemiah xii. 9, where the de-
scendants of the high priest, Joshua are traced down to
Jaddua, the sixth high priest, who went to meet Alexander
the Q-reat, when the Persian empire was almost subdued
(Josephus, "Ant." ii. 108), or who, according to Philo-Judseus,
was tiie sbcth and last high priest under the Persians. In
the same chapter of Nehemiah, verse 22, this point is clearly
brought out : " The Levites in the days of EHashib, Joiada,
and Johanan, and Jaddua, were recorded chief of the
fathers : also the priests, to the reign of Darius the Per-,
sian " — ^that is to say, in the chronicles ; and, I suppose,
no one thinks* that the lives of Nehemiah and Ezra were so
prolonged that they outlived fourteen kings of Persia.
Cyrus was the first who granted the Jews permission to
rebuild their Temple: the period between his time and
Darius, fourteenth and last king of Persia, extends over
230 years. I have, therefore, no doubt that these books
were written after Judas MaccabsBus had restored the
worship in the Temple, for at that time false books of
Daniel, Ezra, and Esther were published by evil-disposed
persons, who were almost certainly Sadducees, for the
writings were never recognized by the Pharisees, so far
as I am aware ; and, although certain myths in the fourth
book of Ezra are repeated in the Talmud, they must not
be set down to the Pharisees, for all but the most igno-
rant admit that they have been added by some trifler:
in fact, I think, someone must have made such addi-

^ See Note 22.


152 A THEOLOGICO-FOLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. X.

tions witli a view to casting ridicule on all the traditions of
the sect.

Perhaps these fonr books were written out and pnbhshed
at the time I have mentioned with a view to showing the
people that the prophecies of Daniel had been fulfilled, and
thus kindling their piety, and awakening a hope of future
deHverance in the midst of their misfortunes. In spite of
their recent origin, the books before us contain many
errors, due, I suppose, to the haste with which they were
written. Marginal readings, such as I have mentioned in
the last chapter, are found here as elsewhere, and in even
greater abundance ; there are, moreover, certain passages
which can only be accounted for by supposing some such
cause as hurry.

However, biaf ore calling attention to the marginal read-
ings, I will remark that, 3 the Pharisees are right in sup-
posing them to have been ancient, and the work of the
original scribes, we must perforce admit that these scribes
(if there were more than one) set them down because they
found that the text from which they were copying was
inaccurate, and did yet not venture to alter what was
written by their predecessors and superiors. I need not
again go into the subject at length, and will, therefore,
proceed to mention some discrepancies not noticed in the
margin.

I. Some error has crept into the text of the second
chapter of Ezra, for in verse 64 we are told that the total
of all those mentioned in the rest of the chapter amounts
to 42,360 ; but, when we come to add up the several items
we get as result only 29,818. There must, therefore, be an
error, either in the total, or in the details. The total is
probably correct, for it would most Hkely be well known to
all as a noteworthy thing ; but with the details, the case
would be different. If, then, any error had crept into the
total, it would at once have been remarked, and easily cor-
rected. This view is confirmed by Nehemiah vii., where
this chapter of Ezra is mentioned, and a total is given in
plain correspondence thereto ; but the details are altogether
different — some are larger, and some less, than those in
Ezra, and altogether they amount to 31,089. We may,
therefore, conclude that both in Ezra and in Kehemiah the


CHAP. X.] OF THE PROPHETIC BOOKS. 153

details are erroneotisly given. The commentators who at-
tempt to harmonize these evident contradictions draw on
their imagination, each to the best of his ability ; and while
professing adoration for each letter and word of Scripture,
only succeed in holding up the sacred writers to ridicule, as
though they knew not how to write or relate a plain
narrative. Such persons effect nothing but to render the
clearness of Scripture obscure. If the Bible could every-
where be interpreted after their fashion, there would be no
such thing as a rational statement of which the meaning
could be relied on. However, there is no need to dwell on
the subject; only I am convinced that if any historian
were to attempt to imitate the proceedings freely attributed
to the writers of the Bible, the commentators would cover
him with contempt. If it be blasphemy to assert that
there are any errors in Scripture, what name shall we apply
to those who foist into it their own fancies, who degrade
the sacred writers till they seem to write confused non-
sense, and who deny the plainest and most evident mean-
ings ? What in the whole Bible can be plainer than the
fact that Ezra and his companions, in the second chapter
of the book attributed to him, have given in detail the
reckoning of all the Hebrews who set out with them for
Jerusalem ? This is proved by the reckoning being given,
not only of those who told their lineage, but also of those
who were unable to do so. Is it not equally clear from
Nehemiah vii. 6, that the writer merely there copies the list ^
given in Ezra ? Those, therefore, who explain these pas- I
sages otherwise, deny the plain meaning of Scripture — ^nay, •
they deny Scripture itself. They think it pious to reconcile
one passage of Scripture with another — a pretty piety, for-
sooth, which accommodates the clear passages to the
obscure, the correct to the faulty, the sound to the corrupt.

Far be it from me to call such commentators blasphe-
mers, if their motives be pure : for to err is human. But
I return to my subject.

Besides these errors in numerical details, there are others
in the genealogies, in the history, and, I fear also in the
prophecies. The prophecy of Jeremiah (chap, xxii.), con-
cerning Jechoniah, evidently does not agree with his history
as given in 1 Chronicles iii. 17-19, and especially with the


.(


154 A THEOLOOIOO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. X.

last words of the cliapter, nor do I see how the prophecy,
"thoTi shalt die in peace," can be applied to Zedekiah,
whose eyes were dug out after his sons had been slain
before Imn. If prophecies are to be interpreted by their
issue, we must make a change of name, and read Jechoniah
for Zedekiah, and vice versa. This, however, would be
too paradoxical a proceeding; so I prefer to leave the
matter unexplained, especially as the error, if error there
be, must be set down to the lustorian, and not to any fault
in the authorities.

Other difficulties I will not touch upon, as I should only
weary the reader, and, moreover, be repeating the remarks
of other writers. For E. Selomo, in face of the manifest
contradiction in the above-mentioned genealogies, is com-
pelled to break forth into these words (see his commentary
on 1 Chron. viii.) : " Ezra (whom he supposes to be the
author of the book of Chronicles) gives different names
and a different genealogy to the sons of Benjamin from
those which we find in Gfenesis, and describes most of the
Levites differently from Joshua, because he found original
discrepancies." And, again, a little later : " The genealogy
of Q-ibeon and others is described twice in different ways,
from different tables of each genealogy, and in writing
them down Ezra adopted the version given in the majority
of the texts, and when the authority was equal he gave
both." Thus granting that these books were compiled foom
sources originally incorrect and uncertain.

In fact the commentators, in seeking to harmonize dif-
ficulties, generally do no more than indicate their causes :
for I suppose no sane person supposes that the sacred his-
torians deliberately wrote with the object of appearing to
contradict themselves freely.

Perhaps I shall be told that I am overthrowing the
authority of Scripture, for that, according to me, anyone
may suspect it of error in any passage ; but, on the con-
trary, I have shown that my object has been to prevent
the clear and uncorrupted passages being accommodated
to and corrupted by the faulty ones ; neither does the fact
that some passages are corrupt warrant us in suspecting
all. No book ever was completely firee firom faults, yet I
would ask, who suspects all books to be everywhere faulty?


CHAP. X.] OF THE FBOFHIETIO BOOKS. 155

Surely no one, especially wlien the pliraseology is clear and '
the intention of tiie autiior plain.

I have now finished the task I set myself with respect to
the books of the Old Testament. We may easily conclude
from what has been said, that before the time of the Macca-
bees there was no canon of sacred books/ but that those
which we now possess were selected from a multitude of
others at the period of the restoration of the Temple by the
Pharisees (who also instituted the set form of prayers),
who are alone responsible for their acceptance. Those,
therefore, who would demonstrate the authority of Holy
Scripture, are bound to show the authority of each sepa-
rate book ; it is not enough to prove the Divine origin of a
single book in order to infer the Divine origin of the rest.
In that case we should have to assume that the council of
Pharisees was, in its choice of books, infallible, and this
could never be proved. I am led to assert that the Phari-
sees alone selected the books of the Old Testament, and in-
serted them in the canon, from the fact that in Daniel ii. is \
proclaimed the doctrine of the Eesurrection, which the
Sadducees denied ; and, furthermore, the Pharisees plainly
assert in the Talmud that they so selected them. For in
the treatise of Sabbathus, chapter ii., folio 80, page 2, it is
written: "E. Jehuda, sumamed Eabbi, reports that the
experts wished to conceal the book of Ecclesiastes because
they found therein words opposed to the law (that is, to
the book of the law of Moses). "Why did they not hide it?
Because it begins in accordance with the law, and ends
according to the law ;" and a little further on we read :
" They sought also to conceal the book of Proverbs." And
in the first chapter of the same treatise, fol. 13, page 2 :
" Verily, name one man for good, even he who was called
Neghunja, the son of Hezekiah: for, save for him, the
book of Ezekiel would been concealed, because it agreed
not with the words of the law."

It is thus abundantly clear that men expert in the law '
summoned a council to decide which books should be re-
ceived into the canon, and which excluded. If any man, *
therefore, wishes to be certified as to the authority of all
the books, let him call a fresh council, and ask every
member his reasons.

1 See Note 23.


156 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAF. X.

The time has now come for examining in the same
manner the books in the 'New Testament ; but as I learn
that the task has been already performed by men highly
skilled in science and languages, and as I do not myself
possess a knowledge of Q-reek sufficiently exact for the
task ; lastly, as we have lost the originals of those books
which were written in Hebrew, I prefer to decline the
undertaking. However, I will touch on those points which
have most bearing on my subject in the following chapter.


CHAP. XI.] OF THE APOSTOLIC MISSION. 157


CTTAPTEB XL

AN INQXTIBY WHETHEB THE APOSTLES WBOTE THEIB EPIS-
TLES AS APOSTLES AND PBOPHETS, OB MEBELY AS
TEACHEBS; AND AN EXPLANATION OP WHAT IS MEANT
BY AN APOSTLE.

NO reader of tlie New Testament can doubt tliat the
Apostles were prophets ; but as a prophet does not
always speak by revelation, but only at rare intervals, as
we showed at the end of Chap. I., we may fairly inquire
whether the Apostles wrote their Epistles as prophets, by
revelation and express mandate, as Moses, Jeremiah, and
others did, or whether only as private individuals or
teachers, especially as Paul, in Corinthians xiv. 6, mentions
two sorts of preaching.

If we examine the style of the Epistles, we shall find it
totally different from that employed by the prophets.

The prophets are continuaUy asserting that they speak
by the command of God : " Thus saith the Lord," " The
liord of hosts saith," " The command of the Lord," &c. ;
and this was their habit not only in assemblies of the pro-
phets, but also in their epistles containing revelations, as
appears from the epistle of Elijah to Jehoram, 2 Ohron. xxi.
12, which begins, " Thus saith the Lord."

Li the Apostolic Epistles we find nothing of the sort.
Contrariwise, in 1 Cor. vii. 40 Paul speaks according to his
own opinion and in many passages we come across doubt-
ful and perplexed phrases, such as, " We think, therefore,"
Bom. iii. 28 ; " Now I think,"^ Eom. viii. 18, and so on.
Besides these, other expressions are met with very different
from those used by the prophets. For instance, 1 Cor.
vii. 6, " But I speak this by permission, not by command-
ment ; " I give my judgment as one that hath obtained mercy
of the Lord to be faithful " (1 Cor. vii. 25), and so on in
many other passages. We must also remark that in the

^ See Note 24.


158 A THEOLOaiOO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAF. XI.

aforesaid cliapter the Apostle says that when he states that
he has or has not the precept or commandment of Qtod, he
does not mean the precept or commandment of Gk)d re-
vealed to himself, but only the words uttered by Christ in
His Sermon on the Mount. Furthermore, if we examine
the manner in which the Apostles give out evangelical doc-
H trine, we shall see that it differs materially from the
' method adopted by the prophets. The Apostles everywhere
reason as if they were arguing rather than prophesying ;
the prophecies, on the other hand, contain only dogmas and
commands. Q-od is therein introduced not as speaking to
reason, but as issuing decrees by His absolute fiat. The
authority of the prophets does not submit to discussion,
for whosoever wishes to find rational ground for his argu-
ments, by that very wish submits them to everyone's private
judgment. This Paul, inasmuch as he uses reason, appears
to have done, for he says in 1 Cor. x. 16, " I speak as to
wise men, judge ye what I say." The prophets, as we
showed at the end of Chapter I., did not perceive what was
revealed by virtue of their natural reason, and though there
are certain passages in the Pentateuch which seem to be
appeals to induction, they turn out, on nearer examination,
to be nothing but peremptory commands. For instance,
when Moses says, Deut. xxxi. 27, " Behold, while I am yet
alive with you, this day ye have been rebellious against the
Lord ; and how much more after my death," we must by
no means conclude that Moses wished to convince the
Israelites by reason that they would necessarily fall away
from the worship of the Lord after his death ; for the argu-
ment would have been false, as Scripture itself shows : the
Israelities continued faithful during the lives of Joshua and
the elders, and afterwards during the time of Samuel,
David, and Solomon. Therefore the words of Moses are
merely a moral injunction, in which he predicts rhetorically
the future backsliding of the people so as to impress it
vividly on their imaginations. I say that Moses spoke of
himseK in order to lend likelihood to his prediction, and
not as a prophet by revelation, because in verse 21 of the
same chapter we are told that Gk>d revealed the same thing
to Moses in different words, and there was no need to make
Moses certain by argument of Gknl's prediction and decree ;


CHAP. XI.] OF THE APOSTOLIC MISSION. 159

it was only necessary tliat it slionld be vividly impressed
on Ms imagination, and this could not be better accom-
plished than by imagining the existing contumacy of the
I)eople, of whidi he had had frequent experience, as likely
to extend into the future.

All the arguments employed by Moses in the five books
are to be understood in a similar manner; they are not
drawn from the armoury of reason, but are merely modes
of expression calculated to instil with efficacy, and present
vividly to the imagination the commands of God.

However, I do not wish absolutely to deny thd.t the
prophets ever argued from, revelation ; I only maintain that
the prophets made more legitimate use of argument in pro-
portion as their knowledge approached more nearly to
ordinary knowledge, and by this we know that they pos-
sessed a knowledge above the ordinary, inasmuch as they
proclaimed absolute dogmas, decrees, or judgments. Thus
Moses, the chief of the prophets, never used legitimate
argument, and, on the other hand, the long deductions and
arguments of Paul, such as we find in the Epistle to the
Bomans, are in nowise written from supernatural revelation.

The modes of expression and discourse adopted by the
Apostles in the Epistles, show very clearly that the latter
were not written by revelation and Divine command, but'
merely by the natural powers and judgment of the authors.
They consist in brotherly admonitions and courteous expres-
sions such as would never be employed in prophecy, as for
instance, Paul's excuse in Bomans xv. 16, " I have written
the more boldly unto you in some sort, my brethren."

We may arrive at the same conclusion from observing
that we never read that the Apostles were commanded to
write, but only that they went everywhere preaching, and
confirmed their words with signs. Their personal presence
and signs were absolutely necessary for the conversion and
establishment in religion of the Gentiles ; as Paul himself
expressly states in Eom. i. 11, " But I long to see you, that
I may impart to you some spiritual gift, to the end that ye
may be established."

It may be objected that we might prove in similar fashion
that the Apostles did not preach as prophets, for they did
not go to particular places, as the prophets did, by the


-./


160 A THBOLOGIOO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. XI.

command of God. We read in the Old Testament that
Jonah went to Kineveh to preach, and at the same time that
he was expressly sent there, and told that he must preach.
So also it is related, at great length, of Moses that he went
to Egypt as the messenger of God, and was told at the
same time what he should saj to the children of Israel and to
king Pharaoh, and what wonders he should work before them
to give credit to his words. Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel
were expressly commanded to preach to the Israelites.

Lastly, the prophets only preached what we are assured
, by Scripture they had received from God, whereas this is
hardly ever said of the Apostles in the New Testament,
when they went about to preach. On the contrary, we find
passages expressly implying that the Apostles chose the
places where they should preach on their own responsibility,
for there was a difference amounting to a quarrel between
Paul and Barnabas on the subject (Acts xv. 37, 38). Often
they wished to go to a place, but were prevented, as Paul
writes, Eom. i. 13, " Oftentimes I purposed to come to you,
but was let hitherto ;" and in 1 Cor. xvi. 12, " As touching
our brother Apollos, I greatly desired him to come unto
you with the brethren, but his will was not at all to come
at this time : but he will come when he shall have con-
venient time."

Prom these expressions and differences of opinion among
the Apostles, and also firom the fact that Scripture nowhere
1 testifies of them, as of the ancient prophets, that they went
^ by the command of Qtod, one might conclude that they
preached as well as wrote in their capacity of teachers, and
not as prophets : but the question is easily solved if we
observe the difference between the mission of an Apostle
and that of an Old Testament prophet. The latter were not
called to preach and prophesy to all nations, but to certain
specified ones, and therefore an express and peculiar man-
date was required for each of them ; the Apostles, on the
other hand, were called to preach to aU men absolutely,
and to turn all men to religion. Therefore, whithersoever
they went, they were fulfilling Christ's commandment;
there was no need to reveal to tiiem beforehand what they
should preach, for they were the disciples of Christ to whom
their Master Himself said (Matt. x. 19, 20) : " But, when


CHAP. XI.] OP THE APOSTOLIC MISSIOIT. 161

they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall
speak, for it shall be given you in that same Hour what ye
shall speak." We therefore conclude that the Apostles
were only indebted to special revelation in what they orally
preached and confirmed by signs (see the beginning of
Chap, n.) ; that which they taught in sx)eaking or writing
without any confirmatory signs and wonders they taught
from their natural knowledge. (See 1 Cor. xiv. 6.) We
need not be deterred by the fact that all the Epistles begin
by citing the imprimatur of the Apostleslup, for the
Apostles, as I will shortly show, were granted, not only the
faculty of prophecy, but also the authority to teach. We
may therefore admit that they wrote their Epistles as
Apostles, and for this cause every one of them began by
citing the Apostolic imprimatur, possibly with a view to
gaining the attention of the reader by asserting that they
were the persons who had made such mark among the
faithful by their preaching, and had shown by many mar-
vellous works that they were teaching true religion and the
way of salvation. I observe that what is said in the
Epistles with regard to the Apostolic vocation and the Holy
Spirit of Q-od which inspired them, has reference to their
former preaching, except in those passages where the ex-
pressions of the Spirit of God and the Holy Spirit are used
to signify a mind pure, upright, and devoted to Grod. For
instance, in 1 Cor. vii. 40, Paul says : " But she is happier
if she so abide, after mv judgment, and I think also that I
have the Spirit of Gk)d. By the Spirit of God the Apostle
here refers to his mind, as we may see from the context :
his meaning is as follows: "I account blessed a widow
who does not wish to marry a second husband ; such is my
opinion, for I have settled to live unmarried, and I think
that I am blessed." There are other similar passages which
I need not now quote.

As we have seen that the Apostles wrote their Epistles
solely by the light of natural reason, we must inquire how
they were enabled to teach by natural knowledge matters
outside its scope. However, if we bear in mind what we
said in Chap. Vil. of this treatise our difficulty will vanish :
for although the contents of the Bible entirely surpass our
understanding, we may safely discourse of them, provided

M


162 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. XI.

we assume nothing not told us in Scripture : by the same
method the Apostles, from what they saw and heard, and
from what was revealed to them, were enabled to form and
elicit many conclusions which they would have been able to
teach to men had it been permissible.

Further, although reHgion, as preached by the Apostles,
does not come within the sphere of reason, in so far as it
consists in the narration of the life of Christ, yet its essence,
which is chiefly moral, like the whole of Christ's doc-
trine, can readily be apprehended by the natural faculties
of all.

Lastly, the Apostles had no lack of supernatural illumi-
nation for the purpose of adapting the religion they had
attested by signs to the understanding of everyone so that
it might be readily received ; nor for exhortations on the
subject : in fact, the object of the Epistles is to teach and
exhort men to lead that manner of fife which each of the
Apostles judged best for confirming them in religion.
We may here repeat our former remark, that the Apostles
had received not only the faculty of preaching the history
of Christ as prophets, and confirming it with signs, but
also authority for teaching and exhorting according as each
thought best. Paul (2 Tim. i. 11), "Whereunto I am
appointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher of
the Gentiles ; " and again (1 Tim. ii. 7), " Whereunto I am
ordained a preacher and an apostle (I speak the truth in
Christ and lie not), a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and
verity." These passages, I say, show clearly the stamp
both of the apostleship and the teachership : the authority
for admonishing whomsoever and wheresoever he pleased
is asserted by Paul in the Epistle to Philemon, v. 8 :
"Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ to
enjoin thee that which is convenient, yet," &c., where we
may remark that if Paul had received from God as a
prophet what he wished to enjoin Philemon, and had
been bound to speak in his prophetic capacity, he would
not have been able to change the command of God into
entreaties. We must therefore understand him to refer to
the permission to admonish which he had received as a
teacher, and not as a prophet. We have not yet made it
quite clear that the Apostles might each choose his own


CHAP. XI.] OF THE APOSTOLIC MISSIOIT. 163

way of teaching, but only that by virtue of their Apostle-
ship they were teachers as well as prophets ; however, if we
call reason to our aid we shall clearly see that an authority
to teach implies authority to choose the method. It will
nevertheless be, perhaps, more satisfactory to draw all our
proofs from Scripture ; we are there plainly told that each
Apostle chose his particular method (Eom. xv. 20) : " Yea,
so have I strived to preach the gospel, not where Christ was
named, lest I should build upon another man's foundation."
If all the Apostles had adopted the same method of teaching,
and had all built up the Christian religion on the same foun-
dation, Paul would have had no reason to call the work of a
fellow- Apostle " another man's foundation," inasmuch as
it would have been identical with his own : his calling it
another man's proved that each Apostle built up his re-
Hgious instruction on different foundations, thus resem-
bling other teachers who have each their own method, and
prefer instructing quite ignorant people who have never
learnt under another master, whether the subject be science,
languages, or even the indisputable truths of mathematics.
Furthermore, if we go through the Epistles at all atten^
tively, we shall see that the Apostles, while agreeing about \
religion itself, are at variance as to the foundations it rests
on. Paul, in order to strengthen men's rehgion, and show
them that salvation depends solely on the grace of Q-od,
teaches that no one can boast of works, but only of faith,
and that no one can be justified by works (Rom. iii. 27, 28) ;
in fact, he preaches the complete doctrine of predestination.
James, on the other hand, states that man is justified by
works, and not by faith only (see his Epistle, ii. 24), and
omitting all the disputations of Paul, confines religion to a
very few elements.

Lastly, it is indisputable that from these different
grounds for religion selected by the Apostles, many quarrels
and schisms distracted the Church, even in the earHest
times, and doubtless they will continue so to distract it ]
for ever, or at least till religion is separated from philo-
sophical speculations, and reduced to the few simple doc-
trines taught by Christ to His disciples ; such a task was
impossible for the Apostles, because the Gospel was then
unknown to mankind, and lest its novelty should offend


164l A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAF. XL.

men's ears it liad to be adapted to the disposition of con-
temporaries (2 Cor. ix. 19, 20), and bmlt up on the ground-
work most familiar and accepted at the time.

Thus none of the Apostles philosophized more than did
^^ Paul, who was called to preach to the Gtentiles ; other

.y Apostles preaching to the Jews, who despised philosophy,.
.. J\. similarly adapted themselves to the temper of their hearers-
'^see Gal. ii. 11), and preached a religion free from all
philosophical speculations. How blest would our age be
if it conld witness a religion freed also from all the tram-
mels of superstition I


CHAP. XII.] OV THS 8ACBEDNESS 09 SCBIPTTTBB. 165


CHAPTEE XIL

OP THE TETTB OBIGINAL OP THE DIVINE LAW, AND WHEBE-
POBE SCBIPTITBE IS CALLED 8ACBED, AND THE WOBD OP
GOD. HOW THAT, IN SO PAB AS IT CONTAINS THE WOBD
OP GOD, IT HAS COME DOWN TO ITS XTNCOBBXTFTED.

THOSE who look upon the Bible as a message sent
down by God from Heaven to men, will doubtless cr j
out that I have committed the sin against the Holy Ghost
because I have asserted that the Word of God is faulty,
mutilated, tampered with, and inconsistent ; that we pos-
sess it only in fragments, and that the original of the
covenant which God made with the Jews has been lost.
However, I have no doubt that a little reflection will
cause them to desist from their uproar: for not only
reason but the expressed opinions of prophets and apostles
openly proclaim that God's eternal Word and covenant, ^
no less than true religion, is Divinely inscribed in human j
hearts, that is, in the human mind, and that this is the ;
true original of God's covenant, stamped with His own
seal, namely, the idea of Himself, as it were, with the
image of His Gk)dhood.

Beligion was imparted to the early Hebrews as a law
writtoldown, because thej were at tl^t time in the condi.
tion of children, but afterwards Moses (Deut. xxx. 6) and
Jeremiah (xxxi. 33) predicted a time coining when the
Lord should write His law in their hearts. Thus only the
Jews, and amongst them chiefly the Sadducees, struggled
for the law written on tablets ; least of all need those who
bear it inscribed on their hearts join in the contest. Those,
therefore, who reflect, will find nothing in what I have
written repugnant either to the Word of Gk)d or to true
religion and faith, or calculated to weaken either one or the
other : contrariwise, they will see that I have strengthened
religion, as I showed at the end of Chapter X. ; indeed,


166 X THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TEEATISE. [CHAP. Xir.

had it not been so, I should certainly have decided to hold
my peace, nay, I would even have asserted as a way out of
all difficTilties that the Bible contains the most profound
hidden mysteries ; however, as this doctrine has given rise
to gross superstition and other pernicious results spoken
of at the beginning of Chapter V., I have thought such a
course unnecessary, especially as religion stands in no
need of superstitious adornments, but is, on the contrary,
deprived by such trappings of some of her splendour.

Still, it will be said, though the law of God is written
in the heart, the Bible is none the less the Word of Grod,
and it is no more lawful to say of Scripture than of God's
Word that it is mutilated and corrupted. I fear that such
objectors are too anxious to. be pious, and that they are
in danger of turning reUgion into superstition, and wor-
shippmg paper and mk in place of God's Word.

I am certified of thus much : I have said nothing un-
worthy of Scripture or God's Word, and I have made no
assertions which I could not prove by most plain argu-
ment to be true. I can, therefore, rest assured that I
have advanced nothing which is impious or even savours
of impiety.

I confess that some profane men, to whom religion is a
burden, may, from what I have said, assume a licence to
sin, and without any reason, at the simple dictates of their
lusts conclude that Scripture is everywhere faulty and
falsified, and that therefore its authorily is null ; but such
men are beyond the reach of help, for nothing, as the pro-
verb has it, can be said so rightly that it cannot be twisted
into wrong. Those who wish to give rein to their lusts are
at no loss for an excuse, nor were those men of old who
possessed the original Scriptures, the ark of the covenant,
nay, the prophets and apostles in person among them, any
better than the people of to-day. Human nature, Jew as
well as Gentile, has always been the same, and in every
age virtue has been exceedingly rare.

Nevertheless, to remove every scruple, I will here show
in what sense the Bible or any inanimate thing should be
called sacred and Divine ; also wherein the law of God con-
sists, and how it cannot be contained in a certain number
of books ; and, lastly, I wiU show that Scripture, in so far


CHAP. XII.] OF THE SACHBDNESS OP SCEIPTTTBE. 167

as it teaches what is necessary for obedience and salvation,
cannot have been corrupted. From these considerations
everyone will be able to judge that I have neither said
anything against the Word of God nor given any foothold
to impiety.

A thing is called sacred and Divine when it is designed
for promoting piety, and continues sacred so long as it if
religiously used : if the users cease to be pious, the thing
ceases to be sacred : if it be turned to base uses, that which
was formerly sacred becomes unclean and profane. For
instance, a certain spot was named by the patriarch Jacob
the house of Gtod, because he worshipped God there re-
vealed to him : by the prophets the same spot was called
the house of iniquity (see Amos v. 5, and Hosea x. 5),
because the Israelites were wont, at the instigation of
Jeroboam, to sacrifice there to idols. Another example puts
the matter in the plainest Hght. Words gain their meaning
solely from their usage, and if they are arranged according
to their accepted signification so as to move those who read
them to devotion, they will become sacred, and the book so
written will be sacred also. But if their usage afterwards
dies out so that the words have no meaning, or the book
becomes utterly neglected, whether from unworthy motives,
or because it is no longer needed, then the words and the
book will lose both their use and their sanctity : lastly, if
these same words be otherwise arranged, or if their cus-
tomary meaning becomes perverted into its opposite, then
both the words and the book containing them become,
instead of sacred, impure and profane.

From this it follows that nothing is in itself absolutely
sacred, or profane, and unclean, apart from the mind, but
only relatively thereto. Thus much is clear from many
passages in the Bible. Jeremiah (to select one case out of
many) says (chap. vii. 4), that the Jews of his time were
wrong in calling Solomon's Temple, the Temple of God, for,
as he goes on to say in the same chapter, God's name
would only be given to the Temple so long as it was fre-
quented by men who worshipped Him, and defended jus-
tice, but that, if it became the resort of murderers, thieves,
idolaters, and other wicked persons, it would be turned
into a den of malefactors.


168 ▲ THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. XII.

Scripture, curiously enougli, nowhere teUs us what be-
came of the Ark of the Oovenant, though there is no doubt
that it was destroyed, or burnt together with the Temple ;
yet there was nothini? which the Hebrews considered more
kcred. or held ^^ter reverence. Thus Scripture is
sacred, and its words Diyine so long as it stirs mankind to
devotion towards Grod : but if it be utterly neglected, as it
formerly was by the Jews, it becomes nothing but pai)er
and ink, and is left to be desecrated or corrupted : still,
though Scripture be thus corrupted or destroyed, we must
not say that the Word of Otod. has suffered in Hke manner,
else we shall be like the Jews, who* said that the Temple
which would then be the Temple of Otod. had perished in
the flames. Jeremiah tells us this in respect to the law,
for he thus chides the ungodly of his time, "Wherefore
say you we are masters, and the law of the Lord is with
us ? Surely it has been given in vain, it is in vain that the
pen of the scribes" (has been made) — ^that is, you say
falsely that the Scripture is in your power, and that you
posseLtiiekwof G5d; for ye live ^e it of none effect.

So also, when Moses broke the first tables of the law, he
did not by any means cast the Word of Grod from his hands
in anger and shatter it — such an action would be inconceiv-
able, either of Moses or of Good's Word — ^he only broke the
tables of stone, which, though they had before been holy from
containing the covenant wherewith the Jews had bound
themselves in obedience to God, had entirely lost their
sanctity when the covenant had been violated by the wor-
ship of the calf, and were, therefore, as liable to perish as
the ark of the covenant. It is thus scarcely to be wondered
at, that the original documents of Moses are no longer
extant, nor that the books we possess met with the fate
we have described, when we consider that the true original
of the Divine covenant, the most sacred object of all, has
totally perished.

Let them cease, therefore, who accuse us of impiety, inas-
much as we have said nothing against the Word of God,
neither have we corrupted it, but let them keep their anger,
if they would wreak it justly, for the ancients whose malice
desecrated the Ark, the Temple, and the Law of God, and all
that was held sacred, subjecting them to corruption. Fur-


CHAP. XII.] OF THB SACBEDNESS OF SCBIPTT7BE. 169

thermore, if, according to the saying of the Apostle in
2 Cor. iii. 3, they possessed " the Epistle of Christ, written
not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living Gk)d, not in
tables of stone, but in the fleshy tables of the heart," let
them cease to worship the letter, and be so anxious con-
cerning it.

I think I have now sufficiently shown in what respect
Scripture should be accounted sacred and Divine ; we may
now see what should rightly be understood by the ex-
pression, the Word of the Lord ; debar (the Hebrew original)
signifies word, speech, command, and thing. The causes
for which a thing is in Hebrew said to be of Otod, or is
referred to Him, have been already detailed in Chap. I.,
and we can therefrom easily gather what meaning Scripture
attaches to the phrases, the word, the speech, the command,
or the thing of Gk)d. I need not, therefore, repeat what T
there said, nor what was shown under the third head in
the chapter on miracles. It is enough to mention the
repetition for the better understanding of what I am about
to say — ^viz., that the Word of the Lord when it has reference
to anyone but God Himself, signifies that Divine law
treated of in Chap. IV. ; in other words, religion, imiversal
and catholic to the whole human race, as Isaiah describes
it (chap. i. 10), teaching that the true way of life consists,
not in ceremonies, but in charity, and a true heart, and
calling it indifferently God's Law and Grod's Word.

The expression is also used metaphorically for the order
of nature and destiny (which, indeed, actually depend and
f oUow from the eternal mandate of the Divine nature), and
especially for such parts of such order as were foreseen by
the prophets, for the prophets did not perceive future events
as the result of natural causes, but as the fiats and decrees
of Gk>d. Lastly, it is employed for the command of any
prophet, in so far as he had perceived it by his peculiar
faculty or prophetic gift, and not by the natural light of
reason ; this use springs chiefly from the usual prophetic
conception of God as a legislator, which we remarked in
Chap. rV. There are, then, three causes for the Bible's
being called the Word of God : because it teaches true reli-
gion, of which God is the eternal Founder ; because it nar-
rates predictions of future events as though they were


170 A THEOLOGICO-FOLITICAL TBBATISE. [CHAP. XII.

decrees of Gtod ; becanse its actnal antliors generally per-
ceived things not by their ordinary natnral faculties, but by
a power peculiar to themselves, and introduced these things
perceived, as told them by God.

Although Scripture contains much that is merely histo-
rical and can be perceived by natural reason, yet its namo
is acquired from its chief subject matter.

We can thus easily see how God can be said to be the
Author of the Bible : it is because of the true religion therein
contained, and not because He wished to communicate to
men a certain number of books. We can also learn from
hence the reason for the division into Old and New Testa-
ment. It was made because the prophets who preached
religion before Christ, preached it as a national law in virtue
of the covenant entered into under Moses; while the
Apostles who came after Christ, preached it to all men as a
universal religion solely in virtue of Christ's Passion : the
cause for the division is not that the two parts are different
in doctrine, nor that they were written as originals of the
. covenant, nor, lastly, that the catholic religion (which is in
'; entire hajrmony with our nature) was new except in relation
to those who had not known it : " it was in the world," as
; John the Evangelist says, " and the world knew it not."
! Thus, even if we had fewer books of the Old and New
Testament than we have, we should still not be deprived of
the Word of God (which, as we have said, is identical with
true religion), even as we do not now hold ourselves to be
deprived of it, though we lack many cardinal writings such
as the Book of the Law, which was religiously guarded in
the Temple as the original of the Covenant, also the Book
of Wars, the Book of Chronicles, and many others, from
whence the extant Old Testament was taken and compiled.
The above conclusion may be supported by many reasons.

I. Because the books of both Testaments were not written
by express command at one place for all ages, but are a for-
tuitous collection of the works of men, writing each as his
period and disposition dictated. So much is clearly shown
by the call of the prophets who were bade to admonish
the ungodly of their time, and also by the Apostolic
Epistles.

n. Because it is one thing to understand the meaning of


CHAP. XII.] OV THB 8ACBEDNESS 07 SCBIPTITBE. 171

Scripture and the prophets, and quite another thing to un-
derstand the meaning of God, or the actual truth. This^
follows from what we said in Chap. II. We showed, in
Chap. VI., that it applied to historic narratives, and to-
miracles : but it by no means applies to questions concern*
ing true religion aid virtue.

m. Because the books of the Old Testament were selected
from many, and were collected and sanctioned by a council
of the Pharisees, as we showed in Chap. X. The books of
the New Testament were also chosen from many by councils
which rejected as spurious other books held sacred by
many. But these councils, both Pharisee and Christian,,
were not composed of prophets, but only of learned men
and teachers. Still, we must grant that they were guided
in their choice by a regard for the Word of God ; and they
must, therefore, have known what the law of G^d was.

rV*. Because the Apostles wrote not as prophets, but a&
teachers (see last Chapter), and chose whatever method
they thought best adapted for those whom they addressed :
and consequently, there are many things in the Epistles (as-
we showed at the end of the last Chapter) which are not
necessary to salvation.

V. Lastly, because there are four Evangelists in the New
Testament, and it is scarcely credible that God can have-
designed to narrate the life of Christ four times over, and
to communicate it thus to mankind. For though there aro
some details related in one Gospel which are not in another,,
and one often helps us to understand another, we cannot
thence conclude that all that is set down is of vital impor-
tance to us, and that God chose the four Evangelists in
order that the life of Christ might be better understood ;
for each one preached his Gospel in a separate locality, each
wrote it down as he preached it, in simple language, in
order that the history of Christ might be clearly told, not
with any view of explaining his fellow-Evangelists.

If there are some passages which can be better, and moro
easily understood by comparing the various versions, they
are the result of chance, and are not numerous : their con-
tinuance in obscurity would have impaired neither the clear«
ness of the narrative nor the blessedness of mankind.

We have now shown that Scripture can only be called


i


172 A THEOLOOICO-FOLITICAL TBXA.TISE. [CHAP. XU.

the Word of God in so far as it affects religion, or the Diyine
law ; we must now point out that, in respect to these ques-
tions, it is neither faulty, tampered with, nor corrupt. Bj
faulty, tampered with, and corrupt, I here mean written so
incorrectly that the meaning cannot be arrived at hj a study
of the language, nor from the authority of Scripture. I
will not go to such lengths as to say that the Bible, in so far
as it contains the Divine law, has always preserved the
same vowel-points, the same letters, or the same words (I
leave this to be proved by the Massoretes and other wor-
shippers of the letter), I only Tnaintfliin that the meaning
by which alone an utterance is entitled to be called Divine,
has come down to us uncorrupted, even though the original
wording may have been more often changed than we sup-
pose. Such alterations, as I have said above, detract
nothing from the Divinity of the Bible, for the Bible would
have been no less Divine had it been written in different
words or a different language. That the Divine law has
in this sense come down to us uncorrupted, is an assertion
which admits of no dispute. For from the Bible itself we
learn, without the smallest difficulty or ambiguity, that
its cardinal precept is : To love Qrod. above all things, and
one's neighbour as one's self. This cannot be a spurious
passage, nor due to a hasty and mistaken scribe, for if
the Bible had ever put forth a different doctrine it would
have had to change the whole of its teaching, for this is
the comer-stone of religion, without which the whole fabric
would fall headlong to the ground. The Bible would not
be the work we have been examining, but something quite
different.

We remain, then, unshaken in our belief that this has
always been the doctrine of Scripture, and, consequently,
that no error sufficient to vitiate it can have crept in with-
out being instantly observed by all ; nor can anyone have
succeeded in tamperii^ with it and escaped the discovery
of his malice.

As this comer-stone is intact, we must perforce admit the
same of whatever other passages are indisputably depen-
dent on it, and are also fundamental, as, for instance, that
a God exists, that He foresees all things, that He is Al-
mighty, that by His decree the good prosper and the wicked


CHAP. XII.] OF THE BACBEDNBS8 OV SOBIPTUBE. 178

come to nax^ht, and, finallj, that our salvation depends
solely on His grace.

These are doctrines which Scripture plainly teaches
throx^hout, and which it is bound to teach, else all the
rest would be empty and baseless ; nor can we be less posi-
tive about other moral doctrines, which plainly are built
upon this universal foundation — ^for instance, to uphold
justice, to aid the weak, to do no murder, to covet no man's
goods, &c. Precepts, I repeat, such as these, human
malice and the lapse of ages are alike powerless to destroy,
for if any part of them perished, its loss would imme-
diately be supplied from the fundamental principle, espe-
cially the doctrine of charity, which is everywhere in both
Testaments extolled above all others. Moreover, though it
be true that there is no conceivable crime so heinous that
it has never been committed, still there is no one who
would attempt in excuse for lus crimes to destroy the law,
or introduce an impious doctrine in the place of what is
eternal and salutary ; men's nature is so constituted that
everyone (be he king or subject) who has committed a base
action, tries to deck out his conduct with spurious excuses,
till he seems to have done nothing but what is just and
right.

We may conclude, therefore, that the whole Divine law,
as taught by Scripture, has come down to us uncorrupted.
Besides this there are certain facts which we may be sure
have been transmitted in good faith. For instance, the
main facts of Hebrew history, which were perfectly well
known to everyone. The Jewish people were accustomed
in former times to chant the ancient history of their nation
in psalms. The main facts, also, of Christ's life and pas-
sion were immediately spread abroad through the whole
Eoman empire. It is therefore scarcely cr^ble, unless
nearly everybody consented thereto, which we cannot sup-
pose, that successive generations have handed down the
broad outline of the Grospel narrative otherwise than as
they received it.

Whatsoever, therefore, is spurious or faulty can only
have reference to details — some circumstances in one or
the other history or prophecy designed to stir the people
to greater devotion; or in some miracle, with a view oi


174 A THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TEBATISE. [CHAP. XII.

confounding pliilosopliers ; or, lastly, in speculative matters
after they had become mixed up with religion, so that some
individual might prop up his own inventions with a pre-
text of Divine authority. But such matters have little to
do with salvation, whether they be corrupted little or much,
as I will show in detail in the next chapter, though I think
the question sufficiently plain from what I have said already,
especially in Chapter IL


CHAP. XIII.] OP THE SIMPLICITY OP SCEIPTTTEB. 175


CHAPTEE Xm.

IT IS SHOWN THAT SCEIPTTTEE TEACHES ONLY VERY SIMPLE
DOCTRINES, SUCH AS SUFFICE FOR RIGHT CONDUCT.

IN the second chapter of this treatise we pointed out that
the prophets were gifted with extraordinary powers of
imagination, but not of understanding ; also that Grod only-
revealed to them such things as are very simple — ^not philo-
sophic mysteries, — and that He adapted His communica-
tions to their previous opinions. We further showed in
dhap. V. that Scripture only transmits and teaches truths
which can readily be comprehended by all ; not deducing
and concatenating its conclusions from definitions and
axioms, but nan-ating quite simply, and confirming its
statements, withji view to inspiring belief, by an appeal to
oxperience as exemplified in miracles aii3rhistory, and set-
ting forth its truths in the style and phraseology which
would most appeal to the popular mind (cf . Chap. "VI., third
division).

Lastly, we demonstrated in Chap. Vii. that the difficulty
of understanding Scripture lies in the language only, and
not in the abstruseness of the argument.

To these considerations we may add that the Prophets
-did not preach only to the learned, but to all Jews, without
exception, while the Apostles were wont to teach the gospel
doctrine in churches where there were public meetings;
whence it follows that Scriptural doctrine contains no lofty
speculations nor philosophic reasoning, but only very
simple matters, such as could be understood by the slowest
intelligence.

I am consequently lost in wonder at the ingenuity of
those whom I have already mentioned, who detect in the
Bible mysteries so profound that they cannot be explained
in human language, and who have introduced so many
philosophic speculations into religion that the Church


1


>


176 ▲ THEOLOaiCO-FOLITIGAL TBEATISE. [CHAF. XIII.

seems like an academy, and religion like a science, or rather
a dispute.

It is not to be wondered at that men, who boast of pos-
sessing supernatural intelligence, should be unwilling to
yield the palm of knowledge to pliilosophers who have only
their ordinary faculties; still I should be surprised if I
found them teaching any new speculative doctrine, which
was not a commonplace to those Gentile philosophers
whom, in spite of aU, they stigmatize as blind ; for, t£ one
inquires what these mysteries lurking in Scripture may be,
one is confronted with nothing but the reflections of Plato
or Aristotle, or the like, which it would often be easier for
an ignorant man to dream than for the most accompHshed
scholar to wrest out of the Bible.

However, I do not wish to affirm absolutely that Scrip-
ture contains no doctrines in the sphere of philosophy, for
in the last chapter I pointed out some of the kind, as
fundamental principles ; but I go so far as to say that such
doctrines are very few and very simple. Their precise
nature and definition I will now set forth. The task will
be easy, for we know that Scripture does not aim at im-
parting scientific knowledge, and, therefore, it demands
from men nothing but obedience, and censures obstinacy,
but not ignorance.

Furthermore, as obedience to Gtod. consists solely in love
to our neighbour — ^f or whosoever loveth his neighbour, as
a means of obeying God, hath, as St. Paul says (Eom. xiii.
8), fulfilled the law, — it follows that no knowledge is com-
mended in the Bible save that which is necessary for
enabling all men to obey God in the manner stated, and
without which they would become rebellious, or without the
discipline of obedience.

Other speculative questions, which have no direct bear-
ing on this object, or are concerned with the knowledge of
natural events, do not affect Scripture, and should be
entirely separated from religion.

Now, though everyone, as we have said, is now quite
able to see this truth for himself, I should nevertheless
wish, considering that the whole of EeUgion depends
thereon, to explain the entire question more accurately and
clearly. To this end I must first prove that the intellectual


CHAP. XIII.] OF THE SIMFLIGITT OV 8CBIPTXJBE. 177

or accurate knowledge of God is not a gift, bestowed upon
all good men like obedience ; and, further, that the know-
ledge of God, required by Him through His prophets from
everyone without exception, as needful to be known, is
simply a knowledge of His Divine justice and charity.
Both these points are easily proved from Scripture. The
first plainly follows from Exodus vi. 2, where Grod, in order
to show the singular grace bestowed upon Moses, says to
him: "And I appealed unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and
unto Jacob by the name of El Sadai (A. V. God Almighty) ;
but by my name Jehovah was I not known to them " — ^for
the better understanding of which passage I may remark
that El Sadai, in Hebrew, signifies the God who suffices, in
that He gives to every man that which suffices for him ;
and, although Sadai is often used by itself, to signify God,
we cannot doubt that the word El (God) is everywhere
understood. Furthermore, we must note that Jehovah is
the only word found in Scripture with the meaning of the
absolute essence of God, without reference to created
things. The Jews maintain, for this reason, that this is,
strictly speaking, the only name of God ; that the rest of
the words used are merely titles ; and, in truth, the other
names of God, whether they be substantives or adjectives,
are merely attributive, and belong to Him, in so far as He
is conceived of in relation to created things, or manifested
through them. Thus El, or Ehah, signifies powerful, as is
weU known, and only applies to God in respect to His
supremacy, as when we caU Paul an apostle ; the faculties
of nis power are set forth in an accompanying adjective, as
Elf great, awful, just, merciful, &c., or else aJl are under-
stood at once by the use of El in the plural number, with a
singular signification, an expression &equeiitly adopted in
Scripture.

Now, as God tells Moses that He was not known to the
patriarchs by the name of Jehovah, it follows that they
were not cognizant of any attribute of God which expresses
His absolute essence, but only of His deeds and promises —
that is, of His power, as manifested in visible tlungs. God
does not thus speak to Moses in order to accuse the patri-
archs of infidelity, but, on the contrary, as a means of ex-
tolling their belief and faith, inasmuch as, though they

N


178 A, THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. XIH.

possessed no extraordinary knowledge of God (such as
Moses had), they yet accepted His promises as feed and
certain ; whereas Moses, though his thoughts about God
were more exalted, nevertheless doubted about the Divine
promises, and complained to God that, instead of the pro-
mised deliverance, the prospects of the Israelites had
darkened.

As the patriarchs did not know the distinctive name of
God, and as God mentions the fact to Moses, in praise of
their faith and single-heartedness, and in contrast to the
extraordinary grace granted to Moses, it follows, as we
stated at first, that men are not bound by decree to have
knowledge of the attributes of God, such knowledge being
only granted to a few of the faithful : it is hardly worth
while to quote further examples from Scripture, for every-
one must recognize that knowledge of God is not equal
among all good men. Moreover, a man cannot be ordered
to be wise any more than he can be ordered to live and
exist. Men, women, and children are all aUke able to obey
by commandment, but not to be wise. If any tell us
that it is not necessary to understand the Divine attributes,
but that we must believe them simply without proof, he
is plainly trifling. For what is invisible and can only be
perceived by the mind, cannot be apprehended by any
other means than proofs; if these are absent the object re-
mains ungrasped; the repetition of what has been heard on
such subjects no more indicates or attains to their meaning
than the words of a parrot or a puppet speaking without
sense or signification.

Before I proceed I ought to explain how it comes that we
are often told in Genesis that the patriarchs preached in
the name of Jehovah, this beii^ in plain contradiction to
the text above quoted. A reference to what was said in
Chap. VJLLL. wHl readily explain the difficulty. It was
there shown that the writer of the Pentateuch did not
always speak of things and places by the names they bore
in the times of which he was writing, but by the names best
known to his contemporaries. God is thus said in the
Pentateuch to have been preached by the patriarchs under
the nailie of Jehovah, not because such was the name by
which the patriarchs knew Him, but because this name was


<JHAP. XIII.] OP THE SIMPLICITY OP SCEIPTTTBE. 179

the one most reverenced by tlie Jews. This point, I say,
must necessarily be noticed, for in Exodus it is expressly
stated that Gk>d was not known to the patriarchs by this
name ; and in chap. iii. 13, it is said that Moses desired to
know the name of God. Now, if this name had been al-
ready known it would haye been known to Moses. We
must therefore draw the conclusion indicated, namely, that
the faithful patriarchs did not know this name of God, and
that the knowledge of God is bestowed and not commanded
by the Deity.

It is now time to pass on to our second point, and show
that Gk)d through His prophets required from men no other
knowledge of HimseK than is contained in a knowle^e of
His justice and charity — ^that is, of attributes which a certain
maimer of life wiU enable men to imitate. Jeremiah states
this in so many words (xxii. 15, 16) : " Did not thy father
<eat, and drink, and do judgment and justice ? and then it
was well with him. He judged the cause of the {>oor and
needy ; then it was well with him : was not this to know
Me ? saith the Lord." The words in chap. ix. 24 of the
same book are equally clear. " But let him that glorieth
glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth Me, that
I am the Lord which exercise loving-kindness, judgment,
and righteousness in the earth ; for in these things I de-
light, saith the Lord." The same doctrine may be gathered
from Exod. xxxiv. 6, where God revealed to Moses only
those of His attributes which display the Divine justice and
charity. Lastly, we may call attention to a passage in
John which we shall discuss at more length hereafter ; the
Apostle explains the nature of God (inasmuch as no one
has beheld Him) through charity only, and concludes that
he who possesses charity possesses, and in very truth knows
Ood.

We have thus seen that Moses, Jeremiah, and John sum
up in a very short compass the knowledge of God needful
for all, and that they state it to consist in exactly what we
said, namely, that God is supremely just, and supremely
merciful— in other words, the one perfect pattern of the true
life. We may add that Scripture nowhere gives an express
definition of God, and does not point out any other of His
attributes which shotild be apprehended save these, nor


1^0 A THEOLOOICO-POLITICAIi TBEATISE. [CHAP. XIII,

does it in set terms praise any others. Wherefore we may
draw the general conclusion that an intellectnal knowledge
of God, which takes cognizance of His nature in so far as
it actually is, and which cannot by any manner of living: be
uniteted V xnaoJdnd or foUowi J^ example, hJuo
bearing whatever on true rules of conduct, on faith, or on
revealed religion ; consequently that men may be in com-
plete error on the subject without incurring the chaise of
sinfulness. We need now no longer wonder that Gk>d
adapted Himself to the existing opinions and imaginations
of the prophets, or that the faithful held different ideas of
Gk>d, as we showed in Chap. II. ; or, again, that the sacred
books speak very inaccurately of God, attributing to Him
hands, feet, eyes, ears, a mind, and motion from one place
to another ; or that they ascribe to Him emotions, such as
jealousy, mercy, &c., or, lastly, that they describe Him as
a Judge in heaven sitting on a royal throne with Christ on
His right hand. Such expressions are adapted to the under-
standing of the multitude, it being the object of the Bible
to make men not learned but obedient.

In spite of this the general run of theologians, when
they come upon any of these phrases which they cannot
rationally harmonize with the Divine nature, maintain that
they should be interpreted metaphorically, passages they
cannot understand they say should be interpreted literally*
But if every expression of this kind in the Bible is neces*
sarily to be interpreted and understood metaphorically,.
Scripture must have been written, not for the people and
the unlearned masses, but chiefly for accomplished experts
and philosophers.

If it were indeed a sin to hold piously and simply the
ideas about God we have just quoted, the prophets ought
to have been strictly on their guard against the use of
such expressions, seekig the weak:iiuiided£ess of the people,
and ought, on the other hand, to have set forth first of all,,
duly and clearly, those attributes of God which are needful
to be understood.

This they have nowhere done; we cannot, therefore,^
think that opinions taken in themselves without respect to-
actions are either pious or impious, but must maintain that
a man is pious or impious in his beliefs only in so far as


CHAP. ZIII.] OF THE BIMPLICITY OF SCBIFTUBE. 181

he is thereby incited to obedience, or derives from them
license to sin and rebeL If a man, by belieying what is
true, becomes rebellious, his creed is impious ; if by be-
lieving what is false he becomes obedient, his creed is
pious ; for the true knowledge of Otod. comes not by com-
mandment, but by Divine gift. €k>d has required nothing
from man but a knowledge of His Divine justice and
charity, and that not as necessary to scientifio accuracy,
but to obedience.


182 ▲ TBWOiio€acO'TQLmcAi0 imxATiBE. [chap.


CHAFTEB XIV.

DSFDIinOVS OF FAITH, THS FAITH, AMD THB WOTJSHATlOJiB'
OF FAITH, WHICH IS OSCB FOK AIJ. 8KPASLATKD FSOIT


FOB a tme knowledge of faitli it is above all things
neeessaij to underhand that the Bible was adapt^
to the inteihgenoe, not onlj of the prophets, but also of
the diyerse and fic^Ia-Jewish nmltitode. This will be
recognized hj all who give anj'thbught to the subject^ for
thej will see that a person who accepted promisenonsl y
everything in Scriptore as being the nniversal and abso-
lute teaching of God, without accuratelj defining what
was adapted to the popular intelligence, would find it
impossible to escape confounding the opinions of the masses^
with the Divine doctrines, praising the judgments and
comments of man as the teaching of God, and malriTig a
wrong use of Scriptural authority. Who, I saj, does not
perceive that this is the chief reason why so many sectaries-
teach contradictory opinions as Divine documents, and
support their contentions with numerous Scriptural texts,
till it has passed in Belgitmi into a proverb, geen ketter-
Bonder letter — ^no heretic without a text r The sacred books,
were not written by one man, nor for the people of a single
period, but by many authors of different temperaments, at
times extendmg from first to last over nearly two thousand
years, and perhaps much longer. We will not, however,
accuse the sectaries of impiety because they have adapted
the words of Scripture to their own opinions ; it is thus
that these words were adapted to the understanding of
the masses originally, and everyone is at liberty so to
treat them if he sees that he can thus obey God in matters
relating to justice and charity with a more full consent :
but we do accuse those who will not grant this freedom
^ to their fellows, but who persecute aJl who differ from


CHAP. XIY.] DEFINITIONS OF FAITH. 183

them, as Gfod's enemies, however honourable and yirtuons ^
be their lives ; while, on the other hand, they cherish those /
who agree with them, however foolish they may be, as.;
Gk)d's elect. Such conduct is as wicked and dangerous to'
the state as any that can be conceived.

In order, therefore, to establish the limits to which indi-
vidual freedom should extend, and to decide what persons,
in spite of the diversity of their opinions, are to be looked
upon as the faithful, we must define faith and its essentials,
l^s task I hope to accomplish in the present chapter, and
also to separate faith from philosophy, which is the chief
aim of the whole treatise.

In order to proceed duly to the demonstration let us
recapitulate the chief aim and object of Scripture; this ^
will indicate a standard by which we may define faith.

We have said in a former chapter that the aim and ^
object of Scripture is only to teach obedience. Thus much,
I think, no one can question. Who does not see that both
Testaments are nothing else but schools for this object,
and have neither of them any aim beyond inspiring man-
kind with a voluntary obedience? For (not to repeat
what I said in the last chapter) I will remark that Moses
did not seek to convince the Jews by reason, but bound
them by a covenant, by oaths, and by conferring benefits ;
further, he threatened the people with punishment if they
should infringe the law, and promised rewards if they
should obey it. All these are not means for teaching
knowledge, but for inspiring obedience. The doctrine of
the Qospels enjoins nothing but simple faith, namely, to
believe in God and to honour Him, which is the same thing
as to obey Him. There is no occasion for me to throw
further light on a question so plain by citing Scriptural
texts commending obedience, such as may be found in great
numbers in both Testaments. Moreover, the Bible teaches
very clearly in a great many passages what everyone
ought to do in order to obey God; the whole duty is
summed up in love to one's neighbour. It cannot, there- ,
fore, be denied that he who by God's command loves his '
neighbour as himself is truly obedient and blessed accord-
ing to the law, whereas he who hates his neighbour or
neglects him is rebellious and obstinate.


184 A THEOLOOICQ-POLITICAL TREATISE. [cHAP. XIY.

Lastly, it is plain to everyone that the Bible was not

written and disseminated only for the learned, but for

[ men of every age and race ; wherefore we may rest assured

. that we are not bound by Scriptural command to believe

anything beyond what is absolutely necessary for fulfilling

its main precept.

This precept, then, is the only standard of the whole
Catholic faith, and by it alone all the dogmas needful to be
believed should be determined. So much being abundantly
manifest, as is also the fact that all other doctrines of the
faith can be legitimately deduced therefrom by reason alone,
I leave it to every man to decide for himself how it comes
to pass that so many divisions have arisen in the Church :
can it be from any other cause than those suggested at the
beginning of Chap. VJJL. ? It is these same causes which
compel me to explain the method of determining the dogmas
of the faith from the foundation we have discovered, for if
I neglected to do so, and put the question on a regular
basis, I might justly be said to have promised too lavishly,
for that anyone might, by my showing, introduce any doc-
trine he liked into rel^on, under the pretext that it was a
necessary means to obedience : especially would this be the
case in questions respecting the IXvine attributes.

In order, therefore, to set forth the whole matter metho-
dically. I will begin with a definition of faith, which on the
(principle above ^ven, should be as follows :-
Faith consists in a knowledge of Gk)d, without which
obedience to Him would be impossible, and which the mere
fact of obedience to Him imphes. This definition is so
clear, and follows so plainly from what we have already
proved, that it needs no explanation. The consequences
involved therein I will now briefly show. (I.) Faith is not
salutary in itself, but only in respect to the obedience it
imphes, or as James puts it in his Epistle, ii. 17, "Faith
without works is dead" (see the whole of the chapter
quoted). (EC.) He who is truly obedient necessarilypossesses
true and saving faith ; for if obedience be granted, faith
must be granted also, as the same Apostle expressly says in
these words (ii. 18), " Show me thy faith without thy works,
and I will show thee my faith by my works." So also John,
1 Ep. iv. 7 : " Everyone that loveth is bom of God, and


CHAP. XIV.] DEFINITIONS OF FAITH. 185

f

knoweth God : lie tliat lovetH not, knoweth not Gk>d ; for 1
Otxi is love." From these texts, I repeat, it follows tliat we :
can only judge a man faithful or unfaithful by his works. !
If his works be good, he is faithful, however much his doc-
trines may differ from those of the rest of the faithful : if
his works be evil, though he may verbally conform, he is
unfaithful. For obedience implies faith, and faith without
works is dead.

John, in the 13th verse of the chapter above quoted, ex-
pressly teaches the same doctrine: "Hereby," he says,
** know we that we dwell in Him and He in us, because He
hath given us of His Spirit," i,e. love. He had said before
that God is love, and therefore he concludes (on his own
received principles), that whoso possesses love possesses
truly the Spirit of Gk)d. As no one has beheld God he
infers that no one has knowledge or consciousness of God,
except from love towards his neighbour, and also that no
one can have knowledge of any of God's attributes, except
this of love, in so far as we participate therein.

If these arguments are not conclusive, they, at any rate,
show the Apostle's meaning, but the words in chap. ii. v.
3, 4, of the same Epistle are much clearer, for they state in
60 many words our precise contention : " And hereby we
do know that we know Him, if we keep His commandments.
He that saith, I know Him, and keepeth not His command-
ments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him."

From all this, I repeat, it follows that they are the true
enemies of Christ who persecute honourable and justice-
loving men because they differ from them, and do not~t^^
uphold the same religious dogmas as themselves : for who- I
soever loves justice and charity we know, by that very fact,
to be faithful: whosoever persecutes the faithful, is an
enemy to Christ.

Lastly, it follows that faith does not demand that
dogmas should be true as that they should be pious — ^that
is, such as will stir up the heart to obey ; though there be
many such which contain not a shadow of truth, so long as
they be held in good faith, otherwise their adherents are
disobedient, for how can anyone, desirous of loving justice
and obeying God, adore as Divine what he knows to be
alien from the Divine nature ? However, men may err from


/;


186 A THEOLOaiCO*FOLITICAL TBIU.TISE. [CHAP. XIY.

simplicitj of mind, and Scripture, as we liave seen, does
not condemn ignorance, but obstinacy. This is the neces-
sary result of our definition of faith, and all its branches
should spring from the universal rule above given, and
from the evident aim and object of the Bible, unless wa
choose to mix our own inventions therewith. Thus it is
not true doctrines which are expressly required by the Bible^
so much as doctrines necessary for obedience, and to con*
firm in our hearts the love of our neighbour, wherein (to-
adopt the words of John) we are in God, and God in us.

As, then, each man's faith must be judged pious or im*
pious only in respect of its producing obedience or obstinacy,,
and not in respect of its truth ; and as no one will dispute
that men's dispositions are exceedingly varied, that all do-
not acquiesce in the same things, but are ruled some by
one opinion some by another, so that what moves one to
devotion moves another to laughter and contempt, it follows
that there can be no doctrines in the Catholic, or universal,
religion, which can give rise to controversy among good
men. Such doctrines might be pious to some and impious
to others, whereas they should be judged solely by their
fruits.

To the universal religion, then, belong only such dogmas
as are absolutely required in order to attam obedience to
] God, and without which such obedience would be impos-
sible ; as for the rest, each man — seeing that he is the best
judge of his own character — should adopt whatever he
thinks best adapted to strengthen his love of justice. If
this were so, I think there would be no further occasion
for controversies in the Church.

I have now no further fear in enumerating the dog-
mas of universal &ith or the fundamental dogmas of the
whole of Scripture, inasmuch as they all tend (as may be
seen from what has been said) to this one doctrine, namely,
that there exists a God, that is, a Supreme Being, Who loves
justice and charity, and Who must be obeyed by whosoever
would be saved ; tiiat the worship of this Being consists in
the practice of justice and love towards one's neighbour, and
that they contain nothing beyond the following doctrines : —

I. That Gk)d or a Supreme Being exists, sovereignly just
and merciful, the Exemplar of the true life ; that whosoever


CHAP. XIV.] D£EINITI017S OF FAITH. 187'

is ignorant of or disbelieves in His existence cannot obej^ \
Him or know Him as a Judge.

n. That He is One. Nobody will dispute that this-
doctrine is absolutely necessa^ for entire devotion, admira-
tion, and love towards God. For devotion, admiration, and.
love spring from the superiority of one over all else.

TTT. That He is omnipresent, or that all things are openi
to Him, for if anything could be supposed to be concealed
from Him, or to be unnoticed by Him, we might doubt or
be ignorant of the equity of His judgment as directing all
things.

rV. That He has supreme right and dominion over all
things, and that He does nothing under compulsion, but
by His absolute fiat and grace. All things are bound to-
obey Him, He is not bound to obey any.

V. That the worship of Otod consists only in justice and)
charity, or love towards one's neighbour. ^ •"

YI. That all those, and those only, who obey God by
their manner of life are saved ; the rest of mankind, who- ,
live under the sway of their pleasures, are lost. If we did
not believe this, there would be no reason for obeying Gtod.
rather than pleasure. ,.

VJJL. Lastly, that Otod forgives the sins of those who re-
pent. No one is free from sin, so that without this behef ,
all would despair of salvation, and there would be no- •
reason for believing in the mercy of God. He who firmly
believes that God, out of the mercy and grace with which
He directs all things, forgives the sins of men, and who> >
feels his love of Qod kindled thereby, he, I say, does really ;
know Christ according to the Spirit, and Christ is in him. \

No one can deny l^at all these doctrines are before aU
things necessary to be believed, in order that every man^
without exception, may be able to obey G^ according tOi
the bidding of the Law above explained, for if one of these
precepts be disregarded obedience is destroyed. But as to
what God, or the Exemplar of the true life, may be, whether
fire, or spirit, or light, or thought, or what not, this, I say,,
has nothing to do with faith any more than has the ques-
tion how He comes to be the Exemplar of the true life,,
whether it be because He has a just and merciful mind, or
because all things exist and act through Him, and conse-


188 A THEOLOaiOO-FOLITICAL TBSATI8E. [cHiiP. XIT.

quently that we understand throngli Him, and through.
Him see what is truly just and good. Everyone may think
on such questions as he likes,

Furthermore, faith is not affected, whether we hold that
€k>d is omnipresent essentially or potentially; that He
directs all things by absolute fiat, or by the necessity of
His nature ; that He dictates laws like a prince, or that He
sets them forth as eternal truths ; that man obeys Him by
virtue of free will, or by virtue of the necessity of the
Divine decree ; lastly, that the reward of the good and the
punishment of the wicked is natural or supernatural :
these and such like questions have no bearing on faith,
except in so far as they are used as means to give us
license to sin more, or to obey GK)d less. I will go further,
and maintain that every man is bound to adapt these
dogmas to his own way of thinking, and to interpret them
according as he feels that he can give them his fullest and
most unhesitating assent, so that he may the more easily
obey God with his whole heart.

Such was the manner, as we have already pointed out, in
which the faith was in old time revealed and written, in
accordance with the understanding and opinions of the
prophets and people of the period; so, in like fashion,
every man is bound to adapt it to his own opinions, so that
he may accept it without any hesitation or mental repug-
nance. We have shown that faith does not so much re-
quire truth as piety, and that it is only quickening and
pious through obedience, consequently no one is faithful
save by obedience alone. The best faith is not necessarily
possessed by him who displays the best reasons, but by
him who displays the best fruits of justice and charity.
How salutary and necessary this doctrine is for a state, in
order that men may dwell together in peace and concord ;
and how many and how great causes of disturbance and
crime are thereby cut off, I leave everyone to judge for
liimself !

Before we go further, I may remark that we can, by
means of what we have just proved, easily answer the
objections raised in Chap. I., when we were discussing
God's speaking with the Israelites on Mount Sinai. For,
though the voice heard by the Israelites could not give


CHAP. XIY.] DEFINITIONS 07 VATTH. 189

those men any philosophical or mathematical certitude of
GKxl's existence, it was jet sufficient to thrill them with
admiration for Grod, as they already knew Him, and to stir
them up to obedience : and such was the object of the dis-
play. God did not wish to te^h the Israelites the absolute
attributes of His essence (none of which He then revealed),
but to break down their hardness of heart, and to draw
them to obedience: therefore He did not appeal to them
with reasons, but with the sound of trumpets, thunder,
and lightnings.

It remains for me to show that between faith or theology,
and philosophy, there is no connection, nor affinity. I thmk
no one will dispute the fact who has knowledge of the aim
and foundations of the two subjects, for they are as wide
apart as the poles.

Philosophy has no end in view save truth : faith, as we
have abundantly proved, looks for nothimr but obedience
aixd piety. AgiiJ pWlosophy is basT^ axioms wHch
must be sought from nature alone : faith is based on his-
tory and language, and must be sought for o nly in Scripture ;
and revelation, as we showed in Chap. YJUL. Faith, there- \
fore, allows the greatest latitude in philosophic speculation,
allowing us wi^out blame to think what we like about
anything, and only condemning, as heretics and schismatics,
those who teach opinions which tend to produce obstinacy,
hatred, strife, and anger; while, on the other hand, only
considering as faithful those who persuade us, as far as
their reason and faculties will permit, to follow justice and
charity.

Lastly, as what we are now setting forth are the most
importajit subjects of my treatise, I would most urgently ,
beg the reader, before I proceed, to read these two chapters
with especial attention, and to take the trouble to weigh
them well in his mind: let him take for granted that I
have not written with a view to introducing novelties, but
in order to do away with abuses, such as I hope I may, at
some future time, at last see reformed.


190 A THEOLOaiCO-FOLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. XT.


V


CHAPTEE XV.

.THEOLOGY IS SHOWN NOT TO BE SXTBSERVIENT TO BEASON,
NOB BEASON TO THEOLOGY: A DEFINITION OP THE BEASON
WHICH ENABLES ITS TO ACCEPT THE AX7THOBITY OP THE
BIBLE.

THOSE who know not tliat philosophy and reason are dis-
tinct, dispute whether Scripture should be made sub-
servient to reason, or reason to Scripture : that is, whether
the meaning of Scripture should be made to agreed with
reason ; or whether reason should be made to agree with
Scripture: the latter position is assumed by the sceptics
who deny the certitude of reason, the former by the dog-
matists. Both parties are, as I have shown, utterly in the
wrong, for either doctrine would require us to tamper with
reason or with Scripture.

We have shown that Scripture does not teach philosophy,
but merely obedience, and that all it contains has been
adapted to the understanding and established opinions of
the multitude. Those, therefore, who wish to adapt it to
jphilosophy, must needs ascribe to the prophets many ideas
which they never even dreamed of, and give an extremely
forced interpretation to their words: those on the other
hand, who would make reason and philosophy subservient
to theology, will be forced to accept as Divine utterances
the prejudices of the ancient Jews, and to fill and confuse
their mind therewith. In short, one party will run wild
with the aid of reason, and the other will run wild without
the aid of reason.

The first among the Pharisees who openly maintained
that Scripture should be made to agree with reason, was
Maimonides, wh ose o pinion we reviewed, and abundantly
Tefuted in Chap. VJJL. : now, although this writer had much
-authority among his contemporaries, he was deserted on
■this question by almost all, and the majority went straight


CHAP. XY.] THBOLOGY NOT BXTBSEBYIEHT TO SEASON. 191

over to the opinion of a certain B^ Jeblida. AIpakbiLr^ who,
in his anxiety to avoid the error of Maimonides, f eU into
•another, which was its exact contrary. He held that reason
should be made subservient, and entirely give way to
Scripture. He thought that a passage shoiQd not be inter-
preted metaphorically, simply because it was repugnant to
reason, but only in the cases when it is inconsistent with
Scripture itself — ^that is, with its clear doctrines. Therefore
he laid down the universal rule, that whatsoever Scripture
teaches dogmatically, and affirms expressly, must on its
own sole authority be admitted as absolutely true: that
there is no doctrine in the Bible which directly contradicts
the general tenour of the whole: but only some which
appear to involve a difference, for the phrases of Scripture
often seem to imply something contrary to what has been
expressly taught. Such phrases, and such phrases only,
we may interpret metaphorically.

For instance. Scripture clearly teaches the imity of God
(see Deut. vi. 4), nor is there any text distinctly asserting a
plurality of gods ; but in seveial passages God speaks of
Himself, and the prophets speak of Him, in the plural
number; such phrases are simply a manner of speaking,
and do not mean that there actually are several gods:
they are to be explained metaphorically, not because a
plurality of gods is repugnant to reason, but because
Scripture distinctly asserts that there is only one.

So, again, as Scripture asserts (as Alpakhar thinks) in
Pent. iv. 15, that God is incorporeal, we are bound, solely
by the authority of this text, and not by reason, to believe
that God has no body: consequently we must explain
metaphorically, on the sole authority of Scripture, all those
passages which attribute to God hands, feet, <&c., and take
them merely as figures of speech. Such is the opinion of
Alpakhar. In so far as he seeks to explain Scripture by
Scripture, I praise him, but I marvel that a man gifted
with reason should wish to debase that faculty. It is true
that Scripture should be explained by Scripture, so long as
we are in difficulties about the meaning and intention of
the prophets, but when we have elicited the true meaning,
we must of necessity, make use of our judgment and reason
in order to assent thereto. If reason, however, much as


192 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. XT.

she rebels, is to be entirely subjected to Scripture, I ask,
are we to effect her submission by her own aid, or without
her, and blindly ? K the latter, we shall surely act fool-
ishly and injudiciously ; if the former, we assent to Scrip-
ture under ^e dominion of reason, and should not assent
to it without her. Moreover, I may ask now, is a man to
assent to anything against his reason ? What is denial if
it be not reason's refusal to assent ? In short, I am asto-
nished that anyone should wish to subject reason, the
greatest of gifts and alight from on high, to the dead letter
which may have been corrupted by human malice ; that it
should be thought no crime to speak with contempt of
mind, the true handwriting of God's Word, caULog it cor-
rupt, blind, and lost, while it is considered the greatest of
crimes to say the same of the letter, which is merely the
reflection and image of God's Word. Men think it pious to
trust nothing to reason and their own judgment, and
impious to doubt the faith of those who have transmitted
to us the sacred books. Such conduct is not piety, but
mere f oUy. And, after all, why are they so anxious ? What
are they afraid of ? Do they think that faith and religion
cannot be upheld unless men purposely keep themselves in
ignorance, and turn their backs on reason? If this be so,
liey have but a timid trust in Scripture.

However, be it far from me to say that religion should
seek to enslave reason, or reason religion, or that both
should not be able to keep their sovereignity in perfect
harmony. I will revert to this question presently, for I wish
now to discuBS Alpakhar's rule.

He requires, as we have stated, that we should accept as
true, or reject as false, everything asserted or denied by
Scripture, and he further states that Scripture never ex-
pressly asserts or denies anything which contradicts its
assertions or negations elsewhere. The rashness of such
a requirement and statement can escape no one. For (pass-
ing over the fact that he does not notice that Scripture
consists of different books, written at different times, for
different people, by different authors: and also that his
requirement is made on his own authority without any
corroboration from reason or Scripture) he would be bound
to show that all passages which are indirectly contradictory


CHAP. XV.] THEOLOGY NOT SXTBSEEVIENT TO REASON. 193

of the rest, can be satisfactorily explained metaphorically
tlirough. the nature of the language and the context : fur-
ther, that Scripture has come down to us untampered
with. However, we will go into the matter at lengih.

Firstly, I ask what shall we do if reason prove recalci-
trant ? Shall we still be bound to aflfirm whatever Scrip-
ture affirms, and to deny whatever Scripture denies ? Per-
haps it will be answered that Scripture contains nothing
repugnant to reason. But I insist that it expressly affirms
and teaches that God is jealous (namely, in the decalogue
itself, and in Exod. xxxiv. 14, and in Deut. iv. 24, and in
many other places), and I assert that such a doctrine is
repugnant to reason. It must, I suppose, in spite of all, be
accepted as true. If there are any passages in Scripture
which imply that God is not jealous, they must be taken
metaphorically as meaning nothing of the kind. So, also.
Scripture expressly states (Exod. xix. 20, <fec.) that God
came down to Mount Sinai, and it attributes to Him other
movements from place to place, nowhere directly stating
that God does not so move. Wherefore, we must take the
passage literally, and Solomon's words (1 Kings viii. 27),
" But will God dwell on the earth ? Behold the heavens
and earth cannot contain thee," inasmuch as they do not
expressly state that God does not move from place to place,
but only imply it, must be explained away till they have no
further semblance of denying locomotion to the Deity. So
also we must believe that the sky is the habitation and
throne of God, for Scripture expressly says so ; and simi-
larly many passages expressing the opinions of the prophets
or the multitude, which reason and philosophy, but not
Scripture, tell us to be false, must be taken as true if we
are to follow the guidance of our author, for according to
him, reason has nothing to do with the matter. Further,
it is untrue that Scripture never contradicts itself directly,
but only by implication. For Moses says, in so many
words ^eut. iv. 24), " The Lord thy God is a consuming
fire," and elsewhere expressly denies that God has any
likeness to visible things. (Deut. iv. 12.) If it be decided
that the latter passage only contradicts the former by im-
phcation, and must be adapted thereto, lest it seem to
negative it, let us grant that God is a fire ; or rather, lest

o


194 A THEOLOOICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [cHAP. XV.

we ghould seem to liave taken leave of our senses, let us
pass the matter over and take another example.

Samuel expressly denies that God ever repents, " for he
is not a man that he should repent" (1 Sam. iv. 29).
Jeremiah, on the other hand, asserts that GK>d does repent,
both of the evil and of the good which He had intended to
do (Jer. iviii. 8-10). What? Are not these two texts
directly contradictory? Which of the two, then, would
our author want to explain metaphorically ? Both state-
ments are general, and each is the opposite of the other —
what one flatly affirms, the other flatly denies. So, by his
own rule, he would be obliged at once to reject them as
false, and to accept them as true.

Again, what is the point of one passage, not being contra-
dicted by another directly, but only by implication, if the
implication is clear, and the nature and context of the pas-
sage preclude metaphorical interpretation ? There are many
such instances in the Bible, as we saw in Chap. II. (where
we pointed out that the prophets held different and contra-
dictory opinions), and also in Chaps. IX. and X., where we
drew attention to the contradictions in the historical narra-
tives. There is no need for me to go through them all
again, for what I have said sufficiently exposes the absurdi-
ties which would follow from an opinion and rule such as
we are discussing, and shows the hastiness of its pro-
pounder.

We may, therefore, put this theory, as well as that of
Maimonides, entirely out of court; and we may take it
for indisputable that theology is not bound to serve rea-
son, nor reason theology, but that each has her own
domain.

The sphere of reason is, as we have said, truth and
wisdom; the sphere of theology is piety and obedience.
The power of reason does not extend so far as to determine
for us that men may be blessed through simple obedience,
without understanding. Theology teUs us nothing else,
enjoins on ub no command save obedience, and has neither
the will nor the power to oppose reason : she defines the
dogmas of faith (as we pointed out in the last chapter) only
in so far as they may be necessary for obedience, and leaves
reason to determine their precise truth : for reason is the


CHAP. XV.] THEOLOGY NOT SUBSEBYIENT TO SEASON. 195

light of the mind, and without her all things are dreams
and phantoms.

By theology, I here mean, strictly speaking, revelation,
in so far as it indicates the object aimed at by Scripture —
namely, the scheme and manner of obedience, or the true
dogmas of piety and faith. This may truly be called the
Word of Giod, which does not consist in a certain number
of books (see Chap. XII.). Theology thus understood, if
we regard its precepts or rules of life, will be found in ac-
cordance with reason ; and, if we look to its aim and object,
will be seen to be in nowise repugnant thereto, wherefore it
is universal to all men.

As for its bearing on Scripture, we have shown in
Chap. VJLL. that the meaning of Scripture should be gathered
from its own history, and not from the history of nature
in general, which is the basis of philosophy.

We ought not to be hindered if we find that our investi-
gation of the meaning of Scripture thus conducted shows
us that it is here and there repugnant to reason ; for what-
ever we may find of this sort in the Bible, which men may
be in ignorance of, without injury to their charity, has, we
may be sure, no bearing on theology or the Word of Q-od,
and may, therefore, without blame, be viewed by every one
as he pleases.

To sum up, we may draw the absolute conclusion that./ _,
the Bible must not be accommodated to reason, nor reason
to the Bible.

Now, inasmuch as the basis of theology — ^the doctrine
that man may be saved by obedience alone — cannot be
proved by reason whether it be true or false, we may be
asked. Why, then, should we believe it? If we do so
without the aid of reason, we accept it blindly, and act
foolishly and injudiciously ; if, on the other hand, we settle
that it can be proved by reason, theology becomes a part /
of philosophy, and inseparable therefrom. But I make
answer that I have absolutely established that this basis ^ ' |
of theology cannot be investigated by the natural light of [ 1
reason, or, at any rate, that no one ever has proved it by j •
such means, and, therefore, revelation was necessary. We | .
should, however, make use of our reason, in order to grasp
with moral certainty what is revealed — ^I say, with mord.


196 A THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TBEATISB. [cHAP. XV*

certainty, for we cannot liope to attain greater certainty
than the prophets : yet their certainty was only moral, as I
showed in Chap. 11.

Those, therefore, who attempt to set forth the authority
of Scripture with mathematic^ll demonstrations are wholly
in error : for the authority of the Bible is dependent on the
authority of the prophets, and can be supported by no-
stronger arguments than those employed in old time by the
prophets for convincing the people of their own authority.
Our certainty on the same subject can be founded on no other
basis than that which served as foundation for the certainty
of the prophets.

Now the certainty of the prophets consisted (as we
pointed out) in these three elements : — (I.) A distinct and
vivid imagination. (11.) A sign. (111.) Lastly, and chiefly,,
a mind turned to what is just and good. It was based on
no other reasons than these, and consequently they cannot
prove their authority by any other reasons, either to the
multitude whom they addressed orally, nor to us whom they
address in writing.

The first of these reasons, namely, the vivid imagination,,
could be valid only for the prophets ; therefore, our certainty
concerning revelation must, and ought to be, based on the
remaining two — namely, the sign and the teaching. Such
is the express doctrine of Moses, for (in Deut. xviii.) he bid»
the people obey the prophet who should give a true sign in
the name of the Lord, but if he should predict falsely, even
though it were in the name of the Lord, he should be put
to death, as should also he who strives to lead away the
people from the true religion, though he confirm his autho-
rity with signs and portents. We may compare with the
above Deut. xiii. Whence it follows that a true prophet
could be distinguished from a false one, both by his doctrine
and by the miracles he wrought, for Moses declares such an
one to be a true prophet, and bids the people trust him
without fear of deceit. He condemns as false, and worthy
of death, those who predict anything falsely even in the
name of the Lord, or who preach false gods, even though
their miracles be real.

The only reason, then, which we have for belief in Scrip-
ture or the writings of the prophets, is the doctrine we find


CHAP. XT.] THEOLOGY KOT STrBSSBYIBlTr TO SEASON. 197

therein, and tlie signs hj whicli it is confirmed. For as we
43ee that the prophets extol charity and justice above all
things, and hare no other object, we conclude that they did
not write from unworthy motiyes, but because Aey really
thought that men might become blessed through obedience
and faith: further, as we see that they confirmed their
teaching with signs and wonders, we become persu^^ided
that they did not speak at random, nor run riot in their
prophecies. We are further strengthened in our conclusion
by the iouct that the morality they teach is in evident agree-
ment with reason, for it is no accidental coincidence that
the Word of God which we find in the prophets coincides
with the Word of GKkL written in our hearts. We may, I
say, conclude this from the sacred books as certainly as did
the Jews of old from the living voice of the prophets : for
we showed in Ohap. XH. that Scripture has come down to
us intact in respect to its doctrine and main narratives.

Therefore this whole basis of theology and Scripture,
though it does not admit of mathematical proof, may yet
be accepted with the approval of our judgment. It would
be f oUy to refuse to accept what is confirmed by such ample
prophetic testimony, and what has proved such a comfort
to those whose reason is comparatively weak, and such a
I)onefit to the state; a doctri£e. moie^yer. which we may
believe in without the slightest penl or hurt, and should
reject simply because it cannot be mathematically proved :
it is as though we should admit nothing as true, or as a
wise rule of life, which could ever, in any possible way, be
called in question ; or as though most of our actions were
not full of uncertainty and hazard.

I admit that those who believe that theology and philo-
sophy are mutually contradictory, and that therefore either
one or the other must be thrust from its throne — ^I admit,
I say, that such persons are not unreasonable in attempting
to put theology on a firm basis, and to demonstrate its truth
mathematically. Who, unless he were desperate or mad,
would wish to bid an incontinent farewell to reason, or to
despise the arts and sciences, or to deny reason's certitude?
But, in the meanwhile, we cannot wholly absolve them from
blame, inasmuch as they invoke the aid of reason for her
own defeat, and attempt infallibly to prove her fallible.


/


198 ▲ THEOLOGICO-POLITICAIi TBEATISE. [cHAP. XV.

WhUe they are trying to prore mathematically the autho-
rity and truth of theology, and to take away the authority
of natural r€^on, they are in reahty only bringing theology
under re^on's dominion, and proving that her authority
has no weight unless natural reason be at the back of it.

If they boast that they themselves assent because of the
inward testimony of the Holy Spirit, and that they only
invoke the aid of reason because of unbelievers, in order to
(^nvince them, not even so can this meet with our approval,
for we can easily show that they have spoken either from
emotion or vain-glory. It most clearly follows from the last
chapter that the Holy Spirit only gives its testimony in
favour of works, called by Paul (in Gtal, v. 22) the fruits
of the Spirit, and is in itself really nothing but the mental
acquiescence which follows a good action in our souls. "No
spirit gives testimony concerning the certitude of matters
within the sphere of speculation, save only reason, who
is mistress, as we have shown, of the whole realm of truth.
If then they assert that they possess this Spirit which
makes them certain of truth, they speak falsely, and accord-
ing to the prejudices of the emotions, or else they are in
great dread lest they should be vtoquished by philosophers
and exposed to public ridicule, and therefore they flee, as it
were, to the altar ; but their refuge is vain, for what altar
will shelter a man who has outiuged reason ? However,
I pass such persons over, for I tlunk I have fulfilled my
purpose, and shown how philosophy should be separated
from theology, and wherein each consists; that neither
should be subservient to the other, but that each should
keep her unopposed dominion. Lastly, as occasion offered,
I have pointed out the absurdities, the inconveniences, and
the evils following from the extraordinary confusion which
has hitherto prevailed between the two subjects, owing to
their not being properly distinguished and separated. Be-
fore I go further I would expressly state (though I have
said it before) that I consider the utility and the need for
Holy Scripture or Eevelation to be very great. For as we
cannot perceive by the natural light of reason that simple
obedience is the path of salvation,^ and are taught by reve-
lation only that it is so by the special grace of God, which
our reason cannot attain, it follows that the Bible has

1 See Note 25.


CHAP. XT.] THEOLOGY NOT SUBSEBYlElTr TO SEASON. 199

brought a yery great consolation to mankind. All are able
to obey, whereas there are but very few, compared with the
aggregate of humanity, who can acquire the habit of virtue
under the unaided guidance of reason. Thus if ti^ had not
the testimony of Scripttire, we should doubt of the salva-
tion of nearly all men.


200 ▲ THBOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TBEATISI. [CHAP. ZTZ.


/


CHAPTEE XVL

OF THE POirNDATIONS OP A STATE ; OP THE NATTJEAL AND
GIYIL BIGHTS OP INDIYIDUALS ; AND OP THE BIGHTS OF
THE SOYEBEIGN POWEB.

HITHERTO OUT care has been to separate pliilosophy
from theology, and to show the freedom of thought
which such separation insures to both. It is now time to
/determine the limits to which such freedom of thought and
[discussion may extend itself in the ideal state. For the

/due consideration of this question we must examine the
foundations of a state, first turning our attention to the
\ I x^atural rights of individuals, and afterwards to religion
andthe state as a whole.

■ By the right and ordinance of nature, I merely mean
those natural laws wherewith we conceive every in^vidual
to be conditioned by nature, so as to live and act in a given
way. For instance, fishes are naturally conditioned for
swimming, and the greater for devouring the less ; there-
fore fishes enjoy the water, and the greater devour the less
by sovereign natural right. For it is certain that nature,
taken in the abstract, has sovereign right to do anything

j she can ; in other words, her right is co-extensive with her
power. The power of nature is the power of Q-od, which
has sovereign right over aU things ; and, inasmuch as the
power of nature is simply the aggregate of the powers of
all her individual components, it follows that every indi-
vidual has sovereign right to do all that he can ; in other
words, the rights of an individual extend to the utmost
limits of his power as it has been conditioned. Now it is
the sovereign law and right of nature that each individual
should endeavour to preserve itself as it is, without regard
to anything but itself; therefore this sovereign law and


N


CHAP. XVI.] OF THE FOITNDATIONdP^ ^ STATE. 205

right belongs to every individual, nam^ only so long as
according to its natural conditions. TV^ ;^ otherwise
acknowledge any difference between mankiikJis stronger
individual natural entities, nor between men enc^ >

reason and those to whom reason is unknown ; norM.t any
fools, madmen, and sane men. Whatsoever an indiVl be
does by the laws of its nature it has a sovereign right to>d
inasmuch as it acts as it was conditioned by nature, ano^v^^
cannot act otherwise. Wherefore among men, so long as
they are considered as living under the sway of nature, he
who does not yet know reason, or who has not yet acquired
the habit of virtue, acts solely according to the laws of hii
desire with as sovereign a right as he who orders his life
entirely by the laws of reason. \

That is, as the wise man has sovereign right to do all
that reason dictates, or to live accordi^ to the laws of X
reason, so also the ignorant and foolish man has sovereign ^
right to do all that desire dictates, or to live according to
the laws of desire. This is identical with the teaching of
Paul, who acknowledges that previous to the law — ^that is,
80 long as men are considered of as living under the sway
of nature, there is mo sin.

The Wtural right of the individual man is thus deter- '
mined, not by sound reason, but by desire and power. All
are not naturally conditioned so as to act according to the
laws and rules of reason ; nay, on the contrary, all men
are bom ignorant, and before they can learn the r^ht way /
of life and acquire the habit of virtue, the greater part of ^'
their life, even if they have been well brought up, has
passed away. Nevertheless, they are in the meanwhile
bound to live and preserve themselves as far as they can
by the unaided impulses of desire. Nature has given them
no other guide, and has denied them the present power of
living according to sound reason; so that they are no
more bound to Hve by the dictates of an enlightened mind,
than a cat is bound to live by the laws of the nature of a
lion.

Whatsoever, therefore, an individual (considered as imder
the sway of nature) thinks useful for himself, whether led «
by soimd reason or impelled by the passions, that he has
Bovereign right to seek and to take for himself aa he best


▲ THBOLOaia^OLITICAL TBBATISE. [cHAP. XYI.

force, CTiimiiigy entreaty, or any other

he may regard as an enemy anyone

le accompUshment of his purpose.

from what we have said that the right and

of nature, under which all men are bom, and

which they mostly Hve, only prohibits such things

LO one desires, and no one can attain : it does not forbid

), nor hatred, nor anger, nor deceit, nor, indeed, any of

the means suggested by desire.

This we need not wonder at, for nature is not bounded
by the laws of human reason, which aims only at man's
true benefit and preservation; her limits are infinitely
wider, and have reference to the eternal order of nature,
wherein man is but a speck ; it is by the necessity of this
alone that all individuals are conditioned for Hving and
acting in a particular way. [ If an3rthing, therefore, in
nature seems to us ridiculous, absurd, or evil, it is because
we only know in part, and are almost entirely ignorant of
the order and interdependence of nature as a whole, and also
because we want everything to be arranged according to
the dictates of our human reason; in reahty that which
reason considers evil, is not evil in respect to the order and
laws of nature as a whole, but only in respect to the laws
of our reason.

Nevertheless, no one can doubt that it is much better for
us to hve according to the laws and assured dictates of
reason, for, as we said, they have men's true good for
their object. Moreover, everyone wishes to hve as far as
\ possible securely beyond the reach of fear, and this would
W quite impossible so long as everyone did everything he
liked, and reason's claim was lowered to a par with those
of hatred and anger ; there is no one who is not ill at ease
in the midst of enmity, hatred, anger, and deceit, and who
does not seek to avoid them as much as he can. When we
reflect that men without mutual help, or the aid of reason,
must needs hve most miserably, as we clearly proved in
Chap, v., we shall plainly see that men must necessarily
come to an agreement to hve together as securely and
' well as possible if they are to enjoy as a whole the rights
which naturally belong to them as individuals, and their
life should be no more conditioned by the force and desire


\


\

CHAP. XVI.] OP THE FOITNDATIoi^OP A STATE. 205

of individuals, but by the power and misq^ only so long as
This end they will be unable to attain i^will ; otherwise
only guide (for by the laws of desire each ina»o is stronger
a different direction) ; they must, therefore, mo^^
cree aqid establish that they will be guided in ey<mt any
by reason (which nobody will dare openly to repudia>)vs be
he should be taken for a madman), and will restrain
desire which is injurious to a man's fellows, that they
do to all as they would be done by, and that they will de-
fend their neighbour's rights as their own.

How such a compact as this should be entered into,,
how ratified and established, we will now inquire.

Kow it is a universal law of human nature that no one-
ever neglects an3rthing which he judges to be good, except
with the hope of gaining a greater good, or from the fear of a.
greater evil ; nor does anyone endure an evil except for tho
sake of avoiding a greater evil, or gaining a greater good^
That is, everyone will, of two goods, choose that which he
thinks the greatest ; and, of two evils, that which he thinks
the least. I say advisedly that which he thinks the greatest
or the least, for it does not necessarily follow that he judges
right. This law is so deeply implanted in the human mind
that it ought to be counted aniong eternal truths and
axioms.

As a necessary consequence of the principle just enun-
ciated, no one can honestly promise to forego tiie right which
he has over all things,^ and in general no one will abide by
his promises, unless under the fear of a greater evil, or the-
hope of a greater good. An example will make the matter
clearer. Suppose that a robber forces me to promise that
I will give him my goods at his will and pleasure. It is.
plain (inasmuch as my natural right is, as I have shown,,
co-extensive with my power) that if I can free myself from
this robber by stratagem, by assenting to his demands, I
have the natural right to do so, and to pretend to accept
his conditions. Or again, suppose I have genuinely pro-
mised someone that for the space of twenty days I will
not taste food or any nourishment ; and suppose I after-
wards find that my promise was foolish, and cannot be
kept without very great injury to myself ; as I am boimd
by natural law and right to choose &e least of two evils, I

^ See Note 26.


\


200 A THBOLoaig^^^^^^^^-^ treatise, [chap. xn.

^t to break mj compact, and act as if
te^'iieyer been uttered. I say that I should
btural right to do so, whether I was actuated
MyBUL evident reason, or whether I was actuated by
liiion in thinking I had promised rashly ; whether
^sons were true or false, I should be in fear of a
bter evil, which, by the ordinance of nature, I should
trive to avoid by every means in my power.
We may, therefore, conclude that a compact is only
made valid by its utility, without which it becomes null
and void. It is, therefore, foolish to ask a man to keep
his faith with us for ever, unless we also endeavour that
the violation of the compact we enter into shall involve
for the violator more harm than good. This consideration
should have very great weight in forming a state. However,
if all men could be easily led by reason alone, and could
recognize what is best and most useful for a state, there
would be no one who would not forswear deceit, for every-
one would keep most religiously to their compact in their
desire for the chief good, namely, the preservation of the
state, and would cherish good faith above all things as the
shield and buckler of the commonwealth. However, it is
far from beim? the case that all men can always be easily
led by reason alone ; everyone is drawn away Cy Ms plea-
sure, while avarice, ambition, envy, hatred, and the like
so engross the mind that reason has no place therein.
Hence, though men make promises with all the appear-
ances of good faith, and agree that they will keep to their
engagement, no one can absolutely rely on another man's
promise tmless there is something behind it. Everyone
|has by nature a right to act deceitfully, and to break his
)mpacts, unless he be restrained by the hope of some
greater good, or the fear of some greater evlL

However, as we have shown that the natural right of the
\y individu^ is only limited by his power, it is clear that* by
transferring, either willingly or under compulsion, this
power into the hands of another, he in so doing necessarily
cedes also a part of his right ; and further, that the sove-
reign right over all men belongs to him who has sovereign
power, wherewith he can compel men by force, or restrain
them by threats of the universally feared punishment of


\XJLMMt

'f.^jco]


CHAP. XVI.] OF THE F0T7NDATI0NS OF A STATE. 205

death ; sucli soyereign right lie will retain only so long as
lie can maintain his power of enforcing his will ; otherwise
he will totter on his throne, and no one who is stronger
than he will be bound iinwillinglj to obey him. ^

In this manner a society can be formed without any '
violation of natural right, and the covenant can always be '
strictly kept — ^that is, if each individual hands over the
whole of his power to the body politic, the latter will then
possess sovereign natural right over all things ; that is, it \
will have sole and unquestioned dominion, and everyone
will be bound to obey, under pain of the severest punish-
ment. A body politic of this kind is called a Democracy,
which may be defined as a society which wields all its
power as a whole. The sovereign power is not restrained
by any laws, but everyone is bound to obey it in all things ;
such is the state of things implied when men either tacitly
or expressly handed over to it all their power of seK-
defence, or in other words, all their right. For if they
had wished to retain any right for themselves, they ought
to have taken precautions for its defence and preserva-
tion ; as they have not done so, and indeed could not have
done so without dividing and consequently ruining the
state, they placed themselves absolutely at the mercy of
the sovereign power ; and, therefore, having acted (as we
have shown) as reason and necessity demanded, they are
obliged to fulfil the commands of the sovereign power,
however absurd these may be, else they will be public
enemies, and will act against reason, which urges the pre-
servation of the state as a primary duty. For reason bids
us choose the least of two evils.

Furthermore, this danger of submitting absolutely to the
dominion and will of another, is one which may be incurred
with a light heart : for we have shown that sovereigns only
possess this right of imposing their will, so long as they
have the full power to enforce it : if such power be lost
their right to command is lost also, or lapses to those who
have assumed it and can keep it. Thus it is very rare for
sovereigns to impose thoroughly irrational commands, for
they are bound xo consult their own interests, and retain
their power by consulting the public good and acting
according to the dictates of reason, as Seneca says, " vio-


^06 A THEOLOGICO-FOLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAF. XYI.

^lenta imperia nemo contimiit diu." No one can long
Tetain a tyrant's sway.

In a democracy, irrational commands are still less to be
feared : for it is almost impossible that the majority of a
vpeople, especially if it be a large one, sbonld agree in an
irrational design: and, moreover, the basis and aim of a
•Hlemocracy is to avoid the desires as irrational, and to bring
men as far as possible under the control of reason, so that
they may live in peace and harmony: if this basis be
removed the whole fabric falls to ruin.

Such being the ends in view for the sovereign power, the
/ -duty of subjects is, as I have said, to obey its commands,
/ -and to recognize no right save that which it sanctions.

It will, perhaps, be thought that we are turning subjects
into slaves: for slaves obey commands and free men live
as they like ; but this idea is based on a misconception, for
the true slave is he who is led away by his pleasures and
vcan neither see what is good for him nor act accordingly :
f he alone is free who lives with free consent under the entire
\j' / guidance of reason.

Action in obedience to orders does take away freedom in
a certain sense, but it does not, therefore^ make a man a
slave, all depends on the object of the action. If the
•object of the action be the good of the state, and not the
good of the agent, the latter is a slave and does himself no
good : but in a state or kingdom where the weal of the
whole people, and not that of the ruler, is the supreme law,
-obedience to the sovereign power does not make a man a
slave, of no use to hmiself, but a subject. Therefore,
'.that state is the freest whose laws are founded on sound
reason, so that every member of it may, if he will, be free ;^
that is, live with full consent under the entire guidance of
reason.

Children, though they are bound to obey all the com-
mands of their parents, are yet not slaves: for the com-
mands of parents look generally to the children's benefit.

We must, therefore, acknowledge a great difference be-
"tween a slave, a son, and a subject ; their positions may be
Tthus defined. A slave is one who is bound to obey his
master's orders, though they are given solely in the master's
nnterest : a son is one who obeys his father's orders, given

1 See Note 27.


fi


\


CHAP. XVI.] OP THE FOUNDATIONS OP A STATE, 207

in his own interest ; a subject obeys tlie orders of the sove-
reign power, given for the common interest, wherein he is
included.

I think I have now shown sufficiently clearly the basis of
a democracy : I have especially desired to do so, for I be-
lieve it to be of all forms of government the most natural,
and the most consonant with individual liberty. In it no n^
one transfers his natural right so absolutely that he has no >
further voice in affairs, he only hands it over to the majority
of a society, whereof he is a unit. Thus all men remain, ]
as they were in the state of nature, equals.

This is the only form of government which I have treated
of at length, for it is the one most akin to my purpose of
showing the benefits of freedom in a state.

I may pass over the fundamental principles of other
forms of govemmeut, for we maj gather from what has
been said whence their right arises without going into its
origin. The possessor of sovereign power, whether he be
one, or many, or the whole body politic, has the sovereign
right of imposing any commands he pleases : and he who
has either voluntarily, or under compulsion, transferred the
right to defend him to another, has, in so doing, renounced
his natural right and is therefore boimd to obey, in all
things, the commands of the sovereign power ; and will be
bound so to do so long as the king, or nobles, or the people
preserve the sovereign power which formed the basis of the
original transfer. I need add no more.

The bases and rights of dominion being thus displayed,
we shall readily be able to define private civil right, wrong, -*
justice, and injustice, with their relations to the state ; and '
also to determine what constitutes an ally, or an enemy, or
the crime of treason.

By private civil right we can only mean the liberty every
man possesses to preserve his existence, a liberty limited by
the edkts of the iovereign power, and preseryei only by its
authority : for when a man has transferred to another his
right of living as he likes, which was only limited by his
power, that is, has transferred his liberty and power of self-
defence, he is boxmd to live as that other dictates, and to
trust to him entirely for his defence. Wrong takes place
When a citizen, or subject, is forced by another to undergo


208 A THEOLOaiCO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [cHAP. XVI.

some loss or pain in contradiction to tlie authority of tlie
law, or the edict of the sovereign power.

Wrong is conceivable only in an organized community :
7// nor can it ever accrue to subjects from any act of the sove-
V^eign, who has the right to do what he likes. It can only
, arise, therefore, between private persons, who are bound by
law and right not to injure one another. Justice consists
in the habitual rendering to every man his lawful due : in-
justice consists in de^i^ a mln, under the pretence of
legality, of what the laws, rightly interpreted, would allow
him. These last are also called equity and iniquity, be-
cause those who administer the laws are bound to show no
respect of persons, but to account all men equal, and to de-
fend every man's right equally, neither envying the rich
nor despising the poor.

The men of two states become allies, when for the sake
of avoiding war, or for some other advantage, they covenant
to do each other no hurt, but on the contrary, to assist each
other if necessity arises, each retaining his independence.
Such a covenant is valid so long as its basis of danger or
advantage is in force : no one enters into an engagement,
\ or is bound to stand by his compacts unless there be a hope
* ' of some accruing good, or the fear of some evil: if this
basis be removed the compact thereby becomes void : this
has been abundantly shown by experience. Tor although
different states make treaties jQot to harm one another, they
always take every possible^re^aution against such treaties
being broken by the stronger party, and do not rely on the
compact, unless there is a sufficiently obvious object and
advantage to both parties in observing it. Otherwise they
would fear a breach of faith, nor would there be any wrong
done thereby : for who in his proper senses, and aware of
the right of the sovereign power, would trust in the pro-
mises of one who has the will and the power to do what he
likes, and who aims solely at the safety and advantage of
his dominion ? Moreover, if we consult loyalty and religion,
we shall see that no one in possession of power ought to
abide by his promises to the injury of his dominion ; for he
cannot keep such promises without breaking the engage-
ment he made with his subjects, by which both he and they
^re most solemnly bound.


i


CHAP. XYI.] OF THE FOTmDATIOKB OF A STATE. 209

An enemy is one who lives apart from the state, and
does not recognize its authority either as a subject or as an
ally. It is not hatred which makes a man an enemy, but
the rights of the state. The rights of the state are the
same in regard to him who does not recognize by any com-
pact the state authority, as they are against him who has
done the state an injury : it has the right to force him as
best it can, either to submit, or to contract an alliance.

Lastly, treason can only be committed by subjects, who
by compact, either tacit or expressed, have transferred all
their rights to the state: a subject is said to have com-
mitted this crime when he has attempted, for whatever
reason, to seize the sovereign power, or to place it in diffe-
rent hands. I say, has attempted, for if punishment were
not to overtake hrm till he had succeeded, it would often
come too late, the sovereign rights would have been ac-
quired or transferred already.

I also say, has attempted, for whatever reason, to seize the
sovereign power, and I recognize no difference whether such
an attempt should be foUowed by public loss or public
gain. Whatever be his reason for acting, the crime is
treason, and he is rightly condemned: in war, everyone
would admit the justice of his sentence. If a man does
not keep to his post, but approaches the enemy without the
knowledge of his commander, whatever may be his motive,
so long as he acts on his own motion, even if he advances
with the design of defeating the enemy, he is rightly put
to death, because he has violated his oath, and infnnged
the rights of his commander. That all citizens are equally
bouM by these rights in tixue of peace, is not so gezTeraJl^
recognized, but the reasons for obedience are in both cases,
identical. The state must be preserved and directed by
the sole authority of the sovereign, and such authority and
right have been accorded by universal consent to him alone :
if, therefore, anyone else attempts, without his consent, to
execute any public enterprise, even though the state might
(as we said) reap benefit therefrom, such person has none
the less infringed the sovereign's right, and would be rightly
punished for trejason.

In order that every scruple may be removed, we may
now answer the inquiry, whether our former assertion that

p


1


210 A THBOLOOICO-FOLITICAL TBBATISSL [CBAP.

eTervone who Las not the practice of reasoiu jdxj, in the
state of nature, Hto b j aoyereign natnial li^t, aoooiding
to the laws of his desires, is not in direct oppoation to
the law and right of Qod as revealed. For as idlmen abeo-
lutelj (whether ther be less endowed with reason or more)
are eqnallj bound by the Divine command to love their
neighbour as themselves, it maj be said that ther cannot,
withont wrong, do injury to anyone, or live according to
their desires.

This objection, so far as the state of nature is ooncemed,
can be eamly answered, for the state of nature is, both in
nature and in time, prior to religion. Xo one knows bj
nature that he owes any obedience to Grod,^nor can he
attain thereto by any exercise of his reason, but solely by
revelation confinned by signs. Therefore, previous to rere-
lation, no one is bound by a Divine law and right of which
he is necessarily in ignorance. The state of nature must
by no means be confounded with a state of religion, but
must be conceived as without either religion or law, and
consequently without sin or vnrong: this is how we haTe
described it, and we are confirmed bv the authority of PauL
It is not only in respect of ignorance that we conceire the
state of nature as prior to, and lacking the Divine revealed
law and right ; but in respect of freedom also, wherewith all
men are bom endowed.

If men were naturallv bound bv the Divine law and
right, or if the Divine law and right were a natural necessitj,
there would have been no need for God to make a covenant
with mankind, and to bind them thereto with an oath and
agreement.

We must, then, fully grant that the Divine law and right
originated at the time when men by express covenant agreed
to obey Qod in all things, and ceded, as it were, their nataral
freedom, transferring their rights to €U>d in the manner
described in speaking of the formation of a state.

However, I will treat of these matters more at length
presently.

It may be insisted that sovereigns are as much bound by
the Divine law as subjects : whereas we have asserted that
they retain their natural rights, and may do whatever thej
like.

1 See Note 28.


CHAF. XYI.] or THE TOXJirDATIONS OF A STATE. 211

In order to clear up tlie whole difficiQty, which arises
rather conceming the natural right than the natural state,
I maintain that everyone is bound, in the state of nature,
to live according to Divine law, in the same way as he is
bound to live according to the dictates of sound reason;
namely, inasmuch as it is to his advantage, and necessary
for his salvation; but, if he will not so live, he may do
otherwise at his own risk. He is thus bound to live accord-
ing to his own laws, not according to anyone else's,, and to
recognize no man as a judge, or as a superior in religion.
Such, in my opinion, is the position of a sovereign, for he
may take advice from his fellow-men, but he is not bound
to recognize any as a judge, nor anyone besides himself as
an arbitrator on any question of right, unless it be a prophet
sent expressly by God. and attesting his mission by indis-
putable signs. Even then he does not recognize a man, but
God Himself as His judge.

If a sovereign refuses to obey God as revealed in His
law, he does so at his own risk and loss, but without vio-
lating any dvil or natural right. For the dvil right is
dependent on his own decree ; and natural right is depen-
dent on the laws of nature, which latter are not adapted to
religion, whose sole aim is the good of humanity, but to the
order of nature— that is, to God's eternal decree unknown
to us.

This truth seems to be adumbrated in a somewhat ob-
scurer form by those who maintain that men can sin against
God's revelation, but not against the eternal decree by
which He has ordained all tlnngs.

We may be asked, what should we do if the sovereign
commands anything contrary to religion, and the obedience
which we have expressly vowed to God ? shoxdd we obey
the Divine law or the human law? I shall treat of this
question at length hereafter, and will therefore merely say
now, that God should be obeyed before all else, when we
have a certain and indisputable revelation of His will : but
men are very prone to error on religious subjects, and,
according to the diversity of their dispositions, are wont
with considerable stir to put forward their own inventions,
as experience more than sufficiently attests, so that if no
one were bound to obey the state in matters which, in his


/


212 A THBOLOGICO-POLmCAL TBBJLTISB. [cHAP. XYI.

own opinion concern religion, the rights of the state would
be dependent on every man's judgment and passions. No
one would consider himself bound to obey laws framed
against his faith or superstition; and on this pretext he
might assume unbounded license. In this way, the rights

M of the civil authorities would be utterly set at nought, so

I^, that we must conclude that the sovereign power, which

^ , alone is bound both by Divine and natural right to preserve

v^ and guard the laws of the state, shoidd have supreme
authority for making any laws about religion which it
thinks fit ; all are bound to obey its behests on the subject
in accordfitnce with their promise which Qod bids them to
keep.

However, if the sovereign power be heathen, we should
either enter into no engagements therewith, and yield up
our lives sooner than transfer to it any of our rights ; or, if
the engagement be made, and our rights transferred, we
should (inasmuch as we should have ourselves transferred
the right of defending ourselves and our religion) be bound
to obey them, and to keep our word : we might even rightly
be bound so to do, except in those cases where God, by in-
disputable revelation, has promised His special aid against
tyranny, or given us special exemption from obedience.
Thus we see that, of all the Jews in Babylon, there were
only three youths who were certain of the help of God, and,
therefore, refused to obey Nebuchadnezzar. All the rest,
with the sole exception of Daniel, who was beloved by the
king, were doubtless compelled by right to obey, perhaps
thinking that they had been delivered up by God into the
hands of the king, and that the king had obtained and pre-
served his dominion by God's design. On the other hand,
Eleazar, before his country had utterly fallen, wished to
give a proof of his constancy to his compatriots, in order
that they might follow in his footsteps, and go to any
lengths, rather than allow their right and power to be
transferred to the Greeks, or brave any torture rather than
swear allegiance to the heathen. Instances are occurring
every day in confirmation of what I here advance. The
rulers of Christian kingdoms do not hesitate, with a view to
strengthening their dominion, to make treaties with Turks
and heathen, and to give orders to their subjects who


OHAP. XYI.] OV THB FOTJKDATIOK8 OF A STATS. 218

settle among sucli peoples not to assume more freedom,
either in things sectdar or religions, than is set down in the
treaty, or allowed by the foreign government. We may see
this exemplified in the Dutch treaty with the Japanese,
which I have already mentioned.


tl4 . ▲ SHXOLCkj^ICO-POLinCiLL TBBAXiaS. [CHA^. XTIl.


CHAPTER XVn.

IT IS SHOWN THAT NO ONE OAK, OB NEED, TBANSFEB AXI*
HIS BIGHTS TO THE SOYEBEIGN FOWEB. OF THE HEBBEW
BBFXTBLIC, AS IT WAS DXTBING THE LIFETIME OF MOSES,
AND AFTEB HIS DEATH, TILL THE FOUNDATION OF THE
MONABCHY ; AND OF ITS EXCELLENCE. LASTLY, OF THE
CAUSES WHY THE THEOCBATIC BEPUBLIC FELL, AND
WHY IT COULD HABDLY HATE CONTINUED WITHOUT
DISSENSION.

THE theory put forward in tlie last chapter, of the tmi-
versal rights of the sovereign power, and of the natural
rights of the individual transferred thereto, though it corre-
sponds in many respects with actual practice, and though
practice may be so arranged as to conform to it more and
more, must nevertheless always remain in many respects
1 purely ideal. No one can ever so utterly transfer to
J Lotlfer liis power and, conseqnently, Ms rights, as to cease
to be a man ; nor can there ever be a power so sovereign
that it can carry out every possible wish. It will always
be vain to order a subject to hate what he believes brings
him advantage, or to love what brings him loss, or not to
be offended at insidts, or not to wish to be free from fear,
or a hundred other things of the sort, which necessarily
follow from the laws of human nature. So much, I think,
is abundantly shown by experience : for men have never so
far ceded their power as to cease to be an object of fear to
the rulers who received such power and right ; and domi-
nions have always been in as much danger from their own
subjects as from external enemies. If it were really the
case that men coxdd be deprived of their natural rights so
utterly as never to have any further influence on affairs,^
except with the permission of the holders of sovereign
right, it would then be possible to maintain with impunity

> See Note 29.


CRAP. ZVn.] OT THB HBBBEW THBOCBAOT. 215

the most violent tyranny, whicli, I suppose, no one wonld
for an instant admit.

We must, therefore, grant that every man retains some v/
part of his right, in dependence on his own decision, and no 'n^
one else's.

However, in order correctly to understand the extent
of the sovereign's right and power, we must take notice
that it does not cover only those actions to which it can
compel men by fear, but absolutely every action which it '
can induce men to perform : for it is the fact of obedience, ^/
not the motive for obedience, which makes a man a subject.

Whatever be the cause which leads a man to obey the
commands of the sovereign, whether it be fear or hope, or
love of his country, or any other emotion— the fact remains
that the man takes counsel with himself, and nevertheless
acts as his sovereign orders. We must not, therefore,
assert that aU actions resultii^ from a man's dehberation
with himself are done in obedience to the rights of the in-
dividual rather than the sovereign : as a matter of fact, all
actions spring from a man's dehberation with himself,
whether the determining motive be love or fear of punish-
ment ; therefore, either dominion does not exist, and has
no rights over its subjects, or else it extends over every in-
stance in which it can prevail on men to decide to obey it.
Consequently, every action which a subject performs in ac-
cordance with the commands of the sovereign, whether such
action springs from love, or fear, or (as is more frequently v .
the case) from hope and fear together, or from reverence V
compounded of fear and admiration, or, indeed, any motive \
whatever, is performed in virtue of his submission to the ^
sovereign, and not in virtue of his own authority.

This point is made still more clear by the fact that obe-
dience does not consist so much in the outward act as in
the mental state of the person obeying ; so that he is most
under the dominion of another who with his whole heart
determines to obey another's commands ; and consequently ,
the firmest dominion belongs to the sovereign who has most
influence over the minds of his subjects ; if those who are
most feared possessed the firmest dominion, the firmest
dominion woiid belong to the subjects of a tyrant, for they
are always greatly feared by their ruler. Furthermore,


J


216 A THEOLOaiCO-FOLZTICAL TBBATI8E. [CHAP. XVII.

though it is impossible to govern the mind as completely
as the tongue, nevertheless minds are, to a certain extent,
under the control of the sovereign, for he can in many ways
bring about that the greatest part of his subjects should
follow his wishes in their beliefs, their loves, and their
hates. Though such emotions do not arise at the express
command of the sovereign thejr often restdt (as experience
shows) from the authority of his power, and from his direc-
tion ; in other words, in firtue of his right ; we may, there-
fore, without doing violence to our understanding, conceive
men who follow the instigation of their sovereign in their
beliefs, their loves, their hates, their contempt, and all other
emotions whatsoever.

Though the powers of government, as thus conceived, are
sufficiently ample, they can never become large enough to
execute every possible wish of their possessors. This, I
think, I have already shown clearly enough. The method
of forming a dominion which should prove lasting I do not,
as I have said, intend to discuss, but in order to arrive at
the object I have in view, I will touch on the teaching of
Divine revelation to Moses in this respect, and we will con-
sider the history and the success of the Jews, gathering
therefrom what should be the chief concessions made by
sovereigns to their subjects with a view to the security and
increase of their dominion.

That the preservation of a state chiefly depends on the
subjects' fidelity and constancy in carrying out the orders
they receive, is most clearly taught both by reason and ex-
perience ; how subjects ought to be guided so as best to
preserve their fidelity and virtue is not so obvious. All,
both rulers an^ ruled, are men, and prone to follow after
their lusts. The fickle disposition of the multitude almost
reduces those who have experience of it to despair, for it is
governed solely by emotions, not by reason : it rushes head-
long into every enterprise, and is easily corrupted either by
avarice or luxury : everyone thinks himself omniscient and
wishes to fashion all things to his liking, judging a thing
to be just or unjust, lawful or imlawful, according as he
thinks it will bring him profit or loss : vanity leads him
to despise his eqiials, and refuse their guidance : envy of
superior fame or f ortime (for such gifts are never equally


CHAP. XYII.] OF THE HSBBXW THBOORAOT. 217

distributed) lead.s him to desire and rejoice in Ids neigh-
bour's downfaU. I need not go through the whole list,
everyone knows akeady how much crime results from dis-
gust at the present — desire for change, headlong anger, and
contempt for poverty — and how men's minds are engrossed
and kept in turmoil thereby.

To guard against all these evils, and form a dominion
where no room is left for deceit ; to frame our institutions
so that every man, whatever lus disposition, may prefer
public right to private advantage, this is the task and this
the toil Necessity is often the mother of invention, but
she has never yet succeeded in framing a dominion that
was in less danger from its own citizens than from open
enemies, or whose rulers did not fear the latter less than
the former. Witness the state of Eome, invincible by her
enemies, but many times conquered and sorely oppressed
by her own citizens, especially in the war between Ves-
pasian and Yitelliuis. (See Tacitus, Hist. bk. iv. for a de-
scription of the pitiable state of the city.)

Alexander thought prestige abroad more easy to acquire
than prestige at home, and believed that his greatness
could be destroyed by his own followers. Fearing such a
disaster, he thus addressed his friends: ''Keep me sate
from internal treachery and domestic plots, and I will
front without fear the dangers of battle and of war. Philip
was more secure in the battle array than in the theatre :
he often escaped from the hands of the enemy, he could
not escape from his own subjects. If you think over the
deaths of kings, you will coimt up more who have died by
the assassin than by the open foe." (Q. Curtius, chap, vi.)

For the sake of making themselves secure, kings who
seized the throne in ancient times used to try to spread the
idea that they were descended from the immortal gods,
thinking that if their subjects and the rest of mankind did
not look on them as equals, but believed them to be gods,
they would willingly submit to their rule, and obey their
commands. Thus Augustus persuaded the Eomans that
he was descended from Mne&a, who was the son of Yenus,
and numbered among the gods. '* He wished himself to
be worshipped in temples, like the gods, with flamens and
priests." (Tacitus, Ann. i. 10.)


218 A THBOLOOIOO-POUnOAL TBBATIBB. [OHAP. XVH.

Alexander wished to be saltited as the son of Jnpiter»
not from motives of pride but of policy, as he showed bj
his answer to the inyective of Hermolans : " It is ahnost
laughable*'' said he, " that Hermolans asked me to contra-
dict Jnpiter, by whose oracle I am recognized. Am I re-
sponsible for the answers of the gods ? It offered me the
name of son ; acquiescence was by no means foreign to my
present designs. Wotdd that the Indians also would be-
Heve me to be a god ! Wars are carried through by pres-
tige, falsehoods that are belieyed often gam the force of
truth." (Curtius, viii. § 8.) In these few words he cleverly
contrives to palm off a fiction on the ignorant, and at the
same time hmts at the motive for the deception.

Oleon, in his speech persuading the Macedonians to obey
their king, adopted a similar device : for after going through
the praises of Alexander with admiration, and recaUing his
merits, he proceeds, " the Persians are not only pious, but
prudent in worshipping their kings as gods : for kingship
is the shield of public safety," and he ends thus, " I, myself,
when the king enters a banquet hall, should prostrate my
body on the ground ; other men should do the like, espe-
cially those who are wise " (Curtius, viu. § 65). However,
the Macedonians were more prudent— indeed, it is only com-
plete barbarians who can be so openly cajoled, and can
suffer themselves to be turned from subjects into slaves
without interests of their own. Others, notwithstanding,
have been able more easily to spread the belief that king-
ship is sacred, and plays the part of God on the earth, that
it has been instituted by God, not by the suffrage and con-
sent of men; and that it is preserved and guarded by
Divine special providence and aid. Similar fictions have been
promulgated by monarchs, with the object of strengthen-
ing their dominion, but these I will pass over, and in
order to arrive at my main purpose, will merely recall and
discuss the teaching on the subject of Divine revelation to
Moses in ancient times.

We have said in Chap. V. that after the Hebrews came
up out of Egypt they were not bound by the law and right
of any other nation, but were at liberty to institute any
new rites at their pleasure, and to occupy whatever terri-
tory they chose. After their liberation from the intolerable


CRAP. Zm. [ OF THE HEBBEW THEOOBACY. 219

bondage of the Egyptians, they were bonnd by no covenant i
to any man ; and, therefore, every man entered into his
natnial right, and was free to retain it or to give it up, and .
transfer it to another. Being, then, in the state of nature,
they followed the advice of Moses, in whom they chiefly
trusted, and decided to transfer their right to no human
being, but only to Gbd ; without further delay they all,
with one voice, promised to obey all the commands of the
Deity(^and to acknowledge no right that He did not pro-
claim as such by prophetic revelatio^ This promise, or
transference of right to God, was effected in the same
manner as we have conceived it to have been in ordinary '
societies, when men agree to divest themselves of their
natural rights. It is, in fact, in virtue of a set covenant,
and an oath (see Exod. xxxiv. 7), that the Jews freely, and
not under compulsion or threats, surrendered their rights _,
and transferred them to God. Moreover, in order that this
covenant might be ratified and settled, and might be free
from all suspicion of deceit, God did not enter into it till
the Jews had had experience of His wonderful power by
which alone they had been, or could be, preserved in a state
of prosperity (Exod. xix. 4, 5). It is because they believed ^
that nothing but G^'s power could preserve them that
they surrendered to God the natural power of self-preser-
vation, which they formerly, perhaps, thought they pos-
sessed, and consequently they surrendered at the same
time all their natural right.

G^ alone, therefore, held dominion over the Hebrews,
whose state was in virtue of the covenant called Gods
kingdom, and God was said to be their king ; consequently
the enemies of the Jews were said to be the enemies ot
God, and the citizens who tried to seize the dominion were
guilty of treason against God ; and, lastly, the laws ot
the state were called the laws and commandments ot
God. Thus in the Hebrew state tlie civil and relig^s
authority, each consisting solely of obedience to WKl,
were one and the same. The dogmas of religion were
not precepts, but laws and ordinajices ; piety was re-
garded as the same as loyalty, impiety as the same as dis- .
affection. Everyone who fell away from religion ceased to
be a citizen, and was, on that ground alone, accounted an


\


220 A THBOLOaiOO-POLinCAL TB£JLTIS£. [CHAP. XTU.

enemy : those who died for the sake of religion, were held
to have died for their country ; in fact, between civil and
religious law and right there was no distinction whatever.
For this reason the government could be called a Theocracy,
Ps/ inasmuch as the citizens were not boimd by anything save
y\sih.e revelations of God.

However, this state of things existed rather in theory
than in practice, for it will appear from what we are about
to say, that the Hebrews, as a matter of fact, retained
absolutely in their own hands the right of sovereignty:
this is shown by the method and plan by which the govern-
ment Wjas carried on, as I will now explain.

Inasmuch as the Hebrews did not transfer their rights
to any other person but, as in a democracy, all surrendered
their rights equally, and cried out with one voice, " What-
soever Gk>d shall speak (no mediator or mouthpiece being
named) that will we do," it follows that all were equally
bound by the covenant, and that all had an equal right to
consult the Deity, to accept and to interpret His laws, so
that all had an exactly equal share in the government. Thus
at first they all approached G-od together, so that they
might leam His cbLaands, but in this first salutation,
they were so thoroughly terrified and so astounded to hear
God speaking, that they thought their last hour was at
hand : full of fear, therefore, they went afresh to Moses,
and said, "Lo, we have heard G-od speaking in the fire,
and there is no cause why we should wish to die : surely
this great fire will consume us : if we hear again the voice
of God, we shall surely die. Thou, therefore, go near, and
hear all the words of our God, and thou (not God) shalt
speak with us: all that God shall tell us, that will we
hearken to and perform."

They thus clearly abrogated their former covenant, and
absolutely transferred to Moses their right to consult God
and interpret His commands : for they do not here promise
obedience to all that God shall tell them, but to all that
God shall tell Moses (see Deut. v. after the Decalogue, and
chap, xviii. v. 16, 16). Moses, therefore, remained the sole
promulgator and interpreter of the Divine laws, and con-
sequently also the sovereign judge, who could not be ar-
raigned himself, and who acted among the Hebrews the


CHAP. XYII.] OF THE HSBBBW THEOCBACt. 221

part of God ; in other words, held the sovereign kingship :
he alone had the right to consult God, to give the Divine
answers to the people, and to see that they were carried
out. I say he alone, for if anyone during the life of Moses
was desirous of preaching anything in the name of the
Lord, he was, even if a true prophet, considered guilty and
a usurper of the sovereign right (Numb. xi. 28).^ We may
here notice, that though the people had elected Moses, they
could not rightfully elect Moses's successor; for having
transferred to Moses their right of consulting God, and
absolutely promised to regard Iiitti as a Divine oracle, they
had plainly forfeited the whole of their right, and were
bound to accept as chosen by God anyone proclaimed by
Moses as his successor. If Moses had so chosen his suc-
cessor, who like him shoxdd wield the sole right of govern-
ment, possessing the sole right of consulting God, and con-
sequently of making and abrogating laws, of deciding on
peace or war, of sending ambassadors, appointing judges —
in fact, discharging all the functions of a sovereign, the
state would have become simply a monarchy, only differing
from other monarchies in the fact, that the latter are, or
should be, carried on in accordance with God's decree, un-
known even to the monarch, whereas the Hebrew monarch
would have been the only person to whom the decree was
revealed. A difference wluch increases, rather than dimi-
nishes the monarch's authority. As far as the people in
both cases are concerned, each would be equally subject,
and equally ignorant of the Divine decree, for each would
be dependent on the monarch's words, and would learn
from him alone, what was lawful or unlawful : nor would
the fact that the people beheved that the monarch was
only issuing commands in accordance with God's decree
revealed to him, make it less in subjection, but rather
more- However, Moses elected no such successor, but left
the dominion to those who came after him in a condition
which could not be called a popular government, nor an
aristocracy, nor a monarchy, but a "Hieocracy. For the
right of interpreting laws was vested in one man, while the
right and power of administering the state according to the

* See Note 30.


222 A THEOLOaiCO-POLITIOAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. XVXT.

laws thus interpreted, was vested in another man (see
Numb, xxvii. 21).^

In order that the question may be thoroughly understood,
I will duly set forth the administration of the whole state.

First, the people were commanded to build a tabernacle,
which should be, as it were, the dwelling of God— that is,
of the sovereign authority of the state. This tabernacle
was to be erected at the cost of the whole people, not of
one man, in order that the place where God was consulted
might be public property. The Levites were chosen as
courtiers and administrators of this royal abode ; while
Aaron, the brother of Moses, was chosen to be their chief
and second, as it were, to God their King, being succeeded
in the office by his legitimate sons.

He, as the nearest to God, was the sovereign interpreter
of the Divine laws ; he communicated the answers of the
Divine oracle to the people, and entreated God's favour for
them. If, in addition to these privileges, he had possessed
the right of ruling, he would have been neither more nor
less than an absolute monarch ; but, in respect to govern-
ment, he was only a private citizen: the whole tribe of
Levi was so completely divested of governing rights that it
did not even take its share with the others in the partition
of territory. Moses provided for its support by inspiring
the common people with great reverence for it, as the only
tribe dedicated to God.

Further, the army, formed from the remaining twelve
tribes, was commanded to invade the land of Canaan, to
divide it into twelve portions, and to distribute it among
the tribes by lot. For this task twelve captains were
chosen, one from every tribe, and were, together with
Joshua and Eleazar, the high priest, empowered to divide
the land into twelve equal parts, and distribute it by lot.
Joshua was chosen for lie chief command of the army, in-
asmuch as none but he had the right to consult God in
emergencies, not like Moses, alone in his tent, or in the
tabernacle, but through the high priest, to whom only the
answers of God were revealed. Furthermore, he was em-
powered to execute, and cause the people to obey God's
commands, transmitted through the high priests ; to find,

^ See Note 31.


CHAP. ZYU.] OF THB HBBBBW THSOOBAOT. 228

and to make use of, means for carrying them out ; to choose
as many army captains as he liked; to make whatever
choice he thought best ; to send ambassadors in his own
name '; and, in short, to haye the entire control of the war.
To his office there was no rightful successor — ^indeed, the .
post was only filled by the direct order of the Deity, on oc-
casions of public emergency. In ordinary times, all th€^
management of peace and war was vested in the captains
of the tribes, as I will shortly point out. Lastly, all men
between the ages of twenty and sixty were ordered to bear
arms, and form a citizen army, owing allegiance, not to its
general-in-chief , nor to th^ high priest, but to Eeligion and
to Gk)d. The army, or the hosts, were called the army of
God, or the hosts of God. For this reason God was called
by the Hebrews the God of Armies ; and the ark of the
covenant was borne in the midst of the army in important
battles, when the safety or destruction of the whole people
hung upon the issue, so that the people might, as it were,
see tibeir King among them, and put forth all their strength.

Erom these directions, left by Moses to his successors^
we plainly see that he chose administrators, rather thanv^
despots, to come after him; for he invested no one with the
power of consulting God, where he liked and alone, conse-
uently, no one had the power possessed by himself of or-
aining and abrogating htws, of deciding on war or peace,
of choosing men to £^ offices both religious and secidar :
all these are the prerogatives of a sovereign. The high
priest, indeed, had the right of interpreting laws, and com-
municating the answers of God, but he could not do so
when he liked, as Moses could, but only when he was asked
by the general-in-chief of the army, the co^mcil, or some
suniLar authority. The general-in-chief and the council
could consult God when they liked, but could only receive
His answers through the high priest ; so that the utterances
of God, as reported by the high priest, were not decrees, as ^
they were when reported by Moses, but only answers ; they r
were accepted by Joshua and the council, and only then had
the force of commands and decrees.

The high priest, both in the case of Aaron and of his son
Eleazar, was chosen by Moses; nor had anyone, after
Moses' death, a right to elect to the office, which became


224 A THBOLOGIOO-POLinCiJ:! TBBATISE. [CHAP. XYII.

hereditary. The general-in-chief of the army was also
chosen by Moses, and assumed his functions in virtue of
the commands, not of the high priest, but of Moses : in-
deed, after the death of Joshua, the high priest did not
appoint anyone in his place, and the captains did not con-
sult God afresh about a general-in-chief , but each retained
Joshua's power in respect to the contingent of his own
tribe, and all retained it collectively, in respect to the whole
army. There seems to have been no need of a general-in-
cbief, except when they were obliged to unite their forces
against a common enemy. This occurred most frequently
during the time of Joshua, when they had no fixed dwelling-
place, and possessed all things in common. After all the
tribes had gained their territories by right of conquest, and
had divided their allotted gains, they became separated,
having no longer their possessions in common, so that the
need for a single commander ceased, for the different tribes
should be considered rather in the light of confederated
states than of bodies of fellow-dtizens. In respect to their
Otod and their religion, they were fellow-citizens ; but, in
respect to the rights which one possessed with regard to
another, they were only confederated : they were, in fact,
in much the same position (if one excepts the Temple
common to all) as the United States of the Netherlands.
The division of property held in common is only another
phrase for the possession of his share by each of the owners
singly, and the surrender by the others of their rights over
8U<^ share. This is why Moses elected captains of the
tribes — namely, that when the dominion was divided, each
might take care of his own part ; consulting Gk)d through
the high priest on the affairs of his tribe, ruling over his
army, bmlding and fortifying cities, appointing judges,
attacking the enemies of his own dominion, and having
complete control over all civil and military affairs. He was
not bound to acknowledge any superior judge save Gk>d,^ or
a prophet whom Orod should expressly send. If he departed
from the worship of Orod, the rest of the tribes did not
arraign him as a subject, but attacked him as an enemy.
Of this we ha^e examples in Scripture. When Joshua was

> Seo Note 32.


CHAP. XVII.] OP THE HEBREW THEOCBACT. 225

dead, the cliildreii of Israel (not a fresh general-in-chief)
consulted God; it being decided that the tribe of Judah
shoidd be the first to attack its enemies, the tribe in ques-
tion contracted a single alliance with the tribe of Simeon,
for uniting their forces, and attacking their common
enemy, the rest of the tribes not being included in the
alliance (Judges i. 1, 2, 3). Each tribe separately made
war against its own enemies, and, according to its pleasure,
received them as subjects or allies, though it had been
commanded not to spare them on any conditions, but to de-
stroy them utterly. Such disobedience met with reproof
from the rest of the tribes, but did not cause the ofEending
tribe to be arraigned: it was not considered a sufficient
reason for proclaiming a civil war, or interfering in one
another's affairs. But when the tribe of Benjamin ofEended
against the others, and so loosened the bonds of peace that
none of the confederated tribes could find refuge within its
borders, they attacked it as an enemy, and gaining the vie-
tory over it after three battles, put to death both guilty and
innocent, according to the laws of war : an act which they
subsequently bewailed with tardy repentance.

These examples plainly confirm what we have said con-
cerning the rights of each tribe. Perhaps we shall be
asked who elected the successors to the captains of each
tribe ; on this point I can gather no positive information in
Scripture, but I conjecture that as the tribes were divided
into families, each headed by its senior member, the senior
of aU these heads of families succeeded by right to the
office of captain, for Moses chose from among these seniors
his seventy coadjutors, who formed with himself the supreme
council. Those who administered the government af tier the
death of Joshua were called elders, and elder is a very common
Hebrew expression in the sense of judge, as I suppose every-
one knows ; however, it is not very important for us to make
up our miids on this point. It is enough to have shown
that after the death of Moses no one man wielded all the
power of a sovereign ; as affairs were not all managed by
one man, nor by a single council, nor by the popular vote,
but partly by one tribe, partly by the rest in equal shares,
it is most evident that the government, after the death of
Moses, was neither monarchic, nor aristocratic, nor popular,

Q


V


226 A THEOLOOICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [cHAP. XVII.

but, as we liave said, Theocratic. The reasons for applying
this name are :

I. Because the royal seat of government was the Temple,
and in respect to it alone, as we have shown, all the tribes
were fellow-citizens,

n. Because all the people owed allegiance to Grod, their
supreme Judge, to whom only they had promised implicit
obedience in all things.

m. Because the general-in-chief or dictator, when there
was need of such, was elected by none save God alone.
This was expressly commanded by Moses in the name of
God (Deut. xix. 15), and witnessed by the actual choice of
Gideon, of Samson, and of Samuel ; wheref rom we may
conclude that the other faithful leaders were chosen in the
same manner, though it is not expressly told us.

These preliminaries being stated, it is now time to in-
quire the effects of forming a dominion on this plan, and
to see whether it so effectually kept within bounds both
rulers and ruled, that the former were never tyrannical
and the latter never rebellious.

Those who administer or possess governing power, always
try to surround their high-handed actions with a cloak of
legality, and to persuade the people that they act from
good-motives ; this they are easily able to effect when they
are the sole interpreters of the law ; for it is evident that
they are thus able to assume a far greater freedom to carry
out their wishes and desires than if the interpretation of
the law is vested in somecJne else, or if the laws were so
seK-evident that no one could be in doubt as to their mean-
ing. We thus see that the power of evil-doing was greatly
curtailed for the Hebrew captains by the fact that the
whole interpretation of the law was vested in the Levites
(Deut. xxi. 5), who, on their part, had no share in the
government, and depended for all their support and con-
sideration on a correct interpretation of the laws entrusted
to them. Moreover, the whole people was commanded to
come together at a certain place every seven years and be
instructed in the law by the high-priest ; further, each in-
dividual was bidden to read the book of the law through
I and through continually with scrupulous care. (Deut. xxxi.
I 9, and vi. 7.)


CHAP. ZYII.] OF THB HEBBEW THEobBACY. 227

The captains were tliiis for their own sakes bound to take
great care to administer everything according to the laws laid
down, and well known to aU, if they wished to be held in
high honour by the people, who would regard them as the
adjninistrators of God's dominion, and as God's vicegerents ;
otherwise they could not have escaped all the virulence of
theological hatred. There was another very important
•check on the unbridled license of the captains, in the fact,
that the army was formed from the whole body of the
•citizens, between the ages of twenty and sixty, without
exception, and that the captains were not able to hire any
foreign soldiery. This I say was very important, for it is
well known that princes can oppress their peoples with the
fiingle aid of the soldiery in their pay ; while there is nothing
more formidable to them than the freedom of citizen soldiers,
who have established the freedom and glory of their country
by their valour, their toil, and their blood. Thus Alexander,
when he was about to make war on Darius, a second time,
after hearing the advice of Parmenio, did not chide him
who gave the advice, but Polysperchon, who was standing
by. For, as Curtius says (iv. § 13), he did not venture to re-
proach Parmenio again after having shortly before reproved
him too sharply. This freedom of the Macedonians, which
he so dreaded, he was not able to subdue till after the
number of captives enlisted in the army surpassed that of
his own people : then, but not tiU then, he g^re rein to his
anger so long checked by the independence of his chief
fellow-countrymen.

If this independence of citizen soldiers can restrain the
princes of ordinary states who are wont to usurp the whole
glory of victories, it must have been still more effectual
against the Hebrew captains, whose soldiers were fighting,
not for the glory of a prince, but for the glory of God, and
who did not go forth to battle till the Divine assent had
been given.

We must also remember that the Hebrew captains were
associated only by the bonds of religion : therefore, if any
one of them had transgressed, and begun to violate the
Divine right, he might have been treated by the rest as an
enemy and lawfully subdued.

An additional check may be found in the fear of a new


226 A THE^'OGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. XVII.

but, as we^^f ^^^ ^ ^ ^^-^ o^ unblemished life could show
this naip^signs that he was really a prophet, he ipso facto

I. B<» *li® sovereign right to rule, which was given to-
and >^s to Moses formerly, in the name of G-od, as revealed
^^^imself alone ; not merely through the high priest, as ia.

(Q case of the captains. There is no doubt that such ajx
^ne would easily be able to enlist an oppressed people in.
his cause, and by trifling signs persuade them of anything
he wished : on the other hand, if afEairs were well ordered^
the captain woidd be able to make provision in time ; that
the prophet should be submitted to his approval, and be-
examined whether he were really of unblemished life, and
possessed indisputable signs of his mission : also, whether
the teaching he proposed to set forth in the name of the-
Lord agreed with received doctrines, and the general law»
of the country ; if his credentials were insufficient, or his
doctrines new, he could lawfully be put to death, or else
received on the captain's sole responsibility and authority.

Again, the captains were not superior to the others in
nobihty or birth, but only administered the government in.
virtue of their age and personal qualities. Lastly, neither
captains nor army had any reason for preferring war to-
peace. The army, as we have stated, consisted entirely of
citizens, so that affairs were managed by the same persona
both in peace and war. The man who was a soldier in the
camp was a citizen in the market-place, he who was a leader
in the camp was a judge in the law courts, he who was a.
general in the camp was a ruler in the state. Thus no one
could desire war for its own sake, but only for the sake of
preserving peace and liberty ; possibly the captains avoided
change as far as possible, so as not to be obliged to consult
the high priest and submit to the indignity of standing in
his presence.

So much for the precautions for keeping the captains
within bounds. We must now look for the restraints upon
the people : these, however, are very clearly indicated in the
very groundwork of the social fabric.

Anyone who gives the subject the slightest attention^
will see that the state was so ordered as to inspire the most
ardent patriotism in the hearts of the citizens, so that the
latter would be very hard to persuade to betray their country^


CBAP. ZYII.I OF THE HEBBEW THEOCBACY. 229 .

i

and be ready to endure anTtldng rather than submit to a ;
foreign yoke. After they had transferred their right to
•God, they thought that their kingdom belonged to Gk)d, \
and that they themselves were God's children. Other ;
nations they looked upon as God's enemies, and regarded \
with intense hatred (which they took to be piety, see Psabn !
oxxxix. 21, 22) : nothing would have been more abhorrent >
to them than swearing allegiance to a foreigner, and pro- >
mising him obedience : nor could they conceive any greater i
or more execrable crime than the betrayal of their country, ;
the kingdom of the God whom they adored.

It was considered wicked for anyone to settle outside of ;
the country, inasmuch as the worship of God by which
they were bound coidd not be carried on elsewhere : their
own land alone was considered holy, the rest of the earth
unclean and prof ane.

David, who was forced to live in exile, complained before
Saul as follows : " But if they be the children of men who
have stirred thee up against me, cursed be they before the
Lord ; for they have driven me out this day from abiding
in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go, serve other gods."
(1 Sam. xxvi. 19.) For the same reason no citizen, as we
should especially remark, was ever sent into exile : he who
sinned was liable to punishment, but not to disgrace.

Thus the love of the Hebrews for their country was not
only patriotism, but also piety, and was cherished and
nurtured by daily rites tiQ, like their hatred of other nations,
it must have passed into their nature. Their daily worship
was not only different from that of other nations (as it
might well be, considering that they were a peculiar people
and entirely apart from the rest), it was absolutely con-
trary. Such daily reprobation naturally gave rise to a
lasting hatred, deeply implanted in the heart : for of all
hatreds none is more deep and tenacious than that which
springs from extreme devoutness or piety, and is itself
cherished as pious. ISTor was a general cause lacking for
inflaming such hatred more and more, inasmuch as it was
reciprocated ; the surrounding nations regarding the Jews
with a hatred just as intense.

How great was the effect of all these causes, namely,^
freedom from man's dominion ; devotion to their country ;


230 ▲ THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAF. XVII.

absolute rights over all other men ; a hatred not only per-
mitted but pious ; a contempt for their fellow-men ; the
singularity of their customs and religious rites ; the effect,
I repeat, of all these causes in strengthening the hearts of"
the Jews to bear all things for their country, with ex-
traordinary constancy and valour, will at once be discerned
by reason and attested by experience. Never, so long as
the city was standing, could they endure to remain under
foreign dominion ; and therefore they called Jerusalem " a
rebellious city" (Ezra iv. 12). Their state after its re-
establishment (which was a mere shadow of the first, for
the high priests had usurped the rights of the tribal
captains) was, with great dijQficulty, destroyed by the
Eomans, as Tacitus bears witness (Hist. ii. 4): — "Ves-
pasian had closed the war against the Jews, abandoning
the siege of Jerusalem as an enterprise difficult and
arduous, rather from the character of the people and the
obstinacy of their superstition, than from the strength left
to the besieged for meeting their necessities." But besides
these characteristics, which are merely ascribed by an in-
dividual opinion, there was one feature pecuHar to this state
and of great importance in retaining the affections of the
citizens, and checking adl thoughts of desertion, or aban-
donment of the country : namely, self-interest, the strength
and life of all human action. This was peculiarly engaged
in the Hebrew state, for nowhere else did citizens possess
their goods so securely as did the subjects of this commu-
nity, for the latter possessed as laige a share in the land
and the fields as did their chiefs, and were owners of their
plots of ground in perpetuity ; for if any man was compelled
by poverty to sell his farm or his pasture, he received it
back again intact at the year of jubilee : there were other
similar enactments against the possibility of alienating real
property.

Again, poverty was nowhere more endurable than in a.
country where duty towards one's neighbour, that is, one's
fellow-citizen, was practised with the utmost piety, as a
means of gaining the favour of Qtod the Xing. Thus the
Hebrew citizens would nowhere be so well off as in their
own country ; outside its limits they met with nothing but
loss and disgrace.


CHAP. XVII.] OP THE HEBREW THEOCBACY. 231

The following considerations were of weight, not only in
keeping them at home, but also in preventing civil war and
removing causes of strife : no one was bound to serve his
equal, but only to serve God, while charity and love to-
wards fellow-citizens was accounted the highest piety ; this
last feeling was not a little fostered by the general hatred
with which they regarded foreign nations and were regarded
by them. Furthermore, the strict discipline of obedience I
in which they were brought up, was a very important
factor ; for they were bound to carry on all their actions
according to the set rules of the law: a man might not
plough when he liked, but only at certain times, in certain
years, and with one sort of beast at a time ; so, too, he i
might only sow and reap in a certain method and season — \
in fact, his whole life was one long school of obedience (see
Chap. V. on the use of ceremonies) ; such a habit was thus
engendered, that conformity seemed freedom instead of ser-
vitude, and men desired what was commanded rather than
what was forbidden. This result was not a little aided by
the fact that the people were bound, at certain seasons of
the year, to give themselves up to rest and rejoicing, not
for their own pleasure, but in order that they might wor-
ship God cheerfuUy.

Three times in the year they feasted before the Lord ; on
the seventh day of every week they were bidden to abstain
from all work and to rest ; besides these, there were other
occasions when innocent rejoicing and feasting were not
only allowed but enjoined. I do not think anv better
means of influencing men's minds could be devised ; for
there is no more powerful attraction than joy springing from
devotion, a mixture of admiration and love. It was not
easy to be wearied by constant repetition, for the rites on
the various festivals were varied and recurred seldom. We
may add the deep reverence for the Temple which all most
religiously fostered, on account of the peculiar rites and
duties that they were obliged to perform before approaching
thither. Even now, Jews cannot read without horror of the
crime of Manasseh, who dared to place an idol in the Temple.
The laws, scrupulously preserved in the inmost sanctuary,
were objects of equal reverence to the people. Popular
reports and misconceptions were, therefore, very little to be


232 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [cHAP. XVH.

feared in this quarter, for no one dared decide on sacred
matters, but all felt bound to obey, without consulting
their reason, all the commands given by the answers of Qod
received in the Temple, and aU the laws which God had
ordained.

I think I have now explained clearly, though briefly, the

main features of the Hebrew commonwealth. I must now

inquire into the causes which led the people so often to fall

away from the law, which brought about their frequent

, subjection, and, finally, the complete destruction of their

I dominion. Perhaps I shall be told that it sprang from

\ their hardness of heart; but this is childish, for why

j should this people be more hard of heart than others ; was

/ it by nature ?

f But nature forms individuals, not peoples ; the latter are
only distinguishable by the difference of their language,
their customs, and their laws ; while from the two last —
i.e,f customs and laws, — ^it may arise that they have a
' pecuHar disposition, a pecuHar manner of life, and peculiar
prejudices. If, then, the Hebrews were harder of heart
/ than other nations, the fault lay with their laws or customs.
This is certainly true, in the sense that, if G-od had
wished their dominion to be more lasting. He would have
/ given them other rites and laws, and would have insti-
; tuted a different form of government. We can, there-
fore, only say that their God was angry with them, not
only, as Jeremiah says, from the building of the city, but
even from the founding of their laws.

This is borne witness to by Ezeldel xx. 25 : " Wherefore
I gave them also statutes that were not good, and judg-
ments whereby they shoidd not live ; and I polluted them
in their own gdEts, in that they caused to pass through the
fire all that openeth the womb ; that I might make them
desolate, to the end that they might know that I am the
, Lord."

In order that we may understand these words, and the
destruction of the Hebrew commonwealth, we must bear in
mind that it had at first been intended to entrust the whole
duties of the priesthood to the firstborn, and not to the
Levites (see Numb. viii. 17). It was only when all the
, tribes, except the Levites, worshipped the golden calf, that


X


CHAP. XYII.] OF THB HEBBEW THBOCBACY. 233

the firstborn were rejected and defiled, and tlie Levites
chosen in their stead (Dent. x. 8). When I reflect on this
change, I feel disposed to break forth with the words of
Tacitus. God's object at that time was not the safety of
the Jews, but vengeance. I am greatly astonished that the
celestial mind was so inflamed with anger that it ordained
laws, which always are supposed to promote the honour,
well-being, and security of a people, with the purpose of
vengeance, for the sake of punishment ; so that the laws do
not seem so much laws — that is, the safeguard of the
people — as pains and penalties.

^e gifts which the people were obliged to bestow on the
Levites and priests — ^the redemption of the firstborn, the
poll-tax due to the Levites, the privilege possessed by the
latter of the sole performance of sacred rites — aU these, I
say, were a continual reproach to the people, a continual
reminder of their defilement and rejection. Moreover, we
may be sure that the Levites were for ever heaping re-
proaches upon them : for among so many thousands there
must have been many importunate dabblers in theology.
Hence the people got into the way of watching the acts of
the Levites, who were but human ; of accusing the whole body
of the faults of one member, and continuaUy murmuring.

Besides this, there was the obligation to keep in idleness
men hateful to them, and connected by no ties of blood.
Especially would this seem grievous when provisions were
dear. What wonder, then, if in times of peace, when
striking miracles had ceased, and no men of paramount
authority were forthcoming, the irritable and greedy temper
of the people began to wax cold, and at length to fall away
from a worship, which, though Divine, was also humilia-
ting, and even hostile, and to seek after something fresh ;
or can we be surprised that the captains, who always adopt
the popular course, in order to gain the sovereign ]X)wer for
themselves by enlisting the sympathies of the people, and
alienating the high priest, should have yielded to their de-
mands, and introduced a new worship ? If the state had
been formed according to the original intention, the rights
and honour of aU the tribes would have been equal, and
everything would have rested on a firm basis. Who is
there who would willingly violate the religious rights of his


234 ▲ THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. XYII.

kindred ? What coiild a man desire more tlian to support
his own brothers and parents, thus fulfilling the duties of
religion ? Who would not rejoice in being taught by them
the interpretation of the laws, and receiving through them
the answers of God ?

The tribes would thus have been united by a far closer
bond, if all alike had possessed the right to the priesthood.
All danger would have been obviated, if the choice of the
Levites had not been dictated by anger and revenge. But,
as we have said, the Hebrews had ofEended their God, Who,
as Ezekiel says, polluted them in their own gifts by reject-
ing all that openeth the womb, so that He might destroy
them.

This passage is also confirmed by their history. As soon
as the people in the wilderness began to live in ease and
plenty, certain men of no mean birth began to rebel against
the choice of the Levites, and to make it a cause for be-
lieving that Moses had not acted by the commands of God,
but for his own good pleasure, inasmuch as he had chosen
his own tribe before all the rest, and had bestowed the
high priesthood in perpetuity on his own brother. They,
therefore, stirred up a tumult, and came to him, crying out
that all men were equally sacred, and that he had exalted
himself above his fellows wrongfully. Moses was not able
to pacify them with reasons ; but by the intervention of a
miracle, in proof of the faith, they all perished. A fresh
sedition then arose among the whole people, who believed
that their champions had not been put to death by the
judgment of God, but by the device of Moses. After a
great slaughter, or pestilence, the rising subsided from
inanition, but in such a manner that all preferred death to
life imder such conditions.

We should rather say that sedition ceased than that
harmony was re-established. This is witnessed by Scrip-
ture (Deut. mi. 21), where G^, after predicting to Moses
that the people after his death will fall away from the
Divine worship, speaks thus : " For I know their imagina-
tion which they go about, even now before I have brought
them into the land which I sware ; " and, a little while
after (xxzi. 27), Moses says : " For I know thy rebeUion
and thy stiff neck: behold, while I am yet alive with you


,'


CHAP. XTII.] OF THE HEBBSW THEOCBACY. 23(»

this day, ye liave been rebellious against tbe Lord j and
bow much more after my death ! " ^

Indeed, it happened according to his words, as we all
know. G-reat changes, extreme license, luxury, and hard-
ness of heart grew up ; things went from bad to worse, till
at last the people, after being frequently conquered, came ^
to an open rupture with the Divine right, and wished for at ^^
mortal king, so that the seat of goyemment might be the
Court, instead of the Temple, and that the tribes might
remain fellow-citizens in respect to their king, instead of
in respect to Divine right and the high priesthood.

Avast material for new seditions was thus produced,,
eventually resulting in the ruin of the entire state. Kings
are above all things jealous of a precarious rule, and can
in nowise brook a dominion within their own. The first
monarchs, being chosen from the ranks of private citizens,,
were content with the amount of dignity to which they had
risen ; but their sons, who obtained the throne by right of
inheritance, began graduaUy to introduce changes, so as to
get aU the sovereign rights into their own hands. This
they were generally unable to accomplish, so long as the
light of l^islation did not rest with them, but ^th the
high priest, who kept the laws in the sanctuary, and inter-
preted them to the people. The kings were thus bound to
obey the laws as much as were the subjects, and were im-
able to abrogate them, or to ordain new laws of equal
authority ; moreover, they were prevented by the Levites
from administering the affairs of religion, king and subject
being alike unclean. Lastly, the whole safety of their do-
minion depended on the will of one man, if that man ap-
peared to be a prophet; and of this they had seen an
example, namely, how completely Samuel had been able to
command Saul, and how easily, because of a single dis-
obedience, he had been able to transfer the right of
sovereignty to David. Thus the kings found a dominion J
within their own. aaid wielded a precarious sorereignty. ^

Li order to surmount these dijQficulties, they allowed other ,
temples to be dedicated to the gods, so that there might be ft""^^
no further need of consulting the Levites; they also sought
out many who prophesied in the name of G-od, so that they
might have creatures of their own to oppose to the true


236 A THEOLOOIOO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. XVII.

prophets. However, in spite of all their attempts, they
never attained their end. "Fot the prophets, prepar^
against every emergency, waited for a favourable opportu-
nity, such as the beginning of a new reign, which is always
precarious, while the memory of the previous reign remains
green. At these times they could easily pronounce by
Divine authority that the long was tyrannical, and could
produce a champion of distinguished virtue to vindicate
the Divine right, and lawfully to claim dominion, or a share
in it. Still, not even so coidd the prophets effect much.
They could, indeed, remove a tyrant; but there were
reasons which prevented them from doing more than setting
up, at great cost of civil bloodshed, another tyrant in bis
stead. Of discords and civil wars there was no end, for the
causes for the violation of Divine right remained always
the same, and could only be removed by a complete re-
modelling of the state.

We have now seen how religion was introduced into the
Hebrew commonwealth, and how the dominion might have
lasted for ever, if the just wrath of the Lawgiver had
allowed it. As this was impossible, it was bound in time
to perish. I am now speaking only of the first common-
wealth, for the second was a mere shadow of the first, inas-
much as the people were bound by the rights of the Persians
to whom they were subject. After the restoration of free-
dom, t£e high priests usurped the rights of the secular
chiefs, and thus obtained absolute dominion. The priests
were inflamed with an intense desire to wield the powers
of the sovereignty and the high priesthood at the same time.
I have, therefore, no need to speak further of the second
commonwealth. Whether the first, in so far as we deem it
to have been durable, is capable of imitation, and whether
it would be pious to copy it as far as possible, will appear
from what follows. I wish only to draw attention, as a crown-
ing conclusion, to the principle indicated already — ^namely,
that it is evident, from what we have stated in this chapter,
that the Divine right, or the right of religion, originates
in a compact: without such compact, none but natural
rights exist. The Hebrews were not bound by their religion
to evince any pious care for other nations not included in
the compact, but only for their own fellow-citizens.


X


CHAP. XVIU.] OF CEBTAIN FOLITICA& M^aCUVlg. 287


GEAPTEE XVm.

FBOM THE COMMONWEALTH OF THE HEBBEWS, AND TUXn%
HI8T0BT, CEBTAIN POLITICAL DOCTBINES ABE DEDTTOXD.


I


ALTHOUGH the commonwealth of the Hebrews, as we
have conceived it, might have lasted for ever, it would
he impossible to imitate it at the present day, nor would it
be advisable so to do. If a people wished to transfer their
rights to God it would be necessary to make an express
covenant with Him, and for this would be needed not only
the consent of those transferring their rights, but also the
consent of God. God, however, has revealed through his
Apostles that the covenant of God is no longer written in
ink, or on tables of stone, but with the Spirit of God in the
fleshy tables of the heart.

Furthermore, such a form of government would only be
available for those who desire to have no foreign relations,
but to shut themselves up within their own frontiers, and
to live apart from the rest of the world ; it would be use-
less to men who must have dealings with other nations ;
so that the cases where it could be adopted are very few
indeed.

Nevertheless, though it could not be copied in its en- /
tirety, it possessed many excellent features which might
be brought to our notice, and perhaps imitated with ad-
vantage. My intention, however, is not to write a trea-
tise on forms of government, so I will pass over most of
such points in silence, and will only touch on those which
bear upon my purpose. ;^i;|

God's kingdom is not infringed upon by the choice of aiTn
earthly ruler endowed with sovereign rights ; for after the
Hebrews had transferred their rights to God, they con-
ferred the sovereign right of rulmg on Moses, investing
him with the sole power of instituting and abrogating laws
in the name of God, of choosing priests, of judging, of


/

^38 ▲ TXa03iUMZ«>-P0LinCAL TREATISE. [CHAP. XYIII.

teaching, o£/ puniwhing — ^in fact, all the prerogatives of an

absolute ijiionarch.

Ag8ir4 though the priests were the interpreters of the

laws, t^y had no power to judge the citizens, or to excona-

!miur-<»te anyone: this could only be done by the judges
Lj^in^ chiefs chosen from among the people. A consideration
^o^ the successes and the histories of the Hebrews will bring

4o light other considerations worthy of note. To wit :

L That there were no religious sects, till after the high
priests, in the second commonwealth, possessed the autho-

lity to make decrees, and transact the business of govern-
ment. In order that such authority might last for ever,
the high priests usurped the rights of secular rulers, and at
last wished to be styled kings. The reason for this is
ready to hand ; in the first commonwealth no decrees could
bear the name of the high priest, for he had no right to

•ordain laws, but only to give the answers of God to ques-
tions asked by the captains or the councils : he had, there-
fore, no motive for making changes in the law, but took
care, on the contrary, to administer and guard what had
already been received and accepted. His only means of
preserving his freedom in safety against the will of the
captains lay in cherishing the law intact. After the high
priests had assumed the power of carrying on the govern-
ment, and added the rights of secular rulers to those they
already possessed, each one began both in things religious
and in things secular, to seek for the glorification of his
own name, settling everything by sacerdotal authority, and
issuing every day, concerning ceremonies, faith, and all else,
new decrees which he sought to make as sacred and autho-
ritative as the laws of Moses. Eeligiou thus sank into a
degrading superstition, while the true meaning and inter-
pretation of the laws became corrupted. Furthermore,
while the high priests were paving their way to the secular
rule just after the restoration, they attempted to gain
popular favour by assenting to every demand ; approving
whatever the people did, however impious, and acconuno-

-dating Scripture to the very depraved current morals.
Malachi bears witness to this in no measured terms : he
chides the priests of his time as despisers of the name of

^God, and then goes on with his invective as follows (Mai.


CHAP. XYIII.] OF CEBTAIN I III IIIIHBi BXHf ■■! 239

ii. 7, 8) : " For the priest's lips should ImM kMwiHiga, and
they should seek the law at his mouth : tor te ift HSd Hes-
senger of the Lord of hosts. But je are ^Aqntfedl^tit of
the way ; ye have caused many to stumble at WtB 'bw, ye
have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith thi -Xoid of
hosts." He further accuses them of interpreting the kiirs
according to their own pleasure, and paying no Mspeot to
Ood but only to persons. It is certain that the high ptioibs
were never so cautious in their conduct as to escape the Kd-
mark of the more shrewd among the people, for the latter
were at length emboldened to assert that no laws oug^t to
be kept save those that were written, and that the decrees
which the Pharisees (consisting, as Josephus says in his
■*' Antiquities," chiefly of the common people), were deceived
into calling the traditions of the fathers, should not be ob-
served at alL However this may be, we can in nowise
doubt that flattery of the high priest, the corruption of re-
ligion and the laws, and the enormous increase of the
extent of the last-named, gave very great and frequent
occasion for disputes and altercations impossible to allay.
When men begin to quarrel with all the ardour of super-
stition, and the magistracy to back up one side or the
other, they can never come to a compromise, but are bound
to split into sects.

n. It is worthy of remark that the prophets, who were \
in a private station of life, rather irritated than reformed
mankind by their freedom of warning, rebuke, and censure ; .
whereas the kings, by their reproofs and punishments, could
always produce an effect. The prophets were often intoler-
able even to pious kings, on account of the authority they
assumed for judging whether an action was right or wrong,
or for reproving the kings themselves if they dared to
transact any business, whether public or private, without
prophetic sanction. King Asa who, according to the tes- 1
timony of Scripture, reigned piously, put the prophet i
Hanani into a prison-house because he had ventured freely
to chide and reprove him for entering into a covenant with
the king of Armenia.

Other examples might be cited, tending to prove that
religion gained more harm than good by such freedom, not
to speak of the further consequence, that if the prophets


240 ▲ flBaOMMHKXKPOLITICAL TBEATIBE. [CHAP. X71II.

Iiad vttnnMd tbeir rights, great civil wars would have
repolted.

nL It if Mmarkable that dming all the period, during
whidk the people held the reins of power, there was only
one civil var, and that one was completely extinguished,
theooDqwsrors taking such pity on the conquered, that they
efidcaToured in every way to reinstate them in their former
dignity and power. But after that the people, little accus-
tomed to kii^s, changed its first form of government into
ft monarchy, civil war raged almost continuously; and
battles were so fierce as to exceed all others recorded ; in
one engagement (taxing our faith to the utmost) five hun-
dred thousand Israelites were slaughtered by the men of
Judah, and in another the Israelites slew great numbers of
the men of Judah (the figures are not given in Scripture),
almost razed to the ground the walls of Jerusalem, and
sacked the Temple in their unbridled fury. At length,
laden with the spoils of their brethren, satiated with blood,
they took hostages, and leaving the king in his well-nigh
devastated kingdom, laid down their arms, relying on ti^e
weakness rather than the good faith of their foes. A few
years after, the men of Judah, with recruited strength,
again took the field, but were a second time beaten by the
Israelites, and slain to the number of a hundred and twenty
thousand, two hundred thousand of their wives and children
were led into captivity, and a great booty again seized. Worn
out with these and similar battles set forth at lei^h in their
histories, the Jews at length fell a prey to their enemies.

Furthermore, if we reckon up the times during which
peace prevailed under each form of government, we shall
find a great discrepancy. Before the monarchy forty years
and more often passed, and once eighty years (an almost
unparalleled period), without any war, foreign or civil.
After the kings acquired sovereign power, the fighting was
no longer for peace and liberty, but for glory ; accordingly
we find that they all, with the exception of Solomon (whose
virtue and wisdom would be better displayed in peace than
in war) waged war, and finally a fatal desire for power
gained ground, which, in many cases, made the path to the
throne a bloody one.

Lastly, the laws, during the rule of the people, remained


CHAP. XYIII.] OF CEBTAIK POLITIOAL BOOTBXnS. 241

Tincorrupted and were studiously obierred. Before the '
monarclij there were very few prophets to cdmonish the
people, but after the establishment of Mngg iinre were a
great number at the same time. Obadiah sared a b.midred
from death and hid them away, lest they should be slain
with the rest. The people, so far as we can see, were nerrer
deceived by false prophets till after the power had beiab'
vested in kings, whose creatures many of the prophets were.'
Again, the people, whose heart was generally proud ot
humble according to its circumstances, easily corrected it-
self under misfortune, turned again to G-od, restored TTig
laws, and so freed itself from all peril; but the kings,
whose hearts were always equally puffed up, and who could
not be corrected without humilialion, clung pertinaciously
to their vices, even till the last overthrow of the city.

We may now clearly see from what I have said : — ^ ^1?*

I. How hurtful to religion and the state is the concession to \
ministers of religion of any power of issuing decrees or trans-
acting the business of government : how, on the contrary,
far greater stability is afforded, if the said ministers are
only allowed to give answers to questions duly put to them,
and are, as a nde, obliged to preach and practise the re-
ceived and accepted doctrines.

n. How dangerous it is to refer to Divine right matters
merely speculative and subject or liable to dispute. The
most tyrannical governments are those which make crimes
of opinions, for everyone has an inalienable right over his
thoughts — nay, such a state of things leads to the rule of
popidar passion.

Pontius Pilate made concession to the passion of the
Pharisees in consenting to the crucifixion of Christ, whom
he knew to be innocent. Again, the Pharisees, in order to
shake the position of men richer than themselves, began to
set on foot questions of religion, and accused the Sadducees
of impiety, and, following their example, the vilest hypo-
crites, stirred, as they pretended, by the same holy wrath
which they called zeal for the Lord, persecuted men whose
unblemished character and distinguished virtue had excited
the popular hatred, publicly denounced their opinions, and
inflamed the fierce passions of the people against them.

This wanton licence being cloaked with the specious garb


242 A TH10LOOIGO«FOLITICAI. TREATISE. [CHAP. XTHX.'

of religion oould not easily be repressed, especially when
the soTereoign authorities introduced a sect of which they
were not the head ; they were then regarded not as inter-
preters of Diiine right, bnt as sectarians — ^that is, as per-
sons reoogmzing the right of Divine interpretation assumed
hy the leaders of the sect. The authority of the magistrates
thus became of Httle account in such matters in comparison
with the 'authority of sectarian leaders before whose inter-
pretations kings were obliged to bow.

To avoid such evils in a state, there is no safer way than
to make piety and religion to consist in acts only — that is,
in the practice of justice and charity, leaving everyone's
judgment in other respects free. But I will speak of this
more at length presently.

m. We see how necessary it is, both in the interests of
the state and in the interests of rehgion, to confer on the
^ y sovereign power the right of deciding what is lawful or the
reverse. If this right of judging actions could not be given
to the very prophets of G-od without great injury to the
state and religion, how much less should it be entrusted to
those who can neither foretell the future nor work miracles !
But this again I will treat of more fully hereafter.

rV. Lastly, we see how disastrous it is for a people un-
accustomed to Idngs, and possessing a complete code of
laws, to set up a monarchy. Neither can the subjects
brook such a sway, nor the royal authority submit to laws
and popular rights set up by anyone inferior to itself. Still
less can a king be expected to defend such laws, for they
were not framed to support his dominion, but the dominion
of the people, or some council which formerly ruled, so
that in guarding the popular rights the king would seem to
be a slave rather than a master. The representative of a
new monarchy will employ all his zeal in attempting to
frame new laws, so as to wrest the rights of dominion to
liis own use, and to reduce the people tiU they find it easier
to increase than to curtail the royal prerogative. I must
not, however, omit to state that it is no less dangerous to
remove a monarch, though he is on all hands admitted to
be a tyrant. For his people are accustomed to royal autho-
rity and will obey no other, despising and mocking at any
less august control*


CHAP. XYIII.] OF CEBTAIN FO^tTriCAL

'T BELIGION. 245

It is therefore necessany, as the propht
old, if one king be removed, that he should
another, who will be a tyrant from necessity .
choice. For how will he be able to endure the Sx^
hands of the citizens reeking with royal blood, an
joice in their regicide as a glorious exploit ? Was n^.
deed perpetrated as an example and warning for himse.

If he really wishes to be king, and not to acknowledge tx.
people as the judge of kings and the master of himself, or
to wield a precarious sway, he must avenge the death of
his predecessor, makmg an example for his own sake, lest
the people should venture to repeat a similar crime. He
will not, however, be able easily to avenge the death of the
tyrant by the slaughter of citizens unless he defends the
cause of tyranny and approves the deeds of his predecessor,
thus following in his footsteps.

Hence it comes to pass that peoples have often changed
their tyrants, but never removed them or changed the mo-
narchical form of government into any other.

The English people furnish us with a terrible example of
this fact. They sought how to depose their monarch under
the forms of law, but when he had been removed, they were
utterly unable to change the form of government, and after
much bloodshed only brought it about, that a new monarch
should be hailed under a different name (as though it had
been a mere question of names) ; this new monarch could
only consolidate his power by completely destroying the
royal stock, putting to death the king's friends, real or sup-
posed, and disturbing with war the peace which might en-
courage discontent, in order that the populace might be
engrossed with novelties and divert its mind from brooding
over the slaughter of the king. At last, however, the
people reflected that it had accomplished nothing for the
good of the country beyond violating the rights of the law-
ful king and changing everything for the worse. It there-
fore decided to retrace its steps as soon as possible, and
never rested tUl it had seen a complete restoration of the
original state of affairs.

It may perhaps be objected that the Eoman people was
easily able to remove its tyrants, but I gather from its his-
tory a strong confirmation of my contention. Though the


/

242 A T9BOI«O0;|^.POLITTCAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. XVUI^


of reUgkm ooj^a^ mnch more thsinordiiiarilj capable of re-
the BovexdmrtjTBjita and cbanging their form of govem-
yrem not tmuch as it held in its own hands the power of
piei^ QRs king and his successor, and being composed of
■<Hif Q&id criminals had not long been used to t3ie royal
* (out of its six kings it had put to death three), never-
less it could accomplish nothing beyond electing several
its in place of one, who kept it groaning under a con-
tinual state of war, both foreign and civil, till at last it-
changed its government again to a form differing fronx
monarchy, as in England, only in name.

As for the United States of the Netherlands, they have
never, as we know, had a king, but only counts, who never
attained the full rights of dominion. The States of the
Netherlands evidentiiy acted as principals in the settlement
made by them at the time of the Earl of Leicester's
mission: they always reserved for themselves the authority
to keep the counts up to their duties, and the power to
preserve this authority and the liberty of the citizens.
They had ample means of vindicating their rights if their
rulers should prove tyrannical, and could impose such re>
straints that nothing could be done without their consent
and approval.

Thus the rights of sovereign power have always been
vested in the States, though the last count endeavoured to-
usurp them. It is therefore little likely that the Statea
should give them up, especially as they have just restored,
their original dominion, lately ahnost lost.

These examples, then, confirm us in our belief, tliat

r|s^ ^ every dominion should retain its original form, and, indeed,

N^ \ cannot change it without danger of the utter ruin of the

\ whole state. Such are the points I have here thought

\ worthy of remark.


CHAP. XIX.] OF THE OUTWABD FOBMS OS* BELIGION. 245


CHAPTEEXIX.

IT IS SHOWN THAT THE BIGHT OVEB MATTEES flPIBmiAL
LIES WHOLLY WITH THE SOTEBEIGN, AND THAT THE OUT-
WABD FOBMS OF BELIGION SHOULD BE IN ACCOBDANCE
WITH PUBLIC PEACE, IF WE WOULD OBEY GOD ABIGHT.

WHEN I said that tlie possessors of sovereign power
have rights over everything, and that all rights are
dependent on their decree, I did not merely mean temporal ,
rights, but also spiritual rights ; of the latter, no less thaji the \j
former, they ought to be the interpreters and the champions.
1 wish to draw special attention to this point, and to discuss
it fully in this chapter, because many persons deny that
the right of deciding religious questions belongs to the
sovereign power, and refuse to acknowledge it as the inter-
preter of Divine right. They accordingly assume full
licence to accuse and arraign it, nay, even to excommuni-
•cate it from the Church, as Ambrosius treated the Emperor
Theodosius in old time. However, I will show later on in ^
this chapter that they take this means of dividing the go-
vernment, and paving the way to their own ascendency. I
wish, however, first to point out that religion acquires its i\
force as law solely from the decrees of the sovereign. God )
has no special kingdom among men except in so far as He l ^
reigns through temporal rulers. Moreover, the rites of re- js.
ligion and the outward observances of piety should be in >
accordance with the public peace ajid well-being, and should .
therefore be determined by the sovereign power alone. I
fipeak here only of the outward observances of piety and I
the external rites of religion, not of piety itself, nor of tl^Orj-
inward worship of Gh>d, nor the means by which the mind^
is inwardly led to do hom^e to God in singleness of heart.

Inward worship of Gk)d mid piety in itself are within the /
sphere of everyone's private rights, and^imot be alieiiated^
(as I showed at the end of Chapter VIL). What I here


246 A THEOLOOICO-FOLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. XIX.

mean by the Mngdom of God is, I think, sufficiently clear
from what has been said in Chapter AJLV. I there showed
that a man best fulfils God's law who worships Him, ac-
cording to His command, through acts of justice and
charity; it follows, therefore, that wherever justice and
charily have the force of law and ordinance, there is G-od's
kingdom.

I recognize no difference between the cases where O^od
teaches and commands the pnurtice of justice and charity
through our natural faculties, and those where He makes
special revelations ; nor is the form of the revelation of im-
portance so long as such practice is revealed and becomes
a sovereign and supreme law to men. If, therefore, I show
that justice and charity can only acquire the force of right
and law through the rights of rulers, I shall be able readily
to arrive at the conclusion (seeing that the rights of rulers
are in the possession of the sovereign), that religion can
only acquire the force of right by means of those who have
the right to command, and that God only rules among men
through the instrumentality of earthly potentates. It
follows from what has been said, that the practice of justice
and charity only acquires the force of law through the
rights o f the sovereign authority; for we showed in
Chapter XYI. that in the state of nature reason has no
more rights than desire, but that men living either by the
laws of the former or the laws of the latter, possess rights
co-extensive with their powers.

For this reason we could not conceive sin to exist in the
state of nature, nor imagine God as a ju<^e punishing
man's transgressions ; but we supposed all things to hap-
pen according to the general laws of universal nature, there
being no difference between pious and impious, between
him that was pure (as Solomon says) and him that was
impure, because there was no possibility either of justice or
charity.

In order that the true doctrines of reason, that is (as we
showed in Chapter IV.)» ^^® ^^^^® Divine doctrines might
obtain absolutely the force of law and right, it was necessary
that each individual should cede his natural right, and
transfer it either to society as a whole, or to a certain body
of men, or to one man. Then, and not till then, does it first


CHAP. XIX.] OF THE OITTWABD FOBMS OF BELIOION. 247

dawn upon us wliat is justice and what is injustice, wliat is
equitj and what is iniquity.

Justice, therefore, and absolutely all the precepts of
reason, including love towards one's neighbour, receive the
force of laws and ordinances solely through the rights of
dominion, that is (as we showed in the same chapter) solely
on the decree of those who possess the right to rule.
Inasmuch as the kingdom of Qod consists entirely in rights
applied to justice and charity or to true religion, it follows
that (as we asserted) the kmgdom of God can only exist
among men through the means of the sovereign powers ;
nor does it make any difference whether religion be appre-
hended by our natural faculties or by revelation : the argu-
ment is sound in both cases, inasmuch as religion is one
and the same, and is equally revealed by G-od, whatever be
the manner in which it becomes known to men.

Thus, in order that the religion revealed by the prophets
might have the force of law among the Jews, it was ne-
cessary that every man of them should yield up his
natural right, and that all should, with one accord, agree
that they would only obey such commands as Grod should
reveal to them through the prophets. Just as we have
shown to take place in a democracy, where men with one
consent agree to live according to the dictates of reason.
Although the Hebrews furthermore transferred their right
to Gk)d they were able to do so rather in theory than in
practice, for, as a matter of fact (as we pointed out above)
they absolutely retained the right of dominion till they
transferred it to Moses, who in his turn became absolute
king, so that it was only through him that G-od reigned [
over the Hebrews. For this reason (namely, that reUgion i I
only acquires the force of law by means of the sovereign V4
power) Moses was not able to pimish those who, before the
covenant, and consequently while still in possession of their
rights, violated the Sabbath (Exod. xvi. 27), but was able
to do so after the covenant (Numb. xv. 36), because every-
one had then yielded up his natural rights, and the ordi-
nance of the Sabbath had received the force of law.

Lastly, for the same reason, after the destruction of the
Hebrew dominion, revealed religion ceased to have the force
of law; for we cannot doubt that as soon as the Jews


^


348 A TKEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. XIX.

transferred their right to the king of Babylon, the king-
dom of God and the Divine right forthwith ceased. For
the covenant wherewith they promised to obey all the
utterances of God was abrogated ; God's kingdom, which
was based thereupon, also ceased. The Hebrews could no
longer abide thereby, inasmuch as their rights no longer
belonged to them b ut to the king of Babylon, whom (as we
showed in Chapter XVI.) they were bound to obey in all
things. Jeremiah (chap. xxix. verse 7) expressly admo-
nishes them of this fact: " And seek the peace of the city,
whither I have caused you to be carried away captives, and
pray unto the Lord for it ; for in the peace thereof shall
ye have peace." Now, they could not seek the peace of the
city as having a share in its government, but only as slaves,
being, as they were, captives ; by obedience in all things,
with a view to avoiding seditions, and by observing all the
laws of the country, however different from their own. It
is thus abundantly evident that religion among the
Hebrews only acquired the form of law through the right
of the sovereign rule ; when that rule was destroyed, it could
no longer be received as the law of a particular kingdom,
but only as the universal precept of reason. I say of
reason, for the tmiversal religion had not yet become known
by revelation. We may therefore draw the general conclu-
sion that religion, whether revealed through our natural
faculties or through prophets, receives the force of a com-
mand solely through the decrees of the holders of sovereign
power; and, further, that God has no special kingdom
among men, except in so far as He reigns through earthly
potentates.

We may now see in a clearer light what was stated in
Chapter IV., namely, that all the decrees of God involve
eternal truth and necessity, so that we cannot conceive
God as a prince or legislator giving laws to mankind. For
this reason the Divine precepts, whether revealed through
our natural faculties, or through prophets, do not receive
immediately from God the force of a command, but only
from those, or through the mediation of those, who possess
the right of ruling and legislating. It is only through
these hitter means that God rules among men, and directs
hiunan affairs with justice and equity.


CHAP. XIX.] OF THE OUTWABD FOBMS OF BELIGION. 249

This conclusion is supported by experience, for we find
traces of Divine justice only in places where just men bear
8waj ; elsewhere the same lot (to repeat again Solomon's
words) befalls the just and the unjust, the pure and the
impure : a state of things which causes Divine Providence
to be doubted by many who think that God immediately
reigns among men, and directs all nature for their
benefit.

As, then, both reason and experience tell us that the
Divine right is entirely dependent on the decrees of secular/
rulers, it follows that secular rulers are its proper inter- /
preters. How this is so we shall now see, for it is time to
show that the outward observances of religion, and all the^N. ^
external practices of piety should be brought into accor-
dance with the public peace and well-being if we would
obey Grod rightly. When this has been shown we shall
easily understand how the sovereign rulers are the proper
interpreters of religion and piety.

It is certain that duties towards one's country are the ;
highest that man can fulfil ; for, if government be taken '
away, no good thing can last, all f aUs into dispute, anger
and anarchy reign unchecked amid universal fear. Conse-
quently there can be no duty towards our neighbour which
would not become an offence if it involved injury to the
whole state, nor can there be any offence against our duty
towards our neighbour, or anything but loyalty in what we
do for the sake of preserving the state. For instance : it
is in the abstract my duty when my neighbour quarrels
with me and wishes to take my cloak, to give him my coat
also ; but if it be thought that such conduct is hurtful to
the maintenance of the state, I ought to bring him to trial,
even at the risk of his beii^ condemned to death.

For this reason ManHus Torquatus is held up to honour,
inasmuch as the public welfare outweighed with him his
duty towards his children. This being so, it follows that
the public welfare is the sovereign law to which all others, ' '
Divine and human, should be made to conform.

Now, it is the function of the sovereign only to decide
what is necesssary for the public welfare and the safety
the state, and to give orders accordingly; therefore it is also
the function of the sovereign only to decide the limits of


250 A TKEOLOGICO-FOLITICAI. TBEATISE. [CHAP. XIX^

our duty towards our neighbour — ^in other words, to deter-
mine how we should obey Grod. We can now clearly imder-
stand how the sovereign is the interpreter of religion, and
further, that no one can obey Q-od rightly, if the practices^
of his piety do not conform to the public welfare ; or, con-
sequently, if he does not implicitly obey all the commands
of the sovereign. For as by Grod's command we are bound
to do our duty to all men without exception, and to do no
man an injury, we are also bound not to help one man at
another's loss, still less at a loss to the whole state. ITow,
no private citizen can know what is good for the state, ex-
cept he learn it through the sovereign power, who alone
has the right to transact pubHc business : therefore no one
can rightly practise piety or obedience to God, unless he
obey the sovereign power's commands in all things. This
proposition is confinned by the facts of experience. For if
the sovereign adjudge a man to be worthy of death or an.
enemy, whether he be a citizen or a foreigner, a private
individ.ual or a separate ruler, no subject is allowed to give
him assistance. So also though the Jews were bidden to
love their fellow-citizens as themselves (Levit. xix. 17, 18),
they were nevertheless bound, if a man offended against
the law, to point him out to the judge (Levit. v. 1, and
Deut. xiii. 8, 9), and, if he should be condemned to death,
to slay him (Deut. xvii. 7).

Further, in order that the Hebrews might preserve the
liberty they had gained, and might retain absolute sway
over the territory they h ad c onquered, it was necessary, as
we showed in Chapter XVII., that their religion should be-
adapted to their particular government, and that they
should separate themselves from the rest of the nations :
j wherefore it was commanded to them, " Love thy neigh-
I bour and hate thine enemy " (Matt. v. 43), but after they
/ had lost their dominion and had gone into captivity in
I Babylon, Jeremiah bid them take thought for the safety of
i the state into which they had been led captive ; and Christ
when He saw that they would be spread over the whole
world, told them to do their duty by all men without ex-
ception ; all of which instances show that religion has always
been made to conform to the pubHc welfare. Perhaps
someone will ask : By what right, then, did the disciples


\


BLIGIOK. 255
CHAP. XIX.] OF THE OTTTWAED ITOEMS OF B^ ^Ild inter-

of Christ, being private citizens, preach a new reli^ yicars
answer that they did so "by the right of the power'^? ?^^
they had received from Christ against uncle an spi rits "^^^
Matt. X. 1). I have already stated in Chapter XVI. that aJ^
are bound to obey a tyrant, unless they have received from
God through undoubted revelation a promise of aid against
him ; so let no one take example from the Apostles unless,
he too has the power of working miracles. The point i&
brought out more clearly by Christ's command to His
disciples, "Fear not those who kill the body " (Matt. x. 28).
If this command were imposed on everyone, governments,
would be founded in vain, and Solomon's words (Prov. xxiv.
21), " My son, fear Q-od and the king," would be impious,. :
which they certainly are not ; we must therefore admit that
the authority which Christ gave to His disciples was given
to them only, and must not be taken as an example for
others.

I do not pause to consider the arguments of those who*
wish to separate secular rights from spiritual rights,,
placing the former under the control of the sovereign, and
the latter under the control of the universal Church ; such
pretensions are too frivolous to merit refutation. I cannot^
however, pass over in silence the fact that such persons are
woefuUy deceived when they seek to support their seditious^
opinions (I ask pardon for ^e somewhat harsh epithet) by
the example of the Jewish high priest, who, in ancient
times, had the right of administering the sacred offices.
Did not the high priests receive their right by the decree of
Moses (who, as I have shown, retained the sole right to rule),
and coTild they not by the same means be deprived of it ?
Moses himself chose not only Aaron, but also his son
Eleazar, and his grandson Phineas, and bestowed on them
the right of adnmiistering the office of high priest. This^
right was retained by the high priests afterwards, but
none the less were they delegates of Moses — that is, of the
sovereign power. Moses, as we have shown, left no successor
to his dominion, but so distributed his prerogatives, that
those who came after him seemed, as it were, regents who-'
administer the government when a king is absent but not
dead.

In the second commonwealth the high priests held their


250 A TQ^OLOGICO-POLITICAI. TBEATISB. [CHAP. XIX.

/

our dutY/^^^J' a^^ they had obtained the rights of prin-
yvDL addition. Wherefore the rights of the high
Lood alwajs depended on the edict of the sovereign,
high priests did not possess them till thej became
^(Svereigns also. Bights in matters spiritual alwajs re-
mained under the control of the kings absolutely (as I will
show at the end of this chapter), except in the smgle parti-
cular that thej were not aUowed to administer in person
the sacred duties in the Temple, inasmuch as they were not
of the family of Aaron, and were therefore considered un-
clean, a reservation which would have no force in a Christian
community.

We cannot, therefore, doubt that the daily. sacred rites
{whose performance does not require a particular genealogy
but only a special mode of life, and from which the holders
of sovereign power are not excluded as unclean) are under
the sole control of the sovereign power ; no one, save l^y
the authority or concession of such sovereign, has the right
or power of administering them, of choosing others to ad-
minister them, of defining or strengthening the foundations
of the Church and her doctrines ; of judging on questions
of morality or acts of piety ; of receiving anyone into the
Church or excommunicating him therefrom, or, lastly, of
providing for the poor.

These doctrines are proved to be not only true (as we
have already pointed out), but also of primary necessity for
the preservation of religion and the state. We all know
what weight spiritual right and authority carries in the
popular mind : how everyone hangs on the lips, as it were,
of those who possess it. We may even say that those who
wield such authority have the most complete sway over the
popular mind.

Whosoever, therefore, wishes to take this right away
from the sovereign power, is desirous of dividing the do-
minion; from such division, contentions, and strife will
necessarily spring up, as they did of old between the Jewish
kings and high priests, and will defy all attempts to allay
them. Nay, further, he who strives to deprive the sove-
reign power of such authority, is aiming (as we have said),
at gaining dominion for himself. What is left for the
sovereign power to decide on, if this right be denied him ?


CHAP. XIX.] OF THE OUTWAED FOEm!^^' BKLIGION. 255

Certainly notlimg concerning either wax or^rs and inter-
to ask another man's opinion as to whether wtoon as vicars
to be beneficial would be pious or impious. ^eCiitistian
woTild depend on the verdict of him who had the^^b'ting
deciding and judging what was pious or impious, rt^ Hs
wrong.

When such a right was bestowed on the Pope of Eo:
absolutely, he gradually acquired complete control over the
kings, till at last he himself mounted to the summits of
dominion; however much monarchs, and especially the
German emperors, strove to curtail his authority, were it
only by a hair's-breadth, they effected nothing, but on the
contrary by their very endeavours largely increased it.
That which no monarch coiild accomplish with fire and
sword, ecclesiastics coiild bring about with a stroke of the
pen ; whereby we may easily see the force and power at the
command of the Church, and also how necessary it is for
sovereigns to reserve such prerogatives for themselves.

If we reflect on what was said in the last chapter we shall "^
see that such reservation conduced not a little to the in- 1
crease of religion and piety; for we observed that the I
prophets themselves, though gifted with Divine efficacy, 1
being merely private citizens, rather irritated than reformed
the people by their freedom of warning, reproof, and denun-
ciation, whereas the kings by warnings and punishments
easily bent men to their will. Furthermore, the kings them-
selves, not possessing the right in question absolutely, very
often fell away from religion and took with them nearly the
whole people. The same thing has often happened from
the same cause in Christian states.

Perhaps I shall be asked, " But if the holders of sove-
reign power choose to be wicked, who will be the rightful
champion of piety? Shoiild the sovereigns stiU be its in-
terpreters?" I meet them with the counter-question,
''But if ecclesiastics (who are also human, and private
citizens, and who ought to mind only their own affairs), or
if others whom it is proposed to entrust with spiritual
authority, choose to be wicked, should they stiU be con-
sidered as piety's rightful interpreters ? " It is quite cer-
tain that when sovereigns wish to follow their own pleasure,
whether they have control over spiritual matters or not, the


.00-POLITICAL TBBATISB. [CHAP. XIX.

*tiial and secular, will go to ruin, and it will
our dutv •^lutel'^r ^ private citizens seditiouslj assume the
.' mine li^in p^V oi the Divine rights.
g^QT\3^oo^^ see that not only is nothing gained by denying
fryd thf>^§^'^^ ^ sovereigns, but on the contrary, great evil
J^^ve^s. For (as happened with the Jewish kings who did
/rop^ possess such rights absolutely) rulers are thus driven
/ ^f^nto wickedness, and the injury and loss to the state be-
"come certain and inevitable, instead of uncertain and
I possible. Whether we look to the abstract truth, or the
', ^security of states, or the increase of piety, we are compelled
\ to maintain that the Divine right, or the right of control
I ^over spiritual matters, depends absolutely on the decree of
the sovereign, who is its legitimate interpreter and champion.
^Therefore the true ministers of God's word are those who
teach piety to the people in obedience to the authority of
\ the sovereign rulers by whose decree it has been brought
\ into conformity with the public welfare.
\ There remains for me to point out the cause for the
^frequent disputes on the subject of these spiritual rights in
Chnstian states ; whereas the Hebrews, so far as I know,
never had any doubts about the matter. It seems mon-
.strousthat a question so plain and so vitaUy important should
thus have remained undecided, and that the secular rulers
•^ould never obtain the prerogative without controversy,
nay, nor without great danger of sedition and injury to
rehgion. If no cause for this state of things were f orth-
•<K>ming, I could easily persuade myself that all I have said
in this chapter is mere theorizing, or a kind of speculative
reasoning which can never be of any practical use. How-
ever, when we reflect on the beginnings of Christianity the
K^use at once becomes manifest. The Christian religion
was not taught at first by kings, but by private persons,
who, against the wishes of those in power, whose subjects
they were, were for a long time accustomed to hold meet-
ings in secret churches, to institute and perform sacred
rites, and on their own authority to settle and decide on
their affairs without regard to the state, When, after the
lapse of many years, the religion was taken up by the
authorities, the ecclesiastics were obliged to teach it to the
emperors themselves as they had defined it: wherefore


CHAP. XIX.] OF THE OTJTWABD FOBMS OF BBLIGION. 255

they easily gained recognition as its teachers and inter-
3)reters, and the church pastors were looked upon as vicars
of God. The ecclesiastics took good care that the Ciinstian
kings should not assume their authority, by prohii'ting
marriage to the chief ministers of religion and to Hs
highest interpreter. They furthermore effected their pur-
pose by multiplying the dogmas of religion to nuch an
extent and so blending them with philosophy tha."* their
chief interpreter was bound to be a skilled philosopher and
theologian, and to have leisure for a host of idle specula-
tions : conditions which could only be fulfilled by a private
individual with much time on his hands.

Among the Hebrews things were very differently ar-
ranged : for their Church began at the same time as their
dominion, and Moses, their absolute ruler, taught religion
to the people, arranged their sacred rites, and chose their
spiritual ministers. Thus the royal authority carried very
great weight with the people, and the kings kept a firm
hold on their spiritual prerogatives.

Although, after the death of Moses, no one held absolute
sway, yet the power of deciding bothin matters spiritual and
matters temporal was in the hands of the secular chief, as I
have already pointed out. Further, in order that it might
be taught religion and piety, the people was bound to con-
sult the supreme judge no less than the high priest (Deut.
xvii. 9, 11). Lastly, though the kings had not as much
power as Moses, nearly the whole arrangement and choice
of the sacred ministry depended on their decision. Thus
David arranged the whole service of the Temple (see
1 Chron. xxviii. 11, 12, &c.) ; from all the Levites he chose
twenty-four thousand for the sacred psalms; six thou-
sand of these formed the body from which were chosen the
judges and praetors, four thousand were porters, and four
thousand to play on instruments (see 1 Chron. xxiii. 4, 5).
He further divided them into companies (of whom he chose
the chiefs), so that each in rotation, at the allotted time,
might perform the sacred rites. The priests he also divided
into as many companies ; I will not go through the whole
catalogue, but refer the reader to 2 Chron. viii. 13, where
it is stated, " Then Solomon offered burnt offerings to the
Lord • • • • after a certain rate every day, offering accord-


256 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CTTAP. XIX.

ing to the commandments of Moses ; " and in verse 14, '' And
hie appointed, according to the order of David his father,
the courses of the priests to their service .... for so had
Dr^d the man of God commanded." Lastly, the historian

irs witness in verse 15 : " And they departed not from
the commandment of the king nnto the priests and Levites
conce^bing any matter, or concerning the treasuries."

F>6m these and other histories of the kings it is abun-
dantly evident, that the whole practice of religion and the
sacred ministry depended entirely on the commands of the
king.

When I said above that the kings had not the same right
as Moses to elect the high priest, to consult G-od without
intermediaries, and to condemn the prophets who pro-
phesied during their reign ; I said so simply because the
prophets could, in virtue of their mission, choose a new
king and give absolution for regicide, not because they
could call a king who offended against the law to judgment,
or could rightly act against him.^

"Wherefore if there had been no prophets who, in virtue
of a special revelation, could give absolution for regicide, the
kings would have possessed absolute rights over all matters
both spiritual and temporal. Consequently the rulers of
modem times, who have no prophets and would not
rightly be bound in any case to receive them (for they are
not subject to Jewish law), have absolute possession of the
spiritual prerogative, although they are not celibates, and
they will always retain it, if they will refuse to allow re-
ligious dogmas to be unduly multiplied or confounded
with philosophy.

1 See Note 33.


CHAP. XX.] FBEEDOM OV THOUGHT AND BPEECH. 257


CHAPTBE XX.

THAT IS A FBEE STATE EYEBY MANICAY THINK WHAT
HE LIKES, AND SAY WHAT HE THINKS.

IF men's miiids were as easily controlled as their tongues,
every king would sit safely on Lis throne, and govern- \
ment by compulsion would cease ; for every subject would
sha^ his life according to the intentions of his rulers, and ^
would esteem a thing true or false, good or evil, just or ^
unjust, in obedience to their dictates. However, we have
shown already (Chapter XVII.) that no man's mind can pos-
sibly lie wholly at the disposition of another, for no one can
willingly transfer his natural right of free reason and judg-
ment, or be compelled so to do. For this reason govern- .
ment which attempts to control minds is accounted tyran-
nical, and it is considered an abuse of sovereignty and a |
usurpation of the rights of subjects, to seek to prescribe ;
what shall be accepted as true, or rejected as false, or what -
opinions should actuate men in their worship of God. All
these questions fall within a man's natural right, which he
cannot abdicate even with his own consent.

I admit that the judgment can be biassed in many ways,
and to an almost incredible degree, so that while exempt
from direct external control it may be so dependent on
another man's words, that it may fitly be said to be ruled
by him ; but although this influence is carried to great
lengths, it has never gone so far as to invalidate the state-
ment, that every man's understanding is his own, and that -**
brains are as diverse as palates.

Moses, not by fraud, but by Divine virtue, gained such a
hold over the popular judgment that he was accounted
superhuman, and believed to speak and act through the in-
spiration of the Deity; nevertheless, even he could not
escape murmurs and evil interpretations. How much, less
then can other monarchs avoid them ! Yet such unlnntted
power, if it exists at all, must belong to a monarch, and

8


\;


^i


258 A THBOLOOICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAJ». XX.

least of all to a democracy, where the whole or a great part
of the people wield authority collectively. This is a fact
which I think everyone can explain for himself.

However unlimited, therefore, the power of a sovereign

may be, however implicitly it is trusted as the exponent of

V law and religion, it can never prevent men from forming

. judgments according to their inteUect. or being influenced

by any given emotion. It is true that it has the right to

treat as enemies all men whose opinions do not, on aU sub-

■ jects, entirely coincide with its own ; but we are not dis-

• cussing its strict rights, but its proper course of action.

I grant that it has the right to rule in the most violent

manner, and to put citizens to death for very trivial causes,

but no one supposes it can do this with the approval of

sound judgment. Nay, inasmuch as such things cannot be

done without extreme peril to itself, we may even deny

that it has the absolute power to do them, or, consequently,

the absolute right; for the rights of the sovereign are

limited by his power.

Since, therefore, no one can abdicate his freedom of judg-
' ment and feeling ; since every man is by indefeasible natu-
ral right the master of his own thoughts, it follows that
^. men thinking in diverse and contradictory fashions, cannot,
/ without disastrous results, be compelled to speak only
according to the dictates of the supreme power. Not even
the most experienced, to say nothing of the multitude, know
how to keep silence. Men's common failing is to confide
their plans to others, though there be need for secrecy, so
that a government would be most harsh which deprived
the individual of his freedom of saying and teaching what
he thought ; and would be moderate if such freedom were
granted. Still we cannot deny that authority may be as
fmuch injured by words as by actions ; hence, although the
freedom we are discussing cannot be entirely denied to sub-
jects, its unlimited concession would be most baneful ;. we
must, therefore, now inquire, how far sud^ freedom can and
ought to be conceded without danger to the peace of the
state, or the power of the rulers ; and this, as I said at the
of Chapter XVI., is my principal object.
iFTollows, plainly, from the explanation given above, of
the foundations of a state, that the ultimate aim of govern-


CHAP. XX.] FEBEDOM OP THOUOHT AND SPEECH. 269

ment is not to rule, or restrain, by fear, nor to exact obe-
dience, but contrariwise, to free every man from fear, that
he may live in aU possible security; in other words, to
strengthen his natural right to exist and work without
injury to himself or others.

No, the object of government is not to change men fronx
rational beings into beasts or puppets, but to enable them
to develope their minds and bodies in security, and to
employ their reason unshackled ; neither showing hatred,
anger, or deceit, nor watched with the eyes of jealousy and
injustice. In fact, the true aim of government is

Now we have seen that in forming a state the power of
making laws must either be vested in the body of the
citizens, or in a portion of them, or in one man. For,
although men's free judgments are very diverse, each one
thinking that he alone knows everything, and although
complete unanimity of feeling and speech is out of the
question, it is impossible to preserve peace, unless in-
dividuals abdicate their right of acting entirely on their
own judgment. Therefore, the individual justly cedes the
right of free action, though not of free reason and judg-
ment ; no one can act against the authorities without dan-
ger to the state, though his feelings and judgment may be
at variance therewith ; he may even speak against them, pro-
vided that he does so from rational conviction, not from
fraud, anger, or hatred, and provided that he does not
attempt to introduce any change on his private authority.

For instance, supposing a man shows that a ]aw is re-
pugnant to sound reason, and should therefore be repealed ;
if he submits his opinion to the judgment of the authorities
(who, alone, have the right of makmg and repealing laws),
and meanwhile acts in nowise contrary to that law, he has
deserved well of the state, and has behaved as a good citizen.,
should ; but i£ he accuses the authorities of injustice, and
stirs up the people against them, or if he seditiously strives
to abrogate the law without their consent, he is a mere
agitator and rebel.

Thus we see how an individual may declare and teach
what he believes, without injury to the authority of his ,
rulers, or to the public peace ; namely, by leaving in their
hands the entire power of legislation as it affects action.


V


J


v/


4


260 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAIi TREATISE. [CHIAF. XX.

and by doing nothing against their laws, though he be com-
pelled often to act in contradiction to what he believes, and
openly feels, to be best.

Such a course can be taken without detriment to justice
and dutifulness, nay, it is the one which a just and dutiful
man would adopt. We have shown that justice is depen-
dent on the laws of the authorities, so that no one who
contravenes their accepted decrees can be just, while the
highest regard for duty, as we have pointed out in the pre-
ceding chapter, is exercised in Tnaintaining public peace
and tranquillity ; these could not be preserved if every man
were to live as he pleased ; therefore it is no less than undu-
tiful for a man to act contrary to his country's laws, for if
the practice became universal the ruin of states would
necessarily follow.

Hence, so long as a man acts in obedience to the laws of
his rulers, he in nowise contravenes his reason, for in obe-
dience to reason he transferred the right of controlling his
actions from his own hands to theirs. This doctrine we
can confirm from actual custom, for in a conference of great
and small powers, schemes are seldom carried unanimously,
yet aU unite in carrying out what is decided on, whether they
voted for or against. But I return to my proposition.

From the fundamental notions of a state, we have dis-
covered how a man may exercise free judgment without
detriment to the supreme power : from the same premises
we can no less easily determine what opinions would be
. seditious. Evidently those which by their very nature
' nullify the compact by which the right of free action was.
ceded. For instance, a man who holds that the suprem.e
power has no rights over him, or that promises ought not to
be kept, or that everyone should live as he pleases, or
other doctrines of this nature in direct opposition to the
above-mentioned contract, is seditious, not so much from
his actual opinions and judgment, as from the deeds which
they involve ; for he who maintains such theories abrogates
the contract which tacitly, or openly, he made with his
rulers. Other opinions which do not involve acts violating
the contract, such as revenge, anger, and the like, are not
seditious, unless it be in some corrupt state, where super-
stitious and ambitious persons, unable to endure men of


CHAP. XX.] FBEEDOM OF THOTJaHT AND SPEECH. 261

learning, are so popular with the nmltitiide that their word
is more valued than the law.

However, I do not deny that there are some doctrines
which, while they are apparently only concerned with ab-
stract truths and falsehoods, are yet propounded and pub-
lished with unworthy motives. This question we have
discussed in Chapter XV., and shown that reason should
nevertheless remain unshackled. If we hold to the prin-
ciple that a man's loyalty to the state should be judged,
like his loyalty to God, from his actions only — namely,
from his charity towards his neighbours ; we cannot doubt
that the best government will allow freedom of philosophi-
cal speculation no less than of religious belief. I confess
that from such freedom inconveniences may sometimes
arise, but what question was ever settled so wisely that no
abuses could possibly spring therefrom ? He who seeks to
regulate everything by law, is more likely to arouse vices
than to reform them. It is best to grant what cannot be
abolished, even though it be in itself harmful. How many
evils spring from luxury, envy, avarice, drunkenness, and
the like, yet these are tolerated — vices as they are — ^because
they cannot be prevented by legal enactments. How much
more then should free thought be granted, seeing that it is in
itself a virtue and that it cannot be crushed ! Besides, the evil
results can easily be checked, as I will show, by the secular
authorities, not to mention that such freedom is absolutely
necessary for progress in science and the liberal arts : for
no man follows such pursuits to advantage unless his judg-
ment be entirely free and unhampered.

But let it be granted that freedom may be crushed, and
men be so bound down, that they do not dare to utter a
whisper, save at the bidding of their rulers ; nevertheless
this can never be carried to the pitch of making them think
according to authority, so that the necessary consequences
would be that men would daily be thinking one thmg and
saying another, to the corruption of good faith, that main-
stay of government, and to the fostering of hateful flattery
and perfidy, whence spring stratagems, and the corruption
of every good art.

It is far from possible to impose unifomaity of speech,
for the more rulers strive to curtail freedom of speech, the


262 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. XX.

more obstinately are they resisted; not indeed by tlie
avaricious, the flatterers, and other niunslnills, who think
supreme salvation consists in filling their stomachs and gloat-
ing over their money-bags, but by those whom good educa-
tion, soimd morality, and virtue have rendered more free.
Men, as generally constituted, are most prone to resent the
branding as criminal of opinions which they believe to be
true, and the proscription as wicked of that which inspires
them with piety towards God and man; hence they are
ready to forswear the laws and conspire against the autho-
rities, thinking it not shameful but honourable to stir up
seditions and perpetuate any sort of crime with this end in
view. Such being the constitution of human nature, we see
/that laws directed against opinions affect the generous-

\y minded rather than the wicked, and are adapted Jess for
coercing criminals than for irritating the upright; so that
they cannot be maintained without great peril to the state.
Moreover, such laws are almost always useless, for those
who hold that the opinions proscribed are sound, cannot
possibly obey the law ; whereas those who already reject
them as false, accept the law as a kind of privilege, and

\ make such boast of it, that authority is powerless to repeal
it, even if such a course be subsequently desired.

To these considerations may be added what we said in
Chapter XVni. in treating of the history of the Hebrews.
And, lastly, how many schisms have arisen in the Church
from the attempt of the authorities to decide by law the
intricacies of theological controversy! If men were not
allured by the hope of getting the law and the authorities on
their side, of triiunphing over their adversaries in the sight
of an applauding multitude, and of acquiring honourable
distinctions, they would not strive so maliciously, nor would
such fury sway their minds. This is taught not only by
reason but by daily examples, for laws of this kind pre-
scribing what every man shall believe and forbidding any-
one to speak or write to the contrary, have often been
passed, as sops or concessions to the anger of those who
cannot tolerate men of enlightenment, and who, by such
harsh and crooked enactments, can easily turn the devotion
of the masses into fury and direct it against whom they
wiU.


CHAP. XX.] FBEEDOIC OF THOUGHT AND SPEECH. 263

How much better would it be to restrain popular angei
and fury, instead of passing useless laws, whicli can only be
broken by those who love virtue and the liberal arts, thus
paring down the state till it is too small to harbour men of
talent. What greater misfortune for a state can be con-
ceived than that honourable men should be sent like
criminals into exile, because they hold diverse opinions
which they cannot disguise? What, I say, can be more
hurtful than that men who have committed no crime or
wickedness should, simply because they are enlightened,
be treated as enemies and put to death, and that the
scaffold, the terror of evil-doers, should become the arena
where the highest examples of tolerance and virtue are dis-
played to the people with all the marks of ignominy that
authority can devise ?

He tha.t knows himself to be upright does not fear the
death of a criminal, and shrinks from no punishment ; his
mind is not wnmg with remorse for any disgraceful deed :
he holds that death in a good cause is no punishment, but
an honour, and that death for freedom is glory.

What purpose then is served by the death of such men,
what example is proclaimed ? the cause for which they die
is unknown to the idle and the foolish, hateful to the tur-
bulent, loved by the upright. The only lessoB we can
draw from such scenes is to flatter the persecutor, or else
to imitate the victim.

K formal assent is not to be esteemed above conviction,
and if governments are to retain a firm hold of authority !
and not be compelled to yield to agitators, it is imperative / V
that freedom of judgment should be granted, so that men
may live together in harmony, however diverse, or even
openly contradictory their opinions may be. We cannot
doubt that such is the best system of government and open
to the fewest objections, since it is the one most in harmony
with himian nature. In a democracy (the most natural
form of government, as we have shown in Chapter XVI.)
everyone submits to the control of authority over his
actions, but not over his judgment and reason; that is,
seeing that all cannot think alike, the voice of the majority
has the force of law, subject to repeal if circumstances
bring about a change of opinion. In proportion as the


^


264 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATI3E. [CHAF. XX.

power of free judgment is witliheld we depart from the
natural condition of mankind, and consequently the govern-
ment becomes more tyrannical.

In order to prove that from such freedom no incon-
venience arises, which cannot easily be checked by the exer-
cise of the sovereign power, and that men's actions can
easily be kept in bounds, though their opinions be at open
variance, it will be well to cite an example. Such an one
is not very far to seek. The city of Amsterdam reaps the
fruit of this freedom in its own great prosperity and in the
adlniration of all other people. For in this most flourishing
state, and most splendid city, men of every nation and
rehgion live together in the greatest harmony, and ask no
questions before trusting their goods to a fellow-citizen,
save whether he be rich or poor, and whether he generally
acts honestly, or the reverse. His religion and sect is con-
sidered of no importance : for it has no effect before the
judges in gaining or losing a cause, and there is no sect so
despised that its followers, provided that they harm no one,
pay every man his due, and hve uprightly, are deprived of
the protection of the magisterial authority.

On the other hand, when the rehgious controversy be-
tween Remonstrants and Counter-Eemonstrants began to
be taken up by pohticians and the States, it grew into a
schism, and abundantly showed that laws dealing with
rehgion and seeking to settle its controversies are much
more calculated to irritate than to reform, and that they
give rise to extreme Hcence: further, it was seen that
schisms do not originate in a love of truth, which is a source
of courtesy and gentleness, but rather in an inordinate
desire for supremacv. From all these considerations it is
clearer than the sun at noonday, that the true schismatics
are those who condemn other men's writings, andl^-
tiously stir up the quarrelsome masses against their authors,
rather than those authors themselves, who generally write
only for the learned, and appeal solely to reason. In fact,
the real disturbers of the peace are those who, in a free
state, seek to curtail the Hberty of judgment which they
are unable to tjrrannize over.

I have thus shown : — ^I. That it is impossible to deprive
men of the Hberty of saying what they think. IL That


CHAP. XX.] FBEEDOM OF THOUGHT AKD SPEECH. 265

such liberty can be conceded to every man without injury
to the rights and authority of the sovereign power, and
that every man may retain it without injury to such rights,
provided that he does not presume upon it to the extent
of introducing any new rights into the state, or acting in
any way contrary to the existing laws. m. That every
man may enjoy this liberty without detriment to the public
peace, and that no inconveniences arise therefrom which
cannot easily be checked. IV. That every man may enjoy
it without injury to his allegiance. V. That laws dealing
with speculative problems are entirely useless. VI. Lastly,
that not only may such liberty be granted without pfeju-
dice to the public peace, to loyalty, and to the rights of
rtaers, but that it is even necessa^ for their preservation.
For when people try to take it away, and bring to trial,
not only thfJts wMch alone are caj^ble of of&ng. but
also the opinions of mankind, they only succeed in sur-
rounding their victims with an appearance of martyrdom,
and raise feelings of piiy and revenge rather than of terror.
Uprightness and good faith are thus corrupted, flatterers
and traitors are encouraged, and sectarians triumph, inas-
much as concessions have been made to their animosity,
and they have gained the state sanction for the doctrines of
which they are the interpreters. Hence they arrogate to
themselves the state authority and rights, and do not scruple
to assert that they have been directly chosen by God, and
that their laws are Divine, whereas the laws of the state are
human, and should therefore yield obedience to the laws of
Q-od — in other words, to their own laws. Everyone must
see. that this is not a state of affairs conducive to public
welfare. Wherefore, as we have shown in Chapter XVm.,
the safest way for a state is to lay down the rule that reh-
gion is comprised solely in the exercise of charity and jus-
tice, and that the rights of rulers in sacred, no less than in
secular matters, should merely have to do with actions, but
that every man should think what he likes and say what he
thinks.

I have thus fulfilled the task I set myself in this treatise.
It remains only to call attention to the fact that I have
written nothing which I do not most willingly submit to
the examination and approval of my country's rulers ; and


2fi6 A THEOLOaiOO-POLITICU. TKXA.TISX. [OHA]

that I am -willing to retract anything which thej sha
dde to be repugnant to the laws, or prejudicial to the p
good. I know that I am a man, and as a man lial
error, but against error I have taken Bcrapulous core
have striven to keep in entire accordance with, the la*
my country, with loyalty, and with moralifj.


)})


AUTHOR'S NOTES.


V


AUTHOR'S NOTES TO THE THEOLOGICO-

POLITICAL TREATISE.

Ghaptsb I.

Note Up. 18). The word naU is rightly interpreted by Babbi
Salomon Jarchi, but the sense is hardly caught by Aben Ezra,
who was not so good a Hebraist. We must also remark that this
Hebrew word for prophecy has a nniyersal meaning and em-
braces all kinds of prophecy. Other terms are more special, and
denote this or that sort of prophecy, as I believe is well known
to the learned.

Note 2 (j9. 14). *^ Although ordincury Tcnowledge is Ditnne, its
professors ccmnot he called prophets.** That is, interpreters of
God. For he alone is an interpreter of God, who interprets the
decrees which God has revealed to him, to others who have not re-
ceived such revelation, and whose belief, therefore, rests naerely
on the prophet's authority and the confidence reposed in him. If
it were otherwise, and all who listen to prophets became prophets
themselves, as all who listen to philosophers become philo-
sophers, a prophet would no longer be the interpreter of Divine
decrees, inasmuch as his hearers would know the truth, not on the
authority of the prophet, but by means of actual Divine revela-
tion and inward testimony. Thus the sovereign powers are the
interpreters of their own rights of sway, because these are de-
fended only by their authority and supported by their testimony.

Note 3 (p. 24). " Prophets were endowed with a pecuWar and e»-
traordinanry power,** Though some men enjoy gifts which nature
has not bestowed on their fellows, they aire not said to surpass the
bounds of human nature, unless i^eir special qualities are such as
cannot be said to be deducible from the definition of l^^^™^
nature. For instance, a giant is a rarity, but still human. Tne
gift of composing poetry extempore is given to very few, yet it is
human. Tne same may, therefore, be said of the faculty pos-
sessed by some of imagining things as vividly as though mey
saw them before them, and this not while asleep, but while


270 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE.

awake. But if anyone could be found who possessed other
means and other foundations for knowledge, he might be said
to transcend the limits of human nature.

Ghapteb III.

Note 4 (p. 47). In Gen. xv. it is written that God promised Abra-
ham to protect him, and to grant him ample rewards. Abraham
answered that he could expect nothing which could be of any
value to him, as he was chHdless and well stricken in years.

Kote 6 {p, 47). That a keeping of the commandments of the
Old Testament is not sufficient for eternal life, appears from
Mark x. 21.

Chapter VL

Note 6 {p, 84). We doubt of the existence of God, and conse-
quently of all else, so long as we have no clear and distinct idea of
God, but only a confased one. For as he who knows not rightly
the nature of a triangle, knows not that its three angles are equal
to two right angles, so he who conceives the Divine nature con-
fasedly, does not see that it pertains to the nature of God to
exist. Now, to conceive the nature of God clearly and distinctly,
it is necessary to pay attention to a certain number of very simple
notions, called general notions, and by their help to associate the
conceptions which we form of the attributes of the Divine nature.
It then, for the first time, becomes clear to us, that God exists
necessarily, that He is omnipresent, and that aU our conceptions
involve in themselves the nature of God and are conceived
through it. Lastly, we see that all our adequate ideas are true.
Compare on this point the prolegomena to my book, ** Prin-
ciples of Besca/rtes' 8 philosophy set forth geometrically"

Chapteb VII.

Note 7 {p» 108). " It is impossible to find a method which would
enable us to gam a certadnhnowledge of all the statemefieytsvn Scrip-
twre** I mean impossible for us who have not the habitual use of
the language, and have lost the precise meaning of its phraseology.

Note 8 (p. 112). ^^Notin things wh&i'eofthe understa^nding cangadn
a clear and distinct idea, cmd which a/re conceivable through tnem^
selves*** By things conceivable I mean not only those which are
rigidly proved, but also those whereof we are morally certain,
and are wont to hear without wonder, though they are incapable
of proof. Everyone can see the truth of Euclid's propositions
before they are proved. So also the histories of things both
future and past which do not surpass human credence, laws.


NOTES. 271

institntions, manners, I call conceivable and clear, though they
cannot be proved mathematioaUy. But hieroglyphics and his-
tories which seem to pass the boimds of belief I call inconceiv-
able; yet even among these last there are many which onr
method enables us to investigate, and to discover the meaning of
their narrator,

Ghapteb VIII.

Note 9 ( jj. 122). " Mount Mo^idh is called the mount of Ood.'*
That is by the historian, not by Abraham, for he says that the
place now called '*In the mount of the Lord it shall be re-
vealed,** was called by Abraham, " the Lord shall provide.**

Note 10 ( ». 124). " Before that territory [Idumcea] was con-
quered hy Vavid,** From this time to the reign of Jehorani
when they again separated from the Jewish kingdom (2 Kings
viii. 20), tiie Idumseans had no king, princes appointed by the
Jews supplied the place of kings (1 Kings xxii. 48), in fact the
prince of Idumseais called a king (2 Kings iii. 9).

It may be doubted whether the last of the Idumsean kings
had begun to reign before the accession of Saul, or whether
Scripture in this chapter of Genesis wished to enumerate only
such kings as were independent. It is evidently mere trifling to
wish to enrol among Hebrew kings the name of Moses, who set
up a dominion entirely different &om a monarchy.


Ghafteb IX.

Note 11 {p. 183). " WUhfew exceptions:* One of these exceptions
is found in 2 Kings xviii. 20, where we read, " Thou sayest (but
they are but vain words),** the second person being used. In
Isaiah xxxvi. 5, we read " I say (but they are but vain words) I
have counsel and strength for war," asxd in the twenty-second
verse of the chapter in Kings it is written, " But if ye say,*' the
plural number being used, whereas Isaiah gives the singular.
The text in Isaiah does not contain the words found in 2 Kings
xxxii. 82. Thus there are several cases of various readings where
it is impossible to distinguish the best.

Note 12 (p. 184). " The expreaaions in the two passages are eo
varied" For instance we read in 2 Sam. vii. 6, " But I have
walked in a tent and in a tabernacle." Whereas in 1 Chron.
xvii. 5, ** but have gone from tent to tent and from one tabernacle
to another.*' In 2 Sam. vii. 10, we read, "to afiftict them,
whereas in 1 Chron. viL 9, we find a different expression. I could
point out other differences still greater, but a single reading of
the chapters in question will suffice to make them manifest
to all who are neither blind nor devoid of sense.


272 ▲ THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE.

Note 18 (p. 184). " THm time carmoi refer to what inrvmediately
precedes,** It is plain from the context that this passage mnst
allude to the time when Joseph was sold by his brethren. But
this is not all. We may draw the same conclnsion from the age
of Jndah, who was then twenty-two years old at most, taking as
basis of oaloolation his own history just narrated. It follows,
indeed, from the last verse of Gen. xxx., that Judah was bom in
the tenth of the years of Jacob's servitude to Laban, and Joseph
in the fourteenth. Now, as we know that Joseph was seventeen
years old when sold by his brethren, Judah was then not more than
twenty-one. Hence, those writers who assert that Judah's long
absence from his father's house took place before Joseph was
sold, only seek to delude themselves and to call in question the
Scriptural authority which they are anxious to protect.

Note 14 (p. 185). *' Dinah was scarcely seven yeoflrs old when she
was violateahy Schechem," The opinion held by some that Jacob
wandered about for eight or ten years between Mesopotamia and
Bethel, savours of the ridiculous; if respect for Aben Ezra
allows me to say so. For it is clear that Jacob had two reasons
for haste : first, the desire to see his old parents ; secondly,
and chiefly to perform, the vow made when he fled from lus
brother (Gen. xxviii. 10 and xxxi. 18, and xxxv. 1). We read
(Gen. xxxi. 8), that God had commanded him to frdfll his vow,
and promised him help for returning to his coimtry. If these
considerations seem conjectures rather than reasons, I will waive
the point and admit that Jacob, more unfortunate than Ulysses,
spent eight or ten years or even longer, in this short journey.
At any rate it cannot be denied that Benjamin was born in the
last year of this wandering, that is by the reckoning of the ob-
jectors, when Joseph was sixteen or seventeen years old, for
Jacob left Laban seven years after Joseph's birth. Now from
the seventeenth year of Joseph's age till the patriarch went into
Egypt, not more than twenty-two years elapsed, as we have
shown in this chapter. Consequently Benjamin, at the time of
the journey to Egypt, was twenty-three or twenty-four at the
most. He would therefore have been a grandfather in the
flower of his age (Gen. xlvi. 21, cf. Numb. xxvi. 88, 40, and
1 Ghron. viii. 1), for it is certain that Bela, Benjamin's eldest
son, had at that time, two sons, Addai and Naaman. This is
just as absurd as the statement that Dinah was violated at the
age of seven, not to mention other impossibilities which would
result from the truth of the narrative. Thus we see that unskil-
ful endeavours to solve difficulties, only raise fresh ones, and
make confusion worse confounded.

Notel^i^, 136). " OthnieltSonofKenagyWasjudgeforfortyyears.'*
Babbi Levi Ben Gerson and others believe tiiat these forty years
which the Bible says were passed in freedom, should be counted


NOTES, 273

from the death of Joshua, and consequently include the eight
years during which the people were subject to Eushan Bisha-
thaim, while the following eighteen yearEr must be added on to
the eighty years of Ehud's and ^hamgar's judgeships. In this
case it would be necessary to reckon the other years of subjection
among those said by the Bible to have been passed in freedom.
But the Bible expressly notes the number of years of subjection,
and the number of years of freedom, and further declares
(Judges ii. 18) that the Hebrew state was prosperous diiring the
whole time of the judges. Therefore it is evident that Levi Ben
Gerson (certainly a very learned man), and those who follow
him, correct rather than interpret the Scriptures.

The same fault is committed by those who assert, that Scrip-
ture, by this general calculation of years, only intended to mark
the period of the regular administration of the Hebrew state,
leaving out the years of anarchy and subjection as periods of
misfortune and interregnum. Scripture certainly passes over in
silence periods of anarchy, but does not, as they dream, refuse
to reckon them or wipe them out of the country's annals. It is
clear that Ezra, in 1 Kings vi., wished to reckon absolutely all
the years since the flight from Egypt. This is so plain, that no
one versed in the Scriptures can doubt it. For, without going
back to the precise words of the text, we may see that the
genealogy of David given at the end of the book of Buth, and
1 Ghron. ii., scarcely accounts for so great a number of years.
For Nahshon, who was prince of the tribe of Judah (Numb. vii.
11), two years after the Exodus, died in the desert, and his son
Salmon passed the Jordan with Joshua. Now this Salmon, ac-
cording to the genealogy, was David's great-grandfather. De-
ducting, then, from the total of 480 years, four years for Solomon's
reign, seventy for David's life, and forty for the time passed in
the desert, we And that David was born 866 years after the pas-
sage of the Jordan. Hence we must believe that David's father,
grandfather, great-grandfather, and great-great-grandfather be-
gat children when they were ninety years old.

Note 16 (j?. 187). " Samson waa judge for twenty years*''
Samson was bom after the Hebrews had fallen imder the
dominion of the Philistines.

Note 17 (jj. 139). Otherwise, they rather correct than explain
Scripture.

Note 18 (p. 140). "Kiifjath-jearim" Kirjath-jearim is also called
Baale of Judah. Hence Kimchi and others think that the words
Baale Judah, which I have translated ** the people of Judah,"
are the name of a town. But this is not so, for the word Baale
is in the plural. Moreover, comparing this text in Samuel with
1 Chron. xiii. 6, we find that David did not rise up and go forth
out of Baale, but that he went thither. If the author of the book

T


274 ▲ THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE.

of Samnel had meant to name the place whence David took the
ark, he would, if he spoke Hebrew correctly, have said, " David
rose up, and set forth from Baale Judah, and took the ark from
thence.*'

Ghapteb X.

Koie 19 {p. 146), " After the reatoration of the Temple hy Judas
MaccahoBus" This conjecture, if such it be, is founded on
the genealogy of King Jeooniah, given in 1 Chron. iii., which
finishes at the sons of Elioenai, iiie thirteenth in direct descent
from him : whereon we must observe that Jeooniah, before his
captivity, had no children ; but it is probable that he had two
while he was in prison, if we may draw any inference from
the names he gave them. As to his grandchildren, it is evident
that they were bom after his deliverance, if the names be any
guide, for his grandson, Pedaiah (a name meaning God hath
delivered me), who, according to this chapter, was the father of
Zerubbabel, was bom in the thirty-seventh or thirty-eighth year
of Jeconiah's life, that is thirty-three years before the restoration
of liberty to the Jews by Cyrus. Therefore Zerubbabel, to whom
Cyrus gave the principality of Judaea, was thirteen or fourteen
years old. But we need not carry the inquiry so far : we need
only read attentively the chapter of 1 Chron., already quoted,
where {v, 17, 8qq») mention is made of all the posterity of Jeoo-
niah, and compare it with the Septuagint version to see clearly
that these books were not published, till after Maccabseus had
restored the Temple, the sceptre no longer belonging to the house
of Jeconiah.

Note 20 (p. 148). *^ Zedehidh should he taken to Bahyhn"
Ko one could then have suspected that the prophecy of Ezekiel
contradicted that of Jeremiah, but the suspicion occurs to every-
one who reads the narrative of Josephus. The event proved
that both prophets were in the right.

Note 21 (p. 160). *^And who wrote Nehemiah,** That the
greater part of the book of Nehemiah was taken from the work
composed by the prophet Nehemiah himself, follows from the
testimony of its author. (See chap. i.). But it is obvious that
the whole of the passage contained between chap. viii. and
chap. xii. verse 26, together with the two last verses of chap,
xii., which form a sort of parenthesis to Nehemiah's words,
were added by the historian himself, who outlived Nehemiah.

Note 22 (p, 161). "I suppose no one thinks " that Ezra was the
uncle of the first high priest, named Joshua (see Ezra vii., and
1 Chron. vi. 14), and went to Jerusalem from Babylon with
Zerubbabel (see Nehemiah xii. 1). But it appears that when
he saw, that the Jews were in a state of anarchy, he returned
to Babylon, as also did others (Nehem. i 2), and remained


KOTES. 275

there till the reign of Artaxerzes, when his requests were
granted and he went a second time to Jerusalem. Nehemiah
also went to Jerusalem with Zerubbabel in the time of Gyrus
(Ezra ii. 2 and 63, cf. x. 9, and Nehemiah x. 1). The version
given of the Hebrew word, translated *' ambassador," is not
supported by any authority, while it is certain that fresh names
were given to those Jews who frequented the court. Thus
Daniel was named Balteshazzar, and Zerubbabel Sheshbazzar
(Dan. i. 7). Nehemiah was called Atirsata, while in virtue of
his office he was styled governor, or president. (Nehem. v. 24,
xii. 26.)

Note 23 ( jj. 166). " Before the time of the Maccahees there was no
canon of eacred hoolcsJ* The synagogue styled "the great" did
not begin before the subjugation of Asia by the Macedonians.
The contention of Maimonides, Babbi Abraham, Ben -David, and
others, that the presidents of this synagogue were Ezra, Daniel,
Nehemiah, Haggai, Zechariah, &c., is a pure fiction, resting
only on rabbinical tradition. Indeed they assert that the
dominion of the Persians only lasted thirty -four years, and this
is their chief reason for maintaining, that the decrees of the
** great synagogue," or synod (rejecteii by the Sadducees, but
accepted by the Pharisees) were ratified by the prophets, who
received them from former prophets, and so in direct succession
from Moses, who received them from God Himself. Such is the
doctrine which the Pharisees maintain with their wonted
obstinacy. Enlightened personii^owever, who know the reasons
for the convoking of councils, or synods, and are no strangers to
the differences between Pharisees and Sadducees, can easily divine
the causes which led to the assembling of this great synagogue.
It is very certain that no prophet was there present, and that
the decrees of the Pharisees, which they style their traditions,
derive aU. their authority from it.


. Ghapteb XI.

Note 24 {p, 167). ^'Now I thinkS^ The translators render the
word XoyiZo/uzt here by I infer ^ and assert that Paul uses it as
synonymous with m)KKo-^iZ,onaju But the former word has, in
Greek, the same meaning as the Hebrew word rendered to
think, to esteem, to judge. And this signification would be in
entire agreement with the Syriac translation. This Syriac
translation (if it be a translation, which is very doubtful, for
we know neither the time of its appearance, nor the translator,
and Syriac was the vernacular of tiie Apostles) renders the text
before us in a way well explained by Tremellios as " we think,
therefore."


276 ▲ THSOLO^ICO-POUnCAI. TSEATI8C


Chaptes XV.

yoU 25 (p. 198). " That timpJe obedience « the path ofsalva'-
iuy».'* In other words, it is enough for sahratiGn or blessedness,
that we shotdd embrace the Divine decrees as laws or com-
mands ; there is no need to conceire them as eternal troths.
This can be tan^t ns by Bevelationf not Beason, as appears
from the demonstrations glyen in Chapter lY.

Chaftzb XYL

Note 26 (p, 202), **No <me can honestly promise to forego the
right which he has over aU things" In the state of social life,
where general ri^t determines what is good or evil, stratagem
is rightly distingoished as of two kinds, good and eviL Bnt in
the state of Nature, where every man is his own jndge, possess-
ing the absolute right to lay down laws for himself, to interpret
them as he pleases, or to abrogate them if he thinks it con-
venient, it is not conceivable that stratagem should be eviL

Note 27 (p. 206). " Every member of it may, if he icill, he free.**
Whatever be the social state a man finds himself in, he may
be free. For certainly a man is free, in so fEur as he is led by
reason. Now reason (though Hobbes thinks otherwise) is always
on the side of peace, which cannot be attained unless the general
laws of the state be respected. Therefore the more a man is led
by reason — in other words, the more he is free, the more con-
stantly will he respect the laws of his country, and obey th(>
commands of the sovereign power to which he is subject.

Note 28 {p, 210). **No one knoucs hy nature that he owes any
obedience to Ood" When Paul says that men have in themselves
no refuge, he speaks as a man : for in the ninth chapter of the
same epistle he expressly teaches that God has mercy on whom
He will, and that men are without excuse, only because they are
in God*8 power like clay in the hands of a potter, who out of the
same lump makes vessels, some for honour and some for dis-
honour, not because they have been forewarned. As regards the
Divine natural law whereof the chief commandment is, as w&
have said, to love God, I have called it a law in the same sense,,
as philosophers style laws those general rules of nature, accord-
ing to which everything happens. For the love of God is not a
state of obedience : it is a virtue which necesarily exists in &
man who knows God rightly. Obedience has regard to the will
of a ruler, not to necessity and truth. Now as we are ignorant
of the nature of God's will, and on the other hand know that^
everything happens solely by God*s power, we cannot, except-
through revelation, know whether God wishes in any way to bei
honoured as a sovereign.


NOTES. 277

Again ; we have shown that the Divine rights appear to ns in
the Hght of rights or conunands, only so long as we are ignorant
of their cause : as soon as their cause is known, they cease to be
rights, and we embrace them no longer as rights but as eternal
truths ; in other words, obedience passes into love of God, which
emanates from true knowledge as necessarily as light emanates
from the sun. Beason then leads us to love God, but cannot
lead us to obey Him ; for we cannot embrace the commands of
Ood as Divine, while we are in ignorance of their cause, neither
can we rationally conceive God as a sovereign laying down laws
a.s a sovereign.

Chaptbb XVII.

Note 29 (p. 214). "J/ men could lose thei/r natural rights so
KM to he absolutely unable for the futwre to oppose the vnll of the
sovereign.^*

Two common soldiers undertook to change the Boman do-
minion, and did change it. (Tacitus, Hist. i. 7.)

Note 80 {p. 221) . See Numbers xi. 28. In this passage it is written
that two men prophesied in the camp, and that Joshua wished to
punish them. This he would not have done, if it had been law-
ful for anyone to deliver the Divine oracles to the people without
the consent of Moses. But Moses thought good to pardon the
two men, and rebuked Joshua for exhorting him to use his royal
prerogative, at a time when he was so weary of reigning, that he
preferred death to holding undivided sway (Numb. xi. 14). For
he made answer to Joshua, ** Enviest thou for my sake ? Would
God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord
would put His spirit upon them.'* That is to say, would God
that the right of taking counsel of God were general, and the
power were in the hands of the people. Thus Joshua was not
mistaken as to the right, but only as to the time for using it,
for which he was rebuked by Moses, in the same way as Abishai
was rebuked by David for counselling that Shimei, who had
undoubtedly been guilty of treason, should be put to death. See
2 Sam. xix. 22, 23.

Note 31 {p. 222). See Numbers xxvii. 21. The translators of the
Bible have rendered incorrectly verses 19 and 23 of this chapter.
The passage does not mean that Moses gave precepts or advice
to Joshua, but that he made or established him chief of the
Hebrews. The phrase is very frequent in Scripture (see Exodus,
xviii. 23 ; 1 Sam. xiii. 15 ; Joshua i. 9 ; 1 Sam. xxv. 30).

Note 32 {p. 224). " There was no judge over each of the cmtains
save God" The Babbis and some Ghnistians equally foolish pre-
tend that the Sanhedrin, called *'the great" was instituted by
Moses. As a matter of fact, Moses chose seventy colleagues to
Assist him in governing, because he was not able to bear alone the


I 1
I .


278 A THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TBEATISE.

bnrden of the whole people ; but he never passed any law for
forming a college of seventy members ; on the contrary he ordered
every tribe to appoint for itself, in the cities which God had given
it, judges to settle disputes according to the laws which he him-
self had laid down. In cases where the opinions of the judges
differed as to the interpretation of these laws, Moses bade them
take counsel of the High Priest (who was the chief interpreter
of the law), or of the chief judge, to whom they were then
subordinate (who had the right of consulting the High Priest),
and to decide the dispute in accordance with the answer obtained.
If any subordinate judge should assert, that he was not bound by
the decision of the High Priest, received either directly or through
the chief of his state, such an one was to be put to death (Deut.
xvii. 9) by the chief judge, whoever he might be, to whom he
was a subordinate. This chief judge would either be Joshua,
the supreme captain of the whole people, or one of the tribal
chiefs who had been entrusted, after the division of the tribes,
with the right of consulting the high priest concerning the
affairs of his tribe, of deciding on peace or war, of fortifying
towns, of appointing inferior judges, &c. Or, again, it might be
the kkig, in whom all or some of the tribes had vested their
rights.

I could cite many instances in confirmation of what I here
advance. I will confine myself to one, which appears to me the
most important of all. When the Shilomitish prophet anointed
Jeroboam king, he, in so doing, gave him the right of consulting
the high priest, of appointing judges, &c. In fact he endowed
him with all the rights over the ten tribes, which Behoboam
retained over the two tribes. Consequently Jeroboam could set
up a supreme council in his court with as much right as Jehosha-
phat could at Jerusalem (2 Ohron. xix. 8). For it is plain that
neither Jeroboam, who was king by God's command, nor Jero-
boam's subjects, were bound by the Law of Moses to accept the
judgments of Behoboam, who was not their kin'g. Still less were
they under the jurisdiction of the judge, whom Behoboam had
set up in Jerusalem as subordinate to himself. According,
therefore, as the Hebrew dominion was divided, so was a
supreme council set up in each division. Those who neglect the
variations in the constitution of the Hebrew States, and confuse
them all together in one, faU into numerous difficulties.

Chapter XIX.

Noie 88 {p, 256). I must here bespeak special attention for
what was said in Chap. XVI. oonceming rights.


BENEDICT DE SPINOZA'S POLITICAL TREATISE,

WHEBEIN IS DEMONSTBATED, HOW THE SOCIETY IN

WHICH MONABCHICAL DOMINION FINDS PLACE,

AS ALSO THAT IN WHICH THE DOMINION

IS ABISTOCBATIC, SHOULD BE OBDEBED,

SO AS NOT TO LAPSE INTO ▲

TTBANNT, BUT TO PBESEBVB

INVIOLATE THE PEACE

AND FBEEDOM OF

THE CITIZENS.

[TRACTATUS POLITICKS.}


PEOM THE EDITOR'S PEEFACE TO THE
POSTHUMOUS WOEKS OF BENEDICT

DE SPINOZA.

OUR author composed the Political Treatise shortly
before his death. Its reasonings are exact, its style
clear. Abandoning tiie opinions of many political writers,
he most firmly propounds therein his own judgment ; and
throughout draws his conclusions from his premisses. In
the first five chapters, he treats of political science in
general — ^in the sixth and seventh, of monarchy; in the
eighth, ninth, and tenth, of aristocracy; lastly, the eleventh
begins the subject of democratic government. But his
untimely death was the reason that he did not finish this
treatise, and that he did not deal with the subject of laws,
nor with the various questions about politics, as may be
seen from the following " Letter of the Author to a Friend,
which may properly be prefixed to this Political Treatise,
and serve it for a Preface :" —

" Dear Friend, — ^Your welcome letter was delivered to me
yesterday. I heartily thank you for the kind interest you
take in me. I would not miss this opportunity, were I not
engaged in something, which I think more useful, and
which, I believe, will please you more — ^that is, in preparing
a Political Treatise, which I began some time since, upon
your advice. Of this treatise, six chapters are already
finished. The first contains a kind of introduction to the
actual work ; the second treats of natural right ; the third,
of the right of supreme authorities. In the fourth, I


282 EDITOS'S PBEFACE.

inquire, whsd political matters are subject to the direction
of supreme authorities ; in the fifth, what is the ultimate
and highest end which a societr can contemplate ; and, in
the sixth, how a monarchy should be ordered, so as not to
lapse into a trrannv. I am at present writing the seventh
chapter, wherein I make a r^^ular demonstration of all the
heads of mv preceding sixth chapter, concerning the order-
ing of a well-regulated monarchy. I shall afterwards pass
to the subjects of aristocratic and popular dominion, and,
lastly, to that of laws and other particular questions about
politics. And so, farewelL"

The author's aim appears clearly from this letter ; but
being hindered by illness, and snatched away by death, he
was unable, as the reader will find for himself, to continue
this work further than to the end of the subject of
aristocracy.


CONTENTS.


Chafteb I. Introduction.

TAGJt

1-3. Of the theory and practice of political science • • • 287

4. Of the author's design 288

5. Of the force of the passions in men 28^

6, 7. That we must not look to proofs of reason for the causes

and foundations of dominion, but deduce them from the

general nature or condition of mankind • • . . 289>

Chafteh n. Op Natural Kigbt.

1. Hight, natural and civil • .291

2. Essence, ideal and real 291

3-5. What natural right is 291

6. The vulgar opinion about liberty. Of the first man's fall . 292
7-10. Of liberty and necessity 294

11. He is free, who is led by reason 295

12. Of giving and breaking one's word by natural right . . 29&

13. Of alliances formed between men 296

14. Men naturally enemies 296

15. The more there are that come together, the more right all

collectively have 29&

16. Every one has so much the less right, the more the rest

collectively exceed him in power 297

17. Of dominion and its three kinds 297

18. That in the state of nature one can do no wrong . . 297
19-21. What wrong-doing and obedience are . . • . 298

22. The free man 299

23. The just and unjust man 29d

24. Praise and blame 300

CuAPTEB m. Of the Bight of Supreme Authorities.

1. A commonwealth, afi&irs of state, citizens, subjects • .30)

2. Kight of a dominion same as natural risht • . .301
3-4. By the ordinance of the commonweals a citizen may not

live after his own mind 301

5-9. Every citizen is dependent not on himself, but on the com-
monwealth • • . 302

10. A question about religion . •••••• 30&


284 CONTENTS.

PAOX

11, 12. Of the right of supreme authorities against the world at

large 306

13. Two commonwealths naturally hostile .... 306

14-18. Of the state of treaty, war, and peace .... 307

Chapter IY. Of the Functions of Supreme Authorities.

1-3. What matters are affairs of state 309

4-6. In what sense it can, in what it cannot be said, that a com-
monwealth does wrong 310

Chapter V. Of the best State of a Dominion.

1. That is best which is ordered according to the dictate of

reason 313

2-6. The end of the civil state. The best dominion . . .313

7. Machiavelli and his design 315

Chapter VI, Of Monarchy.

1-3. Of the causes of establishing a dominion • • • .316
4. Of conferring the authority on one man . . • .317

5-8. Of the nature of a monarchy. Of the foundations of a

monarchical dominion 317

9. Of cities 319

10. Of the militia and its commanders 319

11. Of dividing the citizens into clans 319

12. Of lands and houses 319

13, 14. Of the election of the king and of the nobles . . . 320

15,16. Of the king's counsellors 320

17-25. Of the supreme council's functions 321

26-29. Of another council for administering justice . . . 323

30. Of other subordinate councils 324

31. Of the payment of the militia 324

32. Of the rights of foreigners 325

33. Of ambassadors 325

34. Of the king's servants and body-guard .... 325

35. Of waging war 325

36. Of the king's marriage 326

37,38. Of the heir to the dominion 32C

39. Of the obedience of the citizens 326

40. Of religion 326

Chapter VII. Of Monarchy. Proof of the Foundations of

A Monarchical Dominion.

1. The monarch is not chosen unconditionally. The Persian

kings. Ulysses 327

2. Nature of our monarchy the best and true one • • . 328

3. It is necessary that the monarch have counsellors . . 328


CONTENTS,


285


commonwealth


4. The counsellors must necessarily be representative .

5. The king's right is to select one of the opinions offered by

the council

6-11. The great advantages of this council .

12. The militia to be composed of citizens only

13. How the counsellors are to be chosen
14,15. King's safety. Evidence of history ,

16. Cities to be fortified ....

17. Of mercenaries and military conmianders

18. Citizens to be divided into clans

19. The soil to be the common property of the

20. None to be noble but the issue of kings

21. Judges to be appointed for a term of years

22. The militia to be given no pay .

23. Of foreigners and the king's kinsmen

24. Of the dangers from the king's marriage. Evidence of

history

25. Of the right of succession to the kingdom

26. Of the right of worshipping God

27. All men's nature is one and the same

28. Of the most durable dominion of all .

29. Of hardly concealing the plans of the dominion .

30. The example of the dominion of the Arragonese

31. That the multitude may preserve under a king an ample

enough liberty .


PA6B

329


329
330
332
333
333
334
335
336
336
336
337
337
338

338
339
340
340
341
342
342

344


Chapt£b VIII. Op Aristocbagt.

1. What aristocracy is. Patricians 345

2. An aristocracy should consist of a large number of patri-

cians 345

3. Difference between monarchy and aristocracy . . . 346
4-6. Aristocracyapproacbesnearertoabsolutism than monarchy 347-8

7. Is also fitter to maintain liberty. Foundations of an aris-

tocracy where one city is head of a whole dominion . 348

8. Of fortifying towns 348

9. Of the military and its leaders 349

10. Of the sale of lands and farms 350

11. Of the supreme council of patricians 350

12. Of the causes of the destruction of an aristocracy . .351

13. The primary law of this dominion, to prevent its lapsing

into oligarchy 351

14, 15. Patricians to be chosen out of certain families . . . 352

16. Of the place and time of assembling 352

17. Of the supreme council's functions 353

18. Of the ruler or chief of the council . . • • . 353

19. Equality to be observed among patricians . • • . 353

20-25. Of the syndics and their functions 354

26, 27. Of the ministers of the dominion 356

28. Voting to be by ballot 357


286 CONTENTS.

PAGB

:29-33. Of the senate or second council 358

'^4-36. Of the presidents of the senate and their deputies. Consuls 361

^7-41. Of the bench or college of judges 363

42. Governors of cities and prorinces. Right of the neigh-

bouring cities 366

43. Judges to be appointed in every city . . . .367

44. Ministers of dominion to be chosen fi:t)m the commons . 367

45. Of the tribunes of the treasury 368

46. Of freedom of worship and speech 368

47. Of the bearing and state of the patricians . • • . 368

48. Of the oath 369

49. Of academies and liberty of teaching . • • . 369

Chapter IX. Of Akistocbact.

1. Of the aristocratic dominion held by more than one city . 370

2. Confederate cities 370

3. Of points common to both kinds of aristocracy , . . 370

4. Of the common bond of the cities by a senate and tribunal 37 1

5. Supreme council and senate 371

6. Of assembling this council, of choosing generals and am-

bassadors, of the presidents of the orders, judges, &c. . 372

7. Of commanders of Battalions and military tribunes • . 373

8. Of tributes 373

9. Of the senators' emoluments and place of meeting . .374
HO, Of the councils and syndics of the separate cities • .374

11. Consuls of cities 374

12. Judges of cities 875

13. Of dependent cities 375

14, 15. This kind of aristocracy to be preferred to the other. . 375

Chapter X. Op Aristocracy.

1. Primary cause, why aristocracies are dissolved. Of a

dictator 378

2. Of the supreme council 379

3. Of the tribunes of the commons among the Romans . . 380

4. Of the authority of the syndics 380

6. Sumptuary laws 381

•6, 7. Vices not to be forbidden directly, but indirectly . ,381

8. Honours and rewards rejected 382

*•, 10. An aristocracy may be stable 383

Chapter XI. Op Democracy.

1, 2. Difference between democracy and aristocracy • , . 385

3. Of the nature of democracy 386

4. Women to be excluded from government . • . , 387


POLITICAL TREATISE.


CHAPTEE L

INTBODFCTION.

P H 1 1 iOSOPHE ES conceive of tlie passions wliicli harass u>^^
Tis as vices into wliicli men fall by their own fault,
and, therefore, generally deride, bewail, or blame them, or
execrate them, if they wish to seem unusually pious. And
so they think they are doing something wonderful, and
reaching the pinnacle of learning, when they are clever
enough to bestow manifold praise on such human nature,
as is nowhere to be found, and to make verbal attacks on
that which, in fact, exists. For they conce ivgjtL-iaen, not "
as they are^ but as they themselves would like them to be. |
Whence it has come to pass that, instead of ethics, they '.
have generally written satire, and that they have never . ^\i
conceived a theory of politics, which could be turned to use, c^.^ I
but such as might be taken for a chimera, or might have (/iHj
been formed in Utopia, or jp that golden age of the poets i?^A<*^
when, to be sure, there was least need of it. Accordingly, >^^
as in all sciences, which have a useful application, so
especially in that of politics, theory is supposed to be at
variance with practice; and no men are esteemed less fit to
•direct public affairs than theorists or philosophers.

2. But statesmen, on the other hajid, are suspected of
plotting against mankind, rather than consulting their


288 A POLITICAL TEEATISB. [CHAP. I,

interests, and aare esteemed more crafty tlian learned. No
doubt nature has taught them, that vices will elist, while
men do. And so, while they study to anticipate human
wickedness, and that by arts, which experience and long
practice have taught, and which men generally use under
the guidance more of fear than of reason, they are thought
to be enemies of religion, especially by divines, who believe
that supreme authorities should handle public affairs in
accordance with the same rules of piety, as bind a private
individual. Yet there can be no doubt, that statesmen
have written about politics far more happily than philo-
sophers. For, as they had experience for their mistress,
they taught nothing that was inconsistent with practice.

3. And, certainly, I am fully persuaded that experience
has revealed all conceivable sorts of commonwealth, which
are consistent with men's Hving in imity, and Hkewise the

I means by which the multitude may be guided or kept

'within fixed bounds. So that I do no t beheve that we can
b^me^tajiioajdiscoxer in this matter anytiung not yat tried
aSHSs^Sained, which shall be consistent with experience
or practice. For men are so situated, that they cannot Hvo

. without some general law. But general laws and public
affairs are ordained and managed by men of the utmost
acuteness, or, if you like, of great cunning or craft. And
so it is hardly credible, that we should be able to conceive
of anything serviceable to a general society, that occasion or
chance has not offered, or that men, intent upon their
common affairs, and seeking their own safety, have not seen

: for themselves.

4. Therefore, on applying my mind to politics, I havere-
solved to ^^ninr^'^^"^"^ ^y ° certain and undoubte d course
of argument, or to deduce from the very condition of
human nature, not what is new and^imheajaLiitJbutraty
suqh things j..s ja^ee best w ithj»r^tic e. And that I migK^
investigate the subject-matter of this science with the same
freedom of spirit as we generally use in mathematics, I
have laboured carefully, not to mock, lament, or execrate,
but to^understand himian actions.; and to this end I have
looked upon passions, such as love, hatred, anger, envy,
ambition, pity, and the other perturbations of the mind,
not in the light of vices of himian nature, but as properties.


\


8ECS. 2-6.] INTBODUCTION. 289

just as pertinent to it, as are heat, cold, storm, thunder, I
and the like to the nature of the atmosphere, which phe- /
nomena, though inconvenient, are jet necessary, and have/
fixed causes, by means of which we endeavour to undery -
stand their nature, and the mind has just as much pleasur^
in viewing them aright, as in knowing such things asflattef
the senses.

6. For this is certain, and we have proved its truth ^^^ ^
our Ethics,^ that men are of necessity hable to passions, ^^'^^
and so constituted as to pity those who are ill, and envy Jj/y
those who are well off ; and to be prone to vengeance more^'^'^^
than to mercy : and moreover, that^ery individual wishes
the rest to hve after his own mind, and to approve what Tie
approves, and^i'ejectwhat he rejects. And so it comes to
pass, that, as all are equally eager to be first, they fall to
strife, and do their utmost mutually to oppress one an-
other ; and he who comes out conqueror is more proud of
the harm he has done to the other, than of the good he has
done to himself. And although all are persuaded, that re-
ligion, on the contrary, teaches every man to love his neigh-
bour as himself, that is to defend another's right just as
much as his own, yet we showed that this persuasion, has >•.
too httle power over the passions. It avails, indeed, in the
hour of death, "wlien diseaseTias subdued the very passions,
and man Hes inert, or in temples, where men hold no
traffic, but least of all, where it is most needed, in the
law-court or the palace. We showed too, that reason
can, indeed, do much to restrain and moderate the passions, ^ . .
but we saw at the same time, that the road, which reason f* |p^
herself points out, is very steep ; ^ so that such as persuade j

" emselves, that the multitude or men distracted by politics - •*^*
can ever be induced to hve according to the bare dictate i' t
of reason, must be dreaming of the poetic golden age, or of
a stage-play. •

6. A dominion then, whose well-being depends on any
man's good faith, and whose affairs cannot be properly
administered, unless those who are engaged in them will
act honestly, will be very unstable. On the contrary, to
insure, its permanence, its public affairs should be so

^ Ethics, iv. 4, Coroll. iii 31, note ; 32, note.
* Ibid., V. 42, note.

V


290 ▲ POLITICAL TBEATISE. [SECS. 6-7.

ordered, that those who administer them, whether guided
by reason or passion, cannot be led to act treacherously or
basely. Kor does it matter to the security of a dominion,
in what spirit men are led to rightly administer its affairs.
For liberality of spirit, or courage, is a private virtue ; but
the virtue of a state is its security.

7. Lastly, inasmuch as all men, whether barbarous or
civilized, everywhere frame customs, and form some kind
of civil state, we must not, therefore, look to proofs of
reason for the causes and natural bases of dominion, but
derive them from the general nature or position of man-
kind, as I mean to do in the next chapter.


eSCS. 1-3.] OF NATUBAL BIGHT. 291


CHAPTEE n.

OF NATUBAL BIGHT.

I'N our Theologico-Political Treatise we have treated of
natural and cmlright,*inid in onr Ethics iiaTerexplaraed^
tlie n aiure tyf wrongi-doingy merit, justice, injustice,' and
lastly, of human liberty.* Yet, lest tlie readers of the
present treatise should have to seek elsewhere those points,
which especially concern it, I have determined to explain
them here again, and give a deductive proof of them.

2. Any natural thing whatever, can fe lust as well con-
ceivedr^^ctheFit (Bs[s£alor 'does not" exist. Ai flien the
begiiming of the existence of natural things cannot be in-
ferred from their definition, so neither can their continuing
to exist. For their ideal essenc e la tli,^ gapxe, fltftfir ih^j
have begun to exiat^ aa it wjisf pfiJEoTO .^bty, ^^ated. Ajs
then their beginning to exist cannot be inferred &om their
essence, so neither can their continuing to exist ; but they ^^
need the same power to enable them to go on existing, as

to enable them to begin to exist. From which it follows,
that the power^ by w%h nftt^^.^ tliiT^,gg ftyiat. rti^, f;^oxt^

fore Aat by.isihicL4itey.oper^ mk \^.m . other than .the
etenml power of God its^It. For were it another and a
created power, it could not preserve itself, much less
natural things, but it would itself, in order to continue to •.
exist, have need of the same power which it needed to be
created.

3. From this fact therefore, that is, that tl ^g^ power ,

^j^y^^y.^^t^^^ ^^^^--^™^^^ o perate i^ tto ^myf^mi: <

o f God i tself , we easily understand what natural right is.
i<W'as (^k><| nas a rigbt to^verjtlungj^ and God's right is
nothing else^ but his very power, as i^ar as^lKelalter is con-

^ Theologico-Political Treatise, Chap, xru

' Ethics, iy. 37, note 2. * Ibid., ii. 48, 49, note.


292 A POLITICAL TBEATI8E. [CHAP. II.

sidered to be absolutely free ; it follows from this, that
every natiiral thin g has by. jiajaire »-« TTfi7;^filj^righ ty as it h as
j ^ power to exist ana operi^te ; since fJiA Tin.f.nT^] po^wfir nf
w every natural * thing, . whereby it exLata. and, operat es, is
nothing else but the power of God, which is absolutely
free..

4.' And so by TTfljprq,! right y nnrlfrt^fiiTif) the Vei^ iawS

or rules of nature, jn accordance with which everything
takes iplace, in other words, t he "power of nature itself. And
so the natural right of laiiversal naturej and AOIll^^^^ntly
of every individiial thing, extends as far as its power : and
accordingly, whatever ajix,pa*Q.doi^. after the hussLof. Ids
nature, he doeTlBy the highest Tin.f.nrp.l ^vgl^tj g^^^h e has
as much right over nature as he has power?

5. If then huma n nature had been so constitut ed, that
men should live according to 'di5''Bi.ere dictate of reason7
and attempt nothing inconsistent therewith, in {Ea?~case
natural right, considered as special to mankind, would be
determined by the power of reason only. But men axe
more led by blind desire, than by reason : and therefore
thenaturaj^IHOyfir 01 right .olJniTnaiTi hfiingfl-^ahottld- lae


vf limited, not by reaison, but by every appetite, whereby they
■are determined to action, or seek their own. pxfifiifi^rvationi
I, for my part, admit, that those desires, which arise not
from reason, are not so much actions as passive affections
of man. But as we are treating here of the iiniversal
power or right of nature, we cannot here recognize any
distinction between desires, which are engend.ered in us by
reason, and those which are engendered by other causes ;
since the latter, as much as the former, are effects of
nature, and display the natural impulse, by which man
strives to continue in existence, t For man, be he learned
or ignorant, is part of nature, and everything, by which
any man is determined to action, ought to be referred to
the power of nature, that is, to that power, as it is limited
by the nature of this or that man. For man, whether
guided by reason or mere desire, does nothing save in
accordance with the laws apd rules of nature, that is, by-
natural right. (Section 4.)

6. But most people beheve, that the ignorant rather dis»
turb th-n follow the course of nature, and conceive of


8ECS. 3-6.] OF NATURAL BIGHT. 293

mankind in nature as of one dominion witHn another.
For they maintain, that the himian mind is produced by
no natural causes, but created directly by God, and is so
independent of other things, that it has an absolute power
to determine itself, and make a right use of reason. Ex-
perience, however, teaches us but too well, that it is no
more in our power to have a sound mind, than a sound
body. Kext, inasmuch as everything whatever, as far as
in it lies, strives to preserve its own existence, we cannot
at all doubt, that, were it as much in our power to live
after the dictate of reason, as to be led by blind desire,
all would be led by reason, and order their lives wisely ;
which is very far from being the case. For

" Each is attracted by his own delight." ^

Kor do divines remove this difficidty, at least not by
deciding, that the cause of this want of power is a vice or
sin in human nature, deriving its origin from our first
parents' fall. For if it was even in the first man's power
as much to stand as to fall, and he was in possession of his
senses, and had his nature unimpaired, how coiQd it be,
that he fell in spite of his knowledge and foresight ? But
they say, that he was deceived by the devil. Who then
was it, that deceived the devil himself ? Who, I say, so
maddened the very being that excelled all other created
intelligences, that he wished to be greater than God ? For
was not his effort too, supposing him of sound mind, to
preserve himself and his existence, as far as in him lay?
Besides, how could it happen, that the first man himself,
being in his senses, and master of his own will, should be
led astray, and suffer ImnseK to be taken mentally captive ?
For if he had the power to make a right use of reason, it
was not possible for him to be deceived, for as far as in
him lay, he of necessity strove to preserve his existence and
his soundness of mind. But the hypothesis is, that he ha^
this in his power ; therefore he of necessity maintained his
soundness of mind, and could not be deceived. But this
from his history, is known to be false. And, accordingly,
it must be admitted, that it was not in the first man's

» Virgil, Eel. ii. 65.


\/


\j


294 ▲ POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. 11.

power to make a right use of reason, but that, like us, lie
was subject to passions.

7. But that man, like other beings, as far as in him lies,,
strives to preserve his existence, no one can deny. For if
any distinction could be conceived on this point, it must
arise from man's having a free will. But the freer we
conceived man to be, the more we should be forced to
maintain, that he must of necessity preserve his existence
and be in possession of his senses ; as anyone will easily
grant me, that does not confound liberty with contingency.
For liberty is a virtue, or excellence. Whatever, therefore,,
convicts a man of weakness cannot be ascribed to hi»

' liberty. And so man can by no means be called free, be-
cause he is able not to exist or not to use his reason, but only
in so far as he preserves the power of existing and operat-

^ ing according to the laws of himian nature. The more,,
therefore, we consider man to be free, the less we can say,
that he can neglect to use reason, or choose evil in pref e**
rence to good ; and, therefore, Gkxl, who exists in absolute
liberty, also imderstands and operates of necessity, that is,
exists, imderstands, and operates according to the necessity
of his own nature. For there is no doubt, that God
operates by the same liberty whereby he exists. As then
he exists by the necessity of his own nature, by the neces-
sity of his own nature also he acts, that is, he acts with
absolute liberty.

8. So we conclude, that it is not in the power of any
man always to use his reason, and be at the highest pitch
OT human uberty, and yet that everyone always, as far a»
in hlln lieSj'sfrives to preserve his own existence j and that
(since each has as much right as he has power) whatever
anjonfijj© .fee learned or ignorant, atteinptajand3^^3ie

4 attempts and does Tby. supreme natural right. From which

it follows that the law and ordinance of nature, under which

j all men are bom, and for the most part live, forbids nothing

' but what no one wishes or is able to do, and is not opposed

\ to strifes, hatred, anger, treachery, or, in general, anything

' that appetite stlggests. For the boimds of nature are not

the laws of human reason, which do but pursue the true

interest and preservation of mankind, but other infinite

laws, which regard the eternal order of universal nature^


8EC8. 6-11.] OF NATTJBAL BIGHT. 295

wliereQfjziaA is a^ atpxa ; and according to the necessity of /
tHs order only are all individual beings determined in a
fixed manner to exist and operate. TVlieneTer, then, any-
thing in nature seems to us ridiciQous, absurd, or evil, it is
because we have but a partial knowledge of things, and
are in the main ignorant of the order and coherence of
nature as a whole, and because we want everything to be
arranged according to the dictate of our own reason;
although, in fact, what our reason pronounces bad, is not
bad as regards the order and laws of universal nature,
but only as regards the laws of our own nature taken
separately.

9. Besides, it follows that everyone is so far rightfully
dependent on another, as he is under that other's authority,
and so far independent, as he is able to repel all violence,
and avenge to his heart's content all damage done to him,
and in general to live after his own mind.

10. He has another under his authority, who holds him
bound, or has taken from him arms and means of defence
or escape, or inspired him with fear, or so attached him to
himself by past favour, that the man obliged woiQd rather
please his benefactor than himself, and live after his mind
than after his own. He that has another under authority
in the first or second of these ways, holds but his body,
not his mind. But in the third or fourth way he has
made dependent on himself as well the mind as the body
of the other ; yet only as long as the fear or hope lasts,
for upon the removal of the feeling the other is left in-
dependent.

11. The judgment can be dependent on another, only as
far as that other can deceive the mind ; whence it follows
that the mind is so far independent, as it uses reason
aright. Kay, inasmuch as human power is to be reckoned /
less by physical vigour than by mental strength, it follows
that those men are most independent whose reason is
strongest, and who are most guided thereby. And so I am
altogether for calling a man so far free, as he is led by
reason ; because so far he is determined to action by sucn
causes, as can be adequately understood by his unassisted
nature, although by these causes he be necessarily de-
termined to action. For liberty, as we showed above


1


I


296 A POLITICAL TBEATI8E. [CHAF. H.

(Sec. 7), does not take away the necessitj of acting, but
supposes it.

12. The plf^lgniTg nf JPg,]f,h *^ ii-ny mpr^^ TThflTft f>Tl^ "^^^ ^^'^'

Terbally proqjgiaedjto 3o tihia or that, whiohj fflemigjht righ t-
fully le avft •iiyfj'fif^TiA, or vice versa, ^^gn^yins so long vafflL^dS
tnpi will'ftf auiLJiiat^ve h is word r^^Tnn.^^ POTH-^g*^
For he that has aullEoh^to ISreak ^aith has, in fact, bated
nothing of his own right, but only made a present of words.
If, then, he, being by natural right judge in his own case,
comes to the conclusion, rightly or wrongly (for " to err is
human"), that more harm tha n profit wiU com e of h is
promise, by the judgment of his own mmSFSe-c looid ofl th at
the promise should he. .bxokeni# And by ^"^lilfftl T'rr^^

(Sec. 9) Y ^11 ^mlf tfJT^ °^^^

13. If two come together and unite their strength, they
have jointly more power, and consequently more right over
nature than both of them separately, and the more there
are that have so joined in alliance, the more right they all
collectively will possess.

14. In so far as men are tormented by anger, envy, or
; any passion implying hatred, they are drawn asunder and

made contrary one to another, and therefore are so much
the more to be feared, as they are more powerful, crafty,
and cunning than the other animals. And because men
are in the highest degree liable to these passions (Chap. I,
Sec. 6), therefore men are T^^.ti^p>.nv ATiATnifta. For he is
my greatest enemy, whom I must most fear and be on my
guard against.

15. But inasmuch as (Sec. 6) in the state of nftt^p'j^ each
is so long m4isp!ea)de;ati sls he can guard against oppression
by another, and it is in vain for one man alone to try and
guard against all, it follows hence ^>iq>. «^o }rm^ ^^ -^^^^
natural right of ma^ig determined by ihe power of ..©^©ry
individual aaitelongs to everyone, so long it is a nonen-
tity, eiiasting in opinion rather than fact, as there is no
assurance of making it good. And it is certain that the


be added, that without mutual help men can hardly sup-
port life and cultivate the mind. And so our conclusion is,
that that natural right, which is sgecial to the human race.


SECS. 11-18.] OF NATTTBAL BIGHT. 297

can hardly be conceived, except where men have general
rights, and combine to defend the possession of the lands
they inhabit and cultivate, to protect themselves, to repel
all violence, and to live according to the general judgment
of aU. For (Sec. 13) the more there are that combine
together, the more right they collectively possess. And if
this is why the schoolmen want to call man a sociable
animal — ^I mean because men in the state of nature can
hardly be independent — ^I have nothing to say against
them.

16. Where men have general rights, and are all guided,
as it were, by one mind, it is certain (Sec. 13), that every
individual has the less right the more the rest collectively
exceed him in power; that is, he has, in fact, no right
over nature but that which the common law allows hun.
But whatever he is ordered by the general consent, he is
bound to execute, or may rightfully be compelled thereto
(Sec. 4).

17. This right, which is determined by the power of a /
multitude, is generally called Dominion. And, speaking \
generally, he holds dominion, to whom are entrusted by
foxnxno/consent afEairs of state-such as the laying dowi
interpretation, and abrogation of laws, the fortification of
cities, deciding on war and peace, <&c. But if this charge
belong to a council, composed of the general multitude, j y
then the dominion is called a derng gpacy ; if the council be 1/
composed of certain chosen persons, then it is an aristocr acy ;
and if, lastly, the care of afEairs of state and, consequently,

the dominion rest with one man, then it has the name of
monarchy.

18. From what we have proved in this chapter, it be-
comes clear to us that, in the state of nature, wrong-doing-
is impossible ; or, if anyone does wrong, it is to himself,
not to another. For no one by the law of nature is bound
to please another, unless he chooses, nor to hold anything
to be good or evil, but what he himself, according to his
own temperament, pronounces to be so; and, to speak
generally, nothing is forbidden by the law of nature, except
what is beyond everyone's power (Sees. 6 and 8). But wrong-
doing is action, which cannot lawfully be committed. But
if mefn by the ordinance of nature were bound to be led by


298 A POLITICAL TBEATI8E. [CHAP. II,

reason, then all of necessity woidd be so led. For the
ordinances of nature are the ordinances of God (Sees. 2, 3),
which God has instituted by the liberty, whereby he exists,
and they follow, therefore, from the necessity of the divine
nature (Sec. 7), and, consequently, are eternal, and cannot
be broken. But men are chiefly guided by appetite, with-
out reason ; yet for all this they do not disturb the course
of nature, but follow it of necessity. And, therefore, a man
ignorant and weak of mind, is no more bound by natural
law to order his life wisely, than a sick man is bound to be
sound of body.

19. Therefore wrong-doing cannot be conceived of, Tut
under dominion — ^that is, where, by the general right of
the whole dominion, it is decided what is good and what
evil, and where no one does anything rightfully, save what
he does in accordance with the general decree or consent
(Sec. 16). For that, as we said in the last section, is
wrong-doing, which cannot lawfully be committed, or is by
law forbidden. But obedience is the constant will to
execute that, which by law is good, and by the general
decree ought to be done.

20. Yet we are accustomed to call that also wrong,
which is done against the sentence of soimd reason, and
to give the name of obedience to the constant will to
moderate the appetite according to the dictate of reason :
a manner of speech which I should quite approve, did
human hberty consist in the licence of appetite, and
slavery in the dominion of reason. But as human liberty
is the greater, the more man can be guided by reason,
and moderate his appetite, we cannot without great im-
propriety call a rational life obedience, and give the name
of wrong-doing to that which is, in fact, a weakness of
the mind, not a licence of the mind directed against itself,
and for which a man may be called a slave, rather than
free (Sees. 7 and 11).

21. However, as reason teaches one to practise piety, and
be of a calm and gentle spirit, which cannot be done save
under dominion; and, further, as it is impossible for a
multitude to be guided, as it were, by one mind, as under
dominion is required, unless it has laws ordained according
to the dictate of reason ; men who are accustomed to live


8ECS. 18-23.] OF NATTJBAL BiaHT. 299*

under dominion are not, therefore, using words so im- >
properly, when they call that wrong-doing which is done
against the sentence of reason, because the laws of the best
dominion ought to be framed according to that dictate
(Sec. 18). But, as for my saying (Sec. 18) that man in &
state of nature, if he does wrong at all, does it against him-
self, see, on this point. Chap. IV., Sees. 4, 5, where is
shown, in what sense we can say, that he who holds-
dominion and possesses natural right, is bound by laws and.
can do wrong.

22. As far as religion is concerned, it is further clear,. ,
that a man is most free and most obedient to himself when '^
he most loves Qtod, and worships him in sincerity. But so-
far as we regard, not the course of nature, which we do-
not understand, but the dictates of reason only, which
respect religion, and likewise reflect that these dictates are-
revealed to us by God, speaking, as it were, within our-
selves, or else were revealed to prophets as laws ; so far,,
speaking in human fashion, we say that man obeys God
when he worships him in sincerity, and, on the contrary,
does wrong when he is led by blmd desire. But, at the-
same time, we should remember that we are subject to-
G-od's authority, as clay to that of the potter, who of tho
same lump makes some vessels unto honour, and others,
unto dishonour.^ And thus man can, indeed, act contrarily , /
to the decrees of God, as far as they have been written like ^
laws in the minds of ourselves or the prophets, but against
that eternal decree of Gtod, which is written in universal
nature, and has regard to the course of nature as a whole, he
can do nothing.

23. As, then, wrong-doing and obedience, in their strict
sense, so also justice and injustice cannot be conceived of,
except under dominion. For nature olEers nothing that
can be called this man's rather than another's ; but under
nature everything belongs to all — that is, they have autho-
rity to claim it for themselves. But under dominion, where
it is by common law determined what belongs to this man,
and what to that, he is called just who has a constant will
to render to every man his own, but lie unjust who strives,

* Bomans is. 21*


300 A POLITICAL TBEATI8B. [SBCS. 23, 24.

on the contrary, to make liis own tliat wbicli belongs to
another.

24. But that praise and blame are emotions of jov and
sadness, accompanied by an idea of human excellence or
weakness as their cause, we hare explained in our Ethics.


tEC8. 1-3.] THE BIGHT OF SUPBEKE AT7TH0BITIES. 301


CHAPTEE nL

OF THE BIGHT OF SUFBEl^E AUTHOBITIES.

UNDEB every dominion the state is said to be Civil ;*
but the entire body subject to a dominion is called a ^
Commonwealth, and the general business of the dominion,
subject to the direction of him that holds it, has the nam*
of Aj&drs of States Next we call men Citizens, as far as
they enjoy by the civil law aU the advantages of the
commonwealth, and Subjects, as far as they are bound to
obey its ordinances or laws. Lastly, we have already said
that, of the civil state, there are three kinds — democracy,
aristocracy, and monarchy (Chap. n. Sec. 17). Now, before
I begin to treat of each kind separately, I wLU first deduce
all the properties of the civil state in general. And of
these, first of all comes to be considered tike supreme right
of the commonwealth, or the right of the supreme
authorities.

2. From Chap. U. Sec. 15, it is clear that the right of
the supreme authorities is nothing else than simple natural
right, limited, indeed, by the power, not of every individual,
but of the multitude, which is guided, as it were, by one
mind — ^that is, as each individual in the state of nature, so
the body and mind of a dominion have as much right as
they have power. And thus each single citizen or subject
has the less right, the more the commonwealth exceeds In'm
in power (Chap. U. Sec. 16), and each citizen consequently
does and has nothing, but what he may by the general
decree of the commonwealth defend.

3. If the commonwealth grant to any man the right,
and therewith the authority (for else it is but a gift of
words. Chap. U. Sec. 12), to live after his own mind, by that
very act it abandons its own right, and transfers the same


:802 A. POLITICAZi TBEATISE. [cHAP. m.

to him, to whom it has given such authority. But if it
has given this authority to two or more, I mean authority
ix) Hve each after his own mind, by that very act it has
^vided the dominion, and if, lastly, it has given this same
authority to every citizen, it has thereby destroyed itself,
:and there remains no more a commonwealth, but every-
thing returns to the state of nature ; aU of which is very
manifest from what goes before. And thus it follows,
jCh&t it can by no means be conceived, that every citizen
j/should by the ordinance of the commonwealth live after
his own mind, and accordingly this natural right of being
•one's own judge ceases in the dvil state. I say expressly
" by the ordinance of the commonwealth," for, & we weigh
the matter aright, the natural right of every man does not
K^ease in the civil state. For man, alike in the natural and
in the civil state, acts according to the laws of his own
nature, and consults his own interest. Man, I say, in each
.^tate is led by fear or hope to do or leave undone this or
that ; but the main difference between the two states is
this, that in the civil state all fear the same things, and all
have the same ground of security, and manner of life ; and
this certainly does not do away with the individual's f ainilty
"of judgment. For he that is minded to obey all the
commonwealth's orders, whether through fear of its power
•or through love of qxdet, certainly consults after hiti if my
heart his own safety and interest.

4. Moreover, we cannot even conceive, that every citizen
« should be allowed to interpret the commonwealth's decrees

or laws. For were every citizen allowed this, he would
thereby be his own judge, because each would easily be
able to give a colour of right to his own deeds, which by
the last section is absurd.

5. We see then, that every citizen depends not on him-
self, but on the commonwealth, all whose commands he is
bound to execute, and has no right to decide, what is

• equitable or iniquitous, just or unjust. But, on the con-
trary, as the body of the dominion should, so to speak, be
guided by one mind, and consequently the will of the
commonwealth must be taken to be the will of all ; what
the state decides to be just and good must be held to be

'SO decided by every individual. And so, however iniquitous


B2CS. 3-7.] THE BIGHT OF STTPBEME AUTHOBITIES. SOB

the subject may think the commonwealth's decisions, he is
none the less bound to execute them.

6. But (it may be objected) is it not contrary to the
dictate of reason to subject one's self whoUy to the judgment
of another, and consequently, is not the civil state repug- ^
nant to reason? Whence it would follow, that the civil
state is irrational, and could only be created by men desti-
tute of reason, not at all by such as are led by it. But
fiince reason teaches nothing contrary to nature, sound
reason cannot therefore dictate, that every one should
remain independent, so long as men are liable to passions
{Chap. n. Sec. 15), that is, reason pronounces against such
independence (Chap. I. Sec. 5). Besides, reason altogether
teaches to seek peace, and peace cannot be maintained, ~^
tinless the commonwealth's general laws be kept unbroken.
And so, the more a man is guided by reason, that is
{Chap. n. Sec. 11), the more he is free, the more constantly
he will keep the laws of the commonwealth, and execute the
'Commands of the supreme authority, whose subject he is.
Furthermore, the civH state is naturally ordained to remove
general fear, and prevent general sufferings, and therefore
pursues above everything the very end, after which every-
one, who is led by reason, strives, but in the natural state ^
strives vainly (Chap. II. Sec. 15). Wherefore, if a man, /
who is led by reason, has sometimes to do by the common-
wealth's order what he knows to be repugnant to reason,
that harm is far compensated by the good, which he de-
rives from the existence of a civil state. For it is reason's
own law, to choose the less of two evils ; and accordingly
-we may conclude, that no one is acting against the dictate
of his own reason, so far as he does what by the law of the
commonwealth is to be done. And this anyone will more
easily grant us, after we have explained, how far the power
and consequently the right of the commonwealth extends.

7. For, first of all, it must be considered, that, as in the
state of nature the man who is led by reason is most
powerful and most independent, so too that commonwealth
-will be most powerful and most independent, which is*
founded and guided by reason. For the right of the
commonwealth is determined by the power of the multi-
tude, which is led« as it were, by one mind. But this


*


304 A POLinCAZi TBEATI8E. [cHAF. III.

unity of mind can in no wise be conceived, unless the
commonwealth pursues chiefly the yery end, which sound
reason teaches is to the interest of all men.

8. In the second place it comes to be considered, that
subjects are so far dependent not on themselyes, but on
the commonwealth, as they fear its power or threats, or
as they love the civil state (Chap. IL Sect. 10). Whence it
follows, that such things, as no one can be induced to do
l)y rewards or threats, do not fall within the rights of the
commonwealth. For instance, by reason of his ^iculty of
judgment, it is in no man's power to beUeve. For by what
rewards or threats can a man be brought to believe, that
the whole is not greater than its part, or that God does
not exist, or that that is an infinite being, which he sees to
be finite, or generally anything contrary to his sense or
thought ? So, too, by what rewards or threats can a man
be brought to love one, whom he hates, or to hate one,
whom he loves? And to this head must likewise be
referred such things as are so abhorrent to human nature,
that it regards them as actually worse than any evil, as
that a man should be witness against himself, or torture
himself, or kill his parents, or not strive to avoid death,
and the like, to which no one can be induced by rewards
or threats. But if we still choose to say, that the common-
wealth has the right or authority pt order such things, we
can conceive of it in no other sense, than that in which one
might say, that a ma^ has the right to be mad or delirious.
For what but a delirious fancy would such a right be, as
could bind no one ? And here I am speaking expressly of
such things as cannot be subject to the right of a com-
monwealth and are abhorrent to human nature in generaL
For the fact, that a fool or madma,n can by no rewards or
threats be induced to execute orders, or that this or that
person, because he is attached to. this or that religion,
judges the laws of a dominion worse than any possible
evil, in no wise makes void the laws of the commonwealth,
since by them most of the citizens are restrained. And
so, as those who are without faar or hope are so far in-
dependent (Chap. n. Sec. 10), they are, therefore, enemies
of the dominion (Chap. U. Sec. 14), and may lawfully be
coerced by force.


8ECS. 7-10.] THE BIGHT OF STJFBEME ATJTHOBITIES. 805

9. Thirdly and lastly, it comes to be considered, that
fchose things are not so much within the commonwealth's
right, which cause indignation in the majority. For it is
certain, that by the guidance of nature men conspire to-
gether, either through common fear, or with the desire to
avenge some common hurt ; and as the right of the com-
monwealth is determined by the common power of the
multitude, it is certain that the power and right of the
commonwealth are so far diminished, as it gives occasion
for many to conspire together. There are certainly some
subjects of fear for a commonwealth, and as every sepa-
rate citizen or in the state of nature every man, so a com-
monwealth is the less independent, the greater reason it
has to fear. So much for the right of supreme authorities
over subjects. Now before I treat of the right of the said
authorities as against others, we had better resolve a ques-
tion commonly mooted about religion.

10. For it may be objected to us, Do not the civil state,
and the obedience of subjects, such as we have shown is
required in the civil state, do away with religion, whereby
we are bound to worship Grod ? But if we consider the
matter, as it really is, we shall find nothing that can sug- ^
gest a scruple. For the mind, so far as it makes use of [/
reason, is dependent, not on the supreme authorities, but

on itself (Chap. IE. Sec. 11). And so the true knowledge^
and the love of God cannot be subject to the dominion of
any, nor yet can charity towards one's neighbour (Sec. 8).
And if we further reflect, that the highest exercise of
charity is that which aims at keeping peace and joining in
unity, we shall not doubt that he does his duty, who helps
everyone, so far as the commonwealth's laws, that is so far
as unity and quiet allow. As for external rites, it is certain,
that they can do no good or harm at all in respect of the
true knowledge of God, and the love which necessarily re-
sults from it ; and so they ought not to be held of such
importance, that it should be thought worth while on their
account to disturb public peace and quiet. Moreover it is
certain, that I am not a champion of religion by the law of
nature, that is (Chap. U. Sec. 3), by the divine decree.
For I have no authority, as once the disciples of Christ
had, to cast out unclean spirits and work miracles ; which


806 jl political tbeatise. [chap. hi.

authority is yet so necessary to the propagating of religion
in places where it is forbidden, that without it one not only,
as they say, wastes one's time ^ and trouble, but causes be-
sides very many inconveniences, whereof all ages have seen
most mournful examples. Everyone therefore, wherever
he may be, can worship Q-od with true religion, and mind
his o^ business, which is the duty of a pirate man. But
the care of propagating religion should be left to Q-od, or
the supreme authorities, upon whom alone falls the charge
of affairs of state. But I return to my subject.

11. After explaining the right of supreme authorities
over citizens and the duty of subjects, it remains to con-
sider the right of such authorities against the world at
large, which is now easily intelligible from what has been
said. For since (Sec. 2) the right of the supreme autho-
rities is nothing else but simple natural right, it follows
that two dominions stand towards each other in the same
relation as do two men in the state of nature, with this
exception, that a commonwealth can provide against being
oppressed by another ; which a man in the state of nature
cannot do, seeing that he is overcome daily by sleep, often
by disease or mental infirmity, and in the end by old age,
and is besides liable to other inconveniences, from which a
commonwealth can secure itself.

12. A commonwealth then is so far independent, as it
can plan and provide against oppression by another
(Chap. n. Sees. 9, 15), and so far dependent on another
commonwealth, as it fears that other's power, or is hin-
dered by it from executing its own wishes, or lastly, as it
needs its help for its own preservation or increase (Chap,
n. Sees. 10, 15). For we cannot at all doubt, that if two
commonwealths are willing to offer each other mutual help,
both together are more powerful, and therefore have more
right, than either alone (Chap. U. Sec. 13).

13. But this will be more clearly intelligible, if we
reflect, that two commonwealths are naturally enemies.
For men in the state of nature are enemies (Chap. II.
Sec. 14). Those, then, who stand outside a commonwealth,
and retain their natural rights, continue enemies. Accord-

^ Literally, '^ oil and trouble " — a common proverbial expression in
Latin.


SECS. 10-15.] THE BIGHT OF STJFBEMB ATTTHOBITIBS. 307

ingly, if one commonwealtli wishes to make war on another
and employ extreme meastires to make that other depen-
dent on itself, it may lawfully make the attempt, since it
needs but the bare will of the commonwealth for war
to be waged. But concenung pea<^ it can decide nothing,
save with the concurrence of another commonwealth's will.
Whence it follows, that laws of war regard every common-
wealth by itself, but laws of peace regard not one, but at
the least two commonwealths, which are therefore called
" contracting powers."

14. This " contract " remains so long unmoved as the
motive for entering into it, that is, fear of hurt or hope of
gain, subsists. But take away from either commonwealth
this hope or fear, and it is left independent (Chap. U.
Sec. 10), and the link, whereby the commonwealths were
mutually boimd, breaks of itself. And therefore every J
commonwealth has the right to break its contract, whenever

it chooses, and cannot be said to act treacherously or per-
fidiously in breaking its word, as soon as the motive of
hope or fear is removed. For every contracting party was
on equal terms in this respect, that whichever could first
free itself of fear should be independent, and make use of •
its independence after its own mind ; and, besides, no one
makes a contract respecting the future, but on the hypo-
thesis of certain precedent circumstances. But when
these circumstances change, the reason of policy applicable
to the whole position changes with them; and therefore
every one of the contracting commonwealths retains the
right of consulting its own interest, and consequently en-
deavours, as far as possible, to be free from fear and
thereby independent, and to prevent another from coming
out of the contract with greater power. If then a common-
wealth complains that it has been deceived, it cannot pro-
perly blame the bad faith of another contracting common-
wealth, but only its own folly in having entrusted its own
welfare to another party, that was independent, and had for
its highest law the welfare of its own dominion.

15. To commonwealths, which have contracted a treaty
of peace, it belongs to decide the questions, which may be
mooted about the terms or rules of peace, whereby they
have mutually boimd themselves, inasmuch as laws of


308 A POLITICAL TBBATISE. [SECS. 15-18.

peace regard not one commonwealth, but tlie common-
wealths which contract taken together (Sec. 13). But if
they cannot agree together about the conditions, they by
that very fact return to a state of war.

16. The more commonwealths there are, that have con-
tracted a joint treaty of peace, the less each of them by
itself is an object of fear to the reniainder, or the less it
has the authority to make war. But it is so much the
more bound to observe the conditions of peace; that is
(Sec. 13), the less independent, and the more boTind to ac-
commodate itself to the general will of the contracting
parties.

17. But the good faith, inculcated by sound reason and
rehgion, is not hereby made void ; for neither reason nor
Scripture teaches one to keep one's word in every case.
For if I have promised a man, for instance, to keep safe a
sum of money he has secretly deposited with me, I am not
boimd to keep my word, from the time that I know or
believe the deposit to have been stolen, but I shall act
more rightly in endeavouring to restore it to its owners.
So likewise, if the supreme authority has promised another

, to do something, which subsequently occasion or reason
shows or seems to show is contrary to the welfare of its
, subjects, it is surely bound to break its word. As then
J Scripture only teaches us to keep our word in general, and
leaves to every individual's judgment the special cases of
exception, it teaches nothing repugnant to what we have
just proved.

18. But that I may not have so often to break, the
thread of my discourse, and to resolve hereafter similar ob-
jections, I would have it known that all this demonstration
of mine proceeds from the necessity of human nature, con-
sidered in what Mght you will — I mean, from the universal
effort of aU men after self-preservation, an effort inherent
in all men, whether learned or unlearned. And therefore,
however one considers men are led, whether by passion or
by reason, it wiU be the same thing ; for the demonstration,
as we have said, is of universal application.


SEGS. 1-3.] FUNCTIONS OV SUPBBME AUTHORITIES. 809


CHAPTEE IV.

OP THE FUNCTIONS OF SUPREME AUTHORITIES.

THAT the right of the supreme authorities is limited by
their power, we showed in the last chapter, and saw
that the most important part of that right is, that they are,
as it were, the mind of the dominion, whereby all ought to
be guided; and accordingly, that such authorities alone
have the right of deciding what is good, evil, equitable, or
iniquitous, that is, what must be done or left undone by
the subjects severally or collectively. And, accordingly, we
saw that they have the sole right of laying down laws, and
of interpreting the same, whenever their meaning is dis-
puted, and of deciding whether a given case is in confor-
mity with or violation of the law (Chap. m. Sees. 3-5) ;
and, lastly, of waging war, and of drawing up and offering
propositions for peace, or of accepting such when offered
(Chap. m. Sees. 12, 13).

2. As all these functions, and also the means required
to execute them, are matters which regard the whole body
of the dominion, that is, are affairs of state, it follows, that
affairs of state depend on the direction of him only, who
holds supreme dominion. And hence it follows, that it is
the light of the supreme authority alone to judge the deeds
of every individual, and demand of him an account of the
same ; to punish criminals, and decide questions of law
between citizens, or appoint jxirists acquainted with the
existing laws, to administer tiiese matters on its behalf ;
and, further, to use and order all means to war and peace,
as to found and fortify cities, levy soldiers, assign m^tary
posts, and order what it would have done, and, with a view
to peace, to send and give audience to ambassadors ; and,
finally, to levy the costs of aU this.

3. Since, then, it is the right of the supreme authority


310 jl politicaii tbeatisb. [chap. iy.

alone to handle public matters, or choose officials to do so,
it follows, that that subject is a pretender to the dominion,
' who, without the supreme council's knowledge, enters upon
any public matter, although he believe that his design 'will
be to the best interest of the commonwealth.

4. But it is often asked, whether the supreme authority
|s boimd by laws, and, consequently, whether it can do
wrong. Now as the words "law" and "wrong-doing"
often refer not merely to the laws of a commonwealth, but
also to the general rules which concern all natural things,
and especiaUy to the general rules of reason, we cannot,
without qualification, say that the commonwealth is bound
by no laws, or can do no wrong. For were the common-
wealth bound by no laws or rules, which removed, the
commonwealth were no commonwealth, we should have to
regard it not as a natural thing, but as a chimera. A
commonwealth then does wrong, when it does, or suffers to
be done, things which may be the cause of its own ruin ;
and we can say that it then does wrong, in the sense in
which philosophers or doctors say that nature does wrong ;
. and in this sense we can say, that a commonwealth does
\ wrong, when it acts against the dictate of reason. For a
\ commonwealth is most independent when it acts according
\ to the dictate of reason (Chap. m. Sec. 7) ; so far, then,
\ as it acts against reason, it fails itself, or does wrong. And
we shall be able more easily to understand this if we re-
flect, that when we say, that a man can do what he will
with his own, this authority must be limited not only by
the power of the agent, but by the capacity of the object.
If, for instance, I say that I can rightfully do what I will
with this table, I do not certainly mean, that I have the
right to make it eat grass. So, too, though we say, that
men depend not on themselves, but on the commonwealth,
we do not mean, that men lose their human nature and put
on another ; nor yet that the commonwealth has the right
to make men wish for this or that, or (what is just as im-
possible) regard with honour things which excite ridicule
or disgust. But it is implied, that there are certain inter-
vening circumstances, which supposed, one likewise sup-
poses the reverence and fear of the subjects towards the
commonwealth, and which abstracted, one makes abstrac-


8ECS. 3-6.] FUNCTIONS OF SUPBBUE AtTTHOBITIES. 311

tion likewise of that fear and reverence, and therewith of
the commonwealth itself. The commonwealth, then, to
maintain its independence, is bound to preserve the causes
of fear and reverence, otherwise it ceases to be a common-
wealth. For the person or persons that hold dominion, can
no more combine with the keeping up of majesty the run-
ning with harlots drunk or naked about the streets, or the
performances of a stage-player, or the open violation or
contempt of laws passed by themselves, than they can
combine existence with non-existence. But to proceed to
slay and rob subjects, ravish maidens, and the like, turns
fear into indignation and the civil state into a state of
enmity.

5. We see, then, in what sense we may say, that a
commonwealth is bound by laws and can do wrong. But
if by " law " we understand civil law, and by " wrong "
that which, by civil law, is forbidden to be done, that
is, if these words be taken in their proper sense, we cannot
at aU say, that a commonwealth is bound by laws, or can
do wrong. For the maxims and motives of fear and
reverence, which a commonwealth is bound to observe in
its own interest, pertain not to civil jurisprudence, but to
the law of nature, since (Sec. 4) they cannot be vindicated
by the civil law, but by the law. of war. And a common-
wealth is bound by them in no other sense than that in
which in the state of nature a man is bound to take heed,
that he preserve his independence and be not his own enemy,
lest he should destroy himself ; and in this taking heed
lies not the subjection, but the liberty of human nature.
But civil jurisprudence depends on the mere decree of the
commonwealth, which is not bound to please any but itself,
nor to hold anything to be good or bad, but what it judges
to be such for itseK. And, accordingly, it has not merely
the right to avenge itself, or to lay down and interpret
laws, but also to abolish the same, and to pardon any
guilty person out of the fulness of its power.

6. Contracts or laws, whereby the multitude transfers
its right to one council or man, should without doubt be
broken, when it is expedient for the general welfare to do
so. But to decide this point, whether, that is, it be ex- ^
pedient for the general welfare to break them or not. is


1


j


812 ▲ POLITICAIi TBEATI8B. [SEC. 6.

; ' within tlie right of no private person, but of him only who
/ holds dominion (Sec. 3) ; therefore of these laws he who
11 holds dominion remains sole interpreter. Moreover, no
*i private person can by right vindicate these laws, and so
they do not really bind him who holds dominion. Not-
withstanding, if they are of such a nature that they cannot
be broken, without at the same time weakening the
commonwealth's strength, that is, without at the same time
changing to indignation the common fear of most of the
citizens, by this very fact the commonwealth is dissolved,
and the contract comes to an end ; and therefore such con-
.tract is vindicated not by the civil law, but by the law of
war. And so he who holds dominion is not bound to ob-
* serve the terms of the contract by any other cause than
that, which bids a man in the state of nature to beware
.'of being his own enemy, lest he should destroy himself, as
*^ we said in the last section.


8ECS. 1, 15.] OF THE BEST STATB 07 A DOMINION. 818


CHAPTEE V.

OF THE BEST STATE OF A DOMINION.

IN Chap. n. Sec. 2, we showed, that man is then most
independent, when he is' most led by reason, and, in
consequence (Chap, in.- Sec. 7), that that commonwealth
is most powerful and most independent, which is founded
and guided by reason. But, as the best plan of living, so
as to assure to the utmost self-preservation, is that which
is framed according to the dictate of reason, therefore it
follows, that that in every kind is best done, which a man or
commonwealth does, so far as he or it is in the highest
degree independent. For it is one thing to till a field by
right, and another to till it in the best way. One thing, I
say, to defend or preserve one's self, and to pass judgment
by right, and another to defend or preserve one's self in the
best way, and to pass the best judgment; and, conse-
quently, it is one thing to have dominion and care of
afEairs of state by right, and another to exercise dominion
and direct afEairs of state in the best way. And so, as we
have treated of the right of every commonwealth in general,
it is time to treat of the best state of every dominion.

2. Now the quality of the state of any dominion is easily j
perceived from the end of the civil state, which end ia |
nothing else but peace and security of life. And therefore /
that dominion is the best, where men pass their lives in/
unity, and the laws are kept unbroken. For it is certaini
that seditions, wars, and contempt or breach of the laws
are not so much to be imputed to the wickedness of the^
subjects, as to the bad state of a dominion. For men ar< '
not bom fit for citizenship, but must be made so. Besides,
men's natural passions are everywhere the same ; and if
wickedness more prevails, and more offences are committed
in one commonwealth than in another, it is certain that the


814 A POLITICAL TBEATISB. [CHAP. ▼.

former has not enough pursued the end of unity, nor
framed its laws with sufficient forethought; and that,
therefore, it has failed in Tna>1nng quite good its right as a
commonwealth. For a civil state, which has not done away
with the causes of seditions, where war is a perpetual
object of fear, and where, lastly, the laws are often broken,
^ differs but Mttle from the mere state of nature, in which
everyone Hves after his own mind at the great risk of his
life.

3. But as the vices and inordinate Ucence and contumacy
of subjects must be imputed to the commonwealth, so, on
the other hand, their virtue and constant obedience to the
laws are to be ascribed in the main to the virtue and per-
fect right of the commonwealth, as is clear from Chap. U.
Sec. 15. And so it is deservedly reckoned to Hannibal as an
extraordinary virtue, that in 4 army there never a^ose a
sedition.^

4. Of a commonwealth, whose subjects are but hindered
by terror from taking arms, it should rather be said, that it
is free from war, than that it has peace. For peace is not
mere absence of war, but is a virtue that springs from force
of character : for obedience (Chap. U. Sec. 19) is the con-

f stant wiU to execute what, by the general decree of the
commonwealth, ought to be done. Besides that common-
wealth, whose peace depends on the sluggishness of its
subjects, that are led about hke sheep, to learn but
slavery, may more properly be called a desert than a
commonwealth.

5. When, then, we caU that dominion best, where men
pass their lives in unity, I understand a human hfe, de-
fined not by mere circulation of the blood, and other quali-
ties common to all animals, but above all by reason, the
true excellence and life of the mind.

6. But be it remarked that, by the dominion which I
have said is established for this end, I intend that which
has been established by a free multitude, not that which is
acquired over a multitude by right of war. For a free
multitude is guided more by hope than fear ; a conquered
one, more by fear than hope : inasmuch as the former aims

' Justin, Histories, xxxif. ir. 12.


/


8B0S. 2-7.] OF THE BEST STATE OF A DOHHriON. 315

at making use of life, the latter but at escaping death.
The former, I say, aims at living for its own ends, the
latter is forced to belong to the conqueror ; and so we say
that this is enslaved, but that free. And, therefore, the
end of a dominion, which one gets by right of war, is to be
master, and have rather slaves than subjects. And although
between the dominion created by a free multitude, and that
gained by right of war, if we regard generally the right of
each, we can make no essential distinction ; yet their ends,
as we have already shown, and further the means to the
preservation of each are very different.

7. But what means a prince, whose sole motive is lust of
mastery, should use to establish and maintain his dominion,
the most ingenious MachiaveUi has set forth at large, ^ but
with what design one can hardly be sure. If, however, he
had some good design, as one should believe of a learned
man, it seems to have been to show, with how little fore-
sight many attempt to remove a tyrant, though thereby the
causes which make the prince a tyrant can in no wise be
removed, but, on the contrary, are so much the more
established, as the prince is given more cause to fear, which
happens when the multitude has made an example of its
prince, and glories in the parricide as in a thing weU done.
Moreover, he perhaps wished to show how cautious a free
multitude should be of entrusting its welfare absolutely to
one man, who, unless in his vanity ^e thinks he can please
everybody, must be in daily fear of plots, and so is forced
to look chiefly after his own interest, and, as for the multi-
tude, rather to plot agaiQst it than consult its good. And
I am the more led to this opinion concerning that most far-
seeing man, because it is known that he was favourable to
liberty, for the maintenance of which he has besides given
the most wholesome advice.

* In his book called " D Principe," or « The Prince.*


316 A POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. YI.


CHAPTBE VL

OF MONABCHY.

INASMUCH as men are led, as we have said, more by
passion than reascm, it follows, that a multitude comes
together, and wishes to be guided, as it were, by one mind,
not at the suggestion of reason, but of some common pas-
sion — that is (Chap. HE. Sec. 9), common hope, or fear, or
the desire of avenging some common hurt. But since fear
of solitude exists in all men, because no one in solitude is
strong enough to defend himself, and procure the necessa-
ries of life, it follows that men naturally aspire to the civil
state; nor can it happen that men should ever utterly
dissolve it.

2. Accordingly, from the quarrels and seditions which
are often stirred up in a commonwealth, it never results
that the citizens dissolve it, as often happens in the case of
other associations ; but only that they change its form into
some other — that is, of course, i£ the disputes cannot be
settled, and the features of the commonwealth at the same
time preserved. Wherefore, by means necessary to preserve
a dominion, I intend eiuch things as are necessary to preserve
the existing form of the dominion, without any notable
change.

3. But if human nature were so constituted, that men
most desired what is most useful, no art would be needed
to produce imity and confidence. But, as it is admittedly
&,T otherwise with human nature, a dominion must of
necessity be so ordered, that all, governing and governed
alike, whether they will or no, shall do what makes for the
general weKare ; that is, that all, whether of their own
impulse, or by force or necessity, shall be compelled to
live according to the dictate of reason. And this is the


8ECS. 1-6.] OP HONABCHY. 817

case, if the a&irs of the dominion be so managed, that
nothing which affects the general welfare is entirely en-
trusted to the good faith of any one. For no man is so
watchful, that he never falls asleep ; and no man ever had
a character so vigorous and honest, but he sometimes, and
that just when strength of character was most wanted, was
diverted from his purpose and let himself be overcome.
And it is surely f oUy to require of another what one can
never obtain from one's self ; I mean, that he should be more
watchful for another's interest than his own, that he should
be free from avarice, envy, and ambition, and so on;
especially when he is one, who is subject daily to the
strongest temptations of every passion.

4. But, on the other hand, experience is thought to
teach, that it makes for peace and concord, to confer the
whole authority upon one man. For no dominion has
stood so long without any notable change, as that of the
Turks, and on the other hand there were none so little
lasting, as those, which were popular or democratic, nor
any in which so many seditions arose. Yet if slavery,
barbarism, and desolation are to be called peace, men can
have no -^orse misfortune. No. doubt there are usually
more and sharper quarrels between parents and children,
than between masters and slaves ; yet it advances not the
art of housekeeping, to change a father's right into a right
of property, and count children but as slaves. Slavery
then, not peace, is furthered by handing over to one man
the whole authority. For peace, as we said before, con-
sists not in mere absence of war, but in a union or agree-
ment of minds,

5. And in fact they are much mistaken, who suppose
that one man can by himself hold the supreme right of a
commonwealth. For the only limit of right, as we showed
(Chap, n.), is power. But the power of one man is very
inadequate to support so great a load. And hence it
arises, that the man, whom the multitude has chosen
king, looks out for himself generals, or counsellors, or
friends, to whom he entrusts his own and the common
welfare ; so that the dominion, which is thought to be a
perfect monarchy, is in actual working an aristocracy, not,
indeed, an open but a hidden one, and therefore the worst


318 A POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. TX«

of all. Besides whicli, a king, who is a boy, or ill, or over-
^ come by age, is but king on sufferance ; and those in this
case have the supreme authority, who administer the
highest business of the dominion, or are near t^e king's
person; not to mention, that a lascivious king often
manages everything at the caprice of this or that mistress
or minion. " I had heard," says Orsines, " that women
once reigned in Asia, but for a eunuch to reign is some-
thing new." ^

6. It is also certain, tha t a com moawPP^^^ ^^ a1^«-ya in
V greater danggiiJmnLita.xitizenTthan from its enemies ;

for the' good are few. Whence it follows, that he, upon
whom the whole right of the dominion has been conferred,
will always be n^^nr^ nfi^/l ^f fitfi?ffiBfl ^^^P ^^ ATiArniAB, and
- therefore wiH lo<>Jk ffi hifl . oTgn-g afgty, and not tiyTo consult
his subjects' interests, but to plot against them, especially
against those who are renowned for learning, or have in-
fluence through wealth.

7. It must besides be added, that kings fear their sons
also more than they love them, and so much the more as
the latter are skilled in the arts of war and peace, and
endeared to the subjects by their virtues. Whence it
comes, that kings try so to educate their sons, that they
may have no reason to fear them. Wherein ministers very
readily obey the king, and will be at the utmost pains, that
the successor may be an inexperienced king, whom they
can hold tightly in hand.

8. From all which it follows, that the more absolutely
the commonwealth's right is transferred to the king, the
less independent he is, and the more unhappy is the con-
'dition of his subjects. And so, t hat a monarchicaL.do-
mimon may be.didx ®?*§ibJished, it .is necessary to lay
solid f pimdations, to build it on ; from which may result
to the monarch safety, and to the multitude peace ; and,
therefore, to lay them in such a way, that the monarch
may then be most independent, when he most consults the
multitude's welfare. But I will first briefly state, what
these foundations of a monarchical dominion are, and after-
wards prove them in order.

' Curtias, x. 1.


8ECS. 5-12.] OF HONABCHY. 819

9. One or more cities must be founded and fortified. -^
whosedjiafil^s, whether they live "within the walls, or out-
side for purposes of agriculture, ar e all to enJQy th^ ««Tnft ^
right in thfiuXQininQliwealth ; yet on this condition, that
every city provide an ascertained number of citizens for its
own and the general defence. But a city, which cannot
supply this, must be held in subjection on other terms.

10. The militia- must be formed ^"tr ftf ^^'^^^° ^ilOTT^j^
none being exempt, and of no others. And, therefore, all
are to be bound to have arms, and no one to be admitted
into the number of the citizens, till he has learnt his drill,
and promised to practise it at stated times in the year.
Next, the militia of each clan is to be divided into bat-
talions and regiments, and no captain of a battalion chosen^
that is not acquainted with military engineering. More-
over, though the commanders of battalions and regiments
are to be chosen for life, yet the commander of the militia
of a whole clan is to be chosen only in time of war, to hold
command for a year at most, without power of being con-
tinued or afterwards re-appointed. And these last are to
be selected out of the king's coimsellors, of whom we shall
speak in the fifteenth and following sections, or out of
those who have filled the post of counsellor.

11. The townsmen and countrymen of every city,
that is, the whole of the citizens, are to be divided into -^
clans, distinguished by some name and badge, and all
persons bom of any of these clans are to be received into
the number of citizens, and their names inscribed on the
roll of their clan, as soon as they have reached the age,
when they can carry arms and know their duty ; with the
exception of those, who are infamous from some crime, or
dumb, or mad, or menials supporting life by'some servile y/^
office.

12. The • ^fldfl- and the whole soil, and, if it can be ,
managed, the houses should b e. public orop ertv. that is, the j


townsmen or countrymen, and with this exception let them
all be free or exempt from every kind of taxation in time of
peace. And of this xeaL a part \^ to \^. a4;^pljftd t^^ ^^
fences of the state, a part to the king's private use."^ Tor


320 A POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. TL

it is necessary in time of peace to fortify cities against
war, and also to have ready sliips and other mumtions of
war.

13. After the g^lp<^fiAT^ n-P |,]^p ^nfffrom nnogf Xhc rinnn,
none are to be £eld noble, but his descendants, who are
therefore to be distinguished by royal insignia from their
own and the other clans.

14. Those male nobles, who are the reigning king's col-
laterals, and stand to him in the third or fourth degree of
consanguinity, must not marry, and any children they may
have had, are to be accounted bastards, and unworthy of
any dignity, nor may they be recognized as .heirs to "dieir
p aren ts, whose goods must revert to the king.

*TS*. Moreover the king]^g,ij2a43Lsellors, who are next to him
in^ dignity, must be numg£Q]^, and c hosen out of the
citizens only ; that is (supposing there to \)e no more than
sllTEundred clans) from every clan three or four or five,
who will form together one section of this council; and not
for life, but , for three, four, .or _ five years, so that every
year a third, fourth, or fifth part may be replaced by selec-
tion, in which selection it must be observed as a first con-
dition, that out of every clan at least one counsellor chosen
be a jurist.

JL6. The selection must be made, by the kinghmiBelf,
who should nx^ time of vear for the choice of firest conn-
sellors. Each clan must then submit to the king the
names of all its citizens, who have reached their fiftieth
]gft^ and have been duly put forward as candidates for this
oBlce, and out of these the king will choose whom he
pleases. But in that year, when the jurist of any clan is
to be replaced, only the names of jurists are to be sub-
mitted to the king. Those who have filled this office of
counsellor for the appointed time, are not to be continued
therein, nor to be replaced on the list of candidates for five
years or more. But the reason why one is to be chosen
every year out of every clan is, that the council may not
be composed alternately of untried novices, and of veterans
versed in affairs, which must necessarily be the case, were
all to retire at once, and new men to succeed them. But if
every year one be diosen out of every family, then only a
fifth, fourth, or at most a third part of the council will con-


8EC0. 12-21.] OF MONABCHY. 321

sist of novices. Purtlier, if the king be prevented bj ofcber
business, or for any other reason, from being able to spare
time for this choice, then let the counsellors themselves
choose others for a time, until the king either chooses
different ones, or confirms the choice of the council.

17. Let thQ vmm to<;tjsii ?f Ms. mw^s^JsAii^i^-

the fyu^wx^^ntal Iw a^^Q ^ ^^ ^jgd to give advi ce

^^j^f amninist ni,TOoh , that the king maylbiow, what for
the pulSEcT goodT ought to be decreed: and that on the
understanding, that the Tni^g i^^^y ^<;>t. <^ft fiide in any matter,
■without first hearings as

will generafly happen, the'comSTislQSrolon mind, but
is divided in opinion, even after discussing the same sub-
ject two or three times, there must be no further delay, but
the di fferent opimo ns are to be subpdttedJQjteJking, as -
in the twenty-fifm section o^ tfiis chapter we shall show.

18. Let it be also the duty of this c^unj^ topubHsh the .
king's orders or d^rees^ and to see tcTthe^^i^HfeoS^f.^y
decree concerning affairs '*of state, and to supervise, the ad> v
Tniniatratign .Q£.th€! jfhple^donmu^^^ as the king's deputies.

19. The citizens should have no acceyas t^jfcj^kmg, save


through this coundl, to which' are lo be naoSed all ;3^-
q^ajjdg ^OT $pti13onsi that they may be presented to the ,
king. Nor should the envoys of other commonwealths be
allowed to obtain permission to address the king, but
through thejgQundl. Letters, too, sent from elsewhere to
the kmg, must be handed to him by the council. And in
general the king is to be accounted as the mind ^i^ {he
commonwealth, but Qie ck>uiicil as the senses dutside l^e '
mind, or the commonwealth's body, through whose inter-
venHon £he mInE. understan the st&te <%^ihe-^mmon-
wealth, and acts-tMrit'Jttdges best for itself.

20. The care of the education of the king's sons should^
also fall on this council, and the guardianship, where a
king has died, leaving as his successor an infant or boy.
Yet lest meanwhile the council should be left without a
king, one of the elder nobles of the commonwealth should
be chosen to fiU the king's place, till the legitimate heir has
reached the age at which he can support the weight of
government.

21. Let the candidates for election to this council be such


322 A POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. YI.

as know the system of govemment, and tlie foundations,
and state or condition of the commonwealtli, whose subjects
they are. But he that would fill the place of a jurist must,
besides the .government and condition of the common-
wealth, whose subject he is, be likewise acquainted with
those of the other commonwealths, with which it has any
intercourse. But none are to be placed upon the list of
'candidates, unless they have reached their fiftieth year
without being convicted of crime.

22. In this council no decision is to be taken about the
^afEairs of the dominion, but in the presence of all the
* members. But i£ anyone be unable through illness or

other cause to attend, he must send in his stead one of the
same clan, who has filled the office of counsellor or been put
on the list of candidates. Which if he neglect to do, and
the council through his absence be forced to adjourn any
matter, let him be fined a considerable sum. But this
must be understood to mean, when the question is o£ a
matter afEecting the whole dominion, as of peace or war, o£
abrogating or establishing a law, of trade, &c. But if the
question be one that affects only a particular city or two,
as ahout petitions, <&c., it wiU suffice that a majority of the
council attend.

23. To maintain a perfect equality between the clans,
and a regular order in sitting, making proposals, and

• speaking, every clan is to take in turn the presidency at
the sittings, a different clan at every sitting, and that
which was first at one sitting is to be last at the next. But
among members of the same clan, let precedence go by
priority of election.

24. This council should be summoned at least four times
' a year, to demand of the ministers account of their ad-
ministration of the dominion, to ascertain the state of
affairs, and see i£ anything else needs deciding. For it
seems impossible for so large a number of citizens to have
constant leisure for public business. But as in the mean-
time pubHc business must none the less be carried on,
•therefore fifty or more are to be chosen out of this council
to supply its place after its dismissal ; and these should
meet daily in a chamber next the king's, and so have daily
care of the treasury, the cities, the fortifications, the edu-


8ECS. 21-26.] OF MOKABCHY. 323

cation of the king's son, and in general of all those duties
of the great council, which we have just enumerated, ex-
cept that they cannot take counsel about new matters, con-
cerning which no decision has been taken.

25. On the meeting of the council, before anything is .
proposed in it, let five, six, or more jurists of the clans,
which stand first in order of place at that session, attend on
the king, to deliver to him petitions or letters, if they have
any, to declare to him the state of affairs, and, lastly, to
understand from him what he bids them propose in his
council ; and when they have heard this, let them return
to the council, and let the first in preoedence open the
matter of debate. But, in matters which seem to any of
them to be of some moment, let not the votes be taken at
once, but let the voting be adjourned to such a date as the
urgency of the matter allows. When, then, the council
stands adjourned till the appointed time, the counsellors of
every clan will meanwhile be able to debate the mattei
separately, and, if they think it of great moment, to consult
others that have been counsellors, or are candidates for the
council. And if within the appointed time the counsellors
of any clan cannot agree among themselves, that dan shall,
lose its vote, for every clan can give but one vote. But,
otherwise, let the jurist of the clan lay before the council
the opinion they have decided to be best; and so with
the rest. And if the majority of the council think fit, after
hearing the grounds of every opinion, to consider the
matter again, let the council be again adjourned to a date,
at which every clan shall pronounce its final opinion ; and
then, at last, before the entire council, let the votes be
taken, and that opinion be invalidated which has not at
least a hundred votes. But let the other opinions be sub-
mitted to the king by all the jurists present at the council,
that, after hearing every party's arguments, he may select
which opinion he pleases. And then let the jurists leave
him, and return to the council ; and there let all await the
king at the time fixed by himself, that all may hear which
opinion of those proposed he thinks fit to adopt, and what
he decides should be done.

26. For the administration of lustice, another council is »-
to be formed of jurists, whose busmess should be to decide


824 A POLITICAL TREATISE. [CKAF. TL

suits, and punish criminals, but so that all the jndgmesti
they deliver be tested by those who are for the tnne
members of the great council — ^that is, as to their having
been delivered according to the due process of justice, and
without partiaJity. But if the losing party can prove, that
any judge has been bribed by the adversary, or that theze
is some mutual cause of friendship between the judge ajid
the adversary, or of hatred between the judge and himseit
or, lastly, that the usual process of justice has not been
observed, let such party be restored to his original position.
But this would, perhaps, not be observed by such as Ioto
to convict the accused in a criminal case, rather by tortnie
than proofs. But, for all that, I can conceive on this point
of no other process of justice than the above, that befits tbe
best system of governing a commonwealth.
' 27. Of these judges, there should be a laz^ and odd
number — ^for instance, sixty-one, or at least forty-one, — and
not more than one is to be chosen of one clan, and thai
not for life, but every year a certain proportion are to retire^
and be replaced by as many others out of different danSr
that have reached their fortieth vear.

28. In this council, let no judgment be pronounced save
in the presence of all the jui^s. But if any judge, from
disease or other cause, shall for a long time be unable to
attend the council, let another be chosen for that time to
fill his place. But in giving their votes, they are all not to
utter their opinions aloud, but to signify them by ballot.

29. Let those who supply others' places in this a-Tii^ the
first-mentioned council first be paid out of the goods of
those whom they have condemned to death, and also out of
the fines of which any are mulcted. Xeit^ after every
judgment they pronounce in a civil suit, let them receive a
certain proportion of the whole sum at stake for the benefit
of both councils.

30. Let there be in every city other subordinate coundla,
whose members likewise must not be chosen for life, but
must be partially renewed every year, out of the clana
who live there only. But there is no need to pursue thifl
further.

' 31. Xo military pav is to be granted in time of peace;
but in time of war, sulitazy pay in to be allowed to those


BECS. 26-35.] OF MONABCHY. 325

only, wlio support their lires by daily labour. But tbe
commanders and other officers of the battalions are to
expect no other advantage from war but the spoil of the
enemy.

32. If a foreigner takes to wife the daughter of a citizen, .
his children are to be counted citizens, and put on the roU
of their mother's clan. But those who are bom and bred
within the dominion of foreign parents should be allowed
to purchase at a fixed price the right of citizenship &om
the captains of thousands of any dan, and to be enrolled in
that clan. For no harm can arise thence to the dominion,
even though the captains of thousands, for a bribe, admit
a foreigner into the number of their citizens for less than
the fixed price ; but, on the contrary, means should be de-
vised for more easily increasing the number of citizens, and
producing a lai^e confluence of men. As for those who
are not enrolled as citizens, it is but fair that, at least in
war-time, they should pay for their exemption from service
by some forced labour or tax.

33. The envoys to be sent in time of peace to other
commonwealths must be chosen out of the nobles only, and ^
their expenses met by the state treasury, and not the king's
privy purse.

34 Those that attend the court, and are the king's ser-
vants, and are paid out of his privy purse, must be excluded - ^
from every appointment and office in the commonwealth.
I say expressly, "and are paid out of the king's privy
purse," to except the body-guard. For there should be no
other body-guard, but the citizens of the king's city, who
should take turns to keep guard at court before the king's
door.

35. War is only to be made for the sake of peace, so '
that, at its end, one may be rid of arms. And so, when
cities have been taken by right of war, and terms of peace
are to be made after the enemies are subdued, the captured
cities must not be garrisoned and kept; but either the
enemy, on accepting the terms of peace, should be allowed
to redeem them at a price, or, if by following that policy,
there would, by reason of the danger of the position, remain
a constant lurking anxiety, they must be utterly destroyed,
and the inhabitants removed elsewhere.


326 A POLITICAL TBEATISE. [SECS. 36-40

36. The king mtist not be allowed to contract a foreign

. marriage, but only to take to "wife one of his kindred, or of

the citizens ; yet, on condition that, if he marries a citizen,

her near relations become incapable of holding office in the

commonweath.

.' 37. The dominion must be indivisible. And so, if the king
leaves more than one child, let the eldest one succeed ; but
by no means be it allowed to divide the dominion between
them, or to give it imdivided to all or several of them,
much less to give a part of it as a daughter's dowry. For
that daughters should be admitted to the inheritance of a
dominion is in no wise to be allowed.

38. If the king die leaving no male issue, let the next to
him in blood be held the heir to the domimon, imless he
chance to have married a foreign wife, whom he will not
put away.

39. As for the citizens, it is manifest (Chap. HI. Sec. 5)
• that every one of them ought to obey all the commands of

the king, and the decrees published by the great council,
although he believe them to be most absurd, and other-
wise he may rightfully be forced to obey. And these are
the foundations of a monarchical dominion, on which it
must be built, if it is to be stable, as we shall show in the
next chapter.

40. As for religion, no temples whatever ought to be
- built at the pubfic expense ; nor ought laws .to be esta-
blished about opinions, imless they be seditious and over-
throw the foundations of the commonwealth. And so let
such as are allowed the public exercise of their religion
build a temple at their own expense. But the king may
have in his palace a chapel of his own, that he may practise
the religion to which he belongs.


SEC. 1.] OP MONAECHY. 827


CHAPTER YIL

OP MONARCHY (CONTINUATION).

AFTEE explaining tlie foundations of a monarcliical
dominion, I have taken in hand to prove here in order
the fitness of such foundations. And to this end the first"
point to be noted is, that it is in no way repugnant to
experience, for laws to be so firmly fixed, that not the
king himself can abolish them. For though'^the Persians
wOTShipped their~kiil^s' as gods, yet had not the kings
themselves authority to revoke laws once established, as
appears from Daniel,* and nowhere, as far as I know, is
a monarch chosen absolutely without any conditions ex-
pressed. Nor yet is it repugnant to reason or the absolute
obedience due to a king. For the foundations of the do-'
minion are to be considered as eternal decrees of the king,
so that his ministers entirely obey him in refusing to
execute his orders, when he commands anything contrary
to the same. Which we can make plain by the example of
Ulysses.* For his comrades were executing his own order,
when they would not untie him, when he was bound to the
mast and captivated by the Sirens* soi^, although he gave
them manifold orders to do so, and that with threats. And
it is ascribed to his forethought, that he afterwards thanked
his comrades for obeying him according to his first in-
tention. And, after this example of Ulysses, kings often
instruct judges, to administer justice without respect of
persons, not even of the king hunself, if by some singular
accident he order anything contrary to established law.
For kings are not gods, but men, who are often led captive ;
by the Sirens' song. If then everything depended on the
inconstant will of one man, nothing would be fixed. And
so, that a monarchical dominion may be stable, it must be

» Daniel yi. 15. » Horn. « Odys.," xii. 156-200.


B28 A POLITIOAL TBEATISE. [CHIP. fH.


ordered, so tliat everytliiiig be done by tbe king's decree
. only, that is, so that erery law be an explicit will of the
king, but not erery will of the king a law ; as to which
see Chap. VI. Sects. 3, 6, 6.

2. It must next be observed, that in laying foundatioiui i
it is very necessary to study the human passions : and it is
not enough to. t^Te iihown^ what ought to be 4fififikJbiiliL
ought, aboTe all, to be j^xown h ow Jt can be ei ffected ^ tluU
mftTU whether led by passion or reason, should y^ keep
the laws firm and unbroken. For if the constitution of
the dominion, or thd ']>ublic liberty depends only on the
weak assistance of the laws, not only will the citizens have
no security for its maintenance (as we showed in the third
section of the last chapter), but it wiU even turn to their
ruin. For this is certain, that no condition of a common-
wealth is more wretched than that of the best, when it be-

, gins to totter, unless at one blow it falls with a rush into
' slavery, which seems to be quite impossible. And, there-
fore, it would be far better for the subjects to transfer
'their rights absolutely to one man, than to bargain for un-
ascertained and empty, that is unmeaning, terms of liberty,
and so prepare for their posterity a way to the most cruel
servitude. But if J[ succeed in showing that the founda-
tion of monarchical dominion, which I stated in the last*
chaT>ter, are firm and cannot be plucked up, without the
indignation of the larger part of an armed multitude, and
that from them follow peace and security for king and
multitude, and if I deduce this &om general human nature,
no one will be able to doubt, that these foundations are the
best and the true ones (Chap. m. Sec. 9, and Chap. VL
Sects. 3, 8). But that such is their nature, I will show as
briefly as possible. ./> ^*

3. That the dutyofhim. who holds the dominion, is
always to know itsstate and condition, to watch. p.Yej:iihe
Ofmihon welfare of all« and to execute whatever is to the
interest of the majority of the subjects, is admitted by aJL
But as one person alone is unable to examine into every-
thing, and cannot always have his mind ready and turn it
to meditation, and is often hindered by disease, or old age,
or other causes, from having leisure for public business ;

' therefore it is necessary that the monarch have counsellors


8EC8. 1-5.] OF MONARCHY. 329

to know the sta te o f affa irs, and help the king with their
advice, ah^rfifeq^'Sny "^supply^ his place ; and that so it
come to pass, that the dominion or commonwealth may
continue always in one and the same mind.

4. But asjiimaja nature i^^

fggks with thie utmosr passion his own^^aSyaniage, and
judgeslEose Taws^trtJe-'ttfO'St^^ thinks

necessary to preserve and increase his substance, and
defends another's cause so far only as he thinks he is
thereby establishing his own; it follows hence, that the
counsellors chosen must be juch, that their private affairs*
ajad their own mierests depenc[ oii the gene r al w elf are and
peace of all. "And so it is evident, that if frbin eveiy sort
of^iis of citizens a certain number be chosen, what has
most votes in such a council will be to the interest of
the greater part of the subjects. And though this council,
because it is composed of so large a number of citizens,
must of necessity be attended by many of very simple
intellect, yet this is certain, that everyone is pretty clever
and sagacious in business which he has long and eagerly
practised. And, therefore, if none be chosen but such as
have tni their fiftieth ye%r practised tKeir own business
wi^out disgiface, they will be fit enough to give their
advice abbtit their own affairs, especially if, in matters of
considera1]iIe importance, a time be allowed for considera-
tion. Besides, it is far from being the fact, that a council
composed of a few is not frequented by this kind of men.
For, on the contrary, its greatest part must consist of such,
since everyone, in that case, tries hard to have dullards for
colleagues, that they may hang on his words, for which
there is no opportunity in large councHs.

5. Furthermore, it is certain, that everyone would rather -
rule than be ruled. " For no one of his own will yields
up dominion to another," as Sallust has it in his first
speech to Csesar.^ And, therefore, it is clear, that a whole ,
multitude will never transfer its right to a few or to one,
if it can come to an agreement with itseK, without proceed-
ing from the controversies, which generally arise in large
councils, to seditions. And so the multitude does not, if \

' Cbap. I. Sec. 4 of the speech, or rather letter, which is not now
ftdmittea to be a genaine work of ^Ilast.


s


330 ▲ POLITICAL TBEATISB. [CHAP. TIL

, it is free, transfer to the king anything bnt that, which it
» cannot itself have absolutely witlun its authority, iiamel7»
the ending of controv ersies and the using de spatch in
d*<5MSiMsi For 'as' ^to" the case which offceii arises, where a
Unj^s chosenfon account of war, that is, because war is
I much more happily conducted by kings, it is manifest
folly, I say, that men should choose slavery in time d
peace for the sake of better fortune in war ; if, indeed,
peace can be conceived of in a dominion, where merely for
the sake of war the highest authority is transferred to one
man, who is, therefore, best able to show his worth and the
importance to everyone of his single self in time of war;
whereas, on the contrary, democracy has this advantage,
that its excellence is greater in peace than in war. How-
ever, for whatever reason a king is chosen, he cannot by
himself, as we said just now, Imow what will be to the
interest of the dominion: but for this purpose, as we
showed in the last section, will need many citizens for his
counsellors. And as we cannot at all suppose, that any
opinion can be conceived about a matter proposed for dis-
cussion, which can have escaped the notice of so large a
number of men, it follows, that no opinion can be conceived
tending to the people's welfare, besides all the opinions of
this council, which are submitted to the king. And so,
since the

utmost rii

to choose one of the opinions offered by the council, not to
decree apy th^pg^ or offf^r any opinion cont rary t o^thgjS&id
of all the council at once (Chapi VI. Bee. 25;: But If all
the opinions offered in the council were to be submitted to
the king, then it might happen that the king would always
favour the small cities, which have the fewest votes. For
though by the constitution of the cotmcil it be ordained,
that the opinions should be submitted to the king without
mention of their supporters, yet they will never be able to
take such good care, but that some opinion will get
divulged. -And, therefore, it must of necessity be provided,
that that opinion, which has not gained at least a hundred
votes, shall be held void ; and this law the larger cities
will be sure to defend with all their might.

6. And here, did I not study brevity, I would show


SECS. 5-10.] OP MONAECHT. 331

other advantages of tihis council ; yet one, whicli seems of
the greatest importance, I will allege. I mean, tliat there-
can be given no greater inducement to virtue, than this
general hope of the highest honour. For by ambition are-
we all most led, as in our Ethics we showed to be the case.^

7. But it cannot be doubted that the pajro^t y^of thi s>
^^^TiTlfiil """^^ "nftYPr tft "^JTi*^^*^ to wa ge war. buF rathei-
always pursue and love peace. "'^orbesiSes that war will
always cause them fear of losing their property and liberty,,
it is to be added, that war requires fresh expenditure, which
they must meet, and also that their own children and re-
latives, though intent on their domestic cares, wiU be forced
to turn their attention to war and go a-soldiering, whence-
they ma. never bring ba^sk anything but nnpaid-for scars.
For, as we said (Chap. VI. Sec. 31), no pay is to be givea
to the militia, and (Chap. YI. Sec. 10) it is to be formed
out of citizens only and no others.

8. There is another accession to the cause of peace and.
concord, which is also of great weight: I mean, that na
citizen can have immovable property (Chap. YI. Sec. 12).
Hence all will have nearly an equal risk in war. For all
will be obHged, for the sake of gain, to practise trade, or
lend money to one another, if, as formerly by the Athe-
nians, a law be passed, forbidding to lend money at inte-
rest to any but inhabitants ; and thus they will be engaged
in business,' which either is mutually involved, one man's-
with another's, or needs the same means for its furtherance.
And thus the greatest part of this council will generally
have one and the same mind about their common affairs-
and the arts of j)eace. For, as we said (Sec. 4), every man
defends another's cause, so far as he thinks thereby tO'
estabHsh his own.

9. It cannot be doubted, that it will never occur to any-
one to corrupt this council with bribes. For were any man
to draw over to his side some one or two out of so great a.
number of men, he would gain nothing. For, as we said, the
opinion, which does not gain at least a.hundred votes, is void.

10. We shall also easily see, that, once this council is
established its members cannot be reduced to a less num-^

1 Ethics, iii. 29, &c


332 ▲ POLITICAL TBBATISE. [CHAP. Til.

her, if we consider tlie common passions of mankind. Per
all are guided mostly by ambition, and tbere is no man
who lives in health but hopes to attain extreme old age. If
then we calculate the number of those who actually reach
their fiftieth or sixtieth year, and further take into account
the number that are every year chosen of this great council,
we shall see, that there can hardly be a man of those who
bear arms, but is under the influence of a great hope of
attaining this dignity. And so they will all, to the best of
their power, defend this law of the council. For be it
noted, that corruption, unless it creep in gradually, is easily
prevented. But as it can be more easily supposed, and
would be less invidious, that a less number should be
■chosen out of every clan, than that a less number should be
chosen out of a few clans, or that one or two clans should
be altogether excluded ; therefore (Chap. YI. Sec. 15) the
number of counsellors cannot be reduced, unless a third,
fourth, or fifth part be removed simultaneously, which
change is a very great one, and therefore quite repugnant
to common practice. Nor need one be afraid of delay or
negligence in choosing, because this is remedied by the
council itself. See Chap. VI. Sec. 16.
^ 11. The king, then, whether he is induced by fear of the
multitude, or aims at binding to himself the majority of an
armed multitude, or is guided by a generous spirit, a wish
that is, to consult the public interest, will always confirm
that opinion, which has gained most votes, that is (Sec. 5),^
which is to the interest of the greater part of the dominion ;
and will study to reconcile the divergent opinions referred
, to him, if it can be done, that he may attach all to himself
' (in which he will exert all his powers), and that alike in
peace and war they may find out, what an advantage his
single self is to them. And thus he will then be most in-
dependent, and most in possession of dominion, when he
most consults the general welfare of the multitude.

12. For the king by himself cannot restrain aU by fear.
But his power, as we have said, rests upon the number of

^ This seems to be a mistake for Sec. 4, " Id majori subditorum parti
utile erit, quod in hoc concilio plurima habuerit suffragia." ''What
'has most votes ia such a council, will be to the interest of the greater
ipart of the subjects."


8ECS. 10*14] OF MONABCHY. 833

Ills soldiers, and espedallj on their valour and faith, wliicb
will always remain so long enduring between men, as with
them is joined need, be that need honourable or disgrace-
ful. And this is why kings usually are fonder of exciting
than restraining their soldiery, and shut their eyes more to
their vices than to their virtues, and generaUy, to hold
imder the best of them, seek out, distinguish, and assist
with money or favour the idle, and those who have ruined
themselves by debauchery, and shake hands with them,
and throw them kisses, and for the sake of mastery stoop
to every servile action. In order therefore that the citizens
may be distinguished by the king before aU others, a^d, as
far as the civil state and equity permit, may remain inde-
pendent, it is necessary that the miHtia should consist of
citizens only, and that citizens should be his counsellors ;
and on the contrary citizens are altogether subdued, and
are laying the foundations of eternal war, from the moment
that they suffer mercenaries to be levied, whose trade is
war, and who have most power in strifes and seditions.

13. That the king's counsellors ought not to be elected
for life, but for three, four, or five years, is clear as well
from' the tenth, as from what we said in the ninth section
of this chapter. For if they were chosen for life, not only^
could the greatest part <5f the citizens conceive hardly any
hope of obtaining this honour, and thus there would arise
a great inequality, and thence envy, and constant murmurs,
and at last seditions, which, no doubt, would be welcome to
kings greedy of mastery : but also the counsellors, being
rid of the fear of their successors, would assume a great
licence in aU respects, which the king would be far from
opposing. For the more the citizens hate them, the more
they will cling to the king, and be ready to flatter him.
Nay, the interval of five years seems even too much, for in
such a space of time it does not seem so impossible to
corrupt by bribes or favour a very large part of the council,
however large it be. And therefore it will be far safer, if
every year two out of every clan retire, and be replaced by
as many more (supposing that there are to be five coun-
sellors of each clan), except in the year in which the jurist
of any clan retires, and a fresh one is chosen in his place.

14. Moreover, no king can promise himself more safety. •


^84 A POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. TIL

Hian lie who reigns in a commonwealtli of tUs sort. For
besides that a king soon perishes, when his soldiers cease
to desire his safety, it is certain that kings are always in the
greatest danger from those who are nearest their persons.
The fewer counsellors, then, there are, and the more powerful
they consequently are, the more the king is in danger of
their transierring the dominion to another. Nothing in
fact more alarmed David, than that his own counsellor
Ahitophel sided with Absalom.^ Still more is this the case,
if the whole authority has been transferred absolutely to
•one man, because it can then be more easily transferred
from one to another. For two private soldiers once took
in hand to transfer the Boman empire, and did transfer it.^
I omit the arts and cunning wiles, whereby counsellors have
to assure themselves against falling victims to their un-
popularity ; for they are but too well known, and no one,
who has read history, can be ignorant, that the good faith
-of counsellors has generally turned to their ruin. And so,
for their own safety, it behoves them to be cunning, not
iaithful. But if the counsellors are too numerous to unite
in the same crime, and are all equal, and do not hold their
-office beyond a period of four years, they cannot be at all ob-
jects of fear to the king, except he attempt to take away
their liberty, wherein he w^l offend all the citizens equally.
For, as Antonio Perez * excellently observes, an absolute
dominion is to the prince very dangerous, to the subjects
very hateful, and to the institutes of God and man alike
opposed, as innumerable instances show.

15. Besides these we have, in the last chapter, laid other
foundations, by which the king is greatly secured in his
dominion, and the citizens in their hold of peace and liberty,
which f otmdations we will reason out in their proper places.
For I was anxious above everything to reason out all those,
which refer to the great council and are of the greatest im-
portance. Now I will continue with the others, in the
-s^ame order in which I stated them.

16. It is undoubted, that citizens are more powerful,

' 2 Sam. XV. 31.
' Tacitus, Histories, i., 7.

* Antonio Perez, a publicist, and professor of law in the University
:of Louvain in the first part of the seventeenth century.


SECS. 14-17.] on MONARCHY. 335

and, therefore, more independent, the lai^er and better
fortified their towns are. For the safer the place is, in
which they are, the better they can defend their liberty, and
the less they need fear an enemy, whether without or
within ; and it is certain that the more powerful men are
by their riches, the more they by nature study their own
safety. But cities which need the help of another for their
preservation are not on terms of equal right with that
other, but are so far dependent on his right as they need
his help. For we showed in the second chapter, that right
is determined by power alone.

17. For the same reason, also, I mean that the citizens
may continue independent, and defend their liberty, the
militia ought to be composed of the citizens only, and none
of them to be exempted. For an armed man is more in-
dependent than an imarmed (Sec. 12) ; and those citizens
transfer absolutely their own right to another, and entrust
it entirely to his good faith, who have given him their arms
and the defences of their cities. Human avarice, by which
most men are very much led, adds its weight to this view.
For it cannot be, that a mercenary force be hired without
great expense ; and citizens can hardly endure the exaaions
required to maintain an idle soldiery. But that no man,
who commands the whole or a lar,ge part of the militia,
should, except under pressure of necessity, be chosen for
the extreme term of a year, all are aware, who have read
history, alike sacred and profane. For there is nothing
that reason more clearly teaches. For surely the might of
dominion is altogether entrusted to him, who is aUowed
enough time to gain military glory, and raise his fame
above the king's, or to make the army faithful to himself
by flattery, largesses, and the other arts, whereby generals
are accustomed to procure the enslavement of others, and
the mastery for themselves. Lastly, I have added this
point for the greater safety of the whole dominion, that
these commanders of the militia are to be selected from
the king's counsellors or ex-counsellors — ^that is, from men
who have reached the age at which mankind generally
prefer what is old and safe to what is new and dangerous.^

» Chap. VI. Sec. 10.


886 ▲ POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. TH.

18. 1 said that the citizens were to be divided into clans,^
and an equal number of counsellors cbosen from each, in
order that the larger towns might have, in proportion to
the number of their citizens, a greater number of coun-
sellors, and be able, as is equitable, to contribute more
votes. For the power and, therefore, the right of a
dominion is to be estimated by the number of its citizens ;
and I do not beheve that any fitter means can be devised
for maintaining this equality between citizens, who are
aU by nature so constituted, that everyone wishes to be
attributed to his own stock, and be distinguished by race
from the rest.

19. Furthermore, in the state of nature, there is nothing
which any man can less claim for himself, and make his
own, than the soil, and whatever so adheres to the soil, that
he cannot hide it anywhere, nor carry it whither he pleases, i
The soil, therefore, and whatever adheres to it in the way.
we have mentioned, must be quite common property of the
commonwealth — ^that is, of all those who, by their united
force, can vindicate their claim to it, or of him to whom aU
have given authority to vindicate his claim. And therefore
the soil, and aU that adheres to it, ought to have a value
with the citizens proportionate to the necessity there is,
that they may be able to set their feet thereon, and defend
their common right or liberty. But in the eighth section
of this chapter we have shown the advantages that the
commonwealth must necessarily derive hence.

20. In order that the citizens may be as far as possible
equal, which is of the first necessity in a commonwealth,
none but the descendants of a king are to be thought noble.
But if all the descendants of kings were allowed to marry
wives, or beget children, they would grow, in process of
time, to a very large number, and would be, not only
burdensome, but also a cause of very great fear, to king
and all. For men who have too much leisure generally
meditate crime. And hence it is that kings are, on account
of 4heir nobles, very much induced to make war, because
kings surroimded with nobles find more quiet and safety in
war than in peace. But I pass by this as notorious enough,

* Chap. VI. Sees. 11, 15, 16.


SECS. 18-22.] OF HONABCHY. 337

and also the points whicli I have mentioned in Sees. 15-27
of the last chapter. For the main points have been proved
in this chapter, and the rest are self-evident.

21. That the judges ought to be too numerous for a
large proportion of them to be accessible to the bribes of a
private man, and that they should not vote openly, but
secretly, and that they deserve payment for their time, is
known to everyone.^ But they everywhere have by custom
a yearly salary ; and so they make no great haste to deter-
mine suits, and there is often no end to trials. Next, where
confiscations accrue to the king, there frequently in trials
not truth nor right, but the greatness of a man's riches is
regarded. Informers are ever at work, and everyone who
has money is snatched as a prey, which evils, though
grievous and intolerable, are excused by the necessity of
warfare, and continue even in time of peace. But the
avarice of judges that are appointed but for two or three
years at most is moderated by fear of their successors, not
to mention, again, that they can have no fixed property,
but must lend their money at interest to their fellow-
citizens. And so they are forced rather to consult their
welfare tha^to plot against them, especially if the judges
themselves, as we have said, are numerous.

22. But we have said, that no military pay is to be voted.*
For the chief reward of military service is liberty. For in
the state of nature everyone strives, for bare liberty's sake,
to defend himself to the utmost of his power, and expects
no other reward of warlike virtue but his own indepen-
dence. But, in the civil state, all the citizens together are
to be considered as a man in the state of nature; and,
therefore, when all fight on behalf of that state, all are de-
fending themselves, and engaged on their own business.
But counsellors, judges, magistrates, and the like, are en-
gaged more, on others' business than on their own ; and so
it is but fair to pay them for their time. Besides, in war,
there can be no greater or more honourable inducement to
victory than the idea of liberty. But if, on the contrary, a
certain portion of the citizens be designated as soldiers, on
which account it will be necessary to award them a fixed pay,

* Chap. VI. Sees. 27, 28. « Chap. VL Sec. 31.


38d A POLITICAL TREATISE. [cHAP. VII.

the king will, of necessity, distinguisli them above the rest
(as we showed, Sec. 12) — ^that is, will distinguish men who
are acquainted only with the arts of war, and, in time of
peace, from excess of leisure, become debauched, and,
finally, from poverty, meditate nothing but rapine, civil
discord, and wars. And so we can affirm, that a monarchy
of this sort is, in fact, a state of war, and in it only the
soldiery enjoy liberty, but the rest are slaves.

23. Our remarks about the admission of foreigners
(Chap. VI. Sec. 32) I believe to be obvious. Besides, no
one can doubt that the king's blood-relations should be at
a distance from him, and occupied, not by warlike, but by
peaceful business, whence they may get credit and the
dominion quiet. Though even this has not seemed a suffi-
cient precaution to the Turkish despots, who, therefore,
make a point of slaughterii^ all their brothers. And no
wonder : for the more absolutely the right of dominion has
been conferred on one man, the more easily, as we showed
by an instance (Sec. 14), it can be transferred from one to
another. But that in such a monarchy, as we here sup-
pose, in which, I mean, there is not one mercenary soldier,
the plan we have mentioned provides sufficiently for the
king's safety, is not to be doubted-

24. Nor can anyone hesitate about what we have said in
the thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth sections of the last
chapter. But that the king must,iiot-ma>Fjp y a foroi ghfer ^
is easily proved. For nof'^KTmStion 4hftt two common-
wealths, although united by a treaty, are yet in a state of
hostility (Chap. III. Sec. 14), it is very much to be avoided
that war should be stirred up, on account of the king's
domestic affairs, both because disputes and dissensions
arise peculiarly from an aUiance founded on marriage, and
because questions between two commonwealths are mostly
settled by war. Of this we read a fatal instance in Scrip-
ture. For after the death of Solomon, who had married
the king of Egypt's daughter, his son Behoboam waged a
most disastrous war with Shishak, king of the Egyptians,
who utterly subdued him.* Moreover, the marriage of
Lewis XIY., king of France with the daughter of Philip IV.

^ Chap. VI. Sec. 36. * 1 Kings xir. 25 ; 2 Chron. xil


«ECS. 22-25.] OF MONABCHY. 339

was the seed of a fresh war.* And, besides these, very many
instances may be read in history.

25. The form of the dominion ought to be kept one and
the same, and, consequently, there should be but one kii^,
and that of the same sex, and the dominion should be in-
divisible.' But as to my saying that the king's eldest son
should succeed his father by right, or (if there be no issue)
the nearest to him in blood, it is clear as well from Chap.
YI. Sec. 13, as because the election of the king made by
the multitude should, if possible, last for ever. ^Otherwise
it will necessarily happen, that the supreme authority of
the dominion will frequently pass to the multitude, which
is an extreme and, therefore, exceedingly dangerous change.
But those who, from the fact that the king is master of
the dominion, and holds it by absolute right, infer that he
can hand it over to whom he pleases, and that, therefore,
the king's son is by right heir to the dominion, are greatly
mistaken. For the k ing'g will hn-s^ g^ l ong the force of law,
as he holds the sword of the commonwealth ; for thft rig ht'
o t dom iTiuYn is iiTnitftf| W TOiBfiiii^mT Therefore, a king
may indeed abdicate, but cannot hand the dominion over
to another, unless with the concurrence of the multitude or
its stronger part. And that this may be more clearly
understood, we must remark, that children are heirs to their
parents, not by natural, but by civil law. For by the
power of the commonwealth alone is anyone master of
definite property. And, therefore, by the same power or
right, whereby the will of any man concerning his property
is held good, by the same also his will remains good after
his own death, as long as the commonwealth endures.
And this is the reason, why everyone in the civil state main-
tains after death the same right as he had in his lifetime,
because, as we said, it is not by his own power, but by that
of the commonwealth, which is everlasting, that he can
decide anything about his property. But the king's case/ >'
is quite different. For the king's will is the civil law it-
self, and the king the commonwealth itself. Therefore, by ;
the death of the king, the commonwealth is in a manner '(

^ The war between France and Spain, terminated by the first peace
of Aix-la-Chapelle, 1665.
» Chap. VI. Sec. 37.


840 A POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. VU^

dead, and tlie civil state naturallj returns to the state of
nature, and consequently the supreme auttejrity to the
multitude, which can, therefore, lawfully lay^ down new
and abolish old laws. And so it appears that no man
succeeds the king„l)y. right, but him whom thg ^uIS Iiide
wills to be successor, or in a theocracy, such as &e comlDon-
wealth of the "Hebrews once was, him whom Gtod has
chosen by a prophet. We might likewise infer this from
the fact that the Tnug's sword, or right, is in reality the
will of the nauItitMe it»el^^ .9tiiaaig§r j)art ; or^lse

from tiie 'KcfjTEat men*en3owed with reason never so
utterly abdicate their right, that they cease to be men, and
are accounted as sheep. But to pursue this further is
unnecessary.

26. But the riylit nf rft^^'yioTi. or of worshipping God, no-
man can transfer to another. However, we have treated
of this point at length in the last chapters of our Theo-
logico-PoHtical Treatise, which it is superfluous to repeats
here. And herewith I claim to have reasoned out the
foundations of the best monarchy, thot^h briefly, yet with,
sufficient clearness. But their mutual interdependence^
or, in other words, the proportions of my dominion, any-
one will easily remark, who will be at the pains to observe
them as a whole with some attention. It remains only
to warn the reader, that I am here ConceivmgdE^afe^
monai^ch;,^.whidLia-JnatiteteA.*5^

which alone these foundations can serve. For a multitude-
tEtlSSifi^'used to another forii' of dominion wiU not
be able without great danger of overthrow to pluck up the
accepted foundations of the whole dominion, and change its-
sntire fabric.

27. And what we have written will, perhaps, be received
with derision by those who limit to the populace only the-
vices which are inherent in aU mortals; and use such.
phrases as, " the mob, if it is not frightened, inspires no-
little fear," and " the populace is either a humble slave, or-
a haughty master," and " it has no truth or judgment/**
etc. But all have one common nature. Only we are-
deceived by power and refinement. Whence it comes that
when two do the same thing we say, " this man may do it
with impunity, that man may not ; " not because the deed^


8ECS. 25-28.] OF MOKUtCHT. 841

but because the doer is different. Haughtiness is a pro-
perty of rulers. Men are haughty, but by reason of an
appointment for a year ; how much more then nobles, that
have their honours eternal ! But their arrogance is glossed
over with importance, luxury, profusion, and a £nd of
harmony of vices, and a certain cultivated folly, and
elegant villany, so that vices, each of which looked at
separately is foul and vile, because it is then most con-
spicuous, appear to the inexperienced and untaught honour-
able and becoming. " The mob, too, if it is not frightened,
inspires no little fear ; " yes, for liberty and slavery are
not easily mingled. Lastly, as for the populace being
devoid of truth and judgment, that is nothing wonderful,
since the chief business of the dominion is transacted be-
hind its back, and it can but make conjectures from the
little, which cannot be hidden. For it is an uncommon
virtue to suspend one's judgment. So it is supreme folly
to wish to transact everything behind the backs of the
citizens, and to expect that they will not judge ill of the
same, and will not give everything an unfavourable inter-
pretation. For if the populace could moderate itself, and
suspend its judgment about things with which it is im-
perfectly acquainted, or judge rightly of things by the
little it knows already, it would surely be more fit to
govern, than to be governed. But, as we said, all have
the same nature. AJ1 gri^ w bflT^^ ■ « y t ' '^ ^ ' ■»' ■ ' ^ ^j and cause
fear if they do not feel it, and everywhere truth is
generally transgressed by enemies or guilty people ; espe-
cially where one or a few have mastery, and have respect
in trials not to justice or truth, but to amount of wealth.

28. Besides, paid soldiers, that are accustomed to military
discipline, and can support cold and hunger, are. likely to
despise a crowd of citizens as very inferior for storming
towns or fighting pitched battles. But that my dominion
is, therefore, more unhappy or less durable, no one of
sound mind will affirm. But, on the contrary, everyone
that judges things fairly will admit, that that dominion is
the most durable of aU, which can content itself with pre-
servii^ what it has got, without coveting what belongs to
others, and strives, therefore, most eagerly by every means
to avoid war and preserve peace.


842 ▲ POLITICAL TSEATI8E. [CHAP. VII.

•

29. But I admit tliat the counsels of sucli a dominion,
can hardly be concealed. But everyone will also admit
with me that it is far better for the right coimsels of a.
dominion to be known to its enemies, than for the evil
secrets of tyrants to be concealed from the citizens. Thej
who can treat secretly of the afEairs of a dominion have it
absolutely under their authority, and, as they plot against
the enemy in time of war, so do they against the citizens:
in time of peace. Now that this secrecy is often service-
able to a dominion, no one can deny ; but that without it
the said dominion cannot subsist, no one will ever prove.
But, on the contrary, to entrust afEairs of state absolutely
to any man is quite incompatible with the maintenance of
liberty ; and so it is folly to choose to avoid a small loss-
by means of the greatest of evils. But the perpetual re-
frain of those who lust after absolute dominion is, that it
is to the essential interest of the commonwealth that it»
business be secretly transacted, and other Hke pretences^
which end in the more hateful a slavery, the more they are-
clothed with a show of utility.

30. Lastly, although no dominion, as far as I know, ha»
ever been founded on all the conditions we have mentioned,
yet from experience itseK we shall be able to prove that-
this form of monarchy is the best, if we consider the causes
of the preservation and overthrow of any dominion that is
not barbarous. But this I could not do without greatly
wearying the reader. However, I cannot pass over in
silence one instance, that seems worth remembering: X
mean the dominion of the Arragonese, who showed a sin*
gular loyalty towards their kings, and with equal constancy
preserved unbroken the constitution of the kingdom. For
as soon as they had cast off the slavish yoke of the Moors,
they resolved to choose themselves a king, but on what
conditions they could not quite make up their minds, and
they therefore determined to consult the sovereign pontiff
of Bome. He, who in this matter certainly bore mmself
as Christ's vicar, blamed them for so obstmately wishing-
to choose a king, unwarned by the example of the Hebrews.
However, if they would not change their minds, then he
advised them not to choose a king, without first instituting
customs equitable and suitable to the national genius, and


6ECS. 29, 30.] OF MONASCHY. 343

above all lie would have them create some siapreme council,
to balauce the king's power like the ephors of the Lace-
daemonians, and to have absolute right to determine the
disputes, which might arise between the king and the
citizens. So then, following this advice, they established
the laws, which seemed to them most equitable, of which
the supreme interpreter, and therefore supreme judge, was
to be, not the king, but the council, which they call the
Seventeen, and whose president has the title of Justice.^
This Justice then, and the Seventeen, who are chosen for
life, not by vote but by lot, have the absolute right of re-
vising and annulling aQ sentences passed upon any citizen
by other courts, civil or ecclesiastical, or by the kmg him-
self, so that every citizen had the right to summon the
kini? himself before this council. Moreover, they once had
thTright of electing aoxd deposing the king. But after the
lapse of many years the king, Don Pedro, who is called the
D^r, by cLrassing. bribery. pn>mise8,and every sort of
practice, at length procured the revocation of this right.
And as soon as he gained his point, he cut o£E, or, as I
would sooner beHeve, wounded his hand before them all,
saying, that not without the loss of royal blood could sub-
jects be allowed to choose their king.* Yet he effected this
change, but upon this condition, " That the subjects have
had and shall have the right of taking arms against any
violence whatever, whereby any may wish to enter upon
the dominion to their hurt, nay, against the king himself,
or the prince, his heir, if he thus encroach." By which
condition they certainly rather rectified than aboKshed that
right. For, as we have shown (Chap. IV. Sees. 5, 6), a
kmg can be deprived of the power of ruling, not by the
civil law, but by the law of war, in other words the sub-
jects may resist his violence with violence. Besides this
condition they stipulated others, which do not concern our

1 See Hallam's " History of the Middle Ages," Chap. IV., for the
constitutional history of Arragon. Hallam calls the Justiza the Jus-
ticiary, but the literal translation, Justice, seems warranted by our own
English use of the word to designate certain judges.

^ Hallam says, that the king merely cut the obnoxious Privilege of
Union, which he describes rather differently, through with his sword.
The Privilege of Union was so utterly ^' eradicated from the records of
the kingdom, that its precise words have never been recovered."


844 ▲ POLITICAL TREATISE. [SECS. 30, 81.

present design. Having by these customs given themselves
a constitution to the mind of all, they continued for an in-
credible length of time unharmed, the king's loyalty to-
wards his subjects being as great as theirs towards him.
But after that the kingdom fell by inheritance to Ferdi-
nand of Castile, who first had the surname of Catholic ;
this liberty of the Arragonese began to displease the
Castihans, who therefore ceased not to urge Ferdinand to
abolish these rights. But he, not yet being accustomed to
absolute dominion, dared make no such attempt, but re-
phed thus to his coimsellors : that (not to mention that he
had received the kingdom of Arragon on those terms, which
they knew, and had most solemnly sworn to observe the
same, and that it was inhuman to break his word) he was
of opinion, that his kingdom would be stable, as long as its
safety was as much to the subjects' as to the king's inte-
rest, so that neither the king should outweigh the subjects,
nor yet the subjects the king ; for that if either party were
too powerful, the weaker would not only try to recover its
former equality, but in vexation at its injury to retaliate
upon the other, whence would follow the ruin of either or
both. Which very wise language I could not enough
wonder at, had it proceeded from a king accustomed to
command not freemen but slaves. Accordingly the Arra-
gonese retained their liberties after the time of Ferdinand,
though no longer by right but by the favour of their too
powerful kings, until the reign of Philip 11., who oppressed
them with better luck, but no less cruelty, than he did the
United Provinces. And although PhiHp HE. is supposed
to have restored everything to its former position, yet the
Arragonese, partly from eagerness to flatter the powerful
(for it is foUy to kick against the pricks), partly from
terror, have kept nothing but the specious names and
. empty forms of liberty.
. 31. We conclude, therefore, that the multitude may
preserve under a king an ample enough liberty ; if it con-
trive that the king's power be determined by the sole
power, and preserved by the defence of the multitude
itself. And this was the single rule which I followed in
laying the foundations of monarchy.


6ECS. 1, 2.]


OF ARISTOCRACY.


ZU


CHAPTEE VIIL


OP AEISTOCEACT.

SO far of monarcliy. But now we will say, on what
plan an aristocracy is to be framed, so that it may be
lasting. We have defined an aristocratic dominion as that,
which is held not by one man, but by certai n persons
chosen out oithe mi^tude, whom we shall h^li^f OVCK call
patrician s. I say expressly, " that which is held by certain
persons chosen." For the chie f difference between t his
a nd a d e mocracy is . tlmttl^ ft,j*^^ in^;

anTaristocracy on elec tio^ aCToo cr acylS rlEh^

f orfim eTas we shall explain in its placed : and therefore,
although in any dominion the entire multitude be received
into the number of the patricians, provided that right of
theirs is not inherited, and does not descend by some law
to others, the dominion will for all that be quite an aristo-
cracy, because none are received into the number of the
patricians save by express election. But if these chose n
persons were but two,jBach OjLthexa>»'ViU.ij:yJtfl> j^e. jaore
pOW^IffUl tftan' thfiT other, and from the too great power of
eaLch,*lhe dTOdbaionjwill easily be split into two factions ;
and in^EEe manner"'into t hfe^npurr Qr five facSons! if
three, four, or five persons were put into possession of it.
But the factioasjaUJbfiJhe. we§ikfir#JthajaiaifiihQre are to
whom the dominion was delegated. And hence it follows,
that to secure J;h^^abilj^i)£jui.A^ ..

to C0hsiderT;Ee prnpm4jOTin.f.ft^ij7ftjr^ th^ fTnTmryJoPj in ^

orSer^to deteiini&e the^mliuiuum nuzobev <o£ patficians.

2. Let it be supposedj then, that for a dominion of mo-
derate size it suffices to be allowed a hijiTidred of the best
men, and that upon them has been conferred the supreme
authority of the dominion, and that they have consequently
H^ right to elft^t thftir pfltrician colleagues, when any of


\


846 A POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. VIII

the mimber die. These men will certainly endeavour U
secure their succession to their children or next in blood
And thus the supreme authority of the dominio n wiU
always be with^oSl37Vih(jmHfoTtTme"faan ga>de chilaren 6i
Idiismeii lEo gaJH^g^^ ' 2ud7as dut^of a Kund reA men' wEfl

, riseTo*dffice by fortune, hardly threjB are joun d that exce l
in knowledge and counsel, it will tHus come to pass, ihat
tfie authorityoF^e 3oinmion will rest, not wi th a hundred ,

\but oidywitii. two ..or three who excel by^r igQur of mind.
and who will easily di^jw to themselves e verithin^ . and
each of them, as is the wont of human greed, wiUJ>eableto
prepare the way to a monarchy. And so, if we^ake a
right caldttlatiOn, it is necessary, that the supreme autho-

^ rity of a dominion, whose size requires at least a h undre d
Quatsfate men, should be conferred on not le ss than"^ ve
thgjjgftnd. For by this proportion it will nev erTao l, bxnra
hundred shall l5e found excSling in 'xnetrtal "vigour, that isj
on the hypothesis that, out of fifty that seek and obtain
office, one will always be found not less than first-rate, besides
others that imitate the virtues of the first-rate, and arc
therefore worthy to rule.

3. The patricians are most commonly citizens of one city ,
whichi. is the head pl^^the.jsrjjole domiiuon, so 'IBSTTne
commonwealth or republic has its name"trom it, as onc€
that of Bome, and now those of Venice, G^enoa, etc. But
the republic of the Dutch has its name from an entire pro-
vince, whence it arises, that the subjects of this .dominion
enjoy a greater liberty. Now, before we can determine the
foundations on which this aristocratic dominion ought to
rest, we must observe a verv great difference, which exists
between the dommion which is conferred on one- man and
that which is conferred on a sufficiently large-oounciL
For, in the first place, the power of one man is (as we said,
Chap. VI. Sec. 5) very inadequate to support the _©Qtire
dominion ; but tlus no one, without manifest absurdity, can
afifih of a sufficiently large council. For, in declaring the
council to be sufficiently large, one at the same time denies,
that it is inadequate to support the dominion. A king,
* therefore, is altogether in need of counsellors, but a council
like this is not so in the least. In the second place, kings
are mortal, but councils are everlasting. And so the power


SECS. 2-5.] OP ABISTOCRACT. 347"

of the dominion which has once been transferred to a large
enou^ coujijSf never reYerts to thfij uultitalde. But t his is
"othe^nSe in a " monarchy, as we showed (Chap. VJJL.
Sec. 25). Thirdly, a king's dominion is often on. j\tf-
ferance, whether from his mS.brity,'sictness, or old age, or'
from other causes ; but the power of a council j^f .tJaia If inri ,
on the contrary, remains always one and the same. In the
fourth place, one man's wflTis very fluctuating aiid inconv .
stant ; and, therefore, in" a monarchy, all law i s, in deed, the
e^licit will of the king (as we said. Chap. Vii. Sec. 1)^
but not every will of the king ought to be law ; but this,
cannot be said of the will of a sufficiently numerous council.
For since thejcoun)^_ itself , as we have iust sj^ Qwty n^ ^s.

no coTins^fors,lts..ftYfiiy.©>IP^<^^ -^^

hence "wS" conclude, tluit the dominion conferred upon a

large enough cou^sil is abspr&g;;bl.apTOg^^

the absolufeV I'or d there be any absolute dominion, it is,.

m fact, that which is held by an entire multitude.

4. Yet in so far as this aristo firatifi (^omiTiinTi never (aa
has just been shown) rftvprj^aj^n th^ Trmltitn^ft^ and there ia
under it no consultation with the multitude, but, without
qualification, ^very will of the council is law, it must bo
considered as " quite absolut e, and therefore i ts found ations
ought to rest only on tfie will and judgment of the said
council, and not on the watchfulness qg the multitude,
smce the latter is excluded from giving its advice or its
vote. ThejieasOTi, then, w hy in p ractice ari stocracy is not jr
absolute, is that the mult itude is a oiUBe o f fear "to "lEhe
r ulers , and therefore succeeds m fefaSing for itself some
li berty, which it asserts and holds as its own, if not by an
^^^^^^lU.l^^V^.%Wxl imderstan^i£gr

"5.' And thus it is manifest that this kind of dominion
will b eijg the best possible condition, if^its institutions are
such that it most nearly appro acEes t heli^s olute-— is, "
that the mu IStude is as lit tleas possible tTcause of fear,
and retains no liberty, but su(3i as miLst*necessafiIy'be as-
signed it by~the law of the dominion itself, and is therefore
not so much a right of the multitude as of the whole
dominion, asserted and maintained by the aristocrats only
as their own. For thus practice agrees best with theory,,
as appears from the last section, and is also self-evident.


848 A POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. YIU.

For we cannot doubt that the dominion rests the less with
t he patriciBT) H^ thfi^ . V^QX§.. j^^ts_ thgL-^TTTnOTlfl P'^Pfirft f^^
themselves, such as those which the corporations of artisans
inTiOwer Grermany, commonly called Guilds, generally
possess.

6. But the commons need n ot appr^end any dan ger of
a hateful slavery from this form of dominion, merely be-
oause it is conferred on the council absolutely. For the will
of so large a council cannot be so much determi ned byl tist
as^by'reai on;" because mOT"a.i*e'dra?TOaSu^ by an evil
passion, and cannot be guided, as it were, by one mind,
except so far as they desire things honourable, or that have
at least an honourable appearance.

7. In determining, then, the foiinclatioAi|_fiL.aD..Aligto-
-cracy, it is above aU to be observed, that they should rest
<xrr the sole will and power of the supreme coimcil» s6TEat


t ips s, which are to rest, I say,lipon the sole" will aid power
of the council, l^t us see what foundations of pe ace a re
p^giUiar.ta juajmrcby^and unsuited f n f^^^a fnrjtr nr f[<[^
mijaion. For if we substitute for these equivalent founda-
tions fit for an aristocracy, and leave the rest, as they are
already laid, we shall have removed without doubt eveiy
cause of seditions ; or, at least, this kind of dominion wiU
be no less safe than the monarchical, but, on the contrary,
60 much the more so, and of so much better a condition, as,
without danger to peace and liberty, it approaches nearer
than monarchy to the absolute (Sees. 3, 6). For the greate r
th£jight-af Jiha-supreme authority, the more the form of
dominion agrees with the dictate of .reason (Chfep. TIL
Sec. 5^), and, therefore, the fitter it is to maintain peace
and liberty. Let us run through, therefore, the points we
stated in our sixth chapter, beginning with the ninth sec-
tion, that we may reject what is unfit for this kin^of
dominion, aiid sea. wEat jaigrees with.it

8. That it is necessary, in the first place, to f pund S ffid
fortify onf^ nrmorft fliti^fii, n^ one can doubt. But that city
is above all to be fortified, which is the head of the whole

^ Ought not this reference to be to Chap. III. Sec. 6 ?


3SCS. 5-9.] OF ABISTOCBACT. 349

lominioii, and also those tliat are on its frontiers. For
bhat which is the head of the whole dominion, and has the
supreme right, ought to be more powerful than the rest.
But under this kind of dominion it is quite unnecessary to .
iivide all the inhabitants into clans.

9. As for thejxuliiajY, since under this dominion eqiiaUty
Is not to be looked for among all, but between the patri-
3mns only, and, in particular, the power dUilrerpaMcians is
greater than that of the commons, it is certain that it
makes no difference to the laws or fundamental principles
of this dominion, that the military be formed of others
besides subjects.^ But it ia of the first i mporta nce that no
one be admitted into the number of the pairiciaiis, that has *
n ot TiT'pfoper knoWl6d gj3 of 'flbie art bifw^ . But for the
subjects to be exciuae^ aS^ sbiiie'wSTilA BHve it, from mili-
tary service, is surely folly. For besides that the military
pay given to subjects remains within the reahn, whereas,
on uie contrary, what is paid to a foreign soldiery is alto-
gether lost, the greatest strength of the dominion is also
thereby weakened. For it is certain that those fight with
peculiar valour who fight for altar and hearth. Whence^
also, it is manifest that those are no less wrong, who lay
down that military commanders, tribiines, centurions, etc.,
should be chosen from among the patricians only. For
with what courage will those soldiers fight who are deprived
of all hope of gaining glory and advancement ? But, on the
other hajid, to establish a law forbidding the patricians to^
hire foreign soldiers when circumstances require it, whether
to defend themselves, and suppress seditions, or for any
other reason, besides being inconsiderate, would also be re-
pugnant to the supreme right of the patricians, concerning
which see Sees. 3, 4, 5 of this chapter. But the genera l of
&_£ingle--€m:Q^y,^Tj2£.iha.6atire-ffiilitaiy, ia to be chosen
hn\ jn tfpriigi of lyftr, n.r}(\ fl.TnnTig- the patrida ns Only, and j s
to hold thecommand^for ajfia^^ po«e£of

Being coSinuel'ihefein, or afterwards reappointed. For
this law, necessary as it is under a monarchy, is so above
all under this kind of dominion. For although it is much
easier, as we have said above, to transfer ike dominion

* Cf. Chap. VI. Sec. 10.


B50 A POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. YIIL

from one man to another than from a free council to m
man ; yet it does often happen, that patricians are subdued
\)j their own generals, and that to the mucli greater ham
of the commonwealth. For when a monarcli is remoTed,
it is l»nt a change of tyrant, not of the form of domimoB;
.})ut, under an aristocracy, this cannot happen, withont ai
upsetting of the form of dominion, and a slaughter of tk
greatest men. Of which thing Borne has offered the hkmS
mournful examples. But our reason for saying that, unde
a monarchy, the militia should serve without pay, is her
inapplicable. For since the subjects are excluded froD
giving their advice or votes, they are to be reckoned a
foreigners, and are, therefore, to be hired for service on n
worse t^rms than foreigners. And there is in this case n
•danger of their being distinguished above the rest by th
patricians : nay, further, to avoid the partial judgme
which everyone is apt to form of his own exploits, it i
wiser for the patricians to assign a fixed payment to U
'soldiers for their service.

10. Furthermore, for this same reason, that all but tl
patricians are foreigners, it cannot be without danger 1
the whole dominion, that the lands and houses and tl

o whole soil should remain public property, and be let to (t
inliabitants at a vearly rent. For the subjects having i
part in the domimon would easily, in bad times, all f orsal
their cities, if they could carry where they pleased whi
goods they possess. And, therefore, lands and farma M
not to be let, but goM "^^ "^^^ ffn^jflctfli Jf ?^ OJ^ ffftP^^*^ B?"
tfiey pay every year an aliquot part of the year's produo
etc., as is done in Holland.

11. These points considered, I proceed to the foundatioi
o n which the supreme coufltcil should.- Tiest a5d"15e*^
Bliahfid. We have shown (Sec. 2) that, in a mo3erate-sizc
dominion, this council ought to have about five th pu/MtT
membe rs. And so we must look for means of preventii

, the dominion from gradually getting into fewer hn.T^^g^ ^
of insuring, on the contrary, that the number of membe:
be increased in proportion to the growth of the dominie
itself ; and, next, that between the patricians, equality 1
.as far as possible maintained; and, further, that ^ere ms
be speed and expedition in their counsels, and that th(


.1SECS. 9-13.] OF ABISTOCBACY. 351

tend to the general good ; and, lastly, that the power of the
patricians or coiincil exceed the power of the multitude, yet
.80 that the multitude sufEer no harm thereby.

12. But jealousy causes a great difficulty in maintaining
•our first pomt. Jbor men are, as we liaye said, by nature
■enemies, so that however they be associated, and bound
together by laws, they still retain their nature. And hence


iihat most anstocraciea. y^^x^ fWOf^xJ^.-^SiSSSPiSt^^ -^^^
w£en a given multitude, in search of fresh temtones, has
dEound and cultivated them, it retains, as a whole, its equal
right of dominion, because no man g^yes dpmmion to
.another spontaneously. But aliSLOti^'h every one of them
tfiin^slt fair, that he should have the same right against
smother that that other has against him, he yet thinks it
unfair, that the foreigners that join them shotQd hav ft ft^ual
r ight in tha fjoTpi niATi with fhATHflfl lvea. wh o sought it by
their own toil, and won it at the price of their own blood.
And this not even the foreigners themselves deny, for, of
•course, they migrate thither, not to hold dominion, but for
the benefit of their own private business, and are quite
satisfied if they are but allowed the liberty of transacting
that business in safety. But meanwhile the multitude is
augmented by the influx of foreigners, who gradually ac-
quire the national manners, until at last they are distin-
guished by no other difference than that of incapacity to
get office ; and while their number daily increases, that of
the citizens, on the contrary, is by many causes dimiiu6J)&e£;-
For families often die out, and some persons are disquali-^^,
fied for their crimes, and a great many o.*e driven by
domestic poverty to neglect affairs of state, a^d meanwhile
the more powerful aim at nothing else, 1 it to govern
alone ; and thus the dominion is gradually lirated to a few,
and at length by faction to one. And here we might add
other causes that destroy dominions of this sort ; but as
they are well known, I pass them by, and proceed now to
«tate t he laws by which tM s dominion, of which we are

treating, ought to be maintained^ "'"

13. Thej^rm/urj law of this dommion ought to be that
-which determines t^e pfl>p6rti^mate ntmib6rs"df imtMctigktifl


352 ▲ POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. Till.

aai-Sailltilaide. For a proportion (Sec. 1) ought to be
maintained between the multitude and the patricians, so
that with the increase of the former the number of the
latter should be raised. And this proportion (in accord-
ance with our remarks in the second section) ought to be
ahonf. f^ fty tn oTift. tha.t is, the inequahty be tween the
members of each should never be_^eater. lE^or (Sec. 1)
without destroying the form of dominion, the number of
patricians may be greater than the number of the multi-
titude. But there is no danger except in the smallness
of their number. But how it is to be provided that this
law be kept unbroken, I will presently show in its own
place.

14. Ea> tricians, i n som e places, are chosen only out of

e xpressl y by. law. For not to mention that families often
die out, and that the other families can never be ezdnded
without disgrace, it is also repugnant to the form of this
dominion, Ihat the dignity of patrician should be hereditary
(Sec. 1). But on this system a dominion seems rather a
democracy, such as we have described in Sec. 12, that is in
the hands of very few citizens. But, on the other hand,
to provide against the patricians choosing their own sons
and kinsmen, and thereby against the right of dominion
ri^njainiiig in particular families, is impossible, and indeed
absurd, as I shall slow (Se^ii!t59).^;But provided that
they hold that right by no expreSi Tkw, and that the
rest (I mean, such as are bom within the dominion^ and
■\«5e the vulgar tongue, and have not a foreign wife, and
Are not infamous, nor s-orvants, nor earning their living by
any servile trade, amoiu^ which are to be reckoned those of
a wine-merchant, or I'revrer) are not excluded, the form of
the dominion will, notwithstanding, be retained, and it will
be poeeible to maintain the proportion between the patri-
cians and the m'lltitude. ^

15. But if it be further by law appointed that no.|i^mi^
men be chosen, it will never happen that a few lamilies
hold the right of government in their hands. And, there-
fore, be it by law appointed, that no man that has not
reached his thirtieth year be put on the Hst of candidates.

16. Thirdly, it is next to be ordained, that all the


SECS. 13-19.] OF ABISTOCBACY. 853

patricians must b j B assembled at certain jSxed time s in a •
particular' part of lEe cxTyT and^iBIiat wtoever does not
attend the council, imless he he hindered by illness or some
puhhc business, shall be fined some considerable amoiint.
Por, were it otherwise, most of them would neglect the
public, for the sake of their own private affairs.

17. Let this council's functions be to pass and repeal
laws, and to choose their patrician colleagues, and all the '
ministers of the dominion. For he, that has supreme
right, as we have decided that this council has, cannot give
to anyone authority to pass and repeal laws, without at the
same time abdicating his own right, and transferring it
to him, to whom he gives that power. For he, that has
but for one day only authority to pass and repeal laws, is
able to change the entire form of the dominion. But one
can, without forfeiting one's supreme right, temporarily
entrust to others the daily business of 'dominion to be ad-
ministered according to the established laws. Further-
more, if the ministers of dominion were chosen by any
other but this council, then its members woiQd be more
properly called wards than patricians.

18. Hence some are accustomed to create for the council
a ruler or prince, either for life, as the Venetians, or for a
time, as the Genoese; but yet with such great precautions,
as make it clear enough, that it is not done without great
risk. And assuredly we cannot doubt but that the do-
minion thereby approaches the monarchical form, and as
far as we can conjecture from their histories, it was done
for no other reason, than that before the institution of
these coTindls they had lived under a ruler, or doge, as
under a king. And so the creation of a niler is a necessary
requisite indeed for the particular nation, but not for the
aristocratic dominion considered in itself.

19. But, inasmuch as the supreme authority of thi s

ilnTniTiinTi rftsts with this nmiTiHI a fl fl. whole, not with ftyflfv

^^(J iyjid m^^ •mATn' hftr fff it (for otherwise it would be but
the gathering of an undisciplined mob), it is, therefore,
necessary thq,t all *hft jQaWm^^ }^ aq ^i^d by the ^q.ws>i

a rffrfnrm . a fl ltrw ftfft,,Q no ,.l^yjKye3Sgi^^-.^^^
But the laws by themselves alone are weak and easily

broken, when their vindicators are the very persons who

A A


854 A POLITICAL TBEATZSE. [CHAF. TUL |

are able to transgress them, and the onlj ones who azeto
take warning by the punishment, and must punish their
colleagues in order hj fear of the same punishment to
restrain their own desire : for all this inTolTes a great ib*
surdity. And, therefore, T|pif>«.Tig Trmqt "j^ flf^^ght topraiCTiP .
order in this supreme ..QfiWCilftn4;k§^tuibrpken.,^(jflBafr r
tution of the dominion, so that yet^ the greatest poaaUe i
equality may exist between patncj,^ns.

20. feut smce, from a single ruler or prince, able also to
vote in the debates, there must necessarily arise a great i
inequality, especially on account of the power, which nmrt i
of necessity be granted him, in order to enable him to ,
discharge his duty in safety ; therefore, if we consider the j
whole matter aright, nothing can be devised more useful
to the general welfare than the institution o£_anfltber
council of certain patricians subordinate to the .Bnnxeme
cquiicii, "whose only duty should be to see that.thfi-iaoiiuti'
tutig>ni. as far. as it concerns the coun<dls and minii^tei8-i>^
the dominion, be kept unbroken, and who should, therefoie,
have Q,uthority to summon to ^udginent and» in conformitr
with established law, to condemn any delinquent who^ as a
minister of the dominion, has transgressed £Ee! lairs con-
cerning his office. And these patricians we shall hereafter
call s^iiiiJGB.

21. And they are to be chosen for, life. For, were they
to be chosen for a time, soTEat they should afterwards k
eligible for other offices in the dominion, we should fall
into the very absurdity which we have just pointed out in
the nineteenth section. But lest they should become quite
haughty by very long rule, none are to be elected to this
office, but those who have reached their sixtieth ye ar or more^
and have discharged the duties of senator, of which below.

22. Of these, too, we shall easily determine the number,
if we consider that these syndics stand to the patricians in
the same relation as the whole body of patricians together
does to the multitude, which they cannot govern, if they
are fewer than a proper number. And, therefore, the
number of the syndics should be to that of patricians as
their number is to that of the multitude, that is (Sec. 13),
as one to fifty.

- 23. Moreover, that this council may discharge its func-


BECS. 19-25.] OF ABISTOCBACY. 355

tions in security, some portion of the soldiery must be*
Bissigned to it, and be subject to its orders.

24. The syndics and other ministers of state are to have ..
QO salary, but such emoluments, that they cannot malad-
minster affairs of state without great loss to themselves.
For we cannot doubt that it is fair, that the ministers of
this kind of dominion should be awarded a recompense for
their time, since the commons are the majority in this
dominion, and the patricians look after their safety, while
they themselves have no trouble with affairs of state, but
only with their own private ones. But since, on the other
liandy no man (Chap. Vii. Sec. 4) defends another's
cause, save in so far as he thereby hopes to establish his
own interest, things must, of necessity, be so ordered that
the ministers, who have charge of affairs of state, shotQd
most pursue their own interest, when they are most watch-
ful for the general good.

25. To the syndics then, whose duty, as we said, it is to
see that the constitution is kept unbroken, the following
emoluments are to be awarded : namely, that every house- ••
holder that inhabits any place in the dominion, be bound
to pay every year a coin of small value, say a quarter of
an ounce of silver, to the syndics, that thus they niay
know the number of inhabitants, and so observe whatt
proportion of them the patricians constitute; and next
that every new patrician on his election must pay the
syndics some large sum, for instance, twenty or twenty-five
poTinds of silver. Moreover, that money, in which the
absent patricians (I mean those who have failed to attend
the meeting of the coiincil) are condemned, is also to be
awarded to the syndics ; and a part, too, of the goods of
defaulting ministers, who are bound to abide their judg-
ment, and who are fined a certain sum of money, or have
their goods confiscated, should be devoted to them, not to
all indeed, but to those only who sit daily, and whose duty
it is to summon the coiincal of syndics, concerning whom
see Sec. 28. But, in order that the council of syndics may
always be maintained at its full number, before all other
business in the supreme council, when it is assembled at
the usual time, inquiry is to be made about this. Which,
if the syndics neglect, let it then devolve upon the presi-


356 ▲ POLITICAL TBSATIBE. [cHAP. TIIX.

dent of the senate (concerning which we shall soon have
occasion to speak), to admonish the supreme coTmcil q&
this head, to demand of the president of the syndics the
reason of his silence, and to inquire what is the sapreme
coTincil's opinion in the matter. But if the presidBnt of
the senate is likewise silent, let the case be taken up hy the
president of the supreme court of justice, or if he too is
silent by some other patrician, and let hiia demand an
explanation of their ralence from the presidents of the
senate and the court of justice, as well as from the presi-
dent of the syndics. Lastly, that that law, whereby yonn^
men are excluded, may likewise be strictly observed, it
is to be appointed that all who have reached the thiitieth
year of their age, and who are not by express law excluded,
are to have their names inscribed on a list, in presence of
the syndics, and to receive from them, at a fixed price,
some sign of the honour conferred on them, namely, that
they may be aUowed to wear a particular ornament only
permitted to them, to distinguish them and make them to
be had in honour by the rest; and, at the same time, be it
ordained, that in elections none may nominate as patriciaa
anyone whose name is not inscribed on the general list,
and that under a heavy penalty. And, further, let no one
be allowed to refuse the burden of a duty or office, which
he is chosen to bear. Lastly, that aU the absolutely funda-
mental laws of the dominion may be everlasting, it must
be ordained that if anyone in the supreme council raise a
question about any fundamental law, as of prolonging the
command of any general of an army, or of fJiTnininliiTig the
number of patricians, or the like, he is guilty of treason,
and not only is he to be condemned to death, and his goods
confiscated, but some sign of his punishment is to remain
visible in public for an eternal memorial of the event. But
for the confirming of the other general rights of the do-
minion, it is enough, if it be only ordained, that no law
can be repealed nor new law passed, imless first the college
of syndics, and then three-fourths or four-fifths of the
supreme council agree thereto.

26. Let the right also of summoning the supreme council
and proposing the matters to be decided in it, rest with the
syndics, and let them likewise be given the first place in


^ECS. 25-28.] OF ABISTOCltACT, 857

the council, but without the right to vote. But before thej
take their seats, they must jrwear by the safety o f that
su^^e^cpmxcil and by. the public-IU)eriyy Sat^tii^ will
strive jnth tbio utmost zeal to preserve unbroken the
ancient laws, ai^d to consul good. After which

leFlhem through ibheir secretary open in order the subjects
of discussion.

27. But that all the patricians may have e gyflj ftVthftTl^fy
Tinfl.TriTi g decrees and electing the min isters of the do-

mmioa. and that speed and expedition m all matters may
be^wssible, the order observed by the Venetians is alto-
gether to be approved, for they appoint by lot a certain
number of the council to name the ministers, and when
these have named in org g r t l^ candidates for ofEice, every
patrician signifies bv MiiotT Bs opinion, approving or re-
jecting the candidate m question, so that it is not after-
wards known, who voted in this or that sense. Whereby
it is contrived, not only that the authority of all the patri-
cians in the decision is equal, and that business is quickly
despatched, but also, that everyone has absolute liberty
(wMch is of the first necessity in coimcils) to give his
opinion without danger of unpopxdarity.

28. But in the councils of syndics and the other councils, «
the same order is to be observed, that voting is to be by
ballot. But the right of convoking the counol of syndics
and of proposing the matters to be decided in the same
ought to belong to tl^fiil^^ttdfiot, who is to sit every day
with ten or more other syndics, to hear the complaints and
secret accusations of the commons against the ministers,
and to look after the accusers, if circumstances require, and
to summon the supreme council even before the appointed
time, if any of them judge that there is danger in the
delay. Now this^^^gjdent and those who meet with him
every day are to be appointed by the sufoemie. council and
out of the number oi syndics, not indeed for life, but for*
six months, and they must not have their term renewed
but after the lapse of three or four years. And these, as
we said above, are to be awarded the goods that are confis-
cated and the pecxmiary fines, or some part of them. The
remaining points which concern the syndics we will men-
tion in their proper^places.


858 A POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAP. TUL

29. The second council^ which is snbordiiiate to the

* supreme one, we will call the senate, and let its duij he te
transact public business, for instance, to publish the lavs
of the dominion, to order the fortifications of the citieB
according to law, to confer military commissionBy toimpoM
taxes on the subjects and apply the same, to answer foreigB
embassies, and decide where embassies are to be sent. But
let the actual appointment of ambassadors be the duty of
the supreme council. Por it is of the greatest consequence
to see that no patrician be called to any of&ce in the domi*
nion but by the supreme coiincil itself, lest the patzicianB
themselyes should try to curry favour with the senate.

* Secondly, all matters are to be referred to the supreme
council, which in any way alter the existing state of things^
as the deciding on peace and war. Wheref ore, that &e
senate's decrees concerning peace and war may be Tahd,
they must be confirmed by the supreme council. And
therefore I should say, that it belonged to the supreme
coTindl only, not to the senate, to impose new taxes.

30. In determining the number of senators these points
are to be taken into consideration: first, that aU the
patricians should have an equal hope of gaining senatorial
rank; secondly, that notwithstanding the same senators,
whose time (for which they were elected) is elapsed, may
be continued after a short interval, that so the dominion
may always be governed by skilled and experienced men ;
and lastly, that among the senators many may be found
illustrious for wisdom and virtue. But to secure all these
conditions, there can be no other means devised, than that
it should be by law appointed, that no one who has not

, reached his fiftieth year, be received into the number of
^ senators, and that four hundred, that is about a twelftibi
part of the patricians, be appointed for a year, and that
two years after that year has elapsed, the same be capable
of re-appointment. Por in this manner about a twelfth
part of the patricians will be constantly engaged in the
duty of senator, with only short intervening periods ; and
this number surely, together with that made up by the
syndics, will be little less than the number of patricians
that have attained their fiftieth year. And so all the
patricians will always have a great hope of gaining the rank


8ECS. 29-31.] OF ABISTOCBACT. 359

of senator or syndic, and yet notwithstanding, the same
patricians, at only short intervals, will always hold sena-
torial rank, and (according to what we said, Sec. 2) there
will never be wanting in the senate distinguished men, ex-
celling in counsel and skill. And because this law cannot
be broken without exciting great jealousy on the part of
many patricians, it needs no other safeguard for its con-
stant vaJidily, tlxan that every patrician who has reached
the age we mentioned, should offer the proof thereof to the
syndics, who shaU put his name on the Ust of candidates
for the sengitorial duties, and read the name before the
supreme council, so that he may occupy, with the rest of
the same rank, a place set apart in this supreme council
for his fellows, next to the place of the senators.

31. The emoluments of the senators should be of such a i
kind, that their profit is greater from peace than from
war. And therefore let there be awarded to them a hun-
dredth or a fiftieth part of the merchandise exported
abroad from the dominion, or imported into it from abroad.
For we cannot doubt, that by tlus means they will, as far
as they can, preserve peace, and never desire to protract
war. And from this duty not even the senators themselves,
if any of them are merchants, ought to be exempt ; for such
an immunity cannot be granted without great risk to trade,
as I think no one is ilnorant. Kay, on the contrary, it
must be by law ordained, that no senator or ex-senator
may fill any military post ; and further, that no one may
be declared general or praetor, which officers we said
(Sec. 9) were to be only appointed in time of war, whose
father or grandfather is a senatoi:, or has held the dignity
of senator within two years. Which laws we cannot doubt,
that the patricians outside the senate will defend with all
their might : and so it will be the case, that the senators
will always have more profit from peace than from war,
and will, therefore, never advise war, except the utmost
need of the dominion compels them. But it may be ob-
jected to us, that on this system, if, that is, syndics and
senators are to be allowed so great profits, an aristocracy *
will be as burdensome to the subjects as any monarchy.
But not to mention that royal courts require larger expen-
diture, and are yet not provided in order to secure peace.


860 A POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAF. YHI.

and that peace can never be bought too dear ; it is to be
added, first, that all that under a monarcbj is conferred on
one or a few, is here conferred upon very manj. Next
kings and their ministers do not bear the burden of the
dominion with the subjects, but under this form, of domi-
nion it is just the reverse; for the patricians, who are
always chosen from the rich, bear the largest share of the
weight of the commonwealth. Lastly, the burdens of a
monarchy spring not so much from its long's expenditure,
as from its secret policy. For those burdens of a dominion,
that are imposed on the citizens in order to secure peace
and liberty, great though they be, are yet supported and
lightened by the usefulaess of peace. What nation ever
had to pay so many and so heavy taxes as the Dutch ? Yet
it not only has not been exhausted, but, on the contrary,
has been so mighty by its wealth, that all envied its good
fortune. If therefore the burdens of a monarchy were im-
posed for the sake of peace, they would not oppress the
citizens ; but, as I have said, it is from the secret policy of
that sort of dominion, that the subjects faint under tlieir
lord ; that is, because the virtue of kings counts for more
in time of war than in time of peace, and because they, who
would reign by themselves, ought above all to try and have
their subjects poor ; not to mention other things, which
that most prudent Dutchman V. H.* formerly remarked,
because they do not concern my design, which is only to
describe the best state of every kind of dominion.

32. Of the syndics chosen by the supreme council, some
' should sit in the senate, but without the right of voting,
so that they may see whether the laws concerning that
assembly be duly observed, and may have the supreme
council convoked, when anything is to be referred to it
from the senate. For the supreme right of convoking this
council, and proposing to it subjects of discussion, is, as we
have already said, with the syndics. But before the votes
of the contemporaries of the senators be taken, the pre-


l (C


This V. H. is Pieter de la Court (1618-85), an errinent publicist,
who wrote under the initials D. C. (De la Court), V. H. (Van den Hove,
the Dutch equivalent). He was a friend of John de Witt, and opposed
to the party of the Statholders." — Pollock's Life and Pkilo80p%f qf
Spinoza, towards end of Chap. X«


8SCS. 31-34.] OF ABISTOCBACT. 361

sident of the senate for tHe time being shall explain the
state of affairs, and what the senate's own opinion is on the
matter in qjuestion, and why ; after which the votes shall
be collected in the accustomed order.

33. The entire senate ought not to meet every day, but,
like all great councils, at a certain fixed time. But as in
the mean time the business of the dominion must be
executed, it is, therefore, necessary that some part of the
senators be chosen, who, on the dismissal of the senate,
shall supply its place, and whose duty it shall be to summon
the senate itself, when need is ; to execute its orders about
affairs of state ; to read letters written to the senate and
supreme council ; and, lastly, to consult about the matters
to be proposed in the senate. But that all these points,
and the order of this assembly, as a whole, may be more
easily conceived, I will describe the whole matter more
precisely.

34. The senators who, as we have said already, are to be
chosen for a year, are to be divided into four or six series,
of which let the first have the first seat in the senate for
the first three or two months in the year ; and at the ex-
piration of this time, let the second series take the place of
the first, and so on, observing their turns, so tlutt that
series which was first in the first months may he last in
the second period. Furthermore, there are to be appointed
as many presidents as there are series, and the same
number of vice-presidents to fill their places when re-
quired — that is, two are to be chosen out of every series,
one to be its president, the other its vice-president. And
let the president of the first series preside in the senate
also, for the first months ; or, in his absence, let his vice-
president fill his place ; and so on with the rest, observing
the same order as above. Next, out of the first series,
eome are to be chosen by vote or lot to fill the place of the
senate, when it is dismissed, in conjunction with the presi-
dent and vice-president of the same series; and that, for the
same space of time, as the said series occupies the first place
in the senate ; and thus, when that time is past, as many
are again to be chosen out of the second series, by vote or
lot, to fill, in conjunction with their president and vice-
president, the place of the first series, and supply the lack


UTiBB. [chap, r

of a senate ; and ao on with the rest. And there is no ni
that the eleddon of these men — I mean those that I hi
said are to be chosen for periods of three or two mont
by Tote or lot — should be made by the supreme cotm
For the reason which we gave in the tweuty-ninth sect
is not here applicable, much lesa the reason stated in <
seventeenth. It suffices, then, that they be elected by '
senate and the syndics present at its meeting.

I 35. But of these persons we cajmot so precisely aac
tain the number, HowoTer, this is certain, that they m
be too numerous to be easily susceptible of cormpti
For though they can by themselves determine nothing o
ceming affairs of state, yet they can delay the senate,
what would be worst of aU, delude it by putting forwi
matters of no importance, ajid keeping ba.^ those that i
of greater— not to mention that, if they were too few, i
absence of one or two might delay public busineBB. I
as, on the contrary, these consuls are for that very real
appointed, because great councils cannot devote themBet
eveiy da^ to public business, a remedy must be looked
necessarily here, and their inadequacy of number be nu
up for by the shortness of their term of office. And th

•■ if only thirteen or so be chosen for two or three mont
they will be too many to be corrupted in this sh
penod. And for this cause, also, did I recommend tl
their successors should by no means be appointed, exo
at the very time when they do succeed, and the othera
away.

36. We have said, that it is also their dut^, when a
though few, of them tbinlc it needful, to convoke the sen^
to put before it the matters to be decided, to disnusa it, s
to execute its orders about pubhc business. But I will n
briefly state the order in which this ought to be done,
that business may not be long protracted by useless qu
tiona. Let, then, the consuls consult about the matt^
be proposed in the senate, and what is required to be doi
and, if they are all of one mind about it, then let th
convoke the senate, and, having duly explained the qu
tion, let them set forth what their opinion is, and, witht
waiting for another's opinion, collect the votes in th
order. But if the consiUs support more than one opini


fiSCS. 34-37.] OF ABISTOCEACT. 363*

then, in the senate, that opinion is first to be stated on the
question proposed, which was supported by the larger
number of consuls. And if the same is not approved by
the majority of senate and consuls, but the waverers and
opponents together are in a majority, which is to be deter*
mined by ballot, as we have already mentioned, then let
them set forth the second opinion, which had fewer votes
than the former among the consuls, and so on with the-
rest. But if none be approved by a majority of the whole
senate, the senate is to be adjourned to the next day, or
for a short time, that the consuls meanwhile may see, if
they can find other means, that may give more satisfaction..
But if they do not succeed in finding other means, or if the
majority of the senate refuses to approve such as they have
found, then the opinion of every senator is to be heard '^
and if the majority of the senate also refuses to support
any of these, then the votes are to be taken again on every
opinion, and not only the afOxmative votes, as hitherto, but
the doubtful and negative are to be counted. And if the
afOxmative prove more numerous than the doubtful or
negative, then that opinion is to hold good ; but, on the
contrary, to be lost, if the negative prove more numerous
than the doubtful or affirmative. But if on every opinion
there is a greater number of doubters than of voters for
and against, then let the council of syndics join the senate,>
and vote with the senators, with only affirmative and nega-
tive votes, omitting those that signify a hesitating mind.
And the same order is to be observed about matters re-
ferred by the senate to the supreme council. So much
for the senate.

37. As for the court of justice or bench, it cannot rest r
upon the same foundations as that which exists under a.
monarch, as we described it in Chap. YI. Sees. 26, and
following. For (Sec. 14) it agrees not with the founda-
tions of our present dominion, that any account be made
of families or clans. And there must be a further diffe-
rence, because judges chosen from the patricians only
might indeed be restrained by the fear of their patriciai^
successors, from pronouncing any unjust judgment against
any of the patricians, and, perhaps, would haxdly have the
courage to punish them after their deserts; but they


864 ▲ POLITICAL TBEATISB. [CHAP. Tin.

would, on the other hand, dare everything against the
commons, and daily carry off the rich among l^em for a
prey. I know that the plan of the Genoese is therefore
approved by many, for they choose their judges not among
the patricians, but among foreigners. But this seems to
me, considering the matter in the abstract, absurdly or-
dained, that foreigners and not patricians should be called
in to interpret the laws. For what are judges but inter-
preters of the laws? And I am therefore persuaded that
herein also the Genoese have had regard rather to the
genius of their own race, than to the very nature of this
kind of dominion. We must, therefore, by considering the
matter in the abstract, devi^ the means which best agree
with the form of this government.

88. But as far as regards the number of the judges, the
theory of this constitution requires no peculiar number ;
but as under monarchical dominion, so under this, it suffices
that they be too numerous to be corrupted by a private
man. For their duty is but to provide against one private
person doing wrong to another, and therefore to decide dis-
putes between private persons, as weU patricians as com-
mons, and to exact penalties from delinquents, and even
from patricians, syndics, and senators, as far as they have
offended against the laws, whereby all are bound. But
disputes that may arise between cities that are subject to
the dominion, are to be decided in the supreme council.

39. Furthermore the principle regulating the time, for
vliich the judges should be appointed, is the same in both
dominions, and also the principle of a certain part of them
retiring every year ; and, lastly, although it is not neces-
fiary for every one of them to be of a different family, yet
it is necessary that two related by blood should not sit on
the same bench together. And this last point is to be ob-
served also in the other councils, except the supreme one, in
which it is enough, if it be only provided by law that in
•elections no man may nominate a relation, nor vote upon
his nomination by another, and also that two relations may
not draw lots from the iim for the nomination of any
minister of the dominion. This, I say, is sufficient in a
•council that is composed of so large a number of men, and
has no special profits assigned to it. And so utterly un-


8ECS. 37-41.] OF ABISTOCBACT. 365

harmed will tlie dominion be in this quarter, that it is
absurd to pass a law excluding from the supreme council
the relations of all the patricians, as we said in the four-
teenth section. But that it is absurd is manifest. For
that law could not be instituted by the patricians them-
selves, without their thereby all absolutely abdicating their
own right, and therefore not the patricians themselves but
the commons would defend this law, which is directly con-
trary to what we proved in Sees. 5 and 6. But that law of
the dominion, whereby it is ordained that the same uniform
proportion be maintained between the numbers of the
patricians and the multitude, chiefly contemplates this end
of preserving the patricians' right and power, that is, pro-
vides against their becoming too few to be able to govern
the multitude,

40. But the judges are to be chosen by the supreme
council out of the patricians only, that is (Sec. 17) out of
the actual authors of the laws, and the judgments they
pass, as well in civil as criminal cases, shall be valid, if
they were pronounced in due course of justice and without
partiality ; into which matter the syndics shall be by law
authorized to inquire, and to judge and determine thereof^

41. The judges' emoluments ought to be the same, as
we mentioned in the twenty-ninth section of the sixth
chapter ; namely, that they receive from the losing party
upon every judgment which they pass in civil cases, an
aHquot psurt of the whole sum at stake. But as to their
sentences in criminal cases, let there be here this difference
only, that the goods which they confiscate, and every fine
whereby lesser crimes are punished, be assigned to them-
selves only, yet on this condition, that they may never
compel anyone to confess by torture, and thus, precaution
enough will be taken against their being unfair to the
commons, and through fear too lenient to the patricians.
"For besides that this fear is tempered by avarice itself, and
that veiled under the specious name of justice, they are
also numerous, and vote, not openly, but by ballot, so that
a man may be indignant at losing his case, but can have no
reason to impute it to a particular person. Moreover the
fear of the syndics will restrain them from pronouncing
an inequitable, or at least absurd sentence, or from acting


'366 A POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAF. Yin.

anj of them treaclierouslj, besides that in so large a
ntunber of judges there will always be one or two, that the
unfair stand in awe of. Lastly, as far as the commons are
concerned, they also will be adequately secured if they are
allowed to appeal to the syndics, who, as I have said, are
by law authorized to inquire, judge, and determine about
the conduct of the judges. For it is certain that the syndics
will not be able to escape the hatred of the patricians, and
on the other hand, will always be most popular with the
commons, whose applause they will try as far as thej canto
bid for. To which end, opportunity being given them, they
will not fail to reverse sentences pronounced against the
laws of the court, and to examine any judge, and to punish
those that are partial, for nothing moves the hearts of a
multitude more than this. Nor is it an objection, but, on
the contrary, an advantage, that such examples can but
rarely occur. For not to mention that that commonwealth
is ill ordered where examples are daily made of criminal
{as we showed Chap. V. Sec. 2), those events must surely
be very rare that are most renowned by fame.
* 42. Those who are sent as governors to cities and pro-
vinces ought to be chosen out of the rank of senators,
because it is the duty of senators to look after the forti-
fications of cities, the treasury, the military, etc. But those,
who were sent to somewhat distant r^ons, -would be
xmable to attend the senate, and, therefore, those only are
to be summoned from the senate itself, who are destined
to cities founded on their native soil ; but those whom they
wish to send to places more remote' are to be chosen out of
those, whose age is consistent with senatorial rank. But
not even thus do I think that the peace of the dominion
will be sufficiently provided for, that is, if the neighbour-
ing cities are altogether denied the right of vote, unless
they are so weak, that they can be openly set at naught,
wrhich cannot surely be supposed. And so it is necessary,
that the neighbouring cities be granted the right of citizen-
ship, and that from every one of them twenty, or thirty, or
forty chosen citizens (for the number should vary with the
size of the city) be enrolled among the patricians, out of
whom three, four, or five ought to be yearly elected to be
^f the senate, and one for life to be a syndic. And let


SECS. 41-44.] OF ABISTOCBACY. 867

those who are of the senate be sent with their syndic, to
govern the dty out of which they were chosen.

43. Moreover, judges are to he established in every city,
chosen out of the patricians of that city. But of these I
think it iinnecessary to treat at length, because they con-
cern not the foundations of this sort of dominion in
particular.

44. In every council the secretaries and other officials
of this kind, as they have not the right of voting, should •
be chosen from the commons. But as these, by their long
practice of business, are the most conversant with the
a&irs to be transacted, it often arises that more deference
than right is shown to their advice, and that the state of
the whole dominion depends chiefly on their guidance:
which thing has been fatal to the Dutch. For this cannot
happen without exciting the jealousy of many of the
noblest. And surely we cannot doubt, that a senate, whose
wisdom is derived from the advice, not of senators, but of
officials, will be most frequented by the sluggish, and the
condition of this sort of dominion will be little better than
that of a monarchy directed by a few counsellors of the
king. (See Chap. VI. Sees. 6-7). However, to this evil
the dominion will be more or less liable, according as it
was well or ill founded. For the liberty of a dominion is
never defended without risk, if it has not firm enough
foundations; and, to avoid that risk, patricians choose
from the commons ambitious ministers, who are slaughtered ,
as victims to appease the wrath of those, who are plotting
against liberty. But where liberty has firm enough foun-
dations, there the patricians themselves vie for the honour
of defending it, and are anxious that prudence in the con-
duct of affairs should flow from their own advice only ; and
in laying the foundations of this dominion we have studied
above all these two points, namely, to exclude the commons
from giving advice as much as from giving votes (Sees.
3, 4), and, therefore, to place the whole authority of the
dominion with the whole body of patricians, but its exer-
cise with the syndics and senate, and, lastly, the right of
convoking the senate, and treating of matters affecting the
common welfare with consuls chosen from the senate itself.
But, if it is further ordained that the secretary, whether in


368 A POLITICAL TREATISE. [CHAP. Yin.

the senate or in other councils, be appointed for four or
five years at most, and have attached to him an assistant-
secretaiy appointed for the same period, to bear part of
the work during that time, or that the senate have not
one, but several secretaries, employed one in one depart-
ment, and another in another, the power of the officialB
will never become of any consequence.

45. Treasurers are likewise to be chosen from the com-
mons, and are to be bound to submit the treasury accounts
to the syndics as well as to the senate.

46. Matters concerning religion we have set forth at
sufficient length in our ^eologico-Political Treatise. Yet
certain points we then omitted, of which it was not there
the place to treat; for instance, that all the patricians

% must be of the same religion, that is, of that most simple
and general religion, which in that treatise we described.
For it is above iJl to be avoided, that the patricians them-
selves should be divided into sects, and show &voxir, some
to this, and others to that, and thence become mastered by
superstition, and try to deprive the subjects of the liberty
of speaking out their opinions. In the second place, though

• everyone is to be given liberty to speak out his opinion,
yet great conventides are to be forbidden. And, th^ef ore,
those that are attached to another religion are, indeed, to
be allowed to build as many temples as they please ; yet
these are to be small, and limited to a certain standard of
size, and on sites at some little distance one from another.
But it is very important, that the temples consecrated to

, the national religion should be large and costly, and that
only patricians or senators should be allowed to ad-
minister its principal rites, and thus that patricians only
be suffered to baptize, celebrate marriages, and laj on
hands, and that in general they be recognized as the
priests of the temples and the champions and interpretera
of the national religion. But, for preaching, and to
manage the church treasury and its daily business, let
some persons be chosen from the commons by the senate
itself, to be, as it were, the senate's deputies, and, there-
fore, bound to render it account of eveiything.

47. And these are points that concern the fonndationB
of this sort of dominion ; to which I will add aome few


8ECS. 44-49.] OF ABISTOCBACY. 369

others less essential indeed, but jet of great importance.
Namely, tliat the patricians, when they walk, should he «
distinguished by some special garment, or dress, and be
saluted by some special title ; and that every man of the
commons should give way to them; and that, if any
patrician has lost his property by some unavoidable mis-
fortune, he should be restored to his old condition at the
pubhc expense ; but if, on the contrary, it be proved that
he has spent the same in presents, ostentation, gaming,
debauchery, &c., or that he is insolvent, he must lose his
dignity, and be held ijnworthy of every honour and office.
For he, that cannot govern himself and his own private
affairs, will much less be able to advise on pubHc affairs.

48. Those, whom the law compels to take an oath, will
be much more cautious of perjury, if they are bidden to
swear by the country's safety and liberty and by the
supreme council, than if they are told to swear by Q-od.
For he who swears by Q-od, gives as surety some private
advantage to himself, whereof he is judge ; but he, who by
his oath gives as surety his country's liberty and safety,
swears by what is the common advantage of all, whereof
he is not judge, and if he perjures himseK, thereby de-
clares that he is his country's enemy.

49. Academies, that are founded at the public expense, ,
are instituted not so much to cultivate men's natural
abilities as to restrain them. But in a free commonwealth
arts and sciences will be best cultivated to the full, if every-
one that asks leave is allowed to teach publicly, and that
at his own cost and risk. But these and the like points I
reserve for another place.* For here I determined to treat
only such matters as concern an aristocratic dominion
only.

' This promise is not kept by the author, no doubt owing to his not
living to finish the work.


B B


370 A POLITICAL TBEATISB. [CHAP. IX.


CHAPTEE IX,

OF ABISTOCBACY. COKTINTTATIOir.

HITHEETO we have considered ^an aristocracy, so far
as it takes its name from one city, which is the head
of the whole dominion. It is now time to treat of that,
which is in the hands of more than one city, and which I
think preferable to the former. But that we may notice
its difference and its superiority, we will pass in review
the foundations of dominion, one by one, rejecting those
foundations, which are unsuited to the present kind, and
laying in their place others for it to rest upon.

2. The cities, then, which enjoy the right of citizenship,
must be so built and fortified, that, on the one hand, each
city by itself may be unable to subsist without the rest,
and that yet, on the other hand, it cannot desert the rest
without great harm to the whole dominion. For thus they
will always remain tmited. But cities, which are so con-
stituted, that they can neither maintain themselves, nor be
dangerous to the rest, are clearly not independent, but
absolutely subject to the rest.

3. But the contents of the ninth and tenth sections of
the last chapter are deduced from the general nature of
aristocracy, as are also the proportion between the numbers
of the patricians and the multitude, and the proper age and
condition of those that are to be made patricians ; so that
on these points no difference can arise, whether the do-
minion be in the hands of one or more cities. But the
supreme council must here be on a different footing. !Por
if any city of the dominion were assigned for the meeting
of this supreme council, it would in reality be the head of
the dominion ; and, therefore, either they would have to take
turns, or a place would have to be assigned for this
council, that has not the right of citizenship, and belongs


CECS. 1-5.] OF ABISTOCBAOT* 871

^quallj to all. But either altematiye is as difficult to
effect, as it is easy to state ; I mean, either tliat so manj
thousands of men should have to go often outside their
cities, or that they should have to assemble sometimes in
one place, sometimes in another.

4. But that we may conclude aright what should be
done in this matter, and on what plan the councils of this
dominion ought to be formed, from its own very nature
and condition, these points are to be considered ; namely,
that every city has so much more right than a private
man, as it excels him in power (Chap. 11. Sec. 4), and
consequently that every city of this dominion has as much
right within its walls, or the limits of its jurisdiction, as it
has power ; and, in the next place, that all the cities are
mutually associated and imited, not as under a treaty, but
as forming one dominion, yet so that every city has so
much more right as against the dominion than the others,
as it exceeds the others in power. For he who seeks
equality between unequals, seeks an absurdity. Citizens,
indeed, are rightly esteemed equal, because the power of
each, compared with that of the whole dominion, is of no
account. But each city's power constitutes a large part of ••
the power of the dominion itself, and so much the larger,
as the city itself is greater. And, therefore, the cities can-
not all be held equal. But, as the power of each, so also
its right should be estimated by its greatness. The bonds,
however, by which they should be bound into one doi» •
minion, are above all a senate and a court of justice
(Chap. rV. Sec. 1). But how by these bonds they are all
to be so united, that each of them may yet remain, as far
as possible, independent, 1 will here briefly show.

6. I suppose then, that the patricians of every city, who,
according to its size, should be more, or fewer (Sec. 3),
have supreme right over their own city, and that, in that *
city's supreme council, they have supreme authority to
fortify the city and enlarge its walls, to impose taxes, to
pass and repeal laws, and, in general, to do everything
which they judge necessary to their cit/s preservation and
increase. But to manage the common business of the
dominion, a senate is to be created on just the same foot-
ing as we described in the last chapter, so that there be


V


372 A POLITICAL TBEATI8E. [CHAP. IX.

between this senate and the former no difference, except
that this has also authority to decide the dispntesy whicL
may arise between cities. For in this dominion, of which
no city is head, it cannot be done by the snpreme oonndL
(See Chap. VI. Sec. 38.)

»• 6. But, in this dominion, the supreme council is not to
be called together, unless there is need to alter the form of
the dominion itself, or on some difficult business, to which,
the senators shall think themselves unequal ; and so it wiE
very rarely happen, that all the patricians are summoned
to council. For we have said (Chap. VJLLL. Sec. 17), that
the supreme council's function is to pass and[ re peal laws,
and to" choose the mimste ra ot tbe dominio n. '&nt t.hft iawh^
or general constitution ot the whole dominion, ought not to
be changed as soon as instituted. If, however, time and
occasion suggest the institution of some new law or the
change of one already ordained, the question may first be
discussed in the senate, and after the agreement of the
senate in the matter, then let envoys next be sent to the
cities by the senate itself, to inform the patricians of every
city of the opinion of the senate, and lastly, if the majoriiy
of the cities follow that opinion, it shall then remain good,,
but otherwise be of no effect. And this same order may
be observed in choosing the generals of the army and the
ambassadors to be sent to other realms, as also about
decrees concerning the making of war or accepting condi-
tions of peace. But in choosing the other public officials^
since (as we showed in Sec. 4) every city, as far as can be>
ought to remain independent, and to have as much moie
right than the others in the dominion, as it exceeds them
in power, the foUowing order must necessarily be observed-
The genator s are to be j ^^o«<^ti by thft pQ^^^^'^^°^° ^f cif^^]\
city ; thaTisT the patricians of one city are to elect in their
own^council a fixed number of senators from their col-
leagues of their own city, which number is to be to that of
^ the patricians of that city as one to twelve (Chap. v iii.
Sec. 30) ; and they are to designate whom they will to be
of the first, second, third, or other series ; and in like
manner the patricians of the other cities, in proportion to
thdr number, are to choose more or fewer senators, and
distribute them among the series, into a certain number of


8ECS. 5-8.] OF ASISTOCBACY. 873

i/yhicl i we have said the senate is to be divided. (Chap.
Vlii. Sec. 34.) By which means it will result, that in
every series of senators th ere will be found senators of
-^^jTCity, more or fewer, accordixyg to jt&Vfliae^ "But the
^^riad^flts^aiid "Vice-presidents of the series, being fewer
in number than the cities, are to be chosen by lot by the
senate out of the consuls, who are to be appointed first.
The same order is to be maintained in appointing the
supreme judges of the dominion, namely, that the patricians
of every city are to elect from their colleagues in propor-
tion to their number more or fewer judges. And so it will
be the case, that every city in choosing officials will be
as independent as possible, and that each, in proportion to
its power, will have the more right alike in the senate and
the court of justice; supposing, that is, that the order
observed by senate and court in deciding public affairs,
and settling disputes is such in all respects, as we have
•described it in the thirty-third and thirty-fourth sections
of the last chapter.^

7. I^ext, the commanders of battalions and military tri-
bunes are also to be chosen from the patricians. For as it
is fair, that every city in proportion to its size should be
bound to levy a certain number of soldiers for the general
safety of the whole dominion, it is also fair, that from the
patricians of every city in proportion to the number of
regiments, which they are bound to maintain, they may
appoint so many tribunes, captains, ensigns, etc., as are
needed to discipline that part of the military, which they
supply to the dominion.

o. ^o taxes are to be imposed by the senate on the^
subjects ; but to meet the expenditure, which by decree of
the senate is necessary to carry on public business, not
the subjects, but the cities themselves are to be called
to assessment by the senate, so that every city, in propor-
tion to its size, should pay a larger or smaller share of the
expense. And this share indeed is to be exacted by the
patricians of every city from their own citizens in what
way they please, eitiier by compelling them to an assess-
ment, or, as is miKch fairer, by imposing taxes on them.

* So the text : but the court of justice is not described till the thirty-
serenth and following sections of Chap. YIIL


874 A poLinoAL tbejltise. [chap, ix

9. Further, althougli all the cities of this doxninion are
not inaritime, nor the senators summoned from the mari-
time cities onlj, yet may the same emoluments be awaided
to the senators, as we mentioned in the thirty-first section
of the last chapter. To which end it will hie possible to
devise means, varying with the composition of the do-
minion, tov link the cities to one another more closely .
But the other points concerning the senate and the oo^
of justice and the whole dominion in general, which I
delivered in the last chapter, are to be applied to this
dominion also. And so we see, that in a dominion which
is in the hands of several cities, it will not be necessary to
assign a fixed time or place for assembling the supremo
council. But for the senate and court of justice a place is
to be appointed in a village, or in a city, that has not the
right of voting. But I return to those points, which con-
cem the cities taken by themselves.

10. The order to be observed by the supreme council of
a single city, in choosing officials of the dominion and of
the city, and in making deot'ees, should be the same that
I have delivered in the twenty-seventh and thirty-sixth
sections of the last chapter. For the policy is the same
here as it was there. I^ext a council of syndics is to be

T formed, subordinate to the council of the city, and having
the same relation to it as the council of syndics of the last
chapter had to the council of the entire dominion, and let
its functions within the limits of the city be also the same,
and let it enjoy the same emoluments. But if a ciiy, and
consequently the number of its patricians be so small that
it cannot create more than one syndic or two, which, two
are not enough to make a council, then the supreme council
of the city is to appoint judges to assist the syndics in trials
according to the matter at issue, or else the dispute must
be ref erried to the supreme council of syndics. For fxom
every city some also out of the syndics are to be sent to
the place where the senate sits, to see that the constitutiott
of the whole dominion is preserved unbroken, and they
are to sit in the senate without the right of voting.

11. The consuls of the cities are likewise to be chosen
by the patricians of their city, and are to constitute a sort
of senate for it. But their niunber I cannot determine^


8ECS. 9-14.] OF ABISTOCSACY. 375

nor yet do I think it necessarj, since the city's business of
great importance is transacted by its supreme council, and
matters concerning the whole dominion by the great senate.
But if they be few, it will be necessary that they give their
votes in their council openly, and not by ballot, as in large
councils. For in small councils, when votes are given
secretly, by a little extra cunning one can easilv detect the
author of every vote, and in many ways deceive the less
attentive.

12. Besides, in every city judges are to be appointed by n
its supreme council, from whose sentence, however, let
everyone but an openly convicted criminal or confessed
debtor have a right of appeal to the supreme court of justice
of the dominion. But this need not be pursued further.

13. It remains, therefore, to speak of the ntifts whiieh—"
fire fiot independen t. If these were founded in an actual
province or district of the dominion, and their inhabitants
are of the same nation and language, they ought of neces-
sity, like villages, to be esteemed parts of the neighbour-
ing cities, so that each of them should be under the
government of this or that independent city. And the
reason of this is, that the patricians are chosen by the
supreme council, not of the dominion, but of every city,
and in every city are more or fewer, according to the
number of inhabitants within the limits of its jurisdiction
(Sec. 5). And so it is necessary, that the multitude of the
city, which is not independent, be referred to the census of
another which is independent, and depend upon the latter's
government. But cities captured by right of war, and
annexed to the dominion, are either to be esteemed asso-
ciates in the dominion, and though conquered put under
an obligation by that benefit, or else colonies to enjoy the
right of citizenship are to be sent thither, and the natives
removed elsewhere or utterly destroyed,

14. And these are the things, which touch the founda-
tions of the dominion. But that its condition is better
than that of the aristocracy, which is called after one city
only, I conclude from this, namely, that the patricians of
every city, after the manner of human desire, will be eager
to keep, and if possible increase their right, both in their
city and in the senate ; and therefore will try, as far as


876 A POLITICAL TBEATISE. [CHAF. IX.

possible, to attract the multitude to themselves, p,)id con-
sequently to inake a stir in the dominion bj good deeds
rather than by fear, and to increase their own nuniber ; be-
cause the more numerous they are, the more senators they
will choose out of their own council (Sec. 6), and hence the
more right (Sec. 6) they will possess in the dominion. Nor
is it an objection, that while every city is consulting its
own interest and suspecting the rest, they more often
quarrel among themselves, and waste time in disputing.
"For if, while the Eomans are debating, Saguntum is lost : ^
on the other hand, while a few are deciding everything in
conformity with their own passions only, liberty and the
general good are lost. For men's natural abilities are too
dull to see through everything at once ; but by consulting,
listening, and debating, they grow more acute, and while
they are trying all means, they at last discover those
which they want, which all approve, but no one would
have thought of in the first instance. But if anyone retorts,
that the dominion of the Dutch has not long endured
without a count or one to fill his place, let him have this
reply, that the Dutch thought, that to maintain their liberty
it was enough to abandon their count, and to behead the
body of their dominion, but never thought of remoulding
it, and left its limbs, just as they had been first consti-
tuted, so that the county of Holland has remained with-
out a count, like a headless body, and the actual dominion
has lasted on without the name. And so it is no wonder
that most of its subjects have not known, with whom the
authority of the dominion lay. And even had this been
otherwise, yet those who actually held dominion were far
too few to govern the multitude and suppress their power-
ful adversaries. Whence it has come to pass, that the
latter have often been able to plot against them with im-
punity, and at last to overthrow them. And so the sudden
overthrow of the said republic* has not arisen from a
useless waste of time in debates, but from the misf onned
state of the said dominion and the fewness of its rulers.

* Livy, « Hist.," Bk. xxi. Chaps. VI. and following.

^ A.D. 1672. William Henry, Pirince of Orange, afterwards William
III. of England, was made Statholder by a popular insurrection, conse-
quent on the invasion of the French.


8EC8. 14, 15.] OF AEISTOCEACT. 377


tne nrst aescnDed, to proyide agsdnpt^x^^^^
coi^^]^]^mgj&^6iJ)Owered fcya "^jj^iflfiij frttiP^i since (Sec.
^) 110 time o r •j TaS' lg^'apj^^ More-
over, powerful citizens in this dominion are less to be
feared. For where several cities enioy Hberty, it is not
enough for him, who is maMng ready ms way to dommion,
to seize one city, in order to hold dominion over the rest.
And, lastly, liberty under this dominion is common to more.
For wher e - on e oity r e ign s ft lono» th o fo 4lie ftdvft n tag e>^f
th$LJ:esLifi.U2sJj so far considered, as sui^to tlmt rei^ug
city, ' ' ■ "" ' * ""


878 A POLITICAL TBBATI8S, [CHAP. Z.


CHAPTER X.

OF ABISTOCBACY. CONCLUSIOK.

1.

HAVING explained and made proof of the foundations
of both lands of aristocracy, it remains to inqnice
whether by reason of any fault tiiey are liable to be cUs-
solved or changed into another form. The primaiy oanse,
by which dominions of this kind are dissolved, is that,
which that most acute Florentine ^ observes in his ** Dis-
courses on Livy " (Bk. iii. Chap. I.), namely, that like a
human body, " a dominion has daily added to it something
that at some time or other needs to be remedied." And so,
he says, it is necessary for something occasionally to occur,
to bring back the dominion to that first principle, on which
it was in the beginning established. And if this does not
take place within the necessary time, its blemishes will go
on increasing, till they cannot be removed, but with the
dominion itself. And this restoration, he says, may either
happen accidentally or by the design and forethought of
the laws or of a man of extraordinary virtue. And we
cannot doubt, that this matter is of the greatest impor-
tance, and that, where provision has not been made agsonst
this inconvenience, the dominion will not be able to endure
by its own excellence, but only by good fortune ; and on

. the other hand that, where a proper remedy has been
apphed to this evil, it will not be possible for it to fall by
its own fault, but only by some inevitable fate, as we shall
presently show more clearly. The first remedy, that sug-
gested itself for this evU, was to appoint every five years a

^ supreme dictator for one or two months, who should have
the right to inquire, decide, and make ordinances concern-
ing the acts of the senators and of every official, and

^ Machiavelli.


BEGB. 1, 2.] OF ▲BI8T0CBACY. 87^

thereby to bring back the dominion to its first principle.
But he who studies to avoid the inconyeniences, to which
a dominion is liable, must apply remedies that suit it»
nature, and can be derived fiom its own foundations ;-
otherwise in his wish to avoid Oharjbdis he falls upon
Scjila. It is, indeed, true that all, as well rulers as ruled,
ought to be restrained by fear of pimishment or loss, so
that they may not do wrong with impimity or even advan*
tage ; but, on the other hand, it is certain, that i£ this fear
becomes common to good and bad men alike, the dominion

must be in the utmost danger. Now as tl^e ai;th9yity of

a dictato r^ absoliitgj it- ^^i^nrinij-^nil to be a terror to all,.

egES^t-2tjkJ&^^ at a

s^^^i^Ume, because in that case every amoitious man
would pursue this office with the utmost energy ; and it is
certain that in time of peace virtue is thought less of than
wealth, so that the more haughty a man he is, the more*
easily he will get office. And this perhaps is why the
Bomans used to make a dictator at no fixed time, but
under pressure of some accidental necessity. Though for
all that, to quote Cicero's words, " the tumour of a dic-
tator was displeasing to the good.'' ^ And to be sure, as
this authority of a dictator is quite royal, it is impossible"
for the dominion to change into a monarchy without great
penl to the republic, although it happen for ever so short
a time. Furthermore, i£ no fixed time were appointed for
creating a dictator, no notice would be paid to the interval
between one dictator and another, which is the very thing
that we said was most to be observed ; and the whole thing
would be exceedingly vague, and therefore easily neglected.
Unless, then, this authority of a dictator be eternal and
fixed, and therefore impossible to be conferred on one man
without destroying the form of dominion, the dictatorial
authority itself, and consequently the safety and preser*
vation of the republic will be very uncertain.

2. But, on the other hand, we cannot doubt (Chap. YI.
Sec. 3), that, if without destroying the form of dominion, ^
the sword of the dictator might be permanent, and only

> Cic. ad Quint. Orat. iii. 8, 4. The better reading is " mmoor,'^
not " tumour.^ ^* The good* in such a passage means the aristocratic
party.


380 A POLITICAL TBEATISB. [CHAP. X.

terrible to the wic kecL fiyils will never grow to sricli a pitch,
ttetrtEey^ cannot be eradicated or amended. In order,
therefore, to secure all these conditions, we have said, tluit
there is to be a council of syndics subordinate to the
supreme council, to the end that the sword of the dictator
should be permanent in the hands not of anj natural
person, but of a civil person, whose members are too nume-
rous to divide the dominion amongst themselves (Chap. IX.
Sees. 1, 2), or to combine in any wickedness. To winch is
to be added, that they are forbidden to fill any other office
in the dominion, that they are not the paymasters of the
soldiery, and, lastly, that they are of an age to prefer
actual security to things new and perilous. Wherefore the
dominion is in no danger from them, and consequently they
cannot, and in fact will not be a terror to the good, but
only to the wicked. For as they are less powerful to ac-
compUsh criimnal designs, so are they more so to restrain
wickedness. For, not to mention that they can resist it in
its beginnings (since the council lasts for ever), they are also
sufficiently numerous to dare to accuse and condemn this
or that influential man without fear of his enmity ; espe-
cially as they vote by ballot, and the sentence is pronounced
in the name of the entire council.

3. But the tribunes of the commons at Eome were like-
wise regularly appointed ; but they were too weak to re-
strain the power of a Scipio, and had besides to submit to
the senate their plans for the public welfare,^ which also
frequently eluded them, by contriving that the one whom
the senators were least afraid of should be most popular
with the commons. Besides which, the tribunes' authority
was supported against the patricians by the favour of the
commons, and whenever they convoked the commons, it
looked as if they were raising a sedition rather than as-
sembling a council. Which inconveniences have certainly
no place in the dominion which we have described in the
last two chapters.

4. However, thisauthority-^ -the s y ndies -^w^.jQpljrJba

^ Not by law, except before b.o. 287 and in the interval between the
dictatorship of Sulla and the consulship of Fompey and Crassus. But
in the golden age of the republic the senate in fact controlled th«
tribunes.


8ECS. 2-6.] OF ABISTOCBACT. 381

^jg^. .^g^STO^lfebft p r eflfi i TJ BAi.oi p .ijt %?i ftrro .of. Al i o (t ftm ini fi s^

and tniis to prevent the laws from beiiig broken, or anyone


■>''Mnv*>' ■"


lorDioaen by law, such as those into which men fall from
excess of leisure, and from which the ruin of a dominion
not uncommonly follows. For men in time of peace lay
aside fear, and gradually from being fierce savages become
civilized or humane, and from being humane become soft
and slu^sh, and seek to excel one another not in virtue,
but in ostentation and luxury. And hence they begin to
put ofE their native manners and to put on foreign ones,
that is, to become slaves.

6. To avoid these evils many have tried to establish
sumptuary laws ; but in vain. For all laws which can be
broken without any injury to another, are counted but a
laughing-stock, and are so far from bridling the desires
and lusts of men, that on the contrary they stimulate
them. For " we are ever eager for forbidden fruit, and
desire what is denied." ^ Nor do idle men ever lack ability
to elude the laws which are instituted about things, which
cannot absolutely be forbidden, as banquets, plays, orna-
ments, and the like, of which only the excess is bad ; and
that is to be judged according to the individual's fortune,
so that it cannot be determined by any general law.

6. I conclude, therefore, that the cK)mmQn .vbes.0£ p^aee.
(^wj^i^^l^e are bere speaking, are nevvp'to be.4H?deilyr but
i S^reCTlv forbidd en ; that is, by Ja^HSg^ such f oiindations
of dominion, that the result maybe, t^t 1^ xnajori^^rdo
not say a!re aSmoiis tb^Eve mfe^ (for that is impossi'Ble),

but areffmd§dJ>J^iihofle,.pad3ei^

t gt advantage . And therefore the chief- point to be
stuoE^'isI that the rich may be, if not thrifty, yet avari-
cious. "For there is no doubt, that, if this passion of
avarice, which is general and lasting, be encouraged by the
desire of glory, most people would set their chief affection
upon increasing their property without disgrace, in order
to acquire honours, while avoiding extreme infamy. If then
we examine the foundations of both kinds of aristocracy

» Grid, « Amores," ni. ir. 17.


S82 A POLITICAL TBBJLTISB. [CHAP. X.

whicli I have explained in tHe last two chapters, we shall
4iee, that this yerj result follows from them. For the
number of rulers in both is so large;^ that japs t of the ric h
tore-a ooo sB to -g overnm enit'^and to {he ofELcas^of the do-
minion open to them. ' ^-T"

7. But if it be further ordained (as we said. Chap. TIH
Sec. 47), that patricians who are insolvent be aepgupied ^
from patrician rank, and that those who haye lost tiieir \
property by misfortune be restored to their f onne!r positioij^
there is no doubt that all will try their best to keep their i
property. Moreover, they will never desire foreign cos-
tumes, nor disdain their native ones, if it is bj law ap-
pointed, that patricians and candidates for office sliould be
^distin guishe d by a special robe, concerning which see
•Chap. Viii. Sees. 25, 47. And besides these, other means
may be devised in every dominion agreeable to tlie nature
>of its situation and the national genius, and herein it is
^above all to be studied, that the subjects may dp their
^iuty rather spontaneously than under pressure of the law.

8. For a dominion, that looks no farther than to. lead
men by f eaa%^ will be rather free from vices, than possejssed
^f virtue. 1^ But men are so to be led, that they may think
that they are not led, but Hving after their own mind, and
.accordiag to their free decision ; and so that they are re-
strained only by love of liberty, desire to increase their
property, and hope of gaining the honours of the dominion.
But effigies^ triumphs^ ,wd othej: in catfii PfiiP tB t a yj rtue,
^resigns rather" ofslayeiytlwiJIiberty. For rewards of
virtue are granted to slaves, not f reemefn. I admit, indeed,
that men are very much stimulated by these incitements ;
but, as in the first instance, they are awarded to great men,
-so afterwards, with the growth of envy, they are granted
to cowards and men swollen with the extent of their
^wealth, to the great indignation of all good men. Secondly,
.those, who boast of their ancestors' effigies and irimnphs,
ihink they are wronged, if they are not preferred to otliers.

/^Lastly, not to mention other objections, it is certain that

^ ^equality, which once cast ofE the general liberty is lost, t^rt

^ by no means be maintained, from the time that peculiar

honours are by public law decreed to any man renowned

' (:f or his virtue.


fiECS. 6-10.]


OF ABISTOCBAOT.


883


9. After which premisses, let xus now see whether do-
nunioiis of this kind can be destroyed by any cause to
which blame attaches. ~ ""

Lams


omimon. Tnererore, if it is preserved,
at a constitution caimot tismttijii im-


so is ihe domin ion^
<x>nquere(l, unless it is defended aliJSft7JS^!3ffllBS' 'and
<^3J2IB3p{(££SSff "gs^^ if it relies only on the

help of reason, it is certainly weak and easily overcome.
Now since the fundamental constitution of both kinds of
aristocracy has been shown to agree with reason and com-
mon human passion, we can therefore assert that these, i£
any kinds of dominion, will be eternal, in other words,
that they cannot be destroyed by any cause to which
blame attaches, but only by some inevitable fate.

10. But it m ay still be objected to us, that, although the
constitution^ of. doii^^ above set fdrai" id d^nded by
^e^ason and^ common lipmumjMLSffloi^j^^
aT;^BM^Viiunf»3^ tkere is no passio n.

£tat is not sometimes overgSW ered by a strcmgfir, jRQatr^^
one ; for we frequently see the fear of death overpowered
By'the greed for another's property. Men, who are running
away in panic fear from the enemy, can be stopped by the fear
of nothing else, but throw themselves into rivers, or rush into
fire, to escape the enemy's steel. In whatever degree, there-
fore, a commonwealth is rightly ordered, and its laws well
made ; yet in the extreme difficulties of a dominion, when
all, as sometimes happens, are seized by a sort of panic
terror, all, without regard to the future or the laws, approve
only that which their actual fear suggests, all turn towards
the man who is renowned for his victories, and set him free,
from the laws, and (establishing therehy the worst of pre-
cedents), continue him in command, and entrust to his
fideUty aU affairs of state : and this was, in ta^, the cause
of the destruction of the Eoman dominion. But to answer
this objection, I say, first, that in a rightiy constituted
republic such terror does not arise but from a due cause.*
And so such terror and consequent confusion can be attri-
buted to no cause avoidable by human foresight. In the
next place, it is to be observed, that in a republic such as


884


▲ POLITICAL TBEATISB.


[sec. 10.


we have above described, it is impossible (Chap. Vlll. Sees.
9, 25)- for this or that man so to distinguish himself by the
report of his virtue, as to turn towards himself the atten-
tion of all, but he must have many rivals faroured bj
others. And so, f^Vj^^^^itdi fmn *^irrv thftiri A^«y "^"^^


confusion in tha republic, yet no one will be able to elude
the law and declare the election of anyone to an illegal mili-
tary command, without its being immediately disputed by
other candidates ; and to settle the dispute, it will, in the end,
be necessary to have recourse to the constitution ordained
once for all, and approved by all, and to order the afi&uis
of the dominion according to the existing laws. I may
therefore absolutely assert, that a a. t . hfi flriBtooraoy, wLldi h

be dissoIve3r^"^ctknged in^to anoj^

cause. ' " " ' '"'


8ECS. 1, 2.] OF DEMOCBACT. 885


CHAPTER XL

OF DEMOCBACT.
1.

I PASS, at length, to. t he third and perfectly ahs nliif a <^^,^.
mmion, which we call ctemo cracy. The differen ce be-^
tw^Sti tEs and aristociucy consists, we have said, cluefly
in^thisrtKSf' in 'a,n. Snstbcracy it'depends on'ffie suprenie
coiinciTs'wiIl and free choice only, that' this oir "that m£n is
made^ patrician, so that no one has the right to vote or
fill pubhc offices by inheritance, and that no one can by
right demand this right, as is the case in the dominion,
whereof we are now treating. For all, who are bom of citizen
parents, or on the soil of the country, or who have deserved
well -of the^ Republic, or have accomplished any other con-
ditions upon which the law grants to a man right of
citizenship ; they all, I say, have a right to demand for
themselves the right to vote in the supreme council and to
fill pubhc offices, nor can they be refused it, but for crime
or infamy.

2. If, then, it is bjr a law appointed, that the elder men
only, who have reached a certain year of their age, or the
first-born only, as soon as their age allows, or those who
contribute te the repubhc a certain sum of money, shall
have the right of voting in the supreme council and manag-
ing the business of the dominion ; then, although on this
system the result might be, that the supreme council would
be composed of fewer citizens than that of the aristecracy
of which we treated above, yet, for all that, dominions
of this kind should be called democracies^J6ecgjigft,iii, them
the citizens, who are destined xo xna£age*aSairs of state,
are not chosen as. the best bjr the.supreflio. council, but are
destined to it by a lav. And although for tBii^easbn
dominions of this kind, that is, where not the best, but
those who happen by chance to be rich, or who are bom


386 A POLITICAL TBEATI8E. [CHAP. XL

eldest, are destined to govern, are thought inferior to an
aristocracy; yet, if we reflect on the practice or general
condition of mankind, the result in both cases will come to
the same thing. For patricians will alw^ yt ^ f.hinTr thn aa
t he best, who are rich| orTf 'qt^^ tn f.hftTnpftlv esin hlood. or
allie d by friendsh ip. And, indeed, if such were the nature
ol "patncians, tliat they were free from all passion, and
guided by mere zeal for the public welfare in choosing their
patrician colleagues, no dominion could be compared with
aristocracy. But experience itself teaches us only too well,
that things pass in quite a contrary manner , above all, in
oligarchies, where the will of tJie patncians, trom the absence
of rivals, is most free from the law. For there the patri-
cians intentionally keep away the best men from the council,
and seek for themselves such colleagues in it, as hang upon
their words, so that in such a dominion things are in a
much more unhappy condition, because the choice of patri-
cians depends entirely upon the arbitrary will of a few.
which is free or unrestrained by any law. But I return to
my subject.

3. From what has been said in the last section, it is
manifest that we can conceive of va rious kinds of dp.Tnn-
crasy. But mj intentioaia,ni>t,to.tj:eat^^^ eTceryJdnd^liuJt
of that only, " wherein all| withou t exception, who owe aller
^ance tq^tK^Ta^Ts"^ tE^

independent and of respectable life, have the right of voting
in the supreme coimcil and. of filling the offices of the do-
minJon.^ I say expressly, " who owe allegiance to the
laws of the country only,'' to exclude foreigners, who sa^
treated as being under anoth^^' ^dominion. I added,
besides, " who are independent," except in so far as they
are under allegiance to the laws of the dominion, to exclude
women and slaves, who are under the authority of men and
masters, and also children and wards, as long as thev are
under the authority of parents and guardians. I said,
lastly, " and of respectable life," to exclude, above all, those
that are infamous from crime, or some disgraceful means
of livelihood.

4. But, perhaps, someone will ask, whether women are
under men s authority by nature or institution ? For if it
has been by mere institution, then we had no reason com*


SECS. 2-4.] OF DEMOCBAGY, 887

pelling us to exclude women from govermnent. But if we
consult experience itself, we shall find that the origin of it

is in their weakness. For th^rft hf^g pftvftr h^ftn a naRft of

men and women reigni ng togethe r^ but wherever on the
earth men are found, there we see that men rule, and
womett-are ruled, and that on this plan, both sexgs^Jiye in
harmony. But on the other hand, the Ainazons, who are <

repoiiied to have held rule of old, did not suffer men to '

stop in their country, but reared only their female children, . ^
killing the males to whom they gave birth.^ But if by *

nature women were equal to men, and were equally distin-
guished by force of character and ability, in which human ; ,
power and therefore human right chiefly consist ; surely '^^
among nations so many and different some would be found, 2 >
where both sexes rule alike, and others, where men are "^
ruled by women, and so brought up, that they can make
less use of their abilities. And since this is nowhere the
case, one may assert with perfect propriety, t hat wpm ^n
have not by nat ure equal right^ with men: but that they
necessar ily give way to men^^and'TEal" thus it cannot
happen, thatDoflT sexes should rule ahke, much less that
men should be ruled by women. But if we further reflect
upon human passions, how men, in fact, generally love
women merely from the passion of lust, and esteem their
cleverness and wisdom in proportion to the excellence of
their beauty, and also how very ill-disposed men are to
suffer the women they love to show any sort of favour to
others, and other facts of this kind, we shall easily see that
n^fia-and-^ women cannot rule alike without great hurt to
peace. But of this enough.

^ Justin, Histories, ii. 4.


OilSWICK PRESS :—C
