================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: The Chief Works of Benedict de Spinoza, Vol. II
Creator: Benedict de Spinoza (R. H. M. Elwes, trans.)
Translator: R. H. M. Elwes
Edition: London: George Bell & Sons (Bohn's Philosophical Library), 1884; revised edition reprinted 1891 (scanned copy)
Source: Internet Archive (chiefworksbened03elwegoog), Google Books scan of the 1891 reprint of the revised edition
Public domain: Translation first published 1884; public domain.
Artifact ID: spinoza-chief-works-elwes-vol-2-1884
================================================================================

SPINOZA'S WORKS.

Vol. n.


THE CHIEF WORKS


OP


BENEDICT DE SPINOZA,

TRANSLATED FROM THE LATIN, WITH AN

INTRODUCTION


BY


R. H. M. ELWES.


Felix qui potuit return cognoscere causas,
Aique metus omnes, et inexorabile fatum,
Subjecit 2>edibus, strepitumque Ackerontis avari,

Georgic, 2. 490-2.


Vol. IL
De Intellectus Emendatione — Ethica.


• / "» fl


(SELECT LETTERS.)


,. , , rnvmn. EDITION, ^ , .,


• " •• , / ' ' r. . • , / -..ft.',"

LONDON : GEORGE BELL AND SONS, YORK STREET,

COVENT GARDEN.
1891.


346513


CKLSWICK press: C. WHITTIVGHAM and CO., TOOKS COl/RT,

CHANCKKY LANS.


• ••


♦•*


• «.


•
• • •


CONTENTS OF VOL. II.

FAOB

wOikTHE Improvement op the Understanding . • . 1

y^^Of the ordinary objects of inch's desires 3

^K Of the true and final good . . ' 6

^ Certain rules of life 7

^ Of the four modes of perception 8

p Of the best mode of perception 10

^Of the icg^j^&Aij|tl of the intellect, or t^^tt^dift^ • • .12

Answers to objections , 16

7> . First part of method. Distinction of true ideas from ficti-

^ tio ua id^as "**. 18

nd from taJse ideas 24

If doubt 29

\i memory and forgetfulness 31

[ental hindrances from words — and from the popular confu-
sion of ready imagination with distinct understanding . 33
Second part of method. Its object, the acquisition of cl^r

and distihc^iJga^ 34

Its mpftTifi. 'jyT^nn fiAiini|jQpa Conditions of definition • • 35


How to define ilic understanding , 38

The Ethics .43

Part I. Concerning God 45

Definitions 45

Axioms 46

Prop. I. Sid)s'ance is by 7iature prior to its modifications . 46
Prop. II. Two substances, whose attributes are different, have

nothing in common .46

Prop. 111. Things, which have nothing in common, cannot be

one the cause of the other 47

Prop. IV. Two or Tnore distinct things are distinguished one

from the other either by the difference of the attributes of the

substances^ or by the difference of their modifications . . 47
Prop. V. There cannot exist in the universe two or more sub

stances haviny the saTne nature or attribute .
Prop. VI. One substance cannot be produced by another sub

stance

Prop. VII. Existence belongs to the nature of substance .
Prop. VIII. Every suhstance %8 necessarily infinite , .


47

47
48
48


VI CONTENTS.

PAGE

Prop. IX. The more reality or being a thing has, the greater the
number of its attributes 50

Prop. X. Each particular attribute of the one substance must
be conceived through itself 50

Prop. XI. God, or substance consisting of infinite attributes, of
which each expresses eternal and infinite essentiality, neces-
sarily eansts 51

Prop. XII. No attribute of substance can be conceived, from
which it would follow that substance can be divided . . 54

Prop. XIII. Substance absolutely infinite is indivisible . . 54

Prop. XIV. Besides God no substance can be granted or conceived 54

Prop. XV. Whatsoever is, is in God, and without God nothing
can be, or be conceived 55

Prop. XVI. From the necessity of the divine nature must follow
^ an infinite number of things in infinite ways — that is, all
X things which fall within the sphere of infinite intellect . . 59

Prop. XVII. God acts solely by the laws of his own nattire,
/ and is not constrained by anyone 59

Prop. XVIII. God is the indwelling and not the transient cause
of all things .62

Prop. XIX. God and all the attributes of God are eternal . 62

Prop. yX. The existence of God and his essence are one and the
same . • 63

Pj'op. XXI. All things, which follow from the absolute nature
of any attribttte of God, must always exist and be infinite, or
in other words, are eternal and infinite through the said
attribute 63

Prop. XXII. Whatever follows from any attribute of God, in so
far as it is modified by a modification, which exists necessarily
and as infinite through the said attribute, must also exist
7iecessarily and as infinite 65

Prop. XXIII. Every mode, which exists both necessarily and as
infinite, must necessarily follow either from the absolute
nature of some attribute of God, or from an attribute modi-
fied by a modification, which exists necessarily and as infinite 65

Prop. XXIV. The essence of things produced by God does not
involve existence 65

Prop. XXV. God is the efficient cause not only of the existence
of thingSy but also of their essence 66

Prop. XXVI. A thing, which is conditioned to a^t in a par-
ticular manner, has necessarily been thus conditioned by God ;
and that which has not been conditioned by God cannot con-
dition itself to a/:t 66

Prop. XXVII. A thing, which has been conditioned by God to
act in a particular way, cannot nnder itself unconditioned , 66

Prop. XXVlII. Every individual thing, or everything which is
finite and has a conditioned existence, cannot exist or be con-
ditioned to a^t, unless it be conditioned for existence and
action by a cause other than itself, which also is finite and has
a conditioned existence ; and likewise this cause cannot in its


• ■


CONTENTS. TU

PJLOE

turn exist or he conditioned to act, unless it be conditioned
for existence and action by another cause, which also is finite
and has a conditioned existence, and so on to infinity . .67

Prop. XXIX. Nothing in the universe is contingent, btit all
things are conditioned to exist and operate in a particular
mantier by the necessity of the divine nature .... 68

Prop. XXX. Intellect, in /unction finite, or in function i^finite^
must comprehend the attributes of God and the modifications
of God, and nothing else 69

Prop. XXXI. The intellect in function, whether finite orin^
finite, as will, desire, love, ^'c, should be referred to passive
nature, and not to active nature , , • . . . 69

Prop. XXXII. Will cannot be called a free cause, but only a
necessary cause ,70

Prop. XXXIIL Things could not have been brought into being
by God in any manner or in any order different from that
which has injuct obtained 70

Prop. XXXIV. God's power is identical with his essence . 74

Prop. XXXV. Whatsoever we conceive to be in the potoer of
God, necessarily exists 74

Prop. XXXVI. There is no cause from whose nature some effect
docs not follow 74

Appendix • • • 74

Part II. Of the Nature and Origin of the Mind ... 82

Preface 82

Definitions .....••... 82

Axioms 83

Prop. T. Thought is an attribute of God, or God is a thinJs'
ing thing 83

Prop. II. Extension is an attribute of God, or God is an ex*
tended thing 84

Prop. III. //» God there is necessarily the idea, not only of his
essence, but also of all things which necessarily follow from
his essence . . .84

Prop. IV. The idea of God, from which an infinite number of
things follow in infinite ways, can only be one ... 85

Prop. V. The actual being of ideas owns God as its cause, only
in so far as he is considered as a thinking thing, not in so far
as he is unfolded in any other attribute ; that is, the ideas
both of the attributes of God cmd of particular things do not
own as their efficient cause their objects, or the things perceived,
but God himself, in sofofr as he is a thinking thing . . 85

Prop. VI. 2 he modes of any given attribute are caused by God,
in so far as he is considered through the attribute of which
they are modes, and not in so far as he is considered through
any other attribute 86

Prop. VII. The order and connection of ideas is the same as
the order and connection of things 86

Prop. VIII. The ideas of particular things, or of modes, that


do not exUi, mutt h« com^ehmdHintheinjiniifidea of God,
in the earns vxty at the Jormal eesenors qf parlicular thinga
or modia art eenlaiiud in ike attributei of God ,

Prop. IX. Tht idea of an iadividtial i&ing aalvalli/ exisliuff »
eoMftdby God, nol in so Jar as lie is iiifiniie,batin so far as
Ac is omsidfTtd asaffeciedby another idia of a thina actually
eaisliiu, qf' v^AiiA lis is /he aatsc, in so far as he ts affeat^
by a third idea, and so oa to infinilu

Prop. X. 7'/ie being of suistasxe does not appertain to the
estmee of tnan — in other teords, substam:s does not eonstittile
the acttiai hein^ of man

Prop. XL Thijirti elemeaf, wRtoh coastUates the aotiial being
qf the human mind, is the idea of SBme partmilar thing
aeluattu enisling

Prop. Xfl. WhatEoever comes lopaxs in the i^eni qf the idea,
whieh conslitlUa the Incatiai mind, must be peroHved by the
AuTTHTn mind, or there vriU meisaanly he an idea in the
human mitui of the mid occarTenet. Thai is, if the abject of
the idea eonstitvting the hitman mind be a bodg, nothmg eon
takeplaae in that body tuiihoul being ^ereeived by the mind .

Prop. Xm. The o/n»cl qf the idea comttliiting the hvntan mind
is the body, in other words a certain mode of extension which
acttiaily exists, a-ad nothing else 9f"

Diei'esaioii an Ibe uiLlure of bodiea — Axioma I., II. L? mm:

I.— m

AxioiDB L, IL 91 J

Definition — Axinm III. — LemmBa IV., V. .

Lemmaa VI., VIL

PostuUlea

Prop. XIV. The human mind is capaMe of perceiving a great
number of things, and is so, in proportion as its body is
capaMs of receiiring a great number qf impressions ,

Prop, XV. The idea, which constitutes the actnal being nf the
haraan mind, is not simple, but compounded qf a great number
qfideas

Prop. XVI. Tie idea of every tnode, in vAich the humaa body
il affected by extennu bodies, must iiivalvi the nature qf the
hmnan body, and also the nature of the external body .

Prop. XVII. If the hujnan body is affected in aTnatmervihich
involves the nature qf any external body, the huTnan mind
wiU regard the said external body as actually existing, or ae
present to itself, until the human body be affected i« suoh a
way as to exotvde the txisience of the said exterTiol body

Prop. XVIII. ffthe hamati body has once been affected bytuio
or more bodies at the eaint time, when the tidnd afterwards
imaginis any of them, it will straightiBsy remember the
others also ..■.,.■,.

Prop. XIX. 73e human mind has ne knowledge of the body,
and does not know it to exist, saiie through the ideas of the
modifications, aheriby the body is affected ....


CONTENTS. IX

PAGE

Prop. XX. The idea or knowledge of the human mind is also
in God y following in God in the same manner, and being
referred to God in the same manner , as the idea or know-
ledge of the human body 102

Prop. XXI. This idea of the mind is united to the mind, in the
same way as the mind is united to the body . . . 102

Prop. XXII. The human fnind perceives not only the modifica-
tions of the bod^, but also the ideas of such modifications . 103

Prop. XXIII. The mind does not know itself, except in so far
a« it perceives the ideas of the modificatiotis of the body . 103

Prop. XXIV. The human mind does not involve an adequate
knowledge of the parts composing the human body , .104

Prop. XX V. The idea of each modification of the human body
does not involve an adequate knowledge of the external
body 104

Prop. XXVI. The human mind does not perceive any external
body as actually existing, except through the ideas of the
modifications of its own body 105

Prop. XXVII. The idea of each modification of the human
body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the human
body itself 103

Prop. XXVIII. The ideas of the modifications of the human

body, in so far as they have reference only to the hufnan

y mind, are not clear and distinct, but confused . . .105

V Prop. XXIX. The idea of the idea of each modification of the

human body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the

human mind 106

Prop. XXX. We can only have a very inadequate knowledge
oj^ the duration of our body 1 07

Prop. XXXI. We can only have a very inadeqtiate knowledge
of the duration of particular things external to ourselves . 107

Prop. XXXII. All ideas, in so far as they are referred to God,
are true 108

Prop. XXXm. There is nothing positive in ideas, which
causes them to be called false 108

Prop. XXXIV. Every idea, which in us is absolute or adequate
and perfect, is true 108

Prop. XXXV. Falsity consists in the privation of knowledge,
which in>adequcUe, fragmentary, or confused ideas involve . 108

Prop. XXXVI. Inadequate or confused ideas follow by the
same necessity, as adequate or clear and distinct ideas . 109

Prop. XXXVil. That which is common to all, and is equally
in a part and in the whole, does not constitute the essence of
any particular thina 109

Prop. XXXVIII. Those things, which are common to all, and
are equally in a part and in the whole, cannot be conceived
except adequately 109

Prop. aXXIX. That, which is co^nmon to and a property of
the human body and such other bodies as are wont to affect
the human body, and which is present equally in each part of


CONTENTS.

PAGE

either or in the whole, mil be represented hy an adequate idea

in the mind 110

Prop. XL. Whatsoever ideas in the mind follow from ideas,
which are therein adequate, are also them&elves adequate . Ill

Prop. XLI. Opinion is the only sowrce of falsity, reason and
intuition are necessarily true 114

Prop. XLII. Reason ana intuition, not opinion, teach us to dis-
tinguish the true from the false 114

Prop. XLIII. He, who has a true idea, simultaneously knows
that he has a true idea, and cannot doubt of the truth of the
thing perceived 114

Prop. aLIV. It is not in the nature of reason to regard things
as contingent^ but a^ necessary 116

Prop. XL V. Every idea of every body, or of every particular
tning actually existing, necessarily involves the eternal and
injinite essence of God 117

Prop. XL VI. The knowledge of the efsmal a7id infinite essence
of God, which every idea involves, is adequate and perfect . 118

Prop. XL VII. The human mind has an adequate knowledge of
the eternal and infinite essence of God . . , .118

Prop. XLVm. In the mind there is no absolute or free will;
but the mind is determined to wish this or that by a cattse,
which has also been determined by another cattse, and this last
by another cause, and so on to infinity 119

Prop. XLIX. Th4!re is in the mind no volition, or affirmation
and negation, save that which an idea, inasmuch otitis an
idea, involves 120

Part III. On the Origin and Nature of the Emotions • • 128

Definitions • . 129

Postulates 130

Prop. I. Owr mind is in certain cases active, and in certain
cases passive. In so far as it has adequate ideas, it is neces-
sarily active, and in so far as it has inadequate ideas, it is
necessarikf passive 130

Prop. II. Jaoay cannot determine mind to think, neither can
mind determine body to motion or rest, or any state different
from thesCy if such there be 131

Prop. III. JTie activities of the mind arise solely from adequate
ideas ; the passive states of the mind depend solely on inade-
quate ideas 135

Prop. IV. Nothing can be destroyed, except by acatise external
to itself 136

Prop. V. Things are naturally contrary, that is, cannot exist in
the same object, in so far as one is capable of destroying the other 136

Prop. VI. Aery thing, in so far as itis in itself, endeavours to
persist in its own being 136

Prop. VII. The endeavour, wherewith everything endeavours to
persist in its own being is nothing else out the actrial essence
of the thing in question 136


CONTENTS. XI

^^ PAOB

Prop. VULL Hie endeavour , whereby a thing endeavours to per-
sist in its heinff, involves no finite time, but an indefinite time 137

Prop. IX. The mind, both in so far as it has clear and distinct
ideas, and also in so far as it has confused ideas, endeavours
to persist in its being for an ind^nite period, and of this en-
deavour it is conscious 137

Prop X. An idea, which excludes the existence of our body

cannot be postulated in our mind, but is contrary thereto . 138
Prop. XL Whatsoever increases or diminishes, helps or hinders
the power of activity in our body, the idea thereof increases or
diminishes, he'ps or hinders the power of thought in our mind 138

Prop. XII. The mind, as far as it can, endeavours to conceive
those things, which increase or help the power of activity in
the body 139

Prop. XIII. When the mind conceives things which diminish or
hinder the body^s pmver of activity, it endeavours, a* far as
possible, to remember things, which exclude the existence of the
first-named things 139

Prop. XIV. Jfthe mind has once been affected by two emotions
at the sam£ time, it will, whenever it is afterwards affected by
one of the two, be also affected by the other . , . . 140

Prop. XV. Anything can, accidentally, be the cause qf pleasure,
pain, or desire 140

Prop. XVI. Simply from the fact thai we conceive, that a given
object has some point of resemblance unth another object, which
is wont to affect the mind pleasurably or pair^ully, although
the point of resemblance be not the efficient cause of the said
emotions, we shall still regard the first-named object with love
or hate, 141

Prop. XVII. If we conceive that a thing, which is wont to afect
us painfully, has any point of resemblance with another thing,
which is wont to affect us with an equally strong emotion of
pleasure, we shall hate the first-fiamed thing, and at the same
time we shall love it , . 142

Prop. XVIII. A man is as much affected pleasurably or pain-
fully by the image of a thing past or future, as by tJie linage
of a thing present 143

Prop. XIX. He, who conceives that the object of his love is
destroyed, will feel pain ; if he conceives thai it is preserved,
he wilt feel pleasure ..... ... 144

Prop. XX. lie who conceives that the object of his hate is
destroyed, will feel pleasure 1 44

Prop. XXI. He who conceives that the object of his love is
affected pleasurably or painfully, will himself be affected
pleasurably or painfully ; and the one or the other emoiio7i
will be greater or less in the lover, according as it is greater or
less in the thing loved 145

Prop XXII. If we conceive that anything pleasurably affects
some object of our love, we shall be affected with love towards
that thing. Contrariwise, if we conceive that it affects an object


lU CONTENTS.

PAGE

of cwt love painfully i we shall he affected with hatred towards

it 145

Prop. XXIII. He who conceives thai an object of his haired is
painfully affected^ will feel pleasure. Contrariwise, if he
thinks that the said object is pleasurahly affected, he will feel
pain. Each of these emotions will be greater or less ^ accordinff
as its contrary is greater or less in the object of hatred . .146

Prop. XXIV. If we conceive that any one pleasurably affects an
object of owr hate, we shall feel hatred towards him also. If
we conceive that he painfully affects the said object, we shall
feel love towards him 146

Prop. XXV. We endeavour to affirm, coficeming ourselves and
concerning what we love, everything that we conceive to affect
pleasurably ourselves or the lovea object. Contrariwise, we
endeavour to negative everything, which we conceive to affect
painfully ourselves or the Coved object 147

Prop. XXVI. We endeavour to affirm, concerning that which
we hate, everything which we conceive to affect it painfully ;
and contrariwise, we endeavour to deny concerning it every-
thing which we conceive to affect it pleastmibly . . .147

Prop. aX VII. By the very fact that we conceive a thing, which
is like ourselves, and which we have not regarded with any
emotion, to be affected with any emotion, we are ourselves
affected .with a like emotion 148

Prop. XXVIII. We endeavour to bring about whatsoever we
conceive to conduce to pleasure ; but we endeavour to remove
or destroy whatsoever we conceive to be truly repugn>ant
thereto, or to conduce to pain 149

Prop. XXIX. We shall also endeavour to do whatsofiver we con-
ceive men to regard with pleasure, and contrariwise we shall
shrink from doing thai which we conceive men to shrink from 149

Prop. XXX. If any one has done something which he conceives
as affecting other men pleasurably, he wilt be affected by plea-
sure, accompanied by the idea of himself as a cause ; in
other words, he will regard himself with pleasure. On the
other hand, \fhe has done anything which he regards as affect'
ing others painfully, he will regard himself with pain , .150

Prop. XXX J. If we conceive that anyone loves, desires, or hates
anything which we love, desire, or hate, we shall thereupon
regard the thing in question with more steadfast love, ^-c. On
the contrary, if we think, that anyone shrinks from somS'
thing that we love, we shall undergo vacillation of soul , .151

Prop. XXXII. If we conceive that anyone takes dAight in
something, which only one person can possess, we shall endea-
vour to bring it about, tnat the man in question shall not
gain possession thereof 152

Pi'op. aXXIII. When we love a thing similar to ourselves, we
endeavour, as far aa we can, to bring it about, that it should
love us in return 152

Pi'op. XXXIV. 2%e greater the emotion with which we con-


CONTENTS. Xlll

PAGE
eeive a loved object to be affected towards uty the greater will
be our complacency/ . • 153

Prop. XXXV. If anyone concetveSy that an object of his love
Joins itself to another with closer bonds of friendship than he
himself hizs attained to, he will be affected with hcUreia tovsards
the loved object and with envy towards his rival . . .153

Prop. XXXVI. He who remembers a thina, in which he has
once taken delight, desires to possess it under the same circum-
stances as when hejvrst took aelight therein . . . .154

Prop. XXXVII. Desire arising through pain or pleasure, hatred
or love, is greater in proportion as the emotion ts greater . . 155

Prop. XXXVIII. If a man has begun to hate an object of his
love, so that love is thoroughly destroyed, he wUl, causes being
equal, regard it with more hatred than if he had never loved
it, and his hatred will be in proportion to the strength of his
former love 155

Prop. XXXIX. Jffe who hates anyone will endeavour to do him
an injury, unless he fears that a greater injury will thereby
accrue to himself ; on the other hand, he who loves anyone
will, by the same law, seek to benefit him, . . . .156

Prop. XL. He, who conceives himself to be hated by another,
and believes that he has given him no cause for haired, will
hate that other in return 157

Prop. XLI. If anyone conceives that he is loved by another,
and believes that he has given no cause for such lave, he will
love that other in return 158

Prop. XLII. He, who has conferred a benefit on anyone from
motives ef love or honour, will feel pain, if he sees thai the
berufit is received without gratitude 158

Prop. XLIII. Hatred is increased by being reciprocated, and
can on the other hand be destroyed by love . . . .159

Prop. XLIV. Hatred which is completely vanquished by love,
passes into love ; and love is thereupon greater, than if hatred
had not preceded it 159

Prop. XL V. If a man conceives, that anyone similar to him-
self hates anything also similar to himself, which he loves, he
will hate that person 160

Prop. XL VI. Ifaman has been affected pleasurahly or painfully
by anyone of a class or nation different from his own, and if
the pleasure or pain has been accompanied by the idea of the
said stranger as cause, under the general category of the class
or nation: the man will feel love or hatred not only to the
individual stranger, but also to the whole class or nation,
whereto he belongs 160

Prop. XLVIL Joy arising from the fact, that anything we
hate is destroyed or suffers other injury, is never unaccom-
panied by a certain pain in us 160

Prop. XL V III. Love or hatred towards, far instance^ Peter is
destroyed, if the pleasure involved in the former, or the pain
involved in the tatter emotion, be associated with the idea of


KIV CONTENTS.

PAGE
another cause ; and mil be diminished in proportion as we
conceive Peter not to have been the sole cause of either emotion 161

Prop. XLIX. Love or hatred tovxirds a thing, which we conceive
to be free, must, other conditions being similar, be greater ^
than if it were felt towards a thing acting by necessity . .161

Prop. L. Anything whatever can be, accidentally, a cause of
hope or fear 162

Prop. LI. Different men may be differently affected by the same
ooject, and the same man Tnay be diffperently afffected at different
times by the savne object 163

Prop. LII. An object^ which we have formerly seen in conjunc-
tion with others, and do not conceive to have any property
thai is not common to many, will not be regarded by us for so
long as an object, which we conceive to have some property
peculiar to itself 164

Prop. LIII. When the mind regards itself and its own power of
activity, it feels pleasure ; and thai pleasure is greater in pro-
portion to the distinctness, wherewith it conceives itself and
its own power of activity .... . . 165

Prop. LI V. The mind endeavours to conceive only such things
as assert its power of activity 166

Prop. LV. When the mind contemplates its own weakness, it
feels pain thereat 166

Prop LVI. There are as many kinds of pleasure, of pain, of
desire, and of every emotion compounded of these, such as
vacillations of spirit, or derived from these, such as lov%
haired,hope, fear, ^c, aa there are kinds of objects, whereby
we are affected 1 68

Prop. LVII. Any emotion of a given individual differs from
the emotion of another individual, only in so far as the essence
of the one individual differs from the essence of the other . 169

Prop. LVm. Besides pleasure and desire, which are passivities
or passions, there are other emotions derived from pleasure
and desire, whioh are attribtitable to us, in so far as we are
active 171

Prop. LIX. Among all the e7notions attributable to the mind as
active, there are none which cannot be referred to pleasure or
pain 171

Definitions of the Emotions . . • • • . .173

General Definition of the Emotions 185

Part TV. Of Human Bondage or the Strength of the Emotions 187

Preface 187

Definitions 190

Axiom • 191

Prop. I. No positive qualify/ possessed by a false idea is removed
by the presence of what is true in virtue of its being true . 191

Prop. IL We are only passive in so far as we are a part of
Mature, which cannot be conceived by itself without other
parts. • • • . 192


COKTBNTS. XV

PAGB
Prop. III. The force whereby a man peraUta in exitting is
limitedy and is infinitely surpassed by the power of external
causes 193

ri*op. IV. It is impossible, that man should not be a part of
Nature, or that he should be capable of undergotny no
changes, save such as can be understood through his nature
only as their adequate cause 193

Prop. V. The pouter and increase of every passion, and its
persistence in existing are not defined by the power, wher^
we ourselves endeavour to persist in existing, but by the power
of an extfmal cause compared with our own . . .194

Prop. VI. The force of any passion or emotion can overcome the
rest of a man^s activities or power, so that the emotion becomes
obstinately fixed to him 194

Prop. VII. An emotion can only be controlled or destroyed by
another emotion contrary thereto, and with more power for
controlling emotion 194

Prop. VIII. The knowledge of good and evil is nothing else, but
the emotions of pleasure or pain, in so far as we are conscious
thereof 193

Prop. IX. An emotion, whereof we conceive the cause to be with
us at the present time, is stronger than if we did not conceive
the cause to be with us 196

Prop. X. Towards something future, which we conceive as close
at hand, we are affected more iiitensely, than if we conceive
that its time for existence is separated from the present by a
longer interval ; so too by the remembrance of what we con-
ceive to have not long passed away we are affected more in-
tensely, than if we conceive that it has long passed away . 196

Prop. XI. An emotion towards that which we eonceive asneces^
sary is^ when other conditions are equal, more intense than an
e7noiion towards that which is possible, or contingent, or non-
necessary 197

Prop. Xli. An emotion towards a thing, which we know not to
exist at the present time, and which we conceive is possible, is
more intense, other things being equal, than an emotion to-
wards a thing contingent 197

Prop. XIII. Emotion towards a thing contingent, which we
know not to exist in the present, is, other conditions being
equal,fainter than cm emotion towards a thing past , . 198

Prop. XIV. A true knowledge of good and evil cannot check
any emotion by virtue of being trite, but only in so far as it
is considered as an emotion 198

Prop. XV. Desire arising from the knowledge of good and evil
can be quenched or checked by many other desires arising
from the emotions, whereby we are assailed . . . .198

Prop. XVI. Desire arising from the knowledge of good and
evil, in so far as such knowledge regards what is future, may
be more easily controlled or quenched, than the desire for whaf
is agreeable at the present moment . . . . i99


COKTENTB.


Prop. XVII. Seain ansing from ths trve kneuitedge t^ good
and evil, in so/or a» jibjA knomiedgt M eonoeraid «i(fl viltnl,
it eontivgent, can be contTolled far mart tasilf/ eiill, than
dtaire for Unnga lIuU are ai preKitt

Prop. XVm. Daweariiing JrmnpUasvreiSjOthtT thingabcing

" "' "' " "" ^-'rmirising from pain

<y the lawi of his nature, neeetsarili/


equal, elnmaer tian deiirt Jirising from pain
"^ - - yiX, Everv man, Jy the laua qf his natu;

s or ftWnis from fiat vthich he deetns to be good o,


bad .


Prop. XX. Thii more every vaan eadiavourg and is able to teek
wiat iituefnl tahim,inalAerwordilopreserBe hie own btivg,
t&e more it he endovied tuif A virtue ; on the contrary, in pro-
portion at a man neglects to teek tuhai u us^ul to hiin, that
it, to preserve hit own btnta, he is vxmting in ■pomer

Prop. XXI. ■^'0 one cim n^htlg desvv to be itessed,
rightly, and (o live rightly, mthoat at the same time uiiihiitg
to be, to ad, and to fire, in ethtr words, to actvally exiet

Prop. XXII. No virtve can be conceUied at prior to ikit et


as he It determined to apariimlar
action becaiae he hat inadequate ideas, cannot he absoluleii/
said to act in obedience to tnrtue ; he can only be to described,
in so far at he is determined for the aniion, became he undtr-

Prop. SSrV, Tq att (dwlutdy in oUdkuPe lt> virtitt, it w w
the same thing at to act, Co live, or to preeertie one'a being
(theie three termt are ideiilieal in meaning) in accordance
aith the dictate of reason on the batis of teekisig vihat is
til^fid to on^i self 1

Prop. XXV. No one wishes Co preserve hilbeingfor thesakeej
anything ette i

Prop. XXVI. Whatsoever we endeavotir in obedience to reason
it nothing further than to undertland ; neither does the ntind,
in JN> far as it maies use of rtaeon, jvdgt anything to be
useful to it, tave euch things at are coadntive to under-
itiaiding '.

ftop. SXVIL We hnow nothing to be certainly goad or evil,
lave such IMagt at really conduce to tindirslanding, or such
a* <a-e able to hinder ui from iinderslandiTig . . . S

Prop. XXVIII. The mind's highest good is the hiowledge qf
God, and the miniTt highest virtue It to inow God . '.

Prop. XXIX. Ho indioiduai thing, which is entirely diffident
from our own nature, can help or check oKr power of actisity,
and lUiialuttly nothing con do us good or harm, vnless it lias
aomethinq in common VtHh oar nature . . . . '.

Prop. XS!X. A thing cannot be bad for ui through the
quality which ii hat in confinon ttnih our nature, but it it bad
for us,^in far as it it contrary to our nature . . . '.

Prop. XXXI. In to far as a thing is i» harmony Kith oiw
nature, it is necessarily good !


Prop. XXXII. ft M far at mm tm a jirev to pamaa, they
eaanvl, in IhiU nmecl, hr said to be ualuraliu ti iiirouwy . !

Prop- XXX UL Melt cim difer m fiaiMre. m io far at tkey an
lumttd Ay tttoii mnotUna, vykieh are pauUm at paimM
ftalts; and to Ihu txlenl out and the ian» man i$ varUibU
and incenstanl ........ '.

Pi'op. XXXIV, In to far at mttt are atfaUed by rmetUma
whUh arepaniont, i&v co» be controry one to another , '.

Prop. XXXV. In eo far only a* men live in obediinct to
remon, da they alviayt nectemrily agree in naivre . . I

Prop. XXXVI. ITie kighatgooi qf thott Kho foUow virlv*
it eoiKBum to all, and theryore all can equallii rejoice therein i

fkvp. XXXVJI. Thegood,iBhieh every THanuiho/ollBat after
virtue desires for hinwelf, iemll alio deeire for othrr tiun,
andio nttoA the morttia proportional he iae agrealcr ImoK-
ledgeofGed :

Frop. XXXVIII. WkaUoever dimetre the human body, to as
to render it eapable of being affected in nn increated'nmnbtr
(if «ayi,er of affeelinff external bodiet in an inrrtasednwniber
cfvm^i, it tatful (o man; and li ao, in proportion at the
bodff M tiertbff rendered Tuore capable of being affected or of
affating offer bodiei in an inereaicd manber rf vaye ; eon-
trariviiei, tchateoever rendera the body lea capable in ikit
reject it hurtful to man ...,,., i

Prop. XXXlX fVhateeeeer brings a&xrf tht prtMroaiion of
the ^proportion of motion ajid rettj which the porta of Me
human body mftnatty poeaeet, it r/ood; contrariwiae, vihatio-
ever eaueei a change in tuch proportion is bad , . . '.

Prop. XL. WhaltoeiKT condiicea to man'e aodal life, or cavtet
men to Urn together in harmony, u Httful, wienas tahataoevcr
ftj^ws diacoTdinto a Stale it bad i

Prop. XLI. Pleatare in Utelf it noi bad biii good ; coatmri-
vriti, pain in itielf i» bad . , '.

Prop. XLII. Mirth cannot b* excetaira, but ie alvmyi good;
eonirariunee. Melancholy is altcaj/e bad . . , . i

Prop. XLIIl. Stimslation may be excessive and bad ; on tie
other hand, ffri^ may be good, in so far at ttimiiladion or
pteaanre ia bad L

Prop. XLIV. Love and deain may be excettive , . , S

Prep. XL V. Hatred can neeir be good i

Prop. XLVI. He, who livet under /he gwdanee of reasen. en-
diavosra, at far at pottibte, ta retider baei lom, er Undtiett,
for olher men't halnd, amir, cosienmt, etc., towarda kirn . i

Prop. XL VII. Smotione of hope and fear cfotnol be in them-
ttlvei good '.

Prop. XLVIIL The emolionartfover-eateem end disparagement
an alviayt bad S

Prop. XLIX. Oeer-ttleem is apt to render itt object proud . i

Prop. L. Fily, in a man vtho Uvea nndcr the gvii/anae of
reaioBjia inilaelfbad andvatleaa S


Prop. LI. AppTovi^ b not npngnimt to rvum, but can agree
iAcntBilh and arise iAerefro at

Prop. LII. Self-approval mtm arise from reason, <mi ilat
which arises/mm rtasan u i/it Mgheat jaieible .

Prop. LIIL HnmUUi/ u ntii a virtue, or duel not arUe from

Prop. LIV. Eepenfanre it not a virtue, or does not arise from
reoKm, bvi ke mho repents ojan nction is davblff wrelcked or

Prop. LV. ExireTite pride or dyeclion indieaiea extreme ijno-

Prop. LVL Extreme pride or d^eetUm indicates exlremt in-
firmity <if spirit

Prop. LVII. The proud man delights in the eompanu of
fatterert and pnritsites, bui hales 'the company of the hiffh-
minded

Prop. LVm. Honour [gloria) is not repugnant to reason, but
may arise ther^ront x-m

Prop. LIX. To all the actims, mherelo v« are determined by
miolions, wherein the miiid is passive, vie can be deiermined
viithout emotion by reason SS7

Prop. LX . Desire arieing from a pleostire or paia, thai it, not
lUtribiitaHe ia the whole hody, bitt only to one or certain
ports thereof, is without uiiiity in respect to man as a whole . S3S

Prop. LXL Uetire wAuA tpringa from raaeoa connal be ex-

Prop. LXIL in so faros the mind eonoeives a thing under the
dictate of reason, it il affected eyualty, whether the idea be of
a thing present, poet, orfuiure 229

Prop. liXIIL He who is led b^fear, and does good in order to
escape evU, is fiot led bu reason U30

Prop. LXIV. Ths knowledge <if evil is an inadequate know-
ledge 331

Prop. LSY. Under the giiilanct of reason we AouH pursue
thegreater of two good! and. the tester of two eviis . . 231

Prcf>. IiXVI. We may, wder the guidance qf reason, seek a
greaiergood in the future inmeference to a leaser good in the
presmt, and wsma-g seek a lesser rt>ii tn the present in pre-
ference to a greater evil in the fviure ..... S31

Prop. LXVII. A free man thinis of nothing less than of
death ; astd his wisdom is a meditalien not qf death, but of
We 238

Prop. LXVIir. ffmen were bom free, they would, so long as
thtg remained free,form no coaccptvm of good or evU . , S32

Prop. LXIX The virtue of a fne man is' seen to be as great,
when it deeUnes dangers, as wh^t it oiiercomes them . . 233

Prop. LXX. 214« ,free man, wha lives among the ignorant,
etrives, as far as he can, to avoid receiving favoars from them 234

Prop. LXXI. Onlfi free vuta art thoroaghlt/ grateful, ont to
another ' .' . . .334


I


CONTENTS. ZIX

PAOB
Prop. LXXn. The frw mom never acts fraudulently, hnU

always in good faith 235 '/

Prop. LXXIII. The man, who is guided hy reason, is more free
in a State, where he lives under a general system of law, than

in solUude, where he is independent 235 y

Appendix on the Right Way of Life 2:i6

Part V. On the Power of the Understanding, or of Human

Freedom • • • 244

Preface. • • • • 244

Axioms . • • • • 247

Prop. I. Even as thovahts and the ideas of things are arranged
and associated in the mind, so are the modifications of the
body, or the images of thinas precisely in the same way
arranged and associated in the body 247

Prop. li. If we remove a disturbance of the spirit, or emotion,
from the thought of an external cause, and unite it to other
thoughts, then will the love or haired towards that external
cause, and also the vacUlalions of spirit, which arise from
these emotions, be destroyed 248

Prop. III. An emotion, which is a passion, ceases to be a
passion, as soon as we form a clear and distinct idea thereof . 248

Prop. IV. There is no modification of the body, whereof we
cannot form some clear and distinct conception . . . 248

Prop. V. An emotion towards a thing which we conceive
simply, and not as necessary, or as contingent, or as possible,
is, other conditions being equal, greater than any other
emotion 249

Prop. VI. The mind has greater power over the emotions, and
is less sfuhject thereto, in so far as it understands all things as
necessary 250

Prop. VII. Emotions, which are aroused or spring from reason,
if we take account of time, are stronger than those, which are
attribtUable to particular objects, that we regard as absent . 250

Prop. VIII. An emotion is stronger in proportion to the num-
ber of simultaneous concurrent causes whereby it is aroused . 251

Prop. IX. An emotion, which is attributable to many and
diverse causes, which the mind regards as simultaneous with
the emotion itself, is less hurtful, and we are less subject
thereto, and less affected towards each of its causes, than if it
were a different and equally powerful emotio9i, attributable to
few<r causes or to a single cause 251

Prop. X. So long as we are not assailed by emotions contrary to
our nature, we have the power of arranging and associating
the modifications of our body according to the intellectual
order . . . . • 252

Prop. XI. In proportion as a mental image is referred to more
objects, so is it more frequent, or more eiften vivid, and affects
the mind more . 254

Prop. XII. The mental images of things are more easily aS'


XX CONTENTS.

lociaied unth iht imogta referred to tiiiK/i v/hieh we clearly
and distinctly tmdtrsland, llunt milk olhen ....

Prop. XIII. A nantid image is more ofien vivid, in proportion

as it i» astociaied iciiA a greater number of other imaarg , x33

' rrnp, XIV. The mind cm bring it about, thai ail bodily

■tiiodificalioTU or imagei of tkiagt nay ba referred lo tha

idea of God SSS

, Prop. XV. He, leho clearly and diatintlly uitderatanda himu^
ond hit emotioni, lomi God, Jind fo miirh tMe more in profoi^
tion ai he ■man nndartlanda himtelf and hie tmationi . , ISS
y Frap. XVI. TAit lotu toiairdr God must hold the cAi'f plaai
' la Iht mind Sib

Pnip. XVII. God it mthovl patsioat, neith^iahe nffiettd by
anu emotion ofpteaivre or pain 255

rnp. XVin. No one can hate God Sa6

I'rop. XIX. Hi, mho lovei God, cannot endeavour, Vial God
Mould laiie him in rtltim S56

Frnp. XX. ZKu love lavxirdi God eannet be ftained by tha
emotion of envy or je(douay ; contrarivjier, ii it the more
foitered, in proportion atwt concdvea prcater number of mm
lo be joined to God by Ihe tame bond of loBe . . . 256

Prop. XXL The miad eaa oatg imagine anything, or rstaember

vihat it pati, vthjlt the body rnduret S99

Prop. XX n, IfeverlheUu in God there is neceltarily an idea,
vihich tifprftm (hi wKMv <(f Ihii or that hvman body 'under
the form qf eiermly B59

Fnip. XXIII. The human mindcannol be absolutely dalroyed
tiilh the bodi/, btti there remains of it something lahich is
ettrnai 259

Pr»p. XXIV. J^e mere vm understand particular things, the

amv do ite understand God 260

Prop, XXV. 25* highett mdeavattr of Iht mind, and the
highest virtne, is to undersiaad things by inluition . . S60

Prop. XXVI. In proportion as Ihi mind it more capable of
iindrrttanding things by inticition, it detins more so lo tatder-
stand tkingi 2G0

Prop. XXvIL From inluition oiriset tht highest possible
menlai acguieSBence 261

Prop. XXVIIL The endeavour or disire to know things by
intuilion cannot aristfrom opinion, biUfrtm reason . . 261

Prop. XXIX. Whaltoever the mind undirslojidt under the form
qf eternity, ii doet not understand by virtue of eonodving the
pTftivt aetual txtstenct of tha body, but by virliu of eott-
eeiuing the etienee of the body under the form of atemity . 261
' / Piwp. XXX, Our Blind, in to far at it Itnoiiit iltelf and tht
body under tha form of eternity, hat to thai extent neres-
lanly a hiowledge nf God, and knows thai it u t» God, and
is conceived Ihroiigh God SG2

Pr.jp. XXXI. lalktion depends on the mind, aa its formal
cause, in to far at the mind itself is eternal .... S62


00KTEKT8. XXI

PAOl

Frop. XXXn. Whitsoever we undcrgtand by intuitiaHy W0 take
delight in, and our ddigkt is accompanied by the idea qf God
as cause 263

Prop. XXXIU. The intellectual love of God, which arises Jrom
intuition, is eternal 263

Prop. XXXIV. The mind is, only while the body endures, sub-
ject to those emotions, which are attrihutahle to passions . 264

Prop. XXXV. God loves himself with an infinite intellectual
love 264

Prop. XXXVI. The intellectual love of the mind towards God
is that very love of God, whereby God loves himself, not im
so far as he is infinite, but in so far as he can be e^cplained
through the essence of the human mind regarded under the
form of eternity ; in other words, the intellectual love of the
mind towards God is part of the infinite love, wherewith God
loves himself 264

Prop. XXXVII. There is nothing in nature, which is contrary
to this intellectual love, or which can take it away . .266

Prop. XXXVIII. In proportion as the mind understands more
things by reason and intuition, it is less subject to those
emotions which are evil, and stands in less fear of death . 2G6

Frop. XXXIX. He, who possesses a body capable of the greatest
number of activities, possesses a soul whereof the greatest part
is eternal 2C7

Prop. XL. In proportion as each thing possesses more of per-
fection, so is it more active, and less passive ; and, vice versd,
in proportion as it is more active, so is it more perfect , • 269

Frop. XLI. Even if we did not know that our mind is eternal,
we should still consider as of primary importance piety and
religion, and generally all things, which in Part IV. we
showed to be attributable to courage and high-mindedncss . 26S

Prop. XLII. Blessedness is not the reward of virtue, but virtue
itself; neither do we rejoice therein, because we control our
lusts, but, contrariwise, because we rejoice therein, we are able
to control our lusts 270

Spinoza's Corbespondence (Abridged) 273

Letters I.— XXV.a. (1661-1676.) Between Spinoza and
Henry Oldenburg 275

Letters XXVL — ^Si^VIII. Between Spinoza and Simon de
Vries 309

Letters XXIX., XXIX.a. (1663.) From Spinoza to Lewis
Meyer 317

Letter XXX. (1664.) From Spinoza to Peter Balling . . 325

Letters XXXI.— XXXVIII. (1664-5.) Between Spinoza and
WiUiam Blyenbergh 327

Letters XXXIX.— XLI. (1666.) From Spinoza to Christian
Huyghens, on the unity of God 351

Letters XLI.a., XLII. (1665-6.) From Spinoza to a cor-
respondent probably identified with John Bresser . . 358


• •


XXU CONTENTS.

FAGB

Letter XLTII. (1666.) Spinoza to I. t. M. on a problem
connected with games of chance (omitted).

Letters XLIV. — XLVL (on scientific subjects, and omitted),
and Letter XLVII. (1667-71.) From Spinoza to a cor-
respondent probably identified with Jarig Jellis . . . 362

Letter XLVIII. (1671.) From Lambert de Velthuysen to
Isaac ( hrobio againstTract at u sTheologico-Politiciis (om i tt«d ).

Letter XLIX. (1671.) Spinoza's answer to XLVIII., ad-
dressed to Isaac Orobio 364

Letter L. (1674.) From Spinoza to Jarig Jellis, on Hobbes, &c. 369

Letters LI., LII. (1671.) Between Spinoza and Leibnitz . 370

LettersLIII., LIV. (1673.) Between Spinoza and Fabritius 373

Letters LV. — LX. (1674.) Between Spinoza and Hugo
Boxel on ghosts 375

Letters LXE— LXXIL (1674-6.) Between Spinoza, E. W.
Ton Tschimhausen, and G. H Schaller . . . .389

Letters LXXIIL, LXXIV. (1675.) Between Spinoza and
Albert Burffh 410

Letter LXX V. (1675 ?) Fn.m Spinoza to Lambert de Vel- .
thaysen • ••«#••• •419


ON THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE
UNDERSTANDING.

[TEACTATUS DE INTELLECTUS EMENDATIONE:^


n.


ON THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE
UNDERSTANDING.


I FTEE experience bad taught me that all the usual


sutToimdiiigs of social life a


a and futile ;


; seeing
znaz noneot ineoDjecisot mjiears contained in themselree
anything either good or bad, except in bo far ai the mind
ia aSected by them, I finally resolved to inquire whether
there might be some real good having power to communi-
cate itself, which would afEect the mind singly, to the exclu-
sion of all else : whether, in fact, there might he anything
of which the diacovery and attainment voiUd enable me to
enjoy continuous, supreme, and unending happineaa, I
eay " TfitmUy resolved," for at first sight it seemed unwise
■willingly to lose hold on what was sure for the sake of
Bomething then uncertain. I could see the benefits which
are acquired through fame and riches, and that I should he
obliged to abandon the quest of such objects, if I seriously
devoted myself to the soarch for something different and
new. I perceived that if true happiness chanced to be
[placed in the former I should necessarily misB it ; while if,
□. the other hand, it were not 8o placed, and I gave them
biy whole attention, I should equally fail.
' I therefore debated whether it would not be possible to
jarrive at the new principle, or at any rate at a certainty
p)ncerDing its esisteuoe, without changing the conduct ajid
Iflual plan of my life ; with this end in view I made many
ifforts, but in vain. For the ordinary surroundinga of life
h^hich are esteemed by men (as their actions testify) to be
IB higheat good, may be classed under the three heads —
iches. Fame, and the Pleasures of Sense : with these three


J


4 ON THE IMPKOVEWEKT p? I

the mind is ho ataorfeel that it has little power to reflect
on any differenfr-grjod." By senaual pleasure the mind in
eDthralled-fo ftpjeitent o£ quiescence, as if the BUpreme
good were actually attained, bo that it is quite incapable of
thinliiSg'Bf any other object ; when such pleasure has been
grajjfiii'it is followed by extreme melancholy, whereby
5he inlnd, though not enthralled, is disturbed and dulled.
■_ \ The pursuit of honours and riches ia likewise very ab-
; *Borbing, especially if such objects bo sought simply for
their own aake'.iriasnmch as they are then supposed to
constitute the highest good. In the case of fame the mind
is still more absorbed, for fame is conceived as always good
for ita own sake, and as the ultimate end to which all
actions are directed. Further, the attainment of riches and
fame is not followed as in the case of sensual pleasures by
repentance, but, the more we acquire, the greater is our
delight, and, consequently, the more are we incited to in-
crease both the one and the other ; on the other hand, if
our hopes happen to be frustrated we are plunged into the
deepest sadness. Fame has the further drawback that it
compela its votaries to order their lives according to the
opinions of their fellow-men, shunning what they usually
shun, and seeking what they usually seek.

When I saw that all these ordinary objects of desire
would be obstacles in the way of a search for something
different and new — nay, that they were so opposed thereto,
that either they or it would have to be abandoned, I was
forced to inquire which would prove the most useful to
ma : for, as I say, I seemed to be willingly losing hold on a
sure good for the sake of something uncertain. However,
after I had reflected on the matter, I came in the first
place to the conclusion that by abandoning the ordinary
objects of pursuit, and betakiiig myself to a new quest, I
should be leaving a good, uncertain by reason of its own
nature, as may be gathered from what has been said, for the
Bake of a good not uncertain in its nature (for I sought for
a fiied good), hut only in the possibility of its attainment.
Further reflection convinced me, that if I could really get
to the root of the matter I should be leaving certain evils
for a certain good. I thus perceived that I was in a Hta(«
of great peril, and I compelled myself to seek with all my
' Stc Note, n. ^1.


i StK


r THE IMPBOTEMEKT OF THE TTNDEESTANDINO.


atrengtli for a remedy, however uncertain it might be ; ks.
a sick man struggling with a deadly disease, when he seca
that death will surely be upon him unlese a remedy be
ud, is compelled to aeek such a remedy with ttU his
ingth, inasmuch as bis whole hope lies therein. All the
)jeotB pursued by the multitude not only bring no remedy
lat tends to prcserre our being, but even act'as hindrances,
(Using the death not seldom of those who possess them,
id always of those who are posseaaed by them.' There
6 many examples of men who have suffered persecution
■en to death for the sake of their riches, and of men who
in pursuit of wealth have exposed themselves to so many
dangers, that they have paid away their life as a penalty
for their folly. Examples are no less numerous of men,
irho have endured the utmost wretchedneHS for the sake of
gaining or preserving their reputation. Lastly, there are
innumerable eases of men, who have hastened their death
through over-indulgence in sensual pleasure. All these
erila seem to have arisen from the fact, that happiness or
tmhappineBs is made wholly to depend on the quality of
the object which we Jovg. When a thing is not loved, no
quarrels will arise concernii^ it — ^no sadness will be felt if
it perishes — no envy if it is posaessed by another — no fear,
no hatred, in short no disturbances of the mind. All these
arise from the love of what is perishable, such as the objects
already mentioned. But love towards a thing eternal and
infinite feeds the mind wholly with joy, and is itself un-
mingled with any sadness, wherefore it is greatly to be de-
sired and sought for with all our strength. Yet it was not
atrandom that I used the words, " K I could go to the
root of the matter," for, though what I have urged was
perfectly clear to my mind, I could not forthwith lay aside
all love of riches, sensual enjoyment, and fame. One thing
was evident, namely, that while my mind was employed
■with these thoughts it turned away from its former objects
ot desire, and seriously considered the search for a new
principle ; this state of things -was a great comfort to me,
for I perceived that the evils were not such as to resist all
temeaies. Although these intervals were at first rare, and

' These considerations should be s«t forlll more precisely.


1)


6 ON THE lUPEOYEMENT OF THE CNDERBTASDING.

of Teiy short duration, yet afterwardB, as tie true good
become more and more discernible to me, they became
more frequent aud more lasting; especially after I had
recoguized that the a<KiuiHition of wealth, sensual pleasure,
or fame, is only a hindrance, so long as they are sought as
ends not as means ; if they be sought as means, they will
be under restraint, and, far from being hindrances, will
further not a little the end for which they are sought, as I
will show in due time.

I will here only briefly state what I mean by true good,
and also what is the nature of the liighest good. In order
that this may be rightly understood, we must bear in mind
that the terms good and evil are only applied I'elatively, so
that the same thing may be called both good and bad,
according to the relations in view, in the same way as it
may be called perfect or imperfect. Nothing regarded in
its own nature can be called perfect or imperfect ; especi-
ally when we are aware that all things whidi come to pass,
come to pass according to the eternal order and fixed laws
of nature. However, human weakness cannot attain to
this order in. its own thoughts, but meanwhile man con-
ceives a human character much niore stable than hia own,
and sees that there is no reason why he should not himself
acquire such a character. Thus he is led to seek for means
which will bring him to this pitch of perflation, and calls
everything which will serve as such means a true good.
fThe chief good is that he should arrive, together with other
(individuals if possible, at the possession of the aforesaid
'character. WTiat that character is we shall show in due
time, namely, that it is the knowledge of the union existing
between the mind and the whole of nature.^ This, then, is
the end for which I strive, to attain to such a character
myself, and to endeavour that many should attain to it
iwith me. In other words, it is part of my happiness to lend
la helping hand, that many others may understand even as I
/do, so that their understanding and desire may entirely
agree with my own. In order to bring this about, it ia
necessary to understand as much of nature as will enable
us to attain to the aforesaid character, and also to form a

* These malteri ve expliuned more at length elsewhere.


mDBKSTAjiDna.


il order soeli M ia mo«t condndro to the ftttaimnrat of
T by the gT«ftte«t nmnber wHh the l«ft«t diA-
oger. We most eeefe th« assietanc« of Moiut
iphj ' aod the Tbectrr of Edaoation ; farther, as he»]th
■8 no iosigiiiScai^ means for attaiiiii^ oar end, we must
also biclnda the Thole adenoe of MedieLnei, and, as man/
difficolt things are by oontrirance rendered easy, and we
can in this way gain much time and conreoieuce, the Gcience
of Mechanics mast in no way be deepi^. But. before all
things, a means must be derieed for improring the under-
standing and pnrifpng it, as far as may be at the outset,
to that it n^y apprehend things without error, and in the
beat possible way.

Thns it is apparent to everyone that I wish to direct all
sciences to one end and aim,' so that we may attain to the
sopreme human perfection which we hare named ; and,
therefore, whatsoever in the sciences does not serve ta pro-
IT object will hare to be rejected as oselees. Tosumi


1


moteo


up the matter in a word, all our actions and thoughts musi

be directed to this one end. Yet, as it is necessary that

while we are eadeavonriag to attain our pi^rpoeei and bring

the tmderstanding into the right path, we should cany on

oar life, we are compelled first of all to lay down certain

rules of Ufe as provisionally good, to wit the following : —

I. To speak in a manner intelligible to the multitude,

and to comply with every general custota that does not

Lhinder the attaiomoat of our purpose. For we can gain

I'irom the multitude Iio small adTantages, provided that we

'rive to accommodate ourselves to its understanding as

X as possible : moreover, we shall in this way gain a

riendly audience for the reception of the truth.

IL To indulge ourselves with pleasures only in ao far as

Fllheyare neceasary for preserving health.

nl. Lastly, to endeavour to obtain only sufficient money
or other commodities to enable na to preserve our life and
health, and to follow such general customs as are consistent
r purpose.


There u for the a


le sciences necessary for
un meir orner.
s but one endjlo which Lhej should all be


c


8 ON THE IMPBOYEMENT OV THE TTNBKSSTAHDINO.

Having laid down these preliminary roles, I will betake
myself to the first and most important task, namely, the
amendment of the understanding, and the rendering it
capable of understanding things in the manner necessary
for attaining our end.

In order to bring this abont, the natural order demands
that I should here recapitulate all the modes of perception,
which I have hitherto employed for affirming or denying
anything with certainty, so that I may choose the best, and
at the same time begin to know my own powers and the
nature which I wish to perfect.

Beflection shows that all modes of perception or know-
ledge may be reduced to four : —

I Per^ption arising from hearsay or from some sign
which everyone may name as he pleases.

n. Perception arising from mere experience— that is,from
experience not yet classified by the intellect, and only so
called because the given event has happened to take place,
and we have no contradictory fact to set against it, so that
it therefore remains unassailed in our mind.

TTT, Perception arising when the essence of one thing is
inferred from another thing, but not adequately; this
comes* when from some effect we gather its cause, or when
it is inferred from some general proposition that some pro-
perly is always present.

lY . Lastly, there is the perception arising when a thing
is perceived solelv through its essence, or through the know-
ledge of its proximate cause.

All these kinds of perception I will illustrate by examples.
By hearsay I know the day of my birth, my parentage, and
other matters about which I have never felt any doubt. By
mere experience I know that I shall die, for this I can af&rm
from having seen that others like myself have died, though
all did not live for the same period, or die by the same dis-

> In this case we do not understand anything of the cause from the
consideration of it in the effect. This is sufficiently evident from the
fact that the cause is only spoken of in very general terms, such as —
there exists then something ; there exists tnen some power, &c. ; or
from the fact that we only express it in a negative manner — it is not
this or that, &c. In the secona case something is ascribed to the cause
because of the effect, as we shall show in an example, but only a pro-
perty, never the essence.


>X TBE IMPROTEHENT OF THE GKDBItgTAI'DtNO. 9

I know by mere experience that oil has the property
f feeding fire, and water of extinguishmg it. In the fiam<;
ray I know that a dog is a barking animal, man a rational

'mal, and in fact nearlr all the practical knowledge of
life.

We deduce one thing from another aB follows : when we

clearly perceive that we feel a certain body and no other, we

"fiience dearly infer that the mind is unitedto the body,' and

nat their union is the cause of the given sensafion ; but we

jinot thence absolutely understand the nature of the

nsation and the union.' Or, after I have become tws-
qaainted with the nature of vision, and know that it has
£he property of making one and the same thing appear
smaller when far off than when near, I can infer that the
son is larger than it appears, and can draw other conclu-
sionB of the same kind.

Iiastly, a t hing P^j^y he p p rr"'?'"^ solely- thrri'igh its .
essence ; when, trom the fact of knowing something, I know
Wbaii li is to know that thing, or when, from knowing the
essence of the mind, I know that it is united to the body.
By the same Mnd of knowledge we know that two and
three make five, or that two lines each parallel to a third,
are parallel to one another, &c. The things which I have
been able to know by thia kind of knowledjj'e are as yet
Tery few.

Jji order that the whole matter may be i>ut in a clearer
light, I will make use of a single illustration as follows,
three numbers are given— it is required to find a fourth,
which shall be to the third as the second is to the first,


(he Bensation, the ePfecl, to wit, from which we inl'erred the c
wbich we nniierstand nothing.

^ A conduaion of this sort, (bongh it be certain, ia jet not to be
relied on without jijeat caution ; fur uiiIses we are exceedingtj careful
we aball forthwith fall into error. When things are conceived thus
abslmctedty, and not through their true essence, they are apt to be
onfused by ihe imaginiition, For that, whith is in ilaelf one, men
~" B lo be multiplex. To those things which are conceived ab-
ily, apart , and confusedly, terma are applied which are opt to
le wrested from their strict meaoiag, and bestowed on things more
; whence it results that these latter are imagicod in Ihe some
IS the former to which the terms w-ere originally given.


10 ON THE IMPKOVEMBNT OP THE PN DEE STAND I NO. ^H

Tradesmen will at once teU us tliat they know what ia re-
quired to find the four til number, for they have oot yet
forgotten the rule which was giTCQ to them arbitraj-ily
without proof by their masters ; others construct a uni-
Tersal axiom from their experience with simple numhera,
where the fourth number ia self-evident, as in the case o£
2, 4, 3, 6 ; here it is evident that if the second number be
multiplied by the third, and the product divided by the
first, the quotient is 6 ; when they see that by this process
the number ia produced which they knew beforehand to be
the proportional, they infer that the proceas always holds
good for finding a fourth number proportional. Mathema-
ticiana, however, know by the proof of the nineteenth pro-
position of the aeventh book of Euclid, what numbers are
proportionals, namely, from the nature and property of pro-
portion it follows that the product of the first and fourth will
be equal to the product of the second and third ; still they do
not see the adequate proportionality of the given numbeTs,
or, if they do see it, they see it not by virtue of Euchd's pro-
.^^position, but intuitively, without going through any process.

In order that from these modes of perception the beat
may be selected, it is weU that we should briefly enumerate
the means necessary for attaining our end,

I, To have an exact knowledge of our nature which we
desire to perfect, and to know as much as is needful of


H, To collect in this way the differences, the agreements,
and the oppositions of things.

in. To learn thus exactly how far they can or cannot be
modified.

IV". To compare this result with the nature and power of
man. We shall thus discern the highest degree of perfec-
tion to which man is capable of attaining. We shall then
be in a position to see which mode of perception we ought
to choose.

As to the first mode, it ia evident that from hearsay our
knowledge must always be uncertain, and, moreover, can
give us no insight into the essence of a thing, as is mani-
fest in our illustration ; now one can only arrive at know- |
ledge of a thing through knowledge of its essence, as will
hereafter apjtear. "We may, therefore, clearly conclud]|


"lie


ON THE UIPROTEMENI (


iiiat the certainty ariaing from hearsay caimot be scientilic
in ita character. For simple hea.rsay i^aniiot afF<.>ct aayoDO
whose undeE'Etaiidiiig does sot, so to speak, meet it half
way.

The aecoad mode of perception' cannot be aaid to give us
the idea of the proportion of which we are in 8earch.
Moreover its results are very uncertain and indefinite, for
we shall never discover anything in natural phenomena by
its means, except accidental properties, wluch are never
clearly understood, unless the essence of the things in
question be known first. Wherefore this mode also must
be rejected.

Of the third mode of perception we may say in a manner
that it gives us the idea of the thing sought, and that it
enables us to draw conclusions without risk of error ; yet
it is not by itself sufficient to put us in possession of ths'
perfeetbn we aim at.

The fourth mode alone apprehends the adequate essence-
of a thing without danger of error. This mode, therefore,
must be the one which we chiefly employ. How, then,
should we avail ourselves of it so as to gain the fourth kind
of knowledge with the least delay concerning things pre-
' ipsly unknown ? I will proceed to explain.
How that we know what kind of knowledge is necessary
: ns, we must indicate the way and the method whereby
i may gain the said knowledge concerning the things
^leedful to be known. In order to accompUah this, we
must flrst take care not to commit ourselves to a search,
going back to infinity — that is, in order to discover the
Mst method for finding out the truth, there is no need of
"' ther method to discover au.ch method ; nor of a third
I for discovering the second, and so on to infini ty,
h proceedings, we should never arrive at the know-
__) of the truth, or, indeed, at any knowledge at all.
^e matter stands on the same footing as the making of
laterial tools, which might be ai^ued about in a similar
For, in order to work iron, a hammer is needed, and
ammer cannot be forthcoming unless it has been made ;

I Bhall here treat a little more in detail of experience, and shull
s tiie melboi) adopted by [lie EmpiriLS, aud 1)/ leeent philo-


12 ON THE lUPBOVEMEKT OF THE iniS£EieTANDlNa.^^|

bat, in order to make it, there was need of another hammer
and other tools, and so on to infinity. We might thua
vainly endeavour to prove that men have no power of work-
ing iron. But as men a.t first made use of the ijistriim.enta
supplied hy nature to accomphsh very easy pieces of work-
manship, laboriously and imperfectly, and then, when these
were finished, wrought other things more difficult with less
labour and greater perfection ; and bo gradually mounted
from the simplest operations to the making of tools, and
from the malnng of tools to the making of more complex
tools, and fresh feats of workmanship, till, they arrived at
making, with small expenditure of labour, the vast number
of comphcated mechaniGms which they now possess. So, in
like manner, the intellect, by its native strength, 'makes for
itself intellectual inatrumentB, whereby it acquires strength
for performing other intellectual operations,' and from
these operations gets again fresh inattumenta, or the power
of pushing its investigations further, and thus gradually
proceeds till it reaches the summit of wisdom.

That this is the path pm-sued by the understanding may
be readily eeen, when we undereland the nature of the
method for finding out the truth, and of the natural in-
struments so necessary for the construction of more com-
plex instruments, and for the progress of investigation. I
thus proceed with my demonstration.

A true idea " (for we possesa a true idea) is something
different from its correlate (ideatum) ; thus a circle is dif-
ferent from the idea of a circle. The idea of a drcle ia not
something having a circumference and a centre, aa a circle
has ; nor ia the idea of a body that body itself. Now, aa it
is aomething different from its correlate, it is capable of
being understood through itself ; in other words, the idea,
in ao far as ita actual essence (eesentia formalis) ia con-
cerned, may be the subject of another aubjective essence

IS by external causea,


pbiloaopb?


J philiiBopb
: I shall e


hall take care not nnlj to demotifttrale what I bate just advanced,
bnC also that we bave biitherlo proceeded rightly, and other things needful
tu be known.


OF TUP. UHDEBSTANDISO. 13

waetitia objecliva).' And, again, thla eecond salijectiTe

lence ■wiU, regarded in itself, be something real, and

|ftpable of being understood ; and ao on, indefinitely. For

■ uice, the man Peter is sometLing real ; the true idea of

a the reality of Peter represented BubjectiTely, and is

t itself aomething real, and quite distinct from tlie actual

' ' r. Now, aa this true idea oS Peter is in itself some-

» real, and has its own individual existence, it will alao

e capable of being understood — that is, of being the sub.

t of another idea, which will contain by representation

Jective) all that the idea of Peter contains actually (/ot-

\aliier). And, again, this idea of the idea of Peter has its

1 indiTiduaJity, which may become the subject of yet

wther idea; and eo on, indefinitely. This everyone may

a trial of for himself, by reflecting that he knows what

r is, and also knows that he knows, and further knows

lat he knows that he knows, &.c. Hence it is plain that,

D order to trnderstand the actual Peter, it is not necessary

rat to understand the idea of Peter, and EtUl less the idea

f the idea of Peter. This is the same as saying that, in ~

: to know, there is no need to know that we know,"

[itHTich less to know that we know that we know. This is no -

more necessary than to know the nature of a circle before

knowing the nature of a triangle.' But, with these ideas,

tha contrary is the case : for, in order to know that I know,

1 roust first know, Hence it is clear that cei-tainty ia no-^

lung else than the subjective essence of a thing : in other -

rords, the mode in which we perceive an aiitual reality is

inty, IHirther, it is also evident that, for the certitude

t truth, no further sign ia necessary beyond the poasesaion

t a true idea : for, as I have shown, it is not necessary to

' that we know that we know. Hence, again, it is

r that no one can know the nature of the highest cer-

inty, unless he possesses an adequate idea, or the subjec-

pyfi essence of a thing ; for certainty is identical with such


Id mi>dern langnuge, " the idea may becrm
_ tsenlation." ObjecUma generally correBpoi
Mitai' formalit to the modern '• objeclire.'^— 1
* ObwrtB that we are not here inquiring 1
male in us. This belongs to an i
Riere all these matters are amply explained
It ideus neither afHrmatiun, nor ce^tion,


le the suhject of another

ids to the modern "aub-

:Ta.]

low this first snbjecli>8


14 ON THE IMTEOVEMENT OF THE tTHDEKaTANDING. ^1

Bubjective essence. Thus, aa the truth needs no sifni— it
being anfficient to poaaeas the Bubjective eaaence of things,
or, in other words, the ideas of them, in order that all
doubts may be removed — it follows that the true method
does not consist in seeking for the signs of truth after the
.acquisition of the idea, but that the true method teaches
us the order in which we should seek for truth itself,^ or
the subjective essences of things, or ideas, for all these ex-
pressiona are synonymous. Again, method must neees-
sarily be concerned with reasoning or understanding — I
mean, method is not identical with reasoning in the search
for causes, still less is it the comprehenaion of the causes of
things : it is the diaoemment of a true idea, by distinguish-
. ing it from other perceptions, and by investigating its
nature, in order that we may thus know our power of
understanding, and may so train our mind that it may, by
a given standard, comprehend whatsoever is inteUigible,
by laying down certain rules aa aids, and by avoiding useleas
mental exertion.

Whence we may gather that method ia nothing else than
reflective knowledge, or the idea of au. idea ; and that as
there can be no idea of a.n idea — unless an idea esists pre-
viously.- — there can be no method without a pre-esistent
idea. Therefore, that will be a, good method which shows
na how the mind should be directed, according to the
standard of the given true idea.

Again, seeing that the ratio existing between two ideas ia
the same as the ratio between the actual realities corre-
sponding to those ideas, it follows that the reflective know-
ledge which has for its object the most perfect being is
more excellent than reflective knowledge concerning oflier
objects— in other words, that method mil be most perfect
which afEords the standard of the given idea of the most
perfect being whereby we may direct our mind. We thus
easily understand how, in proportion as it acquires new
ideas, the mind simultaneously acquires fresh instruments
for pursuing its inquiries further. For we may gather
from what has been said, that a true idea must necessarily
first of all exist in us as a natural inatrument; and that

' The nsture of menial search is explainecl in my philoeophy.


I THE IJIPaOTEJBEST OF THE rSDKBSTASDIS'O. 15

D this idea is apprehended ]yy the mind, it en&blea ub
t underetand the differeni* existing between itself and
1 other perceptions. In this, one port of the method

I Hoir it 19 clear that the mind apprehends itself better in

■Dportion as it understands a. greater number of natuml

kecta ; it follows, therefore, that this portion of the method

m be more perfect in proportion as the mind attains to

^ oomprehension of a greater number of objects, and that

I irill be Bbsolut«l7 perfect 'when the mind gains a know-

' e of the absolutely perfect being, or becomes conscious

5of. Again, the more things the mind knows, the better

>ea it underetaud its own strength and the order of nature ;

f increased self-knowledge, it can direct itself more easily,

1 lay down rules for its own guidance ; and, bj increased

vledge of nature, it can more easily avoid what is

I And this is the sum total of method, as we have already

lated. We may add that the idea in the world of

ight is in the same case as its correlate in the world of

Ji^. If, therefore, there be anything in nature which

I without connection' with any other thing, and if we

' " a to it a subjective essence, which would in every way

cpond to the objective reality, the subjective essence

t have no connection with any other ideas — in other

lords, we could not draw any conclusion with regard to it.

a the other hand, those things which are connected with

g all things that eiist in nature — will be under-

i by the mind, and their subjective essences will main-

a the same mutual relations as their objective realities—

■ ' I to say, we shall infer from these ideas other ideas,

t will in turn be connected with others, and thus our

MtrumentB for proceeding with our investigation will in-

This is what we were endeavouring to prove.

r, from what has just been said — namely, that an

a must, in aU respects, correspond to its correlate in the

Drld of reality, — it is evident that, in order to reproduce

i every respect the faithful image of nature, our mind

tnst deduce all its ideas from the idea which represents


16


r THE IMPEOTEMEBT OF THE UN


the origin aad source of tlie whole of nature, bo that
may itself become the source of other ideas.

It may, perhaps, provoke astoniehment that, after ha' __
said that the good method is that which teaches ub to direct
our mind according to the standard of the giveu true idea,
■we should prove our point by reasoning, which would seem
to indicate that it iB not self-evident. We may, therefore,
be questioned as to the vsJidity of our reasoning. If our
.reasoning be Bound, we must take aB a starting-point a true
/idea. Wow, to be certain that our atarting-point ia really
I B, true idea, we need a proof. This first course of reason-
( ing must be supported by a second, the second by a third,
and BO on to ininity. To this I make answer that, if by
some happy chance anyone had adopted this method in his
investigations of nature — that is, if he had acquired new
ideas in the proper order, according to the atandaa-d of the
original true idea, he would never havo doubted of the
truth of his knowledge,' inasmuch as truth, as we have
shown, makes itself maniieat, and all things would flow, as
it were, apontaneously towards him. But as this never, or
rarely, happens, I have been forced so to arrange my pro-
ceedings, that we may acquire by reflection and forethought
what we cannot acquire by chance, and that it may at tho
same time appear that, for proving the truth, and for valid
reasoning, we need no other means than the truth and
vahd reasoning themselves : for by vahd reasoning I have
established vahd reasoning, and, in like measure, I seek
still to estabhsh it. Moreover, this is the order of thinking
adopted by men in their inward meditations. The reaaoua
for its rare employment in investigations of nature are to
be found in current misconceptions, whereof we shall ex-
amine the causes hereafter in our philosophy. Moreover,
it demands, as we shall show, a keen and accurate discern-
ment. Ijastly, it is hindered by the conditions of human
life, which are, as we have already pointed out, extremely
changeable. There are also other ob8ta«lea, which we will
not here inquire into.

If anyone asks why I lave not at the atarting-point set
forth all the truths of nature in their due order, inasmuch
□e way as we have here do duuht of the trutli of our


OS THE TMPEOTEHEMX OF THE rSDEBOTAKDISQ. 17

truth IB self-evident, I reply hy wanting him not to re-
ect as false any paradoxes he may find here, bnt to talca
he troable to reflect on the chain of reasoning by which
ley are supported ; be will then be no longer in doubt that
3 have attained to the truth. This is why I have b^un
above.

If there yet remains some sceptic, who doubts of onr
nimaiy truth, and of all deductions we make, taking such
mth as our standard, he must either be arguing in bad
bitb, or we must confesa that there are men in complete
mental blindness, either innat« or due to misconceptions —
Qiat ie, to some external influence,

Sudi persons are not consetoas of themselves. If they

ffirm or doubt anything, they know not that they affirm

doubt : they say that they know nothing, and they say

.t they are ignorant of the very fact of their knowing

ithing. Even this they do not affirm, absolutely, they are

of conf essii^ that they eiist, ao long as they know

ithing ; in fact, they ought to remain dumb, for fear of

hply supposing something which should smack of truth.

istiyi with such perHoiiB, one should not speak of sciences:

IT, in what relates to life and conduct, they are compeUed

necessity to suppose that thej eiiat, and seek their own

vantage, and often affirm and deny, even with au oath,

they deny, grant, or gainsay, they know not that they

ly, grant, or gainsay, ao that they ought to be r^arded

u automata, utterly devoid of intelligence.

Jjet us now return to our propoBition. Up to the pre-

nt, wa have, first, defined the end to which we desire to

irect all our thoughts ; secondly, we have determined the

aode of perception best adapted to aid us in attaining our

erfection ; thirdly, we have discovered the way which our

lind should take, in order to make a good beginning —

amely, that it should use every tr ue idea as a Ht^Oard in

ursning its inquiries according to fiied rules. Kow, in

>rder that it may thus proceed, our method must furnish

first, with a means of d istinauiBhiny a tni^ idea from

other perceptions, and enabling ino mind to avoid

latter ; Becondly, with rules for perceiTJi ig unknown

gs according to the standard of the true idea ; thirdly,

■rith an order which enables us to avoid useless labour.


Bfltiy


ON THE IMPROVEMBMT OF THE UHDEKBTAKDINa,


-1


When we became acquainted witli this method, we saW
that, fourthly, it would be p^ffegtwien we had attained to
the iiea-flL*^^ absolutely perfeijt B^ g. This ia an obeer-
vation which should be made at theoutBet, in order that
we may arrive at the knowledge of such a being more

i then malte a beginning with the firat part of the
inethod, which is, as we hare said, to distinguish and sepa-

'0 the true Jdaa-f roTn other percep tioTia. and to keep the

ind from, confusing with true ideas those which are false,
fictitious, and doubtful. I intend to dwell on this point at
length, partly to keep a distinction so necessary before the
reader's mind, and also because there are some who doubt
of true ideas, through not haring attended to the distinc-
tion between a true perception and all others. Such per-
sona are like men who, while they are awake, doubt not
that they are awake, but afterwards in a dream, aa often
happens, thinking that they are BUjely awake, and then
finding that they were in error, become doubtful even of
lieing awake. This state of mind arises through neglect of
the SatinctJon between sleeping and waking.

Meanwhile, I give warning that I shall not here give the
essence of every perception, and explain it through its
proximate cause. Such work lies in the province of philo-
sophy. I shall confine myseK to what concerns method —
that ia, to the character of fictitious, false, and doubtful
perception, and the means of freeing ourselves therefroiK
Let us then first inquire into the nature of a fictitious
idea.

Every perception has for its object either a thing con-
sidered as existing, or solely the essence of a thing. Now
"fiction" is chiefly occupied with things considered as
existing, I will, therefore, consider these first — I mean
cases where only the existence of an object is feigned, and
the thing thus feigned is understood, or assumed to be
understood. For instance, I feign that Peter, whom I know
to have gone home, is gone to see me,' or something of that
kind. With what is such an idea concerned ? It is con-

' See below the note on hypotheaea, wliereof we have a oleiir under-
Btondini; ; tbe fiction conaista in sajing that such bypotbeses exist in
he&venly bodies.


1 «ei


OK THE lUI


i XJITDERSTANDINO. 19


«emed with things j>oBsible, and not with things necessary
or impoBsible. I call a thing iitipostible 'when its existence
vonld imply a contradiction; necessary, when its non-
jQxistence would imply a contradiction ; possible, when neither
ma eziBtence nor its non-existence imply a coatradiction,
But when the neceasity or impossibility of its nature de-
Brads on causes unknown to UB, while we fei^ that it
%zistB. If the necessity or impossibility of its existence
depending on external causes were known to ua, we could
not form any fictitious hypothesis about it j whence it fol-
lows that if there be a Ch)d, or omniacicnt Being, such an
one cannot form fictitious hypotlieseB. For, as regards our-
selves, when I know that I exist, I cannot hypothesize that
I exist or do not eiiat,' any more than I can hypothesize an
elephant that can go through the eye of a needle ; nor when
^ taiow the nature of God, can I hypothesize that He exista
does not exist." The same thing must be said of the
isera, whereof the nature implies a contradiction.
im these considerations, it is plain, as I have already
bted, that fiction cannot be concerned with eternal truths.*
But before proceeding further, I muat remark, in pass-
that the diSerence between the essence of one thing
and the essence of another thing is the same as that which
exists between the reality or existeilce of one thing and the
reality or existence of another ; therefore, if we wished to
eonceire the existence, for example, of Adam, simply by
i of existence in general, it would be the same as if, in
to conceive his existence, we went back to the nature
so aa to define Adam as a being. Thus, the more
is conceived generally, the more is it conceived

' Aa ■ thing, when once it ia nnderstood, raanifaata itself, wo have
•d only of Bn example without furllier proof. In the same way llie
imry ban only to be presented to our minds to be recognized BS false, as
11 Ibnhwilh appear When we come todiscuss fictioD concerning essencea.
' Oblerye, thut althonch many assert that th^y doabt whether God
i, they have nought bat bis name in their minda, or else some fiction
ll they call God : this fiction ia not in barmony wilh God'a reaJ

I we will dniy show.

II preaently show that no fiction can concern eternal truths,
n eternal truth, 1 mean that whicli being positive could nerer be-
te negatire. .Thua it is a primary and eternal truth tbat God c:


I


20 OJf THE IMFEOTEMBST OP T

confuBedlj, and the more ed.BiIj caji it be ascribed to a
given object. ContrariwlBe, the more it is conceived par-
ticularly, the more ia it underatood clearly, and the leaa
liable ia it to be ascribed, through negligence of Nature'a
order, to anything save its proper object. This is worthy
of remark.

We now proceed to consider those eases which are
commonly called fictions, though we clearly understand
that the thing is not as we imagine it. For instance, I
know that the earth is round, but nothing prevents my
telling people that it is a bendspbere, and that it is like a
half apple carved in reli&f on a dish; or, that the sun
moves round the earth, and so on. However, eiamination
will show us that there is nothing here inconsistent with
what Las been said, provid«d we first admit that we may
have made mistakes, and be now conscious of them ; and,
further, that we can hypothesize, or at least suppose, that
othera are under the same mistake as ourselves, or can,
J like ua, fall under it. We can, I repeat, thus hypotheaiz©
I ao long as we see no impoBsibility, Thus, when I tell any-
one that the earth ia not round, &c., I merely rectdl the
error which I perhaps made myself, or which I might have
faUen into, and afterwards I hypothesize that the person
to whom I tell it, is still, or may atoll fall under the same
mistake. This I say, I can feign so long as I do not per-
ceive any imposaibillty or necessity ; if I truly understood
either one or the other I should not be able to feign, and
I should he reduced to saying that I bad made the
attempt.

It remains for us to consider hypotheses made in pro-
blems, which Bometinies involve impossibihties. For in-
stajice, when we say: — let uH assume that t^s bum ing
c andle is not l ailloilWj or, let us assume that i t' 'biu-ns m

BOnmjIIUl^UUU;;.^)a£e, or wbpra t.hgrfl hi-'? nn ptTgaii-ftl^tti^

j ecta . Such assumptions are freely made, though the last
ia clearly seen to be impossible. But, though this be so,
there is no fiction in the case. For, in the first case, I have
merely recalled to memory another candle* not burning, or
' AftErwtrds, when we come to ap«B.I[ of fiction iknt is coDceruEd
tlie mind with aiiylhiiig new ; onlj Euch things a^ are already in Ihs


I«oiic«iTcd the caudle before me ae without a flame, and tlien
I nnderBtand as applying to the latter, leaving ite flame out
of the qneation, aR that I think of the former. In the
second case, I have merely to abstract my thoughts from
the objeeta anrrounding the candle, for the mind to deTOte
itself to the contemplation of the candle singly looked at in

I itself only ; I can then draw the conctusion that the candle
contains in itself no cause for its own deBtructioo, so that
if there were no physical objects the candle, and even the
flame, would remain unchangeable, and so on. Thus there
is here no fiction, but true and "bare assertions.' -

Let us now paaa on t« the fictions concerned with essences
only, or with some reality or eiistence simultaneously. Of
these we must spedaUy observe that in proportion as the
mind's understanding is smaller, and its experience multi-
plezf 80 will its power of coining fictions be larger, whereas
as its understanding increases, its capacity for entertaining
fictitious ideas becomes less. For instance, in tbe same
way as we are unable, while we are thinking, to feign that
we are t.tiiTiT.-iiig or not thinkdiig, so, also, when we know
the nature of body we cannot im^ine an infinite fly ; or,
I when we know the nature of the soul,' we cannot imagine
^B it as square, though anything may be expressed verbally.
^■' But, as we said above, the less men know of nature the

^^f brain or imagination are rscalleil to the mpinorj. when the attention ia
I directed to diem confitseJly and all at once. For instance, we have
mnembrance of Bpoken words and of a tree ; when the mind directa
itself to them cont^sedly, it fonns the notion of a tree speaking. The
■ame nay be said of exiateace, especially when it ia cont-elTed quite
generally aa entity ; it is then readily applied to all thinga oceniring
' gBther in the memory. This is specially worthy of remark.

as innch m the case oF hypatheaes pnt forward
explain certain movements accompanying celestial phenomena; but
these, when applied to the oeleati&l motions, we may draw conclu-
aa to the nature of the heavens, whereas (bis last may be quite
ent, especially as many other causes are coni'ejvable wjiioh would
mt for such motions.

It often happflna that a man tocbIIs to mind this word soul, and
'forms at the same time some corpnrual image : as the two repreaenta-
tions are simnltaneons, he easily thinks that ho imagines and feigns a
corporeal aoal : (hua confusing the name with the thing itself. I here
beg that n^ readers will not be in a burry (o refute this pmpneition )


they


wiu, .


hope, have i


le examples giveu and to what fc


3, if they pay cloae


22 ON THB IMPBOYEMENT OF THE TJNDEBSTANDING.

more easily can they coin fictitious ideas, such as trees
speaking, men instantly changed into stones, or into foun-
tains, ghosts appearing in mirrors, something issuing^
from nothing, even gods changed into beasts and men, and
infinite other absurdities of the same kind.

Some persons think, perhaps, that fiction is limited by
fiction, and not by understanding ; in other words, after I
have formed some fictitious idea, and have affirmed of my
own free will that it exists under a certain form in nature,.
I am thereby precluded from thinking of it under any
other form. For instance, when I have feigned (to repeat
their argument) that the nature of body is of a certain
kind, and have of my own free will desired to convince
myself that it actuaUy exists under this form, I am no*
longer able to hypothesize that a fly, for example, is infinite ;.
so, when I have hypothesized the essence of the soul, I am
not able to think of it as square, <&c. But these arguments
demand further inquiry. First, their upholders must
either grant or deny that we can understand anything.
If they grant it, then necessarily the same must be said of
understanding, as is said of fiction. If they deny it, let us^
who know that we do know something, see what they mean.
They assert that the soul can be conscious of, and perceive
in a variety of ways, not itself nor things which exist, but
only things which are neither in itself nor anywhere else>
in other words, that the soul can, by its unaided power»
create sensations or ideas unconnected with things. In fact,,
they regard the soul as a sort of god. Further, they assert
that we or our soul have such freedom that we can con*
strain ourselves, or our soul, or even our souFs freedom*
For, after it has formed a fictitious idea, and has given it&
assent thereto, it cannot think or feign it in any otber
manner, but is constrained by the first fictitious idea to
keep all its other thoughts in harmony therewith. Our
opponents are thus driven to admit, in support of their
fiction, the absurdities which I have just enumerated ; and
which are not worthy of rational refutation.^

^ Though I seem to deduce this from experience, some may deny its
cogency because I have given no formal proof, I therefore append the-
following for those who may desire it. As there can be nothing in
nature contrary to nature's laws, since all things come to pass by fixed


ON TEE I3IFB0VEUBKT OF THE UKDERSTAMSINa. 23


r

^^B Wbile leoiTing such persons La their error, we mil takg
^^naj« to derive from our ai^timent with them a trutli
^^Fnerviceable for our purpose, namely, that the mind, in paj-
^^ ii^ attention to a thing hypotheti(»J or false, so aa to mem<
tate upon it and understajid it, and derive the proper con-
cloaiona in due order therefrom, mil readily discover ita
falaity j and if the thing hypothetical be in its nature tnie^
and the mind pays attention to it, so as to understand it,
and deduce the truths which are derivable from it, tha
mind will proceed with an uninterrupted series of apt con-
^^ dnaiona ; in the same way as it would at once discover fas
^Kve showed just now) the absurdity of a falsa hypothesis,
^^nud of the conclusions dra,wn from it.
^^P We need, therefore, be in no fear of forming hypotheses,
^^ BO long as we have a clear and distinct perception of what
is involved. For, if we were to assert, haply, that men are
suddenly turned into beasts, the statement would be ex-
tremely general, so general that there would be no concep-
tion, that is, no idea or connection of subject and predicate,
in our mind. If there were such a conception we shoidd
at the same time be aware of the means and the caueea
■whereby the event took place. Moreover, we pay no atten-
tion to the nature of the subject and the predicate. Now,
if the first idea be not fictitious, and if all the other ideas
be deduced therefrom, our hurry to form fictitious" ideas
^^ will gradually subside. Further, as a fictitious idea can-
^^L not he cle&r and distinct, but is necessarily confused, and
^^K as all confusion arises from the fact that the mind has only
^^rpartial knowledge of a thing either simple or complex, and
^^ does not distinguish between the known and the unknown,
and, again, that it directs ita attention promiscuously to all
parts of an object at once without making distinctions,
it follows, first, that if the idea be of Bomfthing very
f simple, it must necessarily be clear and distinct. For a
^Teiy simple object cannot Be known in part, it must either
P 1)8 known altogether or not at all. Secondly, it follows that
f a complex object be divided by thought into a number of


;, proceei


'where 1 Bpeak of the false idea.


t irrefragabiy produce ils own proper effect,
wn as it poasesses the trut< eonceptinn of a
houglit that thiogfi elfei^ls. See below.


24' ON THE IMPBOVEMEMT OF THE iruDBBSTANDINO, ■

simple component parts, and if each part be regarded
separately, all confusion will disappear. Thirdly, it follows
thatfiction cannot be simple, but 13 made up oi the blending
o£ several confused ideas of diverse objects or actions ex-
istent in nature, or rather is composed of attention' directed
to all such ideas at once, ajid unaccompanied by any mental
assent.

Now a fiction that was simple would be clear and dis-
tinct, and therefore true, also a fiction composed only o£
distinct ideas would be clear and distinct, and therefore
true. For instance, when we know the nature of the circle
and the square, it is impossible for us to blend together
these two figures, and to hypothesize a square circle, any
more than a square soul, or things of that kind. Let us
shortly come to our conclusion, and again repeat that we
need have no fear of confusing with true ideas that which
is only a fiction. As for the first sort of fiction of which
we have already spoken, when a thing is clearly conceived,
we saw that if the ejdatence of that thing is in itself an
eternal truth, fiction can have no part in it ; but if the ex-
istence of the thiag conceived be aot a,a eternal truth, we
have only to be careful that such existence be compared to
I the thing'sessenoe.andtoconaidertheorderof nature. As
for the second sort of fiction, which we stated to be the re-
sult of simultaneously directing the attention, without the
assent of the intellect, to different confused ideas repre-
senting different things and actions existing in nature, we
have seen that an absolutely simple thing cannot be feigned,
but must be understood, a.nd that a complex thing is in the
same case if we regard separately the simple parts whereof
it is composed ; we shall not even be able to hypothesize any
untrue action concerning such objects, for we shall be
obliged to consider at the same time the causes and the
manner of such action.
* These matters being thus understood, let us pass on to

' Obaerre tlmt (ii^tion regarded in itself, onlj differs fi-om dreajaa i
that ID Che l&Oer we do not periwire the externBl caTisea which we per-
ceive through Ihe senses while awake. It has bence been inferred that
UTing in Bleep have no connection with objeels
Bhall presently see tUat error is the dresming of •
■aches a certain pitch it becomes detiriuia.


i


I


OK THE IMPSOVCU£N-I OF :CHG UNDEBBTA.NDINO. 25


ooDBider the false idea, observing the objects with which it
is concerned, and the me-aus o£ gimrding ourselvea from
falling into false perceptions. Neither of these taaks will
present much difficulty, after our inquiry concerning ficti-
tdouB ideas. The false idea onlr differs from the fictitious ^
ide& in the fa^t of implying a mental aasent — that is, as we
barm already remarked, while the repreE^ntationa are oc-
onrring, there are no causes present to us, wherefrom, as in
' iiaa, we can conclude that such representations do not
from external objects : in fact, it is much the same aa
with our eyes open, or while awak^. Thus. a.
is concerned with, or (to apeak more correctly)
attributable to, the existence of a, thing whereof the essence •"
ie ItTiown, or the essence itself, in the same way as a
fictitdouB idea. If attributable to the existence of the thing,
it is corrected in the same way as a fictitious idea under
mmilar circum stances. If attributable to the essence, it is
likewise corrected in the same way as a fictitious idea. For
if the nature of the thing known implies necessary exis-
tence, we cannot possibly be in error with regard to its
existence ; but if the nature of the thing be not an eternal
troth, like ita essence, but contrariwise the necesBity or
impossibility of ita existence depends on external causes,
then we must follow the same course aa we adopted in the
case of fiction, for it is corrected in the same manner. As
for faise ideas concerned with essences, or even with ac-
tions, such perceptions are necessarily always confused,
being compounded of different confused perceptions of
things existing in nature, as, for instance, when men are
persuaded that deities are present in woods, in statues, in
Drate beasts, and the like ; that there are bodies which, by
their composition alone, give rise to intellect ; that corpses
reason, walk about, and speak ; that God is deceived, and y
«o on. But ideas which are clear and distinct can never be'
for ideas of things clearEy and distinctly conceived
either very simple themselves, or are compounded from
y simple ideas — that ia, are deduced therefrom. The

ipossibility of a very simple idea being false is evident to

jryone who understands the nature of truth or under-

inding and of falsehood.

As r^ards that which constitutes the reality of truth, it


26 ON THE IMPEOTEMEJJT OF THE UNDEEaTAKDlNO. "

ia certain that a. true idea, is diatinguiehed from a false one,
not BO much by its eitrinsic object as by its intrinsic nature.
If an architect eonceivea a building properly constructed,
though such a building may never have eristed, and may
never exist, nevertheless tLe idea is true ; and the idea re-
mains the same, whether it be put into execution or not.
On the other hand, if anyone asserts, for instance, that
Peter exists, without knowing whether Peter really exists
or not, the assertion, as fa,r as its asaerter ia concerned, is
false, or not true, even though Peter actually does exist.
The assertion that Peter exists is true only with regard to
him who knows for certain that Peter does exist. Whence
it follows that there ia in ideas something real, whereby the
true are distinguished from the false. This reality must be
inquired into, if we are to find the best standard of truth
(we have said that we ought to determine our thoughts by
the given standard of a true idea, and that method is re-
flective knowledge), and to know the properties of our
understanding, Neither must we say that the difference
between true and false arises from the fact, that true
knowledge conaiata in knowing; thin^ through their pri-
mary causes, wherein it is totally different from false
knowledge, as I have just explained it: for thought ia
said to be true, if it involves subjectively the essence of
any principle which has no cause, and ia known through
itself and in itself. Wherefore the reahty (forma) of
true thought must exist in the thought itself, without
reference to other thoughts ; it does not acknowledge
the object as its cause, but must depend on the actual
power and nature of the understanding. For, if we aup-
pose that the understanding has perceived some new
entity which has never existed, as some conceive the under-
standing of God before He created things (a perception
which certainly could not arise from any object), and has
legitimately deduced other thoughts from the said percep-
tion, all such thoughts would be true, without being deter-
mined by any external object; they would depend solely
on the power and nature of the understanding. Thus, ths,t
which constitutes the reality of a true thought must be
sought in the thought itself, and deduced from the nature
of the understanding. In order to pursue our investigit.


B ON TR& IMPKOTEUENT OF THE UNDEBSTAKDUTO. 27 I

iaon, let us confront ourselveB mitli some trae idea, whose I

object we know for certain to be dependent on our power of I

thinlring, and to have nothing corresponding to it in oatnre. I

With an idea of this kind before us, we shall, aa appears I

from what has just been said, be more easily able to carry I

on the research we have ia riew. For instance, in order to I

form the conception of a sphere, I invent a, cause at my J

pleasure — namely, a semicircle revolving roimd its centre, 1

and thus producing a sphere. This is indisputably 3. true I

idea ; and, although we know that no sphere in nature has I

ever actually been so formed, the perception remains tnie, I

and is the easiest manner of conceiving a sphere. We must I

obserrd that this perception asserts the rotation of a semi- I

circle — which assertion would be false, if it were not aaso- I

oiated with the conception of a sphere, or of a cause I

determining a motion of the kind, or absolutely, if the
aeeertion were isolated. The mind would then onlytend to
the affirmation of the sole motion of a semicircle, which is
not contained in the conception of a semicircle, and does |

not arise from the conception of any cause capable of
producing such motion. , '

Thus falsity consists only in this, that something ia 1/ '
affirmed of a thing, which is not contained in the conception I

we have formed of that thing, as motion or rest of a semi-
circle. Whence it follows that simple ideas cannot be other
than true — e.y. the simple idea of a semicircle, of motion,
of rest, of quantity, &c.

Whatsoever affirmation such ideas contain is equal to
the concept formed, and does not extend further. Where-
fore we may form as many simple ideas as we please,
without any fear of error. It only remains for ub to
inquire by what power our mind can form true ideas, and
how far such power extends. It is certain that such power
Mjftnnot extend itself infinitely. For when we affirm some-
Hniat of a thing, which is not contained in the concept we
^■hve formed of that thing, such an affirmation shows a
H^ect of our perception, or that we have formed fragmen-
^pay or mutilated ideas. Thus we have seen that the
^Botion of a semicircle is false when it is isolatod in the
^Bdud, but true when it is associated with the concept of a
inhere, or of some cause determining such a motion. But


28 ON THE IMPKOVEMENT 0¥ THK UNDKESTANDING.

if it be tlie nature of a. thinking being, ae seema, primA
facie, to be the case, t« form true or adequate thoughts, it
is plain that inadequate ideas ariee in ub only because we
are parts of a thinking being, whose thoughts-^some in
their entirety, others in fragments onlj — constitute our
mind.

But there is another point to be considered, which was
not worth raising in the case of fiction, hut which gives rise
to complete deception — namely, that certain things pre-
sented to the imagination also exist in the understanding —
in other words, are conceiTed clearly and distinctly. Hence,
«o long as we do not separate that which is distinct from
that which is confused, certainty, or the true idea, becomes
mixed with indistinct ideas. For instance, certain Stoics
heard, perhaps, the term " soul," and also that the soul is
immortaJ, yet imagined it only confusedly ; they im^ined,
also, and understood that very subtle bodies penetrate all
others, and are penetrated by none. By combining these
ideas, and being at the sajne time certain of the truth of
the asioni, they forthwith became convinced that the mind
consists of very subtle bodies ; that these very subtle
bodies cannot be divided, &c. But we are freed from mis-
takes of this kind, so long as we endeavour to examine all
■our perceptions by the standard of the given true idea.
We must take care, as has been said, to separate such
perceptions from all those which arise from hearsay or un-
classified esperience.

Moreover, such mistakes arise from things being con-
ceived too much in the abstract ; for it is sufficiently self-
evident that what I conceive as in its true object I cannot
apply to anything else. Lastly, they arise from a want of
understanding of the primary elements of nature as a,
whole ; whence we proceed without due order, and con-
found nature with abstract rules, which, although they be
true enough in their sphere, yet, when misapplied, confound
themselves, and pervert tlie order of nature. However, if
we proceed with as little abstraction as possible, and begin
from primary elements — that is, from the source and origin
of nature, as far back aa we can reach, — we need not fear
any deceptions of this kind. As far as the knowledge of
the origin of nature is concerned, there is no danger of our


■■ THE DNDEESTASDIKa. 29

GOnf ounding it witli abstractions. For wlien a thing is cou-
ceired in the abstract, as axe all nniverBal notions, the said
muTeraal notions are always more extensive in the mind
than the nomber of individuals forming their contents
really esiBting in nature.

Again, there are many things in nature, the difference
between which is so slight as to be hardly perceptible to
the nnderatanding ; bo that it may readily happen that auoh
things are confounded together, if they he conceived ab-
stractedly. But since the first principle of nature cannot
(as wa shall see hereafter) be conceived abstractedly or
universally, and cannot extend further in the understand-
ing than it does in reality, and has no likeness to mutable
things, no confusion need be feared in respect to the idea
of it, provided (as before shown) that we possess a standard
of truth. This is, in fact, a being single ' and infinite ; in
other words, it is the sum total of being,' beyond which
there is no being found.

^--ThuB far we have treated of the false idea. We have
now to investigate the doubtful idea — that is, to inquire
what can cause us to doubt, and how doubt may be re-
moved. I speak of real doubt existing in the mind, not of
each doubt as we see exemplified when a man says that he
donlrts, though hia mind does not really hesitate. The
cure of the latter does not fall within the province of
method, it belongs rather to inquiries concerning obstinacy
ajid its care. Eeal doubt ia never produced in the mind
by the thing doubted of. In other words, if there were
only one idea in the mind, whether that idea were true or
false, there would be no doubt or certainty present, only a
certain sensation. For an idea is in itself nothing elso
than a certain sensation ; but doubt will arise through
another idea, not clear and distinct enough for us to be
able to draw any certain conclusion with regard to the
matter under consideration ; that ia, the idea which causes

> These are not attribules of Qod displaying His essence, aa I will
allow in my philosoph}'.

» This has been ahown alreiicly. For if bucIi a being did not exist it
would oerer be produced : tliereCore tbe roind would be able to undar-
■tand more than nature conld furnish ; and thia has been shown above


30 ON THE lUPEOTEMENT OF THE USD EB STAND IK G. ^M

U£ to doubt is not clear and distinct. To take on example.
SuppoBing that a man has never reflected, taught by ex-
perience, or by any otlier means, tliat oar seneea Bometimes
deceive us, he will never doubt whether the sun he greater
or lesa than it appears. Thus rustics are generally asto-
nished when they hear that the sun is much larger than
the earth. But from reflection on the deceitfulness of the
Bensea ' douht arisea, and if, after doubting, we acquire a
true knowledge of the senses, and how things at a diBtauce
are represented through their instriimentality, doubt is
again removed. Hence we cannot cast doubt on true ideas
by the supposition that there is a deceitful Deity, who leads
us astray even in what is most certain. We can only hold
such an hypothesis ao long as we have no clear and distinct
idea — in other words, until we reflect on the knowledge
■which we have of the first principle of all things, and find
that which teaches us thitt God ia not a deceiver, and until
we know this with the same certainty as we know from
reflecting on the nature of a triangle that its three angles
are equaj to two right angles. But if we have a knowledge
of 0-od equal to that which we haye of a triangle, all
doubt is removed. In the same way as we can arrive at
the said knowledge of a. triangle, though not abaolntely
«ure that there is not not some arch-deceiver leading
us astray, so can we come to a Uke knowledge of God
under the like conditioo, and when we have attained to it,
it is sufficient, as 1 said before, to remove every doubt
which we can possess concerning clear and distinct ideas.
Thus, if a man proceeded with our investigations in due
■order, inqidring first into those things which should first
he inquired into, never passing over a link in the chain of
association, and with knowledge how to define his questions
before seeking to answer them, he will never have any
ideas save such as are very certain, or, in other words,
■clear and distinct ; for doubt is only a suspension of the
-spirit concerning some affirmation or negation which it
would pronounce upon unhesitatingly if it were not in
ignoi-ance of something, without winch the knowledge of
, the matter in hand must needs he imperfect. We may,
■ Tbat is, it ia known that \he senses sometimes deceive us. But it is
«nly known confused!}', hr it is not known how tbey deceive us.


I THE IMPBOVBMKKT OF THE rHDEKSTUIDING.


IPierefore, conclude that doubt aJwaya proceeds from want
ttf due order in inveatigation.
[ These are the points I promised to discuaa in this first
part of my treatise on method. However, in order not to
omit anyttiing which can conduce to the knowledge of the
nnderGtanding and its faculties, I will add a few words on
the subject of memory and forgetfulness.

The point moat worthy of attention is, that memory iB
Btrengthened both with and without the aid of the under-
standing. For the more intelligible a thing is, the more
^easily is it remembered, and the less intelligible it is, the
piore easily do we forget it, Tor instance, a number of
" moonneoted words is much more difficult to remember than
e same number in the form of a narration. The memory is
*al80 strengthened without the aid of the understajidiiig by
means of the power wherewith the iniagination or the sense
called common is affected by some particular physical object.
T Ba.y particular, for the imagination is only affected by i^xti-
cular objects. If we read, for instance, a single romantic
comedy, we sLall remember it very well, so long as we do not
read many others of the Bume kind, for it will reign alone in
the memory. If, however, we read several others of the same
Hnd, we shall thini of them altogether, and easily confuse
one with another. I say, also, physical. For the imagina-
tion is only affected by physical objects. Aa, then, the
memory is strengthened both with and without the aid of
the understandmg. we may conclude that it is different
from the understanding, and that in the latter considered

I iu itself there is neither memory nor forgetfulness. What,

Ilhen, is memory P It is nothing else than the actual Bensa-\
tion of impressions on the brain, accompanied with the)
ttiought'Of a definite duration of the sensation.' This i^
^BO shown by reminiscence. For then we think of th^
■ensation, but without the notion of continuous duration;
' If the daration be indcdniCe, the recolli^ction is imperfect; this
•reryone seems lo hare learnt from tiatnre. For we ollen ask, to

II ■trenpthen uur belief in aomething we hear of, when and where it hap-
pened; though idoBS themaelvea hare their own daralian in the mind,
yel, as we are wnnt to delei-mine duration bj the aid of some meuora
of motion whieh, again, takes place by aid uf the . imagination, we pee*
10 memory oonneoltd with pure inleUecl.


32 OH THE IMPaOTEMENT OF IHB CNDEESTANDINO. ^

thus the idea of that aensation is not the actual duration of
the sensation or actual memorj', "Wliether ideas are or are
not subject to corruption will be seen in my philosophy.
If this seems too absurd to anyone, it will be sufficient for
our purpose, if he reflect on the fact that a thin^ is more
easily remembered in proportion to its singularity, as
appears from the example of the comedy just cited.
Fiither, a thing is remembered more easily in proportion
to its intelligibility ; therefore wQ cannot help remembering
that which ia extremely singular and sufficiently intelligible.

Thus, then, we have distinguished between a true idea
and other perceptions, and shownthatideas fictitious, false,
and the rest, originate in the imagination — that is, in certain
sensations fortuitous (so to speak) and disconnected, arising
not from the power of the mind, but from external causes,
according as the body, sleeping or waking, receives various
motions.

But one may take any Tiew one likes of the imagination
so long as one acknowledges that it is different from the
understanding, and that the soul is passive with regard to
it. The view taken is immaterial, if we know that the
imagination is something' indefinite, with regard to which
the soul is passive, and that we can by some means or other
free ourselves therefrom with the help of the understanding.
Let no one then be astonished that before proving the ex-
istence of body, and other necessary things, I apeak of
imagination of body, and of its composition. The view
taken is, I repeat, immaterial, so long as we know that
imagination is something indefinite, &c. As regiu'ds a true
idea, we have shown that it is simple or compounded of
simple ideas ; that it shows how and why something is or
has been made ; and that its subjective effects in the soul
correspond to the actual reaUty of its object. This con-
clusion is identical with the saying of the ancients, that true
science proceeds from cause to effect ; though the ancients,
BO far as I know, never formed the conception put forward
here that the soul acts according to fixed laws, and is as it
were an immaterial automaton. Hence, as far as is pos-
sible at the outset, we have acqioired a knowledge of our
understanding, and such a standard of a true idea that we
need no longer fear confounding truth with falsehood and


Om THE IMPBOYEMENT OF THE VNDEBSTANDING. 33

fiction. Neither shall we wonder why we understand some
things which in nowise fall within the scope of the imagi-
nation, while other things are in the imagination but whoUy
opposed to the understanding, or others, again, which agree
therewith. We now know that the operations, whereby the
effects of imagination are produced, take place under other
laws quite different from the laws of the understanding,
and that the mind is entirely passive with regard to them.
Whence we may also see how easily men may fall into
grave errors t/rough not distingishing accuWy be-
tween the imagination and the understanding; such as
believing that extension must be localized, that it must be
finite, that its parts are really distinct one from the other,
that it is the primary and single foundation of all things,
that it occupies more space at one time than at another,
and other similar doctrines, all entirely opposed to truth,
as we shall duly show.

Again, since words are a part of the imagination — that
is, since we form many conceptions in accordance with con-
fused arrangements of words in the memory, dependent on
particular bodily conditions, — there is no doubt that words
may, equally with the imagination, be the cause of many
and great errors, unless we keep strictly on our guard.
Moreover, words are formed according to popular fancy
and intelligence, and are, therefore, signs of things as
existing in the imagination, not as existing in the under- '
standing. This is evident from the fact that to all such
things as exist only in the understanding, not in the imagi-
nation, negative names are often given, such as incorporeal,
infinite, &c. So, also, many conceptions really affirmative
are expressed negatively, and vice versa, such as uncreate,
independent, infinite, immortal, <&c., inasmuch as their con-
traries are much more easily imagined, and, therefore,
occurred first to men, and usurped positive names. Many
things we affirm and deny, because the nature of words
allows us to do so, though the nature of things does not.
While we remain imaware of this fact, we may easily mis-
take falsehood for truth.

Let us also beware of another great cause of confusion,
which prevents the understanding from reflecting on itself.
Sometimes, while making no distinction between the imagi-

II. B


31 ON THE IMPEOVEMEKT OP THE UNDEESTilTDIKO. ^H

nation and the intellect, we think that what we more
readily imagine is clearer to ua ; and also we think that
what we imagine we nnderstand. Thus, we put first that
ivhich should he last : the true order of progreBsion i^
reversed, and no le^timate conclusion is drawn.

Uow, in order at length, to pass on to the setx)nd part of
this method,' I shall first set forth the object aimed at, and
^ext the means for its attainment. The object aimed at is
/the acquisition of clear and distinct ideas, such aa are pro-
' dueed by the pure intellect, and not by chance physical
motions. In order that all ideas may be reduced to unity,
we shall endeayour so to associate and arrange them that ^J
onr mind may, as far as possible, reject subjectively tha^J
reality of nature, both as a whole and as parts. ^B

As for the first point, it is necessary (as we hare said)
for our purpose that everything should be conceived, either
eolely through its essence, or through its proxiTnate cause.
If the thing be self- existent, or, aa ia commonly said, the

I cause of itself, it-must be understood through its easence
only J if it be not self- existent, but requires a cause for its

7 esiatence, it must be understood through its proximate
cause. For, in reahty, the knowledge of an effect is no-
thing else than the acquisition of more perfect knowledge
of its cause.' Therefore, we may never, while we are con-
cerned with inquiries into actual things, draw any conclu-

' sion from abstractions ; we shall be extremely careful not to
confound that which is only in the understanding with that ',
which is in the thing itseli. The best basis for drawing a
conclusionwillbeeither some particular affirmative essence, >
or a true and legitimate definition. Por the understanding
cannot descend from universal axioms by themselves to
particular things, since axioms are of infinite extent, and
do not detfirmine the understanding to contemplate one
particular thing more than another. Thus the true method

' The chief rule of this part is, as appear from the firat part, to
review all the ideas cnming to ua through pure intellect, eo aa to diatin-
guieh them from iiicli aa we imiigloe : the distinction will be shown
through the properties of each, namely, of the imuginacisn and of tha
undtretanding.

" Observe that it ia hereby manifeal that we cannot nnderstand any-
thing of nature without at tba aame time increasing our knowledge of
the firat cauae, or God.


H OK THE IMPB07EMENT OF THE UNDEBSTANDINO. 35

of discovery ie to form thoughts from some given definitioiL
Thia procesH will he the more fruitful and easy in propor-
tion as the thing given be better defined. Wherefore, the
cardinal point of all this second part of method consists in ;
the knowledge of the conditions of good definition, and the
means of finding them. I will first treat of the conditions
of definition.

A definition, if it is to be called perfect, must explain the
inmost essence of a thing, and must take core not to snb-
stitnto for this any of its properties. In order to illustrate
my meaning, -without taking an example which would seem
to show a desire to expose other people's errors, I will
«hooBe the case of something aljstract, the definition of
which is of little moment. Such is a circle. If a circle be
defined as a figure, such that all straight lines drawn from
the centre to the circumference are equal, every one can
see that snch a definition does not in the least explain the
essence of a circle, but solely one of its properties. Though,
as I have said, this is of no importance in the case of
figures and other abstractions, it is of great importance in
fhe case of physical beings and realities : for the properties
of things are not understood so long as their essences are
unknown. If the latter be passed over, there is necessarily
a, perversion of the succ^Hsion of ideas which should reflect
the succession of nature, and we go far astray from our
object.

In order to be free from this fault, the following rules
should be observed in definition : —

I. If the thing in question ,be created, the definition
'must (as we have said) comprehend the proximate cause.
Por instance, a circle should, according to this rule, be de-
fined as follows : the figure deBcribed by any line whereof
one end is fixed and the other free. This definition clearly
comprehends the prosunatfl cause.

n. A conception or definition of a thing should be such
that all the properties of that thing, in so far as it is con-
mdered by itself, and not in conjunction with other things,
^^n be deduced from it, as may be seen in the definition
^BVen of a circle ; for from that it clearly foDowa that all
^^^a^ht lines drawn from the centre to the circiunfereace
^Be equaL That this is a necessary chara^^teristic of a


36 OK THE IMPEOVEMEtfT OP THE CNDEKSTANDIKO. ^M

definition is bo clear to anyone, who reflectB on the matter,
that there ia no need to spend time in proviag it, or in
showing that, owing to tliia second condition, every defini-
tion should be affirmatiTe, I speat of intellectnal affirma-
tion, giving little thought to verbal affirmations which, owing
to tiie poverty of lai^uage, must sometimea, perhaps, be
expressed negatively, though the idea contained ia affirmative.

The rules for the definition of an uncreated thing are as
follows :—

L The escluaion of all idea of cause — that is, the thing
must not need explanation by anytliing outside itself.

n. When the definition of the thing has been given,
there must be no room for doubt aa to whether the thing
exists or not.

HI. It must contain, as far as the mind is concerned, no
substantives which could be put into an adjeetival form ;
in other words, the object defined must not be esplained
through abstractions.

IV. Ijastly, though this is not absolutely neeeaaary, it
should be possible to deduce from the definition all tha
properties of the thing defined.

All these rules become obvious to anyone giving strict
attention to the matter.

I have also stated that the beat basia for drawing a con-
eluaion is a particular affirmative essence. The more
apecialized the idea ia, the more ia it distinct, and therefore
clear. Wherefore a knowledge of particular thinga should
be Bought for as dihgently as possible.

As regards the order of our perceptions, and the manner
in which they should be arranged and united, it is necessary
that, as soon as is poasible and rational, we should inquire
whether there be any being (and, if so, what being), that ia
the cause of all things, so that its essence, represented in
thought, may be the cause of all our ideaa, and then our
mind will to the utmost possible extent reflect nature. Tor
it will poBsesB, subjectively, nature's essence, order, and
union. Thus we can see that it is before all things neces-
sary for us to deduce all our ideas from physical thinga —
that is, from real entities, proceeding, as far aa may be, ac-
cording to the series of causes, from one real entity to
another real entity, never passing to uuiversals and ah-


H OK I'HE IMPBOTEUENT OV THE tJKDEBaTilNDIXG. 37

irtractiona, either for the purpoee of deducmg aome real
entity from theio, or deducing them from aome real entity.
Either of these procflsaea interrupts the true progress of the
imderatanding. But it must be observed that, by the series
of cauees and real entities, I do not here mean the aeries of
particular and mutable things, but only the series of fixed
and eternal tbings. It would be impossible for human
infirmity to follow up the series of particular mutable
things, both on ac»)unt of their multitude, surpassing all
calculation, and on a^rcount of the infinitely diverse circum-
stanoea eurrounding one and the same thing, any one of
which may be the cause for its exiatence or non-existence.
Indeed, their existence has no connection with their essence,
or (as we have said already) is not an eternal truth.
Keitber is there any need that we should understand their
eeriea, forthe easenceB of particular mutable thinga are not
to be gathered from their series or order of eriatence, which
would furnish us with nothing beyond their extrinsic de-
nominations, their relations, or, at most, their circumatances,
aE of which are very different from their inmoat essence.
This inmost essence must be aought solely from fixed and
eternal things, and from the lawa, inscribed (so to speak)
I in those things as in their true codes, according to which all
^particular things take place and are arranged ; nay, these
nantable particular tilings depend so intimately and essen-
Uially (so to phrase it) upon the fixed things, that they
nttnnoteither be or be conceived without them.
m Whence these fixed and eternal thinga, though they are
■Wemselves particular, will nevertheless, owing to their pre-
nmoe and power everywhere, be to ua as universala, or
■Benera of definitions of particular mutable things, and as
Efiie proximate causes of all tbings.

ft But, though this be so, there seems to be no small diffi-
■Bnlty in arriving at the knowledge of these particular
^^sogfl, for to conceive them all at once would far surpass
Bhe powers of the human understanding. The arrange-
Btwrnt whereby one thing is understood before another, as
nre have stated, should not be sought from their series of
BiaiBtence, nor from eternal thinga. For the latt«r are all
Hnr nature simultaneous. Other aids are therefore needed
Bjttides those employed for understanding eternal things


38 ON THE IMPttOTEMENT OF THE USDERSTANDISO. ^B

and tlieir laws ; however, this is not the place to recount
Buch aids, nor is there any need to do ao, until we have
acquired a HufEcient knowledge of eternal things and their
infallible laws, and until the nature of our senses has
become plain to us.

Before betaking ourselTca to seek knowledge of particular
things, it will be seasonable to speak of such aids, as all
tend to teach us the mode of employing our senses, and to
make certain experiments under fiied rules and arrange-
ment which may suffice to determine the object of our
inquiry, ao that we may therefrom infer what laws of
eternal things it has been produced under, and may gain
an insight into its inmost nature, as I will duly show.
Here, to return to my purpose, I will only endeavour
to set forth what seems necessary for enabling us to attain
to knowledge of eternal things, and to define them under
the conditions laid down above.

With this end, we must bear in mind what has already
been stated, namely, that when the mind devotes itself to
any thought, so as to examine it, and to deduce therefrom
in due order all the leg;itimate conclusions possihle, any
falsehood which may lurk in the thought will be detected ;
but if the thought be true, the mind will readily proceed
without intermption to deduce truths from it. This, I
say, is necessary for our purpose, for our thoughts may be
brought to a close by the absence of a foundation. If,
therefore, we wish to inTest^te the first thing of all, it
will be necessary to supply some foundation which may
direct our thoughts thither. Further, since method is
reflective knowledge, the foundation which must direct our
thoughts can be nothing else than the knowledge of that
which constitutes the reality of truth, and the knowledge
of the understanding, its properties, and powers. When
this has been acquired we shall poasess a foundation where-
from we can deduce our thoughts, and a path whereby the
intellect, according to ita capacity, may attain the know-
ledge of eternal things, aJlowance being made for the ex-
tent of the intellectual powers.

If, as I stated in the first part, it belongs to the nature
of thought to form true ideas, we must here inquire what
18 meant by the faculties and power of the understanding.


ii^


I ON THE niPKOTEMENT OF THE UNDERSTANDING. 39

The chief part of our method la to understajid as well as
poBBible the powers of the intellect, and its nature; we are,
therefore, compelled (by the cod eiderations advanced in the
second part of the method) neoeasarily to draw these con-
clnsions from the definition itself of thought and under-
standing. But, so far, we haxe not got any rules for
finding definitions, and, as we cannot set forth stich rules
without a previous Imowledge of nature, that is without a
definition of the understanding and its power, it follows
either that the definition of the understanding must be
^cleax in itself, or that we can tmderatand nothing. Never-
" leleaa this definition is not absolutely clear in itself ; how-

ir, muce its properties, hke aJl things that we possess

■ough the understanding, cannot be known clearly and
—istiiictly, unless its nature be known previously, the defi-
nition of the iinderstandiug makes itself manifest, if we pay
attention to its properties, which we know clearly and dis-
tinctly. Let ua, Uien, entunerate here the properties of
the understanding, let us examine them, and begin by
discussing the instruments for research which we find
innate in us.

The properties of the understanding which I have chiefly
remarlted, and which I clearly understand, are the fol-
lowing : —

I. It involves certainty — in other words, it knows that a
thing exists in reality as it is reflected subjectively.

H. That it perceives certain things^or forms some ideas
absolutely, some ideas from othersj Thus it forms the
idea of quantity absolutely, without reference to any other
thoughts ; but ideas of motion it only foi'ms after taking
into consideration the idea of quantity.

m. Those ideas which the understanding forms abso-
lutely express infinity ; determinate ideas are derived from
"tther ideaaTJ Thus in the idea of quantity, perceived by

eansofacauBe, the quantity is determined, as when a body

perceived to be formed by the motion of a plane, a plane

the motion of a line, or, again, a line by the motion of a
All these are perceptions which do not serve
a understanding quantity, but only towards deter-
j it. This is proved by the fact that we conceive

im as formed as it were by motion, yet this motion is


40 ON THE IMPBOVBMEK-T OP THE CJJDEESTAIJDINO.

not perceived unleaa tlie quantity be perceived also; we
can even prolong the motioa so as to form an infinite line,
■which we certainly conld not do unless we had an idea of
infinite quantity.

IV. I'he understanding forma positiTe ideaa before
forming negative ideas.

V. It perceives things not so much under the condition
of duration as under a certain form of eternity, and in an
infinite number]J or rather in perceiving things it does not
consider either their number or duration, whereas, in
imagining them, it perceives them iu a determinate number,
duration, and quantity.

VI. The ideas which we form as clear and distinct, seem
BO to follow from the sole necessity of our nature, that they
appear to depend absolutely ou our sole power ; with con-
fused ideas the contrary is the case. They are often formed
against our will.

Vii. The mind can determine in many ways the ideas qf
things, which the understajiding forms from other ideay
thus, for instance, in order to define the plane of an ellipse,
it supposes a point adhering to a cord to be moved roimd
two centres, or, again, it conceives an infini ty of points,
always in the same fixed relation to a given straight line, or
a cone cut in an oblique plane, so that the angle of inclina-
tion is greater than the angle of the vertex of the cone, or
in an infinity of other ways.

Viil. The more ideas espress perfection of any object,
the more perfect are they themselTeit for we do not'
admire the architect who has planned a chapel so much as
the architect who has planned a splendid temple.

I do not stop to consider the rest of what is referred to
thought, such as love, joy, &c. They are nothing to our
present purpose, and cannot even be conceived unless the
understanding be perceived previously, "WTien perception
is removed, aU these go with it.

False and fictitious ideas have nothing positive about
them (as we have abundantly shown), which causes them
to be called false or fictitious ; they are only considered as
such through the defectiveness of knowledge. Therefore,
false and fictitious ideas aa such can teach us nothing con-
cerning the essence of thought ; this must be sought from


4

i
i


ON THE IMFBOYBMBNT OF THE T7NDBB8TAKDIKG. 41

the positive properties just enumerated ; in other words, we
must lay down some common basis from whicli these pro-
perties necessarily follow, so that when this is given, the
properties are necessarily given also, and when it is removed,

they too vanish with it.

• • • • • •

The rest of the treatise is wanting.


Note, page 4.

The pursuit of honours and riches is likewise very absorbing, especially
^ such objects be sought simply for their own sake. This might be
explained more at large and more clearly : I mean, by distinguishing
riches according as they are pursued for their own sake, or in further-
ance of fame, or sensual pleasure, or the advancement of science and art.
But this subject is reserved to its own place, for it is not here proper to
investigate the matter more accurately.


THE ETHICS.


lETHICA ORDIN& GEOitETRtCO DEMOHSTBATJli


THE ETHICS.

PAET L CONCEENING GOD.

Definitions.

I.

BY tliat whicli is self-caiised, I mean tliat of whicli the
essence inyolves existence, or that of whicli the nature
is only conceivable as existent.

U. A thing is called finite after its hind, when it can be
limited by another thing of the same nature ; for instance,
a body is called finite because we always conceive another
greater body. So, also, a thought is Hmited by another
thought, but a body is not limited by thought, nor a
thought by body.

m. By svhatance, I mean that which is in itself, and is
conceived through itseK : in other words, that of which a
conception can be formed independently of any other con-
ception.

rV". By attribute, I mean that which the intellect per-
ceives as constituting the essence of substance.

V. By mode, I mean the modifications^ of substance, or
that which exists in, and is conceived through, something
other than itself.

YI. By God, I mean a being absolutely infinite — that is,
a substance consisting in infinite attributes, of which each
expresses eternal and infinite essentiality.

Exjplanation, — ^I say absolutely infinite, not infinite after
its kind : for, of a thing infinite only after its kind, infinite at-
tributes maybe denied ; but that which is absolutely infinite,

1 " AfecHones."


46 THE ETHICS. [PAET !•

contains in its essence whatever expresses reality, and
involves no negation.

yn. That thing is called free, which exists solely by the
necessity of its own nature, and of which the action is
determined by itself alone. On the other hand, that thing
is necessary, or rather constrained, which is determined by
something external to itself to a fixed and definite method
of existence or. action.

Viii. By eternity, I mean existence itself, in so far as it
is conceived necessarily to follow solely from the definition
of that which is eternal.

Explanation, — Existence of this kind is conceived as an
eternal truth, like the essence of a thing, and, therefore,
cannot be explained by means of continuance or time,
though continuance may be conceived without a beginning
or end.

Axioms.

I. Everything which exists, exists either in itself or in
something else.

n. That which cannot be conceived through anything
•else must be conceived through itself.

m. From a given definite cause an effect necessarily
follows; and, on the other hand, if no definite cause be
granted, it is impossible that an effect can follow.

rV. The knowledge of an effect depends on and involves
the knowledge of a cause.

V. Things which have nothing in common cannot be
understood, the one by means of the other ; the conception
of one does not involve the conception of the other.

VI. A true idea must correspond with its ideate or
object.

yn. If a thing can be conceived as non-existing, its
essence does not involve existence.

Propositions.

Pbop. I. Substance is hy nature prior to its modifications,
Froof. — This is clear from Deff. iii. and v.
Prop. H. Two substances, whose attributes are dif event,
have nothing in common.


I^AST I.]


CONCERlflUa GOD.


4?


Proof. — Also evident from Def. iii. For each muat exist
in itself, and be coEceived through itseLf ; in other words,
the conception of one does not imply the conoeption of the
other.

Peop. m. Things which have nothing in common cannot
he one tks cause of the otiwr.

Proof. — If they have nothing in common, it follows that
one cannot he apprehended by means of the other (Ai. t.),
and, therefore, one cannot he the cause of the other
(Ax.iv.). Q..KI).

pHOP. IV, Two or tnovB distinct things are dietinguished
I one from the other, eiilter by the difference of the atirUmtea of
%ike eiAitaneeg, or hy the difference of their modijieationg.

Proof. — Evorytlung which enats, exists either in itself or
^ jn something else {Ax. i.), — that is (by Deff. iii. and t.),
nothing is granted in addition to the ttnderstanding. except
substance and its modi£catioae. Nothing is, therefore,
given besides the understanding, by which several things
may be distinguished one from the other, except the sub-
stances, or, in other words (see Ax. iv.), their attributes and
modifications, Q.E.D.

Prop. V. There cannot exitt in- the universe two or more
ivbgtwncee having the same nature or attribute.

Proof. — If several distinct substances be granted, they
must be distinguished one from the other, either by the
difference of their attributes, or by the difference of theu-
modifications (Prop. iv.). If only by the difference of their
attributes, it will be granted that there cannot be more
than one with an identical attribute. If by the difference
of their modifications— as substance is naturally prior to
its modifications (Prop, i.),— it follows that setting the
modifications aside, and considering substance in itself, that
is truly, (Deff. iii. and vi.), there cannot be conceived one
Bubstance different from ajiother,— that is (by Prop, iv.),
there cannot he granted several substances, but one sub-
stance only. Q.E.D.
, Paop. VI. One eubstance cannot he produced hy another

^_. tubttance,

^L Proof. — It is impossible that there should be in the uni-
^VTerse two substances with an identical attribute, i.e. which
^Hiave anything common to them lioth (Prop, ii.), and, there*


THE £THICB.


[fast i^^^I
:;aimot "ba ^|


43

fore {Prop. iii.)> one cannot be tlie cause of another, neither
can one be produced by the other. Q.E.I>.

Oorollwry. — Hence it follows that a. substance cannot ba
produced by anything external to itself. For
verse nothing is granted, save Bubstances and their modifica-
tions (as appears from As. i. and DefE. iii. and v.). Now (by
the last Prop.) substance cannot be produced by another
Bubstaace, tberefore it cannot be produced by anything
eitemal to itBelf. Q.E.I). Thisia shown atill more readily
by the absurdity of the contradictory. For, if subBtanoe be
produced by an external cause, the knowledge of it would
depend on the knowledge of ita cause (Ax. iv.), and (by
Def. iii.) it would itself not be substance.

Paop. VIL Exiatenee belongs to the nature of svhetance.

Proof. — Substance cannot be produced by anything ex-
ternal (Corollary, Prop, vi,), it must, therefore, be its own
cauae — that is, its esaenee necessarily inyolvea existence, or
exiatence belongs to ita natiire.

Pkop. Vm. Every substance is necessarily infinUe.

Proof. — There can only be one substance with an identi-
cal attribute, and eiistaice follows from its nature (Prop,
vii.) ; ita nature, therefore, involvea exiatence, either as
finite or infinite. It doea n.ot exist as finite, for (by Def. ii.)
it would then be limited by something else of the same
Idnd, which would also necessarily exist (Prop, vii.) ; and
there would be two substances with an identical attribute,
which is abaurd (Prop. v.). It therefore exists as infinite.
Q.S.D.

Note J.^As finite existence involvea a partial negation,
and infinite existence is the absolute affirmation of the
given nature, it follows (solely from Prop, vii.) that every
substance is necessarily infinite.

Note II. — No doubt it wiU be difficult for those who
think about things loosely, and have not been accustomed
to know them by their primary causes, to comprehend the
demonstration of Prop, vii, : for such persons make no dis-
tinction between the modifications of substances and the
substances themselves, and are ignorant of the manner in
which things are produced ; henca they attribute to sub-
stances the beginning which they observe in natural ob-
jects. Those who are ignorant of true causes, make com-


I


PAKT I.]


COMCEBMIKO (


49


plete confusion — think that trees might talk just a
men — that men might ke formed from stones as
from seed; and im^ine that any form might be
into any other. So, also, those who confuse the two
natures, divine and human, readily attrihuts human paa-
siona to the deity, especially so long as they do not know
how paaaiona originate in the mind. But, if people would
consider the nature of substance, they would have no
doubt about the truth, of Prop. vii. In fact, this proposi-
tion would be a universal axiom, and accounted a truism.
For, by substance, would be understood that which is in
itself, and is conceived through itself — that is, something
of which the conception requires not the conception of any-
thing else ; whereas modifications exist in something ex-
ternal to themselves, and a conception of them is formed by
means of a conception of the thing in which they exist.
Therefore, we may have true ideas of uon-exietent modifica-
tions ; for, although they may have no actual existence
apart iroja the conceiving intellect, yet their essence is so
involved in something external to themselves that they may
through it be conceived. Whereas the only truth sub-
etances can have, external to the intellect, must consist in
their existence, because they are conceived through them-
selves. Therefore, for a person to say that he has a clear
and distinct — that is, a true — idea of a substance, but that
he is not sure whether such substance exists, would be the
same as if he said that he had a true idea, but was not sure
whether or no it was false (a little consideration will make
this plain) ; or if anyone affirmed that substance is created,
it would be the same as saying that a, false idea was true —
m. short, the height of absurdity. It must, then, necessarily
be admitted that the existence of substance as its essence ia
an eternal truth. And we can hence conclude by another

frocesB of reasoning — that there is but one such substance,
think that this may profitably be done at once ; and, in
order to proceed r^ularly with the demonstration, we must
premise ;^

1. The true definition of a thinig neither involves nor ei-
is anything beyond the nature o£ the thing defined.

n this it follows that —

2. No definition imphes or expresses a certain number of


[PAET


1


individuals, inasmuch as ii espresseH nothing beyond the
nature of the thing defined. For instance, the definition
of a triangle espresses nothing' beyond the actual nature
of a triangle; it does not imply any fixed number of
triangles.

3. There is necesaarily for each indiTidual eristent thing
a, cause why it ehould exist.

4. This cause o£ existence must either be contained in
the nature and definition of the thing defined, or must be
postulated apart from such definition.

It therefore follows that, if a gi^en nninber of indtvidual
things exist in nature, there must be some cause for the
existence of exactly that number, neither more nor less.
For example, if twenty men exist in the universe (for sim-
plicity's sake, I will suppose them existing simultaneously,
and to have had no predecessors), and we want to account
for the existence of these twenty men, it will not be enoi^h
to show the cause of hiiman existence in general ; we must
also show why there are exactly twenty men, neither more
nor less : for a cause must be assigned for the existence of
each individim!. Jfow thia cause cannot lie contained in
the actual nature of man. for the true definition of man
does not involve any consideration of the number twenty.
Consequently, the cause for the existence of these twenty
men, and, consequently, oJ each of them, must necessarily
be sought externally to each individual. Hence we may
lay down the absolute rule, that everything which maycon-
eiflt of several individuals must have an external cause.
And, as it has been shown already that eiistenee appertains
to the nature of substance, etistence must necessarily be
included in its definition; and from its definition alone
esistence must be deducible. But from its definition (as
we have shown, Notes ii., iii.), we cannot infer the existence
of several substances; therefore it follows that there is only
one substance of the same nature. Q.E.B.

Prop. IX. The more reality or fteinj a, thing has the greater
the number of its attriimiei (Ttef. iv.).

Fbdp. X. Each partieuJaT atirihute of the ofie tubstanca
must be conceived through itself.

Proof. — An attribute is that which the intellect per-
ceives of substance, as constituting its essence (Def. iv.).


i


COHOCBNINO BOD.


51


*xtd, therefore, must be conceived througli itself (Def. iii.).
Q.E.D.

Note. — It is thus evident that, though two attributes are.

in fact, conceived a8 distinct — that is, one without the help

the other — yet we cannot, therefore, conclude that they

institute two entities, or two difierent substances. For it

the nature of substance that each of its attributes is
oonoeiyed through itself, inasmuch as all the attributes it
has have aJways existed simultaneously in it, and none
could be produced by any other ; but each expresses the
reality or being of substance. It is, then, far from an ab-
surdity to ascribe several attributes to one substance : for
notku^ in nature is more clear than that each and every
enti^ must be conceived under some attribute, and that its
reality or being is in proportion to the number of its attri-
butes expressing necessity or eternity and infinity. Conse-
quently it is abundantly clear, that an absolutely infinite
being must necessarily be defined as consisting in infinite
attributes, each of which expreeses a certain eternal and
infinite essence.

If anyone now ask, by what sign shall he he able to dis-
tinguish different substances, let him read the following
propositiona, which show that there is but one subBtance
ia the universe, and that it is absolutely infinite, wherefore
■uch a sign would be sought for in vain.

Pbop. XI. God, or avhatance, consisting of inJinUe attri-
bvtea, of whiek each expresses eternal and infinite essentiality,
lucesuiniy exists.

Froof. — If this be denied, coneeive, if possible, that God
does not exist: then his essence does not involve existence.
But this (by Prop, vii.) is absurd. Therefore God neces-
sarily exists.

Another 'proof. — Of everything whatsoever a cause or
reason must be assigned, either for its existence, or for its
Qon-existenoe — e.g. if a triangle exist, a reason or cause
must be granted for its existence ; if, on the contrary, it
does not exist, a cause must also be granted, which prevents
it from existing, or annuls its existence. This reason or
eaiaa/b must either be contained in the nature of the thing
in question, or be external to it. Por instance, the reason
fxiS the non-existence of a squEtre circle is indicated in its


TBE KIHICa.


[PABT Ii'^l


atter ^^


52

nature, namely, Tiecause it would involve a coctradiction.
On the other hantl, the existccce of subetance followB
also solely from its nature, inaamucL as its natui'e involves
existeuce. (See Prop, vii.)

But the reason for the exiatence of a, triangle or a circle
does not follow from the nature of those figures, but from
the order of tmiversal nature in extension. From the latter
it must follow, either that a triangle necesaarUy exists,
that it ia impossible that it should exist. So much '
evident. It follows therefrom that a thing necessarily exii
if no cause or reason be gra:nted which prevents its existence.

If, then, no cause or reason can be given, which prevents
the exktence of God, or which destroys hie exist«oce, wo
must certainly conclude that he necessariiy does exist. If
such a reason or cause should be given, it must either bo
drawn from the very nature of God, or be external to him
— that ia, drawn from another enbBtanoe of another nature.
For if it were of the same nature, God. by that very fact,
would he admitted to esiat. But eubstance of another
nature could have nothiaig in common with God (by
Prop, ii.), and therefore would be unable either to cause or
to destroy hia existence.

As, then, a reason or cause which would annul the
divine existence cannot be drawn from anything estemal
to the divine nature, such cause must perforce, if God
does not exist, be drawn from God's own nature, which
would involve a contradiction. To make such an affirma-
tion about a being absolutely infinite and supremely per-
fect, is absurd ; therefore, neither in the nature of God, nor
esrtemally to his nature, can a cause or reason be assigned
which would annul hia existence. Therefore, God neeea-
sarily exists. Q.E.D.

Another proof. — The potentiality of non-existence ia a
negation of power, and contrariwise the potentiahty of
existence is a power, as ie obvious. If, then, that which
necessarily exists is nothing but finite beings, such finito
beings are more powerful than a being absolutely infinite,
which is obviously absurd ; therefore, either nothing exists,
or else a being absolutely infinite necessarily exists also.
Nowwe exist eitherin ourselves, or in something else which
necessarily exist* (see Axiom i, and Prop. vii.). Therefore ■


I PAET I.]


CONCEKNINO OOD,


F

^H a being absolutely infinite — in other words, God (Def,

^H Ti.) — necessarily exists. Q.E.O.

^f Note. — In this last proof, I have purpoaely shown God's

{ existence a posteriori, so that the proof might be mora
easily followed, not because, from the same premises, Glod's
existence does not follow a priori. For, aa the potentiality
of existenee is a power, it follows that, in proportion as
reality increases in the nature of a thing, ao ^so will it in-
<:reaBe its strength for existence. Therefore a being abao-
Intely infinite, auch as God, has from, himaelf an absolutely

» infinite power of exiatence, and hence he does absolutely
exist. Perhaps there will be many who will be unable to
aee the force of this proof, inasmuch as they are accuatomed
only to consider those things which flow from external
causes. Of such things, they see that those which quickly
cometopaaa — that ia, quietly come into existence — quickly
also disappear ; whereas they regard as more difficult of ac-
compliahiaent — that ia, not so easily brought into exiatence
— those thinga which they conceive aa more complicated.

However, to do away with thiB misconception, I need not
here show the measure of truth in the proverb, "What
comes quickly, goes quickly," nor discuss whether, from the
point of view of univeraal nature, all things are equally
easy, or otherwise : I need only remark, that I am not hero
spealdng of things, which come to pasa through causes ex-
ternal to themselvea, but only of substances which (by
Prop, vi.) cannot be produced by any external cause.
Things which are produced by eEtenial causea, whether they
eonsist of many parts or few, owe whatsoever perfection or
reality they possess solely to the efficacy of their external
cause, and therefore their existence arises solely from the
perfection of their external cause, not from their own. Con-
trariwise, whatsoever perfection is possessed by substance
is due to no external cause ; ■wherefore the esistenee of
aabstance must arise solely from its own nature, which is
nothing else but its essence. Thus, the perfection of a
thing does not annul its existence, but, on the contrary,
asserts it. Imperfection, on the other hand, does annul
it ; therefore we cannot he more certain of the existence of
anything, than of the existence of a being absolutely infinite
or perfect — that is, of God. For inasmuch aa his essence


L


I


S4 THE ETHICB. [PAET I.

eiclndea all imperfection, and involras absolute perfection,
bU cause for doubt concerning his esistence is done away,
and the utmost certainty on the question is given. This,
I tbink, will be evident to every moderately attentive reader.

pKOP. XII No attribute of aulatance can he conceived
from which it would follow that stihdanee can he divided.

Proof. — The parts into wHeli substance as thus conceived
■would be divided, either will retain the nature of substance.
or they will not. If the former, then (by Prop, viii.) ea^h
part will necessarily be infinite, and (by Prop, vi.) self-
caused, and (by Ptop. v.) will perforce consist of a different
attribute, so that, in that case, several Bubstances could be
formed out of one substance, which (by Prop, vi.) is absurd.
Moreover, the parts (by Prop, ii.) wo\ild have nothing in
common with their whole, and the whole (by I>ef . iv. and
Prop. X.) could both exist and be conceived without its
ptuta, which everyone will admit to be absurd. If we
adopt the second alternative — namely, that the parts will
not retain the nature of sufcstance — then, if tie whole
substance were divided into equal parts, it woiild lose the
nature of substance, and would cease to exist, which (by
Prop, vii.) is absurd.

Peop. X I m Svbstanee ahsalutely infinite is indivieible.

Froof. — ^If it could be divided, the parts into which it
was divided would either retain the nature of absolutely
infinite substance, or they would not. If the former, wo
should have several Bubstancea of the same nature, which
(by Prop. T.) is absurd. If the latter, then (by Prop, vii.)
substance absolutely infinite could cease to esist, which
(by Prop. li.) is also absurd.

Corollary. — It follows, that no substance, and con-
sequently no extended substance, m so far as it is sub-
stance, is divisible.

Note. — The indivisibility of substance may be more
easily understood as follows. The nature of substance can
only be conceived as infinite, and by a. part of substance,
nothing else can be understood than finite substance, which
(by Prop, viii.) involves a manifest contradiction.

Pbop. JULV. Besides God no fubstanee can be granted or
conceived.

Proof. ^Ab God is a being absolutely infinite, of whom


T I,] CONCERNlNCt GOD. 55

o attrilmte that expresses the eBsence of eubetanoe can be
enied (by I>ef.vi.),aiidhe neceesarily eiiets ("by Prop, xi.) ;
t any subatanee besides God wero granted, it woidd have
o be explained by some attribute of God, and thus two
SubstaaoeB with the same attribute would exist, -vhicli
(by Prop. T.) ia absurd ; therefore, besides God no sub-
stance caa be granted, or, consequently, be conceived. If
it oould be conceived, it would neceasarily have to be con-
ceired aa existent ; but this (by the first part of this proof)
is abe\ird. Therefore, besides God no substance can be
granted or conceived. Q.E.D.

CoToUary I. — Clearly, therefore : 1. God ia one, that is
(by Def. vi.) only one eubstance can be granted in the
nniveree, and that substance is absolutely infinite, as we

thave already indicated (in the note to Prop. x.).
Corolla/ry II. — It follows : 2. That extension and thought
tsn fflther attributes of God or (by Ax. i.) aecidents (affec-
tioTieg) of the attributes of God.
Pitop. XV". Whatsoever w, is in God, and wiihout God
motbing cam, he, or he conceived.
i Proof. — ^Besides God, no substance is grants or can be
bonceived (by Prop.iiv.),thatis (by Def.iii.)nothingwhieh
ia in itself and is conceived through itself. But modes (by
Def. v.) can neither be, nor be conceived without substance ;
wherefore they can only be in the divine nature, and can
only through it be conceived. But substances and modes

tform the sum total of existence (by Ax. i.), therefore,
without God nothing can be, or be conceived. Q.B.D.
Nb(e.— Some assert that God, like a man, consists of
body and mind, and is susceptible of passions. How far
luch persons have strayed from the truth is sufficiently
evident from what has been said. But these I pass over.
!For all who have in anywise reflected on the divine nature
deny that God has a body. Of this they find excellent
proof in the fact that we understand by body a definite
quantity, so long, so broad, so deep, bounded by a certain
shape, and it ia the height of absurdity to predicate such a
thi^ of God, a being absolutely infinite. But meanwhile
by the other reasons with which they try to prove their
point, they show that they think corporeal or extended
^^jubBtance wholly apart from the divine nature, and say


IS


THE ETHICS.


[part J, ^


it waa created by God. Wherefrom the divine nature
can have been created, they are wholly ignorant ; thus they
clearly show, that they do not know the meaning of their
own words. I myself have proved snffidently clearly, a,t
any rate in my own judgment (CoroU. Prop, vi., and Note 2,
Prop, viii.), that no substance can be produced or created
by anything other than itself. Further, I showed (in
ftop. liv.), that besides God no substance can be granted or
conceived. Hence we drew the conclusion that extended
substance ia one of the infinite attributes of God. How-
ever, in order to explain more fully, I wii! refute the argu-
ments of my adversaries, which aJl start from the following

Extended substance, in ao far aa it is substance, conaistSi
B,a tbey think, in parts, wherefore they deny that it can bo
infinite, or, consequently, that it can appertain to Ood.
Thia they illustrate with many eiamplea, of which I will
take one or two. If eitended substance, they say, is in-
finite, let it be conceived to be divided into two parts ;
each part will then be either finite or infinite. If the
former, then infinite Buhstance ia composed of two finite
parts, which ia absurd. If the latter, then one infini te will
be twice aa large as another infinite, which ia also absurd.

Further, if an infinite line be measured out in foot
lengths, it will consist of an infinite number of such parts ;
it would equally consist of an infinite number of parts, if
each part measured only an inch : therefore, one inflniiy
Tf ould be twelve times aa g:reat as the other.

lAstly, if from a single point there be conceived to bo
drawn two diverging lines which at first are at a definite
distance apart, but are produced to infinity, it is certain
that the distance between the two lines wiH be continiially
increased, tmtil at length it changes from definite to inde-
finable. As these absurdities follow, it is said, from con-
sidering quantity as infinite, the conclusion is drawn, that
extended substance must neceaaarily be finite, and, con-
sequently, cannot appertain to the nature of God.

The second argument is also drawn from God's supreme
perfection. God, it is said, inasmuch aa he is a supremely
perfect being, cannot be passive ; but extended substance,
in 80 far aa it is divisible, is passire. It follows, therefora,


I


I


^H^ABT I.] coNcEttNiMO aos. S7

that extended aubstaace does not appertain to the essence
of God.

Such are the arguments I find on the subject in writers,
who by them try to prove that extended substance is un-
worthy of the divine nature, and cannot possibly appertain
thereto. However. I think an attentive reader will se«
that I have already answered their propositions ; for all
their arguments are founded on the hypothesis that ex-
tended substance is composed of parts, and such a hypo-
thesis I hare shown (Prop, xii., ajid Coroll. Prop, xiii.) to be
absurd. Moreover, anyone who reflects will see that all
these absurdities (if absurdities they be, which I am not
now discussing), from which it is sought to extract the
concIuBion that extended substance is finite, do not at all
^_ Jfollow from the notion of an infinite quantity, but merely
^Ljfrom the notion that an infinite quantity is measurable,
^Kmd composed of finite parts : therefore, the only fair cod-
^BduBJon to be drawn is that infinite quaatity is not measur-
^* able, and cannot be composed of fimte parts. This ia ex-
actly what we have already proved (in Prop. lii.). Where-
fore the weapon which they aimed at us has in reality re-
coiled upon themselves. If, from this absurdity of theirs,
they persist in drawing the conclusioa that extended sub-
stance must be finite, they will in good sooth be acting like
a man who asserts that circles have the properties of squares,
and, finding himself thereby landed in absurdities, pro-
ceeds to deny that circles have any centre, from which all
lines drawn to the circumference are equal. For, taking
extended substance, which can only be conceived as infinite,
one, and indivisible (Props, viii., t., lii.) they assert, in order
to prove that it is finite, that it is composed of finite parts,
and that it can be multiplied and divided.

So, also, others, after asserting that a line is composed
of points, can produce many arguments to prove that a
line cannot be infinitely divided. Assuredly it is not less
absurd to assert that extended substance is made up of
bodies or parts, than it would be to assert that a sohd is
made up of surfaces, a surface of lines, and a line of points.
This must be admitted by aU who know clear reason to be
infaUihle, and most of all by those who deny the possibihty
E U vacUTim. Eor if extended substance could be so


^^tf u vaci


I"


1


divided that its parts were really separate, why ahoTild not
one part admit of being destroyed, the others remaining-
joined together as Isefore ? And why should aU be bo fitted
into one another as to leave no vacuum ? Surely in the
case of things, which are really distinct one from the other,
one can exist without the other, and can remain in its-
original condition. As, then, there does not exist a vaeuum
in nature (of which anon), but all parts are Ixiund to com©
together to prevent it, it follows from this also that th»
parts cannot be really distinguished , and that extended
substance in so far as it is substance cannot be divided.

If anyone aake me the further question, Why are w»
naturally so prone to di^de quantity? I answer, that
qoantity is conceived by us in two ways; in the abstract
and superficially, as we imagine it ; or as substance, as w»
conceive it solely "by the intellect. If, then, we regard
quantity as it is represented in onr imagination, which w&
often and more easily do, we shall find that it is finite,
divisible, and compounded of parts ; hut if we regard it as
it is represented in our intellect, and conceive it aa suh-
Btance, which it is very difficult to do, we shall then, as I
have sufficiently proved, find that it is infinite, one, and
indivisible. This will be plain enough to all, who make a>
distinction between the intellect and the imagination,
especially if it be remembered, that matter is everywhere
the same, that its parts are not distinguishable, except in
BO far as we conceive matter as diversely modified, whence
its parts are distinguished, not really, but modally. For
instance, water, in so far aa it is water, we conceive to ha
divided, and its parts to be separated one from the other ;
hut not in so far as it is extended substance ; from thia
point of view it is neither separated nor divisible. Turther,
water, in so far as it is water, is produced and corrupted ;
hut, in so far aa it is substance, it is neither produced nor
corrupted.

I think I have now answered the second ai^ument ; it is,
in fact, founded on the eame aaaumption aa the first —
namely, that matter, in so far as it is substance, is divisible,
and composed of parts. Even if it were so, I do not know
why it should be considered unworthy of the divine nature,
inasmuch as besides G(od (by Prop. liv.) no substance cod


i


te granted, ■wherefrom it could receive its modificationa.
All things, I repeat, are in God, and all things ■whioh come
to pass, come to pass solely through the laws of the infinite
nature of God, and follow (aa I ■will shortly show) from
the nec«ssily of his essence. Wherefore it can in nowise
be said, that God is passive in respect to anything other
than himself, or that extended snbatance is unworthy of
the Divine nature, even if it be supposed divisible, so long
as it is granted to be infinite and eternal. But enough of
this for the present.

Paop. XVI. ^From tJie neceeeity of the divine nature mvM
foUvus an infinUe number of things in infinite ways^ihat
ie, aU things which can faU within (Ae sphere of infinite
tnteUed.

Proof. — This proposition will be clear to everyone, who-
remembers that from the given definition of any thing the
intellect infers several properties, which really Qecessarily
follow therefrom (that is, from the actual essence of tho-
thing defined) ; and it infers more properties in proportion.
OS the definition of the thing espreases more reality, that
iSf ia proportion as the essence of the thing defined in-
Tolves more reahty. Now, as the divine nature has abso-
Intely infinite attributes (by Def . vi.) , of which each expresse*
infinite essence after its land, it follows that from the
necesaity of its nature an infinite number of things (that is,
everything which can fall within the sphere of an infinite-
inteUect) must necessarily follow. Q.E.D.

GoToUary I.- — Hence it follows, that God is the efficient
cause of all that can fall within the sphere of an infinite
intellect.

Corollary II. — It also follows tlat God is a cause in him-
self, and not through an accident of his natiu-e.

Corollary III.- — It follows, thirdly, that God is the abso-
lutely first cause.

Pbof. XVII. Ood acts golely hy the latos of his own TOahtrs,.
and is fwt constrained by anyone.

Proof — We have just shown (in Prop, ivi.), that solely
from the necessity of the divine nature, or, what is the
same thing, solely from the laws of his nature, an infinite
number of things absolutely follow in an infinite number
(rf ways ; and we proved (in Prop, xv.), that without Gtod


I


J


61) TSE ETHICS, [PAKT

nothing can be nor be conMired ; bat that all thinga are
in God. Wherefore nothing can eiiat outside hiniBelf,
whereby he can be conditioned or constrained to act.
Wherefore God acts solely by the laws o£ Mb own nature,
and ia not constrained by anyone, Q.E.D.

Corollary I. — It follows r 1. That there can be no cause
which, either estrinsically or intrinaically, besides the per-
fection of his own nature, moves God to act.

Corollary II. — It foUows : 2. That God is the sole free
cause. For God alone exists by the sole necessity of his
nature (by Prop. si. and Prop, siv,, CoroU. i.), and acta by
the sole necessity of his nature, wherefore God is (by
Bef. vii.) the sole free cause. Q.KD.

Note. — Others think that God is a free cause, because he
can, as they think, bring it about, that those things which
we have said follow from his nature — that is, which are in
his power, should not come to pass, or should not be pro-
duced by him. But this is the same as if they said, that
God coijd bring it about, that it should not follow from the
nature of a triangle, tlm.t its three interior angles should
not be equal to two right angles ; or that from a given
cause no effect should follow, which is absurd.

Moreover, I will show below, without the aid of this
proposition, that neither intellect nor will appertain, to
God's nature. I know that there are many who think
that they can show, that supreme intellect and free wUl do
appertain to God's nature ; for they say they know of
nothing more perfect, wliich they can attribute to God,
than that which is the highest perfection in ourselves.
Further, although they conceive God as actually supremely
intelligent, they yet do not believe, that he can bring into
«iist«nce everything which he actually understands, for
they think that they would thus destroy God's power. If,
they contend, God had created everythmg which is in his
intellect, he would not be able to create anything more,
and this, they think, would clash with Qod'a omnipotence;
therefore, they prefer to assert that God is indifferent to
all things, and that he creates nothing except that which
he has decided, by some absolute exercise of will, to create.
However, I think I have shown sufficiently clearly (by
Prop, xvi,), that from God's supreme power, or infinite ,


COKCEENINQ QOU.


r


61


nature, an infinite number of things — that is, all things have
necessarilv flowed forth in an infinite number o£ ways, or
always follow from the same neceesity ; in the same way
as from the nature of a triangle it foIlowB from eternity
and for eternity, that its three interior angles are equal h>
two right angles. Wherefore the omnipotence of God has
been displayed from all eternity, and will for all eternity
remain in the same state of activity. This manner of
Seating the question attributes to God an omnipotence, in
my opinion, far more perfect. For, otherwise, we are com-
pelled to confess that God understands an infinite number
of creatable things, which he will never be able to create,
for, if he created all that he understands, he would,
according to this showing, exhaust his omnipotence, and
render himself imperfect. Wherefore, in order to eatab-
bliflh that God is perfect, we should be reduced to estab-
lishing at the same time, that he cannot bring to pass
ereiything over which his power extends ; this seems f^j
1>e a hypothesis moat absurd, and most repugnant to G^'s
omnipotence.

Further (to Hay a word here concerning the intellect and
the will which we attribute to God), if intellect and will
appertain to the eternal essence of God, we must take
these words in some significations quite different from
those they usually bear. For intellect and will, which
ihould constitute the essence of God, would perforce be as
■tax apart as the poles from the human intellect and will,
in fact, would have nothing in common with them but the
name ; there would be about as much correspondence
tetween the two as there is between the Dog, the heavenly
constellation, and a dog, an animal that barks. This I will
prove as follows. If intellect belongs to the divine nature,
it cannot be in nature, as ours is generally thought to be,
posterior to, or simultaneous with the things understood,
maamuch as God is prior to all things by reason of his
causaJity (Prop, xvi., CoroU. i.). On the contrary, the truth
and formal essence of things ia as it ia, because it exists by
representation as such in the intellect of God. Wherefore
the intellect of God, in so far as it is conceived to consti-
tute God's essence, ia, in reality, ihe cause of things, both
t tbeir essence and of their existence. This seems to


<l2 THIE ETHICa. [pAJtT I.

Jiave teen recognized by those who have asserted, that
■God's intellect, God's will, and God's power, are one and
the Kome. As, therefore, God's intellect is the sole cause
of things, namely, hoth of their essence and existence, it
must necessarily differ from them in respect to its essence,
and in respect to its existence. For a cause differs from a,
thing it causes, precisely in the quality which the latter
gains from the former.

For example, a man is the cause of another man's exis-
tence, but not of his essence (for the latter is an eternal
truth), and, therefore, the two men. may be entirely similar
in essence, but must be different in existence ; and hence
if the existence of one of them cease, the existence of the
other will not necessarily cease also ; but if the essence of
one could be destroyed, and be made false, the essence of
the other would be destroyed also. Wherefore, a thing
which is the cause both of the essence and of the existence
■o£ a given effect, must differ from such effect both in
respect to its eBsence, and also in respect to its existence.
Now the intellect of God is the cause of both the essence
and the eiistence of our intellet^ ; therefore, the intellect
of God in so far as it is conceived to constitute the divine
essence, differs from our intellect both in respect to essence
and in respect to existence, nor can it in anywise agree
therewith save in name, as we said before. The reasoning
would be identical in the ca^e of the will, as anyone can
«asily see.

Prop, x y i i i God is the indwelling and not the transient
^av»e of all things.

Froof. — All things which are, are in God, and must be
conceived through God (by Prop, xv.), therefore (by Prop,
xvi., Coroll. i.) God is the cause of those things which are
in him. This is our first point. Further, besides God there
■can be no substance (by Prop, xiv.), that is nothing in
itseH external to God. This is our second point. God,
therefore, is the indwelling and not the transient cause of
all things^ Q.E.D.

Prop. XI X . Qod, and all the attrHmlee of God, are sternal.

Froof — God (by Def. vi.) is suhsliance, which (by
' Prop, xi.) necessarily exists, that is (by Prop, vii.) existence
.appertains to its nature, o r (what is the same thing) f oUovs i


tut

- J
pot


CONCBBNIKS GOD. 63

from ita definition j therefore, God is eternal (by Def . tuL).
farther, by the attributes of God we must uaderatand
that irhich (by Def. iv.) expresees the esaence of the divine
substajice — in other worda, that which appertains to sub-
stance r that, I say, should be involved in the attribntes of
substance. Now et«mity appertains to the nature of STib-
stanee (aa I have already shown in Prop, vii.) ; therefore,
•eternity must appertain to each of the attributes, and thus
all are eternal. Q-E.D.

2fote.—1hiB proposition is also evident from, the manner
ia which (in Prop. xL) I demonstrated the existence of
<3od ; it is evident, I repeat, from that proof, that the ex-
istence of God, like his essence, is an eternal truth.
Further (in Prop, xix. of my " Principles of the Cartesian
Philosophy"), I have proved the eternity of God, in another
manner, which I need not here repeat.

Peof. XX. The exittence of God and his eiience are <me '•
And the game.

Proof. — God (by the last Prop.) and all his attributes
are eternal, that ia (by Def. viii,) each of his attributes ei-
presses existence. Therefore the same attributes of God
■which explain his eternal essence, explain at the same time
his eternal existence — in other words, that which constitutes
God's essence constitutes at the same time bis existence.
Wherefore God's existence and God's essence are one and
the same. Q.E.D.

CoToll. I. — Hence it follows that God's existence, like
Sis essence, is an eternal truth.

Coroll. II, — Secondly, it follows that God, and all the
attributes of God, are unchang;eable. For if they could be
changed in respect to existence, they must also be able to
be changed in respect to essence — that is, obviously, be
changed from true to false, which is absurd.

Paop. XXL All thiugg which foUoto from the ahsolute

itviTe of any aUribute of God viugt alwayg owsf and be infi-

te, or, in other words, are eternal and injinite through the
'^id ailnhuie.

if it be possible (supposini^ the pro-
position to be denied), that something in some attribute of
Ood can follow from the absolute nature of the said
attribute, and that at the sanae time it Is finite, and


64 THE ETHICS. [pAHT f,

has a. conditioned exiBtence or duration ; for iiiata,nce, the
idea of God espreased in the attribute thought. Now
thought, in so far as it is eupposed to be an attribut* of
God, is necesBarily (by Prop. li.) in its nature infinite.
But, in so far as it poHHeaaes the idea of Qod, it is anp-
posed finite. It cannot, however, be conoeived as finite,
unless it be limited by thought {by Def. ii.) ; but it is not
limited by thought itself, in so far aa it has constituted the
idea of God {for ao far it is supposed to be finite) ; there-
fore, it is limited by thought, in so far aa it has not con-
stituted the idea of God, which nevertheless (by Prop. 3d.)
must necesaarily exist.

We have now granted, therefore, thought not constitu-
ting the idea of God. and, accordingly, the idea of God
does not naturally follow from its nature in so far as it is
absolute thought (for it ia conceived as conatituting, aJid
also as not constituting, the idea of God), which is against
our hypothesia, 'WherefoTe, if the idea of God expresaed
in the attribute thought, or, indeed, anything else in any
attribute of God {for we may tate any example, as the
proof ia of luuversal appUcatiou) follows from the neceB-
sity of the absolute nature of the said attribute, the said
thing must necessarily be infinite, which waa our first
point.

Purtherraore, a thing which thus follows from the neces-
sity of the nature of any attribute cannot have a limited
duration. Por if it can, auppoae a thing, which follows
from the necessity of the nature of some attribute, to
exist in some attribnte of Gk»d, for instance, the idea of
God expressed in the attrilsute thought, and let it be sup-
posed at some time not to have exiated, or to be about not
to exist.

Now thought being an attribute of God, must necesBarily
exist unchanged (by Prop, xi., and Prop, xx., CoroU. ii.) ;
and beyond the limits of the duration of the idea of God
(aupposing the latter at some time not to hare exiated, or
not to be going to exist) thought would perforce have
exiated without the idea of God, which is contrary to our
hypothesis, for we supposed that, thought being given, the
idea of God neceaaarily flowed therefrom. Therefore the
idea of God expressed in thought, or anything which nece*.


1


RAKXI.]


COHCEBNINQ


65


florily follofffi from the absolute nature of some attributo
of Qod, cannot have & limited deration, but through ihe
Baid attribute is eternal, which is our seooad point. Bear
jn mind that the same proposition majr be affirmed of any-
Ithing, which in any attribute necessarily follows from God's
Absolute nature-

Pkop. Tfx 1 1. Whataoeeer follmot from any attribute of ,
^Chd, in eofar aa it is modified by a modification, wfticA ex-
t neceesarily and as infinite, through the said attribute,
ntiit also esnet neceesaaily and at infinite.

Froof. — The proof of this proposition ia similar to that
fof the preceding one,

Pbop. XADI. Every made, which eriets both necessarily

)and as infinite, must necessarily foUoie either from the

bsolute nature of some attribute of Qod, or from an attribute

>difi,ed hy a modification which exists necessarily, and as

iafhtUe.

Froof. — A mode esdsts in something else, through which
t muHt be conceived (Dei. v.), that ia (Prop, xv.), it esiBta
Solely in God, and solely through God eaji be conceived.
""! therefore a mode is conceived as necessarily existing
tnd infinite, it nkust necessarily be inferred or perceived
through some attribute of God, in so far as such attribute
is conceived as expressing the infinity and necessity of exis-
tence, in other words (Dei. viii.) eternity i that is, in ao far
as it ia considered absolutely. A mode, therefore, which
nficessarily exists as infinite, must follow from the absolute
nature of some attribute of God, either immediately
(Prop, ixi.) or through the means of some modification,
_ which follows from the absolute nature of the said attri-
3>nte ; that is (by Prop, xxii.), which exists necessarily and as

Pbop, XXIV, The essence of things produced by Qod does \
tot inwlee existence.

Proof. — This proposition is evident from Def. i. For
"lat of which the nature (considered in itself) involves
ristence is self-caused, and exists by the sole necessity of
1 nature.

Corollary.— ^ence it follows that God is not only the
kiuse of things coming into existence, biit also of their
tontinuing in existence, that is, in scholastic phraseology.


66 THE BrHICS. [PJ

God is cause of the being of things (eesendi rerum), Fat
whether things esist, or do not exist, whenever we contem-
plate their essence, we see that it inyolvea neither existence
nor duration ; consequently, it cannot be the cause of either
the one or the other. Giod must be the sole cause, inas-
much aa to him alone does existence appertain. (Prop. xiv.
CoroU. i. ) Q-E .D.

Prop. XXV. Qod is the efficient caute not only of the ex-
ittence of things, but also of their essence.

Proof. — If this be denied, then God is not the cause of
the essence of things ; and therefore the essence of thing*
can (by Ax. iv.) be conceived without God. This (by
Prop. XT.) ia absurd. Therefore, God is the cauae of the
essence of things. Q.E.D.

Note. — This proposition follows more clearly from Prop,
xvi. For it is evident thereby that, given the divine nature,
the essence of things must be inferred from it, no less than
their existence — in a word, God must be called the eanse
of all things, in the same sense as he is called the cause of
himself. This wUl be made still clearer by the following
corollary.

Corollary. — Individual things are nothing but modifica-
tions of the attributes of God, or modes by which the
attributes of God are expressed in a fixed and definite
manner. The proof appears from Prop. xv. and Def. v.

Pbop. X >^ V I A thing inkich is conditioned to act in a
particwlar ma/nner, has necessarily been thus conditioned by
God ; and that which kae not been conditioned by Qod can-
not condition itself to act.

Proof. — That by which things are said to be conditioned
to act in a particular manner is necessarily something
positive (this is obvious) ; therefore both of its essence and
of ita existence God by the necessity of his nature is the
efficient cauae (Propa. xxv, and xvi.) ; thia ia our first points
Oar second point is plainly to be inferred therefrom. For
if a thing, which has not been conditioned by Gtod, could.
condition itself, the firat part of our proof would be " "
and this, a a we h ave shown, ia absurd.
I Pkop, JiXXU.. A thing, tehich has been eondUionedby
ioact in a particular way, cannot render itself unconditioni

Proof. — This proposition is evident 'rom the third axiom.'


1

1


CONCERNINQ QOD.


67

Pkop. XXV 111. — Every individtial ihiiig, or werythirtg
wMeh is finite and hat a ctmdUioTied exittence, cannot eatitt
<or be eondiiioTied to act, umZess U be eonditioneA for txistenee
<md action by a cauee other than itself, which alto ts fimte,
and haa a conditioned existence ,- and likeunte this cause
ccamot in iti twm exitt, or be conditioned to act, unless it be
conditioned for emttence and action by another ca/ase, which also
xs finite, wad has a conditioned existence, arid soon to infinity.
Proof. — Whatsoerer is conditioned to etiat and act, has
been thus conditioned by God (by Prop, xivi. and Prop,
xdv., Coroll.)

But that which is finite, and has a conditioned existence,
«annot be produced by the absolute nature of any attribute
■of God ; for whatsoever follows from the absolute nature
«f any attribute of God is infinite and eternal (byProp. iii.).
It muBt, therefore, follow from some attribute of God,
in BO far as the said attribute is considered as in aome way
modified ; for substance and modes make up the sum total
of eristence (by Ax. i. and Def. iii.. v.), while modes are
merely modifications of the attributes of God. But from
Ood, or from any of his attributes, in so far as the latter
18 modified by a modification infinite and eternal, a con-
ditioned thing cannot follow. Wherefore it must follow
from, or be conditioned for, existence and action by God
or one of his attributes, in so far as the latter are modified
by some modification which is finite, and has a conditioned
existence. This is our first point. Again, this cause or
this modification (for the reason by which we established
the first part of this proof) must in its turn be conditioned
^^bf another cause, which also is finite, and has a conditioned
^K^stence, and, again, this last by another (for the same
^Eeason) ; and so on (for the same reason) to infinity. Q.E.D.
^V Note. — Ab certain things must be produced immediately
^^lyy God, namely those things which necessarily follow from
bis absolute nature, through the means of these primary
attributes, which, nevertheless, can neither exist nor be
iconceived without God, it follows : — 1. That God is abso-
lutely the proximate cause of those things immediately
prodncsd by him. I say absolutely, not after his kind, as
IB usually stated. For the effects of God cannot either
^^^sist or be conceived without a cause (Prop. xr. and Prop.


iM

irem
y ctui


68 TSE EIHIOS. [PABD

isiv., Coroll,). 2. That God cannot properly l>e styled %
remote cause of individual things, except for the sake
distinguishing these from what he immediately prodiw ^^
or rather from what follows from his absolute nature. For,
by a remote cause, ve underatand a cause which is in no way
conjoined to the efEeet, But all things which are, are in
God, and so depend on God, that wi^out him they can
neither be nor be conceived.

Prop, x xix Nothing in the universe is contirigeTit, I
I all things are condUvmed to exist and operate in a partic
manner by the neeessily of the divine nature.

Proof. — Whatsoever is, is in G!od (Prop. iv.). But God
cannot be called a thing contingent. For (by Prop, si.)
he exists necessarily, and not contingently. Further, the
modes of the divine nature follow therefrom necessarily, and
not contingently (Prop, ivi.) ; and they thus follow, whether
we consider the divine nature absolutely, or whether we
consider it aa in any way conditioned to act (Prop, xxvii.).
Further, God is not only the cause of these modes, in
so far as they simply exist (by Prop, xxiv., Coroll.), but
also in so far &b they are conBidered as conditioned for
operating in a particular manner (Prop. xsvi.). If they
be not conditioned by God (Prop, xxti.), it is impossible,
and not contingent, that they should condition themselves ;.
contrariwise, if they be conditioned by God, it is impos-
sible, and not contingent, that they should render them-
selvea unconditioned. Wherefore all things are condi-
tioned by the necessity of the divine nature, not only to
exist, but also to exist and operate in a particular maunerr
and there is nothing that is contingent. Q.E.D.

Note, — Before going any further, I wish here to explain,
, what we should understand by nature viewed as active-
1 (natwra naturans), and nature viewed as passive (naiura,
, naturata). I say to explain, or rather call attention to it,
for I think that, from what has been said, it is sufBciently
clear, that by nature viewed as active we should understand
that which is in itself, and is conceived through itself, or
those attributes of substance, which express eternal and.
infinite essence, in other words (Prop, xiv., Coroll. i., and
Prop, ivii., CorolL ii.) God, in so far as he is considered a»
B. free cause.


I.]


[C BENIN O GOD.


I By natore viewed aa passive I understand all tliat which
Bollowa from the newssity of the nature of God, or of any
t the attributes of Ood, that is, all the modes of the attri-
futes of God, in so far as they are considered as things
a God, and which without God cannot exist or
conceived.

Pbop. XXX. Intellect, in fwnction (actu) finile, or in
infinite, mvst oomprehend the attrihviet of God and
the vu)diJieatioTi» of God, and not/Uv^ elte.

Proof. — A true idea must s^gree with its object (Ax, vi.) ;
in other words (obviously), that which is contained in the
intellect in representation must necessarily be granted in
nature. But in nature (by Prop, siv., CoroU. i.) there is
no Bubstanoe save God, nor any modifications save those
<Prop. XT.) which are in God, and cannot without God
■either be or be conceived. Therefore the inteUeet, in function
£nito, or in function infinite, muat comprehend the attri-
I butes of God and the modifications of God, and nothing
^ase. Q.E.D.

^^K Pbop. > x > i . The intellect m function, whether finite or
^Hn^tfe, at vnU, desire, love, &c., should he referred to passive
^^^aiwre and not to active natiire.

^^ Proof. — By the intellect we do not (obvioualy) mean ab-
solute thought, but only a certain mode of thinking, differ-
ing from other modes, such as love, desire, Ac, and there-
fore (Dei. V.) requiiing to be conceived through absolute
thought. It must (by Prop, xv, ajid Def. vi.), through some
attribute of God wluch espresaea the eternal and infinite
essence of thought, be so conceived, that without Bueh
attribute it could neither be nor be conceived. It muet
therefore be referred to nature passive rather than to na-
ture active, as must also the other modes of thinking-

, Note. — I do not here, by apealdng of intellect in func-
^on, admit that there is such a thing aa intellect in pot«n-
iaUty: but, wishing to avoid all confusion, I deaire to
aea.i only of what ia moat clearly perceived by ua, namely,
E the very act of understanding, than which nothing is
Diore clearly perceived. For we cannot perceive anything
jrithout adding to our knowledge of the act of under-


[pari ^H

hut «^|

iking, li^^l
can exist^^


I PBOP.XXXn. WUleannothecaUedafreeeaiMe.hiit
I a necetaary cause.

Proof. — Will is only a particnlar mode of thinking,
intellect ; therefore (by I^p. Kxriii.) no Yolition can existT
nor be conditioned to act, unlees it be conditioned by aome
cause other than itself, ■which cause is conditioned by &
third cause, and so on to infinity. But if will be aupposed
infinite, it tauat also be conditioned t^ exist and act by
God, not by virtue of his being substance absolutely in-
finite, but by virtue of his poaaeBBing an attribute which
eipressea the infinite and eternal essence of thought (by-
Prop, niii.). Thus, however it be conceived, whether a,e
finite or infinite, it requires a cause by which it should be
conditioned to eiist and a,ct. Thus (Dei. vii.) it cannot be-
called a free cause, but only a necessary or constrained
cause. Q.E.D.

Coroll. I. — Hence it follows, first, that God does not act-
according to freedom of the will.

Coroll. II. — It foUowB, secondly, that will and intellect
stand in the same relation to the nature of God aa d»
motion, and rest, and absolutely all natural phenomenft^
which must be conditioned by God (Prop, xsix.) to exist)
and act in a particular manner. For will, like the rest^
stands in need of a cauae, by which it is conditioned to-
exist and act in a particular manner. And although, whea
will or intellect be granted, an infinite number of resultBi
may follow, yet God cannot on that account be said to act
from freedom of the will, any more than the infinite num-
ber of results from motion and rest would justify us in say-
ing that motion and reat a«t by free will. Wherefore will
no more appertains to God than does anything elae ia
nature, but stands in the same rela,tion to him as motion,
reat, and the hke, which we have shown to follow from the-
neceasity of the divine nature, and to be conditioned by it.
to exist and act in a particular manner.

Prop. XXXTTT . Thiiigt could not have been hrought into-
being 6y God in any manner or in any order different from,
that which hag in fact obtained.

Proof. — All thu^B neoeasarily follow from the nature of
QroA (Prop, ivi,), and by the nature of God are conditioned
to exist and act in a particular way (Prop, ixix.), If things.


a>A]tT T.]


COKCERNIira GOD.


r

^■itherefore, could have been of a, different nature, or have
^^.been conditioned to act in a different way, bo that the order
^ref nature would have been different, God's nature would
&lso have been able to be difEerent from what it now ia ;
and therefore (by Prop, xi.) that different nature also would
liare perforce existed, and consequently there would have
been able to be two or more Goda. ThiB (by Prop, xiv.,
iJCoroll. i.) is absurd. Therefore things could not have been
^STought into being by Qoi in any other manner, iSc. Q.E.D.
Note I. — Ab I have thus showti, more clearly than the
n at noonday, that there is nothing to justify us in call-
g things contingent, I wish to explain briefly what niean-
g we shall attach to the word contingent ; but I will first
nplatn the words necessary and impossible.
A thing is called necessary either in respect to its essence
' a respect to its cause ; for the existence of a thing neces'
rily follows, either from its essence and definition, or from
[j a ^ven efficient cause. For similar reasons a thing ia said
to be impossible ; namely, inasmuch as its essence or defini-
tion involves a contradiction, or because no external cause
is granted, which ia conditioned to produce such an effect ;
but a thing cau in no respect be called contingent, save in
^relation to the imperfection of our knowledge.

A thing of which we do not inow whether the essence
' MB or does not involve a contradiction, or of which, know-
g that it does not involve a contradiction, we are still in
bdoubt concerning the existence, because the order of causes
—such a thing. I say, cannot appear to us either
MBsary or impossible. Wherefore we call it contingent
r possible.
Note II. — It clearly foUowa from what we have said, that
igB have been brought into being by God in the highest
jerfection, inasmuch as they have necessarily followed from
ik most perfect nature. !Nor does this prove any imperfeo*
in God, for it has compelled us to affirm his perfection,
a its contrary proposition, we should clearly gather (aa
I have just shown), tlmt God is not supremely perfect, for
if things had been brought into being in any other way, we
should have to assign to God a nature difEerent from that.
which we are bound to attribute to him from the considera-
vtion of an absolutely perfect being.


^vUOI


?2


1

lea aB absur^j^^l
templating il^^H
ign to Ood l^^l


I do not doiilit, tliat maay will scout this idea aB absi
and will refuse to give their minda up to contemplatini,
Bimply because they are accustOToed to assign to Glod
freedom very different from that which we (Def. vii.) haye
deduced. They assign to him, in short, absolute free will.
However, I am also convinced that if such persons reflect
on the matter, and duly weigh in their minds our series of
propositiona, they will reject such freedom aa they now
attribute to God, not only as nugatory, but also as a great
impediment to organized knowledge. There is no need for
me to repeat what I said in the note to Prop. xvii. But, for
the sake of my opponents, I will show further, that although
it be granted that will appertaina to the eBBence of God, it
neverthelesB follows from hia perfection, that things could

' not have been by liim created other than they are, or in a
different order ; this ia eaaily proved, if we reflect on what
our opponents themselves concede, namely, that it depends

I solely on the decree and will of God, that each thing ia what
it is. If it were otherwise, God would not be the cause of
all things. Further, that all the decreea of God have beeoi

I ratified from all eternity by God himself. If it were other»J

I -wiBe, God would be convicted of imperfection or change.
But in eternity there ia no auch thing aa when, before, or
after ; hence it follows solely from the perfection of (jod,
that God never can decre«, or never could have decreed
anything but what ia ; that G^3d did not exist before hia
decrees, and would not exist without them. But, it is said,
supposing that God had made a different universe, or had
ordained other decrees from all eternity concerning nature
and her order, we could not therefore conclude any imper-
fection in God. But persons who sa,y this must admit that
God can change hia decreea. For if God had ordained any
decreea concerning nature and her order, different from
those which he haa ordained — in other worda, if he bad
willed and conceived aomething different concerning nature
— he wonld perforce have had a different intellect &omtliat
which he haa, and also a different will. But if it were allow-
able to assign to God a different intellect and a different
will, without any change in his essence or hia perfection,
what would there be to prevent him changing the decreea-
which he haa made concerning created things, and neverthe*


CONCEENINO- OOD, 73

lesB remaining perfect? For his intellect and will concemiug
things created ajid their order are the same, in respect to
Mb esBence and perfection, however they be conceived.

Further, all the philosophera -whom I have read admit
that Gktd'e intellect ie entirely actual, and not at all poten-
tial ; as they also admit that Qod's int«llect, and Glod's
'will, ajid Qod's essence are identical, it follows that, if Ood
bad had a different actual intellect and a different will, his
esaence voald also hare been different ; and thus, as I con-
cluded at first, if things had been brought into being by
God in a different way from that which has obtained, God'a
intellect and will, that is (as is admitted) his essence would
perforce have been different, which is absurd.

As these things could not have been brought into being
by Gtod in any but the actual way and order which has
obtained ; and as the truth of this proposition follows from
the supreme perfection of God ; we can have no sound
reason for persuading ourselves to believe that God did not
■wish to create all the things which were in his intellect,
and to create them in the same perfection as he had under-
stood them.

But, it will be said, there is in things no perfection nor
imperfectioo ; that which is in them, and which causes
th^ to be called perfect or imperfect, good or bad, de-
pends solely on the wiU of God. If God had so willed, he
"light have brought it about that what is now perfection
Bhonld be extreme imperfectioo, and vice versa. What is
sack an assertion, but an open declaration that God, who
necessarily understands that whicb he wishes, might bring
it about by his will, that he should understand things
differently from the way in which he does understand
them? This (as we have juat shown) is the height of ab-
surdity. Wherefore, I may turn the argument against its
employers, as follows ; — All things depend on the power of
Qod. In order that things should be different from what
they are, God's will would necesBarily have to be different.
But God's will cannot be different (as we have just most
clearly demonstrated) from God'a perfection. Therefore
neither can things be different. I confess, that the theory
which subjects all things to the will of an indifferent
J Aatj, and asserts that they are all dependent on his fiat.


74 THE ETHICS. [PAXT X,

is less far from the truth than the theory of those, who
maintain that God acts in all things with a yiew of pro-
moting what is good. For these latter persons seem i»
Bet up something be jond Qod, which does not depend on
God, but which God in acting looks to as an exemplar, or
which he aims at as a definite goaL This is onlj another
name for subjecting God to the dominion of destinj, an
utter absurditj in respect to God, whom we hare shown to
be the first and onl j free cause of the essence of all things
and also of their existence. I need, therefore, spend no
time in refuting such wild theories.

Pbop. XXXIV. Ood^apawer 18 identical with hia esaenee.

Proof. — From the sole necessily of the essence of God it
follows that God is the cause of himself (Prop, xi.) and of
all things (Prop. xvi. and Coroll.). Wherefore the power
of God, bj which he and all things are and act, is identical
with his esse nce. Q,E,D.

Prop. XXXV. Whataoever toe conceive to he in the power
of Ghdf neceaacuHJy exiata.

Proof, — ^Whatsoeyer is in Gt)d's power, must (by the
last Prop.) be comprehended in his essence in such a
manner, that it necessarily follows therefrom, and therefore
necessarily exists. Q,E,I).

Prop. XXX Vi. There ia no cauaefrom whoae nattire aome
effect doea not follow.

Proof, — ^Whatsoeyer exists expresses God's nature or
essence in a given conditioned manner (by Prop, xxy.,
Coroll.) ; that is (by Prop, xxxiv.), whatsoever exists, ex-
presses in a given conditioned manner God's power, which
IS the cause of all things, therefore an effect must (by
Prop, xvi.) necessarily foUow. Q,E,D.

Appendix. — ^In the foregoing I have explained the nature
and properties of God. I have shown that he necessarily
exists, that he is one : that he is, and acts solely by the
necessity of his own nature ; that he is the free cause of
all things, and how he is so ; that all things are in God,
and so depend on him, that without him they could neither
exist nor be conceived; lastly, that all things are pre-
determined by God, not through his free will or absolute
fiat, but from the very nature of Qod, or infinite power. I


I hi


COKCEBNING C


7&


FAST I.]

have further, vliere occasion offered, taken uaxe to
the prejudices, which might impede the comprehenBioa of
my demOQBtrations. Yet there BtUl remain misconceptione
not a few, which might and may prove very grave hin-
drances to the understanding of the concatenation □£
things, as I h^ve explained it above. I have therefore i
thought it worth while to bring these misconceptions before'
the bar of reason.

All such opinions spring from the notion commonlj en-
tertained, that all things in nature act as men the mselves
act, nam gl . Y. with an end in view . It ia accepted as certain,.
that God himself directs all things to a defiidte goal (for it
is said that God made all things for man, and m&a that he
might worship him). I wiB, therefore, consider this,
opinion, asking first, why it obtains general credence,
and why all men aJe naturally so prone to adopt it?
secondly, I will point out its falsity; and, lastly, I will show
how it has given riae to prejudices about good and bad,
right and wrong, praise and blame, order and confusion,
b^aty and ugUness, and the like. However, this is not
the place to deduce these misconceptions from the nature of
the human mind : it will be sufGcient here, if I assume as &.
fltartiog point, what ought to be universally admitted.
namely, that all men are born ignorant of the causes of
things, that all have the desire to seek for what is useful
to them, and that they are conscious of such desire. Here-
from it follows, first, that men think themselves free
inaBmoch as they are conscious of their volitions and de-
sires, and never even dream, in their ignorance, of the
causes which have disposed them so to wish and desire.
Secondly, tha,t men do all things for an end, namely, for
that which is useful to them, and which they seek. Thus
it comes to pass that they only look for a knowledge of the-
final^causes of events, and when these are learned, they are
content, as having no cause for further doubt. If they
cannot learn such causes from external sources, they are-
compelled to turn to considering themselves, and reflecting
vbat end would haveinduced them personally to bring about
the given event, and thus they necessarily judge other
natures by their own. Further, as they find in themselves
—Wid outside themselves many m«ans wldch assist them not


76 THE ETHICS. [PABT I.

a little in their search for what is useful, for instance, eyes
for seeing, teeth for chewing, herbs and animals for yielding
food, the Sim for giving light, the sea for breeding fish, &c.,
they come to look on the whole of nature as a means for
obtaining such conyeniences. Now as they are aware, that
they found these conveniences and did not make them,
they think they have cause for believing, that some other
being has made them for their use. As they look upon
things as means, they cannot believe them to be self -created ;
but, judging from the means which they are accustomed
to prepare for themselves, they are bound to believe in
some ruler or rulers of the universe endowed with human
freedom, who have arranged and adapted everything for
human use. They are bound to estimate the nature of
such rulers (having no information on the subject) in ac-
cordance with their own nature, and therefore they assert
that the gods ordained everything for the use of man, in
order to bind man to themselves and obtain from him the
I highest honour. Hence also it follows, that everyone
I thought out for himself, according to his abilities, a diffe-
\ rent way of worshipping God, so that Gk)d might love him
Wore than his fellows, and direct the whole course of
nature for the satisfaction of his blind cupidity and in-
/ satiable avarice. Thus the prejudice developed into super-
' stition, and took deep root in the human mind ; and for this
reason everyone strove most zealously to understand and
explain the final causes of things ; but in their endeavour
to show that nature does nothing in vain, i.e., nothing
which is useless to man, they only seem to have demon-
;strated that nature, the gods, and men are all mad together.
•Consider, I pray you, the result : among the many helps of
nature they were bound to find some hindrances, such as
istorms, earthquakes, diseases, &c. : so they declared that
«uch things happen, because the gods are angry at some
wrong done them by men, or at some fault committed in
their worship. Experience day by day protested and showed
by infinite examples, that good and evil fortunes fall to
the lot of pious and impious alike; still they would not
abandon their inveterate prejudice, for it was more easy
for them to class such contradictions among other unknown
things of whose use they were ignorant, and thus to retain


^BvUTI,]


CONCERN INQ GOD.


»


77


their actual and innate condition of ignoranco, than to de-
stroy tlie vliole fabric of their reaBoning and start afresh.
They therefore laid down as an axiom, that Qod's judg-
ments far transcend human understanding. Such a doc-
trine might weU have sufficed to conceal the truth from the
hum.an race for all eternity, if mathematics had not fur-
nished another standard of verity in conBidering solely the
esHence and properties of figures without regard to their
final causea, There are other reasons (which I need not
mention here) besidea mathematics, which might have
caused men's minds to he directed to these general preju-
dices, and have led them to the Icnowledge of the truth.

I have now siafficiently explained my first point. There
is no need to show at length, tha,t nature has no particular
goal iu view, and that final causes are mere human figments.
This, I think.is akeady evident enough, both from the causes
and foundations on which I haT« shown such prejudice to
he based, aud also from Prop, svi., and the CoroUary of
Prop, sxxii., and, in fact, all those propositions iu which I
haye shown, that everything in nature proceeds from a sort
of necessity, and with the utmost perfection. However, I
will add a few remarks, in order to overthrow this doctrine
of a final cause utterly. That which is really a cause it
considers as an effect, and vice vered .- it makes that which,
is by nature first to be last, and that which is highest and
most perfect to he most imperfect. Passing over the ques-
tions of cause and priority as self-evident, it is plain from
Props, ixi., xxii., xsiii. that that effect is most perfect which
mediately by God ; the efEect which requires
for its production several intermediate causes is, in that
.respect, more imperfect. But if those things which were
teiade immediately by God were made to enable him to
•attain his end, then the things which come after, for the
sake of which the first were made, are necessarily the most
excellent of all.

Further, this doctrine does away with the perfection of
God: for, if God acts for an object, he necessarily desires
something which he lacks. Certainly, theologians and '
metaphysiciauB draw a distinction between the object of [
ivont and the object of assimilation ; still they confess that
God made all things for the sake of himself, not for the


7S


THE ETHIOB.


[part i^fl


sake of creation. They are unable to point to anything*
prior to creation, except God. himself, as an object for which'
God Bhould act, and are therefore driven to admit (as they-1
clearly must), that God laeked those things for whosej
attainment he created means, and further that he desired,

"We must not omit to notice that the foHowers of this
doctrine, anxious to display their talent in assigning final
causes, have imported a new method of ailment in proof
of their theory — namely, a reduction, not to the impossible,
but to ignorance ; thus showing that they have no other
method of eshibiting their doctrine. For example, if a,
■atone falls from a roof on to someone's head, and lalls him,
they will demonstrate by their new method, that the stone
fell in order to kill the roan ; for, if it had not by God's
will fallen with that object, how could so many circum-
stances (and there are o£ten many concurrent circum-
stances) have all happened toother by chance ? Perhaps
you will answer that the event is due to the facts that the
wind was blowing, and the man was walking that way.
"But why," they will insist, "was the wind blowing, and
why was the man at that very time waiting that way?" If
you again answer, that the wind had then sprung up he-
cause the sea had begun to be agitated the day before, the
weather being previously ca,lm, and that the man had been
invited by a friend, they will again insist : " But why was
the sea agitated, and why was the man inrited at that
time?" So they will pursue their questions from cause to-
I cause, till at la^t you take refuge in the will o," God — in
■ other words, the sanctuary of ignorance. So, again, when
they survey the frame of the human body, they are amazed ;
and being ignorant of the causes of so great a work of art,
conclude that it has been fashioned, not mechanically, but
by divine and supernatural skill, and has been so put
together that one part shall not hurt another.

Hence anyone who seeks for the true causes of miracles,
and strives to understand natural phenomena as an intelli-
gent being, and not to gaze at tbem like a fool, is set down
and denounced as an impious heretic by those, whom the
masses adore as the interpreters of nature and the gods.
Such persons know that, with the removal of ignorance, the


I


I


*ABT I.] CONCEBNINS OOD, 79

wonder which forms their only available means for jjroring
aad preserring their authority would vanish also. But I
now quit this subject, and pass ou to my third point.

After men persuaded themselves, that everything which
in created is created for their sake, they were bound to con-
sider aa the chief quality in everything that which is most
useful to themselves, and to account those things the best
of all which have the moat beneficial effect on mankind.
Further, they were bound to form abstract notions for the
explanation of the nature of things, such as goodneea, bad-
nets, order, confaeion, warmth, cold, beauty, deformity, and
80 on ; and from the behef that they are free agents arose
the furthSr notions prawe and hlwme, ein and merit.

I will apeak of these latter hereafter, when I treat of
human nature ; the former I will briefly explain here.

Everything which conduces to health and the worship of
Ood they have called good, everything which hinders these
objects they have styled had i a.nd inasmuch as those who
do not understand the nature of things do not verify phe-
nomena in any way, but merely imagine them after a
fashion, and mistake their imagination for understanding,
such persons firmly believe that there is an order in things,
being really ignorant both of things and their own nature.
Wtien phenomena are of such a kind, that the impression
they make on our senses requires httle effort of imagina-
tion, and can consequently be easily remembered, we say
that they are welUordered ; if the contrary, that they are
Hi-ordered or confuted. Further, as things which are easily
inu^ined are more pleasing to us, men prefer order to con-
fusion — as though there were any order in nature, except in
relation to our imagination — and say that God has created
all things in order ; thus, without knowing it, attributing
im^ination to God, unless, indeed, they would have it that
God foresaw human imagination, and arranged everything, ■
ao that it should be most easily imagined. If this be their ,
theory, they would not, perhaps, be daunted by the fact
that we find an infinite number of phenomena, far surpass-
ing our imagination, and very many others which confound
its weakness. But enough has been said on this subject.
The other abstract notions are nothing but modes of
king, in which the imagination is differently affected.


80 THE ETHICS. [pAfiT I.

though they are considered ty the ignorant as the chief
attributes of things, inaBmnch as they believe that every-
thing was created for the Bate of themselveB ; and, accord-
ing aa they are affected by it, style it good or bad, healthy
or rotten and corrupt. For instance, if the motion which
objects we see communicate to our nerves be conducive to
health, the objects causing it are styled beautiful; if a.
contrary motion be excited, they are styled ugly.

Things which are perceived through our sense of emell
are styled fragrant or fetid ; if through our taste, sweet or
hitter, full-flavoured or Insipid ; if through our touch, hard
or soft, rough or smooth, &c.

Whatsoever affects our ears is said to give rise to noise,
sound, or harmony. In this last case, there are men lunatic
enough to believe, that even Glod himself takes pleasure in
harmony ; and philosophers are not lacking who have per-
suaded themselves, that the motion of the heavenly bodies
gives rise to harmony— all of which instances sufficiently
show that everyone judges of things according to the state
of his brain, or rather mistakes for things the forms of his
imagination. We need oo longer wonder that there have
arisen all the controversies we have witnessed, and finally
scepticism : for, althoT:^h human bodies in many respects
agree, yet in very majiy other a they differ; so that what
seems good to one seems "bad to aaiotlier ; what seems well
ordered to one seems confused to another; what is pleasing
to one displeases another, and so on. I need not further
enumerate, because this is not the place to treat the subject
at length, and also because the fact is sufficiently well
known. It is commonly said : " So many men, so many
minds ; everyone is wise in his own way ; brains differ as
completely aa palates," AH of which proverbs show, that
men judge of things according to their mental disposition,
and rather imagine than understand : for, if they understood
phenomena, they would, as mathematics attest, be convinced,
if not attracted, by what I have urged.

We have now perceived, that all the explanations com-
monly giren of nature are mere modes of imagining, and
do not indicate the true nature of anything, but only the
constitution of the imagination ; a,nd, although they have
names, as though they were entities, esisting externally toi


CONCBBNINQ OOD.


81


»


imagination, I call them entities imaginary rather than
and, therefore, aJl ailments against us drawn from
Lch abstraction B are easily rebutted.
Many ai^e in this way. If all things follow from a
necessity of the absolutely perfect nature of God, why are
there so many imperfections in nature ? such, for instance,
as things corrupt to the point of putridity, loathsome de-
formity, confusion, evil, sin, &c, But these reasoners are,
as I Lave said, easily confuted, for the perfection of things i
ja to be rectoned only from their own nature and power ;
things are not more or less perfect, according as they de- '
light or offend human senses, or according as they are
serviceable or repugnant to mankind. To those who ask
why God did not so create all men, that they should bo
governed only by reason, I give no answer but this : because
matter was not lacking to him for the creation of eveiy de-
;&e of perfection from highest to lowest ; or, more strictly,
jcause the laws of his nature are bo vast, as to sufBc« for ,.
the production of everything conceivable by an infinite in- '■
telligence, as I have shown in Prop. xvi.

Such are the misconceptions I have undertaken to note j
if there are any more of the same sort, everyone may easily
issipate them for himself with the aid of a tittle re-
action.


LFAKrn.


PART II.
OF THE KATUBE AND OBIGIN OF THE MIKD.


I NOW paw Ofn to explaimiig the lesnlts* which must
neoessaril J follow froon the cwence of <>od, or of th«
eternal and infinite being ; not, indeed, all of them (for we
proved in 'Fart. L, Prop, xri^ that an infinite nombear must
follow in an infinite number of wajs), but onlj those which
are able to lead ns, as it were bj the hand, to the know-
ledge of the human mind and its highest blessedness.

DKFnriTiovs.

L Bj body I mean a mode which expresses in a certain
determinate manner the essence of Grod, in so far as he is
considered as an extended thing. (See Pt. L, Prop. xxy.

Coroll.)

n. Iconsiderasbelongingto the essence of a thing that,
^hich being given, the thing is necessarily given also, and,
which being removed, the thing is necessanlj removed also ;
in other words, that without which the thing, and which
itself without the thing, can neither be nor be conceived.

m. Bj idea, I mean the mental conception which is
formed bj the mind as a thinking thing.

Ea^lcmation, — ^I saj conception rather than perception,
because the word perception seems to imply that the mind
is passive in respect to the object; whereas conception
seems to express an activity of the mind.

rV. By a/n adequate idea, I mean an idea which, in so far
as it is considered in itself, without relation to the object,
has all the properties or intrinsic marks of a true idea.

Eitplanation, — ^I say intrinsic, in order to exclude that
mark which is extrinsic, namely, the agreement between the
idoa and its object (ideatvm),

v. Duration is the indefimte continuance of existing.

Eixplanation, — ^I say indefinite, becouse it cannot be deter-


r


OF THE NATUEE AKD OEIOIN OF THE UIND. 83


I


■rained through the esiatence itself of the exiating thing, or
by its efficient cauee, which neceasarily gives the existence
of the thing, but does not take it away.

TL Eeality and petfeetion I DB.e as eynonymons tenns.

Vli. Sj particular tkitigg, I mean things which are finite
and have a oonditioned enatence ; but if aeTeral individual
things concur in one action, bo as to be all simultaneously

e eEEect of one cause, I consider them all, so far, as one
icular thing.

Axioms.

1. The essence of man does not involve necessary eiis-

ice, that is, it may, in the order of nature, come to pass

lat this or that man does or does not exist.

TT Man thinks.

m. Modea of thinVing, such as love, desire, or any other
of the passions, do not take pla«e, unless there be in the
same individual an idea of the thing loved, desired, &a.
But the idea can exist without the presence of any other
mode of thinking.

IV. We perceive that a certain, body is affected in many
■ways.

V. We feel and perceive no particular things, save bodies
and modes of thought.

N.B. The postulaies wre given after the conclusion of
Prop. xiii.

PKOPOsmoira.

Pbop. I. Thought is an iMrihute of Ood, or Qod ie a ihinh-
■ingUMg.

Proof. — Particular thoughts, or this or that thought, are
modes which, in a certain conditioned manner, express the
natmre of God (Pt. i.. Prop. xxv„ Coroll.). God therefore
possesses the attribute (Pt. L, Def . v.) of which the concept
IS involved in all particular thoughts, which latter are con-
ceived thereby. Thought, therefore, is one of the infinite ■
attributes of God, which express God's eternal and infinite
essence (Pt, i., Def. vi.}. In other words, God is a thinking
thing. Q.E.D.

Note. — This proposition is also evident from the fact, that
we ure able to conceive an infinite thinking being. For, in


84 THE ETBICa.

proportion as a thiaVing teing is conceived a
more thoughts, bo is it conceiTed aa containiiig more r
or perfection. Therefore a being, which can think b
finite number of things in an infinite number of ways, i
necessarily, in respect of thinking, infinite. As, therefore,
from the consideration of tliought alone we conceive an in-
finite being, thought is neoessarily (Pt, i., DeS. iv. and viL
one of the infinite attributes of God, as we wr ■" ' '
of showing.

Pbop, n. Extension is an. atlnbuie of God, or God is a
extended iking.

Proo/.— The proof of this proposition is similar to t!
of the last.

Pbop. m. In Ood there is necessarily the idea not only q
his essence, hut also of all things which neceesa/rilt/ foUot
from, his essence.

Proof.— God. (by the first Prop, of this Part) c
an infinite number of thiaga in infinite ways, or (what ii
the same thing, by Prop. i"vi., Part i.) can form the idea of
hia essence, and of all things which necessarily follow there-
from. Now all that is in the power of God necessarily is.
(Pt. !., Prop. xxxT.) Therefore, such an idea as we a
sidering necessarily is, and in G^d alone. Q.E.D. (Part L
Prop. IV.)

Note. — The multitude understand by the power o
the free will of God, and the right over all things thi
exist, which latter are accordingly generally considered i
contingent. For it is said that God has the power to d
stroy all things, and to reduce them to nothing, Fnrthe
the power of God is very often likened to the power o
kings. But this doctrine wo have refuted (Pt. i.. Prop. Tsiii,,
Corolla, i. and ii.), and we have shown (Part i.. Prop, xvi)
that God acts by the same necessity, as that by which he
understands himself ; in other words, as it follows from
the necessity of the divine nature (as all admit), that God
understands himself, so aJso does it follow by the Bam»
necessity, that God performs i nfini te acts in infinite ways.
We further showed (Parti., Prop, isxiv.), that God's power
is identical with God's essence in action ; therefore it is as
impossible for us to conceive God as not acting, as to con-
ceive him as non-existent. If we might pursue the snbjocb ■


OF THE NATUEB AKD


or THE MIND.


es


farther, I could point out, that tlie power wliiuli is com-
monly attributed to God is not only human (as showing
(hat God is conceived by the multitude aa a man, or in the
likeness of a man), but involves a. negation of power. How-
ever, I am unwilling to go over the same ground so often.
I would only beg the reader again and again, to turn over
frequently in his mind what I Lave said in Part i. from
Prop. xvi. to the end. No one will he able to follow my
meamHg, unless he is scrupulously careful not to confound
the power of God with the human power and right of
tings.

Piop. IV. The idea of Ood, from which an infinite nwm-
ber of thingg follow in ivfinite ways, can only be one.

Proof. — Infinite intellect comprehends nothing save the
attrihutes of God and his modificationB (Part i., I^p. xxx.).
Now God is one (Part i., Prop, siv., CoroU.). Therefore the
idea of God, wheref rom an infinite number of things follow
in infinite ways, can only be one. Q.E.D.

Pbop. V. T}ie actual beivg of ideas ovmt Qod at Hi cause,
only in to far as he is considered as a thinking thiTig, not in
to far as he ie unfolded in any »th$r attr^vte; tk^ is, the
ideas both of the attributes of God and of particular things do
not own as their efficient cause their Ejects (ideata) or tha
tk/ings perceived, but Qod himself in so fa/r as he is a ihinJang
Bang.

Proof. — This proposition is evident from Prop. iii. of this
Fart. We there drew the conclusion, that God can form the
idea of his essence, and of all things which follow neces-
sarily therefrom, solely because he is a thinking thing, and
not because he is the object of his own idea. Wherefore
the actual being of ideas owns for cause God, in so far as
lia is a thinlring thing. It may be differently proved as
follows : the actual being of ideas is (obviously) a mode of
thought, that is (Part i., Prop. xxv„ CorolL) a mode which
expresses in a certain manner the nature of God, in so far
as he is a thinking thing, and therefore (Part i.. Prop, x.)
involves the conception of no other attribute of God, and
consequently (by Part i.. As. iv.) is not the efEect of any
attribute save thought. Therefore the actual being of
ideas owns God as its cause, in so far as he is considered aa
» thi nltip g thing, &c. Q.E.D.


THE ETH1C8.


[PAKT


Prop. VT. The modes of any given attrSmte are cauted
God, in so far at he it eontidered through the attribute
which they a/re modes, and not in so far as he is co7isiderat\
through amy other attriitute.

Proof. — Each attribato is conceived througli itself, ■with-
out any other (Part i., Prop, s.) ; wherefore the modes of
each attribnte involve the conception o£ that attribute, but,
not of any other. Thus (Part i., As. iv.) they are
by God, only in ao far aa he is considered through
attrihutfi whose modes they are, and not in so far as he
considered through any other. Q.E.D.

CoroUary. — Hence the actual being of things, which
not modes of thought, does not follow from the dii
nature, because that nature has prior knowledge of
things. Things represented in ideas follow, and are derivf
from their particular attribute, in the same manner, and
with the same necessity as ideas follow (according to what
we have shown) from the attribute of thought.

Pkop, VII. The order and connection of ideas is the
as the order and connection of things.

Proof. — This proposition ia evident from Part i., Ai. ii
For the idea of everything that ia caused depends on
knowledge of the cause, whereof it is an effect.

Corollary. — Hence God's power of thinking is equal
his realized power of action — that is, whatsoever folic
from the infinite nature of God in the world of estenHioWj
(^formaHier), follows without exception in the .
and connection from the idea of God in the world of thougW
(objective').

Note. — Before going any further, I wiah to recall to
what has been pointed out above — namely, that whatsoe''
can be perceived by the i nfini te intellect as constituting (
essence of substance, belongs altogether only to one sul
stance : consequently, substance thinking and substam
extended are one and the same substance, comprehendeil
now through one attribute, now through the other. S
also, a mode of eitension and the idea of that mode are O!
and the same thing, though eipressed in two ways,
truth seems to have been dunly recognized by those Jewswhf
maintained that God, God'e intellect, and the things undei
stood liy God are identical. For instance, a circle ensl'


1


OF THE NATTBB AND OSIOIN OF THE HIND. 87

in nature, and the idea of a circle eziBting. wMch is also in
God, are one and the eame thing displayed through diffe-
a-ent attributes. Thus, whether we conceive nature under
the attribute of extension, or under the attribute o£ thought,
or under any other attribute, we shall find the same order,
or one and the same chain of causes — that is, the same
things following in either case.

I said that God is the cause of an idea — for instance, of
the idea of a circle, — in so far as he is a thinking thing ;
and of a circle, in so far as he is an extended thing, simply
because the actual being of the idea of a circle can only be
perceived as a proximate cause through another mode of
thinking, and that ^ain through another, and so on to
infinity ; so that, so long as we consider things as modes of
thinking, we must explain the order of the whole of natiire,

: the whole chain of causes, through the attribute of
thought only. And, in so far as we consider things as
modes of extension, we must explain the order of the whole
of nature through the attribute of extension only ; and so
on, in the case of other attributes. Wherefore of things
iS they are in themselvea God is really the cause, inasmudi
s he consists of infinite attributes. I cannot for the present
explain r ay m eaning more clearly.

Peop. VJ-LL. The ideas of particular tkiiigs, or of modes, that
do not exid, must he comprehended in the infinite idea of Qod,
tn the game way as the formal essences of particular things or
nodes are contained in Ike oMrOmteg of God.

Proof. — This proposition is evident from the last ; it is
nnderstood more clearly from the preceding note.

CoroUfvry. — Hence, so long as particular things do not
jOdst, except in so far as they are comprehended in the
attributes of God, their representations in thought or ideas
' » not exist, except in so far as the infinite idea of God
■"Bidats ; and when particular things are said to exist, not
.<Hjyin so far as they are involved in the attributes of God,
iut also in so far as they are said to continue, their ideas
irill also involve existence, through which they ai'e said to
eontinue.

Note. — If anyone desires an example to throw more light
on this question, I shall, I fear, not be atle to give him any,
''which adequately explains the thing of which I here speak.


1


88 THE ETHICS. [PAET

inaHmuch as it is unique ; however, I will entleavoar t
illustrate it as fs.r as possible. The nature of a circle il
such that if any number of straight linea intersect withuvf
it, the rectangles formed by their segments will be equal to
one another ; thus, infinite equal rectangles are contained
in a circle. Yet none of "these rectangles can be said to
exist, except in so far aa the circle exists ; nor can the idea
of any of these roctangles he said to exist, except in so far m,
they are comprehended in the idea of the circle. Iiet vi
grant that, from this infinite number of rectangles, two onl^
exist. The idena of these two not only exist, in so far a*
they are contained in the idea of the circle, but also as the^
involve the existence of those rectangles ; wherefore they artf
distinguished from the remaining ideas of the remain!^
rectangles.

Fbop. IX. The idea of a-n mdtvidiial thing aetually ea
tni; is caused by Qod, not in to far aa heia infinUe, but u
far OB ieia conaidered aa affected by another idea of a thi^
actually existing, of vihich he ia the eauae, in go far aa heiM,
affected by a third idea, and so on to infinity.

Froof. — The idea of an individuaJ thing actnally eristrng
is an individual mode of thinking, and is difltinct from
other modes (by the Corollary and Note to Prop. viiL ot
this part) ; thus (by Prop. vi. of this part) it is caused lay
God, in BO far only as he is a thinking thing. But not (ay:
Prop, xxviii. of Fart i.) in so far as he is a thing t- hinVi ng
absolutely, only in so far as he ia considered as affected by
another mode of thinking ; and he ia the cause of this latter),
aa being affected by a third, and so on to infinity. NoWj
the order and connection of ideas ia (by Prop, vii. of thij
book) the same as the order and connection of causes
Therefore of a given individual idea another individuft
idea, or God, in so far as he is considered aa modified 1
that idea, is the cause ; and of this second idea G!od ia tl
cauae, in so far as he is affected by another idea, and so <
to infinity. Q.KD.

Corollary. — Whatsoever takes place in the individuai
object of any idea, the knowledge thereof is in God, in 80
far only as he has the idea, of the object.

Proof. — Whatsoever takes place in the object of any idel^-,
its idea is in God (by Prop. iii. of this part), not in so f»


IIH he is infinite, 'but in ed far aa he is considered aa
bfiected hj another idea o£ an individual thing (by the
bet Prop.) ; but (by Prop. vii. of this part) the order and
coimection of ideas is the same as the order and connection
of things. The knowledge, therefore, of that which takes
place in any individual object will be in God, in eo far only
as he has the idea of that object. Q.E.D.
^M Pbop. 5. The beijig of substance does not appertain to the
^bssmcs of man — in other words, substance does not coTiMitute
^ml^ actual heiiui^ of man .

^r Proof. — The being of substance involves necessary exist-
ence (Part i,. Prop. vii.). If, therefore, the being of sub-
stance appertains to the essence of man, substance being
granted, man would necessarily be granted also (II. Def . ii.),
and, consequently, man would necessarily exist, "which is
abanrd (II. Ax. i.). Therefore, &c. Q.E.D.

Note. — This proposition may also be proved from I. v.,
in which it is shown that there cannot be two substances
of the same nature ; for as there may be many men, the
being of substance is not that which constitutes the actual
being of man. Again, the proposition is evident from the
other properties of substance — namely, that substance is in
its nature infinite, immutable, indivisible, &c., as anyone
may see for himself.

Corollary. — -Hence it follows, that the essence of man is
constituted by certain modifications of the attributes of
■^od. For (by the last Prop.) the being of substance does
lot belong to the essence of man. That essence therefore
[by i. 15) is something which is in God, and which without
plod can neither be nor be conceived, whether it be a mo-
■ificatdon (i. 25 Coroll), or a mode which expreaaes God's
tature in a certain conditioned manner.

—Everyone must surely admit, that nothing can be
"or be conceived without God. All men agree that God is
the one and onl y cau s e of all things, bot h of their essence and
of tbpir p-ria>aiin a^ thnt. ig, God is not only the cause of
things in respect to their being made (secundum fieri), but
also in respect to their being (secTrndum esse).

At the same time many assert, that that, without which a

thing cannot be nor be conceived, belongs to the essence of

_jBlRt thing ; wherefore they believe that either the nature


or THK NATUKC ASD OfilOIK OF THE UIND.


89


90


IHB ETHICS.


of God appertains to the essence of creftted things, or
that created things can be or be conceited without God ;
else, as is more probably the case, they hold
doctrines. I think the cause for such confusion is mainly,
that they do not keep to the proper order of philosophic
thinking. The nature of God, which should be reflected
on first, inasmuch aa it is prior both in the order of knowh
and the order of nature, they have token to be last in
order of knowledge, and have put into the first place y
they call the objects of sensation ; hence, while they are
sidering natural phenomena, they give no attention at
to the divine nature, and, when afterwards they ap]
their mind to the study of the divine nature, they are
unable to bear in miud the first hypotheses, with wl
they have overlaid the knowledge of natural phenomt
inasmuch as such hypotheses are no help towards undc
standing the Divine nature. So that it is hardly to "
dered at, that these persons contradict themselves freely.

However, I pass over this point. My intention here was
only to give a. reason for not saying, that that, without
which a tiling cannot be or be conceived, belongs to the
essence of that thing : individual things cannot be or be
conceived without God, yet God does not appertain to
their essence. I said that "I considered as belonging to
the essence of a thing that, which being given, the thing is
necessarily given also, and which being removed, the thing-
is necesBarily removed also; or that without which the
thing, and which itself without the thing can neither bo
nor be conceived." (U, I>ef. ii.)

Pkop. XI. The first element, which eonttihiies ike actual
being of the human mind, ie the idea of tome particular thing
actually eating.

Froof. — The essence of man (by the CoroU, of the last
Prop.) is constituted by certain modes of the attributes of
God, namely (by II. Ax. ii.), by the modes of thinking, of
all which (by II. Ax. iii.) the idea is prior in nature, and,
when the idea is given, th« other modes (namely, those of
which the idea is prior in nature) must be in the same in-
dividual (by the same Axiom). Therefore an idea is the
first element constituting the human mind. But not the


idea of a


ii-esistent thing, for then (II. viii. CoroU.) the


r


OP THE NATUEE AND OBICIN OF THE MIND. 91

idea itself cannot be said to exist ; it must therefore "be tie-
idea of something actually esetiog. But not of an iiifimt&
thing. For an infinite thing (I. xxi., szii.), must always,
necessarily enrt ; this would (by II. Ax. i.) involve an ab-
Burdity. Therefore the first element, which constitutes th&
actual being of the hamaa mind, is the idea of something
actually existing. Q.E.D.

CoroUary. — Hence it follows, that the human mind is part
of the infinite intellect of God ; thus when we say, that the
human mind perceives this or that, we make the assertion,
that God has this or that idea, not in so far aa he is infinite^
but in 80 far as he is displayed through the nature of the
human mind, or in so far as he constitutes the essence of
the human mind ; and when we say that God has this or that
idea, not only in so far as he constitutes the essence of the
human mind, but also in so far as he, simultaneously with
the human mind, has the further idea of another thing,
we assert that the human mind perceives a thing in part or
inadequately.

Note. — Here, I doubt not, readers will come to a stand,
and will call to mind many things which will cause them
to hesitate; I therefore beg them to aecompany me slowly,
step by step, and not to pronounce on mj statements, tUl
they hav e rea d to the end.

Pbop. XII Whatsoever comes to pass in the object of the
idea, which constitittei the hviman mind, rn'ost be perceived htf
the haman mind, or there wiU neceeaarHy be an idea in tlw
hvman mind of the said occurrence. That is, if the object of
ike idea conatUviiny tlie human m-ind be a body, nothing can
take place in that body withvtU being perceived by the mind.

Proof. — Whatsoever comes to pass in the object of any
idea, the knowledge thereof is necessarily in God {U. ix.
Ooroll.), in so far as he is considered as affected by the-
idea of the said object, that is (H. xi.), in so far a^ he con-
stitutes the mind of anything. Therefore, whatsoever takes
place in the object constituting the idea of the humaa
mind, the knowledge thereof is necessarily in God, in so far
as he constitutes the nature of the human mind ; that is
(by n. xi. Coroll.) the knowledge of the said thing will
larily be in the mind, in other words the miud per-
it.


^^pjyes it


uvJM


92 THU ETHICS. [p

Note. — This proiwsition is also evident, and ii
clearly to l>e understood from II. vii., which Bee.

Peop. Xm, The object of the idea eonstituling the hui
mind is the body, in other ■w&rde a, certain mode of exteiteion
which actually exidt, and nothing ehe.

Proof. — If indeed the body were not tlie object of the
human mind, the ideas of the modifications of the body
■would not be in God (IL ix. Coroll.) in virtue of Ma con-
stituting onr mind, but in virtue of Ms constituting the
mind of something else ; that is (H. xi. Coroll.) the ideas of
the modifications of the body would not be in our mind : now
^yll. Ax. iv.)wedopoBseBatheideas of the modifications of
"the body. ITierefore the object of the idea, conatitutiag
the human mind ia the body, and the body as it actually
eriata (II. si.). Further, if there were any other object of
the idea constituting the mind beaidea body, then, aa
nothing can exist from which some effect does not follow
(1. xxxvi.) there would neceaaarily have to be in our mind
an idea, wMch would be the effect of that other object (IL
xi.) ; but (n. Ax. T.) there is no such idea. Wherefore the
object of our mind is the body as it esista, and notMng
else. Q.E.D.

Note. — ^We thus comprehend, not only that the human
mind is united to the body, but alao the nature of the
union between mind and body. However, no one will be
able to graap tMs adequately or distinctly, unleaa he first
has adequate knowledge of the nature of our body. The
propositions we have advanced Mtherto have been entirely
genera], applying not more to men than to other indivi-
dual things, all of which, though in different degrees, are
animated.' For of everytMng there is neceaaarily an idea
in God, of which God ia the cause, in the same way as
there is an idea of the human body ; thua whatever we
have asserted of the idea of the human body must neces-
sarily also be asserted of the idea of everything else. Still,
on the other hand, we cannot deny that ideas, like objects,
differ one from the other, one being more excellent than
another and containing more reality, just aa the object of
one idea is more excellent than the object of another idea,
and contains more reahty.

"Wherefore, in order to determine, wherein the human


r THE NATCBE AXD OBIGUT OF THE MIXD. 93

toind differs from other things, and wherein it surpasBes
Stem, it ia ne<%ssai7 for as to know the nature of its object,
2iat is, of the human body. What this nature ia, I am not
Me here to explain, nor is it neeessary for the proof of
irhat I advance, that I should do bo. I will only say geiae-
rally, that in proportion aa any given body is more fitted
ihan others for doing many actions or receiving many im-
preagionB at once, so also is the mind, of which it is the ob-
ect, more fitted than others for forming many simnltaneona
perceptions ; and the more the actions of one body depend
on itself alone, and the fewer other bodies concur with it
>-in action, the more fitted is tba mind of which it is the
I object for distinct comprehension. We may thus recogniKO
the superiority of one mind over others, and may further
Ke the cause, why we have only a, very confused knowledge
of our body, and also many kindred questions, which I wUl,
in the following propositions, deduce from what has been
advanced. Wherefore I have thought it worth while to ex-
. plain and prove more strictly my present statementa. In
crder to do bo, I must premise a few propositions concem-

g the nature of bodies.

Aziou I. All bodies are either in motion or at rest.

Axiom II. Every body is moved sometimes more slowly,
lometimes more quickly.

JjEmu. L Bodies are dittinguixhed frmn one another in re-
^ect of motion and reat, quicknees and elowneeg, and not in
reject of substance.

Proof. — The first part of this proposition is. I take it,
Belf-evulent. That bodies are not distinguiBhod in respect
of Hubatance, is plain both from I. v. and I. viii. It is
brought out atill more clearly from I. iv., note.

Lemka H. All bodies agree in certain respects.

Proof. — All bodies agree in the fact, that they involve the
^«onception of one and the same attribute (11., Def. i.).
Further, in the fact that they may be moved less or more
quickly, and may be absolutely in motion or at rest.

Leuma ' 1 1 A body in tnotion or at rest mitst be deler-
Wtirud to molvm or rest by another body, which other body ha»
(een determined to motion or rest hy a third body, and that
tkird again by a fourth, and so on. to infinity.

Proof. — Bodies are individual things (it, Def. i.), which


■94 THE ETHICS. [piET


respoH


(Lemma I.) are distinguislied one from the otber in reap
to motion and rest ; thu& (I. nriii.) each muet neeeBsai .,
be determined to motion or rest by another iadivid ai
thing, namelv (II. -vi.), hy another body, which other body
ie alBO (As. i.) in motion or at rest. And this body again
can only have been set in motion or caused to rest by being
determined by a third body to motion or rest This third
body again by a fourth, and bo on to infinity. Q.E.D.

Corollary. — Hence it follows, that a body in motion keeps
in motion, imtil it is determined to a state of rest by some
other body; and a body at rest remains so, until it isdetei
mined to a state of motion by some other body. This j
indeed self-evident. For when I suppose, for instai
that a given body, a, is at rest, and do not take into c
sideration other bodies in motion, I cannot affirm anythi
concerning the body A., except that it is at rest. If it afti
wards comes to pass that a is in motion, this cannot hav
resulted from its having been at rest, for no other consa _
quence could have been involved than its remaining at rest.
'is, on the other hand, a be g^ven in motion, %ve shall, so
long as we only consider a, be unable to affirm anything
concerning it, except that it is in motion. If a is subse-
quently found to be at rest, tins rest cannot be the result
of a's previous motion, for such motion can only have led
to continued motion ; the state of rest therefore must have
resulted from something, which was not in a, namely, from
an eitemal cause determining a to a state of rest.

Axiom I. — All modes, wherein one body is affected by
■ another body, follow simultaneously from the nature of the
body afEected and the body affecting ; so that one and the
same body may be moved in different modes, according to
the difference in the nature of the bodies moving it ; on the
other hand, different boilies may be moved in different
modes by one and the same body.

A:domII. — When a body in motion impinges on another
body at rest, which it is unable to move, it recoils, in order
to continue its motion, and the angle made by the line of
motion in the recoil and the plane of the body at rest,
whereon the moving body has impinged, will be equal to
the angle formed by the tine of motion of incidence and
the same plane.


r


! NATUBB AND OKICIN Or THE MIKD.


95


Bo far we have been speaking- only of the most siinple
\>odieB, which are only distinguished one from the other by
motion and rest, quickneaa and BlowaeBB. We now pass on
to compound bodies.

JOejinititm. — When any given bodies of the same or dif-
ferent magnitude are compelled hj other bodies to remain
in contact, or if they be moved at the same or different
Tates of speed, so that their mutual movements should pre-
serve among themselves a certain fixed relation, we say that
auch bodies are in union, and that together they compose
•oas body or individual, which is distingniahed from other
bodies by this fact of union.

Aseiom III. — In proportion as the parts of an individual,
•or a compound body, are in contact over a greater or leas
«uperficieB, they will with greater or less difficulty admit of
beang moved from their position; consequently the in-
■dividual will, with greater or less difficulty, be brought to
assume another form. Those bodies, whose parts are in
«ontaiCt over large superficies, are called hard; those, whose
parts are in contact over small anperflcies, are called goft;
those, whose parts are in motion among one another, are
«alled j7ui(J.

Leuma rV. Jf from a body or individual, compounded of
Mveral bodiee, certain bodies be separated, and if, at the game
Unte, an equal nvmher of other boAies of the tame nature take
iheir place, the indwidwd will preseroe its naiwe as before,
without awy change in iis aetualHy {forma).

Proof. — Bodies (Lemma i.) are not distinguished in re-
spect of substance: that which constitutes the actuality
^formam) of an individual consists (by the last Dof.) in a,
union of bodies ; but this union, although there ia a con-
tinual change of bodies, will (by our hypothesia) be main-
iained ; (be individual, therefore, will retain its nature as
before, both in respect of subatance and in respect of mode.
Q.E.D.

Xemma V, If the parts composing an individual become
^eater or lees, but in such proportion, that they all preeerve
ihe game mutual relations of motion and rest, the individual
vHU still preeerve Us original nature, and Us aciuaUty will
not he changed.

Proof. — The same as for the last Lemma.


THE ETHICS. [p.


1


Leuila. VI. If ttriain bodies composing an individual he
compelled to change the m.otion, which ikey have in one direc-
tion, for motion in another direction, but in mich a man-
ner, that they be able to contin-ue their motions and their
mutual comitnunication in the same rekUions as before, the
individual wiU retain its own nature without any change of
Us actuality.

Proof. — -This proposition ia self-evident, for the in-
dividual is supposed to retain all tbat, which., in its defini-
tion, we spoke of aa its actual being,

Lechha VlX. Furthemwre, the individual thus eomfoeed
preserves its nature, whether itbe, aaa whole, in motion or at
rest, whether it be moved in this or that direction ; so long as
each part reioiins its motion, andpreserves its eommanieation
with other parts as before.

Proof. — This propoaition is evident from the defioition of
an individual prefixed to Lemma, iv.

Note. — We thus see, how a composite individual may 'be
affected in many different ways, and preserve its nature
notwithstanding. Thus far we have conceived an indi-
vidual as composed ot" bodies only distingniBhed one from
the other in respect of motion and rest, speed and slowness ;
that is, of bodies of the moat simple character. If, how-
ever, we now conceive another individual composed of
several individuals of diverse natures, we ahall find that
the number of ways in which it can be affected, without
losing its nature, will be greatly multiphed. Each of its
parts would consist of several bodies, and therefore (by
Lemma vi.) each part would admit, without change to its
nature, of quicker or slower motion, and would conse-
quently be able to transmit its motions more quickly or
more slowly to the remaining parts. If we further con-
ceive a third kind of individuals composed of individuals
of this second kind, we ahall find that they may be affected
in a still greater number of ways without changing their
actuality. We may easily proceed thus to infinity, and
conceive the whole of nature aa one individual, whose parts,
that ia, all bodies, vary ia infinite ways, witho\it any change
in the individual as a whole. I should feel bound to ex-
plain and demonstrate this point at more length, if I were
writing a special treatise on body. But I have already said


D OBKinj OF THE MIND, 97

(bat Buch ia not my object, I have only touched on the
KueBtioii, because it enablea me to prove easily that -which I
Eave in view.

POSTITLATES.

. L The human body is composed of a number of indivi-
%ual parts, of diverse nature, each one of which ia in itself
^eitremely complex,

n. Of the individual parts composing the human body
some are fluid, eome soft, some hard.

nL The individual parts composii^ the human body,
md consequently the human body itself, are affected in a
rariety of ways by external bodies.

IV. The human body stands in need for its preservation
t a number of other bodies, by which it is continually, so
!ak, regenerated.

"When the fluid part of the human body is deter-
led by an external body to impinge often on another
»ft part, it changes the surfaro of the latter, and, as it
were, leaves the impreeaion thereupon of the esternal body
which impels it.

YL The human body can move external bodies, and
arrange them in a variety of ways.

pBOP. iiV. The humion viind U capable of perceiviTig a
great nv/mher of ihinge, and it so 4n proportion as its hodij is
fio^dble of receiving a great number of impressions.

Froof. — The human body (by Post, iii, and vi.) ia af-
very many ways by external bodies, and ia capable
very many waya of affecting external bodies. But
'^X lii.) the human mind must perceive all that takes
place in the human body ; the human mind is, therefore,
capable of perceiving a great number of things, and ia bo in
proportion, &c. Q.E.D.

Pbop. XV. Tlie idea, which conMitutes ike actual being of
h/uman mind, is not simple, but compounded of a great
of ideas.
Froof. — The idea constituting' the actual being of the
human naind ia the idea of the body (H, liii.), which
(Post.i.) ia composed of a great number of complex indivi-
dual parts. But there ia necessarily in Glod the idea of
individual part whereof the body is composed (IL idiL


BlEect)

■^ 1

■OL
plac
caps

I propu.

^PBt
! Ai.
Pro


98 THE ETHICS. [PABT It

Coroll.) ; therefore (11. Tii), the idea of the human body j
composed of these numerous ideas of its component j
Q.KD.

Peop, XVL The idea of every mode, in which ihe h
body ia affected by external bodies, must .involve the notiHvfl
the human body, and also the nature of the external body, r

Proof. — AU the modes, in which any given body is aCectei
follow from the nature of the body affected, and alao from
the nature of the affecting body (by As. i., after the CorolL
of I^emma iii.), wherefore their idea also neeesBarily (by
I. Ai. iv.) involves the nature of both bodies ; therefore, the
idea of every mode, in which the human body is affected by
external bodies, involves tlie nature of the human body and
of the external body. Q.E.D.

Corollary I. — Hence it follows, first, that the hum
mind perceives the nature of a variety of bodies, togetl
with the nature of its own.

Corollary II. — It follows, secondly, that the ideas, '
we have of external bodies, indicate rather the oonstitutifll
of our own body than the nature of external bodies. I han
amply illustrated this in the Appendix to Part I. '

Prop. SVH. If the hv/man body m affected in a mannef
which involves the natwre of any external body, the hv/man
mind vnll regard the said eiiernal body as aclvally existing,
or as present to itself, until the human body he affected in
such a wwy, as to exclude the existence or the presence of ths
said external body.

Proof. — This proposition ia self-evident, for so long as
the human body continues to be thus affected, so long will
the human mind (EE. lii.} regard this modification of the
body — that is (by the last Prop.), it will have the idea of
the mode as actually existing, and this idea involves the
nature of the external body. In other words, it will have
the idea which does not exclude, but postulates the exis-
tence or presence of the nature of the external body ; there-
fore the mind (by H. svi., Coroil. i.) will regard the
external body as actually existing, until it is affected, &c.
Q.KI>.

Corollary. — The mind is able to regard as present exter-
nal bodies, by which the human body has once been affected,
even though they be no longer in existence or present.


r OF THE NATtTEE AND OBISIN OF THE MISD. 99

Proof. — Wlien external bodies determine the fluid part8
of tLe human body, ho that they often impinge on the
softer parts, they change the 6arfa«e of the last named
(Post. T.) ; hence (As. ii., after CoroU, of Lemma iii.) they
are refracted therefrom in a different manner from that
which they foUowed before such change ; and, further,
vhen afterwards they impinge on the new surfaces by their
own spontaneous morement, they will be refracted in the
same manner, as though they had been impelled towards
those surfaces by external bodies ; consequently, they will,
while they continue to be thus refracted, affect the human
Trod^ in the same manner, whereof the mind (IL lii.) will
again take cognizance — that is (II. xvii.), the mind will
again regard the external body aa present, and will do so,
as often as the fluid parts of the human body impinge on
the aforesaid surfaces by their own spontaneous motion.
Wherefore, although the external bodies, by which the
human body has once been affected, be no longer in
eadatence, the mind will nevertheless regard them as present,
as often as this action of the body is repeated. Q.E.D.

Note. — We thus see how it comeB about, as is often the
case, that we regard as present things which are not. It is
possible that the same result may be brought about by
other causes ; but I think it suffices for me here to have
indicated one possible explanation, just as well as if I had.
pointed out the true cause. Indeed, I do not think I axa
▼ery far from the truth, for all my assumptions are based
on postulates, which rest, almost without exception, on ex-
pea:ionce, that cannot be controverted by those who have
shown, as we have, that the human body, aa we feel it,

ists (CoroU. after IL xiii.), Furthermore (H. vii. Coroll..

' ivi. CorolL ii.), we clearly understand what is the diffe-
ice between the idea, say, of Peter, which constitutes the
essence of Peter's mind, and the idea of the said Peter,
which is in another man, say, Paul. The former directly
answers to the essence of Peter's own body, and only im-
plies existence so long as Peter exists ; the latter indicates
rather the disposition of Paul's body than the nature of
Peter, and, therefore, while this disposition of Paul's body
lasts, Paul's mind will regard Peter as present to itself,
though he no longer exists. Further, to retain the


lies in
draw
r Ilea,

of

I


100 THE ETHIC9, [PAET

usual phraseology, the modificatiouB of the humaa body,^
■which the ideas represent external bodiea as present to H"
we will call the images of things, though thej do not rea
the fi^re of things. When the mind regards bodies ii
this fashion, we say that it imagines. I will here dra'w
attention to the fact, in order to indicat-e where error lies,
that the imaginations of the mind, looked at in themselTM
do not contain error. The mind does not err in the mM"
act of imagining, but only in so far as it is regarded t
being without the idea, which excludes the exastence of b-
things as it imagines to be present to it. If the m
while imagining non-existent things as present to it, ii
the same time conscious that thej do not really exist, this
power of imagination must be set down to the efficacy of
its nature, and not to a fault, especially if this faculty <3^
imagination depend solely on its own nature — that |
(I. Def. vii.), if this faculty of imagination be free. 1

Peop, XVlU. If the human body hoe once been affected ft_
two or more bodies at the same time, when the mind ajier-
wards imaginet any of them., it vnll straightway remember the
others aho.

Proof. — The mind (II. svii. Coroll.) imagines any given
body, because the human body is affected and disposed by
the impressions from an external body, in the same manner
as it is affected when certain of its parts are acted on by
the said externa! body; but (by our hypothesis) the body
was then so disposed, that the mind imagined two bodies at
once ; therefore, it will also in the second case imagine two
bodies at once, and the mind, when it imagines one, will
straightway remember the other. Q.E.D.

Note. — We now clearly see what Memory ia. It is simply
& certain association of iAsaa inyolving the nature of things
outside the human body, which association arises in the
mind according to the order and association of the modifi-
cations {affeetionee) of the human body. I say, first, it is
an asBociation of those ideas only, which invoice the nature
of things outside the human body : not of ideas which
answer to the nature of the said things : ideas of the modi-
fications of the human body are, strictly speaking (II. ivi.),
those which involve the nature both of the human body
and of external bodies. I say, secondly, that tliis associa-


tcSU OBIOIK or THE MIND. 101

tdonnxiaeB according to-tlie-iinlerand association of the
tnodificationB of the humaii '^•ij-.jn order to distinguish it
from that association of idea?,' tirhieh arises from the order
of the intellect, whereby the min-d poireeiTeB things through
their primary causes, and which iff.is 4J1 m.en the same.
An d hence we can further clearly understand, why the
mind from the thought of one thing, aho-ild straightway
arrive at the thought of another thing, which has no sinu-
laxity with the first ; for instance, from the thought of the
wordpomum (an apple), a Koman would straightw*,* arrive
at the thoi^ht of the fruit applo, which has no similitude
with the articulate Bouud in c[uestion, nor anything 'in
GOmmon with it, except that the 1jody of the man has often
been afEected hy these two things ; that ia, that the man
has often heard the word pomwm., while he was looking at
the fmit ; similarly every man will go on from one thoaght
to another, according as his habit has ordered the images
of things in his body. For a soldier, for instance, when he
sees the tracks of a horse in sand, will at once pass from
the thought of a horse to the thought of a horseman, and
thence to the thought of war, Ac. ; while a coimtryman
will proceed from the thought of a horse to the thought of
a plough, a field, Ac. Thus every man will follow this or
that train of thought, according aa he has been in the
habit of conjoining and associating the mental images of
things in this or that manner.

Fbop. XIX. The human mind has no knowledge of the
hody, and doet not know it to emsi, eave through the ideas of
the modijieatione whereby Ike hody is affected.

Proo/.~The human mind is the very idea or knowledge
of the human body (H. xiii.), which (II. is.) is in God, in
80 far aa he is regarded as affected by another idea of a
particular thing actually existing : or, inasmuch aa (Post.
ir.) the human body stands in need of very many bodies
whereby it is, as it were, continually regenerated ; and the
order and connection of ideas ia the same as the order
and connection of causes (II. vii.) ; thia idea will therefore
be in God, in so far as he is [regarded as affected by the
ideas of very many particuLir things. Thus God has the
idea of the human body, or knows the human body, in so
■^Ibt as he is affected by very many other ideas, and not in


102 THE bthigSk [pjlbt ii»

.• - :

• * "■ V

to

so far as he constitutes the 'paa^tilre of the human mind ;
that is (by IL xi. Coroll.)fc14\jB'tomian mind does not know
the human body. Bi\t*4^ ideas of the modifications of
body are in God, in /tewfaf^as he constitutes the nature of
the human mind, fft^Hxb human mind perceives those modi-
fications (n. jdit)', ;aind consequently (IL xvi.) the human
body itselij^ancL.als actually existing; therefore the mind
perceive^ tlftis far only the human body. Q,E,D.

PsQ^.lEX*.' The idea or knowledge of the hwman mind is

aUo^Ufif^df following in Ood in the scume manner, a/nd hein^

vffeHed to Ood in the earns mam/ner, as the idea or knowledge

.'• of/ihe hmnan body.

^ '/'\\'Proof — Thought is an attribute of Qtod (IE. i.); there*

*••, 'fore (II. iii.) there must necessarily be in God the ides

both of thought itself and of all its modifications, conse

quently also of the human mind (II. xi.). Further, thi»

idea or knowledge of the mind does not follow from God,.

in so far as he is infinite, but in so far as he is affected by

another idea of an individual thing (IL ix.). But (IL vii.)

the order and connection of ideas is the same as the order

and connection of causes ; therefore this idea or knowledge-

of the mind is in God and is referred to God, in the same

manner as the idea or knowledge of the body. Q.JE.D,

Pbop. XXL This idea of the mind is wnited to the mind
in the same way as the mind is tmited to the body.

Proof — That the mind is united to the body we have
shown from the fact, that the body is the object of the mind
(n. xii. and xiii.) ; and so for the same reason the idea of the
mind must be united with its object, that is, with the mind
in the same manner as the mind is united to the body. Q,E,D .

Note. — ^This proposition is comprehended much more
clearly from what we said in the note to IL vii. We there
showed that the idea of body and body, that is, mind and
body (IL xiii.), are one and the same individual conceived
now under the attribute of thought, now imder the attri-
bute of extension ; wherefore the idea of the mind and the
mind itself are one and the same thing, which is conceived
under one and the same attribute, namely, thought. The
idea of the mind, I repeat, and the mind itself are in God
by the same necessity and follow from him from the same
power of thinking. Strictly speaking, the idea of the mind»


r


1 OEIGIN OP THE I


that is, the idea of an idea, is nothing but the distinctive
quality (forma) of the idea in ao far aa it is conceived aa
a mode of thought without reference to the ohject ; if a
T" ftn knows anytiiing, he, by tha:t very fact, knows that he
knows it, and at the same time knows that he knows that
he knows it, and so on to infinity. But I will treat of this
hereafte r.

Pbop. jQtU. The human mind perceives not only the modl-
fieatioKB of the body, but also the ideas of such raodifiaationg.

Proof. — The ideas of the ideas of modifications follow in
Qod in the same manner, and are referred to Qod in the
aame manner, as the ideas of the said modifications. This
IB proved in the same way as IL ss. But the ideas of the
TOodificfltionB of the body are in the human mind (IL xii.),
that is, in God, in ao far aa he conatitutes the essence of the
human mind ; therefore the ideas of these ideas will be in
Gk>d, in so for as he has the knowledge or idea of the
human mind, that is {H. xxi.), they will be in the human
mind itself, which therefore perceives not only the modi-
fications of the body, but also the ideas of such modifica-
tions. Q,.E.B.

Peop. XXIII , The mind does iioi know iiaelf, exeept in so
Jar a» it perceives the ideas of the inodificaiions of the body.

Proof. — The idea or knowledge of the mind (It. si.)
follows in God in the same manuer, and is referred to God
ia the same manner, as the idea or knowledge of the body.
Sat since (H. xis.) the human mind does not know the
human body itseK, that ia (11. xi. Coroll.), since the know-
ledge of the human body is not referred to God, in so far
88 he constitutes the nature of the human mind ; therefore,
neither ia the knowledge of the mind referred to God, in so
&T as he conatitutes the essence of the human mind;
tiaerefore (by the same Coroll. H. xi.), the human mind
thnB far has no knowledge of itself. Further the ideas of
the modificationa, whereby the body is afEected, involve the
nature of the human body itself (11. xvi.), that is (H. xiii.),
they agree with the nature of the mind ; wherefore the
knowledge of these ideas necessaJily involves iotowledge of
the mind ; but (by the last Prop.) the knowledge of these
ideas is in the human mind itself ; wherefore the human
mind thus far only has knowledge of itself. Q.E.B.


102 THE ETHICB.

BO far aa he constitutes the jia.tHre of the hunian i
that IB (by XL. xi. Coroll.), I^e huDUm mind does not kno^

the humaa body. Bi^t tie tdesM of the modifications <

"body are in Ood, in fi& far'a's he constitutes the nature of
the hiimanmind, a; ih{^ human mind perceives those modi-
fications (H. xii>^, -dad coQsecjuently (H. svi.) the human
body itseli^ an^.a's actatilly existing; therefore the mind,
perceive^ thtts far only the human body. Q.E.D,

PbqA,^S^' The idea or knowledge of the Auman mind ii
alaa^^ifiid, following in God in the same manner, and &
v^efvp'il to God in the tame -manner, as the idea or knowUt
■. (jfiffte human hody.
-.'■.•Proo/.— Thought is aa attribute of God (XL i.) ; thera
■fore (II. iii.) there must necessarily be in Glod the i"
both of thought itself and of aU its modifications, conae '
quently also of the human mind (IL si.). Further, this
idea or knowledge of the nnind does not follow from Qod,
in so far as he is infinite, bnt in so far as he is affected hy
another idea of an individual thing (11. is.), But (IX TiLJ
the order and connection of ideas is the same as the order
and eonnGction of eauaea ; therefore this idea or knowledge-
of the mind is in Qod and is referred to God, in the same
manner as the idea or knowledge of the body. Q.E.B.

Prop. XXI. Thia idea of the m,ind is iinited to ihe mini
in the same way as the mind is united to the body.

Proof. — That the mind is nnitfid to the body we haTe
shoivn from the fact, that the body is the object of the mind
(n.sii. andsiii.) ; and so for the same reason the idea of the
mind must be united with its object, that is, with the mind
in the aamemannerasthemindis united to the body. Q.E.D.

J/"ofe.— This proposition is comprehended much more
clearly from what we said in the note to II. vii. We there
showed that the idea of body and body, that is, mind and
body (IL jdii.), are one and the same individual conceived
now under the attribute of thought, now under the attri-
bute of extension ; wherefore the idea of the mind and the
mind itself are one and the same thing, which is conceived
under one and the some attribute, namelv, thought. The
idea of the mind, I repeat, and the mind itself are in God
by the same necessity and follow from him from the same
power of thinking. Strictly speaking, the idea of the mind.


r


r THE MIND.


that is, th.e idea of an idea, is uotbing but the diitinctive
quality {forma) of the idea, in go far as it is conceived as
a mode of thought without reference to the object ; if a
man knows anything, he, by tha-t very fa«t, knows that he
^owa it, and at the same time knows that he kno\T3 that
he knows it, and so on to infinity. But I will treat of this
hereafte r.

Pbop. X xll The human mind perceives not only the wodi-
ficationa of the body, hut also the ideat of such Tnodificatione.

Proof. — The ideas of the ideaa of modifications follow in
Glod in the same manner, and are referred to God in the
same manner, as the ideas of the said modifications. This
is proved in the same way as U. ss. But the ideas of the
modifications of the body are in the humaji mind (IL sii.),
that ia, in God, in so far as he constitutes the essence of the
hmnan mind ; therefore the idea-a of these ideas wil! be in
Orod, in so far aa he has the knowledge or idea of the
human mind, that is (H. xsi.), they will be in the human
mind itself, which therefore perceives not only the modi-
fications of the body, but also the ideas of such modifica-
tionfl. Q. E..P.

pBOP. y X III . The mind doee Tust hnow iieelf, except in to
far as it perceives the ideas of the modifications of the body.

Proof. — The idea or knowledge of the mind (II. si.)
follows in God in the same majiner, and is referred to God
in the same manner, as the idea or knowledge of the body.
But since (II. xii.) the human mind does not know the
Lnman body itself, that is (II. si. CoroU.), since the know-
ledge of the human body is not referred to God, in so far
as he constitutes the nature of the human mind ; therefore,
neither ia the knowledge of the mind referred to God, in bo
far as he constitutes the essence of the human mind ;
therefore (by the same Coroll. H. li.), the human mind
thus far has no knowledge of itself. Further the ideaa of
the modifications, whereby the body is affected, involve the
nature of the human body itself (11. xvi.), that is (11. siii.),
they agree with the nature of the mind; wherefore the
knowledge of these ideas necessarily involves knowle<lge of
the mind ; bat (by the last Prop.) the knowledge of these
ideas ia in the human mind itself ; wherefore the human
loind thuB far only has knowledge of itself. Q.E.D.


104 Tn£ ETHICB.

Pbop, . XXI V — The human mind doet not invobje
adequate htunoledge of the parte composing the human hoc

Proof. — The parts composing the human body do
lielong to the essence of that bodj, except in so far as th^
commimicat© their motions to one another in a certain
Used relation (Def. after Lemma iii). not in bo far aa they
can be regarded as individuals Tpithout relation to the
human body. The parts of the human body are highly
complex individuals (Post, i.), whose parts (Xemma '
can be separated from the human body without
way destroying the nature and distinctive quality of
latter, and they can communicate their motions (Ai.
after Lemma iii.) to other bodies in another relatii
therefore (IL iii.) the idea or knowledge of each part
be in God, inasmuch (U. ix.) as he is regarded as affE
by another idea of a particular thing, which particular
thing is prior in the order of nature to the aforesaid part
(IL vii.). We may afBrm the same thing of each part of
each individual composing the human body ; therefore, the
knowledge of each part composing the human body is in
God, in so far aa he is affected by yery many ideas of
things, and not in so far as he has the idea of the human
body only, io other words, the idea which constitutes the
nature of the human mind (11. xiii.) ; therefore (11. li.
Coroll.). the human mind does not involve an adequate
knowled ge of t he human body, Q.JS.JO,

Pbop, XXV. The idea- of each modification of the
body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the &dt

Proof. — "We have shown that the idea of a modification
of the human body involves the nature of an external
body, in so far as that external body conditions the human
body in a given manner. But, in so far aa the external
body is an individual, which has no reference to the human
body, the knowledge or idea thereof ia in God (II. ix.), in
80 far as God ia regarded as affected by the idea of a
further thing, which (II. vii.) ia naturally prior to the
Eaid external body. Wherefore an adequate knowledge of
the external body is not in God, in so far as he has the
idea of the modification of the human body ; in other words,
the idea of the modification of the humaji body does ni


T THE NATUBB JlSH OKIOIN OF TBE 1


105


IlnTolve an adequate knowledge of the external body.
Paop. SSVI. The human mind dots nol perceive any ex-
iemal body m cKtvally existing, except through the ideas of
the •modifieatione of its own body.

Proof. — ^I£ the hvunan body is in no way affected by a
given external body, then (IL yii.) neither is the idea of
the hiiman body, in other words, the human mind, affected
in any way by the idea of the eiiatence of the said external
"body, nor does it any manner perceive its existence. But,
in BO far as the human body is affected in any way by a
given external body, thus far (II. xvi. and CoroU.) it per-
ceives that external body. Q.E.H.

Corollary. — In so far aa the human mind imagines an
external body, it has not an adec|ua,te knowledge thereof.

Proof— When the human mind regards external bodies
through the ideas of the modifications of its own body, we
aay that it imagines (see II, ivii. note) ; now the mind can
oiJy imagine external bodies as actually existing. There-
fore (by IL xxT.), in so far as the mind imagines external
bodies, it h as not an adequate knowledge of them. Q-KD.
Pbop. "yx VII 17(6 idea of each madijicalion of the human
hody does not involve an adequate knowledge of the hvman
hody itself.

Proof. —Every idea of a modification of the human body

. involves the nature of the human body, in so far as the

Lihvunan body is regarded as affected in a given manner

■l^IL xvi.). But, inasmuch as the human body ia an indi-

fe'Tidual which may be affected in many other ways, the

a of the said modification, Ac. Q.E.D.

Peop. XiVLU- 37(6 ideas 0/ the modifications of thn

ijiv/man body, in to far as they have reference only to iks

Ind, are not clear and distinct, bid confuted.

Proof. — The ideas of the modifications of the human

3dj involve the nature both of the human body and of

temal bodies (11. xvi.) ; they must involve the nature

I not only of the human body but also of its parts ; for the

modifications are modes (Post, iii.), whereby the parts of

the human body, and, consequently, the human body as a

whole are affected. But (by IT. xxiv., xsv.) the adequate

I ^Dwledge of external bodies, els also of the parts com-


1


108 THE ETHICS. [PAET

qnate idea of their duration (by the last Prop.), and this is
what we nmst underBtand by the contingency and perish-
ablenesB of things. (I. xxxiii., Kote i.) For (I. sxix.), ex-
cept in this sense, nothing is contingent.

Paop. YTTH AU ideag, in so far as they are referred to
God, are true.

Proof. — All ideas wloich are in God agree in every re.^
spect with their objects (11. rii. CoroU.}, therefore C
Ax. vi.) th ey are a ll true. Q,.E.B.

Pkop. XX XIII. There ia nothing positive in ideae, wkieS\
iMUses thetn to be called false.

Proof. — If this be denied, conceiTe, if poHsible, a positive
mode of thinking, which should constitute the distinctiTe
quality of falsehood. Such a mode of thinting cannot be
in God (n. xsxii.) ; external to God it cannot be or be con-j~
ceived (I. iv.). Therefore there is nothing positive inidea
which causes them to be called false. Q.E.D.

Peop. XXXIV. Every idea, which in us is absolute c
adequate and perfect, is true.

Proof. — When we say that an idea in us is adequate and
perfect, we say, in other words (11. xi, CorolL), that the idea
is adequate and perfect in God, in so far as he constitutes. ■
the essence of our mind ; consequently (JI. xxxii.), we si
that such an idea is true. Q.E.D.

Pkop. x x x V. Falsity consists in the privation of ftnow- j
ledge, which inadeqwite, fragmentary, or confused ideOM
involve.

Proof. — There ia nothing positive in ideas, which causea
them ti3 be called false (H. xxxiii) ; but falsity cannot con-
sist in simple privation (for minds, not bodies, are said to
err and to be mistaken), neither can it consist in absolute
ignorance, for ignorance and error are not identical ; where-
fore it consists in the privation of knowledge, which inade- -
quate, fragmentary, or confused ideas involve. Q.E.D.

Note. — In the note to IL srii. I explained how error o
fiiats in the privation of knowledge, but in order to thr
more hght on the subject I will give an example. For ii
.stance, men are mistaken in thinking themselves free^
their opinion is made up of consciousness of their owaf
actions, and ignorance of the causes by which they aian
43onditioned. Their idea of freedom, therefore, is simplw


"H

'kieS^

>tbe

COQ-^H

ideai^l

te of^V

tnd
iea I

itea.^H


? THE NATURE AND OETOIN ot THE MISD.


Illieir ignorance of anj cause for their actions. Ab for their
iSayiog that humaji actions depend on the will, this is a
mere plira§e without any idea to correspond thereto. What
the will ia, and how it movea the body, they none of them
know ; those who boast of such knowledge, and feign dwell-
ings and habitations for the soul, are wont to provoke either
laughter or diagust. So, again, when we look at the ann,
we imagine that it is distant from us about two hundred
feet ; this error does not lie solely in this fancy, but in the
, fact that, while we thus imagine, we do not know the sun's
K true distance or the cause of the fancy. For although we
^L^afterwards learn, that the sun ia distant from us more than
^■'■ix hundred of the earth's diameters, we none the less shall
^B fancy it to be near ; for we do not imagine the sun as near
^B-UB, because we are ignorant of its true distance, but because
^H the modification of our body inTolvos the essence of the sun,
^K in so far as our said body is affected thereby.
^1 Pbop. yx X VI, Inadequate and cotifused ideas folloiD hij
^B fAe same neeessity, as adequate or clear and distinct ideas.
^B Proof. — ^All ideas are in God (I. xv.), and in so far as
^fithey are referred to God are true (11. xsxii.) and (II. vii.
~ ■ Coroll.) adequate ; therefore there are no ideas confused or
inadequate, except in respect to a particular niind (cf. H.
xiiv, and sxviii.) ; therefore all ideas, whether adequate or
inadequate, follow b y the same necessity (11. vi.). Q.E.D.
Pbop. SJiAVli. That which is common to all (cf,
Jjewma II. above), and which is equally in a part and in the
whole, does not constitute the essence of any particular thing,
Proof. — If this be denied, conceive, if possible, that it
[ constitutes the essence of some particular thing ; for in-
■e, the essence of b. Then (11. Def. ii.) it cannot with-
B out B either exist or be conceived ; but this is against our
I hypothesis. Therefore it does not appertain to n's essence,
VBor does it constitute the essence of any particular thing.

I Q.E.D.

[ Pbop. "XXX yrrT. Those things, which are common to all,
I a/nd which are equally in a part and in the whole, cannot he
xneeived except adequately.
Proof. — Let a be something, which is common to all
I Ijodies, and which ia equally present in the part of any
I given body and in the whole. I say a cannot be conceived


110 THE ETHICB. [pABT ^

«icept adequately. For the idea thereof in Godwin neces-
eajrily he adequate (II. viL Coroll.), both in so far as God
has the idea of the human body, and also in ao far as he
has the idea of the modifications of the human body, which
(II. xvi„ XXV., xrvii.) involve in part the nature of the
human body and the nature of external bodies ; that is
(IL xii., xiii, ) . the idea in God wiU neceeearily be adequate,
Ijoth iu eo far aa he constitutes the human mind, and in so
far as he has the ideaa, which are in the human mind.
Therefore the mind (IL xi. Coroll.) necessarily perceives a
adequately, and has this adequate perception, both in so
far as it perceives itself, and in ao far aa it perceives its own
or any external body, nor can a be conceived in any other
manner. Q.E.D.

OomUaTy. — Hence it follows that there are certain ideas
or notions common to all men; for (by Lemma ii.) all
bodies agree in certain respecta, which (by the foregoing
Prop.) must he adequately or clearly and distinctly per-
ceived b y all.

Pkop. XXXIX. That, whiek is cowiTnon to and a property
of the human, hody and euch other iodies aa are wont to affect
the human body, atid which, ie present egually in eachpcai eft
either, or in the whole, will be r^resented by am adequatt
in the mind.

Proof. — If A be that, which ia common to and a propel
of the human body and external bodies, and equally present
in the human body and in the said external bodies, in each
part of each external body and in the whole, there will be
an adequate idea of a in God (II. vii. Coroll.), both in aofar
as he has the idea of the human body, and in ao far aa he
has the ideaa of the given external bodiea. Let it now be
granted, that the human body ia affected by an estemal
body through that, which it haa in common therewith,
namely, a ; the idea of this modification will involve the
property a (IE. xvi.), and therefore (II. vii. CoroU.) the
idea of thia modification, in bo far as it involvea the pro-
perty A. will be adequate in God, in so far aa God ia affected
by the idea of the human body ; that is (XT. xiii.), in so far
as he conatitTites the nature of the human mind ; therefore
(II. xi. Coroll.) this idea is also adequate in the hamui
mind. Q.E.D. "


OF THE NATPKE AND ORIGIN OF THE MISD. Ill


I Corollary. — Hence it follows that the mind is fitted to
perceive adequately more thinga, in proportion as its body
^B more in cammon witli other bodies.
Peop. XL, WhaUoevfr ideaa in the mind follow from
ideas lekich are therein adequate, are aho tkemeelves
adequate.
Froof. — This proposition is self-evident. For when we
say that an idea in the human mind follows from ideas
which are therein adequate, we say, in other words (IL xL
CorolL), that an idea is in the divine intellect, whereof God
is the cause, not in so far as he is infinite, nor in so far as
he is affected by the ideas of very many particular things,
"but only in so far as he constitutes the easeooe of the
Jmman mind.

»Note I. — 1 have thus set forth, the cause of those notions,
wMch are common to all men, and which form the basis of
our ratiocination. But there are other causes of certain
axioms or notions, which it would be to the purpose to set
forth by this method of ours ; for it would thus appear what
notions are more uaeftil than others, and what notions
Lave Bcarcely any use at all. Furthennore, we should aee
what notions are common to all men, and what notions are
only clear and distinct to those who are unshackled by
prejudice, and we should detect those which are ill-founded.
Again we should discern whence the notions called secon-
dary derived their origin, and consequently the axioms
on which they are founded, and other points of interest
connected with these questions. But I have decided to
pass over the subject here, partly because I have set it
aside for another treatise, partly because I am afraid of
wearying the reader by too great prolixity. Hevertheless,
in order not to omit anything necessary to be known, I
will briefly set down the causes, whence are derived the
terms styled trangcejideTilai, such as Being, Thing, Some-
thing. These terms arose from the fact, that the human
body, being limited, la only capable of distinctly forming a
. certain number of images (what an image is I explained in
LIL xvii. note) within itself at the same time; if this
l&umber be exceeded, the images will begin to be confnsed;
I if thiR number of images, which the body is capable of
lorming distinctly within itself , be largely exceeded, all will


lX ^^I


112 THE ETHICa. [P\BX

become entirely confused one with another. This being bo,
it is evident (from II, Prop. xvii. Corotl. and sviii.) that
the human mind can dietinctly imt^ine as manj tbinga
simidtaneoTisly, Eis its body can form images simultaneoush'.
When the images become quite confused in the body, the
mind also imagines all bodies confuBedly without any dis-
tinction, and will comprehend them, as it were, under one
attribute, namely, under the attribute of Being, Thing, <fec.
The same conclusion can be drawn from the fact that
images are not always equally vivid, and from other ana-
](^ou8 canaes, which there is no need to explain here ; for
the purpose which we have in riew it is sufficient for ua to
consider one only. AH may he reduced to this, that these
terms represent ideas in the highest degree confused.
From similar causes arise those notions, which we call
general, such as man, horse, dog, &c. They arise, to wit,
from the fact that so many images, for instance, of men,
axe formed simultaneously in the hiiman mind, that the
powers of imagination break down, not indeed utterly, but
to the extent of the mind losing count of small differencea
between individuals (e.g. colour, size, &c.) and their defi-
nite number, and only distinctly ima^ning that, in which
all the individuals, in so far as the body is affected by
them, agree ; for that ia the point, in which each of the
said individuals chiefly affected the body ; this the mind
expresses by the name man, and this it predicates of an
infinite number of particular individuals. For, as we have
said, it ia unable to imagine the definite number of indivi-
duals. We must, however, bear iu mind, that these general
notions are not formed fay all men in the same way, but
vary in each individual according as the point varies,
whereby the body has been most often affected and which
the mind most easily imagines or remembers. For instance,
those who have most often regarded with admiration the
stature of man, will by tie name of man understand an
animal of erect stature ; those who have been accustomed
to regard some other attribute, will form a different general
image of man, for instance, that man is a laughing animal,
a two-footed animal without feathers, a ratioual animal,
and thus, in other cases, everyone will form general
images of things according to the habit of liis body.


f THE KATUEE iSD OKIOIM OF THE MINP. 113

_ It is thus not t« be wondered at, that amoi^ philosophers,
Bwho seek to explain things in na.tnre merely by the images
^formed of them, bo many controversies ahoiild have

Note IT. — From all that has been said above it is clear,
e, in many cases, perceive and form our general no-
tions: — (1.) From particular things represented to our in-
illect ftagraentarily, confusedly, and without order through
r senses (IL xxiz. Coroll.) ; I have settled to call such
septions by the name of knowledge from the mere sug-
sstiona of experience.' (2.) Prom symbols, e.g., from the
it of having read or heard certain words we remember
gs and form certain ideas cO'nceming them, similar to
e through which we imagine things (II, iviii, note). I
' shall call both these ways of regarding things knowledge
of the first kind, opinion, or imaginalion. (3.) From the
fact that we have notions common to all men, and adequate
ideas of the properties of things (H. xxrviii. Coroll., sxxix.
and Coroll. and xl.) ; this I call reason and knowledge of the
second kind. Besides these two kinds of knowledge, there
is, aa I will hereafter show, a third kind of knowledge,
_ 'which we will call intuition. This kind of knowledge pro-
ida from an adequate idea of the absolute essence of
■ L attributes of God. to the adequate knowledge of
e essence of things. I wiU illustrate all three kinds of
aiowledge by a single example. Three numbers are given
EoT finding a fourth, which shall be to the third as the
'h to the first. Tradesmen without hesitatiou mul-
^ply the second by the third, and divide the product by
■ the first ; either because they have not foigotten the rule
which they received from a master without any proof, or
because they have often made trial of it with simple num-
bers, or by virtue of the proof of the nineteenth proposition
of the seventh book of Euchd, namely, in virtue of the
general property of proportionala.

Bat with very simple numbers there is no need of this.

i'or instance, one, two, three, being given, everyone can

EjBee that the fourth proportional is six ; and this is much

BSearer, because we iifer the fourth number from an in-

H ' A Baconian plirose. Not. Org. Apt. 100. [Pollock, p, 126, b.]


114


TBE ETHIC B.


[PAKT r.


tuitive grasping of the ratio, vhlch tlie first bears to
Becond.

Pkop. XLI. Knowledge of the first Idnd is the only
of falsity, knowledge of the second and third hinds is Tiei
sarUy true.

Proof. — To knowledg^e of the first kind we have {in
foregoing note) assigned aU those ideas, which are ini
quate and confused ; therefore this kind oE knowledgt
the only source of falsity (H, sxxv.). Furthermore, we
assigned to the second and third kinds of knowledge those
ideas which are adequate; therefore these kinds
sarily true (H. hsIt.)- Q.E.D.

Pbop. "XTiTT . Knowledge of the secoTid and third Icint
not knowledge of the first kind, teaches -ua to distinguish
true from, the false.

Proof — This proposition is self-evideut. He, whoknoi
how to distinguish between true and false, mu
adequate idea of true and false. That is (II. xl., note iL___
he must kTiow the true and the false by the second or*
third kind of knowledge.

Pbop. XLIU, He, who has a (rue idea, nmultatieornhf
Tcnowe tliat he has a true idea, and cannot doubt of the truth ^.
the thing perceived.

Proof,- — A true idea in us is an idea which is adequal
in God, in so far as he is displayed through the nature <
the human mind (TL xi. CoroLI.), Iiet ns suppose that'
there is in God, in so far as he is displayed through the
human mind, an adequate idea, a. The idea of this idea
must also necessarily be in Gfod, and be referred to him in
the same way as the idea a (by n. xi., whereof the pn
is of universal application) . But the idea a is supposed
be referred to God, in so far as he is displayed through ('
human mind ; therefore, the idea of the idea A must
referred to God in the same manner ; that ia (by 11.
Coroll.), the adequate idea of the idea a will be in themin(
which has the adequate idea A ; therefore he, who has
adequate idea or knows a thing truly (II. xxxiv.), must
the same time have an adequate idea or true knowledge o£ .
his knowledge; that is, obviously, he must be assured.,'
Q.KD.

Note. — I explained in the note to II. ssi. what is meant


la*"


Ilty tlie idea of an idea ; but -we may remfirt that the £ore-
^ing proposition ifl.in itself suffieiently plain. No one,
*rho has a true idea, is ignorant that a true idea involves
Uie highest certainty. For to have a true idea is only
another expression for knowing a. thing perfectly, or as well
ax possible. No one, indeed, can doubt o£ tliis, unless he
thinks that an idea ia something lifeless, like a picture on
a panel, and not a mode of thinking — namely, the very act
of understanding. And who, I ask, can know that he
imderatands anything, iinleES he do first understand it ?
In other words, who can know that he is sure of a thing,
unless he be first sure of tbat thing? Further, ■what can
there be more clear, and more certain, than a true idea as
a standard of truth ? Even as light displays both itscK and

t darkness, so is truth a standard both of itself and of falsity.
I think I have thus sufficiently answered these ques-
tions — namely, if a true idea is distinguished from a false
idea, only in so far as it is said to agree with its object, a
true idea has no more reahty or perfection than a false idea
(aince the two are only distinguiahed by an estrinaic mark) ;
oonsequentlj, neither will a man who has true ideas have
any advantage over him who has only false ideas. Further,
how comes it that men have false ideas ? Lastly, how can
anyone be sure, that he has ideas which agree with their
objects ? These questions, I repeat, I have, in my opinion,
Buffieiently answered. The difference between a true idea
md a false idea is plain : from what was said in XL sxxv.,
Qie former is related to the latter aa being is to not'being.
1 causes of falsity I have set forth very clearly in
[. lii, and n. xixv. with the note. From what is there
bated, the difference between a. man who has true ideas,
a man who has only false ideas, is made apparent. As
Ffor the last question — as to how a man can be sure tbat he
has ideas that agree with their oTijects, I have just pointed
out, with abundant clearness, that his knowledge arises from
the simple fact, that he has an idea which corresponds with
its object — in other words, that truth is its own standard.
We may add that our mind, in so far as it perceives things
truly, is part of the infinite intellect of God (II. si. Coroll.) ;
therefore, the clear and distinct ideas of the mind are aa
. secesBarily true as the ideas of God.


lltt THE ETHIC8.

Peop. XUV, It ie not in the nature of reason
thingg as contingent, hut ag neceseary.

Froof.—lt ia in the nature of reason to jwrceive tl
truly (11. sli.), namely (I. is. vi.), as they are in them-
selvea^ — that is (L isis.), cot as contingent, l>ut aa necesBarj.
Q.KD.

CoroUary J,— Hence it followB. that it is only throngli
OUT imagination that we consider things, whether in res ' '
to the future or the past, as contingent.

Note. — How this way of looking at things arises, I
briefly explain. We have shown above (IX ivii,
CorolL) tlmt the mind always regards things as present
itself, even though they be not in existence, until somi
causes arise which esclude their existence and preaencei|
Further (H. rviii.), we showed that, if the human bodyhaS
once been affected by two external bodies simultaneously,
the mind, when it afterwards imagines one of the said ex-
ternal bodies, will straightway remember the other — that
is, it will regard both as present to itself, unless there arise:
causes which exclude their existence and presence, Purther,'
no one doubts that we imagine time, from the fact that we
imagine bodies to be moved some more slowly than othera,<
some more qiuckly, some at equal speed. Thus, let na
suppose that a child yesterday saw Peter for the first time
in the morning, Paul at noon, and Simon in the evenintri
then, that to-day he again sees Peter in the morning,
evident, from II. Prop, xviii., that, as soon as he se
morning light, he will imagine that the sun will travi
the same parts of the sky, aa it did when he saw it on
preceding day ; in other words, he will imagine a compli
day, and, together with his imagination of the morning,
will imagine Peter ; with noon, he will imagine Paul
with pvuning, ho wiU imagine Simon — that is, ht
imagine the existence of Faul and Simon in relation to t^
future time ; on the other hand, if he sees Simon in thfrj
evening, he will refer Peter and Paul to a past time, by;'
imagining them simultaneously with the imagination of &
past tim,e. If it should at any time happen, that on some
other evening the child should see James instead of Simon,
he will, on the following morning, associate with his
imagination of evening sometimes Simon, sometimek.i


oac

risei^B
lerjH

sra,.^


F THE UATtJEE AiJD ORIOIK OF THE «lin>. 117

^TameB, not totli together: for the child is etipposed to
"" en, at evening, one or other of them, not both to-

gether. His imagination will therefore waver j and, with
he itnagiiiation of future evenings, he will associate £ret
me, then the other — that is, he will imagine them in the
tituie, neither of them as certain, but both as contingent,
'" "a wavering of the imagination will be the same, if the
maginatdon be concerned with things which we thus con-
template, standing in relation to time past or time present :
consequently, we may im^ine things as contingent, whether
tbtsy be referred to time present, past, or future.

UoroUary II. — It is in the nature of reason to perceive
fhingB under a certain form of eternity (eub quddam
mUrwiatia specie).

Proof. — It is in the nature of reason to regard things,
not as contingent, but as necessary (XL iHv,), Keoson
jiereeives this necessity of things (TI. xli.) truly — that is
I. Ax. vi.), as it ia in itself. But (L ivi,) this necessity of
jthings is the very necessity of the eternal nature of God ;
'^iierefore, it is in the nature of reason to regard things
' under this form of eternity. We may add that the baaea
of reason are the notions (H. ssxviii.), which answer to
'things common to all, and which (II. uxvii.) do not answer
to the essence of any particular thing : which must there-
^re he conceived without any relation to time, under a
certain form of eternity.

Peop. XLV. Every idea of every iody, or of every par-
HrMlar thing actually existing, necessanly involves the eternal
and infinite essence of Ood.

Proof. — The idea of a particular thing actually existing
ItecesBarily involves 1x)th the existence and the essence of
" e Baid thing (H. viii.). How particular things cannot be
tonceived without God (L xv.) ; but, inasmuch as (H. vi)
3iCT have Gi^d for their cause, in so far as be is r^arded
inder the attribute of which the things in question are
piodes, their ideas must necessarily involve (I. Ai. iv.) the
^ionception of the attribute of those ideas — that is (I, vi.),
the eternal and infinite essence of God. Q.E.D.

Note. — By existence I do not here mean duration— that
Ib, existence in so far as it is conceived abstractedly, and as
L certain form of quantity. I am speaking of the very


1


115 THE ETHICS, [PAKT

nstture of existence, wMcli is assigned to particular tilings,
because they follow in infinite numbers and in infinite wayB
from the eternal necessity of God'a nature (I. xvi.), I am
speaking, I repeat, of the very existence of particular thingB,
in BO far as they are in God. For although each particular
thing be conditioned by another particular thing to esist in
a given way, yet the force whereby each particular thii^
perserereB in existing follows from the eternal necessity of
God's nature fcf. I. sxiv, Coroll.)-

Phop. XLVI. The knowledge of {ht eternal and infinite
egsence 0/ God which every idea, involoea is adec[uate and
peTfeci.

Proof. — The proof of tlie last proposition is universal ;
and whether a thing be considered as a, part or a whole, ih©
idea thereof, whether of the whole or of a part (by the last
Prop.), wUl involve God's eternal and infinite essence.
Wherefore, that, which gires tnowledge of the eternal and
infinite essence of God, is common to all, and is equally ia._
the part and in the whole ; therefore (II. xxiyiii.) 1' "
knowledge will be adequate. Q.E.D.

Pkop. XT iV 1 1. The human mind Jias an adequate I
ledge of the eternal and infinite eeeence of Qod.

Proof. — The human mind has ideas (TL. xiii.), from whit^
(H. xdii.) it perceives itseli and its own body (II. xii.) a
external bodies (II. xvi. CoroU. I. and n. xvii,) as actua
existing ; therefore (IT. slv. xlvi.) it has an adequaM
tnowledge of the eternal and infinite eseence of C "
Q.KD.

Note. — Hence we see, that the infinite essence and thfrl
eternity of God are known to all, Now as all things ar©
in Grod, and are conceived through God, we can from this
knowledge infer many things, which we may adequately
know, and we may form that third kind of knowledge (yE._
which we spoke in the note to II. xl., and of the exce"
lence and use of which we shall have occasion to apeak i
Part V. Men have not so clear a knowledge of C ""
they have of general notions, because they are unable
imagine God as they do bodies, and also because they hi
associated the name GiDd vdth images of things that tl
are in the habit of seeii^, as indeed they can hardly avoi
doing, being, as they are, men, and continually afEected li


OF THE NATTBB AND ORIOIX Or THE MISD. 119

Kteraal bodies. Many errors, in truth, can be trawd to
is head, namely, that we do not apply names to things
brightly. For instance, when a, man says that the lines
drftwn from the centre of a circle to its eiremnference are
not eq|nal, he then, at all events, assuredly attaches &
meaning to the -word circle different from that assigned by
Brnthematicians, So again, when men make mistakes in
»,lcnlation, they have one set of figures in their mind, and
Uiother on the paper. If we could see into their minds,
Uiey do not make a mistake ; they seem to do so, because
We think, that thoy ha.vo the same numbers in their mind
as they haye on the paper. If this were not so, we should
not believe them to be in error, any more than I thought
■jhat a man was in error, whom I lately heard exclaiming
Jhat hia entrance hall had flown into a neighbour's hen,

Bor Ma meaning seemed to me sufficiently clear. Very
^^ aany controversies have arisen from the fact, that men do
not rightly explain their meaning, or do not rightly inter-
Ciet the meaning of others. For, as a matter of fact, as
they flatly contradict themselves, they assume now one
aide, now another, of the argument, so as to oppose the
opinions, which they consider mistaken and absunl in their
.opponents.

Pkop. "yr. v IN, In the ^tid there is no abgoliife orjree
wiU: but the mind is determined to wish this or that ly a
Vause, which hoe also 6ee« determined hy another came, and
piit UiM hy another cause, and so on to injiniti/.

Proof. — The mind is a fixed and definite mode of thought
(EL li,), therefore it cannot be the free cause of its actions

■I, xrii. Coroll. ii.) ; in other words, it cannot have an abao-
ute faculty of positive or negative volition ; but (by I.
nviii.) it must be determined by a cause, which has also
been determined by another cause, and this last by another,
to. Q.i:.D.

Note. — In the same way it is proved, that there is in the
tnind no absolute faculty of understanding, desiring, loving,
ifcc. Whence it follows, that these and similar facidtiea are
either entirely fictitious, or are merely abstract or general
terms, such as we are accustomed to put together from
mrticnlar things. Thus the intellect and the will stand
ame relation to this or that idea, or this or that


THE ETHICS,


[fart tf^M


120


volition, as " lapidity " to tliia or tliat Btone, or
to Peter and Paul. The cause which leads men to con-
Bider themselves free has "been set forth in the Appendix
to Part I. Bat, Iiefore I proceed further, I would hero
remark that, by the will to affirm and decide, I meaa
the faculty, not the desire. I mean, I repeat, the faculty,
whereby the mind affirms or denies what is true or faUi
not the desire, wherewith the mind wishes for or
away from any given thing. After
these faculties of ours are general notions, which
be distinguished from the particulaj- instajiceB on whii
they are haaed, we must inquire whether volitions them-
selves are anything besides the ideas of things. We must
inquire, I say, whether there is in the mind any affiir-
mation or negation beyond that, which the idea, i
as it ia an idea, involves. On which subject
following proposition, and H. Def. iii., lest the idea
pictures should suggest itself. For by ideas I do not mi
images such as are formed at the back of the eye, or in
midst of the brain, but the conceptiouB of thought.

Peop. YTiTT . There is in the mind no volition or a^\
tion and negation, save that which an idea, inasm/uch
an idea, involves.

Proo/,— There is in the mind no absolute faculty of
positive or negative volition, but only particular volitions,
namely, this or that affirmation, and this or that negatit
Wow let UB conceive a particular volition, namely, the
of thinking whereby the mind affirms, that the three interit
angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles,
affirmation involves the conception or idea of a triangl
that is, without the idea of a triangle it cannot be cm
ceived.' It is the same thing to say, that the concept
m.uBt involve the concept B, as it is to say, tha,t A cannot '
conceived without b. Further, this affiiination cannot
made (XL Ax. iii.) without the idea of a triangle. Thei
fore, this affirmation can neither be nor be conceivf
withoiit the idea of a triangle. Again, this idea of
triangle must involve this same affirmation, namely, tl
its three interior angles are eqiial to two right angl
"Wherefore, and vice versa, this idea of a triangh
neither be nor be conceived without this affirmation, thei


op 1


! HATHKE AND ORIOtS Or THE MINI


1-21


^re, tliis affirmation belongs to tbe csseace of the idea
£ a triangle, and is nothing besides. What we have said
f this ToUtion (inaemuch as we have selected it at random)
"may be said o£ any other volition, namely, that it is nothing
tut an idea. Q.E.D.

Corollary. — Will and understanding are one and the
same.

Proof. — Will and underatanding are nothing beyond the
individual volitions and ideas (H. ilviii. and note). But a
particular vohtion and a particnlar idea are one and the
same (by the foregoing Prop.) ; therefore, will aod under-
Btanding are one and the same. Q.E.D.

Jfate. — ^We have thus removed the cause wliich ia com-
monly aaaigned for error. For we have shown above, that
falsi^ conaists solely in the privation of knowledge in-
Tolved in ideas which are fragmentary and confused.
Wherefore, a false idea, inasmuch as it is false, does not
uiTolve certainty. When we say, then, that a man acqui-
esces in what is false, and that he has no doubts on the
subject, we do not say that he ia certain, but only that he
does not doubt, or that he acquiesces in what ia false, inas-
m.ach as there are no reasons, which should cause his
imagination to waver (see 11. xHv, note). Thus, although
the man be assumed to acquiesce in what ia false, we shall
never aay that he is certain. For by certainty we mean
ething positive (JI. iliii. and note), not merely the
mce of doubt.

' However, in order that the foregoing proposition may
)e fully explained, I will draw attention to a few additional
_Joints, and I will furthermore answer the objections which
may be advanced against our doctrine. Lastly, in order
to remove every scrapie, I have thought it worth while to
point out some of the advantages, which follow therefrom.
I Bay " some," for they will be better appreciated from
what we shall set forth in the fifth part.

I begin, then, with the first point, and warn my readers
to make an accurate distinction between an idea, or con-
ception of the mind, and the inaagea of things which we
imagine. It is further necessary that they should distin-
guish between idea and words, whereby we signify things.
™^ese three— namely, images, words, and ideas — are by


122 THE ETHICa. [PABT 11.

many persons either entirely confused together, or not dia-
tinguished with sufficient accuracy or care, and hence people
are generally in ignorance, how absolutely necessary ia a
knowledge of this doctrine of the will, hoth for philosophic
purposes and for the wise ordering of life. Those who think
that ideas eonaist in images which are formed in ua by con-
tact with external bodies, persuade themselves that the
ideas of those things, whereof we can form no mental pic-
ture, are not ideas, but only figments, which we invent by
the free decree of our will; they thus regard ideas as
though they were inanimate pictures on a panel, and, filled
with this misconception, do not see that an idea, inasmuch
as it ia an idea, involves aji affirmation or negation. Again,
those who confuse words with ideas, or with the aiBrma-
tion which an idea involves, think that they can wish some-
thing contrary to what they feel, affirm, or deny. This
misconception will easily "be laid aside by one. who reflects
on the nature of knowledge, and seeii^ that it in do wise
involves the conception of extension, will therefore clearly
understand, that an idea (being a mode of thinking) does
not consist in the image of anything, nor in words. The
essence of words and images is put together by bodily
motions, which in no ■wise involve the conception dE
thought.

These few words on this subject will suffice : I will there-
fore paaa on to consider the objections, which may be raised
against our doctrine, Of these, the first is advanced by
those, who think that the will has a wider scope than the
understanding, and that therefore it is difEerent therefrom.
The reason for their holding the belief, that the will has
wider scope than the uuderatanding, is that they assert,
that they have no need of an increase in their faculty of
assent, that is of affirmation or negation, in order to assent
to an infinity of things which we do not perceive, but that
they have need of an increase in their faculty of under-
standing. The will is thua distinguished from the intellect, *
the latter being finite and the former infiuite. Secondly,
it may be objected that experience seems to teach us espe-
cially clearly, that we are able to suspend our judgment
before assenting to things which we perceive ; this is con-
firmed by the fact that no one is said to b " ■ - ■ - —


r


AKO OKIOIS or THE UINP.


123


far as he perceiveB anytliing, but only in bo far as lie
assents or dissenta.

For instance, lie who feigna a winged horae, does not
therefore admit that a winged horse exists ; that is, he la
not deceived, nulesa he admits in addition that a winged
horse does eiist. Nothing therefore seems to he taught
more clearly by experience, than that the will or faculty of
assent is&ee and different from the faculty of understand-
ing. Thirdly, it may be objected that one affirmation does
not apparently contain more reality than another ; in other
words, that we do not seem to need for affirming, that what
is true is true, any greater power than for affirming, that
what is false is true. We have, however, seen tluit one
idea has more reality or perfectdou than another, for as
objects are some more excellent than others, so also are the
ideas of them some more excellent than others ; this also
seems to point to a difference between the understanding
and the wSL Fourthly, it may he objected, if man does
not act from free will, what will happen if the incentives
to action are equally balanced, as in the case of Buridan's
ABa ? Will he perish of hunger and thirst ? If I say that
he would, I shall seem to have in my thoughts an ass or
the statue of a man rather than an actual man. If I say
that he would not, he would then determine his own action,
and would consequently poaaess the faculty of going and
doing whatever he liked. Other objections might also be
raised, but, as I am not bound to put in evidence everything
that anyone may dream, I will only set myself to the task
of refuting those I have mentioned, and that as briefly as
posdble.

To the jirei objection I answer, that T admit that the will
has a wider scope than the understanding, if by the under-
jrtanding be meant only clear aJid distinct ideas ; but I
Heny that the will has a wider scope than the jjereeptions,
bid the faculty of forming conceptions ; nor do I see why
Hia faculty of voHtion should be called infinite, any more
'than the faculty of feehng : for, as we are able by the same
faculty of vohtion to affirm an infinite number of things
(one after the other, for we cannot affirm an infinite number
simultaneously), so also can we, by the same faculty of
feel or perceive (in succession) an in fini te numbei


124 THE ETHICS. [PAET U.

of bodies. If it be said fhat there is an infinite nnraber of
things which we cannot perceire, I answer, that we cannot
attain to such things by any thinking, nor, consequently,
by any faculty of volition. But, it may still be iii^;ed, if
God wished to bring it about that we should perceive them,
be would Ix obliged to endow vm with a greater faculty of
perception, but not a greater faculty of volition than we
bave already. This is the same aa to say that, if Ood wished
to bring it about that -wb should understand an in&nite
number of other entities, it would be necesBary for him to
give 11H a greater -understanding, hut not a more universal
idea of entity than that which we have already, in order to
grasp such infinite entities. We have shown that will is a
universal entity or idea, whereby we explain all particular
Toiitions — in other words, that which is common to all such
volitions.

As, then, our opponents maintain that this idea, common
or universal to all volitions, is a faculty, it is little to ba
wondered at that they assert, that such a faculty extends
itself into the infinite, beyond the Hmits of the understand-
ing : for what is universal is predicated alike of one, of
many, and of an infinite number o£ individuals.

To the second objection I reply by denying, that we have
a free power of suspending our judgment : for, when we
isay that anyone suspends his judgment, we merely mean
that he sees, that he does not perceive the matter in ques-
tion adequately. Suspension of judgment ia, tlierefore,
Btrictly speaking, a perception, and not free will. In order
to illustrate the point, let us suppose a boy imagining a
horse, and perceiving nothing else. Inasmuch as tide
imagination involves the esistence of the horse (H. xviL
OoroII.), and the boy does not perceive anything whioU
would exclude the eiisteace of the horse, he will necessarily
regard the horse aa present : he will not be able to doubt
of its existence, althougii he be not certain thereof. Wo
have daily experience of such a state of things in dreams ;
and I do not suppose that there is anyone, who would
maintain that, while be is dreaming, he has the free power
of suspending his judgment concerning the things in his
dream, and bringing it about that he should not dream
those things, which he dreams that he sees ; yet it happe


■ Tint:


OF THE NATDEE AND ORIOIM OF THE MINH.


126


notwithstanding, that even in dreams wo euspend our
judgment, namely, when we dream that we are dreaming.

Further, I grant that no one can be deceived, bo far as
actual perception extends — that is, I grant that the mind'a
imaginationB, r^arded in themselves, do not involve error
(H. ivii,, note) ; but I deny, that a mim does not, in the
act of preoption, make any afiirmation. For what is th»
perception of a winged horae, save affirming that a horse
has wings ? If the miad could perceive notliing else but
the winged horse, it would regard the same as present to
itself: it would have no reasons for doubting its existence,
nor any faculty of dissent, unless the imagination of a
innged horse be joined to an idea which precludes the
existence of the said horse, or unless the nund perceives
that the idea which it posseaaes of a winged horse is in-
adequate, in which case it will either necessarily deny the
existence of such a horse, or will neceSEanlybe in doubt on
the subject.

I tb'"lf that I have anticipated my answer to the third
objection, namely, that the will is something universal
-which is predicated of all ideas, and that it ouly signilieft
that which is common to all ideas, namely, an affirmation,
whose adeijuate essence must, therefore, in so far aa it is
thus conceived iu the abstract, "be in every idea, and be,
in this respect alone, the same in. all, not in so far as it is
considered as constituting the idea's essence : for, ux this
respect, particular affirmations differ one from the other,
as much as do ideas. For instance, the affirmation wliich
inTolTes the idea of a circle, difEers from that which involves
the idea of a triangle, as much as the idea of a circle diJfers
from the idea of a triangle.

Further, I absolutely deny, tkat we are in need of an
equal power of tbinkiog, to affirm that that which ia true is
true, and to affirm that that which is false is true. These
two affirmations, if we regard the mind, are in the same
relation to one another as being and not-being- • for there ia
nothing positive in ideas, which constitutes the actualreality
of falsehood (11. xxxv. note, and xlvii. note).

We muat therefore conclude, that we are easily deceived,
irben we confuse universale with singulars, and the entities
of reason and abstractions with realities. As for the fourth


126 THE ETHICS. [PAET 11.

objection, I am quite ready to admit, that a man placed in
the equihbrium described (namely, as perceiving nothing
but hunger and thirat, a certain food and a certain drink,
«ach equally distant from, him) would die of hunger and
thirst. If I am asked, 'whether such an one should not
rather be considered an ass than a man ; I answer, that I
do not know, neither do I know how a, man should be
■considered, who bangs himself, or how we should consider
■children, fools, madmen, i£c.

It remains to point out the advantages of a knowledge
■of this doctrine aa bearing on conduct, and this may be
■easily gathered from what has been said. The doctrine is
good,

1, Inasmuch as it teaehea us to ajrf. solely according to
the decree of Gtod, and to be partakers in the Divine
nature, and so much the more, aa we perform more perfect
actions and more and more understand God, Such a doc-
trine not only completely tranqiiillizes our spirit, but also
shows us where our highest happiness or blessedness is,
namely, solely in the knowledge of Grod, whereby we are
led to act only us love and piety shall bid ua. We may
thus clearly underatand, how far astray from a true esti-
mate of Tirtue are those who expect to be decorated by
God "with high rewards for their virtue, and their best
actions, as for having endured the direst slavery; as if
virtue and the service of God were not in itself happiness
and perfect freedom,

2, Inasmuch as it teaches us, how we ought to conduct
ourselves with respect to the ^fta of fortune, or matters
which are not in our own power, and do not follow from
our nature. For it shows us, that we should await and
endure fortune's smilea or frowns with an equal mind,
seeing that all 'things follow from the eternal decree of
God by the same necessity, as it follows from the essence
of a triangle, that the three angles are equal to two right
angles.

3, This doctrine raises social life, inaamueh as it teaches
us to hate no man, neither to despise, to deride, to envy,
or to be angry with any. Further, as it tells us that each
should be content with his own, and helpful to his neigh-
bour, not from any womanish pity, favour, or superstitioi


or THE NATT7BB AND OBIGIK OV THE MIND. 127

but solely by the guidance of reason, according as the time
and occasion demand, as I will show in Part ITT.

4. Lastly, this docfcrine confers no smaU advantage on
the commonwealth ; for it teaches how citizens should be
gOYcmed and led, not so as to become slaves, but so that
th^ may freely do whatsoever things are best.

I have thus fulfilled the promise made at the beginning
of* this note, and I thus bring the second part of my
treatise to a close. I think I have therein explained the
nature and properties of the human mind at sufficient
length, and, considering the difficulty of the subject, with
Aomcient clearness. I have laid a foundation, whereon
may be raised many excellent conclusions of the highest
utality and most necessary to be known, as will, in what
f oUowSy be partly made plain.


ON THE OEIGIN AND NATUEE OF THE
EMOTIONS.

MOST writers on the eraotjona and on human condnct
aeem to be treating rather of matters outside nature
thaa of natural phenomena following nature's general
]aw9. They appear to conceive man to be situated in
nature aa a kingdom within a Idngdom : for they believe
that he disturbs rather than follows nature's order, that he
has absolute control over his actions, and that he is deter-
mined solely by himaeK. They attribute human infirmities
and fickleness, not to the power of nature in general, but
to some mysterious flaw in the nature of man, which
aecordingly they hemoan, deride, deapise, or, as usually
happens, abuse : he, who succeeds in hitting ofE the weak-
ness of the human mind more eloquently or more acutely
than his fellows, is looked upon as a seer. Still there has
been no lack of very excellent men (to whose toil and
industry I confess myself much indebted), who have written
many noteworthy things concerning the right way of hfe,
and have given much sa,ge advice to mankind. But no
one, BO far aa I know, has defined the nature and strength
of tiie emotions, and the power of the mind against them
for their restraint.

I do not forget, that the illustrious Descartes, though he
believed, that the mind ha-s absolute power over its actions,
strove to explain human emotions by their primary caua ""
and, at the same time, to point out a way, by which 1
mind might attain to absolute dominion over them. Ha
ever, in my opinion, he aecompliahea nothing beyond j
display of the acuteness of hia own great intellect, aa
will show in the proper place. For the present I wish 1
revert to those, who wouJd rather abuse or deride hu
emotions than understand them. Such persons will, douli


1 Ion,


ON THE ORIGIN A2(D NATUBE OW THE EMOTIOSB, 129

leas think it etrange that I should attempt to treat of
human vice and folly geometrically, and should wish to
set forth with rigid reasoning those matters which they
cry out against as repugnant to reason, frivolons, absurd,
and dreadful. However, such ia my plan. Nothing cornea
to pass in nature, which can be set down to a flaw therein ;
for nature is always the same, and everywhere oue and the
same in her efficacy and power of action ; that is, nature's
laws and ordinances, whereby all things come to paaa and
change from ono form to another, are everywhere and
always the same ; so that there should be oue and the
same method of understanding the nature of aU. things
whatsoever, namely, through nature's universal laws and
rules. Thus the passions of hatred, anger, envy, and so
on, considered in themselves, follow from this same ne-
cessity and efficacy of nature j they answer to certam
definite causes, through which they are understood, and
possess certain properties as worthy of being known as the
properties of anything else, whereof the contemplation in
itself siEorda us delight, I almll, therefore, treat of the
n&ture and strength of the emoti-ons according to the same
method, as I employed heretofore in my investigations
loeming God and the mind. I shall consider human
iona and desires in exactly the same mamier, as though
■were concerned with hnes, planes, and solids.

Definitions.

I, By an adequate cause, I mean a cause through which
"" ■ in be clearly and distinctly perceived. By an
inadequate or partial cause, I mean a cause through which,
by itself, its effect cannot be understood.

U, I say that we act when anything takes place, either
within us or externally to us, whereof we are the adequate
cause ; that ia (by the foregoing definition) when through
our nature something takes place within us or eitemally
to us, vrhich can through our nature alone be clearly and
diatinctly imderstood. On the other hand, I say that we
are passive as regards something when that something
I takes place within us, or follows from our nature esteraally,
^_^e bemg only the partial cause.

^E II.


130 THE ETHICB. [PAKT HI.

HI. By emolwn 1 mean the modifications of the body,
whereby the active power of the said body is incTeased
or diminished, aided or constrained, and also the ideas of
Biich modifications.

N^.B. If we can be the adequate cause of any of these
modificationa, I then cali the emotion an activity, other-
wise I call it a passion, or state wherein the mlad ig
passive. J

POBTHLATES. fl

I. The human body can be affected in many wayB,*
■whereby its power of activity is increased or diminished,
and also in other ways which do not render its power of
activity either greater or less.

H.B. This postulate or asiom rests on Postulate i. and
lienunas v. and vii,. which see after II. siii.

n. The human body can imdergo many changes, and,
nevertheless, retain the impressions or traces of objects
(cf. XL Post, v.), and, consequently, the same images of
things (see note H. svii.).

Fbof. L Our mind U in certain ca«e« active, and in
certain eaeei passive. In eo far at it hat adequate ideaa it is
neceeearily active, and in so far as it has inadequate ideas, U
is necessarily passive.

Proo/.^In every human mind there are some adequate
ideas, and some ideas that are fragmentary and confused
{H. xl. note). Those ideas which are adequate in the
mind are adequate also in Qod, inasmuch as he constitutes
the essence of the mind (TE. xl. Coroll.), and those which
are inadequate in the mind are likewise (by the same
Coroll) adequate in God, not inasmuch as he contains in
himself the essence of the given mind alone, but as he, at the
same time, contains the minds of other things. Again, from
any given idea some effect must necessarily follow (1. 36) ;
of tins effect God is the adequate cause (EH. Def. i.), not
inasmuch as he is infinite, but inasmuch as he is conceived
as affected by the given idea (H. is.). But of that effect
whereof God is the cause, inasmuch as he is affected by an
idea which is adequate in a given mind, of that efEect, I re-
peat, the mind in question ia the adequate cause (TL xi.
CoroU.). Therefore our mind, in so far as it has adequate


OM THE ORIGIN AND NATURE OF THE EMOTIONS. 131


9 (m, Def , u.), ia in certaia cases necessarily active ;
I was our first point. Again, ■whatsoever necessarily

illowa from the idea which is adequate in God, not by

virtne of his possessing in himself the mind o£ one man
only, but by virtue of his containing, together with the
mind of that one man, the minds of other things also, of
such an effect (11. xi. Coroll.) the mind of the given man is
not an adequate, but only a partial cause; thus (HL
Def. ii.) the mind, inasmuch as it has inadequate ideas, is
in certain cases necessarily passive ; this was our second
point. Therefore our mind, &c. Q.E.D.

CoroUwy. — ^Henoe it follows that the mind is more or
leas liable to be acted apon, in proportion as it poaaeases
inadequate ideas, and, contrariwise, is more or less active
in pro^rtion as it poasesBes adequate ideas.

Prop. H. Body coMiiot determdne mind to thinJc, neither
eon mind determine body to motion or rest or any date
different from these, if e-uch there be.

Proof. — All modes of thinking have for their cause God,

by virtue of his being a thinking thing, and not by virtue

of Mb being displayed \inder acj other attribute fll. vi.).

That, therefore, which determinea the mind to thought is a

mode of thoi^ht, and not a mode of estenaion ; that is (XL

Def. i.), it is not body. This was our first point. Again,

the motion and rest of a body must arise from another

^^ledy, which has also been determined to a state of motion

^bgr rest by a third body, and ahBolutely everything which

^^pdces place in a body mnst spriiig from God, in so far as

^Pw is regarded as affected by some mode of extension, and

not by some mode of thought (LL vi.) ; that ia, it cannot

spring from the mind, which is a mode of thought. This

was o»ir second point. Therefore body cannot determine

mind, Ac. Q.U.D.

Note. — Thia is made more clear by what was said in the
note to H. vii., namely, that mind and body are one and
the same thing, conceived first under the attribute of
titonght, secondly, under the attribute of eitension. Thus
it follows that the order or concatenation of things is iden-
tical, whether nature be conceived under the one attribute
or the other ; consequently the order of states of activity
Ud passivity in our body ia simultaneous in nature with


^ud


132 THE ETHICS. [PABT IH.

the order of states of activity and passivity in tlie mind.
The same conclusion is evident from the manner in which
we proved II. lii.

Nevertheless, though such is the case, and though there
be no further room for d-oubt, I can scarcely believe, until
the fafit is proved by experience, that men can be induced
to consider the queation calmly and fairly, ao firmly are
they convinced that it ja merely at the bidding of the mind,
that the body is set in motion or at rest, or performs a
variety of actions depending solely on the mind's will or
the oKerciae of thought. However, no one has hitherto laid
down the Umits to the powers of the body, that ia, no one
has as yet been taught by esperience what the body can
acci>mpliah solely by the laws of nature, in so far aa she is
regarded as extension. 'No one hitherto has gained such
an accurate knowledge of the bodily mechanism, that he
can explain all its functions ; nor need I call attention to
the fact that many actions are observed in the lower
animals, which far transicend human sagacity, and that
somnambuhats do many things in their sleep, which they
would not venture to do -when awake : thene inatances are
enough to show, that the body can by the sole laws of its
nature do many things which the mind wonders at.

Again, no one knows how or by what means the mind
moves the body, nor how many various degrees of motion
it can impart to the body, nor how quickly it can move
it. Thus, when men say that this or that physical action
has its origin in the mind, which latter has dominion
over the body, they are using words without meaning, or are
confeaaing in specious phraseology that they are ignorant
of the cause of the said action, and do not wonder at it.

But, they will say, whether we know or do not know the
means whereby the mind acts on the body, we have, at any
rate, experience of the fact that unleaa the human mind ia
in a fit state to think, the body remains inert. Moreover,
we have experience, that the mind alone can determine
whether we speak or are silent, and a variety of similar
states which, accordingly, we say depend on the mind's
decree. But, as to the first point, I ask such objectors,
whether experience does not also teach, that if the body be
inactive the mind is simultaneously unfitied for thinking ?


V OH THE OKIGIH AND SATH&E OF THE EMOTIONS. 133

For when the }Mdj is at rest m sleep, the mind simul-
toneonaly is in a state of torpor also, and has no power of
thinking, Buch as it possesses when the bodj is awake.
A gftin , I think everyone's experience will confinn the state-
moat, that the mind is not at all times equally fit for
thinking on a given snbject, but according as the body is
more or leas fitted for being stimulated by the image of
this or that object, so also is tba mind more or less fitted
for contemplating the said object.

But, it will be m^ed, it is impossible that solely from
the laws of nature considered as extended substance, we
ahould be able to deduce the causes of buildings, pictures,
and things of that kind, which are produced only by human
art ; nor would the human body, unless it were determined
and led by the mind, be capable of building a single temple.
However, I have just pointed out that the objectors cannot
fix the limits of the body's power, or say what can be con-
eluded from a eonaideration of its sole nature, vfhereas they
have experience of many things being accomplished solely
bythe uiws of nature, whicli they would never have believed
possible except under the directioa of mind ; eueli are the
actiona performed by somnambulists while asleep, and
wondered at by their performers when awake. I would
further call attention to the mechanism of the human body,
which far aurpasses in complexity all that has been put
■ _ ther by human art, not to repeat what I have already
jjiown, namely, that from nature, under whatever attribute
be be considered, infinite results follow. As for the second
Ibjection, I submit that the world would be much happier,
ire as fully able to keep silence as they are to
speak. Experience abundantly shows that men can govern
anything more easily than their tongues, and restrain any-
thmg more easily than their appetites ; whence it oomes
about that many believe, that we are oidy free in respect to
objecte which we moderately desire, because our desire for
Huch can easily be controlled by the thought of something
else frequently remembered, but that we are by no means
free in respect to what we seek with violent emotion, for
our desire cannot then be allayed, with the remembrance of
anything else. However, luiless BUch persons had proved
' y experience that we do many things which we afterwards


134 THE ETHICS. [part iir.

repent of, and t^am tiat we often, when assailed by con-
trary emotions, see the better and follow the worse, there
would be nothing to prevent their beliering that we are
free in all things. Thus an infant believes that of its own
free will it desires milk, an angry child believes that it
freely desires vengeance, a. timid child believes that it freely
desires to run away ; fiuther, a drunken man heHeves that
he uttfirs from the free decision of his mind words which,
when he is sober, he would willingly have withheld : thus,
too, a delirious man, a garruloua woman, a child, and
others of like complexion, beheve that they speak from the
free decision of their mind, when they are in reality unable
to restrain their impulse to talk. Experience teaches us no
leaa clearly than reason, that men believe themselves to bo
free, simply because they are conseioua of their actions, and
unconscious of the causes whereby those actions are deter-
mined ; and, further, it is plain that the dictates of the
mind are but another name for the appetites, and therefore
vary accordiog to the varying state of the body. Every-
one shapes his actions according to his emotion, those who
are assailed by conflieting emotions tnow not what they
wish ; those who are not attacked by any emotion are
readily swayed this way or that. AH these considerations
clearly show that a mentfil decision and a bodily appetite,
or determined state, are simultaaeous, or rather are one
and the same thing, which we call decision, when it is re-
garded under and explained through the attribute of
thought, aad a conditioned state, when it is regarded under
the attribute of extension, and deduced from the laws of
motion and rest. This will appear yet more plainly in the
sequel. For the present I wish to call attention to another
poittt, namely, that we cannot act by the decision of the
mind, unless we have a remembrance of having done so.
For instance, we cannot say a word without remembering
that we have done so. Again, it is not within the free
power of the mind to remember or forget a thing at wilL
Therefore the freedom of the mind must in any case be
limited to the power of uttering or not uttering something
which it remembers. But when we dream that we speak,
we believe that we speak from a free decision of the mind,
yet we do not apeak, or, if we do, it is by a spontanec


r THE OBtOIN XXD NATiritB OF THE EMOTIONS, 135

potion of the body. *g"i", we 'Sr^am that wo are conceal-
Lg something, and we eeem to act from the eame decision
! the mind as that, whereby we keep eilence when awake
inoeming eomething we know. Lastly, we dream that
from the free decision of our mind we do something, which
ffre ehoold not dare tj> do when awake.
^^ Now I should lite to know whether there be in the mind
two sorts of decisions, one sort illusive, and the other sort
bree P If our folly does not carry us so far as this, we must
lecessarily admit, that the decision of the mind, which ia
'ieved to be free, is not distingiiishable from the imagina-
tion or memory, ajid is nothing more than the affirmation,
which an idea, by virtue of being an idea, necessarily in-
TolvoB (n. ilix.). Wherefore these decisions of the mind
ttrise in the mind by the same necessity, as the ideas of
things actually eMstiiLg. Therefore tlioae who believe, that
they speak or keep silence or act in any way from the
free decisioo of their mind, do but dream with their eyes
cipen.

Paop. m. The adivUiea of the mind arise solely from
ffldequaie ideas ; the paeeive glates of the mind depend eoldy
;0» inadequaie ideas.

Froof. — The first element, which constitutes the essence
,of the mind, is nothing else but the idea of the actually
existent body (H. li. and liii.), which (II, xv.) is eom-
■^pounded of many other ideas, whereof some are adequate
^and some inadequate (II. ssis. CoroU., II. mviii, Coroll.).
.Whatsoever therefore follows from the nature of mind,
I has mind for its proximate cause, through which it
must be understood, must necessarily follow either from an
'adequate or from an inadequate idea. But in so far as the
^juind (TEL. i.) has inadequate ideas, it is necessarily passive;
■.-wherefore the activities of the mind follow solely from
adequate ideas, and accordingly the mind is only passive
"ji so far as it has inadequate ideas. Q.E.D.

Note. — ^Thus we see, that passive states are not attributed
4» the mind, except in so far as it contains something involv-
ii^ negation, or in so for as it is regarded as a part of
nature, which cannot be clearly and distinctly perceived
.iiiroi^h itself without other parts ; I could thus show, that
waive states ore attributed to individual things in the


■^


TOB ETHICS.


[,i


eamc way that thev are attributed to the mind, and that
they cannot otherwise be perceived, but my purpose ia
Bolely to treat of the hnman mind.

pKOF. IV. Nothing can be dettroyed, except by a cause ex-
ternal to iteelf.

Proof, — This proposition is self-evident, for the defini-
tion of anything af&rms the eBsence of that thing, but
does not negative it ; in other words, it poHtulatea the
essence of the thing, but does not take it away. So long
therefore as we regard only the thing itself, without taking
into account external cansea, we shall not be able to find in
it anything which could destroy it. Q.E.D.

Pkop. V. Things are waiuraUy contrary, that is. cannot
exist in the same object, in so far at one is capable of destroy-
ing the other.

Proof— J£ they could agree together or co-esiHt in the
same object, there would then be in the said object some'
thing which could destroy it ; but this, by the foregoing
proposition, is absurd, therefore things, &c. Q.E.D.

Pkop. "VI, Everything, in so far as it is in itself, endea-
vours to persist in its ovm being.

Proof. — ^Individual things are modes whereby the attri-
butes of Gk>d are expressed in a given determinate manner
(I. zxv. CoroU.) ; that is (I. xxziv.), they are things which
express in a given determinate manner the power of Ood,
whereby God is and acts ; now no thing contains ii
anything whereby it can be destroyed, or which can t
away its existence ( I ll . iv.} ; but contrariwise it ia o
to tdl that could take away its existence ( HI , v.),
fore, in so far as it can, and in so far as it is in i
it endeavours to persist in its own being. Q.E.D.

Pkop. Vn. The endeavour, Kherevnth every {king endeavo
to persist in Us omn being, is nothing else hit the actual ei
of the thing in question.

Proof. — From the given essence of any thing a
sequences necessarily follow (I. xixvi.), nor hi
any power save such as necessarily follows from t
nature aa determined (I. xxii.) ; wherefore the power «
any given thing, or the endeavour whereby, either a'
with other things, it acts, or endeavours to act. ■
(HL vi,), the power or endeavour, wherewith it endeavom


I


OK THE OKIOIN ADD NATtTRE OF THE EMOTIONS.


137


to perrast in its own bedng, is nothing else Lut tlie given or
actual es sence of the thing in question. Q.E.D.

Pbop. Viil. The evdeauour, wherein/ a thing endeavoun to
pereitl in itt being.invobiee tw finite time, bvi an indefinUe time.

Proof. — If it inyolved a limiteii time, which should deter-
iniiie the duration of the thing, it would then follow solely
from that power whereby the thing exists, that the thing
could not exist beyond the limits of that time, but that it
must be destroyed ; but this (HI. iv.) is absurd. "Where-
fore the endeavour wherewith a thing exists involves no
definite time; but, contrariwise, since (lU. iv.) it wilt
by the same power whereby it already exists always oon-
turne to exist, unless it be destroyed by some external
cause, this endeavour involves an indefinite time.

Fbof. LX. The mind, both in to far a* it hag clear and
4iaHnet ideas, and also in aofar cm it has confused ideas, en-
deaoovrs to perritt in tit being for an indefinite period, and
of ihit endeavour it u eonaeioua.

I Proof. — The essence ot the mind is constituted by ade-
quate and inadequate ideas (Hi. iii.), therefore (HI. vii.),
hoth in so far ae it possesses the former, and in so far as
it possesses the latter, it endeavours to persist in its own
b^ig, and that for an indefinite time ( 111 viii.), Now as
the mind (II. xiiii.) is necessarily conscious of itself through
the ideas of the modifications of the body, the mind is there-
fore (ill. vii.) conscious of its own endeavour.

Note. — This endeavour, when referred solely to the mind,
is called viilt, when referred to the mind and body in con-
jnnetion it is called appetite ; it is, in fact, nothing else but
man's eaaenee, from the nature of which necessarily follow
all those results which tend to its preservation ; and which
man has thus been determined to perform.

Further, between appetite and desire there is no difEe-
rence, except that the term desire is generally applied to
men, in so far as they are conscious of their appetite, and
may accordingly be thus defined : Deeire is appetite with
eomeioneness thereof. It is thus plain from what has been
Baid, that in no case do we strive for, wish for, long for,
or desire anything, because we deem it to be good, but on
the other hand we deem a thing to be good, because we
^trive for it, wish for it, long for it, or desire it.


diminishes, hdpa or
body, the idea thereof in-
hinders the^ower of thought in

i. or from


138 THE ETHICS. [pART 111,

Pbop. X. An idea, which excludes the existence of our body,
cannot be postulated in ov* mind, bui is contrary thereto.

Proof. — ^Whateoever can destroy our body, cannot b©
postulated tliereiu (HI. v.). Therefore neither can the
idea of Buch a thing occur in God, in ao far as he has the
idea of our body (&. ii. Coroll.) ; that is (IE. n. siii.), the
idea of that thing cannot; be postulated as in our mind,
bat contrariwise, since (11, li. xiai.) the first element, that
constitutes the essence of the mind, is the idea of the
hnman body as actually eustiug, it follows that the first
and chief endeavour of our mind is the endeavour to afELnn
the esBtence of our body : thus, an idea, which negativea
the existence of our body, is contrary to our mind, &c
Q.E.D.

Peop. XI. Whatsoever i
hinders the power of aetiviiy u
ereages or diminishes, heipe o
our mind.

Proof. — This proposition is evident from II. v

n. xiv.

JToie. — Thus we eee, that the mind can undergo many
changes, and can pass sometimes to a state of greater per-
fection, sometimes to a state of leaser perfection. These
passive states of transition exphun to us the emotions of
pleasure and pain. 'By pleasure therefore in the following
propositions I shall signify a passive state wherein the mind
passes to a greater perfection. By pain I shall signify a
passive state wherein the mind passes to a lesser perfection.
Further, the emotion of pleasure in reference to the body
and mind together I slmU call stimulation (titUlaiio) or
merrim,ent (hilaritas), the emotion of pain in the same rela-
tion I shall call suffering or melancholy. But we m.ust
bear in mind, that stimnlation and suffering are attributed
to man, when one part of his nature is more affected than
the rest, merriment and melancholy, when all parts are
aliie affected. What I mean by desire I have explained
in the note to Prop. is. of this part ; beyond these three
I recognize no other primary emotion ; I will show as I
proceed, that all other emotions arise from these three.
But, before I go further, I should like here to explain at
greater length Prop. x. of this part, in order that we may


ON I


t oaiOIN AND NATDEB OT THE


ISO


hearty understand how one idea i.B coDtrajy to another. In
fJienote to IL xvii. weeliowed tJiat the idea, which constitutes
the essence of mind, involves the existence of body, ao long
i the body itself exists. Again, it follows from what we
Ipoiuted out in the Coroll, to II. viii., that the present exig-
ence of our mind depends solely on the fact, that the mind
■tToIves the actual existence of the body. Lastly, we
bowed (LL xvii. xviii. and note) that the power of the
1, whereby it im^ines and remembers things, also de-
n the fact, that it involves the actual existence of
e body. Whence it follows, that the present existence of
e mind and its power of imagining are removed, as soon
B the mind ceases to affirm the present existence of the
>ody. Now the cause, why the mind ceases to affirm this
xifltence of the body, cannot be the mind itself (HI. iv.),
«r agun the fact that the body ceases to exist. For
by n. vi.) the cause, why the mind affirms the existence of
be body, is not that the body began to exist ; therefore,
{for the same reason, it does not cease to nffirm the exia-
a of the body, because the body ceases to exist ; hut
ifll. xvii.) this reBTilt follows from another idea, which ex-
Sodes the present existence of our body and, consequently,
II mind, and which is therefore contrary to the idea
gonstdtuting the essence of our mind.
Pbof. Xn. The mind, as far as it eari, endeavours to
i those things, which increase or help the power of
iivib/ in the body.

JProqf. — So long as the human body ia affected in a
" !, which involves the nature of any external body, the
ui mind will regard that external body as present
ijpX xvii.), and consequently {11. vii.), so long as the human
4sind regards an external body aa present, that is (H. xvii.
Dote), conceives it, the human body is affected in a mode,
Mrhich involves the natiu% of the said external body ; thus so
g as the mind conceives things, which increase or help the
ffer of activity in our body, the body is affected in modes
Irhich increase or help its power of activity (111. Post i.) ;
intly (m. xi.) the mind's power of thinking is for
lat period increased or helped. Thus (III. vi. ix.) the mind,
J far as it can , endeavours to imagine such things. Q.E.D,
Prop, xhi Wlien the mind conceivet things vihich di-


m.^B


140 THB ETHICS. [PABT

minish or hinder the hody'r power of activity, it endeavouri,
as far at poeeible, to remetn&«r ikinge which exclude the exit-
tenee of the fird-named thtTigg.

Proof. — So long as the mind conceives anytliing of the
kiad alluded to, the po-wer of the mind and body ia
diminished or constrained (ef . m. xii. Proof) ; neverthe-
less it will continue to conceive it, until the mind con-
ceives HOraething else, which excludes the present existence
thereof {II. xvii.) ; that is (as I have just shown), the power
of the mind and of the body is diminished, or constrained,
until the mind conceives eomething else, which excludes
the existence of the former thing conceived : therefore the
mind (HI. ii.), as far as it can, will endeavour to conceive
or remember the latter. Q.E.D.

Corollary. — Hence it follows, that the mind ahrinks from
conceiving those things, which diminish or constrain the
power of itself and of the body.

Note. — Prom what has "been said we may clearly under-
etand the nature of Love and Hate. Love is nothing else
T>ut pleasure accompanied by the idea of am. external cause :
Hate ia nothing else but pain accompanied iy the idea of on
external cause. We further see, that he who loves neces-
Barily endeavours to have, and to ke«p present to him, the
object of his love ; while he who hates endfavonra to ra-
move and destroy the object of his hatred. But I will
treat of these matters at more length hereaf t«r.

Pbop. Xiy. If the mind hoe once been affected by two
em.olione at the same time, U wUl, wTiene^er it is afterwards
affected by one of the two, be also affected by the other.

Proof. — If the human body has once been affected ty two
bodies at once, whenever afterwards the mind conceives
one of them, it will straightway remember the other also
(H. xviii.). But the mind's conceptions indicate rather
the emotions of our hodj than the nature of external
bodies (U. xvi. CoroU. ii.) ; therefore, if the body, and con-
sequently the mind (HI. Def . iii.) has been once affected by
two emotions at the same time, it will, whenever it is after-
wards affected by one of the two, be also affected by the other.

Peop. XV. Anything can, accidentally, be the cause of
pleagure, pain, or desire.

Proo/,— Let it be granted that the mind is simultaneously


V OK THE OBIGIN XtID NATCBR Of THE EKOTIONS. Ill

affected by two emotioDa, of Trhicb one neither increases
HOT dimmJBliea its power of activity, and the other does
either iacreaae or dimiiusli the said power (III. Post, >.).
Prom the forgoing proposition it is evident tiat, whenever
the mind is afterwards aSect«d hj the former, through its
true cause, which (by hypotheaia) neither increaxes nor
diminishes its power of action, it will be at the same time
affected by the latter, which doee increase or diminiah its
power of activity, that is (III. xi. note) it will be afEected
with pleasure or pain. Thus the former of the two emotions
will, not through itself, but accidentally, be the cause of
pleasure or pain. In the same way also it can be easily
shown, that a thing may be accidentally the cause of
dedre. Q.E.D.

CoToUary. — Simply from the fact tliat we have regarded
a thing wiUi the emotion of pleasure or pain, though that
thing be not the efficient cause of the emotion, we can
^ther love or hate it.

Proof. — For from this fact alone it arises (HI. xiv.), that
the mind afterwards conceiving the said thii^ is affected
with the emotion of pleaauie or poia, that is (UL. si,
note), according as the power of the mind and body may
be increased or diminished, &c. ; and consequently (TTT .
xii.), according aa the mind may desire or shrink from
the conception of it (ill. liii. CorolL), in other words
(ill. xiii. note), according as it may love or hate the same.
Q.E.D.

Note. — Hence we understand how it may happen, that
we love or hate a thing without any cause for our emotion
bdng known to us ; merely, as the phrase ia, from sympathy
or aniipaihy. We should refer to the same category those
objects, -which affect us pleasurably or painfully, simply
because they resemble other objects which affect us in the
same way. This I will show in the next Prop. I am
aware that certain authors, who were the first to introduce
these terms " sympathy " and " antipathy," wished to
signify thereby some occult qualities in things ; neverthe-
less I think we may he permitted to use the same terms to
indicate known or manifest qualitieB.

pBOP. XVT. Simply from the fact that we conceive, that a.
given object has some point of resemblance with another ohject


142 THE ETHICS, [part III.

v)h'oh U wont to affect ike mind plea«urahly or 'painfully,
although the point of resemJilaMce he not the e^deni cause of
the mid emotions, we ahall stiU regard the fbret-na/med object
with love or hate.

Proof. — The point of reaemljlance ■was in the object (by
hjpotheais), when we regurded it with pleasure or pain,
thus (HI. xiT.), when the mind is affected by the image
thereof, it will straightwaj he affected by one or the other
emotion, and eonBequently the thing, which we perceiTe
to have the same point of resemblance, will be accidentally
(HL xv.) a cause of pleas«re or pain. Thus (by the fore-
going Corollary), althongh the point in which the two objects
resemble one another be not the efficient cause ot the
emotion, we shall still regard the first-named object with
love or h ate. Q.E.D.

Pkop. XVn. If we conceive thai a thing, which is wont to
affect us painfully, has wn/y point of reeemblamce with another
thing which is wont to affect iM with an eqvath/ strong
emotion of pleasure, we shall hate the firet-named thing, and
at the mme time tee shall love it.

Proof. — The given thing is (by hypothesis) in itself a
cause of pain, and (Til. siil. note), in so far as we imagine
it with tins emotion, we shall bate it ; further, inaamuch as
we conceive that it has some point of resemblance to some-
thing else, which is wont to afEect ua with an equally strong
emotion of pleasure, we ehall with an equally strong im-
pulse of pleasure love it (HI. xvi.) ; thus we shaU botft
hate and love the same thing. Q.E.D.

Note. — This disposition of the mind, which ai
two contrary emotions, is called vacillation ; it stands t
the emotions in the same relation as doubt does to t"
imagination (11. sliv, note) ; vacillation and doubt do n
differ one from the other, escept as greater differs frosa
less. But we must bear in mind that 1 have deduced tM
vacillation from causes, which give rise through themselTl
to one of the emotions, and to the other accidentally,
have done this, in order that they might be mc
deduced from what went before ; but I do not d
vacillation of the disposition generally arises from an ol _
which is the efficient cause of both emotions. The hui
body is composed (II. Post, i.) of a variety of individui


143

3 of different nature, and may therefore (Ai. i. after
ma Jii. after IL liii.) be affected in a variety of different
rays by one and the same body ; and contrariwi§e, as one
and the same thing can be affected in many ways, it can
also in many different ways affect one and the same part
of the body. Hence we can easily conceive, tliat one and
the same object may be the cauRO of many and conflicting


1


Pbop. XVJJI. a man ie an mtich affected plea»iira},hj nr
painfully by the image of a tkin^ past or future as by lh«
^^image of a thing present.

^L Proof. — Bo long as a man is affected by the imo^ of

^^nything, lie will regard that thing aa present, even though

^Vft be non-existent (IL xvli. and Goroll.), he will not con-

^^Ceive it as past or future, except in ao far aa its image is

joined to the image of time past or future (H. iliv. note).

Wherefore tlie image of a thing, regarded in itself alone,

is identical, whether it be referred to time past, time future,

or time present ; that is (IL xvL Coroll.), the disposition

or emotion of the body is identical, whether the image be

of a thing past, future, or present. Thus the emotion of

pleasure or pain ia the same, whether the image be of a

thing past or future. Q.KD.

Note I. — I call a thing past or future, according as we
either have been or shall be affected thereby. For instance,
According as we have seen it, or are about to see it, accord-
'sg OB it has recreated us, or will recreate ua, according as
% hax harmed ua, or will harm us. For, as we thus con-
e it, we affirm its existence ; fhat is, the body is affected
f no emotion which excludes the existence of the thing,
1 therefore (IT, xvii.) the body ia affected by the imago
( the thing, in the same way as if the thing were actually
m.t. However, as it generally happens that those, who
lave had many experiences, vacillate, so long as they regard
a thing aa future or past, and are uaually in doubt about
its issue (II. xliv. note) ; it follows that the emotions which
arise from similar images of things are not so constant,
nit are generally disturbed by the images of other things,
mtU men become assured of the issue.
Note II. — From what has just been said, we understand
meant hy the terma Hope, Fear, Confidence,


144


TUB ETHICS.


[PAET HI.


Despair, Joy, and Diaapp ointment.' Hope ia nothing else
but an inconglant pleasure, arising from the image of some-
thing fvtv/re or past, whereof we do not yet Tcnow the iseue.
Fear, on the other hand, is an inconstant pain also a/rising
from, the image of something concerning which we are in doubt.
If the element of doubt be removed from these emotdons,
hope becomes Confidence and fear becomes Despair. In
other words, Fleaeure or Pain arising from the image of
something concerning whicA we have hoped or feared. Again,


t the image of eomething past
Disappointment is the Pain


that the object of his love is
coTiceives that it is preserved


Joy is Pleasure arising fro\
whereof -we doubled the ies
apposed to Joy.

Peop. TTT . He u
destroyed vnR feel pain ; if h
he viill feel pleasure.

Proof. — ^The mind, as far as possible, endeavours to con-
ceive those things which increase or help the body's power
of activity (HE. xii.) ; in other words (DI. lii. note), those
things which it loves. But conception ia helped by those
things which postulate the existence of a thing, and con-
trariwiee ia hindered by those which exclude the exietence
of a thing (IL irii.) ; therefore the images of things, which
postulate the esistence of an object of love, help the mind's
endeavour to conceive the object of love, in other words
(in. si. note), affect the mind pleasurably ; contrariwise
those things, which esclude the eiiBtence of an object of
love, hinder the aforesaid mental endeavour; in other
words, affect the mind painfully. He, therefore, who con-
ceives that the object of his love is destroyed will feel pain,
&c. Q.E.D.

Prop. XX. He who conceives that the object of his hate is
destroyed will feel pleasure.

Proof. — The mind (ILL siii.) endeavours to conceive
those things, which exclude the existence of things whereby
the body's power of activity ia diminiahed or constrained ;
that is ( TTT , jiii, note), it endeavours to conceive such
things aa exclude the esistence of what it hatea ; there-
fore the image of a thing, which excludes the existence of
what the miad hates, helps the aforesaid mental effort, in

' Coiiscieitiiit morsus — ihus rendered by Mr. Pollock.


OJT THE OBIOIN AND NATITKB OF THE EMOTIONS. 1-15

Bother words (111. xi. note), affects tlie mind pleasurablT.
K^us he who conceiyes that the object of iiis bate is
%leatroyed will feel pleasure. Q,E.J).

\ Prop, XXI. He who conceive*, that the object of ki» love w

mtfffMted pUamrably or painfully, will himte!^ he affteted

asuraUy or painfully ; and the one or the other emotion

I be greater or less in the lover according tu it is 'jreater

r Um in the thing loved.

Proof. — Tlie images of things (as we showed in HI. xix.)

which poatnlate the existence of the ohji«t of love, help

Kthe mind's endeaToor to coaceive the said object. But

■ pleasure postulates the existence of something feeling

L pleasure, so much the more in proportion as the emotion

r of pleasure is greater; for it is (in. li. note) a transition

to a greater perfection ; therefore the image of pleasm'e in

the object of love helps the mental endeavour of the lover ;

that is, it aifects the lover pleasurably, and so much tlio

more, in proportion as this emotion maj have been greater

a the object of love. This waa our fi^t imint. Further,

n so far as a thing is affectfd with pain, it is to that extent

Bdeatr oyed , the extent being in proijortion to the amount of

Kpain (111, jd. note) ; therefore (ill. six.) he who conceives,

Kiliat the object of his love ia affected painfully, will him-

■■elE be affected painfully, in proportion as the said emotion

B greater or les s in the object of love. Q.E.B.

Peop. xxii If we conceive thai anything pleasurahly
affects some object of our love, we ehoM be affected with love
towards that thing. Contrariwise, if we conceive Uiat it af-
fects an object of our love painfu-Uy, we shall be affected with
hatred towards H.

Proof. — He, who affects pleaanrably or painfully the ob-
ject of our love, affects us also pleasnrably or painfuUy—
that is, if we conceive the loved object as affected with the
said pleasure or pain (ill. xii.). But this pleasure or pain
is postulated to come to us accompanied by the idea of an
external cause ; therefore (HI, xjii. note), if we conceive
that anyone affects an object of our love pleasnrably or
painfully, we shall be affected with love or hatred towards
him. Q.E.I).
Note. — Prop, xxi, explains to us the nature of Pity, which


146 1BE ETHICS. [fABT


eM on '


we may define as pain armng from, anolher'e hurt.
term we can use for pleasure arising from another's gain,
know not.

We will call the love toioarda him leko eonftre a benefit on
another, Approval ; and the haired towards him who itijuree
aaotlier, we will call Indignation. We must further re-
mark, that we not only feel pity for a, thing which we have
loveii (as shown in nX ixi.), but also for a, thing which we
hare Htherto regarded without emotion, provided that we
deem that it resembles ourselves (as I wiU show presently).
Thus, we bestow approval on one who has benefited any-
thing resembling ourselves, and, contrariwise, aire iai''
with him who has done it an injury.

Pbop. XXm. He who conceives, that an object of
hatred ia painfully affected, will feel pleature. Gontrc
wise, if he IMnke that the said object is pleaavraily affectt
he mil feel padn. Each of thsse emotions wifl be greati
less, according ae its contrary is greater or less in the
of htdred.

Proof. — In 8o far as an object of hatred is painfully
affected, it is destroyed, to an extent proportioned to the
strength of the pain (lU. si. note). Therefore, he (ill. xs.)
who conceives, that some object of his hatred is painfully
a£Eect«d, will feel pleasure, to an extent proportioned to the
amount of pain he conceives in the object of hia hatred.
This was our first point. Again, pleasure postulates thj
existence of the pleasnrably affected thing ( 1 1 1 , xi. note)
in proportion as the pleasure is greater or less. If anyoi '
imagines that an object of Ins hatred is pleasural
flfEccted, this conception (HI. xiii.) will hinder hia own
deavour to persist ; in other words ( in , xi, note), he ^
hates will he painfully afEected. Q.B.D,

Note. — This pleasure can scarcely be felt unalloyed, ai
without any mental conflict. For (as I am about to shi
in Prop, xxvii.), in so far as a man conceives that
similar to himself is afEected by pain, he will himself
affected in hke maimer; and he v.'ill have the contn
emotion in contrary circumstances. But here we
regarding hatred only.

Prop, XXIV". If vie conceive that anyone phasurably
feds an object of our hate, we shall feel hatred towards hi


H 05 THE OEIGIS AXD BAinBE OF THE KMOTIOSB. 147

alea. If W« conedve that he j>ain-/u!ly affeds the gaid object,
tee ghallfeel love toward* him.

Proof. — This propoHitio© is proTed in tLe same way aa
IL xxii,, vhich ime.

I Note. — These and BimiLi,r emotioDB of hatred are attri-
(tatable to envy, which, accordisfi^lv, is nothing else hut
aired, in so far aa it xe regarded ae diepoeing a man to
isfoiee in anofhe/e hurt, and to grieve at another's ad-

)antage.

[ Pbop. XX V. We endeavour to afirm, concerning ourselves,
d c&neeming what uie love, everything that vie conceive to
affect pleasurably ourselves, or the loved object. Contrariwise,
lee endeavour to negative everything, which tee conceive to
affect painfully ourselves or the lowed object.

Proof. — That, which we conceive to afBeet an ohjeot of our
love pleasurably or painfully, affects us also pleasurably or
painfully (HE. ssi.). But the ntind (HI. lii.) endeavours,
as far aa possible, to conceive those things which affect us
pleasurably ; in other words (H. xvii, and Coroll.), it en-
deavours to regard them as present. And, contrariwise
( 1 1 1 xiii,), it endeavours to exclude the existence of such
thii^ as affect us painfully ; therefore, we endeavour to
affirm concerning ourselves, and concerning the loved ob-
ject, whatever we conceive to affect ourselves, or the loved
object pleasurably. Q.E.D.

Peop. XXn. We endeavour to affirm, concerning that

ieh we hate, everything which we conceive to affect if paiii-

lyj a/nd, contrariwise, we endeavour to deny, concerning

'\vng which we conceive to affect it pleasurably.

— This proposition follows from HI. xxiii., as the

{oing proposition followed from IH. xxi,

— Thus we see that it may readily happen, that a

ij easily think too highly of himself, or a loved

, and, contrariwise, too meanly of a hated object.

"' ig is caDed pride, in reference to the man wJio

B too highly of himself, and is a species of madness,

jin a man dreams with his eyes open, thinking that he

u. accomplish all things that fall within the scope of his

1, and thereupon accounting them real, and extdt-

1 them, BO long aa he is unable to conceive anything

I excludes their existence, and determines hia own


u^l


lis THE ETHICS. [PAET

power of action. Pride, therefore, is pleasure Bpringing
from a man tkinMng too highly of himself. A^in, the
pleasure which arieea from, a man thinking too highly of
another is called over-esteem.. Whereas the pleasure which
arieea from ihinlnng too little of a man is called disdain.

Prop. XXVU. By the very fact that we conceive a iking,
which is like onreelvee, and which we have not regarded with
any emotion, to he affected vrith any emotion, we are ouraelvea
affected with a like emotion (affecttts).

Proof, — The images of thinga are modifications of the
hiunan body, whereof the ideas represent eKtemal bodies
as present to us (H, srii.) ; in other words (H, s.), whereof
the ideas involve the nature of our body, and, at the same
time, the nature of external bodies as present. If, there-
fore, the nature of the external body be similar to the
nature of our body, then the idea which we form of the
external body will involve a modification of our own body
similar to the modification of the external body. Conse-
quently, if we conceive anyone similar to ourselves as
a^ffected by any emotion, this conception will express a
modification of our body aimilar to that emotion. Thus,
from the fact of conceiving a thing lite ourselves to be af-
fected with any emotion, we are ouraelvea a-fEeeted vi ' ' ~
like emotion. If, however, we hat« the said thing liki
selves, we shall, to that extent, be affected by a oontr
and not similar, emotion. Q.E.D.

Note J. — This imitation of emotions, when it ia referr
to pain, is called convpasdon (cf, HE. xxii. note) ; when it
referred to desire, it ia ca.lled emulation, which ii
else but the desire of anything, engendered in us by the J
that we conceive that others have the like desire.

OoTollary I. — If we conceive that anyone, whom n
hitherto regarded with no emotion, pleasurably affeq
something similar to ouraelvea, we shall be afEected Ti "
love towards him. If, on the other hand, we conceive 1
he painfully affects the same, we shall be affected i
hatred towards bim.

Proof. — This ia proved from the last proposition in t
same maimer aa III. xxii. is proved from lEf. xsi.

Corollary II. — We cannot hate a thing which we ]
because its misery affects tib painfully.


OM THE OEIOIN AND KATTBE OF THE EMOTIONB. 149

Proof. — -If we coiJd liate it for this reason, we ahoiild
DJoice in its pain, ■which is contrary to the hypothesiB,

Corollary III. — "We BL"ek to free from miaery, as far aa
TB caJi, a thing which we pity.

Proof. — -That, which painfully affects the ohject of otir
ity, affects ns also with similar pain (by the foregoing pro-
osition) ; therefore, we shall endeavour to reaiU everything
'hich removes its eiiatenee, or which destroys it (cf. Ill
iii.); in other word* (HI. is. note), we shall desire to
estroy it, or we shall he determined for its destruction ;
bus, we shall endeavour to free from misery a thing which
i pity. Q.E.D.

Note H. — This will or appetite for doing good, which
1808 from pity of the thing whereon we would confer a
uefit, is called henevolenae, and is nothing else but degire
Uing/rofit emnpMiion. Concerning lore or hate towards
m who has done good or harm to something, which we
nceive t o be like ourselves, see HI. xiii. not«.
Pbop. JUtVill. We endeavour to bring about whttsoeoer
! conceive to conduce to pleasure ; but we endea/vour to
destroy whatsoever lee conceive to he truly repugnant
tereto, or to conduce to pain.
Proof. — ^We endeavour, as far as possihle, to conceive that
tldch we imagine to eondtice to pleasure (HI. xii.) ; in
Kher words (H. xvii.) we shall endeavour to conceive it as
Vt aa possible as present or actually esistii^. But the
ideftTonr of the mind, or the mind's power of thought, is
to, and simultaneous with, the endeavour of the
ly, or the body's power of acrtion, (This is clear from
. Tii. Coroll. and H, xi. CoroD.). Therefore we make
L absolute endeavour for its existence, in other words
rhich by m. is. note come to the same thing) we desire
id strive for it ; this was our first point. Again, if we
nceive that something, which we believed to be the cause
pain, that is ( Ml . siii. note), which we hate, is destroyed,
i shall rejoice (HE. xi.). We shall, therefore (by the
it part of this proof), endeavour to destroy the same, or
■^ jdii.) to remove it from ns, so that we may not
' " a present ; this was our second point. Where-
ira whatsoever conduces to pleasure, Ac. Q.E.7).
pBOP. XXTS. We shall also endeavour to do whafioever


loO THE EiHicaL [fabx ni:

"•<? rfynrpii'p rripn' ^o reqard mth pleasure, and conirariteise
"•*> ikall -ikrink from 'JLuiag that which ice conceive men to
-ihTnnJc from.

Proof. — From the fact «>f imaciiiiiiff, tiiat men love or
iiai^ anytliini?, we shall love or hate the same thing \ TT\.
\w\\.;, Tliat is <TTT. xiii. note), from this mere fact we
•ihall fei'l pleasnre or pain at the thing's presence. And so
-v»» -ihall i^mlKivonr to do whatever we conceive men to love
•r rwranl \vith pleasure, etc. Q.H.D.

Not**. — Tills f^ndeavour to do a thing or leave it nndone*
<iAAv in •)nl(T to please men. we <.*all ainbition, especially
■vlif'n w»' >o ^atrprlv endeavour to please the vulgar, that we
■ in or omit 4M»rrain rhinirs to our own or another's hurt: in
•rluT «*aH08 it is iienerallv called Icindliness. Furthermore
f ,'iv*^ rhe name ot praise to the pleasnrf, with which ite ctwi-
'Vii,i« th.t^ net inn nf > mot Iter, fchervby he has endeavoured to
l,it»njtp. tijt ; hilt ot blame to the paiti wherewith we feel aver'
.-lion to hi)» 'iHion.

Prop. XXX. If anyone haa done something which he con^
f*n.vt*s iM iijf'fctinff other men pleas^irably^ fie iviU be affected
hy plffuru^p, iiccnmpanied by the idea of himself as canse ; in
other v?ord)t, he will retjard himself with pleasure. On the
nther hand, if he has ilone anything which he conceives as
iiffurtlvg others painfidly, he will regard himself with pain.

Proof — He who conceives, that he affects others with
pleasure or pain. wiU, bv that very fact, himself be affected
with pleasure or pain (UL xxviL), but, as a man (TL xix.
and xxiii. J is conscious of himself through the modifications
whereby he is determined to action, it follows that he who
conceives, that he affects others pleasurably, will be affected
with pleasure accompanied by the idea of himself as cause ;
in other words, wiU regard himself with pleasure. Aiif! so
mutaiis mutandis in the case of pain. QJE.D,

Note. — As love (1 1 1, xiii.) is pleasure accompanied by
the idea of an external cause, and hatred is pain accom-
panied by the idea of an external cause ; the pleasure and
pain in question will be a species of love and hatred. But»
as the terms love and hatred are used in reference to exter-
nal objects, we will employ other names for the emotions
now under discussion : pleasure accompanied by the idea

' N.B. By '* men ** in this and the following propositionf, I mean men
whom we regard without any particular emotion.


UK AND MATUBE OF THE EUOTIONS. 151

' we will style Hononr. and the eTnotion
Wntrary thereto we will stylo Skajtie: I mean in sucU
.Ases as vhere pleasure or paio arises from a man's belief,
tbat he is being praised or blamed: otherwise pleasure
Kcompanied by the idea of an external cause ' ia called gel/-
complacency, and its contrary pain is called repentance.
Again, as it may happen (II. xvii. CoroU.) that the pleasure,
wherewith a man conceives that he affects others, may exist
solely in his own imagination, and as (HI. sxv.) everyone
^pad^voure to conceive concerning himself that which he
■kmceives will affect him with pleasure, it may easily come
^K pass that a vain man may be proud and may imagine
^Bat he is pleasing to all, when in reality he may he an
^fcnqyance to al l .

^HX^BOF. XXXI. If we conceive that anyone loveg, deilres, or
^■(es anything which we ovrtelves love, detWe, or hate, ice
^B|b2Z ihereufon regard the iking in quettion with more
^^adfoBt lote, &c. On the contrary, i/we think Viat anyone
^mrinkafrom $omelhing that we love, we sltall undergo vacll-
^Kion 0/ BOiil.

^BjVix^. — From the mere fact of conceiving that anyone
^Bres anything we shall ourselves love that thing (ITT.
^Krii.) : but we are assumed to love it already ; there ia,
^Bfirefore, a new cause of love, whereby our former emotion
Pl fostered ; hence we shall thereupon love it more stead-
Ffiiatly. Again, from the mere fact of conceiving that any-
one shrinks from anything, we shall ourselves shrink from
I that thing (in. sxvii,). If we a^ssume that we at the same
I time love it, we shall then simultaneously love it and
I shrink from it ; in other words, we shall be subject to
I TaciUatiou (III. xvii. note). Q.E.D.

i Corollary. — From the foregoing, and also from HI. xsviii.
^Kfollows that everyone endeavours, aa far as possible, to
^Ense others to love what he himself loves, and to hate
^Btat he himself hates : as the poet says : " As lovers let
Bb share every hope and every fear : ironhearted were he
^^^ should love what the other leaves.= "

^5' Sc ^"^ ^lo'fi" ""^ Bruder. The Dnlcb version and Camcrer read,

fcp itMamal CHUJse." " lIonour"^= (??ori((.
^■E^Orid, Amoros, II. six. 4, 5. Spinoza transposes the versPs,
^H " Speremus pruiter, parlter metuatmu amanles ;

^^B Fcrreus eat, si quis, qaod aicit alter, amat."


152 THE ETHICS. [pAET III.

Note. — This endeaTOur to bring it about, that our O'
likes ajid dislikes sbould meet witli universal approval, is
really ambition (see m. xsix. note) ; wherefore we see that
everyone by nature desires (appetere), that the rest of man-
kind should live according to his own individual disposi-
tion : when such a desire ia equally present in all, everyone
ritande ia everyone else's way, and in wishing to be loved or
praised b y all, all become mutually hateful.

Prop, y XXH, Jf we conceive that anyone takes delight
in something, which only one person can possess, we shaU
endeavour to bring ii about tliat ike man in qtieetion shall not
gain poggession thereof.

Proof. — From the mere fact of our conceiving that
another person takes delight iu a thing (HI. nvii. and
Coroll.) we shaU ourselvea love that thing and desire to
take delight therein. But we assumed that the pleasure
in question would be prevented by another's delight in itB
object; we shall, therefore, endeavour to prevent his
possession thereof (HI. xiviii.). Q.E.D.

Note, — We thus see tha,t man's nature is gisnerally so
constituted, that he takes pity on those who fare ill, and
envies those who fare well with an amount of hatred
proportioned to his own love for the goods in their poaaes-
sion. Further, we see that from the same property of
human nature, whence it follows that men are merciful,
it follows also that they are envious and ambitious. Lastly,
if we mate appeal to Experience, we shall find that shft
entirely confirms what we have said; more especially if wB:
turn our attention to the first years of our life. We find
that children, whose body is continually, as it were, ill'
equihbrium, laugh or cry simply because they see others
laughing or crying; moreover, they desire forthwith to
imitate whatever they see others doing, and to possesB
themselves whatever they conceive as delighting others :
inasmuch aa the images of things are, as we have said,
modifications of the human body, or modes wherein the
human body is affected and disposed by external causoa to
act in this or that manner.

Pkop, XxyTTT . When we love a thing similar to ourselvei
■we endeavour, agfar as vie can, to bring about thai it ghoaJd^
love us t» return.


J


I


OS TBS OEIQIX AND KATCBE OF TH£ ESI0TION8. 153

Proof,— That wliich we love we endeavoiir, as far as we

can, to conoeire in preference to anything else (III. lii.).
If the thing be similar to ourselves, we shall endeavour to
affect it pleastirably in preference to anytlmig else (HI,
nil.)- 1q other worda, we shall endeavour, as far as we
can, to bring it about, that the thing should be affected
■with pleasure accompanied by the idea of ouraelveB, that is
(m. siii. no te), th at it should love us in return. Q.E.D.

Prop. TtXxl v. The greater the emotion with which icf
conceive a loved object to be affected toward* vs, the greali-r
toitl be our co-mplaiency.

Proof.^We endeavour (TH. xxsiii,), as far as we can, to
bring about, that what we love should love us in return :
in other words, that what we loTe should be affected with
pleasure accompanied by the idea of ourself 0,5 cause.
Therefore, in proportion as the loved object is more
pleaeurably affected because of us. our endeavour wiU be
assisted. — that is (HI. n. and note) the greater will be
our pleasure. But when we take pleasure in the fact, that
we pleasurably affect something similar to ouraelvea, we
regid ourselves with pleasure (ill. 30) | therefore the
greater the emotion with which we conceive a loved object
to be affected, &c. Q.E.D.

Peop, XXXV. If anyone eonceivee, that an object of his
love joins itself to another with closer bonds of friejidghiptlian
he himself has attained to, he will he affected wiih hatred
to'wa/rdg the loved object and with eiivy towards his rival.

Proof. — In proportion as a man thinks, that a, loved
object is well affected towards him, will be the strength of
his self-approval {by the last Prop.), that is (ill. xxs.
note), of his pleasure ; ho will, therefore (HI. sxviii.), en-
deavour, as far as he can, to imagine the loved object as
most closely bound to him : this endeavour or desire will
be increased, if he thinks that someone else has a. similar
desire (ill. isxi.). But this endeavour or desire is assumed
to be checked by the image of the loved object in eon-
^nnction with the image of him whom the loved object has
joined to itself ; therefore (IH. xi. note) he will for that
reason be affected with pain, Eiccompanied by the idea of
the loved object as a cause in conjunction with tho image
of his rival; that is, he will be (HI. siii.) affected with


154 THE ETHICB. [Pi

hatred towards the loved object and also towards Hs rival
( 1 1 1 . 5v. CoroII.)i which latter he will envy as enjoying the
heloved object. Q.E.D.

Note. — This hatred towards an object of love joined with
envy is called Jealottmj, which accordingly is nothing else
but Br wavering of the disposition arising from combined
love and hatred, accompanied by the idea of some rival
who is envied. Further, this hatred towards the object of
love will be greater, in proportion to the pleasure which
the jealous man had been wont to derive from the reci-
procated love of the said object ; and also in proportion to
the feelings he had preTiously entertained towards his
rival. If he had hated him, he will forthwith hate the
object of hia love, because he oonceivea it is pleasurably
affected by one whom he himself hates : and also because
he is compelled to associate the image of hia loved one
with the image of him whom he hates. This condition
generally comes into play in the ease of love for a woman :
for he who thinka, that a woman whom he loves prostitutes
herself to another, will feel pain, not only because hia own
desire is reBtrained, but also because, b«ing compelled to
associate the image of her he loves with the parts of shame
and the excreta of another, he therefore shrinka from her.

We must add, that a jealous man is not greeted by hia
beloved with the same joyful countenance as before, and
this aJso pves him pain a.a a lover, as I will now show.

Pbop. XXXVI. He who remembers a thing, in which ha
has once taken delight, desires to possess it under the same
circumstances as when he first took delight therein.

Proof. — Everything, which a man has seen in conjunction
with the object of his love, will be to him accidentally a
cause of pleasure (ILL. xrv.) ; he will, therefore, desire to
possess it, in conjunction with that wherein he has taken
delight ; in other words, he wiU desire to possess the object
of his love under the same circumstances as when he first
took delight therein. Q.M.I).

CoroUary. — ^A lover will, therefore, feel pain if one of the
aforesaid attendant circumstances be missing.

Proof. — For, in so far as be finds some circumstance to
be missing, he conceives something which eKcludes its
exiatence. As he is assumed to he desirous f or '


1


I TSE ORlam AND SATCRE OS* THE EMOT10N§


155


of tliat thing or circumstance (liy tlie last Prop.), he will,
in 60 far as he conceivea it to be missing, feel pain (HI.
III.)- Q-E.D.

Note, — This pain, in so far as it has reference to tha
ibsence of the obj ect of love, is caUed Beffret.

Pbop. XXXVU. Desire arising through pain or pleagure,
tatred or love, it greater in proportion aa the emoiion is greater.
\ Proof. — Pain diminishes or oonstraina man's power of
tivit^ (m. xi. note), in other words (IIL vii.). diminishea
r conetrains the effort, wherewith he endearours to persist
1 hia own being ; therefore (HL v.) it is contrary to the
'i endeavonr; thus all the endeavours of a man affected
f pain are directed to removing that pain. But (bv the
Inition of pain), in proportion as the pain is greater, bo
> is it necesBarilj opposed to a greater part of man's
rer of activity; therefore the greater the pain, the
reater the power of activity employed to remove it ; that
ft, the greater will be the desire or appetite in endeavour-
ing to remove it. Again, since pleasure (HL xi. note)
increases or aids a man's power of activity, it may easily
be shown in like manner, that a man affected by pleasure
has no desire further than to preserve it, and hia desire
will be in proportion to the magnitude of the pleasure.

Lastly, since hatred and love bjb themselves emotions of

pain and pleasure, it follows in like manner that the endea-

ir, appetite, or desire, which arises through hatred or to ve,

.. 1 be greater in proportion to the hatred or love, Q.E.D.

L Fbof. "Kx XVI it J^ q, man has begun to hate an object of

'i love, ea that love it thoroughiy destroyed, he wiU, eausee

g egual, regard it imth more hatred than if he had never

i U, and hit hatred will he in ^proportion to the strength

W. Ail former love.

I Froof. — If a man begins to hate that which he had
e of his appetites are put under restraint than
i he had never loved it. For love is a pleasure (TEI. siii.
te) which a man endeavours as far as he can to render
rmanent (IH. xrviii.) ; he does so by regarding the object
E his love as present, and by affecting it as far as he can
rably ; this endeavour is greater in proportion as the
s greater, and so also is the endeavour to bring about
Lthe beloved should return his affection ^QI. xxxiii.).


1


ithe


166 THE ETHICS. [PAKT

Kow these endeavours are constrained by hatred towards
theobjectofloveCHLsiii. CoroU. andm. ssiii.); wherefore
the Ipver (ILL, si. note) will for this cause also he afEected
with pain, the more so in proportion as Ms love has b*«n
greater; that is, in addition to the pain caused hy hatred,
there ia a pain caused by the fact that he has loved the
object ; wherefore the lovfir will regard the beloved witK
greater pain, or in other "words, will hate it more than if
he had never loved it, and with the more intensity '
portion as his former love was greater. Q.E.D.

Prop, x x xTT , He who hates anyone wiU endeavour
do hint an injury, unZess he fears that a greater injvry
thereby accrue io himself; on the other hand, he loko
anyone loUl, by the same lavj, seek to benefit him.

Proof.— To hate a man ia (HL xiii. note) to conceive
Mm as a cause of pain ; therefore he who hates a man wiU
endeavour to remove or destroy him. But if anything
more painful, or, in other words, a greater evil, should
accrue to the hater thereby — and if the hater thints he
can avoid such evil by not carrying oiit the injury, which
he plaimed against the object of hia bate — he will desire to
abataiQ from inflicting that injury (HI, xsviii.), and the
strength of his endeavonr (ILL. xssvii.) will be greaterthan
his former endeavour to do injury, and will therefore pre-
vail over it, as we asserted. The second part of this proof
proceeds in the same manner. Wherefore he who hates
another, etc. Q.E.D.

Note. — By good I here mean every kind of pleasure, and
all that conduces thereto, especially that which satisfies
our lon^ngs, whatsoever they may be. By evil, I mean
every loiid of pain, especially that which frustrates our
longings. For I have shown ( TTT, is. note) that we in no
case desire a thing because we deem it good, but, contrari-
wise, we deem a thing good because we desire it ; conse-
quentiy we deem evil that which we shrink from ; every-
one, therefore, according to his particular emotions, judges
or estimates what is good, what is bad, what is better, what
is worse, laaUy, what is best, and what is worst. Thus a
miser thinks that abundance of money is the best, and
want of money the worst ; an ambitious man desires
nothing so much as glory, and fears nothing so much


ON THE OKiaiN AND NATDRE OF THE EUOTtUKB. 157

afaaiue. To on esTioue man nothiug is more delightful
tliaa another's misfortune, and nothing more painful tliaJi
auotber's succesa. So every man. according to his emotione,
judges a thing to be good or bad, useful or useless. The
emotion, wbich induces a man to turn from that which he
wiahes, or to wish for that which he turus from, is oalled
timidity, which may accordingly be defined as the fear
whereby a man is induced to avoid a« evil tvkich he regards
at future by encouniuring a leaser evil {HI, ixviii.). But if
the evil which he fears be shame, timidity becomes baek-
fulness. Lastly, if the desire to avoid a future evil be
checked by the fear of another evil, so that the man knows
not which to choose, fear becomes consternation, especially
if l>oth the evils feared be very great.
^_ Pbof. XIi. Seiiaho eoneeieeg himself to he haledhy another,
^Band believes that he has given him no cause for haired, vili
^^gtate that other in retuni.

^^F Proof. — He who conceives another as affected with
^^^Tiatred, wUl thereupon bo affected himself with hatred
(ill. sivlL.), that is, with pain, accompanied by the idea of
aa external cause, But, by the hypothesis, he conceives no
cause for this pain except him who is his enemy ; therefore,
from conceiving that he is hated by some one, he will be
affected with pain, accompanied by the idea of his enemy ;
in other words, he will hate his enemy in return, Q.E.t).
Note. — He who thinks that be has given just cause (or
.tred will (HI. six. and note} be affected with shame ;
± this case (ILL. xxv.) rarely happens. This reciproca-
a of hatred may also arise from the hatred, which follows
endeavour to injure the object of our hate (HI, sxxis.).
therefore who conceives that he is hated by another will
iceive his enemy as the cause of some evil or pain ; thus
will be affected with pain or fear, accompanied hj the
a of his enemy as cause ; in other words, he will be
lected with hatred towards his enemy, as I said above.
Corollary J.— He who conceives, that one whom he loves
i,tee Mm, will be a prey to conflicting hatred and love,
in Bo far as he conceives that he is aa object of hatred,
determined to hate his enemy in return. But, by the
lypothesis. he nevertheless loves him : wherefore he will
a prey to conflicting hatred and love.


153 THE ETHICS. [PAET III.

Corollary 11.— 11 a man conceives that one, wliom he has
hitherto regarded without emotion, has done Tiim any in-
juiy from motivea of hatred, he will forthwith seek to re-
pay the injury in kind.

Proof. — He who conceives, that another hates him, will
(by the last proposition) hate his enemy in return, and ( 1 1 1,
xsri.) will endeavour to recall everythmg which can affect
Tiim painfully ; he will moreover endeavour to do him an
injury ( TTT . rxsis.). Now the first thing of this sort which
he conceives is the injury done to himself ; he will, therefore,
forthwith endeavour to repay it in kind. Q.E.D.

Note. — -The endeavour to injure one whom we hate is
called Anger ; the endeavour to repay in kind injury done
to ourselves is called Revenge.

Pbop. XLI. If anyone conceives that he ie loved by
another, and believes that he has given no cause for such love,
A* mil love that other in return. (Cf. TTT. sv. Coroll., and

m.™.)

Proof,— Tins proposition ia proved in the same way as
the preceding one. See also the note appended thereto.

Note. — If be believes that he has given just cause for the
love, he will take pride therein (TTT. xxx. andnot«) ; this is
■what most often happens (in. ixv.), and we said that its
contrary took place whenever a man conceives himself to be
bated by another. (See note to preceding proposition.)
This reciprocal love, and consequently the desire of bene-
fiting bim. who loves us (HI. xxxis.), and who endeavoars
to benefit us, is called gratitude or ihanJifulneas. It thus
appears that men are much more prone to take vengeance
than to return benefits.

Corollary. — He who imagines, that he is loved by one
whom he hates, will be a. prey to conflicting hatred and
love. This is proved in the same way as the first coroUaiy
of the preceding proposition.

Note. — If hatred be the prevailing emotion, be '
endeavour to injure bim -who loves bin) ; this emotion i
called cruelty, especially if the victim be believed to baid
given no ordinary cause for hatred.

Pbop. XLII, Se who has conferred a benefit on anyi
from motiveg of love or honour viUl feel pain, if he »i
the benefit is received vnthoixt gratitude.


IF


ON THB OBiaiN AND NATUEE OF THE BM0TIOM3, 159

Proof. — Wlien a man loves something similar to himself,
he endeavourB, as far as he can. to bring it aliont that he
should be lofed thereby in return (III. xsxiii.). Therefore
he who has conferred a benefit confers it in obedience to
the desire, which he feels of being loved in return ; that is
{m. sisiv,) from the hope of honour or (ill. xix. not^)
pleasure ; hence he will endeavour, as far as he can, to con-
ceive this cause of honour, or to regard it as actually esist-
ing. But, by the hypothesis, h« conceives something else,
wlach excludes the eiistence of the said cause of honour :
wherefore he will thereat feel pain (iXl. xii.). Q.E.J?.

Pbop, yT.TTT . Maired is increaied by being reciprocated,
and can on the other hand be dettroyed by love.

Proof. — He who conceives, that an object of his hate
hates him in return, will thereupon feel a new hatred,
while the former hatred (by hypothesis) still remains (HI,
xl.). But if, on the other hand, he conceives that the
object of hate loves him, he will to this extent (ill,
xssviii.) regard himself with pleasure, and (lii. siii.) will
endeavour to please the cause of his emotion. In other
words, he will endeavour not to hate him (in. ill.), and
not to affect him painfully ; this endeavour (ill. uxvii.)
will be greater or less in proportion to the emotion from
which it arises. Therefore, if it be greater than that which
arises from hatred, and through which the man endeavours
to affect painfully the thing which he hates, it will get the
better of it and banish the hatred from his mind. Q.E.D.
pKOP. XLIV. Satred tekiek ia completely vanqmsked by
Jove patges ijito love : and love m thereupon greater than if
hatred had not preceded U.

Proo/.— The proof proceeds in the same way as Prop,
accxviii. of this Part : for he who begins to love a thing,
which he was wont to hate or regard with pain, from the
veiy fact of loving feels pleasure. To this pleasure in-
volved in love is added the pleasure arising from aid given
to the endeavour to remove the pain involved in hatred
(m. xsxvii.), accompanied by the idea of the former object
^f of hatred as cause.

^V J!b(e.^Though this be so, no one will endeavour to hate
^B Anything, or to be affected with, pain, for the sake of en-
^H, joying this greater pleasure ; that is, no one will desire that


J


160 THE ETHica, [part III.

he ahould be injured, in the hope of recovering from the
injury, nor long to he ill for the sake of getting well. For
everyone will always endeavour to peraist in hie being,
and to ward o£E pain as far as he csjl If the contrary ia
conceivable, namely, that & man should desire to hate some-
one, in order that he might love him the more thereafter,
he will always desire to hate him. For the strength of the
love is in proportion to the strength of the hatred, where-
fore the man would desire, that the hatred be continually
increased more and more, and, for a similar reason, he
would desire to become more and more ill, in order that he
might take a greater pleasure in being restored to health:
in such a case he would always endeavour to be iU, which
(m. vi.) is absurd.

Pbop. XLV. If a man. conceives, that anyone similar to
himself hates anything also similar to himself, which he lovee,
he wiU hate that person.

Proof. — The beloved oTjject feels reciprocal hatred to-
wards him who hates it (III. si.) ; therefore the lover, in
conceiving that anyone hates the beloved object, conceive*
th9 beloved t hing as affected by hatred, in other words
( Ml , siii.), by pain ; consequently he is himself affected by
pain accompanied by the idea of the hater of the beloved
thing aa cause ; that is, he will hate him who hates any-
thing which he himself loves (HL xiU. note). Q.H.I).

Prop. XLTI. If a man hoe been affected ■pleasurahly or
painfvily by anyone, of a, class or nation different front his
own, and if the pleasure or pain has ieen accompanied hy the
idea of the said stranger aa canse, under the general category
of the class or nation : the man vrill feel love or haired, not
only to the indimdual stranger, hnt also to the whole class or
nation whereto he belongs.

Proo/,— This is evident from HI. Tvi.

Prop. "yT. y 1 1, Joy arising from the fact, i?iat anything we
hate 18 destroyed, or suffers other injury, is never unaccom-
'panied by a certain pain irt us.

Proof. — Thia is evident from HI. xxvii. For in so far
as we conceive a thing similar to ourselves to be affected
with pain, we oarselves feel pain.

Note. — This proposition can aiso be proved from the
Corollary to U. xvii. Whenever we remember anything.


^


OH 1HB OBIOIH AND RATDBB OF THE BM0TI0N9, 161

l«veii if it does not actually exist, we regard it only as present,
And the body is affected In tha same manner; wherefore,
the remembrance of the thing is strong, a man
is determined to regard it with pain ; this determination,
vbile the image of the thing in question lasts, is indeed
diecked by the remembrance of other things excluding tha
^Btence of the aforesaid thing, but is not destroyed : henc^,
& man only feels pleasure in so far aa the said determina-
tion is checked: for this reason the joy arising from the
injury done to what we hate is repeated, every time we re-
anember that object of hatred. For, aa we have said, when
.the ima^ of the thing in question is aroused, inasmuch
it iuTolvea the thing'a existence, it determines the man
to regard the thing with the same pain as he was wont to
ido, when it actually did exist. However, since he has joined
to the image of the thing other images, which exclude its
eiiBtence, this determination to pain ia forthwith checked,
land the man rejoices afresh as often aa the repetition takes
ilace. This is the cause of men's pleasure in recalling
_ia8t erila, and delight in narrating dangera from which
|they have escaped. Tor when meu coaceiTe a danger, they
Mneeive it as still future, and are determined to fear it j
ihia determination is checked afxesh by the idea of freedom,
which became associated with the idea of the danger when
they escaped therefrom : this renders them secure afresh :
therefore the y rejo ice afresh.

Pbof. XLVm. Love or Tiatred towards, for inriajice,

•flier is destroyed, if the pleaswre involved in the former, or

pain involved in the latter ertMtion, be associated with the

i%aea of another cause : and will he diminished in 'proportion

as we conceive Peter not to have been tiie sole cause of either

emotion.

Proof. — This Prop, is evident from, the mere definition

iOf love and hatred (HI. xiii. note). For pleasure is called

love towards Peter, and pain is called hatred towards

Peter, simply in so far as Peter is regarded as the cause of

lOne emotion or the other. When this condition of causality

either wholly or partly removed, the emotion towards

jter also whoUy or iu part vanishes. Q.E.D.

Pbop. XLES. Love or hatred towards a thing, which vie

fioneeive to be free, must, other condiiitma beinij similar, ie


'A'l


Jf. '^^&0is^'x^ -w^ ^ncerr* fc Hi -aft acoK -rf _
^a- ▼-?: ttftZ '^iusB'sfc.p*: HL ifL 3inse- jc«» i

*iifu. ''i^o. "'.7 "^ waaxut iPiiL tz. Bun L ^rauaecv^ is Kitai

V.*«r^i'>y%','ir >yr*cr iasz5dtt?wariii3'»:_u»]iB^ QuElD.

V. v^ ff^f if^ zsi-jVi: IcfT^ at cozred «?vu<is <Hie anmKer
^<V!^. V.inbria scj^^izie eLae : ;o iks yyrrgiVfasigm v« must
v:«^ \cj^ hcr^A^x: o€ <x&crCiufLS trp^sed <£ izL IIL xxnL xxxit.

P*/>7', L, AmifQi^mg wkaiiv«T cam he, mondemUnf^ a eamm

jPr'x// — Thii pry>positkn is prored in the amme mj ms
III, zr,, whkh i^, Vjngether with the note to TTT. xviiL

/iVy^/ — Thin^ idkich are aoddentalh' the cauaes of hope
^/f inM ;ur«r calkd good or eril omens. Now. in ao fur as
« -;/>> fffUHfi% are tfai^ catue of hope or fear, thej are (br the
4^;r*^t«//r*%</f )y/p^ and feargiren in TIT. xriiL note) the canses
x\*^f fA \f\hnainrh a&d pain; conseqaentlr we, to this extent^
t^/7kfA ttt^n with lore or hatred, and endearonr ^her to
ihrokh t)tfan as mfOLns towards that which we hope tofr, or
f// r^^hf/vH thtim as obstacles, or canses of that which we
fi^r. It folU/wu, further, from TTT. xxr., that we are natnraUj
Wf ///Tiirtitu Wl as to beliere readily in that which we hope for,
A/f/J With di/fj/;ijltj in that which we fear; moreoTer, we are
aj/t t// 'tniiMhUi mitih objects abore or below their true vahie.
\\*'jH'Ai ihffrh have arisen superstitions, wherebj men are
#fV<7rywh/?r<5 a^ffailed, Howerer, I do not think it worth
w\itU; Uf [ffAui out here the vacillations springing from hope
ftw\ firu,r ; It folkxws from the definition of these emotions,
fiiAt iharh can }}fi no hope without fear, and no fear with-
oiii >i//fMj, as I will duly explain in the proper place. Further,
hi Ht) faraM we hoj>o for or fear anything, we regard it with
Jove or hatred; thus everyone can apply by himself to


I' OK THE OKICIN AND HATimS OF THE EUOTIONS. 163 ^H

liope and fear wLat we ha,ve eaid conceming love and ^M

liatred. H

Peop. IL Different men may he differently affected by ike ^|


i


ibjeet, and the eame man may be differently affected at
different times by the same object.

Proof. — The human body is affected "by external bodies
in a. variety of ways (H. Post. iii,). Two men may there-
fore be di£Eerently affected at tho same time, and therefore
i(by As. i. after Lemma iii. after IL liii.) may be diffe-
Tently aiEected by one and the same object. Fnrther (by
the same Post.) the human body can be affected Bometimes
in one way, Bometimes in another ; consequently (by tbo
«ame Axiom) it may be differently affected at different
times by one and the eame object, Q.E.D.

Note. — We thus see that it is possible, that what one
zoan loves another may hate, and that what one man fears
(mother may not fear ; or, again, that one and the same
man may love what he once hated, or may bo bold where
be once was timid, and so on. Again, as everyone judges
according to his emotions what i^ good, what bad, what
better, and what worse (HE. mil. note), it follows that
■ men's judgments may vary no less than their emotions,'
hence when, we compare some with others, we distinguish
them solely by the diversity of their emotions, and style
wmie intrepid, others timid, others by some other epithet.
"For instance, I ahaJl caU a man intrepid, if he despises an
«vil which I am accustomed to fear ; if I further take into
consideration, that, in his desire to iajure his enemies and to
benefit those whom he loves, he is not restrained by the
^ear of an evil which is sufficient to restrain me, I shall call
^Mm daring. Again, a man will appear timid to me, if he
leara an evil which I am accustomed to despise ; and if I
further take into consideration that liis desire is restrained
"by the fear of an evil, which is not sufficient to restrain me,
I shall say that he is cowardly ; and in Hke manner will
everyone pass judgment.

Lastly, from this inconstancy in the nature of human
jn^ment, inasmuch as a man often judges of things
Bolely by his emotions, and inasmuch as the things which
part of the divins in-


I


164 THE EiHica.

he believes canBG pIcaBure or pain, and therefore endeavotri
to promote or prevent, are often purely imaginary, not I
apeak of the nncertainty o f tilings alluded to in I H. xrviii.
■we may readily conceive that a man may be at one time
affected ■with pleasure, and at another ■with pain, accom-
panied by the idea of himseH as cause. Thus we can easily
understand what are Bepentance and Belf-complaoency,
Repentance is pain, accompanied by tke idea of one's self aa
cause ; Self-complacency is pleasure accompanied by the idea
of one's self ae cause, and these emotions are mOat intense
becaose men believe themselves to be free (UL xlix.).

Peop. TiTT An object which we havefomterhj seen i/n. eon~
junction witk others, and which we do not conceive to have amy
property thai is Tiot common to many, will not be regarded by
us for 80 long, as an object which we conceive to have some
property peculiar to itself.

Proof. — As soon as we conceive an object which we hava
Been in conjunction 'with others, we at once remember those
others (II. xviii. and note), and thus we pass forth'with from
the contemplation of one object to the contemplation of
another object. And this ia the case with the object, which
we conceive to have no property that is not common to
many. For we thereupon assume that we are r^arding
therein nothing, which we have not before seen in conjunc-
tion ■with other objects. But when we suppose that we
conceive in an object something special, which we have
never seen before, we must needs say that the mind, while
regarding that object, has in itself nothing which it can fall
to regarding instead thereof ; therefore it is determined to
the contemplation of that object only. Therefore an object,
&c. Q.E.D.

Note. — This mental modification, or imagination of a
particular thing, in so far as it is alone in the mind, is
called Wonder; but if it be excited by an object of fear, it
is called Consternation, because wonder at an evil keeps a
man so engrossed in the simple contemplation thereof, that
he has no power to think of anything else whereby he
might avoid the evil. If, however, the object of wonder bo
a man's prudence, industry, or anything of that sort, inas-
much as the said man is thereby regarded as far surpasaingf
ourselves, wonder is called Veneration; otherwise, "'" —


I OH THE OBIGm ADD HATDBB OF THE EUOTION3. 165

I loan's anger, envy, Ac, be what we wonder at, the amotion
I ia called Horror. Again, if it be the prudence, industrj, or
I vhat not, of a man we love, that we wonder at, our lova
I will on thia account be the greater (HL lii.), and when
w joined to wonder or veneration is called Devotion. We may
I in like manner conceive hatred, hope, confidence, and the
I -other emotions, as aesociated with wonder ; and we ehould
I dus be able to deduce more emotions than those wUch

■ }iave obtained names in ordinttry speech. Whence it ia
I evident, that the names of the emotions have been appEed
ft in accordance rather with their ordinary mamfestatioua
K.'Chan with an accurate knowledge of their nature.

m- To wonder is opposed Coniempt, which generally arises
■from the fact that, because we see someone wondering at,
Hoviiig, or fearing something, or because something, at first
^Ktght, appears to be like thin ga, which we ourselves wonder
Blit, love, fear, &c„ we are, in consequence (m. xv. CoroU.
Bknd iii. xxrii.). determined to wonder at, love, or fear that
BUung. But if from the presence, or more accurate contem-
I plation of the said thing, we are compelled to deny couoem-
I his it all that csm be the cause of wonder, love, fear, &o.,
I -the mind then, by the presence of the thing, remains
K determined to think rather of those qualities which are not
■. in it, than of those which are in it ; whereas, on the other
K.^and, the presence of the object would cause it more par-
fc-ticularly to regard that which is therein. As devotion
l-nrings from wonder at a thing which we love, so does
I Merimon spring from contempt of a thing which we hate or
r &ar, and Scorn, from contempt of foUy, as veneration from
I wonder at prudence. Lastly, we can conceive the emo-
I tions of love, hope, honour, &a., in association with con-
I t«mpt, and can thence deduce other emotions, which are
I not distinguished one from another by any recognized
ftjiame.

I Paop. TTTT . When the mind regards itmlf and its own
^foaier of activity, it feels jileasure : and thatphagure w greater
Wilt proportion to the distinctness wheremih U conceives itself
mtmd Ua own power of activity.
I Proof. — A man doea not know himself except through

■ Jihe modifications of his body, and the ideas thereof {IL
[xix. and xxiii.). When, therefore, the mind is able to con-


166 THB ETHICS. [PABT III^

template itself, it is thereby aHHumed to pass to a greater
perfection, or (HI. li. note) to feel pleasure ; and the pleasure
■will be greater in proportion to the distinctness, ■wherewith
it is able to conceive itself and its own power of activi* ^
Q.KD.

Corollary. — This pleasure is fostered more and more,
proportion aa o, man conceives himself to be praised
others. For the more he conceives himself as praised by
others, the more will he imagine them to he affected with
pleasure, accompanied by the idea of himself (HI. zxix.
note) ; thus he is (HE. ixvii.) himself affected with greater
pleasure, accompanied by the idea of himself. Q.E.JO.

Pkof. lit. The mind endeavours to conceive only such
things as assert ite power of activity.

Froqf. — The endeavour or power of the mind is the actual
essence thereof (HI. vii.) ; but the essence of the mind
obviously only affirms that which the mind is and cai
not that which it neither ia nor can do ; therefore the
endeavours to conceive only such things as ai
its power of activity. Q.E.D.

Prop. LV. When the mind contemplates Us
it feels pain thereat.

Proof. — The essence of tlie mind only affirms that which,
the mind is, or can do ; in other woiils, it is the mind's-
nature to conceive only such things as assert its power of
activity (last Prop.). Thus, when we say that the mind
contemplates its own weakness, we are merely saying that
while the mind is attempting to conceive something which
asBerta its power of activity, it is checked in its endeavour
— in other words (HI, xi. note), it feela pain. Q.KD.

Corollary. — This paia is more and more fostered, 11
man coneeivea that he ia blamed by others ; this may
proved in the same way as the corollary to III. liii.

Note. — This pain, accompanied by the idea of o
weakness, is called Av/miliiy; the pleasure, which Bpi
from the contemplation of ourselves, is called
self-complacency. And inafimuch as this feeUng
as often as a man contemplntes his own virtues, or his o'
power of activity, it follows that everyone ia fond
narrating his own exploits, and displaying the force bi
of his body and mind, and also that, for this reason, n


it h

i


an do;^

e mind^^^
' affin^^l


*


ON THE OEiaiN AND KATUKE (


Iti?


are troableaome one to anothor.
men are naturally eavioua (ill. xi
tiot«), rejoicing in the sliortcominga of their etjuals, and
feeling pain at their virtues, For whenever a man conceives
Mb own actions, he ia affected witli pleasure (111. liti.), in
proportion as hia actions display more perfection, and he
conceivea them more distinctl}' — that is (IE. xl. note), in
proportion aa he can diBtinguish them from others, and
regard them aa something special. Therefore, a man will
take most pleasure in GOntempla.ting himself, when he con-
templates some quality which he denies to others. But, if
that which he affirms of himself be attributable to the idea
of man or animals in general, he will not be ao greatly
pleased : he will, on the contrary, feel pain, if he conceives
that hie own actions fall short when compared with those
of others. This pain (111. ssviii.) he will endeavour to
remove, by putting a, wrong construction on the actions of
hia equals, or by, as far as he caji, embeUishing his own.

It is thua appsjent that men are naturally prone to
hatred and envy, which latter is fostered by their education,
For parents are accustomed to incite their children to
virtue solely by the spur of honour and envy. But, per-
haps, some will scruple to assent to whut I have said,
"because we not seldom admire men's virtues, and venerate
their possessors. In order to remove auch doubts, I append
the following corollary.

Corollary. — No one envies the virtue of anyone who is
not his equal,

Proof. — Envy is a species of hatred (111. xxiv. note) or
(m. siii. note) pain, tha,t is (III. li. note), a modification
whereby a man's power of activity, or endeavour towarda
activity, is checked. But a man does not endeavour or de-
aire to do anything, which cannot follow from his nature as
it is given ; therefore a man will not desire any power of
activity or virtue (which is the same thing) to be attributed
to bim, that is appropriate to another's nature and foreign
to hia own ; hence his desire ■cannot be checked, nor he
Hmself pained by the contemplation of virtue in some one
Bnlike himself, consequently he cannot envy auch an one.
But he can envy his equal, who is assumed to have the sama
nature as himself. Q.E.D,


163 THE ETHIC3, [part in.

Note,— When, therefore, as -we said in the note to TTI.
lii., we venerate a man, througli ■wonder at his prudence,
fortitude, &e., we do so, hecaiise we conceive those qualitieB
to be peculiar to him, aJid not aa common to our nature ; .
we, therefore, no more envy their poBsessor, than we envy
trees for being tall, or lione for being courageous.

Peop. LVI. There are ae many kinds of pleasure, of pawtf
of detire, and of every emotion eompounded of these, such at<
vaeillatiom of spirit, or derivedfrom these, such as love, hatred,
hope, fear, &c., as there are Jdnds of objects whereby we art
affected.

Proof. — Pleasure and pain, and consequently the emo-
tions compounded thereof, or derived, therefrom, are
passions, or passive states (TEI. si. note) ; now we are
necessarily passive ( 111 , i,), in bo far aa we have inadequate
ideas ; and only in so far as we have such ideas are we
passive (HI. iii.) ; that is, we are only necessarily paasiTe
(H. xl. note), in so far as we conceive, or (IL xvii, and
note) in bo far as we are afEectfid by an emotion, wbich in-
volves the nature of our own body, and the nature of an
external body. "Wherefore the nature of every passive
state must necessarily be bo explained, that the nature of
the object whereby we are affected be expressed. Namely,
the pleasure, which arises from, say, the object a, involves
tbe nature of that object A, and the pleasure, which arises
from the object b, involves the nature of the object b ;
wherefore these two pleasurable emotions are by nature
different, inasmuch aa the causes whence they arise are by
nature different. So again the emotion of pain, wMch
arises from one object, is by nature different from ""
pain arising from another object, and, similarly, in
case of love, hatred, hope, fear, vacillation, &c.

Thus, there are necessarily as many kinds of pleas
pain, love, hatred, &c., as there are kinds of
whereby we are affected. Kow desire is each man's
or nature, in so far as it is conceived aa determined
particular action by any p.ven modification of itself
ii. note) ; therefore, according aa a man is affected throi
external causes by this or that kind of pleasure, pain, )
hatred, &c., in other words, according as his nature is
posed in this or that manner, so will his desire be of


I


OSt THE OBIaIN A.ND HATUBE OF THE EU0TIOK8. 1C9

kind or another, and tlie nature of one desire mnflt necea-

Baril J differ from the nature of another desire, aa widely as
the emotions differ, wherefrom each desire arose. Thus
there are as many kinds of desire, as there are kinds of
pleasure, pain, love, Ac., conseqnently (by what has been
shown) there are as many kinds of desire, as there are
kinds of objects whereby we are affected. Q.E.D.

Note. — AJnong the kinds of emotions, which, by the last
proposition, mxiat be Tery numerous, the chief are htrury,
drunlcenness, hist, avarice, and ambition, being merely 8pecie«
of love or desire, displaying the nature of those emotions in
a manner Taryio}; according to the object, with which they
are concerned. For by luxury, drunkenness, lust, avarice,
ambition, &c., we simply mean the immoderate love of
feasting, drinking, venery, riches, and fame. Further-
more, these emotions, in so far as we distinguish them
from others merely by the objects wherpwith they are con-
cerned, have no contraries. For temperance, sobriety, and
ehagtiiy, which we are wont to oppose to luxury, drunken-
ness, and lust, are not emotions or passive states, but indi-
cate a power of the mind which moderatoa the last-named
emotions. However, I cannot here explain the remaining
' inda of emotions (seeing that they are as numerous as the
inds of objects), nor, if I could, would it be necessary. It
I sufficient for our purpose, namely, to determine the
trengthof the emotions, and the mind's power over them,
have a general definition of each emotion. It is sufficient,
l repeat, to understand the general properties of the emo-
■jons and the mind, to enable us to determine the qnaUty
md extent of the mind's power in moderating and check-
g the emotions. Thus, though there is a, great difference
ietween various emotions of love, hatred, or desire, for in-
i between love felt tawards children, and love felt
bowards a wife, there is no need for us to take cognizance
f 8uch differences, or to track out further the nature and
_ n of the emotions.
Pbop. LVli. Any ^notion of a given individual differs
n the emotion of another indimdual, only in go far as the
! of the one individval differs from the essence of iJie
^pther.

Proof. — This proposition is evident from Ax. i. (which


see after Lenmia iii, Prop, xiii. Part ia,). H'eyOTtlie]
we ■will prove it from the nature of the three p] '


LBT III.

thel^H


AU emotaonB are attributatle to desire, pleaaiire, orpain,
as their definitions above given show. But desire is each
man's nature or esaence ( 111 , ii. note) ; therefore desire in
one iudividuaJ difEers from desire in another individual,
only in BO far aa the nature or esaeuee of the one differs
from the nature or essence of the other. Again, pleasure
and pain are passive states or passions, whereby every
man's power or endeavour to persist in his being is in-
creased or diminished, helped or hindered ( 1 1 1 . xi. and
note). But by the endeavour to persist iu its being, in bo
far aa it ia attributable to mind and body in conjunction,
we mean appetite and deaire (HE. is. note) ; therefore plea-
sure and pain are identical with desire or appetite, in bo
far as by external causes they are increased or diminished,
helped or hindered, in other words, they are every man's
nature ; wherefore the pleasure and pain felt by one man
differ firom the pleasure and pain felt by another man.
Only iu So far as the Qatute or eeaence o£ the one man
differs from the essence of the other ; consequently, any
emotion of one individual only differs, &c. Q.E.D.

Note. — Hence it follows, that the emotions of the animals
which are called irrational (for after learning the origin of
mind we cannot doubt tbat brutes feel) only differ from
man's emotions, to the extent that brute nature differs
from human nature. Horse and man are ahke carried
away by the deaire of procreation ; but the desire of the
former ia equine, the desire of the latter is hunaan. So
also the lusta and appetites of ineects, fiahes, and birds
must needs vary according to the several natures. Thns,
although each individual lives content and rejoices in that
nature belonging to bim wherein he has his being, yet the
life, wherein each is con1;ent and rejoices, is nothing else
but the idea, or soul, of the said individual, and hence the
joy of one only differs in nature from the joy of another,
to the extent that the essence of one differs from the essence
of another. Lastly, it follows from the foregoing proposi-
tion, that there is no small difference between the joy which
actuates, say, a drunkard, and the joy possessed by a pbili


1


ON THE OKIGIN AND NATUEB OF THE EMOTIONS. 171

Bopher, as I just mention here by the way. Thus far I
have treated of the emotiona attributable to man. in so far as
he is passive. It remains to add a few words on those
attributable to him in so far as he is active.

Paop. LVm. Besideipleaeare and desire, which are poBfi-
vitiee or pasgione, there are other emolions derived from
pleasure and desire, which are attributable to «» in so far as
we aire active.

Proof. — When the mind conceives itself and its power oi
ftctiTity, it feols pleasnre (lil. liii.) : now the mind neeea-
sarily contemplates itseH, when it conceives a true or
adetjuate idea (H. xliii). But the mind does conceive cer-
tain adequate ideas (IL il. note 2). Therefore, it feels-
pleasure in bo far as it conceives adequate ideas; that
is, in so far as it is active (HI. i). Again, the mind,
both in GO far as it has clear and distinct ideas, and in so-
far aa it has confused ideas, endeavours to persist in its
own being (HI. ii.) ; hut by such an endeavour we mean
Bdestte (by the note to the same Prop.) ; therefore, desire ia
^Hbo attributable to us, in ho £ar as we understand, or
Hpn. i.) in so far aa we are active. Q.E.D.
•^ Pbop. LIX. Among all the emoiiom attrihutabh to the
W inind as active, there are none which cannot be referred to
L fleoBwre or pain.

L Proof. — All emotions can be referred to desire, pleasure,
Hp pain, as their definitions, already given, show. !Now by
^■BJn we mean that the mind's power of thinking is dimi'
^Kshed or checked (m. si. and note) ; therefore, in so far
^ps the mind feels pain, its power of understanding, that is,
Ettf activity, is diminished or checked (ill. i.) ; therefore, no
[ s>ainfal emotions can he attributed to the mind in virtue of
f xta being active, but only emotions of pleasure and desire,
gwhich (by the last Prop.) are attributable to the mind in
Bthat condition. Q.E.D.

H JTofe.— All actions following from emotion, which are at-
■bihntable to the mind in virtue of its understanding, I
Bfet down to strength of character (fortitudo), which I divide
F jntoi courage (animositas) and highmindedriess (generositat),
K '3^ courage I mean the desire whereby every man strivet to
t-jireeeniB his oum being in aeeorda.nce solely vnih the dictates
Wm reason. Sy highmindednees I mean the desire whereby


172 TBE KTHICS. [pAKTni.

every man endeavours, solely under the dictates of reason, to
aid other men and to unite them to himself in friendship.
Those actions, therefore, which have regard solely to the
good of the a^nt I set down to courage, those which aim
at the good of others I Bet down to highmindedneaa. Thus
temperance, sobriety, and presence of mind in danger, &o.,
are varietieB of courage ; courtesy, mercy, &c., are varieties
of highmindedness.

I thinl: I hitve thus explained, and displayed through
their primary causes the principal emotions and vacillations
of spirit, which arise from the combination of the three pri-
mary emotions, to wit, desire, pleasure, and pain. It is
evident from what I have said, that we are in many ways
driven about by external causes, and that like waves of the
aea driven by contrary winds we toss to and fro unwitting
of the issue and of our fate. But I have said, that I have
only set forth the chief conflicting emotions, not all that
might be given. For, by proceeding in the same way as
above, we can easily show that love is united to repentance,
scorn, shame, &a. I think everyone will a^ee from what
has been said, that the emotions may be compounded One
with another in so many ways, and ho many variations may
arise therefrom, aa to exceed all possibility of computation.
However, for my purpose, it is enough to have enumerated
the most important; to reckon up the rest which I have
omitted would be more curious than profitable. It remains
to remark concerning love, that it very often happens that
while we are enjoying a thing which we longed for, the
body, from the act of enjoyment, acquires a new disposition,
whereby it is determined in another way, other images of
things are aroused an it, and the mind begins to conceive
and desire something fresh. For example, when we con-
ceive something which generally dehghta us with its flavour,
we desire to enjoy, that ia, to eat it. But whilst we are
thua enjoyingit, the stomach is filled and the body is other-
wise disposed. If, therefore, when the body is thus other-
wise disposed, the image of the food which is present be
stimulated, and consequently the endeavour or desije to
«at it be stimulated also, the new disposition of the body
will feel repugnance to the desire or attempt, and conse-
quently the presence of the food which we formerly longed


PAKT III,] DEFINITIONS OP 1


173


r ■will fcecome odioua. This reTulaion of feeling is called
J or wearinesB. For the rest, I have neglected the
mtward modificationa o( the body obBcrrable in emotionB,
Mch, for instance, as trembling, pallor, aobbing, laughter,
Itc., for these are attributable to the body only, withoafc
my reference to the mind. Lastly, the definitions of the
motionB require to.be supplemented in a few points j I will
afore repeat them, interpolating such observations as I
'i should here and there be a,dded.


1


Dbfinitions of the Emotioss,

I. Deaire is the actual esBence of man, in so far as it is
conceived, as determined to a particular activity by Bome
given modification of itself.

Explanation. — Wa have said a.bove, in the note to Prop.

ix. of this part, that desire is appetite, with consciousness

"'■'fireof J further, that appetite is the essence of man, in so

r as it is determined to act in a way tending to promote

I awn persistence. But, in the same note, I also re-j

irked Uiat, strictly speaking, I recognize no distinction

len appetite and desire. For whether a man be con-

a of his appetite or not, it remains one and the same

Kppetite, Thns, in order to avoid the appearance of tauto-

B^^, I have refrained from explaining desire by appetite ;

put I have taken care to define it in such a manner, as to

Jomprehend, under one head, all those endeavours of

p-omaa nature, which we diatinguish by the terms appetite,

I, desire, or impulse. I might, indeed, have said, that

■ e is the essence of man, in so far as it is conceived as

determined to a particular activity ; but from such a defi-

■ition (cf. II. xxiii.) it would not follow that the mind can

e conaciouB of its desire or appetite. Therefore, in order

o imply the cause of such consciousness, it was necessary

) add, in to far as it is determined by gome given modifica-

'For, hy a modification of man's essence, w&

jnderstand every disposition of the said essence, whether

wch disposition he innate, or whether it be conceived solely

inder the attribute of thought, or solely under the attri-

Jbute of extension, or whether, laatly, it be referred aimul- .


174 THE ETHICS. [pABT

laneously to totli these attributes. By the term desire,
then, I here mean all man's endeavours, impulses, appe-
tites, and voIitionB, which vary according to each man's
disposition, and are, therefore, not seldom opposed one to
another, according as a man is drawn in diiferent directions,
and knows not where to turn.

II. Fleasiire is the transition of a man from a less to a.
greater perfection. . ^M

J 11. Pain is the transition of a to 3,11 from a greater to i|^H
less perfection. ^H

Enfilanaiion. — I say transition : for pleasure is not per- ^
fection itself. For, ff man were bom with the perfection
to which he passes, he would possess the same, without the
emotion of pleasure. This appears more clearly from the
consideration of the contrary emotion, pain. No one can
deny, that pain consists in the transition to a less perfec-
tion, and not in the less perfection itseK ; for a man cannot
be pained, in so far as he partakes of perfection of any
degree. Neither can we say, that pain consists in the ab-
sence of a greater perfection. For absence is nothing,
whereas the emotion of pain ia an activity ; wherefore this
activity can only be the activity of transition from a graater
to a less perfection — in other words, it is an activity ^^
whereby a man's power of action is lessened or constrainea ^|
(cf. HL li. note). I pass over the definitions of merri- ^B
ment, stimulation, melancholy, and grief, because these
terms are generally used in reference to the body, and are
merely kinds of pleasure or pain.

IV. Wonder is the conception (imaginatio) of anything,
wherein the mind comes to a stand, because the particular
concept in question has no connection with other eonoepti ~
(cf. TTT. lii. and note).

Explanation. — In the note to II. sviii, we showed thftfl
reason, why the mind, from the contemplation of one thing;*
straightway falls to the contemplation of another thiqgjfl
namely, because the images of the two things are so asB<H
ciated and arranged, that one follows the other. This staU
of association is impossible, if the image of the thing 1(
new ; the mind will then be at a stand in the contempt
tion thereof , until it ia determined by other can
■of something else.


r-


DEFINITIONS OF 1


! EMOTIONS. 175

Tliua the conception of a new object, considered in itself,
is of the same nature aa other conceptlone ; hence, I do not
include wonder among the emotiona, nor d« I aee why I
should BO include it, inasmuch as this distraction of the
mind arises from no positive cause drawing away the mind
from other objects, hut merely from the absence of a
cause, which should determine the mind to pass from the
contemplation of one object to the contemplation of
another.

I, therefore, recognize only three primitive or primary
emotions (as I said in the note to 1 1 1 - si.), namely, pleasure,
pain, and desire. I have spoken of wonder, simply because
it is customary to speak of certain emotions springing
from the three primitive ones by different names, when
they are referred to the objects of our wonder, I am led
by the same motive to add a de&nition of contempt.

V, Contempt is the conception of anything which touches
the mind so little, that its presence leads the mind to imagine
those qualities which are not in i1^ rather than such as are
in it (cf. m. lu. note).

The deflmtions of veneration and scorn I here pass over,
for I am not aware that any emotiona are named after

VL Iiove is pleasure, accompanied by the idea of an
external cause.

Explanation. — This definition eiplaina sufficiently clearly
the essence of love ; the definition given by those authors
who say that love ia ike lover's with to unite himself to the
Jotied object expresses a property, but not the essence of
love ; and, as such authors have not suiEciently discerned
love's essence, they have been unable to acquire a true con-
ception of its properties, accordingly their definition is on
all hands admitted to be very obacure. It must, however,
be noted, that when I say that it is a property of love, that
the lover should wish to unite himself to the beloved object,
I do not here mean by wwfc consent, or conclusion, or a
free decision of the mind (for I have shown such, in H.
xlviii., to bo fictitioua) ; neither do I mean a desire of being
united to the loved object when it ia absent, or of continu-
ing in its presence when it is at hand ; for love can be con-
ceived without either of these desires; but by viiah I


J


lavE)


176 THE ETHICS. [pABT ifl

mean the contentment, ■wbich is in tLe lover, on account of
the presence of the beloved object, whereby the pleaanre of
th e lov er is strengthened, or at least maintained.

Vll. Hatred is pain, accompanied by the idea of an es-
temal cause.

Explanation. — These obaervations are easily grasped after
what has been said in the explanation of the preceding
definition (cf. alao HI. iriii . note).

VIM. Inelination is pleasure, accompanied by the idea of
Bomething ■which is accidentally a cause of plei

IX. Averiion is pain, accompajiied by the idea of soi
thing which is accidentally the cause of pain (cf. ,) M.
note).

S. Devotion is love towards one whom we admire.

Eifplanaiion. — ^Wonder {admiraiio) arisea (as we hai
shown, m. lii.) from the novelty of a thing. If, therefore,
it happens that the object of our wonder is often conceived
by us, we shall cease to wonder at it ; thus we see, that
the emotion of devotion readily degenerates into simple
love.

XI. Derision ia pleasure arising from our conceiving tha
presence of a quality, which we despise, in an object which

Explanation. — In so far as we despise a thing which we
hate, we deny existence thereof (HI. lii, note), and to that
extent rejoice (lii. xx.). But since we assume that man
hates that which he derides, it follows that the pleasure in
question is not without alloy (cf. HI. xlvii. note).

XH. Hope is an inconstant pleasure, arisinf^ from the
idea of something past or future, whereof we to a certain
ex tent d oubt the issue.

Xm. Fear is an inconstant pain arising from the idea
of something past or fiiture, whereof we to a certain extent-
doubt the issue (cf. m. xviii. note).

Hasplwaation. — From these definitions it follows, that there
is no hope unmingled with fear, and no fear unmingled
with hope. For he, who depends on hope and doubts con-
cerning the issue of anything, is assumed to conceive some-
thing, which excludes the existence of the said thing in the
future ; therefore he, to this extent,[f eela pain (cf . in. xix.) ;
consequently, while dependent on hope, ho fears for t'


FAKT nl.j DKTISniOSB OP THE EltfOTlOMB. 177

isBue. ConlrariwiBe he, who fears, in other words doubts,
concerning the issue of something which he bates, also
conceives something which excludes the eiisteoce of the
thing in question ; to this extent he feels pleasure, and
consequently to this extent he hopes that it will turn out
as he desires (ill. ix.).

XIV. Confidence is pleasure arising from the idea of
wanething past or future, wherefrom aJ! cause of doubt has
' '"been removed.

XV". Deapatr is pain arising from the i<lea of something
»at or future, wherefrom aJl cause of duubt has been re-
moved.

Explanation. — Thus confidence springs from hope, and
lespair from fear, when all cause for doubt as to the issue
f an event has been removed: this comes to pass, because
oan conceives something past or future as present ajid re-
gards it as such, or else because he conceives other things,
which exclude the existence of the causes of his doubt,
Por, although we can never be absolutely certain of the
issue of any particular event (H. ixxi. Coroll.), it may
nevertheless happen that we feel no doubt concerning it,
For we have shown, that to feel no doubt concerning a
thing is not the same as to be quite certain of it (II. xtiy.
note). Thus it may happen that we are affected by the
eajne emotion of pleasure or pain concerning a thing past
or future, as concerning the conception of a thing present ;
this I have already shown in HI. iriii., to which, vrith its
note, I refer the reader.

XVI. Joy is pleasure accompanied hy the idea of some-
L thing past, which has had an issue beyond our hope.
L XVH. DiawppoirUment is pain accompanied by the idea of
I io methin g past, which has had an issue contrary to our hope.
XVm. Pity is pain accompanied by the idea of evil,
'ich has befallen someone else whom we conceive to be
e ourselves (cf. m. xxii, note, and HI. xivii. note),
Eeplamotioji.— Between pity and sympathy (miserieordia)
^ere seems to be no difference, unless perhaps that the
ftOTEDBT term is used in reference to a particular action, and
k-the latter in reference to a disposition.

MX. Approval is love towards one who has done good
o another.


178 THE BTHICB. [pAET lit.

XS. Indignation ia hatred towards one wLo liaa doi
evil to aaother.

Explanation. — I am aware that these tonna are employed '
in senaea somewhat different from those usuaDy
But my purpose is to explain, not the meaning of words,
hut the nature of things. I therefore make nse of such
terms, aa may convey my meaning without any violent de-
parture from their ordinary signification. One state-
ment of my method wiD suffice. As for the cause of the
above-named emotions see TTT, xsvii. Coroll. i., and ill.
xxU. note.

XSX Partiality is thinking too highly of anyone because'
«f the loTe we hear him.

yyTT. Disparagement la thinkiiig too meanly of anyonfe,
because we hate Hm.

Explanation. — Thua partiality is an effect of love, and
disparagement an effect of hatred ; so that partiality may
also he defined as love, in so far as it induces a man to tkink
too Tiighly of a beloved object. Contrariwise, di^aragement
may be defined as hatred, in eo far aa it induces a man to
think too meanly of a hated object. Gf . m. xxvi. note.

yXlTT . Envy is hatred, in so far as it induces a man to
he pained by another's good fortune, and to rejoice in an-
other's evil fortune.

ExplaTiation. — Envy ia generally opposed to sympathy,
which, by doing some violence to the meaning of the word,
may therefore he thus defined :

XXIV. Sympathy (inisericordia) ja love, in so far as it
induces a man to feel plaaaure at another's good fortune,
and pain at another's evil fortune.

Explanation. — Concerning envy see the notes to HI. xsiv.
and Ttimi i. These emotions also ariae from pleasure or
pain accompanied by the idea of something external, as
cauae either in itself or accidentally. I now pass on to
other emotions, which are accompanied by the idea of some-
thing within as a cause.

XXV. Self-approval ia pleasure arising from a man's
contemplation of himself and his own power of action.

XA.V1, HwmUily is pain arising from a man's contem-
plation of hia own weakneaa of body or mind.

Explanation. — Self-complacency is opposed to humility.


:it.S


4


IpABT in.] DErlNlTIONS 0¥ THE KMOTIOMH. 1*9


^Hin BO far bh we thereby mean pleasure ariring from a. con-
^H templation of oiir own power of action ; but, in ho far ae
jK^ we mean thereby pleasure accompanied by the idea of any
1^ action wMch we believe we have performed by the free de-
<nsiou of our mind, it is opposed to repentance, which we
may thus define :

^ X VI I Sepeniance is pain accompanied by the idea of
some action, which we believe we have performed by the
free decision of our mind.

Explanation.- — The causes of these emotions we have set
forth in HI. li. note, and in in. liu. Uv. Iv. and note.
Concerning the free decision of the mind Bee IL niv,
note. This ia perhaps the pUice to call attention to the
fact, that it ia nothing wonderful that all those actions,
which are commonly called wrimg, are followed by pain,
and all those, which are called right, are followed by plea-
sure. We can easily gather from what has been said, that
this depends in great measure on education. Parents, by
reprobating the former class of actions, and by frequently
chiding their children because of them, and also by per-
suading to and praising the latter clasH, have brought it
^^ about, that the former should be associated with pain
^K and the latter with pleasure. This is confirmed by eipe-
^■irience. For custom and reUgion are not the same among
^V all men, but that which some consider sacred others con-
^^ sider profane, and what some consider honourable others
consider disgraceful. According as each man has been
educated, he feels repentance for a given action or glories
therein.

y X V I II, Pride is thinking too highly of one's self from
aelf-love.

JEiiplanation. — Thus pride is different from partiality, for
the latter term is used in reference to an estemal object,
but pride is used of a man thinking too highly of him-
self. However, as partiahty is the effect of love, bo is
pride the effect or property of self-love, which may there-
. fore be thus defined, love of telf or self-approval, in eo
Ljfiw at a leads a man to think too highly of "himself. To
" 's emotion there is no contrary. For no one thinks too
anly of himself because of self-hatred j I say that no
3 thinks too meanly of himself, in so far as he con-


180 THE ETHIC8, [PAET III, I

ceives that he is incapable o£ doing this or that. For what-
Boever a, man imagineB that he ia incapable of doing, he
imagines this of necesBifcy, and by that notion he ia ao dis-
poaed, that he really cannot do that which he conceives that
he cannot do. For, so long ae be conceives that he cannot
do it, so long is he not determined to do it, and conse-
quently 60 long ia it impoBsible for him to do it. However,
if we consider such matters as only depend on opinion, wa
shall find it conceivable that a man may think too meanly
of himself ; for it may happen, that a man, sorrowfully re-
garding bis own weakness, should imagine that he ia de-
spised by all men, while the rest of the world are thinMng
of nothing lees than of despising him. Again, a man may
think too meanly of himself, if he deny of himself in the
present something in relation to a future time of which he
IS uncertain. As, for instance, if he should say that he is
unable to form any clear conceptions, or that he can desire
and do nothing but what is witied and hase, &c. We may
also say, that a man thinks too meanly of himself, when we
see him from eicessive feaj of shame refusing to do things
which others, Mb equals, Tenture. We can, therefore, aet
down aa a contrary to pride an emotion which I will call
self-abasement, for aa from self-complacency springs pride,
BO from hu mili ty springs self-abasement, which I will
accordingly thus define r

XXIX Self -abatement is thinking too meanly of one's self
by reason of pain.

Sseplanation. — We are nevertheleaa generally accustomed
to oppose pride to h umili ty, but in that case we pay more
attention to the efEect of either emotion than to its nature.
We are wont to call proiui the man who boasts too much
( 1 1 1, sxs. note), who talis of nothing but his own virtues
and other people's faults, who wishes to be first ; and lastly
who goes through life with a style and pomp suitable to
those far above him in station. On the other hand, we
call humhle the man who too often blushes, who confesses
his faults, who sets forth other men's virtues, and who,
lastly, walks with bent head and is neglij^ent of his attire.
However, these emotions, hamihty and self-ahasement, are
extremely rare. For human nature, considered in itself.
strives against them aa much aa it can (see HI. xiii. lly.) ;


1


>AET III,] D£FIMTIOVB OF THE EMOTIONS, 181

enee those, who are believed to be most eelf-ahased and
lumble, are generally in reality the most ambitious and
nvious.

Honour^ is pleasure accompanied by the idea of
ome action of onr own, which we believe to be praised by
thera.

'. Shame is pain accompanied by the idea of some
jction of our own, which we believe to be blamed by

Explanation. — On this subject see the note to HI. ttt.
we should here remark the difference which exists be-
a shame and modesty. Shame is the pain following
the deed whereof we are ashamed. Modesty is the fear
'or dread of shame, which restrains a man from committing
\ base action. Modesty is usually opposed to ahomelesa-
lesB, but the latter is not an emotion, as I will duly show ;
towever, the names of the emotions (aa I have remarked
ilJready) have regard rather to their exercise than to their
Ikature.

I have now fidfilled my task of explaining the emotions
Kmog from pleasure and pain, I therefore proceed to
it of th ose which I refer to desire.
xy xii Regret is the desire or appetite to possess some-
fhing, kept alive by the remembrance of the said thing, and
it the same time constrained by the remembrance of other
Qiinga which exclude the existence of it.

^X^Umation. — "When we remember a thing, we are hy that
yfact.aB I have already said more than once, disposed to
intemplate it with the same emotion as if it were something
present ; hut this disposition ot endeavour, while we are
ttwake, is generally checked by tlie images of things which
pxclude the existence of that which we remember. Thus
when we remember Bom.ething which affected us with a
iCertain pleasure, we by that very fact endeavour to regard
it vrith the same emotion of pleasure as though it were
^present, but this endeavour is at once cheeked by the re-
Inembrance of things which exclude the existence of the
Jiiing in question. Wherefore regret is, strictly apeak-
jng, a pain opposed to that pleasure, which arises from
£he absence of somethii^ we hate (cf. HI. ilvii. note).
"Int, as the name regret seems to refer to desire, I eet


182 THE ETHICS. [PABT

this emotion dovn, amon^ tlie emotionB Bpringing froi
desire.

y "y X I n , Emulation is tie desire of Bomething,
dered ia us by our conception that others have the same
desire.

Explanation. — He who runs airay, because he sees othera
running away, or he who fears, because he sees others in
fear; or again, be who, on seeing that another man has
burnt hia hand, draws towards him his own hand, and
moves his body as though his own hand were burnt; each
an one can he said to imitate another's emotion, but not to
emulate him ; not because the causes of emulation and imi-
tation are different, but because it has become customary to
speak of emulation only in him, who imitates that which
we deem to be honourable, useful, or pleasant. As to the.
cause of emulation, cf. HI. ssrii. and note. The reason]
why this emotion ia generally coupled with envy may b»"
seen from HI. xzxii. and note.

yxxi y. Thar\kfulneaa or GraiUude is the desire or zeal
springing from love, whereby we endeavour to benefit him,
who with Rimilar feelings of love has conferred a benefit
on us. Cf. m. xKsii, note and si.

XXX. V. Benevolence is the desire of benefiting one whom,
we pity. C f. m, Xivii. note.

SAJLVI. Anger is the desire, whereby through hatred
we are induced to injure one whom we hate, HI. sxxiz.

X X XVI r Sevenge is the desire whereby we are induced,
through mutual hatred, to injure one who, with similar
feelings, has injured us. (See m. il. Coroll. ii, and

X X X V I fT. Cruelty or eavagenesg is the desire, whereby
a man is impelled to injure one whom we love or pity.

Explanation. — To cruelty is opposed clemency, which i*;
not a passive state of the naind, but a power whereby
restra ins M s anger and revenge,

^yxix' Timidity is the desire to avoid a greater evil,'
which we dread, by undergoing a lesser evil. Cf . HI. xixix.
note.

XL, Daring is the desire, whereby a man is set on to d(y
something dangerous which his equals fear to attempt.

XLI, Cowardice is attributed to one, whose desire is


I PAET ni.] DEFINITIOBS or THB EMOTIONS.


^B diecked bj the fear of some danger wliich hie equals dare
^H to encounter.

^B Explanation. — Cowardice ia, therefore, nothing else but
'' thefearof some evil, which moBt men are wont not to fear;
bence I do not reckon it among the emotionB springing from
desire. NeTertheless, I have choeeu to explain it here, be-
cause, in BO far as we look to the desire, it is trulj opposed
to the emotion of daring.

TTT.TT . Conetemation is attributed to one, whose desire of
avoiding evil is checked bj amazement at the evil which he
fears.

Explanation. — Consternation is, therefore, a, speiries of

oow^dice. But, inasmuch as consternation arises from a

double fear, it may be more coaveuiently defined as a fear

which keeps a man so bewildered and wavering, that he is

not able to remove the evil. I say bewildered, in so far as

we undeB^tand his desire of removing the evil to be con-

^_ strained by his amazement. I say wavering, in so far aa

^L ve understand the said desire to be constrained by the

^B fear of another evil, which equally torments him : whence

^B it comes to pass that he knows not, which be may avert of

^H the two. On this subject, see m. ixxix. note, and HE. lii.

^B note. Concerning cowardice and daring, see HL li. note.

^H XLm. Courtesy, or deference (HumanHat sew inodestia),

^f IB the desire of acting in a wa,y that should please men,

^^ and refraining from that which should displease them.

XXIV. Ambition is the immoderate desire of power.

Explanation. — Ambition is the desire, whereby all the

i emotions (cf. HI. ssvii. and xxxi.) are fostered and
strengthened ; therefore this emotion can with difficulty
be overcome. Tor, so long as a, man is bound by any de-
sire, he is at the same time necessarily bound by this.
" The best men," says Cicero, " are especially led by honour.
Even philosophers, when they write a book contemning
honour, sign their names thereto," and so on.
XLV. Luxury is excessive desire, or even love of living
anmptuously.

jijVI. Inlemperance is the excessive desire and love of
drinking.
XLVn. Avarice ia the excesaivo desire and love of


18-i THE ETHICS. [piKT

XLVlii. Lmd is desire and love in tie matter of aei
intercourse.

Explanation.—'Whether tMe desire be escesalve or not,
is stOl called lust. These last £ve emotions (as I ha^
shown in m. Ivi.) have no contraries. For deference la
species of ambition Cf . I n nix. note.

Again, I have already pointed out, that temperance,
sobriety, and chastity indicate rather a power than a
passivity of the mind. It may, neverthelsBS, happen, that
an avaricious, an ambitious, or a timid man may abstain
from. ezcesB in eating, drinking, or sexual indulgence, yet
avarice, ambition, and fear are not contraries to luxury,
dnmkeaneBB, and debauchery. For an avaricious man
often is glad to gorge himself with food and drink at
another man's expense. An ambitious man will restrain
himself in nothing, so long as he thinks his indulgences are
secret ; and if he lives among drunkards and debauchees,
he will, from the mere fact of being ambitious, be more
prone to those vic«s, Laatly, a timid man does that which
he would not. For though an avaricious man should, for
the sake of avoiding death, cast his riches into the sea, he
wiU none the less remain avaricious ; so, also, if a lustful
man is downcast, because te cannot foUow his bent, he does
not, on the ground of abstention, cease to be lustful. In
fact, these emotions are not so much concerned with the
actual feasting, drinking, <&.c., as with the appetite and I079,
of such. Nothing, therefore, can be opposed to these em<
tions, but high-mindedness and valour, whereof I will spei
presently.

The definitions of jealousy and other waverings of the
mind I pass over in silence, first, because they arise
from the compounding of the emotions already described ;
secondly, because many of them have no distinctiTe names,
which shows that it is sufficient for practical purposes to
have merely a general knowledge of them. However, it is
established from the definitions of the emotions, which we
have set forth, that they all spring from desire, pleasure,
or pain, or, rather, that there is nothing besides these three ;
wherefore each is wont to he called by a variety of names in
accordance with its various relations aixd extrinsic tokens.
If we now direct our atteotion to these primitive emotion!


I


ao4H


I


FAST III.] GENERAL DEFINITION OF THE EU0TION8. 185

and to what Las been said coaceming tbe nature of the
miud, we ahall be &ble thus to define the emotions, in so
far aa they are referred to the mind only.


General Definition op i


'. Emotions.


Emotion, which ia called a passivity of the soul, is a
■confused idea, whereby the mind affirms concerning ita
"body, or any part thereof, a force for existence {erietendi
vW) greater or leas than before, and by the presence of
■which the mind ia determined to think of one thing rather
than another.

EnsplaTiaiion. — I say, first, that emotion or passion of
the soul is a eonfuged idea. For we have shown that the
mind is only passive, in so far aa it has inadequate or con-
ifused ideas. ( TTT , iji.) I say, further, •whereby the tnind
affirms concerning Us body or a-ny part thereof a force for
anatence greater than before. For all the ideas of bodies,
which we possess, denote rather the actual disposition of
OUT own body {U. xri. CoroU. ii.) than the nature of an
external body. But the idea which constitutes the reality
of an emotion must denote or express the disposition of
the body, or of some part thereof, which is possessed by
the body, or some part thereof, because its power of action
or force for existence ia increased or diminished, helped or
liindered. But it must be noted that, when I eay a greater
or lets force for existence than before, I do not mean that
the mind compares the present with the past disposition of
the body, but that the idea which constitutes the reality of
an emotion afQrms something of the body, which, in fact,
inTolves more or less of reahty than before.

And inasmuch as the essence of mind consists in the
fact (H. xi.xiii.}, that it affirms the actual existence of its own
body, and inasmuch as we understand by perfection the
Teiy esaence of a thing, it foUowa that the mind passes to
greater or less perfection, when it happens to affirm con-
cerning its own body, or any part thereof, something in-
Tolring more or less reahty than before.

"When, therefore, I said above that the power of the
mind is increased or diminished, I merely meant that the


18(> THE ETHICS. [PAET III*

mind liad formed of its own body, or of some part thereof,.
an idea inyolving more or less of reality, than it had already
affirmed oonoeming its own body. For the excellence of
ideas, and the actiml power of thinking are measured by
the ezcellenoe of the object. Lastly, I have added by the
presence of which the mind is determined to think of one thing
rather than another, so that, besides the nature of pleasure
and pain, which the first part of the definition explains, I
might also express the nature of desire*


>i


PAST IT.] OP S17WUC B0V9A0K.


OF HUMAN BONDAGE. OE. THE STRENGTH OP
THE EMOTION&

FssrA^CK.

HITMAN infirmity in modeiadng and checting the
emotiouB I natne bondage: for, when & man is a pi'ey
_ to bis emotione, he is not his ow^ master, but lies at the
J of fortnDe : so much so, tliat he is often compelled,
while seeing that which ig better for him, ia follow that
iffhich ia worse. Why this is so, and what is good or evil
* L the emotions, I propose to show in this part of my
atise. But, before I begin, it would be well to make &
<r prefatory obserratioas on perfection and imperfection,

3 and evil.

"When a man has purposed to make a given thing, and
.H brought it to perfection, his work will be pronounced
riect, not only by himself, but by everyone who rightly
LOWS, or thinks that he knows, the intention and aim of
I author. For instance, suppose anyone sees a work
hich I asHume to be not yet completed), and knows that
e um of the author of that work is to build a house, hd
I call the work imperfect ; he will, on the other hand,
B«aU it perfect, as soon as he sees that it is oarried through
Bto the end, which its author had purposed for it. But if a
^tnan Beea a work, the like whereof he has never seen before,
i if he knows not the intention of the artificer, he plainly
mot know, whether that work be perfect or imperfect.
h seems to be the primary meaning of these terms.
ut, after men began to form general ideas, to think out
a of houses, buildings, towers, Ac, and to prefer certain
;>es to others, it came about, that each man called per-
i that which he saw ^ree with the general idea he
d formed of the thing in question, and called imperfect
t which he saw agree leas with his own preconceived


type, even though, it had evidently been completed i&l
accordance with the idea, of its artificer. This seems to b9,W
the only reason for caJling natural phenomena, which, in-
deed, are not made with human hands, perfect or imper-
fect : for men are wont to form general ideas of thingB
natural, no less than of things artificial, and such ideas
they hold as types, believing that Nature (who they thinlc ,
does nothing without an object) haa them in view, and haA^
set them as types before herself. Therefore, when th«yB
behold something in Nature, which does not wholly conform ■
to the preconceived type which they have formed oE the
thing ia question, they saj that Nature ha^ fallen short or
has blundered, and has left her work incomplete. Thus
we see that men are wont to style natural phenomena per-
fect or imperfect rather from their own prejudices, dian
from true knowledge of what they pronounce upon.

How we showed in the Appendix to Part I„ that Nature
does not work with an end in view. For the eternal and
infinite Being, which we call Gk>d or Nature, acts by the
same necessity as that whereby it exists. For we have shown,
that by the same necessity of its nature, whereby it exists,
it likewise works (I. xvi.). The reason or cause why God
or Nature exists, and the reason why he acts, are one and
the same. Therefore, as he does not exist for the sake of
an end, so neither does he act for the sake of an end ; of
his existence and of hia action there is neither origin nor
end. Wherefore, a cause which ia called final is nothing
else but human desire, in so far as it ia considered as the
origin or cause of anything. For example, when we say
that to be inhabited is the final cause of this or that house,
we mean nothing more than that a man, conceiving the
conveniences of household life, had a desire to build a,
house. "Wherefore, the being inhabited, in so far as it ia
regarded as a final cause, is nothing else but this particular
desire, which is really the efficient cause ; it is regarded as
the primary cause, because men are generally ignorant of
the causes of their desires They are, as I have often said
already, conscions of their own actions and appetites, but
ignorant of the causes whereby they are determined to any
particular desire. Therefore, the common saying that
Nature sometimes falls abort, or blunders, and produaes


r

I

I


FAKT rv.] OP HUMAN BONDAGE. 189

things which are imperfect, I set down among the gloBses
treated o£ in the Appendis to Part I. Perfection and im-
perfection, then, are ia reality merely modes of thinking,
or notions which we form from a compajiHon among one
another of individuaU of the &ame species ; hence I said
above (II. Def. Ti.), that by reality and perfection I mean
the same thing. For we are wont to refer all the indiyidual
things in nature to one genua, which is called the highest
genns, namely, to the category of Being, whereto absolutely
all individuals in nature belong. Thus, in so far as we
refer the individuals in nature to this cati^ory, and com-
paring them one with another, find that some possess more
of being or reality than others, we, to this extent, say that
some are more perfect than others. Again, in so far as we
attributo to them anything implying negation — as term,
end, infirmity, etc., — we, to this eitent, call them imper-
fect, because they do not afEect our mind so much as the
things which we call perfect, not because they have any in-
trinsic deficiency, or because Nature has blundered. Fop
nothing lies within the scope of a thing's nature, save that
■which follows from the neceasity of the nature of its
efficient cause, and whatsoever foUows from the necessity of
the nature of its efficient cause necessarily comes to pass.

As for the terms good and bad, they indicate no positive
quality in things regarded in themselves, but are merely
modes of thinfing, or notions which we form from the
comparison of things one with another. Thus one and the
same thing can be at the same time good, bad, and indiffe-
rent. For instance, music is good for him that is melan-
choly, bad for him that mourns ; for him that is deaf, it ia
neither good nor bad.

NeverthelesH, though this be so, the terms should still
be retained. For, inasmuch aa we desire to form an idea
of man as a type of human nature which we may hold in
■new, it will he useful for ua to retain the terms in ques-
tion, in the sense I have indicated.

In what follows, then, I shall mean by "good" that
which we certainly know to be a means of approaching
more nearly to the type of human nature, which we have
set before ourselves; by "bad," that which we certainly
know to be a hindrance to us in approaching the said type.


190 THE ETH103. [PAKT ITO

Again, we shall say that men are more perfect, or more im-
perfect, in proportion as they approach more or lees nearly
to the said type. Por it must be specially remarked that,
when I say that a man passeB from a leaser to a greater
perfection, or vice tiersd, I do not mean that he is changed
from one essence or reality to another ; for instance, a horse
would be as completely destroyed by being changed into a
man, as by being changed into on insect. What I mean is,
that we conceive the thing's power of action, in bo far
as this is understood by its nature, to be increased or
diminished. Lastly, by perfection in general I shall, as I
have said, mean reality — in other words, each thing's
essence, in so far as it exists, and operates in a particular
manner, and without paying any regard to its duration.
For no given thing can be said to be more perfect, because
it has passed a longer time in existence. The duration of
things cannot be determined by their essence, for the

■essence of things involves no fix^ and definite period of
existence; but everything, whether it be more perfect or
less perfect, will always be able to persist in existence with
the same force wherewith it begtm to eiist ; wherefore, in

.this respect, all things are equal.

Definitions,

I. By good I mean that which we certainly know to be
useful to us.

n. By evil I mean that which we certainly know to be a
hindrance to us in the attainment of any good.

(Concerning these terms see the foregoing preface to-
wards the end.)

m. Particular things I call coniiTigent in so far as, while
regarding their essence only, we find nothing therein, which
necessarily asserfs their existence or excludes it.

IV. FarticTilar things I call poeeible in bo far as, while
regarding the causes whereby they must be produced, we
know not, whether such ca-uses be determined for producing
them.

(In 1. TTTi ii. note i., I drew no distinction between
possible and contingent, because there was in that plat
need to distinguish them accurately.)


(


JABT IV.]


li>l


V. By eonfiieiinr} emoliotit I mean those which draw a

' 1 different directionB, though thej are of the same

ind, BDch as luxury and avarice, which are both species

/ai love, and are contraries, not by nature, but by accident.

VL What I mean by emotion felt towards a thing,

future, present, and past, I explained in ITL iviii, notes

^. and ii., which see.

(But I should here also remark, that we can only die-

inctly conceive distance of space or time up to a certain

Lefinite limit ; that is, all objects distant from ua more

1 two hundred feet, or whose distance from the place

pirliere we are exceeds that which we can distinctly conceive,

1 to be an equal distance from ub, and all in the same

Fplane ; so also objects, whose time of existing is conceived

"as removed from the present by a longer interval than we

can distinctly conceive, seem to be all equally distant from

the present, and are set down, as it were, to the same

m omen t of time.)

Vii. By an end, for the sake of which we do something,

a desire.

VILL By virtue (viriuB) and power I mean the same

■ thing ; that is (HI. vii.), virtue, in so far as it is referred

to man, is a man's nature or essence, in so far as it has the

power of effecting what can only be nnderstood by the

laws of that nature.

AxrOBi.

There is no individual thing in nature, than which there
IB not another more powerful and strong. Whatsoever
thing be given, there is something stronger whereby it can
be destroyed.

Peop. I. No positive qnalUy possegeed hy a falee idea is
removed by the presence of wJiat is true, in virtue of its being

—Falsity consists solely in the privation of know-

6 which inadequate ideas involve (II. isxv.), nor have

r any positive quality on account of which they are

illed false (II. xxxiii.) ; contrariwise, in so far as they are

i to God, they are true (IT. sixii.). Wherefore, if

e positive qnahty possessed by a false idea were removed

■' e presence of what is true, in virtue of its beu^ true.


I


192


[Pi


a true idea would then be remoTed by itself, whicli (TV", iii
is absurd. Therefore, no positiye ijualitj possessed by
faJse idea, Ao. Q.E.D.

Note. — This proposition is more clearly understood from
n. xvi. Ooroll. ii. For imagination is an idea, irhich indi-
cates rather the present disposition of the imman body
than the nature of the external hody ; not indeed distinctly,
but confusedly ; whence it comes to pass, that the mind ia
said to err. For instance, when we look at the sun, we
conceive that it is distant from na about two hundred feet;
in this judgment we err, bo long as we are in ignorance of
its true distance j when its true distance ia known, the
error is removed, but not the ima^nation; or, in other
words, the idea of the sun. which o^y explains the nature
of that luminary, in so far as the body is afEected thereby :
wherefore, though we know the real distance, we shall still
nevertheless imagine the eun to be near us. For, as we
said in H. xxxv. note, we do not imagine the sun to be ho
near ns, because we are ignorant of its trae distance, but
because the mind conceives the magnitude of the sun to
the extent that the body is affected thereby. ThuH, whea
the rays of the sun falhng on the surface of water are re-
flected into our eyes, we ima^ne the sun as if it were in
the water, though we are aware of its real position ; ancl
similarly other imaginations, wherein the mind is deceived,.
whether they indicate the natural disposition of the body,,
or that its power of activity is increased or diminished, aia
not contrary to the truth, and do not vanish at its presence.
It happens indeed that, when we mistakenly fear an eri]^,
the fear vanishes when we hear the true tidings ; but tl '
contrary also happens, namely, that we fear an evil whit
will certainly come, and our fear vanishes when we h
false tidings ; thus imaginations do not vanish at
presence of the truth, in virtue of its being trae, but
cause other imaginations, stronger than the first, superv<
and exclude the present existence of that which
imagined, as I have shown in II. xvii.

Pbop. n. We are only jxiesive, in so far as we are a j«M#'
of Nature, which cannot be conceived hy itself without other

Proof. — We are said to be passive, when something


1


E 17.]


li)3


a us, whereof we are only a> partial cause (HE, Def.

K), tliat is ( 111 . Dei. i.), BOntetlimg wluch cannot be de-

ftuced solely from tlie laws of our nature. We are passive

^lerefore, in ao far as we are a part of Nature, whicli cannot

6 conceived by itself without other parts. Q.E.D.

I Pbop, TTT, The force thereby a manpereigta in exUling is

"tnited, and is injimtely surpaseed by the power of external

Proof. — Thi3 is evident from the axiom of this part.

For, wheu man is gJTen, there is something else — say a —

more powerful ; whea a is given, there is something else —

»ay B — more powerful thtm a, and so on to infinity ; thus

Bthe power of man is limited by the power o£ some other

" ' ig, and is infinitely surpassed by the power of esternal

»uBes, Q.E.D.

I Paop. XV. Xt is impoesible, that man ghould not be a pari

f Nature, or thai lie should he capable of undergoing ho

is, save sueh as can be understood through his nature

s their adequate cause.

Proof. — The power, whereby each particular thing, and

Sonsequently maji, preserves hia being, is the power of

d or of Nature (I. xxiv. Coroll.) ; not in ao far as it in

cite, but in so far as it can be explained by the actual

buman essence ( 1 1 1 , vii.). Thus the power of man, in so

i: as it is explained through his own actual essence, is a

■t of the infinite power of God or Nature, in other words,

£ the essence thereof (I. xxxiv.). This wa.s our first point.

Again, if it were possible, that man should undergo no

phanges save such as can be understood solely through the

Jaiature of man, it would follow that he would not be able

■ to die, but would always necessarily exist ; this would be

Btlie necessary consequence of a cause whose power was

fcieither finite or infinite ; namely, either of man's powei

Ponly, inasmuch as he would be capable of removing from

IJlimself all changes which could spring from external causes ;

^'or of the infinite power of Kature, whereby all individual

\ things would be so ordered, that man should be incapable

mdei^oing any changes save such as tended towards

own preservation. But the first alternative is absurd

\ {by the last Prop,, the proof of which is universal, and can

B'lw appHed to all individual things). Therefore, if it be


IM


THE ETHICS,


[Pi


possible, that man should not be capable of undergoing any
cbanges, save Buch as can be eicplained solely tbrougb his own
nature, and consequently that he must always (as we have
shown) necesBBjily esiBt ; such a result must follow from
the infinite power of God, and consequently (I. xvi.) from
the necessity of the divine nature, in Ho far as it is resided
as aiEected by the idea of any given man, the whole order
of nature as conceived under the attributes of extension
and thought must be deducible. It would therefore follow
(L xsi.) that man is infinite, which (by the first part of this
proof) is absurd. It is, therefore, impossible, that
should not imdergo any changes save those whereof he
the adequate cause. Q.E.D.

Corollary. — Hence it f»Uows, that man is neoesst
always a prey to his passions, that he follows and obeys tliii'
general order of nature, and that he accommodates himself
thereto, as much as the nature of things demands.
■^ Pbof. V. The power artd increase of every passion, anA
its persistence in existing are not defined hy the power, whereby,
we ow»diie» endeavour to persiet in exieting, but by theptnoer
of an ert&Tnal ca/ute compared with our own.

Proof. — The essence of a passion cannot be explained ,
through our essence alone (TTT. Deff. i, and ii,), that u
(m, vii.), the power of a passion cannot be defined by tha
power, whereby we ourselres endeavour to persist in eiisfc-
inj, hut (as is shown in H. svi.) must necessarily be de-
fined by the power of an external cause compared with our
own. Q.ED.

Paop. VL The force of any passion or emotion can over-
come the rest of a tnan'g activUiee or power, so that the emo-
(ion becomes oietinaiehj fixed to Mm,.

Proof. — The force and increase of any passion and its
perajstenee in esisting are defined by the powerof an external
cause compared with our own (by the foregoing Prop.) ; there-
fore (IV. iii.) it can overcome a man's power, &c. Q.E.D,

Prop. Vii. An emotion can only be controlled or destroyed
6y another emotion contrary thereto, and vnth more power for
controlling emotion.

Proof. — Emotion, in so far as it is referred to the mind,
is an idea, whereby the mind af&rms of its body a greater
or less force of esistence than before (cf . the general Defini*


1


riT.]


OF HCMAH BONDAQE.


^HHoa oE the Emotioiia at the end of Part IH.). When,

^Rherefore, the mind is assailed by any emotion, the body ia

fat the same time affected with a modification whereby ita

power of activity ia inoreaaed or dijninisbed. Kow tliis

modification of the body (IV, v.) receives from ita cause

the force for pereistence in its beicij ; which force can only

be checked or destroyed by a bodily cause (11. yi.), in yir-

^Btue of the body being affected with a, modification contrary

^BtO ( I H- T.) and stronger than itBell (TV. Ax.) ; wherefore

^B^n. xii.) the mind is affected by the idea of a modification

■contrary to, and stronger than the former modification, in

' other words, (liy the general definition of the emotions) the

mind will be affected by an emotion contrary to and stronger

than the former emotion, which will exclude or destroy the

existence of the former emotion ; thus an emotion cannot be

destroyed nor controlled except by a contrary and stronger

emotion. Q.E.D.

Corollary. — An emotion, in ao far as it is referred to the
•mind, can only be controlled or destroyed through an idea
6f a modification of the body contrary to, and stronger
fiian, that which we are undergoing. For the emotion
Which wu undei^ can only be checked or destroyed by an
(motion contrary to, and stronger than, itself, in other
words, (by the general Definition of the Emotions) only by
I idea of a modification of the body contrary to, and
rot^r than, the modification which we undergo.
Prop. "VUL Tiie hmmledge of good and evil is nothing
' le ivt the emotiona of pleaanre or pain, in ao far as we are
w thereof.
Proof, — We call a thing good or evil, when it is of service
>r tho reverse in preaerving our being (TV. Deff. i. and ii.),
that ia (Ml. vii.), when it increases or diminishes, helps or
r power of activity. Thus, in so far as we per-
SMve that a. thing affects ua with pleasure or pain, we call
t good or evil ; wherefore the knowledge of good and evil
^_M nothing else but the idea of the pleasure or pain, which
hecesaarily follows from that pleasurable or painful emo-
tion (H. xjdi.). But this idea is united to the emotion in
tbs same way as mind is united to body (H.xxi.) ; that is,
•there is ao real distinction between this idea and the
: idea of the modification of the bodv, save in


19fi THE ETHICS. [PJ

conception only. Therefore the knowledge of good e
evil Ib nothing else hut the emotioD, in so fur as we are ct
Bciocs thereof. Q.E.I).

Prop. IX. An BTnotion, whereof we conceive the
be with ue at the Regent time, is etrtmger tlio/n, if we did H
conceive the cau«e to be with ug.

Proof, — Imagination or conception is the idea, by whioh 1
the mind regards a thing as present (11. ivii. note), but
which indicates the disposition of the mind rather than the
nature of the external thing (H, ivi. C'oroU, ii). An emo-
tion is therefore a conception, in bo far aa it indicates the
disposition of the body. But a conception (by II. rrii.) is
stronger, so long as we conceive nothing which excludes the
present existence of the external object ; wherefore an
emotion is also stronger or more intense, when we conceive
the cause to be with us at the present time, than when we
do not conceive the cause to be with us. Q.E.I).

Sbie.— When I said above in HI. sviii. that we are
affected by the image of what ia past or future with the
same emotion as if the thing conceived were present, I
espressly stated, that this is only true in so far as we look
solely to the image of the thing in question itself; for the
thing's nature is unchanged, whether we have conceived it
or not ; I did not deny that the image becomes weater,
when we regard as present to us other things which exclude
the present existence of the future object : I did not ex-
pressly call attention to the fact, because I purposed to treat
of the strength of the emotions in this part of my work.

Corollary. — The image of something past or future, that
is, of a thing which we regard as in relation to time past or
time future, to the exclusion of time present, is, when other
conditions are equal, weaker than the image of something
present ; consequently an emotion felt towaids what is past
or future is less intense, other conditions being equal, than
an emotion felt towards something present,

Pbop. X. Towards something future, which we conceive as
close at hand, we are affected itwre intensely, than if we con-
ceive thai its tiTue for existence is separated from the present
by a longer interval; so too by the rememhrance of what we
conceive to have not long passed away we are affected mora
intensely, than if we conceive that it has longpaseed away.


v.] OF HUMAN BOND.


H Proof.-

^B'lOF not long paEsod away, i

^f the presence of the object less, than if ita period of future
existence were more distant from the present, or if it had
long passed away (this is obviona) ; therefore (by the fore-
going Prop.) we ore, so far, more intensely affected towards
it. Q,.E.D.

Corollary. — From the remarks made in DeE. vi, of this
part it follows that, if objects are separated from the pre-
sent by a longer period than we can define in coaception,
though their dates of occurrence lie widely eeparattd one
from the other, they all affect us equally faintly.

Pbof, XI. An emotion towards that which we conceive a&
neeessary is, mhen other condUioTis are equal, more intense
than an emotion towards that whi ck is possihle, or contingent,
or non-necessary.

Proof. — In BO far as we conceiTe a thing to be necessary,
we, to that extent, affirm its eaatence ; on the other hand
■we deny a thing's eiiatence, in so far as we conceive it not
to he necessary (I. xisiii. note i.) ; wherefore (TV. is.) an
emotion towards that which is necessary is, other conditiona
—Tjetng equal, more intense than an emotion towards that
mhich is non-necessary. Q.EJ}.

Prop. , X I [ . An emotion towards a thing, ■which we Icnow
^ to exist at the present time, and which we conceive as pos-
ible, is more intense, other conditions being equal, than an
^notion towarde a thing coidingent.

Proof. — In so far as we conceive a thing as contingent,

jwe are affected by the conception of some further thing,

which would assert the existence of the former (17. Def.

■jii ) ; but, on the other hand, we (by hypothesis) conceive

'n things, which exclude its present existence. But, in

as we conceive a thing to be possible in the future,

re thereby conceive things which assert its existence (IV. iv.),

f that is (m. xviii.), things which promote hopo or fear :

wherefore an emotion towards something possible is more

^,Tehement. Q.E.D.

Corollary. — An emotion towards a thing, which we know
■not to exist in the presejit, and which we conceive as con-
■iingent, is far fainter, than if we conceive the thing to be
f 'present with us.


198 THE ETHICS, [PAET

Proof. — Emotion towards a tiling, which we conceive to
exist, is more intense than it would be, if we conceived the
thing as future (iV. is. Coroll.), ajid is much more vehe-
ment, than if the future time he conceived as far distant
from the present (IV. x.). Therefore an emotion towards
a thing, whose period of existence we conceive to he far dia-
tant from the present, is far fainter, than if we conceive the
thing as present ; it is, nevertheless, more intense, than if ,
we conceived the thing as contingent, wherefore an emotion
towards a thing, which we regard as contingent, will he far
fainter, than if we conceived the thing to be present with -
ns. Q.KD. 4

Pbop. Xm. Hmotion towards a thing contingent, iciio&i
vie know not to exist in the present, ie, other conditions beiTi^'
egval, fainter than an emotion towards a thing past.

Froof. — In so far as we conceive a thing as contingent ,
we are not affected by the image of any other thing, which.
asserts the existence of the said thing (IV. Def . iii,), but, ow
the other hand (by hypothesis), we conceive certain thing*'
excluding its present existence. But, in so far as we con- '
ceive it in relation to time past, we are assumed to eonceiTB '
something, which recaUa the thing to memory, or excites •
the image thereof (11. xviii. and note), which is so far the
same as regarding it as present (II. ivii. Coroll. ). There-
fore (IV. ix.) an emotion towards a thing contingent, which
we know does not exist in the present, is fainter, other con-
ditions being equal, than a,n emotion towards a thing past.
Q.J1.D.

Prop. XIV. A true hnowledge of good and evil cannot
cheek any emotion 6j virtue of being true, but only in so far
M it is considered as an emotion.

Proof. — An emotion is an idea, whereby the mind affirms
of its body a greater or less force of existing than before
(by the general Definition of the Emotions) ; therefore it has
no positive quahty, which can be destroyed by the presence
of what is true ; consequently the knowledge of good and
evil cannot, by virtue of bemg true, restrain any emotion.
But, in BO far as such knowledge is an emotion (TV. viii.) if
it have more strength for restraining emotion, it will to
that extent be able to restrain the given emotion. Q.JB.D.

Prop. XV. Deeire arising from the knowledge of good


1


r FABT rv,] or HCM4N BONDAGE. 199

had can be quenched or checked by many of the other deaira
arUing from the emotion* whereby we are assaihd.

Proof. — From the true knowledge of good and e^-il, ia so
far as it is an emotion, neceasarilj arises desire (Dei. o£
the Emotions, i.), the strength of wliich is proportioned to
the strength of the emotion "wherefrom it arises (III.
xsxvii.). But, inasmuch els this desire arises (by bypu-
thesia) from the fact of our truly understanding anything,
it follows that it is also present with us, in so far as we
are active (ill. i.), and must therefore be understood
through our essence only (HI. Def. ii.) ; consequently (HI.
Til.) its force and increase can be detoed solely by humaji
power. Again, the desires arising from the emotions
whereby we are assailed are stronger, in proportion as the
said emotions are more vehement ; wherefore thoir force
and increase must be defined solely by the power of ex-
ternal causes, which, when compared with our own power,
indefinitely surpass it (IV. iii.) ; hence the desires arising
from like emotions may be more vehement, than the desire
which arises from a true knowledge of good and evil, and
may, consequently, control or quench it, Q.E.D.

Peop, XVT. Desire arising from the kiutwledge of good and
evil, in so far as such knowledge regards what is future, vioy
he more easily controlled or guenelied, than the desire for what
is agreeable at the present mmnent.

Proof. — Emotion towards a thing, which we conceive as
future, is fainter than emotioa tow^ards a thing that is
present (TV. ii. Coroll.). But desire, which arises from the
true knowledge of good and evil, though it be concerned
with things which are good at the moment, can Ije quenched
or controlled by any headstrong desire (by the last Prop., the
proof whereof is of universal application). Wherefore
desire arising from such knowledge, when concerned with
the future, can be more easily controlled or quenched, &c.
Q.KD. ^^

Prop. XV ii. Desire arising from the true knowledge of
good and evil, in to far as suck Icnowledge is concerned teilh
*Bkat is contingent, can be controlled far more easily slill, Iha n
desire for things thai are present.

Proof. — This Prop, is proved in the same way as the last
Prop, from IV. xii. Coroll.


'200 THE ETHICS, [PAKT IVf^

Note. — I think 1 have now shown the reason, why men
are moved by opinion more readily than by true reason,
why it ia that the true knowledge of good and evil stirs up
coi^ict8 in the eonl, and often yields to every kind (d
pasaioE. This state of things gave rise to the eiclamatitm^'
of the poet : ' —

" The belter path 1 gaie at nnd approre.
The worse— 1 follow."

Ecclesiastes seems to have had the same thought in lii»
mind, when he says, " Ha who inereaseth knowledge in^
creaaeth sorrow," I have not written the above with the
object of drawing the conclusion, that ignorance is more
excellent than knowledge, or that a wise man is on a par
with a fool in controlling his emotions, hut because it ia
necessary to know the power and the infirmity of our
nature, before we can determine what reason can do in re-
straining the emotiona, and what is beyond her power. I
have said, that in the present part I shall merely treat of
liuman ioflrmitj. The power of reason over the emotions
I have se ttled to treat separately.

Peop. XVIII Besire arising from pleaanre is, oiker cot^
ditioni ieing e^ual, etronger than desire arieiri'g from pain.

Proof— DeaJie ia the essence of a man (Def. of the Emo-
tions, i.), that is, the endeavour whereby a man endeavours to
persist in his own being. Wherefore desire arising from
pleasure is, by the fact of pleasure being felt, increased or
helped ; on the contrary, desire arising from pain is, by
the fact of pain being felt, diminished or hindered ; hence
the force of desire arising from pleasure must be defined
by human power .together with the power of an external
cause, whereas desire arising from pain muat be defined by
human power only. Thus the former ia the stronger of the
two. Q.E.D.

Note. — In these few remarks I have explained the causes
of liuman infirmity and inconstancy, and shown why men
do not abide by the precepts of reason. It now remains for
me to show what course is marked out for ua by reasoit,,
which of the emotions are in harmony with the rules at.
human reason, and which of them are contrary thereto.,

' Oy. llet. vii. 20, " Video mpliora proboqne, Deleriora sequor."


I


^mas.:


IT IT.] or HDMAN UONDAGB. 201

But, tefore I begin to prove my propositions in detailed
geometricaJ. fashion, it ia advisable to sketch them briefly
in advance, bo that everyone maj more readily grasp mj
jneajiiiig.

Ab reason makes no demands contrary to nature, it de-
mands, that every man should love hiniseU, should seek
that which is useful to him — I mean, that which is really
tiaeful to him, should desire everything which really brings
man to greater perfection, and should, each for himself,
endeavour as far as he can to preserve his own being.
This is as necessarily true, as that a whole is greater than
its part. (Cf . HX iv.)

Again, as virtue is nothing else but action in accordance
with the laws of one's own nature (TV. Def, viii.), and aa
no one endeavours to preserve his own being, except in
accordance with the laws of his own nature, it follows,
jint, that the foundation of virtue is the endeavour to
preserve one's own being, and that happiness cousiate in
man's power of preserving his own being; secondly, that
virtue is to be desired for its own sake, and that there is
nothing more excellent or more useful to us, for the sate of
which we should desire it ; ihirdly and lastly, that suicides
are weat-minded, and are overcome by external causes
repugnant to their natm^. Further, it follows from Postu-
late iy. Part II., that we can never arrive at doing without
1 external things for the preservation of our being or
'ng, so as to have no relations with things which are out-
9 ourselves. Again, if we co^nsider our mind, we see
t our intellect would be more imperfect, if mind were
lone, and could understand nothing besides itself. There
re, then, many things outside ourselves, which are useful
\-fa us, and are, therefore, to be desired. Of such none can
' te discerned more excellent, than those which are in entire
agreement with our nature. For if, for example, two
individuals of entirely the same nature are united, they form
a combination twice as powerful as either of them singly.
Therefore, to man there is nothing more useful than
gaan — nothing, I repeat, more excellent for preserving
l^iheir being can be wished for by men, than that all should
\-tio in all points agree, that the minds and bodies of all
ihould form, as it were, one single mind and one single


203 THE ETHICS. [PiET

body, and that all should, with one consent, as far as th»
are able, endeavour to preserve their being, and all wi1
one consent seek what is useful to them all. Hence, mea
who are governed by reason — that is, who seek what is
useful to them in accordance with reason. — desire for
themselyes nothing, which they do not also desire for the
rest of mankind, and, consequently, are just, faithful, and
honourable in their conduct.

Such are the dictates of reason, which I purposed thntt*
briefly to indicate, before beginning to prove them ia
greater detail. I have taien this course, ia order, if pos-
sible, to gain the attention of those who believe, that the
principle that every man is bound to seek what is useful
for himself is the foundation of impiety, rather than of
piety and virtue.

Therefore, after briefly showing that the contrary is th«-i
case, I go on to prove it by the same method, as that whereby.
I have hitherto proceeded.

Pkop, XTS. Every matt, hy the laws of his nature, neeea*
earily desires or shrinks from that which he deems to be goad
\ or bad.

Proof—The knowledge of good and evil is (IV.viii.) the
emotion of pleasure or pain, in so far as we are conscious
thereof; therefore, every man necessarily desires what he
thinks good, and shrinks from what he thinks bad. Now
this appetite is nothing else but man's nature or essence
(cf , the Definition of Appetite, HI, ix. note, and Def . of the'
Emotions, i.). Therefore, every man, solely by the laws c£-'\
liis nature, desires the one, and shrinks from the other, &6,
Q.E.D.

Paop. X X. TJie more every man endeavours, and is abl
eeeh what is useful to him — in other words, to preserve
ovm being — the more is he endowed with virtue; on
irary, in proportion as a, man neglects to seek what
to Mm, that is, to preserve his own being, he is wanting
power.

Proof. — ^Virtue is human power, which is defined
by man's essence (IV. Def. viii.), that is, which is d
solely by the endeavour made by man to persist in his
being. Wherefore, the more a man endeavours, and is
to preserve his own being, the more is he endowed wii


1

aea ^M

1

I


^0


OF aVUAS BOHDAOE.


205


r. and vi,), in so far aa a
Ti being, he is wanting in


I


Tirtue, and, consequently (111. i
I neglects to preserve hia u^
power. Q.E.D.

Hfote.-^-No one, therefore, neglects seeking his
or preserving his own being, unless be be t
caufles external and foreign to Tiis nature. No one, 1 say,
from the necessity of his own nature, or otherwise than
under compulsion from eitemal causes, shrinks from food,
or kills himself: which latter may be done in a variety of
■ways. A man, for instance, killa himself under the com-
pulsion of another man, who twists round his right hand,
wherewith he happened to have taken up a sword, and
forces him to turn the blade gainst hia own heart ; or,
i^ain, he may be compelled, like Seneca, by a tyrant's com-
mand, to open his own veins — that is, to escape a greater
evil by incurring a leaser ; or, lastly, latent external causes
may so disorder his imagination, and so affect his body,
that it may assume a nature contrary to its former one, and
whereof the idea cannot exist in the mind (IH. x.) But
that a man, from the necessity of his own nature, should
endeavoui' to become non-existent, is as impossible as that
something should be made out of nothing, as everyone
'will see for himself, after a little reflection.

Pbop. XXI. No one can desire to he blessed, to act righlly,
and to live rightly, icithoiit at the twme time vnthing to be, ia
act, am.d to live— in other words, to actually emet.

Pi-oof. — The |)roof of this proposition, or rather the pro-
position itself, 18 self-evident, and is also plain from tho
definition of desire. For the desire of liTing, acting, &e.,
blessedly or rightly, is (Dei. of the Emotions, i.) the esaenco
of man — that is (III. vii.), the endeavour made by everyone
to preserve bis ovm being. Therefore, no one can desire,
&c. Q.E.J).

Peop. XXn. No virtue can he conceived (m j)rior to ihia
mdeaxow to preserve one's own being.

Proof. — The effort for self-preservation is the essence of
a thing (HE. vii.) ; therefore, if any virtue could be con-
ceived as prior thereto, the essence of a thing would have
to be conceived as prior to itself, which is obviously absurd.
Therefore no virtue, &c. Q.E.D.

oToUary. — The effort for self-preservation is the first


201 THE ETHICS. [PAKT tr,M

and only f onndataon of virtue. For prior to thia princi]
nothing can lie conceived, and irithout it no virtue can
conceived .

Fbof. xxiiT Mom, in so far aa he i» determined to v\
particular action hecauee he has inadequate ideas, cannot be
absolutely said to act in obedience to virtue ; he can oniy ht_
so described, in so far at he is determined for the action becaiuti
he understands.

Proof, — In so far as a man is determined to an actioa,
throHg-h having inadequate ideas, lie is passive (III. i.), that
is (ILL. DefE. i. and iii,), he does aometlmig, which cannot be
perceived solely through his eBsence, that is (by IV. Def.
viii.), which does not follow from hia virtue. But, in so far
&a he is determined for an action because he understands,
he is active ; that ia, he does something, which is perceived
through his essence alone, or which adequately foUowB
from his virt ue. Q.E.D.

Peop. XXIV. To act abaohdely in obedience to virtue
us the same thing aa to act, to live, or to preserve one's &einf .
(these three terms are identical in mea/ning) in accordant
with the dictates of reason on the hasis of seeking what is u
ful to one's self.

Proof. — To act absolutely in obedience to virtue ia
nothing else hut to act according to the laws of one's own
nature. But we only act, in so far as we understand ( 1 1 1-
iii.) : therefore to act in obedience to virtue is in us nothing
else but to act, to live, or to preserve one's being in obe-
dience to reason, and that on the basis of seeking what is
useful for us fIV. sxii, CoroU.). Q.E.D.

Peop. XXV. No one wishes to preserve his being for the
sahe of anything else.

Proof. — The endeavour, -wherewith everything endeavours
to persist in its being, is defined solely by the essence of
the thing itself ( I i I vii) ; from this alone, and not from
the essence of anything elee, it necessarily follows (IH. vi.)
that everyone endeavours to preserve hia being. Moreover,
this proposition is plain from IV. xxii. CoroU., for if a man
should endeavour to preserve lua l>eing for the Bake of
anything else, the last-named thing would obviously be the
basis of virtue, which, by the foregoing corollary, is absurd.
Therefore no one, &c. Q.E.D.


i


J


I PAET IT,] OP HinuAS BONDAGE. 205


I

^^|i Prop. XXVI. Whaleoever vre etideavoiir in obedience to
^^m-vecuon ie nothing further than to understand; neithfr does
^^MiKe mind, in eo far as it makes uee of reaeon, judge anything
^H to be nseful to it, save such things a» are conducive to under-
^^P atanding.

^H Proof. — The effort for Sfilf-preaervation ia nothing else
^K but the esBence of the thing is. question (HI. vii,), which,
^H in so far as it exists such as it is, ia conceived to have
^H force for continuing in existence (ill. vi.) and doing' euch
^B things as necessarily follow from its given nature (see the
^^ Drf. of Appetite, in. is. note). But the essence of reason
' ia nought dse but our mind, in so far as it clearly and dis-

tinctly understanda (see the definition in n. xl. note ii.) ;
therefore (II. il.) whatsoever we endeavour in obedience to
reason is nothing else but to understand. Again, siaco
this effort of the mind wherewith the mind endeavours, in
BO far as it reasons, to preserve its own being is nothing
else but understanding; this effort at understanding is

I (IV. ixii. CoroU.) the first and single basis of virtue, nor
Bhall we endeavour to understand things for the sake of
any idterior object (IV. ixv.) ; on the other hand, the
mind, in so far as it reasons, will not be able to conceive
any good for itself, save such things as are conducive to
understanding.
Pkop. XXVTI. We know nothing to be certainly good or
evU, save suah things as really conduce to under danding, or
gach as are able to Ainder usfrOTn -anderstanding.

Proof. — The mind, in bo far as it reasons, desires nothing
beyond understanding, and judges nothing to be useful to
^■^ itself, save such things as conduce to understanding (by tbe
^^k foregoing Prop.). But the mind (II. xli. xliii. and note)
^^m cannot possess certainty concerning anything, except in so
^B faj as it baa adequate ideas, or (what by fi. xl. note, ia
^H the same thing) in so far as it reasons. Therefore we
^H know nothing to be good or evil save such things as really
^H conduce, &c. Q.E.D.

^H Pbop. XXV ill. The mind^s highest good is the 'knowledge
^^M of Ood, oTid the mind^s highest virtue is to know Qod.
^H Proof. — -Tbe mind is not captable of understanding any-
^H thing higher than God, that is (I. Def. vi.), than a Being
^H absolutely infinite, and without which (I. xv.) nothing can


206 THE ETHICS. [past

either "be or be conceived ; therefore (TV. uvi. and xxvii.),
the mind's higheBt utility or (TV, Def . i.) good is the know-
ledge of G-od. Again, the mind is active, only in bo far as
it underatanda, and only to the same extent can it be said
absolutely to act virtuously, The mind's absolute virtue
is therefore to understand. Now, as we have already
shown, the highest that the mind can understand is God :
therefore the highest virtue of the mind is to undersf
or to know God. Q.H.D.
^ Peop. yyrX". ISo indivCdttal thing, which ia entirely dij
rent front our own nature, can help or clieck our power
aetiviiy, and ahsolittely nothing can do UB good or harm, unleti'
it has totnething in common, with out natwre.

Proof. — The power of every individual thing, and con-
-sequently the power of man, whereby he exists and operates,
can only be determined by an individual tiling (I. xxviii.),
whose nature (H. vi.) nmst be understood through the
same nature as that, through which human nature is con-
ceived. Therefore our power of activity, however it be
conceived, can be determined and consequently helped or
hindered by the power of any other individual thing, which
has something in common with us, but not by the power
of anything, of which the nature is entirely diJEEerent from
our own ; and since we call good or evil that which is the
cause of pleasure or pain (IV. viiL), that is (IH. xi. note),
which increases or diminishes, helps or hindera, our power
of activity ; therefore, that which is entirely different from.
our nature can neither be to us good nor bad, Q.E.D.

Prop. XSX, A thing cannot be bad for us through the
quality which it hag in common wiihournaliire, btUUU bad
for iM in to far as it ig contrary to our nature.

Proof. — We call a thing bad when it is the cause oC'
pain (IV. viii.), that is (by the Def., which see in HI. xL
note), when it diminishes or checks our power of action.
Therefore, if anything were bad for us through that quality
which it has in common with our nature, it would be able
itself to diminish or ch eck that which it has in common
mth our nature, which (HI. iv.) is absurd. Wherefore no-
thing can be bad for us through that quality which it has
in common with us, but, on the other hand, in so far aa it
is bad for us, that is (as we have just shown), in so far aa


1


I


r HDMAfl £OSDAGE.


207


r poirer of action, it ie contrary
a th ing is in harmony with out


I diminish or check oi

r na ture. Q.E.J).

Pbop. XXSI. In so far ag

tature, it is necesaarily goad.

Proof. — In 60 far as a thing Is in harmony irith our

fciatnre, it cannot Tw'bad for it. It will therefore neoeasarily

e either good or indifferent. If it be assumed that it he

either good nor bad, nothing will follow from its nature

""". Def . i.), which tends to the preaervation of onr nature,

^at is (by the hypothesiB), which tends to the preservation

f the thing itself ; but this ( i 1 1 , vi.) is absurd ; there-

■ u BO far as a thing is in harmony with our nature, it

A necessarily good. Q.E.B.

CoroUary. — Hence it follows, that, in proportion as a

'a harmony with our nature, so is it more useful

%pT better for us, and vice vered, in proportion as a thing

B more useful for us, so is it more in harmony with our

lature. For, in so far as it is not in harmony with our

Uttore, it will neeeaaarily be diiEerent therefrom or con-

y thereto. If different, it can neither be good nor had

". xm) J if contrary, it wili be contrary to that which is

I harmony with our nature, that la, contrary to what ia

'n short, bad. Nothing, therefore, can be good, except

a so far as it ia in harmony with our nature ; and hence a

ihing is useful, in proportion as it is in harmony with our

lature, and vice vered. Q.E.B.

Pbop. ^x>ill In eo far as men are a prey io paenon,

y cannot, in that reaped, be eaid to be naturally in harmony.

Proof. — Things, whueh are said to be in harmony naturally,

e understood to agree in power (ill, "rii.), not in want of

[)ower or negation, and consequently not in passion (111. iii,

iote) ; wherefore men, in so far as they are a prey to their

fjassiona, cannot be said to be naturally in harmony. Q.E.D.

f Note. — Thia is also self-evident ; for, if we say that white

I and black only agree in the fact that neither is red, we

Ijabaolutely affirm that they do not agree in any respect.

liBo, if we say that a man and a stone only agree in the fact

I that both are finite — wanting in power, not existing by the

J of their own nature, or, lastly, indefinitely sur-

I passed by the power of external causes — we should certainly

" I that a man and a stone- are in no respect aUke ;


208 THE CTHIC8. [PAB¥ IT.

therefore, things which agree ovlj in negation, or in qxiali-
ties which neither possess, really agree in no respect.

Prop, xxxiii. Men can differ in nature, in eo fa/r om
they are assailed by those emotions, which are jHissions, or
passive staies ; and to this extent one and the same man it
variable and inconstant.

Proof, — The nature or essence of the emotions cannot he
explained solely through our essence or nature (JLLL. Deff.
i. ii.), but it must be defined by the power, that is (JSL,
vii.), by the nature of external causes in comparison with
our own ; hence it follows, that there are as many kinds of
each emotion as there are external objects whereby we are
affected (HE. Ivi.), and that men may be differently affected
by one and the same object (m. li), and to this extent
differ in nature ; lastly, that one and the same man may
be differently affected towards the same object, and may
therefore be variable and inconstant. Q.E.D.

Fsop. XXXrV. In so far as men are assailed by emotions
which are passions, they can be contrary one to another.

Proof, — ^A man, for instance Peter, can be the cause of
Paul's feeling pain, because he (Peter) possesses something
similar to that which Paul hates (HE. xvi.), or because Pet«r
has sole possession of a thing which Paul also loves (IIL
xxxii. and note), or for other causes (of which the chief are
enumerated in III. Iv. note) ; it may therefore happen that
Paul should hate Peter (Del. of Emotions, vii.), consequently
it may easily happen also, that Peter should hate Paul in
return, and that each should endeavour to do the other an
injury (ill. xxxix.), that is (TV", xxx.), that they should be
contrary one to another. But the emotion of pain is always
a passion or passive state (HE. lix.) ; hence men, in so far
as they are assaUed by emotions which are passions, can be
contrary one to another. Q.E.D.

Note. — I said that Paul may hate Peter, because he con-
ceives that Peter possesses something which he (Paul) also
loves ; from this it seems, at first sight, to follow, that
these two men, through both loving the same thing, and,
consequently, through agreement of their respective na-
tures, stand in one another's way ; if this were so, Props,
xxx. and xxxi. of this Part would be untrue. But if we
give the matter our unbiassed attention, we shall see that


•aet it,] op human bondage. 209

e ctiBcrepancy ranishes. For tLe two men are not in ona
mother's way in virtue o£ the agreement of their natures,
'lat is, through both loving the same thing, but in virtue
B diCering from the other. For. in so fkr as each
the same thing, the love of each is fostered thereby
Exxi.), that is (Def. of the Amotions, vi.) the pleasure
I each ia fostered thereby. Wherefore it is tax from being
ne case, that they are at variance through both loving the
me thing, and through the agreement in their natures,
!he cause for their opposition lies, as I have said, solely in
' e fact that they are assumed to differ. For we assume
t Feter has the idea of the loved object as already in
e pOBsession, wlule Paul has the idea of the loved object
B lost. Hence the one man will he affected with pleasure,
^e other will be affected with pain, and thus they wUl be
t Tariance one with another. We aui easily show in like
lanner, that all other causes of hatred depend solely on
'iferences, and not on the agreement between men's

pBOP. XXX V. In so far only as men live in obedience to

iBon, do tlity always necessarily agree in nature.

Proof.- — In Bo far as men are assailed by emotions that
tre passions, they caji be different in nature (lY. T rriii. ),
bid at variance one with another. But men are only said
be active, in bo far as they act in obedience to reason
^ (m. iii.) J therefore, whatsoever follows from human nature
in 80 fax as it is defined by reason must (ill. Def . ii.) be
mtderstood solely through human nature as its proiimate
cause. But, since every man by the laws of his nature
desires that which he deems good, and endeavours to re-
move that which he deems bad (IV. sis.) ; and further,
since that which we, in accordance with reason, deem good
or bad, necessarily is good or bad (11. xli.) j it follows that
men, in so far as they Uve in obedience to reason, neces-
Barily do onlysuch things as are neceBsarilygoodfor human
natmv, and consequently for each individual man (TV.
xxxi. CoToll.) ; in other words, atich things as are ia har-
mony with each man's nature. Therefore, men in so far
as they live in obedience to reason, necessarily hve always
in harmony one with another. Q.E.S.

Corollary I. — There is no individual thing in nature, which


210


THE ETHICS.


I"


ia more useful to man, than a man who lives in obedienoi
to reason. For that thing is to man moat useful, which <4
most in harmony with his nature (IV, xxsi. Coroll) ;
ia, obviously, man. But man acta absolutely aoeordii^ t
the laws of Ms nature, when he lives in obedience to reaw^ ^
(in, Def. ii,), and to this extent only is alwaya neceasariljd
in harmony with the nature of another man (by the Ian
Prop.) ; wherefore among- individual things nothing i
more useful to man, than a man who lives in obedience i
reason. Q.E.D.

Corollary II. — As every man seeks most that which i
useful to him, so are men most useful one to another
Tor the more a man seeks what is useful to him and e
deavours to preserve himsajf, the more ia he endowed v
virtue (TV. si.), or, what is the aame thing (IV. Def, viii.)j
the more is he endowed with power to act according to tht
laws of his own nature, that is to live in obedience to rea-
son. But men are moat in naturnJ harmony, when they liv(U
in obedience to reason (by the last Prop.) ; therefore (by thai
foregoing Coroll.) men will be most useful one to anotherj
when ea.ch aeeba moat that wMeh ia useful to him. Q.E.D

Note. — ^What we have just shown is attested by expe-fl
rience so conspicuously, that it is in the mouth of nearljil
everyone ; " Man is to man a God." Tet it rarely happen»J
that men live in obedience to reason, for things are so ^
ordered among them, that they are generally envious and
troublesome one to another. Nevertheless they are scarcely
able to lead a solitary life, ao that the definition of man as
a social animal has met with general assent ; in fact, men
do derive from social life much more convenieneo thaji
injury. Let satiriats then laugh their fill at human afEairs,
let theologians rail, and let misanthropes praise to their
utmost the life of untutored rusticity, let them heap con-
tempt on men and praises on beasts ; when all ia said, they
will find that men can provide for their wants much more
y mutual help, and that only by uniting their forces
y escape from the dangers that on every side beset
them : not to say how much more excellent and worthy of
our knowledge it is, to study the actions of men than the
actions of beasts. But I will treat of this more at length
elaewiiere.


J


E


' BUXAJS BONDAGE,


Prop. XXX VI. The highest ^ood of Ihote who foUow
non to all, and therefore all can e^aaily ryoiee

Proof. — To act virtuously is to act in obedience witTi reason
{TV, ixiv.), and whatsoever we endeavour to do in obedience
to reason is to understand (TV. xxvi.) ; therefore (TV. nviii.)
the highest good for those who follow after virtue is to
know God; that is {II. ilvii. and note) a good whicli is
conunon to all and can be possessed bj all men equaUj, in
so far aa they are of the same nature. Q.S.D.

Note. — Someone may ask how it would be, if the higheat
good of those who follow af t«r virtue were not common to
all ? Would it not then follow, aa above (IV. xxxiv.), that
men living in obedience to reason, that ia (IV. xisv.), men
in so far as they agree in nature, would be at variance one
with another P To such an inquiry I make answer, that it
follows not accidentally but from liie very nature of reason,
that man's higheat good is common to all, inasmuch as it is
deduced from the very essence of man, in so far as defined
by reason ; and that a tiih.ti could neither be, nor be con-
ceived without the power of taking pleaaure in this highest
good. For it belongs to the essence of the human mind
{II. zlvii.), to have an adequate knon^ledge o£ the eternal
and infinite easence of Qod.

Pbop. XXX Vll. The good which every man, who follows
after otriite, detirea for himself he wUl also desire for other
men, and ao much the more, in priyportion aa he has a greater
Jmowledge of Qod.

Proof, — ^Men, in ao far as they live in obedience to
reaaon, are moat useful to their fellow men (IV. xxsv ;
Coroll. i.) ; therefore (IV. xii.), ■we shall in obedience to
reaaon necesaarily endeavour to bring about that men
should live in obedience to reason. But the good which
eveiT man, in so far aa he is guided by reason, or, in other
words, follows after virtue, desires for himself, is to under-
stand (IV. xxvi,) ; wherefore the good, which each follower
«f virtue seeks for himself, he wUl desire also for others.
Again, desire, in so far aa it is referred to the mind, is the
very essence of the mind (Dei. of the Emotions, i.) j now the
essence of the mind consista in knowledge (II. xi.), which
■.involves the knowledge of God (H. ilvii.), and without it


212 THE ETHIca. [PAET I

(I. IV,), can neither be, nor be conceived ; therefore, i
portion aa the mind's essence involrea a greater
ledge of God, bo also will be greater the desire of t
follower of virtue, tbat other men should posseaB
which he seeks as good for himself. — QE.D.

Another Proof. — The good, wbich a man desires for h
self and loves, he will love more constantly, if he sees thi
others love it also (HI. sxxi.) ; he will therefore endeavot
tliat others shonld love it also ; and aa the good in questial
ia common to all, and therefore all can rejoice therein, ll
wiU endeavonr, for the same reason, to bring about tlu
all should rejoice therein, and this he will do the moflj
(HE. ixivii,), in proportion as his own enjoj-ment of t' '
good is greater.

Note I. — He who, guided by emotion only, endeavours ii
cause others to love what he loves himself, and to make t^
rest of the world live according to his own fancy, E
solely by impulse, and ia, therefore, hateful, especially t
those who take delight in something different, and acconT
ingly study and, by similar impulse, endeavour, to x
men live in accordance with what pleases themaelva
Again, as the highest good sought by men under 1
guidance of emotion is often sucb, that it can only I
possessed by a single individual, it follows that those y,'
love it are not consistent in their intentions, but, while thM
delight to sing its praises, fear to be believed. But he, w
endeavours to lead men by reason, does not act by impn]
but courteously and kindly, and hia intention is alwajj
consistent. Again, whatsoever we desire and do, where _
we are the cause in so far as we possess the idea of God, i
know God, I set down to Beligion. The desire of wdj
doing, which is engendered by a life according to reason, 9
call piety. Further, the desire, whereby a man li'
accoi^ng to reason ia bound to associate others with 1
self in friendship, Icall Aomowr,-' by honourable I meant]
which is praised by men living according to reason, aiidlj_^_
hose I mean that which is repugnant to the gaining of
friendship. I have also shown in addition what are tho
foundations of a state ( and the difference between true
virtue and infirmity may "be readily gathered from what I
have said ; namely, that true virtue is nothing else hxd

' Sontstas.


t hai


OF HDMAN BONDAQE. 213

Uring in accordance with reason ; while infirmity is nothing
I but man's allowing himself to be led by things which
external to himself, and to be by them determined to act

a manner demanded by the general disposition of things

ither than by his own nature considered solely in itselL

Such are the matters which I engaged to prove in Prop.
of this Part, whereby it is phun that the law against
the slaughtering of animals is founded rather on vain
Buperatition and womanish pity than on sound reason,
The rational quest of what is useful to ua further teaches
UB the necessity of associating ourselTes with our fellow-
men, but not with beasts, or things, whose nature is
different from our own; we have the same rights in
respect to them as they hayo in respect to us. Nay, as
everyone's right is defined by his vn1.ue, or power, men
have far greater rights over beasts than beasts have over
men. Still I do not deny that beasts feel: what I deny is,
that we may not consult our own advantage and use them

we please, treating them in the way which best suits

for their nature is not like ours, and their emotions

naturally difEerent from human emotioiiB (HI. Ivii.

■). It remains for me to explain what I mean by just

and unjust, sin and merit. On these points see the follow-

ingnote.

Note JJ,— In the Appendix to Part I. I undertook to
explain praise and blame, merit and sin, justice and
injustice.

Concerning praise and blame I have spoken in HI. ssix.
note: the time has now come to treat of the remaining
terms. But I must first say a few words concerning man
in the state of nature and in society.

Every man exists by aovercign natural right, and, con-
aequently, by sovereign natural right performs those actions
vMch follow from the necessity of his own nature ; there-
fore by sovereign natural right every man judges what is
good and what is bad, takes care of his own advantage
according to his own disposition (IV. sis. and sx.), avenges
the wrongs done to him (TTT , xl. CorolL ii.), and endeavours
to preserve that which he loves and to destroy that which
he hates (HI. sxviii.). Now, if men lived under the guid-
ance of reason, everyone would remain in possession of


214 TSB SXHIiC&. [fast IT.

ihia Ids rigiit, witboirt asnr iajnij bemg done to Ids
neigliboar (IT. xxxv, €<»oIL L). Bat seeing tiiat thi^ see
a prej to their esnotiaiifl, wiiidi fa^ snrpoaa Inznuyi power
or virtue (IV* tL), thej aze offe»i drawn izLdi&rent diree-
tioos, and being »t fariaiiiee one witii another (TT. Tniii,
xxxiT,), stand in need of mntoal help (IT. mr. note).
Wherefore, in <»der that nien may lire together in harmon J,
and masj aid one another, it is neeessarj that they should
forego their natural lig^ and, £or the sake of seenzitjr,
refraon from all actions whjch can injure thexr f eDow-men.
The way in whkh this end can he attained, so that men
who are neces s a rily a prej to their emotions (IV. it.
CoroIL), inconstant, and direrse, dkonld he able to render
each other nratnallj secure, uid feel mntnal trost, ia
erident from IV. TiL and TTT. xcdz. It is there shown^
that an emotion can onlj be restrained bj an emotion
stronger than, and contrary to itself and that men aToid
inflicting injury throogh fear of incurring a greater injnry
themselTes.

On this law society can be established, so long as it keepa
in its own hand the right, possessed bj everyone, of aToug*
ing inimy, and pnmonncing on good and evil ; and pro-
Tided it also possesses the power to hiy down a general
role of conduct, and to pass hiws sanctioned, not by reason,,
which is powerless in restraining emotion, but by threats-
(IV. zTii. note). Such a society established with laws and
the power of preserving itself is called a State, while those
who live under its protection are called citizens. We may
readily understand that there is in the state of nature
nothing, which bj universal consent is pronounced good or
bad ; for in the state of nature everyone thinks solely of
his own advantage, and according to his disposition, with
reference only to his individual advantage, decides what is-
good or bad, being bound by no law to anyone besides
himself.

In the state of nature, therefore, sin is inconceivable ; it
can only exist in a state, where good and evil are pro-
nounced on by common consent, and where everyone is
botmd to obev the State authority. 8in, then, is nothing
else but disooedienoe, which is therefore punished by the
right of the State only. Obedience, on the other hand» ia


IV.] OF HTTMAK BONDAOE. 215

Met down as merit, inasmuch, as a man is thought worthy
,«£ merit, i£ he takes delight in the advantages which a
gtaf* provides.

Again, in the state of nature, no one is hy common con-
Bent master of anything, nor ia there anything in nature,
Thich can be said to belong to one man ratlier than another :
bJI things are common to all. Hence, in the state of na-
■ ire, we can conceire no wish to render to every man his

mi, or to deprive a man of that which belongs to him ; in
Bther words, tJiere is nothing in the atate of nature anawer-
ing to justice and injustice. Such ideas are only possible
in a social state, when it is decreed by common consent
what belongs to one man and what to another.

From all these considerations it is evident, that justice
.and injustice, sin and merit, are extrinsic ideas, and not
.attributes which display the nature of the mind. But I
■have sai d enough.

Pkof. X X X V I it Whatsoever disposes the human body, so
» io center ii ca,pahle of being affected in an increased num-
er of ways, or of affecting external bodies i» on increased
number of ways, is useful to man ; and ia to, in proportion as
the body is thereby readied more capable of being affected or
fleeting other bodies in an increased number of ways ; con-
'rariwise, wAateoever renders the body less capable in this re-
's hurtful to Tnan.

J'roo/.— Whatsoever thus increases the capabilities of

e body increases also the mind's capability of perception
;^. liv.) ; therefore, whatsoever thus disposes the body
and thus renders it capable, is necessarily good or useful
(TV. Kivi. xivii.) ; and is so in proportion to the extent to
which it can render the body capable ; contrariwise (H.
3QT. IV. xivi, ixvii.), it is hurtful, if it renders the body in
'ids respect less capable. Q.KD.

pBOp. JtXJdX. WhatBoever hrin^g about the preservation
xf the proportion of motion and rest, which the parts of the
buman body mutually poseess, is good ; contrariwise, whatso'
't a change t» such proportion is bad.

Proof. — The human body needs many other bodies for
ijia preseirvation (II, Post, iv.). But that which constitutes
the specific reahty (forma) of a human body i^, that its
iparts communicate their several motions one to another in


216


THE ETHICS.


a certain fixed proportion (Def. before Lemma iv. after I
liii.). Therefore, whatsoever brings abont the preservatil
of the proporlion between motion and rest, which the p
o£ the human body mntuaEj pobbcbb, preserves the specific
reality of the homan body, and eonseqnently renders the
human body capable of being affected in many ways and
of affecting external bodies in many ways ; consequently it
is good (by the last Prop,), Again, whatsoerer brings
about a change in the aforesaid proportion causes the
human body to assume another- specific character, in
other words (see Preface to this Part towards the end,
though the point is indeed self-evident), to be destroyed, and
consequently totally incapable of being affected in an in-
creased numbers of ways ; therefore it is bad. Q.E.B.

Note. — The eitent to which such causes can injure or be
of service to the mind will be explained in the Fifth Part.
But I would here remark that I consider that a body under-
goes death, when the proportion of motion and rest whicl
obtained mutually among ita several parts
For I do not venture to deny that a human body, whi
keeping the eircolation of the blood and other propertk
wherein the life of a body is thought to consist, may nta
the leas be changed into another nature totally differ '
from its own. There is no reason, which compels me I
maintain that a body does not die, unless it becomes I
corpse ; nay, experience would seem to point to the opj
site conclusion. It sometimes happens, that a man undei
goes such changes, that I should hardly call him the si
As I hare heard tell of a certain Spanish poet, who i
been seized with sickness, and though he recovered ther
I from yet remained so oblivious of his past life, that ]

D would not beheve tho plays and tragedies he had wii

L ten to be his own : indeed, he might have been tak<

1 for a grown-up child, if be had also foi^tten his natiiJ

I tongue. If this instance seems incredible, what shall iT

m say of infants? A man of ripe age deems their natu

m so unlike his own, that he can only be persuaded that he to^

I has been an infant by the nnalc^ of other men. However,

I I prefer to leave such questions undiscussed, lest I should

B give ground to the superstitious for raising new issues.

■ Prop. XL. Wlialsoever condvceg to •man's godal life, OtM

■fa ^ ^


^■pLBTIV.]


217


coKtes tnen to live together in harmony, it useful, wTtereai
tohateoever brings discord into a 8itUe ia bad.

Proof. — For whatBoaver causes men to live together in
harmony also canses them to live aecording to reason (IV.
xxsT.), and ia therefore (IV. xxvi. and xivii.) good, and (for
the same reason) whatsoever brings about discord is bad.
Q.E.D.

Pbop. XLT. Pleasure in itself is not bad but good : con-
trariwise, pain in itself ia bad.

Proo/.— Pleasure ( II I . xi. and note) is emotion, whereby
the hody's power of activity is increased or helped ; pain ia
emotion, whereby the body's power of activity is diminished
or checked ; therefore (IV. xixviii.) pleasure in itaeif is
good, &e. Q.E.D.

Prop. 2ILIL Mirtk cannot he excessive, hut is always good ;
eofitrariwiee. Melancholy is always had.

Proof.— Mirth (see its Def . in HI. xi. note) ia pleasure,
which, in so far as it is referred to the body, consists in all
parta of the body being affected equally : that is (m. si.),
tha body's power of activity is increased or aided in such a
maimer, that the several parta maintain their former pro-
portion of motion and rest ; therefore Mirth ia always good
(IV. xrdx,), and caouot be escesaive. But Melancholy (see
its Def. in the same note to HI. id.) ia pain, which, in ao far
ae it is referred to the body, conaiata in the absolute de-
oreaae or hindrance of the body's power of activity ; there-
fore (TV. xsxviii.) it is always bad. Q.E.D.

Pbop. XTiTTT. Blimulation may be excessive and bad; on
the other hand, grief way be good, in so far ae stimulation or
pleasure is had.

Proof. — iKicalized pleasure or stimulation (tilillatio') is
pleasure, which, in so far aa it ia referred to the body, con-
siats in one or some of its parta being affected more than
the rest (see ita Definition, Id. xi. note) ; the power of this
emotion may be sufficient to overcome other actions of the
body (IV. vi.), and may remain obstinately fixed therein,
_ thaa rendering it incapable of being affected in a variety of
ways: therefore (IV. xsiviii.) it may be bad. Again.
which i


lr«^


1 (IV. xli.).


BjBut, aa its force and increase is defined by the power of an


R-^temal C


e compared with our own (IV". v.), we cancc


218


TBB ETHICS.


[PASTIV^H

Bof

c«s-__


ceire mfinito degreea and Taodes of Btrength in this emo*
tion (TV. iii.) ; we can, therefore, coneeive it as capable of
restraining atimolation, and preventing its becoming eicea-
give, and hindering the body's capabilities ; thus, to this a
tent, it will be go^ Q.E,D.

Pkof. XT.r y, Love and dfnre may he t

Proof. — Love ie pleasure, accompanied bj the idea of ■
external cause (Sef. of Emotions, fi.); therefore stimulation,
accompanied by the idea of an external cause ia love (HL
xi. note) ; hence love may be excessive. A gai", the Btrength
of desire variea in proportion to the emotion from which it
arises ( iii , xxxvii.). Now emotion m^y overcome all tha
rest of men's actions (TT. vi.) ; so, therefore, can desire,
which arises from the same emotion, overcome all other de-
sires, and become excessive, as we showed in the last pro-
position concerning stimulation.

Note. — Mirth, which I have stated to be good, can be
conceived more easily than it can be observed. For the
emotions, whereby we are daily assailed, are generally re-
ferred to some part of the body which is affected more
than the rest; heac* the emotions are generally escesttve,
and so fii the mind in the contemplation of one object, tl
it is unable to think of others ; and although men, as 4
rule, are a prey to many emotions — and very few are foia
who are always assailed by one and the same — yet there a
caBee, where one and the same emotion remains obstinate
fiied. We soraethnea see men so absorbed ia one objec
that, although it be not present, they think they have ^
before them ; when this is the case with a man who is i
asleep, we say he is delirious or mad ; nor are those p
sons who are inflamed with love, and who dream all n
and all day about nothing but their mistress, or i
woman, considered as less mad, for they are made objee
of ridicule. But when a miser thinks of nothing bat ga
or money, or when an ambitious man thinks of nothing bi
glory, they are not reckoned to be mad, because they a
generally harmful, and are thought worthy of being bated.*
But, in reality, Avarice, Ambition, Lust, &c., are species of
madness, though they may not be reckoned among diseases.

Prop. XLV. Hatred can never be good.

Proof. — When we hate a man, we endeavour to destroy a


PABT IT.]


r B0KD40E.


219


I


him ( III - nsii.), that is (TV. ixivii.), we endeavour to do-
something that is bad. Therefore, Ac. Q.E.J}.

N.B. Here, and in what followB, I mean by hatred only
hatred towards men.

CoToUary I. — Envy,deriaion, contempt, anger, revenge, ami
other ernotiona attributable to hatred, or arising therefrom.
are bad ; this ia evident from TTT, xxsix. and IV. xxsvii.

Corollary 11. — Whatsoever we desire from motives of
hatred ia base, and in a State unjust. This also ia evident
from HL xnix., and from the definitions of baseness and
injustice in IV. xxxvii. note.

Note. — Between derision (whicJi I have in Coroll. I. statect
to be bad) and laughter 1 recognize a great difierence. For
laughter, as also jocularity, ia merely pleasure ; therefore,
BO long aa it be not excessive, it ia in itself good (TV. xli).
-Assuredly nothing forbids man to enjoy himself, save grim
and gloomy superstition. For why is it more lawful U>
satiate one's hunger and thirst than to drive away one's
melancholy ? I reason, and have convinced myself as
follows r No deity, nor anyone else, save the envious, takes
pleasure in my infirmity and discomfort, nor seta down to
my virtue the tears, sobs, feaj, and the like, which are
Bigns of infirmity of spirit ; on the contrary, the greater
the pleasure wherewith we are affected, the greater the
perfection whereto we pass ; in other words, the more must
we necessarily partake of the divine nature. Therefore, to
make use of what comea in our way, and to enjoy it as
much aa possible (not to the point of satiety, for that
would not be enjoyment) is the part of a wise man, I say
it is the part of a wise man to refresh and recreate himself
with moderate and pleasant food and drink, and also with
perfumes, with the soft beauty of growing plants, with
dress, with music, with many sports, with theatres, and the
like, such as every man may make use of without injury to
Ma neighbour. For the human body is composed of very
numerous parts, of diverse natiire, which continually stand
in need of fresh and varied nourishment, so that the whole
body may be equally capable of performing all the actions,
which follow from the necessity of its own nature ; and,
consequently, so that the mind may also be equally capable
of understanding many things simultaneously. This way


BT IT.^I


220 THE ETHICS. [PAAT

of life, then, agrees beat wdtli our principlea, and also Trith
general practice; therefore, if there be any question of
another plan, the plan we have mentioned is the best, and
in every way to be commended. There is no need for me
to set forth the matter more clearly or in more detail.

Pbop. XLTX Me, who lives vmder the guidance of reason,
endeavours, as far as possible, to render hack love, or kmdness,
for other men's hatred, anger, contempt, &c., towards him.

Proof. — ^All emotions of hatred are bad (IV. xlv, Ooroll.i.) ;
therefore he who lives under the guidance of reason wOl
endeavour, as far as possible, to avoid being assailed by
Huoh emotions (iV. lii.) ; consequently, he will also endear-
Tonr to prevent others being so assailed (TV. xuvii.). But
hatred is increased by being reciprocated, and can be
quenched by love ( IN . sliii.), so that hatred may pa^s into j
love ( 1 1 1 , sliv.) ; therefore he who hvea under the guidanoeJ
of reason will endeavour to repay hatred with love, that i
with Idndneas, Q.E.D.

Note. — He who chooses to avenge wrongs with hatred-J
assuredly wretched. But he, who strives to conquer hatrf
with love, fights his battle in joy and confidence ; he wiu
Btanda many as easily as one, and has very little need 4
fortune's aid. Those whom he vanquishes yield joyfuT
not through failure, but through increase in their powei
all these consequences follow so plainly from the mere 6
finitions of love and understanding, that I have no need 4
prove them in detail. f

pEOP. SLVil. Emotions of hope and fear cannot ha 'i
themselves good. '

Proof. — Emotions of hope and fear cannot exist withoi
pain. For fear is pain (I)ef. of the Emotions, xiii.), i
hope (Def. of the Emotions, Explanation sii. and x
cannot exist without fear ; therefore (IV. xh.) these em,
tioas cannot be good in themselves, but only in so far ^
they can restrain excessive pleasure (IV. xliii.). Q.E.D.

Note. — We may add, that these emotions show defe(
tive knowledge and an absence of power in the mind ; for
the same reason confidence, despair, joy, and disappoint-
ment are signs of a want of mental power. For although
confidence and joy are pleasurable emotions, they never-
theless imply a preceding pain, namely, hope and fear.


I


PAHT IV.] OF BOSiAN BONDAQE. 221

Wberefore the more we endeavour to bo guided \ij reason,
the leas do we depend on hope ; we endeavour to free our-
selves from fear, ajid, as far as we can, to dominate fortune,
directing our actions by the sure counsels of wisdom,

Pbop. XLVHI. The emoHoTU of over-etteem and dit-
paragemeiii are alwayg had.

Proof. — These erootions (see Def. of the Emotions, iii.
xxii.) ara repugnant to reason ; ajid are therefore (IV. ixvi.
XKvii.) bad. Q.E.D.

Pkop. XLIX. Ooer-esteeTit it a^t to render ite object proud.

Proof. — If we Beo that any one rates us too highly, for
love's sate, we are apt to become elated (III. xli.), or to ba
pleasurably affected (Def . of tho Emotions, xxx.) ; the good
which we hear of ourselves we readily believe (IH, xrv.) ;
and therefore, for love's sake, Tate ourselves too highly;
in other worda, we are apt to become proud. Q.E.D.

Paop. L. Pi'iy, in a man who lives under ike guidance of
reason, it in itself bad and vteleta.

Proof, — Rty (Def. of the Emotiona, xviii.) is a pain, and
therefore (TV. xli.) is in itself btid. The good effect which
■follows, namely, our endeavour to free the object of our
]pity from misery, is an action which we desire to do solely
.at the dictation of reason (IV. xxxvii.) ; only at the dicta-
eason are we able to perform any action, which we
loiow for certain, to be good (IV. sxvii.) ; thus, in a man
who lives under the guidance of reason, pity in itself is
useleaa and bad. Q.E.J),

Note. — He who rightly realizes, that all things follow
from the neceaaity of the diviuej nature, and come to pass
in accordance with the eternal laws and rules of nature.
Tvill not find anything worthy of hatred, deriaion, or con-
tempt, nor will he bestow pity on anything, but to the ut-
moBt extent of human virtue he will endeavour to do well, as
the Baying is, and to rejoice. "We may add, that he, who is
easily touched with compaBsion, and is moved by another's
Borrow or tears, often doea Bomething which he afterwards
regrets ; partly because we can never be sure that an action
caused by emotion is good, partly because we are eaaUy
deceived by false tears. I am in. thia place expressly apeak-
iug of a man hving under the guidance of reason. He who

moved to help others neither by reason nor by compas-


t eJs^M

od
ay

a


222 THB ETHICS. [fAST

aion, is rightly styled inliuman, for (111, urii.) he see
unlike a, loan.

Peop. LI, Approval w not repugnant to reason, hut t
agree therewith and ari»e tli^refrom.

Proof. — Approval ia love towards one who has done good
to another (Def. of the Emotions, xix.) ; therefore it may
he referred to the mind, in so far as the latter is actiF&™
(UL Hi.)' til** is Cni- i"-)' ^ so far as it understand*^
therefore, it is in agreement with reason, &c. Q.E.D.

Another Proof.- — He, who Utos under the guidance ( .
reason, desires for others the good which he seeks for him-
self (IV. mvii.) ; wherefore from seeing someone doing
good to his fellow Ma own endeavour to do good is aided ;
in other worda, he will feel pleasure ( 1 11 si. note) accom-
panied by the idea of the benefactor. Therefore he approveWB
of him. Q.E.D. M

Note, — ^Indignation as we defined it (Def . of the £m<>^H
tiona, xs.) i^ necessarily evil (TV. ilv.) ; we may, howevesrfB
remark that, when the sovereign power for the sake of pre-f
serring peace punishes a citizen who has injured anofJiep,,' J
it should not be said to bs indicant with the criminal, iattt
it is not incited by hatred to ruin him^ it is led by a Benaaifl
of duty to punish him. ^M

Pbop. T7TT , Self-approval may arise from reason, on^H
thai which arises from reason is the highest possible. fl

Proof. — Self-approval is pleasure arising from a mau'sV
contemplation of himself and his own power of action (DefcTj
of the Emotions, siv.). But a man's true power of action ■
or virtue is reason herself ( III iii.), as the said man clearly' I
and distinctly contemplates her (H. xl, xliii.) ; theref orB' J
self-approval arises from reason. Again, when a man ixtM
contemplating himself, he only perceives clearly and dia^- J
tinctly or adequately, such things as follow from his power V
of action (TIT. Def. ii.), that is (UL iii.), from his power ot^M
understanding ; therefore in such contemplation alone does]
the highest possible seK-approval arise. Q.E.I). ^

Note. — Self-approval is in reahty the highest object forj
which we can hope. For (as we showed in IV. xiv.) na'V
one endeavours to preserve his being for the sake of anjr. J
ulterior object, and, as this approvalie more and morel
fostered and strengthened l>y praise (ill. hii. CoroU.), and ob, I


DF HTIIUtr BOHDAOE. 223

the contrary (III. Iv. Coroll,) is more and more disturbed
"bj blame, fame becomes the most powerful of incitements
to action, and life under disgrace is almost unendurable.
^L Pbop. T.I 1 1 SumUUi/ is not a virtue, or doea not write

^P Proof. — Humility is pain arising from a man's contem-
Hi^lation of Ms own infirmities (Dei', of the Emotions, xsri.).
But, in BO far as a man knows himself by true reason, he
is assumed to understand his essence, that is, his power
(m. vii.). Wherefore, if a man in self- contemplation per-
ceives any infirmity in himself, it is not by virtue of his
understanding himself, but (HI. Iv.) by virtue of his power
of activity bemg checked. But, if we assume that a man
perceives his own infirmity by virtue of understanding
BOmething stronger than himself, by the knowledge of
■which he determines his own power of activity, this ia the
.same as saying that we conceive that a man understands
himself distinctly (IV. xivi.), because' hia power of activity
'" aided. Wherefore humility, or the pain which arises
a man's contemplation of his own infirmity, does not
from the contemplation or reason, and is not a virtue
lEmt a passion. Q.E.I).

Fbop. UV. R^enianee ia not a virtue, or does not arise
from reason; but he who repents of an, action is doubly
tereti^d or infirm.

Proof. — The first part of this proposition is proved Uke
the foregoing one. The second part is proved from the
mere definition of the emotion in question (Dei. of the
Emotions, sxvii.), Tor the man allows himself to be over-
icome, first, by evil desires ; secondly, by pain.

Note. — As men seldom hve under the guidance of reason,
ihesa two emotions, namely. Humility and Bepontance, as
also Hope and Fear, bring more good than harm ; hence,
as we must sin, we had better sin in that direction. Tor,
if all men who are a prey to emotion were all equally proud,
they would shrink from nothing, and would fear nothing ;
how then could they be joined and linked together in bonds
" union ? The crowd plays the tyrant, when it is not in


Hjis ail
»TErat»


' land reads r " Quod
e tranalaled above, ho auggesti
o ' (^ whereby) and ' quodcjue ' (:


agenili


lessed,


224 THE ETHICS. [fABT |

fear; hence we need not ■wonder that the prophets, who
consulted the good, not of a, few, but of ajl, sio strenuonsly
commended Humility, Eepentance, and Etjrerenee. Indeed
thoae who are a prey to these emotions may be led much
more easily than others to live under the goidauce of reason,
that is, to become free and to enjoy the life of the blessed,

pKOP. LV. Extreme pride or dejection indicates exb
ignorance of eelf.

Proof. — This is eyident from Def . of the Emotions,
and xzix.

Feop. LVL Exireme pride or dejection indicates i
injirmity of gpiril.

Proof. — The ftrat foundation of virtue is self -preservation
(IV, sxii. Coroll.) under the guidance of reason (IV. xxiv.).
He, therefore, who is ignorant of himself, is ^orant of the
foundation of all virtues, and consequently of all virtues.
Again, to act virtuously is merely to act under the guidance
of reason (IV. xxiv.) : now^ be, that acta under the guidance
of reason, must necessarilj know that be so acts (H. xliii.).
Therefore he who is in extreme ignorance of himself, and
conaequQntly of all virtues, acta least in obedience to virtue ;
in other words (IV. Def. viii.), ia most infirm of spirit.
Thus extreme pride or dejection indicates eitreme infirmity
of spirit. Q.E.D.

Corollary. — Hence it most clearly follows, that the proud
and the dejected specially fall a prey to the emotions.

JToie.— Yet dejection can be more easOy corrected than
pride ; for the latter being a pleasurable emotion, and the
former a painful emotion, the pleasurable is stronger than
the painful (IV. xviii.). M

I^op. LVil. The proud man delights in the eompamg a|
flatterers and parasites, hid hates the company of the hi^lM
minded. V

Proof. — Pride is pleasiue arising from a man's over-
estimation of himself (Def. of the Emotions, xxviii. and
vi.) ; this estimation the proud man will endeavour to
foster by all the means in hia power (IH. xiii. note) ; he
will therefore dehgbt in the company of flatterers and
parasites (whose character ia too well known to need de-
finition here), and will avoid the company of high-minded
men, who vaJue him according to his deserts. Q.JS.J?.


ART rv.]


OF HITMAN


2-15


Note. — It would be too long a task to eniijnerat« here
I all the evil reaulta of pride, maemuch as the proud are a
prey to all the emotions, though to none of them leaa than
(to love and pitj. I cannot, however, pass over in silence
the fact, that a man maj be called proud from his nnder-
:eBtunB.tion of other people ; and, therefore, pride in this
xense may be defined as pleasure arising from the false
opinion, whereby a roan may consider himseK superior to
''tis fellows. The dejection, wliieli is the opposite quality to
this sort of pride, may be defined as pain arising from the
false opinion, whereby a man may think himaelf inferior to
iis fellows. Such being the case, we can easily see that a
proad man ia neeesBarily envious {lH. xU. note), and only
takes pleasure in the company, who fool his weak mind to
the top of his bent, and make him insane instead of merely
Soolisb.

Though dejection is the emotion contrary to pride, yet is
the dejected man very near akin to the proud man. For,
inasmuch as his pain arises from a comparison between his
i)wn infirniity and other men's jwwer or virtue, it will be
removed, or, in other words, be will feel pleasure, if his
itnagination be occupied in contemplating other men's
^Eaults J whence arises the proverb, " The unhappy are com-
forted by finding fellow- sufferers." Contrariwise, he will
'he the more pained in proportion as he thinks himself in-
ferior to others ; hence none are so prone to envy as the
dejected, they are specially keen in observing men's actions,
with a view to fault-finding rather than correction, in order
io reserve their praises for dejection, and to glory therein,
tboagh all the time with a dejected air. These effects
follow as neecssaiily from the said emotion, as it follows
!Xrom the nature of a triangle, that the three angles are equal
;to two right angles. I have already said that I call these
and similar emotions bad, solely in respect to what ia useful

K3 man. The laws of nature have regard to nature's general
rder, whereof man is but a part. I mention this, in pass-
!at any should think that I have wished to set forth
the faults and irrational deeds of men rather than the
nature and properties of things. Por. as I said in the pre-
face to the thirf. Part, I regard human emotions and their
properties as on the same footing with other natural pheno-


power ai^^^l

i delight t^^H
litiea in th^^

■aeoTi,

4


226 THE ETHICS.

mena. Assuredly Lumaa frmotioBs indicate the power
ingennity of nature, if not of human nature, quite
as other things which we admire, and which we delight
contemplate. But I pass on to note those quahtii
emotions, which bring advantage to man, or inflict injury
upon him.

Peop. T.V I 1 1. Honour (gloria) is not repugnant to reasoTi,
hut may arise ikerefrom.

Proo/.— This is evident from Def . of the Emotions,
and alao from, the definition of an honourable man
xsrrii. not« i.).

Note. — Empty honour, as it is styled, is self-approval,
fostered only by the good opinion of the populace ; when
this good opinion ceaaea there ceases also the self-approval,
in other words, the highest object of each man's love (IVj
lii. note) ; consequently, he whose honour is rooted
popular approval must, da.y by day, ansioualy strive,
and scheme in order to retain his reputation. Por
populace is variable and inconstant, so that, if a reputal
be not kept up, it quickly vtitherB away. Everyone wie
to catch popular applause for MmBelf , and readily represE
the fame of others. The object of the strife being esttmal
as the greatest of all goods, each combatant is seized Tritli
fierce desire to put down his rivals in every possible way,
he who at last comes out victorious is more proud of hai
done harm to others than of having done good to himi
Tbis sort of honour, then, is really empty, being nothing.

The points to note concerning shame may easily be
ferred from what was said on the subject of mercy and
pentanee. I wUl only add that shame, Uke compaaait
though not a virtue, ia yet good, in so far as it shows, tl
the feeler of shame ia really imbued with the desire to
honourably ; in the same way as suffering ia good, as ahoi
ing that the injured part is not mortified. Thereft
though a man who feels ahame is sorrowful, he is yet in(
perfect than he, who is shameless, and has no desire
live honourably.

Such are the points which I undertook to remark
concerning the emotions of pleasure and pain; as fort!
desires, they are good or bad according as they spring f i
good or evil emotions. But all, in so far


HCTMAN BONDAOB, 227

^ Ijy emotions ■wlierein the inind is paasive, are

blind (as is evident from what waa said in IV. sliv, note),
and would be useless, i£ men could easily be induced to live
by the guidance of reason only, as I will now briefly show.

Prop. T.TY To all the actions, whereto we are determined
hy emotion wherein the m,ind is passive, we can he determined
wiihowt emotion by reason.

Proof. — To act rationally is nothing else ( III , iii. and
Def . ii.) but to perform those actions, which follow from
the necessity of our nalnire considered in itself alone. But
pain ia bad, iu so far as it dimiziiahes or checks the power
of acfaon. (IV. sli.) ; wherefore we cannot by pain be deter-
mined to any action, which we should be unable to perform
iinder the guidance of reason. Again, pleasure is bad only
in BO far as it hinders a man's capability for action (IV.
xli. xliii.) ; therefore to this extent we could not be deter-
mined by it to any action, which we could not perform
under the guidance of reason. Lastly, pleasure, in so far
as it is good, is in harmony with reason (for it consists in
the fact that a man's capability for action is increased or
aided) ; nor is the mind paesiTe ■therein, except in bo far as
a man's power of action is not increased to the extent of
affording him an adequate conception of himself and his
actions (HI. iii. and note).

"Wherefore, if a man who ispleaeurably affected be brought
1iO such a atate of perfection, that he gains an adequate con-
ception of himself and his own actions, he will be equally, nay
more, capable of those actions, to which he is determined by
amotion wherein the mind is passive. But all emotions are
attributable to pleasure, to pain, or to desire (Def. of the
Emotions, iv. esplanatioa) ; and desire (Dei. of the Emo-
tions, i.) is nothing else but the attempt to act ; therefore,
to all actions, &c. Q.E.D.

Another Proof. — A given action is called bad, in so far as
it arises from one being affected by hatred or any evil emo-
tion. But no action, considered, in itseK alone, is either
good or bad (as we pointed out in the preface to Pt. IV.),
one and the same action being sometimes good, sometimes
bad ; wherefore to the action which is sometimea bad, or
arises from some evil emotion, we may be led by reason
^ ^. xix.). Q,.E.D.


\


^m


228 THK ETHICS. [PAKT

Note. — An example wiQ put this point in a clearer light.
The action of Btr iVing , ia so far as it is considered physi-
caUj, and in bo far as we mere!; look to tbe fact that a man
laises his arm, clenches his fist, and moves his vhole arm
violently downwards, is a "rirtne or escelleuce which ia con-
ceived as proper to the structure of the human body. If,
then, a man, moved by anger or hatred, ia led to clench his
fiat or to move hia arm. thia result tokea place (as we
showed in Pt. 11.), because one and the same action can
he associated with Tarious mental im^es of things ; there-
fore we may be determined to the performance of one and
the same action by confnsed ideas, or by clear and distinct
ideas. Hence it is evident that every desire which springs
from emotion, wherein the micd ia passive, wonld become
neeleas, if men could be guided by reason. Let ns now al
why desire which arises from emotion, wherein the n ' "
passive, is called by ns bhnd.

Pnop, LX. Detire ari^itg from a pleasure or pain, H
not attributable to the whole hody, hut ojily to one or et
partf thereof, w wiikout utility in retpeet to a man oc a «

Froof. — Let it be assumed, for instance, that a, a pa
a bodv, is so strengthened by some external cause, tha^
prevajla over the remaining parts (TV. vi.). Thia part H
not endeavour to do away with its own powers, in order il
the other parts of the body may perform its office j for fl.
it would he necessary for it to have a force or power 1
doing away with its own powers, which (HE. vi.) ia absiq
The said part, and, consequently, the mind also, will endf
vonr to preserve its condition. Wherefore desire axiai
from a pleasure of the kind aforesaid has no utility ia ^
ferenee to a man as a whole. If it be asaumed, (
other hand, that the part, a, be checked so that the n
ing parta prevail, it may be proved in the same manner ti
desire arising from pain has no utility in respect to ^ n
aa a whole. Q.E.D.

Note. — Ab pleasure is geinerally (TV. xliv. note) attributJ
to one part of the body, we generally desire to preserve o
being without taking into consideration our health as a wh
to which it may be added, that the deaires which have n
hold over us (IT. is.) take account of the present and B
of the future.


VAKT IT.] OP mcytAJS B9KDAC1B. i29

Prop. T.TT. Daire «hieh tpringe from reaton eaimol h«

Proof. — Desire (Def. of the Emotions, L) considered ab-

iliit«]y is the actual essence of man, in so far as it is coo*

'.Ted as in anr way determined to a particular actlvitj \>j
given modification of itself. Hence desire, which arises
reason, that is (UL iii.), which ia engendered in us in so
&r as we act, is the actual essence or nature of man, in so
far as it is conceived as determined to such activities as are
adequately conceived through man's essence only ( TTT , Def.
iL). Now, if such desire could be excessive, human natnro
considered in itself alone would "be able to exceed itself, or
would be able to do more than it can, a manifest con-
toadictbn. Therefore, such desire cannot be excessive.
Q.E.D.

Prop, L.ViI. In bo far a» the mmd conceive* a thing
under the diftatee of reason, it is affected equally, whether the
idea he of a thing future, past, or present.

Proof. — ^Whatsoever the mind conceives binder the ^d-
ukce of reason, it conceives under the form of eternity or
necessity (IE. xUv. Coroll. ii.), and is therefore affected witli
lie same certitude (IT. xliii. and note). Wherefore, whether
the thing be present, past, or future, the mind conceives it
under the same necessity and is affected with the same cer-
titude ; and whether the idea be of something present, past,
.or fnture, it will in all cases be equally true (TL. xh.) ; that
" I, it will always possess the same properties of an adequate

[ea (H Def . iv.) ; therefore, in so far as the mind conceives
under the dictates of reason, it is affected in the
lanner, whether the idea te of a thing future, past,
ant. Q.E,D.

Note. — ^If we could possess an adequate fcnowled|;?e of the
Imation of things, and could determine by reason their
periods of esiBtence, we should contemplate things future
with the same emotion as things present ; and the mind
would desire as though it were present the good which it
conceived as future; consequently it would necessarily ne-
glect a, lesser good in the present for the sake of a greater
good in the future, and would in no wise desire that which is
good in the present but a source of evil in the future, as we
' " presently show. However, we can have but a very in-


_^I


[PA£T IT^^I


230 THE ETHICS.

adequate knowledge o£ the duration of things (IL ssxi.) ;
and the periods of their existence (IL iliv. note) we can
only determine Ijj imagination, which is not so powerfnllj
affected by the future as hy the present. Hence such true
knowledge of good and evil as we possess is merely ahstract
or general, and the judgment vhich we pass on the order
of things and the connection of causes, with a view to de-
termining what is good or bad for us in the present, i&
rather imaginary than reaL Therefore it ia nothing won-
derful, if tiie desire arising from such knowledge of good
and evil, in so far aa it looks on into the future, be mora
readily checked than the desire of things which are agree-
able at the pres ent time. {Cf . IT. ivi.)

Prop. T.xiil Me who is led by fear, and does good in
order to escape evil, U not led 6y reason. '^

Proof. — All the emotions which are attributable to ti
mind as active, or in other words to reason, are emotions o
pleasure and desire (HI. hx.) ; therefore, he who ii
fear, and does good in order to escape evil, ia not led 1
reason.

Note. — Superstitious persons, who know better how f
rail at vice than how to teach virtue, and who strive not si
guide men by reason, but bo to restrain them that t
would rather escape evil than love virtue, have no other a
but to make others as wretched aa themselves ; wherefo*
it is nothing wonderful, if they be generally troublesonl
and odious to their fellow-men.

Corollary. — Under desire which springs from reason, i
seek good directly, and shun evil indirectly.

Proof. — Desire which springa from reason can only sprii
from a pleasurable emotion, wherein the nund is not p
sivQ ( 1 1 1 , lii.), in other words, from a pleasure which c
not be excessive (IV. Ixi.), and not from pai
this desire springs from the knowledge of good, not i
evil (IV. viii.); hence under the guidance of reason m
seek good directly and only by implication shun eTl
Q,.E.D.

Note. — This Corollary may be illustrated by the ezamp]
of a sick and a healthy ma.n. The aick man through fear q
death eats what he naturally ahrinks from, but the healtJi
man takes pleasure in his food, and thus gets a better e


^■joyment out of life, than if he were in fear of death, and
^B desired directly to avoid it. So a judge, who condemns a
^ criminal to death, not from hatred or anger but from love
of the public -well-being, is guided solely by reason.

Pbof. T,XI V, The knowledge of evil w an inadequate
knowledge.

Proof.— The knowledge of evil (TV. viii.) ie pain, in so far
BJB we are conscious thereof. Now pain is the transition to
0. lesser perfection (Def. of the Emotions, iii.) and there-
fore cannot be understood through man's nature (1 1 1, vi,
ajid vii.) ; therefore it is a passive state (HI. Def. ii.) which
(HI, iii.) depends on inadequa.te ideas; conaequeiitly the
knowledge thereof (II. xsix.J, namely, the knowledge of
evU, is inadequate. Q.E.D.

Corollary. — Hence it follows that, if the human miad
possessed only adequate ideas, it would form no conception
of evil.

tPaop, LXY. Under the guidance of reason we should jmr-
me the greater of two goods and the lesser of two evils.
Proof. — A good which prevents our enjoyment of a greatei
good ia in reality an evil ; for we apply the terms good and
I bad to things, in so far as we compare them one with
another (see preface to this Part) ; therefore, evil ia in
reality a lesser good ; hence under the guidance of reason
we Beek or pursue only the grea.ter good and the leaser evil.
Q.E.I>.

Corollary. — Wc may, under tbe gui<lance of reason, pur-
Bue the lesser evil as though it were the greater good, and
we may shun the lesser good, which would be the cause of
the greater evil. For the evil, which is here called the lesser,
is really good, and the lesser good ia really evil, wherefore
we may seek the former and shim the latter. Q.E.S.

Prop. LJLVI. We vuty, vnder the guidance of reason,
teek a greater good in the future in preference to a lesser good
in the present, a/nd we may seek a lesser evil in the present
in preference to a greater evil in the future.^

Proof— 1£ the mind could have an adequate knowledge

' "Malum pnesens minus pnemnjori fnlnro." (Van Vlolen). Brnder
'eaHg : " Malum priEsens minus, quod caQSa est faturi alicnjna mali."
Fho iaac word of the latter is an obvioas misprint, and is corrected bj
lie Dutch translator into " majoria banl" (Pollock, p, 208, note.)


»•]


odia


202 IBS ETHICS. [pAET r

of tliiiiga future, it woiild be affected towards what is
future in the same way as towards what is present (IV.
Ixii.) ; wherefore, lookii^ merely to reason, as in this pro-
position we are assumed to do, there is no difference, whether
the greater good or evil be assumed as present, or msumed aa
future ; hence (IV. Isf.) we may seek a greater good i
the future in preference to a lesser good in the present
&c. Q.KD.

Cctrollary. — We may, under the guidance of reason,
a leaser evil in the present, because it is the cause
greater good in the future, and we may shun a leaser _
in the present, because it is the cause of a greater evil in
the future. This Corollary is related to the foregoing; Pro-
position as the CoroOory to IV. Ixt. is related to the said
IV. kv.

Note. — If these statements be compared with what we
have pointed out coueemiag the strength of the emotions
in this Part up to Prop, xviii., we shall readily see the
difference between a man, who is led solely by emotion or
opinion, and a man, who is led by reason. The former,
whether he will or no, performs actions whereof he is utterly
ignorant ; the latt«r is his own master and only performs
such actions, as he knows are of primary importance in life,
and therefore chiefly desires ; wherefore I call the former
a slave, and the latter a free man, eouceming whose dis-
position and manner of life it will be well to make a few
observations.

Paop. LXVn. A free -man iMnhi of death lead of all
things; and his wisdom is a meditation not of death but ofUfe.

Proof. — A free man is one who lives under the guidance
of reason, who is not led by fear (TV. Ixiii.), but who directly
desires that which is good (IV. Ixiii. Coroll.), in other words
(IV. isiv,), who strives to act, to live, and to preserve his
being on the basis of s&eting hia own true advantage j
wherefore such an one thinks of nothing less than of death,
but his wisdom is a meditation of life. Q.E.D.

Pbop, T X V 1 1 1 . Ifmen-wBTe horn free, they would, so long
as they remained free, form no conception of good and evil.

jProof. — I call free him who is led solely by reason ; he,
therefore, who is bom free, and who remains free, has only
adequate ideas ; therefore (TV. kiv. Coroll.) he has no con-


T.] OF HDUAN BOHDAOH 2o3

Jjoeption of evil, or consequently (good and evil boing corre-
■latiTe) of good. Q.E.I).

I Note. — It iB evident, from IV. iv., that the hypotheeia of
BthiB Proposition is false and inconceivable, except in bo far
Kb£ we look solely to the nature of man, or rather to God ;
l^t in BO far as the latter is infinite, but only in ho far aa
llie is the cause of man'a esiatenee.

Thia, and other mattera which we have already proved,
a to have been aignifled by Moaes in the hiatory of the
K first man. For in that narrative no other power of God is
K conceived, save that whereby be created man, that is the
Ktwer wherewith be provided solely for man'a advantage ;
t is stated that God forbade man, being free, to eat of the
t tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and that, as soon aa
■sian should have eaten of it, be would straightway fear
Ijdeath rather than desire to live. Further, it is vrritten
w ihat when man had found a wife, who was in entire bar-
Imony witk his nature, he knew that there could be nothing
^n nature which could be more useful to him; but that
■'after he believed the beasts to be like himself, he atraight-
■ Way began to imitate tbeir emotions (HI. ssvii.), and to
I lose bis freedom ; this freedom was afterwards recovered
l)y the patriarchs, led by the spirit of Christ; that ia, by
the idea of God, whereon alone it dependa, that man may
be free, and desire for otbera the good which be desires for
bimaelf, aa we h ave shown above (TV. sxivii.),
r Peop, liXXK. The virtue of a free maw ia seen to he aa '
I ffreat, loAew it declines dangers, as when it overcomes them.
I Proof. — Emotion can only be checked or removed by an
I emotion contrary to itaelf, and possessing more power in
I lestraining emotion (TV. vii.). But blind daring and fear
lure emotions, which can be conceived as equally great (TV.
I V, and iii.) : hence, no less virtue or firmness is rcqtured in
I checking daring than in checking fear ( 111 , lis. note) ; in
t other words (Dei. of the Emotions, xl and xli.), the free
r man shows aa much virtue, when he declines dangers, aa
I when he atrivea to overcome them, Q.E.D.
r Corollary. — The free man is as coura^oua in timely re-
[ treat as in conibat ; or, a free man shows equal courage
I or presence of mind, whether he elect to give battle or to
I retreat.


234, TH8 ETHICS. [l

Note.— What courage (animOBilag) is, and what I i
thereby, I esplitined in III. lis. note. By danger I n
everything, which can give rise to any evil, such i
hatred, discord, &c.

Pbop, T'X \ , The free man, teho lives among the tyn
strives, as far as he can, to avoid receiving favov/r» J
them.

Proof. — Everyone judges what is good according to his
disposition (ILL. isnx. not«) ; wherefore an ignorant man,
■who has conferred a benefit on another, puts his own esti-
mate upon it, and, if it appears to be estiinated less highly
by the receiver, will feel pain (ill. slii.). But the freeman
only desires to join other men to him in friendship (TV.
xixvii.}, not repaying their benefits with others reckoned
as of like value, but guiding himself and others by the free
decision of reason, and doing only such things as he knows
to be of primary importance. Therefore the free man,
lest he should become hateful to the ignorant, or foUoit
their desires rather than reason, will endeavour, as f
he can, to avoid receiving their favours.

Note. — I say, aefar at Tie can. For though men be i(
rant, yet are they men, and in cases of necessity c
afEord ua human aid, the most excellent of all thi
therefore it is often necessary to accept favours from t
and consequently to repay such favours in kind ; we i
therefore, exercise eautioa in deeliniag favours, le;
should have the appearance of despising those who b
them, or of being, from avaricious motives, unwillii
quite them, and so give ground for ofEence by the v
of striving to avoid it. Thus, in declining favours, wen
look to the requirements of utility and courtesy.

Peop. T.x X I Only free "men are thoroughly grateful e
to another.

Proof. — Only free men are thoroughly useful one I
another, and associated among themselves by the closa
necessity of friendship (IV. iiiv. and Coroll, 1.), only siu
men endeavour, with mutual zeal of love, to confer benei
on each other (TV. sxivii.), and, therefore, only they ^
thoroughly grateful one to another. Q.E.D.

Note. — The goodwill, which men who are led by blind c(
sire have for one another, is generally a bargaining 4


PAET IT.] OF HUMJUf BONDAGE, 235

Beiitic«meiit. rather than pure goodwill. Moreover, ingrati-
fttade is not an emotion. Yet it is base, inasmuch as it
ft^aerallj stiowe, that a man is aCected hj ezcesaiTe hatred,
■anger, pride, avarice, &c. He who, bj reason of hia foil;,
Dws not how to retnm benefits, is not ungrateful, much
s he who is not gained over l)y the gifts of a courtesan
serve her Inat, or by a thief to conceal his thefts, or by
■'Buy itiiniln.r persons. Contrariwise, such an one shows a
Keouatant mind, inasmuch as he cannot by any gifts be cor-
liupted, to his own or the general hurt.

Pbop. LXXn. The free nuxn never acts fraudently, hut
\.aiwaye in. good faith.

Proof. — If it be asked: What should a man's conduct
Llie in a cose where he could by breaking faith free him-
l«6lf from the danger of present death P Would not his
tplan of seK-preservation completely persuade him to de-
'' this may he answered by pointing out that, if
I persuaded him to act thus, it would persuade all
men to act in a similar manner, in which case reason would
I persuade men not to agree in good faith to unite their
l.forees, or to have laws in common, that is, not to have nny
fc general laws , whi ch is absurd.

Pbop. LXXHI. The man, who is guided hy reason, w more
'li a Stale, where he lives under a general system of law,
[ fAan in solitude, where he is independent.

f. — The man, who is guided by reason, does not obey
through fear {IV. Isiii.) : but, in so far as he endeavourB
to preserve his being according to the dictates of reason,
that is (IV. livi. note), in so far as he endeavours to Kve
in freedom, he desires to order his life according to the
general good (TV. xxxvii.), and, consequently (as we showed
in IV. xuvii, note ii.), to live according to the laws of hiR
sountry. Therefore the free man, in order to enjoy greater
I freedom, desires to possess the general rights of eitiienship.

Note. — These and similar obaervations, which we havo
nade on man's true freedom, may be referred to strength,

I that is, to courage and nobihty of character (III, hx:. note),

I I do not think it worth while to prove separately all the-
T properties of strength ; much less need I show, that he
f that is strong hates no man, is angry with no man, envies


.T^


236 THB ETHICS. [pABT

no man, ia indignant with no man, despises no maJi, and
least of all things is proud. These propositions, and all
that relate to the true waj of life and religion, are easily
proved from IV. issvii. and xlvi. ; namely, that hatred
should be OTercome with love, and that every man should
desire for others the good -which he seeks for himself. We
may also repeat what we drew attention to in the note to
IV. 1., ajid in other places ; namely, that the etron)^ man
has ever first in Ha thouglits, that all things follow from
the necessity of the divine nature ; so that whatsoever he
deems to be hurtful and evil, and whatsoever, accordingly,
seems to him impious, horrible, unjust, and base, assumes
that appearance owing to his own disordered, fragmentary,
and confused view of the universe. Wherefore he strives
before all things to conceive things as they really are, and
to remove the hindrances to true knowl^ge, such as aie
hatred, anger, envy, derision, pride, and similar emotions,
which I have mentioned above. Thus he endeavours, a
we said before, as far as in him lies, to do good, and to B
on his way rejoicing. How far human virtue is capable i
attaining to such a condition, and what its powers may t
I will prove in the following Part


Appendix.

What I have said in this Part concerning the right «
of life has not been arranged, so as to admit of being bi
at one view, but has been set forth piece-meal, accord
ing as I thought each Proposition could most readily I
deduced from what preceded it. I propose, therefore, %
rearrange my remarks and to bring them under lea ~'
heads.

I. All our endeavours or desires so foEow from (
necessity of our nature, that they can be understood e
through it alone, as their proximate cause, or by virtue a
our being a part of nature, which cannot be adequately a
ceived through itself without other individuals.

n. Desires, which follow from our nature in such <


IpART IT.]


237


^^naimer, that they can be understood through it alone, axe
^Klbose which are referred to the mind, in eo for as the latter
^f is conceived to consist of adequate ideas: the remaining
I deBires are only referred to the mind, in so far as it con-
ceives things inadequately, and their force and increase are
generally defined not by the power of man, but by the
power of things eitemal to ns : wherefore the former are
trightly called actions, the latter passions, for the former
Islways indicate our power, the latter, on the other hand,
pihow our infirmity and fragmentary knowledge.

m. Our actions, that is, those desires which are defined
■fcy man's power or reason, are always good. The rest may
"» either good or bad.

IV. Thus in life it is before all things useful to perfect
ihe understanding, or reason, as far as we can, and in this

^alone man's highest happiness or blessedness consists, in-
tdeed blessedness is nothing else but the contentment of
" iipirit, which arises from the intuitive knowledge of God :
now, to perfect the understanding is nothing else but to
understand G-od, God's attributes, and the actions which
follow from the neceaaity of hia nature. Wherefore of a
man, who is led by reason, the ultimate aim or highest
■ desire, whereby he seeks to govern all his feUows, is that
Twhereby he is brought to the adequate conception of himself
land of all things within the scope of hia intelligence.

V. Therefore, without intelligence there is not rational
.Hf e : and things are only good, in so far as they aid man in
Mb enjoyment of the intellectual life, which is defined by
.intelligence. Contrariwise, whatsoever things hinder man's

jwrfeoting of his reason, and capability to enjoy the ra-
tional life, are alone called evU.

TL As all things whereof man is the efficient cause are
necessarily good, no evil can befsill man escept through ei-
temal causes ; namely, by virtue of man being a part of
nniveraal nature, whose laws human nature is compelled to
obey, and to conform to in almost infinite ways.

vil. It is impossible, that man should not be a part of
nature, or that he should not follow her general order ; hut
if he be thrown among individuals whose nature is in har-
mony with hia own, his power of action will thereby be
aided and fostered, whereas, if he be tlirown among auchas


238 THE ETB1C3.

are but very little in harmony witli his nature, he i
hardly be able to acconunodate himseK to them ^ '"
undergoing a great change himself.

Viii. Whatsoever in nature we deem ti be evil, or to he
capable o£ injuring our faculty for eiisting and enjoying
the rational life, we may endeavour to remove in whatever
way seems safest to us j on the other hand, whatsoever we
deem to he good or useful for preserving our being, and
enabling us to enjoy the rational life, v& may appropriate
to our use and employ as we think best, Everyone with-
out exception may, by sovereign right of nature, do whatso-
■ever he thinks will advance hia own interest,

IS. Nothing can be in more harmony with the nature
of any given thing than other iadividuala of the ssjne
Bpecies; therefore (cf. vii.) for man in the preservation of
luB being and the enjoyment of the rational hfe there ia
nothing more useful than his feilow-man who is led by
reason. Further, as we know not anything among indivi-
dual things which is more excellent than a man led by
reason, no man can better display the power of his skill
iind disposition, than in ho training men, that they come at
last to Uve under the dominion of their own reason.

X. In BO fax as men are influenced by envy or any kind
of hatred, one towards aaiother, they are at variance, and
are therefore to be feared in proportion, as they are more
powerful than their fellows.

XI. Tet minds are not conquered by force, but by love
and high-mindedneas.

XTT. It is before all things useful to men to assodate
their wavBoflife, to bindthemselves together with such bonds
as they think most fitted to gather them all into unity, and
generally to do whatsoevei serves to strengthen friendship.

Xm. But for this there is need of skill and watchful-
ness. For men are diverse (seeing that those who live
under the guidance of reason are few) , yet are tLey generally
envious and more prone to revenge than to sympathy. Ho
small force of character is therefore required to ta,ke every-
one as he is, and to restrain one's self from imitating the
emotions of others. But those who carp at mankind, and
are more skilled in raihng at vice than in instilling virtue,
and who break rather thaji strengthen men's disposition!, j


PART IV.] APPENDIX. 239

are hurtfiil both to themselves and others. Thus many
from too great impatience of Bpirit, or from misguided re-
ligious zeal, have preferred to live among brut«s rather
than among men ; as haja or youths, who cannot peaceahlj
«iulure'the chidings of their parents, will enlist as soldiers
and choose the hardships of war and the despotic discipline
in preference to the comforts of home and the admonitions
of their father: aufiering any burden to be put upon them,
BO long as they may spite their parents.

XIV". Therefore, although men ore generally governed in
everything by their own lusts, yet their association in com-
mon brings many more advantages than drawbacks.
Wherefore it is better to hear patiently the wrongs they
may do us, and to strive to promote whatsoever serves to
bring about harmony and friendship.

"XV, Those things, which beget harmony, are such as are
attributable to justice, equity, and honourable living. For
men brook ill not only what is Tmjust or iniquitous, but
also what is reckoned disgraceful, or that a man should
slight the received customs of their society. For winning
love those qualities are especially necessary which have
regard to religion and piety (cf. IV. iiivii. notes, i. ii. ;
xlvi. note ; and lixiii. note).

XVI. Further, harmony is often the result of fear : but
such harmony is insecure. Further, fear arises from infir-
mity of spirit, and moreover belongs not to the exercise of
in : ihe same is true of compassion, though this latter
B to bear a certain resemblance to piety,
, XVIL Men are also gained over by liberality, especially
plch as have not the means to buy what is necessary to

iBtaia life. However, to give aid to every poor man is far

iyond the power and the advantage of any private person.

or the riches of any private person are wholly inadequate
""to meet such a call. Again, an individual man's resources
of character are too limited for him to be able to make all
men his friends. Hence providing for the poor is a duty,
which falls on the State as a whale, and has regard only to
the genera] advantage.

XVm. In accepting favours, and in returning gratitude
oar duty must be wholly different (cf. IV. lix. note;
Ini. note).


240 TSE ETHICa.

XIX. Again, meretricioua love, that ia, the lust of g
ration arising from bodily beauty, and generally every i
of love, which oTrnH anything save freedom of soul as a
cause, readily passes into hate ; unless indeed, what ia worao,
it is a species of madness ; and then it promotes discord
rather than harmony (cf. HI. xxxi. Coroll.).

XX. Ab concerning nia.rriage, it ia certain that this is in
harmony with reason, if the desire for physical union bo
not engendered solely hy bodily beauty, but also by tho
desire to beget children and to train tbem up wisely ; and
moreover, if the love of both, to wit, of the man and of the
woman, is not caused by bodily beauty only, but also by
freed om of soul.

XXI. Furthermore, flattery begets harmony ; but only
by means of the vile offence of slavishneaa or treachery.
None are more readily taken with flattery than the proud,
who wish to be first, but are not.

XXH. There is in abasement a spurious appearance of
piety and religion. Although abaaement ia the opposite fe
pride, yet ia be that abases himaelf moat akin to the pro '
(l y. Ivii. note).

X X 1 1 1 Shame alao brings about harmony, hut only J
such matters as cannot be hid. rurther, as
species of pain, it does not concern the eiereiai

SSIV. The remaining emotions of pain towards i
are directly opposed to justice, equify, honour, piety, t
rehgion ; and, although indignation seems to hear a, cert
resemblance to equity, yet is life but lawless, where en
man may pass judgment on another's deeds, and vindioi
his own or other men's rights. ,

XXV. Correctness of conduct (modedia), that ia,tlieQ
sire of pleasing men which is determined by reason, is ati
butable to piety {as we said inlV.TTivii. notei.). ~
it spring from emotion, it is ambition, or the deairei
men, under the false cloak of piety, generally stir up
cords and seditions. For he who desires to aid hia foU
either in word or in deed, so that they may together enji
the highest good, he, I say, will before all things strivej
win them over with love : not to draw them into admin
tion, so that a system may be called after his name, nor i
give any cause for envy. Further, iu bis oonversation I


B.PABT IV.]


241


|mll Bhrini from talking of men' a faults, and will be careful
tto apeak but sparingly of human infirmity; but he will
fcdweU at length on human virtue or power, and the way
Trherehy it may be perfected. Thus will men be etirred
jiot by fear, nor by aversion, but only by the emotion of
[joy, to endeavour, so far as in them lies, to live in obe-
^TiencG to reason.

XXVI. Besides men, we know of no particular thing in

lature in whose mind we may rejoice, and whom we can

f associate with ourselves in friendship or any sort of f ellow-

; therefore, whatsoever there be in nature besides man,

a re^rd for our advantage does not call on ua to preserve,

■l)ut to preserve or destroy according to its various capa-

K'bilitieB, and to adapt to our use as best we may.

, X X V 1 1 , The advantage which we derive from things es-
■ ternal to us, besides the experience and knowledge which
»Tfe acquire from observing them, and from recombining
■"their elements in different forma, is principally the preser-
■Tation of the body ; from this point of view, those things
ware most useful which can bo feed and nourish the body,
■that all ita parts may rightly fulfil their functions, For, in
rproportion as the body is capaljle of being affected in a
greater variety of ways, and of affecting external bodies in
a great number of ways, so much the more ia the mind capa-
ble of thinking (IV. xxxviii. xxxix.). But there seem to be
very few things of this kind in nature ; wherefore for the
due nourishment of the body too must use many foods of
diverse nature. For the human body is composed of very
many parts of different nature, which stand in continiml
need of varied nourishment, so that the whole body maybe
equaJly capable of doing everything that can follow ixota
it« own nature, and consequently that the mind also may
be equally capable of forming nfcany perceptions.
I 'XX VIII. Now for providing these nouriabiueuta the
I strength of each individual would hardly suffice, if men
[did not lend one another mutual aid, But money has
nished us with a token for everything; hence it ia with
J notion of money, that the mind of the multitude is
Behiefly engrossed : nay, it can hardly conceive any kind of
■pleasure, which is not accompanied with the idea of money


tTI^H


Qina


243 THE ITHICS. t^iBT

XXIS. This result is the fault only of thoae, who seek
money, not from poverty or to supply their necessary
TCaata, Tiut )>ecause they have learned the arts of gaki,
wherewith they bring thenaaelvea to great aplendoor. 0( ""
tainly they nourish their bodies, according to cnstoDi, b
scantily, beheving that they lose as much of their wealth i
they spend on the preservation of their body. Bat tl
who know the true use of money, and who fix the meaai
of wealth solely with r^ard to their actual needs,
content with little.

XXX. Aa, therefore, those things are good which a,(
the various parts of the body, and enable them to perform
their functions ; and as pleasure consists in an increase of,
or aid to, man's power, in so far as he is composed of mind
and body ; it follows that all those things which bri
pleasure are good. But seeing that things do not w<
with the object of giving us pleasure, and that their poi
of action is not tempered to suit our advantage, and, lastli _
that pleasure ia generally referred to one part of the body
more than to the other parts ; therefore most emotions of
pleaBure (unlees reason and watchfulness be at hand), and
consequently the desires arising therefrom, may become ex-
cessive. Moreover we may add that emotion leads ub to pay
moat r^ard to what is agreeable in the present, nor can
we estimate what is future with emotions equally vivid,
(IV. xliv. note, and li. note.)

XXXI. Superstition, on the other hand, seems to account
as good all that brings pain, and as bad all that brioga
pleasure. However, as we said above (TV. slv. note), none
but the envious take delight in my infirmity and trouble.
For the greater the pleasure whereby we are affected, the
greater is the perfection whereto we pass, and consequently
the more do we partake of the divine nature : no pleasure
can ever be evil, which is regulated by a true regard for our
advantage, But contrariwise he, who is led by fear and
does good only to avoid evil, is not guided by reason.

XXXn. But human power ia extremely limited, and is
infinitely surpassed by the power of external causes ; we
have not, therefore, an absolute power of shaping to our
use those things which are without ua. Nevertheless, we
sliaU bear witli an equal mind all that happens to us in


PAST ly.] APPENDIX. 243

contravention to the claims of our own advantage, so long
as we are conscious, that we have done onr duty, and that
the power which we possess is not sufficient to enable us to
protect ourselves completely ; remembering that we are a
part of universal nature, and that we follow her order. K
we have a clear and distinct understanding of this, that
part of our nature which is defined by intelligence, in other
words the better part of ourselves, wiU assuredly acquiesce
in what befalls us, and in such acquiescence will endeavour
to persist. For, in so far as we are intelligent beings, we
cannot desire anything save that which is necessary, nor
yield absolute acquiescence to anything, save to that which
is true : wherefore, in so far as we have a right under-
standing of these things, the endeavour of the better part
of ourselves is in harmony with the order of nature as a
whole.


IHB ETHICS,


OF THE POWER OF THE "UNDERSTANDING, <
OF HUMAN FREEDOM.

Pbefacb.

AT lengti I pass to the remaining portion of
which is concerned with the way leading to freedom
I shall therefore treat therein of the power of the r
showing how far the reason can control the emotions, and
what ia tiie nature of Mental Freedom or Eleasedneas; we
shall then be able to see, how nmch more powerful the
wise man is than the ignorant. It ia no part of my design
to point out the method and means whereby the under-
standing may be perfected, nor to show the slrill whereby
the body may he so tended, as to he capable of the due per-
formance of its functions. The Iatt«r question lies in the
province of Medicine, the former in the province of JJogie.
Here, therefore, I repeat, I shall treat only of the power of
the mind, or of reason ; and I shall mainly show the es*
t«nt and nature of its dominion over the emotions, for their
control and moderation. That we do not possess absolute
dominion over them, I ha-ve already shown. Tetthe Stoica
have thought, that the emotions depended absolutely on our
will, and that we could absolutely govern them. But these
philosophers were compelled, by the protest of experience,
not from their own principles, to confess, that no slight
practice and zeal is needed to control and moderate them:
and this someone endeavoured to illuatrat« by the example
(if I remember rifrhtly) of two dogs, the one a house-dog
and the other a hunting-dog. For by long training it
coiJd be brought about, that the house-dog should become
accustomed to hunt, and the hunting-dog to cease from
running after hares. To this opinion Descartes not a little
inclines. For he maintained, that the soul or mind is
specially united to a particular part of the brain, namely.


VABI v.]


' HVM4N FB.EEDOH,


245


that part called the pineal gland, by the aid of which

he tnind is enabled to feel all the movenienta which are

B*et going in the body, and also external objects, and which

f jthe mind by a simple act of Tolition can put iu motion in

rarioua waye. He aaserted, that this gland is so sus-

Knded in tlie midst of the brain, that it could be moved

"■ the slightest motion of the animal spirits ; further,

at this gland ia snspended is the midst of the brain

1 as many difEerent manners, as the animal spirits can

mpinge thereon ; and, a^in, that as many diffei-ent marks

B impressed on the said gland, aa there are difEerent

temal objects which impel tlie animal spirits towards

; whence it follows, that if the will of the aonl auapenda

!ihe gland in a position, wherein it baa already been sus-

)ended once before by the animal spirits driven in one

r another, the gland in ita turn reacts on the said

ipirits, driving and determining them to the condition

wherein they were, when repulsed before by a similar poai-

Ktaon of the gland. He further asserted, that every act of

■mental volition is imited in nature to a certain given

■motion of the gland. For instance, whenever anyone desires

' o loot at a remote object, the act of volition causes the pupil

Bof the eye to dilate, whereas, if the person in question had

nly thought of the dilatation of the pupil, the mere wish to

■'dilate it would not have brought about the result, inas-

much as the motion of the gland, which serves to impel

mal spirits towards the optic nerve in a way which

IWould dilate or contract the pupil, is not associated in

lature with the wiah to dilate or contract the pupil, but

with the wish to look at remote or very near objects,

jastly, he maintained that, although every motion of the

Uoreaaid gland seems to have been united by nature to

i particular thought out of the whole number of our

iDughta from the very beginning of our life, yet it can

Bvertheleas become through habituation associated with

" ■ thoughts ; this he endeavours to prove in the

iong de Vdme, I. 50. He thence concludes, that there

W^ no Boul BO weak, that it cannot, under proper direc-

■jtion, acquire absolute power over ita paasiona. Forpasaiona

9 defined by him are " percepiiona, or feelings, or dia.

tturbanizea of the soul, which are referred to the soul as


2i6 THE ETHICS.

species, and which, (mark the expression) are produced, prft
served, and strengthened tlirough some movement of IJ
Bpirita." (Passion* de I'dme, L 27.) But, seeing that we a
join any motion of the gland, or consequently of the spirita,
to any volition, the determination of the will depends
entirely on our own powers; if, therefore, we determine
our will with sure and firm decisions in the direction to
which we wish our aetions to tend, and associate the motions
of the passions which we wish to acquire with the said de-
cisions, we shall acquire an absolute dominion over onr pas-
eioQS. Such is the doctrine of this illustrious philoBOphe
(in BO far as I gather it from his own words) j it is <H^
which, had it been less ingenious, I could hardly belieH
to have proceeded from si> great a man. Indeed, I a'
lost in wonder, that a philoaopher, who had stoutly aase
that he would draw no conchisions which do not follow
from self-evident premisses, and would affirm nothing whioh
ho did not clearly and distinctly perceive, and who had so
often taken to task the scholastics for wishing to explain
obscurities through occult quaHties, could maintain a
hypothesia, beside which occult qualities are commoDplace.
What does he understand, I ask, by the union of the min^
and the body? What cleajr and distinct conception '
got of thought in most intimat* union with a ceitain p
of extended matter ? Truly I ahoiild like him to expls
this union through its proximate cause. But he ht "*
distinct a conception of mind being distinct from I
that he could not assign any particular cause of the t
between the two, or of the mind itself, but wi
have recourse to the cause of the whole universe, that ii
God. Further, I should much like to know, what deg
of motion the mind can impart to this pineal gland, i
with what force can it hold it suspended ? For I a
ignorance, whether this gla,nd can be agitated more a
or more quickly by the mind than by the animal sj
and whether the motions of the pasaions, which we 1
closely united with firm decisions, cannot be again disjoin
therefrom by physical causes ; in which case it would fi
low that, although the mind firmly intended to face a glyS
danger, and had united to this decision the motions i'
boldness, yet at the s^ht of the danger the gland n '


PAKTT.j OF HUUAIf FBCBDOU. 247

become Bnspendod in a way, which would preclude the
mind thinking of anything except miining away. In truth,
as there is no conunou atandard of volition and motion, bo
is there no comparison possible hetween the powers of the
mind and the power or strength of the body j consequently
the strength of one cannot in any wise be determined by
the strength of the other. We may also add, that there ia
no gland discoverable in the midst of the brain, bo placed
that it can thus easily be set in motion in so many ways,
&nd also that all the nerves are not prolonged bo far as
the cavities of the brain. Lastly, I omit all the asser-
tions which he makes concerning the will and its freedom,
inasmuch as I have abundantly proved that his premisses
are false. Therefore, since the power of the mind, as I
have shown above, is defined by the nnderstandii^ only, we
shall determine eolely by the knowledge of the mind the
remedies against the emotions, which I behevo all have had
experience of, but do not accurately obserTe or distinctly
Bee, and from the same basis we shaU deduce all those con-
cludons, which have regard to the mind's blessedness.

Axioms.

I. If two contrary actions be started in the same subject,

change must necessarily take place, either in both, or in
one of the two, and continue until they cease to be contrary.

n. The power of an effect is defined by the power of its
cause, in so far as its essence is explained or defined by tho
essence of its cause.

(This axiom is evident from IH. vii.)

pKop, I, Even tit tkoitgMs and the idea^ of things are
.arran^ged and assoeiaied in the mind, so are the inodificaiiont
of body oi the imagee of things precisely in iAs same way
ammged and associated in the body.

Proof. — The order and connection of ideas is the same
(II. vii.) as the order and connection of things, and vine
versd the order and connection -of things is the same (II.
vi. CoroU. and vii.) as the order and connection of ideas.
"Wherefore, even as the order and connection of ideas in the

ind takes place according to the order and association of
modifications of the body (11. xviii.J, bo vice verad (III. ii.)


^


248 THE ETHICS, [l

the order and connection of modiflcationa of the ImmIj takes
place in accordance with the manner, in which thoughtB
and the ideas of thinga are arranged and associated in tbe
mind. Q.E.D.

Peop. n. If we remove a dieturhance of the spirit, or
emotion, from ike ihowgid nf o» external cause, and unite it
to other thovglits, then will the love or hatred towarde that
external cattee, and aleo tlie vacillations of spirit which arise
from these emotions, be destroyed.

Proof.- — That, which conBtituteB the reality of love or
hatred, is pleasure or pain, accompanied by the idea of an
external cause (Def. of the Emotions, vi. vii.) ; wherefore,
when this cause is removed, the reahty of love or hatred ia
removed with it ; therefore these emotions and those which
arise therefrom are destroyed. Q.K1).

Paop, ni. An emotion, which is a patsion, ceases to be a
passion, as soon as we form a clear and distinct idea thereof.

Proof. — An emotion, which ia a passion, is a confused
idea (by the general Def. of the Emotions). If, therefortf^
we form a clear and distinct idea of a given emotion, tb
idea will only be diatinguished from the emotion, in so £
as it ia refeired to th e mind only, by reason (TL xxi. ai
note); therefore (XfX iii,), the emotion will cease to bel
}>assioii. Q.E.D.

Corollary. — An emotion therefore becomes more i
onr control, and the mind is less passive in respect to it, ^
proportion as it is more known to ua.

Peop, TV. There is no modification of the body, wht
we cannot form some clear and distinct conception.

Proof. — Properties which are common to all thinga a
only be conceived adequately (TL. xiiviii.) ; therefore Q
xii. and Lemma ii. after II. xiii.) there is no modifiotf
tion of the body, whereof we cannot form some clear a
distinct conception. Q.E.D.

Corollary. — Hence it follows that there is no emoti<^
whereof we cannot form some clear and distinct conceptiffld
For an emotion is the idea of a modification of the bod'
(by the general Def. of the Emotions) , and must therefoi
(by the preceding Prop.) involve some clear and distindl
conception.

Nate. — ^Seeing that there ia nothing which is not followi


1.7 a


^T r,] OF HirUAK FBEEUOU. 249

tiy an effect (I. xssri.), and that we clearly and diatinctlT
understand whatever follows from an idea, whicli in us is
adequate (H. xl.), it follows that eveiyone has the power
■of dearly and distinctly understanding himself and his
emotions, if not absolutely, at any rate in part, and couse-
iquently of bringing it ahout, that he should become less
subject to them. To attain this result, therefore, we must
ehiefly direct our efforts to acquiring, as far as possible, a
'ear and distinct knowledge of every emotion, in order
lat the mind may thus, through emotion, he determined
to think of those things which it clearly and distinctly
■perceives, and wherein it fully acquiesces : and thus that
the emotion itself may be separated from the thought of an
«rteraal cause, and may be associated with true thoughts;
■whence it will come to pass, not only that lore, hatred, &e.
will be destroyed (V. ii.), but also that the appetites or de-
jBires, which are wont to arise from such emotion, ■will be-
come incapable of being excessire (TV. Ixi.). For it must

especially remarked, that the appetite through which a
'3 said to be active, and that through which he is

i to he passive is one and the same. For instance, we
bare shown that human uature is so constituted, that
sreryone desires his fellow-meu to live after his own
laaMon (111. nxi. note) ; in a man, who is not guided by
1, this appetite is a passion ■which is called ambition,
^d does not greatly differ from pride ; whereas in a man,
ftho lives by the dictates of reason, it is an activity or
tirtue which is called piety {IT. xixvii, note i, and second
proof). In Uke manner all appetites or desires are only
^Bsions, in so far as they spring from inadequate ideas ;
Ihe same results are accredited to ■virtue, when they are
■roused or generated by adequate ideas. For all desires,
whereby we are determined to any given action, may arise
&B much from adequate as from, inadequate ideas (IV.lix.).
Than this remedy for the emotions (to return to the point
from which I started), which consists in a true knowledge
hereof, nothing more excellent, being ■within our power,
lean be devised. For the mind has no other power save that
of thinking and of forming adequate ideas, as we have
fehowu above (ill. iii.).

Peop. V. An efnotion towards a thing, which we conceive


250


THB ETHICS.


timply, and not as necetsary, or as eoTttingent,

gible, ie, other ctmdilions being equal, greater than, any othm

emotion.

Proo/.— An emotioa towards a thing', ■wMcli we conceive
to be free, is greater than one towards what we conceiTB to
be necesBary ( M I, slix.), and, conBeqnently, still greater
than one towards what we conceive as possible, or con*
tingent (IV. xi.). But to conceive a thing as free can
nothing else than to conceive it simply, while we are
ignorance of the causes whereby it has been determined
action (H. sxsv. note) ; therefore, an emotion towajda
thing which we conceive simply is, other conditions
equal, greater than one, which we feel towards wl
necessary, possible, or contingent, and, consequently,
the greatest of all. Q.E.D.

Peop. VI. The miiid has greater power over the emoi
and is less subject thereto, in so far as it MJiderata^ds
things as necessary.

Proof. — The mind understands all things to be ni
(I. xxix.) and to be determined to existence and op
by an infinite chain of causes j therefore (by the fo
IVoposition), it thus far brings it about, that it
subject to the emotions arising therefrom, and (ILL. xli
feels less emotion towards the things themselves. Q. ~

Note. — The more this knowledge, that things are ;
sary, is applied to particulax things, which we conceive
distinctly and vividly, the greater is the power <
mind over the emotions, as experience also testifies,
we see, that the pain arising from the loss of any gi
mitigated, as soon as the man who has lost it perceives,
it could not by any means have been preserved. ~
we see that no one pities an infant, because it cannot 8]
walk, or reason, or lastly, because it passes so man;
as it were, in unconsciouaness. Whereas, if most
were bom full-grown and only one here and there
infant, everyone would pity the infants ; because ii
would not then be looked on as a state natural and
sary, but as a fault or delinquency in Nature ; and we
note several other instances of the same sort.

Peop. Vil. Emotions -mhich are aroused or spring
reason, if we take account of time, are stronger than


p


v.] OP HDMAN FEBBDOM. 251

I Khich are atir3>utdble to jwrticwiar objeda tJuit we regard aa

Froof. — ^We do not regard a thing as absent, by reason of
the emotion wherewith we conceive it, bnt by reason of the
body being afEected by another emotion eicluding the
existence of the said thing (H. ivii.). Wherefore, the
emotion, which is referred to the thing which we regard as
absent, is not of a nature to overcome the rest of a man's
activities and power (IV. vi.), but ia. on the contrary, of a
nature to be in some sort controlled by the emotions, whigh

I exclude the existence of its external cause (IV. ii.). Bub
an emotion which springs from reason is necessarily re-
ferred to the common properties of things (see the def . of
reason in II. xl. note ii.), which we always regaxd as present
(for there can be nothing to exclude their present exiatenee),
and which we always eooeeive in the same manner (II,
nxviii.). Wherefore an emotion of this kind always remains
the same ; and consequently (V. Ax, i.) emotions, which are
contrary thereto and are not kept going by their external
causes, will be obliged to adapt themselves to it more
and more, until they are no longer contrary to it ; to this
«[tent the emotion which springs from reason is more
powerful. Q.E.D.
Pbop. V.IJT. An emotion is sironger in proportion to the
nfomber of svmulianeoua concwrrerU cavaet whereby it ia
arovsed.
Proof. — Many 8tmultfl,ueous causes are more powerful
than a few (m. vii.) : therefore (IV. v.), in proportion to
the increased number of simultaneous causes whereby it is
aroased, an emotion becomes stronger. Q.E.D.

Note. — This proposition ia also evident from V. Ax. ii.

Fbof. IX, An emotion, wkiek it attrSmtdble to irmny and

di/B&rge eaueea which the mind regards at mnuUaneous with

the emotion Ueelf, u less hurtful, and we are less sKbject

ih^eto a/nd less affected towards each of its cavaeg, thorn, if ii

' were a different and equally powerful emotion attribniable to

1 fewer eauaeg or to a single cavse.

1 Proof—An emotion is only bad or hurtful, in so far as it
I hinders the mind from being able to think (IV. xxvi,
3csvii.) ■ therefore, an emotion, whereby the mind is deter-
mined to the contemplation of several things at once, is less


252 THE ETHica. [past ™

hurtful than another equally po-werful emotion, which so
engrosses the mind in the single contemplatiou oE a fe«
objects or of one, that it is unable to think of anything
else; this was our first point. Again, as the mind's esseni '
in other words, its power ( 1 1 1 . Tii.), consists solely
thought (TL si.), the mind is less paaaive in respect to
emotion, which causes it to think of several things at on<
than in regard to au equally strong emotion, which ti
it engrossed in the contemplation of a few or of a sii ^
object : this was our second point. Lastly, this emotii
(JJi. xlviii.), in so far as it is attributable to several
is less powerful in regard to eaoh of them. Q.E.I),

Fbop, X. Bo long aa we a>% not assailed hy emotions eon^
trarij to our nature, we have the power of arranging and
aseocMing the modifications of our body according to the
intetJectual order.

Proof. — The emotions, which are contrary to our nature,
that is (IV". 3CXX.), which are bad, are bad in so far as they
impede the mind from understanding [TV. xsvii.). So long,
therefore, as we are not assailed by emotions contrary to
nature, the mind's power, whereby it endeavours to under*,
stand things (IV. xxvi.), is not impeded, and therefore it is
able to form clear and distinct ideas and to deduce them
one from another (II. si. note ii. and xlvii. note) ; conHequently
we have in such cases the power of arranging and asso-
ciating the modifications of the body according to the
intellectual order. Q.E.D.

Note. — By this power of rightly arranging and aasociat-'
ing the bodily modifications we can guard ourselves fr(»a<
being easily affected by evil emotions. For (V. vii.) a^
greater force is needed for controlling the emotions, whffli
they are arranged and associated according to the intelleo
tual order, than when they are uncertain and unsettledl
The beat we can do, therefore, so long as we do not possest
a perfect knowledge of our emotions, is to frame a ayst^n'
of right conduct, or fixed practical precepts, to commit it'
to memory, and to apply it forthwith ' to the particular atk.

' Coiiliitui). Rendered " eon scan tly " by Mr. Pollock on tie giousd I
tliat the cittaaietti meaning of ttie word does not suit (he context. 1 1
ventnre to tbink, bowever, thut a tolerable sunae may be obtiinod 1
withoul duing violence to Spinoia'a scliolaraliip, ^


;hey

der«^|
it is ■


I PAST T.j


' HuafAK FBEESOM.


^B PAI

^ft'GumstanceB wMcli now and aga.in meet us in life, eo that
^B our ima^uatiou may become fully imbued thcrewitli, and
^H that it may be alwaya ready to our hand. For instance, we
^H have laid down among the rulea of life (IV. slvi. and not«),
^Hthat hatred should be overcome with love or high-minded-
^■nesa, and not requited with hatred in return. Now, that
^H this precept of reason may be always ready to our hand in
^P'time of need, we should often think over and reflect upon
^^ the wrongs generally committed by men, and in what
^F manner and way they may be best worded ofE by high-
mindedness: we shall thus associate the idea of wrong with
the idea of this precept, which accordingly will always be
ready for use when a wrong is done to us (II. sviii.) If
we keep also in readiness the notion of our true advan-
tage, and of the good which follows from mutual friend-
ships, and common fellowships ; further, if we remember
that complete acqiuescenc« is the result of the right way
of life (IV. lii.), and that men, no less than everything else,
^L act by the necessity of their nature : in such case I say the
^1 ■wrong, or the hatred, which commonly arises therefrom,
^K ynil engross a very small part of Oilf imagination and will
^H be easily overcome ; or, if the anger which springs from
^B a grievous wrong be not overcome easily, it wUl neverthe-
^H less be overcome, though not without a spiritual conflict,
^m far sooner than if we had not thus reflected on the subject
I beforehand. As is indeed evident from V. vi. vii. viii.
We should, in the same way, reflect on courage as a means
of overcoming fear ; the ordinary dangers of life should
frequently be brought to mind a,nd imagined, together with
the means whereby through readiness of resource and
strength of mind we can avoid and overcome them. But
we must note, that in arranging our thoughts and concep-
tions we should always bear in mind that which is good in
[ eveiy individual thing (TV. kiii. Coroll. and HI. lis.), in
order that we may always be determined to action by an
L emotion of pleasure. For instance, if a man sees that he
I i« too keen in the pursuit of honour, let him think over its
f light use, the end for which it should be pursued, and
] the means whereby he may attain it. Let him not think
I of its misuse, and its emptiness, and the fickleness of man-
lind, and the like, whereof no man thinks except through a


Tiere- '


251 THE ETHICS. [PABT

mortidneas of disposition ; -with thoughts like these do
moat ambitious most torment themselveB, when they def
of gaining the distinctions they hanker after, and in ■
giving vent to their anger would fain appear wise. Where-
fore it is certain that those, who cry ont the loudest against
the misuse of honovu- and the vanity of the world, are those
who most greedily covet it. This is not peculiar to the
aanliitious, but is common to all who are ill-used by for-
tune, and who are infirm in spirit. For a poor man also,
who ia miserly, will talk incessantly of the misuse of wealth
and of the vices of the rich ; whereby he merely torments
himself, and showa the world that he is intolerant, not only
of his own poverty, but also of other people's riches. So,
again, those who have been ill received by a woman they
love think of nothing but the inconstancy, treachery, and
other stock faults of the fair ses ; all of which they oonagn
to oblivion, directly they are again taken into favour by
their sweetheart. Thus he who would govern his emotiooB.
and appetite solely by the love of freedom strives, as fi
he can, to gain a knowledge of the Tirtues and their cai
and to fill his spirit with the joy which arises from the
knowledge of them : he wOl in no wise desire to dwell
men's faults, or to carp at his feUowa, or to revel in a f
show of freedom. Whosoever will diligently obaerve
praetifle these precepta (which indeed are not difficult)
verily, in a short space of time, be able, for the most \
to direct his actions according to the commandments o3

Pbop. XI. In ■proportion as a inental image ia referred U
more objects, go ie it inore frequent, or more often vivid, onM
oceupi6» the -miTid more.

Proof. — In proportion as a mental image or an emotioi
is referred to more objects, ao are there more oausea wherebj
it can be aroused and fostered, all of which (by hyp
thesis) the mind contemplates aimultaaeouely in assodatu
with the given emotion ; therefore the emotion is more fr
quent, or is more often in full vigour, and (V. viii.) occupea
the mind more. Q.E.D.

Paop. TTT . The mBTUal images of things are more eaaiiyM
(uaoeiated with the iniagee re/erred to things whiah ive elearlf^
and dietincily undereiand, ifian with others.


I

^H Proof. — Things, which we clearly and difltinetly under-
^Vgtand, are either the common properties of things or de-
^Kdiiotioas therefrom (see deflnition of Beason, U. xl. note ii.),
and are eonaequently {by the last Prop.) more often aroused
in 118. Wherefore it may more readily happen, that we should
contemplate other things in conjimction with these than in
conjunction with something else, and consequently (II.
xviii.) that the images of the said things shoilld be more
often asBociatod with the Imc^es of these than with the
images of something else. Q.E.D.

»Pbop. xril . A mental image m more often vivid, inpro-
foriion as it is associated with a greater number of other
imagea.
Proof.~ln proportion as an image ia associated with a
greater number of other images, so (II. xviii.) are there
more causes whereby it can be aroused. Q.E.J).
Pbop. XIV. The mind can bring U about, that all bodily
Inodifications or images of things may be referred to the idea
I */ Ood.

Proof. — There is no modification of the body, whereof the
mind may not form some clear and distinct conception
(V, iv.) ; wherefore it can bring it about, that they should
all bo referred to the idea of G-od (I. iv.). Q.E.D.

Prop. SV, Se who clea/rly and distinctly understands
himself and his emotions loves God, and so much the more in
^ proportion as he more understands himself and his emotions.
^L Proof. — He who clearly and distinctly understands him-
^M self and his emotions feels pleasure (lU. liii.), and this
^M pleasure is (by the last Prop.) accompanied by the idea of
^1 God; therefore (Def. of the Emotions, vi.) such an one
^M loves God, and (for the same reason) so much the more in
^B proportion as he more understands himself and his emotions.

■ <i.E.B.

^B Prop. XVI. This love towards God must hold the chief
^B place in the m,ind.

^H Proof. — For this love is associated with all the modifiea-
^H tions of the body (V. sir.) and is fostered by them all
^M (V. XT.) ; therefore (V. id.), it must hold the chief place in

■ -the mind. Q.E.D.

^M Prop. XVTL God is withont passions, neither is he affected
^m by any emotion of pleasure or pain.


iTABT T.]


OF HUMAN FB&EDOM.


255


256


THE ETHICS,


31

. is

1


Proof. — All ideas, in so far aa tliey are refeiTed to God.
are true (11. xisii.). that is (II. Def. i\.) adequate ; and
therefore (by the general Def. of the Emotions) God is
without paeaions. Again, Ood cannot paiss either to i
greater or to a lesser perfection (I. ii. Coroll. ii.) ; then
fore (by Def. of the Emotions, ii. iii.) he is not affected b
any emotion of pleasnre or pain. _

Corollary. — Strictly epealiing, God does not love or hate
anyone. For God (by the foregoing Prop.) is not affected
Ijy any emotion of pleasure or pain, consequently (Def. of
the Emo tions, y i. vii.) he does not love or hate anyone.

Pbop. JS-VlIi. No one caa hate God.

Proof. — The idea of God which is in us is adequate a
perfect (H. slvi. ilyii.) ; wherefore, in so far as we contenl
plate God, we are active (HI. iii.) ; consequently ( 1 1 1 , Ii
there can be no pain accompanied hy the idea of C '
other words (Def. of the Emotions, vii.J, no one ca
God. Q.KD.

Gorollary. — Love towards God cannot be turned i
hate.

I^ots. — It may he objected that, as we understand G
the cause of all things, we by that very fact regard C
as the cause of pain. But I make answer, that, i
far as we uuderstand the causes of pain, it to that e
(V. iii.) ceases to be a passion, that is, it ceases to be p
(in. Iii.) ; therefore, in so far as we understand God ti
the cause of pain, we to that extent feel pleastire.

Pkop. XCS, He, who ioces God, cannot endeavour iKe
God should love Mm in retam.

Proof. — For, if a man ahould so endeavour, he ■won]
desire (V. svii. Coroll.) that God, whom he loves, should-l
not be God, and consequently he would desire to feel para..!
(HE. lis.) ; which is absurd (III. xsviii.). Therefore, hs wbtf j
loves God, &e. Q.E.S.

Pkop. X X. This love towards God cannot ie stained b]
emotion of envy or jealouayi contTwriwise, it ■
fostered, in proportion as we conceive a greaier number of m
to he joined to God hy the same hond of love.

Proof.- — This love towards God is the highest good whicib. I
we can seek for under the guidance of reason (IV. xxviiL), j
a to all men (IV. xxivi.), and we desire that a"'


»■]


OF HIJBIAN FHEEDOM.


;57


I

^H sLould rejoice therein (IV. xsivii,) ; therefore (Def. of the

^r Emotiona, isiii,),it cannot "be stained by theemotjonof envy,

" nor hy the emotion of jealousj (V. xviii, see definition of

Jealousy, HI. xxky. note) ; but, contrariwise, it must needs

he the more fostered, in proportion as we conceive a greater

number of men to rejoice therein. Q.E.D.

INote. — -We can in the same way show, that there is no
emotion directly contrary to this love, whereby this love
can be destroyed ; therefore we may conclude, that tins love
towards God is the most constant of all the emotions, and
that, in so far as it is referred to the body, it cannot be
destroyed, nnlesB the body be destroyed also. As to its
nature, in so far as it is referred to the mind only, we shall

t presently inquire,
I have now gone through all the remedies against the
emotions, or all that the mind, considered in itself alone,
can do against them. Whence it appears that the mind's
power over the emotions consists : —

I. In the actual knowledge of the emotions (V. iv. note).
H. In the fact that it separates the emotions from the
thought of an external cause, which we conceive confusedly
(V. ii. and iv. note),

m. In the fact, that, in respect to time, the emotions re-
ferred to things, which we distinctly nnderstand, aurpass
those referred to what we conceive in a confused and frag-
mentary manner (V. vii.).

IV. In the number of causes wherehy those modifica-
tions ' are fostered, which have regard to the common pro-
f perties of things or to God (V. is. xi.).
h V. lastly, in the order wherein the mind can arrange
land associate, one with another, its own emotions (V. s.
I note and xii. xiii. xiv.).

But, in order that this power of the mind over the emo-
tiona may he better understood, it should be specially ob-
served that the emotions are called by ns strong, when wo
compare the emotion of one man with the emotion of
I another, and see that one man is more troubled than an-
I other hy the same emotion; or when we are comparing the
\ Tarious emotions of the same man one with another, and

' Affeoiioiies, CamErcr reads ajfectne — emotions.


258


THE ETHICS,


ned

edb<^H

• th^H
de up)^^^


find that he ia more affected or stirred by one emotion than
by another. For the strength of every emotion is defined
by a eompariaon of our own power with the power of an
ustemal cause. Now the power of the mind is defined I
knowledge only, and its infirmity or paBsion is defined I
the privation of knowledge only : it therefore follows, f
that mind ia moat passive, whose greatest part is made u
of inadequate ideas, so that it may be characterized more
readily by its pasaive states than by ita activities : on the
other hand, that mind is moat active, whose greatest part
is made up of adequate ideas, bo that, although it may con-
tain as many inadeqaate ideas as the former mind, it may
yet be more easily characterized by ideas attributable to
human virtue, than by ideas which tell of human infir-
mity. Again, it must be observed, that spiritual unhealthi-
ness and misfortunes can generally he tracod to excessive
love for something which is subject to many variations,
and which we can never become masters of. For no one
ia aolicitoua or anxious about anything, tinless he loves it ;
neither do wrongs, suspicions, enmities, &c. arise, except
in regard to things whereof no one can be really master.

We may thus readily conceive the power which clear and
distinct knowledge, aad especially that third kind of know^
ledge {n. xlvii. note), founded on the actual knowlei^e ojf
God, possesses over the emotions : if it does not ahsolutaljl
destroy them, in so far as tbey are passions (V. hi. and ir]
note) ; at any rate, it causes them to occupy a very sma]
part of the mind (V. xiv.). Further, it begets a love to
warda a thing immutable and eternal (V. sv.), whereof w^fl
may really enter into possession (II. ilv.) ; neither can iC
be defiled with those faults which are inherent in ordinary
love ; but it may grow from strength to strength, and may
engross the greater part of the mind, and deeply pene-
trate it,

And now I have finished with all that concerns this pre
sent life : for, as I said in the beginning of tliis note, I haw
briefiy described all the remedies against the emotionM
And this everyone may readily have seen for himself, if hfli
has attended to what is advanced in the present not«, anm
also to the definitions of the mind and its emotions, a
lastly, to Propositions i. and iii. of Pai-t HL It ia ni


"■]


OF HUMAN FBBEDOM,


^B therefore, time to pa.sB on to those matters, Tvhich appertain
^B to tte duration of the mind, without relation to the body,
^r Pbop. XXI. The mind can only ijna^ne anything, or re-
mtrnber what u past, while ike body endures.

Proof.— The mind does not eipresB the actual esiatence
of its body, nor does it imagine the modifications of the
body as actual, except while the body endures (II, Tiii.
Coroll.) ; and, consequently (II. xivi.), it does not imagine
any body as actually eiisting, eicept while its own body
endures. Thns it cannot imagine anything (for definition

»of Imagination, see II. ivii, note), or remember things
past, except while the body endures (see definition of
Memory, II. rriii. note). Q.KD.
Paop. "yXTT. Nevertheleaa in God there i» necessarily an
idea, which eofpressee the estence of thin or that h-wman body
v,nder the form of eternity.

Proof— Oroi is the cause, not only of the existence of
this or that human body, but also of its essence (L ixv.).
This essence, therefore, must necessarily be conceived
through the very essence of God (I. Ax. iv.), and be thus
conceired by a. certain eternal neceaaity (I. xri.) ; aud this
conception must neceaearily exist in God (IL iii,). Q.E.D,

tPaop. X xTTT Tlie human mind ctmnot be abtolutely de-
Mroyed wiih the body, but there remains of it something which
■is eternal.
Proof. — There is necessajily in God a concept or idea,
which expresses the essence of the human body (last
Prop.), which, therefore, is neceaaarily something apper-
taining to the essence of the human mind (EL xiii.). But
we have not assigned to the human mind any duration, de-
finable by time, except in so f Eir aa it expresses the actual
existence of the body, which is explained through duration,
and may be defined by time — tbat is (II. viii. Coroll.), we

I do not Eiaaign to it duration, except while the body endures.
Xet, as there is something, notwithstanding, which is con-
ceived by a certain eternal necessity through the very
essence of God (last Prop.) ; this something, which apper-
tains to the essence of the mind, will necessarily be eternal.
Q.E.D.

Note. — This idea, which expresses the essence of the body
_ under the fonn of eternity, is, as we have said, a certain


TT^^


260 THE ETHICS. [pAttT

mode of tliiiiting, which belonj^s to tlie essence of the mind,
and is necessarily eternal. Yet it ia not possitla that wb
should remember that we eiisted before our body, for our
body can bear no trace of such ejistence, neither can
eternity be defined in terms of time, or have any relation to
time. But, notwithatandiag, we feel and know that we are
eternal. For the mind feela those things that it conceives
by understanding, no less than those tbii^s that it re-
members. For the eyes of the mind, whereby it sees and
obserres thinga, are none other than proofs. Thus, although
■we do not remember that we existed before the hody, yet
we feel that our mind, in bo far as it involves the essence
of the body, under the form of eternity, is eternal, and that
thus its existence cannot be defined in terms of time, or
explained through duration. Thus our mind can only be
said to endure, and its existence can only be defined by a
fixed time, in so far as it involves the actual existence of
the body. Thus far only has it the power of determining*
the existence of things by time, and conceiving them undorj
the category of duration.

Paop. XXIV. The more we understand particular thirty
the -more do tee understand Qod.

Proof, — This is evident from I. xxv. CoroU.

Pbop. XXV. The highest endeavour of the mind, aiad t
highest virtue is to urtdergtand things iy the third kind 6
knowledge.

Proof.— The third kind of knowledge proceeds from lUfefl
adequate idea of certain attributes of Gk>d to an adequatdJ
knowledge of the essence of things (see its definition H. xL 1
note ii.) ; and, in proportion as we understand things more in
this way, we better understand God {by the last Prop.) ;
therefore (IV. ixviii.) the highest virtue of the mind, that
is (TV. Def. viii.) the power, or nature, or (TTT vii.) highest
endeavour of the mind, is to understand things by the
third kin d of k nowledge. Q.ED.

Pbop. XXVI. In proportion as the mind w m.i)re capable
of rnideratanding things by the third kind of knowledge, it
deeirea more to understand things hy that kind.

Proof. — This is evident. For, in so far as we concdya
the mind to be capable of conceiving things by thia
kind of knowledge, we, to that extent, conceive it as det«r-


T.]


261


I mined thus to conceive thinga ; and conaeq^nentlj (Def.
of the Emotions, i.), the mind desires so to do, m proportion"
as it is more capable thereof. Q.E.D.

Prop. XX VI I. From this third kind of Jcnowledge ameg
Ute higheit poie^le 'menial acquieecence.

Proof. — The highest virtue of the mind is to know God
(TV. xxviii.), or to uuderstand things by the third kind of
knowledge (V. xxr.), and this rirtue is greater in propor-
tion as the mind knows things more by the said kind of
knowledge (V. xxiv.) : consequently, he who fcnowa things

»by this land of knowledge passes to the summit of human
perfection, and is therefore (Def. of the Emotions, ii.) affected
W the highest pleasure, such pleasure being accompanied by
*he idea of himself and his own virtue ; thus (Def. of the
Amotions, xxv.), from this kind of knowledge arises the
highest possible acquiescence. Q.E.D.

Pbop. X X V H I- The endeavour or desire to know things
by the third kind of knowledge cannot ariae from the first, but
from the second kind of knowledge.

Proof. — This proposition is self-evident. For whatsoever
Tre underetaad clearly aad distinctly, 'we underetand either
through itself, or through that which ia conceived through

» Itself ; that is, ideas wHch are clear and distinct in us, or
■which are referred to the third land of knowledge (II, xl,
note ii.) cannot follow from ideas that are fragmentary and
^nfused, and are referred to knowledge of the first kind,
but must follow from adequate ideas, or ideas of the second
and third kind of knowledge ; therefore (Def. of the Emo-
tions, i.), the deaire of knowing things by the third kind
of knowledge cannot arise from the first, but from the second
Mnd. Q.. E.D.

Pbop. XSIX. Whaisoeiiev the mind understands under

the form of eternity, it does not understand by virtue of con-

eeimng the •present actual existence of the body, but by virtue

«/ conceiving the essence of the body under ike form of

I eternity.

Proof. — In so far as the mind conceives the present
existence of its body, it to that extent conceives duration
which can be determined by time, and to that extent only
has it the power of conceiving things in relation to time
(V. iii. H. xjvi.). But eternity cannot be explained in


»


THE ETHICS.


). l^ero^l
con ceiviiugl^H


.terms of duration (I. Def. viii. and eiplanation). Thei
fore to this extent the mind has not the power of coneeii '
things under the form of et«mity, but it poaaesses 8
power, because it ia of the nature of reason to oonoe£v»
things under the form of eternity (H. xUt. CoroII. ii.), and
aJflo because it is of the nature of the mind to conceive the
essence of the body under the form of eternity (V, xaiii,),
for besides these two there is nothing which belongs to the-
essence of mind {H. siii.). Therefore this power of con-
ceiving things under the form of eternity only belongs to-
the mind in virtue of the mind's conceiving the essence of
the body under the form of eternity, Q.E.D.

Note. — Things are conceived by us as actual in two
ways ; either as existing in relation to a given time and
place, or as contained in God and following from the-
necessity of the divine nature. Whatsoever we conceive in
this second way as true or real, we conceive under the form
of eternity, and their ideas involve the eternal and infinite
6 of God, aa we showed in II. xlv, and note, wH<'


Prop, XXX. (hif mitul, in so far aa U hiowa Uadf a
the body under the form, of eternUy, has to that aient necM
sa/rUy a. knowledge of Qod, and kn<yws that it is in &od, t
ia conceived through Qod.

Proof — ^Eternity is the very essence of God, in si
this involves necessary existence {I. Def. viii.), Therefta
to conceive things under the form of eternity, ia to conceinil
thii^ in so far aa they are conceived through the esseiu
of God aa real entities, or in ao far as they iavolve eril
tence through the essence of God ; wherefore our mind, ;'
so far as it conceives itself and the body under the foni
of eternity, has to that extent necessarily a knowledge o
God, and knows, Ac. Q.E.D.

Peop. XXXI. The third kind of knowledge d^ertds c
the mind, aa Ua formal cauee, in so far as the mind itself m
eternal.

Proof. — The mind does not conceive anything tmder tht
form of eternity, except in ao far as it conceives its ownl
body under the form of eternity (V. xxix.) ; that is, except I
in Bo far as it is eternal {V. isi, xxiii.) ; therefore (by the
last Prop,), in so far as it is eternal, it poasesses the ^oiR


'J


[ FBEEDOM.


r

^H ledge of God, which knowledge is necessarily adequate (II.
^1 xlvi.) ; hence the mind, in so fn,r as it is eternal, is capable
^1 of knowing everything which can follow from this given
^m knowledge of God (IL xl.), in other words, of knowing
^B things by the third kind of knowledge (see Def. in II. xl,
^P note ii.). whereof accordingly the mind (HI. Def. i.), in
H^ HO far as it is eternal, is the adequate or formal cause of
such knowledge. Q.E.D.

Note, — In proportion, therefore, as a man ia more potent
in this kind of knowledge, he will be more completely con-
scious of himself and of Giod ; in other words, he will be
more perfect and blessed, as mU appearmore clearly in the
sequel. But we must here observe that, although we are
already certain that the mind ia eternal, in so far as it con-
ceives things under the form of eternity, jet, in order that
what we wish to show may be more readiJy explained and
better understood, we will consider the mind itself, as though
it had juat begun to eiist and to understand things tinder
the form of eternity, as indeed we have done hitherto ; this
we may do without any danger of error, so long as we are
careful not to draw any conduaion, unless our premisses are

Prop. T X X I [ . Whaimever we undereland hy the fhird
Had of lenoviledge, we take delight in, and our delight is
accompanied hy the idea of God as cause.

Proof. — From this kind of knowledge arises the highest
possible mental acquiescence, that is (Def. of the Emotions,
XXV.), pleasure, and this acquiescence is accompanied by the
idea of the mind itself (V, xxvii.), and consequently (V, xxx.)
the idea also of God as cause. Q.KD.

CoToUary. — From the third kind of knowledge necessarily
arises the intellectual love of God. From this kind of know-
ledge arises pleasure accompanied by theidea of Godas cause,
that is (Def. of the Emotions, vi.) , the love of God ; not in so
far as we imagine him as present (V. xxis.), but in so far
as we understand him to be eternal ; this is what I call the
intellectu al love o f God.

Pkop, X X Jt 1 1 1 - The intellectual love of God, which arises
from, the third hind of knowledge, is eternal.

Proof. — The third kind of knowledge is eternal (V.
xxii. 1. Ax iii.); therefore (fcy the same Axiom) the


264


THE ETHIca.


I tterefrom i


[part
also □ecessa.rilj etei


love Trliich.

Q.i:.D.

Note. — Although this love towards God has (by the
going Prop.) no beginning, it yet poBBessea aU the perfi
tions of love, just as though it had arieen as we feigned in
the Coroll. of the last Prop. Nor ia there here any diffe-
rence, except that the mind posaessea as eternal thoae
perfections which we feigned to accrue to it, and they
accompanied by the idea of God as eternal cause. If p
sure consiatB in the transition to a greater perfection,
Buredlj blessedness must consist in the nund being endow*
with perfection itself.

Pbop, TX X l y, The mind U, only while the body endut
subject to those emotions whi'Ch are atlributable to passions.

Proof. — Imagination is the idea wherewith the mind
contemplates a thing as present (H. xvii. note) ; yet this
idea indicates rather the present disposition of the human
body than the nature of the external thing (H, xvi. Coroll.
ii.). Therefore emotion (see general Def. of Emotions)
imagination, in so far as it indicates the present dispositi
of the body; therefore (V.ixi.) the mind is, onlywhile '
body endui'es, subject to emotions which are attributable
passions. Q.E.D.

Corollary. — Hence it follows that no love save intellect!
love is eternal.

Note.-^JI we look to men's general opinion, we shall
that they are indeed conscious of the eternity of their mi
hut that they confuse eternity with duration, and ascril
it to the imagination or the memory which they believe
remain after death.

Prop. XXXV. God loves himself with an infijiite
tiial love.

Proof.— Oiod ia absolutely infinite (I. Def. vi.),
(II. Def. vi.), the nature of God rejoices in infinite perft
tion ; and such rejoicing ia (H. iii.) accompanied by
idea of himself, that is (I. si. and Def. i.), the idea of
own cause : now this is what we have (in V. ssiii. Cort
described as intellectual love.

Prop. XXXVX The intellectual love of the mind ioword*.'
6od ii that very love of God whereby God loves himself, not
in so far as he ie infinile, hut in so far aahe can be explainaA


RTt^H

fon^H
srfeo- 1


^^^ABl


'■:


OP HUM AN FREEDOM.


S65


through the essence of the humaa, mijid regarded tinder the
form of eteraUy ; in other words, the intellectual love of the
mind towards God is part of tlie infinite love wherewith God
lovea himself.

Proof. — ^This loye of the mind must te referred to tLe

activities of the mind (V. sssii. CoroU. and IH. iii,) ; it is

itself, indeed, an actiTity wheretj the mind regards itself

accompanied by the idea of God as cause (V. sxiii. and

Coroll.) ; that is (I. ssv. CoroU. and IL xL Coroll.), an

activity wherehy God, in so far a^ he can be explained

through the human mind, regards himself accompanied "by

I the idea of himself ; therefore (by the last Prop.), this love

Kof the mind is part of the infinite love wherevith God loves

f himself. Q..E.D.

OoroUary. — Hence it follows ihat God, in so far as he
Jves himself, loves man, and, consequently, that the love
f God towards men, and the intellectual love of the mind
towards God are identical.

Note. — From what has been said we clearly understand,

vherein our salvation, or blessedness, or freedom, consists i

Kiamelj, ia the constant and eternal love towards God, or

I in God's love towards men. This love or blessedness is, in

the Bible, called Glory, and not undeservedly. For whether

this love be referred to God or to the mind, it may rightly

be called acquiescence of spirit, which (Def . of the Emotions,

IX.) is not really distinguished from glory. In so far

9 referred to God, it is (V. xisv.) pleasure, if we may

se that term, accompanied by the idea of itseH, and,

far as it is referred to the mind, it ia the same

Again, since the esaence of our mind consists solely in
tnowledge, whereof the beginning and the f oimdation is God
(I. XV. and 11. slvii. note), it becomes clear to us, in what

Imamier and way our mind, as to its essence and existence,
iollows from the divine nature and constantly depends on
^kid. I have thought it worth while here to call attention
to this, in order to show by this eiample how the knowledge
of particular things, which I have caUed intuitive or of the
third kind (H. xl. note ii.), is potent, and more powerful
than the universal tnowledge, which I have styled know-
ledge of the second kind. For, although in Part L I


[fabt y^^M


ebowed In ^ueraJ tenue, that all tliinga (and consequently,
also, the human mind) depend as to their essence and exis-
tence on Giod, yet that demonstration, though legitimate
and placed beyond the cLances of doubt, does not afFect
our mind 80 much, as when the same conclusion is derired
from the actual essence of some particular thing, which wo
say depe nds on Go d.

Peop. AJiJt.V.U.. There is nothing in nature, which it
trary to thie intellectual love, or which can take it away.

Proof. — This intellectual love follows necessarily £roi
the nature of the mind, ia so far as the latter is regarde
through the nature of God as aa eternal truth (V. xxxiii.
and xsix.). If, therefore, there should be anything which
would be contrary to this love, that thing would be con-
trary to that which ia true ; consequently, that, which ahoold.
be able to take away this love, would cause that which i»
true to be false ; an obvious absurdity. Therefore there
is nothing in nature which, &c. Q.E.I).

Note. — The A^om of Part IV", has reference to partii
things, in so far as they are regarded in relation to a gi'
time and place : of this, I think, no one can doubt.

Prop, x x x v i IT Jji proportion, (w the inind wnders
more things by the second and third kind of knowledgt
less subject to those emotiong which are evil, and standg
fear of death.

Proof. — The mind's essence consists in knowledge (II.h.) ;
therefore, in proportion a.s the mind nnderstanda more
things by the second and third kinds of knowledge, the
greater will be the part of it that endures (Y. xxix. and.
sxiii.), and, consequently (by the last Prop.), the great
vrill be the part that is not touched by the emotions, v " '
are contrary to our nature, or in other words, evil (IV. 3
Thus, in proportion as the mind understands more tl
by the second and third kinds of knowledge, the greater'
will be the part of it, that remains unimpaired, and, consd-*
quently, less subject to emotions, &c. Q.E.D.

Note. — Hence we understand that point which I touoheJ
on in TV. xssis. note, and winch I promised to explain in thi»
Part ; namely, that death becomes less hurtful, in propor-
tion as the mind's clear and distinct knowledge is greater,
and, consequently, in proportion as the mind loves "


iroil^^l
rdec^^^


irX&T T.]


OF HUMAN FBEBDOM.


267


^Hmore. .A^ain, since from the third kind of toowledfre
^V arisea the highest possible acquiescence (V. xxvii.), it fol-
^f lows that the human mind can attain to being of eueb a,
nature, that the part thereof ■which we have shown tO'
perish with the body (V. isi.) ahonld be of little impor-
tance when compared with the part which endures. But I
^^ will soon treat of the subject at greater length.
^L Pbop. X X X DC. ffe, who poggesgeg a body capable of the
^^ greatest nitmber of activUiee, po»se»ges a inind whereof the
^V greatest part is eternal.

^" Proof.— 'Ke, who possesses a body capable of the greatest,
number of activities, is least agitated by those emotions
which are evil (TV. xxiviii.)— that is (IV, ixx.), by those
emotions which are contrary to our nature; therefore

»(y. X.), he possesBes the power of arranging and asaociflting-
the modifications of the body according to the intellectual
order, and, consequently, of bringing it about, that all the
modifications of the body should be referred to the idea of
Qod ; whence it will come to pass that (V. it.) he will be
affected with love towards God, which (V.svi.) must occupy
or constitute the chief part of the mind; therefore (V,
zxziii.), such a man will poesess a mind whereof the chief
part is eternal. Q.E.D.

Note . — Since human bodies are capable of the greate st num -
fcer of activities, there is no doubt but that they may be of
I Buch a nature, that they may be referred to minda possesBiiig
■ a great knowledge of themselves and of God, and whereof
I the greatest or chief part is eternal, and, therefore, that
I they should scarcely fear death. But, in order that this
I. nay be understood more clearly, we must here call to mind,
I that we live in a state of perpetual variation, and, accord-
t ing as vre are changed for the better or the worse, we are
1 called happy or unhappy.

For he, who, from being an infant or a child, becomes a
I corpse, is called unhappy ; whereas it is set down to happi-
I nesB, if we have been able to live through the whole period
I of life with a sound mind in a sound body. And, in
I. leaEty, he, who, as in the case of an infant or a, child, has
ra body capable of very few activities, and depending, for
T the most part, on external causes, has a mind which, con-
[ Bidered in Itself alone, is scarcely conacioua of itself, or of


1


268 THE ETHICS. [PAET

God, or of things ; wliereaa, he, who has a body capable
of Terr nianv aRtivities, has a imad which, considered in
itself alone, is hijjhly consdona of itself, of God, and of
things. In this life, therefore, we primarily endeavour
to bring it about, that the body of a child, in bo far oa
its nature allows and conduces thereto, may be changed
into something else capable of very many activities, and
referable to a mind which is highly conscious of itself, of
God, and of things ; and "we desire so to change it, that
what is referred to its imagination and memory may be-
come insignificant, in comparison with its intellect, as I
have already said in the noto to the last Proposition.

Peof, XL. III. proportion as each thing posseaaee mora
of perfection, eo is it more active, and lese passive; and,
vice vend, in proportion aa it is more active, so it it more
perfect.

Proof— Jo. proportion as each thing is more perfect, it
possesses more of reality (11. Def, vi,}, and, consequently
(m. iii. and note), it is to that extent more active and leaf"
jjassive. This demonstration may be reversed, and tihtH
prove that, in proijortion as a thing is more active, so is i|
more perfect. Q.E.D.

Corollo/ry. — Hence it follows that the part of the i
which endures, be it great or small, is more perfect thi
the rest. For the eternal part of the mind (V. xxiii. nil
is the understanding, through which alone we are said t
act (UL iii.) ; the part which we have shown to perish iB,^
the imagination (V. ssi,), through which only we are said f
to be passive (HI. iii. and general Def . of the Emotions) if
therefore, the former, be it great or small, is more perfeo'
than the latter. Q.E.B.

Note. — Such are the doctrines which I had purposed t
set forth concerning the mind, in so far as it is regardedll
without relation to the body ; whence, as also from L nL
and other places, it is plain that our mind, in so far as it
understands, is an eternal mode of thinking, which is deter-
mined by another eternal mode of thinking, and this other
by a third, and so on to infinity ; so that all taken to- ■
gether at once coustitnto tbe eternal and infinite intellect ]
of God.

Prop. XLI. Even if tee did not know tliat our mind it


'■]


or HCUAN FSEEDOU.


269


t


T

^H eternal, wb ghould stUl consider aa of primary importance
^K piety and religion,, and generally all ihinga which, m Part
^f JV., we alumed to be attributable to courage and high-
mindednees.

Proof. — The first and only foundation of virtue, or the
rule of right living in (IV. ssii. Coroll. and xsiv.) seeking
one's own true interest. Now, while we determined what
reason prescribes as useful, we took no account of the
mind's eternity, which has only become known to us in
this Fifth Part. Although we were ignorant at that time
that the mind is eternal, we nevertheless stated that the
qualities attributable to court^e and high-mindedness are
of primary importance. Therefore, even if we were still
ignorant of this doctrine, we should yet put the aforesaid
precepts of reason in the first place. Q.E.D.

Note. — The general belief oi the multitude seems to bo
different. Most people seem to believe that they are free,
in so far as they may obey their lusts, and that they
cede their rights, in ao far aa they are bound to hve ac-
cording to the commandments of the divine law. They
therefore believe that piety, religion, and, generally,

I all things attributable to fimmces of mind, are burdens,
which, after death, they hope to lay aside, and to receive
the reward for their bondage, that is, for their piety and
religion ; it is not only by thia hope, hut also, and chiefly,
"by the fear of being horribly punished after death, that
they are induced to Hve according to the divine command-
meota, bo far as their feeble and infirm spirit will carry
them.

If men had not this hope and thia fear, but be-
lieved that the mind perishes with the body, and that no
hope of prolonged life remaina for the wretches who are
broken down with the burden of piety, they would return
to their own inclinations, controlling everything in accor-
dance with their luats, and desiring to obey fortune rather
than themselves. Such a course appears to me not less
absurd than if a man, because he does not beheve that he
can by wholesome food austain hia tody for ever, should
wish to cram himself with poisons and deadly fare ; or if,
he sees that the mind is not eternal or immortal,
he should prefer to be out of hia mind altogether, and to


270


; these ideas are bo abst


live Tritliout the use of r

as to be scarcely worth refuting;.

Peop. XLH. Bleaeednegg is not the reward of virtuB, 1
virtue iiaelf ; neither do
owr huts, l»it, contrairivnte, heeause vie rejoice thertin, we a
able to control our Itutg.

Proof.- — Bleasedneaa consiats in love towards God (
xxxri. and note), ■which love springs from the third kind of
tnowledge (V. zxxii. CoroU.) ; therefore this love ( M I, iii.
]ix.) must be referred to the mind, in so far as the latter is
active j therefore (IV. Def. viii) it is virtue itself. This was
our first point. Again, in proportion as the mind rejoices
more in this divine love or blesaedneas, so does it the more
understand (V. i!odi.) ; that is (V. iii. Coroll.), so much the
more power has it over the emotions, and (V. isxviii.) bo
much the less ia it subject to those emotions which are I
evil ; therefore, in proportion aa tho mind rejoices in this I
divine love or blesaedneas, bo has it the power of eontrolling>J
lusts. And, since human power in controlling the emotior
consists solely in the understanding, it follows that u
rejoices in blessedness, because he has controlled his lust^
but, contrariwise, his power of controlHng his luats arise '
from this blessedneaa itaelf. Q.E.D.

Note. — I have thus completed all I wished to set fort
touching the mind's power over the emotions and i'
mind's freedom. Whence it appears, how potent is thetV
wise man, and how much he surpasses the ignorant m&n, J
who is driven only by his lusta. For the ignorant man is I
not only distracted in vftrioua ways by external c
without ever gainhig the true acquiescence of his spirit, I
but moreover Uvea, aa it were unwitting of himself, and of 1
God, and of things, and aa soon as he ceases to suiEer,
ceases also to be.

"Whereas the wise man, in so far as he is regarded a
such, is scarcely at all disturbed in spirit, but, being ooit- ,
scioua of himself, and of God, and of things, by a certain J
eternal necessity, never ceases to be, but always posaesaeij
true acquiescence of his spirit.

If the way which I have pointed out aa leading to tl
result seema exceedingly hard, it may nevertheless be d
covered. Needs must it be hard, since it is so seldoni


PABT y.] OF HUMAN FBEEDOM. 271

found. How would it be possible, if salvation were ready
to our band, and could without great labour be found, tbat
it should be by almost all men neglected ? But all things
excellent are as difficult as they are rare.


SPINOZA'S CORRESPONDENCE,

[abbidged.]


n.


CORRESPONDENCE.


LETTER I. (!.')

Eehet Oldenbitro' to B. db Spinoza.

{^OMenbjirg, after complimenting Spinota, agJcs him. to enter
into a phUogopkical correipondence.'\

ILLTJSTEIOTJS Sie, and most woetht rKiEWD,— So
painful to me was the separation from yon the other day
after our meeting in year retreat at KhijnBturg, that it is
my first endeaTonr, now that I am retnmed to England, to
renew,as far as is possible hy correspondence, my intercourse
■with yOu. Solid learning, conjoined with courtesy and
refinement of manners (wherewith both nature and art
have moat amply endowed you), carries with it such
charms as to command the love of eTerr honourable and
liberally-educated man. Let us then, most excellent air,
join hands in sincere friendship, and lot us foster the feel-
ing with erery zealous endeavour and kind office in our
power. "Whatever my poor means can furnish I beg you
to look on as your own. Allow me in return to claim a
share in the riches of your taleuts, aa I may do without in-
flicting any loss on yourself.

We conversed at Ehijnsburg of God, of extension, of
infinite thought, of the differences and agreements between
these, of the nature of the connection between the human
aoul and body, and further, of the principles of the Car-
tesian and Baconian philosophies.

But, aa we then spoke of these great questions merely
cursorily and hy the way, and a,a my mind haa been not a


' Hie nnoiber of eouh letter as arranged i:
ven in brackets.


Van yioten's cdltbn is


276 BPiNozA'a [letteh i

little tormented witli them aince, I will appeal to the r _
of our newly eem.eiited friendBhip, aad most afEectionafil
beg you to give me at somewhat greater length yd
opiiiiou on the sabjecte I Iiave mentioned. On two po^
especially I ask for enlightenment, if I may presiiiiieS
far ; firet : In what do you place the true distinction befr
thought ajid matter? aecondly: What do you considi
be the chief defects in the Cartesian and Baconian phj
Bophiea, and how do you think they might best be remoyl
and something more sound substituted ? The more fre«
you write to me on these and similar subjects, the mdfl
closely will you tie the bonds of our friendship, and the
stricter will be the obligation laid on me to repay you, aa
far as possible, with similar services.

There is at present in the press a collection of physio-
logical discourses written by an Euglisbman of noble
family and distinguished learning,' They treat of the nature
and elasticity of the air, as proved by forty-three experi-
ments; also of its fluidity, solidity, and other analogous
matters. As soon as the work is published, I shall make a
point of Bending it to you hy any friend who maybs cross-
ing the sea. MeanwhUe, farewell, and remember you^_
friend, who is

Tours, in all affection and zeal,

Henry OLnEHBUBO.

London, JJ Aug., 1661.


LETTER n. (n.)

Spihoza to Oldenbtteg.

[Angwer to Letter I. Sfvnoza defines " God," and "
hute," and eendg definitions, axioms, and firet fo^
lions of Book I. of EtUcs. Some errors of 1
SescoHes disewesed.^

iLicaTEiouB Sib, — How pleasant your friendship is I
me, you may yourself judge, if your modesty will allow y
to reflect on the abundance of your own excellences.
' Robert Boyle.


I


)


LETTER H.] COBBEBPONDENCB. 27?

deed the thonglit. of tLeae mates me seem not a little bold
in entering into eueh a compact, tlie more so when I con-
aider that between frienda all thingB, and especially things
flpiritaal, ought to be in conunon. However, thiB mnst
lie at the charge of your modesty and IdndneBB rather
than of myBelf. You have been willing to lower yourself
"through the former and to fill me with the abundance of
the latter, till I am no longer afraid to accept the close
friendship, which you hold out to me, and which you deign
to aak of me in return ; no effort on my part shall be
spared to render it lasting.

As for my mental endowments, such as they are, I would
willingly allow you to share them, even though I knew it
would be to my own great hindrance. But this is not
meant as an excuse for denying to you what you ask by
the rights of friendship. I will therefore endeavour to
explain my opinions on the topics you touched on ; though
I scarcely hope, unless your kindnesB intervene, that 1
shall thus draw the bonds of oor friendship closer.

I will then be^n by speaking briefly of God, Whom I
define as a Being eonHiating in infinita attributes, whereof
ea«h is infinite or supremely perfect after its kind.
Tou must observe that by attribute I mean everythii^, '
which is conceived through itself and in itself, so that the
conception of it does not involve the conception of anything
else. For instance, extension is conceived through itself
and in itself, but motion is not. The latter is conceived
through something else, for the conception of it implies
extension.

That the definition above given of God is true appears
from the fact, that by God we mean a Being supremely
perfect and absolutely infinite. That such a Being exists
may easily be proved from the defijiition ; but as this is
not the place for such proof, I will pass it over. "What I
am bound here to prove, in order to satisfy the first inquiry
of my distinguished questioner, aJe the following conse-
quences ; firat, that in the universe there cannot exist two
substances without their differing utterly in essence ;
eeeondly, that substance cannot be produced or created — -
existence perfEiins to its actual essence ; thirdly, that all sub-
stance must be infinite or supremely perfect after its kind.


278


8PINOZA. a


[lettbb 1


When these pointB have been demonatrated, my (
tinguished questioner will readily perceive my drif^ if [
reflects at the same time on the definition of God. .
order to prove them clearly and briefly, I can think j
nothing tetter than to auhmit them to the bar of ;
judgment proved in the geometrical method,' I ther*
enclose them separately and await your verdict

Again, yon ast me what erroya I detect in the Cartel
and Baconian philosophies. It is not my custom to exp
the errors of others, nevertheless I will yield to yoi;
quest. The first and the greatest error is, that i
philosophers have strayed so far from the knowledge 1
the first cause and origin of all things ; the second is, 1'
they did not know the true nature of the human m '
the third, that they never grasped the true cause of e
The necessity for correct knowledge on these three p
can only be ignored by persons completely devoid of lea
ing and training.

That they have wandered astray from the knowledge J
the first canse, and of the human mind, may easily r
gathered from the truth of the three propositions givi
above ; I therefore devote myself entirely to the demca
stration of the third error. Of Bacon I shall say very littl
for he speaks very confusedly on the point, and works o'
scarcely any proofs : he simply narrates. In the first pla
he assumes, that the human intellect is liable to en
only through the fallibility of the senses, but also e
through its own nature, and that it frames its conceptioaj
in accordance with the analogy of its own na.ture, not wi '
the analogy of the universe, so that it is like a mirror :
ceivLng rays from external objects unequally, and mingin
its own nature with the nature of things, &o.

Secondly, that the human iutellect is, lay reason o:
own nature, prone to abstractions ; such things as aj
flui it feigns to be constant, &c.

Thirdly, that the human intellect continually augmi
and is unable to come to a. stand or to rest content,
other causes which he assigns may all be reduced to t

' The bUiuIoh is Co Eth. I., Buginnitig— Prop, i'


LETTEK III.] COEKEBPONDENCB, 279

one Cartesian principle, that the human will is free and
more estenaive than the intellect, or, aa Verulam him-
self more confusedly puts it, that " the understanding is
not a dry light, but receives infusion from the will." ' (We
may here observe that Verulam often employa " intellect "
as synonymoua with mind, diifeiing in this respect from
BeBcaites). This cause, then, leaving aside the others as
unimportant, I shall show to be false ; indeed its falsity
would be evident to its supporters, if they would conaider,
that will in general differs from this or that particular
volition in the same way aa whiteneas differs from this or
that white object, or humanity from this or that man. It
is, therefore, as impoBsible to conceive, that will ia the cause
of a given volition, as to conceive that humanity is the cause
of Peter and Paul.

Hence, as will is merely an entity of the reaaon, and
cannot be called the cause of particular volitiona, and aa
some cause ia needed for the existence of such volitiona,
these latter cannot be called free, but are necessarily such
as they are determined by their causes; lastly, according
to Descartes, errors are themselves paxticular volitiona ;
hence it necessarily follows that errors, or, ia other words,
particular volitions, are not free, but are determined by
external causes, and in nowise by the will. This is what I
undertook to prove.


LETTER UL. (m.)

OLDBNBUBfl TO SpiNOZA.


mburg propounds several qnestions cortceming God and
Mia existence, thought, and the axioms of Hth, I. He
aho informa Spinona of a philosophical society, and pro-
mises to send Boyle's hooJe.}


H Most excellent Feibttd, — ^Your learned letter has beec

H delivered to me, and read with, great pleasure.

^L I highly approve of your geometrical method of proof,

^■^ ' Bacon, Nov, Org. I, Aph, 49.


sFiNozA a


[letteb c


but I must Bet it down to my dulness, that I cannot follo^
with readiness what you set forth with auch acciu
Suffer me, then, I beg, to espoae the slowness of my undei
standing, while I put the following questioas, aud beg 4
you to answer them.

First. Do you clearly and indisputably understa _
solely from the definition you have given of God, thatsael
a Being exists ? Por my part, when I reflect that def
tions contain only the conceptions formed by our dl'
and that our mind forms many conceptions of things w
do not exiat, and is very fertile in multiplying and a
ijiug what it has conceived, I do not yet see, that from t
couception I have of God I can infer God's existence.
am able by a mental combination of all the perfections 1
perceive in men, in animals, in vegetables, in miner
&c., to conceive and to form an idea of some single s
stance uniting in itself all such excellences ; indeed i
mind is able to multiply and augment such excellences ii
definitely ; it may thus fignre forth for itself a most p
feet and excellent Being, "but there would be no re
thencs to conclude that such a Being actually cxista.

Secondly. I wish to aak, whether you think it unquea.
tionablc, that body cannot be limited by thought, or thoughj
by body ; seeing that it still remains undecided, vrht '
thought ia, whether it be a physical motion or a spiritui
act quite diatinct from body ?

Thirdly. Do you reckon the axioms, which you have a
to me, as indemonstrable principles known by the light a
nature and needing no proof ? Perhaps the first is of thj
nature, but I do not see how the other three can be placa
in a like category. The second aaaumeatbat nothing exist
in the universe save substances and accidents, but manT]
persona would say that time and place cannot be classe
either as one or the other. Tour third axiom, that (Atnj
having different attrihuteg have no quality in comm
far from being clear to me, that its contrary seema to befl
shown in the whole universe. All things known to us agree:!
in certain respects and differ in othera. Lastly, your fourtlLl
axiom, that wh&n things have no gtcality in common, oneu
cannot be produced by another, is not so plain to my groping M
intelligence as to stand in need of no further illumination. ,f


I


ll


LETTEB III.] C0BEE3PONDEKGE, 281

God haa nothing actnallj in common with created things,
yet nearly all of ua Ijelieve TTim to he their cause.

Aa you eee that in my opinion your axioms are not estab-
lished beyond all the aasaulta of doubt, you will readily
gather that the propoaitions you have based upon them do
not appear to me absolutely firm. The more I reflect upoa
them, the more are doubts suggested to my mind concern-
ing them.

Ab to the first, I submit that two men are two aubatancea
with the same attribute, inaamucb as both are rational ;
whence I infer that there can be two substances with the
flame attribute.

As to the second, I opine that, as nothing can be its own
cause, it is hardly within the scope of our intellect to pro-
nounce on the truth of the proposition, that Buhetance can-
not be produced even by any other Bubatance. Such a
proposition asserts all substances to be self-caused, and all
and each to be independent of one another, thus mating so
many gods, and therefore denying the first cause of all
things. This, I willingly confess, I cannot understand,
unless you will be kind enough to explain your theory on
this sublime subject somewhat more fully and simply, in-
forming me what may be the origin and mode of produc-
tion of substances, and the mutual interdependence and
subordination of things. I most strenuously beg and con-
jure you by that friendship which we have entered into, to
answer me freely and faithfully on these points ; you may
rest assured, that STerything which you think fit to com-
municate to me win remain untampered with and safe, for
I will never allow anything to become public through me
to your hurt or disadvantage. In our philosophical society
we proceed diligently as far as opportunity offers with our
experiments and observations, Kngering over the compila-
tion of the history of mechanic arts, with the idea that the
forma and qualities of things can best be explained from
mechanical principles, and that all natural effects can be
produced through motion, shape, and consistency, without
reference to inexplicable forms or occult qualities, which are
but the refuge of ignorance.

I will send the book I promised, whenever the Dutch
AmbassadorB said (aa they freijuently do) a messenger to


282 bfinoza's [i

the Hague, or wheDeTer Bome other friend wbom I a.
trust goes your way. I beg you to excuse my prolizit^a^
freedom, and simply ask jou to take in good part, ae (
friend from, another, the straightforward and unpolial
reply I have sent to your letter, believing me to be w " '
deceit or afEectation,

Yours most faithfully,

London, 27 Sept., 1G61.


LETTER IV. (IV.)

Spinoza to OLDBUBUKfJ.

[Sjiinoza anewers some of Oldenburg's questiov^ and d
but has tiot time to Te;ply to ail, as he is just setting oviA
Amsierdam.J

Illuhtrious Sie,— As I waa starting for Amat
where I intend staying for a week or two, I receiyod 3
most welcome letter, and noted the objectiona you raia
the three propoaitioiiB I sent you. Not having time--]
reply fully, I will confine myself to these three. ^

To the^M* I answer, that not from every definition doe
the existence o£ the thing defined follow, but only (as I
showed in a note appended to the three propositions) from
the definition or idea of an attribute, that is (as I explained
fully in the definition given of God) of a thing conceived
through and in itself. The reason for this distinction was
pointed out, if I mistake not, in the above-mentioned note
sufBciently clearly at any rate for a philosopher, who is
assumed to be aware of the difference between a fiction and
a clear and distinct idea, and also of the truth of the axiom
that every definition or clear and distinct idea is tnie.
When this has been duly noted, I do not see what more is
required for the solution of your first question.

I therefore proceed to the solution of the second, wherein
you seem to admit that, if thought does not belong to the
nature of extension, then extension will not be limited \


[V.J COKBBSPOKD-ENCE. 283

Ehonglit; your doubt only involveB tlie example given.
But observe, I beg, if we say tha,t extenaion ia not limited
* y extenaion but by thought, is not this the same as saying
boat extension Is not infinite absolutely, hut only aa far as
n is concerned, in other words, infinite after its
PMnd ? But you aay : perhaps thoiight ia a corporeal action :
' "be it so, though I by no meana grant it: you, at any rate,
will not deny that estension, in so far as it is extension, is
not thought, and this is all that is required for esplaiuing
my definition and proving the third proposition.

Thirdly. Tou proceed to object, that my axioms ought
not to be ranked as universal notions. I will not dispute-
this point with you ; but you further hesitate as to flieir
truth, seeming to desire to show that their contrary ia.
more probable. Consider, I beg, the definition which I
gave of substance and attribute, for on that they all depend.
When I say that I mean by substance that which is con-
ceived through and in itself ; and that I mean by modifi-
cation or accident that, which is in something else, and is
conceived through that wherein it is, evidently it follows
t}iat substance is by nature prior to its accidents. For
without the former the latter can neither be nor be con-
ceived. Secondly, it follows that, besides substances and
acd-denta, nothing exists really or externally to the intellect.
For everything is conceived either through itself or through
Hometbing else, and the conception of it either involves or
does not involve the conception o£ something else. Thirdly,
it follows that things which possess different attributea
have nothing in common. For hy attribute I have ex-
plained that I mean something, of which the conception
does not involve the conception of anything else. Fourthly
and lastly, it follows that, if two things have notbii^ in
common, one csiunot be the cause of the other. For, aa
there would be nothing in common between the efEect and
tlie cause, the whole efEect would spring from nothing. As
for your contention that God has nothing actually in com-
mon with created things, I have maintained the exact
opposite in my definition. I said that God is a Being con-
sisting of infinite attributes, whereof each one ia inflmte or
Bupremely perfect after its Mnd. "With regard to what
jou aay concerning my first proposition, 1 beg you, my


1


284 hpinoza'b [letteb t

frienc!, to "bear in mind, that men are not created btg
bom, and that their bodiea already esiat before bin
though under different forma. You draw the condueioi
wherein I fully concur, that, if one particle of matta
be annihilated, the whole of eitenaion would forthwi"
vanish. My second proposition doea not make
gods but only one, to wit, a Being consiating of ii
attributes, &c.


LETTER V, (V.)

Oldknbtjrq to Spinoza.

\Oldenbarg sends Boyh'g hook, and laments that Spinoza A
not been able to answer all his douits.J

Most bebpected Fbieh"D .^Please accept herewith t]
book I promised you, and write me in answer your opinion
on it, especially on the remarks about nitre, and abottj
fluidity, and Holidity. I owe you the warmest thanka for yonj
learned second letter, which I received to-day, but I great]]
grieve that your journey to Amsterdam prevented yM
from answering all my doubta. I beg you will supply t]
omission, as soon as you have leisure. Tou have tarn
enlightened me in your laet letter, but have not yet d
pelled all my darkness ; this result will, I believe, be ha,^
pily accomplished, when yuu send me clear and distinct ii '
formation concerning the first origin of things. Hitb
I have been somewhat in doubt aa to the cause from whicl^
and the manner in which things took their origin ; also, as tt
what is the nature of their connection with the first cause
if such there be. All that I hear or read on the subjec
seems inconclusive. Do you then, my very learned mast
act, as it were, aa my torch-bearer in the matter. Ton n
have no reason to doubt my confidence and gratitudw
Such is the earnest petition of

Xours most faithfully,

HSHBY OLDENBtrBO.


C O a£ B BFO KDE NCE .


LETTER VI. (VI.)
Spinoza to Oldbnbukq.


I [Containing detailed eriticismB hy Spin


I of Hoberl Boyle'a


LETTER VH. (vn.)

Oldehburq to Spinoza.

L {After {hanking SpinosKi, in tlie name of himself and Soyle,
Oldenburg mentiom the foundation of the Moyal Society,
and begs his correspondent to publish his theological and
philosophical worAv.]


The body of philosopherB whicli I formerly mentioned to
, /oil hB,s now, by the king's grace, been constituted as a,
• Itoyal Society, and furnished with a pubhc charter, whereby
distiiiguisbed. privilegeB are conferred upon it, and an ex-
cellent prospect afforded of endowing it with the neceaaary
revenues.

I would by all meana advise you not to begrudge to the

learned those works in philosophy and theology, which you

have composed with the talent that distinguiaheB you.

Publish them, I beg, whatever be the verdict of petty

theologians. Tour country is free ; the course of philo-

Hophy should there be free also. Tour own prudence will,

doubtleas, suggest to you, that your ideas and opinions

should be put forth as quietly as poaaible. For the rest,

commit the issue to fortune. Come, then, good sir, cast

I away all feaj: of exciting against you the pigmies of our

time. Long enough have we sacrificed to ignorance and

I pedantry, let us spread the saila of true knowledge, and

I explore the recesses of nature more thoroughly than hereto-


"286 spiNozi's [lbttbb t

fore. Toar meditations can, I take it, 1m printed in _
countrj with impunity ; nor need, any scandal among ■
learned he dreaded because of them, If these "be jC
patrons and supporters (and I warrant me you will i
them so), why should you dread the carpings of ignoran
I will not let you go, my honoiired friend, till I lialjfl
gained my request ; nor -will I ever, so far as in me liB^"
allow thoughts of Buch importance as yours to rest i
eternal silence. 1 eameatly beg you to communicate to n
as soon as you conveniently can, your decision in t
matter. Perhaps events Trill occur here not unworthy of
your knowledge. The Society I have mentioned will n
proceed more strenuoualy on its course, and, if peace o
tinues on our shores, will possibly illustrate the republic of
letters with some extraordinary achievement. Farewell,!
excellent air, and believe me.

Tour most zealous and friendly.


LETTEE Vin. (SI.)
Oldehbukg to Spinoza.


■[After further replying io Spinoza' g criticiame oTi
Oldenburg again exhorta his correapond&at i


Boyle'a


1


1 now proceed to the question which has arisen between
us. rirst, permit me to aek you whether you have finished
the important little work, in which you treat "of the origin
of things and their dependence on the first cause, and of the
improvement of our understanding." Truly, my dear sir,
I believe nothing more pleasing or acceptable to men of
true learning and discrimination could possibly be pub-
lished than such a treatise. This is what a man of your
talent and disposition should look to, far more than the
gratification of theologians of our time and fashion. The
latter have less regard for truth than for their own con-
Tenienee. I, therefore, conjure you, by the bond of oar i


lETTEK 15.] COKBESPONDENCE. 2S7

f riendHhip, by every duty of inpreaemg and proelaiming tte
truth, not to begrudge ua, or withiold from us jour writings
on these Bubjecta. K anything of greater importance than
I cfin foresee preventB you from publishing the work, I
eimestly charge you to give me a, Biimmaiy o£ it by letter.
Another book is soon to be publiahed by the learned
Boyle, which I will send you as an exchange. I will add
papers, which will acquaint you with the whole constitution
of our Eoyal Society, whereof I, with twenty others, am on
the Council, and, with one other, am Secretary. I have no
time to discourse of any further euhjecta. All the confi-
dence which honest intentions can inspire, all the readiness
to serve, which the smallneas of my powers wiU permit, I
pledge to you, and am heartily.

Dear sir, yours wholly,

H, Oldenbueo.

ladoD, 3 Api-il, 1G63.


LETTER rX. (XIII.)

Spinoza to OLnENBUEO.

[Spinoza informe Oldefiburg that he has removed to Skijns-
burg, and kiM spent gome time at Amderdam for the pur-
pote of puhlishing the" Prineiplea of Cartesian Philoao^hy."
Me tken replies to Boyle's objections.']

D1BTIHGUI8HED Sib, — I have at length received youi
long wished for letter, and am at liberty to answer it.
But, before I do bo, I will briefly tell you, what has pre-
vented my replying before. When I removed my house-
hold goods here in April, I aet out for Amaterdam. While
there certain friends asked me to impart to them a treatise
containing, in brief, the second part of the principles of
Descartes treated geometrically, t<^ether with some of the
chief points treated of in metaphysics, which I had formerly
dictated to a youth, to whom I did not wish to teach my own
opinions openly. They further requested me, at the first
opportunity, to compose a aimilaj- treatise on the first part.
Wishing to oblige my friends, I at once set myself to the


23^ Spinoza's [LBTTKsa x.4

task, wMcli I finiBhed in a fortniglit, and handed
thein. They then aaked for leave to print it, which I
readilj granted on the condition thB,t one of them should,
under my supervision, clothe it in more elegant phra.seologj',
and add a httle preface warning readers that I do not
acknowledge all the opinions there set forth as my own,
inasmuch as I hold the exact contrary to much that is there
written, illustrating the fact by one or two examples. All
this the friend who took chaj^ of the treatise promised to
do, and this is the cause for my prolonged stay in Amster-
dam. Since I returned to this village, I have hardly been
able to call my time my own, because of the friends who
have been kind enough to visit me. At last, my dear
friend, a moment has come, when I can relate these occur-|
rences to you, and inform you why I allow this treatise to
see the light. It may be that on this occasion some of
those, who hold the foremost positions in my country, will
be found desirous of seeing the rest of my writings,
which I acknowledge as my own ; they will thus take care
that I am enabled to publish them without any danger of
infringing the laws of the land. If IMb be aa I thmk, I
shall doubtless pubhsh at once ; if things fall out other-
wise, I would rather be silent than obtrude my opinions
on men, in defiance of my country, and thus render them
hostile to me. I therefore hope, my friend, that you will
not chafe at having to wait a short time longer ; you shall
then receive from me either the treatise printed, or the
summary of it which you ask for. If meanwhile you would
hke to have one or two copies of the work now in the press,
I will eatisfy your wish, as soon as I know of it and'
means to send the book conveniently.

[The rest of the letter U taken up with criticwmg on Bi
hook.^


LETTEES X.— XrV."


1


\Coniain further eorrespoTidenee concerning Boyle's look,

kindred Buhjecis.^

> These leltera are numbered by Van Vlolen, SIV., SVI., XXV.,
XXVI., XXXI,


COSBEBFONDENGX,


LETTEE SIII.A.

OLDENBtJEa TO SpiNOZA.


l,[rAej>iace of Ikia letter ie between Letten XIII. and XIV.
It was written aip^arenthj in S^temher, 1665, It mentions
the plague, which tool then at He height, the wa/r, and the
labours of the Moyal Society, and espeetaUy of Soyle, Then
comes the passage here given. The letter terminates wUh
references to the eotnetg, and to Muyghena.']


I Bee that you are engaged not so mucli in philosophy as
m theology, if I may say so. That is, you are recording
your thoughts about angels, prophecy, and miracles, but
you are doing this, perhaps, in a philosophical manner;
hoTever that may be, I am certain that the work ' ia worthy
o£ you, and that I am most anxious to have it. Since these
most difficult timea preyent free intercourse, I beg at least
that you will not disdain to signify to me in your next
letter ' your design and aim in this writing of yours.

I Here we are daily expecting news of a second' naval

I 'battle, unleaa indeed your fleet has retired into port.
"Virtue,* the nature of which you hint is being discussed
among your friends, belongs to wild beasts not to men.
For if men acted according to the guidance of reason, they
would not so tear one another in pieces, as they evidently
do. But what is the good of my complaining? Vices will
esist while men do ; ' but yet they are not continuous, but

I compensated by the interposition of better things.

I ••«««•

' The Tractalns Theologico-Politious,

* SpinaEa's answeF to this letter is noC extant.

» The English fleet twice defeated lie Dutch in 16B5, on Jnne 3rd
aud Sept. 4th. Secundo perbaps meaas "successfuJ,'' bat this hardly
agrees with Uldeoburg's politeneas. — [Tb.]


^^^290


[letter XT.


LETTER XV. (XXXII.)
Spinoza to OLDBNBUKa.


[^Spinoza writes to hit friend concerning the reasons u-hichUad
MB to heUeve, that " every part of nature agrees with the
whole, and it aegoeiated with all other parte." Se aho
Thokee afeie remarks abo-ut Muyghens.]

DiSTiNOUiBHED SiB, — For the encouragement to pursue
my speciilationB given me by yourself and the distinguished
E. Boyle, I return you my beat thanks. I proceed as far
aa my slender abilities will allow me, with full confideaice
in your aid and kindness. When you aak me my opinion
on the question raised concerning our fcoowlodge of tha
raeana, whereby each part of natiu'S agrees with its whole,
and the majmer in which it is associated with the remain-
ing parts, I presume you are asking for the reasons which
iuduce US to belieTS, that each part of nature agrees with its
whole, and is associated with the remaining parts. For as
to the means whereby the parts are really associated, and
each part agrees with its whole, I told you in my former
letter that I am in ignorance. To answer such a question,
we should have to know the whole of nature and its several
parts, I will therefore endeavour to show the reason, which
led me to make the statement ; but I will premise that I
do not attribute to nature either beauty or deformity, order
t or confusion. Only in relation to onr imagination can
! things be called beautiful or deformed, ordered or con-
fused.

By the association of parts, then, I merely mean that the
laws or nature of one part adapt themselves to the laws or
nature of another part, so as to cause the least possible in-
consistency. As to the whole and the parts, I mean that a
given number of things are parts of a whole, in so far asi
the nature of each of them Is adapted to the nature of the
rest, BO that they all, as far as possible, agree together.
On the other hand, in so far as they do not agree, each of
them forms, in our mind, a separate idea, and is to that


»


LBTTEK IT.] COBKBBPONDBNCB. 291

extent considered, as a. wLole, not as a part. For inatance,
■when the parts of lymph, chyle, ttc, combine, according to
the proportion of the figure and size of each, so as to
eridently vimte, and form one fluid, the chyle, lymph, Ac,
considered under this aspect, are part of the blood ; but, in
80 far as we consider the particles of lymph as differing in
figure and size from the particles of chyle, we shall consider
each of the two as a whole, not as a part.

Let us imagine, with your permiasion, a little worm,
living in the blood, able to distinguish by sight the particles
of blood, lymph, A-cand to reflect on the manner in which
each particle, on meeting with another particle, either is
repulsed, or communicates a portion of its own motion.
This little worm would live in the blood, in the same way aa
■we Hve in a part of the vmiverae, and would consider each
particle of blood, not as a part, but as a whole. He woT.ild
be unable to determine, how all the parts are modified by
the general nature of blood, and are compelled by it to
adapt themselves, so as to stand in a fixed relation to one
another. Por, if we imagine that there are no causes ex-
ternal to the blood, which could communicate fresh move-
ments to it, nor any space beyond the blood, nor any bodies
whereto the particles of blood could communicate their
motion, it is certain that the blood vould always remain in
the same state, and its particles "would undergo no modifi-
cations, save those which may be conceived as arising from
the relations of motion existing between the lymph, the
chyle, &c. The blood would then always have to be con-
sidered as a whole, not as a part. But, as there exist, as
a matter of fact, very many causes which modify, in a given
manner, the nature of the blood, and are, in turn, modified
thereby, it follows that other motions and other relations
arise in the blood, springing not from the mutual relations
of its parts only, but from the mutual relations between
the blood as a whole and external causes. Thus the blood
comes to be regarded aa a part, not as a whole. So much
for the whole and the part.

All natural bodies can and ought to be considered in the
aame way as we have here considered the blood, for all
bodies are surrounded by others, and are mutually deter-
mined to exist and operate in a fixed and definite propor-


SPINOZA S


[le


tion, while the relationa Ijetween motion fuid rest in (j
sum total of them, that is, in the whole universe, r
tmchaaged. Hence it follows that each body, in bo :
it eiistB as modified in a particular manner, must be (
aidered as a part of the whole imiTerse, as agreeh^ yi
the whole, and associated with the remaining parts.
the nature of the universe is not limited, like the uatura'l
blood, but is absolutely infinite, its parts are by thia natnT
of infinite power infinitely modified, and compelled ^f
undergo infinite variationa. But, in respect to eubBta
I conceive that each part has a, more close union vrith j
whole. For, as I said in my first letter' (addressed to y
while I was still at Ehijnsburg), substance being i
in its nature,' it follows, a,s I endeavoured to show, t^
each part belongs to the nature of substance, and, witho^
it, can neither be nor be conceived.

Ton see, therefore, how and why I thint that (
human body is a part of nature. As regards the bus
mind, I believe that it also is a part of nature j for I n
tain that there exists in nature an infinite power of i'
iag, which, in so far as it is iafinite, contains subjectiTei
the whole of nature, and its thoughts proceed in the a
manner as nature — that is, in the sphere of id)
Further, I take the human mind to be identical with t
said power, not in so far as it is infinite, and perceives t
whole of nature, but in so far as it is finite, and perceifl
only the human body; in this manner, I maintain that t"
human mind is a, part of an infinite understanding.

But to explain, and accurately prove, aU these and b
dred questions, would take too long ; and I do not t'
you expect as much of me at present, I am afraid t
may have mistaken your meaning, and given an answer ti
a difEerent question from that which you asked. ""
inform me on this point.

' Letter U. * Ethics, I. viii,

° I hare given what seems lo be the mcanine of (his passage,
text is very obscure ; " Nenipe qaia atatao data etiam is Datura ""
tiam inliiuliLia cogitandi, qa», quatenus iofiDita, in Se oontinet
□Btarani objective et cqjtis cogitationes procedunt ac natura ejaa
rnm iiiearum." M. SaisMt in his Frencb translalion aays her .
this place I rather interpcat than Iranslnle Spinoca, u hit thought dl
not fieom to ma completely expressed." — [Ti(.J


H LE

H Ton write in your last letter, iliat I hinted that nearly

H all the Cartesian laws of motion are false. What 1 said

H was, if I remember rightly, that Huyghens thinks so ; I

H myself do not impeach any of the lawa except the siith,

H concerning which I think Huyghens is also in error. I

V asked you at the same time to communicate to me the

P experiment made according to that hypothesis in your

EoyaJ Society ; as you have not replied, I infer that yon are

not at liberty to do so. The ahoye-mentioned Huyghens

is entirely occupied in polishing- lenses. He has fitted up

for the purpose a handsome workshop, in which he can also

construct moulds. "What will be the result I know not,

nor, to speak the truth, do I greatly care. Experience has

Bufficiently taught me, that the free hand is better and

more sure than any machine for polishing spherical

moulds. I can tell you nothing certain as yet about tho

success of the clocks or the date of Huyghens' journey to

France.


■>o


CDBRESPOBDENCE.


293


LETTEE XVI. (XXSIII.)

Oldehbttrq TO Spisoza,

lAfler tome remarkg on Spinoza's last hiier, and am a

of experiments at ilie Royal Society and at Oxford, Olden,-
h%rg mentione a report aioiil the return of the Jews to
Paleslme'].


I But I pass on to pohtics. Everyone here is talking
of a report that the Jews, after remaining scattered for
more than two thousand years, are about to return to
their country. Few here beheve in it, but many desire it.
Please tell your friend what you hear and think on the
matter. For my part, unless the news is confirmed from
trustworthy sources at Constantinople, which is the place
chiefly concerned, I shall not belieTe it. I should like to
know, what the Jews of Amsterdam have heard about the
matter, and how they are afEected by such important


294


BPINOZAS


[letteb xtii.


tidinga which, if true, would assuredly seem to harbinger
the end of the world. • • • Believe me to be
XouTB most zealously,

Henry Old em bubs
London, 8 Dec., 1665.

P.S. I wHl shortly (d-v.) teU you the opinion of our
philosophers on the recent comets.


MITTER XVn. (LXI.)

OUIKNBUBQ TO SfINOZA.

[Oldeniurg tlumJcB Spinona/or the Tractatue Theoligico-Poi
ticus despatched hut not received, and modifies a
verdict e^preated in a former letter {now loat).^

I was unmUin^ to let pass the convenient opport
offered me by the journey to Holland of the learned I
Bourgeois, a,n adherent of the Eef onned religion, for ezprei.
ing my thanka a few weeks ago for your treatise fdl
waxded to me, but not yet arrived. But I am doubtfT
whether my letter waa duly delivered. I indicated i
them my opinion on the treatise ; but on deeper and u
careful inspection I now think that my verdict waa 1
Certain arguments seemed to me to be urged at the k
of religion, as measured by the standard suppKed by £(
common run of theologians and the received formulaa-l
creeds which are evidently biassed. But a closer conaidei
tioa of the whole subject convinced me, that you are far h
attempting any injnry to true religion and sound philosopl
hut, on the contrary, strive to exalt and establish the tr
object o£ the Christian religion and the divine loftinesa ■
fruitful philosophy. I

Now that I believe that this is your fixed pnrpos^«
would most earnestly beg you to have the kmdneaa i
write frequently and explain the nature of what you are
now preparing and considering with this object to your old
and sincere friend, who is all eager for the happy issue of
BO lofty a design. I sacredly promise you, that I will not


'EK ITIII,] COBBBBPONDENCE, 295

divTilge a ajllable to anyone, if yoa enjoin silence ; I will
only endeavour gently to prepare the minds of good and
■wise men for the reception of those trutha. which you will
§ome day bring before b, wider public, and I will try to dis-
pel the prejudices, which ha,ve been conceived against your
doctrines. XTnleBs I am quite mistaken, yon have an insight
deeper than common into the nature and powers of the
human mind, and its union with the human body. I
earnestly beg you to favour me with your reflections on
this subject. Farewell, moat excellent Sir, and favour the
devoted admirer of your teaching and virtue,

HSNBT Ol.DEHBtrRQ.
LoDdoD, 8 June, lfl75.'


LETTER XVin. (LXII.)

O1.DEHBIJB0 TO Spinoza.

burg rejoices at the renewal of cor^sgpondenee, and
alhidee to the Jive hoohs of the Ethics which Spinoza (in a
letter tww loet) had announced his intention of publishing.']

Our correBpondence being thn a happily renewed, I should
M unwilling to fall short of a friend' a duty in the exchange
of letters. I understand from your answer delivered to me
on July 5, that you intend to pubhsh your treatise in five
parts. Allow me, I beg, to warn yon by the sincerity of
your affection for me, not to insert any passages which may
Beem to discourage the practice of religion and virtue ;
especially as nothing is more sought after in this degenerate
and evil age than doctrines of the kind, which seem to
give coimtenance to rampant vice.

However, I will not object to receiving a few copies of

the said treatise. I will only ask you that, when the time

arrives, they may be entmsted to a Dutch merchant

1 Hving in London, who will see that they are forwarded to


296 BPiNOZA'a [lettek xn.

me. There is no need to ueDtioii, tha.t books of the kind
in question have been aent to me ; if they arrive safely tfi
my keeping, I do not doubt that I cau. conveniently diepose
of some copies to mj friends here and there, and can
obtain a just price for them. Farewell, and when yon
have leisure write to

Yours most zealously.

Hen BY Oldbmbcbo,

London, 22 July, 1675.


LETTEE XIX. (LXVIQ.)

Spimoza 10 Oldesbttbo.

[^Spinoxa relateg hig journey to Amaterdamfor thepurpoge qf
publieking hU Slhicg ; he was deterred by the dissuasiong
of theologiaTig and CarteeiaTig. Se hopeg that Oldenburg
will inform him of gome of the objectiong to the Traetatiis
Theologico-PoUticus, mide by learned men, so that they'
moy be answered in no(es,]

DiSTiifQTnsHED AND ItiuaTEions Sie, — When I i
ceived your letter of the 22nd July, I had set out to Amsta
dam for the purpose of publishing the book I had n
tioned to you. While I was negotiating, a rumour gaiai
currency that I had in the press a book concerning G
wherein I endeavoured to show that there is no Qod. j
report was believed by nia.ny. Hence certain theologi
perhaps the authors of the rumour, took occasio
plain of me before the prince and the magistrates ; monf
over, the stupid Cartesians, being suspected of favoui' "
me, endeavoured to remove the aspersion by abusing erei
where my opinions and writings, a course which they a'
pursue. When I became aware of this through trustwort
men, who also assured me that the theologians were eTer
where lying in wait for me, I determined to put off puH
lishing till I saw bow things were going, and I proposed ti
inform you of laj intentions. But matters seem to g
worse and worse, and I am still uncertain what to *


■ ZiKTTEK XS.]


COEEEBFONDENCE.


297


^KKeanwhile I do not like to delay any longer answering
^^our letter. I will first thank you heartily for your
^firiendly warning, wliich I should be glad to have further
explained, so that I may know, which are the doctrines
which seem to you to be aimed against the practice of re-
ligion and virtue. If principles agree with reason, they are,
I take it, also most serviceable to virtue. Further, if it be
not troubling you too much I beg you to point out the
paseages in the Tractatus Theologico-Politicua which are
objected to by the learned, for I want to illustrate that
.treatise with notes, and to remove if possible the prejudic8i
K conceived against it. Farewell,

■[pibl


LETTER XX. (LXSI.)
Oldeubueo to Spihoza.


»


As I see from your last letter, the boot you propose to

.blish is in peril. It is impossible not to approve your
inirpose of illustrating and softening down those passa^a
in the Tractatus Theologico-Politicua, which have given
pain to its readers. First I would call attention to the
ambiguities in your treatment of God and Nature ; a great
many people think you have confused the one with the
other. Again, you seem to many to take away the autho-
rity and value of miracles, whereby alone, as nearly all
Christiana beHeve, the certainty of the divine revelation

n be established.

Again, people Bay that you conceal your opinion concern-
ing Jeeus Christ, the Redeemer of the world, the only
Mediator for mankind, and concerning His incarnation and
redemption : they would like you to give a clear explanation
of what you think on these three subjects. If you do this
and thuB give satisfaction to prudent and rational Chris-
tians, I think your affairs are safe. Farewell.


P.S. — Send me a line, I beg, to inform n
Mote has reached you safety.


Spinoza's [lbttes zxi.


LETTER XSI. (LXXTTL)

Spihoza to Oldenburo.

DisTiHGUiaHED SiE, — I received oq Saturday last your
very Hhort letter dated 15tL Sov. In it you merely indi-
cate the points in the theolt^cal treatise, which have giTen
pain to readers, whereas I had hoped to learn from it, what
were the opinions which militated against the practice o£
religious virtue, and which yon formerly mentioned, How-
a^er, I will apeak on the three subjects on which you desire
me to disclose my sentiments, and tell you, first, that my
opinion concerning God differs widely from that which is
ordinarily defended by modem Christiana. For I hold
^ that God is of all thinga the cause immanent, as the phrase
' is, not transient. I say that all things are in God and
move in God, thus agreeing with Paul,' and, perhaps, with
all the ancient philosophers, though the phraseology may
be different ; I will even venture to affirm that I agree
with all the ancient Hebrews, in so far as one may judge
from their traditions, though these are ia many ways
corrupted. The supposition of some, that I endeavour to
, prove in the Tractatus Theologico-Politicua the unity of
God and Nature (meaning by the latter a ceiiain mass or
corporeal matter), ia wholly erroneous.

As regards miracles, I am of opinion that the revelation
of Ood can only be established by the wisdom of the doc-
trine, not by miracles, or in other words by ignorance.
This I have shown at sufficient length in Chapter VI.
concerning miracles. I will here only add, that I make
this chief distinction between religion and superstition, that
the latter is founded on ignorance, the former on know-
ledge ; this, I take it, ia the reason why Christians are dis-
tinguished from the rest of the world, not by faith, nor by
charity, nor by the other fruits of the Holy Spirit, but
solely by their opinions, inasmuch as they defend their
cause, like everyone else, ty miracles, that ia by ignorance,
which is the source of all malice j thua they turn a faith,

' S«e Acl. xvii. 28. Cf, t Cor. iii. 16, sii. 6 ; Eph. i. 83.


""


rKTTBB SXn.]


209


whicli m&j be true, into superstition. Lastly, in order to
disclose mj opinions oa the third point, I will tell jou that
I do not think it neceasaiy for salvation to know Christ
according to the fleah: but with regard to the Eternal Son. i
of God, that is the Etenial Wiedom of God, which haa )
manifeated itself in all things and especially in the human,
mind, and ahove all in Christ Jesus, the ease is far other-
-wiso. Por without this no one can come to a state of
blessedness, inasmuch aa it alone teaches, what is true or
iaise, good or evil. And, inasmuch as this wisdom was
made especially manifest through Jesus Christ, as I have
aaid. His disciples preached it, in so far as it was revealed
to them through Him, and thua showed that they could
rejoice in that spirit of Christ more than the rest of
mankind. The doctrines added by certain churches, such
as that Qod took upon Himself Iiuman nature, I have ex-
pressly said that I do not understand ; in fact, to speak the
truth, they seem to me no leas absurd than would a state- '
ment, that a circle had taken upon itself the nature of a
square. This I think will be sufficient explanation of my
opmioQS concerning the three points mentioned. Whether

rwiU he satisfactory to Christians you will know better
ui I. farewelL

[Oldeniwrg wishes to he enlightened concerning the doctrine
of fatalism, of which Spinoza haa been accueed. Mb dis-
eauTses on man's limited ititellicfence and o
tivn of the Son of Qod.}


I^TTEB XXn. (LXXIT.)

Oldenbuko to Spinoza.


^Km(
■Xse


As you seem to accuse me of excessive brevity, I will this.

me avoid the cha:^ by excessive proliaity. Ton expected,.
I see, that I should set forth those opinions in your writings,
which seem to discourage the practice of re%iou8 virtue in
your readers. I will indicate the matter which especially
pains them. You appear to set up a fatahatic necessity for all
things and actions ; if such is conceded and asserted, people^


300 BPHTozA'a [LrrrEB sxn.

BTBT, that the sinews of aD lawa, of rirtne. and of leHgion,
are severed, aad that all rewards and pnniskment are rjun.
WhtttsocTer can compel, or mTolves necessity, is held also
to excnse; therefore no one, they think, can be without
eicnse in the sight of GoA. If we are driven by fate, and
all thin^ follow a fixed and inevitable path laid down by
the hard band of necessity, they do not see where ptmiah-
ment can come in. What wedge can be brotight for the
nntying of this knot, it ie very difficidt to say. I shoold
mneh like to know and leam what help you can sapply in
the matter.

As to the opinions which yon have kindly disclosed to
me on the three points I mentioned, the following inqttiries
suggest themselves. First, In what sense do you take
lairaelts and ignorajice to be synonymoos and equivalent
terms, aa vou appear to think in yoor last letter ?

The bringing back of Iazbtus from the dead, and the resni^
reiction from death of Jesus Christ seem to snrpass all tKe
power of created nature, and to fall within the scope of divine
power only ; it would not be a sign of culpable ignorance,
that it was necessary to exceed the limits of finite inteUi-
gence confined within certain bounds. But perhaps you do
not think it in harmony with the created mind and sciesce^
to acknowledge In the uncreated mind and supreme Deity
a science and power capable of fathoming, and bringing ti>
pass events, whose reason aJid manner can neither be broi "
home nor eiplained to us poor human pigmies ? " W
men ; " it appears, that we must " think everything hi
akin to ourselves." '

Again, when you Bay that you cannot understand
God reaUy took upon Himself human nature, it beooi
aUowable to ask you, how you understand the t«i:t8 in
Gospel and the Epistle to the Hebrews, whereof the first m ^ ^
" The Word was made flesh," ' and the other, " For venly
he took not on him the nature of angels ; but he took on
him the seed of Abraham." ' Moreover, the whole tenor of
the Gospel infers, as I think, that the only begotten Son
God, the Word (who both was God and was with Q
showed Himself in human nature, and by TTin pardon


>, Heaul. I, i. US.


I


I^TTEE Um.] CORREBPONDZKCB. 301

death offered up the Bamfice (or our buib, the price o£ tho
atonement. What you have to eay coaceming this with-
out impugning the truth of the Gospel and the Christian
religion, wliich I think you approve of, I would gladly
learn.

I had meant to write more, but am interrupted I'y friends
on a Tiait, to whom I cannot refuse the duties of courtesy.
But what I have already put on paper is enough, and will
perhaps weary you in your philosophiiong. Farewell,
therefore, and believe me to be ever an admirer of your
learning and knowledge.


I


LETTEE XXni. (LXSY.)

Spinoza, to OuDuxBtna.

yS^nota expounds to Oldenburg hia views on fate and necee-
aity, diecriminates betweert miT<icles and ignorance, taka
the Tourrection of Christ as spiritual, and deprecate aitri-
bviing to the sacred writers Wesiern mod^s of speech.']

DiarnfOTJisHED Sie, — At last I see, what it was that you
begged me not to publish, However, as it forma the chief
foundation of everything in the treatise which I intended
to bring out, I should like briefly to explain here, in what
sense I assert that a fatal necessity presides over all things
and actions. God I in no wise subject to fate : I conceive
that all things follow with inevitable necessity from the
nature of God, in the same way as everyone conceives that
it follows from God's nature tha,t God underslands Him-
Bolf. This latter consequence aJl admit to follow neces-
sarily from the divine nature, yet no one conceives that
God is imder the compulsion of any fate, but that He
understands Himself quite freely, though necessarily.

Further, this inevitable neceaaity in things does away
neither with divine nor human laws. The principles of
morality, whether they receive from God Himself the form
of laws or institutions, or whether they do not, are still


302


[lETTKB TTil I,


divine and salutarr ; whether we receive the good, whicL
flows from virtue and the divine love, as from God in the
capadtj of a judge, or as from the neceesitj of the divms
nature, it will in either case he equally desirable ; on ^
other hand, the evils following fix>m wicked actions t
passions are not leas to he feared because they are asi
sarr consequences. lastly, in our actions, whether the^V
necessary or contingent, we are led by hope and fear, r

Men are only withont eicnse before God, because they d
in God's power, as clay is in the hands of the potter, i
from the same tump makes ressela, some to honour, e
to dishonour.' K you wiU reflect a little on this, you -9
1 doubt not. easily be able to reply to any objections whi
may be urged against my opinion, as many of my f '
have already done.

I have taken nuracles and ignorance as equivalent U
because those, who endeavour to establish God's exisi
and the truth of rehgion by means of miracles, seek to pro
the obscure by what is more obscure and completely «
known, thus introducing & new sort of ai^ument, the redn
tion, not to the impossible, as the phrase la, but to iai
ranee. But, if I mistake not, I have sufficiently expla~
my opinion on miracles in the Theologico-Political troat^
I will only add here, that if you wiU reflect on the £
that Christ did not appear to the coimcil. nor to Pilate,^
to any unbeliever, but only to the faithful, ; also that C.
has neither right hand nor left, but ia by His essence a
in a particular spot, hut everywhere ; that matter is era:
where the same ; that God does not manifest himself I
the imaginary space supposed to be outside the world ;
lastly, that the frame of the himian body is kept wit|
due limits solely by the weight of the air ; you will ri
see that this apparition of Christ is not unlike that whsi
with God appeared to Abraham, when the latter saw n
whom he invited to dine with him. But, you will say, i
the Apostles thoroughly believed, that Christ rose from ti
dead and really ascended to heaven: I do not deny j
Abraham, too, believed that God had dined with him, at
all the Israehtes believed that God descended, surroundi


I^ETTEB KSIII.] COEEKBPOITDBMCB. 303

with fire, from heaven %o Mount Sinai, and there spoke
directly with them ; whereas, these apparitionB or roTela-
tiona, and many others like them, were adapted to the l
understanding and opiuiona of those men, to whom God
wished thereby to reveal His wiU, I therefore conclude, '
that the resurrectioii o£ Christ from the dead was in reaU^ j f
spiritual, and that to the faithful alone, according to their , '
understanding, it was revealed that Christ was endowed
with eternity, and bad risen from the dead (using dead in
the sense in which Christ said, " let the dead bury their .
dead " '), giving by His life and death a matchless example ]
of holiness, Moreover, He to this extent raises his disciples
from the dead, in so far as they follow the eiaiople of His
own life and death. It would not be difficult to explain
the whole Gospel doctrine on this hypothesis. Nay, 1 Cor.
ch. rv. cannot be explained on any other, nor can Paul's
arguments be understood : if we follow the common inter-
pretation, they appear weak and can easily be refuted : not
to mention the fact, that Christians interpret spiritually all
those doctrines which the Jews accepted literally. I join with

?oa in acknowledging human weakness. But On the other
and, I ventuje to ask yon whether we "human pigmies"
possess sufficient knowledge of nature to be ahle to lay down
the limits of its force and power, or to say that a given thing
Burpasses that power ? Ho one could go so far without arro-
gance. We may, therefore, without presumption explain
miracles as far as possible by natural causes. When we can- '
not explain them, nor even prove their impossibility, we may
well suspend onr judgment about them, and establish re-
ligion, as I have said, solely by the wisdom of it« doctrines.
You think that the texts in John's Gospel and in Hebrews
are inconsistent with what I advance, because you measure
oriental phrases by the standards of European speech ; though
John wrote his gospel in Greek, be wrote it as a Hebrew.
However this may be, do you helieve, when Scripture saya
that God manifested Himself in a cloud, or that He dwelt
in the tabernacle or the temple, that God actually assumed
the nature of a cloud, a tabernacle, or a temple? Tet the
utmost that Christ says of HimseK is, that He is the Temple


I


3M SPITCOIA's [x-ETTEa XIIT

of God,' because, as I said before. Gtod had speciaDy mani-
fested Himself in Christ. Jolm, wishing to express the same
tmth more forcibly, said that " the Word waa made flesh,"
But I hare said enough on the subject.


tETTER XXIV. ( T.TXV TT)

Ou>E)rBuso TO Spinoza.

{pld«7tbiif^ returtu to the quewtioTia of ttninertal necettv
miraelet, and of the lUeral and alUgoneat iiU^
SeriptitTe.J

t5 rpdnfir,

Tou hit the point eia«tlv, in perceiTii^ the canae w
did not wish the doctrine of the fatalistic necessity o
things to be promulgated, lest the practice of virtue s'
thereby be aspersed, and renards and puniahmenta ^
ineffectual. The su^estions in your la«t letter bard _
sufficient to settle the matter, or to quiet tbe husmn c
For if we men are, in all our actions, moral as i
natural, tmder the power -of Gfod, like clay ij
the potter, with what face can any of us be accused of d
this or that, seing that it was impossible for him t
otherwise ? Should we not be able to cast all reaponMbi
on God ? Tour inflexible fate, and your irresistible p
compel as to act in a given manner, nor can we j
aet otherwise. "Why, then, and by what right (
deliver us np to terrible punishments, which we can ia
way avoid, since you direct and carry on all things throol
supreme necessi^, according to your good will and j '
sure ? When you. say that men are only inexcusable b
God, because they are in the power of God, I C
reverse the argument, and say, with more show of i
that men are evidently excusable, since they are i
power of God. Everyone may plead, " Thy power a
be escaped from, God ; therefore, since I could i
otherwise, I may justly be excused."

' John Si. 19. C£ Malt. i.tvi. 60 ; Mark siv. 58,


LETTER SXF.] COBREaPONOENCB. 305

^L Again, in taking miracles and ignorance as equivalent
^Bterma, you seem to bring within the same Hniits the poner
^Tof Qoi and the knowledge of the ablest men ; for Oud la,
~ according to you, iinable to do or produce anything, for
which men cannot osaign a reason, if they employ all the
strength of their faculties.

Again, the history of Christ's passion, death, burial, and
resurrection seems to be depicted in such lively and genuine
colours, that I vcntjire to appeal to your conscience, whether
you can l:>elteve them to be all^orical, rather than literal,
while preserving your faith in the narrative ? The circum-
stances HO clearly stated by the Evangelists seem to urge
strongly on our minds, that the history should be under-
stood literally, I have ventured to touch briefly on these
points, and I earnestly beg you to pardon me, and answer
me as a friend with your usual candour. Mr. Boyle sends
you his kind regards. I will, another time, tell you what
the Boyal Society is doing. Farewell, and preserve me in

tyour aiEection.
Londoa, U Jan., 1676.


LErrEK XXV. (LXXYin.)


Spinoza to Oldenbuko.

[^Spinout again treats of fatalism. He repeats thathe accepts
Ohriit' s paesion, death, and hurial literally, but Sit re»ar-
rection gpiritwally.']

DiSTisanisHED Sie, — ^When I said in my former letter
that we are ineicuaable, because we are in the power of
God, like clay in the hands of the potter, I meant to be
understood in the sense, that no one can bring a complaint
against God for having given him a weak nature, or infirm
spirit. A circle might as well complain to God of not
being endowed with the properties of a sphere, or a child
who is tortured, say, with stone, for not being given a
healthy body, as a man of feeble spirit, because God has


306 spkioza's [lettkb i

denied to Mm fortitude, and the true knowledge and 1(
of the Deitj, or because he ia endowed with so wea'
nature, that he cannot chect or moderate his deeires.
the nature of each thing is oul^ competent to do thatw
follows neceBsarily from itB given cause. That everT n
cannot he brave, and that we can no more command 4
ourselves a healthy body than a healthy mind, nohodj d
deny, without giving the lie to experience, as well as I
reason. "But," you urge, *'if men sin by nature, they BT
excusable ; " but you do not state the conclusion you dr^
whether that God cannot he angry with them, or that thS
are worthy of blessedness — that is, of the knowledge ana
love of God. If you say the former, I fully admit that
God cannot be angry, and that all things are done in ac-
cordance with Bjs will ; but I deny that all men ought,
therefore, to be blessed — men may be excusable, and,
nevertheless, be without blessednesa and afflicted in many
ways. A horse ia excusable, for being a horse and not a
man ; but, nevertheless, he must needs be a horse and noS
a man. He who goes mad from the bite of a dog is eifl
cuaable, yet he ia rightly enfiocated. Lastly, he who casfl
not govern his desires, and keep them in check with tl^|
fear of the laws, though bis wealmees may he excusabUH
yet he cannot enjoy with contentment the knowledge a^H
love of O-od, but necessarily perishes. I do not think ^M
necessary here to remind you, that Scripture, when it aa;^|
that God is angry with sinners, and that He is a Judge w]^|
i takes cognizance of human actions, passes sentence (jB
them, and judges them, is Bpeakdog humanly, and in a 'wi^|
adapted to the received opinion of the masses, inasmuch i^|
its purpose is not to teach philosophy, nor to render mcgfl
wise, hut to make them ohedient. ^M

How, by taking miracles and ignorance as equival^^|
terms, 1 reduce Gtod's power and man's knowledge withqH
the same limits, I am unable to discern. fl

For the rest, I accept Christ's passion, death, and hnrii^B
Uterally, as you do, but His resurrection I understand aHflA
gorically. I admit, that it ia related by the Evangelista i^|
I such detail, that we cannot deny that they themselTf^f
' believed Christ's body to have risen from the dead anfl
ascended to heaven, in order to sit at the right hand olM


I.ETTEE SIT. A.] COBBEHPONDENCE. S07

God, or that tLey believed that Christ might Lave heen
seen by unbelievera, if they had happened to be at hand,
in the places where He appeared to His disciples ; but in j
itheae matters they might, without injury to Gospel teach-,'
'"og, Lave been deceived, as was the case with other pro-i
(Leta mentioned in my laat letter. But Paul, to whom'
Jhriat afterwards appeared, rejoices, that he knew Christ
not after the flesh, but after the spirit.' Farewell, honour-
able Sir, and believe me yours in all affection and zeaL


I LETTER SXy.A.

H OLDENBTnta TO Sfihoza.

^m[pldenh'urg adduces certain further objections against Spinoxa'a
^■T doctrine of neoeesity and miracles, and exposes the incon-
^K aistency of a partial allegorization of Scrijiture.]

P To the moat illustrioua Master Benedict de Spinoza
W Henry Oldenburg aenda greetinga.

In your last letter," written to me on the 7th of February,
there are some points which aeem to deserve criticism. You
say that a man cannot complain, because God has denied
him the tsrue knowledge of Himself, and strength sufficient
to avoid sins ; forasmuch as to the nature of everything
nothing ia comiietent, except that which follows necessarily
from its cause. But I say, that inasmuch aa God, the
Creator of men, formed them after His own image, which
seems to imply in its concept wisdom, goodness, and power,
it appears quite to follow, that it is more within the sphere
'a power' to have a sound mind than to have a sound
k.body. For physical soundness of body follows from me-
K ohanical causes, but soundness of mind depends on purpose

' 2 Cor. V. 16. » Lelter XXV.

' FoUstas, BB distingaiahed from poifKiia — the word just aboTe trans-

led power — means power delegated by a rightfnl Buperior, aa hara by

f God. So it 19 rendered here "sphere of power," and in Tract. Pol.

■^generally " authority." It would not be propiT to Bay that the " image

Wm God implied poUalat.


308 bpisoza's [lErrsB s

and design. Yon add, that men ma; be mexciisable,' i
vet suffer pain in inanv "ways. This seems bard at I
eight, and what you add by way of proof, namely, t
dog ' mad from having been bitten is indeed to bo exc
but yet ia rightly HUed, does not seem to settle the q
tioa. For the killing of ench a dog would argue e
were it not necessary in order to preserve other doga 1
animals, and indeed men, from a maddening bite of I
same kind.

But if Orod impla.ntcd in man a sound mir
able to do, there would be no contagion of
feared. And, surely, it seems very cruel, that God shoal
vote men to eternal, or atleast terrible temporary, tort
for sins which by them could be no wise avoided. Sf ore
the tenour of all Holy Scripture seeme to suppose and J
ply, that men can abstain from sins. For it aboondd
denunciations and promiaea, in declarations of rewards J
punishments, all of which seem to militate against f
necessity of sinning, and infer the possibility of avoim
punishment. And if this wore denied, it would hare t(
said, that the human miud acts no lesa mechaJucaUj ti
the human body.

Next, when you proceed to take miracles and ignorfl
to be equivalent, you aeem to rely on this foundation, ti
the creature can and should have perfect insight into 1
power and wisdom of the Creator: and that the facS
quite otherwise, I have hitherto been firmly 3)erauaded. I

Iiastly, where you affirm that Christ's passioo, c*
and burial are to be taken literally, but His resom
allegorically, you rely, as far as I can see, on no proof 3
aU. ChriBt's resurrection eeema to be delivered in the
Gospel as Uterally aa the rest. And on this article of the
resurrection the whole Chxistiau religion and its truth reat.
and with its removal Christ's mission and he-avenly doo
trine collapse. It cannot escape you, how Christ, after He
waa raised from the dead, laboured to convince TTia disciples

' Surely Ihig is a mistake for " excusable." — [Tr.]

* See Letter XXV. OId«Dbiirg DiisiiiKlFrstiinds Spinota'a illDStra-
tion, hecauBe he takes "canii" in the phrase, "qui ei morsu canis
forit,'' Id be nominatire instead ofgeDitiia; "a dog wtiieh goea mad
Irum a bite," instead of " he who gees mad from the bite of a dog.


J


sxvr.] coKRBaposBENCE. 309

i the truth of the Kesurrectioii properly so called. To
pant to turn all these thingB into allugorieB is the same
Hiing, aa if one were to busy one's self in plucting up the
thole truth of the Gioapel history,
1 These few points I wished again to euhmit in the interest

t my liberty of philosophizing, which I earnestly beg you

-• '■ "ate amiss.

a in London, 11 Feb., 1676.

I will eommnnicate with you ehortly on the present
ArtudieB and ejtperimenta of the Eoyal Society, if God grant
me life and health.


tETTBE XXVI. CVTII)

Simon dk Vbies' to SpitrozA.

aSimon de Vrieg, a diligent student of Spinoxa'e writingg and
philoBophy, descrihet a club formed for ike study o/Spinoxa't
M8. containing some of the matter afterwards worked into
the Ethics, and aeis queetioTia about the di_ffieulties felt
by members of the club/']

Most Honoueablb Pkiend, — I have for a, long time
wished to be present with you; but the weather and the
hard winter have not been propitious to me. I sometimeB
complain of my lot, in that we are separated from each,
other by so long a distance. Happy, yes most happy is
the fellow-lodger, abiding under the same roof with you,
who can talt with you on the best of subjects, at dinner,

of Simon cle Vriea see In trod ucl ion, p. jcit. His
in very indifferent Latin, wbich is, perhaps, oiie
Bon, why the pcasent letter at Iciist had been altered freely by tha
n^flrat ediiora,

' Tbe ver^on of this ktter in Bmder's and former editions is mach
altered by the oroissinn of all mention of the club, and of the reference
to Albert Burgh, and by the change thronghonl of the plural referring
to [ha members of llie tlnb into the singular referring to the writer
only. The genuine form here followed i« to be found in VtiD Vloten'a
[ Supplomentum.


GIO


[letteb xd


at supper, and during your walks/ However, thougt I
am far apart from you in body, you have l>een totj
frequently present to my tnJnd. eapecially in your writing!,
while I read and ttirn them over. But aa they are not all
clear to the members of our club, for whioh reason we haye
begun a freah aeries of meetings, and as I woitld not have
you think me unmindful of you, I have applied my mind
to writing this letter.

As regards our club, the following is its order. One of
us (that is everyone by turn) reads through and, aa far as
he understands it, expounda and also demonstrates tbe
whole of your work, according to the sequence and order of
your propositions. Then, if it happens that on any point
we cannot satisfy one another, we have resolved to make a
note of it. and write to you, so that, if possible, it may he
made clearer to na, and that we may be able under your
guidance to defend the truth B^inat thoaa who are
superstitioualy religious, and against the Christiana," and to
withstand the attack of the whole world. Well then, since,
when we first read through and expounded them, the de-
finitions did not all seem clear to us, we differed about tke
nature of definition. Next in your absence we consulted
as our authority a celebrated mathematician, named Borel;'
for he makes mention of the nature of definition, axiom,
and postulate, and adduces the opinions of others on. the
subject. But hia opinion is aa follows: "Definitions are
cited in a demonstration aa premisses. Wherefore it is
neceaaary, that they should be accurately known ; other-
wise scientific or accurate knowledge cannot be attained by
their means." And elsewhere he says : "The primary and
most known construction or passive quaUty of a given
subject should not be chosen rashly, but with the greatest
care ; if the conatruction or pasaive quality be an imp(
bility, no scientific definition can be obtained. For insta

' This " felloW'lodger," again n


• Van Vloten infers that the membera of tlie club were cfaiefly

' Peter Bore], born 1620, phjaician to the king of France, died lU

Re wrote several medical and philosophiRal works, d ' ' ' ~

a member of the French Academy of aciences.


VI.] COBSEBPONDENCE. 311

S anyone were to sa.y, let two two etraight lines encloaing a
pace he called fignrala, tlie definition would be of non-
xistences and impossible : hence ignorance rathw than
aiowledge would be deduced therefrom. Again, if the
Bonstruction or passive quality "be possible and true, biit
■r doubtful to us, the definition will not be good,
r conclusions arising from what is unknown or doubtful
e themBelves uncertain or doubtful ; they therefore bring
I about conjecture or opinion, but not certain knowledge.
Jacquet ' seems to dissent from this opinion, for he thinks
that one may proceed from a false premisB directly to a
true conclusion, as you are aware. Claviua,' however, whose
opinion ha quotes, thinks as follows : " Deflnitions," he
says," areartifleialphraaea, nor is there any need in reason-
ing that a thing should be defined in a particular way ; but
it is sufficient that a thing defineji should never be said to
agree with another thing, until it bas been shown that its
lefinition also agrees therewith."

Thus, according to Borel, the definition of a given thing
ibould consist as regards its construction or passive quality
a something thoroughly known to us and true. Clavius,
"bn the other hand, holds that it is a matter of indifference,
whether the construction or passive quality be well known
and true, or the reverse ; so long as we do not assert, that
our definition agrees with anything, before it has been
proved.

I should prefer Borel's opinion to that of Clavius. I know
Botwhichyou would assent to, if to either. As these difficul-
"es have occurred to me with regard to the nature of de-
nition, which is reckoned among the cardinal points of
demonstration, and as I cannot free my mind from them,
[ greatly desire, and earnestly lieg you, when you have
1 and opportunity, to be kind enough to send me
Jtour opinion on the matter, and at the same time to tell
me the distinction between asioma and definitions. Borel
says that the difference ia merely nominal, but I believe
TOu decide otherwise.


' Andrew Jacquet. born at Antwerp IBH
<Bor in that town, died 1660.
" Christopher Clavius, bom at Bamberg 1S3
uor at Rume, died 1612.


a niathematiL'Hl pro-
is matheiralical pro-


I.ETTES xxn.
Is aboat tlw


312 BPnio»i.'fl [i

Further, we cannot make np our mliids :
Uiird deSnition.' I adduced to illustrate it, what mj
master said to me at the Hague,' to wit, that a thing
may te regarded in two ways, either as it ia in itself,
or aa it is in relation to something else ; as in the case
of the intellect, for that can be regarded either under
the head of thoaght, or as consisting in ideas. But we do
not see the point of the distinction thus drawn. For it
se«ni8 to ua, that, if we rightlj conceive thought, we must
range it nnder the head of ideas ; as, if all ideas were re-
moved from it> we should destroy thought. As we find the
illustration of the matter not sufBciently clear, the matter
itself remains somewhat obe<;ure, and we need further
explanation.

lastlj, iu the third note to the eighth proposition.' the
beginning runs thus : — " Hence it is plain that, although
two attributes really distinct be conceived, that is, one
vathont the aid of the other, we cannot therefore infer, that
they constitute two entities or two difEerent substances.
For it belongs to the nature of substance, that each of its
attributes ehovdd be conceived through itself, though all
the attributes it possesses esdst simultaneously in it." Here
our master seems to assume, that the nature of substance
is so constitnted, that it may have several attributes. But
this doctrine has not yet been proved, unless you refer to
the sixth definition, of absolutely infini te' substance or G '
Otherwise, if it be asserted that each substance has o
one attribute, and I have two ideas of two attributes,!
may rightly infer that, where there are two different atft
butes, tiiere are also different substances. On this point aJ
we beg you to give a further explanation. Besides I thi
you very much for your writings communicated to i
P. Balling,' which have greatly delighted me, espedi


tbere.

' In Ihe Eibics u they now esist, " in I. s. note, lowards the bi
ning,"'[o HLich reading the eHilore iionsequontlj altered tli
inie re»dii,K wag reslored by Van VIoten,

' Peter Bulling is the curra§poniienl, to whom Spinoa.

XXX., which Bee. He translated into Dutch Spinoia'g Principia, •>■
whirL see Intruduclion, p. xv,


atTTER SXVII.] CORBESPOSDENCE.


313


■ note on PropoBition XIX.' If I can do you anv
e here in anything that is within my power, I am at
r diapesaL Ton have but to let me know, I have
n a course of anatomy, and am nearly half through
with it; when it is finished, I shall begin a course of
chemistry, aud thna under your gnidauce I shall go through
the whole of medicine. I leave off, and await your answer.
Accept the greeting of

Tour most deTotod

S. J, DB Vbies.

Amiterdam, 24 Feb., 1663,


I


I


LETTEE XXTU. (EX.)

Spinoza to Bihoh ds YsiDa.

[Spinoza depreeate* hU correspondent' e jedlovty of Albert
Bwrgh ; and anfwiera that distinction, muct he made betvreea
different tinds of definitions. He explaina kia opinioTu
more precisely. ]

B&BFBcTED Pkiend, — IhavereceiTed'yourlong wished-
f or letter, for which, and for your affection towards nse, I
heartily thank you. Tour long absence has been no less
gricToua to me than to you ; yet iu the meantime I rejoice
that my trifling studies are of profit to you and our friends.
For thus while you ^ are away, I iu my absence speak to
you.* Tou need not envy my fellow-lodger. There is no
one who is nkore diBpleasing to me, nor against whom I
i'have been more anxiously on my guard ; and therefore I
would have you and all my acquaintance warned not to

There ia no nole to EtbicB, I. xix. As there is nnlbing tn alie\w
what propoBUion is inleniled. (he old re-rsion supprassed the wIjoIb pas-
Bise from "Besides I (hank you" to "medicine.

' The whole beginning of this letter, till after the manlion of the club,
is otnitced in the editions before V&n Vlolen'a Sniipleiasntum, tii make
the letter agree with the altered Teraion of Letter XSVI., to which it ia


3U


e mj djHiuoau to liiiB, except when he liaa eome
reaixL So £u' beis too duMish and moongUut.
T of nordtj than of bnth. But I liope, th&i
in a few raais be will ■"*"H tfaipse rhiH'gT' faults. Indeed
I am almost snre of it, as far as I can judge fffMU his natnre.
And BO his tenpenment bids me Hke him.

As {or the qnestioas prDf>oi)i)ded in toot chib. whkh is
iriselj enongh ordered, I see that your ' diffimilties ahee
&om Qot diatingninlitwp between kinds of definitiua : that
is, between a definition serrine to explain a thing, of which
the essence onlris sought and in question, and a defimtioa
which is put forward only for purposes of inqairr. The
former having a definite object oo^ht to be tnxe, the latter
need not. For instance, if someone asks me for a descrip-
tion of Solomon's temple, I am liotmd to give him. a true
description, unless I want to talk nonsense with him. Bat
if I have coostmcted, in my mind, a temple which I desire
to build, and infer from the description of it that 1 must
buy such and such a site and so many thousand stones and
other materials, will any sane person tell me that I have
drawn a wrong ooncluaion because my definition is possibly
untrue ? or will anyone ask me to prove my definition ? Sach
a person would simply be telling me, that I had not conceived
that which I had conceived, or be requiring me to prove,
that I had conceived that which I had conceived ; in iati,
evidently trifling. Hence a definition either eipMins j " " "
in 80 far as it is external to the intellect, in which
ought to be true and only to differ from a proposition.
an ariom in being concerned merely with the esseu
things, or the modifications of things, whereas the
has a wider scope and extends also to eternal truths.
else it explains a thing, as it is conceived or can '
by us ; and then it differs from an axiom or propositii
inasmuch as it only requires to be conceived absolutely, and
not like an axiom as true. Hence a bad definition is one
which is not conceived. To explain my meaning, I will take
Borel's example — a man saying that two stra^ht lines
closing a space shall be called " figurals." If the man mi
by a straight line the same as the rest of the world


1


LETTEB IXVir,] COBREBPONDESCE. 315

a curved line, Ms definition is good (for by the definition,
would be meant some such figure as Q, or the like) ; so long as
he does not ai'terwarda mean a equare or other fcind of figure.
But. if he attaches the ordinairy meaning to the words
straight line, the thing is evidently inconceivable, and there-
fore there is no definition. These considerations are plainly
confused by Borel, to whose opinion you incline. I give
another example, the one you cite at the end of your letter.
If I say that each substance has only one attribute, this is
an unsupported statement and needs proof. But, if I say
that I mean by subatance that whiuh consists in only one-
attribute, the definition will be good, so long aa entities
consiating of several attributes are afterwards styled by
some name other than substance. When you say that I do
not prove, that substance (or being) may have several attri-
butes, you do not perhaps pay attention to the proofs
g^ven. I adduced two:^Firat, "that nothing is plainer
s, than that every being may be conceived by us under
Rome attribute, and that the more reality or essence a given
being has, the more attributes may be attributed to it.
Lflence a being absolutely infinite must be defined, &c."
Secondly, and I think this is the stronger proof of the two,
"the more attributes I assign to any being, the more am I
compelled to assign to it existence ; " in other words, the more
I conceive it as true. The contrary would evidently result,
if I were feigning a chimera or some such being.

Tour remark, that you cannot conceive thought esoept as
consisting in ideas, because, when ideas are removed, thought
^is annihilated, springs, I think, from the fact that while you,
a thinking thing, do as you say, you abstract all your
tiioughts and conceptions. It is no marvel that, when you
have abstracted all your thoughts and conceptions, you have
nothing left for thinking with. On the general subject I
think I have shown sufficiently clearly and plainly, that the
intellect, although infinite, belongs to nature regarded as
passive rather than nature regarded as active (ad naturam
naturatam, non vero ad naturann naturantem).

However, I do not see how "this helps towards under-
Btandii^ the third definition, noT what difficulty the latter
presents. It runs, if I mistake not, as follows : " By sub-
etanee I mean that, which is in itself and is conceived


\

\


316 bpinoza's [letter xxviii.

through itseK ; that is, of which the conception does not in-
volve the conception of anything else. By attribute I
mean the same thing, except that it is called attribute with
respect to the understanding, which attributes to substance
the particular nature aforesaid." This definition, I repeat,
explains with sufficient clearness what I wish to signify by
substance or attribute. You desire, though there is no
need, that I should illustrate by an example, how one and
the same thing can be stamped with two names. In order
not to seem miserly, I will give you two. First, I say that
by Israel is meant the third patriarch ; I mean the same by
Jacob, the name Jacob being given, because the patriarch
in question had caught hold of the heel of his brother.
Secondly, by a colourless surface I mean a surface, which
reflects all rays of light without altering them. I mean
the same by a white surface, with this difference, that a
surface is called white in reference to a man looking at
it, <&c.


LETTER XXVIII. (X.)
Spinoza to Simon de Vbies.

[Spinoza, in answer to a letter from De Vries now lost, spealcB
of the experience necessary for proving a definition , and also
of eternal truths.']

Respected Friend, — ^Tou ask me if we have need of
experience, in order to know whether the definition of a
given attribute is true. To this I answer, that we never
need experience, except in cases when the existence of the
thing cannot be inferred from its definition, as, for instance,
the existence of modes (which cannot be inferred from their
definition) ; experience is not needed, when the existence
of the things in question is not distinguished from their
essence, and is therefore inferred from their definition.
This can never be taught us by any experience, for ex-
perience does not teach us any essences of things ; the
utmost it can do is to set our mind thinking about definite
essences only. Wherefore, when the existence of attributes


XETIEB XXIX.] COBBBaPOtTDENCB.


r

^M does not difEer from their eseeiice, no experience is capable

^B of attaining it for us.

^f To jour further question, -whether things and their
modificationfl are eternal truths, I answer ; Certainly. If
you ask me, why I do not call them eternal truths, I
answer, in order to distinguish them, in accordance with
general usage, from those propositions, which do not make
manifest any particular thing or modifleation of a thing ;
for example, nothing comee from nothing. These and such
like propositions are, I repeat, called eternal truths simply,

(the meaning merely being, that they have no standpoint
external to the mind, &c.


ij:ttee XXIX, (xn.)

Spihoza to L. M.' (Lbwib Meteb).


Deaubst Feiend, — I have received two letters from you,
one dated Jan. 11, delivered to me by our friend, N. N.,
the other dated March 26, sent lay some unknown friend to
Leyden. They were both moat welcome to me, especially
as I gathered from them, that all goes well with you, and
that you are often mindful of me. I also owe and repay
you the wannest thanks for the courtesy and consideration,
with which you have always been kind enough (« treat me:
I hope you will believe, that I am in no less d^ree devoted
to you, as, when occasion ofEers. I will always endeavour to

I prove, as far aa my poor powers will admit. As a first
proof, I will do my best to answer the questions you ask
in your letters. You request me to tell you, what I think
about the infinite ; I will moat readily do so.

Everyone r^ards the question of the infinite as most

difiicult, if not insoluble, through not making a distinction

between that which must be infinite from its very nature,

_ or in virtue of its definition, and that which has no limits.

K not in virtue of ita essence, but in virtue of ita cauae ; and

H also through not distinguishing "between that which is called


' See Introduclion, pp. x


M


318 Spinoza's [lettek

infinite, because it has no limits, and tliat, of which the
parts cannot be equalled or espreesed by ajiy number,
though the greatest and least magnitude of the whole maj
be known ; and, lastly, through not distinguishing beti
that, which can be understood but not imagined, and
which can also be imagined. If these distinctjona, I rei
had been attended to, inquirers would not have been o'
"Whelmed with such a vast crowd of difficulties. They woi
then clearly have understood, what kind of infinite is
divisible and possesses no parts; and what kind, on the ot_
hand, may be divided without involving a contradictum !
terms. They woidd further bare understood, what kind<
infinite may, without solecism, be conceived greater
another infinite, and what kind cannot be bo conce_
All thia will plainly appear from what I am about

However, I wiU first briefly eiplain the terms «■
Tuode, eternity, and duration.

The points to be noted conceming substance are thei
First, that eiisteBce appertains to its essence; in o1"'
worde, that solely from ita eseeoce and deflnitioii ita e
tence follows. This, if I remember rightly, I hare a'
proved to you by word of mouth, without the aid ot a
other propositions. Secondly, as a consequence of (
above, that substance is oat manifold, but single :
cannot be two of the same nature. Thirdly, eveiy b
stance must be conceived as infinite.

The modifications of substance I call modeg. Their d
finition, in so far as it is not identical with that of s
stance, cannot involve any existence. Hence, though t!
exist, we can conceive them as non-existent. fVom thia]
follows, that, when we are regarding only the (
modes, and not the order of the whole of nature, we o
not conclude from their present existence, that they v
exist or not exist in the future, or that they have exist ,
or not existed in the past ; whence it is abundantly clea
that we conceive the existence of substance as emt'
■different from the existence of modes. From this differ
arises the distinction between eternity a,a3. deration.
Hon is only applicable to the existence of modes ; efet^iq
' 'e to the existence of substance, that is, the is


LETTBB XXlX.j COEEEaPONDEKCE. 319

finite faculty of existence or being (^infifiUum exigt&ndi sive
(iavitd LatinUate^) e»»endi fmitionem).

Prom what has been eoid it ia quite clear that, when, as
IB most often the case, we are regarding only the essence
■of modes and not the order of nature, we may freely limit
the eiistence and duration of modea without destroying the
conception we have formed of them ; we may conceive them
as greater or less, or may divide theoi into parts. Eternity
and substance, being only conceivable as infinite, cannot w
thus treated without our conception of them being de-
stroyed. Wherefore it is mere foolishness, or even insanity,
to say that extended substance ia made up of parts or
bodies really distinct from one another. It ia as though
■one should attempt by the aggregation and addition of
many circles to make up a square, or a triangle, or aome-
thing of totally different essence. Wherefore the whole
heap of arguments, by which philosophers commonly en-
deavour to show that extended substance ia finite, falls to
the ground by its own weight. Por all such peraons sup-
pose, that corporeal aubatance ia made up of parts. In the
«ame way, others, who have persuaded themselveB that a
line ia made up of points, have been able to discover many
arguments to show that a line is not infinitely divisible.
If you aak, why we are by nature so prone to attempt to
divide extended substance, I answer, that quantity is con-
ceived by ua in two ways, namely, by abstraction or super-
ficially, as we imagine it by the aid of the senses, or as
substance, which can only be accompUshed through the
tmderstanding. So that, if we regard quantity as it exists
in the imagination (and this is the more frequent and easy
method), it will be found to be divisible, finite, composed
■of parts, and manifold. But, if we regard it aa it is in the
understanding, and the thing be conceived aa it ia ia itself
(which is very difficult), it will then, aa I have sufficiently
ishown you before, be found to be infinite, indiviaihle, and
sins-le.

can limit duration and
i conceive the latter ab-

' Spinoia upologiiicB hero in t&e original fur the use of the unclaasinal
form " esseiidi," teitig. The classical Latin verb of being ia, as the
«DcLenls IheitiselvL'B admitted, dufuctjve in a luotit iaixiDYeaient degree.


Again, from the fact that v
quantity at our pleasure, when


320 sprsozi'a [lettee i ntn .

atractoUy &8 apart from substance, and separate the tarmer
from the manner Trhereby it flows from things eternal,
there arise time and Toeararf ; tim« for the purpose of limit-
ing duration, metwure for the purpose of limiting quantitr,
BO that we maj, as far as is possible, the more readily
imagine them. Further,, inasmuch as we separate tlie
modifications of substance from substance itself, and reduce
them to classes, bo that ve may, as far as is possible, the
more readily imagine them, there arises number, wheteby
we limit them. Whence it is clearly to be seen, that mea-
sure, time, and number, are merely modes of thinking, or,
rather, of imagining. It ia not to be wondered at, there-
fore, that all, who have endeavoured to understand the
course of nature by means of such notions, and withont
fully understanding even them, hare entangled themselvea
so wondrously, that they have at last only been able to
extricate themselveB by breaking through every rule and
admitting absiirdities even of the grossest kind.* For there
are many things which cannot be conceived through the
ima^nation but only through the understanding, for in-
stance. Substance, eternity, and the like ; thus, if anyone
tries to eiplain such things by means of conceptions which
are mere aids to the imagination, he is simply assisting his
imagination to run away with him.' Nor can even the
modes of substance ever be rightly undereteod, if we confuse
them with entities of the kind mentioned, mere aids of the
reason or imagination. In so doing we separate them
from substance, and the mode of their derivation from
eternity, without which they can never be rightly tinder-
stood. To make the matter yet more clear, take the following
esample ; when a man conceives of duration abstractedly,
and, confusing it with time, begins to divide it into parts,
he will never be able to understand how an hour, for in-
stance, can elapse. For in order that an hour should
elapse, it ia necessary that its half should elapse first, and
afterwards half of the remainder, and again half of the
half of the remainder, and if you go on thus to infinity,
subtracting the half of the residue, you will never be able


" Nihilo ploH a^t, qnHDi si [let opernm at sua imagin]
." Mr. Pollotk parophrases, -'It ia like applying '
s of sanity and insaailj to acta of pure ima^aatioa.


i mlellecMi^^


UTTEB XXIS.] COBSEBPOND£NCE.


^Ho arrive at the end of the houi. Wherefore many, who

^Kre not accustomed to diatiaguiBh a.bstra«tiona from reaJi-

^Vties, have ventured to assert that duration ia made up of

r instantfl, and so in wishing to avoid Charybdis have fallen

into Scylla. It is the same thing to make up duration out

of instants, as it is to make number simply by adding up

noughts.

Further, as it is evident from what has been said, that

neither number, nor measure, nor time, being mere aids to

the imagination, can be infinite (for, otherwise, number

H would not be number, nor measure measure, nor time

^wtime) ; it ia hence abundantly evident, why many who

^Feonfuse these three abstractions with realities, through.

^P leing ignorant of the true nature of things, have actually

denied the infinite.

The wretchedness of their reasoning may be jndged by
mathematicianB, who have never allowed themselves to be
delayed a moment by argiunents of this sort, in the case of
things which they clearly and distiaetly perceive. For not
only have they come across many things, which cannot be
expressed by number (thus showing the inadequacy of

Ijiumber for determining all things); but also they have found
jnany things, which cannot be eqtialled by any number, but
turpase every possible number. But they infer hence,
that such things surpass enumeration, not because of the
multitude of their component parts, but because their
nature cannot, without manifest contradiction, be ex-
inessed in terms of number. As, for instance, in the case of
two circles, non-concentric, whereof one encloses the other,
no number can express the inequalities of distance which
exist between the two circles, nor all the variations which
matter in motion in the intervening space may undei^o.
This conclusion is not based on. the excessive size of the
g space. However small a portion of it we take,
ihe inequalities of this small portion will surpass all
aoumerical expression. Nor, again, is the conclusion based
L the fact, as in other cases, that we do not know the
Qum and the minimum of the said space. It springs
y from the fact, that the na,ture of the space between
nou-concentric circles cannot be expressed in number.
, he who would assign a numerical equivalent


822 sensoxAs' [lettek a

for the ineqiialities in qneBtion, ^onld he botuid, at]
mtmo time, to bring about that a. cirole should not I
drole. ',

The surao result would take place— to return to my sl
joet — if one were to wish to determine all the mot^
undergone by matter up to the present, by reducing i'
and tlioir duration to a certain number and time. '
would be the same aa an attempt to deprive corporeal i
Btniice, which we cannot conceive except as existent, of*
modificationB, and to bring about that it should not pogi
tho nature which it does possess. All this I could del
domonstrate hero, together with many other points toudj
on in this letter, but I deem it suporfluous. 1

From all that has beftu Baid, it ia abundantly eviSL
that certain things are in their nature infinite, and can]
no mennfl be conceived aa finite ; whereaa there are oSS
thinga, infinite In virtue of the cause from which they ■
derived, which can, when conceived abstractedly, be divifl
into parts, and regarded as finite. Lastly, there are wa
which aro called infinite or. if you prefer, indefinite, g
<'auBe they cannot bo espresaed in number, which may j
bo conceived aa greater or less. It doea not follow n|
tuch are equal, because they aro alike incapable of numd
cal expression. This ia plain enough, from the exai
given, and many othera.

Ijftstly, I liave put briefly before you the causes of e
and confusion, which have arisen concerning the question o£
llio infinite. I have, if I mistake not, so explained them
that no quoation concerning the infinite remains untreated,
or cannot readily be solved from what I have said ; where-
fore, I do not think it worth while to detain you longer on
tho matter.

But I should like it first to be observed here, that the
later Peripatetics have, I think, misunderstood tho proof
given by the ancients who sought to demonstrate tho eiia-
teuoi) of God, This, as I find it in a certain Jew named
Rabbi Ghasdai, runs as follows : — " If there be an infinite
series of causes, all things which are, are caused. But
nothing which ia caused can exist necessarily in virtue of
its own nature. Therefore there is nothing in nature, to
whose essence existence necessarily belongs. But this ia


Bfc'baurcl. Therefore the premise is absurd also." Hence
Hthe force of the ai^ument lies not in the impoasihiUty of an
■ actual infinite or an infinite seri^a of causes ; "but only in
the absurdity of the assumption that things, which do not
necessarily exist by nature, are not conditioned for eiis-
tenoe by a thing, whiuh does by its own nature necessarily
exist.

1 would now pass on, for time presses, to your second

letter ; but I sh^ be able more conreuiently to reply to its

contents, when you are kind enough to pay me a visit. I

I therefore beg that you will come as soon aa possible ; the

I time for travelling is at hand. Enougfh. Farewell, and

I keep in remembrance Toura, Ac.

EJiijnsbalg, 20 April, 1663.


■xKiTEE xxis.A.] coebebpohdzxce;.


LETTEE SXIX-i.'

SfiHOZA 10 Lewis Meteb.

Deae rEiEND, — The preface you sent me by our friend
I De Vries, I now send back to you by the same hand. Some
r few things, as you will see, I have marked in the margin ;
hut yet a few remain, which I have judged it better to men-
tion to you by letter. First, where on page 4 you give
the reader to know on what occasion I composed the first
part ; I would have you likewise eiplain there, or where
you please, that I composed it wit hin a fortnight, For
when this is explained none will suppose the exposition to
be BO clear as that it cannot be bettered, and so they will not
stick at obscurities in this and that phrase on which they
may chance to stumble. Secondly, I would have you ex-
plain, that when I prove many points otherwise tlw,n they
be proved by Descartes, 'tia not to amend DeHcartes,
but the better to preserve my order, and not to multiply

' This letter is not giTen ia the Optra Foslhuma, but was preserved
in M. Cousin's library at the Sorlionne. This version is rc^printei), b?
kinil permission, &om Mr, f uUodL's" Spinozn, bis Life and Pbilosaphy,"
' Appendix C.


324 bpinoza'b [lettee sir.*.

asioma overmuch t and that for this same reason I prove

many thinga which by Descartea are barely alieged with-
out any proof, and miiat needs add other matters which
Descartes let alone. Lastly, I will earnestly beseech yon,
as my especial friend, to let be everything you have
written towards the end against that creature, and wholly
strike it out. And though many reasons determine me
to this request, I will give but one. I would fain have
all men readily beheve that these matters are published
for the common profit of the world, and that your sole
motive in bringing out the book is the love of spreading
the truth ; and that it is accordingly all your study to
make the work acceptable to all, to bid men, with all
courtesy to the pursuit of genuine philosophy, and to con-
sult their common advantage. "Which every man will be
ready to think when he sees that no one is attacked, nor
anything advanced where any man can find the least offence.
Notwithstanding, if afterwards the person you know of, or
any other, be minded to display his ill wiU, then you may
portray bis life and character, and gain applause by it.
So I ask that you will not refuse to be patient thua far,
and sufEer yourself to he entreated, and believe me wholly
bounden to you, and

Tours with aU afEection,

B. DE Spinoza.
■Voartmrg, Ang. 3, 1663.

Our friend De Tries had promised to take this with
him ; but seeing he knows not when he will return to yon,
I send it by another hand.

Along with this I send you part of the acholium to
Prop, sxvii. Part JL where page 75 begins, that you may
hand it to the printer to te reprinted. The matter I send
you must of necessity be reprinted, and fourteen or fifteen
lines added, which may easily be inserted.


LETTES XXZ.] COBEEaFONQSHCB.


LETTEE XXX. (XVil.)
Sfihoza to Peteb BAiLiiiro.'


|< [CoTteerning oment and pTiemtoms. The mind tiiay have a
confused preeentinient of the futwTe.J


f

B Bbioted Fkieiid, — Tour last letter, written, if Imiataka
W not, on. the 26th. of last month, has duly reached me. It
caused me no small sorrow and solicitude, though the feel-
ing sensibly diminished when I reflected on the good sense
and fortitude, with which you have known how to despise
the evils of fortune, or rather of opinion, at a time when
they most bitterly assailed you. Tet my anxiety increases
daily ; I therefore beg and implore you by the claims of
our friendship, that you will rouse yourself to write me a
long letter. With regard to Omeng, of which you make
L mention in telling me that, while your child was still healthy
■and strong, you heard groans like those he uttered when he
Fira.8 ill and shortly afterwards died, I should judge that
"these were not real groans, but only the effect of your
imagination ; for you say that, when yoa got up and com-
posed yourself to Usten, you did not hear them so clearly
either as before or as afterwards, when you had fallen asleep
again. This, I think, shows that the groans were purely
due to the imagination, which, when it was unfettered and
free, could imagine groans mora forcibly and vividly than
■when you sat up in order to hsten in aparticular direction.

II think I can both illustrate and confirm what I eay by
Another occurrence, which befell me at Bhijnsbuig last
winter. When one morning, after the day had dawned, I
woke up from a very unpleaaant dream, the images, which
had presented themselves to me in sleep, remained before
my eyes just as vividly as though the tlungs had been real,
especially the image of a certain black and leprous Brazilian
whom I had never seen before. This image disappeared
for the most part when, in order to divert my thoughts, I


4


I:

■ +1


326


[lettee s


cast my eyes on a, Ixiok, or sometliiiig else. Bat, as Booi
as I lifted my eyes again ■without fixing my attention oi
any particular object, the same image of thia same negnt
appeared with, the same Tividness again and again, v '
the head of it gradually vanished. I say that the e
thing, which occurred with regard to my inward t
Bight, occurred with your hearing; but as the caus
very difEerent, your case was an omen and mine was n
The matter may be clearly grasped by means of what I aj
about to say. The effects of the imagination arise eith
from bodily or mental causes. I will proceed to prow
this, in order not to he too long, solely from experience.
We know that fevers and other bodily ailmenta are the
causes of dehrium, and that perBOus of stubborn disposi-
tion imagine nothing but quarreis, brawls, slaughterings,
and the Uke. We aJao see that the imagination is to a
certain extent determined by the character of the disposi.
tion, for, as we know by experience, it follows in the tracks
of the understanding in every respect, and arranges its
ima^s and words, just as the understanding arranges its
demonstrationB and connectB one with another; so that we
are hardly at all able to say, what will not serve the imagi-
nation as a basis for some image or other. This beiag so,
I say that no effects of imagination springing from phy-
sical causes can ever be omens of future events; inasmuch
as their causes do not involve any future events. Bat the
effects of imagination, or images originating in the mental
disposition, may he omens of some future event; inasmuch
as the mind may have a confused presentiment of the
future. It may, therefore, imagine a future event as
forcibly and vividly, as though it were pi-esent ; for instance
a father (to take an example resembling your own) loves
his child so much, that he and the beloved child are, as it
were, one and the same. And since (like that which I
demonstrated on another occasion) there must necessarOy
exist in thought the idea, of the essence of the child's
states and their results, and since the father, through i'
union with his child, is a part of the said child, the soul
the father must necessarily participate in the ideal esseii
of the child and his states, and in their results, as I h
shown at greater length elsewhere.


[


SXXl.] COBBESPONDEKCE. 327

Again, as the soul o£ the father participateB ideally in
the consequences of bis child's essence, he nmy (as 1 have
said) sometimes imagine some o£ the said consequences as
■rividly as if they were present with him, provided that the
following conditions are fulfilled i — I. If the occurrence in
his son's career be remarkable. XT. If It be capable of
being readily imagined. HI. If the time of its bappeoii^
be not too remote. IV, If hia body be sound, in respect
not only of health but of freedom from every care or busi-
ness which could outwardly trouble the senses. It may also
assist the result, if we think of something which generally
stim.ulates similar ideas. For instance, if while we are
talMng with this or that man we hear groans, it will gene-
rally happen that, when we thinlc of the man again, the
groans heard when we spoke with him ^ill recur to our
mind. This, dear friend, is my opinion on the question
you ask me. I have, I confess, been very brief, but I have
furnished you with material for writing to me on the first
opportuni^, &c,

Vtwrburg, 20 July, 166*.


LETTER XSXr. (XYIH.)
"Wn-LiAM HE Blyenbebgh' to Spinoza.
Unknown Friend and Sib,— I have already read several
times with attention your treatise and its appendix re-
cently pubhshed, I should narrate to others more becom-
ingly than to yourself the extreme solidity I found in it,
and the pleasure with which I perused it. But I am un-
able to conceal my feeelings from you, because the more
frequently I study the work with attention, the more_ it

f leases me, and I am constantly observing something which
had not before remarked. However, I will not too loudly
extol its author, lest I should seem in this letter to be a
flatterer. I am aware that the gods grant all things to
labour. Not to detain you too long with wondering who I
may be, and how it comes to pass that one unknow-u to you
' See Inlroduclinn, p. xvi. The eorreapDniitnce with Bljenbergh
una orlgiDollj' cunducteil in Datcb.


J


328 Spinoza's [letteb

takes the great liberty of writing to you, I will tell yon
tliat he ia a man who is impelled by his longing for pure
and nnadulterated truth, and desires daring this brief and
frail hfe to fix hia feet in the waja of science, bo far aa our
human faculties will allow ; one who in the ptu-Buit of truth
has no goal before his eyes aave truth herself; one who by
his science seeks to obtain as the result of truth neither
honovir nor riches, but simple truth and tranquillity ; one
who, out of the whole circle of truths and sciences, takes
delight in none more tbaji in metaphyaica, if not in all
branches at any rate in some ; one who pla<!es the whole
delight of hia Me in the f act, liiat he can pass in the study
of them his hours of ease and leisure. But no one, I rest
assured, ia so blessed as yourself, no one has carried his
studiea so far, and therefore no one baa arrived at the
pitch of perfection which, aa I see from your work, you
have attained. To add a last word, the present writer ia
one with whom you may gain a cloaer acquaintance, if yon
choose to attach him to you by enlightening and intei
trating, as it were, his halting meditations.

But I return to your treatise. While I found in it mi
things which tickled my palate vastly, some of them proi
difficult to digest. Perhaps a stranger ought not to re]
to you his objections, the more so aa I know not whi
they will meet with your approval. This is the reason
my making these prefatory remarks, and asking you, if
can find leisure in the winter evenings, and, at the si
time, will be willing to answer the difficulties which I still
find in your book, and to forward me the result, always
under the condition that it does not interrupt any occupa-
tion of greater importance or pleasure ; for I desire nothing
more earnestly than to see the promise made in your book
fulfilled by a more detailed exposition of your opinions. I
should have communicated to you by word of mouth what
I now commit to paper; but my ignorance of your address,
the infectious disease,' and my duties here, prevented me.
I must defer the pleasure for the present.

However, in order that this letter may not be qi

' The plague, which had prevnilud on the Continent during 1664, w
Introduced into London in the verj month in wtiiub this letter H"
written, perhaps from Holland.


»4mpty, and in the hope that it -will not be displeasing to
H70U, I will aak yon one qneation. Ton aay in various pas-
V sagea in the " Principia," and in the " Metaphysical Eeflec-
tiona," either aa your own opinion, or as explaining the
philosophy of Deacartea, that creation and preservation are
identical (which ia, indeed, so evident to thoae who have
considered the queation aa to be a primaiy notion) ;
secondly, that God haa not only created aubatances, but
also motions in Bubatancea — in other words, that God, by a
oontinnoua act of creation preaervea, not only substances in
their normal atate, but also the motion and the endeavours
of aubstancea. God, for inatance, not only brings about
by Hia immediate will and working (whatever be the term
employed), that the soul should last and continue in ita nor-
mal atate ; but He ia also the cause of Hia will determining,
in aome way, the movement of the soul — in other words, aa
God, by a continuoua act of creation, brings about that
things should remain in existence, so is He alao the cause
of the movements and endeavours existing in things. In
fact, save Gwi, there ia no cauae of motion. It therefore
follows that God ia not only the cause of the eiibstance of
mind, but alao of every endeavour or motion of mind, which
we call volition, aa you frequently say. From this state-
ment it seema to follow necessarily, either that there ia no
evil in the motion or volition of the mind, or else that God
directly brings about that evil. For that which we call
evil comes to pass through the aoul, and, conaequently,
through the immediate influence and concurrence of God.
For instance, the soul of Adam wiahea to eat of the for-
bidden fruit. It foUowa from what has been said above,
not only that Adam forms hia wish through the influence
of God, but also, as will preaently be shown, that through
that influence he forma it in that particular manner.
Hence, either the act forbidden to Adam is not evil, inaa-
much aa God Himaelf not only caused the wish, but also
the manner of it, or elae God directly brought about
that wliich we call evil. Neither you nor Deacartea eeem
to have solved this difficulty by saying that evil is a nega-
tive conception, and that, as auch, Glod cannot bring it
about. "Wlience, we may ask. came the wiah to eat the for-
bidden fruit, or the wish of devils to be equal with God ?


KX.ETTEBXXXI.J COBBESFONDENCE.


330 ariNOZAS [letteb isxi.

For aince (as you justly otserve) the will is not eomething
differeut from the mind, but is only an endeavour or move-
ment of the mind, the concurrence of God ia as necessary
to it as to the mind itself. Now the concurrence of God,
aslgatherfrom your writings, is merely the determining i>f
a thing in a particular manner through the will of God, It
f ollowB that God concurs no less in an evil wish, in so far as
it is evil, than in a good wish in so far as it is good, in other
words, He determines it. For the will of Glod being the
absolute cause of all that exists, either in substance or m
efEort, seems to be also the primary cause of an evil wish,
in so far aa it is eviL Again, no exercise of volition takes
place in us, that God has not known from all eternity. If
we say that God does not know of a particular exercise of
volition, we attribute to Tfim imperfection. But how could
God gain knowledge of it except from His decrees ? Therft-
fore His decrees are the cause of our volitions, and henceit
seems also to follow that either an evil wish is not evil, or
else that God is the direct cause of the evil, and brings it
about. There is no room here for the theological distinc-
tion between an act and the evil inherent in that act. For
God decrees the mode of the act, no less than the act, that
is, God not only decreed that Adam should eat, but also
that he should necessarily eat contrary to the command
given. Thus it seems on all sides to follow, either that
Adam's eating contrary to the command was not an « "
or else that God Himself brought it to pass.

These, iUustrioua Sir, are the questions in your t
which I am unable, at present, to elucidate. Either a.
native seems to me difficult of acceptance. Howere
await a satisfactory answer from your keen jadgment q
learning, hoping to show you hereafter how deeply indebj
I shall be to you. Be assured, illuatrious Sir, that I x
these questiona from no other motive than the desire
truth. I am a man of leisure, not tied to any profeu
finin g my living by honest trade, and devoting my k
time to questions of this sort. I humbly hope that m
culties will not be displeasing to you. If you are n
to send an answer, as I most ardently hojie, write to, i
"William db Blsei

Dardrecbt, IS Dec., 16G4.


LEIX£& XSSII.] COSEEBPONQEitCB.


LETTEK SXXn. (SIS.)
Spinoza, to Bltenbebgh.


^u-i^io with his usual eouHeey the qiiestion
pro£ou7ukd by Slyenbergh.)


I


Unknown Fbiend, — I received, at Sctiedam, on tLe
26tli of December, your letter dated the 12th o£ Decem-
ber, encloeed in another written on the 24th of the same
month. I gEither from it your fervent love of truth, and
your making it the aim of all your etudies. This compelled
me, though by no meanB otherwise unwilling, not oaly to
grant yotir petition by answering; all the questions you have
sent, or may in future send, to the best of my ability, but
also to impart to you everything in my power, which can
conduce to further knowledge and sincere friendship. So
Ear as in me hes, I value, above all other things out of my |
awn control, the joining hands of friendsbip with men who !
axe sincere lovers of truth. I beiieve that nothing in the '
world, of things outside our own control, brings more peaco
than the possibility of affectionate intercourse with euch
men ; it is just as impossible that the love we bear them
can be disturbed (inasmuch as it is founded on the deeire
each feels for the knowledge of truth), as that truth once-
perceived should not be assented to. It is, moreover, tha
'highest and most pleasing source of happiness derivable
from things not under our own control. Nothing save truth
has power closely to unite difEerent feelings and disposi-
tions. X say nothing of the very great advantages which
it brings, lest I should detain you too long on a subject
which, doubtless, you know already. I have said thus
much, in order to show you better how gladly I shall em-
brace this and any future opportimity of serving you.

In order to make the best of the present opportunity. I
will at once proceed to answer your question, This seema
to turn on the point " that it seems to be clear, not only
from God's providence, which is identical with His will,
Taut also from God's co-operation and continuous creation


3

bepm- I


I ml, or that Ood direcdj bnngs bb *ad eril to
Toa do not, Imrnvra, — j^*-™ what joa nean In- .e:riL _
£u »■ one naj jndge &«■ tlie exanqile jou give in ^e pm-
detemuDed act of «vGtian of Adau. ym Mem to meAn br
evil the actaal exaaaetd ToKtian. ia ao for as '
caved aa pcedetenBiaied in apartioilar nj, or ~
it ii t^agoMtit to tbe *ww« » »»«^ of God. Bon
dode (and I agraevitk jon if this be vfaat jva

lit is abaord to adcwt ettfaer ah«tiatin^ ertba
brings to {MM anj^uiBg eantiaiy toBia own wi^

I wkat i> ooutzaiy to Ood'a will can be good.

Vix nr own part, I cannot admit that sin and eri] hxn

I aDT jwtrt JTe <^iitfi«yft, fax leoa that anjthiiig tan exist, ei

) CDoefopasa, contraiy to the iriU t^ Ood. C^ the coatnrj,
not onlf do I aaaert tiiat abt has no podtjre ezistencev I

alan main tarn that milj in apgaUng iTiipntpprfj. ar hni^fMily,

can we saj that we on against 1>od, as in the expreanon
that men offend Ood.

As to the first point, we kitow that whatsr>eTeT is,
considered in its^ without regard to MiytMng dM, ,
sessea perfection, extending in each thing aa Ear as
limits of that thing's essence : for essence is nothing else.
I take for an iilnstratlon the design or determined will of
Adam to eat the forbidden fruit- This design or deter>
mined will, considered in itself alone, indndes perfection
in BO far as it expresses reality ; hence it may he inferred
that we can only conceire imperfection in things, irhen
they are riewed in relation to oUier things possessing
reality : thus in Adam's decision, so long as \re view
itself and do not compare it \rith other things more pei
or exhibiting a more perfect state, we can find no im
fection -. nay it may be compared with an infinity of oi
things far less perfect in this respect than itself,
stones, stocks, &c. This, as a matter of fact,
grants. For we all admire in animals qualities whic
regard with dislike and aversion in men, such as the
nacity of bees, the jealousy of doves, &c, ; these
beings are despised, but are nevertheless considered
hance the value of animals, This being so, it follows
sin, which indicates nothing save imperfection, cannot


»doo^J


I X-ETIEE XXSII,]


H aist in anytliiag tba.t expreaaes reality, as we see in tlie

H case of Adam's decision and its esecution.

f Again, we cannot say that Adam's will is at variance
■wjtli the law of God, and that it is evil because it is dis-
pleasing to God ; for besides the fact that grave imperfec-
tion would be imputed to Gh>d, if we say that anything
happens contrary to Hia will, or that He desires anything
whjch He does not obtain, or that Hia nature resembled
that of His creatures in having sympathy with some
thinga more than others ; such an occurrence would be at

Icompleto variance with the nature of the divine will.
The will of God is identical with Hie intellect, hence the
former can no more be contravened than the latter ; in
other words, anything which should come to pasa against
Sia will must be of a nature to be contrary to Hia intellect, '
Buch, for instance, as a round square. Hence the will or
decision of Adam regarded in itself was neither evil nor,
properly speaking, against the will of God : it follows that
<Jod may — or rather, for the reason you caU attention to,
must — be its cause ; not in so far as it was evil, for the
eTilinit conaiBted in the Iohb of the previous stateof being
which it entailed on Adam, and it is certain that loss has
K no positive existence, and ia only so spoken of in respect
H to our and not God's understanding. The difficulty arises
V from the fact, that we give one and the same definition to
" all the individuals of a genus, as for instance all who have
the outward appearance of men : we accordingly assume all
things which are expressed by the same definition to be
equally capable of attaining the highest perfection possible
for the genua ; when we find an individual whose actions
are at variance with such perfection, we suppose him to
be deprived of it, and to fall sbort of his nature. We
should hardly act in this way, if we did not hark back to
the definition and ascribe to the individual a nature in ac-
cordance with it. But as God does not know things through
abstraction, or form general definitions of the kind above

I mentioned, and as things have no more reality than the
divine understanding and power have put into them and
actually endowed them with, it clearly follows that a state
(rf privation can only be spoken of in relation to our
intellect, not in relation to God.


834


[letter


1


Thus, as it seems to me, the difficulty is compli
Bolved. However, in order to make the way still pi

and remove every doubt, I deem it neceaeary to answer

two following difficulties: — First, why Holy Scripture says
,' that God wishes for the conversion of the wicked, and also
■' why God forbade Adam to eat of the fruit when He had
I ordained the contrary ? Secondly, that it seems to follow
I from what I have said, that the wicked by their pride,
I avarice, and deeds of desperation, worship God in no less
degree than the good do by their nobleness, patience, love,
&c., inasmuch aa both execute God's will.

In answer to the^rst question, I observe that Scrip!
being chiefly fitted for and beneficial to the mnltif
speaks popularly after the fashion of men. For the __
titiide are incapable of grasping sublime conceptions.
Hence I am persuaded that all mattera, which God revealed
to the prophets as necessary to salvation, are set down in
the form of laws. With tlus understanding, the prophi
invented whole parables, and represented God as a t '
and a law-giver, because He had revealed the means of
vation and perdition, and was their cause; the in(
which were simply causes they styled laws and wrote tK
down as such ; salvation and perdition, which are simply
effects necessarily resultingfrom the aforesaid means, they
described as reward and punishment ; framing their doc-
trines more in accordance with such parables than with
actual truth. They conataJitly speak of God as resembling
a man, as sometimes angrj, sometimes merciful, now de-
siring what is future, now jealous and suspicious, even "'
deceived by the devil ; so that philosophers and all
arc above the law, that is, who follow after virtue,
in obedience to law, but through love, because it is
most excellent of all things, must not be hindered by
expressions.

Thus the command given to Adam consisted Bolt
this, that God revealed to Adam, that eating of the
brought about death ; as He reveals to us, through
, natural faculties, that poison is deadly. If you aa'
what object did He make this revelation, I answer, in
to render Adam to that extent more perfect in knowh
Hence, to ask God why He had not bestowed on


STTEB XXXII.] tOHEESPONDENCa.


335


lore perfect will, ia just as absurd aa to aaV, why the circle '
not been endowed with all the properties of a sphere, i,
3 follows clearly from what has been aaid, and I have
10 proved it in my Principles of Cartesian Philosophy,

As to the second difficulty, it is true that the wicted
execute after their manner the will of God : but they can-
not, therefore, be in any respect compared with the good.
The more perfection a thing baa, the more does it partiei^
pate in the deity, and the more doea it express perfection.
Thna, as the good have incomparably more perfection than
the bad, their virtue cannot be Ekened to the virtue of the.
wicked, inasmuch aa the wicked lack the love of (Jod,
which proceeds from the knowledge of God, and by which
alone we are, according to our human understanding, called
the servants of God. The wicked, knowing not God, are
but as instrumentiB in the hand of the workman, serving '
unconaciouBly, and periahing in the using ; the good, on
,jGiq other hand, serve consciously, and in serving become
lore perfect,

' This, Sir, ia all I can now contribute to answering your
tation, and I have no higher wish than that it may satisfy
yon. But in case you still find any difficulty, I beg you to
let me know of that also, to see ii I may be able to remove
it. Ton have nothing to fear on your aide, but so long as
you are not satisfied, I like nothing better than to be in-
formed of your reasons, so that finally the truth may
appear. I could have wished to write in the tongue in
which I have been brought up. I should, perhaps, have
been able to express my thoughts better. But be pleased
to take it as it is, amend the mistakes yourself, and believe


Tour si


e friend and servant.


' llie last paragraph (not founii in the Latin version} is reprinted by
■'Idnd pennisaion from Mr. Follovk'a translation from the Dut(.-li original,
■'^iDck'fl " Spinoia," Appendix C. On page 332 a misprint of " pfic-
' tbr " imperfccCioribus " is corrected from the original


^^^^SS6


£lETTEK TXT in ,


LETTEK XSXin. (XX.)

BLTHlfBERGH TO SfIHOZA.

(A summary onh/ ofthia letter ie here given. — Tb.)

1 have two rules in my pHlosopliie inquiries ; i. Confor-
mitj to reason ; ii. Conformity to scripture. I consider the
second the most important. Esamining your letter by the
first, I observe that your identification of God's creative
power with His preservative power seems to involve, either
that evil does not ertst, or else that God brings about evil.
If evil be only a term relative to our imperfect knowledge,
how do you explain the state of a man who falls from a
state of grace into sin ? If evil be a negation, bow can wo
have the power to sin ? If God cauees an evil act, he must
cause the evil as well as the act. Ton say that every m fin
can only act, aa he, in fact, does act. This removes all dis-
tinction between the good and the wicked. Both, according
to you, are perfect. You remove all the sanctions of virtue
and reduce us to automata. Your doctrine, that strictly
speaking we cannot sin against God, is a hard saying.

[The rest of the letter is taken up with an examination
of Spinoza's arguments in respect to their conformity to
Scripture,] ^~

Dordrecht, 16 Jua., 1665.


LETTEK XXXIV. (XXI.)

Spinoza to Eltbhbekqh.

: complains that Sh/enbergh his misundt
him: he seta forth his true m,eaning.']

VoOTbuTg, 128 Jan, :

Fkiend AiTD .SiK, — When I read your first j
thought that our opinions almost coincided. But 1
the second, which was delivered to me ou the Slst of ti


T.]


CORBBSPONDENCE.


337


montt, I see tliat the matler stands far otherwise, for I
perceire that we disagree, not only in renaote inferences
from first principles, but alao in first principles themselves j
so that I can Lardl/ think that we can derive any mutual
instruction from further correspondence, I see that no
proof, though it te Ijy the laws of proof most sound, has
any weight with you, unless it agrees with the explanation,
which either you yourself, or other theologians known to
you, attribute to Holy Scripture. HowoTer, if you are I
convinced that God speaks more clearly and efEectually J
through Holy Scripture than through the natural under-
standing, which He also has bestowed upon us, and
with His divine wisdom keeps continually stable and un-
corrupt«d, you have valid reasons for makiDg your under-
standing bow before the opinions which you attribute to
Holy Scripture ; I myself could adopt no different course.
For my own part, as I confess plainly, and without circum-
locution, that I do not understand the Scriptures, though I
have spent some years upon them, and also as I feel that
when I have obtained a firm proof, I cannot fall into a,
state of doubt concerning it, I acquiesce entirely in what is
commended to me by my understanding, without any sus-

£'cion that I am being deceived in the matter, or that
oly Scripture, though I do not search, could gainsay it:
for " truth is not at variance with truth," as I have already
clearly shown in my appendix to The Principles of Car-
tesian Philosophy (I cannot give the precise reference, for
I have not the book with me here in the country). But if
in any instance I found that a result obtained through my
natural understanding was false, I should reckon myself
fortunate, for I enjoy life, and try to spend it not in sor-
row and sighing, but in peace, joy, and cheerfulness, ascend-
ing from time to time a step higher. Meanwhile I know
(and this knowledge gives me the highest contentment and
peace of mind), that all things come to pass by the power '
and unchangeable decree of a Being supremely perfect.

To return to your letter, I owe you many and sincere
thanks for having confided to me your philosophical
opinions ; but for the doctrines, which you attribute to me,
and seek to infer from my letter, I return you no thanks
at at all. What ground, I should like to know, has my


[letter xxxiT,

letter afforde<3 you for aseribing to me the opinions ; tbat
men are like beasfa, that they die and perish after the
manner of beasts, that our aetiona are displeasing to God,
&c. ? Perhaps we are moat of all at variance on this third
point. Ton think, as fax aa I can judge, that God takes
pleaEnre in onr actions, aa though H« were a man, who has
attained his object, when things fall out as he desired. For
my part, have I not said plainly enough, that the good
worship God, that in continually serving Sim they become
more perfect, and that they love God ? Is this, I ask,
likening them to beasts, or Haying that they perish lite
beaats, or that their actions are diapleaaing to God ? If
you had read my letter with more attention, you would
have clearly perceived, that our whole dissension lies in the
following alternative ;— Either the perfectiona which the
good receive are imparted to them by God in His capacity
of God, that is abaolutely without any human qualities
being ascribed to Him — this is what I believe [ or else such
perfections aje imparted by God as a judge, which ia what
you maintain. For this reason you defend the wicked,
saying that they carry out God's decrees as far as in them
lies, and therefore serve God no leas than the good. But
if my doctrine be accepted, thia consequence by no means
' follows ; I do not bring in the idea of God aa a judge, and,
therefore, I eatimate an action by jta intrinsic merits, not
by the powers of ita performer ; the reconipenae ^which
follows the action follows from it as necessarily as from
the nature of a triangle it follows, that the three angles are
equal to two right anglea. This may be understood by
everyone, who reflects on the f a«t, that our highest blessed-
ness consists in love towards God, and that such love flows
naturally from the knowledge of God, which ia ao strenu-
ously enjoined on us!" The question may very easily be
proved in general terms, if we take notice of the nature of
God's decrees, aa explained in my appendix. However, I
confess that all those, who confuse the divine nature with
humau nature, are gravely hindered from understanding it.
I had intended to end my letter at thia point, lest I
should prove troublesome to you in these questions, the
discussion of which (as I discover fi-om the extremely pious
postscript added to your letter) serves you as a pastime and a


I.ETTES XXSIY.]

jeat, but for DO serious use. Eowerer. that I may not eum-
marily deuj your request, I will proceed to eiplain further
the words privation and negation, and briefly point out
■what is necessary for the elucidation of my former letter.

I say then, first, that privation, is not the act of depriTing,
but simply and merely a state of want, which is in itself , 'if
nothing : it is a mere entity of the reason, a mode of
thought framed in comparing one thing with another.
We say, for example, that a blind man is deprired of sight,
because we readily imagine him as seeing, or else because
we compare him with others who can see, or compare hia
present condition with hia past condition when he could
see ; when we regard the man in this way, comparing hia
nature either with the nature of others or with his own
past nature, we affirm that sight belongs to his nature, and
therefore assert that he has been deprived of it. But
when we are considering the nature and decree of God, we
cannot affirm privation of sight in the case of the aforesaid
man any more than in the case of a, stone ; for at the
actual tune sight lies no more within the scope of the man
than of the atone ; since there belojigt to man wnd form part of
hi» nature only that which it granted to him by the VMder-
atanding and will of God. Hence it follows that Qod is
no more the cause of a blind man not seeing, than he ia of
a stone not seeing. Kot seeing is a pure negation. So
also, when we consider the case of a man who is led by iastful
desires, we compare hie preseTtl desires with those which exist
in the good, or which exited in himself at some other time ;
we then assert that he is deprived of the better desires, because
we conceive that virtuous desires lie wUhtn the scope of his
nature. This we cannot do, if we eonsider the nature and
decree of Qod. For, from thii point of view, virtuous desires
lie at that time no more within the scope of the nature of the
hiMfvl man, than within the scope of the nature of the devil
or a stone. Hence, from the latter standpoint the virtuous
desire is not a privation but a negation.

Thus privation is nothing else than denying of a thing
Bomething, which we think belongs to its nature ; negation
is denying of a thing something, which we do not think
belongs to its nature.

We may now see, how Adam's desire for earthly things


340 BPINOZA's [lETTKK X5XIT.

was evil from our standpoint, but not from God's. Although
God knew both the present and the past state of Ada/m,
He did Tiot, therefore, regard Adam as deprived of his pati
state, that ia, Se did not regard Adam's past state as imtkin
the eeope of Adam's j>regeni natvre. Otherwise Qod would
have apprehended Bomething contrary to His own ■will, that
is, contrary to His own understanding. If you q^uite grasp
my meiming here and at the same time rememher, that I do
not grant to the mind the same freedom as Descartes does
— L[ewis] M[eyer] hears -witness to this in his preface to
my book — you will perceiTe, that there ia not the smallest
contradiction in what I lia.ve said. But I see that I should
haye done far better to have answered you in my first letter
with the words of Descartes, to the effect that we cannot
' know how oyr freedom and its consequences agree with the
foreknowledge and freedom of God (see several passages
in my appendix), that, therefore, we can discover no con-
tradiction between creation by God and our freedom,
because we cannot understand how God created the universe,
nor (what is the same thing) how He preserves it, I
thought that you had read the preface, and that by not
giving you my real opinions in reply, I should sin against
those duties of friendship which I cordially offered you.
But this is of no consequence.

Still, as I see that you have not hitherto thoroughly
grasped Descartes' meaning, I will call your attention to
the two following points. Tirst, that neither Descartes
nor I have ever said, that it appertains to our nature
to confine the will within the limits of the understanding ;
we have only said, that God baa endowed ua with a deter-
mined understanding and an undetermined will, so that we
know not the object for which He has created us. Turther,
that aji undetermined or perfect will of this kind not onl^
makes ua more perfect, but also, as I will presently a"
you, is extremely necessary for us.

Secondly : that our freedom is not placed i
contingency nor in a certain indifference, but i
method of affirmation or denial; so that, in proport
aa we are less indifferent in affirmation or denial,
we more free. For instance, if the nature of (
known to us, it follows aa necessarily from our nature i


XETTES XSXrv.j COEEESPOSDEMCn. 8il

affiiiu that God exists, aa from the nature of a, triangle
it follows, that tlie three angl^es are equal to two right
tingles ; we are neTer more free, than when we affirm a
thing in this waj. As this necessity is nothing else but
the decree of God (as Ihave clearly shown in my appendix),
we may hence, after a fashion, understand how we act
freely and are the cause of our action, though all the time
"we are acting necessarily and according to the decree of God.
This, I repeat, we may, after a fashion, understand, when-
ever we affirm, something, which we clearly and distinctly \
perceive, hut when we assert aomething which we do not 1
clearly and diatinotly understand, in other words, when we ,
iillow our will to pass beyond the limits of our understand-
ing, we no longer perceive the necessity nor the decree of ■ i ,-,
God, we can only see our freedom, which ia always involved " '.

in our will ; in which respect only our actions are called good ' - , / j
or evU. If we then try to reconcile our freedom with GJod's
decree and continuous creation, we confuse that which we
'Clearly and distinctly understand with that which we do
not perceive, and, therefore, our attempt is vain. It is,
therefore, euffieient for iia to know that we are free, and
that we can be so notwithstanding God's decree, and
further that we are the cause of evil, because an act can
only he called^" evil in relation to our freeSbm. I have
Baitt'^uf'ittticli for Descartes in order to show that, in
the question we are considering, hia words exhibit no ■
contradiction.

I will now turn to what concerns myself, and will first
briefly call attention to the advantage arising from my
opinion, inasmuch as, according to it, our understanding
offers our mind and body to God freed from all superstition.
Nor do I deny that prayer is extremely useful to us. For
my understanding ia too small to determine all the means,
■whereby God leads men to the love of Himself, that is, to
salvation. So far is my opinion from being hurtful, that
it offers to those, who are not taken up with prejudices and
childish Buperstitions, the only means for arriving at the
highest stage of blessedness.

When you say that, by making men ao dependent on
God, I reduce them to the bkeuesa of the elements,
plants or stones, you sufficiently show that you have


k


1


342 SPIN oz a' 8 [i-ETTBE x:

thorougMy misnnderBtood my meaning, and have confnaed
things which regard the understanding with things which
regard the imagination. If by your intellect only you had
perceived what dependence on Glod meana. you certainly
would not think that things, in so far as they depend on
Glod, are dead, corporeal, and imperfect (who ever dared to
Bpeak BO meanly of the Supremely Perfect Being ?} ; on the

: contrary, you would understand that for the very reason

. that they depend on God they are perfect j so that this
dependence and necessary operation may best be understood
as Gk)d's decree, by considering, not stocks and plants, but
the moat reasonable and perfect creatures. This sufficiently
appears from my second observation on the meaning of
Descartes, which you ought, to have looked to.

I cannot refrain from espreeaing my extreme astonish-
ment at your remarking, that if God does not punish wrong-
doing (that is, as a judge doea, vrith a punishment not in-
trinsically connected with the offence, for our whole diffe-
rence Ues in this), what reason prevents ma from rushing^

I headlong into every kind of wickedness ? Assuredly he, who-
is only kept from vice by the fear of punishment (which I

I do not think of you), is in no wise acted on by love, and by
no means embraces virtue. For my own part, I avoid or
endeavour to avoid vice, because it is at direct variance
with my proper nature and would lead me astray from the
knowledge and love of God.

Again, if yon had reflected a little on human nature and
the nature of God's decree (as explEtined in my appendix),
and perceived, and known by this time, how a con-
sequence should be deduced from its premises, before a
conclusion is arrived at ; you would not so rashly have
stated that my opinion makes us like stocks, &c. : nor
would you have ascribed to me the many absurdities you
conjure up.

As to the two points which you say, before passing on
to your second rule, that you cannot understand ; I answer,
that the first may be solved through Descartes, who says
that in observing your own nature you feel that you can
suspend your judgment. If you say that you do not feel,
that you have at present sufficient force to keep your juds
ment suspended, this wouid appear to Descartes to be t


IiETTEE XXSIT.] COEEESPONUEHCB. 343

Bame as saying that we cannot a* present see, that bo long
-as we esiat we shall always be thinking things, or retain
the nature at thinking tilings j in fact it would imply a
contradiction.

As to your second difEcnlty, I Hay with Descartes, that j£
we cannot extend our will beyond the bounds of our
extremely limited understanding, we shall be most wreteht^d
— it will not be in our power to eat even a crust of bread, or
to walk a step, or to go on living-, for all things are uncer-
tain and full of peril.

I now pass on to your second rule, and assert that I
believe, though I do not ascribe to Scripture that sort of
truth which you think you find in it, I nevertheless assign
to it as great if not greater authority than you do. I am
£ar more careful than others not to ascribe to Scripture any
childish and absurd doctrines, a precaution which demands
either a thorough acquaintance with philosophy or the
possession of divine revelations. Hence I pay very little
attention to the glosses put upon Scripture by ordinary
theologians, especially those of the kind who always inter-
pret Scripture aceorifing to the literal and outward mean-
ing : I have never, except among the Socinians, found any
theologian stupid enough to ignore that Holy Scripture
very often speaks in human fashion of God and expresses
its meaning in parables; as for the contradiction which
you vainly (in my opinion) endeavour to show, I think you
attach to the word parable a meaning different from uiat
usually given. For who ever heard, that a man, who
expressed his opinions in parables, had therefore taken
leave of his senses? When Micaiah said to £ing Ahab,
that he had seen God sitting on a throne, with the armies
of heaven standing on the right hand and the left, and
that God asked His angels winch of them would deceive
Ahab, this was asstiredly a parable employed by the
prophet on that occasion (which was not fitted for the in-
culcation of sublime theological doctrines), as sufficiently
setting forth the message he had to deliver in the name of
God. "We cannot say that he had in anywise taken leave
of his senses. So aJso the other prophets of God made
manifest Qod's commands to the people in this fashion as
being the best adapted, though not expressly enjoined by


344 BpiNozA'a [i-ETTEB xxxiF.

God, for leading the people to the primary object of Serip-
\ ture, which, as Christ Himself says, is to bid men love God
. above all things, and their neighbour aa themselves. Sub-
lime speeulationa have, in my opinion, no bearing on Scrip-
ture. Aa far aa I am concerned I have never learnt or
' been able to Icam any of God's eternal attributes from
') Holy Scripture.

^ to your fifth argument (that the prophets thus made
manifest the word of God, since truth is not at variantw
with truth), it merely amounts, for those who understand
the method of proof, to asking me to proye, that Scripture,
aa it is, is the true roTealed word of God. The mathe-
matical proof of this proposition could only be attained by
divine revelation. 3, therefore, expressed myself as follows :
■' I believe, but I do not mathematically know, that all ihinge
revealed by God to the prophets," &c. Inasmuch as I firmly
beheve but do not mathematically know, that the prophets
were the most trusted counsellorB and faithful ambaasadors
of God. So that in all I have written there is no contra-
diction, though several such may be found among holders
of the opposite opinion.

The rest of your letter (to wit the passage where you
aay, " Lastly, the snpretnely perfect Being knew before-
hand," &c ; and again, your objections to the illustration
from poison, and lastly, tte whole of what yon say of the
appendix and what follows) seems to me beside the question.

As regards Lewis Meyer's preface, the points winch were
stiil left to be proved by Descartes before establishing his
demonstration of free will, are certainly there set forth ; it
is added that I hold a contrary opinion, my reasons for
doing BO being given. I shall, perhaps, in due time give
further explanations. For the present I have no such
intention.

I have never thought alwut the work on Descartes, nor
given any further heed to it, since it has been translated
into Dutch. I have my reasons, though it would be tedious
to enumerate them here. So nothing remains for i
to subscribe myself, &c.


»


LHTTEB XIIVI.] COBKESPOND-ENCE.


IJ3TTER XXXT. (XSII.)

Blyenbebgh to Spinoza,

lT}iie letter (extending over five paget) is only given here in
brief Bummari/.']

The tone o£ your last letter is very different from that
of your first. If our essence is equivalent to our atate at a
given time, we are as perfect when sinning as when virtu-
ous : God would wish for vice as much as virtue. Both
the TJrtuotis and the vicious execute Qod'e will — ^What
is the difference between them ? Tou say some actions are
more perfect than others ; wherein does this perfection con-
sist ? If a mind existed so framed, that vice was in agree-
ment with its proper nature, why should such a mind
prefer good to evil ? If God makes ns all that we are, how
can we " go astray " ? Can rational siihstances depend on
God in any way except lifelesBly ? What is the difference
between a rational being's dependence on God, and an irra-
tional being's? If we have no freewill, are not oar actions
God's actions, and our will Ghid's will? I could ask
several moi-e questions, but do not venture.

P.S. In my hurry I forgot to insert this question:
"Whether we cannot by foresight avert what would other-
wise happen to ua P

Dordrecht, 19 Feb., 16G9.


LETTER SXXVI. CXXHI.)

Spinoza to Bltbrbbboh.

[Spinom replies, that there ia a difference between the theo-
logical and the philosophical vfay of speaking of God and
things divine. Seproeeedt to diecitseBlyeiibergh's questions.
(Voorburg. I3th March, 1665.)]

Feiend and Sib, — I have received two letters from you
this week j the second, dated 9th March, only served to in-


Si6 bpinoza's [letter xxiti.

form me of the first written on February 19th, and aentto
me at Schiedam. In the former I see that you. complaia
o£ my saying, that " demonstration carried no weight with
you," ae though I had spoken of my own arguments, which
had failed to convince you. Such was far from my inten-
tion. I was referring to your own words, which ran as
follows : — " And if after long investigation it comes to paa«,
that my natural knowledge appears either to he at variance
with the word (of Scripture), or not sufficiently well, &c.;
the word has bo great authority with me, that I would
rather doubt of the conceptions, which I think I clearly
perceive," Ac, Tou see I merely repeat in brief your own
phrase, so that I cannot think you have any cause for
anger against me, especially as I merely quoted in order to
show the great difference Ijetween our standpoints.

Again, as you wrote at the end of your letter that yonr
only hope and wish is to continue in faith and hope, and
that all else, which we may become convinced of through
OUT natural faculties, la indifferent to you ; I reflected, as I
BtiU continue to do, that my letters could be of no use to
you, and that I should best consult my own JntereBts by
ceasing to neglect my pursuits (which I am compelled
while writing to you to interrupt) for the sake of things
which could bring no possible benefit. Nor is this contrary
to the spirit of my former letter, for in that I looked upon
you as simply a philosopher, who (like not a few who call
themselves Christians) possesses no touchstone of truth
save his natural understanding, and not as a theologian.
However, you have taught me to know better, and have
also shown me that the foundation, on which I was minded
to build up our friendsliip, has not, as I imagined, been
laid.

As for the rest, such are the general accompaniments of
controversy, so that I would not on that account transgreSB
the limits of courtesy: I will, therefore, pass over in your
second letter, and in this, these and similar expressions,
as though they Lad never been observed. So much for
your taking offence ; to show you that I have given
you no just cause, and, also, that I am quite wilhng to
brook contradiction. I now turn a second time to answer-
ing your objections.


LETTEK XKXVI.] COEEESPONDB:


347

I maintain, in the first place, that God is absolutely '

and really the cause of all thinga which have eseenee,

I whatsoever they may be. If you can demonstrate that

^^jrril, error, crime, &e., liave any positive existence, which

^B^Epresses essence, I vrill fully grant you that Qod is the

Boause of crime, evil, error, &c. I believe myself to have

^«afficiently shown, that that which constitutes the reality

' of evil, error, crime, &c., does not eonsiat in anything,

which expresses essence, and therefore we cannot say that

God is its cause. For instance, Nero's matricide, in so far

as it comprehended anything positive, was not a crime ; the

same outward act was perpetrated, and the same matriddal

intention was entertained by Orestes; who, nevertheless,

is not blamed — at any rate, not so much as Nero. Wherein,

then, did Nero's crime consist ? In nothing else, but that

by his deed he showed himself to be ungrateful, unmer-

Citvl, and disobedient. Certainly none of these qualities

express aught of essence, therefore God was not the cause ,

I of them, though He was the cause of Nero's act and |
intention.
Further, I would have you observe, that, while we apeak
philosophically, we ought not to employ theological phrases.
For, since theology frequently, and not unwisely, repre-
ients God as a perfect man, it is often expedient in theo-
logy to say, that God desires a given thing, that He is angry
at the actions of the wicked, and delights in those of the
good. But in philosophy, when we clearly perceive that
the attributes which make men perfect can as ill be ascribed
aJid assigned to God, as the attributes which go to make
perfect the elephant and the asa can be ascribed to man ;
here I say those and similar phrases have no place, nor can
we employ them, without causing extreme confusion in our
conceptions. Hence, in the language of philosophy, it
cannot be said that God desires anything of any man, or
that anything- is displeasing or pleasing to Him : all these '
axe human qualities and have no place in God.

I would have it observed, that although the actions of
the good (that is of those who have a clear idea of God,
whereby all their actions and their thoughts are deter-
mined) and of the wicked (that is of those who do not
possess the idea of God, but only the ideas of earthly


348 bpinoza'b [lkttee sxitl

tliiugB. wherel>y their actiona and thoughts are determined),
and, in fiiet, of all things that are. necwssarily flow from
God'a eternal lawa and decreea ; yet they do not differ
from one another in degree only, but also in essence. A
mouse no less than an angel, and sorrow no less than joj
depend on Uod , yet a mouse is not a kind of angel, neither
is sorrow a kind of joy. I think I have thns answered
your ohjections, i£ I rightly understand them, for I some-
times doubt, whether the conclusions which yon deduce aw
not foreign to the proposition you are undertaking to

However, this will appear more clearly, if I answer the
questions you proposed on these principles. First, Whether
murder is as acceptable to God aa alms-giving ? Secondly.
Whether stealing is as good in relation to God as honesty?
Thirdly and lastly. Whether if there he a mind so framed,
that it would agree with, rather than be repugnant to its
proper nature, to give way to lust, and to commit crimeSj

I whether, I repeat, there can he any reason given, why such

! a mind should do good and eschew evil ?

To your first question, I answer, that I do not know,
speaking as a philosopher, what you mean by the worfs
"acceptable to God." If you aak, whether God does not
hatfl the wicked, and love the good? whether Gkid does not
regard the former with dislike, and the latter with favour ?
I answer. No. If the meaning o£ your question is : Are
murderers and almsgivers equally good and perfect ? my
answer is again in the negative. To your second ques-
tion, I reply : If, by " good in relation to Gfod," you mean

., that the honest man confers a favour on Glod, and the

' thief does Him an injury, I answer that neither the honest
man nor the thief can cause God any pleasure or dU-
pleaaure. If you mean to ask, whether the actions of each,
in so far aa they posssesa reahty, and are caused by God,
are equally perfect ? I reply that, if we merely regard the
actions and the manner of their execution, both may be
equally perfect. If you, therefore, inquire whether the
thief and the honest man are equally perfect and blessed P
I answer. No. For, by an honest man, I mean one who
always desires, tliat everyone should poasesa that which is
his. This desire, as I prove in my Ethics (as yet unpub-


LETTER XJCX fl.] COEEESPOSDENCE. 341

lisLed), Deceaearily derirea its origin in the pious from the
clear knowledge which they posseBS. of G-od and of them-
Belves. Aa a thief has no desire of the kind, he ia neces-
sarily without the knowledge of God and of himself — in
other words, without the chief element of our blessedness.
If you further ask, What causes you to perform a. given
action, which I call virtuous, rather than another ? I reply,
that I cannot know which method, out of the infinite
methods at His disposal, God euLploya to determine you to
the said action. It may he, that God has impressed you
with a clear idea of Hi tn self, so that you forget the world
for love of Him, and love your fellow-men as yourself ; it is
plain that such a disposition is at variance with those
dispositions which are called bad, and, therefore, could
i-esifit with them in the same man.

However, this is not the place to expound all the founda-
tiouB of my Ethics, or to prove all that I have advanced ; I
now only concerned in answering your questions, and
defending myself against them.

Lastly, as to your third question, it assumes a contradic-
tion, and seems to me to be, as though one asked: If it
agreed better with a man's nature that he should hang
himself, could any reasons be given for his not hanging
himself P Can such a nature possibly exist? If bo, I
maintain (whether I do or do not grant free will), that
such an one, if he sees that be can Kve more conveniently
on the gallows than sitting at his own table, would act
most f ooEshly, if he did not hang himself. So anyone who
clearly saw that, by committing crimes, he would enjoy a
really more perfect and better life and existence, than he
could attain by the practice of virtue, would be foolish if
he did not act on his convictions. For, with such a perversa

i human nature as his, crime would become virtue.
As to the other queatioa, whicb you add in your post-
script, seeing that one might ask a, hundred such in an hour,
without arriving at a conclusion about any, and seeing
that you yourself do not press for aa answer, I will send
tun


I will now only Bubscribe myself, &.C.


■

S50 spiNozi's [lbttek xxxtu

m

•.

*■ LETTEE XXXVni. (XXVH.)

Spinoza to BLYESBBaoH.


LETTER SXSVII. (XXIV.)

Eltenbeeoh to Spinoza.

[Blyenlergh, who had been to gee Spinoza, agks the laHer to
send him a report of ikeir eonveTgation, and to answer fiu
fresh qiiestions. {Dordrecht, 27th March, 1665.)] '^

Omitted.


SXTlt I

ier to

■erfi^


[[Spinoza declines further correspondence with Blyeiihergh,
but says he will give explanations of certain points hy word
of mouth. {Voorburg, 3rd June, 1665.)] '

Eeiend and Sib, — When your letter, dated 27tli Majni,
was delivered to me, I was juat starting for Amsterdam.
I, therefore, after reading half of it, left it at home, to be
answered on my retiim : for I thought it dealt only with
questiona raised in onr first controveray. However, a
second peruaal showed me, that it embraced a far wider
subject, and not only asked me for a proof of what, in
my preface to " Principles of Cartesian Philosophy," I
wrote (with the object of merely stating, without proving
or uiging my opinion), but also requested me to impart a
great portion of my Etliies, wlileh, as everyone knows.
ought to be based on physics and metaphysics. For this
reason, I have been unable to allow myself to satisfy your
demands. I wished to await an opportunity for begging
you, in a most friendly way, by word of mouth, to with-
draw your request, for giving you my reasons for refusal,
and for showing that jour inquiries do not promote the


IxBTTEB XXXIX.] COSREBPONDENCG.


R«olution o£ our firat controyeray, but, on the contrary, are
Hfor tlie laost part entirely dependent on ita previous
f settlement. So far are they not essential to the understand-
ing of my doctrine concerning necessity, that they cannot be
apprehended, nnleaa the latter qneation. is understood
first. However, before such an opportunity ofEored, a
second letter reached me this week, appearing to convey
a certain sense of displeaaure at my delay. Ifeceasity,
therefore, Las compelled me to write you these few words,
to acquaint you more fully with my proposal and decision.
I hope that, when the facts of the case are before you, yon
.ivill, of your own accord, desist from your request, and
■■will still remain kindly disposed towarda me. I, for my
.part, will, in all things, according to my power, prove
.myself your, itc


LETTER XXSIS,

Spisoza to Christian Huyohens.

(Treating of the JJn-ity of ffod.)

Distinguished Sib, — The demonstration of the unity
of God, on the ground that His nature involves necessary
existence, which you asked for, and I took note of, I have
been prevented by various business from sending to you
"before. In order to aecompHsh. my purpose, I will pre-
mise — -

I. That the true definition of anything includes nothing
except the simple nature of the thing defined. From this
it follows —

IL That no definition can involve or express a multitude
or a given number of individuals, inasmuch as it involves
and eipresaea nothing except the nature of the thing as it
is in itself. For instance, the definition of a triangle in-
cludes nothing beyond the simple nature of a triangle ; it
does not include any given number of triangles. In like


352 Spinoza's [letteb hxA-

mtLnner, the definition of the mind as a thinking tiling, or
the definition of God as a perfect Being, includea nothing
beyond the naturea of the miad and of God, not a given
number of minds or gods.

m. That for everything that exists there must neces-
sarily be a positiTe cause, through which it eiista.

IV". This cause may be situate cither in the na.tTire and
definition of the thing itself (to wit, because existence be-
longs to its nature or necessarily includes it), or estemaUy
to the tiling.

From these premisses it followB, that if any given num-
ber of individuals exists in nature, there must be one or
more causes, whieh have been able to produce exactly that
number of individuals, neither more nor less, If, for io-
Btance, there existed in nature twenty men (in order to
avoid all confusion, I will assume that these all exist to-
gether as primary entities), it is not enough to investigate
the cause of human nature in general, in order to account
for the existence of these twenty ; we must also inquire
into the reason, why there exist exactly twenty men, n«,thOT
more nor less. For (by our third hypothesis) for each mana
reason and a cause must be forthcoming, why he should exist.
But this cause (by our second and third hypotheses) caimot
be contained in the nature of man himself ; for the true
definition of man does not involve the number of twfinty
men. Hence (by our fourth hypothesis) the cause for tie
existence of these twenty men, and consequently for the
existence of each of them, must exist externally to them.
"We may thus absolutely conclude, that all thiiiga, -which
are conceived to exist in. the plural number, must neces-
sarily be produced by external causes and not by the force
of their own nature. But since (by our second hypothesis)
necessary existence appertains to the nature of God, His
true definition must neceesarjly include necessary existence:
therefore from His true definition His necessary existence
must be inferred. But from His true definition (as I have
already demonstrated from our second and third hypo-
theses) the necessary existence of many gods cannot bs
inferred. Therefore there only follows the existence of a
single God. Which was to be proved.

This, distinguished Sir, has now seemed to me the besl


LKTTEB XL.'] CORBESPOHSENOB. 353

nietliod for demoBBtrating the proposition. I Lave also
pi-oved it differently by means of the distinction between
essence and existence ; bnt bearing in mind the object you
mentioned to roe, I have preferred to send you the demon-
stration given above. I hope it wiD eatisfy you, and I will
'await your reply, meanwhile remaining, &c.
Voorljurg, 7 Jan,, 1666.


LETTER XL. (XXXV.)
Spinoza to CHaisTiAS Hpiohens.
Furiher arguments for the unity of God.

DiETiNGHiSHED SiE, — Li voiir last letter, written on
March 30th, you have eicellently elucidated the point,
which was somewhat obscure to me in your letter of
February 10th. As I now know your opinion, I will set
fortti the state o£ the question a.s you wnceive it ; whether
there be only a single Being who Bubaists by his own suffi-
ciency or force ? I not only affirm this to be so, but also
undertake to prove it from the fact, that the nature o£
such a Being necessarily involves existence ; perhaps it may
also be readily proved from the understanding of God (aa
I set forth, "Principles of Cartesian Philosophy," I.
Prop, i.), or from others of Hia attributes. Before treating
of the subject I will briefly show, aa preliminaries, what
propertiea muat he possessed by a Being including uecea-
sary existence. To wit; —

I. It muat be eternal. For if a defirkite duration be
aasigned to it, it would beyond that definif* duration be
conceived as non-esistent, or as not involving necessary
existence, which would be contrary to its definition.

IL It must be simple, not made up of parts. For parts
must in nature and knowledge he prior to the whole they
compose : this could not be the case with regard to that
which ia eternal,

in. It cannot be conceived a.s determinatej but only as
infinite. For, if the nature of the said Being were deter-


35i sfinoza's [letteb xl.

minate, and conceived aa determinate, that nature -would
beyond the said UmitB be conceived &a non-existent, which
a^in is contrary to its definition.

IV. It IB indivisible. For if it were divisible, it could be
divided into parts, either ol the same or of different nature.
If the latter, it could be destroyed and so not exist, vf hieh
is contrary to its definition ; if the former, each part would
in itaelE include necessajy existence, and thus one part
could exist without others, and consequently be con-
ceived as BO existing. Hence the nature of the Being
would be comprehended as finite, which, by what has been
said, is contrary to its definition. Thus we see that, in
attempting to ascribe to such a Being any imperfection,
we straightway fall into contradictions. For, whether the
imperfection which we wish to assign to the said Being he
situate in any defect, or in limitations possessed by its
nature, or in any change which it might, through deficiency
of power, undergo from external causes, we are always
brought back to the contradiction, that a na,ture which in-
volves necessary existence, does not exist, or does not ne-
cessarily eiist. I conclude, therefore —

V. That everything, which includes necessary existence,
cannot have in itself any imperfection, but must express
pure perfection.

TI. Further, since only from perfection can it come
about, that any Being should exist by its own sufficiency
and force, it follows that, if we asaume a Being to exist by
its own nature, but not to express all perfections, we must
further suppose that another Being exists, which does com-
l)rehend in itself aU perfections. For, if the leas powerful
Being exists by its own sufficiency, how much more must
the more powerful ao exist ?

Lastly, to deal with the question, I affirm that there can
only be a single Being, of which the existence belongs to its
nature ; such a Being which possesses in itself all perfec-
tions I wUl call God. If there be any Being to whose
nature existence belongs, such a Being can contain in itself
no imperfection, but must (by my fifth premiss) express
every perfection ; therefore, the nature of such a Being
seems to belong to God (whose existence we are bound to
affirm by Premiss "VI.), inasmuch as He has in Himself all


EB XLI.] COaKEaPONBENCB, 355

I perfections and no imperfections. Nor can it exist externally
to God. For if, externally to Otod, there existed one and
the same nature involving necessary existence, such nature
"Would be twofold ; but this, by wLat we have just shown,
is abeurd. Therefore there ia nothing save G-od, but there
Ib a single God, that involves necessary existence, which
WBs to be proved.
Such, difitingnialied Sir, are the arguments I can now
produce for demonstrating this question. I hope I may
alBO demonstrate to you, that I a,m., &c.

Voorburg, 10 April, 1666.


LETTEE XT.I. (XXXVI.)

Spinoza to CsKiaTiiN HuTGHBira.

IFivrther discu§gion concerning the unity of God. Spinoea
asks for advice abcmt polishing leTuee. {Voorburg, May,
1666.)]

DisTiNGTrraHKD Sie, — I have been by one means or
another prevented from answeriag sooner your letter, dated
19th May. As I gather that you suspend your judgment
with regard te most of the demonstration I sent you (owing,
I believe, to the obscurity you find in it), I will here en-
deavour to explain its meaning more clearly.

First I enumerated four properties, which a Being exist-
ing by its own sufficiency or force must possess. These
four, and others like them, I reduced in my fifth ohaerva-
le. Further, in order to deduce all things neees-
Bary for the demonstration from a single premiss, I en-
deavoured in my sixth objervation to demonstrate the
existence of God from the given hypothesis ; whence, lastly,
taking (as you know) nothing beyond the ordinary mean-
ing of the terms, I drew the desired conclusion.

Such, in brief, was my purpose and such my aim. I will
now explain the meaning of each step singly, and will first
Btart with the aforesaid four properties.


366 Spinoza's [i.ETTKa ill

In the first yoa find no .difficulty, nor is it anything but,
as in the case of tlie second, an axiom. By simple I merely
mean not compound, or not made up of ports differing in
nature or other parts agreeing in nature. This demonstra-
tion is assuredly universal.

The sense of my third observation (that if the Being be
thought, it cannot be conceived as limited by thought, hai
only, as infinite, and similaxly, if it be extension, it cajinot
be conceived as limited by extension) you have excellently
perceived, though you say you do not perceive the con-
clusion ; this last is based on the fact, that a contradiction
ia involved in conceiving under the category of non-exis-
tence anything, whose definition includes or (v^hat is the
same thmg) affirms existence. And since determinatioB
implies nothing positive, but only a limitation of the «iiB-
tence of the nature conceived as determinate, it follows that
that, of which the definition affirms existence, cannot be
conceived as determinate. For instance, if the term exten-
sion included neceaaary existence, it would be alike im-
poaaible to conceive extension without existence and exis-
tence without extension. If this were establiahed, it would
be impossible to conceive determinate extension. For, if it
be conceived as determinate, it must be determined by its
own nature, that is by extension, and this extension, where-
by it ia determined, must be conceived under the category
of non-existence, which hj the bypothesis is obTioudy ft
contradiction. In my fourth observation, I merely wished
to show, that such a Being could neither be divided into
parts of the same nature or parts of a different nature,
whether those of a different nature involved neceaaary exis-
tence or not. If, I said, we adopt the second view, the
Being would be destroyed ; for destruction is merely the
resolution of a thing into parts so that none of them
expresses the nature of the whole ; if we adopt the first
view, we should be in contradiction with the first three
propertiea.

In my fifth observation, I merely asserted, that perfection
consists in being, and imperfection in the privation o£
being. I say the privation ; for although ext«n8ion denies
of itself thought, this argues no imperfection in it. It
would be an imperfection in it, if it were in any degree


»


liETTEB XII.] CORBEaPONBBNCE. 35/

deprived of estensioa, as it -would be, if it were determinate j
or again, if it lacked duration, position, &o.

My BJsth obserration you accept absolutely, and yet you
Bay, that your whole difficulty remains (inasmuch as
there may be, you think, several self-existent eatities of
different nature ; as for instance thought and extension
are different and perhaps subsist by their own sufficiency).
I am, therefore, forced to beheve, that you attribute to my
observation a meaning quite different from the one in-
tended by me. I think I can discern your interpretation
of it; however, in order to save time, I will merely set
forth my own meaning. I say then, as regards my sixth
observation, that if we assert that anything, which ia inde-
terminate and perfect only after its Innd, exists by its own
sufficiency, we must also grant the esistenee of a Being in-
determinate and perfect absolutely ; such a Being I will
call God. If, for example, we wish to assert that extension
or thought (which are each perfect aftfir their kind, that is,
in a given sphere of being) exists by its own sufficiency, we
must grant also the eriBtence of Gh)d, who is absolutely
perfect, that ia of a Being absolutely indeterminatfl. I
would here direct attention to what I have jnat said with
regard to the term imperfection ; namely, that it signifies
that a thing is deficient in some quality, which, neverthe-
less, belongs to its nature. For instaiiee, extension can
only be called imperfect in respect of duration, position, or
quantity : that is, as not enduring longer, as not retaining
its position, or as not being greater. It can never be called
imperfect, because it does not think, inasmuch as its nature
requires nothing of the kind, but consiats solely in exten-
sion, that is in a certain sphere of being. Only in respect
to its own sphere can it be called determinate or indeter-
minate, perfect or imperfect. Now, since the nature of God
is not confined to a certain sphere of being, hut exists in
Ijeing, which ia absolutely indeterminate, so His nature also
demands everything which perfectly expresses being ; other-
wise His nature would be determinate and deficient.

This being bo, it follows that there can he only one
Being, namely God, who exists by His own force. If, for
the sake of an illustration, we assert, that extension in-
volves existence ; it is, therefore, necessary that it shouli'


IIlETTEB XLI.i.

be eternal and indeteriiiiiiate, and express abaoluielj
no imperfection, but jierfection. Hence extension wiU
appertain to God, or will he eomething whicli in eorae
fashion expresses the nature of God, since God is a Being,
who not onlj in a certain respect but absolutely is in esseain
indeterminate and omnipotent. What we have here said
oy way of illustration regarding extension must ha assertei
of all that we ascribe a similar existence to. I, therefore,
conclude aa in my former letter, that there is nothing
external to God, but that God alone exists by His own
sufficiency. 1 think I have said enough to sliom the mean-
ing of my former letter j however, of this yon will "be the
best judge. • • • • *

(The regl of the letter is occupied with detaUa ai>0Kt tin
polithing of leneet.)


LETTER XLI.A.

Spinoza to • • * • •' (May or June, 1665).

[Spinota urgeg his correspmid^nt to he diligent in studying
philosophy, ^TOmisCB to send part of the Ethics, and add*
some personal details.']

Dbab Peiend, — I do not know whether you have qnit«
forgotten me ; but there are many circumstances whieh
lead me to suspect it. First, when I was setting out on
my journey,' I wished to bid you good-bye ; and, after
your own invitation, thinking I should certainly find you
at home, heard that you had gone to the Hague. I return
to Voorbut^, nothing douhting but that you would at least
have visited me in passing; but you, forsooth, without
greeting your friend, went back home. Three weeks have
I waited, without getting sight of a letter from you. If
you wish this opinion of mine to be changed, you may
easily change it by writing ; and you can, at the same

' Probably J. Bresser, a member of ihe Spinoilslio Society formed At
AmaterdBtn. See note lo Letter XLII.
' See Letter SXXVIII., wh^c!i fixes appraxiiDBtely the dateof thit,


I


^1 LE

^^ time, point out a means of entanng into a correspondeiiL-e,

^P as we once talked of doing at your house.

V Meanwhile, I should lite to ask yon, nay I do bog and

" entreat you, hy our frieodahip, to apply yourself to some
serious work with real study, and to demote the chief part of
your life to the cultivation of your understanding and
your soul. Now, while there is time, and before you com-
plain of having let time and, indeed, your own aeu slip by.
rurther, in order to set our eorrespondenee on foot, and to
give you courage to write to me more freely, I would have
you know that I have long thought, and, indeed, beea
almost certain, that you are somewhat too diffident of your
own abilities, and that you are afraid of advancing some

I question or proposal unworthy of a man of learning. It
does not become me to praise you, and expatiate on your
talents to your face ; but, if you are afraid that I shall
show your letters to others, who will laugh at you, I give
you my word of honour, that I will religiously keep them,
and will show them to no mortal without your leave. On
these conditions, you may enter on a correspondence,
unless you doubt of my good faith, which I do not in the
least believe. I want to hear your opinion on this in your
first letter ; and you may, at the same time, send me the
ionserve of red roses, though I am now much better.

After my journey, I was once bled; but the fever did
not cease, though I was somewhat more active than before
the bleeding, owing, I think, to the change of air ; but I
■was two or three times laid up with a tertian. This, how-
ever, hy good diet, I have at length driven away, and sent
about its business. Where it ha,s gone, I know not j hut I
am taking care it does not return here.

Aa regards the third part of my philosophy, I will
shortly send it you, if you wish to be its transmitter, or to
oui- friend De Vries ; and, although I had settled not to
send any of it, till it was finished, yet, as it takes longer
than I thought, I am unwilling to keep you waiting. I
will send up to the eightieth proposition, or thereahouts.'

Of English afEairs I hear a good deal, but nothing for
certain. The people continue to be apprehensive, and can
■e probably □riginallj'


I LETTER XLI.A.]


359


Bxiq^


SGO Spinoza's [letteb

see no reason, why the fleet should not be despatclied ; but
the matter does not jet seem to be set on foot. I a.m
afraid our nilera want to be overwise and prudent ; bat
the event will show wha,t they intend, and wKat they will
attempt. May the gods turn it all to good. I want to
know, what our people think, where you are, and what they
know for certain; but, above all things, I want jou to
believe me, &C.


LETTER XLII. (XXSVIL)

Sputoza to I. B.1

[Concerning the ltd methed, ly wMck we may safely arrive al
Ike kiiowledge of things.^

Most i-bakxed Sib aud DEiSEBT Feiend, — ^1 have not
been able hitherto to answer your last letter, received some
time back, I have been so hindered by various oocupa-
tiouH and calls on my time, that I am hardly yet free from
them. However, as I have a few spare moments, I do not
want to fall short of my duty, but take this first opportu-
nity of heartily thanking you for your affection and kind-
ness towards me, which you have often displayed in your
actions, and now also abundantly prove by your letter.

I pass on to your question, which runs as follows : ■' la
there, or can there be, any method by which we may, with-
out hindrance, arrive at the knowledge of the most excel-
lent things? or are our minds, like our bodies, subject to
the vicissitudes of circumstance, so that our thoughts are
governed rather by fortime than by skill ? " I think I
shall satisfy you, if I show that there must necessarily be
a method, whereby we are able to direct our clear and dis-
tinct perceptions, and that our mind is not, like our body,
subject to the vicissitudes of circumstance.

' I, B. has heea identified hy some wicli Jnbn Brpdeoburg-, n, cio'ien
nf Rotterdnni, who tranalKted into Ijitin (1675) a Dutch allftck on the
TriwlBtus Theologico-Politicua, bnt the tone of the letter renders thii
■mprobable, Mnrr and Van Vloten think that L B. may be tlie phy-


LETTEK XLn.] COSBESPONDENCB.


361


Tbia conclusion may be based eiinply on tbe conaideration
that one clear and diatiact perception, or eeveral auch
together, can be abeolutely the cause of another clear and
distinct perception. Now, all the clear and distinct percep-
tions, which we form, can only arise from other clear and
distinct perceptions, which are in ua ; nor do they acknow-
ledge any cause external to ua. Hence it foUowa that the
clear and distinct perceptions, which, we form, depend solely
on our nature, and on its certain and fixed laws ; in other
worda, on our absolute power, not on fortune — that is, not
on causes which, although also acting by certain and fixed
laws, are yet unknown to us, ajid aBeu to our nature and
power. As regards other perceptions, I confess that they
depend chiefly on fortune, Henee clearly appears, what
the true method ought to be like, and what it ought chiefly
to consist in— namely, solely in the knowledge of the pure
understandii^, and its nature and laws. In order that
auch knowledge may be acquired, it la before all things
necessary to distinguish between the understanding and
the imagination, or between ideas which are true and the
rest, such as the fictitious, the false, the doubtful, and
absolutely all which depend solely on the memoiy. For
the understanding of these matters, as far as the method
requires, there is no need to know the nature of the mind
through its first cause ; it is sufficient to put together a short
history of the mind, or of perceptions, in the manner taught
liy Verulam.

I think that in these few words I hare explained aud
demonstrated the true method, and have, at the same time,
pointed out the way of acquiring it. It only remains to
remind you, that all these questions demand assiduous
study, and great firmness of disposition and purpose, la
order to f ulfil these conditions, it is of prime necessity to
follow a fixed mode and plan o£ living, and to set before
one some definite aim. But enoiigh of this for the
present, &c.

Toorburg, 10 June, 1666.


362 bpikoza'b [usttsr xun.

LETTEE XLin. (XXXVILL.)
Spinoza to I. v. M.*

l8j>inoza solves for his friend an arithmetical problem con-
nected with games of chance. (Voorburg, Oct. 1, 1666.)]

Omitted,


LETTERS XLIV., XLV., XLVI. (XXXIX., XL., XL!)

Spinoza to L L*

XLIV. [Remarlcs on Descartes^ treatise on Optics."]

XLV. [JRemarlcs on some alchemistic experiments, on the third
and fourth meditations of Descartes, and on Optics.']

XLVX {Bemxirlcs on Hydrostatics.]

LETTER XLVn. (XLIV.)
Spinoza to 1. 1.

[Spinoza tegs his friend to stop the printing of the Dutch
version of the Tractatus Theologico-Politicus. Some re-
marhs on a pernicious pamphlet, " Homo PoliticiLs,** and
on ThaUs of Miletus.]

Most cottbteoits Sib, — ^When Professor N. N. visited
me tlie otlier day, lie told me that my Theologieo-Political
Treatise lias been translated into Dutch, and that someone,
whose name he did not know, was about printing it. With
regard to this, I earnestly beg you to inquire carefully into
the business, and, if possible, stop the printing. This is the

^ It is rot known who I. v. M. was. Letters XLIII.-XLVII. were
written in Dutch.

^ 1. 1. Probably Jarig Jellis, a merchant of Amsterdam and a
Mennonite. He translated the Opera Fosthuma into Dutch, 1677.


k


LETl'EE XLVII.] COEEESPONDENOB. 363

request not on\j of myself, but of many of my friends ini
acquaintancea, irho would be sorry to see the Iwolt plaeed
under Em interdict, as it undoubtedly would be, if pub-
lished in I>utch. I do not doubt, but that you will do this
seryice to me and the cause.

One of my friends sent me a abort time since a pamphlet
called "Homo Pohticus," of which I had heard much. I
hare read it, and find it to be the moat pemieions work
which men could devise or invent. Bank and riches are
the author's highest good ; he adapts his doctrine accord-
ingly, and shows the means to acquire them ; to wit, by
inwardly rejecting aJl religion, and outwardly professing
whatever best serves his own advancement, also hy keep-
ing faith with no one, except in ao far as he himself is
profited thereby, For the rest, to feign, to make promises,
and break them, to lie, to swear falsely, and many such
hke practices call forth his highest praises. When I had
finished reading the hook, I debated whether I should
write a pamphlet indirectly aimed against its author,
wherein I should treat of the highest good and show the-
troubled and wretched condition of those who are covetous,
of rank and riches ; finally proving by very plain reaaon-
ing and many examples, that the insatiable desire for rank
and riches must bring and has brought ruin to states.

How much better and more excellent than the doctrines
of the aforeaaid writer are the reflections of Thales of
Miletus, appears from the foDowing. All the goods of
friends, he says, are in common ; wise men are the friends
of the gods, and all thinga belong to the gods ; therefore
all things belong to the wiae. Thus in a single aentence,
this wisest of men accounts himself most rich, rather by
nobly deapiaing riches than by sordidly seeking them.
In other paaaages be shows that the wise lack riches, not
from necessity, but from choice. For when his friends re-
proached him with his poverty he answered, " Do you wish
me to show you, that I could acquire what I deem un-
worthy of my labour, but you BO diligently seek?" On their
answering in the affirmative, he hired every oil-press in the
whole of Greece {for being a distinguished astrologer he
knew that the olive harvest would be aa abundant as in
previous years it had been scanty), and sub-let at his own


: xi,Tiif/V


[I.ETTBB

price what he had hired for a. very amal! aura, tliua acquir-
ing In a single Tear a large fortune, which ho bestowed
liberallj aa he had gained it induattiouslj, Sx,
The Hague, IT Feb., 16;i.


LETTEE XLVm

"Written by a physician, Lambert de Velthuysen, to
Isaac Orobio, and forwarded by the latter to Spinoza. It
containa a detailed attack on the Tractatus Theologico-
Politicua. Ita tenor may be sufficiently seen from Spinoza's
reply. (Written at Utrecht, January 24.th, 1671.) Velt-
huysen afterwards became more friendly to Spinoza, as
appears from Letter LXXV,


LETTEE T T.Ty .

Spinoza to Isaac Oeobio.'

[A defence of Hie Trad-atus Theohgico-Politia'^-: (The
Hagve. 1671.)]

Most leakned Sib, — Ton doubtless wonder why I hare
kept you bo long waiting. I could hardly bring myself to
reply to the pamphlet of that person, which you thought
fit to send me ; indeed I only do ao now because of my
proniiae. However, in order as far aa possible to humour
my feelings, I will fulfil my engagement in aa few words as
I can, and will briefly show how perversely he has inter-
preted my meaning ; whether through maUce or through
ignorance I cannot readily say. But to the matter in

First he says, "tliat it is of little ino-oient to iatow whai
nation I belong to, or wha-t sort of life I lead." Trulj, if he

' The rough copj of this latter ia still preserved, and cuDtains manr
■ironi; expreasioiiB of SpiiiDiB.'R indigoatian BgaiuBt Velthu^Ben, whi^
he Qfreiivards suppressed or mitigated. ~


LETTEE ILIX.] COEEESPONDENCE, 365

had known, he would not bo easily have persuaded him-
self that I teach Atheism. For Atheists are wont greedily
to covet rant and riches, which I have always despised, as
all who know me are aware. Again, in order to smooth
his path to the object he has in view, he says that, ■' J am
possessed of no mean talents," bo that he may, forsooth,
more easily convince his readers, that I have knowingly
and cunningly with evil intent argued for the cause of the
deists, in order to discredit it. This contention sufficiently
shows that he has not understood my reasons. For who
could be so cunning and clever, as to be able to advance
uader false pretences eo many and such good reasons for a
doctrine which he did not believe in? Who will pass for
an honest writer in the eyes of a. man, that thinks one may
argue as soundly for tiction aa for truth ? But after al! I
am not astonished. Itescartea waa formerly served in the
same way by Voet, and the most booourable writers are

nstautly thus treated.

He goes on to say, "In order to shun the reproach of
auperstUion, he seems to me to have thrown off all religion."
"WTiat this writer means by religion and what by eupersti-
tion, I know not. But I would ask, whether a man throws
oS all religion, who maintains that God must be acknow-
ledged as the highest good, and must, as such, be loved
with a free mind? or, again, that the reward of virtue is
virtue itself, while the punishment of folly and weatneas ia
folly itaeU ? or, lastly, that every man ought to lore Iiia
neighbour, and to obey the commands of the supreme
power? Such doctrines I have not only eipresaly stated,
but have also demonstrated them by very aoM reaaoning.
However, I think I aee the mud wherein this person sticks.
He finds nothing in virtue and the imderatanding in them-
selves to please him , but would prefer to live in iiceordance
with his passions, if it were not for the single obstacle that
lie fears punishment. He abstains from evil actions, and
obeys the divine commands like a stave, with unwillingneas
and hesitation, expecting as the reward of hia bondage to
be recompensed by God with gifts far more pleasing than
divine love, and greater in proportion to his dislike to
goodness and consequent uuwillingneBs to practise it.
Eence it comes to pass, that he believes that aU, who are


366 spimoza's [lettek klu.

not restrained by this fear, lead a life of licence and throw
off all religion. But this I pass over, and proceed to the
deduction, whereby he wishes to show, that " -ufitk covert
and diaguUed nrgvmiente I teach aihewm." The foundation
of his reasoning is, thai he thinks I take away free-
dom from God, and subject Him to fate. This is flatk
false. For I have maintained, that all things follow br
inevitable necessity from the nature of God, in the same
way as all maintain that it foUowa from the nattire of God,
that He underatands Himself: no one denies that this
latter conaeqnence follows necessarily from the divine
nature, yet no one conceives that God is constrained by
any fate ; they believe that He understands HimaeW
with entire freedom, though neeeHsarily. I find nothing
here, that cannot be perceived by everyone ; if, never-
theless, my adversary thinks that these argnmenta are
advanced with evil intent, what does he think of his
own Deseartea, who aaaerted that nothing is done by ns,
which has not been pre-ordained by God, nay, that we are
newly created aa it were by God eveiy moment, though
none the less we act according to our own free will P
This, as Descartes himself confesses, no one can under-
stand.

Further, this inevitable necessity in things destroya
neither divine laws nor human. For moral principles,
whether they have received from God the form of laws or
not, are nevertheless divine and salutary. Whether we
accept the good, which follows from virtiiB and the divine
love, as given us by God as a judge, or as emanating from
the necessity of the divine nature, it is not in either case
more or less to he desired ; nor are the evils which follow
from evil actions less to be feared, because they follow
neceasarily: finally, whether we act under necessity or
freedom, we ore in either case led by hope and fear. Where-
fore the assertion is false, " that I inaiiitain that there is flo
TooTn leji for preceptg and eommande." Or as he goes on to
say, "that there is no expectation of reward or jitmiahment,
since aU things are ascribed to fate, and are eaid to flow vnih
in&oitaHle nfceesity from Cfod."

I do not here inquire, why it is the same, or almost the
flame to say that all things necessarily flow from God, as


BtETTEE ILIS.]

Bay that God is universal ; but I would liave you observe

i insinuation which he not less maliciously subjoins,
" titat I wish that mem should practise virtue, not hecause of

* precepts and law of God, or throiigh hope of reward and
of puninhment, hut," Ac. Such a sentiment yon will
EiiBSuredly not find anywhere in my treatise : on the con-
Ftrary, I have eipressly stated in Chap. lY., that the sum
of the divine law (which, as I have said in Chap. 11., has
been divinely inscribed on our hearts), and its chief pre-
cept is, to love God as the highest good : not, indeed, from
the fear of any punishment, for love cannot spring from
fear ; nor for the love of anything which we desire for our
own dehght, for then we should love not God, but the
object of our desire.

I have shown in the same chapter, that God revealed
this law to the prophets, so that, whether it received from
God the form of a command, or whether we conceive it
to he lite God's other decrees, which involve eternal
necessity and truth, it will in either case remain God's
decree and a salutary principle. Whether I love God in
freedom, or whether I love TTim from the necessity of the
divine decree, I shall nevertheless love God, and shall be
in a state of salvation. Wherefore, lean now declare here,
that this person is one of that sort, of whom I have said at
the end of my preface, that I would rather that they utterly
neglected my book, than that by misinterpreting it after
their wont, they should become hostile, and hinder others
without benefiting themselves.

Though I think I have said enough to prove what I in-
tended, I have yet thought it vForfii while to add a few
observations — namely, that this person falsely thinks,
that 1 have in view the axiom of theologians, which draws
a distinction between the words, of a prophet when pro-
pounding doctrine, and the same prophet when narrating
an event. If hy such an axiom he means that which in
Chap. XV. I attributed to a certain E. Jehuda Alpakhar,
how could he think that I agree with it, when in that very
chapter I reject it as false? If he does not mean this, I
confess I am as yet in ignorance as to what he does mean,
and, therefore, could not have had it in view.

Again, I cannot see why he sajs, that all will adopt my


« [I.ETTBK XLlgfl

opinions, who deny that reason and philosophy ehould bo
the interpreters of Scripture ; I have refuted the doctiine of
Buch persons, together with that of MaimonideB.

It TOnld take t&o long to review ail the indications he
gives of not having judged me altogether calmly. I there-
fore pass on to his conclueion, where he says, " that I have
no argwmenlt left to prove, that Mahomet viag not a truepro'
fhet." This he endeavours to show from my opinions,
whereas from them it clearly follows, that Mahomet was
an impostor, inasmuch aa he utterly forbids that freedom,
which the Catholic religion revealed by our natural faculties
and by the prophets grants, and which I have shown' should
be granted in its completeness. Even if this were not so, am
I, I should like to know, bound to show that any prophet
is false ? Surely the burden hes with the prophets, to
prove that they are true. But if he retorts, that Mahomet
also taught the divine law, and gave certain signs of his
mission, as the rest of the prophets did, there is surely no
a why he should deny, that Mahomet also was a true


As regards the Turks and other non-Christian nations;

I if they worship Gfld hy the practice of justice and charity

towards their neighbour, I believe that they have the spirit

I of Christ, and are in a state of salvation, whatever they

< may ignorantly hold with regard to Mahomet and oracles.

Thus you see, my frieitd, how far this man has strayed
from the truth ; nevertheless, I grant that he has inflicted
the greatest injury, not on me but on himself, inastmich as
he has not been ashamed to declare, that " under disguised
and covert argumerUs I teach atheism."

I do not think, that you will find any expreBsions I have
used against this man too severe. However, if there be
any of the kind which offeud you, I beg you to correct
them, as you shall think fit. I have no disposition to irri-
tate him, whoever he maj be, and to raise up by my labours
enemies against myself ; as this is oft«u the result of dis-
putes like the present, I could scarcely prevail on myself to
reply — nor should I have prevailed, if I had not promiaed.
Farewell. I commit to your prudence this letter, and
myself, who am, &c.


lETTEJt L.] iCOEBEaPOJTDENCE.


LETTER L. (L,)

Spinoza to Jinia Jellis.

\Pf the difference between the polUical theoriea of Sohhee and
Spinoza, of the Unity of Ood, of the notion of figure, of
ike hook of a Utrecht prof eesor against the Traetatua Theo'
logiao-PoHticia.^

Most couetbouh Sib, — Aa regards political theories,
tlie difference which you inq uire about between Hohbes and
jnyaelf, consista in this, that I always preserve natural
light intact, and only allot to the chief ma^strates in sreiy
state a right over their subjects commensurate with the
excess of their power over the power of the subjects. This
is what always takes place in the state of nature.

Again, with regard to the demonstration which I eatab-
lish in. the appendix to my geometric expositioa of Car-
tesian principles, namely, that God can only with great
impropriety "be called one or aingle, I answer that a thing
can only he called one or single in respect of existence, not
in respect of essence. For we do not conceive things under
the category of numbers, unless they have first been reduced
to a common genua. For example, he who holds in Lis
hand a penny and a crown piece will not thint of the two-
fold nuniher, unless he can call both the penny a»d the
crown piece by one and the same name, to wit. coins or
pieces of money. In the latter case he can say that he
holds two coins or pieces of money, inasmuch as he calls
the crown as well as the penny, a coin, or piece of money.
Hence, it is evident that a thing cannot be called one or
single, unless there be afterwards another thing conceived,
which (as has been said) agrees with it. How, since the
existence of God is His essence, and of His essence we can
form DO general idea, it is certain, that he who caUa God
one or single has no true idea of God, and speaks of HJi ^
Tery improperly,

As to the doctrine that figure is negation and not any-
thing positive, it is plain that the whole of matter considered
indefinitely can have no figiwe, and that figure can only


I


370 sfisoza's [j.wena'U

enet in finite and detenninate bodies. For lie vrlio can,
that he perceives a fi^;ure. merely indicates therebj. thatW
conceives a determinate tltiitg. and how it is dtit«rmiiiab.
This determination, therefore, does not appertain to tiw
thing according to its being, but, on the contrarr, is ili
non-being, As then figure is nothing else than determina-
tion, and determination ifl negation, figure, as has been said,
can be nothing but negation.

The boot, which a Utrecht professor wrote against mine,
and which was published aff«r his death, I saw lying in a
bootseller's window. From the little I tben read of it. I
judged it nnworthy of pertisal, still lesa of reply. I, there-
fore, left the book, and its author. With an inward smile
I reflected, that the most ignorant are ever the most
audacious and the most ready to rush into print. The
ChristianB seem to me to expose their wares for eale Kte
hucksters, who always show first that which is worst Tbe
devil is said to be very cunning, but to my ttinMng the
tricks of these people are in cunning far beyond his.
FarewelL

The Hagae, 2 June, 1674.


LEITEK LI. (XLT.)

GODPEEY LSIBNITZ TO SpDrOZA.

DiaTiNonsHED SiK, — Among your other merits spnsd
abroad by fame, I understand that you have remarkable
skill in optics. I have, therefore, wished to forward mj
essay, such as it is, to you. as 1 am not likely to find a
better critic in this branch of learning. The paper, which
I send you, and which I have styled " a note on advanced
apticB," haa been published with the view of more con-
veniently mftking known my ideas to my friends and the
jurious in such matters. I hear that * • • • • ia very
3leTer in the same subject, doubtless he is well known to
you.' If you could obtain for me his opinion and kind

' Probably the nsme moilted is Diemerbrooeh, a learned phj-aicinn
and CarlesiaD at L'tcccht.


LETTEE HI.] COBKESPONDBSCB, 371

attention, you would greatly inereaBe my otligation to you.
The paper explains itself.

I believe you have already received the " Prodromo" of
Francis Lana' the Jesuit, written in Italian. Some remark-
able obaervationa on optics are contained iu it. John
Oltius too, a young Swiss very learned iu these matters,
has published " Phyaico-Mechanical Keflections conc«ming
Tision ; " in which he announces a machiue for the polish-
ing aU kinds of glaasea, very simple and of umversal
applicability,' and also declares that he haa discovered a
means of collecting all the rays coming from different
points of an object, ao as to obtain an equal number of
corresponding points, but only under conditions of a given
distance and form of object.

My proposal is, not that the raya from all points should
be collected and re-arranged (tills is with any object oi
distance impoesible at the present sta.ge of our kiiowledge) ;
the result I aim at is the equa.1 coUection of rays from
points outside the optic axis and in the optic axis, so that
the apertures of glasses could be made of any size desired
without impairing the diBtinctneBs of viaion. But this
must stand according to your skilled verdict. Tarewell,
and believe me, distinguished Sir, your obedient servant,
GoDPBEY Leibnitz,
J. TJ. D., Councillor of the Elector of Mainz.

Frankfort, 5 Oct, 16"1 (new style).


LETTEK LH. (XLYI.)

Spinoza to Luibnitz.

[AtiMoer to the foregoing letter].

Most lbakked ahu dibtinotjishei) Sie, — 1 have read
the paper you were kind enough' to send me, and return
you many thanks for the communication. I regret that I


372 spinoza'b

have not Leen able quits t« follow your tQeaning, thoo^
jou explain it sufficiently clearly, whether you think tlat
there is any cause for making the apertures of the glasM
small, except that the xaya coming &om a single point hii
not collected accurately at another single point, but in i
small area which we generally call the mechanical poiiil,
and that this small area is greater or leea in proportion ta
the size of the aperture, Further, I ask whether tie
lenaea which yon call " jiandochie " correct this fault, »
that the mechanical point or small area, on which the rajl
coming from a single point are after refraction collected,
always preserves the same proportional size, whether tie
apertiire be small or large. If so, one may enlarge tie
aperture as much aa one hkes, and consequently these
lenses will be far superior to those of any other shape
known to me ; if not, I hardly aee why you praise them aa
greatly beyond common lenses. For circular lenses hart
everywhere the same axis ; therefore, when we employ them,
we must regard all the points of aJi object as placed in tiw
optic axis ; although all the points of the object be not at
the same distance, the di:Serence arising theuce will not 1»
perceptible, whon the objects are very remote ; becauM
then the rays coming from a single point would, aa thej
enter the glass, he regarded as parallel. I thmk votit
lenses might be of service in obtaining a more diatinrt
representation of all the objects, when we wish to include
several objects in one view, aa we do, when we employ rer;
large convex circular lenses. However, I would ratbw
suspend my judgment about all these details, till you have
more clearly explained your meaning, as I heartily beg von
to do. I have, as you requested, sent the other copy of
your paper to Mr, • * * •, He answers, that he has at
present no time to study it, but he hopes to have leisure in
a week or two.

I have not yet seen the " Prodromo " of Francis Lana,
nor the " Phyaico-Mechanical Keflections " of John OltiiM.
What I more regret is, that your "Physical Hypothesis"
has not yet come to my hands, nor is there a copy for sale
here at the Hague. The gift, therefore, which you so
liberally promise me will be most acceptable to me ; if I
can be of use to you in any other matter, you will always


tETTEB nn.] CORKEBPONDBSCB. 373

find me most ready. I hope you will not tlunk it too irk-
Bome to reply to tMa short note.

Distinguished Sir,

ToiiTH sincerely,

B. DE Spin OKA,
The Hi^o, g Nov., 1671.

P.S. Mr, Diemerbroeoh does not lire here. I am, there-
fore, forced to entrust this to au ordinary letter-carrier. I
doubt not that you know someone at the Hague, who would
take charge of our letters ; I should like to hear of such a
person, that our correspondence might he more con-
veoiently and securely taken care of. If the " Traotati»
Theologico-PoliticuB " has not yet come to your hands, I
will, unless you have any ohjeetion, send you a copy.
Farewell.


LETTER Lni. (XLVII.)

Fabeitius to SriNOZi,

[FabrUiug, under the order and in the name of the Elector
Palatine, offers Spinossa iJie post ofProfegaor of Philosophy
at SeideUierg, under very liherai condUiont.']

Most eenowsed Sik, — His Most Serene Highness the
Elector Palatine,' my most gracious master, commands me
to write to you, who are, as yet, unknown to me, but most
favourably regarded by his Most Serene Highness, and to
inqiiire of you, whether you are wilHng to accept an ordi-
nary professorship of Philosophy in his illustrious univer-
sity. An annual salary would be paid to you, equal to that
enjoyed at present by the ordinary professors. You will
hardly find elsewhere a prince more favourable to distin-
guished talents, among which ke reckons yourself. Tou
■will have the most ample freedom in philosophical teach-
ing, which the prince is confident you will not misuse, to
disttirb the religion publicly establiahed, I cannot refrain
trom seeoading the prince's injunction. I therefore most

' Charles L«wi6,Eifcl.>r. 1632-1680.


374 Spinoza's [letter lit.

earnestly beg you to reply as soon as possible, and to
address your answer either under cover to the Most
Serene Elector's resident at the Hague, Mr. Grotius, or to
Mr. Q-illes Van der Hele, so that it may come in the packet
of letters usually sent to the court, or else to avail yourself
of some other convenient opportunity for transmitting it.
I will only add, that if you come here, you will live plea-
santly a life worthy of a philosopher, imless events turn
out quite contrary to our expectation and hope. So fare-
well.

I remain, illustrious Sir,

Your devoted admirer,

I. Lewis FABRiTiirs.
Professor of the Academy of Heidelberg, and
Councillor of the Elector Palatine.

Heidelberg, 16 Feb., 1673.


LETTEE LIV. (XLVIH.)
Spinoza to Fabrititis.

{^Spinoza ihanks the Elector for his kind offer, hut, owing to
his unwillmgness to teach in jpvhlic, a/nd other causes^
humbly begs to he allowed time to consider it,"]

DisTiNGxnsHED SiR, — 11 I had ever desired to take a
professorship in any faculty, I could not have wished for
any other than that which is offered to me, through you,
by His Most Serene Highness the Elector Palatine, espe-
cially because of that freedom in philosophical teaching,
which the most gracious prince is kind enough to grant,
not to speak of the desire which I have long entertained,
to live under the rule of a prince, whom all men admire
for his wisdom.

But since it has never been my wish to teach in public,
I have been unable to induce myself to accept this splen-
did opportunity, though I have long deliberated about it,
I think, in the first place, that I should abandon philoso-
phical research if I consented to find time for teaching


LETTER LT.] CO B RESPOND EH CE. 875

young students, I think, in the Becond p]a«e, that I do
not know the limits, within whici the freedom of my philo-
Bophical teaching would he confined, if I am to avoid all
appearance of disturhing the putlicly estahlished religion,
lieligious quarrels do not arise so much from ardent zeal
for religion, as from men's various dispositions and love of
contradiction, which causes them to habituallj distort and
condemn everything, however rightly it may have been
said, I have experienced these results in my private and
secluded station, how much more should I have to fear
them after my elevation to this post of honour.

Thus you see, distinguished Sir, that I am not holding
tack in the hope of getting somtsthing better, but through
my love of quietness, which I think I can in some measure
Heeare, if I keep away from lecturing in public. I there-
fore most earnestly entreat yon to beg of the Moat Serene
Elector, that I may be allowed to consider further about
this matter, and I also ask you to concihate the favour of
the most gracious prince to his most devoted admirer,
thus increasing the obligations of your sincere friend,

B. DE. 8.

Tbe Hague, 30 Martb, 1673.


LETTEE LV. (LI.)

Hugo Boxel to Spinoz*.

[Afrie/id aelis Sjpinoxda opinion about GAorfg,]

DisTiBouiaHED Sir, — My reason for writing to you is,
that I want to know your opinion about apparitions and
ghosts or spectres ; if you admit their existence, what do
Tou think about them, and how long does their life last ?
Mot some hold them to be mortal, others immortal. As I
am doubtful whether you admit their existence, I will
—^oceed no further.

Meanwhile, it is certain, that the ancients beheved in


376 sfixoia's [i.ettkelH

them. The theologians £und philosophers of to-dav are
hitherto agreed as to the caistence of some creatures of the
kind, though they may not agree as to the natnre of their
essence. Some assert that they ore composed of verythin
and subtle matter, others that they are spiritual. But, at
I was saying before, we are quite at cross purposes, inas-
much as I am doubtful whether you would grant thar
eiiatence ; though, as you must be aware, bo many in-
stances and stories of them are found throughout anti-
quity, that it would really be difficult either to deny or to
doubt them. It is clear that, even if you confess that
they eiist, you do not believe that some of them are the
souls of the dead, as the defenders of the Eomish faith
would have it, I will here end, and will say nothii^ aboi^
war and rumours, inasmuch as our lot is cast in an age, &c.
Farewell.

H Sept., 1671.

LETTER LVI. (LII.)

Spinoza to Hugo Boxel.

[Spinoxa anawere that he does not know wkai ghoata are, and
can gain no information from aiUiquitT/. (The Sague,
Sept., 1674.)]

Deab Sie, — Tour letter, which I received yesterday,
was most welcome to me, both because I wanted to hear
news of you, and also because it shows that you have not
utterly forgotten me. Although some might think it a
bad omen, that ghosts are the cause of your writing to me.
I, on the contrary, can discern a deeper meaning in the
circumstance ; I see that not only truths, but also things
trifling and imaginary may he of use to me.

However, let ua defer the question, whether ghosts are
delusions and imaginary, for I see that not only denial of
them, but even doubt about them seems very singular to
you, as to one who has been convinced by the numerous
histories related by men of to-day and the ancients. The
great esteem and honour, in which I have always held and
still hold you, does not suffer me to contradict you, still


lETTEK Lvr.] OOKEESPONaENCB. 377

lesa to humour you. The middle courae, which I shall
adopt, is to beg you to be kind enough to select from the
numerous stories which you have read, one or two of those
least open to doubt, and most clearly demonstrating the
existence of ghosts. For, to confess the trutli, I have
never read a trustworthy author, who clearly showed that
there are such things. Up to the present time I do not
know what they are, and no one has ever been able to tell
Yet it ia evident, that in the case of a thing so
clearly shown by esperienee we ought to know what it is ;
otherwise we shall have great difficulty in gathering from
histories tha,t ghosts exist. W« only gather that some-
thing exists of nature unknown. If philosophers choose to
call things which we do not know ■' ghosts," I shall not
deny the esisteuee of such, for there are an infinity of
things, which I cannot make out.

Pray tell me, my dear Sir, hef o re I explain myself further
ill the matter, What are these ghosts or spectres ? Are
they children, or fools, or madmen ? for aU that I have
heard of them seems more adapted to the silly than the
■wise, or, to say the best we can of it, resembles the pas-
times of children or of fools. Before I eud, I would submit
to you one coneideratioc, namely, that the desire which
most men have to narrate things, not as they really hap-
pened, but as they wished them to happen, can be illus-
trated from the stories of ghosts and spectres more easilv
than from any others. The principal reason for this ia, I
Ijeheve, that such stories are only attested by the narrators,
and thus a fabricator caa add or suppress circumstances,
as seems most convenient to him, without fear of anyone
being able to contradict him. He composes them to siut
special cireumatances, in order to justify the fear hefeela of
dreams and phantoms, or else to confirm his courage, his
credit, or his opinion. There are other reasons, which lead
me to doubt, if not the actual stories, at least some of the
narrated circumstances ; and which have a close bearing on
the conclusion we are endeavouring to derive from the
aforesaid stories, I will here stop, until I have learnt from
you what those stories are, which have so completely
convinced you, that you regard all doubt about them aa
absurd, &c.


SPINOZA 8


LETTER LVII. (LHI.)
Htjoo BoKEi TO Spisoza.

Most BAoAcioua Sik, — Tou have eent me just the a»
Bwer I expected to receive, from a friend holding an opinion
adverse to my own. But no matter. Friends may ^wayi
disagree on indifferent Bubjects without injury to thor
friendship.

Tou ask me, before you gave aji opinion as to what these
spectres or spirits are, to tell you whether they are childr^
fools, or madmen, and you add that everything- yon have
heard of them seems to have proceeded rather fo^m the in-
sane than the saue. It is a true proverb, which says di&t
a preconceived opinion hinders the pursuit of truth,

I, then, believe that ghosts exist for the follomng rea-
sons : first, hecause it appertains to the beauty and [Srieo-
tion of the universe, that they shoidd ; secondly, hecause it
is probable that the Creator created them, as being more
lite Himself than are embodied creatures ; tturdly, because
as body exists without soul, soul eiista without body;
fourthly and lastly, because in the upper air, region, or
space, I beheve there is no obscure body without inhabi-
tants of its own ; consequently, that the measurelesa space
between us and the stars is not empty, but thronged with
spiritual inhabitants. Perhaps the highest and most re-
mote are true spirits, whereas the lowest in the lowest
region of the air are creatures of very thin and subtle sub-
stance, and aleo invisible. Thus I think there are spirits
of all sorts, hut, perhaps, none of the female aex.

This reasoning will in no wise convince those, who rashly
believe that the world has been created by chance. Daily
experience, if these reasons be dismissed, shows that there
are spectres, and many stories, both new and old, are cur-
rent about them. Such may he found in Plutarch's book
" De viris illustribua," and in his other works ; in Sueto-
nius'a " Lives of the Cfflsars," also in Wierus's and I^vater's
books about ghosts, where the subject is fully treated and
Uluatrated from writers of all kinds. Cardano, celebrated
for his learning, also speaks of them in his hooks " De


ETTEK ITU.] COREEBPONDEBGB. 379

lubtilitate," " De Varietate," and in his " Life ; " ehowing,
by experience, that they have appeared to himself, hia re-
lations and friends. Melancthon, a wise man and a lover
of truth, testifies to his experience of them, ai also do
many others. A certain hnrgomaster, learned and wise,
who ia still living, once told me that he heard by night the
noiae of ■working in hia mother's hrew-house, going on just
as it does while beer is being brewed in the day ; this he
att-eated as having occurred frequently. The same sort of
thing has happened to me, and will never fade from my
memory ; hence I am convinced by the above-mentioned
experiences and reasons, that there are ghosts.

As for evil spirits, who torture wretched men in this life
and the nest, aiid who work spells, I believe the atories of
them to he fables. In treatises about apirits you will find a
Jiost of details. Besides those Ihave cited, you may refer to
Pliny the younger, hk. vii,, the letter to Sura ; Suetonius,
" Life of Juhus Cseaar," ch. sssii, ; Valerius Maximus,
ii. § § 7, 8 ; and Alexander ah Aleiandro, " Dies
Genialea." I am sure these books are aceeasible to you.
I say nothing of monks and prieata, for they rekte so many
tales of souls and evil spirits, or as I should rather say of
spectres, that the reader hecomes wearied with their abun-
dance. Thyneua, a Jesuit, in the book about the apparition
of spirits, also treats of the question. But these last-
named discourse on such subjects merely for the sake of
gain, and to prove that pui^tory ia not ao bad as is sup-

waed, thuB treating the question as a mine, from which
they dig up plenteous store of gold and silver. But the
same cannot be said of the writers mentioned previously,
Knd other modems, who merit greater credit from their
absence of bias.

an answer to the passage in your letter, where you
•peak of fools and madmen, I subjoin this sentence from
.■Uie learned Lavater, who ends with it bia first book on
■ghosts or spectres. " He who is hold enough to gainsay so
inany witnesses, both ancient and modem, seems to me un-
ivorthy of credit. Tor as it is a mark of frivoHty to lend
incontinent credence to everyone who says he haa seen a
ghost ; ao, on the other hand, rashly and flatly to contradict
eo many trustworthy historians. Fathers, and other per-


spiNozii'a [letter l^M

a authority would argue a remarkable shan*

SI Sept., ie74

LETTEB, LVin. (LIV.)

Spihoz*. to Hugo Boeel.

[Spinoea treats of the neceegary creation of the world — 14
refutee hie friend' t argumente and quotations,']

Dear Sib, — I will rely oo what you said in your letter
of the 21st of last mooth, that frieuds may disagree on in-
different questions, without injury to their friendsljip, and
will franlly tell you m.y opinion on the reasons and stories,
whereon you base your conclusion, that there are ghotts Of
every kind, hid perhaps none of the female sex. The reason
for my not replying sooner ia that the boots you quot«d
are not at hand, in fact I have not found any except Pliny
and Suetonius. However, these two have saved me file
trouble of consulting any other, for I am persuaded ^hat
they all talk in the same strain and hanker after extraor*
dinary tales, which rouse men's astonishment and compel
their wonder. I confess that I am not a little amazed, not
at the stories, but at those who narrate them. I wonder,
that men of talent and judgment should so employ their
readiness of speech, and abuse it in endeavouring to con-
vince us of such trifles.

However, let us dismias the writers, and turn to tho
question itself. In the first place, we will reason a little
about your conclusion. Xet us see whether I, who deny
that there are spectres or spirits, am on that account less
able to understand the authors, who have written on the
I subject ; or whether you, ■who assert that such beings ezis^
do not give to the aforesaid writers more credit tlmn ther
deserve. The distinction you drew, in admitting without
hesitation spirits of the male sex, but doubting whether
any female spirits esist, seems to me more like a fancy thaa
a genuine doubt. If it were really your opinion, it would
resemble the common imagination, that Qod is masculine,
not feminine. I wonder that those, who have seen naked


I.ETTEB LTIII.] COKKBflPOBDBSCB.


381


ghosts, have not east their eyes on those parts of the per-
son, which would remove all doubt ; perhaps they were
timid, or did not tnow of this distinction. Ton would sajr
that this is ridicule, not reasoning; and hence I see, that
yonr reasons appear to you so strong and well founded,
that no one can (at least in your judgment) contradict
them, unless he be some perverse fellow, who thinks the
■world has been made by chance. This impels me, before
going into your reasons, to set forth briefly my opinion oa
the question, tchether the world viae made hy chavtce. But
I answer, that as it is clear that chance and necessity aro
two contraries, so ia it also clear, that he, who asserts the
world to be a necessary efEect o£ the divine nature, must
ntterly deny that the world has been made by chance ;
■whereas, he who affirms, that Gk)d need not have made the
world, confirms, though in different language, the doctrine
that it hi|fl been made by chance ; inasmuch as he main-
tains that it proceeds from a wish, which might never have
been formed. However, as this opinion and theory ia on
the face of it absurd, it ia comnionly very unanimously
admitted, that God's 'will is eternal, and has never been
indifferent ; hence it must necessarily be also admitted,
yon will observe, that the world is a necessary effect of the
divine nature. Let them call it will, understanding, or any
name they Uke, they come at last to the same conclusion,
that under different names they are expressing one and the
same thing. If you ask them, whether the divine will does
not differ from the human, they answer, that the former
has nothing in common with the latter except its name ;
especially as they generally admit that God's will, under-
standing, intellect, essence, and nature are all identical ; so
I, myself, lest I should confound the divine nature with
the human, do not assign to God human attributes, such
a,B will, understanding, attention, hearing, &c. I therefore
eay, as I have said already, that the world is a neeesmry
effect of the divine nabare, and that U has not been made hy
chance. I think this is enough to persuade you, that the
opinion of those (if such there be), who say that the
■world has been made by chance, ia entirely contrary t-o
mine; and, relying on this hypothesis, I proceed to
. eiamine those reasons which lead you to infer the esia-


382 bpinoza's ^i-etteb lv^

tence of all Idnda of ghosts. I should lito to say of thew
reasons generally, that they seem rather conjectures tiai
reasons, and I can with difficulty hehere, that you taie
them for guiding reasons, However, be they conjectuwB
or be they reasons, let ua see whether we can take them
for foundations.

Your firat reason is, tha.t the existence of ghoata is need-
ful for the beauty and perfection of the muTerse. Beai^,
my dear Sir, is not ao much a quahty of the object bebel4.
as an effect in him who beholds it. If our sight were
longer or shorter, or if our constitution were different, what
now appears beautiful to us would seem misshapen, and
what we now think misshapen we should regard aa beau-
tiful. The most beautiful hand seen through, the miao-
se-ope will appear horrible. Some things are beautiful at
a distance, but ugly near; thus things regarded in them-
selTes, and in relation to God, are neither ugly nor beau-
tiful. Therefore, he who says that God has created Uu
world, so that it might be beautiful, ia bound to adofl
one of the two alternatives, either that God created the
world for the eake of men'a pleasnre and eyesight, or ehe
that He created men's pleasure and eyesight for the safee
of the world. Now, whether we adopt the former or the
latter of these views, how God could have furthered Hi»
object by the creation of ghosts, I cannot see. Perfection
and imperfection are natnes, which do not differ much
from the names beauty and ugliness. I only aak, thrae-
fore (not to be tedious), which would contribute most to the
perfect adornment of the world, ghosts, or a quantity of
monsters, such as centaurs, hydras, harpies, satyrs, gry-
phons, arguses, and other similar inventions ? Truly the
world would be handsomely bedecked, if God had adorned
and embelHshed it, in obedience to our fancy, with beings,
which anyone may readily imagine and dream of, but no
one can understand.

Tour second reason is, that because spirits express God's

lage more than embodied creatures, it is probable that He

,s created them. I frankly confess, that I am as yet in

ignorance, how spirits more than other creatures express

God. This I know, that between finite and infinite there

comparison; so that the difference between God and


TEE LVIU.] COEEESPONDENCE. 883

"the greatest and most exceUent created thing is no leas '
thaQ t!ie difference between God and the least created
Tlhiug. This argument, therefore, is beside the mark. If
I had as cleai- an idea of ghosts, as I have of a triangie or
a circle, 1 should not in the least hesitate to affirm that
they had Ijeen created bv God ; but aa the idea I possess
of them is just like the ideas, which mj imagination forms
of harpies, gryphons, bydnw, &c., I cannot consider them
as anything but dreams, which differ from God as totally,
as that which is not differs from that which is.

Tour third reason (that as "body exists without soul.
BO soul should exist without body) seems to me equaUy
absurd. Pray tell me, if it ia not also likely, that memory,
hearing, sight, &e., exist without bodies, because bodies
exist without memory, bearing, sight, &c., or that a sphere
exists without a circle, because a circle exists without a
sphere ?

Tour fourth, and last reason, is the same as your first,
and I refer you to my answer given above. I will only
observe here, that I do not know which are the highest or
which the lowest places, which you conceive aa esistittg in
infinite matter, unless you take the earth as the centre of
the universe. For if the sun or Saturn be the centre of the
universe, the sun, or Saturn, not the earth, will be the
lowest.

Thus, passing by this argument and what remains, I
conclude, that these and similar reasons will convince no
one of the existence of all kinds of ghosts and spectres,
tinleas it be those persons, who shut their ears to the under-
fitanding, and allow themaelvea to be led away by supersti-
tion. This last is so hostile to right reason, that she lends
willing credence to old wives' tales for the sake of dis-
crediting philosophers.

As regards the stories, I have already said in my first
letter, that I do not deny them altogether, but amy the
conclusion drawn from them, To this I may add, that I
do not believe them bo thoroughly, aa not to doubt many
of the details, which are generally added rather for orna-
ment than for bringing out the truth of the story or the
conclusion drawn from it. I had hoped, that out of so
many stories you would at least Lave produced one or two,


884 spi^oza'a [lettes ml

which could hardly be questioned, and wliich would cleatlr
abov that ghosts or spectres exist. The case you relate of
the" burgomaster, who want«d to infer their existence,!*
cause he heard apeetral brewers workjng in his motW's
brewhouBO by night, and making the same noises as he
was accustomed to hear by day, seems to me laughable.
In like manner it would be tedious here to examine all the
storieB of people, who have ■written on these trifles. To be
brief, I cite the iuBtance of Julius Ceesar, who, as Sneto-
niuB testifies, laughed at such things and jet waa happT,
if we may trust what Suetoniua says in the 59th chapt«i
of his life of that leader. And so should all, who reflect
on the human imagination, and the effects of the emotions,
langh at such notions ; whatever Lavater and others, who
have gone dreaming with him in the matter, may produce
to the contrary.


LETTER LIX. (XV.)

Hnoo BoxEL TO Spinoza.

[A eontiniioiion of the argwmenia in favour of ghosts, whieh
vuty be »utnmarked as follows : — I say a thing ia done l»
chance, leken U hag not been the subject of vdll on the part
of the doer ; not when it migM never have happened.—
NecesaUy and freedom,, not neeestUy and chance, are eon-
irarieB. — Jfiee do not insome sense attribute human gwHi-
ties to God, what meaning com we attach to the term ?—
Youae&for ahaolute proof of the exUteace of epiritt; swih
proof u not obtainable for tnany things, which are yet
firmly believed. — Some thinye are more beavtifvZ intrinsi-
cally than others. — As God is a spirit, ^irUs resemble Him
more than embodied creatures do, — A ghost cannot be con-
ceived as clearly as a triangle : can you say that your own
idea of God is at clear as your idea of a triangle ? — As a
circle eaasi* without a sphere, ao a sphere exists mitkout a
circle. — We caU things higher or lower in proportion to their
distancefrom the earth. — All the Stoica, Pythagoreans, and
Platonists, Empedoclea, Maximua Tyrivs, Apuleius, and
nthera, hear witnem to ghoela ; and no m,odem denies them.


It in presvmption to tmeer at such a body of iegtimony.
Ctetar did not ridicule ghosts, hut oTuene, and if lie had
lietened to Spnrina he would not have been murdered.]


LETTER LX. (LTX.)
Spinoza to Huqo Boxel,


ISpin


the argument it
(The Kague, 1674).]


favour of ghosts.


I>BAB Sib,— I hasteii to ans-wer your letter, received
yesterday, for if I delay my reply, I may have to put it
off longer than I Bhonld like. The state of your health
would have made me ansioua, if I ditl not understand
that you are better. I hope you are by thia time quite
well again.

The difficulties experienced by two people following dif-
ferent principles, and trying to agree on a matter, which
depends on many other queBtiona, might be shown from
this discuHHion alone, if there were no reason to prove it
"by. Pray tell me, whether you have seen or read any phi-
losophers, who hold that the world has been made by
chance, taking chamce in your sense, namely, that God had
Bome design in making the world, and yet has not kept to
the phm he had formed. I do not know, that such an idea
has ever entered anyone's mind. I am likewise at a loss
for the reasons, with which you want to make me beUeve,
that chance and necessity are not contraries. As soon as

affirm that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two i
right angles necessarily, I deny that they are thus equal :
by chance. As soon as I affirm that heat is a necessary
effect of fire, I deny ihat it is a chance effect. To say, that
necessary and free are two contrary terms, seems to me no
less absurd and repugnant to reason. For no one can
deny, that G!od freely knows Himself and all else, yet all
with one voice grant that God knows Himself necessarily.
Hence, as it seems to me, you draw no distinction between
constraint or force and necessity. Man's wishes to live, to
love, &c., are not under constraint, but nevertheless are


^^


38ti


SPINOZA S


[r.ETTE» U.


I. necessarj; much more is it necessary, that God wishes to
\\be, to kuow, and to act. If jou will also reflect, that in-
difference ie only another name for ignorance or doabt,Md
that a will always constant and determined in all things is
a necessary property of the understanding, jou will m
that my words are in complete harmony with truth. If vt
affirm, that God xnight have been able not to wish a given
event, or not to understand it, we attribute to God twn
different freedoms, one necessary, the other indifferent;
consequently we shaJl conceive God's will aa different from
Hia essence and understanding, and shall thua fall from
one absurdity into another.

The attention, which I aekedfor in my former letter, has
not seemed to you necessary. This has been the reason
why you have not directed your thoughts to the mMB
issue, and have neglected a point which is very importaai.

Further, when you say that if I deny, that the operations
of seeing, hearing, attending, wishing, &c., can be ascribed
to God, or that they exist in Him in any eminent fashion,
you do not know what sort of God mine is ; I suspect that
JOU believe there is no greater perfection than such as ClUi
he explained by the aforesaid attributes, I am not asto-
nished [ for I believe that, if a triangle could speak, ii
would say, in like manner, that God is eminently triangular,
while a circle would say that the divine nature is emi-
nently circular. Thus each would ascribe to God its own
attributes, would assume itself to be like God, and look on
everything else as ill-shaped.

The briefness of a letter and want of tim.e do not allow
me to enter into my opinion on the divine nature, or the
questions you have propounded. Besides, suggesting
difficulties is not the same as producing reasons. That we
do many things ia the world from conjecture is true, but
that our reflections are based on conjecture is false, Li
practical life we are compelled to foDow what is most pro-
bable ; in speculative thought we are compelled to follow
truth. A man would perish of hunger and thirst, if he re-
fused to eat or drink, tUl he had obtained positive proof
that food and drink would be good for him. But in phi-
losophic reflection this is not so. On the contrary, we
must take care not to admit as true anything, which '


i


' I.ETTEB LX.]

only probable. For wben one falsity has been let in,
infinite others follow.

Again, we cannot infer that b«canse sciences of tbings
.divine and human are full of controveraiea and quarrels,
therefore their whole subject-matter is uncertain ; for there
liave been many persons so enamoured of contradiction, as
to turn into ridicule geometrical axioms. Septus Empiricua
and other sceptics, whom you quote, declare, that it ia
.falae to say that a whole ia greater than its part, and pa,aa
wmilar judgments on other azioma.

However, as I pass over and grant that in default of
proof we must be content with probabilitiea, I aay that a
probable proof ought to be aueh that, though we may doubt
about it, we cannot maintain its contrary ; for that which
can be contradicted resembles not truth but falsehood.
For instance, if laaythat Peter ia alive, because Isaw him
yeaterday in good health, this ia a probability, in so far as
no one can maintain the contrary ; but if anyone says that
he saw Peter yesterday in a swi>on, and that he believed
Peter to have departed this life to-day, he will make my
Btatement seem false. That year conjecture about ghosts
and apectres seems false, and not even probable, 1 have
ahown so clearly, that I can find jiothiog worthy of answer
in your reply.

To your question, whether I have of God as clear an
idea as I have of a triangle, I reply in the affirmative. But
if you ask me, whether I have as clear a mental image of
God tia I have of a triangle, I reply in the negative. For
we are not able to imagine God, though we can understand
Him. Tou must also here obaerve, that I do not aaaert
that I thoroughly know God, but that I understand some
of His attributes, not all nor the greater part, and it is
evident that my ignorance of very many does not hinder
the knowledge I have of some. When I learned Euclid's
Elements, I understood that the three angles of a triangle
are equal to two right angles, and this property of a
triangle I perceived clearly, though I might be ignorant of
many others.

As regards spectres or ghosta, I have hitherto heard at-
tributed to them no intelligible property ; they seem like
phantoms, which no one can understand. When you say


388 BPIN0ZA.'S [I.ETTER H

that Bpectres, or ghosts, in these lower regions (I adopt
your phraseology, thoi^h I know not why matter below
should be inferior to matter above) consist in a. verytiiiii
rarefied and subtle Bubetanee, you seem to me to be speak-
ing of spiders' webs, air, or vapours. To say, tbat they an
inTisible, seema to me to be equivalent to saying that thef
do not exiet, not to stating their nature ; unless, perhaps,
you wish to indicate, that they render themselves visible or
invieible at will, and tbat the imagination, in these aaiii
other impossibilities, will £nd a difficulty.

The authority of Plato, Aristotle, and Socrates, does not
carry much weight with me. I should have been astonishei
if you had brought forward Epicurus, Democritus, Lucre-
tiua, or any of the atomists, or upholders of tbe atomio
theory. It is no wonder that persons, who have invented
occult qualities, intentional species, substantial forms, and
a thousand other trifles, slioijd have also devised spectre*
and ghosts, and given credence to old wives' tales, in order
to take away the reputation of Democritus, Tvhom the?
were so jealous of, that they burnt all the boots which be
had published amid so muoh eulogy. If you are inolin«d
to believe such witnesses, what reason have yoii for deny-
ing the miracles of the Blessed Vi^^in, and all the Sainta?
These have been described by so many famous philoBophers,
theolc^ana, and historians, that I could produce at least a
hundred such authorities for every one of the former. But
I have gone farther, my dear Sir, than I intended : I do
not desire to cause any further annoyance by doctrines
which I know you will not grant. For the principles which
you follow are far difEerent from my own.


COKBESPONDENCE.

LETTER LXI. (LVn.)

• # • • • j,Q gpufozA.'


SS^^^H


Fhiloso^hers often differ ihrough uHng words in different
genaeg. Thue in the question of free will Descartes meant
hy free, constrained ly no cause, Yoit mean by the
same, UTid^ermined in a partic-alar way by a cause. The
question of free wiU is threefold ; — J, Have vie cmy power
whatever over things external to tie? II. Have we absolute
power over the intentional movements of our own body ?
III. Hone we free use of our reason? Both Descartes and
yourself are right according to the terms employed by each
<8th October, 167*3.]


LETTER LXn. (LVm.)

Spinoza xo • • • • • = (The Ea^e, October, 1674).

[Spinota gives his o]}iiiions on liberty and necessily.']

SiE, — Our friend, J. K.' has sent me the letter which you
Lve been kind enough to write to me, and also the judg-
ment o£ your friend * as to the opinions of Deecaxtes and
jnyBelf regarding free will. Both encloffureB were very
welcome to me. Though I am, at prcBent, much, occupied
with other matters, not to mention my delicate health,
'ar courtesy, or, to name the chief motive, jour
ive of truth, impels me to satisfy jour inquiries, as far as
iny poor abihtiea will permit. What jour friend wishes to
imply by his remark before he appeals to experience, I

This letter is by Vatv Vloten, followed by Mr. Poiloek, assigned to
Shrenfried Walti!r von TBchimliaiiaea, a Bohemiiia nobleman. See
iduetioD, p. XFi. The correspondence wilb TschimliauseD was
formerly supposed to be with Iiewia Meyer. The letters of Tschirn-
Juiisen contain by far tbe most acute contempnrary criticisni of Spinaia.
' This letter is addressed to Q. E. SchalJer, who had seut on Letter
IXI. to SpiDom.

' Jiiho Rienwerts, a. bimkacllfif of Amsterdam.

< Tmhirnhau.seii; iho '-juduTnenf^ is Letter LSI.


C;


S90


HPinOZA 8


[LETTCa L


know not. Wlat he adds, "that when one of two di^vimit
affinng iometking which the other denies, both may he i^U,
IS true, if he means that the two, though uaing the same
terms, are thinking of different things. I once sent Beveirf
eiamplea of this to our friend J. R.,' and am now WTiting
to tell him to communicate them to jou.

I, therefore, pass on to that definition of liberty, whicfc
he says is mj own ; but I know not whence be has taken
I it. I Bay that a thing is free, which exists ajid acts sole^
I by the necessity of its own nature. Thus also God under-
stands Himself and all things freely, because it follows
solely from the necessity of His nature, that He ahonld
\ understand all things. You see I do not place freedom in
I free decision, bnt in free necessity. However, let us descend
to created things, wliich are all determined by eitemal
causes to exist and operate in a given determinate mamiCT.
In order that this may he clearly nnderstood, let us con-
ceive a very simple thing. For instance, a. atone receives
from the impulsion of an eitemal cause, a certain quantity
of motion, by virtue of which it continues to move after
the impulsion g;iven by the external cause has ceased. Ths
permaneuce of the stone's naotion is constrained, notneces-
sary, because it must be defined by the impulsion of an
external cauae. What is true of the stone is true of aaj
individual, however complicated its nature, or varied its
functions, inasmuch as every individual thing is neceasarilj
determined by some external cause to exist and operate in
a filed and detenninate manner.

Further conceive, I beg, that a stone, while continuing' in
motion, should be capable of thinking and knowing, that it
ia endeavouring, as far as it can, to continue to move. Such
a stone, being conscious merely of its own endeavour and
not at all indifferent, would believe itself to be completely
free, and woidd think that it continued in motion solely be-
cause of ita own wish. This ia that human freedom, which
' all boast that they possess, and which consiats solely in the
fact, that men are conscious of their own desire, but are
ignorant of the causes whereby that desire has been deter-
mined. Thus an infant believes thatit desires milkfreely;

' John Bicuwefts. ■


ETTEE LXII.]


COEEESPONDENcn.


:i9l


mgry cMId thinks he ■wiBhes freely for Tengeance, a
timid child thinlte he wishes freely to ran away. Again, a
drunken man thioks, that from the free decision of his mind
he gpeaka words, which afterwards, when Boher, he would
B to have left unsaid. 80 the delirious, the garrulous,
and others of the same sort think that they act from the
free decision of their mind, not that they are carried away
■by impulse. As this misconception is innate in all men,
it is not easily conquered. For, although esperience abun-
dantly shows, that men can do anything rather than check
their desires, and that very often, when a prey to conflict-
■ emotions, they see the better course and follow the
ae, they yet believe themselves to be free ; because in
e cases their desire for a thing is alight, and can easily
^^ 6 overruled by the recollection of something else, which is
frequently present in the mind.

I have thus, if I mistake not. sufficiently explained my
►pinion regarding free and constrained necessib?, and also
regarding so-called human freedom : from what I have
'd you will easOy be able to reply to your friend's objec-
bons. For when he Bays, with Descartes, that he who ia
Donstrained by no external cause is free, if by being con-
strained he means acting against one's will, I grant that
ire are in some cases quite unreatrained, and in this respect
a free will. But if by constrained he means acting
aecesearily, although not againet one's will (as I have
explained above), I deny that we are in any instance free.

But your friend, on the contrary, asserts that we may •
employ our reason absolutely, that ie, m complete freedom ;
d is, I think, a little too confident on the point. For
who, be says, could deny, without contradicting his own con-
M, that I can think with my thoughts, thai I wish or
do not wish to write t I should like to know what conscious-
-Bess he is talking of, over and above that which I have
I illustrated by the example of the stone.

Aa a matter of fact I, without, I hope, contradicting my
l.ConaciouBness, that ia my reason and experience, and with-
I out cherishing ignorance and misconception, deny that I
1 can by any absolute power of thought think, that I wish or
I do not wish to write. I appeal to the consciousness, wliich
' he has doubtless experienced, that in dreams he ha.R Q«t,


a32 Bpntozi's [i.ETrKB Lia

the power of thinking ttiat be wishes, or doea not wish te
write ; and that, when he dreams that he wishes to writt,
he has not the power not to dream that he wishes to wiile.
I think he must also have experienced, that the ntind is Ml
always equally capable of thiniing of the same object, but
according as the body is more capable for the image of thii
or that object being eicited in it, bo is the mind more
capable of thinking of the same object.

When be further adds, that the causes for his ^tplviig
bis mind to writing have led him, but not constraiaed'him
to write, he merely means (if he wilt look at the questioD
impartially), that his disposition was then in a. state, in
which it could be easily acted on by causes, which ifouU
have been powerless under other circumstances, as for in-
stance when be was under a, violent emotion. That a,
causes, which at other times would not have constnused
bim, have constrained bim in this case, not to write ogaiiut
bis will but necesBarily to wish to write.

As for his statement, that 1/ we were eotulrained by a-
temal causes, no one could acquire the habit of virtue, I
know not what is hia authority for saying, that fimmeaj
and constancy of disposition cannot arise from predeetiueJ
necessity, bat only from free wilL

"Wbat be finaJIy adds, that 1/ ihis -were granted, aJI
viiekedness wov,Td he excueable, I meet with the questjon.
What then ? Wicked men are not less to be feared, snd
are not less harmful, when tbey are wicked from necessity.
However, on this point I would ask you t« refer to niy
Principles of CartesiaJi Philosophy, Part 11., chap. viii.

In a word, I should lite your friend, who makes these
objections, to tell me, bow he reconciles the human virtue,
which be says arises from the free decision of the mind,
with God's pre-ordainment of the imiverse. If, with Dw-
cartea, he confesses his inability to do bo, he is endeayour*
ing to direct against me the weapon which has already
pierced liimseK. But in vain. Por if you examine my
opinion attentively, you will see that it is quite consifr
tent, &c.


ftSTIES LXIII.] COBSEBPOKDEKCE.


LETTER LXm. (LIX.)
* # # • # ^PO Spinoza.'

The writer exhortg Spinoza to pitfilisA the ireatieei on Ethicg
and on the Improvement of the Under glanding. — Remarka
on the definition of inotion. On the difference hetween a
(rue and an adequate idea.^

MoBT EXCELLEHT SiE, — Wlieii shaJl we liave your
method of rightly directing the reason in. the acquisition
of unknown truthB, and your general treatiae on physics ?
I know you Lave already proceeded far with them. The
first has already come to my knowledge, and the second I
lave hecome aware of from the Lemmas added to the second
part of the Ethics ; whereby many difBcnlties in physica
are readily solred. If time and opportunity permit, I
humbly beg from you a, true definition of motion and its
explanation ; also to know how, seeing that extension in so
Sax as it is conceived in itself is indiviaible, immutable, &c,,
■we can infer d priori, that there can arise so many varieties
of it, and consequently the existence of figure in the
particles of any given body, which are, nevertheless, in
every body various, and distinct from the figures of the
parts, which compose the reality of any other body. Tou
bave already, by word of mouth, pointed out to me a
method, which you employ in the search for truths as yet
Ttntnown. I find this method to be very excellent, and at
the same time very easy, in ho far as I have formed an
opinion on it, and I can assert that from thia single dis-
covery I have made great progress in mathematics. I wish
therefore, that you would give me a true definition of an
adequate, a true, a false, a fictitious, and a doubtful idea.
I have been in search of the difference between a true and
an adequate idea. Hitherto, however, I can ascertain no-
thing except after inquiring into a thing, and forming a cer-
tain concept or idea of it. I then (in order to ehcit whether
thia true idea is also an adequate idea of its object) inquire,


LXuH


894 spiNOzi's [lbtteb l:

what is the cause of this idea or concept ; when this is ascer-
tained, I again ask, "What is the cause of this prior concqit?
and so I go on always inquiring for the causes of the cause*
of ideas, until I find a cause of such a kind, that I can not
find any cause for it, except that among all the ideas ■whici I
can command this alone exists. If, for instance, yte inquire
the true origin of our errors, Descartes will answer, that it
consists in our giving assent to things not yet clearly per-
ceived. But supposing this to be the true idea of the
tiling, I nevertheless shall not yet be able to determine ail
things necessary to be known concerning it, unless I hare
also an adequate idea of the thing in question ; in order fa>
obtaiii such, therefore, I inquire into the cause of this con-
cept, how it happens that we give assent to things not
clearly understood — and I answer, that it arises from de-
fective knowledge. But here I cannot inquire further, and
ask what is the cause, that we are ignorant of certain
things ; hence I see that I have detect^ an adequate idea
of the origin of our errors. Here meanwhile I ask yon,
whether, seeing that many things expressed in infmits
modes have an adequate idea of themselves, and that from
every adequate idea all that can be known of its object can
be inferred, though more readily from some ideas '" "
others, whether, I say, this may be the means of kno'
which idea is to be preferred ? For instance, one adeqi
idea of a circle consists in the equality of its radii ; aii<
adequate idea consists in the infinite right angles e
to one another, made by the intersection of two lines,
and thus we have infinite expressions, each giving
adequate nature of a circle, How, though all the j
ties of a circle may be inferred from every one of
they may be deduced much more easily from som*
from others. So also he, who considers lines applied
curves, will be able to draw many conclusions as fa
measurement of curves, but will do so more readily
the consideration of tangents, &c. Thus I have w
to indicate how far I have progressed in this 8tuc_
await perfection in it, or, if I am wrong on any point,
rection ; also the definition I asked for. Farewell.


MiTTEE LXIV.] CORBE8PONDENCE. 395

LETTER LXIT. (LX.)

Spihoza to • • • " •.'

The difference between a true and an adequate idea is merely
extrinsia, Jbo. The Sague, Jan., 1675,]

HoNOUEED Sir. — Between a tme au^ an adequate idea,
I recognize no difference, except that the epithet true only
has regard to the agreement between the idea and its
jptject, whereas the epithet adequate has regard to the
'Oflitiire of the idea in itself ; bo that in reality there ia no
■difference between a tme and an adequate idea beyond
Hue extrinsic relation. However, in order that I may
fcnow, from which idea out of many all the properties of
its object may be deduced, I pay attention to one point
only, namely, that the idea or definition should express the
efficient cause of its object. For instance, in inquiring into
Jhe properties of a circle, I aak, whether from the idea of
I, circle, that it consists of infinite right angles, I can de-
e all its properties. I ask, I repeat, whether this idea
involves the efficient cause of a circle. If it does not, I look
for another, namely, that a circle is the apace described
"by a line, of which one point is fixed, and the other mov-
able. As this definition explaizia the efficient cause, I
know that I can deduce from it all the properties of a
, circle. So, also, when I define Q-od as a supremely perfect
Being, then, aaice that definition does not express the
efficient cause (I mean the efficient cause internal as well
as external) I shall not be able to infer therefrom aJl the
properties of God ; as I can, wheji I define God as a Being,
Ac. (see Ethics, I. Def, vi.). Aa for your other inquiries,
namely, that concerning motion, and those pertaining to
inethod, my observations on them are not yet written
■out in due order, so I will reserve them for another


Aa regards your remark, that he "who considers lines
applied to curves makes many deductions with regard to
tihe meaeurement of curves, but does so with greater
' Tii^himhausen.


396 BPiNozi'a [lettbr l

facility from the conBideration of tangents," &c., I think
tliat from the conBideration. of tangents many deductioM
■will be made with more difficulty, than from the considet*'
tion of lines appHed in snccession ; and 1 assert absolately
that from certain properties of any particular thing (whal
ever idea be given) some things may be discoTered mcM
readily, others with more difficulty, though all are coa
ceraed with the nature of the thing. I think it need onl
be oheerved, that an idea should be sought for of such
kind, that all properties may be inEerred, as has been sai
above. He, who is about to deduce aU the properties ot
particolar thing, knows that the ultimate properties wj
necessarily he the most difBcuIt to discover, &c.


LETTER LXV. (LSUL)

G. H. SCHALLEB TO SpINOZA.'

[ScliaUer ash for anewert to four questions of hit fnm
Tgehimliawsen on the attributeg of God, and mentions tha
Tsckimhaueen has retnoved the unfavourable opinion q
jSpifioai lately cmiceived hy Boyle and OldenburgJJ

Most DiaTiNGuisHKD and excellent Sie,— I shouk
blush for my silence, which has lasted so long, and bai
laid me open to the charge of ingratitude for your 1 "
ness extended to me beyond my merits, if I did not rt
that your generous courtesy inclines rather to excuse tl
to accuse, and also know that you devote your leisure, fM
the common good of your friends, to serious studies, whid
it would be harmful and injurious to disturb without d
cause. For this reason I have been silent, and have r
while been content to hear from friends of your f
health; I send you this letter to inform you, that ourn
friend von Tsclumhausen is enjoying the same in England
and has three times in the letters he has sent me bidden

' In the Opera PoBlhama tliia letter is arranged, bo as lo ae
from llip pBrson who paw Ihe questiona himBelf, mid the i
Si;Lnlli-r ami TschirnliBusen are siippresaed.


XETTER LXT.] COBBBBPONDENCE. 897

6 convey his kindeBt regards to the maBter, again hidding
me request from you the Bolution of the following ques-
tioES, and forward to hiTn your hoped-for answer : would
the master be pleased to conTince him by positive proof,
aot by a reduction to the imposBible, that we cannot know
imy attributes of God. save thought and extension ? Further,
whether it follows that creatures constituted under other
attributes can form no idea of estenaioD ? If so, it would
bllow that there must be as many worlds as there are
ittributes of God. For instance, there would be as m.uch
foom for extension in worlds afEected by other attributes,
ia there actually exists of extension in our world. But as
we perceive nothing save thought besides extension, so
creatures in the other -world would perceive nothing besides
'the attributes of that world and thought.

Secondly, as the understanding of God differs from our
trnderstanding as much in essence as in existence, it has,
therefore, nothing in common with it ; therefore (by Ethics,
~ 'ii.) God's understanding cannot be the cause of our own.

Thirdly (in Ethics, I. x. note) you say, that nothing in
ftatwe is charcr than tliat every entity mugt be coTiceived
under gome attribiite (this I thoToughly understand), and
ihat the more it has of reality or being, the more oMrihTttea ap-
pertainio it. It seems to follow from this, that there are
^tities possessing three, four, or more attributes (though

e gather from what has been demonstrated that every

sing consists only of two attributes, namely, a certain
attribute of God and the idea of that attribute).

Fourthly, I should like to have examples of those things
which are immediately produced by God, and those whiiih
are produced through the means of some infinite modifica-
tion. Thought and extonsion seem to be of the former
kind ; understanding in thought and motion in extension
neem to be of the latter.

And these are the points which our said friend von
Tschimhausen joins with mein wishing to have explained by
TOUT excellence, if perchance your spare time allows it.
le further relates, that Mr. Boyle and Oldenburg had
formed a, strange idea of your personal character, but that
lie has not only removed it, but also given reasons,
■which have not only led them back to a moat 'nortJc.-^ vj.-sv^


[letter l:

favourable opinion thereof, but also made them value a
highly the Theologico-Politieal Treatise. Of this I k
not ventured to inform you, because of yoiir health. \
aasured that I am, and live.

Most noble air,
for every good office your most devoted sen^nt, \
G. H. Sea
AmBlerduDi, 25 Jatj, 167S.

Mr. i, Geut and J, Eieuwerts dutifully greet you.


LETTER LXVI. (LXIV.)

Spinoza to * • • • *'

[Spinota answers by references to the first Oiree books
of the Ethics.']

Deak Sib,— I am glad that you have at last had occa-
sion to refresh me with one of your letters, always most
welcome to me. I heartily b^ that you will frequently
repeat the favour, &c.

I proceed to consider your doubts t to the first I answer,
that the human mind can only acquire knowledge of those
things which the idea of a body actually existing involves,
or of what can be inferred from such an idea. For the
power of anything is defined solely by its essence (Ethics,
m. vii.) ; the essence of the mind (Ethics, II. xiii.) consist*
solely in this, that it is the idea of body actnally e
therefore the mind's power of understanding only
to things, which this idea of body contains in itself, o
follow therefrom. Now this idea of body does i
volve or express any of God' s attributes, save extensi
thought. Por its object (i^eatum), namely, body (by
n. vi), has God for its cause, in so far as He '
under the attribute of eatension, and not in a
is regarded under any other ; therefore (Ethics, 1. ax.
this idea of the body involves the knowledge of God,
' TachirohanBeD.


■Ij


COKBEBPONDBKCE.


ii99


IB He ia regarded under the attribute of extension,
'nrther, this idea, in bo far as it is a mode of thinking,
B also {by the same proposition) God for its cause, in so
r aa He is regarded as a thinking thing, and not in bo far
B He is regarded under any other attribute. Hence (by the
ame axiom) the idea of this idea InvolveB the knowledge
£ God, in bo far as He is regarded under the attribute of
lought, and not in so far as He ia r^arded under any
ttribute. It ia therefore plain, that the human mind, or
e idea of the human body neither involves nor espresses
ly attributes of God save theae two. Now from these
nro attributes, or their modifications, no other attribute of
a (Ethics, I. s.) be inferred or conceived. I there-
tore conclude, that the human mind cannot attain know-
ige of any attribute of God besides these, which ia the
jropoeition you ioquire about. With regard to your
Eueation, whether there must be as many worlds as there
ire attributes, I refer you to Ethics n, vij. note.

Moreover this proposition might be proved more readily
by a reduction to the absurd ; I am accustomed, when the
propoaition ia negative, to employ thia mode of demonstra-
tion as more in character. However, as the question you
i aak is positive, I mate use of the positive method, and ask,
^rhether one thing can be produced from another, from
Jwhich it differs both in essence and existence ( for things

■ IwLich differ to this estent seem to have nothing in common.

■ jBut since all particular things, except those which are
^produced from things similar to themselves, differ from
Btheir causes hoth in essence and esiatence, I see here no
■reason for doubt.

B The sense in which I mean that God is the efficient

■cause of things, no less of their essence than of their exis-

rtence, I think has been sufficiently explained in Ethics I.

XXT. note and corollary. The asiom in the note to Ethics

L s., as I hinted at the end of the said note, is based on

the idea which we have of a Being absolutely infinite, not

_ on. the fact, that there Eire or may be beings possessing

^e, four, or more attributes.

lastly, the examples you ask for of the first kind are, in

bought, absolutely infinite understanding ; in extension,

motion and rest ; an example of the second kind is the


400


[lettsb l


sum of the whole extended universe {fades totiita *
which, though it varies in infinite modes, jet i
always the same. Cf. Ethica II. note to Xiemma. vii b
Prop. idv.

Thus, most excellent Sir, I have answered, as I thi
the objections of jourself and your friend. If you tl
any uncertainty remains, I hope you will not neglect d
tell me, so that I may, if possible, remove it,

Tbe Hague, 29 July, 1G75.


LETTER IXVII. (LXV.)

*•***' TO Spiwoza.

[Afreth ifiquiry as to whether there are two or more
attributes of Corf.]

DiBTiNGUisHED Sib,— I should like a demonstration ■])
what you Bay ; namely, that the soul cannot perceive a
attributeB of God, except extension and thought. Thouc
this might appear evident to me, it seems possible that ^
contrary might be deduced from Ethica II. vii. notQ
perhaps because I do not rightly grasp the meaning 4
that passage. I have therefore resolved, distinguid
Sir, to show you how I make the deduction, eamea
begging you to aid me with your nsual courtesy, wherff
I do not rightly represent your meaning. I reason |
follows : — Though I gather that the universe is one, it i|
not less clear from the passage referred to, that it ia
pressed in infinite modes, and therefore that every indifi)
dual thing is expressed in infinite modes. Hence it sec"'
to f oDow, that the modification constitutii^ my mind, i .
the modification constdtutiDg my body, though one and tJ
same modification, is yet expressed in infinite ways — fii
through thought ; secondly, through extension ; thirdhJ
through some attribute of <Jod unlmown to me, and so oi
to infinity, seeing that there are in God infinite attribute
and the order and connection of the modifications a


L


' TacLirobauaen.


LETTER LXYIII.] COBBESPONDENCE. 401

be the same in all. Hence arises tlie question : Why the
mind, which represents a certain modification, the same
modification being expressed not only in extension, but in
infinite other ways, — why, I repeat, does the mind per-
ceive that modification only as expressed through extension,
to wit, the human body, and not as expressed through any
other attributes ? Time does not allow me to pursue the
subject further ; perhaps my difficulties will be removed
by further reflection.

London, 12 Aug., 1675.


LETTEE LXVni. (LXVI.)
Spinoza to * * * * V

[In ihis fragment of a letter Spinoza refers Ms friend to

Ethics^ I. X. and IL vii. note,"]

DiSTiNGinsHED SiR, — . . . But in answer to your ob-
jection I say, that although each particular thing be ex-
pressed in infinite ways in the infinite understanding of
God, yet those infinite ideas, whereby it is expressed, cannot
constitute one and the same mind of a particular thing,
but infinite minds ; seeing that each of these infimte ideas
has no connection with the rest, as I have explained in the
same note to Ethics, 11. vii., and as is also evident from
I. X. If you will reflect on these passages a little, you will
see that all difficulty vanishes, &c.

The Hague, 18 Aagast, 1675.

1 Tschirnhauseiu


II. ©D


LETTER LXVULa,
G. H. ScsALLEB TO Spikoza.


[SchaUer relate* to Spin-oxa Tgckirnhausen'e doin^t I
France, and letter to him, and makes tnotpn to Spinoza
amwere cvntained t'n tlioi Utter to Spinoia'g objeetion
Letter LXVIII. and ike request of Leibnitz to gee Spine
unpublished vmtingg.^

Amaterdam, 11 Nov., 16T!3

Most leaened and excellent MiSTEa, mt mwH'*
TENEKABLE Patros, — I hope that you duly received niT

letter with 's method,' and likewise, that you are up W

the preBent time in good health, as I am.

But for three months I had no letter from our friend von
Tschimhauaen.whencel formed Bad conjectures that hehwl
made a fatal journey, when he left England for France,
Now that I have received a letter, in my fulness o£ joy I
felt hound, according to hia request, to communicate it to
the Master, aud to let yon know, with his most dutiful
greeting, that he has arrived safely in Paris, and found
there Mr. Huygens, as we had told him, and consequently
has in every way sought to please him, and is thus highk
esteemed by him. He mentioned, that the Master had re-
commended to him Huygenfi'a conversation, and made
very much of him persona-Uy. This greatly pleased Huy-
gens ; so be answered that he likewise greatly esteemed
you personally, and he has now received from you a c
of the Theologieo-PoHtical Treatise, which is esteemed ^
many there, and it is ea^rly inquired, whether there H
eitant any more of the same writer's works. To this ll
von Tachirnhausen replied that he knew of none but the D
monstrations iu the first and second parts of the Cartesil
Principles. But he mentioned nothing ahout the Mast^
but what I have said, and so he hopes that he has not i
pleased you herein.

To the objection that you last made he replies, that
those few words which I wrote at the Master's dicta-


lETTER LSTin.A.] COEKEaPOfTDENCB. 403

aon,^ explained to him yoiir meaning more tborongUy,
^^md that he has favourably entertained the aaid reason-
Ings (for by these two methods ' they best admit of ei-
j)lanation). But two reasons have obhged him to con-
iinue in the opinion implied in his recent objection. Of
these the first is, that otherwise there appears to he a
eontradietion between the fifth and seventh propositions
of the second boot. For in the former of these it is laid
.down, that the objects of ideas are the efficient causes of
the ideas, which yet seems to be refuted by the quotation,
in the proof of the latter, of the fourth axiom of Part I.
" Or, as I rather think, I do not make the right apphcation
of this asiom according to the author's intention, which I
Tvould moat willingly be told by him, if hia leisure permits
The second cause which prevented me from following
the explanation he givea was, that thereby the attribute
of thought is pronotinced to extend much more widely
than other attributes. But since every one of the attri-
butes contributes to mate up the essence of God, I do not
quite aee how this fact does not contradict the opinion just
Stated. I will say just this more, that if I may judge the
ininda of others by my own, there will he great difficulty
ia understanding the seventh and eighth propositions of
Sook U., and this for no other reason than that the author
lias heen pleased (doubtless hecauae they aeemed so plain
to him) to accompany the demonstrations annexed to them
with such short and laconic explanations."

He further mentions, that he has found at Paris a man
called Leibnitz, remarkably learned, and most stiUed in
various sciences, as also free from the vulgar prejudices of
•theology. With him he has formed an intimate acquain-
tance, founded on the fact that Leibnitz labours with him to
pursue the perfection of the intellect, and, in fact, reckons
nothing better or more useful. Von Tschimhausen says,
that he ia moat practised in ethics, and speaks without any
BtimuluB of the passions by the sole dictate of reafioa. He
adds, that he is most stilled in physics, and also in meta-

' Letter LXTIII.
, ' Tbat is, I thinli, hesriag from the author crUiciKed what hia precise
meaning is, and atUn{iinir carefully In his argumenta in fuvom- of the
opinion ihua precisely ascertained. — [Tii.]


404 Spinoza's [letter lxtiii.b.

plrfsical etuclies concemingGod and the souL PinaUy, hfl
concludes tliat he is moat worthy of having oominunicated
to liim the Master's WTitinga, if you will first give your
permission, for he believes that the author will thence gain
a great advantage, as he promises to show at length, i£ tbe
Master he so pleased. But if not, do not doubt, in the
least, that he will honourably keep them concealed as ha
has promised, as in fact he has not otade the slightett
mention of them., Leihnitz also highly values the Theo-
logico-PoUtical Treatise, on the subject of which he once
wrote the Master a letter, if he is not mistaken. And
therefore I would beg my Master, that, unless there is
some reason against him, yon will not refuse your permis-
sion in accordance with your gracious kindness, but will, if
possible, open your niinii to me, as soon as may be, for
after receiving your answers I shall be able to reply to our
friend von Tschimbausen, which I would gladly do on
Tuesday evening, unless important hindrances cause my
Master to delay.

Mr. Bresscr, on his return from Cleves, Laa sent here a
luTge quantity of the beer of that country ; I suggested to
biivi that be should make a present to the Master of half &
tim, which he promised to do, and added a niost friendly
greeting,

PinaJly, excuse my unpractised style and hurried writing,
and give me your orders, that I may have a real occasiou
of proving myself, most excellent Sir,

Tour most ready servant,

G. H, SCHALLEB,


LETTER IXVin.B,

Spinoza to Schalleb.

[^Spinoza anmoere all (he points ia Sehaller'a letter, cmd ]fc
tales to entrust his writings to Leibnitx.]

Most espeeienced Sik, and valtted Fkibnd,—
much pleased to leam from your letter, received to-d
that you are well, and that our friend von Tschimhani
' SeeLetlerflXLI.i,SLU,


LXVIII.B.] COBBESPON&ENCE.


■405


has liappily accomplishett his journey to France. In the
conversation which he had about me with Mr. Hujgens, he
hehaved, at least in my opinioB, very judiciously; and
besides, I am very glad that he haa found bo convenient
an opportunity for the purpose ■which he intended. But
■what it ia he has found in the fourth asioni of Part I. that
Beema to contradict Proposition v. of Part n. I do not see.
Forin that proposition it is affirmed, that the essence of every
idea has for its cause God, in so far as He is considered as
a, thinking thing; but in that a.xioni, that the knowledge
or idea of a cause depends on the knowledge or idea of an

rfffect. But, to tell the truth, I do not quite follow, in this
' latter, the meaning of your letter, and suspect that either
";, or in his copy of the book, there is a sUp of the pen.
you ■write, that it is affirmed in Propoaition v. that the
ibjecta of ideas are the efficient causes of the ideas, whereas
exactly what is expressly denied in that proposition,

Jindlnow think that this is the cause of the whole confusion.^
Accordingly it would be useless for me at present to try
to write at greater length on this subject, but Imust wait,
till you explain to me his mind more clearly, aBd till I
know whether he has a correct copy. I believe that I
have an epistolary acquaintance with the Leibnitz he
mentions. But why he, who was a counsellor at Prank-
fort, has gone to France, I do not know. As far as I could
.conjecture from his letters, he seemed to me a man of
"iberal mind, and versed in every science. But yet I think
imprudent bo soon to entrust my ■writings to him, I
should like first to know what is his business in France, and
the judgment of our friend von Tschimhausen, when he has
been longer in his company, and knows his character more
intimately. However, greet that friend of ours in my
name, and let him command me what he pleases, if in
anything I can be of service to him, and he will find me
most ready to obey him in everything,

I congrat^ulate my most worthy friend Mr. Eresser on
his arrival or ret^urn, and also thank him heailily for the


' It appears to me, tliat 6clia.ner c


eclly s


s ihe difficult}' □
to Prop, vii., B,ai


4-06 Spinoza's [i

lirouiised beer, and will requite him, too, in any way that
I can. Lastly, 1 bave not yet tried to find out your rela-
tion's method, nor do I think that I ehall be able to applj
my mind to trying it. For the more I think over the
tluB!^ in itself, the more I am persioaded that you have
not made gold, but had not euMciently eliminated that
which was bidden in the antimony. But more of this
another time ; at present 1 am prevented by want of leianie.
In the meanwhile, if in anything I can assist you, you wiE
always find me, most excellent Sir, your friend and devote
eery ant,

C S£ Spinoza.

Tilt; Hague, 18 Not., 1675.


4


I.ETTEK LXIS. (LXSX.)
• • • • # 1 jQ Spinoza.

[The writer aglet for explaTiationa of Bome passages
letter about the infinite (XXIX.).]

DiSTiNGinsHED Si»,— In the first place I can wit!)
great difficulty conceive, bow it can be proved, o. priori, that
bodies erist having motion and figure, seeing that, in ei-
tension considered absolutely in itself, nothing of the kind
ia met with. Secondly, I should like to leam from you,
how this passage in your letter on the infinite ia to be
understood: — "They do not hence infer tJiat such things elude
number by the inuUitade of their component parts." For,
as a matter of fact, all mathematidanB seem to me always to
demonstrate, with regard to such infinities, that the num-
ber of the parts is so great, as to elude all expression in
terms of number. And in the esample you give of the
two drcles, you do not appear to prove this statement,'
which was yet what you had undertaken to do. For in
this second passage you only show, that they do not draff
this conclusion from "the excessive evie of the intervening

' TsetiimhaaBen.

' Viz., " They do not hence infur .... component parts."


LETTER LXX.] COBBESFONDENCE. 407

spacey* or from the fact that " we do not know the maximum
and the minimum of the said apace ; " but you do not de-
monstrate, as you intended, that the conclusion is not
based on the multitude of parts, &c.

2 May, 1676.


LETTEE LXX. (LXXXI.)

Spinoza to * * * * •*

[Spinoza explains his vi^w of the infinite."]

Distinguished Sib, — My statement concerning the in-
finite, that an infinity of parts cannot be inferred from a
multitude of parts, is plain when we consider that, if such
a conclusion could be drawn from a multitude of parts, we
should not be able to imagine a greater multitude of parts;
the first-named multitude, whatever it was, would have to
be the greater, which is contrary to fact. For in the whole
space between two non-concentric circles we conceive a
greater multitude of parts than in haU that space, yet
the number of parts in the half, as in the whole of the
space, exceeds any assignable number. Again, from ex-
tension, as Descartes conceives it, to wit, a quiescent mass,
it is not only difficult, as you say, but absolutely impossible
to prove the existence of bodies. For matter at rest, as it
is in itself, will continue at rest, and will only be deter-
mined to motion by some more powerful external cause ;
for this reason I have not hesitated on a former occasion to
affirm, that the Cartesian principles of natural things are
useless, not to say absurd.

The Hague, 5 May, 1676.

' Tschirnhausen.


I ws


[lBTTEB tSSL


LETTER LXXL (T.XTT TT)
• • • • » 1 iPQ Spinoza.


[Hbtp can the rariefy of ilie wnirerse he ekmon h priori fmn
the S^inOiUtic conception of exteneion /j

Most i,eaeneii Sie, — I Tfisb yon would gratify me in
this matter by pointing out how, from the conception ol
extension, as you give it, the variety of the Tiniverse can be
shown, d priori. Ton recall the opinion of Descartes,
wherein he asserts, that this variety can only be deduced
from extension, by supposing that, when motion was start^
by God, it cansed this effect in extension. Now it appears
to me, that he does not deduce the existence of bodies from
matter at rest, unless, perhaps, you count as notliing the
assumption of God as a motive power ; you have not shown
how such an cfEect must, a, priori, necessarily follow from
the nature of God. A difficulty which Descartes professed
himself unable to solve as being beyond human »mder-
standing, I therefore ask you the question, knowing tliat
yon have other thoughts on the matter, unless perhaps
there be some weighty cause for your unwilHngness
hitherto to disclose your opinion. If this, as I suppose,
be not espedient, give me some bint of your meaning.
You may rest assured, that whether you speak openly with
me, or whether you employ reserve, my regard for you will
remain unchanged.

My special reasons for making the requests are i
follows : — I have always observed in mathematics, th
from a given thing considered in itself, that is, from t
definition of a given thing, we can only deduce a a'
property ; if, however, we require to find Beveral prope
we are obliged to place the thing defined in relation \
other things. Then from the conjunction of the definititrf
of these things new properties result. For instance, if J
regard the circumference of a circle by itself. I can oi^
infer that it is everywhere alik^ or uniform, in wl '
property it difEers essentially from all other curves ; I si
' TscLirnhausen.


LETTER LXXII.] COBBESPONDENCE. 409

never be able to infer any other properties. But if I place
it in relation with other things, such as the radii drawn
from the centre, two intersecting lines, or many others, I
shall be able hence to deduce many properties ; this seems
to be in opposition to Prop. xvi. of your Ethics, almost
the principal proposition of the first book of your treatise.
For it is there assumed as known, that from the given
definition of anything several properties can be deduced.
This seems to me impossible, unless we bring the thing
defined into relation with other things ; and further, I am
for this reason unable to see, how from any attribute
regarded singly, for instance, infinite extension, a variety
of bodies can result ; if you think that this conclusion can-
not be drawn from one attribute considered by itself, but
from all taken together, I should hke to be instructed by
you on the point, and shown how it should be conceived. —
Farewell, &c,

Paris, 23 June, 1676.


LETTER LXXII. (LXXXIII.)
Spinoza to * * • •*

[^Sjpinoza gives the required explanation. Mentions the

treatise of Huet, AcJ]

Distinguished Sib, — ^With regard to your question as
to whether the variety of the universe can be deduced
a ]mori from the conception of extension only, I believe I
have shown clearly enough already that it cannot; and
that, therefore, matter has been ill-defined by Descartes as
extension; it must necessarily be explained through an
attribute, which expresses eternal and infinite essence.
But perhaps, some day, if my life be prolonged, I may
discuss the subject with you more clearly. For liitherto
I have not been able to put any of these matters into due
order.

As to what you add ; namely, that from the definition

^ Tschirnhausen.


410


SPINOZA 8


[LETTEB I- TT'"


of a given thing considered in itself ve can oiily deduce a
single property, this is. perhaps, trne in the ease of Teiy
simple things (ajnong which I coont figures), but not in
reahties. For, from the fact alone, that I define God aa a
Being to whose essence belongs existence, I infer serenl
of His properties ; namely, that He neceGsarily exists, that
He is One, unthangeable, infinite, &c. I couhi addnea
several other esamples. which, for the present, I paas ova.
In conclusion. I ask you to inquire, whether Hiwt'g
treatise (against the "Tractatus Theolc^co-Politicns "}
atout which I wrote to you before, has yet been public' '
and whether you could send me a copy. Also, wl
you jet tnow, what are the new discoveries about i
tion. And so farewell, dear Sir, and continue to i
yours, Ac.
TLe lln^'Up, 15 July, 1676.


LETTER LXXni. (LXVII.)

Albe£t Buboh to Spinoza.

[Albert Burgh announces his reception into the SomiA
Church, and exhorts Spinom to follow hia example.^]

I promised to writ« to you on leaving my country, if
anything noteworthy occurred on the journey. I take thB
opportunity which offers of an event of the utmost impoi-
tance, to redeem my engagement, by informing you that I
have, by God's infinite meroy, been received' into fl»
Catholic Church and made a member of the same. Ton
may learn the particulars of the step from a letter whioll
I have sent to the diatinguiahed and accomplished fto-
fesBor Craanen of Leyd-en. I will here subjoin a iet
remarks for your special benefit.

Even as formerly I admired you for the subtlety and
keenness of your natural gifts, so now do I bewail and
deplore you; inasmuch as being by nature most talented)

' The whole of this very long letter is not given here, but only mcb
yaii' us aeemed most cliatiuiteristiu, or Kre ulladed lo in ISpinozs's replr.
-\T,.]


litTTEK ixxin.] cOBBESPOsnENca. 411

id adomod ty God vnih extraordinary gifts ; being a

wer, nay a coveter o£ the truth, you yet allow yourself to
lae ensnared and deceived by that most wretched and most
proud of beingB, the prince of eril spirits. As for all your
(philosophy, what is it but a mere illusion and chimera ?
Yet to it you entrust not only yonr peace of mind in
thia life, but the salvation of your soul for eternity. See
on what a wretched foundation all your doctrines rest,
Tou assume that you have at leng^ discovered the true
philosophy. How do you know that your philosophy is
the best of all that ever have been taught in the world,
lare now being taught, or ever shall be taught? Passing
over what may be devised in the future, have you ex-
amined all the philosophies, ancient as well as modem,
which are taught here, and in India, and everywhere
throughout the whole world P Even if you have duly ex-
amined them, how do you know that you have chosen the
best ? You will say : " My philosophy is in harmony with
light reason ; other philosophies are not." But all other
philosophers except your own followers disagree with you,
:ajid with equal right say of their philosophy what you say
I of yours, accusing you, aa you do them, of falsity and
lerror. It is, therefore, plain, that before the truth of your
philosophy can come to light, reasons must be advanced,
■which are not common to other philosophies, but apply
'solely to your own; or else you must admit that your
philosophy ia aa uncertain and nugatory as the rest.

However, restricting myself for the present to that boob
■of yours with an impious title,' and mingling your philo-
aophy with yonr theology, as in reality you mingle them
yourself, though with diabolic cunning you endeavour to
maintain, that each is separate from the other, and has
difEerent principles, I thus proceed.

Perhaps you will say : " Others have not read Holy
Scripture so often as I have ; and it ia from Holy Scripture,
the acknowledgment of which distinguishes Christians
.from the rest of the world, that I prove my doctrines.
But how? By comparing the clear passages with the
more obscure I explain Holy Scripture, and out of my in-

' "Tractnliis Theuiogico-Politicus."


412 Spinoza's [lettes mm.

terpretations I frame dogmas, or else confirm those whicli
are already concocted in my brain." But, I adjure you.
reflect seriously on what you say. How do you know,
that you have made a right apphcation of your method, or
again that your method is sufficient for the interpretation
of Scripture, and that you are thus interpreting Scriptuw
aright, especially as the Catholics say, and most truly, that
the imiTersal "Word of God is not handed down to us in
writing, hence that Holy Scripture camiot be explained
through itself, I will not say by one man, but by tliH
Church heraoM, who is the sole authorized interpreter?
The Apostolic traditions must likewise be consulted, as is
proved by the testimony of Holy Scripture and the Holy
Fathers, and as reason and experience suggest. Thus, as
your first principlea are most felse and lead to destruction,
what will become of all your doctrine, built up and
supported on bo rotten a foundation?

Wherefore, if you believe in Christ cnicified, acknow-
ledge your pestUent heresy, reflect on the perverseness rf
your nature, and be reconciled with the Churclu

How do yoiir proofs difier from those of all heretics, who
ever have left, are now leaving, or shall in future leava
God's Church ? All, like yourself, make use of the same
principle, to wit, Holy Scripture taken by itself, for the
concoction and establishment of their doctrines.

Do not flatter yourself with the thought, that neither
the Calvinists, it may be, nor the so-called Eefonned
Church, nor the Lutherans, nor the Mennonites, nor the
Soeinians, &c., can refute your doctrines. All these, as I
have said, are as wretched as yourself, and like you are
dwelling in the shadow of death.

If you do not beUeve in Christ, you are more wretched
than I can express. Yet the remedy is easy. Turn away
from your sina, and consider the deadly arrogance of your
wretched and insane reasouing. You do not believe in
Christ. Why? Youwillsay: "Because thet«achingaiid
the life of Christ, and also the Christian teaching concejE-
ing Christ are not at all in haimony with my teaching," Bui
again, I say, then you dare to tlunk yourself greater than
all those who have ever risen up ia the State or Church
of God, patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs, doctors,


I.ETTEE LXXin.] COBRESPOXDESCB. 413

confessors, and holy virgins innnmprable, yea, in your

blasphemy, than Christ hunsell'. I'o you alone surpass
iiU these in doctrine, in manner of life, in every respect?
"Will you, wretched pigmv, vile worm of the earth, yea,
ashes, food of worms, will you in your unspeakable blas-
phemy, dare to put yourself before the incarnate, infinite
wisdom of the Eternal Father? "Will yon, alone, consider
yourself wiser and greater than all those, who from the
beginning of the world haye been in the Church of Qod, and
have believed, or believe still, that Christ would come or
has already come ? On what do yon base this rash, insane,
deplorable, and inescusable arrogance ?

• • • • • a

If you cannot pronounce on what I have just been eni]-
moraiing (divining rods, alchemy, &c.), why, wretched
man, are yon eo pufEed up with dtabohcal pride, as to pass
rash judgment on the awful mysteries of Christ's life and
passion, which the CathoUcs themselves in their teaching
declare to be incomprehensible ? "Why do you commit the
further insanity of silly and futile carping at the number-
less miracles and signs, which have been wrought through
the virtue of Almighty Qod by the apostles and disciples
of Christ, and afterwards by so many thousand saints, in
testimony to. and confirmation of the truth of the Catholic
faith; yea, which arebeingwroiight in our own time in cases
dthout number throughout the world, by God's almighty
OoduesB and mercy? If you cannot gainsay these, and
rely you cannot, why stand aloof any longer ? Join hands
feUowship, and repent from your sins : put on humility,
id be bom again.

ilbert Surgh requests Spinota. to consider i (i.) The large
' number of helieoers in the Momiah faith, (ii.) The wniw-
ierrtipted succession of the Church, (iii.) The fact that a
Je'a unlearned men cowoerteA the leorld to Christianity.
(iy.) The aTUiquity, the immutabUily, the infallibility, the
tTieorruption, the unify, and the vaet extent of the Catholic
Religion ; also the fact, that secession from, it involves
damnation, and that it will itself endure as long as the
world, (y.) The admirable organisation of the Somieh
Church, (vi.) The superior morality of Calholics. (vii.)


M ^


414 Spinoza's [letteb lxxit.

The frequent cases of recantation of opinions among heretics,
(viii.) The miserable life led by atheists, whatever their
outward demeanov/r may he,'] * * * *

I have written this letter to you with intentions truly
Christian ; first, in order to show the love I bear to you,
tliough you are a heathen ; secondly, in order to beg you
not to persist in converting others.

I therefore will thus conclude : Gk)d is willing to snatch
your soul from eternal damnation, if you will allow Him.
Do not doubt that the Master, who has called you so often
through others, is now calling you for the last time through
me, who having obtained grace from the ineffable mercy of
God Himself, beg the same for you with my whole heart.
Do not deny me. For if you do not now give ear to Gk)d
who calls you, the wrath of the Lord will be kindled against
you, and there is a danger of your being abandoned by
His infinite mercy, and becoming a wretched victim of the
Divine Justice which consumes all things in wrath. Such
a fate may Almighty God avert for the greater glory of
His name, and for the salvation of your soul, also for
a salutary example for the imitation of your most unfortu-
nate and idolatrous followers, through our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, Who with the Eternal Father liveth and
reigneth in the Unity of the Holy Spirit, God for all
Eternity. Amen.

Florence, III. Non. Sept. cididclxxv. (Sept. 3, 1675.)^


LETTER LXXIV. (LXXVI.)
Spinoza to Albert Bfegh.

\_8jpinoza laments the step taken hy his pupil, and answers his
arguments. The Hague, end of 1675.]

That, which I could scarcely believe when told me by
others, I learn at last from your own letter ; not only have
you been made a member of the Eomish Church, but you are

* There is a kind of affectation very consistent with the letfer in the
use of the classical calendar and Boman numerals for the date.


LETTEE tlHT.] C0KBE8P0KDENCE. 415

become a very keen champion o£ the same, and hare already

learned wantonly to insult and roil against your opponents.

At fii-et I resolved to leave your letter unanswered,

thinking that time and experience will assuredly be of

more avail than reasoning, to restore you to yourself and

your friends ; not to mention other arguments, which won

your approval formerly, when we were discussing the case

of Steno,' in whose steps you are now following. But

some of my friends, who like myself had formed great

hopes from your superior talents, strennously ui^ me not

to fail in the offices of a friend, but to consider what you

lately were, rather than what you ara, with other arguments

of the like nature, I have thus been induced to write you

this short reply, which I earnestly beg you will think

porthy of calm perusal,

^^ I will not imitate those adversaries of Romanism, who

ould set forth the vices of priests and popes with a view

( kindling your aversion, Such considerations are often

at forward from evil and imworthy motives, and tend

ither to irritate than to instruct. I will even admit, that

bore men of learning and of blameless life are found in

le Bomish Church than in any other Christian body ; for,

I it contains more members, bo will every type of character

a more largely represented in it. Ton cannot possibly

any, unless you have lost your memory as well as your

mson, that in every Church there are thoroi^hly hononr-

ible men, who worship God with justice and charity. We

lave known many such among the Lutherans, the Reformed

Shurch, the Mennonites, and the Enthusiasts, Not to go

urther, you knew your own relations, who in the time of

he Duke of Alva suffered every kind of torture bravely and

rillingly for the sake of their religion. In fact, you must

dmit, that personal holiness is not pecuhar to the Bomish

Srarch, but common to all Churches,

Ab it is by this, that we know " that we dwell in God

id He in us" (1 Ep. John, iv. 13). it follows, that what

Sstinguishes the Romish Church from others must be

omething entirely superfluous, and therefore founded

olely on superstition. For, aa John says, justice and

A Dnnish Rnotomiat, who ronounced Luthennism for Culliolicism

tt Florence in 1669.


416 BPINOZA's [lEITEE LXSIT.

charity are the one sure aiffn of tbe true Catholic faatb,
and the true fruits of the Holy Spirit. Wherever they
are found, there in truth ia Christ ; wherever they are
absent, Christ ia absent also. For only by the Spirit of
Christ can we be led to the love of justice and charity.
Had joa been willing to reflect on those points, you would
not have ruined yourself, nor have brought deep aflBictioa
on your relations, who are now sorrowfully bewailing youi-

But I return to your letter, which you begin, by lament-
ing that I allow myself to be ensnared by the prince of
evil spirits. Pray take heart, and recollect yourself.
When you had the use of your faculties, you were wont, if
I mistake not, to worship an Infinite God, by Whose
ef&cacy all things absolutely come to pass and are pre-
served; now you dream of a prince, God'a enemy, who
against God'a will ensnares and deceives very many men
(rarely good ones, to be sure), whom God thereupon hands
over to this master of wickedness to be tortured eternally.
The Divine justice therefore allowa the devil to deceive
men and remain unpunished ; but it by no means allows
to remain unpunished the men, who have been by that
self -same devil miserably deceived and ensnared.

Those absurdities might bo far be tolerated, if you
worshipped a God infinite and eternal j not one whom
ChastiUon, in the town which the Dutch call Tienen, gave
with impunity to horses to be eaten. And, poor wretch,
you bewail me ? My philosophy, which you never behold,
you style a chimera f youth deprived of understanding,
who has bewitched you into believing', that the Supreme
and Eternal is eaten by you, and held in your intestines ?

Tet you seem to wish to employ reason, and ask me,
" Soto Ihnow that my pAUosopky i§ the best wmong all that
have ever been tmight in the luorld, or are being taught, or
ever wiU he taught f " a qaestion which I might with much
greater right ask you ; for I do not presume that I have
found the best philosophy, I know that I understand the
true philosophy. If you. ask in what way I know it, I
answer: In the same way as you know that the threo
angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles ; that
this ia suffideot, will be denied by no one whose brain is


TEE LXSIT.] COBBeaPOSDENCE. 41?

Kmd, and who does not go dreaming of evil spirits in-

piring US with false ideas lifce the true. For the truth is
e index of itself and of what ia fulae.
But jou, who presiune that you have at last found the
SBt religion, or rather the beat men. on whom jou have
inned your credulity, you, " ■who inow that they are the
it among aU who have taught, do now teach, or shall tn
lure teach oth^rreligioTU. Have i/oa examined all religiortM,
tctent as toell at modem, ta-ught here and in India and
teryuihere throughout the world ? And, if you have dWy
wmined them, how do you know that you have chosen the
■ " since you can give no reason for the faith that ia in
? But you will say, that you acquiesce in the inward
Ktimony of the Spirit of (Sod, while the rest of mankind
; ensnared and deceived by the prince of evil spirits,
nt aU those outside the pale of the Romish Church can
ith equal right proclaim of their own creed what you
(oclftim of yours.
As to what you add of the common consent of myriads I

I and the uninterrupted ecclesiastical succession,
lis ia the very catch-word of the PhariseeB. They with I
9 leaa confidence than the devotees of Eome bring for-
ard their mjTiad witnesaes, who as pertinaciously as the
Oman witnesses repeat what they have heard, as though
were their personal experience. Further, they carry hack
'r line to Adam. They boast with equal arrogance, that
r Church has continued to this day unmoved and un-
Lpaired in spite of the hatred of Christians and heathen.
y more than any other sect are supported by antiquity.
y exclaim with one voice, that they have received their
amtiona from God Himaelf, anij that they alone preserve
B Word of God both written and unwritten. That all
1 have issued from them, and that they have re-
ined constant through thousands of years under no
toiBtraint of temporal dominion, but by the sole efficacy
! their superstition, no one can deny. The miracles they
11 of would tire a thousand toingues. But their chief
ast is, that they count a far greater number of martyrs
lan any other nation, a number which is daily increased

K those who suffer with singular coostaniy for the faith
y profess ; nor is their boasting false. I myself knew


iI8 BPiKOZA'a [letteb liiit.

ajnong others of a certain Judah called the faithful,' who in
the midst of the flames, when he was already thought to be '
dead, lifted his voice to sing the hymn beginning, "To
Thee, God, I offer up my eonl," and so singing perished.

The organization of the Eoman Chnreh, which yon so
greatly praise, I confess to be politic, and to many lucra-
tive. I should believe that there was no other more
convenient for deceiving the people and keeping men's
minds in check, if it were not for the organization of the
Mahometan Ohiuch, which far surpasses it. For trom the
time when this auperatition arose, there has been no sehisni
in its church.

If, therefore, you had. rightly judged, you would haw
seen that only your third point tells in favour of die
Christians, namely, tha.t unlearned and common men
should have been able to convert nearly the whole world to
a belief in Christ. But this reason militatea not only for
the Eomish Church, but for all those who profess the name
of Christ,

But assume that all the reasons you bring forward tell
in favour solely of the iomish Church. Do you thint
that you can thereby prove mathematically the authority
of that Church? As the case is far otherwise, why do yon
wish me to believe that my demonstrations are inspired
by the prince of evil spirits, while your own are inspired
by Gh>d, especially as I see, and as your letter cleailj
shows, that you have be«n led to become a devotee of thii
Church not by your love of God, but by your fear of hell,
the single cause of superstition ? Is this your humility,
that you trust nothing to yourself, but everything to
others, who are condemned by many of their fellow menP
Do you set it down to pride and arrogance, that I employ
reason and acquiesce in this true Word of God, which is in
the mind and can never be depraved or corrupted ? Cast

' " Don Lope de Vera y Alarcon de San CJemente, R Spanish noblf-
mnn who was coDrerted to Judaism through the study of Hebrcir, id
wsj burnt at Valladulid OD tha 25th July, 11144." — Pollock's l^nots,
chap, ii., last note. Mr. Pollock refules the infarenc^e of Grat», lh«l
Spini'za'a childho'id must hare been spent in i^pain, by pointing aal thai
the word used here, " novi," is the same as that UBed above of Albert
Bnrgh'x knowledge of his ancesl^ira' Bufierings^of wtuob he mi
certainly not an eye-witness. "


IKTTKB LKXT.] COEBEBPONDBNCB. il9

away this deadly superstition, acknowledge the reason
Wbiub Gfod haa given you, and follow that, unless you
froTild he numbered with the brutes. Cease, I say, to call
idiculous errors mysteries, and do not basely confound
Ihose things which are unknown to us, or have not yst
>een discovered, with what is proved to be absurd, like the
lorrible secrets of this Church of yours, which, in propor-
aon as they are repugnant to right reason, you believe to
ransc«iid the understanding.

But the fundamental principle of the " Tractatus Theo-
logico-PoliticuB," that Scripture should only be expounded
Idirough Scripture, which you so wantonly without any
zeason proclaim to he false, ia not merely assumed, but
■categorically proved to be true or sound; especially in
chapter vii., vfhere also the opinions of adversaries are
Bonfuted ; see also what is proved at the end of chapter
rv. K you will re6ect on these things, and also examiuo
the historj] of the Church (of which I see you are com-
pletely ignorant), in order to see how false, in many
respects, is Papal tradition, and by what course of events .
and witih what cunning the Pope of Eome six hundred
years after Christ obtained supremacy over the Church, I
do not doubt that you will eventually return to your
JBensea. That this result may come to pass I, for your sake,
lieaxtily wish, Farewell, &g.


LETTER LXXV. (LSIS.)

A TO Lambekt vam Velthtjtsen' {Doctor of Medicine
at Vtreckt.) i


Most excellent and distinouishbd Sir, — I wonder at
our friend Neuatadt having said, that I am meditating the
refutation of the various writings eirctdated against my

' See Letlers XLVUI., SLIX.


420 BPINOZA'b COEEESPONDENCE, [lETTEE I.ISJ.

Look." and that among the worka for me to refute he
places your MS. t'or I certainly have never entertained
the intention of refuting any of my adversaries : they all
seem to me utterly unworthy of being answered. I do not
remember to have eaid to Mr. Neustadt anything more,
than that I proposed to illustrate eome ot the obscurer
passages in the treatise with notes, and that I should add
to these vour MS., and my answer, if your couseiit could
he gained, on which last point I begged hi'm to speak to
you, adding, that if you refused permission on the ground,
tliat some of the observations in my answer were too harshly
put, you should be given full power to modify or expunge
them, In the meanwhile, I am by no means angry with
Mr. Neustadt, but I wanted to put the matter before yoa
as it stands, that if your permission be not granted, I
might show you that 1 have no wish to publish your MS.
against your will. Though I think it might be issued
without endangering your reputation, if it appeals withont
your name, I will take no steps in the matter, unless yo) ''
give me leave. But, to t«ll the truth, you would do mo^
far greater kindness, if you would put in writing the ar|
mentiS with which you think you can impugn my treat
and add them to your MS. I most earnestly beg youl
do this. For there is no one whose arguments I wot'
more wilhngly consider ; knowing, aa I do, that you
bound solely by your zeal for truth, and that your m '
singularly candid, I therefore beg you again and
not to shrink from undertaking this task, and to '
me. Yours most obediently,

B. DE Spin 02 A.

I The " Tractntua Throbeico-PolitJtUE."


/ Lt . - .' * ^ »■ •
