Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XVIII (1903-1904)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1903 London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. edition (Parts XLVI-XLIX) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc18soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XVIII

(CONTAINING  PARTS  XLVI-XLIX)

1903-4.


The  respofisibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  m papers
p2iblished  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  ivith  their  authors


LONDON

R.  BRIMLEY  JOHNSON

4 ADAM  STREET,  ADELPHI,  W.C.

1904

\_The  Rights  of  Translation  and  Reproduction  are  reserved]


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2015


https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc18soci


•<r

.'O

a)


5 ’ ^


j

^0

?


CONTENTS,


• H

4=’

/■.

A ■


j

t

A


5


PART  XLVI.

June,  1903.

Presidential  Address.  By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.

Supplement. — Reviews :

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers’s  “ Human  Personality  and  its  Survival  of
Bodily  Death  ” :

I.  By  Professor  William  James  - - - -

II.  By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.  - - - -

III.  By  Professor  Th.  Flournoy  - - - -

IV.  By  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.  -----
“The  Nineteenth  Century”  and  Mr.  Frederic  Myers.  By  Andrew

Lang -

Reply  to  Mr  Podmore’s  Criticism.  By  Professor  James  H.  Hyslop  -


PART  XLVII.

January,  1904.

L-  General  Meetings  . . -

i I.  On  the  Types  of  Phenomena  displayed  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s

^ Trance.  By  J.  G.  Piddington

II.  On  Certain  Unusual  Psychological  Phenomena.  By  John
Honeyman,  R.S.A. - - -


PART  XT  WITT.

March,  1904.

Address  by  the  President,  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.

:U10J


PAGE

1


22

34

42

53

62

78


103

104
308


323


c c


IV


'Corcte'Ats:


. ‘PART.  XLIX,

< ' c ■ c c <

Co  < ^c<c<rc  tr

October,  1904.


General  Meetings . .

I.  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality  (with  Illustrations).  By
Albert  Wilson,  M.D.

Introduction

History  of  the  Case  . - -

Theory  of  Cerebral  Changes  connected  with  Changes  of
Personality

Appendix  I.  ;

Writings  of  the  different  Personalities  - - . -

Comments  on  the  Writings  and  Drawings  of  the
Secondary  Personalities.  By  Alice  Johnson
Diary  of  Appearances  of  different  Personalities
Diary  of  Appearances  of  the  Normal  State
Description  of  Illustrations
Appendix  II.  :

Letter  from  Mr.  Piddington  to  Dr.  Wilson
Comments  by  Dr.  C.  Lloyd  Tuckey  . . - .

Comments  by  Dr.  Robert  Jones  - - - ' -

II.  The  Answers  to  the  American  Branch’s  Questionnaire  regard-
ing Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  By  F.  C.  S.
Schiller  - - - - - - - - . -

III.  The  Poltergeist  at  Cideville.  By  Andrew  Lang  -


Supplement.

I.  The  History  of  a Haunted  House.  By  Dr.  J.  Gr asset.
Translated  and  Abridged  by  Vera  Larminie

II.  Reviews :

Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell’s  “ Hypnotism  : its  History,
Practice,  and  Theory.”  By  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.  -

Dr.  J.  Maxwell’s  “ Les  Phenomfenes  Psychiques : Re-
cherches,  Observations,  Methodes.”  By  The  Hon.

E.  Feilding  - - -

Editorial  Note  ---------

Mr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller’s  “ Humanism : Philosophical
Essays.”  By  F.  N.  Hales  - . . . .

Officers  and  Council  for  1904  ------

List  of  Members  and  Associates  - - - . -

List  of  Members  and  Associates  of  the  American  Branch


PAGE

351

352
355

380

387

393

398

400

402

405

412

413

416

454

464


481

490

501

501

505

506
533


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  XLVI.

June,  1903.


PEESIDERTIAL  AllDEESS.

Delivered  on  January  'iOth,  1903.

By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.E.S.

In  taking  the  Chair  of  this  Society  for  one  more  year  and
giving  a third  Presidential  Address,  I think  it  desirable  to
treat  the  subject  from  a business  point  of  view,  and  to  con-
sider on  what  lines  the  Society  may  profitably  work  in  the
future.  It  must  be  remembered  that  our  primary  aim  is  to
be  a Scientific  Society,  to  conduct  our  researches  and  to
record  our  results  in  an  accurate  and  scientific  manner,  so
as  to  set  an  example  of  careful  work  in  regions  where  it  has
been  the  exception  rather  than  the  rule,  and  to  be  a trust-
worthy guide  to  the  generation  of  workers  who  shall  follow.

To  be  scientific  does  not  mean  to  be  infallible,  but  it  means
being  clear  and  honest,  and  as  exact  as  we  know  how  to  be.
In  difficult  investigations  pioneers  have  always  made  some
mistakes,  they  have  no  immediate  criterion  or  infallible
touchstone  to  distinguish  the  more  true  from  the  less  true,  but
if  they  record  their  results  with  anxious  care  and  scrupulous
honesty  and  painstaking  precision,  their  mistakes  are  only  less
valuable  to  the  next  generation  than  their  partially  true
generalisations ; and  sometimes  it  turns  out,  after  a century  or

A


2


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


so,  that  mistakes  made  by  early  pioneers  were  no  snch  thorough
errors  as  had  been  thought,  that  they  liad  an  element  of
truth  in  them  all  the  time,  as  if  discoverers  were  endowed
with  a kind  of  prophetic  insight  whereby  they  dimly  glimpsed
theories  and  truths  which  it  would  take  several  generations
of  workers  to  disencumber  and  bring  clearly  to  light.

Suppose,  however,  that  their  errors  were  real  ones,  the
record  of  their  work  is  just  as  important  to  future  navigators
as  it  is  to  have  the  rocks  and  shoals  of  a channel  mapped
out  and  buoyed.  It  is  work  which  must  be  done.  The

great  ship  passing  straight  to  its  destination  is  enabled  to
attain  this  directness  and  speed  by  the  combined  labours  of
a multitude  of  workers,  some  obscure  and  forgotten,  some
distinguished  and  remendjered,  but  none  of  whom  were  able
to  realise  the  stately  passage  of  the  great  ship  through  the
channels  marked  out  for  it,  and  by  aid  of  mechanism  which
they  had  taken  a part  in  designing  or  constructing.  So  it  is
with  every  great  erection ; and  the  Forth  Bridge  stands  upon
piers  sunk  below  the  water-mark  by  the  painful  and  long
continued  labours  of  Italian  workmen  in  “caissons”  full  of  com-
pressed and  heated  air.

The  study  of  specifically  Natural  knowledge  was  fostered
and  promoted  by  the  recognition  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.
of  a body  of  enthusiasts  who,  during  the  disturbed  but  hopeful
era  of  the  Commonwealth,  had  met  together  to  discuss  problems
of  scientific  interest ; and  to-day  the  Eoyal  Society  is  among
the  dignified  institutions  of  our  land,  taking  all  branches  of
Natural  Philosophy  and  Natural  History — the  Physical  Sciences
and  the  Biological  Sciences — under  its  wing.

Us  it  does  not  recognise,  but  then  neither  does  it  recognise
Mental  and  Moral  Philosophy,  or  Ethics,  or  Psychology,  or
History,  or  any  part  of  a great  region  of  knowledge  which  has
hitherto  been  regarded  as  outside  the  pale  of  the  Natural
Sciences.

It  is  for  us  to  introduce  our  subjects  within  that  pale,  if  it
turns  out  that  there  they  properly  belong ; and  if  not,  it  is  for
us  to  do  pioneer  work  and  begin  the  establishment  of  another
Society  or  group  of  Societies  for  recognition  and  promotion  of
work  in  the  mental,  the  psychological,  the  psychical  direction,
until  the  day  for  unification  shall  arrive.


XLVI.]


Presidential  Address.


3


Half  knowledge  sees  divisions  and  emphasises  barriers,
delights  in  classification  into  genera  and  species,  affixes  labels,
and  studies  things  in  groups.  And  all  this  work  is  of  the

utmost  practical  value  and  is  essentially  necessary.  That  the
day  will  come  when  barriers  shall  be  broken  down,  when
species  shall  be  found  to  shade  off  into  one  another,  when
continuity  and  not  classification  shall  be  the  dominant  feature,
may  be  anticipated  by  all,  but  we  have  no  power  of  hastening
the  day  except  by  taking  our  place  in  the  workshop  and
doing  our  assigned  quota ; still  less  have  we  any  advantage  in
pretending  that  the  day  of  unification  has  arrived  while  as
yet  its  dawn  is  still  in  the  future.

Eeturning  to  my  thesis  I say  our  primary  aim  is  to  be  a
scientific  Society,  doing  pioneering  and  foundation  work  in  a
new  and  not  yet  incorporated  tract  on  which  future  genera-
tions may  build,  and  making  as  few  mistakes  as  we  can
reasonably  contrive  by  the  exercise  of  great  care.

We  are  not  a literary  society,  though  we  have  had  men  of
letters  among  our  guides  and  leaders ; and  we  are  not  a
religious  society,  though  some  of  our  members  take  an
interest  in  our  subject  because  it  seems  to  them  to  have  a
bearing  on  their  religious  convictions  or  hopes.  I will  say
a few  words  on  both  these  points.  First,  our  relations  to
literature.

The  name  of  Francis  Bacon  is  a household  word  in  the
history  of  English  scientific  ideas.  I do  not  mean  in  the  recent,
and  as  it  seems  to  me  comic,  aspect,  that  he  wrote  everything
that  was  written  in  the  Elizabethan  era  (a  matter  to  which  I
wish  to  make  no  reference  one  way  or  the  other,  for  it  is
completely  off  my  path),  but  before  that  hare  was  started  his
name  was  weighty  and  familiar  in  the  history  of  English
scientific  ideas.  It  is  instructive  to  ask  why.  Was  he  a man
of  Science  ? No.  Did  he  make  discoveries  ? No.  Do  scien-
tific men  trace  back  their  ancestry  to  him  ? No.  To  Isaac
Newton  they  trace  it  back,  to  Gilbert,  to  Roger  Bacon,
speaking  for  those  in  England ; but  of  Francis  Bacon  they
know  next  to  nothing.  Outside  England  all  the  world  traces
its  scientific  ancestry  to  Newton,  to  Descartes,  to  Galileo,  to
Kepler  ; but  of  Francis  Bacon  scientific  men  outside  England
have  scarcely  heard,  save  as  a man  of  letters.  Yet  the  pro-


4 Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [PART

gress  of  science  owes  much  to  him.  All  unconsciously  scientific
men  owe  to  him  a great  debt.  Why  ?

Because  he  perceived  afar  off  the  oncoming  of  the  scientific
wave,  and  because  he  was  able,  in  language  to  which  men  would
listen,  to  herald  and  welcome  its  advance.

Scientifically  he  was  an  amateur ; but  he  was  an  enthusiast
who  with  splendid  eloquence,  with  the  fire  of  genius,  and  with
great  forensic  skill,  was  able  to  impress  his  generation,  and  not
his  own  generation  alone,  with  some  idea  of  the  dignity  and
true  place  of  science,  and  to  make  it  possible  for  the  early
pioneers  of  the  Eoyal  Society  to  pursue  their  labours  unim-
peded by  persecution  and  to  gain  some  sort  of  recognition  even
from  general  and  aristocratic  Society.

For  remember  that  the  term  “ science  ” was  not  always
respectable.  To  early  ears  it  sounded  almost  as  the  term
witchcraft  or  magic  sounded,  it  was  a thing  from  which  to
warn  young  people ; it  led  to  atheism  and  to  many  other
abominations.  It  was  an  unholy  prying  into  the  secrets  of
Nature  which  were  meant  to  be  hid  from  our  eyes,  it  was
a thing  against  which  the  Church  resolutely  set  its  face,  a
thing  for  which  it  was  ready  if  need  were  to  torture  or  to  burn
those  unlucky  men  of  scientific  genius  who  were  born  before
their  time.  I mean  no  one  Church  in  particular : I mean
the  religious  world  generally.  Science  was  a thing  allied  to
heresy,  a thing  to  hold  aloof  from,  to  shudder  at,  and  to
attribute  to  the  devil.  All  which  treatment  that  great  and
eminent  pioneer,  Boger  Bacon,  experienced  at  our  beloved
University  of  Oxford ; liecause  the  time  was  not  yet  ripe.

How  came  it  that  in  the  days  of  the  Stuarts  the  atmosphere  was
so  different  from  that  prevalent  in  the  days  of  the  Plantagenets  ?
Doubtless  the  age  of  Elizabeth,  the  patriotism  aroused  by  the
Armada  and  by  the  great  discoveries  in  geography,  had  had  their
vivifying  effect  ; and  the  same  sort  of  originality  of  thought
which  did  not  scruple  to  arraign  a king  for  high  treason  like-
wise ventured  to  set  orthodoxy  at  defiance,  and  to  experiment
upon  and  investigate  openly  all  manner  of  natural  facts.  But  1
wish  to  maintain,  or  at  least  to  suggest,  that  the  result  was
largely  due  to  the  influence  of  the  writings  of  Francis  Bacon.
He  had  accustomed  scholars  and  literary  men  to  the  possibili-
ties and  prerogatives  of  scientific  enquiry,  he  had  emphasised


xlvl]


Presidential  Address.


5


the  importance  and  the  dignity  of  experiment,  and  it  is  to  his
writings  that  the  rapid  spread  of  scientific  ideas,  discovered
as  always  by  a few,  became  acceptable  to  and  spread  among
the  many.

Do  not  let  us  suppose,  however,  that  the  recognition  of
science  was  immediate  and  universal.  Dislike  of  it,  and
mistrust  of  the  spread  of  scientific  enquiry,  persisted  well
into  the  Victorian  era,  and  is  not  wholly  extinct  to  this
day.

I am  not  at  the  moment  speaking  of  investigation  into
affairs  of  the  mind — that  is  unpopular  and  mistrusted  still,  and
still  good  people  are  found  who  will  attribute  anything  un-
usual to  the  devil,  and  warn  young  people  from  it, — but  I refer
to  some  slight  trace  of  lingering  prejudice  against  the  orthodox
sciences  of  Chemistry  and  Physics  and  Biology.  They  have
achieved  their  foothold,  they  are  regarded  with  respect,  people
do  not  disdain  to  make  money  by  means  of  them  when  the
opportunity  is  forthcoming,  but  they  are  not  really  liked.  They
are  only  admitted  to  our  Schools  on  sufferance,  as  an  inferior
grade  of  study  suited  to  the  backward  and  the  ignorant ;
they  are  not  regarded  with  affection  and  enthusiasm,  as  revela-
tions of  Divine  working,  to  be  reverently  studied,  nor  as
subjects  in  which  the  youth  of  a nation  may  be  wholesomely
and  solidly  trained.

Very  well,  still  more  is  the  time  not  quite  ripe  for  our  sub-
ject ; pioneers  must  expect  hard  knocks,  the  mind  of  a people
can  change  only  slowly ; and  until  the  mind  of  a people  is
changed,  new  truths  born  before  their  time  must  suffer  the
fate  of  other  untimely  births ; and  the  prophet  who  preaches
them  must  expect  to  be  mistaken  for  a useless  fanatic,  of
whom  every  age  has  always  had  too  many,  and  must  be  con-
tent to  be  literally  or  metaphorically  put  to  death,  as  part  of
the  process  of  the  regeneration  of  the  world.

The  dislike  and  mistrust  and  disbelief  in  the  validity  or
legitimacy  of  psychical  enquiry  is  familiar.  The  dislike  of
the  Natural  Sciences  is  almost  defunct.  It  survives  un-
doubtedly ; they  are  not  liked  but  they  are  tolerated ; and  I
am  bound  to  say  that  part  of  the  surviving  dislike  is  due  not
alone  to  heredity  and  imbibed  ideas,  but  to  the  hasty  and
intolerant  and  exuberant  and  splay-footed  attitude  of  some


6 Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

men  of  science,  who,  knowing  themselves  to  be  reformers,  feel-
ing that  they  have  a grain  of  seed-corn  to  plant  and  water,
cannot  be  content  to  go  about  their  business  in  a calm  and
conciliatory  spirit,  but  must  seek  to  burry  things  on  by  a rough-
shod method  of  progression,  which  may  indeed  attain  its  ends,
but  gives  some  pain  in  the  process,  and  perhaps  achieves  results
less  admirable  than  those  which  might  have  been  attained  by
the  exercise  of  a little  patience,  a little  more  perception  of  the
point  of  view  of  others,  a little  more  imagination,  a little  more
of  that  recognition  of  the  insignificance  of  trifles  and  of  the
transitory  character  of  full-blown  fashions  which  is  called  a
sense  of  humour,  a little  more  cultivation  of  the  historic  sense.
In  a word  a little  more  general  education.

I am  digressing  again.  I was  pointing  out  the  importance
of  Francis  Bacon  as  a man  of  letters  in  the  history  of  the
development  of  the  national  recognition  of  the  natural  sciences
in  England.

Has  it  struck  you,  it  has  often  struck  me,  that  in  the  history
of  the  psychical  sciences  we  too  have  had  a Bacon,  and  one
not  long  departed  from  us  ? Is  it  possible  that  in  the  two
volumes,  which  to-day  or  to-morrow  may  be  emerging  from
the  press,  we  have  a book  which  posterity  will  regard  as  a
Novum  Organon  ? History  does  not  repeat  itself,  and  I would
not  draw  the  parallel  too  close.  It  may  be  that  posterity  will
regard  Myers  as  much  more  than  that,  as  a pliilosophic  pioneer
who  has  not  only  secured  recognition  for,  but  has  himself
formulated  some  of  the  philosophic  unification  of,  a mass  of
obscure  mental  and  barely  recognised  human  faculty,  and  has
thrown  a light  on  the  meaning  of  personality  which  may  sur-
vive the  test  of  time.  It  may  be  so,  but  that  is  for  no  one
living  to  say.  Posterity  alone,  by  aid  of  the  experience  and
further  knowledge  which  time  brings,  is  able  to  make  a
judgment  of  real  value  on  such  a topic  as  that.

Meanwhile  it  is  for  us  to  see  that  time  does  bring  this  greater
knowledge  and  experience.  For  time  alone  is  impotent.  Mil-
lions of  years  passed  on  this  planet,  during  which  the  amount
of  knowledge  accpured  was  small  or  nil.  Up  to  the  sixteenth
century,  even,  scientific  progress  was  at  the  least  slow.  Eecently
it  has  been  rapid — none  too  rapid,  but  rapid.  The  rate  of
advance  depends  upon  the  activities  and  energies  of  each


XLVI.]


Presidential  Address.


7


generation  and  upon  the  organisation  and  machinery  which  it
has  inherited  from  its  immediate  forebears.

The  pioneers  who  created  the  S.P.E.  have  left  it  in  trust
with  us  to  hand  it  on  to  future  generations  an  efficient  and
powerful  machine  for  the  spread  of  scientific  truth,  and  for  the
advancement  of  scientific  knowledge  in  a direction  overgrown
with  thickets  of  popular  superstition,  intermixed  with  sandy
and  barren  areas  of  resolute  incredulity.  We  have  to  steer
our  narrow  way  between  the  Scylla  of  stony  minds  with  no
opening  in  our  direction,  and  the  Charybdis  of  easy  and
omnivorous  acceptance  of  every  straw  and  waif  whether  of
truth  or  falsehood  that  may  course  with  the  currents  of  popular
superstition.

Eealising  this  to  be  our  duty,  and  perceiving  that  we  have
a long  period  of  danger  and  difficulty  before  us,  it  has  become
evident  to  persons  of  clear  vision  that  the  Society  must  be
established  on  a sound  and  permanent  basis,  and  must  endeavour
to  initiate  an  attitude  of  regarding  the  psychical  sciences  as
affording  the  same  sort  of  scope  to  a career,  the  same  sort  of
opportunities  of  earning  a livelihood,  as  do  the  longer  recognised
sciences, — those  which  are  more  specifically  denominated
“ natural,”  because  of  the  way  they  fit  into  our  idea  of  the
scheme  of  nature  as  by  us  at  present  recognised,  or  at  any
rate  because  they  deal  with  facts  to  which  we  have  gradually
grown  accustomed.

Any  young  man  who  wishes  to  make  money  should  be
warned  off  the  pursuit  of  pure  science  at  the  outset.  People
who  enter  the  field  with  that  object  in  view  will  do  neither
themselves  nor  science  any  good.  A certain  amount  of  enthu-
siasm and  pioneering  proclivity  is  essential,  but  fortunately  that
has  never  yet  been  wanting  in  our  race ; witness  the  hardships
willingly  entered  upon,  and  the  risks  run,  in  Arctic  or  Antarctic
exploration,  for  nothing  more  than  a living  wage.  A living
wage  is  however  to  many  a necessity.  It  has  always  been
recognised  that  those  who  labour  at  the  altar  should  live  by
the  altar ; and  a minimum  of  provision  for  bread  and  homely
needs  ought  to  be  at  the  disposal  of  a Society  like  this  where-
with to  enable  a person  of  ability  and  enthusiasm  to  undertake
the  prosecution  of  our  researches  in  a definite  and  continuous
and  so  to  speak  professional  manner.  Hitherto  we  have


8


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


depended  on  the  spontaneous  and  somewhat  spasmodic  work
of  amateurs,  often  of  wealthy  amateurs,  before  whose
minds  such  questions  as  salary  never  even  momentarily
pass.  We  shall  always  have  need  of  services  such  as
theirs.  In  the  more  orthodox  sciences,  in  Physics  for  instance,
it  has  been  notorious  that  throughout  last  century  the
best  work  has  often  been  done  by  people  who  having  the
means  of  living  otherwise  secured  to  them  were  able  to
devote  their  time,  and  often  considerable  means  too,  to  the
prosecution  of  research.  There  has  been  no  rule  either  way.
Some  of  the  leaders  have  been  paid  a small  salary,  like  Paraday  :
others  have  had  independent  means,  like  Joule.  Always  I
say  we  shall  depend  upon  and  be  grateful  for  the  spontaneous
work  and  help  of  people  of  means,  but  we  must  not  depend
solely  upon  that,  else  will  young  people  of  genius  be  diverted
by  sheer  force  of  circumstance  into  other  channels,  and  our
nascent  science  will  lose  the  benefit  of  their  powers  and  con-
tinuous work.

I have  had  the  pleasure  of  communicating,  to  the  Annual
General  Meeting  of  the  Society  this  afternoon,  the  fact  that  a
few  friends  who  desire  to  remain  anonymous  have  started  an
endowment  fund  in  order  to  achieve  this  object,  in  order  to
set  the  Society  upon  a sound  financial  basis,  and  in  order  to
provide  the  material  means  of  attacking  the  problems  which
the  future  may  bring  before  us.  Member  A has  given  us  £750,
member  B £250,  the  Society  has  transferred  £1000  from
the  legacy  of  Dr.  Arthur  Myers,  and  a trust  deed  has  been
drawn  up  and  approved  by  the  Council,  whereby  the  Society
accepts  these  donations  and  others  which  we  hope  may  be
forthcoming,^  and  determines  to  accumulate  them  until  the
sum  of  £8000  at  least  has  been  reached,  or  until  a certain
specified  time  elapses,  whichever  event  happens  first.  As
soon  as  a minimum  capital  sum  of  £8000  has  been  attained,
it  will  be  permissible  to  offer  a Eesearch  Scholarship  in
Psychical  Science,  to  which  a holder  irrespective  of  sex  or
nationality  may  be  appointed  for  one  year,  and  from  year  to
year  as  may  seem  good,  his  or  her  time  to  be  devoted  to  the
work  of  psychical  investigation.

If  we  had  more  means  more  might  be  done ; a much-

' A legacy  of  £380.5  has  since  been  left  to  the  Society  by  Mr.  A.  X.  AksakofF.


XLVi.]  Presidential  Address.  9

needed  laboratory,  with  special  appliances  such  as  1 fore-
shadowed some  years  ago,  might  be  erected ; but  this  is  to  be
the  heginiring.  This  is  not  an  appeal  to  people  to  increase
or  supplement  their  subscriptions,  such  as  was  recently  issued,
in  order  to  meet  our  ordinary  working  expenses  and  enable
us  to  employ  an  Organising  Secretary  and  to  take  what  I
think  you  will  agree  with  me  in  calling  improved  offices.
The  need  for  ordinary  subscriptions  and  new  members  con-
tinues, and  it  should  be  clearly  represented  to  all  persons
interested  in  our  work  that  we  should  welcome  them  if
they  will  join  the  Society,  and  that  we  apply  no  test  save
the  test  of  sympathy  and  sanity.  But  the  movement  1 now
report  has  new  and  additional  objects  ; it  is  the  establishment
of  an  endowment  fund  to  place  the  Society  on  a sound
and  permanent  basis  and  enable  it  before  long  to  begin
prosecuting  its  work  with  greater  ardour,  and  especially  with
greater  regularity.

We  cannot  always  depend  on  spontaneous  cases  alone.
They  are  most  important  and  are  often  extremely  valuable
instances  of  a spontaneous  and  purposeful  exercise  of  the
faculty  we  are  investigating,  and  it  would  be  a great  mistake
to  suppose  that  we  have  had  enough  of  them.  It  is  essential
that  we  be  kept  informed  of  recent  well-attested  cases,  especially
of  apparitions  at  or  near  the  time  of  death  ; but  we  shall  not
make  progress  in  understanding  the  laws  of  the  phenomena
and  in  disentangling  their  deeper  meaning  if  we  confine  our-
selves to  observation  alone.  We  must  experiment,  we  must
endeavour  to  produce  and  examine  phenomena  as  it  were  in
a laboratory  and  submit  them  to  minute  investigation.

For  instance  there  is  the  question  of  so-called  spirit
photography,  there  are  asserted  levitations  and  api:>orts  and
physical  movements,  none  of  which  have  been  subjected  to
adequate  scientific  examination ; many  such  cases  have  been
examined  and  found  fraudulent,  and  there  is  great  difficulty
in  obtaining  the  phenomena  under  prescribed  and  crucial  con-
ditions ; but  until  these  things  have  been  submitted  to  long-
continued  scientific  scrutiny  they  will  make  no  undisputed
impression,  they  will  be  either  improperly  accepted  or  im-
properly rejected,  and  will  continue  in  that  nebulous  hazy
region,  the  region  of  popular  superstition,  from  which  it  is  the


10


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


business  of  this  Society  to  rescue  them : raising  them  on  to
the  dry  land  of  science,  or  submerging  them  as  impostures
in  the  waters  of  oblivion.  And  I may  say  parenthetically
that  we  do  not  care  one  iota  which  alternative  fate  is  in
store  for  them;  we  only  want  the  truth.

Xow  1 know  that  some  few  of  our  members  are  impatient
of  such  an  investigation  and  decline  to  see  any  need  for  it.
They  feel  that  if  they  have  evidence  enough  to  justify  their
own  l)elief,  further  encpiiry  is  superfluous.

These  have  not  the  scientific  spirit,  they  do  not  under-
stand the  meaning  of  “ law.”  A fact  isolated  and  alone,
joined  by  no  link  to  the  general  body  of  knowledge,  is  almost
valueless.  Tf  what  they  believe  is  really  a fact,  they  may
depend  upon  it  that  it  has  its  place  in  the  cosmic  scheme,
a place  which  can  be  detected  by  human  intelligence ; and
its  whole  bearing  and  meaning  can  gradually  be  made  out.

A still  smaller  class  of  persons  may  of  course  take  the

purely  selfish  view  that  what  they  have  already  learnt  is
sufficient  for  them,  and  they  will  help  us  no  further.  To
such  I do  not  speak,  except  to  point  out  to  them  that
their  attitude  is  selfish.  Heal  knowledge,  like  real  wealth
of  any  kind,  cannot  be  wrapped  up  thus,  it  pines  for  re-
production, for  increase : “ how  am  I straightened  till  it  be

accomplished  ” ; the  missionary  spirit,  in  some  form  or  other,
is  inseparably  associated  with  all  true  and  worthy  know-
ledge. Think  of  a man  who,  having  made  a discovery  in
Astronomy, — seen  a new  planet,  or  worked  out  a new
law, — should  keep  it  to  himself  and  gloat  over  it  in  private.
It  would  l)e  inhuman  and  detestable  miserliness ; even  in

a thing  like  that  of  no  manifest  importance  to  mankind.
The  only  excuse  would  be  if  he  lived  so  much  in  advance
of  his  time  that,  like  Galileo  with  his  newly  invented  and
applied  telescope,  he  received  nothing  but  rebuffs  and
jjersecution  for  the  publication  of  his  discoveries.  But  even
so,  it  is  his  business  to  brave  this  and  tell  out  what

he  knows ; still  more  is  it  his  business  so  to  act  upon
the  mind  of  his  generation  as  to  convert  it  gradually  to  the
truth,  and  lead  his  fellows  to  accept  what  now  they  reject.

Those  who  believe  themselves  the  repositories  of  any  form
of  divine  truth  should  realise  their  responsibility.  They  are


XLVI.]


Presidential  Address.


11


bound  in  honour  to  take  such  steps  as  may  wisely  cause
its  perception  and  recognition  by  the  mass  of  mankind.
They  are  not  bound  to  harangue  the  crowd  from  the  nearest
platform ; that  might  be  the  very  way  to  retard  progress
and  throw  back  the  acceptance  of  their  doctrine.  The  course
to  pursue  may  be  much  more  indirect  than  that.  The
way  may  be  hard  and  long,  but  to  the  possessor  of  worldly
means  it  is  far  easier  than  to  another.  If  the  proper

administration  of  his  means  can  conduce  to  the  progress  of
science,  and  to  the  acceptance  by  the  mass  of  mankind  of
important  and  vivifying  knowledge  of  which  they  are  now
ignorant,  then  surely  the  path  lies  plain.

The  inauguration  of  this  endowment  fund,  of  which  I
announce  a nucleus  to-day,  makes  it  possible  and  easy  for
persons  without  leisure,  but  with  means  and  enlightenment,
to  assist  their  fellows  by  ensuring  a continuation  and  ex-
tension of  investigation  into  the  more  unconscious  and  less
recognised  mental  operations.

But  still  it  will  be  asked.  Why  investigate  further  when
we  are  already  convinced  ? of  telepathy  for  instance, — it  may
be  said, — you  yourself  are  convinced  of  that.  Why  do  you
want  us  to  conduct  experiments  in  that  ? Hypnotism  again  :
An  excellent  paper  was  read  a few  weeks  ago  to  the  Society
on  certain  aspects  of  hypnotism ; but  hypnotism  is  an  accepted
medical  fact.  Why  waste  time  in  making  further  experiments
on  its  manner  and  its  bearing  ?

Alas,  here  again  the  effect  of  the  lack  of  scientific  educa-
tion in  the  schools  of  England  is  painfully  prominent.  Effective
knowledge  concerning  anything  can  only  be  the  result  of
long-continued  investigation,  and  belief  in  the  possibility  of
a fact  is  only  the  very  first  step.  Until  there  is  some

sort  of  tentative  belief  in  the  reasonable  possibility  of  a
fact  there  is  no  investigation, — the  scientific  priest  and  Levite
have  other  business,  and  pass  by  on  the  other  side.  And

small  blame  to  them  : they  cannot  stop  to  investigate  every-
thing that  may  be  lying  by  the  roadside.  If  they  had

been  sure  that  it  was  a fellow  creature  in  legitimate  dis-
tress they  would  have  acted  differently.  Belief  of  a tentative
kind  will  ensure  investigation,  not  by  all  but  by  some  of

the  scientific  travellers  along  the  road ; but  investigation  is


12


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


the  prelude  to  action,  and  action  is  a long  process.  Some
one  must  attend  to  the  whole  case  and  see  it  through.

Others,  more  pressed  for  time,  may  find  it  easier  to  sub-
scribe their  two  pence  to  an  endowment  fund,  and  so  give
indirect  but  valuable  assistance.

But  once  more  the  question  is  reiterated,  Why  investigate
that  of  which  we  are  sure  ? Why  seek  to  confirm  that
of  which  we  already  have  conviction  ? Why  value  well-
evidenced  narratives  for  instance  of  apparitions  at  times  of

death  or  catastrophe,  when  so  many  have  already  been
collected  in  Idumtasms  of  the  Living,  and  when  careful

scrutiny  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  proved  that  they  could  not  be

the  result  of  chance  coincidence  ? ^ There  is  a quite  definite
answer  to  this  question,  which  I wish  to  commend  to  the
consideration  of  those  who  feel  this  difficulty  or  ask  this  sort  of
question.

The  business  of  science  is  not  belief  but  investigation.
Belief  is  both  the  prelude  to  and  the  outcome  of  knowledge.

If  a fact  or  a theory  has  had  a ‘prirna  facie  case  made  out

for  it,  subsequent  investigation  is  necessary  to  e.xamine  and
extend  it.

The  object  of  investigation  is  the  ascertainment  of  law,
and  to  this  process  there  is  no  end.  What,  i'or  instance,  is
the  object  of  observing  and  recording  earthquakes,  and
arranging  delicate  instruments  to  detect  the  slightest  indica-
tion of  earth  tremor  ? Every  one  knows  that  earthquakes
exist,  there  is  no  seepticism  to  overcome  in  their  case  ;
even  people  who  have  never  experienced  them  are  quite
ready  to  believe  in  their  occurrence.  Investigation  into  earth-
quakes and  the  whole  of  the  motile  occurrences  in  the

earth’s  crust,  is  not  in  the  least  for  the  purpose  of  con-

firming faith,  but  solely  for  tlie  better  understanding  of  the
conditions  and  nature  of  the  phenomena ; in  other  words,
for  the  ascertainment  of  law.

So  it  is  in  every  branch  of  science.  At  first  among  new
phenomena  careful  observation  of  fact  is  necessary,  as  when
Tycho  Brahe  made  measurements  of  the  motion  of  the  planets
and  accumulated  a store  of  careful  observations.  Then  came

^ See  tlie  Report  of  Professor  Sidgwick’s  Committee,  Proceedmgs  S.P.R.,  Vol.  x.
p.  .394.


xlvl]  Presidential  Address.  1 5

the  era  of  hypothesis,  and  Kepler  waded  through  guess  after
guess,  testing  them  pertinaciously  to  see  if  any  one  of  them
would  tit  all  the  facts : the  result  of  his  strenuous  life-

work  being  the  three  great  laws  which  for  all  time  bear
his  name.  And  then  came  the  majestic  deductive  epoch  of
Newton,  welding  the  whole  into  one  comprehensive  system  ;
subsequently  to  be  enriched  and  extended  by  the  labours
of  Lagrange  and  Laplace  ; after  which  the  current  of

scientific  enquiry  was  diverted  for  a time  into  other  less
adequately  explored  channels.

For  not  at  all  times  is  everything  equally  ripe  for
enquiry.  There  is  a phase,  or  it  may  be  a fashion,  even  in
science.  I spoke  of  geographical  exploration  as  the  feature  of
Elizabeth’s  time.  Astronomical  enquiry  succeeded  it.  Optics
and  Chemistry  were  the  dominating  sciences  of  the  early
part  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Heat  and  Geology  of  the
middle,  Electricity  and  Biology  of  the  later  portion.  Not  yet
has  our  branch  of  psychology  had  its  phase  of  popularity ; nor
am  I anxious  that  it  should  be  universally  fashionable.  It
is  a subject  of  special  interest,  and  therefore  perhaps  of
special  danger.  In  that  respect  it  is  like  other  studies  of
the  operations  of  mind,  like  a scientific  enumeration  of  the
phenomena  of  religion  for  instance,  like  the  study  of  any-
thing which  in  its  early  stages  looks  mysterious  and
incomprehensible.  Training  and  some  admixture  of  other
studies  are  necessary  for  its  healthy  investigation.  The  day
will  come  when  the  science  will  put  off  its  foggy  aspect,
bewildering  to  the  novice,  and  become  easier  for  the  less
well-balanced  and  more  ordinarily-equipped  explorer.  At
present  it  is  like  a mountain  shrouded  in  mist  whose  sides
offer  but  little  secure  foothold,  where  climbing,  though  possible,
is  difficult  and  dangerous.

As  a Society  we  exist  to  curb  rash  and  inexperienced
novices,  and  to  support  trusted  and  experienced  climbers  by
roping  ourselves  together  so  that  we  may  advance  safely
and  in  unison,  guarding  ourselves  from  foolhardy  enterprises,  but
facing  such  legitimate  difficulties  as  lie  in  our  path,  and
resolved  that,  weather  and  uncontrollable  circumstances  per-
mitting, our  exploration  shall  continue,  and  the  truth,  whatever
it  may  be,  be  ascertained.


14


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


The  assuring  ourselves  as  to  facts  is  one  of  our  duties,
and  it  is  better  to  hesitate  too  long  over  a truth  than  to
welcome  an  error,  for  a false  gleam  may  lead  us  far  astray
unless  it  is  soon  detected.

Another  of  our  duties  is  the  making  and  testing  of  hypo-
theses, so  as  gradually  to  make  a map  of  the  district  and
be  able  to  explain  it  to  future  travellers.  We  have  to
combine  the  labours  of  Tycho  with  those  of  Kepler,  and
thus  prepare  the  way  for  a future  Kewton ; who  has  not
yet  appeared  above  the  psychical  horizon.

His  advent  must  depend  upon  how  far  we  of  this  and
the  next  few  generations  are  faithful  to  our  trust,  how  far
we  work  ourselves,  and  l:»y  our  pecuniary  means  enable

others  to  work  ; and  I call  upon  those  who  are  simul-

taneously blessed  with  this  world’s  goods  and  likewise  inspired
with  confidence  in  the  truth  and  value  of  mental  and
spiritual  knowledge,  to  bethink  themselves  whether,  either  in
their  lifetime  or  in  their  wills,  they  cannot  contribute  to
the  world’s  progress  in  a beneficent  way,  so  as  to  enable

humanity  to  rise  to  a greater  height  of  aspiration  and  even
of  religion ; as  they  will  if  they  are  enabled  to  start  with
a substantial  foundation  of  .solid  scientific  fact  on  which  to
erect  their  edifice  of  faith.

If  it  be  said,  but  why  should  investigation  be  expensive  ?
I would  ask  you  to  look  round  and  think  what  is  expended
on  the  investigation  of  the  orthodox  sciences.  Before  Columbus’
voyage  could  be  undertaken,  the  Courts  of  Europe  had  to  be
appealed  to  for  funds.  Before  astronomical  discoveries  can  be
made,  large  observatories  and  costly  telescopes  have  to  be

provided  ; and  not  one  only,  but  many,  so  that  by  collabora-
tion of  observers  in  many  parts  of  the  world  the  truth  may
be  ascertained.

Look  at  the  expense  of  biological  and  ethnological  explora-
tion to-day.  Think  of  the  highly  equipped  physical  laboratories,
one  of  which  is  maintained  at  every  College  or  University  in
the  civilised  world.  And  of  chemical  laboratories, — remember
that  every  large  commercial  chemical  manufacturing  firm  in
Germany  maintains  a band  of  trained  and  competent  chemists,
always  investigating,  in  the  hope  of  a new  compound  or  a
new  process  or  some  little  profitable  improvement.


xlvl]


Presidential  Address.


15


Money  is  not  see.roe,  .a.nd  .’if  people ^realisea  "the  interest  of
science  to  the  human  race  it  would  be  poured  out  far  more
lavishly  than  it  is  at  present.  Certain  small  special  sums  are
now  provided  for  the  investigation  of  disease.  The  origin  of
IMalaria  has  been  traced,  and  this  disease  has  some  chance  of
being  exterminated,  so  that  the  tropical  belt  of  the  earth  may
become  open  to  white  habitation.  Cancer  is  being  pursued  to  its
lair,  without  success  so  far;  but  funds  for  researches  such  as  these
are  bound  to  be  forthcoming.  I read  in  the  papers  only  this
week  a magnificent  donation  for  the  purpose  of  investigating
cancer,  a large  portion  of  a million,  attributed  to  Mr.  Eocke-
feller,  founder  of  Chicago  University.

That  IS  the  scale  on  which  to  do  things  with  effect.  "When
practical  benefits  can  be  definitely  foreseen,  people  feel  justified
in  spending  money  even  on  Science ; though  as  a rule  that
and  education  are  things  on  which  they  are  specially  economical.
Municipal  extravagance  in  any  such  things  as  those  is  sternly
checked,  though  in  other  directions  it  is  permitted.

And  why  should  not  psychical  investigation  lead  to  practical
results  ? Are  we  satisfied  with  our  treatment  of  criminals  ?
Are  we  as  civilised  people  content  to  grow  a perennial
class  of  habitual  criminals,  and  to  keep  them  in  check  only
by  devices  appropriate  to  savages ; hunting  them,  flogging
them,  locking  them  up,  exterminating  them  ? Any  savage
race  in  the  history  of  the  world  could  do  as  much  as  that :
and  if  they  know  no  better  they  are  bound  to  do  it  for  their
own  protection.  Society  cannot  let  its  malefactors  run  wild,  any
more  than  it  can  release  its  lunatics.  Till  it  understands  these
things  it  must  lock  them  up,  but  the  sooner  it  understands
them  the  better ; an  attempt  at  comprehension  is  being  made  by
criminologists  in  Italy,  France,^  and  elsewhere.  Force  is  no  remedy:
intelligent  treatment  is.  Who  can  doubt  but  that  a study  of
obscure  mental  facts  will  lead  to  a theory  of  the  habitual
criminal,  to  the  tracing  of  his  malady  as  surely  as  malaria  has
been  traced  to  the  mosquito  ? Axrd  once  we  understand  the  evil
the  remedy  will  follow.  Already  hypnotic  treatment,  or  treat-
ment by  suggestion,  occurs  to  one.  The  fact  of  imprisonment
ought  to  lend  itself  to  brilliant  attempts  at  reform.  It  is  a

^ E.g.  Bulletin  de  Plnstitut  General  P/tychologiqne,  dirige  par  Dr.  Pierre  Janet;
Decembre  1902,  p.  225.


16


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


XLVI,


great  advantage  to  doed'rs  to  .have  patients  collected

compactly  in  a hospital ; and  without  it  medical  practice
would  languish.  It  ought  to  be  a similar  advantage  to  have
criminals  herded  together  in  gaols,  and  lunatics  in  asylums.
It  is  unwise  and  unscientific  to  leave  prisoners  merely  to  the
discipline  of  warders  and  to  the  preaching  of  chaplains.  That
is  not  the  way  to  attack  a disease  of  the  body  politic.  I
have  no  full-blown  treatment  to  suggest,  but  I foresee  that
there  will  be  one  in  the  future.  Society  will  not  be  content
always  to  pursue  these  methods  of  barbarism ; the  resources
of  civilisation  are  not  really  exhausted,  though  for  centuries
tliey  have  appeared  to  be.  The  criminal  demands  careful
study  on  the  psychical  side,  and  remedy  or  palliation  will  be
a direct  outcome  of  one  aspect  of  oui'  researches.  The  influence
of  the  unconscious  or  subliminal  self,  the  power  of  suggestion,
the  influence  of  one  mind  over  another,  the  phenomena  of
so-called  ‘ possession,’  these  are  not  academic  or  scientific  facts
alone : they  have  a deep  practical  bearing,  and  sooner  or

later  it  must  be  put  to  the  proof


One  of  the  things  I want  to  impress  upon  all  Members  and
Associates  and  beg  them  to  spread,  wherever  they  have  any
influence,  among  persons  who  being  supernormally  gifted  may
expect  to  experience  facts  and  sensations  worth  recording,  is
that  too  much  care  cannot  Ije  expended  in  getting  the  state-
ments exact.  Exact  in  every  particular,  especially  as  regards
the  matter  of  time.  In  recording  a vision  or  an  audition  or
some  other  impression  corresponding  to  some  event  elsewhere,
there  is  a horriljle  tendency  to  try  to  coax  the  facts  to  fit

some  half-fledged  preconceived  theory  and  to  make  the  coinci-
dence in  point  of  time  exact.

Such  distortions  of  truth  are  misleading  and  useless.  What
we  want  to  know  is  exactly  how  the  things  occurred,  not  how
the  impressionist  would  have  liked  them  to  occur,  or  how  he
thinks  they  ought  to  have  occurred.  If  people  attach  any

importance  to  their  own  predilection  concerning  events  in
the  Universe,  they  can  set  them  forth  in  a footnote  for  the

guidance  of  any  one  who  hereafter  may  think  of  starting  a
Universe  on  his  own  account : but  such  speculations  are  of
no  interest  to  us  who  wish  to  study  and  understand  the


XLVI.]


Presidential  Add/ress.


17


Universe  as  it  is.  If  the  event  preceded  the  impression,  by
all  means  let  us  know  it,  and  perhaps  some  one  may  be  able
to  detect  some  meaning  in  the  time-interval,  when  a great
number  of  similar  instances  are  compared  hereafter.  If  the
impression  preceded  the  event,  by  all  means  let  us  know  that
too,  and  never  let  the  observation  be  suppressed  from  a
ridiculous  idea  that  such  anticipation  is  impossible.  Nor  let
us  exclude  attested  physical  phenomena  from  a historical
record,  on  any  similar  ground  of  impossibility.  We  want  to
learn  what  is  possible,  not  to  have  our  minds  made  up  oefore-
hand  and  distort  or  blink  the  facts  to  suit.

If  the  correspondence  in  time  is  exact,  then  let  future
students  be  able  to  ascertain  that  also  from  the  record ; but
let  not  the  recorder  make  any  remark  about  “ allowing  lor
difference  of  longitude  ” or  anything  of  that  kind,  unless
indeed  he  is  an  astronomer  or  some  one  who  thoroughly  under-
stands all  about  “ time.”  Arithmetic  of  that  sort  can  be  left
to  those  who  subseq^uently  disentangle  and  criticise  the
results.  The  observer  may  of  course  amuse  himself  in  that
and  other  ways  privately,  but  nothing  ot  it  should  appear  in
the  record.  That  should  be  accurate  and  cold-blooded  and
precise.  Sentences  indicating  contemporary  emotion,  in  so  tar
as  that  is  part  of  the  facts  to  be  recorded,  are  entirely  in  place  ;
but  ejaculations  of  subsecpient  emotion,  speculation  as  to  the
cause,  or  moralisation  as  to  the  meaning,  are  out  of  place.
It  may  be  said  that  these  do  no  harm,  and  can  easily  be
ignored  by  a future  student ; and  that  is  so  in  one  sense,  but
their  atmosphere  is  rather  apt  to  spoil  the  record,  to  put  the
recorder  into  an  unscientific  frame  of  mind,  and,  even  when
they  have  biassed  him  no  whit,  to  suggest  to  a subsequent
reader  that  they  may  have  biassed  him,  and  so  discount
unfairly  the  value  of  his  record.

With  respect  to  the  important  subject  of  possible  pre-
diction, on  which  our  ideas  as  to  the  ultimate  nature  ot
time  will  so  largely  depend,  every  precaution  should  be
taken  to  put  far  from  us  the  temptation  or  the  possibility
of  improving  the  original  record  after  the  fact  to  which  it
refers  has  occurred,  if  it  e^mr  does  occur  ; and  to  remember
that  though  we  have  done  nothing  of  the  sort,  and  are  in  all
respects  honest,  and  known  to  be  honest  and  truthful,  yet  the

B


18  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [paet

contrary  may  be  surmised  by  posterity  or  by  strangers  or
foreigners  who  did  not  know  ns ; and  even  onr  friends  may
fancy  that  we  did  more  than  we  were  aware  of,  in  some

access  of  somnambulic  or  automatic  trance.  Automatic  writers
for  instance  must  be  assumed  open  to  this  suspicion,  unless
they  take  proper  precautions  and  deposit  copies  of  their
writings  in  some  inaccessible  and  responsible  custody  ; because
the  essence  of  their  phenomena  is  that  the  hand  writes  what
they  themselves  are  not  aware  of,  and  so  it  is  an  easy
step  for  cautious  critics  to  maintain  that  it  may  also  have
written  when  they  were  not  aware  of  it.

The  establishment  of  cases  of  real  prediction,  not  rnei'e
inference,  is  so  vital  and  crucial  a test  of  something  not
yet  recognised  by  science  that  it  is  worth  every  effort  to

make  its  evidence  secure.

Another  thing  on  which  I should  value  experiments  is
the  detection  of  slight  traces  of  telepathic  powei'  in  epute

normal  persons,  in  the  average  man  for  instance,  or  rather
more  likely  perhaps,  in  the  average  child.  The  power  of
receiving  telepathic  impressions  may  he  a rare  faculty  exist-
ing only  in  a few  individuals  and  in  them  fully  developed ;
but  it  is  equally  possible,  and,  if  one  may  say  so,  more  likely,
that  what  we  see  in  them  is  but  an  intensification  of  a power
which  exists  in  every  one  as  a germ  or  nucleus.  If  such  should
be  the  fact,  it  behoves  us  to  know  it  ; and  its  recognition
would  do  more  to  spread  a general  belief  in  the  fact  of  tele-
pathy— a belief  by  no  means  as  yet  universally  or  even

widely  spread — than  almost  anything  else.

The  method  that  has  been  suggested  is  to  offer  to  a
percipient  the  choice  of  one  out  of  two  things,  and  to  see
whether  in  multitudes  of  events  the  predetermination  of  a
bystander  as  to  which  shall  be  chosen,  exerts  any  influence
whatever  on  the  result.  Alany  devices  can  be  made  for
carrying  this  out,  but  experiments  of  greater  interest  and
novelty  will  be  made  if  the  devices  are  left  to  individual
ingenuity  and  experience.  Leisure,  and  patience,  and  system,
and  industry,  are  the  requisites  : and  if  I do  not  myself

practise  what  I preach,  in  this  and  other  particulars,  it  is
because  whatever  I may  lack  of  the  others  1 am  at  present
conspicuously  lacking  in  the  first  of  these  e.ssentials.


xlvl]


Presidential  Address.


19


There  are  many  topics  on  which  I might  speak  ; one  is
the  recent  advance  in  our  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the
atom  of  matter,  and  the  discovery  of  facts  which  one  would
think  must  have  some  bearing, — some  to  me  at  present  quite
unknown  bearing, — on  the  theory  of  what  are  called
physical  phenomena ; but  I am  speaking  on  this  subject
in  the  summer  at  Oxford  in  the  Romanes  lecture, — I
mean  the  subject  of  the  nature  of  matter,  not  its  bearing
upon  our  researches,  for  on  the  latter  I have  at  present
no  useful  ideas, — so  1 will  not  mention  it  further  here  and
now,  except  to  call  the  attention  of  all  educated  persons  to
the  intense  interest  of  this  most  recent  purely  scientific  subject.

On  another  topic  I might  say  a few  words,  viz.,  on  the
ambiguity  clinging  round  the  phrase  “ action  at  a distance,”
in  connection  with  telepathy.  Physicists  deny  action  at  a
distance,  at  least  most  of  them  do.  I do  for  one.  At

the  same  time  I admit  telepathy.  Therefore  it  is  sup-
posed I necessarily  assume  that  telepathy  must  be  con-
ducted by  an  etherial  process  analogous  to  the  transmission
of  waves.  That  is  however  a non-scquittcr.  The  phrase
“ action  at  a distance  ” is  a technical  one.  It  signifies  that
no  physical  force  is  exerted  save  through  a medium.  There
must  either  be  a projectile  from  A to  B,  or  a continuous
medium  of  some  kind  extending  from  A to  B,  if  A exerts
force  upon  B,  or  otherwise  influences  it  by  a physical
process.

But  what  about  a psychical  process  ? There  is  no  such
word  in  physics  : the  term  is  in  that  connection  meaning-
less. A physicist  can  make  no  assertion  on  it  one  way
or  the  other.  If  A mesmerises  B,  or  if  A makes  an
apparition  of  himself  appear  to  B,  or  if  A conveys  a tele-
pathic impression  to  B ; is  a medium  necessary  then  ? As
a physicist  I do  not  know ; these  are  not  processes  I
understand.  They  may  not  be  physical  processes  at  all.

Take  it  furtlier ; A thinks  of  B,  or  A prays  to  B,  or
A worships  B ; — is  a medium  necessary  for  these  things  ?
Absolute  ignorance  ! The  question  is  probably  meaningless
and  absurd.  Spiritual  and  psychical  events  do  not  enter

into  the  scheme  of  Physics,  and  when  a physicist  denies
“ action  at  a distance  ” he  is  speaking  of  things  he  is


20


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


competent  to  deal  with,- — of  light  and  sound  and  electricity
and  magnetism  and  cohesion  and  gravitation.  He  is  not,

or  should  not  be,  denying  anything  psychical  or  spiritual  at
all.  All  the  physical  things,  he  asserts,  necessitate  a medium  ;
ljut  beyond  that  he  is  silent.  If  telepathy  is  an  etherial

process,  as  soon  as  it  is  proved  to  be  an  etherial  process,
it  will  come  into  the  realm  of  physics  ; but  till  then  it

stays  outside.

There  are  rash  speculators  who  presume  to  say  that
spiritual  and  psychical  and  physical  are  all  one.  To  me
it  seems  that  the  instinct  for  simplification  has  run  away
with  them,  that  they  are  trespassing  out  of  bounds  and
preaching  what  they  do  not  know,  eking  out  a precarious

ignorance  with  cheap  dogmatism.

I find  I have  omitted  to  say  anything  on  one  topic
at  which  I hinted  in  an  earlier  portion  of  my  Address,

viz.,  the  bearing  of  our  encpiiry  on  religion.  It  is  a large
subject  and  one  too  nearly  trenching  oir  the  region  of  emotion
to  be  altogether  suitable  for  the  consideration  of  a scientific
Society.  Yet  every  science  has  its  practical  applications,

and  though  they  are  not  part  of  the  science,  they  are
its  legitimate  outcome,  and  the  value  of  the  science  to

humanity  must  be  measured  in  the  last  resort  by  the  use

which  humanity  can  make  of  it.  To  the  enthusiast,  science
for  the  sake  of  knowledge,  without  ulterior  ends,  may  be
enough, — and  if  there  were  none  of  this  spirit  in  the

world  we  should  be  poorer  than  we  are ; — but  for  the  bulk
of  mankind  this  is  too  high  or  too  arid  a creed,  and  people

in  general  must  see  just  enough  outcome  to  have  faith

that  there  may  be  yet  more.

That  our  researches  will  ultimately  have  some  bearing,

some  meaning,  for  the  science  of  Theology,  I do  not  doubt.
AYhat  that  bearing  may  be  I cannot  tell.  I have  indicated
in  an  article  in  the  HiUbert  Journal  for  January  part  of
what  I feel  on  the  sulject,  and  I have  goire  as  far  in
that  article  as  I feel  entitled  to  go.  We  seek  to  unravel
the  nature  and  hidden  powers  of  man ; and  a fuller  under-
standing of  the  attributes  of  humanity  cannot  but  have
some  influence  on  our  theory  of  Divinity  itself.


XLVI.]


Presidential  Address.


21


If  any  scientific  Society  is  worthy  of  encouragement  and
support  it  should  surely  be  this.  If  there  is  any  object
worthy  the  patient  and  continued  attention  of  humanity,  it
is  surely  these  great  and  pressing  problems  of  whence,  what,
and  whither,  that  have  occupied  the  attention  of  Prophet
and  Philosopher  since  time  was.  The  discovery  of  a new
star,  or  of  a marking  on  Mars,  or  of  a new  element,  or
of  a new  extinct  animal  or  plant,  is  interesting : surely  the
discovery  of  a new  human  faculty  is  interesting  too.  Already
the  discovery  of  “ telepathy  ” constitutes  the  first-fruits  of
this  Society’s  work,  and  it  has  laid  the  way  open  to  the
discovery  of  much  more.  Its  aim  is  nothing  less  than  the
investigation  and  better  comprehension  of  human  faculty,
human  personality,  and  human  destiny.


22


ProfesHor  William  James.


[part


SUPPLEMENT.

REVIEWS.


Human  Personality  and  its  Survival  of  Bodily  Death.  By  FPtEDERic
W.  H.  Myers.  2 vols.  8vo.  (Longmans,  Green  V Co.,  London,
New  York,  and  Bombay.  1903.)


I.

Snch  large  portions  of  the  text  of  these  bulky  volumes,  which  are
the  legacy  of  Myers’s  literary  life,  have  already  appeared  in  these
Proceedings,  and  their  author’s  general  conceptions  are  so  familiar
to  my  reatlers,  that  I feel  free  to  omit  from  this  notice  all  detailed
account  of  the  book’s  contents  and  composition.  For  aught  I know
such  an  account  may  Im  given  by  my  fellow-reviewers.  The  contents
are  so  intricate  and  the  ideas  so  many  that  the  great  danger  is
that  of  not  seeing  the  forest  for  the  trees,  and  of  not  appre-
hending with  distinctness  the  steps  of  M3mrs’s  reasoning.  It  seems
to  me  wisest,  therefore,  to  emi)loy  the  opportunity  accorded  me
in  analj'sing  his  argument  into  its  essential  features,  following,  as
I do  so,  a logical  rather  than  a textual  order.

AVhat  would  entitle  Myers,  if  he  were  successful  in  what  he
attempted,  to  be  regarded  as  the  founder  of  a new  science  is  that  con-
ception of  the  Subliminal  Self,  by  which  he  colligated  and  co-ordinated
a mass  of  phenomena  which  had  never  before  been  considered
together,  and  thus  made  a sort  of  objective  continuum  of  what,
before  him,  had  appeared  so  pure  a disconnectedness  that  the
ordinary  scientific  mind  had  either  disdained  to  look  at  it,  or  pro-
nounced it  mostl}'  fictitious.  Two  years  ago  I wrote  in  these  Pro-
ceedings that  Myers  had  endowed  psychology  with  a new  problem —
The  exjjlomtion  of  the  subliminal  region  being  destined  to  figure  here-
after in  that  branch  of  learning  as  Myers’s  problem.”  Reading  these


XLVI.]


Eeview  of  Human  Personality.


23


volumes,  we  gain  a definite  idea  of  how  far  he  himself  had  pushed
forward  the  topograpliical  survey  of  that  region.

Conservatives  in  anthropologic  science  will  immediately  ^y  that
Myers  used  the  concept  of  the  “ subliminal  ” far  too  broadly,  and
that  the  only  safe  demarcation  of  the  term  is  that  of  the  neuro-
pathologists. These  observers  for  the  most  part  now  recognise  a
sul)liminal  region  frankly,  but  they  recognise  it  only  as  a dissociated
part  of  the  normal  personality.  Experiences  forgotten  by  the  upper
consciousness  may  here  still  lead  a parasitic  existence,  and  in  an
inferior,  dreamlike  way  may  interfere  with  normal  processes.  For
these  critics  the  subliminal  is  synonymous  with  the  fonjotten  and
forms  a region  of  disintegration  exclusively.

Most  neurologists  either  ignore  tho.se  other  “ evolutive,”  “ superior,”
or  “ supernormal  ” phenomena,  in  which  Myers’s  chief  interest  lay,  or
scout  them  wholesale  as  deceptions.  The  few  who  admit  them  are
more  likely  to  see  in  them  another  department  of  experience
altogether  than  to  treat  them  as  having  continuous  connection  with
tlie  ordinary  phenomena  of  mental  dissociation.

Those  who  simply  ignore  them  (for  whatever  reason)  may  them-
selves be  ignored  here  as  belatetl  students.  However  acutely  awaie
one  may  be  of  the  sources  of  fallacy  in  reports  of  the  marvellous,  I
fail  to  see  how  the  records  quoted  in  these  volumes,  and  in  vastly
greater  profusion  in  Gurney’s  Phantasms  of  the  Living  and  the  other
S.P.R.  publications,  can  rightfully  be  met  by  a wholesale  and  in-
discriminating  non  possumus.  Any  one  with  a healthy  sense  for
evidence,  a sense  not  methodically  blunted  by  the  sectarianism  of

Science,”  ought  now,  it  seems  to  me,  to  feel  that  exalted  sensi-
bilities and  memories,  veridical  phantasms,  haunted  houses,  trances
with  supernormal  faculty,  and  even  experimental  thought-transference,
are  natural  kinds  of  phenomenon  which  ought,  just  like  other
natural  events,  to  be  followed  up  with  scientific  curiosity.

Hypnotic  phenomena  form  the  centre  of  perspective  for  Myers’s
map  of  the  subliminal  region.  In  the  first  place,  the  system  of
faculty  of  a subject  under  hypnosis  is  quite  dift'ereiit  from  his  waking
system  of  faculty.  While  portions  of  the  usual  waking  system  are
inhibited,  other  portions  are  sometimes  supernormally  energised  in
hypnosis,  producing  not  oidy  hallucinations,  Init  after-results  in  the
way  of  sense-discrimination  and  control  of  organic  function,  to  which
the  waking  consciousness  is  unable  to  attain.  VVe  are  thus  led  to
the  notion  of  two  different  currents  of  mental  life,  one  deeper,  and
the  other  shallower,  of  which  either  is  best  appealed  to  while  the


24


Professor  William  James.


[part


other  is  in  abeyance.  That  these  currents  may  not  only  alternate
but  may  co-exist  with  each  other  is  proved  by  Gurney’s,  Binet’s,  and
Janet’s  discovery  of  Subjects  who,  receiving  suggestions  during
hypnosis  and  forgetting  them  when  wakened,  nevertheless  then
wrote  them  out  automatically  and  unconsciously  as  soon  as  a pencil
was  placed  in  their  hands.

Allying  the  curative  phenomena  of  hypnosis  with  the  great
reparative  powers  of  sleep,  and  its  enhancements  of  facidty  with  the
enhancements  of  faculty  to  which  dreaming  and  natural  somnam-
bulism occasionally  give  rise,  Myers  postulates  a region  of  sleeping
consciousness  present  at  all  times  in  all  of  us,  a region  moreover
which  in  certain  respects  has  an  advantage  over  the  waking  levels  of
the  mind.  This  subliminal  region  is  usually  closed  off  from  the
ordinary  waking  consciousness,  but  under  special  conditions  of  appeal,
which  vary  with  the  idiosyncrasy  of  the  individual,  it  may  break  in
with  effects  which  reveal  its  j^resence  to  us.  The  pojrular  word
“ suggestion  ” is  only  a name  for  a successful  appeal  to  this  sub
liminal  consciousness.

The  appeal,  in  hypnotic  subjects,  is  made  througli  the  ordinary
consciousness  in  the  first  instance  ; and  into  that  consciousness  the
efiects,  when  they  are  “ post-hyjmotic,”  return  in  the  form  of  “auto-
matisms,” sensory  or  motor.  In  other  words,  hallucinations  or
unmotived  impulses  to  act,  which  in  some  cases  are  upheavals  from
the  subliminal  into  the  supraliminal  region,  may  be  so  in  all  cases.
The  two  regions  thus  form  environments  for  each  other,  with
possibilities  of  interaction,  though  under  ordinary  conditions  their
intercourse  is  small.

So  far  Myers  would  seem  to  be  on  perfectly  solid  ground.  There
is  a subliminal  region  of  life  which  opens  fitfully  into  the  supraliminal
region.  The  only  doubt  is  as  to  whether  it  be  general  in  human
beings,  or  whether  it  be  not  limited  to  a few  hypnotic  and  hysteric
subjects.

The  subliminal  region  being  thus  established  as  an  actuality,  the
next  question  is  as  to  its  farther  limits,  where  it  exists.  My  sub-
liminal, for  instance,  has  my  ordinary  consciousness  for  one  of  its
environments,  but  has  it  additional  environments  on  the  remoter
side  ? Has  it  direct  relations  of  intercourse,  for  example,  with  the
consciousness,  subliminal  or  supraliminal,  of  other  men  ?

Some  of  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  or  mesmerism  suggest  that
this  is  actually  the  case.  I refer-  to  the  reports  (several  of  them
irreproachably  recorded)  of  hypnotism  at  a distance,  of  obedience  to


xlvl]


Review  of  Hitman  Personality.


25


unspoken  orders,  and  of  “ community  of  sensation  ” between  hypnotiser
and  subject,  of  which  Sections  568  to  571  of  Myers’s  Volume  I.  give
some  account.  Remote  influences,  to  which  the  supraliminal  region  is
closed,  may  thus  occasionally  pass  into  the  subliminal  region,  showing
that  this  latter  communicates  not  only  with  the  supi'aliminal  mind
of  the  subject  himself,  but  with  the  mind  of  other  persons,  and
possibly  with  a still  wider  world.

How  wide  this  world  may  possibly  be  is  suggested  by  all  the
va.rious  reports  of  thought-transference  and  clairvoyance  in  the  hyp-
notic state.  And  if  we  now  pass  beyond  conditions  of  artificial
hypnosis,  and  take  into  account  states  of  abstraction  like  those  pro-
duced in  some  persons  by  crystal  gazing  and  by  automatic  writing,
and  the  “trances”  of  certain  somnambulists  and  mediums,  with  the
clairvoyant  faculty  reported  to  be  found  therein,  we  find  ourselves
obliged  (if  we  credit  the  reports)  to  assume  that  the  subliminal  life
has  windows  of  outlook  and  doors  of  ingress  which  bring  it  (in  some
persons  at  least)  into  a commerce,  of  which  the  channels  entirely
escape  our  observation,  with  an  indefinitely  extended  region  of  the
world  of  truth.

The  jump  which  Myers  makes  here  is  that  of  generalising  his
conclusions.  The  “ conservative  ” critic  who  does  not  deny  the
facts  in  tolo  would  most  probably  call  them  pathological  freaks  of
idiosyncrasy.  He  would  protest  against  their  being  treated  as  revela-
tions of  the  constitution  of  human  nature  at  large.  Myers,  on  the
other  hand,  regards  them  as  such  revelations,  and  considers  that
the  subjects  show  their  “ idiosyncrasy  ” rather  in  lying  as  open  as
they  do  to  our  observation,  than  in  having  the  kind  of  human  con-
stitution which  the  observations  disclose.

He  is  thus  led  to  the  general  conception  of  a subliminal  life
belonging  to  human  nature  in  general,  and  having  its  own  indefinitely
wide  environment,  distinct  from  that  with  which  our  bodily  senses
carry  on  their  commerce.  Set  over  against  this  subliminal  life,  and
in  strong  contrast  with  it,  we  find  the  normal  consciousness,  dealing
primarily  through  the  senses  with  the  material  world,  and  in  pos-
session of  faculties  of  attention,  and  in  particular  of  memory,  which
are  pitifully  small  in  comparison  with  those  which  the  subliminal
consciousness  wields.  The  normal  consciousness  is  thus  only  a
portion  of  our  nature,  adapted  primarily  to  “terrene”  conditions.
Those  more  directly  intuitive  faculties  which  it  lacks,  and  of  which
we  get  glimpses  in  individuals  whose  subliminal  lies  exceptionally
open,  can  hardly  be  vestiges,  degenerations  of  something  which  our


26


Professor  William  James.


[part


ancestors  once  possessed.  We  should  rather  regard  them  as  germs
of  something  not  yet  evolved  for  methodical  use  in  our  natural
environment,  but  jjossibly  even  now  carrying  on  a set  of  active
functions  in  their  own  wider  “cosmic”  environment.

The  “ supernormal  ” becomes  thus  for  Myers  synonymous  with  the
“evolutive”  as  contrasted  with  the  “ dissolutive”  with  which  the
ordinary  neurologist  would  prefer  to  connect  it.  The  supernormal
faculties  of  the  subliminal  take  us  into  the  cosmic  environment ; and
for  Myers  this  cosmic  environment  takes  on  more  and  more,  as  the
volumes  proceed,  the  character  of  a “spiritual  world.”  From  its  inter-
course with  this  spiritual  world  the  subliminal  self  of  each  of  us  may
draAv  strength,  and  communicate  it  to  the  supraliminal  life.  The
“energising  of  life  ” seems,  in  fact,  to  he  one  of  its  functions.  The
reparativeness  of  sleep,  the  curative  effects  of  self-suggestion,  the
“uprushing”  inspirations  of  genius,  the  regenerative  influences  of
praj'er  and  of  religious  self-surrender,  the  strength  of  belief  which
mystical  experiences  give,  are  all  ascribed  by  Myers  to  the  “ dynamo-
geny  ” of  the  spiritual  world,  upon  which  we  are  enabled  to  make
drafts  of  power  by  virtue  of  our  connection  with  our  subliminal.
He  dreams  of  a methodical  evolution  and  extension,  as  our  know-
ledge of  the  channels  shall  improve,  of  our  resources  in  this  direction.

Myers’s  theory,  so  far,  is  simple  enough.  It  only  postrdates  an
indefinite  inward  extension  of  our  being,  cut  off'  from  common  con-
sciousness by  a screen  or  diaphragm  not  absolutely  impervious  but
liable  to  leakage  and  to  occasional  rupture.  The  “ scientific  ” critic
can  only  say  it  is  a pity  that  so  vast  and  vaguely  defined  a hypo-
thesis should  be  reared  upon  a set  of  facts  so  few  and  so  imperfectly
ascertained.

The  vagueness  of  the  hypothesis  at  this  point  chiefly  consists  in  the
ill-defined  relations  of  the  subliminal  with  its  “cosmic”  environment.
Is  this  latter  the  Absolute  Soul  of  the  World,  with  which  all  our
subliminals  may  be  supposed  to  be  substantially  continuous  ? Or
are  the  various  subliminals  discontinuous  ? — and  is  their  intercourse
transacted  across  an  isolating  intervals

As  the  work  ju'oceeds,  Myers  tends  more  and  more  towards
the  latter  conception:  the  “spiritual  world”  becomes  a “world  of
spirits  ” which  interact.

This  follows  naturally  from  the  consideration,  to  which  he  next
proceeds,  of  veridical  phantasms  and  mediumistic  messages.  At  first
sight  “ghosts,”  etc.,  (if  admitted  to  be  actual  phenomena)  would
seem  to  require  a physical  rather  than  a mental  hypothesis  for  their


XLVI.]


Review  of  Human  Personality.


27


explanation  ; and  mediumistic  messages,  if  taken  at  their  face  value,
suggest  that  the  “ controlling  ” spirit  intrudes  into  the  very  organism
of  the  medium  rather  than  that  it  merely  actuates  the  medium’s
subliminal  mind.  The  plot  thickens  very  much  hereabouts,  and
obliges  one  to  ask  more  definitely  whether  the  environment  of  the
subliminal  be  mental  exclusively  or  whether  it  may  not  also  be
physical.  Myers  is  shy  of  putting  forth  psychophysical  hypotheses,
but  in  his  conceptions  of  “ phantasmogenetic  invasion”  of  space  and
of  “ telergy  ” and  “ telekinesis,”  we  find  that  he  is  forced  to  abandon
purely  mental  territory.  Subliminal  selves,  affecting  one  another  in
their  qirality  of  purely  psychic  entities,  are  not  the  sole  factors  that
need  be  considered  in  our  explanations.  Space  and  their  physical
relations  to  space  are  also  required.

Let  me  indicate  very  briefly  what  are  the  essential  points  in
Myers’s  handling  of  this  new  range  of  experiences.

In  the  first  place,  take  the  so-called  “veridical  phantasms  of  the
living.”  Assuming  them  to  be  established  by  the  evidence,  the
records  show  that  the  mind  of  the  percipient  must  be  at  least  one  of
the  factors  of  their  production.  If  they  were  purely  physical  or
“ astral  ” presences,  why  should  they  wear  earthly  clothes,  and  carry
earthly  accessories '?  and  when  the  percipient  is  in  the  midst  of  com-
panions, why  should  they  so  seldom  appear  to  them?

Evidently  the  phantasm,  whatever  may  be  its  remoter  starting-
point,  involves,  as  a mere  immediate  bit  of  experience,  the  psj'cho-
physical  process  called  “ hallucination  ” on  the  part  of  the  percipient
himself.

'Secondly,  since  there  are  well  recorded  cases  where  a living  person,
A,  made  his  phantasm  appear  to  B by  simply  willing  that  it  should
do  so,  and  since  in  many  of  the  other  cases  of  phantasms  of  the
living,  the  person  who  appeared  probably  ivished  to  appear  where  he
did  appear,  it  seems  fair  to  interpret  these  appearances  generally  as
hallucinations  produced  by  the  action  of  one  mind  upon  another,
somewhat  after  the  pattern  of  the  hallucinations  which  a hypnotiser
makes  his  subject  experience  so  easily  by  suggesting  that  he  shall
have  them,  either  during  the  hypnosis  or  after  waking  up.  “ Tele-
pathy ” is  the  name  which  Myers  gaA'e  to  the  immediate  influence  of
one  subliminal  upon  another.  The  records  seem  to  prove  that
telepathy  either  may  or  may  not  be  a transfer  of  ready-made  content
from  one  mind  to  another.  Sometimes  the  influencing  mind  appears
to  act  only  as  a suggestive  stimulus,  and  the  results  on  the  mind
influenced  show  every  variation  from  a vague  emotional  mood  to  an


[part


28  Professor  William  James.

elaborated  perception  full  of  accessories,  or  to  an  automatically
impulsive  act.

Activity  of  the  influencing  mind  at  a distance  from  its  body  is  at  any
rate  proved,  according  to  Myers,  by  these  phantasms  of  the  living
and  by  other  telepathic  phenomena.

It  is  round  this  conception  of  action  at  a distance,  to  which  Myers
apjdies  the  term  of  “ psychical  invasion,”  that  his  theory  now  turns
towards  its  ulterior  developments.

The  fact  that  a phantasm  may  appear  to  a whole  collection  of
persons  at  once,  or  to  an  indifferent  companion  of  the  person,  rather
than  to  the  person  himself  of  whom  the  phantasm’s  original  might
reasonably  be  supposed  to  be  thinking,  suggests  that  our  soul’s  invasive
powers  apply  to  outer  space  as  well  as  to  other  minds.  Myers  cites
examples  of  these,  as  of  all  other  special  ty2Jes  of  case  which  his
argument  recpiires,  and  considers  that  the  probability  of  this  space-
invasion  b}^  the  subliminal  powers  of  the  living  is  strengthened  by
two  additional  kinds  of  fact.  First  we  have  cases  of  apj^arent
“ bilocation  ” of  mind  and  organism,  as  when  a living  j^erson  ai)pears
to  view  his  own  body  from  a remote  jiosition,  or  to  see  his  own
“ double  ” as  a phantasm ; and  second,  we  have  an  impressive  array
of  cases  which  make  for  “travelling”  clairvoyance,  (“ telsesthesia,”  as
Myers  calls  it)  whether  in  dream,  in  crystal  gazing,  or  in  the  mesmeric
trance.  M3'ers  indulges  in  no  hypothesis  whatever  as  to  the  modus
aperemdi  of  this  space-invasion  by  our  subliminal.  At  any  rate
it  seems  to  bring  space  in  as  a portion  of  the  subliminal’s  environ-
ment. The  subliminal  has  relations  with  space  as  well  as  with  other
minds.

So  far  the  j3owers  of  living  jiersons  have  been  considered  exclusively.
But  phantasms  of  the  slowl}^  or  suddenly  dying  shade  by  continuity
of  time-relation  into  phantasms  of  the  recently  dead,  and  these  in  turn
shade  into  phantasms  of  the  long  dead,  i.e.  into  xrarratives  of  the
haunted-house  tyjie,  of  which  the  mass  recorded  is  decidedly  imposing.

The  order  of  theoretic  construction,  if  we  go  back  to  the  beginning,
is  thus  somewhat  as  follows  : — From  hypersesthefsia  in  the  hypnotic
state  we  pass  gradually  into  telepathy  between  the  subject  and  the
operator  ; from  this  to  ^xhantasmogenetic  telejxathy  between  living  men
at  a distance  from  one  another ; from  this  to  sjiace-invasions,  whether
phantasmogenetic  or  clairvoyant,  by  the  subliminal  of  living  jxersons  ;
ami  finally  from  this  to  similar  invasions  (phantasmogenetic,  at  any
rate)  by  the  dead.  We  thus  reach  the  hj'pothesis  of  spirit  survival.
Primarily,  we  reach  this  only  in  the  somewhat  idiotic  form  of  “ ghosts,”


XLVI.]  Review  of  Human  Personality.  29

for  up  to  this  point  we  have  been  considering  only  what  Myers  calls
automatisms  of  the  sensory  order.

But  motor  automatisms  carry  us  a good  deal  further  towards  a
“ world  of  spirits.”  Sensoiy  automatisms  seem  to  be  essentially
fugacious.  Rarely  is  their  content  elaborately  developed  or  pro-
longed. It  is  quite  otherwise  with  automatic  writing  and  speech,
for  here  the  messages  are  consecutive,  and  bring  explicit  pro-
fessions of  origin  and  purpose  along  with  them.  This  may  obtain
when  the  subject  who  offers  them  is  awake  as  well  as  when  he  is
entranced.

The  whole  topic  of  “spirit  messages”  is  thus  opened  up  to  our
reflection.  Although  Myers  died  before  he  could  write  out  his  review
of  the  evidence  for  spirit  messages  in  detail,  he  all  along  shows  that
he  deemed  it  sufficient : some  such  messages,  at  any  rate,  he  held
to  have  been  proved  authentic.  With  this  our  “ cosmic  ” environment,
as  he  believed  in  it,  comes  into  full  view.  Our  subliminals  surround
one  another  and  act  upon  one  another,  as  well  as  upon  space ; and
spirits  of  the  departed  (which  may  themselves  be  constituted  as
we  are,  and  have  something  like  a subliminal  condition  of  their  own)
may  also  act  upon  us  and  upon  space,  and  receive  our  action  too.
When  the  action  is  transient,  it  is  probably  merely  an  impact  upon
our  subliminal,  of  which  we  need  not  necessarily  suspect  the  source.
When  it  is  more  protracted  or  “invasive,”  space  gets  affected,  and  we
either  see  a ghost  or  feel  a presence ; and  it  is  an  open  question,  in
such  effects  as  these  upon  our  consciousness,  how  far  our  subliminal
mind  exclusively  receives  the  operation  of  the  invader,  and  how  far
he  may  act  directly  on  our  physical  nervous  system.  Prolonged
“possession”  or  “control”  of  the  organism  seems  to  involve  the
profoundest  sort  of  operation  which  is  possible  ; and  Myers  is  willing
here  to  admit  that  the  foreign  spirit  may  directly  actuate  the
medium’s  nervous  system.

That  spirits  of  departed  men  should  actuate  these  living  bodies
of  ours  directly,  shows  a form  of  physical  influence  to  which  Mjmrs
gives  the  name  of  telekinesis,  and  of  which  still  other  instances  would
be  the  raps,  the  table-movings  without  contact,  and  the  other
“ physical  phenomena  of  mediumship,”  as  they  are  commonly  termed.
Myers  discusses  these  phenomena  warily,  using  delicate  methods  of
gradual  approach  (see  especially  the  exc[uisitely  ingenious  “ Scheme
of  Vital  Faculty,”  which  ought  to  have  been  prominently  printed
as  the  concluding  chapter  of  the  whole  book,  but  which  appears  in-
conspicuously among  the  Appendices  as  Section  926  A,  Vol.  II.,


Pi'ofessoT  William  James.


30


[part


pp.  505-554).  On  the  whole  he  seems  well  disposed  to  treat  the
evidence  for  physical  phenomena  as  adequate.

And  now  his  whole  theor}^  lies  before  us.  It  is  a vast  synthesis,
but  a coherent  one,  notwithstanding  the  vagueness  of  some  of  the
terms  that  figure  in  it.  No  one  of  the  dots  by  which  his  map  is
plotted  out,  no  one  of  the  “corners”  required  by  his  triangulation,
is  purely  hypothetical.  He  offers  empirical  evidence  for  the  concrete
existence  of  every  element  which  his  scheme  postulates  and  works
with.  In  logical  form  the  theory  is  thus  a scientific  construction  of
a very  liigh  order,  against  which  one  can  urge  only  two  general  kinds
of  objection.  One  can  say  first  that  the  stepping-stones  themselves,
the  corners,  are  too  frail,  that  the  types  of  fact  invoked  need  much
additional  corroboration  ; or  one  can  say,  even  if  the  kinds  of  facts
were  admitted  to  be  solid  where  they  have  been  observed,  that  Myers
has  ascribed  a universality  and  an  extension  to  them  for  which  he  has
no  wairant,  that  he  has  drawn  his  rules  from  the  exceptional  cases,
and  made  his  spiritual  universe  too  continuous.

Disregarding  these  criticisms  for  the  moment,  I am  impelled  to
say  a word  about  this  matter  of  Myers’s  “ scientific”  ability.  Reading
him  afresh  in  these  two  volumes,  I find  myself  filled  with  an  admir-
ation which  almost  surprises  me.  The  work,  whatever  weaknesses  it
may  have,  strikes  me  as  at  lea.st  a masterpiece  of  co-ordination  and
unification.  The  voluminous  ansenal  of  “cases”  of  which  the  author’s
memory  disposes  might  make  the  most  erudite  naturalist  or  historian
envy  him,  and  his  delicate  power  of  serially  assorting  his  facts,  so
as  to  find  always  just  the  case  he  needs  to  fit  into  a gap  in  the
scheme,  is  wholly  admirable.  He  shows  indeed  a genius  not  unlike
that  of  Charles  Darwin  for  discovering  shadings  and  transitions,  and
grading  down  discontinuities  in  his  argument.

Three  circumstances,  probably,  have  worked  against  the  general
])ublic  recognition  of  Myers’s  scientific  powers.  These  have  been,
first,  the  nature  of  the  material  he  w'orked  in ; second,  his  literary
fluency  ; and  third,  his  emotional  interest  in  immortality.  The  two
latter  characteristics,  combining  their  effects,  have  given  to  certain
passages  in  the  present  volumes  a tone  so  lyrical  that  it  may  well
make  them  distasteful  to  the  ordinary  scientific  reader.  For  propa-
gandist purposes  the  existence  of  these  passages  is,  I think,  to  be
regretted.  Myers  could  well  have  afforded  (having  shown  his  undis-
puted lyrical  power  elsewhere)  to  be  dryer  in  this  argument,  and  by
being  so  he  would  have  doubtless  turned  certain  possible  disciples,
now  lost  to  him,  into  respectful  listeners.  But  he  so  habitually  saw"


XLA'  I.]  Revieto  of  Human  Personality.  3 1

the  meanest  subliminal  phenomena  in  the  light  of  that  transterrene
world  with  which  they  might  remotely  be  connected,  that  they
became  glorified  in  his  mind  into  experiences  in  themselves  majestic.
All  his  materials  were  objects  of  love  to  him,  and  the  richly  latinized
and  hellenized  vocabulary  in  which  he  spoke  of  them  shows  how  they
affected  his  imagination.

From  this  point  of  view  I think  we  need  not  regret  a feature  of
these  volumes  which  to  some  persons  may  have  seemed  pathetic.
Mj-ers,  namely,  was  cut  off  by  death  before  he  could  write  his  direct
discussion  of  the  evidence  for  spirit-return.  But  that  discussion  is  a
matter  of  dry-as-diist  detail  which  may  well  be  left  to  the  pages  of
our  Proceedings  and  Journal,  and  to  workers  who  are  not  such
universal  geniuses.  ^ He  has  fully  expressed  in  this  book  his  general
position  on  the  suliject ; and  being  so  lyrical  a fountain  in  the  direction
of  immortality,  he  could  hardly  have  embarked  on  the  evidence
without  alienating  still  more  a class  of  students  whose  sympathy  may
oil  the  whole  be  precious.  Even  though  the  cap-stone  of  the  work,
as  he  projected  it,  be  lacking,  still  the  essential  Myers  is  in  it,  for  it
IS  as  the  organiser  and  co-ordinator,  far  more  than  as  the  critic  of
this  or  that  particular  set  of  observations,  that  posterity  will  best
remember  him.

As  regards  Uie  truth  of  his  theory,  as  contra-distinguished  from
Its  formal  merits  as  a constructive  effort,  it  is  certainly  too  eaily
tor  any  one  to  pass  dogmatic  judgment.  Most  readers,  even  those
who  ^ admire  the  scheme  as  a whole,  will  doubtless  shrink  from
yielding  their  credence  to  it  unreservedly.  It  will  seem  like  skatino-
over  ice  too  thin  for  any  intellect  less  nimble  than  Myers’s  to  place
its  feet  on  boldly.  The  types  of  case  which  he  uses  as  steppiim
stones  are  some  of  them,  at  present,  either  in  quality  or  quantit>q
decidedly  weak  supports  for  the  weight  which  the  theory  would  rest
upon  them,  and  it  remains  at  least  possible  that  future  records  ma\'
not  remedy  this  frailty.

The  reproach  that  he  has  over-generalized  the  exceptional  is  also
one  which,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  cannot  be  decidedlv
rebutted.  He  may  extend  the  subliminal  too  far  when  he  sup-
poses that  all  of  us  possess  it,  and  that  works  of  genius  generally
have  their  source  in  it.  He  may  extend  “ phantasms  too  far
when  he  fills  a whole  cosmic  environment  with  spirits  able  to  en-
gender them.  As  between  the  individual  subliminal  and  the  cosmic
eiivironment,  he  may  also  not  have  drawn  the  boundary  correctly
Ihere  may  well  be  more  of  the  “dissolutive”  subliminal  and  less  of  the


32


Professor  William  James.


[part


“ sj)irit  ” than  he  supposes,  in  some  of  his  palmary  phenomena.  But
however  it  may  have  to  be  contracted  in  one  case,  or  extended  in
another,  the  subliminal  region,  as  Myers  conceived  it,  will  remain
a vera  amsa  in  psychology,  explanatory,  either  of  the  whole  or  of  a
part,  of  the  great  mass  of  occult  occurrences  so  far  as  they  are
authentic.  “ Automatisms  ” are  indeed  what  he  first  said  they  were,
messages  from  the  subliminal  to  the  supraliminal  regions.

The  imperfection  which  I feel  most  acutely  in  Myers’s  survey  of
the  subliminal  life  is  its  failure  adequately  to  account  for  its  being
so  impartially  the  home  both  of  evolutive  and  of  dissolutive  pheno-
mena. The  parasitic  ideas  of  psycho-neurosis,  and  the  fictitious
personations  of  planchette-writing  and  mediumship  reside  there  side
l)y  side  with  the  inspirations  of  genius,  with  the  faculties  of  telepathy
and  tehesthesia,  and  with  the  susceptibility  of  genuine  spirit-control.
Myers  felt  the  parailoxical  character  of  such  cohabitation,  and,  as
usual,  was  ready  with  a suggestion  for  attenuating  the  difficulty.

“ It  may  be  expected,”  he  writes,  “ that  supernormal  vital  pheno-
mena will  manifest  themselves  as  far  as  possible  through  the  same
channels  as  abnormal  or  morbid  vital  phenomena,  when  the  same
centres  or  the  same  synergies  are  used.  ...  If  there  be  within
us  a secondary  self  aiming  at  manifestation  by  physiological  means,
it  seems  probable  that  its  readiest  path  of  externalisation — its
readiest  outlet  of  visible  action — may  often  lie  along  some  track
which  has  already  been  shown  to  be  a line  of  low  resistance  by  the
disintegrating  processes  of  disease,  ...  lie  along  some  j^lane  of
cleavage  which  the  morbid  dissociations  of  our  psychical  synergies
have  already  shown  themselves  disposed  to  follow  ” (Vol.  ii.,  p.  84).

But  this  conception  is  deficient  in  clearness.  Are  there  three
zones  of  subliminal  life,  of  which  the  innermost  is  dissolutive,  the
middle  one  superior  (the  zone  of  genius,  telepathy,  etc.),  and  the
outermost  supreme  and  receptive  directly  of  the  impact  of  the  spirit-
world  1 And  can  the  two  latter  zones  reach  the  supraliminal
consciousness  only  by  passing  through  the  interior  and  inferior
zone,  and  consequently  using  its  channels  and  mixing  its  morbid
eft'ects  with  their  own  1 Or  is  the  subliminal  superior  throughout
when  considered  in  itself,  and  are  the  curious  parasitisms  of  hysteria
and  alternate  personality,  and  the  curious  uncritical  passivity  to
the  absurdest  suggestions  which  we  observe  in  hypnosis  to  be
explained  by  defective  brain-action  exclusively,  without  bringing
in  the  subliminal  mind  1 Is  it  the  brain,  in  short,  which  vitiates
and  mixes  results,  or  is  it  the  interior  zone  of  the  subliminal


XLVI.]


Review  of  Human  Personality.


33


mind  ? I make  no  attempt  to  solve  the  question^  It  is  practi-
cally as  well  as  theoretically  a vital  one,  for  there  can  be  no  doubt
whatever  that  the  great  obstacle  to  the  reception  of  a Weltanscluiwung
like  Myers’s  is  that  the  superior  phenomena  which  it  believes  in
are  so  enveloped  and  smothered  in  the  mass  of  their  degenerative
congeners  and  accompaniments  that  they  beget  a collective  impres-
sion of  disgust,  and  that  only  the  strongest  of  mental  stomachs  can
pick  them  over  and  seek  the  gold  amongst  the  rubbish.

Meanwhile  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  if  one  finds  Myers’s  map
unsatisfactory,  that  no  regular  psychologist  has  ever  tried  his  hand
at  the  problem.  Psychologists  admit  a subliminal  life  to  exist  in
hypnosis  and  in  hysteria,  and  they  use  a case  like  that  of  Janet’s
“Adrienne”  to  explain  the  manner  in  which  “secondary  personalities”
may  become  organised.  But  the  existence  all  about  us  of  thousands
and  of  tens  of  thousands  of  persons,  not  perceptibly  hysteric  or  un-
healthy, who  are  mediumistic  to  the  degree  at  any  rate  of  being
automatic  writers,  and  whose  mediumism  results  in  these  grotesque
impersonations,  this,  I say,  is  a phenomenon  of  human  life  which
they  do  not  even  attempt  to  connect  with  any  of  the  other  facts  of
Nature.  Add  the  fact  that  the  mediumship  often  gives  supernormal
information,  and  it  becomes  evident  that  the  phenomenon  cannot
consist  of  pure  eccentricity  and  isolation.  There  is  method  in  it ;
it  must  have  a context  of  some  sort  and  belong  to  a region  where
other  things  can  be  found  also.  It  cries  aloud  for  serious  investiga-
tion. Myers’s  map  is  the  only  scientifically  serious  investigation  that
has  yet  been  offered.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  those  whom  it  dis-
satisfies may  not  merely  reject  it,  but  also  make  some  effort  to

provide  something  better.

I cannot  conclude  without  paying  my  tribute  to  the  innumerable
felicities  of  suggestion  with  which  Hitman  Personality  al)ounds.
Myers’s  urbanity  of  style,  and  his  genius  for  analogy  were  never
more  profusely  displayed,  or  in  so  many  directions.  Bold  as  his

theory  is,  it  is  one  of  its  merits  that  it  should  be  so  sober  in  the

way  of  either  physical  or  metaphysical  hypothesis.  What  “spirits”
are,  or  what  their  relations  are  to  “ space,”  he  never  tries  to  say,
but  uses  the  terms  like  a Naturfm'sclier,  as  mere  designations  foi'
factors  of  phenomena.  The  book  on  the  whole  must  be  considered
a worthy  monument  to  his  memory.

William  James.

^ For  Mr.  Myers’s  treatment  of  the  question,  see  especially  Vol.  i.,  pp.
7‘2-7o. — Editor.


C


34


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


II.

Mr.  Myers’  great  conception  of  the  subliminal  self  has  been
adojrted,  explained,  parodied,  and  paraded,  by  several  writers,
usually  in  the  garbled  and  misleading  form  that  man  has  a dual
nature  or  duplex  soul,  that  sometimes  the  more  usual,  and  some-
times the  less  usual  aspect  of  his  personality  comes  to  the  front
and  influences  his  actions  and  thoughts.  In  the  form  of  a contest
between  two  rival  principles,  this  idea  is  extremely  old ; and  in
the  form  of  a divided  soul  or  bifurcated  personality,  a version  of
the  conception  has  been  elaborated  by  Mr.  Thomson  Jay  Hudson
in  an  ambitious  book  extensively  read  in  America  called  The  Law
of  Psychic  Phenomena^  wherein  it  is  sought  to  explain  everything,
from  the  Christian  miracles  downwards,  by  a crudely  stated
hypothesis  of  duplex  personality  or  a double  soul  : an  idea  which
seems  to  have  been  borrowed,  without  acknowledgment,  from  Mr.
Myers’  papers  in  the  Proceedings,  and  spoiled  in  the  borrowing.

And  in  a recent  number  of  the  Nineteenth  Century  Mr.  Mallock,
getting  hold  ajjparently  of  this  version  of  Mr.  Hudson’s,  has  .skil-
fully set  it  forth  as  if  it  were  an  explanation  or  summary  of  Mr.
Myers’  own  theory ; and  has  pointed  a flippant  finger  of  scorn  at
the  triviality  of  the  evidence,  and  at  the  futility  of  a life-work
which  has  this  conclusion  for  its  result.  Few  essays  which  bear
a superficial  resemblance  to  the  truth  could  readily  be  more  mis-
leading or  less  illuminating  than  this  article  of  Mr.  Mallock’s,  and
I am  content  to  caution  any  student  not  to  accept  that  ostensible
summary  as  giving  any  adeqviate  or  true  idea  of  Mr.  Myers’
comprehensive  treatise.

The  doctrine  which  Mr.  Myers  arrived  at  after  years  of  study
is  that  each  individual  as  we  perceive  him  is  but  a small  fraction
of  a larger  whole,  is  as  it  were  the  foliage  of  a tree  which  has  its
main  trunk  and  its  roots  in  another  order  of  existence ; but  that
on  this  dark  inconspicuous  and  permanent  basis,  now  one  and  now

^ Reviewed  in  Proceedings  S.P.l!.,  Vol.  ix.  p.  230.


XLYI.]


Beview  of  Human  Personality .


35


another  system  of  leaves  bud,  grow,  display  themselves,  wither,
and  decay,  while  the  great  trunk  and  roots  persist  through  many
such  temporary  appearances,  not  independently  of  the  sensible
manifestations,  nor  unassisted  by  them,  but  supporting  them,  dominat-
ing them,  reproducing  them,  assimilating  their  nourishment  in  the  form
of  the  elaborated  sap  called  experience,  and  thereby  growing
continually  into  a more  perfect  and  larger  whole.  Many  metaphors
could  be  suggested,  but  this  is  the  one  which  occurs  to  me  now,
and  it  carries  us  a certain  distance.

As  the  tree  periodically  buds  and  blossoms  into  an  aerial  life,  so
we  bud  and  blossom  in  a terrestrial  life,  clothing  ourselves  with
material  particles  for  a time,  assimilating  and  utilising  the  sunshine
and  the  dew,  realising  the  existence  and  the  neighbourhood  of
other  organisms  in  a like  stage  of  development,  and  joyfully
availing  ourselves  of  the  consequences  that  flow  from  proximit}'
and  contemporaneous  specialised  existence.

The  mystery  of  incarnation  and  of  gradual  development,  of  the
persistence  of  existence  beyond  bodily  death  and  decay,  and  even
some  glimmerings  of  the  possible  meaning  of  the  vague  dream  of
so-called  re-incarnation,  all  become  in  some  sort  intelligible  on  a
basis  of  this  kind — the  basis  of  a full  and  never  wholly  manifested
persistent  self,  from  which  periodically  sprouts  a terrestrial  mani-
festation, though  never  twice  the  same.  Each  terrestrial  appearance
flourishes  and  assimilates  mental  and  moral  nutriment  for  a time,
and  the  result  of  each  is  incorporated  in  the  constant  and  growing
memory  of  the  underlying,  supporting,  but  inconspicuously  mani-
festing, and  at  present  barely  recognised,  fundamental  self.

And  whereas  we,  the  visible  manifestations,  exposed  to  sun  and  air,
can  signal  to  each  other  and  receive  impressions  through  rays  of
light  and  sound  and  heat,  our  transcendental  portions  with  roots  in
another  order  of  being  must  be  supposed  capable  of  communication
too ; they  are  individualised  but  not  isolated,  being  welded  into
the  framework  of  things  in  such  way  as  to  receive  nutriment  from
subterranean  moisture  and  from  dying  relics  of  the  past,  even  from
things  which  to  the  aerial  portion  seem  useless  or  noxious ; and  they
may  thus  send  up  to  the  leaves  strange  streamings  of  sap  laden  with
the  common  wealth  of  mother  earth.

The  metaphor  constantly  breaks  down,  as  all  metaphors  must
sooner  or  later ; for  some  purposes  it  would  seem  better  that  the
tree  should  be  inverted;  and  the  adjective  “subliminal”  contains
no  reference  to  what  is  beneath,  except  in  the  sense  of  foundation


36


Sir  Olirer  Lodge.


[part


and  support ; in  every  other  aspect  the  subliminal  is  probably  the
more  real  and  more  noble,  more  comprehensive,  more  intelligent,
self,  of  which  the  supraliminal  development  is  but  a natural  and
healthy  and  partial  manifestation.

The  products  of  the  subliminal  are  to  be  regarded  as  “higher,”
in  a definite  sense,  than  those  of  the  supraliminal.  The  supra-
liminal is  that  which  is  the  outcome  of  terrestrial  evolution,  and
so  is  able  to  manifest  itself  in  a planetary  manner ; the  subliminal
has  a cosmic  existence,  which  may  play  a part  in  terrestrial  evolution
hereafter,  but  at  present  only  shows  signs  of  doing  so,  as,  for  instance,
in  the  supernormal  uprushes  which  are  known  as  the  inspirations  of
genius ; signs  which  may  be  taken  as  anticipatory  of  the  course  of
evolution  in  the  future.

In  this  wa}"  sleep,  death,  genius,  insanity,  hysteria,  hypnotism,
automatism,  clairvoyance,  and  all  other  disintegrations,  abnormalities,
and  supernormalities  of  personality,  fall  into  a consistent  compre-
hensive scheme;  and  it  is  the  object  of  the  book  to  elaborate
this  hypothesis  and  to  unify  all  these  strange  features  of  human
personality,  features  which  have  so  long  afforded  an  exercise
alternately  to  resolute  credulity  and  to  blatant  scepticism,  and  have
so  perennially  perplexed  mankind.

It  may  be  that  in  this  my  brief  summary  and  metaphorical  rej)re-
sentation  of  the  chief  theoretical  conclusion  or  unifying  principle  of
the  book  I too  am  guilty  of  a parod}’  ; but  I am  writing  for
members  of  the  Society,  who  will  surely  take  the  trouble  to  read  the
book  itself  and  not  be  put  off  with  any  brief  account  or  compressed
record  of  the  work  of  what  they  know  to  have  been  an  industrious
lifetime.  The  book  lias  been  editorially  prepared  by  a student  for
students,  and  is  provided  with  syllabuses  giving  a conspectus  of  the
contents  of  each  chapter,  which  may  be  valuable  for  reference  and
stud}'^  after  the  chapter  has  been  read.  It  is  also  provided  with  a
glossary  of  terras  and  a copious  index.  For  the  student  the  book  is
well  adapted  ; for  the  general  reader  its  arrangement  is  troublesome,
because  each  chapter  and  almost  each  section  of  each  chapter  has  a
detached  appendix  as  long  as  itself  placed  further  on  in  the  book  ;
and  in  order  to  read  continuously  constant  turning  over  pages  is
necessary.  If  the  illustrative  cases  had  been  incorporated  with  the
text,  it  would  have  been  easy  for  those  pressed  for  time  to  skim
tliem,  whereas  the  tendency  now  is  to  skip  them  altogether  from
their  proper  place,  and  read  them,  if  at  all,  subsequently  in  an
indigestible  mass.


XLVi.]  Revicto  of  Human  Personality.  37

Another  feature  of  the  book,  against  which  many  persons  have
rebelled,  is  the  comparative  smallness  of  the  type  and  over-
transparency of  the  paper ; necessitated  probably  by  the  bulk  of
material,  which  otherwise  would  have  run  into  three  volumes.
On  these  trivial  heads  I say  no  more.

The  book  begins  with  an  explanatory  and  properly  prosaic  Intro-
duction, and  closes  with  a more  poetic  Epilogue.

Successive  chapters  deal  with  the  following  subjects  :

First.  Disintegration  of  personalit}^,  such  as  Multiple  personality,
and  other  hysterical  and  pathological  cases.

Second.  Genius,  which  is  one  of  the  most  illuminating  and  brilliant
chapters  in  the  book,  where  the  man  of  genius  so  far  from  being
regarded  as  afflicted  with  any  form  of  nascent  insanity  is  regarded
as  the  standard  or  norm  of  the  race — a product  of  a higher  stage  of
evolution  than  the  average  man  has  yet  attained.

Clearly  a genius  is  one  who  can  draw  more  than  others  on  his
central  and  sustaining  subliminal  organisation,  one  who  can  breathe
out  products  obtained  not  from  sun  and  air  alone,  but  from  roots
driven  deep  into  the  heart  of  tlie  universe  : one  whose  existence  is
not  planetary  merely,  but  cosmic,  and  in  whom  subliminal  uprushes
of  fructifying  sap  are  frequent.

The  next  chapter  deals  with  sleep,  or  the  state  when  the  supra-
liminal activities  are  dormant  : when  the  sun  has  ceased  to  awaken
full  activities,  when  the  whole  self  is  more  massed  together  and
partially  withdrawn  from  its  active  planetary  existence ; and  when
by  dreams  and  visions  some  reminiscence  of  a wider  though  dimmer
purview  can  sometimes  be  retained  for  a time  and  carried  over  into
the  waking  or  terrestrially  conscious  existence.

This  leads  up  to  the  chapter  which  deals  with  the  artificial  or
experimental  induction  of  this  state,  the  chapter  on  Hypnotism  ; a
process  whereby  the  deeper  strata  of  personality  can  be  reached,  and
suggestion  and  other  influences  implanted,  which  may  subsequently
bear  fruit  in  waking  life.  One  may  liken  this  to  gardening  opera-
tions, such  as  grafting  and  manuring  and  other  systems  of  treatment,
applied  not  to  the  leaves  or  flowers  of  a tree  direct,  but  to  its
branches  and  roots ; operations  which  nevertheless  influence  those
leaves  and  flowers  in  a subsequent  and  unmistakable  manner.

The  chapter  on  Sensory  Automatism  deals  with  those  conditions
of  hallucination  of  the  senses  under  which  clairvoyance  or  pseudo-
sense-impressions of  various  kinds  are  generated  ; furnishing  avenues
whereby  telepathy,  crystal  vision,  and  other  perceptions,  not  received


Si7-  Oliver  Lodge.


3S


[part


through  the  normal  organs  of  sense  but  by  some  ill-understood
subliminal  reaction,  become  possible.

And  chapter  viii.  in  the  second  volume,  on  Motor  Automatism,
expands  this  same  region  into  the  muscular  or  efferent  output  of
the  same  kind  of  faculty  ; — resulting  in  automatic  writing,  and
other  physical  manifestations  of  subliminal  activity,  whether  of  the
nature  of  inhibition  or  of  propulsion,  up  to  such  strenuously  active
but  subliminally  guided  lives,  as  for  instance  those  of  Socrates  and
Joan  of  Arc.  Between  these  two  is  interpolated  a chapter  on
Phantasms  of  the  Dead  : those  hallucinatory  appearances  or  visions
of  departed  persons,  which  are  here  treated  as  an  example  of
sensory  automatism  on  the  part  of  the  percipient,  excited  however
in  many  cases  veridically  bj^  external  influence,  and  capable  of
conveying  real  information.

And  the  chapter  on  Motor  Automatism  is  similarly  followed  by
a chapter  on  the  developed  form  of  the  same,  viz.  a chapter  headed
“ Trance,  Possession,  Ecstasy,”  in  which  certain  well-known  cases  of
veridical  trance  utterance  are  partiall}^  included,  though  with  many
serious  omissions,  due  to  the  recent  occurrence  of  some  of  tlie
cases,  so  that  insuflicient  time  had  been  afforded  for  their  complete
digestion  and  for  a final  decision  as  to  their  place  and  purport.
This,  together  with  sensory  and  motor  automatisms,  may  be  regarded
as  the  part  of  the  subject-matter  which  has  attracted  most  popular
attention,  and  the  part  which  when  stated  by  itself  seems  to  excite
nothing  but  scepticism  on  the  one  hand  and  superstition  on  the
other.  It  was  Mr.  Myers’  plan  to  so  gradually  build  or  lead  up
to  these  strange  phenomena  that  when  reached  they  should  be
realised  as  a fitting  and  natural  consequence  of  what  had  gone
before,  leaving  them  no  longer  as  an  inaccessible  or  aerial  structure
without  foundation,  Imt  as  the  upper  storey  of  a large  and  lofty
building  through  which  a fairly  sound  staircase  had  been  constructed.

Myers’  life-work  either  achieves  this  unification  or  it  does  not.
If  it  does,  this  book,  as  I suggested  last  January  in  my  Presidential
Address  to  the  Society,  will  stand  as  a Novum  Organon  in  psychical
science.  If  it  does  not,  it  may  mean  either  that  the  attempt  is
impossible,  or  that  it  still  remains  for  some  future  pioneer  to
achieve  that  which  for  the  present  generation  has  turned  out  too
difficult.

Myei'S  himself  took  a modest,  but  I think  hopeful,  view  of  his
labours.  He  must  have  felt,  at  any  rate  his  friends  felt  for  him,  that
by  the  industiy  of  himself  and  Gurney  and  the  other  founders  of  the


XLVI.]


Review  of  Human  Personality.


39


Society,  he  had,  amassed  and  ready  to  his  hands,  a fund  of  material  to
draw  upon,  such  as  no  philosopher  or  psychologist  had  ever  had  before  ;
and  although  he  himself  would  have  seriously  deprecated  any  com-
parison with  the  sages  of  the  past,  some  of  us  felt  that,  building  on
their  foundation,  utilising  their  work,  and  fortified  with  such  a vast
mass  of  modern  information,  aided  also  by  his  classical  learning  and
by  a great  natural  scientific  insight,  with  the  opportunity  of  con-
sulting many  scientific  men,  some  hostile,  some  sympathetic  to  his
researches,  and  with  the  nineteenth  century  of  science  behind  him,
gifted  also  with  considerable  leisure,  persistent  enthusiasm,  and
industry,  he  was  a man  supremely  fitted  to  push  back  the  barriers
of  ignorance  in  this  region  farther  than  had  been  accomplished  before,
and  to  give  to  the  human  race  an  insight  into  the  hidden  faculties
and  destiny  of  man  such  as  not  even  the  gigantic  genius  of  Plato,
nor  the  profound  insight  of  Kant  had  been  able  to  bestow.

It  is  not  a matter  on  which  an  opinion  of  mine  would  be  of
value,  nor  would  I be  understood  as  expressing  one,  but  the  glorious
sense  of  having  accomplished  a work  worthy  of  the  serious  atten-
tion of  humanity  has  blossomed  in  an  Epilogue  where  the  cosmic
import  and  religious  significance  of  the  whole  vista  of  human  faculty
is  eloquently  set  forth.  And  this  specially  written  epilogue  is  happily
completed  and  supplemented  by  his  one  Presidential  Address  to  the
Society,  an  address  which  will  be  in  the  memory  of  many  readers ;
and  this  is  further  supplemented  by  two  short  essays,  one  on  the
“ Decline  of  Dogmatism,”  wherein  the  ultimate  upshot  of  the
messages  which  claim  to  come  from  another  order  of  existence  are
briefly  summarised,  and  another  on  “ Prayer  and  Supplication,”
regarded  from  the  illuminating  point  of  view  of  the  telepathic  law.
From  this  last  I extract  the  following  quotation  : —

“ In  the  law  of  telepathy,  developing  into  the  law  of  spiritual
intercommunication  between  incarnate  and  discarnate  spirits,  we  see
dimly  adumbrated  before  our  eyes  the  highest  law  with  which  our
human  science  can  conceivably  have  to  deal.  The  discovery  of
telepathy  opens  before  us  a potential  communication  between  all  life.
And  if,  as  our  present  evidence  indicates,  this  telepathic  intercourse
can  subsist  between  embodied  and  disembodied  souls,  that  law  must
needs  lie  at  the  very  centre  of  cosmic  evolution.  It  will  be  evolu-
tionary, as  depending  on  a faculty  now  in  actual  course  of  develop-
ment. It  will  be  cosmic  ; for  it  may — it  almost  must — by  analogy
subsist  not  on  this  planet  only,  but  wherever  in  the  universe  dis-
carnate and  incarnate  spirits  may  be  intermingled  or  juxtaposed.”

One  other  portion  of  the  book  must  be  mentioned,  for  it  was  a


40


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


laborious  attempt  at  a synthesis  or  conspectus  of  the  whole,  viz,,
his  “Scheme  of  Vital  Faculty” — sadly  buried  by  the  arrangement  of
the  book  between  pages  505  and  555  of  the  second  volume — a scheme
wherein  the  usual  orthodox  view  of  the  tripartite  nature  of  man  is
utilised,  and  each  vital  faculty  is  displayed  under  the  aspect  appro-
priate to  the  three  heads,  somatic,  psychic,  and  pneumatic ; or,  as  he
st3’les  them,  supraliminal,  subliminal,  and  spiritual.  The  scheme  was
the  result  of  a great  deal  of  thought,  but  it  is  open  to  question  in
many  points  of  detail,  and  Myers  would  have  been  the  last  to  insist
that  each  subject  is  classified  precisely  in  the  most  appropriate  manner,
or  that  it  always  fits  the  niche  provided  for  it.  At  the  same  time
it  would  be  well  for  future  students  to  realise  that  Myers  had  a
reason  for  his  system  of  classification,  and  that  though  it  may  be
changed,  it  is  worthy  of  being  changed  not  lightly,  but  after  due
consideration.

How  far  such  a scheme  as  tliis  soars  above  the  range  of  the
orthodox  science  of  to-day  is  apparent  from  the  fact  that  few  of  the
faculties  catalogued  and  classified  in  it,  beyond  those  in  the  first
category,  are  as  yet  generallj'  recognised  as  existing  at  all.  A few
from  the  second  or  middle  category  are  coming  into  recognition —
such  as  suggestion,  hyperfesthesia,  psycho-therapeutics,  and  telepath}' —
but  the  greater  part  even  of  this  second  list  is  still  only  on  the
outskirts  of  recognised  knowledge ; while  in  Myers’  view  it  is  the
third  and  at  present  wholly  ultra-scientific  category  which  lies  in
the  path  of  future  knowledge  and  development,  and  constitutes  the
most  pregnant  portion  of  his  message  to  mankind.

It  is  not  to  be  claimed  for  a moment  that  these  volumes  will
convince  a reader  of  the  survival  of  personality  beyond  bodily  death,
if  he  was  previously  hostile  to  or  otherwise  fortified  against  such
an  idea.  Perhaps  they  will  convince  nobody  : I see  no  reason
why  they  should.  The  main  object  of  the  book  is  not  edification
and  finality,  but  stimulation  to  enquiry ; and  convictions  of  any
value  are  seldom  attained  by  mere  reading ; they  can  only  be
formed  by  soaking  one’s  mind  in  a subject  for  years,  by  “ con-
tinually thinking  unto  it,”  as  Newton  said.  As  the  outcome  of  such
a process  it  became  Myers’  undoubted  belief  that  intelligence  and
human  personality  persist  beyond  bodily  death ; and  that,  between
the  two  states  or  conditions  of  being,  intercommunication  though
extremely  difficult  was  not  altogether  impossible.  But  this  conclusion
of  his  has  been  popularly  seized  and  over-emphasised  till  to  many
contemporaries  it  seems  that  an  easy  credulity  on  this  point  was  his


XLVI.]


Review  of  Human  Personality.


41


characteristic  attitude.  Nothing  could  be  further  from  the  truth.
Easy  credulity  does  not  lead  to  a life-long  labour  and  evolution  of
a comprehensive  scheme  such  as  this.  To  those  who  have  not  been
through  it,  the  assured  conviction  which  was  the  outcome  of  his
long  training  may  seem  like  easy  credulity;  just  as  the  physicist  is
often  twitted  for  believing  in  the  reality  of  an  “ ether,”  which  to
the  oidooker  is  a mere  hypothesis — a blank  form  to  be  filled  up
arbitrarily  at  pleasure,  and  with  no  more  reality  than  the  figment  of
a dream.

This  is  one  of  those  cases,  and  there  are  several,  wdiere  the
onlooker  does  not  see  most  of  the  game,  w'here  the  man  in  the
street  with  all  his  conspicuous  ability  is  not  an  ultimate  authority,
and  where  the  profound  gibes  of  the  clubs,  or  of  a monthly  maga-
zine, are  not  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.

For  people  who  are  immersed  in  such  an  atmosphere  it  is  difficult
to  realise  the  strenuously-acquired  full-bodied  certitude,  or  the
clear-visioned  perception  and  what  one  can  hardly  help  calling,
in  some  sense,  knowledge,  whether  it  be  concerning  the  “ ether  ”
or  concerning  the  problem  of  what  is  known  as  human  “ im-
mortality,” which  may  be  possessed  by  a specifically  trained  man
of  science.  That  is  the  position  in  which  the  author  of  these  two
vohrmes  seems  to  me  definitely  to  have  acquired  the  right  to  range
himself ; and  in  this  estimate  of  his  position  I believe  that  scientific
posterity  wall  acclaim  agreement.  It  is  by  the  name  of  Man  of
Science  that  I wish  to  hail  our  late  chief  and  leader,  Frederic  Myers.

Oliver  Lodge.


42


Professor  Th.  Flournoy.


[part


III.

L’ouvrage  posthume  de  Fred.  Myers  constitue  im  monument  si
vaste  et  d’une  telle  richesse  qu’il  serait  t6meraire  de  le  juger  sur  une
premiere  et  hative  lecture.  Ce  n’est  pas  au  lendemain  de  sa  publi-
cation que  Ton  pent  en  apprecier  tous  les  details  et  mesurer  sa
portee  r6elle : il  y faut  un  certain  temps  d’accoutumance,  de

reflexion,  et,  pour  dire  le  mot,  de  digestion  subliminale.  Aussi  me
bornerai-je  ici  a quelques  remarques  generales,  qui  n’ont  que  la  valeur
d’impressions  ]mrement  personnelles,  denuees  de  toute  pretention  au
complet  ou  au  definitif.

(I.)  Le  premier  point  qui  me  frappe  dans  cet  ouvrage  est  sa  ten-
dance mixte,  a la  fois  scientifique  et  religieuse.  Le  but  procliain  de
Myers  est  d’instituer  une  science  nouvelle,  consacree  k la  demon-
stration experimentale  de  I’existence  et  de  la  survivance  de  Tame ;
mais  c’est  en  vue  d’un  but  lointain,  superieur,  k savoir  la  fondation
d’une  nouvelle  religion,  dont  le  contenu,  quintessence  de  ce  qu’il  y a
de  mieux  dans  le  triple  courant  du  christianisme,  du  bouddhisme,
et  de  la  sagesse  antique,  reposera  cette  fois  sur  la  connaissance  et
non  plus,  comme  par  le  passe,  sur  la  simple  croyance.  En  soi  cette
entreprise  n’est  pas  neuve,  puisque  I’idee  d’une  synthese  religieuse
definitive,  basee  sur  I’experimentation  scientifique  au  lieu  de  la  foi,
appartient  en  commun  a toutes  les  sectes  modernes  de  tlieosophie  et
de  spiritisme.  Ce  qui  fait  la  puissante  originalite  de  Myers,  c’est  la
fa9on  dont  il  en  a tente  et  poursuivi  la  realisation,  c’est  I'etendue
de  ses  connaissances,  la  hardiesse  de  ses  hypotheses  alliee  a son  sens
penetrant  des  methodes  rigoureuses,  en  un  mot  la  profondeur  et  la
solidite  de  son  genie  scientifique,  qui  ne  le  cedent  en  rien  a celles
de  son  enthousiasme  religieux.  Que  Ton  compare  son  ouvrage  a
ceux  d’Allan  Kardec  ou  de  tels  autres  ecrivains  fran^ais  recents  de
la  meme  ecole  : I’intention  premibre  et  la  tournure  d’esprit,  je  dirai
la  mentalite  fondamentale,  est  identique,  mais  il  y a la  meme
difference  dans  I’execution  qu’entre  la  hutte  du  sauvage  et  I’bditice
d’un  grand  architecte,  et  Ton  s’etonne  qu’il  n’y  ait  que  I’ecart  de


xlvl]


Revievj  of  Human  Personality .


43


quelques  annees  ou  de  quelques  lieues  entre  des  oeuvres  qui  sem-
blent  s4par4es  par  des  milliers  de  siecles.

Mais  pour  en  revenir  a cette  mentalite  nieme,  qui  aspire  a I’itidis-
soluble  fusion  de  la  Science  et  de  la  Religion,  celle-ci  reposant  sur
celle-la,  j’avoue  qu’elle  me  laisse  perplexe.  Je  me  sens  disqualifi4
l)Our  I’apprecier.  Personnellement  en  effet,  je  me  suis  trop

profondement  penetre  aux  jours  de  ma  jeunesse  de  la  distinction
kantienne  entre  le  “ Glauben  ” et  le  “ Wissen  ” (sans  doute  parce
qu’elle  repondait  a ma  nature  congenitale)  pour  pouvoir  m’en
affranchir  aujourd’hui  et  me  couler  dans  le  moule  oppose.  J’ai  beau
avoir  depuis  longtemps  oublie  le  detail  des  categories  et  le  systeriie
complique  du  philosophe  de  Kbnigsberg,  mon  cerveau  ou  ma  con-
science subliminale  n’en  conservent  pas  moins,  comme  un  pli
indelebile,  son  inspiration  fonciere  d’une  heterogeneite  irreductible
entre  le  croire,  attitude  essentiellement  personnelle  et  morale,  fondee
sur  des  sentiments  de  valeur,  a I’endroit  des  supremes  realites  inac-
cessibles  a la  raison  discursive, — et  le  savoir,  organisation  des  pheno-
menes  dans  les  formes  indifferentes,  amorales,  impersonnelles,  de  la
pensbe  scientifique.  Je  ne  pretends  pas  que  cette  sorte  de  dualisme
soit  preferable  en  soi  a la  position  unitaire  si  brillamment  representee
par  Myers;  je  dis  seulement  que,  relevant  de  deux  types  psycholo-
giques  ou  de  deux  mentalites  differentes,  chacun  de  ces  points  de
vue  est  bien  difficile  a comprendre,  et  impossible  a juger  equitable-
ment,  par  ceux  qui  n’y  sont  pas  adaptes.

Les  natures  comme  Myers  eprouvent  evidemment  un  profond
malaise  tant  qu’elles  n’ont  pas  reussi  a transformer  les  postulats  de
leur  raison  pratique  (pour  parler  comme  Kant) — la  vie  future,  I’exis-
tence  de  Dieu,  la  realite  du  Devoir,  la  communion  finale  des  ames,
I’efificacitb  de  la  priere,  etc. — en  verites  d’ordre  scientifique,  objective-
ment  demontrables  a I’egal  de  la  rotation  de  la  terre  ou  de  la  loi
de  Mariotte.  C’est  un  malaise  inverse,  mais  pareillement  profond,
que  j’eprouve  de  mon  cote  en  voyant  suspendre  ces  memes  croyances,
vitales  et  essentielles  pour  moi,  au  fil  tenu  d’une  recherche  de  patho-
logie,  d’une  enquete  statistique  ou  d’une  seance  de  medium.  II  me
semble  que  c’est  porter  atteinte  aux  ressorts  les  plus  intimes  de  mon
etre,  que  de  les  exposer  ainsi  a tous  les  risques,  en  les  rendant
solidaires  d’interpretations  ou  de  resultats  scientifiques  tenus  aujour-
d’hui pour  acquis,  et  demain  peut-etre  renverses.  Des  gouts  et  des
couleurs  on  ne  pent  discuter,  et  pas  davantage  de  la  confiance
qu’inspirent  a I’individu  les  diverses  voies  qu’on  lui  propose  pour
atteindre  le  Reel,  saisir  la  Verite,  asseoir  sa  vie  morale  ou  sa  foi


44


Professor  Th.  Flournoy.


[part


religieuse.  II  est  bien  entendu,  je  le  repete,  que  tout  ceci  ne  ren-
ferme  aucune  espece  de  critique  ou  de  blame  a I’endroit  de  Myers.
Je  constate  simplement  que  je  ne  suis  pas  fait  comme  lui,  voila
tout : mais  je  songe  d’autant  moins  a lui  jeter  la  pierre,  que
j’ai  rencontre  autour  de  moi  une  foule  de  gens  partageant  (sans  le
connaitre)  sa  maniere  de  sentir,  sa  soif  inextinguible  de  certitude
scientifique  en  matiere  religieuse,  son  ardent  Vjesoin  d’une  demon-
stration experimentale  et  tangible  de  la  vie  future,  etc.  Et  comme
en  definitive  I’essentiel  est  que  tout  le  monde  soit  content,  je  sou-
haite  que  ravenir  lui  donne  raison,  pour  le  bonheur  de  tant  d’ames
tourmentees  a qui  la  garantie  de  la  science,  appliquee  comme  un
l)oimjon  sur  leurs  aspirations  intimes,  rendrait  aussitot  la  joie  et  la
paix — sans  aucun  inconvenient  d’ailleurs  pour  ceux  que  ne  tiennent
pas,  ou  ne  se  fient  pas,  a cette  estampille  olRcielle.

(II.)  Les  croyances  et  I’attitude  religieuses  visent  au  bout  du
compte  le  fond  des  choses,  I’enigme  supreme,  le  dernier  mot  de
I’linivers  et  de  la  vie.  Pour  placer  ces  fonctions  de  notre  ^tre
moral  sous  la  juridiction  de  la  science  experimentale  et  appeler  celle-ci
a prononcer  en  dernier  ressort  sur  de  pareilles  questions,  il  faut
avoir  en  elle  une  confiance  quasi-absolue,  et  ne  pas  s’embarrasser
des  petites  querelles  C|ue  les  philosophes  lui  out  faites  sur  sa  portee
veritable.  Aussi  n’y  a-t-il  pas  a s’etonner  si  Pun  des  traits  carac-
teristiques  de  Myers  est  son  indifference  pour  les  problemes  de
metaphysique,  ou  de  critique  de  la  connaissance,  agites  par  les  pen-
seurs  de  ces  derniers  siecles.  Toutes  les  difficultes  du  commerce  de
Tame  et  du  corps,  les  questions  relatives  au  realisme  et  a I’ideal-
isme,  a I’existence  ilu  monde  materiel,  aux  conditions  et  limites  de
validite  de  notre  connaissance,  etc.,  Myers  les  passe  resolument  sous
silence.  L’histoire  de  la  philosophie  moderne  n’existe  pas  pour  lui.
Amateur  passionne  de  I’antiquite  classique,  il  en  cite  volontiers  les
penseufs,  surtout  si  ce  furent  des  poetes,  mais  c’est  vainement  qu’on
chercherait  sous  sa  plume  les  noms  de  Descartes  ou  de  Spinoza,  de
Hume  ou  de  Berkeley,  de  Spencer  ou  de  Reuouvier.  Leibnitz  y est
reduit  a partager  avec  Hamilton  une  maigre  note  au  bas  de  la  page,
et  Kant  lui-meme  n’aj)parait  guere,  au  cours  de  ces  deux  volumes,
Cjue  comme  historiographe  de  Swedenborg.  Myers  ignore  jusqu’^
Schopenhauer,  dont  le  “ Versuch  fiber  Geistersehen  ” avec  la  theorie
du  “ Traumorgan  ” aurait  pourtant  pu  lui  fournir  d’interessants
points  d’attache  pour  sa  doctrine  des  facultes  subliminales.  Il  faut
d’ailleurs  lui  rendre  cette  justice  que  s’il  fait  ainsi  table  rase  de
toute  la  grande  tradition  philosopliique  occidentale,  il  ne  recourt


XLVI.]


Eevievj  of  Human  Personality.


45


guere  davantage  a la  litterature  spirite  ou  occultiste  de  notre  temps,,
sauf  pour  lui  emprunter  certaines  observations  de  faits.  C’est  done
bien  au  pied  de  la  lettre,  et  avec  une  parfaite  consequence,  qu’il  se
donne  jiour  le  representant  de  la  “ psychologie  paleolithique  ” et
que,  sautant  a pieds  joints  par  dessus  toutes  les  fortes  tetes  philo
sophiques  de  notre  civilisation  (a  I’exception  du  seul  Swedenborg),
il  va  chercher  ses  vrais  precurseurs  dans  “les  humbles  penseurs  de
I’age  de  la  pierre,  les  adeptes  de  la  sorcellerie  et  du  ebamanisme.”
Tels  sont  bien  les  ancetres  dont  il  s’est  donne  pour  tache  de
remettre  en  honneur  les  conceptions  oubliees,  en  leur  apportant
I’appoint  inattendu  et  triomphant  de  tout  le  tresor  d’hjqiotheses  ou
de  faits  accumules  par  nos  sciences  experimentales  contemporaines.
Car  pour  celles-ci,  il  les  connait  admirablement,  et  il  excelle  a les
faire  servir  a ses  desseins,  en  leur  empruntant,  avec  une  habilete
consommee  tout  ce  qui  peut  venir  a I’appui  de  ses  vues,  depuis  les
menues  observations  de  la  psychopathologie  jusqu’aux  thbories  biolo-
giques  de  I’evolution  et  aux  petits  demons  de  Clerk  Maxwell  jouant
avec  les  atomes.

Ici  encore,  il  ne  faut  pas  croire  qu’en  constatant  ce  gout  exclusif
de  Myers  pour  les  sciences  positives  et  son  magnifique  dedain  pour
les  problemes  de  la  philosophie  moderne,  je  songe  a lui  en  faire  le
moindre  reproche.  Bien  au  contraire ; cette  allure  dbgagee,  cet
affranchissement  de  tout  prejuge  d’ecole,  cette  matter- of -fadness  si  Ton
me  pa'-se  le  terme,  me  plaisent  infiniment.  Il  y a quelque  chose  de
piquant  et  de  bienfaisant  a voir  uu  systeme  carrement  spiritualiste
sortir — par  la  simple  vertu  des  rnethodes  empiriques  et  de  la
logique  du  bon  sens,  mais  maniees  par  un  homme  de  genie — sortir,
dis-je,  de  ces  meraes  sciences  naturelles  et  medicales  d’ou  taut  de
bruyants  vulgarisateurs  out  cm  pouvoir  tirer  des  syntheses  materia-
listes  et  hostiles  aux  croyances  seculaires  de  I’liumanite.  Et  si
I’oeuvre  de  Myers  a pour  resultat  final  de  faire  un  victorieux  con-
trepoids  a celle  des  Biichner,  Haeckel  et  consorts,  en  les  battant
par  leurs  propres  armes — c’est  a dire  sur  le  pur  terrain  du  raisonne-
ment  experimental,  sans  recourir  aux  subtilites  de  I’epistemologie, —
elle  aura  pleinement  rempli  sa  tache  dans  I’histoire  de  la  pensee
humaine,  et  nul  ne  lui  trouvera  a redire  d’avoir  ete  droit  au  but
en  dedaignant  les  detours  traditionnels  de  la  critique  philosophi(pie.

(III.)  Ceci  m’amene  a parler  du  noyau  plus  particulierement
scientifique  de  I’ouvrage  de  Myers,  en  laissant  de  cote  sa  philosophie
religieuse  (que  je  trouve  d’ailleurs  tres  elevee  et  pour  laquelle
j’eprouve  la  plus  sympathique  admiration).  Abstraction  faite  des


46


Professor  Th.  Flournoy.


[part


Appendices,  Glossaire,  et  autres  pieces  d’appui  iiidispensables  et  du
plus  grand  interet  pour  le  lecteur,  ce  noyau  consiste  en  huit
chapitres  formant  deux  groupes  bien  distincts.  Les  quatre  premiers
en  effet  {Disintegrations  of  Personality  ■,  Genius ; Sleep  ■,  Hypnotism)
traitent  de  faits  couramment  reconnus  par  la  science  contemporaine,
mais  auxquels  Myers  apporte  une  interpretation  originale  par  sa
doctrine  proprement  psychologique  sur  la  constitution  de  la  per-
sonnalite  humaine.  Les  quatre  deruiers  chapitres  au  contraire,  qui
lui  servent  plus  specialement  de  fondement  pour  sa  demonstration  de
I’ind^pendance  et  de  la  survivance  de  I’ame,  se  meuvent  dans  des
spheres  qui  sont  encore  vues  d’un  fort  mauvais  ceil  par  la  plupart
des  savants  en  renom.  II  convient  done  de  suivre  I’auteur  sur  ces
deux  terrains  separ6ment.

Appliquee  au  premier  domaine,  la  theorie  myersienne  de  la  Con-
science Subliminale  (assez  connue  pour  que  je  me  dispense  de  la
resunier  ici)  me  parait  extremement  remarquable,  et  digne  d’une
serieuse  attention  de  la  part  des  psychologues  (meme  ofBciels  et
universitaires),  par  la  merveilleuse  souplesse  avec  laquelle  elle  se
plie  aux  groupes  de  faits  les  plus  divers,  la  clarte  dont  elle  les
illumine  aussitot,  I’enchainement  et  les  relations  inattendues  qu’elle
introduit  entre  eux,  I’ordre  systematique  en  un  mot  et  I’intelligence
qui,  grace  a elle,  jaillissent  tout  a coup  de  cette  masse  jusque-la
chaotique  et  obscure  de  phenomenes  plus  ou  moins  btranges.  Sans
doute,  sur  l)ien  des  points  elle  depasse  notablement  les  donnees
rigoureuses  de  I’observation,  et  parfois  elle  pent  sembler  aventureuse
ou  mystique  dans  sa  maniere  de  relier,  de  completer  et  d’interpreter
les  phenomenes  directement  verifiables.  Mais  e’est  hi,  un  trait  in-
evitable de  toute  theorie  par  opposition  a la  simple  notation  des  faits
bruts ; et  la  hardiesse  d’une  hypothese  doit  lui  etre  comptee  comme
une  qualite  plutot  que  comme  un  defaut,  quand  les  seules  conse-
quences de  cette  hardiesse  sont  un  blargissement  de  notre  horizon,
une  intelligence  plus  complete  et  plus  satisfaisante  des  donnees
empiriques,  un  elan  superieur  communique  a la  pensee  et  a la
recherche.  Or  sous  ces  divers  rapports  la  theorie  de  Myers  presente
deux  ou  trois  marques  d’excellence  qui  me  semblent  la  mettre  actuelle-
ment  hors  de  pair  (sans  prejudice  des  ameliorations  cpi’elle  pourra
subir  ulterieurement).

(1°.)  D’abord  elle  embrasse  sous  elle,  comme  un  point  de  vue
superieur  et  plus  comprehensif,  une  foule  de  theories  analogues  mais
moins  elaborees  et  ne  cadrant  chacune  qu’avec  un  certain  ordre
restreint  de  faits.  Le  polypsychisme  de  Durand  de  Gros,  le  double-


xlvl]


Eeview  of  Human  Personality.


47


moi  de  Dessoir,  la  desagregation  mentale  de  Janet,  les  etats  hypno'ides
de  Brener  et  Freud,  I’etre  subconscient  de  Gyel,  d’innombrables
doctrines  allemandes  de  I’inconscient  et  de  non  moins  innombrables
theories  fran^aises  du  somnambulisme  et  de  I’hypnose,  tout  cela
semble  n’Stre  en  somme  que  des  ebauches  preliminaires,  des  frag-
ments, on  des  echos  deformes,  de  la  doctrine  meme  de  Myers.  Les
historiens  futurs  pourront  s’evertuer  a faire  le  depart,  dans  ces
communes  analogies,  entre  ce  que  le  psychologue  anglais  doit  a ses
devanciers  ou  a ses  contemporains  moins  brillants  que  lui,  et  ce  que
maints  de  ces  derniers  lui  ont  au  contraire  emprunte,  sciemment  ou
non,  de  son  vivant ; ce  fait  reste  evident  a mes  yeux,  que  si  I’idee
de  la  Conscience  Subliminale  (par  opposition  au  Moi  simple  des
spiritualistes  classiques  et  a la  cerebration  inconsciente  des  physio-
logistes  etroits)  flotte  dans  I’air  depuis  une  ou  deux  generations  et
a perce  simultanement,  sous  des  formes  diverses,  dans  I’esprit  d’une
foule  de  chercheurs,  c’est  cependant  bien  le  gbnie  de  Myers,  qui  a
donne  a cette  idee  son  expression  actuellement  la  plus  parfaite  et
la  plus  fouillee.

(2°.)  Une  preuve  indirecte  de  la  valeur  et  de  la  fecondite  de  la
doctrine  de  Myers,  c’est  le  tresor  de  comparaisons  heureuses  et  de
formules  bien  frappees  qu’elle  lui  a suggerees,  et  qui,  encore  trop
ignorees  des  specialistes  toujours  lents  a prendre  en  consideration
les  travaux  des  amateurs,  jouiront  certainement  d’une  faveur  crois-
sante  a mesure  que  son  oeuvre  sera  mieux  connue.  Je  ne  parle  pas
seulement  des  ingenieux  neologismes,  dont  plusieurs  sont  ddja
devenus  courants,  incorpores  par  Myers  au  vocabulaire  psychologique,
mais  aussi  des  explications  etonnamment  simples  et  precises  que  sa
theorie  lui  fournit  pour  des  choses  oil  tant  de  maitres  illustres
pataugent  encore  a I’envi.  Par  exemple  : I’hysterie,  attribute  par
Myers  a “ an  undue  permeability  of  the  psychical  diaphragm  ”
entrainant  un  etat  de  confusion  dans  les  echanges  entre  la  per-
sonnalite  ordinaire  et  ses  couches  subconscientes  plus  ou  moins
maladives ; le  genie,  caracterisb  par  I’inspiration,  c’est  a dire  “a
subliminal  uprush  of  helpful  faculty  ” ; la  suggestion,  a la  fois
eclairee  et  circonscrite  par  cette  definition,  qui  est  un  vrai  chef
d’ceuvre,  “ a successful  appeal  to  the  subliminal  self,”  etc.  Tout
cela,  objectera-t-on  peut-etre,  ce  sont  des  mots  ou  des  images,
non  des  realites.  Soit,  mais  comparez  done  ces  mots  et  ces  images
aux  autres  assemblages  d’images  et  de  mots  dont  se  paient  les
auteurs  en  vogue,  et  vous  verrez  vite  de  quel  cote  se  trouvent  au
plus  haut  degre  la  clarte  jointe  a la  profondeur,  I’exactitude  dans


48


Professor  Tli.  Flournoy.


[part


1 ’expression  concise  des  faits  en  meme  temps  que  I’approche  d’une
explication  reelle  et  satisfaisante.  II  n’y  a qu’a  prendre  par  exemple
les  plus  recentes  theories  fran^aises  de  I’liysterie  ^ pour  etre  frappe
de  voir  combien  toutes — a I’exception  de  celle  de  Janet,  tres  proche
parente  de  celle  de  Myers  et  psychologique  comme  elle — laissent  an
fond  a desirer,  en  depit  de  leurs  frequentes  pretentions  physio-
logiques,  et  sont  encore  rudimentaires  a cote  de  la  conception  que  la
doctrine  de  la  conscience  subliniinale  permet  dejii  de  se  faire  de  cette
nevrose.  C’est  bien  autre  chose  encore  quand  on  aborde  I’hypno-
tisrne  et  la  suggestion,  et  qu’on  voit  tant  d’auteurs  se  perdre  en
discussions  oiseuses,  faute  de  connaitre  les  idees  et  les  definitions  si
claires  de  Myers.

(3°.)  Sa  tbeorie  I’emporte  sur  toutes  ses  congeneres,  a ma  con-
naissance,  par  son  ampleur  et  le  champ  qu’elle  laisse  ouvert  a des
possibilitbs  eventuelles  non  encore  realisees ; en  sorte  que,  meme  a
ceux  qui  ne  lui  attribueraient  aucune  verite  en  soi,  elle  offre  du
moins  les  avantages  inaj)})reciables  d’un  schema  suffisamment  exten-
sil^le  pour  embrasser,  a I’occasion,  nombre  de  faits  nouveaux  qui  ne
trouvent  point  de  place  dans  les  theories  scientifiques  courantes  et
qui  y detonent  comme  des  intrus  dont  on  ne  sait  que  faire.  Je
jmurrais  imaginer  le  cas,  a tout  le  moins  concevable,  ou  la  telepathie
et  la  telekinhsie  venant  a etre  mises  hors  de  doute  par  des  faits
evidents  et  repetes,  les  cadres  etablis  de  la  physiologic  en  seraient
absolument  disloques,  tandis  que  ces  possibilites  ont  leur  place  deja
marquee,  comme  bien  Ton  sait,  dans  la  tbeorie  de  Myers.  Mais
point  n’est  besoin  d’aller  si  loin  et  d’inventer  des  circonstances
encore  imaginaires : il  suffit  de  feuilleter  la  litthrature  medicale  la

plus  recente  pour  y trouver,  sous  la  plume  d’auteurs  fort  peu  suspects
de  mysticisme,  deux  exemples  tout  frais  de  ce  que  je  venx  dire.
D’une  part,  des  psychiatres  francjais  viennent  de  publier  quelques
cas  d’alienes  ayant  presente,  peu  de  jours  avant  leur  fin,  une
amelioration  aussi  subite  qu’inexplicable,  en  meme  temps  que  le
pressentiment  net  de  leur  mort  prochaine.  D’autre  part  le  fait,  cite
par  tons  les  magnetiseurs  depuis  Fuysegur,  de  somnambules  ayant
la  claire  vision  de  leurs  visceres,  parfois  jusque  dans  leur  structure

^Exemples  ; Pour  Bemheim,  l’hyst(5rie  ii’existe  pas  par  elle-meme,  elle  ii’est  que
la  reaction  exageree  d’un  appareil  hysterogene  particuli6renient  sensible. —
Suivant  Sollier,  elle  est  uu  engourdisseinent  cerebral,  un  sommeil  dont  il  n’y
a qu’a  reveiller  le  inalade  pour  le  guerir. — D’apres  Babinsky,  elle  est  un  etat
oil  le  sujet  pent  s’autosuggestionner  et  dont  tons  les  phdnomenes  peuvent  etre
reproduits  par  suggestion  et  gueris  par  persuasion. — Etc.


XLVI.]


Revievj  of  Human  Personality.


49


intime,  ce  fait  vient  pour  la  premiere  fois  de  franchir  I’enceinte  de
la  science  sous  le  nom  d’autoscopie  interne  ou  auto-rep'6sentation
de  I’organisme ; et  par  une  amusante  ironie  du  sort,  les  parrains  de
ce  nouveau-venu — assurement  tres  psychologique  et  subliminal — se
trouvent  etre  les  tenants  d’une  ecole  qui  pretend  rejeter  toute  ex-
plication psychologique  de  I’hysterie  et  veut  definir  cette  nevrose  en
purs  termes  de  physiologie  cerebrale  ! Je  ne  m’occupe  pas  ici  de
savoir  si  ces  deux  faits — prevision  de  la  mort  chez  des  alienes,  aper-
ception  interieure  des  moindres  details  de  I’organisme  chez  des
hysteriques — sont  reels  et  authentiques,  ou  le  produit  de  la  fumisterie
et  de  la  malobservation.  II  me  suffit  de  constater  que,  redecouverts
ces  derniers  temps  par  des  savants  de  la  nuance  la  plus  positive,  ils
trouvent  aisement  leur  explication  dans  la  theorie  des  facultes  sub-
liminales  de  Myers,  tandis  qu’ils  depassent  et  heurtent  la  physiologie
traditionnelle  pour  le  moins  autant  que  I’anesthesie  suggeree  le  faisait
il  y a soixante  ans ; et  si  les  corps  officiels  aujourd’hui  ne  s’insurgent
plus,  comme  alors,  contre  des  nouveautes  aussi  incroyables,  c’est  que
ceux-la  meme  qui  affichent  encore  en  paroles  un  souverain  mepris
pour  la  psychologic  subliminale,  sont  a leur  insu  deja  tout  penetr6s
de  cette  derniere,  qu’ils  ont  respiree  avec  Fair  du  temps,  et  peuvent
par  consequent  etre  comptes  comme  des  disciples  malgre  eux  de  la
doctrine  de  Myers.

Si  j’ajoute  enfin  que  cette  theorie,  quoique  elaboree  specialement
sous  la  pression  des  faits  anormaux  ou  morbides,  s’applique  egale-
ment  a la  psychologie  normale  et  permet  d’en  elucider  beaucoup  de
phbnomenes  quotidiens  (le  jeu  des  souvenirs,  etc.)  mieux  que  dans
bien  d’autres  doctrines  classiques,  j’en  aurais  assez  dit  pour  justifier
le  cas  que  je  fais  de  I’oeuvre  proprement  scientifique  de  Myers.  II
est  grand  temps  que  pathologistes  et  psychologues  prennent  enfin
contact  avec  elle,  et  que,  mettant  de  cote  leurs  preventions  vieillottes
contre  tout  ce  qui  vient  des  amateurs  de  “ psychical  research
indistinctement,  ils  se  decident  a etudier  serieusement  la  doctrine  de
la  Conscience  Subliminale  chez  son  plus  illustre  representant ; non
pas  certes  pour  I’accepter  aveuglement,  mais  afin  de  I’utiliser  dans
ce  qu’elle  a d ’excellent  et  de  profondement  vrai,  de  I’amender  en
ses  points  faibles,  et  de  I’adapter  toujours  mieux  a la  complexite
des  phenomenes.

(IV.)  Pour  ce  qui  est  maintenant  des  quatre  derniers  chapitres
{Sensory  automatism ; Phantasms  of  the  dead ; Motor  automatism ; Trance,
possession,  and  ecstasy),  ils  roulent  sur  des  sujets  brfilants,  qui  seront
probablement  longtemps  encore  une  pomme  de  discorde  parmi  les

D


50


Professor  Tli.  Flou,rnoy.


[part


chercheurs.  Les  faits  que  Myers  a recoltes  ou  observes  lui-meme
I’ont  aboudamment  convaincu  de  la  verite  fonciere  de  I’antique
croyance  spirite,  dont  le  seul  enonc6  a coutiime  de  donner  des  crises
epileptiques  a la  plupart  de  nos  penseurs  modernes,  a moins  qu’ils
ne  se  eontentent  de  se  voiler  la  face  on  de  hausser  les  epaules.  Tout
bien  reflechi,  je  ne  partage  pas  leur  sentiment  d’horreur  ou  de  pitie  ;
le  spiritisme,  d’ailleurs  tres  complexe  et  savaniment  elabore  de  Myers,
ne  me  parait  point  devoir  etre  necessairement  rejete  d’embl^e  pour
I’unique  raison  cju’il  est  aux  antipodes  de  nos  habitudes  scientitiques
actuelles.  En  fait,  notre  psychologie,  meme  physiologique,  repose
deja  sur  une  absurdite  telle  qu’on  n’en  saurait  concevoir  de  pire :
je  veux  parler  de  I’union  des  phenomenes  de  conscience  et  des  pheno-
menes  cerebraux.  Qu’on  la  formule  empiriquement  comme  un
commerce  reciproque,  ou  une  liaison  fonctionnelle  quelconque,  ou  un
simple  parallelisme,  elle  est  de  toute  fa(jon  inintelligible,  et  ne  cesse
pas  de  I’etre  lorsqu’on  se  refiigie  dans  les  creases  metaphores  du
nionisme,  la  theorie  du  double  aspect,  de  I’unite  a deux  faces,  du
miroitement  subjectif  du  neurocyme,  etc.  En  sorte  que  cela  n’aggra-
vera  guere  la  situation  d’admettre,  si  les  faits  le  rcclament,  Cjue  cette
inconcevable  union  n’est  pas  a ral)ri  du  divorce,  et  que  ces  memes
phenomenes  de  conscience,  que  I’experience  ordinaire  nous  montre
mysterieusement  lies  a des  centres  nerveux,  peuvent  s’en  separer
momentanement  ou  definitivement  sous  forme  de  syntheses  mnesiques,
de  personnalites  psychiques,  d’ames  survivautes,  d’esprits  desincarnes,
peu  importe  le  nom  qu’on  leur  donne.

Si  les  faits  le  rMament.  Toute  la  question  est  la ; malheureusement
elle  ne  parait  pas  encore  pres  d’etre  resolue,  et  chacun  en  est  reduit
a se  faire  comme  il  pent,  la-dessus,  son  opinion  personnelle.  La
mienne,  apres  avoir  In  ces  deux  volumes,  se  trouve  an  meme  point
qu’avant,  c’est  a dire  d’une  prudence  et  d’une  sagesse  tellement
banales  que  j’ose  a peine  la  formuler.  Qu’il  s’agisse  de  la  telepathic
(entendue  au  sens  de  Myers,  comme  influence  purement  psychique,
sans  le  secours  de  vibrations  intercer6brales),  de  la  clairvoyance
(telesthesie),  de  la  precognition  qui  bouleverse  nos  idees  courantes  sur
le  temps,  de  la  possession  enfin  ou  envahissement  de  I’organisme  d’un
medium  par  les  desincarnes,  j’estime  : (1°)  que  les  preuves  et  raisonne-
ments  avances  par  Myers  en  faveur  de  ces  phenomenes  supranormaux
constituent,  par  leur  nombre  et  leur  poids,  un  dossier  trop  formidable
pour  qu’on  puisse  desormais  I’ignorer,  a moins  de  se  boucher  volon-
tairement  les  yeux ; et  que  ce  serait  une  folle  niaiserie  que  de  pre-
tendre  encore  I’ecarter  en  bloc  sous  le  fallacieux  pretexte  que  ces  sujets


xlvl]


Review  of  Huvicm  Personality.


51


ne  sont  pas  susceptibles  d’etre  efcudies  d’une  maniere  scientificpie.
(2°)  Que  les  conclusions  de  Myers  ne  ressortent  pas  de  ce  dossier  avec
une  Evidence  telle,  une  necessity  si  ineluctable,  qu’on  puisse  dores
et  deja  les  considerer  comme  hors  de  contestation.  On  me  fera
grace,  j’espbre,  des  objections  et  discussions  de  detail ; il  y faudrait  un
volume,  et  je  suis  d’ailleurs  incompetent  sur  la  pi^ce  principale  du
dossier,  celle  que  Myers  considbrait  lui-meme  comme  decisive  et  oil  il
voyait  le  couronnement  de  son  edifice.  Je  veux  naturellement  parler
des  phenombnes  de  Mme  Piper  (et  j’ajoute  de  Mine  Thompson,
qu’il  est  vraiment  bien  singulier  de  voir  entierenient  passee  sous
silence  au  cours  de  ces  quatorze  cents  pages,  quand  on  salt  la  place
que  ses  seances  ont  tenue  dans  les  dernieres  annees  de  la  vie  de
Myers  et  dans  la  formation  de  ses  convictions  sur  I’authenticite  du
commerce  spirited).  Sont-ce  reellement  les  esprits  des  morts,  ou  tout
au  moins  c{uelque  segment  de  leur  personnalite,  qui  viennent  converse!'
avec  nous  par  I’intermediaire  des  mediums  intrances  1 Ou  bien  n’y
aurait-il  la  que  des  apparences  decevantes,  dues  a une  subtile  coni-
binaison  de  rimagination  subconsciente,  dont  on  ne  connait  c|ue  trop
la  malice,  avec  la  telepathie  des  vivants  dont  on  ignore  encore  les
limites  1 II  ne  faut  pas  etre  plus  royaliste  que  le  roi  ; ce  n’est  point
a moi,  spectateur  eloigne  et  imparfaitement  renseigne,  a me  permettre
une  opinion  arretee  sur  ces  problemes  oil  le  plus  auguste  areopage,
siegeant  aux  premieres  loges  et  suivant  les  choses  de  pres,  n’a  pas
encore  reussi  a rendre  un  verdict  unanime.  L’expectative  patiente,
et  sans  parti  pris,  est  la  seule  attitude  qui  convienne  en  face  des
divergences  d’interpretation  qui  separaient  meme  Myers  et  Mme
Sidgwick  (I’un  etant  pour  la  possession  directe,  I’autre  pour  la  telb-
pathie,  de  la  part  des  desincarnes),  et  du  desaccord  plus  fondamental
encore  qui  subsiste  entre  des  autorites  telles  cpie  MM.  Hyslop  et
Podmore,  Hodgson  et  Lang,  etc.

(V.)  Je  conclus.  Nul  ne  pent  prevoir  le  sort  cpie  I’avenir  rbserve
a la  doctrine  spirite  de  Myers.  Si  les  decouvertes  futures  viennent
a confirmer  sa  these  de  I’intervention  empiricpiement  verifiable
des  desincarnes  dans  la  trame  physique  ou  psychologiciue  de
notre  monde  phenomenal,  alors  son  nom  s’inscrira  au  livre  d’or
des  grands  initiateurs,  et  joint  a ceux  de  Copernic  et  de  Darwin,
il  y completera  la  triade  des  genies  ayant  le  plus  profondement
rbvolutionne  la  pensbe  scientifique  dans  I’ordre  cosmologique,  bio-
logique,  psychologique.  Si  au  contraire  le  voile  qu’il  a essaye

^With  regard  to  this  point,  see  a statement  in  t\\&  Joxirnal  S.P.R.  for  May,
1903,  p.  74. — Editor.


52


Professor  Th.  Flournoy.


[part


de  soulever  venait  a retomber  lourdement,  et  que  les  brillantes
perspectives  d’une  mitaphysique  exp^rimentale,  portant  jusque  dans
I’Au-dela  les  precedes  objectifs  et  impersonnels  de  la  science,  se
trouvassent  n’etre  qu’un  mirage  trompeur,  une  illusion  d’optique  par
laquelle  on  aurait  pris  pour  des  revelations  d’outre-tombe  ce  qui
n’etait  en  realite  que  jeux  enfantins,  ou  plaisanteries  macabres,  de
consciences  subliminales  tres  incarnees  et  plus  on  moins  perverties ;
si,  en  un  mot,  il  fallait  definitivement  renoncer,  non  point  a la
survivance  (qui  est  une  toute  autre  affaire),  mais  a la  demonstration
scientifique  de  la  survivance,  alors  ce  serait  I’effondrement  du  but
vers  lequel  Myers  avait  fait  converger  tons  ses  efforts,  et  I’idee
dominante  de  sa  carriere  n’aurait  ete  qu’une  utopie.  Mais  n’oublions
pas  que,  dans  ce  cas  encore,  son  oeuvre  proprement  scientifique,  bien
loin  de  se  trouver  ruinee,  subsisterait  intacte  et  nieme  d’une  solidite
d’autant  plus  evidente  que  e’est  piecisement  en  s’appuyant  sur  elle
qu’on  aurait  fini  par  tirer  les  cboses  an  clair.  II  me  parait  certain
en  effet  que  si  jamais  on  reussit  a dissiper  les  illusions  et  a decouvrir
la  verite  dans  ce  mysterieux  domaine  des  phenomenes  occultes,  ce  ne
sera  qu’en  continuant  la  voie  meme  largement  ouverte  par  Myers,  je
veux  dire  en  poussant  plus  a fond  cette  investigation,  dont  il  a ete
le  propagateur  par  excellence,  des  fonctions  cachees  et  des  puissances
intimes  de  notre  etre,  et  en  achevant  d’edifier  cette  Psychologic
Subliminale  a laquelle,  quels  qu’en  soient  les  resultats,  son  nom,
restera  glorieusement  attache.  Th.  Flournoy.


XLYI.]


Review  of  Human  Personality.


53


IV.

It  is  hard  to  know  the  best  point  of  view  from  which  to  approach
Myers’s  great  work  in  writing  for  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
in  whose  publications  so  large  a part  of  Human  Personality  has
already  appeared,  and  to  so  many  of  whose  members  these  pages
will  still  bring  with  them  the  memory  of  the  thrill  of  word  and
gesture  with  which  their  author  used  to  vivify  them  as  he  poured
them  forth  at  our  meetings  in  impetuous  eloquence.  It  seems  best,
on  the  whole,  that  for  our  members  the  earlier  portion  of  the  book
should  be  taken  as  known,  and  that  no  time  should  be  spent  on
any  criticism  of  the  theorj^  of  the  Subliminal  Self,  with  which  we
are  now  so  familiar.  The  evidential  portion  too  may  be  taken  for
granted,  the  more  so  as  what  evidence  is  now  for  the  first  time
published  is  not  so  extensive  or  so  novel  in  character  as  to  call
for  special  discussion.

Myers’s  aim  throughout  was  above  all  etliical ; his  life’s  task  was
to  give  such  a scientific  proof  of  a future  life  as  should  provide  a
dominating  motive  for  the  conduct  of  this  life  : and  it  is  by  this
standard  alone  that  he  would  have  wished  to  be  judged.  I propose
therefore  to  devote  myself  almost  entirely  to  the  later  chapters  in
which  he  sums  up  his  conclusions  from  this  point  of  view,  and  to
indicate  exactly  how  far  I find  myself  convinced,  and  where  I have
to  leave  him,  being  unable  to  follow  the  argument  with  him  to  his
end.  The  whole  question  must  be  for  every  one  of  us  eminently
a personal  one,  and  apologies  are  hardly  called  for  if  I endeavour  to
place  a personal  view  on  record  where  no  general  concord  is  to  be
expected  for  many  years  to  come.

Unfortunately  the  portion  of  the  book  which  is  in  this  respect
the  most  vital  is  precisely  that  which  its  author’s  death  left  in-
complete, and  we  lack  the  final  revision  of  the  ultimate  synthesis
which  we  seek  with  the  deepest  interest  from  a mind  so  acute,  so
logical,  and  so  strenuous.  We  have  indeed  much  to  be  grateful
for.  In  dealing  with  evidence  which  is  at  once  disparate  and


54


Dr.  Wcdter  Leaf.


[part


voluminous,  the  meie  arrangement  is  not  the  least  laborious,  as  it  is
perhaps  the  most  responsible  portion  of  the  writer’s  task ; and  it
is  one  for  which  M3'ers’s  special  gifts  admirably  qualified  him.  The
patience,  the  penetration,  and  the  lucidity  which  he  has  brought
to  bear  on  it  are  above  all  praise,  and  his  argument  is  marshalled
and  organised  by  a master’s  hand.  Only  the  last  deductions  are
left  unfinished,  and  even  here  the  argument  is  from  the  first  so
directed  to  a plain  end  that  one  can  never  doubt  as  to  Myers’s  real
opinion  on  any  vital  matter.  Yet  one  may  well  hesitate  to  raise
objections  to  which  he  may  seem  to  have  given  too  little  weight;
one  may  always  fancy  that  so  finished  a dialectician  had  his  answers
in  reserve,  and  might  have  found  them  a place  in  a completed  work.

We  have  however  a right  to  remember  that,  for  all  his  real
genius  for  scientific  conceptions,  Myers  could  not  really  approach
this  great  subject  with  scientific  detachment.  He  nowhere  conceals
his  overwhelming  desire  that,  in  the  highest  interests  of  the  human
race,  human  personality  should  be  proved  to  survive  bodily  death.
The  burning  conviction  that  he  holds  in  his  hands  this  irrefutable
proof  fires  his  words  with  the  enthusiasm  of  the  prophet,  while  his
desire  to  appeal  to  the  reason  of  his  contemporaries  often  imposes
on  him  the  stern  restraint  of  the  scientific  treatise.  The  struggle
between  the  two  impulses  is  visible  on  every  page  of  the  book,
and  the  skill  with  which  they  are  fused  is  characteristic  and
admirable.  But  if  Myers  did  not  attain  to  detachment,  neither
can  any  critic  hope  t(j  do  the  same ; the  matter  is  too  vital  for
every  man.  However  surely  the  evidence  be  established,  it  is  still
so  dark  in  interpretation  that  every  one  will  read  in  it  that  which
he  most  wants  to  read.  Let  me  therefore  honestl}'  say  at  once
that  I want  to  find  in  it  something  which  Myers  did  not  want,
and  that  I find  it  accordingly.

With  this  confession  let  me  express  at  once  the  effect  which
Myers’s  work  produces  upon  me.  It  greatlj'  weakens  my  sense  of
personality,  to  such  an  extent  that  I am  rather  less  than  more
willing  to  believe  that  my  personality  will  survive  death,  at  least
in  any  sense  which  can  make  such  a belief  a dominant  motive  for
this  life’s  work.  This  result  is  clearly  not  what  Myers  would  have
w'ished ; and  yet  it  seems  to  me  to  be  the  natural  outcome  of  all
his  evidence.  I follow  him  in  the  greater  part  at  least  of  what  he
claims  for  the  “subliminal  Self”  of  the  living;  and  then  I have
to  ask,  “can  this  subliminal  self  be  called  a part  of  my  personality,
in  any  sense  in  which  such  a belief  will  influence  my  life  1 ” My


XLVi.]  Review  of  Human  Personality.  55

subliminal  self  is  something  of  which  I am  not  conscious.  It  does  not
appear  to  be  governed  exclusively  by  the  moral  laws  which  I take
as  my  guide,  or  by  the  physical  laws  which  control  my  body,  and,
through  my  brain,  my  consciousness.  I am  barely  aware,  through
the  experience  of  others,  of  its  existence,  and  know  nothing  of  the
laws  by  which  it  can  affect  what  I call  “me,”  or  “I”  can  affect
it.  It  appears,  so  far  as  I can  learn  anything  about  it,  to  move
in  another  world,  which  approaches  marvellously  near  to  the  Infinite  or
the  Absolute  or  the  World  Spirit  or  whatever  we  like  to  call  it ;
at  all  events  in  a region  where  what  we  call  Personality  becomes
void  of  all  meaning.

Personality  as  conceived  by  the  ordinary  man — and  this  is  the
view  which,  for  the  present  at  least,  is  of  real  moral  significance —
has  both  a positive  and  a negative  aspect.  On  the  one  hand  it  is
based  fundamentally  on  the  continuous  stream  of  memory,  which
carries  with  it  too  our  hopes  and  aspirations  for  the  future.  On  the
negative  side  it  is  equally  defined  by  its  limitations — primarily  by
its  clear  separation  from  the  other  similar  streams  of  memory  which
we  conceive  as  co-existent,  and  call  the  personalities  of  other  men.
Normally  we  think  of  our  personality  as  limited  by  our  physical
frame  and  its  capacity  for  sense  impressions,  and  cut  off  from  other
personalities  by  a line  as  hard  and  fast  as  that  which  divides  our
bodies  from  the  rest  of  material  nature.  It  is  difficult  for  a man
to  think  of  his  personality  apart  from  his  body ; and  it  is  no  doubt
this  difficult}'^  which  leads  to  the  conception  of  what  St.  Paul  calls
the  “ spiritual  body  ” of  the  Resurrection.  This  spiritual  body
would  I suppose  in  modern  phrase  be  called  a surviving  personality,
a boundary,  that  is,  which  shall  in  a future  life  keep  our  earthly
memories  together  in  a continuous  stream  with  our  discarnate
memories,  free  from  solution  and  absorption  by  any  surrounding
spiritual  medium.  And  it  is  at  any  rate  the  existence  of  such  a
spiritual  body  that  Myers  sets  himself  to  prove.

And  yet  it  seems  to  me  that  the  whole  effect  of  his  book  is  to
shake  and  weaken  every  property  of  personality.  He  sets  out  with
a striking  chapter  on  Disintegrations  of  Personalit}^  which  at  once
shatters  the  natural,  if  somewhat  crude  idea  of  a man’s  self  as  a
single  stream  of  continuous  memory  in  a single  body.  The  stream
is  not  continuous — it  is  subject  to  interruptions  as  capricious  as
they  may  be  extensive.  It  is  not  single,  for  several  streams,
distinct  and  in  some  cases  independent,  may  exist  in  the  same
body  during  its  material  life.


56


Dr.  Walter  Leaf.


[part


He  then  in  subsequent  chapters  goes  on  to  abolish  the  limitations
which  form  the  other  elements  in  our  conception  of  self.  He  conceives
a secondarj"  state  in  which  the  “ spirit  ” can  leave  the  body,  and
not  only  travel  afar  but  actually  modify  spatial  relations  at  a
distance,  so  as  to  impress  the  sense-organs  of  other  conscious
persons.  It  may  enter  into  their  thoughts.  It  may  even  be  inde-
pendent of  time,  and  become  precognitive.  It  can  in  short  take

upon  it  some  at  least  of  the  capacities  which  we  usually  associate
with  the  “Absolute.”  And  all  of  this — most  of  all  the  production
of  “ collective  hallucinations,”  for  which  the  theory  of  space-modifica-
tion seems  to  me  to  be  a rather  crude  and  unsatisfying  hypothesis
— to  my  mind  reduces  the  notion  of  personality  almost  to  vanish-
ing point.  Once  more,  it  seems  to  take  us  into  a region  where
personality  becomes  meaningless,  because  it  loses  its  limitations,  and,
with  its  limitations,  its  unity.

And  if  this  is  the  case  with  the  incarnate  spirit,  how  much  more
must  we  hesitate  before  we  can  ascribe  to  the  discarnate  the  necessary
boundaries  which  are  required  to  constitute  a personality.  Of  the
<liscarnate  spirit  we  only  know  for  certain  that  if  it  does  exist,  it
is  without  the  most  obvious  bond  which  constituted  it  a separate
unity.  So  far  as  there  can  be  said  to  be  any  probabilities  in  such
a matter,  it  would  seem  probable  that  the  spirit  emancipated  from
the  body  would  extend  those  powers  of  the  “secondary  self”  which
appear  to  us  as  transcendental,  and  would  enter  into  closer  communion
with  kindred  spirits,  till  the  bounds  of  personality  grew  vaguer  or
even  vanished.

This  is  however  a question  of  evidence,  if  evidence  can  be  obtained.
And  the  ultimate  object  of  Myers’s  work  is  to  bring  forward  such
evidence  and  interpret  it.  Let  me  say  first  that  the  evidence
which  he  brings  is  relevant  and  of  the  highest  importance.  It

seems  to  me  to  prove  much,  but  not  all  that  he  claims.  And  I

say  at  once  that  it  does  seem  to  me  to  prove  that  something  of

us  does  survive  death.  It  seems  to  me  to  show  that  after  the

death  of  the  body  there  remains  a more  or  less  coherent  complex
of  memories  which  is  accessible  to  the  subliminal  self  of  certain
living  persons.  What  I do  not  as  yet  see  is  that  this  complex
has  such  coherence  as  can  enable  us  to  consider  it  a personality,
or  that  it  is  bound  up  with  such  continuing  vital  processes  as  may
justify  us  in  holding  that  life  in  the  spiritual  world  is  continuous
with  life  in  this.  The  evidence  seems  to  point  rather  to  an
alternative  which  at  least  is  consistent  with  analogy,  and  demands


xlvl]


Eevieto  of  Human  Personality.


57


to  be  fully  considered — that  as  the  physical  body  only  gradually
dissolves  into  its  elements  after  death,  so  the  spiritual  retains  for
a time  a certain  coherence  which  is  no  proof  of  life.  Under
certain  circumstances  the  physical  body  may  be  preserved  in  a
way  which  enables  us  to  tell,  it  may  be  centuries  after,  how  the
living  man  appeared  externally  in  the  world.  It  is  possible  that
the  same  may  be  the  case  with  the  spiritual.  There  may  be  a
process  of  dissolution,  varying  perhaps  greatly  under  conditions  of
which  we  know  nothing ; and  it  may  be  possible  for  peculiarly
gifted  living  spirits  to  behold  the  gradually  disintegrating  spirit,
and  bring  us  word,  with  more  or  less  completeness,  of  what  the
spiritual  man  was  during  life.

Even  if  we  go  no  farther  than  this,  we  have  made  a gigantic
step.  At  all  events  the  great  abyss  has  been  bridged,  and  with
a foot  on  the  other  shore  Ave  have  the  possibilities  of  unknown
realms  to  explore.  Even  if  we  hesitate  to  follow,  we  cannot  blame
a man  like  Myers  who,  Avith  courage  and  hope,  Avould  lead  us
into  the  neAV  Avorld.  But  Ave  must  claim  for  ourselves  the  right
to  be  heard  if  Ave  carefully  examine  our  first  footing  before  Ave
take  a second  step.

It  is  practically  on  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Piper  that  the  Avhole
case  is  founded.  Our  reports  of  her  trance-communications  are  so
full  that  all  other  evidence  sinks  unto  unimportance  compared  to
them,  and  can  onlj"  be  regarded  as  confirmatory  and  of  the  second
degree.  Even  the  note-books  of  Stainton  Moses,  as  Myers  freely
admits,  full  as  they  are,  do  not  ofier  anything  like  the  same
strength  of  testimony.  It  is  then  to  Mrs.  Piper  that  Ave  must
turn,  and  more  particularly  to  the  sittings  of  her  second  period,
Avhen  she  Av^as  under  the  control  knoAvn  as  “George  Pelham.”

Let  us  see  then  Avhat  are  the  claims  Avhich  Myers  founds  on  these.

They  are  so  daring  and  startling  that  it  is  best  to  state  them
in  his  OAvn  Avords,  Avhich  are  clear  and  fearless  enough.^

“ The  claim  then  is  that  the  automatist,  in  the  first  place,  falls
into  a trance,  during  Avhich  his  spirit  partially  ‘ quits  his  body  ’ ; —

enters  at  any  rate  into  a state  in  Avhich  the  spiritual  Avorld  is

more  or  less  open  to  his  perception  ; and  in  Avhich  also — and  this
is  the  novelty — it  so  far  ceases  to  occupy  the  organism  as  to
leave  room  for  an  invading  spirit  to  use  it  in  someAvhat  the  same
fashion  as  the  OAvner  is  accustomed  to  use  it.

“ The  brain  being  thus  left  temporarily  and  partially  uncontrolled,

^Vol.  II.  p.  190.


58


Dr.  WoMer  Leaf.


[part


a disembodied  spirit  sometimes,  but  not  always,  succeeds  in  occupy-
ing it ; and  occupies  it  with  varying  degrees  of  control.  In  some
cases  (Mrs.  Piper)  two  or  more  spirits  ma}'  simultaneously  control
different  portions  of  the  same  organism.”

Thus  we  have  two  distinct  hypotheses — first,  that  the  spirit  of
the  sensitive  has  access,  more  or  less,  to  the  secrets  of  the  in-
visilffe  world  ; and  secondly,  that  other  spirits  can  take  possession
of  the  vacant  organism,  and  reveal  themselves  through  it,  by
speech  or  writing,  or  both  together.  What  a complication  results
may  l>e  conceived.  “ We  must  continually  bear  in  mind  the

impossibility  of  distinguishing  the  different  elements  that  may  enter
into  so  complex  a phenomenon.  . . . The  transparency  which
renders  the  one  possession  possible  facilitates  also  the  other.  This
ma}^  be  one  reason  for  the  .admixture  seen  in  most  trance-utterances —
of  elements  which  come  from  the  sensitive’s  own  mind  with  elements
inspired  from  without.  . . . Further,  we  cannot  draw  a clear  line
between  the  influence  of  the  organism  itself — as  already  moulded
by  its  own  indwelling  spirit— and  the  continuing  influence  of
that  spirit,  not  altogether  separated  from  the  organism.  . . . The
result  may  be  a kind  of  mixed  telepathy  between  the  sitter,  the
sensitive’s  spirit,  and  the  extraneous  spirit.”  ^

Let  us  see  if,  for  this  appalling  complication,  we  cannot  substitute
a theory  more  consistent  with  facts  already'  observed,  and  simple
enough  to  allow  of  some  hope  of  interpretation.  Let  us  then  admit
that  Mrs.  Piper  passes  into  a secondary  state  in  which  her  power
of  })erception  of  the  spiritual  world  is  largely  increased.  Let  us  now
suppose  that  in  this  spiritual  world  her  secondar}^  self  finds  memory
groups  surviving. — possibly  undergoing  the  process  of  dissolution,  but
still  surviving  and  retaining  a certain  amount  of  coherence,  and  thus
representing  with  more  or  less  completeness  the  inner  life  of  known
persons  who  have  passed  away.  Will  not  the  known  tendency  of
her  secondary  self  to  dramatic  presentation  lead  to  such  communica-
tions as  those  which  have  been  so  fully  and  so  carefully  reported  ?

This  question  is  in  fact  forced  upon  us  by  the  principle  of  con-
tinuity Avhich  Myers  rightly  takes  as  his  guide,  and  which  is
notably  exemplified  in  the  development  of  Mrs.  Piper  herself  Her
first  control,  as  we  all  know,  was  “Dr.  Phinuit.”  Myers  still  clings
to  the  belief  that  Phinuit  may  possibly  be  regarded  “ as  an  intelli-
gence extraneous  to  Mrs.  Pipei' — as  in  fact  a discarnate  spirit.”  ^
But  he  is  conscious  of  the  enormous  difficulties  in  the  way  of  such

2Vol.  II.  p.  240.


iVol.  II.  p.  249.


XLVI.]


Beview  of  Human  Personality.


59


a belief,  in  view  of  Phinuit’s  untrue,  and  indeed  absurd,  statements
respecting  his  life  on  earth  ; and  he  admits  that  “ many  may  think
it  most  probable  that  the  Phinuit  control  was  nothing  more  than  a
secondary  personality  of  Mrs.  Piper.”  This  is  in  fact  the  only  theory
which,  at  least  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  we  have  any
right  to  hold.

In  her  third  stage  Mrs.  Piper  is  controlled  by  “Imperator,”
“ Rector,”  and  others,  who  profess  to  have  been  when  on  earth
certain  illustrious,  but  not  divine  personages.  They  profess  also  to
be  identical  with  Stainton  Moses’  controls,  who  gave  their  real
names  to  him ; these  were  never  pul)lished,  but  were  known  to
Myers  himself.  It  was  therefore  an  obvious  test  that  they  should
give  through  Mrs.  Piper  the  names  which  they  had  given  to  Stainton
Moses.  This  simple  test  they  completely  failed  to  fulfil. ^ Thus  in
the  third  stage  the  evidence  for  external  personality  breaks  down  as
it  did  in  the  first.  If  Imperator  and  his  assistants  are  really  dis-
carnate  personalities,  they  are  lying  spirits.  But  in  the  meantime
we  are  bound  to  regard  them  as  further  dramatis  personae  of  Mrs.
Piper’s  fertile  subliminal  self.

There  remains  her  second  period,  when  she  was  under  the  control
of  “George  Pelham,”  who  claimed  to  he  the  spirit  of  a known
person  recently  deceased.  We  notice  the  progressive  advance  from
the  vulgar  “Phinuit,”  through  the  cultivated  “G.P.”  to  the  exalted
“ Imperator  ” ; and  if  we  are  to  follow  anj'  principle  of  continuity,
we  must  not  assume  for  “ G.P.”  any  different  origin  from  the
other  two.  The  evidence  may  jrossibly  be  overwhelming  enough
to  force  us  to  do  so ; hut  then  we  must  abandon  the  principle  of
continuity.

Is  then  the  evidence  so  overwhelming  1 Is  it  enough  to  force  us
to  acknowledge  that  the  controls  of  the  second  period  are  what
they  profess  to  be — the  still  living  spirits  of  those  who  have  recentl}"
passed  away,  and  are  making  themselves  known  to  their  friends  on
earth  1 I have  already  indicated  my  own  answer  to  this  question.
The  evidence  is  very  striking  and  very  strong.  It  proves,  I think,
that  memories  of  the  dead  survive,  and  are  under  special  con-
ditions accessible  to  us.  But  I do  not  see  that  it  proves  the

survival  of  what  we  call  the  living  spirit,  the  personality — a unit  of
consciousness,  limited  and  self-contained,  a centre  of  will  and  vital
force,  carrying  on  into  another  world  the  aspirations  and  the  affec-
tions of  this.

Proceedings,  Vol.  xm.,  pp.  408-9.


-60


JDr.  Walter  Leaf.


[part


Those  who  took  part  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  earlier  sittings  came  gene-
rally to  the  conclusion  that  she  had  by  some  subliminal  faculty
access  to  a store  of  memories  belonging  to  the  sitters  and  their
friends,  but  not  consciously  present  in  their  minds.  As  some  one
then  put  it,  the  effect  was  as  though  she  had  been  able  to  rummage
through  a waste-paper  basket  full  of  their  old  letters,  often
torn  and  blurred,  containing  much  that  was  unintelligible,  but  often
affording  an  unmistakable,  though  forgotten,  piece  of  fact.  The  main
question  for  us  in  1890  was  whether  these  broken  memories  belonged
only  to  the  living,  or  whether  there  was  not  some  similar  store-
house for  the  dead  as  well.  The  result  of  the  later  evidence  seems
to  me  to  be  that  we  must  now  accept  the  latter  proposition  as  true.
Further  than  this  I do  not  think  that  it  carries  us.

A full  discussion  of  the  “ G.P.”  communications  would  mean  a
review  of  Hodgson’s  and  Hyslop’s  reports,  rather  than  of  Hmian
Personality.  But  no  reader  of  them  can  have  failed  to  be  struck
by  their  fragmentary,  obscure  and  generally  muddled  character.
Professor  Hyslop  speaks  frankly  of  the  “ discarnate  spirit,”  as
“ exhibiting  various  degrees  of  clearness  and  confusion,  merging  now
and  then  into  delirium,  automatism,  or  complete  syncope.”  ^ No
better  illustration  of  this  can  be  found  than  the  ingenious  series
of  experiments  by  which  he  illustrates  the  nature  of  the  communica-
tions by  telegraphic  messages  between  living  persons.-  These  clearly
show,  by  the  artificial  restrictions  required,  how  far  the  spirits
fall  below  the  intelligence  of  the  normal  rational  man.

This  undeniable  and  puzzling  confusion  is  explained  bj'  Myers  as
due  to  the  novel  conditions  under  which  a mind  is  using  a brain
which  does  not  belong  to  it.^  Such  a supposition  hardly  seems
to  meet  the  case.  The  most  obvious  puzzle  is  that  the  communicating
spirits  seem  to  have  the  greatest  difficulty  in  getting  at  what
should  be  the  primary  means  of  identification — their  own  names.
This  is  hard  to  understand  if  the  difficulty  is  one  of  means  of
communication  only ; it  clearly  points  to  some  imperfect  com-
prehension at  the  origin  of  the  message.  It  becomes  intelligible
enough  on  the  alternate  hypothesis,  that  the  messages  are  in  fact
being  given  at  second  hand.  If  we  imagine  ourselves  as  endeavour-
ing to  construct  a dramatic  presentation  of  a human  being  from
what  we  can  find  in  an  old  diary  belonging  to  him,  we  see  at
once  that  his  own  name  might  be  one  of  the  hardest  things  to

Froi:eedini/.‘i,  Vol.  xvi.  p.  284.  -Ibid.  pp.  537-623.

®Vol.  II.  p.  254.


XLVI.]


Review  of  Human  Personality.


61


make  out.  And  I conceive  that  the  secondary  personality  of  Mrs.
Piper  may  be  in  somewhat  the  same  position — having  access  to  a
cluster  of  earthl}"  memories  where  the  name  of  the  owner  is  not
explicitly  presented,  and  must  be  slowly  extricated,  not  by  the
agency  of  the  owner  himself,  but  by  a process  of  inference —
largely  aided,  no  doubt,  by  the  recipients  of  the  communications.
And  further,  the  general  mental  attitude  of  the  communicants
seems  distinctly  to  point  to  the  cluster  of  memories  as  disinte-
grating— full  of  the  gaps  and  vaguenesses  which  we  should  expect
to  find  as  the  forerunners  of  ultimate  dissolution.

That  is  the  conclusion  to  which  Human  Personality  has  brought
me.  iNIyers  himself  would,  I fear,  have  regarded  it  as  a complete
negation  of  his  hopes,  and  a practical  rejection  of  his  life’s  work.
To  me  it  is  not  so.  To  me  “ personality  ” presents  itself  mainly  as
a limitation — as  the  barrier  which  inexorably  cuts  me  off  from  those
who  are  nearest  and  dearest  to  me,  so  that  they  can  never  “know
half  the  reasons  why  I smile  or  sigh.”  To  a large  part  of  the
human  race  personality  means  something  crippled  by  surroundings,
or  smirched  with  sin,  or  distorted  by  hereditary  taint,  as  it  seems
to  us,  beyond  hope  of  cure.  It  is  a hope  and  not  a fear  that  the
dissolution  of  the  body  may  mean  the  dissolution  of  this  spiritual
crust  as  well ; that  one  day  the  infinite  which  is  within  us  all  may
have  freer  plaj^,  and  mingle  in  unconstrained  communion  with  other
spiritual  elements  ec[ually  purged  of  earthly  dross,  through  channels
infinitely  clearer  and  more  translucent  than  the  imperfect  and  un-
satisfying organs  of  the  mortal  frame.

And  this  hope  Myers,  by  the  life’s  work  which  he  has  summed  up
in  Human  Personality,  has  enormously  strengthened.  He  has  shown
that  even  in  this  life  we  have,  through  the  subliminal  self,  a contact
with  the  infinite  which  is  more  than  a mere  guess — that  however
imperfectly  and  sporadically,  man  has  glimpses  of  a faculty  trans-
cending the  powers  of  sense.  And  he  has  carried  the  link  across
the  grave.  This  is  after  all  the  great  step,  beside  which  the  rest
sinks  into  insignificance.  When  once  that  is  taken,  anything  else
may  follow.  Myers’s  further  conclusions  may  prove  in  the  end  to  be
right;  or  man  may  through  the  ages  work  out  a scheme  of  the
spiritual  world  as  far  transcending  Myers  as  Myers  transcends  the
Hottentot.  But  this  will  not  one  whit  diminish  the  debt  we  owe
to  him.  Walter  Leaf.


62


Andreiv  Lang.


[part


“THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY”  AND  MR.  FREDERIC

MYERS.

By  Andrew  Lang.

In  The  Nineteenth  Century — and  After,  for  April  1903,  appeared  two
articles  on  Lluinan  Fersoncdity,  the  book  by  Mr.  Frederic  Myers.
At  a Highland  inn,  being  destitute  of  more  seiions  literature,  I read
these  essays.  It  did  not  appear  to  me  that  they  were  quite  worthy
of  the  genius  of  our  leading  Comteist,  Mr.  Frederic  Harrison;  and
of  one  of  our  most  eminent  scientific  men,  theologians,  and  investiga-
tors of  Mrs.  Gallup,  Mr.  AY.  H.  Mallock.  The  essay  of  Mr.  Harrison
was  a sportive  apologue.  Free,  as  he  is,  from  degrading  supersti-
tion, Mr.  Harrison  playfully  informed  the  town  that,  after  “ dipping
into  ” Mr.  Myers’s  book  for  about  ninety  minutes,  he  dreamed
that  he  died,  after  an  apoplectic  seizure.  Absit  omen ! Mr.
Harrison  must  be  cautious  as  to  what  he  reads,  avoiding  what  he
disagrees  with.  He  then  described  his  posthumous  adventures.
AVhile  remaining  Mr.  Frederic  Harrison,  he  felt  great  difficulty  in
retaining  a firm  hold  of  his  consciousness  of  personal  existence.  The
Aurora  Borealis  and  (I  think)  other  cosmic  phenomena,  sniggered  at
his  efforts,  and  Mr.  Harrison  found  Iiimself  tittering  in  sympathy.
‘AVas  I even  a Gas,  or  a Force?”  Mr.  Harrison  asked  himself  with
natural  anxiety.  We  are  not  concerned  to  answer  these  queries,
nor  to  decide  whether  Mr.  Harrison  was  a Force,  or  merely  a Gas,
nor  even  whether  a Gas  is  a Force,  as  the  domestic  meter  may
seem  to  suggest.  ‘AVas  not  my  dream,”  he  exclaims  complacently,
“infinitely  more  sublime,  more  beautiful,  more  wonderful,  than
that  of  any  S.P.R.  ?”

Who  can  reply  ? No  S.P.R.  known  to  us  has  any  vision  of  its
own ; we  cannot  compare  such  a non-existent  dream  with  the  Somnia
Pythagorea  of  Mr.  Harrison,  when  he  asked  himself  whether  he  was
not,  perhaps,  a Gas,  or  a Force,  perhaps.

The  apologue  of  Mr.  Harrison,  composed  after  “ dipping  into  ” a
book  by  Mr.  Myens,  a man  of  not  inconsiderable  intellect  and


XLVI.]


“ The  Nineteenth  Century  ” and  Mr.  Myers.


63


industry,  seemed  an  odd  apparition,  and  a trifle  out-of-date,  in  the
Nineteenth  Century — and  After.  After  the  Nineteenth  Century,  are  we
to  be  discussing  Mr.  Harrison’s  taste  in  dreams'?

Having  read  the  badinage  of  Mr.  Harrison,  I turned  to  the  more
solid  arguments  of  Mr.  Mallock.  Now  I And  liim  deep  in  the

ornamental  title-pages  of  books  of  the  Elizabethan  age,  looking  for
emblems  of  the  Hanged  Hog  (or  Bacon),  and  encountering
the  Porcupine,  collared  and  fettered  Or,  which,  I learn,  was  the
crest  of  Sir  Philip  Sidney.  Again  he  is  in  the  forefront  of
the  science  of  our  time,  instructing  the  veteran  Lord  Kelvin,
who  appears  to  require  some  hints  as  to  the  Suction  of  the
Cosmic  Egg.  Next  Mr.  Mallock  reveals  to  the  reading  public
the  Doctrine  of  Mrs.  Gallup,  and  examines  a Baconian  cypher
with  the  acumen  of  a Poe  or  a Phellips ; and  anon  he  dazzles,  or
admonishes,  as  the  novelist  of  Society.  It  was  to  be  expected  that
such  a man  would  have  taken  Psycliical  Research,  like  all  the  rest
of  knowledge,  for  his  province;  while  a tie  yet  more  endearing
seemed  to  exist  between  the  sympathies  of  Mr.  Mallock  and  those
of  Mr.  Myers.  Among  the  fair  and  intellectual  daughters  of
Columbia  there  are  two  whose  claims  to  distinction  are  not  freely
accepted  by  the  wise  and  learned.  One,  Mrs.  Gallup,  has  discovered
that  Bacon  wrote  most  of  Elizabethan  literature  and  did  into  prose  part
of  Pope’s  translation  of  the  Iliad.  She  lias  unriddled  the  cypher  in
which  Bacon  not  only  reveals  his  literary  secret,  but  displays  an  engag-
ing ignorance  of  history,  law,  and  even  of  his  own  family  circle.  " In
the  most  chivalrous  manner,  and  with  a mind  truly  open,  Mr.
Mallock  advocated  the  desirableness  of  studying  Mrs.  Gallup’s  system,
though,  to  the  pedantic  specialist,  it  seems  to  be  demonstrably  con-
spicuous nonsense.  Mr.  Myers  was  an  even  more  ardent  believer
in  those  claims  to  communicate  with  the  dead,  which  Mrs.  Piper,  of
Boston,  U.S.  (as  I understand),  does  not  make,  the  lady  leaving  the
question  to  be  settled  by  the  learned.

Nobody  can  believe  everything,  and  it  was  too  much  to  expect
that  an  investigator  of  Mrs.  Gallup  should  also  be  a student  of  Mrs.
Piper.  Still,  one  thought  that  Mr.  Mallock  wouhl  sympathize  with
Mr.  Myers.  He  does  not,  and  he  even  attributes  intellectual  dis-
honesty to  that  writer.  This  is  an  antiquated  method  in  con-
troversy, and  I do  not  dispute  the  intellectual  honesty  of  Mr.
Mallock.  Heaven  forbid  ! Still,  when  I read  his  article  it  appeared
to  me  that  he  had  not  perused  his  author  very  carefully,  and  that
he  first  attributed  to  Mr.  Myers,  and  then  refuted,  certain  ideas  which


Andrew  Lang.


64


[part


Mr.  Myers  did  not,  in  my  opinion,  entertain  : a practice  very
common  among  critics.

I therefore  wrote  to  the  editor  of  the  Nineteenth  Century— and  After,
saying  that  if  no  stronger  champion  were  in  the  field  I would
gladly  cross  swords  with  Mr.  Mallock.  As  the  editor  had  given
plenty  of  room  to  a discussion  about  Bacon’s  claim  to  the  throne
of  England,  and  to  the  authorship  of  Shakespeare’s  plays,  I deemed
that  he  might  spare  a few  pages  to  my  attempt  to  expiscate  Mr.
Myers’s  ideas.  The  editor  consented ; two  or  three  letters  passed
between  us.  I sent  in  the  following  paper,  and  he  rejected  it
almost  by  return  of  post.  I then  asked  whether  I might  publish
his  letters  with  my  paper,  and  he, — I think  not  unnaturally, — refused
his  permission.  About  the  contents  of  these  letters  my  lips  are
sealed.  The  S.P.R.,  however,  will  observe  that  the  labour  of
half  the  lifetime  of  a learned  and  industrious  man  appears  to  be
deemed  less  worthy  of  discussion  than  the  cypher  of  Mrs.  Gallup.
But  the  fault  may  be  my  own ; my  paper  may  be  unworthy  of
the  topic  about  which  I treat,  and  I make  no  claims  to  the  scientific
eminence  of  Mr.  Mallock,  though  conceivably  I know  as  much  as
he  does  about  psychical  research.  The  rejected  paper  follows,  with
onlj'  verbal  alterations.


In  trying  to  review  Mr.  Mallock’s  review  of  Human  Personality  by
the  late  Mr.  Frederic  Myers,  I attempt  a task  difficult  and  ungrate-
ful. It  is  ungrateful  because  I wish  that  Mr.  Myers  had  left  theories,
especially  metaphysical  and  “ metetherial  ” theories,  out  of  his  work;
and  it  is  difficult,  because  I am  not  at  all  certain  that  the  theories
are  understood  either  by  Mr.  Mallock  or  by  myself.  Indeed,  if  the
theories  are  bad,  they  are  perhaps  a good  deal  worse  than  Mr.
Mallock  has  proved  them  to  be.  It  is  also  my  misfortune  to  regard
metaphysics  with  the  extreme  distrust  and  dislike  which  the  general
public,  and  most  men  of  science,  freely  bestow  on  “ Metapsychics.”
But  if  I am  no  psychologist  or  metaphysician,  as  Mr.  Mallock  is,
Professor  ‘William  James  is  a psychologist  of  acknowledged  eminence.
It  is,  therefore,  worth  remarking  that  while  Mr.  Mallock  regards
Mr.  Myers’s  theory  “ as  being  not  only  fantastic  in  respect  of  its
general  character,  but  also  as  gratuitously  inapplicable  to  the  facts
which  he  invokes  it  to  explain,”  Professor  James,  without  actually
accepting  the  theory,  treats  it  in  a much  more  respectful  manner.
He  does  not  like  the  terms  “supraliminal”  and  “subliminal,”  and
Mr.  Myers  himself  gave  us  alternatives,  “ extra-marginal  ” and  “ intra-


XLVi.]  “ The  Nineteenth  Century"  and  Mr.  Myers.  65

marginal,”  which  seem  less  open  to  objection.  But  Mr.  James,  like
Mr.  Myers  himself,  regards  the  theory  as  a mere  provisional  pioneer-
ing hypothesis.  Mr.  Myers  says  that  he  does  not  “ claim  to  attain  to  a
scientific  standard.”  If  a science  he  has,  it  is  “ in  its  dim  and  poor
beginnings,”  as  chemistry  was  “ when  a few  monks  groped  among
the  properties  of  the  nobler  metals.”  (Vol.  I.,  p.  2.)  Professor  James
says  that  Mr.  Myers  took  “ a lot  of  scattered  phenomena  ...  he
made  series  of  them,  filled  in  the  transitions  by  delicate  hypotheses
or  analogies,  and  bound  them  together  in  a system  by  his  bold
inclusive  conception  of  the  Subliminal  Self.  . . . What  is  the  precise
constitution  of  the  Subliminal  ? Such  is  the  problem  which  deserves
to  figure  in  our  Science  hereafter  as  the  problem  of  Myers,”  who
has  also  added,  says  Professor  James,  not  wuthout  levity,  “ many
ways  of  putting  the  Subliminal  on  tap.”  ^ Sir  Oliver  Lodge  also
claims  for  Myers  that  “ he  has  laid  a foundation  ...  on  ground
more  solid  than  has  ever  been  available  before,”  ^ which  is  not  saying
much !

If  we  listen  to  these  eminent  men  of  science,  Mr.  Myers’s  effort
can  scarcely  be  so  “fantastic,”  and  “gratuitously  inapplicable  to  the
facts  which  he  invokes  it  to  explain,”  as  Mr.  Mallock  avers.  Au-
thority, to  be  sure,  goes  for  very  little  in  such  matters ; still  the
opinions  of  two  specialists  in  psychology  and  other  sciences  cannot
wholly  be  disdained.  “Analogies”  and  “delicate  hypotheses”  are,
as  a rule,  worth  very  little  (despite  Mr.  Mallock’s  own  use  of  them),
and  Mr.  Myers  was  clearly  aware  of  the  fact.  He  was  groping  in
what  he  calls  “the  Subliminal,”  as  Friar  Bacon  may  have  groped  in
“ the  nobler  qualities  of  metals.”  He  was  guessing  with  a purpose,
namely  to  form  a kind  of  thread  on  which  to  string  series  of  facts,
or  of  what  he  believed  to  be  facts.  The  question  is  not  so  much
whether  he  solved  “ Myers’s  problem,”  but  whether  he  stated  his
problem  without  too  much  of  the  inconsistency  and  self-contradiction
which  almost  invariably  beset  the  makers  of  “ delicate  hypotheses,”
even  in  such  fields  as  anthropology  and  history.  But  if  Mr.  Myers’s
theory  turns  out  to  be  self-contradictory  and  fantastic,  that  does  not
damage  the  value  of  his  great  collection  of  facts,  any  more  than  Mr.
Frazer’s  chain  of  hypotheses,  if  here  and  there  to  some  critics  un-
acceptable, injures  the  merit  of  the  vast  collections  in  his  Golden  Bough.

Mr.  Mallock  writes  : “ Mr.  Myers  asserts  that  the  subliminal  self
is  not  the  unconscious  part  of  the  supraliminal,  but  is  a separate

^Proceedings  S.P.R..  Vol.  XVII.,  pp.  15-18.

-Op.  cit.,  Vol.  XVII.,  p.  4.


66


Andrew  Lang.


[part


conscious  entit}^,  and  that  the  supraliminal  is  a separate  entity  also.
The  latter  is  as  mortal  and  as  dependent  on  the  physical  organism
as  any  man  of  science  can  say  it  is ; but  the  former  stands  on  a
totally  different  footing.  The  organism  depends  on  it,  not  it  on  the
organism,  and  for  it  alone  Mr.  Myers  claims  immortality”  (p.  629).

Does  Mr.  Myers  really  mean,  or  say,  all  this  ? ^ He  writes  “Ido
not  . . . assume  that  there  are  two  correlative  and  parallel  selves
existing  always  within  each  of  us.  Rather  I mean  by  the  subliminal
Self  that  part  of  the  Self  which  is  commonly  subliminal.”  (Vol.  I.,
p.  15.)  What  is  “a  Self,”  and  what  is  meant  by  “a  part  of  a
Self”?  I have  no  clear  idea:  such  phrases  seem  mere  counters
representing  notions  of  no  fixed  value.  But  here  Mr.  Myers  certainly
does  not  speak  of  “ two  separate  conscious  entities,”  one  mortal,  the
other  immortal.  He  denies  that  he  makes  the  assumption  which  Mr.
Mallock  attributes  to  him.  But  he  goes  on  to  say  that  “ no  Self  of
which  we  can  here  have  cognisance  is  in  reality  more  than  a frag-
ment of  a larger  Self, — revealed  in  a fashion  at  once  shifting  and

limited  through  an  organisation  not  so  framed  as  to  afford  it  full

manifestation.”

All  this  does  not  agree  with  Mr.  Mallock’s  statement  of  Mr.  Myers’s
theory.  Mr.  Myers  is  not  saying  that  we  know  here  two  separate
conscious  entities  or  selves,  one  deathly,  one  exempt  from  death.
He  says  that  we  know  no  such  entities,  but  merely  have  glimpses
of  fragments  of  “a  larger  Self”  which  we  cannot  know.  That  larger
Self,  I take  it,  is  not  the  Subliminal  Self,  as  more  or  less  known  to

science.  If  we  cannot  possibly  know  it,  perhaps  the  less  we  say  about

it  the  better ; however,  man  is  a guess-making  animal.

^ Mr.  Myers,  in  a footnote  (Vo).  I.,  p.  14)  writes:  “We  may  attempt,  indeed,
deeper  distinctions,  and  speak  of  the  em-pirical  self  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  sur-
viving or  the  transcendental  self  on  the  other  hand.”  But  he  does  not  say
that  the  surviving  self  is  exclusive  of  the  emjjirical  self,  and  he  constantly
gives  examples  of  the  alleged  survival  of  the  empirical  self  in  the  alleged
surviving  self.  In  Vol.  I.,  p.  Ill,  he  writes;  “The  ‘conscious  self’  of  each  of
us,  as  we  call  it, — the  empirical,  the  supraliminal  self,  as  I should  prefer  to  say —
does  not  comprise  the  whole  of  the  consciousness  or  of  the  faculty  within  us.
There  exists  a more  comprehensive  consciousness,  a profouuder  faculty,  which
for  the  most  part  remains  potential  only  so  far  as  regards  the  life  of  earth,
Init  from  which  the  consciousness  and  the  faculty  of  earth-life  are  mere  selections,
and  which  reasserts  itself  in  its  plenitude  after  the  liberating  change  of  death.”
The  “supraliminal”  is  a “mere  selection”  from  the  “subliminal.”  The  passage
quoted  demonstrates  that  Mr.  Mallock  has  misconceived,  and  therefore  mis-
stated Mr.  Myers’s  theory,  and,  I repeat,  he  gave  no  references  for  his
averments  on  this  important  head.


XLVI.]  “ The.  Nineteenth  Cenhiry  ” and  Mr.  Myers.  6 7

As  Mr.  Myers  denies  that  he  believes  in  “ two  separate  conscious
entities  ” in  each  man,  and  denies  that  in  this  world  we  know  the
whole  of  any  Self  whatever,  one  argument  of  Mr.  Mallock’s  seems  of
doubtful  validity.  It  is  a telling  argument,  as  it  stands.  “ The
supposed  subliminal  self,”  he  says,  “ as  operated  on  by  the  hypnotiser,
instead  of  exhibiting  any  special  independence  or  superiority,  dis-
tinguishes itself  mainly  by  its  docile  and  credulous  slavery  to  the
suggestions  of  any  chance  operator.  It  is  tricked  by  statements
which  would  hardly  deceive  an  idiot  ” (p.  638).

Indeed  I understand  that  idiots,  of  all  people,  are  least  amenable
to  the  hypnotist.

Mr.  Mallock  goes  on  to  say  that,  according  to  Mr.  Myers,  this
ultra-idiotic  subliminal  self  “ will  do  almost  anything  that  the
hypnotiser  tells  it  to  do,  except  what  is  morally  wrong.  Here  it
shows  its  innate  spiritual  purity.  ...”

If  Mr.  Myers  really  means  all  this,  he  has  clearly  lost  hold  of
his  own  theory.  For  his  theory  is  that  in  no  way  can  we,  while
“here,”  get  knowledge  of  the  whole  of  “the  larger  self,”  or  even
of  any  other  self : we  cannot,  therefore,  disengage  by  hypnotism
the  whole  of  the  subliminal  self.  Consecpxently  “ the  hypnotic

stratum,”  as  Mr.  Myers  calls  it,  which  is  so  easily  “ tricked  ” by
the  operator,  is  not  all  the  “larger,”  or  even  “the  subliminal  self.”
That  self,  bj'^  Mr.  Myers’s  definition,  it  cannot  be.  The  self  mani-
fested in  the  hypnotic  condition  is  not  the  subliminal  self,  or  the
soul,  or  the  immortal  somewhat,  neat,  for  we  can  never  get  it
neat  ! It  is  only  one  “ fragment  ” (or  aspect,  or  faculty,  as  I should
prefer  to  say)  of  a larger  self,  “revealed  in  a fashion  at  once
shifting  and  limited.”  This  being  so,  and  the  hypnotic  self  being,
in  Mr.  Myers’s  opinion,  on  the  moral  level  of  the  workaday  self,
Mr.  Mallock  says  “ it  is  hard  to  imagine  a clearer  admission  than
this,  that  the  two  selves  are  the  same  self  in  different  conditions,
and  not,  as  Mr.  Myers  imagines,  two  independent  beings.”

But  Mr.  Myers  has  denied  that  he  conceives  any  two  selves
known  to,  or  knowable  by,  us,  here,  as  “two  independent  beings.”
I have  never  understood  him,  as  Mr.  Mallock  does — apparently —
to  hold  that,  when  observing  a patient  in  any  hypnotic  stage
whatever,  we  observe  the  “supposed  subliminal  self”  at  work  as
“ an  independent  being,”  in  full  untrammelled  power.  I understand
him  to  mean  that  a fragment  or  a potentiality  of  a self  is,  in  the
hypnotic  state,  able  to  exert  itself  in  different  degrees, — degrees
“ shifting  and  limited,” — upon  our  organisms.  That  self  is  able,


68


Andrew  Lang.


[part


more  or  less,  to  trick  the  body  into  supposing  that  soap  is  chocolate,
for  example,  or  into  raising  a blister  where  a postage  stamp  has
been  apj)lied  to  the  skin.  Therein  lies  all  of  its  “supposed  inde-
pendence or  superiority,”  as  far  as  evinced  in  certain  hy})notic
stages.!  In  other  cases  it  appears  sometimes  to  control  the  tendency
to  drink,  for  example.  For  all  that  I know,  perhaps  a sober  man
may  be  capable  of  conversion  into  a drunkard,  by  suggestion.  Mr.
Myers  seems  to  think  not,  but  I am  unaware  that  the  experiment
has  been  tried.  Whether  improvements  of  conduct  under  sugges-
tion are  without  “moral  value”  (as  in  Mr.  Mallock’s  view)  I do
not  know  ; but,  even  if  non-moral,  such  improvements  would  be
practically  welcome.  If,  indeed,  there  is  no  Free  Will  (as  I under-
stand Mr.  Mallock  to  argue,  but  I may  misunderstand  him),  I don’t
see  where  morality  comes  in,  anyhow,  but  that  is  a question  which
does  not  interest  me.

So  far,  I really  conceive  that  Mr.  Mallock  may  have  glided  into
an  ignoratio  elenrhi.  Mr.  Myers  does  not  hold  (I  take  it)  that  we
living  men  know,  or  can  know,  two  separate  conscious  entities,
one  of  which  is  immortal : nor  does  Mr.  Mjmrs  think  that  this
superior  entity  is  known  by  us  completely,  or  is  fully  on  view,  in
patients  under  hypnotism.  That  were  absurd.  Mr.  Myers  does
not,  I repeat,  maintain  that  in  hypnotism  or  an}'  other  condition,
do  we  get  at  the  full-blown  subliminal  self,  or  at  the  “larger
self.”

If  the  subliminal  self,  as  known  in  hypnotism,  is  in  one  aspect
rather  an  ass,  it  is  much  worse,  Mr.  Myers  shows,  in  various
automatisms.  Planchette,  and  a table  (in  table-tilting),  are  often

silly,  occasionally  profane  or  obscene,  more  rarely  are  credited  with
knowledge  not  normally  acquired.  As  a rule,  the  rubbish  of  the
subliminal  stratum  comes  to  the  top  in  automatic  writing.  We  get
subliminal  nonsense,  or  chaff,  or  jn'ofanity ; as  well  as  subliminal
sagacity,  just  as  in  dreams  we  get  nonsense,  usually ; clairvoyance
very  seldom,  even  on  Mr.  Myers’s  showing.  The  reason  is  that
the  subliminal  self,  as  knoicahle  by  us  here,  not  “a  separate  conscious
entity  ” of  a vastly  superior  character,  but  is  only  a flickering  set
of  glimpses  of  all  kinds,  from  idiocy  to  inspiration.  At  least  I

have  always  understood  Mr.  Myers  in  this  sense,  while  taking  him
to  mean  that,  in  the  inspired  sorts  of  glimpses,  we  may  detect
brief  fragmentary  visions  of  his  “ larger  self.”

^ In  other  stages  and  conditions  other  powers  are  supposed  to  be  displayed.
But  it  is  7iot  supposed  that  the  subliminal  self  is  “all  there”  at  large.


XLVI.]  “ The  Nineteenth  Century  ” and  Mr.  Myers.  6 9

On  another  point  the  critic  seems  to  me  to  misunderstand  his

author.  “ For  it  alone,”  says  Mr.  Mallock  (meaning  his  “ superior
conscious  entity”),  “Mr.  Myers  claims  immortality.”  It  appears
more  accurate  to  say  that  he  claims  for  “the  larger  self”  per-
sistence or  surAuval,  after  death.  Immortality  is  another  matter.
But  does  Mr.  Myers  say  that  the  supraliminal  ordinary  self — the

inferior  of  l\Ii'.  Mallock’s  jxiir  of  conscious  entities — is  mortal,  or
is  extinguished  by  death  1 Mr.  Mallock  avers  that  he  does  : if
he  does,  Mr.  Myers  rejects  much  of  what  he  himself  accepts  as

evidence.  The  only  supraliminal  “self”  that  can  be  conceived  of
as  surviving  death  is  the  continuous  chain  of  human  memories  and
associations.  Now  if  these  do  not  survive,  immortality  had  no

interest  for  Mr.  Myers.  He  wanted  to  renew  his  old  friendships,

veterum  hcmcl  immemor  amorum.  His  phantasms  of  the  dead  mani-

festly remember  their  earthly  homes,  friends,  and  kinships,  so  do
his  spirits  which  talk  through  Mrs.  Piper  & Co.,  though  they

have  forgotten  any  Greek  they  ever  had  to  an  astonishing  degree.
“G.P.,”  that  famed  spirit,  “felt  bad  in  his  head”;  a thoroughly
supraliminal  sensation,  just  as  a man  whose  leg  has  been  amputated
feels  pain  in  that  leg.  All  these  memories — all  things,  in  fact,

that  Mr.  Myers’s  spirits  do  or  say — are  survivals  of  the  supra-
liminal consciousness.  How,  then,  can  Mr.  Mallock  aver  that,

in  Mr.  Myers’s  theory,  the  supraliminal  self  is  independent,

and  is  mortal  1 If  Mr.  Myers  has  said  so,  he  is  not  worth

thinking  about  at  all  : he  is  to  be  placed  far  below  the  rather

humble  level  assigned  to  him  as  a reasoner  by  Mr.  Mallock.  The
common  phantasm  of  the  dead,  in  Mr.  Myers’s  opinion,  is  “not

all  there”;  the  soul  of  the  dead  man  is  not  wholly  occupied,  like
the  spectral  minister  of  the  Kirk,  in  tramping  round  the  country
near  Lessudden  (Vol.  II.,  pp.  396,  397).  Only  a casual  side-stream  of
his  consciousness  is  occupied  with  Tweed-side,  but  tliat  side-stream
is  as  supraliminal  as  trout.  Thus  the  supraliminal  self  must  survive,
despite  Mr.  Mallock,  in  the  theory  of  Mr.  Myers.  If  it  did  not,

the  personality  of  each  of  us  could  not  survive  at  all,  to  the  joy

of  Mr.  Frederic  Harrison.

Mr.  Mallock  remarks  that  Mr.  Myers,  in  his  chapter  on  Sleep,

“ insists  again  that  the  subliminal  self  is  a separate  self-existing
personality  ” (p.  630).  If  so,  Mr.  Myers  contradicts  himself,  for  he  has
written  “I  find  it  permissible  and  convenient  to  speak  of  subliminal
selves,  or  of  a subliminal  self.  ...  I mean  by  the  subliminal  self
that  part  of  the  self  which  is  commonly  subliminal,”  being  no  more


70


Andrew  Lang.


[part


than  “a  fragment  of  a larger  self.”  Now,  unlike  Mr.  Mallock,  I
cannot  find  in  Mr.  Myers’s  chapter  on  Sleep  any  statement  that  the
subliminal  self  is  “ a separate  self-existing  personality.”  An  exact
reference  to  this  statement  is  not  given  by  Mr.  Mallock,  nor  can  I
find  the  passage.  I do  find  Mr.  Myers  saying  that  “ we  shall  have
fvjo  ‘phafics  of  personulitg  develojnvg  into  separate  purposes  and  separate
directions  from  a piarent  stem,”  “ the  waking  personality,”  and  “ the
sleeping  personality”  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  151-152).  It  is  true  that,  elsewhere
in  this  ]iassage,  Mr.  Myers  speaks  of  “the  soul,”  but  I do  not
understand  him  to  mean  that  “ the  soul  ” is  identical  with  the
subliminal  self,  as  hioion  to  us.

But  what  especially  puzzles  me  is  that  Mr.  Mallock,  after
asserting  that  Mr.  Myers  insists  that  “ the  subliminal  self  is  a
separate,  self-existing  personality,”  ofl'ers  the  references  which  he
does  give  to  “the  classes  of  facts  which  prove  this  most  con-
clusively.” They  are  “Sections  41-3  and  421  A”  (Vol.  I.,  p.  130,
p.  379).  In  one  of  these  cases  a woman  remembers  in  sleep  events
productive  of  a mental  shock,  which  she  does  not  remember  when
awake.  In  the  other  case  a man  discovers  in  a dream  the  place
where  a friend  has  dropped  a watch.  Mr.  Myers  conjectures  that
the  loser’s  “subliminal  self”  saw  the  watch  fall,  which  merely  means
that  consciousness  of  the  incident  did  not  also  present  itself  to  the
loser’s  ordinary  mind ; such  cases  are  common,  the  correct  memory
arising  later  in  a dream.  In  this  instance  the  loser’s  siddiminal
self  may  have  wired  on  the  fact  to  the  friend  by  telepathy,  or,
says  Mr.  Myers,  there  may  be  another  explanation.  I do  not  see,
as  Mr.  Mallock  does,  that  Mr.  Myers  here  asserts  that  tiie  sub-
liminal self  is  “a  separate  self-existing  personality,”  any  more  than
any  psychologist  does  when  he  speaks  of  the  “separate”  or
“secondarj^  personalities”  of  hysterical  patients,  Felida  or  Helene
Smith.  These  are  not  conceived  of  as  “ self-existing  entities,”  but
as  mere  phases  of  the  personality  of  Felida  or  of  Helene.

To  me  it  appears  that  matters  of  terminology  cause  the  mis-
apprehensions of  Mr.  Myers’s  meaning  which  are  entertained  either
by  Mr.  Mallock  or  by  myself.  I do  not  conceive  Mr.  Myers  to
mean  that  “soul”  and  “subliminal  self”  are  synonymous  terms.
Mr.  Mallock  speaks  of  “the  subliminal  soul,”  which  appears  to
imply  the  existence  (in  Mr.  Myers’s  theory)  of  a supraliminal  soul,
but  did  Mr.  Myers  ever  speak  of  a supraliminal  soul  1 In  his
Glossary,  to  my  chagrin,  “ soul  ” does  not  appear,  nor  does  “ spirit.”
But  (Vol.  I.,  p,  119)  “soul”  seems  to  mean  something  in  man,  to


xlvl]  “ The  Nineteenth  Cenhtry  ” and  Mr.  Myers.  7 1

which  a spirit  in  the  universe  is,  for  purposes  of  argument,
assumed  to  be  “ accessilde  and  responsive,”  and  soul  or  spirit,  or
both,  are  active  in  vision,  “hypnotic  rejuvenation,”  automatisms,  and
so  forth.  But  “ soul  ” is  not  identical,  as  I understand  my  author,
with  “subliminal  self,”  as  known  to  us,

Neither  Mr.  Mallock  nor  myself  is  much  to  be  blamed  if  one  oi'
both  of  us  misapprehend  Mr.  Myers’s  meaning.  For  my  part  I
think  that  he  meant  “soul  is  not  absent  from  the  constitution  of  the
subliminal  self,  as  ether  is  not  absent  from  the  constitution  of
apple  dumi)ling.  But  apple  dumpling  is  not  ether,  and  the
subliminal  self  is  not  the  soul.”  That  is,  the  suldiminal  self,  as  at
present  known  to  psychologists,  is  not  the  soul,  which,  to  us  here,
is  not  knowable.

The  general  reader  will  not  study  Mr.  Myers’s  book,  but  he  has
perused  Mr.  Mallock’s  article.  I am  anxious  that  the  authority  of
so  great  a philosophic  name  should  not  (without  further  examina-
tion) convince  the  general  reader  that  Mr.  Myers  was  so  abjectly
muddle-headed  as  Mr.  Mallock  would  induce  us  to  believe.  If  the
general  reader  has  favoured  me  with  his  esteemed  attention  so  far,
I hope  that  he  will  feel  so  hopelessly  perplexed  that  he  will  try  to
hammer  out  Mr.  Myers’s  meaning  for  himself,  or  will  dismiss  the
subject  from  his  meditations  altogether,  which  I take  to  be
his  better  course.  Into  Mr.  Mallock’s  criticism  of  Mr.  Myers’s
“ synthesis  ” I cannot  pretend  to  go.  I do  not  profess  to  under-
stand why,  if  “ether”  is  “material,”  “ metether  ” ^ should  be
“spiritual”  (Vol.  I.,  p.  215).  The  whole  thing  merely  comes
to  this,  that  Mr.  Myers  believed  in  spirit  as  well  as  matter,  and
that  most  men  of  science  (but  not  all)  do  not.  The  words
“matter”  and  “spirit”  seem  to  me  but  cheques  drawn  on  an  airj"
capital  without  metallic  basis.  But  I do  not  think,  as  Mr.  i\Iallock
does,  that  Mr.  Myers  “juggled  with  his  own  convictions,”  or  was
“dishonest”  when  he  wrote  “ metetherial  ” in  place  of  “ metetheric.”
I take  no  sense  of  difference  between  the  two  new  words.  It  is  as
absurd,  I think,  to  talk  of  the  “metetherial”  as  of  the  “metetheric
grace  of  God.”  Both  phrases  are  absurd.  To  myself  Mr.  Myers
appeared  unusually  honest ; one  could,  and  I think  that  I actually
did,  shake  or  destroy  his  belief  in  a case,  for  example,  of  supposed

1 “ Metetheric ” apparently  include.s  the  meaning,  “not  etheric,”  as  “meta-
physics” includes  the  meaning,  “not  physics.”  Like  Mr.  Mallock  I suppose
the  ether  (if  it  exists)  to  be  material,  but  I must  disclaim  all  knowledge
about  ether,  matter,  and  spirit.


72


Andrew  Lang.


[part


communication  from  a spirit,  to  which  he  had  attached  considerable
value.  I also  notice  that  the  most  extraordinary  of  modern
“ ghost  stories,”  which  appeared  in  Mr.  Myers’s  work  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  is  not  included  in  his  l)ook.^  Perhaps
he  saw  reason  to  distrust  this  narrative.  He  was  always  ready,
beyond  most  writers  whom  I have  known,  to  accept  criticism  with
candour  and  good  humour.

Mr.  Mallock,  preoccupied  with  Mr.  Myers’s  theory,  does  not
criticise  his  alleged  “facts”  with  any  fulness.  The  facts,  not  Mr.
Myers’s  interpretations  of  them,  are  to  my  mind  the  important  part
of  the  book.  For  example,  Mr.  Mallock  mentions  various  categories
of  waking  hallucinations  of  the  sane  and  healthy.  Some  cases,  as
Mr.  Myers  quotes  Mr.  Gurney  (and  Mr.  Mallock  quotes  Mr.
Lawrence  Oliphant)  might  be  (rather  fancifully)  ascribed  to  move-
ments leaving  “ some  impress  ” on  things  in  general  “ like  the
lines  in  which  the  voice  records  itself  on  the  moving  disc  of  a
phonograph,”  and  the  person,  perhaps  long  dead,  who  caused  the
original  movement,  might  “ be  reproduced  in  the  consciousness  of
persons  sufficiently  sensitive.”  This  would  imply  no  survival  of  the
aforesaid  pers  m,  any  more  than  a dead  man’s  voice,  echoed  from  a
phonograph,  would  prove  his  survival.

Mr.  Mallock  says  “ the  majority  of  ghosts  can  perhaps  be  disposed
of  in  these  ways,  without  the  necessity  of  invoking  any  theory
which  does  not  accord  in  character  with  current  scientific  concep-
tions.” But  that  things  at  large  are  phonographs  and  spectrographs,
(as  if  the  road,  trees,  hedges,  and  so  on  at  Lessudden  retained  and
reproduced,  for  Miss  Scott  of  Lessudden  and  others,  the  spectre  of
a dead  minister  on  his  “ daidling  bit,^  ”)  is  not  “ a current  scientific
conception,”  surely  ! Moreover  the  phantasms  of  the  dead  (on  the
evidence),  usually  “ take  notice  ” (like  babies)  of  attempts  to  approach
them.  The  spook  of  the  minister,  pursued  by  Miss  M.  W.  Scott,
“turned  round  and  faced  her,”  twice  (Vol.  II.,  p.  397).  As  I know
the  lady  and  the  place,  the  adventure  interests  me,  and  such  cases
are  not  infrequent,  if  I may  trust  persons  of  honour  and  distinction
who  have  been  “percipients.”  Now  mei-e  spectrographic  reflections
would  not  give  these  signs  of  con.sciousness.  However,  my  point  is
that,  if  science  did  entertain  this  spectrographic  theory,  then  science
would  not  merely  deny  and  say  “pooh!”  to  “ghost  stories,”  but
would  admit  the  facts  (if  well  attested),  having  secured  an  expla-
nation. In  the  same  humour,  Mr.  Mallock  does  not  reject,  en  masses
^ Proceedings,  Vol.  XI.,  pp.  .547-5.54.  ^ Sauntering  spot.


XLVI.]


73


“ The  Nineteenth  Century  ” and  Mr.  Myers.

Mr.  Mj^ers’s  death-wraiths,  and  other  hallucinations,  nor  dispose  of
them  by  the  cheap  theory  of  “It  happened  to  be  B’s  hour  to  see
a hallucination  of  A,  when  it  happened  to  be  A’s  hour  to  die  ” He
does  not  reject  them,  but  says,  “ had  Mr.  Myers  only  lived  to  see
the  development  of  wireless  telegraphy,  he  would  have  realised  how
unnecessary  and  how  childish  was  the  spiritualistic  hypothesis
whereby  he  seeks  to  explain  the  fact  that  a telepathic  message  is
capable  of  being  conveyed  to  several  recipients  simultaneously.”

Mr.  Myers  died  in  January,  1901,  and,  in  April,  1901,  I ventured
to  begin  a romance  of  wireless  telegraphy.  The  topic  was  not
revealed  to  man  between  January  and  April,  1901.  Mr.  Myers’s
comments  on  Sir  William  Crookes’s  suggestion  of  a theory  by  which
telepathy  is  propagated  by  “ ether-waves  of  even  smaller  amplitude
and  greater  frequency  than  those  which  carry  the  X rays,”  are
quite  as  germane  to  the  matter  as  the  latest  exploits  of  Mr.  Marconi.
Any  one  can  read  Mi\  Myers’s  objections  to  Sir  William  Crookes’s
suggestion  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  245,  246).  To  me  they  appear  telling,  though
I have  no  theory,  especially  no  “spiritualistic”  theory,  of  my  own.
It  does  seem  clear  that,  if  we  accept  any  of  Mr.  Myers’s  cases
either  of  “ precognition,”  or  of  phantasms  of  the  dead  of  a departed
generation,  the  phenomena  cannot  be  explained  by  the  widest
licence  of  an  assumption  based  on  the  analogy  of  wireless  telegraph}',
and  postulating  similar  “waves”  from  living  brain  to  living  brain.
“An  etheric  telepathy,  and  other  cognate  perceptions  of  distant
things”  (distant  in  space,  Mr.  Mallock  probably  means),  is  a hypo-
thesis which  cannot  explain,  (even  if  it  state  a vera  causa,  about
which  we  know  nothing),  the  classes  of  phenomena  to  which  I
allude  The  hypothesis  rests  on  the  sand  of  analogy,  and  does  not
cover  all  the  alleged  facts.

Now,  in  my  opinion,  theorizing  here  is  but  a human  weakness ;
we  need  many  years  devoted  to  collecting  and  criticising  statements
of  alleged  facts.  The  merit  of  Mr.  Myers  and  his  friends  is  to
have  done  in  collection  and  criticism  of  statements  hitherto  ignored,
so  much  work,  that  scientific  men  of  Mr.  Mallock’s  eminence  may
admit  the  “ sober  likelihood  ” of  facts  previously  scouted,  but  now
explained  (by  aid  of  analogy),  as  the  result  of  processes  in  the
living  organism.  To  myself,  explanations  based  on  analogy  appear
of  next  to  no  value ; the  scientific  police  “ has  a clue  ” of  the  most
vaporous  nature.  But  Mr.  Myers’s  own  explanation,  at  present,
seems  rather  poetry  than  science.  The  theory,  on  the  other  hand,
to  which  Mr.  Mallock  inclines  is  at  least  as  old  as  Lavaterus  (ch'c.


74


Andrew  Lang.


[part


1580)  and  Izaak  Walton.  The  hypothesis  of  Mr.  Myers  is  of  neo-
lithic antiquity,  and  its  modern  forms,  as  held  by  Hegel  and  Karl
du  Prel,  are  so  closely  akin  to  Mr.  Myers’s  that  I am  surprised  to
find  him  citing  du  Prel  but  once,  and  Hegel  (as  far  as  the  index
shows)  not  at  all.^

The  success  of  Mr.  Myers  and  his  associates  has  lain  in  procuring
a slight  amount  of  attention  for  facts  in  human  nature  accepted  by
Hegel,  but  hitherto  dismissed,  as  a rule,  without  examination.
Whatever  may  be  the  future  (or  non-future),  of  the  human  person-
ality, that  personality  may  come  to  be  more  closely  studied  : science
may  no  longer,  like  the  fabled  ostrich,  hide  her  head  in  the  sand.
To  me  the  “Gospel”  of  Mr.  Myers  may  be  expre.ssed  in  the  words,
“ Do  look  into  things  ! ” He  aimed  at  the  sky,  but  he  has,  I hope,
hit  this  tree.  If  we  cease  to  argue  about  such  themes  as  perplexed
Milton’s  fallen  angels  in  hell,  if  we  merely  study  and  make  experi-
ments in  human  nature,  following  a path  hitherto  barred  against
trespassers,  we  may  learn  that  we  are  other  than  a vain  people
su]>  poses.

Differing  from  Mr.  Myers  on  a hundred  points,  holding  Mrs.  Piper
almost  as  cheap  as  I do  Mrs.  Galhq)  (but  not  quite),  I yet  think
that  many  qualities  and  portions  of  Mr.  Myers’s  work  deserve
recognition  more  geneious  than  Mr.  Mallock  has  given  them.  Even
if  he  did  “ see  distant  gates  of  Eden  gleam”  (a  childish  and  fan-
tastic hallucination),  even  if  he  did  not,  like  Mr.  Mallock’s  Virginia
St.  John,  go  about  giggling  at  the  idea  of  an  Intelligent  First
Cause,  he  worked  manfully,  courageously, — I say  honestly, — at  an
uphill  task.

It  is  a matter  of  detail,  and  I could  only  make  my  point  by  long
citations,  but  I do  not  agree  with  Mr.  Mallock  that  the  cases  of
Helhne  Smith,  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  Mrs.  Piper,  and  the  Rev.
Stainton  Moses,  offer  “the  best  examples”  of  “veridical  phantasms
of  the  dead,”  among  other  phenomena.  Indeed  I find  no  “ veridical
phantasms  of  the  dead  ” among  the  records  of  these  gifted  persons.
Possibly  Mr.  Mallock  has  not  studied  Professor  Flournoy’s  two  books
about  Helene  Smith  ? The  examples  which  Mr.  Mallock  does  adduce,
of  other  phenomena,  are  not  given  at  their  strongest ; indeed  some
are  hardly  given  at  all.  The  odd  case  of  Colonel  Gurwood  (Vol.  IT,

’ I)u  Prel:  P/n7o.sopAy  q/’ il/y.sP'ci-wi,  translated  by  Mr.  Massey.  Hegel:  Philo-
xophie  den  Geisles,  Werke,  Vol.  VII.,  Berlin,  1845.  Mr.  Wallace’s  translation  of
1894  is  published  by  the  Clarendon  Press  (cf.  my  Making  of  Religion,
pp.  38-36,  Longmans,  1898).


XLVI.]


“ The  Ninetmith  Ccniury  ” and  Mr.  Myi:rs.


75


pp.  161-167)  is  not  offered  as  a proof  of  the  survival  of  that  gallant
officer — with  a headache — but  as  an  instance  of  “the  growing  diffi-
culty which  the  theory  of  forgotten  memoi-ies  ” (in  tlie  living)  “here
involves.”  By  the  collection  of  many  such  records,  Mr.  Myers  thinks
that  we  might  reach,  or  approach,  “ some  general  conclusion  as  to
the  source  from  which  these  retrocognitive  facts  come — if  in  any  cases
forgotten  memory  fails  to  explain  them  ” (Vol.  II.,  p.  167).  These  are
impartial  remarks,  though,  for  his  own  personal  j)art,  Mr.  Myers
put  his  trust  in  some  “ records  ” which  to  me  seem  valueless,  and,
like  Dr.  Hodgson  (a  sceptical  man),  came  to  believe  that  he  had
proofs  of  actual  “ possession.”

So  far  I give  my  reply  to  Mr.  Mallock  exactly  as  it  was  written
for  the  Editor  of  The  Ninefeerifh  Century  and  After.  I now  add,  by
way  of  reinforcement,  other  examples,  as  1 conceive,  of  Mr.  Mallock’s
misfortune  in  misunderstanding  and  misstating  the  ideas  which  he
opposes.

The  gist  of  Mr.  Mallock’s  argument  is,  that  “the  two  selves  are
the  same  self  in  different  conditions,  and  not,  as  Mr.  Myers  imagines,
two  independent  entities.”  But  Mr.  Mallock,  though  often  insisting
on  this  alleged  imagination  of  Mr.  Myers,  never  once  gives  a refer-
ence to  Mr.  Myers’s  book  for  the  opinion.  I must  repeat  that,  if  I
understand  Mr.  Myers,  he  did  not  occupy  the  position  which  Mr.
Mallock  attacks.  Mr.  Mallock  climbs  a kopje  gallantly,  with  fixed
bayonets  and  hoorays ; he  plants  his  banner  victoriously  (ui  the  top.
But  that  is  easy,  for  the  kopje  was  not  held.  Mr.  Myers,  like  Mr.
Mallock,  believes  that  “ the  two  selves  are  the  same  self  in  different
conditions,”  and  not  that  “they  are  two  independent  beings.”  Mr.
Mallock,  at  first,  seems  to  understand  that  this  is  Mr.  Myers’s  notion,
for  he  writes — in  his  second  page — “The  supraliminal  self  is”  (that
is,  in  Mr.  Myers’s  theory),  “ something  thrown  up  above  the  surface
by  the  self  which  is  submerged  below.”  If  so,  how  can  Mr.  Mallock
keep  averring  that  Mr.  Myers  regards  the  supraliminal  self  as  “an
independent  being’”?  The  so-called  “supraliminal  self,”  in  Mr.
Myers’s  hypothesis,  is  only  the  one  self  revealing  itself  in  the  con-
ditions of  explicit,  ordinary,  every-day  consciousness.  The  hypnotic
self,  again,  is  only  the  one  self  under  hypnotic  conditions  of  various
kinds  and  degrees  : it  is  not  the  one  self  utteily  untrammelled,  as
Mr.  Mallock  seems  to  think  that  Mr.  Myers  held  it  to  be.  On  the
same  page  (629)  Mr.  Mallock  asserts  both  that  Mr.  Myers  holds  the
supraliminal  self  to  be  an  emanation  of  the  submerged  self,  “ some-


76


Andrevj  Lang.


[part


thing  thrown  up  by”  that,  and  also  that  he  holds  the  supraliminal
self  to  be  “ a separate  entity.”  Some  one  is  guilty  of  a contradiction
in  terms,  and  I do  not  think  that  Mr.  Myers  is  the  erring  logician.

Mr.  Mallock  drops,  I conceive,  into  another  error.  We  have
noted  that,  in  his  opinion,  Mr.  Myers,  had  he  lived  to  see  the
development  of  wireless  telegraphy  (which  to  a considerable  extent
he  did),  “ would  have  realised  how  unnecessary  and  how  childish
was  the  spiritualistic  hypothesis  whereby  he  seeks  to  explain  the
fact  that  a telepathic  message  is  capable  of  being  conveyed  to
several  percipients  simultaneously”  (p.  641).  Mr.  Myers’s  hypothesis
of  telepathy,  involving  several  percipients,  is  here  said  by  Mr.
Mallock  to  be  “spiritualistic.”  But  (p.  6.32)  Mr.  Mallock  had
remarked,  “telepathy  in  itself  is  not,  Mr.  Myers  says,  a fact  more
spiritual  or  hyperphysical  than  light,  nor  does  it  point  of  itself
to  an  intelligence  independent  of  matter,”  except  in  certain  cases,
for  which  he  provides  a “spiritualistic”  and  “childish”  and  “un-
necessary” explanation.  Now,  where  does  Mr.  Myers  say  that

telepathy  “ is  Jiot  more  spiritual  or  hyperphysical  than  light  ? ” He
says  just  the  contrary  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  24,  and  Vol.  II.,  p.  195.
As  usual,  no  reference  is  given  by  Mr.  Mallock.  In  Volume  L,
pp.  245,  246,  Mr.  Myers  argues  against  the  theory  that  a “system
of  undulations  ” (as  in  light)  “ can  explain  the  alleged  facts  ” (cf.  II.,
141-145).  I cannot  find  that  Mr.  Myers  (while  not  presuming  to
deny  that  ether  and  undulations  may  be  concerned  in  telepathy)
ever  says  what  Mr.  Mallock  makes  him  say,  that  telepathy  “ is  not,
in  itself,  a fact  more  spiritual  or  hyperphysical  than  light.”

In  short,  Mr.  Mallock  appears  to  me  too  often  to  credit  Mr.
Myers  with  opinions  which  he  did  not  hold,  to  give  no  references,
and  to  attack  positions  which  are  not  held.  As  to  telepathy,  Mr.
Mallock  does  not  appear  to  deny  the  phenomenon,  but  to  incline
to  explain  it,  if  it  exists,  by  the  analogy  of  “wireless  telepathy.”
Mr.  Myers  had  considered,  as  we  see.  Sir  William  Crookes’s
suggestion  in  that  kind  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XII.,  pp.  348-352),
and,  among  other  objections,  urged  that  “ it  is  hard  to  understand
how  A can  emit  a pattern  of  vibrations  which,  radiating  equally  in
all  directions,  shall  affect  not  only  his  distant  friend  B,  but  also
the  strangers  C and  D who  happen  to  be  standing  near  B,  and
affect  no  other  persons,  so  far  as  we  know,  in  the  world  ” (Vol.  I.,
p.  246).

Mr.  Mallock  appears  to  see  nothing  in  all  this.  The  syntonisa-
tion  of  the  cerebral  coherers  of  A,  B,  C,  and  D offers  no  difficulty


XLVi.]  “ The  Nineteenth  Century”  and  Mr.  Myers.  77

to  his  expert  mind.  Xot  knowing  aught  about  these  matters,  I
must  refer  the  question  to  Sir  Olivier  Lodge,  who  has  gone  pretty
deep  into  these  things.  Men  are  not  Marconi  machines,  and,  in
my  ignorance,  I must  pause  before  arguing  as  if  they  were,  for  that,
I repeat,  would  be  a mere  argument  from  analogy.

For  the  rest,  I am  not  defending  Mr.  Myers’s  hypotheses — that
of  “ possession  ” I reject — I am  only  anxious  that  they  should  be
understood  before  they  are  rejected.  In  history  it  is  well  to  quote
the  exact  words  of  a document  : in  science  it  appears  to  be  enough
to  write  that  “ Mr.  Myers  says  ” this  or  that,  in  the  terms  of  the
scientist  himself,  and  without  references  to  the  text  of  the  author.
Daily  experience  proves  that  profitable  criticisms  cannot  be  produced
in  this  way.  I need  hardly  add  that,  though  I think  Mr.  Mallock
misunderstood,  I am  sure  that  he  never  dreamed  of  misrepresenting
Mr.  Myers.


78


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


[fart


REPLY  TO  MR  PODMORE’S  CRITICISM.
By  Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


In  this  repl}'  to  Mr.  Podmore’s  review  in  Proceedings,  Part  XLV.,  of
my  report  on  the  trance  phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper,  I shall  not  say
one  word  in  defence  of  the  spiritistic  hypothesis.  I do  not  think
that  the  defence  of  this  theory  is  half  so  important  at  this  stage
of  our  investigations  as  an  intelligent  and  consistent  conformit}'  to
scientific  method,  as  it  must  be  applied  to  any  mass  of  facts  what-
ever. This  requires  the  detailed  application  of  some  single  hyjjothesis
to  all  the  facts  of  a record  and  the  exclusion  of  all  adjunctive
suppositions  which  do  not  naturally  articulate  with  each  other  in
dealing  with  the  concrete  totality  involved,  but  which  represent  some
probability  in  their  conjunction,  as  well  as  inherent  applicability  to
the  facts.

There  are  two  considerations  to  be  noticed.  They  are  the
questions  of  accuracy  in  dealing  with  the  record  and  of  the  appli-
cation of  general  principles  evidentially  sustained  in  the  case.  The
first  is  a question  of  fact,  and  the  second  a question  of  method.  I
take  these  in  their  order.

1.  Mr.  Podmore  says:  “The  first  seance  in  Professor  Hyslop’s
series,  according  to  his  own  original  estimate  of  it  is  ‘ absolutely  ’
worthless  as  evidence.”  Now,  if  the  reader  of  Mr.  Podmore’s  review
will  turn  up  his  own  reference  to  my  report  and  also  look  at  p.  26
of  the  same,  he  will  find  that  I did  not  say  that  the  nrst  sitting
“is  absolutely  worthless,”  or  that  I regarded  it  in  the  light  which
Mr.  Podmore’s  garbled  quotation  would  imply.  I said  a very
difi'erent  thing.  I said  that  I had  “treated  it  and  would  treat  it
■alone  as  absolutely  worthless.”  But  I was  careful  to  indicate  that  I
was  treating  it  as  a part  of  a whole  requiring  the  same  hypothesis
to  explain  it.  The  statements  which  follow  this  quotation  do  not
commit  me  to  any  view  that  the  reader  may  adopt,  but  show  that
I hold  to  my  present  opinion  in  spite  of  difficulties  which  I recog-
nised and  appreciated  in  the  minds  of  those  who  did  not  and  could


xlvl]


Reply  to  Mr.  Pochnores  Criticism.


79


not  measure  the  facts  as  I could.  I did  not  alter  my  opinion  of
its  weakness  evidentially  until  I discovered  a number  of  true  things
in  it,  some  of  them  synthetic,  which  I had  at  first  supposed  false.
These  gave  it  a value  and  unity  with  other  sittings  that  it  did  not
seem  to  have  at  first.

2.  In  the  allusion  to  the  “communicator’s”  cjuestion,  “Do  you

hear  her  sing,”  Mr.  Podmore  does  not  seem  to  see  why  I called  it

an  automatism  and  apparently  refuses  to  recognise  it  as  such.  I

agree  that  “ to  the  uninstructed  reader  it  was  not  more  out  of  place
than  other  remarks  interjected  in  the  course  of  the  trance  writings,”
many  of  which  in  the  dramatic  play  of  personality  were  treated  as

automatisms.  But  I was  speaking  to  the  instructed  reader,  the

psychopathologist,  and  to  those  who  admitted  the  trance  condition
as  Mr.  Podmore  does,  who  would  recognise  on  any  theory  whatever,
except  conscious  fraud,  that  as  an  irrelevant  statement  it  must  be
treated  as  an  automatism.  Moreover,  I did  not,  as  charged,  recog-
nise the  question  as  relevant,  but  on  the  contrary,  just  because  it
was  irrelevant,  recognised  that  it  was  an  automatism.  The
psychological  reasons  for  this  judgment  are  patent  to  the  student  of
abnormal  mental  phenomena.

3.  In  regard  to  the  confusion  about  the  names  “Alice”  and
“ Annie  ” several  things  are  to  be  said,  (a)  Mr.  Podmore  does  not
state  what  true  “ valuable  information  ” the  trance  intelligence  could
have  easily  gained  under  the  circumstances.  If  guessing  is  as  easy  as
he  implies,  will  he  please  to  tell  some  evidential  true  fact  following
from  the  suggestion  which  he  insinuates.  (Ij)  What  has  the  supposed
fact  that  the  incident  is  “ quite  in  Phinuit’s  old  style  ” to  do  with
the  case  ? Does  Mr.  Podmore  suppose  that  Phinuit  is  wholly  dis-
posed of  by  a verdict  of  non-proven  in  regard  to  his  identity  ? I
had  explicitly  provided  in  my  discussion  for  this  very  matter
(pp.  254-255)  and  may  abbreviate  it  by  referring  to  what  I have  said
in  the  reply  to  Mr.  Carrington  on  the  same  point  (Part  XLV.  p.  365).
(c)  The  remark  by  Mr.  Podmore  is  wholly  irrelevant  to  the  question
of  interpreting  the  record  and  confuses  the  reader  with  implica-
tions about  the  evidential  issue  which  is  not  here  concerned,  because
my  question,  “Is  it  Alice?”  may  have  two  interpretations  other
than  the  one  suggested  by  the  bracketted  doubt  about  the  writing
which  was  inserted  afterwards,  and  in  fact,  as  shown  by  the  next
question,  was  intended  as  a ruse  to  make  the  medium  think  that
Alice  was  correct,  and  there  was  no  excuse  for  the  correction  on
any  theory  of  suggestion.


80


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


4.  Regarding  the  confusion  of  D for  NK  in  the  name  Frank,  I
may  say  : {a)  The  reading  was  primarily  Dr.  Hodgson’s,  as  explained
in  my  report  (pp.  14-15,  and  301),  and  not  mine,  and  his  first  im-
pression was  allowed  to  stand,  although  the  resemblance  to  NK  is
definite  and  clear  enough.  We  decided  the  doubt  in  this  as  in
all  similar  cases  against  the  evidential  interpretation,  {b)  Does  Mr.
Podmore  think  this  is  a prejudiced  way  to  treat  the  subject?  (c)
The  name  is  distinctly  FRAD,  except  the  symbol  for  D or  NK,  the
A being  a very  clear  capital.  Now  how  does  Mr.  Podmore  account
for  such  a name  on  the  hypothesis  of  either  guessing,  suggestion,
or  inference?

5.  Mr.  Podmore  says  : “ The  messages  for  the  most  part  bear  no
label  of  origin.”  {a)  If  he  means  some  of  the  messages  which  he
mentions  without  explaining  their  context,  his  statement,  which
allows  for  some  of  them  having  this  label,  will  not  be  open  to  criti-
cism. If  he  means,  as  is  most  apparent  from  his  allusions  being
general,  the  messages  in  the  whole  report,  his  statement  is  either
misleading  or  false,  and  the  facts  of  the  record,  which  are  not  so
dependent  on  “internal  evidence”  (an  elastic  expression)  as  Mr.
Podmore  implies,  support  a very  definite  “label  of  origin”  in  most
cases.  A man  does  not  have  to  announce  his  name  every  time  he
talks  through  a telephone,  though  he  may  have  to  do  so  generally
at  first.  There  may  be  plenty  of  conclusive  indications  on  any
theory  whatever,  fraud,  guessing,  or  secondary  personality,  of  the
origin  intended,  and  this  suffices  for  the  psychological  question  in  an
inductive  problem.  Mr.  Podmore  is  so  enamoured  of  the  importance
of  proper  names  that  he  apparently  cannot  see  or  appreciate  this
fiict,  which  I suspect,  however,  he  would  see  easily  enough  if  fraud
were  in  the  question.  (/;)  The  proof  of  my  assertions  is  found  all
the  way  through  Appendix  iv.  of  my  Report,  which  apparently  Mr.
Podmore  has  not  examined.  In  the  experiments  there  described
and  discussed,  it  should  be  noticed  that  I did  not  permit  any  “ label
of  origin  ” to  be  communicated.  Only  with  one  exception  did  I
allow  any  name  or  relationship  of  the  communicator,  or  fragmentary
intimation  of  them  to  be  sent.  I pursued  this  policy  purposely  to
anticipate  and  answer  just  such  reflections  as  Mr.  Podmore  indulges
in  his  review,  and  there  were  instances  where  the  correct  origin  was
discovered  when  the  message  very  effectively  concealed  it.

6.  Mr.  Podmore  says:  “Names  are  thrown  out  haphazard,  to  be
taken  up  and  identified  or  left,  as  the  sitter  wills,”  and  then  he  gives
one  example  of  his  assertion,  and  that  one  not  an  illustration  of


XLVI.]


Reply  to  Mr.  Podmore’s  Criticism.


81


either  the  guessing  or  chance  coincidence  that  he  suggests  ! (a)  The

statement  conveys  to  the  reader  the  suggestion,  especially  since  he
makes  the  statement  general,  that  we  are  dealing  throughout  with
phenomena  like  those  of  the  ordinary  guessing  mediums,  when  as
a fact  Mr.  Podmore  admits  both  the  trance  and  an  unusual  intelligence
connected  with  it.  There  is  just  enough  semblance  occasionally  in
the  giving  of  names  in  the  Piper  case  to  deceive  the  unscientific  man,
but  that  is  all.  I have  had  a great  many  experiences  with  guessing
mediums,  and  the  haphazard  throwing  out  of  names  has  never  shown
systematically  the  peculiar  marks  of  the  Piper  case.  There  is  in
the  latter  instance  very  generally,  when  the  name  is  not  given  at
one  shot,  some  phonetic  analogy  around  which  the  approximations
to  the  correct  name  play,  many  of  them  not  naturally  suggested  to
any  guessing  intelligence.  A man  who  had  the  slightest  acquaint-
ance with  the  phonetics  of  guessing  and  experimental  fishing  would
not  confuse  the  Piper  case  with  the  “ ordinary  professional  clair-
voyant,” even  on  the  supposition  of  fraud,  (d)  Mr.  Podmore  would
have  done  well  to  note  and  mention  the  experiments  on  this  point
in  Appendix  v.,  where  phonetics  played  a part  in  the  results,  (c)
The  example  given,  which  has  no  resemblance  to  the  general  pro-
cedure in  the  sittings  and  indicated  in  the  record,  does  not  bear  out
the  very  natural  implication  of  Mr.  Podmore’s  remark,  namely,  that
the  “ billet  ” was  found  in  Dr.  Hodgson ; for  the  record  (p.  330)
shows  that  it  was  not  so  found  either  in  fact  or  according  to  the
spontaneous  correction  of  the  “ controls  ” after  its  possible  appli-
cability to  Dr.  Hodgson  had  been  assumed  the  day  before.  (d)
After  admitting  the  existence  of  a trance  intelligence  in  the  Piper
case  Mr.  Podmore  ought  to  have  remarked  that  his  instance  was
not  an  example  of  the  “ordinary  professional  clairvoyant,”  instead
of  allowing  the  reader  to  suppose  that  he  was  thinking  of  conscious
frauds.

7.  In  the  catalogue  of  proper  names  which  occur  in  the  first
sitting,  Mr.  Podmore  says,  mentioning  that  of  Elizabeth,  “ It  should
be  added  that  the  lady  introduced  as  Elizabeth  was  known  in  life
as  Eliza.”  This  language  is  not  clear  in  its  implications,  as  a most
important  point  is  omitted.  (a)  It  suggests  that  I had  positively
identified  Elizabeth  with  Eliza,  apparently  on  the  resemblance  of
names,  as  Mr.  Podmore  is  here  omitting  reference  to  context  in
speaking  of  proper  names.  I did  not  so  identify  them.  (5)  Mr.
Podmore  classes  it  as  correct.  I did  not  say  that  it  was  correct,
and  the  record  does  not  justify  any  assurance  on  this  point.  I

F


82


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


[part


indicated  this  fact,  (c)  I explicitly  spoke  of  the  name  as  a “possible”
reference  to  my  mother’s  sister,  and  I did  so,  not  primarily  on  the
ground  of  any  resemblance  between  Elizabeth  and  Eliza,  but  expressly
on  the  ground  that  the  “ communicator  ” definitely  referred  to  my
mother’s  sister  in  close  connection  with  the  name  Elizabeth,  though
in  the  order  of  statement  the  reference  could  have  been  to  the  name
of  Mary,  and  if  the  reader  will  examine  the  record  in  its  psychological
character  he  will  find  a natural  explanation  of  even  this  discrepancy.
Mr.  Podmore  omits  to  say  anything  about  the  synthetic  feature  of
the  case  on  which  I had  founded  the  “ possible,”  and  only  the
“possible,”  reference  to  my  mother’s  sister.  {d)  Further,  I said

merely  that  it  contained  “ only  this  approximation  to  the  truth,”
naming  the  “possible”  meaning  of  the  name.  All  this  should  be
recognised  in  any  discussion  or  remarks  about  the  application  of
chance  to  the  first  sitting.

8.  A little  further  on,  in  giving  a list  of  correct  names  mentioned
at  the  second  sitting,  Mr.  Podmore  explicitly  identifies  the  name
Eliza  with  that  of  Elizabeth,  as  mentioned  in  the  first  sitting.  This
is  a guess  by  Mr.  Podmore  and  is  wrong.  There  is  not  a word  in
the  record  or  in  my  statements  to  suggest  this  identification.  I
had  explicitly  distinguished  them  by  saying  that  Elizabeth  was
possibly  intended  for  my  mother’s  sister,  whose  name  was  Eliza,
and  that  the  Eliza  of  the  second  sitting  was  my  father’s  sister.  I
did  not  know  until  more  than  two  weeks  later  (cf.  note  p.  .350)  that
my  mother  had  a sister  by  the  name  of  Eliza,  and  it  was  my  aunt
that  suspected  the  meaning  of  the  reference  to  Elizabeth.  Mr.  Pod-
more’s  mistake  comes  from  his  habit  of  attaching  undue  importance
to  proper  names  and  ignoring  the  synthetic  and  contextual  features
of  the  “communications.”

9.  Mr.  Podmore  says  that  my  full  name  was  given  at  the  second
sitting,  although  this  was  given  only  in  piecemeal,  according  to  his
statement,  {a)  This  statement  of  Mr.  Podmore  is  not  correct,  and
there  is  not  a word  in  the  record  to  support  it.  (b)  Only  a part  of
my  Christian  name  was  given  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  and  no
reference  to  my  surname  made  afterward  at  that  sitting.  (t)  The
explicit  statement  in  the  record  (p.  322)  is  that  “Hyslop”  referred
to  my  father  and  not  to  myself.  The  “ communicator  ” definitely
claimed  to  be  my  father  as  Mrs.  Piper  came  out  of  the  trance,  and
mj^  note  assumed  and  discussed  only  that  interpretation  of  the
name,  {d)  The  reader  will  see  from  the  facts  just  stated,  including
the  context,  that  the  name  was  7iot  “ejaculated  without  context.


XLVJ.]


Etply  to  Mr.  Podmore’s  Criticism.


83


leaving  the  sitter  to  find  his  own  application,”  as  is  asserted  by  Mr.
Podmore.  This  failure  to  observe  contextual  incidents  is  all  the
more  inexctisable  when  taken  in  connection  with  his  own  remark,
(c)  The  name  was  not  the  only  “ definite  true  statement  ” made  at
the  second  sitting.  There  were  several  of  a very  pertinent  sort  and
with  as  much  weight  in  the  recognition  of  personal  identity  as  many
that  sufficed  to  suggest  and  confirm  it  in  the  experiments  recorded
in  Appendix  iv^  (/)  The  intimation  that  “the  medium  bad  an
opportunity  of  passing  in  review  the  events  of  the  first  sitting  ” is
either  a siiggestio  falsi,  contradicting  j\Ir.  Podmore’s  own  readiness
to  exclude  fraud  from  the  case  (p.  376),  or  it  is  an  irresponsible
generality  wdthout  specific  illustration  or  proof.  It  does  not  dis-
tinguish between  Mrs.  Piper’s  conscious  reflection  in  her  normal  state
on  what  was  observed  by  her  before  and  after  the  trance  and  normally
conscious  knowledge  of  the  “ communications  ” which  might  be  inferred
from  Mr.  Podmore’s  statement,  but  which  she  has  no  external  means
of  obtaining  and  which  all  the  facts  seem  to  disprove  or  contradict.
Neither  does  it  distinguish  between  either  of  these  and  supernormal
•subliminal  action.  Now  as  Mr.  Podmore  had  intimated  that  there
was  nothing  of  a supernormal  character  in  my  record  in  his  remark
that  “ normal  channels  of  information  were  wide  enough  to  have
conveyed  everything  in  the  later  seances  which  was  true  and  relevant  ”
(p.  376),  the  only  rational  interpretation  of  his  language  regarding
the  review  of  the  events  at  the  sitting  is  that  he  meant  to  suppose
the  possibility  of  fraud,  and  unless  you  specify  the  kind  of  fraud
that  you  mean,  the  reader  is  justified  in  supposing  that  you  mean
conscious  fraud.  Subliminal  fraud  I had  considered  and  discussed
(pp.  153,  292).  There  should  be  no  admission  of  the  trance  if  you
are  going  to  use  such  language  as  “ passing  in  review  the  events  of
the  first  sitting,”  as  it  conveys  a wholly  false  implication  in  the  case.
It  is  using  the  imputation  of  “ possible  ” conscious  fraud  without
making  oneself  responsible  for  evidence  that  it  is  a fact,  after  con-
fessing earlier  (p.  376)  that  there  was  no  evidence  in  Mrs.  Piper’s
past  history  that  she  practised  the  ordinary  fraud.

10.  In  Mr.  Podmore’s  summary  marked  (C)  he  mentions  some  inci-
dents in  the  record  and  then  says;  “In  the  detailed  notes  (p.  314)
the  passage  is  interpreted  as  coming  from  the  father.  But  in  the
report  (p.  28)  it  is  apparently  assigned  to  the  uncle.”  Let  me
remark : (a)  The  passage  to  which  Mr.  Podmore  alludes  is  not
specifically  quoted  nor  specifically  alluded  to  on  page  28  of  the
Report,  (b)  I do  not  “in  the  detailed  notes  (p.  314)”  specifically


84


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


[part


refer  the  passage  to  my  father  directly.  I made  a purely  hypothetical
statement  and  it  was  made  with  reference  to  the  possibility  of
treating  m}^  brother  Charles  as  an  intermediary,  though  the  “ com-
munication ” be  supposed  to  be  thus  indirectly  from  my  father,
(c)  I do  not  specifically  refer  the  passage  to  my  uncle  on  page  28,
and  there  is  not  even  an  appearance  of  it,  unless  you  assume  that
I must  indicate  all  omissions  made  for  the  sake  of  brevity  and
including  non-evidential  matter.  I left  the  reader  to  observe  where
ray  uncle  began,  not  even  specifying  page  references  to  the  passage
purporting  to  come  from  my  uncle,  as  it  had  no  importance  for  the
summary  at  this  point.  There  is  no  such  definite  contradiction  in
my  interpretation  as  is  apparently  implied  by  Mr.  Podmore’s  obser-
vation. {(1)  I distinctly  said  on  page  28  that  I passed  by  all  that
might  have  come  from,  my  uncle  to  summarise  my  father’s  messages,
and  so  gave  no  clue  to  what  I identified  and  what  I did  not  iden-
tify with  the  uncle’s  “ communications.”

11.  In  Mr.  Podmore’s  summary  {!))  he  says:  “Then  follows  general
talk  about  the  loneliness  and  grief  of  Eliza,  after  the  sitter  had
intimated  by  his  question  that  Eliza  was  still  living.”  A slight
correction  is  necessary  in  this  statement,  (a)  Not  one  word  is  said
in  this  “ general  talk  ” about  the  “ loneliness  ” of  Eliza  either  before
or  after  the  question  which  I asked.  The  idea  has  to  be  imported
into  the  statement  from  my  note  (p.  363).  (i)  The  answer  to  my
question  is  not  a case  of  “intimation,”  or  suggestion,  as  understood
in  the  phenomena  of  secondary  personality,  but  is  rather  amenable
to  guessing,  (c)  If  this  passage  is  to  be  described  as  “general  talk,”
what  should  be  said  of  the  specific  and  very  pertinent  incidents  in
the  reference  to  “ music,  flowers,  walks,  drives,”  and  “ she  thought
she  saw  me  in  her  sleep  ” in  close  connection  with  the  apparent
allusion  to  my  father  ?

12.  In  summary  {K)  Mr.  Podmore  repeats  the  error  made  previ-
ously in  regard  to  the  “ ejaculation  of  the  sitter’s  surname  without
context.”

13.  Mr.  Podmore  says  that  the  statement,  “Give  me  my  hat  and
let  me  go,”  made  in  the  second  sitting,  is  “claimed  as  characteristic.”
(a)  This  is  not  correct.  I made  no  such  statement  in  the  record.
{h)  I explicitly  excluded  this  statement  by  “ my  father  ” from  the
list  of  phrases  which  I claimed  to  be  “ characteristic  ” (p.  89).  (c)  It
was  the  connection  in  which  it  was  said,  not  the  fact  of  it,  that
gave  the  statement  interest,  and  it  was  made  also  in  the  first  sitting
in  a similar  psychological  situation  and  very  suggestive  connection.


XLVI.]


Reply  to  Mr.  Podmorc’s  Criticism.


85


{d)  It  was  my  brother  that  discovered  and  indicated  the  pertinence
of  the  statement.

14.  As  to  Mr.  Podmore’s  statements  about  the  Cooper  incidents
there  are  a few  things  to  notice,  {a)  The  correspondence  with  Dr.
Cooper  was  not  “purely  conjectural,”  and  I did  not  say  it  was.  I
stated  that  it  was  probable,  which  I so  put  cautiously  as  against
fairly  definite  evidence,  my  stepmother’s  memory,  that  it  was  a fact.

(b)  The  imputation  in  Mr.  Podmore’s  statement,  “ It  is  true  that  in
any  case  writing  is  not  talking,”  is  not  justified  by  the  record.  The
talks  were  a fact  supported  by  specific  mention  of  my  stepmother  of
the  time  and  incidents  connected  with  them  : the  fact  of  writing  was
not  so  supported.  I mentioned  the  friendship  and  talking  in  my
note  on  the  incident,  both  certain  facts,  as  evidence  independently
of  my  stepmother’s  testimony  that  the  correspondence  was  probable,
as  well  as  indications  of  correctness  in  the  “ communications.”

(c)  The  “communicator”  made  no  reference  whatever  to  a photo  of
either  this  Dr.  Joseph  Cooper  or  Mr.  Samuel  Cooper,  the  latter  of
whom  had  been  suggested  by  myself.  Mr.  Podmore’s  statement  implies
that  this  mention  was  made  in  reference  to  Dr.  Cooper,  (rl)  I did
not  make  the  slightest  reference  in  my  notes  or  elsewhere  to  any
such  photo.  Mr.  Podmore’s  conception  of  the  incident  exists  only  in
his  imagination,  (e)  The  actual  “ communications  ” about  the  photo,
in  connection  with  the  name  of  Cooper,  as  any  intelligent  reader  of
the  record  may  see  for  himself,  do  not  lend  the  slightest  support  to
Mr.  Podmore’s  supposition  that  the  mention  of  it  referred  to  either
of  the  Coopers.  The  form  of  statement  in  this  connection  explicitly
indicates  a previous  allusion  to  it  when  I was  present  and  out  of
all  connection  with  the  Coopers  and  before  I had  suggested  the
name  (pp.  52,  397).  (/)  Mr.  Podmore  actually  quotes  the  statement
of  the  “ communicator  ” and  does  not  remark  this  reference,  (g)  The
implication  in  Mr.  Podmore’s  statement,  “that  Dr.  Cooper  did  not
live  West,  but,  unfortunately.  East,”  is  wholly  misleading.  It  implies
most  apparently  that  the  interpretation  on  which  the  statement  is
founded  is  the  necessary  one  regarding  the  message.  This  is  not  the
fact  and  I so  intimated  it.  The  “communicator”  did  not  say  that
Cooper  “lived  West,”  but  “old  friend  in  the  IFest.”  How  would
Mr.  Podmore,  on  his  interpretation,  make  the  falsity  of  the  state-
ment rational  on  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  or  guessing?  You  have  to
put  on  it  the  interpretation  which  I said  was  possible  in  order  to
make  the  assumption  of  fraud  rational,  and  I stated  this  interpre-
tation, as  my  original  note  shows,  to  indicate  that  I was  willing  to


86


Professor  James  H.  Hyslo'p.


[part


test  the  “communications”  by  the  hypothesis  of  fraud,  (/i)  The
interpretation  of  the  note  (p.  386)  which  was  a correction  of  the
earlier  note  and  whose  most  apparent  meaning  refers  to  the  correct-
ness of  the  allusion  “in  the  West,”  if  it  imjdied  the  fact  of  Dr.
Cooper’s  living  there,  flatly  contradicts  Mr.  Podmore’s  interpretation
of  the  message.’  (f)  Mr.  Podmore  omits  one  of  the  most  important
facts  of  the  Cooper  incident  and  which  with  its  synthetic  or  con-
textual relation  to  others  in  the  same  connection  is  a circumstance
of  some  interest.  It  was  the  statement  regarding  the  temporal
relation  between  the  death  of  Dr.  Cooper  and  that  of  my  father.

15.  Mr.  Podmore  cjuotes  (p.  388)  a statement  of  mine  relative  to
the  evidential  natui’e  of  a passage  in  the  “communications”  of  my
uncle,  dames  M‘Clellan,  and  names  references  in  the  record  in  which
my  statement  was  not  made  and  which  would  most  naturally  imply
to  the  reader  that  my  statement  was  made  in  the  connection  indi-
cated, when  it  was  not.  («)  My  statement  was  made  on  page  109,
and  Mr.  Podmore’s  references  were  111,  470,  535,  representing  a
totally  difl'erent  context  and  one  that  would  conceal  the  incidents  on
which  my  statement  was  based.  (6)  In  alluding  to  the  mistake
regarding  the  identity  of  John  M‘Clellan,  the  incidents  of  whom  I
had  summarised  separately  from  those  of  James  M‘Clellan,  Mr.
Podmore  rather  intimates,  in  his  remark  about  a supposed  suspicious
circumstance,  that  my  statement  respecting  the  pertinent  and  eviden-
tial character  of  the  incidents  from  James  M‘Clellan  is  not  justified.
If  Mr.  Podmore  had  actually  mentioned  the  correct  and  decidedly
evidential  incidents  in  the  “communications”  of  this  James  M'Clellan
his  strictures  might  have  been  treated'  as  less  objectionable  as
regards  the  facts.  But  to  mention  this  one  lone  exception  and  error
as  if  it  were  the  whole  case  is  ver}^  like  concealing  the  truth  from
the  reader.  Besides  Mr.  Podmore  positively  indicates  that  the

’ 1 shall  confess  frankly  to  a sin  in  this  note  correcting  the  earlier  one.  Mr.
Podmore,  however,  has  not  remarked  it,  although  I had  indicated  in  various
places  the  proper  interpretation  of  the  incident.  I confess,  on  reading  it  now,
that  the  note  correcting  the  earlier  one  is  quite  misleading,  and  should  have
been  e.vpanded  a little  or  modified  to  make  clear  what  I had  in  mind.  At  the
time  it  was  written,  and  this  was  while  the  report  was  going  through  the
press,  1 was  anxious  to  abbreviate  and  had  the  Cooper  incident  as  a whole  in
mind,  and  inserted  it  here  because  I was  mainly  bent  on  changing  the  allusion
to  “ mediumistic  tricks.”  I am  very  glad  that  I can  call  attention  to  this
piece  of  carelessness.  It  is  quite  probable  also  that  in  writing  the  note  I had
in  mind  the  Cooper  Memorial  School  which  was  situated  in  the  West  from  my
father's  home.


XLVi.]  Reply  to  Mr.  Podmores  Criticism.  (S7

mistake  is  “ suspicious,”  and  this  without  evidence  for  the  insinuation
of  fraud  in  his  allusion  to  the  county  history  which  I had  con-
sidered in  making  up  my  judgment,  a fact  not  told  the  reader
by  Mr.  Podmore,  and  without  the  consideration  of  the  incidents  of
the  lost  finger  and  the  name  Hathaway  together  with  the  omission
of  all  reference  to  the  only  other  fact  than  the  name,  the  ensign
commission,  that  could  be  obtained  in  that  history  and  that  was  not
mentioned  by  the  “ communicator.”  I had  mentioned  every  circum-
stance and  fact  by  which  Mr.  Podmore’s  hypothesis  could  be  tried
and  it  was  clear  to  every  intelligent  reader  that  this  county  history
was  not  the  source  of  the  knowledge  conveyed.  Of  Journal  S.P.B.,
Vol.  X.,  p.  219.

16.  In  regard  to  the  name  Carruthers,  which  is  not  fully  ex-
plained by  Mr.  Podmore,  I have  not  to  complain  of  an  error  of
fact  so  definitely  as  in  other  cases,  but  only  to  say  that  his  apparent
representation  of  the  incident  seems  to  insinuate  that  I did  not
treat  the  failure  to  get  that  name  as  an  objection  to  the  hypothesis
that  I was  testing,  and  that  I should  have  treated  it  as  he  does.
In  the  statistical  summary  where  I was  treating  all  “ factors,”  or

single  incidents,”  individually  and  without  relation  to  context,  I
classed  this  name  as  a positive  error.  But  it  is  context  and
synthetic  character  and  relation  that  may  serve  for  positive  identi-
fication on  any  theory  whatever,  even  when  a large  amount  of

mistake  and  confusion  occurs.  On  Mr.  Podmore’s  own  supposition;
whether  of  “ possible  ” or  actual  fraud,  I would  have  maintained  the
same  opinion  of  the  meaning,  other  things  being  the  same,  of  that
failure  in  the  “ ordinary  clairvoyant’s  ” performances,  though  I should
be  very  much  puzzled  to  know  why  any  conscious  fraud  would
make  such  an  unnecessary  mistake.  Mr.  Podmore  might  have
indicated  what  I said  about  this  name  and  the  “communications”
of  this  uncle  on  pp.  90,  94,  and  223.  It  would  also  have  been

well  to  have  remarked  what  I said  in  the  footnote  on  p.  240
regarding  the  possible  mistake  of  Charles  for  Carruthers.

17.  In  allusion  to  “normal  channels  of  information,”  on  p.  376,

such  as  inference  and  suggestion,  Mr.  Podmore  says ; “ To  this

question  Professor  Hyslop  has  not  addressed  himself  at  all.”  This

is  not  true.  I very  carefully  “ addressed  ” myself  to  these  theories
and  rejected  them  as  nonsense.  The  reader  may  consult  the  follow-
ing references  as  proof  that  I explicitly  did  so,  in  my  Rejmrt,
pp.  16-17,  124,  and  especially  247-248.  As  Mr.  Podmore  gives  no
evidence  in  his  review  that  he  had  examined  what  I said  between


88  Professor  James  H.  Hysloj^.  [part

pp.  124  and  296,  he  may  be  able  to  plead  ignorance  of  my  state-
ments.

These  mistakes  have  a humorous  aspect  for  me  after  Mr.  Pod-
more’s  animadversions  on  the  manner  in  which  I treated  mistakes
and  fragmentary  messages  in  my  Report.  I have  always  been
taught  to  believe  that  Mr.  Podmore  could  state  facts  as  clearly,
as  correctly,  and  as  accurately  as  people  usually  suppose  that  dis-
carnate  spirits  ought  to  communicate  through  Mrs.  Piper’s  organism.
But  after  all,  these  numerous  mistakes  and  eiTors  mentioned  above
and  committed  by  Mr.  Podmore,  who  might  have  been  in  a rational
state  of  mind  when  quoting  my  Report  and  writing  his  review  of
it,  a condition  in  which  the  spiritistic  hypothesis,  as  I stated
it,  does  not  suppose  the  communicator  to  be,  I confess  that,  if  I
cannot  use  fragmentary  messages  and  mistakes  as  evidence  of  per-
sonal identity  I must  doubt  the  very  existence  of  the  Mr.  Podmore
that  I have  believed  in,  and  may  be  required  to  believe  that
some  fraudulent  writer  of  very  ordinary  intelligence  has  been
personating  him  with  less  cleverness  than  the  review  of  my  Report
supposes  was  necessary  or  adequate  to  explain  the  messages  in
that  record.  It  ma}’’  be  that  spirits  ought  to  do  better,  but  it  is
time  to  be  charitable  toward  them  as  a “possibility.”


II.

I come  next  to  Mr.  Podmore’s  method  of  treating  the  record  and  the
assumptions  which  he  makes  without  producing  evidence  that  they  apply.

1.  There  are  various  statements  and  intimations  in  Mr.  Podmore’s
review,  which  the  reader  may  remark  for  himself,  such  as  the
‘‘possibility”  that  information  was  or  “might  be”  obtained  from
outside  sources  by  at  least  the  medium ; the  “ possibility  ” that
chance  coincidence,  guessing,  inference,  and  suggestion  “ might  ”
explain  much ; the  manner  of  reversing  the  emphasis  which  my
Report  placed  upon  explanatory  as  compared  with  evidential
problems  there  discussed,  and  especially  the  limitation  of  his  review
and  argument  to  the  earlier  sittings  and  assumptions  of  “ 2)Ossible  ”
fraud  in  connection  with  the  later  sittings,  though  his  attitude  even
here  is  not  consistent,  as  he  is  content  with  a general  and  un-
supported assertion  about  the  application  of  inference  and  suggestion
to  the  later  seances — these  statements  and  intimations  which  most
apparently  show  that  Mr.  Podmore  assumed  that  I was  trying  to
demonstrate  the  spiritistic  theory,  or  primarily  to  convince  the  reader


XLVJ.]


Reply  to  Mr.  Podmore's  Criticis7U.


89


of  its  truth  by  dumbfounding  the  imagination  in  tlie  exclusion  of
the  “ possibility  ” of  fraud,  when  I distinctly  renounced  all  intention
of  doing  this.  They  go  to  show  this  contention,  because  all
demonstration,  in  the  proper  sense  of  absolute  proof,  implies  the
exclusion  of  alternative  possibilities  of  explanation,  as  rationally
sustained  to  some  extent  at  least.  A?i  ind.uctive  prohlem  does  not
exclude  the  recognition  of  alternative  ^^possibilities,”  hut  insists  that  the
entertainment  of  them  shall  he  accompanied  hy  a,s  much  consistent  evidence
that  they  are  facts  in  the  particular  case  as  is  p>resented  for  the  hypothesis
adopted.  This  conception  of  the  problem  is  fundamental  to  the
position  consciously  taken  in  my  Report  and  defined  for  the  very
purpose  of  remaining  at  the  inductive  point  of  view  until  further
evidence  was  obtained,  either  for  refuting  Dr.  Hodgson  and  myself,
or  for  better  chances  to  convince  the  reader.

How  careful  I was  to  define  the  problem  that  I was  investigating
and  discussing,  as  both  explanatory  and  evidential,  with  the  emphasis
in  my  Report  on  the  explanatory  character  of  the  hypothesis
defended,  can  be  seen  by  consulting  the  following  references  to  that
Report  and  the  Journal  (pp.  4,  footnote,  86,  90,  124,  244-247,  290-294,
and  especially  295-296  ; Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X,  pp.  213-215).  I
agree  that  a hypothesis  must  liave  evidence,  but  it  must  also  explain
and  be  applicable  p.sychologically  to  the  whole  case  in  court  and
consistently  adapted  to  details  without  imaginary  and  unsupported
adjunctive  suppositions.  Now  as  my  explicit  statements  showed
that  I was  not  trying  to  demonstrate  the  spiritistic  theory,  or  to
convince  the  reader,  but  only  testing  a hypothesis  formed  on  other
records  and  applied  to  mine  with  less  evidential  value,  Mr.  Podmore
ought  to  have  seen  that  it  was  as  much  his  duty  to  give  evidence
of  his  hypotheses  of  inference  and  suggestion  as  he  thinks  it  was
mine  to  prove  spiritism.  If  I had  professed  to  demonstrate  the
spiritistic  theory,  the  mention  of  alternative  “possibilities”  not  con-
sidered by  me  might  have  had  some  respect  given  them,  but  as  I
professedly  was  dealing  with  an  inductive  problem,  Mr.  Podmore
must  accept  tha.t  issue  in  reviewing  the  Report,  and  not  demand
that  I shall  look  at  the  problem  in  his  way,  without  applying  his
“ possible  ” hypotheses  to  the  record  evidentially  and  in  detail.
But  instead  of  evidence  and  detailed  application  of  his  theory,  he
.simply  asserts  that  his  various  hypotheses  are  “not  excluded,”  that
they  are  “possible,”  that  they  “might”  explain  certain  incidents.

Of  all  the  words  of  tongue  or  pen

The  saddest  are  these  : it  might  have  been.


Professor  James  H.  Hyshrp.


90


[part


1 do  not  understand  that  scientific  work  consists  or  is  exhausted  in
the  collection  and  publication  of  “ might  he’s.”

The  reader  will  now  anticipate  how  I mean  to  treat  Mr.  Podmore’s
playing  with  the  hypotheses  of  fraud.  I simply  repeat  what  I said
in  my  Eeport  on  this  matter  (pp.  5-10).  I absolutely  refuse  to
discuss  the  supposition  of  it  seriously  until  the  issue  is  squarely  faced
as  I defined  it  for  myself  and  as  the  history  of  the  Piper  case

defines  it  inductively.  I explicitly  gave  my  reasons  for  taking  this
position  (pp.  5-10  : cf.  pp.  298,  344-346).  The  last  page  and  a half
of  my  Report  (pp.  295-296)  also  had  the  same  issue  in  mind.  When
Mr.  Podmore  is  prepared  to  give  definite  evidence  that  fraud  of
any  kind  is  a probable  fact  in  the  case,  I can  take  his  treatment  of
the  subject  with  some  scientific  seriousness.

Mr.  Podmore’s  position  regarding  fraud  is  this.  The  first  sitting
was  a failure,  and  the  second  sitting  was  very  poor  at  least,  if  not
an  equal  failure.  The  later  sittings  are  so  separated  by  intervals
of  time  and  opportunity  to  collect  information  regarding  the  sitter
that  their  evidential  claims  are  vitiated.  His  statements  on  pp.

376  and  3<S8  have  no  rational  meaning  except  on  the  assumption

that  he  has  conscious  detective  fraud  in  mind  : for  he  alludes  to

“knowledge  normally  acquired  by  the  medium,  either  in  her  waking
state  from  things  heard  and  read,”  etc.,  to  information  “possibly”
obtainable  “ from  registers,  tombstones,  old  newspapers,  directories,
or  any  other  sources,”  and  to  the  “suspicious  mistake”  which  he
imagines  “might”  be  due  to  consulting  an  old  county  history.

Now  1 shall  frankly  admit  the  plausibility  of  this  claim  or  insinua-
tion by  Mr.  Podmore  that  fraud  is  a factor  in  my  record  to  be  con-
sidered, but  on  the  following  conditions  : («)  If  he  will  show  that  no
adequate  attempts  have  been  made  in  the  past  previous  to  my  sittings
to  exclude  fraud  on  Mrs.  Piper’s  [tart  and  to  show  that  it  was  both
foreign  to  her  habits  and  unnecessary  to  produce  the  results,  {h)  If
he  will  apply  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  to  the  whole  case  in  detail  and
give  specific  evidence  for  the  truth  of  the  adjunctive  suppositions
necessary  to  account  for  these  details,  including  trivialities,  mistakes,
confusions,  automatic  writing,  the  dramatic  play  of  personality,  the
apparent  difference  of  clearness  in  the  “ communicators,”  the  absence
of  definite  time  relations  in  the  “communications,”  and  all  the
p,sychological  peculiarities  generally  in  the  case,  as  well  as  the
omissions  of  what  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  would  most  naturally  lead
us  to  expect  would  be  given  most  easily  and  without  unnecessary
expense  and  trouble  in  collecting  the  information.  (c)  If  he  will


XLV].]


Reply  to  Mr.  Rodmorc’s  Criticism.


91


abandon  the  admission  that  there  is  any  “ trance  intelligence  ” con-
nected with  the  Piper  phenomena,  and  show  that  there  is  no  evidence
to  support  the  belief  that  her  trance  is  genuine.  ((^)  If  he  will  prove,
what  his  method  of  treating  my  Report  in  reality  assumes — namely
that  the  Piper  and  similar  phenomena  are  not  to  be  treated  as  a
whole  after  reasonable  evidence  that  fraud  is  not  practised,  but
de.  novo  with  each  new  sitting  or  sitter,  and  with  the  liberty  to  articulate
theories  as  you  please  whether  consistent  with  each  other  or  not.
(e)  If  he  will  show  that  the  explanatory  problem  does  not  enter  into
the  scientific  treatment  of  the  case  as  a whole,  but  only  his  conception
of  the  evidential  incidents.  (/)  If,  remembering  that  this  is  an
inductive  problem,  he  will  produce  specific  evidence  that  there  is
reason  to  believe  that  “registers,  tombstones,  old  newspapers,  direc-
tories,” and  similar  sources  of  information,  did  actually  supply  any
one  connected  with  the  Piper  case  with  the  information  contained  in
the  incidents  of  the  “ communications  ” on  which  I definitely  formed
my  reasons  for  applying  the  spiritistic  hypothesis  to  my  record.
{g)  If  he  will  show,  after  his  admission  in  the  review  and  elsewhere
that  there  is  a supernormal  faculty  indicated  in  the  Piper  case,  that
there  is  no  reason  to  assume  this  faculty  operative  when  the  a g^ciori
and  imaginary  “ possibility  ” of  fraud  is  not  excluded  from  it  all  the
time  and  from  all  incidents  in  the  same  way,  and  wherein  it  is  rational
for  Mrs.  Piper,  without  the  collusion  of  others,  to  carry  on  so  vast
a system  of  detective  agencies  as  must  be  assumed  to  account  for
the  peculiarity  of  many  of  the  details,  with  the  attendant  trouble
and  expense  and  so  little  result,  according  to  the  opinion  of  Mr.
Podmore,  when  it  would  have  been  so  easy  and  inexpensive  to  get
far  better  results,  and  to  avoid  mistakes  and  confusions.  Wheir  Mr.
Podmore  has  done  all  these,  it  will  be  time  to  take  his  reflections  as
seriously  as  he  does  himself.

But  how  does  Mr.  Podmore  proceed  1 He  makes  an  allusion  to
“ knowledge  normally  acquired  b}^  the  medium,”  and  then  goes  on
to  indicate  that  the  result  can  be  explained  by  inference  from  my
statements  and  suggestions  to  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  trance  state,  and  so
expresses  himself  as  to  include  this  trance  state  in  the  conception  of
“ normal.”  Now  the  trance  is  not  a “ normal  ” condition,  and  Mr.
Podmore’s  ambiguous  way  of  speaking  has  the  advantage  of  suggest-
ing conscious  fraud  to  the  reader,  while  he  shelters  himself  against
the  accusation  that  he  intends  this  by  taking  refuge  behind  the
admission  of  the  trance,  and  the  hj  potheses  of  inference  and  sugges-
tion. Then  after  intimating  that  “ these  normal  channels  of


92


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


[part


information  were  possibly  wide  enough  to  have  conveyed  everything
in  the  later  seances  which  was  true  and  relevant,”  he  returns  near
the  close  of  his  review  to  the  idea  of  detective  fraud,  and  even
says  that  any  possible  information  obtainable  from  “ registers,  tomb-
stones,” etc.,  “ is  to  be  attributed  to  such  sources.”  This  is  abandoning
the  hypothesis  of  inference  and  suggestion  from  my  statements  at
the  sitting.  If  you  are  going  to  assume  the  “possibility”  of  con-
scious fraud,  you  should  explain  the  latter  results  by  it,  and  if  you
are  going  to  explain  them  by  subliminal  inferences  from  suggestions,
etc.,  you  must  not  hint  at  conscious  fraud  of  the  detective  type,
especially  after  you  have  admitted  that  in  the  previous  history  of
the  case  it  had  been  excluded,  and  that  in  my  case  “ we  may  perhaps
exclude  it,”  as  his  treatment  of  the  first  two  sittings  and  explanation
of  results  in  others  by  subliminal  inference  and  suggestion  alone,
and  the  admission  of  the  trance,  show  that  he  does,  and  must  con-
sistently exclude  it.  Now,  if  inference  and  suggestion  can  explain
everything  after  these  two  sittings,  why  did  not  Mr.  Podmore  apply
these  hypotheses  evidentially,  as  my  consideration  and  rejection  of
them  explicitly  required  him  to  do,  to  such  incidents  as  the  brown-
handled  knife  with  which  my  father  pared  his  finger  nails,  the
medicines,  hyomei  and  strychnine,  black  skull  cap,  the  name  of  Lucy
M‘Clellan,  the  name  of  James  M'Clellan,  the  name  Hathaway,
the  allusion  to  Swedenborg,  and  our  talk  about  him,  to  hallucination,
to  the  experiment  with  the  young  woman  in  connection  with  her
dream,  the  organ  incident  in  connection  with  the  name  of  Harper
Crawfoi'd,  the  reference  to  the  mortgage,  the  refei'ence  to  taxes,  the
mention  of  the  talk  with  the  principal  of  the  school  about  my
brother  George,  and  to  the  anxieties  of  my  father,  my  aunt  Nannie,
and  myself,  in  connection  with  this  brother,  the  allusion  to  war,
and  the  mental  anxiety  associated  with  the  injury  to  my  father’s
leg.  the  horse  Tom,  and  my  brother’s  disposal  of  him,  the  name
Jerry,  the  allusion  to  an  organ  and  the  “communicator’s”  desire
to  “hear”  my  sister  Lida  sing,  the  fact  of  my  uncle,  James
M'Clellau,  despising  the  name  Jim,  the  name  and  relationship  of
this  uncle’s  brother  John,  the  prediction  of  this  brother’s  death,  and
the  message  of  that  death  afterwards,  the  incident  of  the  lost  finger
in  the  case  of  John  M'Clellan,  the  sunstroke  and  the  name  David
connected  with  it,  the  allusion  to  the  chimney,  and  its  having  been
taken  down,  the  allusion  to  a school  in  connection  with  the  name
Cooper,  the  relative  time  of  this  Cooper’s  death  as  compared  with
my  father’s,  the  dog  Peter  whioh  George  had,  the  tokens,  the


xlvl]  llcply  to  Mr.  Fodmore's  Criticism.  93

mention  of  excitement  on  the  occasion  of  my  cousin’s  visit,  the
names  Jennie  and  Lucy  mentioned  together,  my  father’s  moving
west,  and  the  visit  to  my  brother  just  before  this  move,  and  many
others  which  it  would  unnecessarily  swell  this  list  to  mention  1 I have
given  this  large  list  for  the  reader  to  decide  for  himself  how  utterly
preposterous  Mr.  Fodmore’s  unsui»ported  assertion  is.  You  may  account
for  them  by  detective  fraud  if  you  like,  but  this  is  not  inference,
chance  coincidence,  or  suggestion.  The  fact  is  that  Mr.  Podmore,  in
making  his  assertion,  confuses  the  conditions  of  fraud  with  those  for
inference  and  suggestion,  when  the  two  theories  do  not  consist  with
each  other  in  application  to  the  same  facts.

(2)  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Podmore,  on  p.  376,  says  that
we  “ may  perhaps  exclude  fraud,”  remarking  at  the  same  time  that
we  cannot  equally  “ exclude  chance  coincidence,  skilful  inference,
and  the  reproduction  of  information  casually  acquired,”  a few  pages
later  (p.  380),  coming  to  the  same  situation,  he  says  of  fraud,  “clearly
that  possibility  is  not  one  which  we  can  altogether  exclude.”  This
position  he  apparently  reserves  as  a vantage  ground  in  case  the
other  assumptions  are  laughed  out  of  court.  Tlien  he  proceeds  to
discuss  the  first  and  second  sittings  in  a manner  to  suppose  the
“ possibility  ” of  conscious  fraud,  chance  coincidence,  and  inference
from  suggestion,  etc.  Now  the  application  of  all  these  hypotheses
to  the  same  data  is  either  superfluous  or  contradictory.  He  assumes
that,  in  the  first  sitting,  I had  excluded  the  opportunity  for  conscious
fraud,  and  that  chance  will  account  for  all  that  occurred  in  that
sitting.  He  limits  his  treatment  of  facts,  however,  to  the  proper
names  in  that  sitting,  and  neglects  all  the  incidents  which  had  in-
fluenced my  mind  to  consider  it  as  psychologically  connected  with
later  sittings,  and  to  treat  it  as  “ slightly  evidential  ” of  the  super-
normal, though  not  of  spirits  when  taken  alone.  Now  there  are
two  things  which  rather  discredit  the  easy  application  of  chance,  even
to  this  sitting.  The  first  is  the  grouj)  of  facts  associated  with  my
brother  Charles,  namely,  the  relationship  to  me,  the  reference  to
his  fever,  to  his  “ bad  throat,”  to  his  decease  many  years  ago,  to
his  }iassing  away  in  the  winter,  and  to  the  remembrance  of  seeing
snow  on  the  ground.  The  mention  of  typhoid  fever  was  wrong,  but
this  was  spontaneously  corrected  in  a later  sitting  without  any  sug-
gestion from  me  that  he  was  wrong.  Besides,  there  were  several
other  true  incidents  mentioned  by  this  “ communicator  ” apparently,
but  those  just  given,  as  there  was  no  fishing  or  suggestion,  are  beyond
chance,  however  you  may  prefer  to  account  for  them.  The  second


94


Frofessor  James  H.  Hyslop.


[part


fact  is  that  the  proper  names  in  this  sitting  are  grouped  in  a way
to  suggest  that  chance  is  not  the  supposition  to  account  for  them.
Five  names  coming  close  together,  and  associated  with  the  “ com-
municator,” whom  I would  not  recognise,  were  all  irrelevant  to  me,
and  all  the  relevant  names  in  the  main  correct,  near  the  close  of
the  sitting,  applied  to  me.

Now,  when  it  comes  to  the  second  sitting,  Mr.  Podmore  tries  the
hypothesis  of  guessing  and  inference  to  account  for  what  he  wrongly
supposes,  against  my  definite  statement  to  the  contrar}^  to  have
been  intended  for  my  full  name,  and  in  the  remark  that  “ the  medium
had  had  the  opportunity  of  passing  in  review  the  events  of  the  first
sitting,  and  the  names  of  likely  sitters,”  virtuall}’  implies  the  dis-
position to  conscious  fraud  on  her  part  affecting  the  trance  utterances,
so  that  we  have  a hypothesis  which  luakes  guessing  and  inference
al^sui'd,  as  these  applied  to  the  case  assume  previous  ignorance  of
the  sitter.  Now  in  his  reference  to  the  first  sitting,  Mr.  Podmore
says  that  “ the  precautions  taken  against  the  discovery  of  his  (my)
identity  seem  to  have  been  pretty  complete.”  He  does  not  seem
to  have  remarked  that  I had  a sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  1892,
the  record  of  which  is  published  in  my  report  before  him  (p.  297).
'fo  many  persons  it  would  seem  impossible  after  that  to  exclude
the  “ possibility  ” of  conscious  fraud,  and  those  who  believe  in
large  supernormal  powers  the  fact  would  settle  the  probability  of  m3'
identity  at  the  outset.  In  fact,  I dispute  Mr.  Podmore’s  statement
from  the  standpoint  of  “possible”  fraud  which  he  flirts  with.  T
took  the  precaution  of  wearing  the  mask  mainly,  as  I indicated
explicitly  (p.  12),  to  be  able  to  say  so  and  answer  the  first  objection
of  the  scientific  plebs,  among  whom  Mr.  Podmore  is  apparently
willing  to  be  classed,  and  not  to  exclude  the  “ possibility  ” of  fraud.
There  are  all  sorts  of  ways  in  which  I can  “ inragine  ” that  Mrs.
Piper-  “ could  ” have  ascertained  my  identity  at  the  fir-st  sitting,  or
have  krrowrr  that  it  was  I that  had  the  errgagement.  My  treatment
of  fraud  showed  clearly  enough  that  I so  corrsidered  the  matter,  and
my  fttll  notes  indicated  the  same  (pp.  11,  298-299,  .344-346).  I make
bold  to  say  that,  personally,  I had  no  objections  at  the  time  to
Mrs.  Piper’s  krrowing  who  I was,  as  I had  previously  been  convinceil
that  fraud  was  not  the  hypothesis  to  account  for  the  facts  in  the
case,  and  went  solely  to  test  the  hypothesis  which  Mr.  Podmore
considers  “ possibly " srrfficient  to  explain  all  the  true  and  relevant
incidents  in  later  sittings.  I explicitly  said  so  (p.  12).  I think
that  every  intelligent  man  will  agree  with  the  judgment  that  the


XLVi.]  Ile'ply  to  Mr.  Podmorcs  Criticism.  !)5

results  absolutely  prove  that  chance  coincidence,  skilful  inference,
and  suggestion  are  excluded  from  the  account  in  the  explanation  of
the  facts.  I can  appreciate  this  claim  for  a few  of  the  sittings,
even  when  I do  not  agree  with  it,  but  it  was  certainly  incumbent
on  Mr.  Podmore,  after  his  minute  examination  of  the  first  two
sittings,  to  test  his  supj)ositions,  that  he  should  show  how  the  same
hypothesis  could  apply  to  the  specific  and  complicated  incidents  of
later  sittings,  and  not  content  himself  with  a mere  assertion.  The
situation  was  one  for  Mr.  Podmore  to  press  the  “ possibility  ” of
conscious  fraud,  if  he  wished  to  worry  the  spiritistic  believer,  since
he  could  make  the  most  of  the  time  over  which  the  sittings  were
distributed,  and  not  to  commit  himself  to  so  absurd  a proposition
as  inference,  chance  coincidence,  and  suggestion  for  matter  so  pal-
pably impossible  on  those  hypotheses  as  the  later  sittings.

(3)  Mr.  Podmore’s  serious  and  elaborate  discussion  of  the  statis-
tical summary,  particularly  in  his  limitation  of  the  illustrations  to
the  sittings  which  he  chose,  shows  that  he  either  does  not  under-
stand the  problem  we  are  investigating,  or  did  not  notice  what  I
had  said  about  the  summary  in  the  most  explicit  manner  (pj).  116-118).
1 regard  the  statistical  treatment  of  the  problem  involved  in  the
Piper  case  as  sheer  nonsense,  and  indicated  as  much  in  the  discus-
sion of  it,  intimating  that  I had  made  the  table  for  the  “statisti-
cally inclined  person.”  The  problem  before  me  was  a 'psjiclwlogical
not  a mathematical  one.  No  one  would  think  of  applying  mathematics
or  statistical  methods  of  this  kind  to  the  evidence  in  a murder  case.
But  it  was  necessary  to  throw  a delusive  sop  to  some  of  our  experi-
mental psychologists  who  have  a great  friendliness  for  figures.  If
all  the  “incidents”  had  contained  but  one  “factor”  in  an  Isolated
situation,  there  might  be  some  apparent  plausibility  and  excuse  for
statistics.  But  even  this  would  be  pertinent  only  in  the  consideration
of  chance  coincidence,  and  not  to  any  other  theory.  “Skilful  in-
ference and  reproduction  of  information  casually  acquired  ” ai-e  not
suitable  hypotheses  to  be  tested  in  any  such  way.  Much  less  would
the  statistical  method  apply  to  synthetic  “ incidents  ” such  as  those
on  which  I laid  the  whole  stress  of  the  argument.  One  complex
“ incident  ” might  outweigh  a hundred  mistakes  or  false  statements
of  the  single  kind.

Let  me  take  up  special  points  in  the  review  of  the  statistical
summary,  (a)  The  hypotheses  of  chance  and  fraud  ai’e  absolutely
incompatible  with  each  other  when  applied  to  the  same  data.  Fraud
implies  knowledge  of  some  sort  and  chance  excludes  it.  You  appeal


96


Professor  James  H.  Hyslop.


[part


to  fraud  only  when  you  tacitly  admit  the  striking  and  intelligent
character  of  your  fact,  and  to  chance  when  tlu's  is  not  so.  If  Mr.
Podmore  had  confined  his  statistical  study  to  the  first  sitting  in  the
record,  there  might  have  been  some  plausible  excuse  for  what  he  says
of  chance  as  applied  to  it.  But  his  proper  procedure  was,  according
to  his  admission,  that  “ the  precautions  taken  against  the  discovery  of
his  (my)  identity  seem  to  have  been  j)retty  complete  ” in  the  first
seance,  to  ap]dy  chance  coincidence  to  this  first  sitting ; and  unless
the  same  security  against  my  identification  is  not  admitted  in  the
second  sitting,  to  exclude  it  from  that,  if  he  wants  to  apply  fraud  in
connection  with  it,  as  he  says  that  even  the  “ possibility  ” of  con-
scious fraud  has  not  been  excluded  from  it.  That  either  or  both
conscious  and  unconscious  fraud  is  applied  to  this  second  sitting  is
evidenced  by  what  is  said  about  my  full  name,  and  the  “ possibility  ”
of  this  sort  of  thing  is  said  to  increase  with  the  later  experiments.
Yet  in  his  application  of  the  statistical  summaiy  which  deals  with
the  matter  as  a whole,  not  in  detail  or  in  single  incidents,  he  applies
chance,  not  only  to  the  second  sitting  in  the  first  series,  but  also
to  the  first  sitting  in  Dr.  Hodgson’s  series  in  my  behalf  more  than
a month  later.  Now,  considering  that  inference — whether  consciously
made  from  data  obtained  by  “passing  in  review  the  events  of  the
first  sitting,”  or  subliminally  made  from  data,  however  acquired,
admitting  as  Mr.  Podmore  does,  that  Mrs.  Piper’s  trance  intelli-
gence is  unique — is  a fraud  of  some  kind,  we  see  that  Mr.  Podmore’s
endeavour  is  to  apjtly  fraud  and  chance  to  the  same  data.  Carthago
est  delenda,  whether  the  polic}^  is  consistent  or  not,  seems  to  be  Mr.
Podmore’s  motto,  (b)  If  Mr.  Podmore  had  remarked  the  fact  which
I stated  in  my  report,  that  I had  the  same  security  against  identifi-
cation, so  far  as  the  mask  was  concerned,  and  independently  of
detective  agencies,  at  the  second  as  at  the  first  of  my  sittings,  he
might  have  claimed  some  immunity  in  the  application  of  chance  to
it.  But  he  would  be  obliged  to  exclude  fraud  of  all  sorts  from  it,
wliether  conscious  or  subliminal.  Granting,  however,  that  the  cir-
cumstances admit  this  application  of  chance,  the  case  of  Dr.  Hodgson’s
sitting  would  still  remain  unequivocally  against  him,  according  to
his  .supposition  that  the  “possibility”  of  fraud  increases  with  the
number  and  postponement  of  the  experiments,  and  the  statement
that  “skilful  inference”  l>y  this  “unique  intelligence”  explains
“ everything  in  the  later  seances  that  was  true  and  relevant.”  (c)
Mr.  Podmore  ought  to  have  seen  that  I was  consistent  and  correct
in  the  exclusion  of  chance  from  consideration  when  it  is  remarked


xlvl]  Reply  to  Mr.  Rod-mores  Criticism.  97

as  the  evidence  of  the  record  shows,  that  I had  intimated  as  much
“possibility”  of  fraud  in  my  first  sitting  as  in  others,  that  I had
considered  guessing,  fishing,  inference,  and  suggestion,  and  rejected
them  on  evidence,  and  that  I insisted  on  my  treating  the  Piper  case
as  a whole,  (d)  Mr.  Podmore  bases  his  treatment  of  these  sittings
in  their  statistical  aspect,  applying  chance  to  the  “ factors,”  not  to
the  “ incidents,”  that  is,  to  the  mathematical,  not  to  the  psychological
view  of  the  question.  He  expressly  isolates  the  proper  names  in
these  sittings  from  all  contextual  considerations  and  incidents,  and
does  not  even  mention  the  fact  of  contextual  relation  in  his  summary
of  the  facts,  and  treats  the  proper  names  as  if  they  were  the  im-
portant feature,  when  I explicitly  said  that  I attached  no  superior
value  to  them  (pp.  21,  173).  He  simply  omits  to  remark  for  the
reader  the  synthetic  “ incidents  ” such  as  I have  mentioned  above  as
associated  with  my  brother  Charles  in  the  first  sitting,  as  good  as
any  that  led  to  identification  in  Appendix  IV.,  and  the  unity  between
the  whole  series,  to  which  I called  attention,  and  on  which  I had
based  my  opinion  of  the  suggestiveness  of  the  two  sittings,  (e)  The
difficulties  which  Mr.  Podmore  encounters  in  the  comparison  of  his
reckoning  in  the  statistical  summary  with  mine  are  fully  explained
in  the  footnote  (p.  115)  which  he  apparently  has  not  remarked.  I
leave  this  to  the  reader.  The  case  is  not  based  on  the  “ factors,”
but  on  synthetic  “ incidents,”  and  I was  careful  to  explain  why  I
even  mentioned  the  “factors,”  to  which  I attached  and  attach  no
importance  other  than  that  indicated.  It  is  not  the  mere  counting
of  correct  and  false  “ factors,”  or  “ incidents  ” even,  that  determines
this  problem,  but  the  question  of  psychological  unity  and  relevance
in  regard  to  the  personal  identity  of  the  persons,  either  actually
present  or  masquerading  as  such  in  secondary  personality,  that  deter-
mines the  way  the  facts  should  be  treated.

4.  Mr.  Podmore  says:  “The  intelligence  which  inspires  those
messages,  whatever  its  precise  nature,  is  certainly  complex,  and  of
an  unusual,  if  not  unique  kind.”  This  is  said  apparently  with  other
records  of  the  same  case  in  view;  for  he  begins  the  paragraph  with
the  statement:  “In  considering  generally  from  the  evidential  stand-
point the  utterances  of  Mrs.  Piper’s  later  seances,”  etc.,  in  which  the
implication  is  reasonably  distinct  that  he  includes  in  his  “evidential
standpoint”  at  least  the  whole  of  the  Imperator  regime,  so  far  as
published,  and  none  of  the  detailed  records  even  of  this  have  yet  been
published  for  any  one’s  inspection.  Let  me  note  the  following,  {a)
If  you  are  going  to  isolate  my  record  from  previous  accounts  of  the

G


98


Professor  Javics  H.  Hyslop.


[part


Piper  case  in  discussing  the  spiritistic  hypothesis,  the  same  must  be
done  in  regard  to  every  other.  You  cannot  isolate  it,  as  Mr.  Pod-
more  does,  in  order  to  disqualify  spiritism  and  then  connect  it  Avith
the  larger  whole  to  prove  or  illustrate  an  “ unusual  if  not  unique  ”
intelligence.  (&)  If  “ later  seances  ” include  mine,  this  “ unusual  if
not  unique  ” intelligence  is  admitted  there  and  it  is  either  not  con-
sistent or  not  necessary  to  play  with  “possible”  fraud,  inference  and
suggestion,  as  is  done.  These  are  very  simple  affairs  in  the  “ordinary
professional  clairvoyants.”  It  is  because  they  are  not  unusual  or
unique  that  the  ajApeal  to  them  has  so  much  force  with  the  public
and  with  the  scientific  mind.  But  once  grant  a unique  intelligence
not  defined,  and  a supernormal  faculty  as  proved  in  the  Piper  case
at  large,  which  is  admitted  by  Mr.  Podmore,  and  assume  also,  as  he
does,  that  the  trance  condition,  in  connection  Avith  Avhich  this  super-
normal faculty  is  usually  found,  prevailed  at  my  sittings,  and  you
forfeit  the  right  to  suggest  without  producing  evidence  suspicions
and  “possibilities”  on  the  ordinary  grounds,  (c)  What  is  the  use,
after  granting  such  an  intelligence,  and  after  showing  reasonable
evidence  that  the  ordinary  methods  of  mediums  are  not  employed  by
Mrs.  Piper,  of  talking  about  fraud,  etc.,  in  absfracto,  as  if  our  only
duty  was  to  perpetually  test  the  ordinary  hypotheses  ? When  you
have  once  shown  that  there  are  facts  which  these  do  not  explain,
and  therefore  that  the  unity  of  the  case  includes  the  less  evidential
situations,  and  that  all  reasonable  criteria  for  the  exclusion  of  the
ordinary  methods  of  fraud,  etc.,  have  been  satisfied,  we  then,  in  every
other  scientific  investigation,  proceed  to  examine  and  discuss  the
case  as  a whole,  and  in  the  Piper  phenomena  the  psychological
analysis  of  the  record  has  its  place.  When  Ave  have  once  found
that  our  machine  Avorks  rightly  under  test  conditions,  Ave  do  not  go
on  testing  it  perpetually  in  the  same  way.  We  put  it  to  its  proper
Avork.  “ Das  bestiindige  Wetzen  der  Messer  ist  langweilig  wenn  man
Nichts  zu  schneiden  vorhat.”

5.  Mr.  Podmore  evidently  attaches  much  importance  to  proper
names.  This  is  indicated  by  the  stress  laid  by  him  on  the  failure  to
get  them  at  all  in  some  instances  and  on  getting  them  imperfectly  in
others.  Here  is  where  I think  he  entirely  misses  the  problem  as  I
defined  it  for  myself  and  as  I think  the  spiritistic  theory  requires  it
to  be  conceived.  Proper  names  are  not  the  most  important  evidence
for  a spiritistic  theory.  They  are  too  easily  explicable  by  fraud  to
have  any  primary  significance  in  evidential  matters.  In  the
psychological  question  they  have  only  tAvo  considerations  of  interest


XLVi.]  Reply  to  Mr.  Poclmores  Criticism.  99

in  favour  of  getting  them  at  all.  Firstly,  they  are  corroborative  of
other  and  better  testimony,  and  so  afford  a cumulative  value.
Secondly,  they  present  the  definite  clue  to  the  segregation  of  person-
alities involved  in  the  “communications,”  on  any  theory  whatsoever,
and  to  the  discovery  of  the  person  whose  identity  may  be  concerned
when  the  sitter  does  not  know  the  facts.  The  real  evidential  crux
consists  in  those  synthetic  “ incidents  ” which  have  a direct  psycho-
logical bearing  upon  the  personal  identity  of  a deceased  person  and
against  the  probability  of  that  selective  telepathy  from  the  memory
of  the  living,  for  which  there  is  as  yet  no  adequate  scientific  evidence.
Proper  names  cannot  supply  this  (yuaesitum.  That  they  are  not  this
and  that  they  are  not  absolutely  necessary  to  prove  personal  identity
is  apparent  from  the  experiments  recorded  in  Appendix  iv.  of  my
Report.  When  this  is  read  with  due  care,  it  will  be  observed  that  I
refused  to  permit  the  names  and  relationship  of  communicators  to  be
identified  to  be  sent  to  receivers  of  the  message,  except  in  one  instance
and  that  for  a purpose,  so  that  both  names  and  relationships  had  no
place  in  the  identification  of  personality.  The  result  might  be  studied
with  some  interest  to  Mr.  Podmore  and  his  point  of  view.

6.  Mr.  Podmore  takes  serious  exception  to  mj^  use  of  confused  and
fragmentary  messages  as  evidence  of  personal  identity.  I laid  stress
on  them  purposely,  because  there  is  no  excuse  for  this  character  in
them  on  any  of  the  hypotheses  which  Mr.  Podmore  makes  so  much
of.  They  are  against  fraud,  chance,  inference  and  suggestion,  especi-
ally in  the  form  in  which  they  usually  occur.  If  he  had  studied
Appendix  iv,  as  I intended  every  scientific  reader  to  do,  he  would
have  found  there  a definite  anticipation  and  answer  to  the  difficulty
which  troubles  him.  I had  purposely  constructed  these  incoherent
and  fragmentary  messages  to  test  the  very  cjuestion  which  Mr.  Pod-
more raises.  Pp.  586-590  show  occasional  instances  in  which
fragmentary  messages  succeeded  well  and  the  most  specific  and  clear
messages  failed.  The  same  phenomenon  is  observable  in  this  record
between  pp.  608  and  623  inclusive.  I called  special  attention  to  this
fact  on  p.  268  of  my  report,  and  italicised  one  very  interesting
instance  bearing  upon  the  point  at  issue,  namely,  “ Question  7,
p,  619.”  It  must  be  remembered  that  these  experiments  represented
communications,  most  of  them  telegraphic,  between  living  persons
where  we  knew  both  ends  of  the  line.

7.  I must  note  a number  of  important  omissions  by  Mr.  Podmore
which  affect  the  accuracy  of  his  representation  of  my  Report.
(a)  He  does  not  tell  the  reader  that  I took  precisely  the  same  view


100  Professor  James  P£.  Hyslop.  [part

of  the  proper  names  in  the  first  sitting,  considered  individually
(pp.  21,  173),  that  he  takes  in  a criticism  which  seems  to  imply
that  I had  not  done  so.  (5)  In  regard  to  such  reconstructions  as
the  incident  of  “ the  trip  to  the  lake  after  leaving  the  camp,”  he
does  not  tell  the  reader  that  I condemned  them  as  emphatically  as
he  does,  and  I did  so  right  in  connection  with  what  he  quotes,
(r)  He  omits  to  tell  the  reader  that  I explicitly  rejected  the  state-
ment about  the  curved-handled  cane  with  the  initials  in  the  end  as
non-evidential  and  as  having  “little  or  no  importance”  (p.  61).  I
classed  the  incident  as  false  in  the  statistical  summary,  though  it
may  not  be  strictly  so,  but  because  I could  not  call  it  either  true
or  indeterminate  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  terms  as  defined.
{d)  Mr.  Podmore  omits  all  reference  to  and  discussion  of  the  syn-
thetic incidents  on  which  I specifically  laid  the  whole  stress  of  my
argument  as  the  primary  psychological  question  in  the  spiritistic
hypothesis  (pp.  1.58-176),  and  confines  his  attention  generally  to  the
simple,  false,  and  confused  incidents  which  I had  expressly  repudiated
as  unimportant  and  non  evidential,  without  telling  the  reader  that
I had  recognised  this  apparent  objection,  and  then  claims  that  he
has  fairly  represented  the  whole,  (e)  He  does  not  even  allude  to
the  dramatic  play  of  personality  and  my  discussion  of  it,  though  he
admits  the  fact  of  Mrs.  Piper’s  trance  intelligence.  This  dramatic
play  is  a psychological  phenomenon  of  some  importance  on  any
theory  whatsoever,  whether  of  the  spiritistic  or  non-spiritistic  sort,
and  must  be  made  intelligible  as  a functional  and  integral  part  of
the  whole,  and  must  be  as  explicable  by  chance,  inference,  and  sug-
gestion as  the  apparently  evidential  incidents,  if  you  do  not  expressly
add  the  supposition  of  peculiarly  fiendish  form  of  secondary  person-
ality to  these  processes.  (/)  He  omits  all  reference  to  my  discussion
of  “Mistakes  and  Confusions”  and  the  reasons  for  treating  them  as
I did.  They  too  must  be  rationally  accounted  for  on  the  hypotheses
which  Mr.  Podmore  proposes,  if  they  are  to  have  any  suanding  in
court.  The  problem  is  not  a mere  matter  of  counting  the  true  and
false  statements  of  Mrs.  Piper’s  trance  intelligence  or  of  other
mediums,  but  it  is  a problem  of  explaining  the  correct  and  incorrect
statements  and  confusions  by  the  same  general  theory  with  tjie
proper  adjuncts  from  normal  and  abnormal  psychology,  which  may
be  fairly  assumed  in  the  case.

In  conclusion  I have  only  to  say  that,  as  I think  no  intelligent
reader  of  my  record  will  accept  chance  coincidence,  inference,  and
suggestion  without  conscious  detective  fraud  as  an  adequate  explana-


XLVi.]  Reply  to  Mr.  Podmore’s  Criticism.  101

tioM  ot  the  later  sittings  and  incidents,  Mr.  Podmore  would  liave
done  better  to  liave  pressed  the  supposition  of  fraud  as  the  only
rational  escape  from  spiritism  or  some  omniscient  telepathy.  I
should  not  argue  against  the  hypothesis  of  conscious  and  detective
fraud.  It  is  better  not  to  have  any  theory  at  all  than  to  propose
such  preposterous  and  unsupported  suppositions  as  Mr.  Podmore
entertains.  We  are  not  obliged  to  have  explanations.  It  is  open
to  us  to  say  that  we  do  not  know,  or  that  we  are  not  convinced,  or
that  the  case  is  not  proven.


y


• • i


PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  XLVU.


EKKATUAl.

P.  161.  line  8.  For  Marsden  Park  read  Marsden  Manor.


190;;,  at  4.;:')0  p.m. ; the  Ppesident,  Sii;  Oliveu  Lodge,  in  the
chair.

Addresses  on  Mr.  Myers’  “ Human  Personality  and  its  Survival
of  Bodily  Death”  were  delivered  by  Mh.  Andrew  Lang,  Dr.
Walter  Leaf,  and  the  President.  These  have  since  been
published  in  the  Proceedings,  Part  XLVi.


The  121st  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on
Monday,  November  2nd,  1903,  at  5 p.m.;  Sir  William  Crookes
in  the  chair.

Professor  AV.  F.  Barrett  read  a paper  on  “ Further  Experi-
ments on  Dowsing  and  some  Considerations  thereon,”  which  will,
it  is  hoped,  appear  in  a future  Part  of  the  Proceedings.


104.


J.  G.  Piddingtoa.


PART


I.

OX  THE  TYPES  OF  PHEXOMENA  DISPLAYED  IX
MPS.  THOMPSOX’S  TKAXCE.

By  J.  O.  Piddingtox.


TABLE  OF  COXTEXTS.

Page

(1)  Inti'iicluetioii,  105

(2)  Amplification  of  knowledge  already  in  the  possession  of  the

Medium  or  of  the  Ti'anee-personality,  - - - - - 116

(3)  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Controls  and  the  Dramatic  Business  of  the

Trance,  -----------126

(4)  The  relations  between  Mrs.  Thompson’s  normal  consciousness

and  the  trance-con.scionsness,  - - - - - - 157

(5)  Mrs.  Thompson’s  recollections  on  waking  from  trance,  - - 167

(6)  The  exercise  of  supernormal  faculty  Ipy  Mrs.  Thom]3son  when

not  entranced,  - - - - - - - - - 182

(7)  The  Peregrinations  of  Nelly,  -------  200

(8)  Ignorance  displayed  lyy  the  Trance-personality  of  matters  which

wei’e  or  might  have  been  within  the  cognizance  of  the
Medium,  ----------  210

(!J)  An  incident  illustrative  of  the  giadual  emergence  of  facts  in

the  trance-utterances, 214

(10)  Nelly’s  associations  of  ideas,  -------  221

(11)  The  Automatic  Wilting,  --------  231

{12)  Prophecies,  ----------  246

(13)  A Pet  Subject  of  Nelly’s,  -------  261

(14)  Nelly  on  Physical  Phenomena,  ------  265

(15)  The  “Susanna  Parkes”  Case,  - - - - . _ - 267

(16)  “ Sus]jicious  Circumstances,”  -------  271

(17)  Marked  Failures  in  the  case  of  sitters  with  whom  Mrs.

Thomjison  was  personally  acquainted,  -----  291

(18)  (-h’oss-correspondences  between  the  Trance-utterances  and  script

of  Mrs.  Thompson  and  those  of  other  mediums,  - - - 294


XLVii.]  Flu nomena  in  Mrs.  Thorapsons  Trance.


105


(1)  INTRODUCTION.

In  the  records  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  published  in
Part  XLIV.  of  the  Proceedings,  it  was  indicated  that  several
omissions  were  made.  Very  little  of  the  matter  thus  omitted
was  connected  with  the  main  trend  of  the  communications
intended  for  the  sitter  immediately  concerned ; most  of  it
had  no  reference  to  or  interest  for  the  person  attending
the  sitting,  and  consisted  chiefly  of  remarks  casually  and
parenthetically  interposed  by  Nelly  (Mrs.  Thompson’s  usual
“ control  ”),  and  to  have  retained  them  in  their  proper  place
in  the  record  would  only  have  interrupted  and  confused  the
main  narrative.

I propose  to  rescue  these  omitted  passages  from  an  oblivion
that  in  my  opinion  they  do  not  deserve ; and  I shall  also
make  use  of  some  material  taken  from  some  unpublished
records  of  sittings,  and  also  of  certain  impressions  received
by  Mrs.  Thompson  when  in  a normal  state,  or,  at  least,  when
she  was  not  in  trance.

Dr.  Hodgson  has  expressed  the  opinion  that,  on  the  occasions
when  he  was  present  at  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  she  was
simulating  a state  of  trance.  He  has  confined  his  expression
of  opinion  to  the  six  sittings  which  he  attended,  and  has  not
said  that  he  thinks  that  the  trance  is  always  fraudulently
assumed  ; nor,  indeed,  do  I understand  that  such  is  his  real
belief.  1 am  not  at  all  surprised  that  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trance
should  not  have  impressed  Dr.  Hodgson  as  genuine.  So  easy,
and  sudden,  so  entirely  unannounced,  as  a rule,  is  the  transi-
tion from  the  medium’s  waking  to  her  entranced  state,  and,
except  on  rare  occasions,  so  free  from  any,  at  least  apparent,
physical  discomfort,  and  so  alert  her  attention  and  behaviour
during  the  trance  that  to  one  accustomed  to  Mrs.  Piper’s
trance  Mrs.  Thompson  might  well  appear  to  be  shamming.^

'In  his  recent  work.  Hy}motUm:  History,  Practice  and  Theory,  Dr.  J.  ^Jiliie

Brainwell  maintains  that,  in  some  cases  where  only  the  very  .slightest  hj'pnosis  has
been  induced,  and  even  where  no  certain  trace  of  it  has  been  detected,  suggestion
yields  therapeutic  results  as  striking  as  in  the  case  of  patients  who  have  been


10(i


J.  G.  Piddrngto'a.


[part


]>ut  not  only  to  one  accustomed  to  the  deep  and  dramatic
form  of  trance  displayed  by  Mrs.  Piper  might  Mrs.  Thompson’s
trance  be  unconvincing,  but  also  to  one  who,  having  had  but
little  experience  of  raediumistic  trances,  was  biassed  by  pre-
conceived notions  of  what  a trance  ought  to  be.  Thus  after
my  first  sitting  I wrote  to  Mr.  Myers  as  follows :

“ As  to  the  genuineness  of  her  trance  I have  not  enough
experience  to  pronounce  an  opinion  of  any  value.  . . . The
merely  external  characteristics  of  the  trance  could  certainly
be  simulated  by  anybody.”  Later  on  I was  convinced  of  the
genuineness  of  the  trance  partly  by  the  content  of  the  trance-
communications  and  partly  by  the  fact  that  during  the  not
brief  period  of  my  acquaintance  with  Mrs.  Thompson  I have
never  detected  what  on  reflection  I felt  could  be  regarded  as
a suspicious  overlapping  of  her  normal  by  her  trance  memory.

I do  not  intend  to  discuss  here  the  genuineness  of  Mrs.
Thompson’s  trance ; but,  as  reference  has  been  made  to  the
question,  it  may  be  of  interest  to  quote  a letter  addressed
to  me  by  Professor  James  in  answer  to  my  enquiries  about
an  experiment  which  I knew  that  he  had  made  with  a view
to  testing  whether  Mrs.  Thompson  when  entranced  was  in-
sensible to  pain.  Professor  James  writes  as  follows:

“Our  conception  of  ‘trance’  is  anything  but  definite,  and
1 know  of  no  test  of  genuineness.

“ Aiifesthesia  may  not  be  a sure  sign  of  it ; and  if  it  were
a sign  it  might,  within  limits,  be  easily  feigned.

“ Failure  of  pupils  to  react  to  light  has  been  used  to  prove
the  genuineness  of  hypnotic  trance,  and  so  have  other  neural
oddities.  They  certainly  would  prove  an  unfeigned  and  abnorinal
state.  The  altered  speech  and  the  amnesia  ^ are  what  are
■understood  by  medium  trance.  Insensibility  to  violent  pain  being
with  difficulty  simulable,  it  would,  if  found,  be  presumptive  proof
that  the  altered  personality  and  amnesia  were  also  unsimulated.

deeply  hypinotised.  Thus  the  view  that  the  exercise  of  superuornial  faculty  need
not  be  accompanied  by  either  profound  or  even  slight  trance  would  fall  into
line  with  Dr.  Dramwell’s  observations  if,  with  Myers,  we  attribute  both  response
to  curative  suggestions,  and  supernormal  faculties  generally  to  the  activities  of
the  subliminal  consciousness.

^ It  will  appear  later  that  complete  amnesia  does  not  obtain  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s


ca«e.


XLV'ii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


107


“ I subjected  Mrs.  T[horapsou]  to  no  violent  pain,  merely
pricked  her  lips  and  hands  with  a pin,  without  warning.  Her
demeanour  might  have  been  feigned,  but  I doubt  or  disbelieve
it.  It  tallies  with  the  demeanour  of  Flournoy’s  case,  and

combines  with  the  general  impression  of  sincerity  which  I
receive  from  iUrs.  T[hompson].”

I have  never  attempted  any  pain  test  with  Mrs  Thomp.son  ;
and  indeed  in  any  case  if  she  were  shown  to  be  not  insensible
to  violent  pain  when  in  trance,  it  would  only  prove  that
amesthesia  was  absent,  and  not  that  the  trance  was  feigned.

There  is,  however,  Iresides  I’rofessor  W.  James’  experiment,
one  other  item  of  evidence  which  goes  to  show  that  Airs.
Thompson’s  trance  may  l>e  accompanied  Ijy  antesthesia,  and
the  case  is  none  the  less  interesting  because  the  amesthesia
would  seem  to  have  been  acconi})anied  by  the  exercise  of  super-
normal faculty.  I am  indebted  to  IMr.  Norman  Reeve,  L.D.S.
(J.ondon)  of  Bennett’s  Hill,  Birmingham,  for  the  account  which
follows.  Although  posted  on  IMay  lOtli,  1899,  and  so  dated,
it  was  written  on  IMay  9tli  within  half-an-hour  of  the  incident
witli  which  it  deals,  and  was  addressed  to  the  lady  who  is
now  his  wife,  together  with  a coveiing  letter  in  which  Mr.
Reeve  wrote: — “ T shall  deal  at  some  length  with  the  visit  on
Monday  to  show  Uiat  Mrs.  Thompson  and  hei'  sistei'  were
strangers  to  me.”  In  a letter  addressed  to  me  on  Novemljer
1 dth,  190J,  Mr.  Reeve  writes: — “I  have  enclosed  the  letters
and  envelopes  accompanying  [the  account]  with  postmarks
May  10,  1899.  You  will  see  l)y  the  tone  of  the  narrative
that  the  effect  on  me  was  neither  slight  nor  transient.”

Mil  Reeve’s  N.\i;i;atjve  ;

.1/(0/  10//i,  1899.

On  Monday  morning  [i.e.  May  8th,  1899]  I had  an  appointment
with  Mrs.  Alter  from  1.30  till  3 — at  3 o’clock  one  with  Annie  Reeve.
At  1 o’clock  a telegram  came  from  Mrs.  Arter  saying  she  regretted
she  was  unable  to  come.  At  1.15  two  strangers  called,  sisters  I
afterwards  found  out ; one  of  them,  a Mrs.  Thompson,  wanted  some
rvork  done,  and  had  come  in  quite  by  chance.  I took  them  into
tlie  surgery  . . . Mrs.  Thompson  . . . placed  herself  in  my  hands,
asked  me  to  decide  what  was  necessary  to  stojr  a couple  of  her  teeth
with.  Gold  was  required  for  one  and  a cement  for  the  other;  this


108


J.  G.  Field rn(/f on.


[part


I told  her  would  be  the  best.  . . . Mrs.  Thompson  . . . said  although
she  had  had  no  breakfast  she  would  have  the  gold  filling  put  in
there  and  then.  I proceeded  at  once  with  the  Avork  . . . after  I had
been  Avorking  about  a quarter  of  an  hour  I noticed  that  Mrs.
Thomp.son’s  eyes  had  become  fixed,  that  she  was  entirely  oblivious
of  anything  that  was  going  on.  I asked  if  anything  Avas  the  matter,
and  was  she  well  ? She  pulled  herself  together  and  assured  me
she  Avas  all  right,  and  by  1.45  I had  finished  the  operation.  ...  I
made  another  appointment  for  Tuesday  at  11,  and  they  left  at  1.50
by  my  surgery  clock.  At  2.50  my  cousin  Annie  came  in.

The  next  morning  [i.e.  Tuesday,  May  9th,  1899]  Mrs.  Thompson
came  in  alone.  The  first  Avords  she  said  as  she  entered  the  room
Avere,  “ Oh,  Mr.  Reeve,  I did  so  want  to  ask  you  yesterday  ; have
you  any  relation  named  Annie  Reeve?”  I told  her  if  she  had  asked
last  Friday  I should  have  said  no,  but  since  I had  seen  and  heard
of  her  for  the  first  time.  “Well,”  she  said,  “I  used  to  go  to  school
with  an  Annie  Reeve,  and  yesterday  as  I sat  in  your  chair  her  figure
appeared  before  me  as  plainly  as  I see  you  noAv.  . . . I Avas  . . .
absolutely  dumfounded,  but  within  two  minutes  I had  so  far  recovered
as  to  be  determined  to  sift  the  matter  absolutely  to  the  bottom.  . . .
“ Do  you  think,”  she  said,  “ if  I described  the  clothes  she  Avore,  you
would  recognise  her  from  the  description  ? ” I ansAvered  that  from
peculiar  circumstances  I could  tell  every  garment  she  had  on  from
“top  to  toe,  from  head  to  foot”  ; for,  as  you  knoAv,  after  our  discussion
at  Solihull  on  Saturday  I should  take  notice  of  everything  she  Avore
when  I saw  her  on  Monday.  “Well,  she  .said,”  “the  form  that
appeared  to  me  in  this  room  Avas  dressed  in  a tailor-made  jacket,  loose
fitting,  open  at  the  front,  Avearing  a stand-up  collar,  and  a necktie  tied
in  a sailor  knot.”  I had  by  this  time  ceased  to  be  astonished,  and
told  her  that  although  she  had  described  the  garments  fairly  well,
she  had  not  given  the  jacket  its  proper  title.  She  said  that  it  had
no  other  description  as  far  as  she  knew.  I then  told  her  it  was  a
sack-back  jacket.  She  then  said  as  “she  had  only  seen  the  figure
liom  the  front  she  Avas  unable  to  see  to  tell  the  cut  at  the  back.”

Her  next  question  Avas : Avhen  did  I see  Annie  Reeve  last  ? and
1 Avas  obliged  to  admit  that  the  very  next  person  Avho  entered  the
room  after  she  had  left  Avas  Annie  Reeve  herself  Mrs.  Thompson
Avent  out  at  1.50;  Annie  ReeA^e  came  in  at  2.50.


' Mrs.  Thompson  then  e.xplainecl  why  she  did  not  speak  of  her  experience  at  the
time,  i.e.  on  the  Monday.  Her  reason  is  borne  out  liy  statements  contained  in  Mr.
Reeve’s  full  account,  which  have  been  omitted  on  account  of  their  private  character.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrt<.  Thompsons  Trance.  109

She  asked  for  corroboration  on  my  part,  and  I opened  my  appoint-
ment-book and  showed  her  “Miss  Eeeve — 3 o’clock.”

I proceeded  with  the  rest  of  the  work  for  her  in  the  ordinary  way,
and  after  I had  finished  we  had  half-an-hour’s  chat.  She  then  told
me  it  was  nothing  new  to  her  to  have  these  metaphysical  ex-
periences. . . .

(Signed)  Xorm.w  Keeve.


i\Ir.  Keeve  had  originally  sent  an  account  of  the  episode  to
j\Ir.  jMyers.  It  could  not,  however,  be  found  among  his  papers,
and  I,  not  thiirking  that  i\Ir.  Keeve  would  have  preserved  any
contemporaneous  note  of  the  incident,  asked  j\Irs.  Thompson  to
write  me  out  her  recollections  of  it.  Her  reply  was  as
follows : —


Pov.  3n/,  1903.

In  repl}"  to  your  letter  of  to-day’s  date,  I have  not  the  account
of  my  visit  to  the  dentist,  Norman  Keeve,  L.D.S.,  Bennett’s  Hill,
Birmingham,  but  I have  done  my  best  to  write  out  my  account  of
this  affair.  I think  it  is  a great  pity  the  letter  from  Mr.  Eeeve
cannot  be  found,  as  it  was  written  within  a few  days  (or  weeks  at
most)  of  the  whole  thing  happening,  and  a business  man  like  Mr.
Keeve  might  not  care  to  be  bothered  to  write  another.  However,
I will  write  out  as  best  I can  all  that  took  place.  It  is  more  than
strange  that  the  stopping  of  this  rerij  tooth  has  come  out  during
these  last  three  weeks,  and,  as  I thought  of  running  down  to  Birming-
ham for  a night,  I was  going  to  call  and  have  it  replaced  if  he  \i.e.
Mr.  Keeve]  is  still  at  Bennett’s  Hill ; but  now  I think  it  would  be
wiser  for  me  to  keep  away,  if  3mu  intend  to  investigate  the  case,  as
I have  no  desire  to  be  the  one  to  refresh  Mr.  Eeeve’s  mind.  I think
it  would  be  better  for  someone  else  to  call.  I am  afraid  mj'  account
is  rather  jumbled.


Mrs.  Thompson’s  Account.

IVritten  from  rnemoi-y,  Novemher  3rct,  1903.

I cannot  remember  the  date,  but  probably  4 years  ago  I went  to
Birmingham  to  visit  my  sister,  and  wrote  a letter  the  daj'  or  so
before  to  my  usual  dentist  making  an  aj^pointment.  This  letter  was
returned  to  me  “Gone,  left  no  address.”  When  I arrived  in  Bir-
mingham my  sister  met  me,  and  I suggested,  as  I had  a troublesome


110


<yn.


[part


tooth  1 must  at  once  have  stopped,  we  should  go  and  find  a dentist.
We  walked  across  New  Street  to  Bennett’s  Hill.  (The  rooms  of
nearly  all  the  dentists  are  in  this  street,  or  were,  years  ago.)  Two
or  three  doors  up  on  the  right-hand  side  we  spied  a brass-plate  with
Mr.  Eeeve’s  name,  etc.  I said  : “ Oh  ! this  will  do  ; ‘ L.D.S.  London  ’
can  surely  settle  my  tooth,”  and  we  went  inside.

T also  attended  the  next  day,  and  I am  not  sure  if  the  following
took  place  the  first  or  second  visit,  but  I think  the  first.  When
the  dentist  began  to  work  upon  the  tooth  it  hurt  very  much,^  but
I thought  I must  try  to  imagine  I had  no  pain.  I suppose  he  went
on  just  the  same,  but  I felt  nothing  until  I was  roused  by  his  hand
on  my  shoulder,  and  heard  him  say:  “What’s  the  matter  1”  I
told  him  I had  been  making  myself  proof  against  feeling  any  pain,*’
and  he  laughed  and  said  : “ I wondered  what  was  the  matter  with
you,  as  I know  I was  hurting  you,  and  you  were  so  still.”

What  reall}"  happened  was  this: — Directly  I became  insensible  to
the  pain  I saw  a young  lady  dressed  (I  remember  this  very  well)
in  a tailor-made  grey  coat  and  skirt,  and  a linen  collar.

The  name,  Annie  Reeve,  came  into  my  mind,  as  when  I went  to
boarding-school  at  Much  AYenlock  my  first  half-term  was  Annie
Reeve’s  last  half-term  ; and  I felt  certain  this  was  the  Annie  Reeve
I had  known  at  school,  though  I had  never  seen  or  heard  of  the  girl
except  just  that  half-term  14  years  before,  and  did  not  recognise  the
face.  I asked  Mr.  Reeve  if  he  had  a relative  A.  R.,  and  so  on  ; and
if  she  was  still  living  and  [if  her]  name  [was]  still  A.  Reeve.  He
said  : “ Yes,  she  is  my  cousin,  and  was  the  last  patient  I attended  to
before®  you  came  in,  and  was  dressed  exactly  as  you  describe.”  Mr.
R.  looked  it  up  in  his  Ijook  and  showed  me  the  entry ; and  no


^Mr.  Reeve  writes  on  Xovember  10th,  1903: — “I  tilled  a left  upper  central
tooth  with  gold  for  Mrs.  T.  At  first  the  jjatieut  appeared  very  sensitive  to
the  pain  occasioned  by  cutting  away  the  dentine,  but  quite  suddenly  appeared
oblivious  of  everything  going  on,  so  much  so  that  when  the  operation  was
finished  I had  to  gently  shake  her.”

- Mrs.  V^errall  has  described  to  me  how  under  similar  circumstances  at  her
dentist’s  she  has  been  able  by  an  effort  of  will  to  render  herself  insensible  to
pain.  'I’he  parrots  who  defend  tlieir  want  of  interest  or  belief  in  psychic
faculties  with  a “But  what’s  the  use  of  it  all?”  might  have  to  learn  a new
cry  if  this  kind  of  self-induced  anaesthesia  became  common.

^This  should  really  be  “the  next  patient  I attended  to  a/'ter  you  left
yesterday.”  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  story  has  7/ot  improved  with  keeping,
but  the  reverse,  as  I believe  is  often  the  case.  Contemporaneous  records  cut


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.  Ill

doubt  he  still  has  the  book.  I can  positively  declare  I did  not  see
A.  R.  in  or  out  of  the  dentist’s  rooms,  and  if  I met  her  to-day  I
should  not  know  her,  and  I thought  it  was  the  name  Reeve  which
suggested  to  me  the  name  A.  R.  as  that  of  the  girl  in  grey.  It  was
not  because  I recognised  her  in  any  normal  way.  After  all  this
long  rigmarole  the  points  are : —

Does  Mr.  R.  remember  wu’iting  to  me  for  Mr.  Myers  ? and  if  so,
does  he  remember  what  he  said  about  my  not  feeling  the  pain  ? and
also  does  he  remember  the  tailor-made  dress  and  linen  collar  ? and,
last  but  not  least,  does  he  remember  me  and  m3'  trumpery  tooth-
stopping 1

(Signed)  R.  THo:\tPSON.


I shall  throughout  this  paper  assume  the  hona  Jichs
of  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trance,  and  at  the  same  time  I shall
abstain  from  discussing  the  source  of  the  trance  communica-
tions, and  confine  myself  to  describing  what  took  place  and
to  explaining,  in  certain  instances,  my  reasons  for  thinking
that  there  is  evidence  for  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  in
some  supernormal  manner.  Rut  as  the  record  of  any  observer,
however  desirous  to  be  scrupulously  accurate  and  fair,  may
be  affected  by  the  view  that  he  may  take  of  the  phenomena
which  he  is  observing,  I think  I ought  to  state  what  my
view  of  these  phenomena  is.

Xo  theory  of  them  satisfies  me.

Thus  negatively  only  can  I state  my  view.  And  1 can
perhaps  best  indicate  my  position  by  confessing  that  after
repeated  revisions  of  what  1 had  written,  I have  given  up
the  attempt  to  define  my  opinions  in  despair.  I do  not  halt
between  two  opinions,  but  I shilly-shally  betw'een  many : so
much  so  that  1 hesitate  to  dignify  such  vacillation  with  the
name  of  “ suspense  of  judgment.”

Though,  as  1 have  said,  not  avoiding  critical  discussion
of  particular  incidents,  my  paper  is  chiefly  devoted  to  an
attempted  classification  of  the  phenomena.  Such  a method  is

both  ways:  they  check  exuberance,  but  also  ‘rationalisation.’  I submitted
Mrs.  Thompson’s  account  to  Mr.  Reeve,  before  he  discovered  his  contemporaneous
notes,  and  he  both  confirmed  and  repeated  Mrs.  Thompson’s  error.  The  con-
temporary account  makes  it  quite  clear  that  Miss  Reeve's  visit  did  not  precede
but  followed  Mrs.  Thompson’s  by  an  hour.


J.  G.  Piddington.


PART


11-J


naturally  open  to  the  objection  that  I may  have  twisted,
misinterpreted,  or  selected  my  material  to  suit  conclusions
which  I wished  to  reach.  I can  only  say  that  I have  not
done  so  consciously,  and  that  I pursued  my  study  of  the
records  with  no  theoretic  axe  to  grind.  The  more  thorough
my  acquaintance  with  the  facts  grew,  the  more  convinced
became  my  belief  in  their  authenticity ; and  what  had  once
struck  me  as  awkward  and  suspicious  inconsistencies,  now,  as
a result  of  a careful  sifting  of  the  evidence  (and  not,  I
venture  to  hope,  because  I have  talked  myself  round  into  a
credulous  acquiescence),  do  .so  no  longer.  That  from  this
process  of  classification  an  unforced  and  reasonable  con-
sistency has  emerged — such  as  would  not  have  emerged

had  the  phenomena  been  fraudulent — is  the  underlying,  though
often  unexpressed  argument  of  this  ]>aper.  1 am  perhaps
open  to  attack  for  not  publishing  in  full  the  evidence  with
which  I deal.  In  defence  of  this  omission  1 would  urge
that,  though  I do  not  by  any  means  consider  that  there  i.s
yet  a sufficient  mass  of  evidence,  or  evidence  of  sufficiently
various  origin,  to  place  the  existence  of  supernormal  faculty
beyond  cavil  or  doufjt,  yet  there  is  enough,  both  generally
and  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  particular  case,  to  create  a strong
presumption  in  its  favour,  and  to  justify  an  attack  being
made  on  the  problem  from  a different  standpoint  from  hereto-
fore.

Finally,  I would  repeat  that  1 have  been  specially  on  my
guard  against  selecting  evidence  in  favour  of  any  particular

theory  of  the  phenomena,  and  against  suppressing  any  evidence
which  might  be  held  to  tell  against  the  integrity  of  the
medium.

The  first  I heard  of  ]\Irs.  Thompson  was  through  Mr.
Myers,  who  wrote  to  ask  if  some  sentences  read  by  her  in
a crystal  had  any  meaning  for  me.  At  that  time  I did  not

even  know  of  the  existence  of  Mrs.  Thompson,  and  I have  no

reason  to  doubt,  and  every  reason  to  believe  her  statement
that  she  was  then  equally  unaware  of  my  existence.

I give  below  Mrs.  Thompson’s  own  account  of  the  inci-
dent, prepared  for  Mr.  Myers  at  his  request.  (I  should
explain  that  at  the  time  when  this  incident  occurred  my
surname  was  Smith.)


XLVii  ] Phenomena  in  il/r,s-.  TJunnpHona  Trance.


n:


It  opens  with  the  copy  of  a letter  addressed  by  ]\Irs.
Thompson  to  Mr.  Myers  on  November  8th,  1898:

“About  11.15  this  morning  I heard  a little  voice  tell  me  to
look  in  the  crystal.  I say  a little  voice,  but  I could  better
describe  it  as  a ver}'  weak  adult  voice,  which  was  quite
strange  to  me ; and  as  I was  very  busy  sewing,  I must  say  I
rather  resented  the  suggestion  of  spending  my  time  crystal-
gazing.

The  voice  insisted — at  least,  I may  say,  commanded  me.  It
said  : ‘ Put  away  that  work  and  take  for  my  friend  a message.'

I did  so,  and  taking  up  the  crystal  I saw  perfectly  the
following;  altogether  I was  from  11.25  to  12.35  getting  the
whole  of  the  letters.  They  were  in  large  ‘ block  ’ capitals,
without  any  attempt  at  division  into  words.

[The  letters,  transcribed  in  the  order  in  which  they  ap-
peared— though  this  was  without  division  into  words  or
spacing — formed  the  following  sentences  :]

‘You  cough  like  Noel  Smith’s  a[c]quaintance,  that  queer  old
buffer  doctor  J.  Cf.  Walker.  I am  still  eccentric,  and  keep
my  eye  on  eccentric  folk.  His  feet  are  better  than  mine,
but  not  his  boots,  eh  Siwel.’”

I sent  above  to  Mr.  F.  Mb  H.  IMyers,  who  with  me
thought  the  whole  thing  a stupid  senseless  message.

When  Mr.  Myers  was  having  a talk  with  Nelly  on  Novem-
ber 10th,  she  said  to  him:  “Mr.  J.  G.  Smith  of  Sloane
Street  will  know  about  that  muddled  message,  which  is  from
a clergyman  named  Lewis.”

That  Mr.  Myers  had  such  a friend  or  that  such  a man  as
J.  G.  Smith  liveil  in  Sloane  Street  was  quite  unknown  to  me.

Mr.  Mymrs  had  such  a friend,  and  wrote  and  sent  on  the
message.  This  is  the  reply  from  Mr.  J.  G.  Smith  :

“ I understand  this  is  a confused  message  from  a clergyman
named  Lewis — (is  it  E.  H.  Lewis,  or  H.  E.  Lewis,  or  is  eh
simply  ‘ eh  ’ 1)  and  has  some  reference  to  me.

Probably  on  Monday  the  7th  of  November,  or  possibly  on
Tuesdays  the  8th,  about  11  a.m.  my  wife  went  to  see  a Dr.
de  Noe  M^alker.  . . . He  is  not  her,  or  my,  regular  doctor,
but  she  consults  him  occasionally,  but  I have  never  seen  him,
though  I have  heard  a great  deal  about  him  from  my  wife  and
other  people.

He  is  an  exceedingly  clever  but  eccentric  homceopathic  doctor.


11+  J.  (t.  Piddington.  [part

}^e  was  strongly  recommended  to  my  wife’s  brother-indaw,
who  in  turn  recommended  him  to  my  wife

Although  he  could  have  had  one  of  the  finest  practices  in
London,  he  will  oul}^  see  a few  people,  mostly  poor  gover-
nesses, etc.,  to  whom  he  charges  no  fee,  and  a few  people
whom  he  charges  10s.  a visit  simply  as  a protection.  . . .

His  house  is  a veritable  museum  of  pictures,  statuettes,  etc.,
mostly  Italian.  . . . His  house  is  also  a regular  ‘ Zoo  ’ of
cats  and  birds,  who  are  his  first  thought  in  life.  When  my
wife  went  to  see  him  at  the  beginning  of  this  week  she  met
him  in  the  street  feeding  his  birds.  Whereupon  he  said :

‘ You  go  inside.  I’ll  attend  to  you  when  I’ve  fed  my  birds.’

He  wears  no  socks,  wears  a red  Hannel  shirt  a la  Garibaldi,
over  which  he  sometimes  throws  a curious  kind  of  cloak.  He
wears  no  boots,  but  some  peculiar  kind  of  slipper.

I need  hardly  add  that  he  is  as  eccentric  as  a man  can
well  be.  You  will  note  that  in  order  to  read  De  Noe  Walker
into  the  text  one  must  substitute  De  Noe  for  Noel,  and  join
to  it  the  Walker  which  occurs  further  down  the  sentence.
[And  the  initials  J.  G.  must  be  transposed  and  conjoined  with
the  surname  Smith.]

My  wife  knows  nothing  special  about  his  cough.

‘(jueer  old  buffer’  and  ‘eccentric’  suit  admirably;  the  refer-
ence to  feet  and  boots  is  perhaps  to  be  explained  b}'^  what  I
liave  said  above.

I know  no  clergyman  named  Lewis,  but  perhaps  Dr.  De
Noe  Walker  may  have  known  one.  I shouldn’t  dare  to  go  and
ask  him,  . . . but  next  time  my  wife  goes  to  see  him  I

will  ask  her  to  make  enquiries.

The  doctor  is  not  an  acquaintance  of  mine,  though  it  can  be
said  that  I am  acquainted  with  him.”

Dr.  Walker  died  before  1 screwed  up  iny  courage  to  ask
him  if  he  had  known  an  eccentric  clergyman  of  the  name  of
Lewis.  (If  any  member  of  the  S.P.II.  can  supply  the  desired
information,  will  he  kindly  communicate  it  to  me  ?)  Assum-
ing that  the  coincidences  betw'een  the  crystal-message,  Nelly’s
explanatory  comment  on  that  message,  and  the  real  fact.s  are
not  accidental  (and  I for  one  cannot  regard  them  as  such),
two  solutions  only  suggest  themselves  to  me:  (I)  That  in
some  ordinary  way  Mrs.  Thompson  got  to  know  of  my  wife’s
visits  to  Dr.  Walker,  and  reproduced  this  information  in  the


XLVii.J  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thoni'psons  Trance.


115


crystal- message ; (2)  that  the  information  was  conveyed  to

her  in  some  supernormal  way  through  the  crystal.

The  former  alternative  seems  to  me  improbable.  I think
it  most  unlikely  that  iVIrs.  Thompson  could  have  learnt  of  any
connection  between  myself  and  T)r.  Walker.  I can’t  give  my
reasons ; 1 even  doubt  if  I could  define  them  clearly  to
myself,  let  alone  make  them  clear  to  other  people,  but  anyhow
that  is  my  opinion.

But  suppose  that  this  odd  scrap  of  information  had  reached
]\Irs.  Thompson  accidentally,  it  is  vastly  more  probable  that
she  would  have  learnt,  not  of  my  indirect  connection  with  T>r.
Walker,  but  of  my  wife’s  immediate  connection  witli  him.

Is  it  possible  that  she  learnt  the  facts  correctly  in  her
normal  state,  and  then  muddled  them  in  the  crystal-vision
version  ? Possible,  but  not  very  probable,  I think,  for  Nelly,
who  is  aware  of  the  crystal- vision,  though  she  put  Mr.  Myers
on  the  right  tack  for  obtaining  verification,  doesn’t  clear  up
the  muddle,  and  Nelly  seems,  as  I shall  show  later,  to  have
no  difficulty  in  reproducing  fully  and  clearly  in  the  trance
facts  known  to  Mrs.  Thompson.

But  Mrs.  Thompson  may  liave  concocted  this  muddled
crystal-message  with  deliberate  cunning,  and  with  a view  to
divert  suspicions  which  might  have  been  felt  if  the  real  facts
had  been  given  with  perfect  accuracy.  Well,  if  any  one
likes  to  adopt  that  theory,  I can’t  disprove  it ; only  I would
recall  some  words  written  by  I’rofessor  William  James  about
Mrs.  Piper  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VL,  p.  65ti):  “If  it  be  sug-
gested that  all  this  was  but  a rehnement  of  cunning,  for  that
such  skilfully  distributed  reticences  are  what  bring  most  credit
to  a medium,  I must  deny  the  proposition  in  toto.  I have
seen  and  heard  enough  of  sittim>s  to  be  sure  that  a medium’s

o O

trump-cards  are  promptitude  and  completeness  in  her  revela-
tions. It  is  a mistake  iir  geireral  (however  it  may  occasionally,
as  now,  be  cited  in  her  favour)  to  keep  back  anything  she
knows.”

I should  much  prefer  to  believe  that  the  correspondences
were  due  to  chance  than  that  the  crystal-message  was  a
cunning  concoction  of  Mrs.  Thompson’s.

Whatever  the  source  of  the  crystal-message,  and  whatever
its  evidential  worth,  it  has  air  interesting  bearing  on  the  first


IK)


J.  G.  FiddmgUni.


[part


sitting  which  1 had  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  for  I cannot  doubt
that  a great  proportion  of  the  true  statements  made  about  me
and  my  affairs  and  belongings  at  my  first  sitting  were  but
amplifications  of,  or  deductions  from,  or  happy  guesses  based  on
this  crystal-message.


{'!)  Amplification  of,  and  Deductions  from.  Knowledge
ALREADY  IN  THE  POS.SESSION  OF  THE  MEDIUM  OR  OF  THE
Trance-Personality.


If  my  interpretation  of  the  oracular  crystal-message  is  right,
the  somebody  or  something  responsible  for  it  certainly  knew
five  things:  (1)  My  surname;  (2)  my  initials;  (3)  that  I lived
in  Sloane  Street ; (4)  that  there  was  some  connection  between
me  and  Dr.  de  Noe  Walker;  and  (.5)  certain  facts  about  Dr.
Walker.

The  date  of  the  crystal-message  was  November  8th,  1898.

Nearly  a year  later,  on  October  28th,  1899,  I met  Mrs.
Thompson  for  the  first  time,  going,  with  Mr.  Feilding,  to  her
house  under  an  assumed  name.  1 am  not  satisfied,  for  reasons
into  wliich  it  is  not  necessary  to  enter,  that  the  means  taken
to  conceal  my  identity  were  effective ; but  whether  they  were
or  not,  it  does  not  affect  my  argument  that  the  greater  part
of  what  Nelly  said  about  me  at  my  first  sitting  can  be  re-
garded as  a mere  expansion  of  the  facts  given  in  the  crystal-
message,  or  of  facts  which,  though  not  actually  expressed  in
the  crystal-message,  may  without  impropriety  be  treated  as
latent  in  the  mind  of  the  author  of  the  crystal- message.

The  seance  of  October  28th,  1899,  opened  in  this  way:

Nelly : “ Some  one  belonging  to  you  has  got  neuralgia ; not
yourself.  I see  white  ’buses  going  in  front  of  you  all  the
time.  T get  the  influence  of  a lady  with  neuralgia.  I think
there  is  a George  in  your  personality.  ...  Is  your  name
Tod  Sloane  ? . . . You  have  a wife,  but  I can’t  see  any
children.”

Nelly  then  suddenly  addressed  me  as  “ Mr.  Smith,”  which,
as  1 liave  said,  was  at  that  time  my  name  ; and  when  neither


xlvil]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.  117

Mr.  Feilding  nor  myself  gave  any  indication  that  the  name
was  right,  the  medium  wrote  on  a piece  of  paper  the  letters
“ HTIMS,”  i.e.  the  name  Smith  backwards.  I assume  that  at
this  point — it  does  not  matter  by  what  means — the  trance
personality  had  come  to  connect  me  with  the  Mr.  Smith  of
the  crystal- vision.

I will  take  these  opening  sentences  of  the  trance-utterance
seriatim.

“ Some  one  belonging  to  you  has  got  neuralgia : not

yourself.”

“ I get  the  influence  of  a lady  with  neuralgia.”

The  only  point  of  contact  between  Dr.  de  Noe  M^alker
and  myself  was  the  fact  that  my  wife  was  consulting  him
on  account  of  neuralgia.

The  author  of  the  crystal-message  was  aware  of  there  being-
some  connection  between  the  doctor  and  myself ; and  though
what  the  connection  was  is  not  explained,  it  would  seem  on
the  face  of  it  likely  that  any  one  who  discovered  that  there
was  a connection  at  all  would  have  discovered  that  the  connection
was  through  my  wife,  and  that  she  was  being  treated  by  Dr.
Walker,  and  if  so  much  was  known,  it  is  but  a very  little
step  farther  to  assume  that  the  particular  complaint  for  which
she  was  being  treated  might  also  have  been  learnt.

“ I see  white  ’buses  going  in  front  of  you  all  the

time.”

Is  your  name  Tod  Sloan  ? ”

At  a sitting  held  on  November  10th,  1898,  Nelly  had

explained  to  Mr.  Myers  that  Mr.  J.  G.  Smith  of  Sloane

Street  would  know  about  the  muddled  crystal-message.  The
white  ’buses  are  an  association  of  ideas  with  Sloane  Street,
obvious  enough  to  any  Londoner ; though  it  will  be  noted  that,
though  clearly  latent  in  the  trance-consciousness,  the  words

“ Sloane  Street  ” were  not  actually  mentioned.  Obvious  too
is  the  association  between  Sloane  Street  (unexpressed)  and
Tod  Sloan;  though  what  are  we  to  think  of  a little  spirit
girl’s  familiarity  with  turf  celebrities  of  the  hour  ? Nelly,
I fancy,  afterwards  felt  that  the  allusion  to  Tod  Sloan  was
rather  too  incongruous,  and  needed  some  apology  ; for  two  or
three  months  later  she  said  to  me  : “ Do  you  know  any  one
named  Sloan  ? You’re  the  man  I called  Sloan.  I expect


J.  G.  Fkldington.


118


[part


that  was  mother’s  subliminal  called  you  that.”  (Cf.  “ Benson
& Bensons  Limited,”  p.  224).

“ I think  there  is  a George  in  your  personality.”

My  initials  J.  G.  and  my  then  surname  had  been  given,
though  in  a disjointed  fashion,  in  the  crystal-message,  and
also  had  been  clearly  given  by  Nelly  on  November  10th,
1898.  The  initial  G.  was  correctly  interpreted,  much  as  in
another  case  where  the  initials  E.  H.,  which  had  been  within
the  medium’s  range  of  vision,  were  rightly  read  as  Edward
Horace  by  Mrs.  Cartwright  (see  p.  178).

“ You  have  a wife,  but  I can’t  see  any  children.”

Yly  comment  on  the  reference  to  the  lady  with  neuralgia
applies  equally  to  this  sentence.  The  author  of  the  crystal-
message  must,  in  my  view,  have  been  aware  of  the  existence
of  my  wife  ; but  need  not  have  known  that  I had  any
children.  As  a matter  of  fact  I have  one  child ; to  whom
Nelly,  since  Mrs.  Thompson  made  her  acquaintance,  has  often
referred.

Then  came  the  first  reference  to  “ Dorothy,”  on  which  I
comment  elsewhere  (see  pp.  214-220).  This  allusion  cannot  be
traced  to  anything  contained  in  the  crystal-message.  Nelly
subsequently  attributed  it  to  the  momentary  intrusion  of
another  spirit ; and  in  any  case  I am  obliged  to  consider  that
she  turned  at  this  point  to  some  fresh  source  of  information.

I tlieii  "ave  to  the  medium  an  old  coin  that  had  been  in

O

the  possession  of  my  father  for  some  years,  and  Nelly  said
it  had  been  worn  by  a man  of  whom  she  proceeded  to  give
a personal  description,  and  about  whom  she  made  in  all  six
statements ; four  of  which  were  correct,  while  two  were  possibly
so."^  Still,  these  details  were  neither  numerous  nor  distinctive
enough  to  permit  me  to  say  that  their  correspondence  with
facts  was  beyond  chance.  Then  followed  a prediction  about
my  wife’s  health,  as  if  Nelly  were  harking  back  to  the  nucleus
of  knowledge  on  which  the  crystal-message  was  based.  Not
that  the  prediction  came  true ; but  Nelly,  having  at  her  disposal


1 One  of  tliese  four  statements  was  to  this  effect  : “ He  has  a dead  Annie
belonging  to  him.”  For  over  three  years  I had  regarded  this  as  incorrect ;
and  it  was  only  in  September,  1903,  that  I learnt  from  a very  old  friend
of  my  father’s,  who  had  known  him  from  childhood,  that  my  father  had
liad  a sister  Annie,  who  died  more  than  50  years  ago  (see  pp.  152-3).


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.  119

the  fact  of  my  wife’s  ill-health,  could  not  resist  the  temptation
of  manufacturing  a prophecy  ont  of  it.  (See  pp.  246-250.)

A few  more  statements  were  addressed  to  me  by  Nelly,
but  not  one  of  them  was  right,  and  none  were  traceable  to
the  same  source  (whatever  that  may  have  been)  as  the  crystal-
message.  AVith  the  exception,  then,  of  the  mention  of  Dorothy,
and  of  the  things  given  in  connection  with  the  coin,  which  latter,
though  not  without  interest,  must  on  the  whole  be  dismissed
as  not  sufficiently  definite,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  successful
hits  were  such  as  might  without  any  straining  of  probabilities
have  been  made  by  an  intelligent  being  already  possessed  of
the  information  displayed  or  presupposed  in  the  crystal-message.
In  other  words,  it  is  not  necessary,  as  far  as  an  important
proportion  of  the  veridical  communications  is  concerned,  to
assume  that  at  the  seance  of  October  28th,  1899,  any  new
source  of  knowledge  was  tapped ; a sufficient  explanation  is
that  knowledge  held  in  reserve  or  latent  was  now  brought
forward,  and  that  infei’ences  were  drawn  from  knowledge
already  manifested.

As  an  instance  of  what  I should  call  a happy  guess  rather
than  a logical  deduction,  I quote  the  following :

At  one  sitting  Mr.  Feilding  and  a lady  were  present  together.
They  did  not  arrive  together,  but  it  would  have  been  obvious
to  an  observant  person  from  their  manner  of  greeting  that
they  were  friends,  and  probably  intimate  friends.  Mr.
Feilding  is  a Eoman  Catholic,  and  this  fact,  if  not  known
to  Mrs.  Thompson,  might  easily  have  been  known  to  her.
Nelly  almost  at  once  observed : “ That  lady  and  Mr.  Feilding
belong  to  one  another.”  And  later  on : “ And  that  lady  smells
of  incense,  too.”  The  lady  was  a Eoman  Catholic,  and  it  might
be  imagined  that  the  medium  either  by  means  of  her  normal  or
a hyperaisthetic  sense  of  smell  detected  an  odour  of  incense
which  might  have  been  clinging  to  the  lady’s  clothes.  This  is,  of
course,  a possible  explanation,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  lady
had  not  been  inside  a church  for  ten  days  at  least ; but  com-
parison of  this  with  a similar  case  makes  it  more  probable  that
the  allusion  to  incense  was  merely  a symbolical  way  of  saying
that  the  lady  was  a Eoman  Catholic,  for  the  same  phrase  was
used  by  Nelly  on  another  occasion  when  there  could  have

I


J.  G.  Piddington.


120


[part


been  no  question  of  the  medium’s  senses  being  brought  into
play.

The  occasion  was  Dr.  Max  Dessoir’s  sitting  on  April  19th,
1900.  Speaking  of  a lady  who  she  said  was  associated  with  a
locket  handed  to  the  medium  by  Dr.  Dessoir,  Nelly  remarked :
“ The  lady  used  to  be  at  school  in  a foreign  country.  Of  coui'se
that’s  silly.  There’s  a little  chapel  inside  the  school.  A smell  of
incense.”  The  statements  of  fact  are  wrong  ; the  lady  was  not
at  school  in  a foreign  country,  but  in  England,  and  there  was
no  chapel  inside  the  school,  and  there  was  no  significance  in
the  reference  to  incense.^  It  seems  clear  to  me  that  all  three
statements  were  deductions  from  the  obvious  fact  that  the
sitter  was  a foreigner.  The  data  were : this  man,  the  sitter,
is  a foreigner,  and  he  presents  a locket.  The  train  of

inferential  reasoning  would  have  been  somewhat  as  follows  :
The  object  being  a locket,  the  dead  or  living  owner  must
be  a woman  ; as  it  is  presented  by  a foreigner,  it  is  pretty
certain  that  the  woman  was  also  a foreigner ; and  if  a foreigner,
the  chances  are  in  favour  of  her  being  a Koman  Catholic,  and
that  she  was  educated  abroad,  and  very  possibly  at  a convent-
school,  and  attached  to  the  convent-school  was  probably  a
chapel  ; and  in  the  chapel  incense  would  have  been  used.
Nelly  recognises  that  the  inference  that  the  lady  was  edu-
cated abroad  is  so  obvious  as  to  be  silly ; but  she  either  does
not  recognise  or  does  not  admit  that  the  reference  to  incense
is,  if  not  quite  so  obvious,  at  least  so  obvious  on  refiection  as
to  be  “ silly  ” too.

A student  of  the  phenomena  of  Mrs.  Thompson  or  of  Mrs.
Piper  would  do  well  to  exercise  a little  time  and  ingenuity  in
going  carefully  through  the  records  of  a few  sittings,  with  a
view  to  tracing  how  many  of  the  statements  contained  in  them,
no  matter  whether  true  or  false,  can  be  referred  to  one  or  more
parent  stems.  The  point  which  I am  making  is  not,  of  course.


' Since  the  above  was  written  Mrs.  Thompson,  in  the  course  of  a conversa-
tion with  me,  made  use  of  an  e.xpression  very  similar  to  Nelly’s.  Speaking
either  of  a person  or  a place  (I  cannot  remember  which)  she  said  she  felt
there  was  a smell  of  incense  about  him  (or  it),  aud  afterwards  exjjlained
that  by  that  she  meant  the  person  (or  place)  was  Homan  Catholic.  It
will  be  noticed  that  she  used  the  symbolical  expression  fir.st,  as  if  it  came
the  more  naturally  to  her.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.  121

original,  and  has  often  been  made  before ; but  it  has  not  been
enough  insisted  on,  and  I fear  a careless  reader  is  inclined  to
scan  the  record  of  a sitting  and  gather  an  impression  from  the
general  effect  produced  on  him  by  seeing  a number  of  state-
ments marked  as  correct  or  incorrect : counting  up  the  “ W.’s  ”
and  the  “ E.’s,”  and  by  a simple  sum  in  addition  arriving  at
what  he  imagines  to  be  the  evidential  value  of  a sitting.  The
manner  in  which  we  are  bound  for  the  sake  of  convenience
and  preciseness  to  affix  to  each  separate  statement  an  affirma-
tive or  negative  comment  no  doubt  tends  to  encourage  such  a
system  of  reckoning  ; but  if  any  one  really  wishes  to  assess  at
their  proper  worth  the  strings  of  details  forming  the  trance-
utterances,  he  must  not  consider  each  detail  by  itself,  but  with
an  eye  to  their  sequence  and  interdependence.

The  chief  difficulty  is  to  decide  how  far  inference  can  be
carried.  Let  us  suppose  that  a middle-aged  person  attends  a
particular  sitting,  and  that  the  medium  adjudges  his  age
rightly  to  be  about  45.  An  easy  inference  will  he  that  the
sitter’s  mother  must  be  an  elderly  and  quite  probably  an  old
lady ; likewise  his  father.  That  is  inference  the  first.  In-
ference the  second,  let  us  suppose,  might  be  (a)  that  the
sitter’s  mother  has  or  had  grey  or  white  hair,  or  wore  a wig ;
(b)  that  the  sitter’s  father  is  or  was  bald  or  had  white  hair.

Of  course,  neither  of  these  inferences  might  prove  to  be  true,

for  both  parents  might  have  died  young,  or  they  might  have
or  have  had  exceptionally  luxuriant  and  healthy  hair ; but  in
a great  proportion  of  cases  they  would  be  correct.

These,  of  course,  are  very  simple  e.xamples  ; but  with  some

ingenuity  it  ought  not  to  be  difficult  to  plan  far  more  intri-

cate and  less  obvious  deductions.

Let  us  suppose,  for  instance,  that  our  middle-aged  sitter  of
45  attends  a sitting  in  England  in  the  year  1900,  and  is
plainly  an  Englishman.  He  was  born  then  in  1855,  when

his  father  was,  say,  30  years  of  age.  In  1851  the  father

would  have  been  26.  The  medium  hazards  a guess  : “ I seem
to  see  your  father  in  a huge  building  of  glass.  There  are
crowds  of  people.  And  now  I see  him  looking  at  lots  of

things,  so  interested  in  them ; and  he’s  talking  to  a lady

in  a poke-bonnet  who’s  leaning  on  his  arm.  And — Oh  ! yes,
it’s  just  like  Hyde  Park,”  etc.,  etc.


122


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


The  middle-aged  sitter,  who  doesn’t  seize  the  allusion  to
the  Great  Exhibition  of  1851,  is  not  at  all  impressed  until
on  reading  over  the  notes  of  the  sitting  to  an  elderly  aunt  he
is  reminded  by  her  of  the  great  interest  which  “ your  dear
father  took  in  the  Great  Exhibition.  I remember  so  well  his
talking  to  me  about  it.  I was  quite  young  in  those  days.
And  when  he  and  your  mother  were  engaged  he  used  to  take
her  there  every  Saturday  afternoon.”  And  aunt  and  nephew
are  both  mightily  impressed,  though  neither  will  admit  it,  be-
cause one  thinks  such  trafficking  with  mediums  not  conformable
with  strict  piety,  and  the  other  because,  as  a man  of  the  world,
he  is  unwilling  to  avow  any  belief  in  such  things.

Now,  is  my  suppositious  communication  far-fetched?  Cannot
parallels  to  it  be  found  jmssim  in  the  records  of  trance-utterances?
Not,  indeed,  that  I wish  for  one  moment  to  suggest,  because
one  may  in  certain  instances  be  able  to  discover  a train  of
reasoning  that  could  have  furnished  a medium  with  a portion
of  his  communications,  that  therefore  the  process  was  coirscious
or  even  that  any  such  process  was  brought  into  play  at  all.
All  I wish  to  urge  is  that  any  statements  made  by  a medium
in  trance  which  can  be  accounted  for  in  this  normal  way,  even
if  they  do  not  entirely  lose  their  weight,  must  at  least  cease  to
rank  as  evidence  for  supernormal  faculty.

I am  not  losing  sight  of  the  cumulative  force  of  a large
number  of  details  in  themselves  non-distinctive ; but  even  when
this  factor  enters  into  the  problem,  mere  accumulation  alone  is
not  enough  to  exclude  chance,  as  much  will  depend  on  the
character  of  the  details.  If  all  the  details,  however  numerous,
can  be  traced  back  to  one  basic  fact  within  the  ken  of  the
medium’s  normal  or  trance-consciousness,  or  perhaps  to  two  or
three  such  facts,  their  cumulative  force  may  not  be  entirely
destroyed,  but  it  is  at  least  considerably  diminished.

There  is  another  type  of  statement  which  may  be  explained
as  an  inference  from  antecedent  knowledge,  though  at  first  sight
only  attributable  to  chance  or  supernormal  power,  which  I will
illustrate  from  my  own  sittings.  The  following  statements  were
made  by  Nelly  about  a lady  whom  she  subsequently  identified
as  my  mother.

{a)  “ She  used  to  be  fond  of  doing  white  embroidery : cut
little  holes,  and  then  sew  them  round.  That  makes  like


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.  123

Madeira  work.  They  use  it  for  making  babies’  pinafores,
dresses,  and  embroidery.”

(b)  “ She  had  a funny  little  thing  about  five  inches  long
like  a needle-case,  only  like  a carved  ivory  umbrella.  You
screwed  the  handle  out,  and  you  could  put  needles  inside.”

(c)  “ She  has  got  a real  Indian  shawl  in  the  possession  of  her
daughter  still.  Is  Paisley  Indian  ? It’s  a bright-coloured  shawl.”

As  regards  {a),  my  mother,  who  was  very  clever  with  her
needle,  did  Madeira  work,  and  did  it  well ; but,  so  far  as  my
information  goes,  she  was  not  particularly  fond  of  it.

With  regard  to  {h),  my  mother  possessed  a wooden  needle-
case  with  a bone  (not  ivory)  handle  shaped  like  an  umbrella.
It  was  about  5 inches  long,  and  the  handle  unscrewed.

With  regard  to  (c),  there  is  in  the  possession  of  one  of  my
sisters  a white  Chinese  shawl  that  had  belonged  to  my  mother.

P>efore  being  in  a position  to  comment  on  these  three  state-
ments, I had  to  consult  some  members  of  my  family.  At  the
time  of  the  sitting  the  only  statement  which  I thought
mi"ht  have  somethiiis;  in  it  was  that  about  the  needle-case.  I
seemed  to  have  a hazy  recollection  of  having  seen  such  an
article  in  my  mother’s  workbox,  though  on  reflection  I was
later  inclined  to  accuse  myself  of  having  yielded  to  Nelly’s
suggestion.

What  one  may  know  subconsciously  only  Heaven  knows ;
but  consciously  I did  not  know  that  my  mother  had  pos-
sessed such  a thing  as  a white  shawl,  and  that  one  of  my
sisters  had  it  still.  There  was  not,  however,  a complete  corre-
spondence between  Nelly’s  statement  and  the  actual  facts.

As  to  the  Madeira  work,  I had  never  known  that  any-
thing except  an  island,  a wine,  and  a cake  bore  the  name
Madeira;  nor  did  Nelly’s  description  given  in  answer  to  my
enquiry  enlighten  me  much.  Now  that  I know  what  Madeira
work  is,  I think  it  possible  that  as  a child  I saw  my  mother
engaged  on  it.

No  doubt,  especially  at  the  first  blush,  these  three  coin-
cidences taken  in  combination  are  impressive,  and  for  the
purpose  of  my  argument  it  would  perhaps  have  been  wiser
to  have  chosen  a less  extreme  example  of  what  I conceive
may  be  the  results  of  successful  inference.  Yet  tliere  is  a
certain  advantage  in  selecting  for  discussion  what  may  per-


124


J.  0.  Piddington.


[part


haps  be  regarded  as  the  utmost  limit  of  ingenious  deduction  ;
for  if  it  can  be  shown  to  be  not  outside  the  bounds  of  normal
processes  of  thought,  it  follows  that  to  less  salient  instances  a
similar  treatment  can  be  legitimately  and  confidently  applied.

Apart  from  the  fact  that  Nelly  later  on  admitted  that  she
had  suspected  that  the  lady  about  whom  she  had  been  speak-
ing was  my  mother,  it  is  clear  from  the  general  tone  of
the  communications  that  throughout  Nelly  had  in  her  mind
a person  whose  career  on  earth  dated  back  a considerable
time,  and  one  who  belonged,  roughly  speaking,  to  the  mid-
Victorian  epoch.  Now  the  question  is,  to  how  many  women
whose  youth  or  middle  age  belonged  to  this  period  could  the
three  statements  quoted  above  apply  ? It  appears  to  me  that
they  might  be  applied  with  a very  fair  chance  of  success  to  a
very  large  number  of  my  mother’s  contemporaries.

The  shawl,  the  needle-case,  and  the  Madeira  work ; they
seem  to  me  almost  as  redolent  of  the  mid-Victorian  lady  as
wax  flowers  under  a glass-case  standing  on  a woolly  mat
are  of  the  lodging-house-keeper  of  blessed  memory.^  I was
asking  a friend  and  contemporary  of  my  mother’s  the  other
day  about  Madeira  work,  and  she  said  : “ Oh  ! we  all  used  to
do  Madeira  work  in  those  days.”  And  then  the  shawl.  Look
in  the  pages  of  Punch  or  at  the  illustrations  of  an  Anthony
Trollope  novel  and  the  ladies  all  seem  to  be  wearing  shawls
at  all  times  of  the  day,  and  under  all  kinds  of  circumstances,
and  I know  some  ladies  of  the  old  school  even  now  who  seem
as  unhai^py  apart  from  their  shawls  as  a man  from  his  pipe.
I understand  that  such  shawls,  in  spite  of  their  modest  appear-
ance, were  often  made  of  some  relatively  costly  material : which
would  explain  why,  apart  from  associations,  they  might  be
preserved  by  a daughter  of  the  wearer.^

^For  an  earlier  period,  of.  Pride  and  Prejudice,  ch.  viii.  : — ‘ “All  young  ladies
accomplished  ! My  dear  Charles,  what  do  mean?”

“Yes,  all  of  them,  I think.  They  all  paint  tables,  cover  skreens,  and  net
purses.  I scarcely  know  anyone  who  cannot  do  all  this,  . . ’

“ After  reading  the  above,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  sent  me  the  following  comment: —
“40  or  .50  years  ago  Indian  Cashmere  shawls  were  much  more  common  than
now,  and  were  often  very  valuable,  being  heavily  embroidered.  The  patterns
of  these  shawls  were  imitated  in  Paisley  shawls.  I should  think  that  many
daughters  have  their  mothers’  Indian  shawls.  I have  one  that  was  my
mother’s.”


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.  125

As  for  the  ivory  umbrella-shaped  needle-case,  I should  class
this  under  the  same  heading  as  the  Madeira  work  and  the
shawl : namely,  under  the  heading  of  typical  possessions  or
occupations  of  the  mid-^hctorian  ladyd  There  are  fashions  in
needle-cases  as  there  are  in  everything  else.  A particularly
fascinating  or  artistic  novelty  will  have  a great  and  relatively
prolonged  vogue.  Needle-cases,  workboxes,  smelling-bottles,
scissor-cases,  pin-cushions,  writing-desks,  ink-stands,  pencil-
holders,  blotting-pads,  cigar-cases,  cigar-cutters,  cigarette-holders,
match-boxes,  and  the  thousand-and-one  knick-knacks  which  men
and  women  possess — of  each  and  all  of  these  some  ideal  pat-
tern may  be  laid  up  in  heaven,  but  the  earthly  artificer  is
every  year  or  so  fashioning  some  novel  image  of  the  ideal
needle-case,  let  us  say ; and  an  experienced  manufacturer  or
retailer  of  fancy-goods  ought,  I should  surmise,  to  be  able  to
date  within  a year  or  two  any  particular  specimen.  But
because  a specialist  might  be  capable  of  assigning  to  the  objects
of  his  trade  the  approximate  date  of  their  first  appearance  in
the  market,  is  it  reasonable  to  endow  a medium  with  equal
technical  knowledge  ? To  answer  with  a bald  affirmative  would
be  ridiculous ; but  if  the  subconscious  memory  has  been  rightly
defined  as  “ half  lumber-room  and  half  King’s  treasury,”  stowed
away  in  its  lumber-room  may  well  be  many  such  trumpery
details ; and  if  the  lumber-room  be  a woman’s,  they  may  not
lie  in  so  inaccessible  a corner  as  in  a man’s.  Most  women,
so  it  seems  to  me,  display  an  extraordinary  power  of  observing
and  recollecting  details  about  material  objects.  Listen  to  a
man  and  a woman  describing  their  reminiscences  of  their
childish  or  youthful  days,  and  while  the  man  will  talk  about
what  he  has  done  or  thought,  the  woman  will  speak  of  things
which  she  has  possessed  or  loved,  and  if  she  recalls  an  inci-
dent, as  often  as  not  she  associates  it  with  some  material
object : a brooch,  a watch,  a picture,  or  what  not.  It  would
be  interesting  to  compare  the  trance-utterances  of  a male  and
female  medium  together ; for,  if  the  subliminal  memory  plays
any  such  part  as  I am  here  suggesting,  references  to  personal
possessions  ought  to  be  more  numerous  in  the  utterances  of
the  woman.

'Mrs.  Verrall,  likewise,  writes: — “We  had  as  children,  about  1865,  a similar
needle-case.”


12G


J.  0.  Piddington.


[part


(3)  Mrs.  Thompson’s  “Controls”  and  the  Dramatic  Business

OF  the  Trance.

So  far  as  my  experience  goes,  Xelly  plays  by  far  the
most  important  rule  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trances.  Of  the
other  regular  control,  Mrs.  Cartwright,  I have  seen  but  little.
Mr.  Myers  had  a high  opinion  of  Mrs.  Cartwright’s  powers,
and  was,  I believe,  glad  when  she  took  Nelly’s  place.  The
results  of  her  rare  interventions  at  the  sittings  which  I
attended  were  not  so  successful  as  to  make  me  regret  their
rarity.  She  seemed  to  me  a good  deal  more  interested,  when
she  did  control  directly,  in  uttering  sesquipedalian  words  than
in  doing  her  best  to  communicate  evidential  facts.

Mrs.  Cartwright  is  supposed  to  Ije  the  spirit  of  a lady
who  was  (not  Mrs.  Thompson’s  school- mistress,  but)  the
proprietress  of  the  school  where  Mrs.  Thompson  was  educated.
As  represented  in  the  trance,  she  is  the  typical  school-dame
of  caricature ; and  indeed  the  Cartwright  impersonation  has
never  impressed  me  favourably.  It  seems  to  me  lacking  in
the  spontaneity  of  the  Nelly  and  tlie  “ Mr.  D.”  controls ; and
to  be  not  unlike  the  sort  of  stereotyped  caricature  that
school-boys,  and,  I imagine,  school-girls  too,  make  of  their
pastors  and  masters.  I have  known  cases  where,  when  once  a
true  mimic  has  shown  the  way,  a whole  number  of  boys  or
undergraduates  will,  thougli  incapable  tliemselves  of  original
mimicry,  reproduce  a rather  wooden  but  on  the  whole
amusing  and  recognisable  caricature  of  some  unfortunate  peda-
gogue.

Now  the  Cartwright  impersonation  struck  me  as  having
much  in  common  with  this  kind  of  conventional  caricature ;
and  I felt  as  if  the  medium  might  be  reproducing  in  her
trance  a cut  and  dried  delineation  of  her  old  mistress  witli
which  she  had  been  familiar  at  school.  Any  one  who  is
acquainted  with  the  sort  of  stock  caricature  which  I mean
will  understand  me  when  I say  that  one  knew  beforehand
almost  the  exact  words  which  would  be  put  into  the  mouth
of  the  caricatured  personage  under  any  given  circumstances.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.  127

In  the  same  way  I felt  about  the  Cartwright  control  that  her
mode  of  expressing  herself  on  any  given  topic  was  inevitable.

Yet  in  spite  of  creating  this  effect  of  being  a mechanical  puppet,
this  trance-personality  aroused  in  me  such  feelings  as  one  would
suppose  could  only  result  from  intercourse  with  a human  being.
Foolish  as  such  a confession  may  seem,  I must  in  justice
to  the  cpialities  of  this  control  admit  that  she  irritated  me
to  so  great  an  extent  with  her  verbosity  and  pomposity  that
I was  heartily  thankful  when  she  didn’t  put  in  an  appearance,
or  when  she  disappeared  after  a short  space  of  time.  Her

conversation  was  as  distasteful  to  me  as  that  of  the  most  in-
dubitably alive  of  living  bores ; and  the  dislike  was,  I grieve
to  say,  mutual.  There  is,  of  course,  a contradiction  here : on
the  one  hand  she  produced  the  impression  of  the  most
mechanical  of  secondary  personalities,  while,  on  the  other,  she
produced  the  irritation  which  only  a living  individual  ought
to.  I cannot  explain  the  discongruity : I can  but  record  it.
Yet  if  Xelly  is  not  a mere  secondary  personality,  no  more
can  Mrs.  Cartwright  be : for  Nelly  has  no  doubts  about  the
reality  of  Mrs.  Cartwright,  and,  so  to  speak,  vouches  for  her,
just  as  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  case  G.  P.  vouches  for  Phinuit.  The
pair  of  them  must  stand  or  fall  together.  And  after  all  one

must  recognise  that  it  is  a common  enough  experience  in  this

world  to  come  across  persons  unfortunately  and  undoubtedly
real  who  strike  one  as  mere  puppets  in  their  behaviour  and
in  their  mannerisms ; and  this  wooden  type  is  to  be  found
as  often  as  not  among  prim  old-maidish  ladies  who  think  it
unbecoming — indelicate,  in  fact, — to  let  themselves  go  and  be
natural  spontaneous  human  beings.

Whatever  view  one  may  take  of  Mrs.  Cartwright  as  a person-
ality, it  is  perfectly  clear  that  she  is  working  behind  the  scenes
all  the  time.  That  she  is  no  mere  nonentity  in  the  trance-

drama,  to  be  brought  on  the  stage  only  to  create  a diversion,

will  be  seen  from  the  following  quotations :

Sitting  of  Xovemher  29th,  1899.

In  answer  to  an  enquiry  which  I made  about  materialisations,
Xelly  said : “ Whenever  a spirit  materialises  it  is  quite  a

spontaneous  thing.”  And  then  added,  “ Mrs.  Cartwright  dictated
that  bit,  and  also  about  Alice  James.”


]28


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


One  might  have  fancied  that  the  explanatory  comment  on
materialisations  was  attributed  to  Mrs.  Cartwright  because,  in
using  language  incongruous  with  the  ordinary  language  of  a
child,  there  was  a desire  on  the  part  of  the  trance-consciousness
to  correct  a momentary  slip : but  no  such  motive  could  have
prompted  the  assigning  of  the  statement  concerning  “ Alice
James”  to  Mrs.  Cartwright,  and,  as  will  appear,  this  was  no
solitary  instance,  but  a regular  chai'acteristic  of  the  trance-drama.
Earlier  in  the  sitting  I had  handed  to  the  medium  a letter
written  by  Mrs.  William  James ; and  in  connection  with  it
Nelly  had  among  other  things  said:  “Alice  Janies  writes

letters  ; I’ve  got  to  tell  that.”  She  liad  meant  evidently  that
Mrs.  Cartwright  had  told  her  to  tell  that.

Sitting  of  December  1st,  1899.

About  a lady  connected  with  an  object  handed  to  the  medium
Nelly  said : “ She  had  one  or  two  unsuccessful  trips  for  her
health.  This  is  what  Mrs.  Cartwright  says.”

This  is  the  only  reference  to  Mrs.  Cartwright  throughout  this
sitting;  and  it  occurs  just  when  Nelly  has  made  use  of  rather
“grown-up”  phraseology.  “Unsuccessful  trips  for  her  health”
is  not  at  all  in  Nelly’s  style.  If  I^ might  venture  on  a parody,
Nelly’s  way  of  expressing  the  same  idea  would  have  been
something  of  this  kind  :

“ You  know  Margate,  Mr.  Piddington.  M^ell,  the  lady
associated  with  the  hair  used  to  go  to  Margate  when  she  was
ill ; only  it  wasn’t  Margate,  but  a place  like  Margate.”

Supposing  the  statement  had  been  expressed  both  in  Mrs.
Cartwright’s  words,  and  also  in  the  language  wliich  I imagine
Nelly  would  have  used,  I believe  that  the  difference  in  the
mode  of  expression  would  not  have  been  due  to  a difference
in  the  source  of  the  information,  and  not  altogether — though
perhaps  partly — to  the  difference  in  the  stages  of  intellectual
development  represented  by  Mrs.  Cartwright  and  Nelly  re-
spectively, but  cliiehy  to  the  Cartwright  personality  being  able
to  receive  general  ideas,  and  to  Nelly  having  to  have  general
ideas  translated  to  her  by  means  of  charade-pictures  into
concrete  particular  ideas.  A close  study  of  the  trance-utterances
has  convinced  me  that  some  diflhrence  in  the  mental  processes
of  these,  the  two  chief  controls,  is  constantly  exhibited,  and  with


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  'Thompson’s  Trance.  129

an  undesigned  consistency  so  suljtle  that  it  is  impossible  to
attribute  it  to  deliberate  artifice.  Although  this  is  the  only
instance  in  this  sitting  where  Mrs.  Cartwright’s  participation
is  directly  intimated,  there  is  one  other  passage  where  Nelly
represents  herself  as  receiving  information  through  another,
though  unspecified,  intelligence.

Nelly  had  been  making  various  attempts  to  pronounce  the
name  of  the  sitter.  Dr.  van  Eeden,  but  had  not  got  very  near
it.  Then  suddenly  she  remarked  : “ Do  you  know  van  Eeden  ?
Somebody  said  that : somebody  slipped  in  and  said  that,  I

think.”

Similarly,  in  Dr.  van  Eeden’s  next  sitting,  Nelly,  in  com-
pliance with  a recpiest  that  she  should  try  to  tell  the  name
of  the  favourite  place  of  Dr.  van  Eeden’s  father-in-law,  said  : —
“Am-felt — Hamfelt — Handfelt — and  then  after  going  off  on
another  tack  renewed  her  attempts  at  the  name : —

“ I am  trying  to  find  the  name.  It’s  like  Shovelt.  It’s
difficult.  They  have  to  say  the  word  and  tell  Mrs.  Cartwright
and  she  tells  me.”

The  “ they  ” was  intended  no  doubt  to  refer  to  the  Dutch
friends  and  relations  of  Dr.  van  Eeden  from  whom  communi-
cations were  purporting  to  come.

Twice  in  the  sitting  of  January  23rd,  1900,  the  notes  of
which  were  taken  by  Mrs.  Benson,  Nelly  quotes  Mrs.  Cartwright
as  her  authority  for  two  statements.  The  passage  runs  as
follows,  and  is  worth  giving  in  full  because  it  illustrates  very
clearly  Nelly’s  emphatic  and  apparently  motiveless  (motiveless,
I mean,  unless  it  really  indicates  tlie  conveyance  of  knowledge
to  the  trance-personality  by  some  involved  and  not  direct  method)
attribution  to  Mrs.  Cartwright  of  certain  of  her  assertions  : —

“ Mother’s  brooch.  This  was  her  brooch,  and  belonged  to
more  than  one  generation.  A lady — two  children  died.  Her
own  hair,  and  two  dead  children’s  hair  made  into  a brooch.
The  lady  seems  to  be  the  third  generation.  Grandmother —
mother — grandchildren.  Mrs.  Cartwright  said  ‘ Mother’s  brooch.’

Some  one  telling  me  to  say  it  was  her  mother’s.”

All  the  points  here  mentioned  were  true,  but  why  does  Nelly
quote  Mrs.  Cartwright,  or  an  undesignated  “ some  one,”  as  her
authority  for  only  one  of  these  several  correct  statements  ?
Nelly  continues  : — “ The  person  who  wrapped  it  up  {i  e.  the


130


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


brooch,  which  had  been  wrapped  in  a sealed  envelope)  was  not
well  when  they  wrapped  it  up.  Inanition.  Delicate — not  well

at  all — wants  nourishment.  Mrs.  Cartwright  used  the  word.  I
don’t  know.”

The  word  meant  is  no  doubt  “ inanition,”  which  would  be
out  of  place  in  Nelly’s  vocabulary.  She  uses  it  like  a parrot,
and  though  she  translates  it  correctly,  she  appears  to  be  un-
certain whether  her  interpretation  is  right  or  not.  The  diagnosis
w'as  quite  accurate.

The  sitting  of  February  Qth,  1900,  furnishes  several  good
instances  of  Nelly’s  dependence  on  Mrs.  Cartwright’s  coaching.

Speaking  of  my  mother  she  said : — “ Without  being  religious
she  was  very  fond  of  her  Bible.”  (“  Eeligious  ’’  in  Nelly’s
sense  means  what  is  called  “ goody-goody.”)  “ The  Bible  to
her  was  a comfort.  She  derived  a certain  amount  of  pleasure
from  perusing  it.”

This  last  stilted  phrase  made  me  prick  up  my  ears,  and  I
asked  : — “ Did  Mrs.  Cartwright  say  that  ? ” and  Nelly  assented.
But  when  I have  rightly  suspected  from  the  peculiar  turn  of
a phrase  that  Mrs.  Cartwright  is  responsible  for  it,  it  has  not
always  been  the  affectation  of  the  phraseology  that  has  led  me
to  detect  the  authorship,  but  often  the  manner  in  which  Nelly
has  the  air  of  repeating  words  that  she  does  not  understand,
or  with  which  she  is  unfamiliar.  She  brings  these  phrases  out
just  like  a child  who,  having  been  entrusted  with  a message,
delivers  it  slowly  and  painfully  in  the  precise  words  in  which
it  was  given.

Then,  again,  later  in  the  same  sitting,  Nelly,  describing  the
character  of  a relative  of  mine,  delivered  herself  of  the  follow-
ing ; — “ He  was  a harum-scarum,  seek-your-luck  man ; not  in
a bad  sense ; not  a man  who  appreciated  any  form  of  civilisation.”
The  last  phrase  Nelly  admitted  in  reply  to  my  question  was
Mrs.  Cartwright’s.  Nelly’s  translation  (or  what  I believe  to
be  her  translation  of  something  told  her  by  Mrs.  Cartwright),
as  in  the  case  just  referred  to,  came  first,  and  the  original  on
which  it  was  based  is  given  afterwards,  as  if  Nelly  is  not  quite
sure  of  having  conveyed  the  true  meaning.  In  this  instance
the  “ original  ” is  correct  and  the  “ translation  ” wrong ; in  the
statement  about  my  mother  and  her  Bible  Nelly’s  translation
is  truer  than  Mrs.  Cartwright’s  original.


XL VII.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thomijson's  Trance.  131

In  the  case  where  the  symptoms  of  the  lady  who  wrapped
up  the  brooch  are  mentioned,  Mrs.  Cartwright’s  “ inanition  ” and
Nelly’s  rendering — “ wants  nourishment  ” — are  about  equally
near  the  mark.

A little  later,  speaking  again  of  the  man  who  “ did  not
appreciate  any  form  of  civilisation,”  Nelly  said : — “ When  he
went  to  school  he  didn’t  like  the  monotony  of  the  ordinary
scholastic  routine.”  This  pedantic  expression  I also  rightly  put
down  to  Mrs.  Cartwright’s  account.^

Just  before  this  Nelly  had  been  talking  about  a clergyman
who  was  said  to  have  played  a considerable  part  in  my  mother’s
life.  “ He  was  a friend : he  seemed  to  do  her  some  service.
Mrs.  Cartwright  says,  ‘ Eender  her  a considerable  amount  of
assistance,’  and  she  didn’t  forget  it.”

Note  the  mixture  of  Mrs.  Cartwright  “ tout  pur  ” and  of
Nelly’s  colloquial  “ and  she  didn’t  forget  it.”  Had  Mrs.  Cart-
wright completed  the  sentence,  it  would  have  run  like  this :
“ He  rendered  her  a considerable  amount  of  assistance,  of  which
she  preserved  a life-long  and  most  grateful  recollection.”
During  this  sitting  my  mother  was  represented  as  communi-
cating through  Nelly,  and  once  Nelly  professes  to  repeat  her
actual  words.  The  words  thus  repeated  are  the  words  of  a
grown-up  person,  and  yet  not  such  as  Mrs.  Cartwright
would  have  used  to  express  the  same  idea.  My  mother  is
supposed  to  be  referring  to  the  man  who  “ did  not  appreciate
any  form  of  civilisation,”  and  Nelly  reports  as  follows : — “ Oh  1
dear,  the  lady  says  ‘ he  teas  an  unorthodox  person.’  ”

The  interest  of  this  expression  to  me  is  that  I have  myself
heard  this  precise  phrase  in  the  sense  of  “ unconventional  ” used
of  this  precise  person  by  a sister  of  my  mother.  Nelly  does
not  father  this  phrase  on  to  Mrs.  Cartwright,  as  in  other  cases
where  she  has  employed  a phrase  not  in  keeping  with  her
usual  simple  style,  but  appropriately  on  to  another  spirit  and
with,  at  least  for  me,  most  telling  effect.

Mrs.  Cartwright  would  never  have  said ; “ Oh ! dear,  he  was

^The  way  in  which  these  passages  are  strung  together  may  create  the
impression  that  I was  responsible  for  suggesting  to  the  trance-personality
this  particular  bit  of  by-play.  I am,  however,  quite  clear  in  my  own
mind  that  I did  not  suggest  it,  and  that  it  was  only  its  spontaneous
and  frequent  recurrence  which  led  me  to  notice  it.


132


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


an  unorthodox  person.”  In  her  Daily  Telegraphese  the  senti-
ment would  have  transpired  somewhat  in  this  form : “ I regret
to  be  compelled  to  observe  that  he  was  an  individual  who
possessed  but  slight  regard  and  respect  for  the  accepted  con-
ventionalities of  social  existence.”  The  following  effort  of  a
modern  lady  novelist  might  have  been  written  by  Mrs.
Cartwright,  and  would  certainly  have  met  with  her  approba-
tion : — “ The  burnt  child  is  proverbially  a dissenter  from  the
form  of  religion  established  by  Zoroaster.”

But  I think  I have  said  enough  to  indicate  what  part  Mrs.
Cartwright  played  in  the  series  of  sittings  now  under  con-
sideration. I draw  attention  elsewhere  (see  p.  212)  to  a
■case  where  Nelly  appears  to  have  remained  in  ignorance  for
some  time  of  a fact  known  to  Mrs.  Cartwright,  and  I have  also
described  (see  p.  173)  a tiff  between  the  two ; and  it  only  remains
for  me  here  to  put  on  record  two  grammatical  slips  made  by
that  otherwise  immaculate  stylist,  Mrs.  Cartwright ; and  both,
I regret  to  say,  occurred  at  the  sitting  which  had  been  enlivened
by  the  tiff,  and  at  which  Nelly,  who  was  very  sore,  complained
that  Mrs.  Cartwright  had  criticised  her  culture : — “ Mrs.  Cart-
wright says  I’m  illiterate.”

Nelly’s  grammar,  it  is  true,  is  not  above  reproach,  but,  in
spite  of  her  choice  diction,  no  more  is  Mrs.  Cartwright’s.  I
had  handed  to  the  medium  a cap,  and  Nelly  failed  to  give
more  than  one,  though  that  a very  essential,  fact  about  its
owner,  so  Mrs.  Cartwright  undertook  to  come  to  the  rescue,  and
expressed  her  intention  as  follows : — “ With  regard  to  that  cap,
Sir,  I’m  not  prepared  with  any  information  about  it ; but  I will
,[sfc]  be  able  to  fathom  it  out  for  you.  It  may  be  even  now
one  or  two  months  l)efore  I can  give  details  about  it,  but  I
shall  eventually  do  all  that  you  desire.”

Note  the  “ I will  be  able.”  This  is  not  the  language  of  a
purist.  But  a more  palpable  error  occurred  in  the  same  sitting.
I was  the  only  person  present,  and  Nelly  had  been  giving  facts
about  Archbishop  Benson,  although  I had  not  handed  to  the
medium  any  object  associated  with  him.  Mrs.  Cartwright  broke
in  in  reproving  tones : —

“ I’m  afraid  that  child  {i.e.  Nelly)  has  been  strolling  out  of
her  usual  path,  and  not  attending  to  the  usual  round.  I refer
•to  the  Archbishop,  you  know.  It  was  not  given  when  the


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thomiisons  Trance.  133

relative  of  the  person,  or  any  article  belonging  to  the  person
was  present.  It  is  only  us  [sic]  higher  spirits  who  do  not
have  to  make  use  of  material  objects  in  order  to  obtain
information.  You  must  not  allow  her  to  talk  of  trivial  subjects,
but  send  her  back  to  us.  Things  that  you  make  use  of  as
evidence  seem  rather  debasing  to  us.”

I have  quoted  more  of  the  passage  than  was  necessary  to
show  the  grammatical  error  involved  in  using  “ us  spirits  ”
in  the  nominative,  as  it  is  an  admirable  illustration  of  Mrs.
Cartwright’s  high-falutin’  and  consequential  style.  If  it
should  be  argued  that  these  occasional  grammatical  lapses  are
due  to  what  Dr.  Hodgson  calls  a defect  in  the  machine,  I
would  reply  that  though  Nelly’s  speech  is  slangy  and  incorrect
— in  keeping  with  her  character,  for  she  is  half  Puck,  half
gamin,  though  entirely  lovable — not  only  is  Mrs.  Thompson’s
language  vastly  more  refined  and  accurate  than  Nelly’s,  but
the  “ Mr.  D.”  control,  who  has  occasionally  spoken  with  great
fluency  and  ease  in  my  presence,  talks  as  good  English  as  one
can  wish  to  hear.

The  occasional  mistakes  of  Mrs.  Cartwright  are  not  at  all
difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  theory  that  she  is  the  spirit
of  a middle-class  woman  of  imperfect  education  (it  should  be
borne  in  mind  that  she  was  not  a teacher,  but  the  proprietress
of  a school),  who  piqued  herself  upon  her  superior  command
of  language ; but  it  is  not  quite  so  easy  to  e.x plain  them  if
she  is  a secondary  personality ; for  if  “ Mr.  D.”  can  be  made
to  speak  correctly,  why  not  Mrs.  Cartwright  also  ?

Sitting  of  Fehrnary  Is^,  1900.

There  had  been  a break  in  the  trance  of  long  duration,
over  an  hour  and  a half  in  fact.  Shortly  before  the  medium
was  re-entranced  she  said  she  thought  Mrs.  Cartwright  might
be  coming  to  control.  Later  on  Mrs.  Cartwright  did  control ;
but  she  was  preceded  by  the  control  whom  I call  here  “ Mr.
D.”  This  control  spoke  only  a dozen  words,  and  disappeared.
Nelly  then  came  on  the  scene  for  a moment  to  say  that
Mr.  D.  had  made  a mistake,  and  added  that  Mrs.  Cartwright
would  explain  better  than  herself  what  had  happened.  Mrs.
Cartwright’s  explanation  was  that  she  could  not  explain  Mr.
D.’s  sudden  and  confused  intrusion ; and  then  the  matter


134


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


dropped.  But  the  episode  was  an  interesting  one  to  witness,
for  the  change  of  controls  was  effected  very  rapidly  and  with
complete  ease,  only  a moment’s  silence  between  the  going
away  of  one  and  the  arrival  of  the  next ; the  medium  displayed
no  symptoms  of  physical  discomfort,  and  the  alterations  of
personality,  occurring  as  they  did  within  the  space  of  a minute
or  two,  brought  out  into  strong  relief  the  distinctive  features
of  these  the  three  principal  controls.  Mr.  D.’s  intrusion  was
most  lifelike  and  natural,  his  behaviour  and  slight  discomposure
were  just  like  those  of  a person  who  has  entered  a room  by
mistake  and  found  a stranger  in  it.

But  Mrs.  Cartwright  is  not  the  only  spirit  whom  Nelly
represents  as  being,  as  it  were,  behind  the  scenes  during  the
progress  of  the  trance  phenomena  and  assisting  in  the  play.
Throughout  the  whole  series  of  sittings,  even  where  it  is  not
categorically  stated,  Nelly  evidently  means  it  to  be  inferred
that  she  is  often  in  direct  communication  with  other  spirits,
as,  for  instance,  the  friends  of  the  sitters.  The  directness  of
the  intercourse  seems  to  vary ; at  one  instant  she  appears
to  be  quoting  their  actual  words,  and  at  another  to  be  drawing
facts  out  of  them  without  their  knowledge  or  approval.  Dr.

van  Eeden  failed  to  appreciate  this  complex  phase  of  the

phenomena,  and  was  led  to  give  expression  to  an  opinion
which  is  I believe  unfounded.  He  writes  (see  Proceedings,
Part  XLIV.,  p.  84):

“ I feel  sure  that  genuine  direct  information  is  far  rarer
than  the  medium  believes,  and  in  good  faith  would  have  us

believe.”  [I  take  it  that  “ the  medium  ” here  means  “ the

medium  in  trance,”  i.c.  the  trance-personality.]  “ I hold  that
a certain  amount  of  unconscious  play-acting  is  nearly  ahvays
going  on.”

And  again  {ibid.,  p.  82),  “I  could  follow  the  process  and
perceive  when  the  genuine  phenomena  stopped  and  the  uncon-
scious play-acting  began.  In  hardly  perceptible  gradations
the  medium  takes  upon  herself  the  role  of  the  spirit,  completes
the  information,  gives  the  required  finish,  and  fills  in  the  gaps
by  emendation  and  arrangement.”

This  is  in  my  view  a misreading  of  the  situation.  Play-
acting of  a sort  there  may  be : though  to  apply  such  a term
to  genuine  phenomena  is  not  very  illuminating.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.  1-S5

Nelly  does  not  try  to  pass  herself  off  as  another  communi-
cating spirit,  nor  to  represent  as  coming  directly  from  another
spirit  information  which  she  has  herself  acquired  telepathically
or  clairvoyantly,  let  us  say,  or  at  any  rate  in  some  way
other  than  by  direct  and  mutually  conscious  intercourse  witli
another  spirit.  Indeed  she  sometimes  is  at  pains  to  guard
against  any  misconception  of  this  kind  arising,  and  after

having  jumbled  up  messages  from  a spirit  with  other  facts

learnt  by  herself  she  will  carefully  differentiate  the  one  from
the  other,  and  at  the  same  time  intimate  that  the  more

authentic  of  the  two  are  the  facts  derived  directly  from  the
spirit.

It  is  true  that  if  Nelly’s  exact  words  are  not  caught,

it  might  appear  sometimes  as  if  she  were  trying  to  pass
herself  off  as  another  spirit ; but  there  is,  I am  convinced,
no  intent  to  deceive  here,  the  confusion  is  due  to  the  com-
pulsion she  feels  to  get  things  “ oft'  her  chest.”  I use

this  slang  phrase  advisedly,  because  I think  it  hits  oft'  the
situation.  She  either  comes  to  a sitting  primed  with  facts

which  she  feels  she  must  divulo;e  before  she  has  time  to
forget  them,  or  else  a sentence  reaches  her  couched  in  tlie
first  person  singular,  and  she  repeats  it  just  as  she
receives  it  except  for  transposing  it  into  the  third  person,

or  gives  it  in  the  first  person  with  the  prefix  “ he  ” or  “ she

says.”  Her  chief  anxiety  is  to  give  statements  of  fact,  and
other  considerations  are  only  secondary.  But  to  any  one
familiar  with  Nelly’s  style  it  is  nearly  always  clear  when  she
is  purporting  to  be  in  direct  communication  with  a spirit
and  when  not ; though  very  occasionally  there  are  indications
that  Nelly  is  herself  unaware  of  the  source  of  her  knowledge.

In  support  of  what  I here  maintain  I append  some  quota-
tions, by  no  means  all  that  might  be  cited,  but  selected
specimens.  These  quotations  will  also  serve  to  illustrate  the
different  methods  by  which  Nelly  claims  to  obtain  information.

Sittimj  of  December  Atle,  189!).

Dr.  van  Eeden  asks  for  details  about  his  father-in-law.

Nelly  at  once  makes  a statement,  wliich  perhaps  had  some
significance.  Thereupon  Dr.  van  Eeden  asks,  “ How  do  you
know?”  and  Nelly  replies,  “He  says  ‘My  son  is  a doctor.’”

K


136


J.  G.  Fiddinfjton.


[part


She  then  goes  off  on  to  another  topic,  but  Dr.  van  Eeden
brings  her  back  to  the  subject  of  his  father-in-law  again,  and
more  statements  are  given  as  coming  from  him,  or  rather  it
is  to  be  so  inferred  from  the  style  in  which  they  are  made.
Then  Nelly  says,  “ He  has  somebody  belonging  to  him  ill  now,
not  very  ill,  has  to  lie  down  and  be  careful.”

Dr.  van  Eeden  : — “ How  do  you  know  ? ”

Nelly  : — “ I see  a picture  of  a lady  lying  down ; she  ought
to  be  in  bed.  She’s  not  well  at  all.”

Here  it  will  be  noticed  that  Nelly  does  not  claim  to  have
derived  the  (correct)  fact  about  the  invalid  lady  directly  from
Dr.  van  Eeden’s  father-in-law,  but  from  a (clairvoyant)  picture.
Yet  a few  sentences  later  she  names  him  as  her  authority  for
another  (also  correct)  statement,  and  again  goes  on  to  complain
that  he  does  not  pronounce  a foreign  name  which  she  is
trying  to  get  sufficiently  clearly  for  her  to  catch  it.

SifMnrj  of  December  4:th,  1899.  {Evening.)

Nelly  describes  the  symptoms  of  a friend  of  Dr.  van  Eeden’s.
and  adds,  “ This  is  a description.  I can  ask  him.”

“ A description  ” in  Nelly’s  lingo  means  that  she  is  seeing
a picture  in  contradistinction  to  receiving  information  direct
from  a spirit.  She  then  gives  further  details  about  the  same
person,  some  true  and  some  false,  and  Dr.  van  Eeden  asks  her
if  the  spirit  is  himself  speaking  to  her.  “ Yes,”  replies  Nelly,
“ but  yet  I can’t  say  he  does.  He  speaks  to  some  one  who
tells  me.”

In  connection  still  with  the  same  spirit  more  facts  were
being  given,  Nelly  speaking  slowly  as  if  repeating  the  words  of
an  informant.  This  led  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  was  recording,  to
say,  “ He  is  speaking  now,  is  he  not  ? ” Nelly  assents,  but
nevertheless  she  was  using  the  third  person,  not  the  first.

Sitting  of  January  18;!/;,  1900  {Mr.  Wilson’s  First  Sittvng).

The  trance  was  twice  broken.  In  the  first  part  the  chief
subject  of  the  communications.  Miss  Clegg,  is  not  represented
as  being  present ; at  the  beginning  of  the  second  part  she  is
said  to  have  come  to  Nelly  in  the  interval  and  told  Nelly  to
ask  for  her  ring  to  be  given  to  the  medium.  In  the  third


XLVii  ] Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.  137

she  is  supposed  to  be  comnmnicating  not  directly,  but  through
the  intermediary  of  Nelly.

Sitting  of  Janvarg  23?'</,  11)00  (d/rs.  Bensons  Second  Sitting).

At  110  time  throughout  this  sitting  is  any  spirit  represented
as  communicating  either  directly  or  through  Nelly,  but  at  the
close  of  it  Nelly  remarks : “ When  I can  find  the  young  man
he  will  tell  me  all  about  it.  He’s  very  interested,  but  not
quite  convinced,  rather  guarded.  In  his  heart  rather  religious
scruples  about  me  talking.”

Nelly  here  is  careful  to  point  out  unasked  that  on  this  occa-
sion the  “ young  man  ” {i.e.  a deceased  son  of  Mrs.  Benson’s
who  had  been  mentioned  at  her  first  sitting)  is  not  himself
taking  any  part  in  the  trance-communications ; yet  she  ap-
parently claims  to  have  met  him  in  the  spirit-world,  and
expects  to  meet  him  again.

Sitting  of  Januarg  25th,  1900.

At  this,  Mr.  “Wilson’s”  second  sitting.  Miss  Clegg  was  again
the  chief  subject  of  the  communications,  but  not  until  the  end
is  she  represented  as  being  within  close  enough  range  of  Nelly
to  allow  of  the  direct  transmission  of  messages.  At  one  point
Nelly  says ; “ She  isn’t  a lady  who  takes  notice  when  I tell
her  I’m  talking ; ” and  then  somewhat  later  she  makes  a state-
ment which  is  in  superficial  contradiction  at  least  with  the
last:  “I  couldn’t  find  the  lady  anywhere.  I could  only  find  a
brother  of  this  gentleman  (i.c.  Mr.  AVilson)  who  died,  etc.”

And  then  she  turns  to  the  sitter  and  says  : “ Will  you  come
and  talk  secrets  ? Perhaps  the  lady  will  come  in  a minute.”
Towards  the  end  the  lady  seems  to  get  into  closer  relation  with
Nelly,  for  after  saying,  “ Somehow  or  another  I think  that  lady
sent  a message,”  Nelly  proceeds  to  deliver  four  messages  for
Mr.  Wilson,  and  although  it  is  not  definitely  stated  that  Miss
Clegg’s  words  are  being  repeated  textually,  yet  the  messages
are  worded  in  a way  which  not  only  suggest,  but  I have  no
doubt  were  intended  to  suggest,  that  they  emanated  consciously
from  the  spirit.


138


J.  G.  Fiddiin/ton.


PART


S'dling  of  Fchruarij  \d,  1900.

1 was  the  only  person  present  at  this  sitting.  The  laediuni
was  entranced  very  quickly,  and  before  I had  time  to  hand
any  olqect  to  her,  Nelly  spontaneously  started  off  on  subjects
connected  with  Mrs.  Henson — spontaneously,  that  is,  in  the  sense
that  1 liad  not  suggested  the  topic  to  her,  though  possiljly  it
was  suggested  to  her  by  Mrs.  Thompson  having  shown  me  before
trance  began  an  entry  in  her  diary  recording  a communication
made  to  her  by  Nelly  about  Archljishop  Benson.  Possibly,
however,  this  is  an  example  of  Nelly’s  anxiety  to  unburden
herself  of  an  accumulated  store  of  facts  before  they  have  time
to  fade  from  her  memory  ; for  she  remarks  early  in  the  sitting,
“ 1 have  been  working  hard,  finding  out  about  all  these  people.”
Then,  after  a very  brief  digression,  she  reverts  to  l\Irs.  Benson’s
belongings  :

“ I’ve  still  got  the  ecclesiastical  on  my  mind.  There’s  an
ecclesiastical  standing  by  you  fix.  by  J.  (I.  P. ).  He  has  got  a
night-shirt  on — a respectable  niglit-shirt — loose,  blue  sleeves  ;
no,  Ijalloon  sleeves — ribbon  tied  round — full  all  round.  Broad
face.”

“ Is  he  really  there  ? ” I ask,  “ or  do  you  see  a picture  of
him  ? ”

“ He’s  showing  himself  so  that  I can  describe  him.  He’s
rather  unapproachable.  I can’t  ask  him  anything.”  . . . “ He’s
not  a talking  gentleman.  He’s  asking  for  you.”  (This  second
association  of  Archbishop  Benson  with  myself  is  quite  mean-
ingless, and  I think  it  })0ssible  that  it  is  to  be  explained  by  a
momentary  forgetfulness  on  Nelly’s  part  that  I and  not  Airs.
Benson  was  the  sitter.  Cf.  p.  2 1.3.)

Then  follows  another  description  of  the  spirit’s  dress ; and
after  this  he  is  said  to  be  askino-  for  some  information  about

O

some  one  named  Christopher ; but  in  the  middle  of  the  refer-
ences to  Christopher  Nelly  interjects  this  odd  remark ; “ He’s
almost  like  a queen.  He’s  talking  to  the  Queen  like  a great
man.”  I call  it  odd,  because  almost  in  the  same  breath  Nelly
describes  a past  event  in  the  life  of  the  spirit  and  what  he  is  at
the  moment  engaged  upon  in  the  spirit-world,  both  e(|ually  in
the  present  tense.  It  is  a fine  chronological  jumble,  but  at  the
same  time  an  instructive  one,  for  it  bears  witness  to  the  com-


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mn<.  Thoni'pson Trance.


i:}‘)

plexity  of  the  processes  employed  by  the  control  and  tells  in
favour  of  the  spontaneity  of  the  phenomena.

The  two  processes  which  I believe  were  in  operation — perhaps
in  simultaneous,  and  anyhow  in  rapidly  successive  operation —
were  converse,  direct  or  telepathic,  or  both,  between  the  trance-
personality  and  a spirit,  and  clairvoyant  perception  of  facts
about  this  spirit.  I do  not  mean  that  I hold  that  to  be  the
real  explanation  of  the  phenomena,  but  I do  hohl  that  the  thing
presents  itself  to  “the  trance-personality  somewhat  as  1 describe,
and  that  whether  spirits  be  involved  in  the  matter  or  no,  know-
ledge reaches  the  consciousness  of  the  entranced  medium  in  the
manner  stated  or  adumbrated  in  the  trance-utterances,  and  that
there  is  nothing  to  show  that  there  is  any  play-acting  on  the
part  of  the  trance-personality,  and,  on  the  contrary,  much —
especially  in  the  artless  consistency  of  the  allusions  to  the

modus  o'perandi — to  disprove  it.

At  the  conclusion  of  the  references  to  “ Christoplier,”  Nelly,
alluding  to  the  spirit  from  whom  the  Cliristoplier  messages
purported  to  come,  said : “ He  doesn’t  like  me  to  talk.  He

has  got  religion  in  his  heart  and  won’t  talk  to  me.  He  says

he’s  tolerant  to  all  men.  . . .”  (Here  came  an  interjected
remarlc  about  an  object  connected  in  no  way  with  Mrs.  Ben-
son.) “ He  nearly  said  he  had  many  cranks  to  deal  with

in  his  lifetime.  I don’t  like  him  to  ))e  so  consec{uential.”

After  this  Nelly  went  off  to  entirely  different  topics ; and
subsequently  Mrs.  Cartwright  expressed  her  disapproval  of
Nelly  having  attempted  to  talk  of  matters  concerning  Mrs.
Benson  when  she  was  not  present ; as  if  she  wished  to  indi-
cate that  Nelly  bad  been  exceeding  lier  powers  in  trying  to
get  within  range  of  spirits  belonging  to  Mrs.  Benson’s  sur-
roundings, when  the  conditions  were  not  favouralile.  In  any
event  it  is  obvious  that  Nelly  was  in  a confused  state  of  mind
as  to  whether  she  was  holding  converse  or  not  with  the  spirit
about  whom  she  was  speaking.  First  she  says  he  is  showing
liimself  in  order  that  she  can  describe  his  personal  appear-
ance, then  that  he  is  rather  unapproachable,  and  that  she
can’t  ask  him  anything,  next  that  he  is  asking  a question  and
sending  a message,  and  that  he  doesn’t  like  to  talk,  and,  not-
withstanding, finally  reports  observations  wliich  he  apparently
addresses  to  her.


140


J.  G.  IHddhufton.


1 PAUT


It  is  best  to  record  these  puzzling  and  complicated  state-
ments without  seeking  to  explain  or  reconcile  the  contradictions.
I would  offer  only  one  reflection,  namely  that,  whatever  diffi-
culties these  complexities  may  raise  on  the  assumption  that
the  phenomena  are  either  what  they  are  represented  to  be,  or
are  at  any  rate  supernormal,  as  great  difficulties  arise  on  the
assumption  that  the  plienomena  are  fraudulent ; for,  though  an
impostor  might  introduce  complexities  through  a momentary
failure  to  carry  through  with  perfect  consistency  either  an
elaborate  or  a simple  scheme  of  mystiffcation,  neither  from  cal-
culated artifice  nor  from  want  of  skill  would  so  erratic  a
portrayal  of  the  methods  of  spirit  communication  be  likely  to
result  as  we  are  offered  in  the  foregoing  instance.

Sift  inf!  of  February  %th,  1900.

At  the  end  of  this  sitting  another  methotl  by  which  Nelly
obtains  information  is  disclosed.  I alone  was  present,  but,  as
at  the  previous  seance,  Nelly  referred  to  Mrs.  Benson’s  affairs
among  others.

Just  before  the  trance  concluded  she  said:  “Canon,  then
Bishop  Bowlby,  he  came  and  talked  through  mother.  You
know  that  old  gentleman,  Mr.  Benson,  he  was  an  extreme  friend
of  his.  He  told  mother.  He  has  been  talking  to  mother.”
(For  comments  on  other  aspects  of  this  episode,  see  p.  174.)
Here  the  source  of  Nelly’s  information  seems  to  be  the  medium
herself,  rather  than  Bishop  Bowlby,  for  Mrs.  Thompson,  when
she  awoke,  repeated  what  Nelly  had  said,  with  the  exception
of  one  assertion,  namely,  that  the  prelate  “ was  very  pompous,”
a fact  which  she  would  hardly  be  expected  to  have  learnt  from
the  man  himself.

As  this  again  sounds  intolerably  “ anthropomorphic,”  1 once
more  guard  myself  against  a charge  of  accepting  the  phenomena
at  their  face  value,  and  emphasise  the  fact  that  my  aim  here
is  to  render  a roughly  systematised  account  of  the  trance-drama
as  dejjicted  in  the  trance-utterances.

Sitting  cf  April  19th,  1900.

l)r.  Dessoir  was  the  sitter  on  this  occasion,  but  interspersed
among  communications  addressed  to  him  were  frequent  refer-
ences to  my  own  affairs.  My  mother,  too,  was  represented  as


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  3Trs.  Thompson  s Trance.  141

taking  an  active  part  on  the  other  side  in  the  effort  to  com-
municate. She  suggests  to  Nelly  that  she  should  ask  Dr.
Dessoir  for  a certain  object,  and  Nelly  adds  : “ I don’t  under-
stand, but  somehow  the  old  lady  belonging  to  you  is  interested
in  finding  out  things  for  this  gentleman.”

And  then  again  later  she  is  said  to  have  been  talking  to
“ Mr.  D.,”  “ but  she  didn’t  think  him  such  an  angel  as  we  do.”
Yet  later  on,  when  the  medium  was  holding  an  object  that
had  belonged  to  my  mother,  Nelly  complains  that  she  seems
“ rather  indistinct,”  adding,  however,  as  if  in  e.xplanation,  “ .she
couldn’t  talk  very  distinctly  before  she  died.”  This,  I believe,
was  not  the  case ; but  it  may  have  been  a conjecture  of  Nelly’s
to  account  for  the  inaudibility  of  the  spirit’s  conversation,  for
she  creates  the  impression  of  reporting  scraps  of  information
which  are  being  told  her  by  the  spirit,  and  which  she  has
great  difficulty  in  catching.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  it  is  clear
that  when  spirits  are  represented  as  “ present,”  or  within  ear-
shot, or  within  visible  range  of  Nelly,  their  proximity  fluctuates
spasmodically  and  capriciously ; they  flit  into  focus  and  out
again  like  figures  in  a cinematograph.


Sitting  of  May  1st,  1900.

This  was  Mrs.  Benson’s  third  sitting,  and  though,  as  described
above.  Archbishop  Benson  had  formerly  been  supposed  to  have
been  within  near  enough  range  for  Nelly  to  describe  his  ap-
pearance, and  to  repeat  messages  sent  by  him,  on  this  occasion
it  is  expre.ssly  and  spontaneously  denied  by  Nelly  that  he  is
present.

“ The  person  belonging  to  it  isn’t  here  a bit.  I see  a liright
colour,  though  confused.”

At  the  end  of  the  sitting  a dramatic  scene  occurred  (see
p.  212),  in  which  Nelly  displays  great  agitation  in  conse-
quence of  discovering — what  Mrs.  Cartwright  already  knew —
the  identity  of  “ the  clergyman  who  wears  the  night-shirt  over
his  clothes.”

Following  on  the  long  delayed  discovery  came  another  passage
of  considerable  dramatic  vividness  : —

Nelly  ; — What  is  this  ? He  wants  to  say — Mrs.  Cartwright’s
.saying  it  out  loud.  She  can’t  say  it  out  loud.  Write  it  ”


142


J.  G.  Flddington.


PART


(these  two  last  words  seemed  to  be  addressed  by  way  of  advice
by  iNelly  to  Mrs.  Cartwright.)  (The  medium  here  took  a pencil
and  paper  and  wrote,  apparently  under  the  stress  of  much
agitation,  as  follows  : —

“ He  desires  me  to  convey  to  you  his  intention  to  tell  you
of  his  private  life  apart  from  his  public  one.  If  possible  alone,
May  30th.”)

Nelly ; — “ He  doesn’t  want  you  (i.e.  Mr.  Myers)  to  hear,  or
any  one  : he  is  very  certain.  Mrs.  Cartwright  fetched  him  out.
He  doesn’t  want  any  one  to  be  there.  Mrs.  Cartwright  has
made  him  promise  that.  Very  important.  May  30th.  The
Grey  Lady  wants  to  take  me  home.”

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  throughout  this  sitting  the  spirit
about  whom  facts  are  being  given  never  comes  within  Nelly’s
range  at  all.

She  sees  him  only  as  a bright  colour  in  the  distance.  Mrs.
Cartwright,  however,  gets  into  closer  relations  ; she  “ fetched
him  out,”  and  is  the  bearer  of  a message  from  him,  which  she
conveys  not  by  speech,  but  l.)y  writing.  Nelly  repeats  verbally
the  substance  of  the  message,  and  then  announces  that  “ the
Grey  Lady  ” (a  spirit  who  plays  a subordinate  part  in  tlie
trance-drama,  see  p.  147)  has  come  “to  take  her  home.”


Sitting  of  May  30/4,  1900.

It  might  have  been  expected  on  any  hypothesis  of  the  pheno-
mena after  this  very  definite  and  impressively  made  appointment
that  on  May  30th  the  Archbishop  would  have  been  represented,
at  the  least,  as  in  direct  and  easy  communication  with  Nelly,
and  had  he  controlled  directly  no  surprise  could  have  been  felt.
Yet  as  a matter  of  fact  neither  of  these  two  things  took  place.
Mrs.  Benson  sat  with  Mrs.  Thompson  alone,  acting  both  as
sitter  and  recorder,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  desire  for  privacy
expressed  at  the  last  seance.  There  were  good  things  in  the
sitting,  but  it  was  neither  l:>etter  nor  worse,  or  at  any  rate
not  markedly  so,  than  the  other  sittings  attended  by  Mrs.
Benson.  Nothing  of  a specially  intimate  character  was  men-
tioned, and  the  best  thing  given  was  obtained  not  from  the
spirit  concerned,  luit,  so  it  seems,  by  means  of  a clairvoyant
impression  received  by  Nelly  from  Mrs.  Benson’s  daughter.


XLVii.]  Fkenonviua  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.


14:3


Apart  from  tliis  particular  instance,  throughout  the  sitting
there  is  a disorderly  amalgam  of  communications,  based  at  one
moment  on  information  supplied  from  the  soi-disant  Archbishop,
and  at  the  next  on  telepathic  or  clairvoyant  impressions.

The  seance  opened  in  this  way :

Xelly : — “ This  was  the  day  when  that  gentleman  said  he
wanted  to  come  and  talk.  . . . Xow  I’ve  got  to  ask  that
gentleman  to  tell  you  things.  There  is  an  Alice  the  old
gentleman  is  very  fond  of.”  [Wrong.]  He  wants  to  know  if
you  are  lonely,  if  you  are  all  lonely.  What’s  that  weakly
lady  with  you  ? She  is  getting  stronger ; it’s  like  nerves.”
[This  allusion  has  significance,  but  had  been  made  before.]
*■  Was  General  Buller  when  you  saw  him  ? ” [iMrs.  Benson
knows  General  Sir  B.  Buller.]

(Here  Mrs.  Benson  handed  a ring  containing  hair  to  the
medium.)

Xelly  : — “ Two  generations — two  gentlemen.  [Wrong.]  . . .

“ The  old  gentleman  has  met  his  dead  brother.  [The  brother
was  dead.]

“ He  had  a carriage  accident  in  a country  place.”  [Wrong.]

Then,  after  some  other  details,  “ The  old  gentleman  says  he
isn’t  as  interested  as  you  are.  He’s  very  happy,  perfectly  happy
without  communications,  and  he  doesn’t  think  you  need  so
much  of  his  evidence.  ...

“ I see  the  old  books  of  his  in  the  study.  Xo  earthly  use
having  them ; no  use  your  keeping  and  worrying  with  them.”
[Mrs.  Benson  notes  : — “ Our  house  is  full  of  books  we  have  kept.
We  scarcely  know  what  to  do  with  them,  and  yet  don’t  like
to  part  with  them.”]

And  so  in  this  fashion  the  communications  continue  for  some
time,  with  an  occasional  message  from  “ the  old  gentleman,”  but
nowhere  is  any  personal  note  struck,  such  as  might  well  have
been  looked  for  under  the  circumstances.  Then  the  seance
•concludes  thus  : —

“ He  {i.e.  the  Archbishop)  blames  me — the  things  he  wants
to  say.  He  says  one  of  the  boys  is  going  to  publish  a new
book  in  the  autumn.  It  will  bring  him  more  success  than
anything  he  has  published  before,  but  if  he  can’t  get  it  published
in  the  autumn,  he  must  wait  till  May ; not  winter.  The  old
gentleman  is  very  spiritual : really  in  a higher  world  than  I


144  J.  G.  Pidclin(jt(m.  [part

am.  Just  as  difficult  for  him  to  tell  me  as  it  is  for  me  to  tell
you.  He  is  quite  a stranger  to  me.  What  do  you  think  he
is  a clergyman  for  ? He  is  not  come  of  a clergyman’s  family.”

Eegarded  solely  from  the  point  of  view  of  drama,  the  com-
munications at  this  sitting  constitute  the  flattest  anticlimax.
The  spirit  who  announced  with  so  much  precision  and  emjyresse-
mcnt  his  intention  of  communicating  seems  to  have  grown
lukewarm  in  the  matter,  and  Nelly  on  her  part  appears  to
make  no  special  effort  to  carry  out  the  intention  expressed  at
the  former  sitting,  and  to  prefer  picking  up  scraps  of  information
by  some  other  method  than  by  holding  converse  with  a remote
spirit.

Sitting  of  June  bth,  1900.

A promise  had  been  given  by  Nelly  that  a friend  of  l)r.
van  Eeden’s,  who  had  committed  suicide,  should  control  directly
at  this  sitting.

i\Ir.  Myers  and  Mr.  F.  N.  Hales  were  present  with  Hr.  van
Eeden  at  the  beginning,  and  when  they  left  the  room  Nelly
said  to  Dr.  van  Eeden : — “ I want  you  by  myself.  I do  not
like  them  to  know  all  these  things.  ...  It  is  not  that  he
{i.c.  the  suicide)  did  not  want  to  come  himself,  but  the  strange
gentleman  upset  him.”  She  then  proceeded  to  give  facts  about
the  suicide  and  messaoes  from  him,  and  in  conclusion  said ; — “ I
do  not  want  to  put  you  off,  but  next  Thursday  I promise  you
that  he  will  speak.  I want  you  all  by  myself.”

Sitting  of  June  dth,  1900.

1 must  refer  the  reader  to  Proceedings,  Part  XLIV.,  pp.  100-
111,  for  the  report  of  this  sitting,  as  a summary  could  not
furnish  an  intelligible  account  of  the  dramatic  play  and  of  the
alternations  in  the  controls.  I imagine  that  Dr.  van  Eeden’s
charge  of  unconscious  play-acting  was  based  principally  on  what
took  place  at  this  sitting.  The  action  and  the  utterance  pro-
ceeded too  rapidly  to  allow  Dr.  van  Eeden  time  to  take  down
a verbatim  record,  but,  judging  from  the  record  which  he  was
able  to  make,  I cannot  understand  why  he  supposes  that  there
is  a tendency  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  case  to  exaggerate  the  extent
and  duration  of  the  direct  control  of  a communicating  spirit.
So  far  as  I can  see,  there  is  no  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  Nelly


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.  14*>

control  to  personate  the  suicide.  The  coramuirications,  con-
sistently with  what  can  be  observed  elsewhere  in  Mrs.
Thompson’s  trance,  fall  under  three  heads : («)  impressions  about
the  spirit,  the  source  of  which  is  not  e.xplained  ; (h)  messages
purporting  to  be  given  by  the  spirit  to  Nelly : (c)  direct  control
by  the  spirit ; and  no  one  who  has  studied  the  characteristic
form  of  ]\Irs.  Thompson’s  trance-utterances  could  be  in  doubt
as  to  when  one  control  was  supposed  to  have  ceased  and  when
the  other  was  supposed  to  take  up  the  thread.


Sitting  of  July  16f/i,  1900.

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Percival’s  first  sitting.  Mr.  Myers  recording.

Mrs.  Cartwright  was  the  only  direct  control,  though  tlie
Percivals’  son  was,  so  to  speak,  in  close  touch  with  the  control,
and  sending  messages  and  information  through  her.  She  had
correctly  stated  that  the  boy  had  died  from  measles,  and  that
he  “had  spots  over  him  like  measles”;  “his  face  looked
red  ” ; and  added  the  reflection  : — “ He  thinks  it  was  funny
to  describe  a spirit  with  a red  blotchy  face.”

Throughout  the  sitting  many  glimpses  are  afforded  of  what
is  supposed  to  be  going  on  on  the  other  side.

Mrs.  Cartwright  opened  with  the  words : — “ Mr.  Piddington
is  just  as  dictatorial  to  me  as  I was  in  old  days  to  the
children  ” ; which  may  have  been  intended  as  an  explanation
of  the  infrequency  of  her  appearances  at  sittings  where  I was
recorder.

A book  that  had  belonged  to  W.  Stainton  Moses  was  handed
to  the  medium,  hut  nothing  came  of  this  ex'cept  that  the
medium’s  hand  wrote  “ AVilliam  Stainton,”  and  that  subse-
quently Mrs.  Cartwright  said  that  she  saw  little  chance  of
getting  at  Moses,  who  was  in  a different  part  of  the  spiritual
world.  She  also  denied  all  knowledge  of  the  Imperator  group.

Mr.  Myers  asked  what  had  first  interested  Mrs.  Cartwright
in  the  subject  of  spirit  communication,  and  she  replied  as
follows : — “ I abhorred  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  when  on
earth.  Yet  I could  not  help  thinking  about  it,  and  I made  up
my  mind  that  the  first  thing  I would  do  on  the  other  side
was  to  see  whether  there  was  any  truth  in  it,  and  then,  if
possible,  come  back  and  tell  people  it  was  all  nonsense.”


U6


./.  G.  Flddington.


[part


3Irs.  Cartwright’s  meaning  is  clear  enough,  but  her  manner
of  expressing  it  suggests  that  she  must  have  had  more  than
a drop  of  Irish  blood  in  her  veinsd

Mr.  Myers  then  congratulated  her  on  the  improvement  in
her  own  control,  “which,”  he  says,  “is  to-day  more  flowing
and  natural  than  ever  before,”  and  she  admits  that  she  can
now  control  more  easily.

Tlien  Mr.  l\Iyers  asked  if  more  than  two  sittings  a week
were  advisable.  Mrs.  Cartwright  answers  that  she  herself  does
not  think  that  there  would  be  any  harm  in  increasing  the
number,  l;mt  she  must  refer  the  question  to  Edmund  Gurney
and  Mr.  D.,  “who  are  giving  orders  now.”  (See  p.  299.)
She  goes  away  to  consult  them,  and  on  her  return  breaks
into  a conversation  between  Mr.  Myers  and  the  sitters,  apolo-
gises for  the  interruption,  and  says  : — “ I can  hear  the  confused
inurmur  of  voices.  I am  interrupting.  I have  consulted  Mr.
k).  He  thinks  that  besides  two  sittings  there  might  l)e  a
trance  each  wee!':  at  home,  when  objects  Innught  might  be
considered.”

Then,  as  if  her  return  to  the  atmosphere  of  the  seance-room
reminded  her  of  what  had  been  going  on  before  she  went
away,  she  remarks: — “The  boy  (i.e.  E.  H.  Percival)  is  a jolly
little  chap.  He  can’t  understand  why  he  is  wanted  to  talk
about  himself.  ‘ Mother  and  auntie,’  he  says,  ‘ know  much
more  than  I do  about  myself.’  ”

Yet  it  is  a noticeable  fact — an  example  of  the  undesigned
and  subtle  consistency  of  the  trance  phenomena — that  when
some  months  later  E.  H.  Percival  controlled  directly,  the
medium  exhibited  symptoms  corresponding  to  those  that  the
boy  himself  had  in  his  last  illness ; the  breathing  was  laboured,
curious  noises  were  made  in  the  lungs,  there  was  constant
restlessness  accompanied  by  coughing,  and  the  control  spoke  of
his  dislike  of  being  poulticed.  So  long,  therefore,  as  the  boy  was
only  represented  as  conversing  with  Nelly,  he  cannot  under-
stand why  the  symptoms  of  his  last  illness  should  be  mentioned  ;

* Cf.  F.  C.  8.  SchilleFs  JIumamsm,  \k  288: — “Even  if  a ghost  returned
ti>  announce  t(j  us  tfie  complete  extinction  of  the  soul  at  death,  we  could
not  credit  so  Hibernian  an  assertion.”  Mr.  Schiller  wrote,  I believe,  in
ignorance  of  Mrs.  Cartwright’s  ‘ Hibernian  assertion,’  as  did  I in  ignorance
of  his  suppositious  poxt-mortem  Irish  bull.


XLVir.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson  s Trance.


147


but  as  soon  as  lie  controls  the  inediuin,  physical  syinptonis
analogous  to  those  from  which  he  suffered  before  death  are

O

not  only  manifested  in  the  medium’s  organism,  but  form  the
subject  of  the  trance-utterance.

Mr.  Myers  then  asked  whether  she  can  see  any  spirit

higher  than  the  governing  group,  mentioning  as  one  of

that  group.  “ No,”  she  replied,  “ while  1 am  doing  tliis  work
L am  excluded  from  the  power  of  even  visualising  spirits
higher  than  these.  Names  are  hard  to  recall  in  the  trance.

If  you  had  not  said  ‘ ’ I should  not  have  known  the

name  of  Nelly’s  ‘ Grey  Lady.’  ”

The  “Grey  Lady”  is  Nelly’s  name  for  a well-known  authoress
who  is  supposed  to  take  an  active  interest  in  the  direction  of
]\Irs.  Thompson’s  trance-phenomena ; she  has  already  been  re-
ferred to  as  waiting  to  take  Nelly  “home”  at  the  end  of  a
trance.  (See  p.  142.)

Earlier  in  the  sitting  Mr.  Myers  had  asked  who  w'ere
going  to  control  Mrs.  Thompson  later  on.  Mrs.  Cartwright
said : — “ X.  Y.  will  control.  She  tried  yesterday  ; she  could
not  do  it  gently ; she  threw  the  sensitive  on  the  floor,  but
did  not  hurt  her.  She  was  selected  by  spirits  before  she
died  for  this  purpose ; she  was  prepared  even  in  the  old
days.”

1 do  not  give  the  name  of  the  spirit  here  mentioned  by
IMrs.  Cartwright,  because,  if  this  spirit  did  purport  to  control
some  other  medium  than  Mrs.  Thompson,  such  a development
would  be  interesting  in  view  of  Mrs.  Cartwright’s  assertions :
the  more  so  because  the  lady  mentioned  was  not  the  kind  of
person  likely  to  suggest  itself  to  the  rather  conventional  fancy
of  the  ordinary  entranced  medium.

This  is  not  the  only  occasion  on  which  a tyro  in  the  art
of  controlling  has  been  said  to  have  thrown  the  medium  down
as  a consequence  of  clumsy  and  inexperienced  exertions.  Mrs.
Thompson  has  several  times  told  me  that  when  alone  at  home
she  has  been  thrown,  sometimes  with  considerable  violence,
on  to  the  door.  She  herself  and  Nelly  also  attributed  this
to  the  ineffectual  attempts  of  a certain  spirit  to  gain  control
of  the  medium.  On  one  occasion,  although  I did  not  actually
witness  Mrs.  Thompson  fall  to  the  ground,  I saw  her  lying  on
the  door  with  the  leg  of  a chair  poised  on  her  forehead,


14S


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


where  it  had  raised  a biggish  bump,  I examined  this  bump
very  carefully  ; it  was  evidently  freshly  caused,  of  that  there
was  no  doubt,  as  the  lump  increased  in  size  and  in  redness
after  I first  examined  it.  Mrs.  Thompson  was  deeply  entranced,
and  though  she  showed  signs  of  a good  deal  of  physical  dis-
comfort, she  did  not  appear  to  be  aware  of  the  bruise  on  her
forehead.  Nearly  an  hour  passed  before  I parted  from  her,
by  which  time  the  bruise  had  almost  disappeared.  Not  even
when  she  awoke  from  the  trance  did  she  seem  to  suffer
pain  from  it,  but  rather  from  a general  sense  of  malaise.
When  she  awoke  from  the  trance  after  the  fall  I was  anxious
to  prevent  her  from  going  into  trance  again,  but  she  seemed
compelled  to  relapse,  and  quite  contrary  to  her  usual  custom,
which  is  to  sit  perfectly  quietly  in  any  sort  of  chair,  she
sank  on  to  the  floor,  and  for  some  time  seemed  as  if
about  to  be  possessed  by  the  same  maladroit  spirit  as  before ;
but  gradually  the  agitated  movements  subsided  and  gave  way
to  the  placid  control  of  Nelly.  The  odd  part  about  it  was  that
Nelly  seemed  in  doubt  as  to  who  it  was  that  had  made  the
ineffectual  attempt  to  control  and  caused  the  rather  distressing
symptoms.  She  was  at  first  inclined  to  lay  the  blame  on
the  spirit  who  had  been  supposed  to  have  thrown  Mrs.  Thomp-
son to  the  ground  when  she  was  alone  at  home ; but  afterwards
she  was  inclined  to  withdraw  this  statement  and  to  substitute
the  name  of  another  spirit,  who  has  occasionally  controlled,
though,  as  far  as  1 am  aware,  without  causing  any  bodily
discomfort  to  the  medium.


Sitiing  of  January  3rd,  1901.

E.  H.  P ercival  had  been  speaking  directly,  and  at  intervals
Nelly  was  telling  facts  about  him.  At  the  first  sitting  which
i\Ir.  and  Mrs.  Percival  had  attended  a plain  red  cap  had
been  given  to  the  medium  that  had  been  E.  H.  Percival’s
school  cap ; but  it  was  not  presented  at  this  sitting.  Nelly
said : — “ He  was  very  fond  of  cricketing,  and  he  wore  a red
and  black  striped  jacket ; striped  blazer.  He  says  it  was  a
blazer,  not  a jacket.  (Then  in  a tone  of  mixed  indignation
and  contempt)  ‘ Jacket,’  he  says  ; ‘ It  was  a blazer.’  ” [Correct.]
It  would  be  difficult  to  portray  with  a happier  or  a lighter


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.  149

touch  the  importance  which  the  schoolboy  attaches  to  the  use
of  recognised  terms,  especially  in  matters  of  clothing,  and  his
bristling  up  when  a mere  girl  misnames  an  object  which  has
only  one  possible  designation  for  him.


Sitting  of  April  lS)th,  1900.

This  sitting  supplies  another  instance  of  the  parenthetical
way  in  which  Nelly  intimates  the  modus  opcra'tidi  of  the
trance.  Eeferring  to  a lady  whom  she  connects  with  Dr.

Max  Dessoir,  she  says “ Dead  lady.  I can  see  her.  I don’t
know  what’s  the  matter  with  her.  ...  It  almost  makes
my  heart  stop.  (Here  the  medium  puts  her  hand  over  the
heart  as  if  in  pain.)  She  is  like  here  quite  distinctly.  She
doesn’t  believe  I am  really  talking  to  you.  She  very  much
objects  to  one  talking  to  her.”

Besides  illustrating  Nelly  s method  of  ac(|uiring  information,
this  passage  also  contains  two  interesting  points.

(1)  Although  the  spirit  is  clearly  represented  as  not  at  close
range,  the  medium  displays  symptoms  of  experiencing  a sympa-
thetic physical  pain  akin  to  what  the  spirit  herself  is  supposed
to  have  suffered.

If  such  sensitiveness  is  exhibited  when  there  is  no  pretence
of  direct  obsession,  it  can  hardly  l)e  surprising  to  find  symptoms
of  bodily  disease  far  more  strongly  reproduced  when  a spirit
is  supposed  to  be  in  actual  possession  of  a medium’s  organism.

(2)  Here  as  elsewhere  (cf.  pp.  137,  138,  139,  146),  Nelly
intimates  that  scepticism  is  not  confined  to  this  side  of  the
veil,  and  that  in  her  efforts  to  forward  the  cause  of  psychical
leseaich  she  has  to  incur  the  invidious  charge  of  being  a
Taul  Pry.  If  my  memory  serves  me  well,  Phinuit  likewise
has  complained  of  the  odium  into  which  his  inquisitiveness
into  the  affairs  of  strangers  has  brought  him.

I did  not  have  any  regular  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson
tor  the  purpose  of  getting  communications  on  my  own  account ;
but  in  the  course  of  three  sittings  I handed  to  the  medium
objects  which  had  belonged  to  my  mother.  Until  Nelly  had
discovered  the  identity  of  the  owner  of  these  objects,  I most
carefully  refrained,  at  least  consciously,  from  giving  any  hint
that  I was  any  more  interested  in  these  objects  than  in  others


]50


J.  (j.  Piddington.


[PAl’vT


belonging  to  otlier  people  which  I was  handing  to  the  medium
at  the  same  sittings.  The  most  noticeable  point  about  the
things,  which  were  given  in  connection  with  my  mother,  was
that  the  best  things  were  given  just  at  the  moments  when
my  mother  was  represented  as  being  within  very  near  range
of  Nelly.

On  the  first  of  the  three  occasions,  my  mother  was  not
mentioned  at  all ; only  my  father,  of  whom  a slight,  though,
as  far  as  it  went,  correct  personal  description  was  given,  and
some  other  details  (see  pp.  118,  152-3).

On  tlie  second  occasion,  it  was  not  suggested  that  my
mother  was  within  speaking  range  of  Nelly,  and  apparently
such  facts  as  were  given  were  obtained  by  means  of  clair-
voyant pictures.  Still  the  most  striking  passage  occurred
immediately  before  Nelly  attributed  a statement  to  an  un-
specified “ some  one,”  whose  words  she  heard  and  repeated.
On  the  analogy  of  what  took  place  on  the  two  subsequent
occasions,  it  would  not  be  inconsistent  to  regard  this  “ some
one  ” as  my  mother.  The  passage  ran  as  follows : —

“ A Mary  belonging  to  this  lady.  Mary  or  Marian — a
daughter.  And  an  Uncle  John,  who  everybody  has  got.

Don’t  lose  Margaret’s  liair.  1 heard  some  one  say : ‘ Move
the  hair  belonging  to  Margaret.’  ”

The  overheard  sentence  indirectly  conveys  a correct  state-
ment of  fact,  and  conveys  it  in  a way  which  can,  I think,
without  a strain  be  regarded  as  Nelly’s  rendering  of  a
sentence  which  might  very  naturally  have  been  spoken  by  my
mother  under  the  circumstances.

I had  handed  to  the  medium  a lock  of  my  mother’s  hair,
which  was  part  of  a larger  quantity  which  had  been  in  the
possession  and  keeping  of  my  mother’s  daughter  and  my
sister  Margaret  for  many  years.  My  sister  had  given  me  a
portion  of  the  hair  some  year  or  two  before  this.  Nowhere
is  it  suggested  or  stated  that  the  dead  lady’s  name  was  Mar-
garet, and  though  Nelly  did  not  seem  to  understand  what
was  meant  by  the  words,  “ Move  the  hair  belonging  to
Margaret,”  it  is  noticeable  that  Nelly  did  not,  as  might  have
been  expected,  draw  the  inference  from  these  words  that
Margaret  was  the  name  of  the  dead  lady.

The  advice  to  remove  or  not  to  lose  the  hair  was


XL VII.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson  s Trance.  151

Ignite  appropriate,  for  the  trance  was  coming  to  an  end,
and  I was  collecting  the  various  objects  and  odds  and  ends
that  I had  brought  to  the  sitting,  and  the  tiny  lock  of  hair
might  very  easily  have  been  overlooked.  I quoted  the  mention
of  the  two  names  given  in  connection  with  my  mother  imme-
diately before  the  reference  to  the  hair,  because  they  are  both
right,  and,  with  the  name  Margaret,  make  three,  albeit  common,
names  given  close  together,  which,  on  the  supposition  that  my
mother  was  really  communicating,  I should  have  expected  to
have  heard  mentioned.  Marian  (not  Mary)  was  a step-daughter,
always,  however,  spoken  off  as  a daughter;  and  the  Uncle  John,
“ who,”  as  Xelly,  with  the  instinct  of  the  psychical  researcher,
remarked,  “ everybody  has  got,”  is  my  mother’s  only  brother
and  my  only  uncle,  that  is,  my  only  uncle  except  for  two
uncles  by  marriage,  of  whom  I have  hardly  seen  anything
at  all.

At  the  next  sitting  at  which  mention  was  made  of  my
mother,  only  twice  do  the  words  used  by  Nelly  suggest  that
my  mother  was  in  direct  converse  with  her ; and  on  each  occa-
sion the  facts  given  were  good.

“ There  was  an  Annie  and  a John  belonging  to  her,  not
Jack.  She  seemed  to  be  deliberate  over  it,  as  if  it  were  John.”

At  first  sight  it  would  seem  as  if  this  repetition  of  a John
in  connection  with  the  same  person  was  inept  and  meaning-
less. As  a matter  of  fact,  it  is  not  so  at  all.  Four  members
of  my  mother’s  immediate  family  bore  the  name  of  John ; her
father,  husband,  brother,  and  son.  She  would  naturally  neither
speak  nor  think  of  her  father  by  his  Christian  name.  Her
husband  was  never  called  by  his  first  name,  John,  but  by  his
second  Christian  name;  her  brother,  the  “Uncle  John”  men-
tioned above,  was  and  is  always  called  John,  and  never  Jack;
I,  her  son,  am  and  always  have  been  called  Jack,  and  never
John.  Although  therefore  Nelly  does  not  seem  to  understand
why  any  care  should  be  taken  to  distinguish  carefully  between
John  and  Jack,  there  was,  as  a matter  of  fact,  need  for
careful  discrimination.

After  the  words : “ She  seemed  to  be  deliberate  over  it,  as
if  it  were  John,”  Nelly  continued  without  a break : “ The
Annie  was  not  like  a daughter.  She  seems  to  be  one  that
she  used  to  help.  She  made  her  a shawl  once.  Not  help  in

L


J.  G.  Ficldington.


152


[PAirr


monetary  ways,  but  she  helped  her  and  knitted  for  her,  and
she  bought  Annie  an  old-fashioned  pedestal  work-table.”

This  statement,  made  in  February,  1900,  I was  not  able
to  verify  until  the  end  of  September,  1903.  I could  not  re-
member any  friend  of  my  mother’s  whose  Christian  name  was
Annie,  and  eii(|uiries  among  my  relations  did  not  help  to  throw
anv  light  on  the  matter.  In  the  summer  of  1903  I received
a letter  from  an  old  friend  of  my  mother’s,  from  whom  I do
not  remember  having  received  a letter  liefore ; though  she  may
perhaps  have  written  me  a letter  of  congratulation  in  1894  ; but
in  any  case  T had  seen  her  only  two  or  three  times  since  my
early  childhood,  and  her  existence  was  so  little  in  my  con-
scious thoughts  that  though  at  some  time  or  other  T must  have
learnt  that  her  name  was  Annie,  the  mention  of  the  name
by  Nelly  never  suggested  this  lady  to  my  mind.  When,  how-
ever, 1 noticed  the  signature  of  the  letter,  I recalled  the
reference  liy  Nelly  to  an  Annie  connected  with  my  mother,
and  so  I went  to  see  this  old  friend  of  my  mother’s.  She
told  me  that  my  mother  had  “ been  exceedingly  good  and
kind  ” to  her,  and  helped  her  in  many  ways.  She  had  once,
and  once  only,  knitted  a shawl  for  her.  She  used  to  help  her
with  making  clothes  for  her  little  children ; and  especially  in
devising  and  cirtting  out  patterns  for  their  dresses.  She  never
gave  or  bought  her  an  old-fashioned  pedestal  work-table  ; but
having  come  into  possession  of  some  furniture  (whether  by
purchase  or  inheritance,  I cannot  say)  on  the  death  of  a
relation  of  my  father’s,  and  not  needing  it  all  herself,  she.
gave  Annie  some  of  it.  This  furniture  was  probably  very  old-
fashioned  even  then.

The  correspondence  is  close,  and  interesting  because,  though
out  of  my  subconscious  memory  might  have  been  got  the  name
Annie  ” as  that  of  the  friend  of  my  mother,  I think  it  very
unlikely  that  at  any  time  in  my  existence  had  I heard  of  the
gift  of  a shawl,  or  of  the  help  that  my  mother  gave  to
Annie.”

I think  that  such  coincidence  as  there  is  between  Nelly’s
statements  about  this  Annie  and  the  real  facts  is  the  more
striking  because  there  were  two  Annies  mentioned  by  Nelly
in  my  sittings,  one  said  to  be  connected  with  my  father,  and
the  other  with  my  mother.  Not  only  at  the  time  of  the


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson' s Trance.  153

sitting  was  I,  but  for  more  than  three  years  and  a half  after
it  I remained  under  the  impression  that  the  name  was  without
significance  in  either  connection.  The  day  after  I discovered
about  my  mother’s  friend  Annie,  from  an  entirely  different
source,  1 learnt  that  my  father  had  had  a sister  named  Annie,
who  died  more  than  fifty  years  ago.

I had  never,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  heard  her  men-
tioned, nor  did  I know  of  her  existence.  My  ignorance  on
this  point  may  seem  curious,  but  my  father  outlived  all  the
immediate  relations  of  his  own  generation  by  some  twenty
years,  and  but  rarely  referred  to  them.  He  had,  for  instance,
an  only  brother,  to  whom  he  was  deeply  attached ; yet  I never
heard  him  mention  him,  or  even  refer  to  his  existence.

Nelly  continues  to  give  facts  about  my  mother,  but  she
does  not  purport  to  recite  her  actual  words  except  once,  and
then,  as  I have  already  described,  with  telling  effect.  She  is
speaking  about  a living  relation  of  my  mother’s  when  she
exclaims : — “ Oh  ! dear,  the  lady  says  ‘ he  was  an  unorthodox
person.’  ”

There  is  a note  of  amused  despair  at  the  unconventionality
of  the  relation’s  character  which  strikes  me  as  most  lifelike.
Nelly  scored  a double  success,  first  in  hitting  off  so  neatly  a
prominent  characteristic  of  the  individual  in  question,  and  then
in  putting  the  phrase  into  the  mouth  of  my  mother.  I am
well  aware  not  only  how  difficult  it  is  to  convey  to  strangers
the  force  of  little  intimate  touches  of  this  kind,  but  also  how
easily  one  may  be  led  into  reading  into  turns  of  phrase  a special
appropriateness  when  really  they  are  commonplace  enough ;
yet  neither  of  these  considerations  ought  to  deter  me  from
admitting  with  frankness  when  some  small  personal  point  has
produced  on  me  a strong  impression.

This  sentence  alone  seems  to  have  been  directly  inspired
by  my  mother,  for  when  a little  later  on  Nelly,  making  the
discovery  that  the  lady  about  whom  she  had  been  speaking
was  my  mother,  I asked  : — “ Where  is  she  ? ” I got  the  reply  :
— She  doesn’t  seem  to  be  in  England.”  “ No,”  I said,  “ I
mean  in  what  sphere  ? ” “ It’s  no  good  me  pretending  I know.

I can’t  see  her ; I only  see  pictures.”

At  only  one  other  sitting  were  communications  supposed  to
come  from  or  about  my  mother.  Though  she  was  said  to  be


154


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


assisting  Nelly  in  discovering  facts  about  the  sitter,  twice  only
is  the  impression  conveyed  that  she  is  conversing  directly  with
her,  and  then  only  once  were  the  messages  of  an  evidential
character.  They  were  not  so  striking,  or  rather  they  did  not
strike  me  so  much,  as  the  others  which  I have  just  cited ; yet
they  were  the  best  things  said  in  the  sitting.  I will  not,  how-
ever, quote  them,  because  they  would  need  a good  deal  of
explanation,  and  the  point  which  I wish  to  make  is  that  the  com-
munications which  either  purported,  or  which  were  so  worded
as  to  lead  me  to  infer  that  they  purported,  to  come  directly
from  the  communicating  spirit,  were  more  evidential  and  im-
pressed me  as  more  authentic  than  those  which  were  merely
the  outcome  of  Nelly’s  own  researches.

Sitting  of  December  20th,  1900.

This  was  the  first  of  the  screen  sittings  (see  p.  163)  at
which  I was  present,  and  the  second  that  had  been  tried.  The
strange  conditions  not  only  annoyed  Nelly,  but  also  aflected
her  powers  adversely.  Whether  the  medium  would  have  gradu-
ally accustomed  herself  to  them,  or  whether  they  would  have
permanently  hampered  the  full  exercise  of  her  abnormal
perceptive  faculties,  must  remain  an  open  question.  I was  told
by  various  critics  that  in  thus  rendering  the  conditions  more
severe  I was  putting  an  undue  strain  on  Mrs.  Thompson’s
mediumship,  which,  remarkable  as  it  might  be,  would  by  reason
of  the  slightness  of  her  trance  prove  unequal  to  the  new  test.
Had  a pi’olonged  enquiry  shown  a lower  percentage  of  success
in  screen  sittings  as  compared  with  others  where  the  sitters
were  not  hidden  from  the  medium’s  view,  and  if  similar  experi-
ments with  other  mediums  produced  similarly  inferior  results,
at  any  rate  we  should  learn  something  about  the  conditions
which  influence  the  exercise  of  trance-mediumship,  instead  of  as
at  present  remaining  without  one  glimmer  of  light  to  guide  u.s
in  such  investigations.  And  I take  it  that  while  we  do  not  at
present  possess  a sufficient  mass  of  evidence  to  place  beyond
doubt  the  fact  of  exercise  of  supernormal  faculty,  yet  there  is
enough  presumptive  evidence  to  justify  irs  in  varying  the  con-
ditions (even  though  by  doing  so  we  diminish  the  stream  of
purely  “ evidential  ” facts)  in  the  hope  of  lighting  upon  some-
law  of  the  phenomena.


XLV]i.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.  155

After  the  experience  gained  at  the  half-dozen  screen  sittings
I am  by  no  means  sure  that  the  concealment  of  the  sitter
would  have  necessarily  resulted  in  the  eclipse  or  partial  eclipse
of  Mrs.  Thompson’s  powers.  None  of  these  sittings,  it  is  true,
could  be  accounted  successful,  but  they  were  not  entire  failures,
and  such  falling  off  as  there  was  from  the  general  standard
ought  not  probably  to  be  attributed  wholly  to  the  new  conditions
but  in  part  to  other  disturbing  influences.  And  even  where
the  deterioration  was  plainly  due  to  the  concealment  of  the
sitter,  T am  disposed  to  think  that  the  reason  must  be  looked
for  more  in  the  subjective  effect  produced  on  the  medium
than  in  the  objective  separation  of  the  sitter  from  the  medium.

In  spite,  however,  and  perhaps  in  consequence  of  the  com-
parative non-success  of  this  sitting,  it  furnishes  several  hints  of
the  various  modes  of  communication  resorted  to  by  Nelly,
given  as  usual  in  asides : —

“All  these  are  pictures  only;  not  from  the  lady  herself.”  . . .

“Some  knitted  bedroom  slippers.  There’s  .such  a lot  of
pictures  of  things.”

J.  G.  P. : — “ Can’t  you  get  at  the  people  themselves  ? ”

Nelly: — “Not  yet;  they  can’t  understand  how  to  get  at
things.”

./.  G.  P. : — “ Are  they  trying  now  ? ”

Nelly : — “ Yes,  for  they’ve  tried  before  this  time.”

. . . “ Do  you  think  Mrs.  Benson  writes  poetry  ? 1 can

only  see  that  old  gentleman.  Why  did  you  {i.e.  J.  G.  P.')
talk  about  Mrs.  Benson  ? ”

/.  G.  P. “I  didn’t.”

Nelly: — “Well,  T can  hear  somebody  talking  about  Mrs.
Bensou.”

(j\Irs.  Benson  was  as  a matter  of  fact  the  sitter,  though  she
had  up  to  this  point  been  hidden  from  the  medium,  but  as
she  had  inadvertently  whispered  a few  words  to  me,  and  since,
as  a former  sitter,  she  might  have  been  recognised  by  her
walk,  or  breathing,  or  by  some  other  such  clue,  one  is  not
bound  to  conclude  that  there  was  anything  supernormal  in
Nelly’s  allusion.)

“ . . . I wish  you’d  tell  Mrs.  Benson  to  come  and  see  me.”

J.  G.  P.;— “Why?”

Nelly : — “ I only  want  to  tell  her  that  something  made  them


15G


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


very  thirsty  when  coming  in  the  train  from  Ober-Amergau.
Somebody  belonging  to  Mrs.  Benson,  who  took  care  of  them
when  they  went  there,  told  me  that.”  . . . “ I can  only  see
Mrs.  Benson  now.  To  begin  with  the  beginning.  First  comes
the  old  lady  belonging — You  do  mix  it  up,  you  know.”  (This
remark  was  not  apparently  addressed  to  me,  but  sotto  wee  to
spirits.)  . . .

(On  the  removal  of  the  screen.)  “ You  can  use  the  screen
until  I’ve  found  out  six  more  people.  You  see,  I scored  off
you.  It’s  more  harder  work.  I can  never  find  spirits  when
I’ve  got  anything  earthly  to  find.  I can  only  see  pictures.
I don’t  mean  that  you  are  earthly,  darling  Mrs.  Benson  ; but
you  understand.”  . . .

“ I didn’t  find  anything  or  anybody.  I shall  only  talk
nonsense  if  I go  on.”

This  distinction  between  seeing  pictures  and  direct  converse
with  a spirit  is  again  brought  out  in  the  sitting  of  January  3rd,
1901.  Nelly,  referring  to  the  Percival  control,  says; — “He’s
gone  away,  and  there’s  a picture  only.”

J.  G.  P.: — “Won’t  he  come  back?”

Nelly  : — “ He’ll  come  back  soon.  He’s  talking  so  much  to  Mr.
Moses.  He’s  a kind  of  little  Moses — a disciple  of  Moses.”

From  the  record  of  the  sitting  of  January  8th,  1901,  I take
the  following  illustrations  of  the  trance-mechanism  : —

“ I can  see  King’s  Cross  written  up  in  front  of  my  eyes  ; not
my  mother’s  eyes.  You  see  the  diflerence  ? ”

(Referring  to  the  Geoffrey  Scott  control)  “ He’s  trying  to  find
out  [certain  information].  My  mother’s  very  disagreeable.  I’m
only  looking  after  her  while  Geoffrey’s  gone  away.  . . . He
can’t  remember  what  he  said  he’d  write  last  night ; but  he  can’t
remember  it  now.  He  has  got  to  impress  it  on  Mother’s  brain,
and  I’m  using  half  Mother’s  brain.”

The  loeus  classievs  on  the  fitful  variations  in  the  continuity  of
the  trance  and  normal  consciousness  is  to  be  found  in  the  sitting
of  January  29th,  1901.  It  is  worth  quoting  in  full,  because  it
shows  that  Nelly  recognises  and  admits  not  only  various  sources
of  information,  but  also  variation  in  the  authenticity  of  her  own
utterances.

“ Sometimes  I can  really  be  my  mother.  Sometimes  I can
really  think  with  my  mother’s  tlioughts  into  other  people’s


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.  157

hearts,  and  sometimes  I am  really  myself,  not  a bit  my  mother,  a
spirit  talking  to  spirits.  When  I’m  really  a spirit  talking,  every-
thing in  mother  is  cpiiet,  like  an  empty  house.  When  I’m  a bit
of  my  mother,  it’s  like  as  if  I was  in  an  inhabited  house,  though
I can’t  see  the  inhabitant.  When  I’m  inside  mother  and  she’s
not  right  away  I seem  to  hear  things  said  and  thought,  and
don’t  know  whether  it’s  my  mother  or  something  else.  ‘ I
haven’t  the  power  to  discriminate,’  Mr.  Sidgwick  says  that  of
it.  He  can  hear  me  quite  well  now.”

J.  G.  F. : — “ Ask  him  about  ‘ Trevelyan’s  transferred.’  ”

Nelly. — “No,  I can’t  make  him  understand.  I should  only
guess.”

This  avowal  was  unprovoked  by  any  enquiry  on  my  part,  and
its  frankness  may  be  compared  with  other  instances  where  Nelly
has  been  at  some  pains  to  prevent  equal  confidence  being  placed
in  all  her  statements  indiscriminately.


(4)  The  Eelations  p.etween  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Normal
Consciousness  and  the  Trance-Consciousness.

The  most  marked  difference  lietween  Mrs.  Thompson  awake
and  Mrs.  Thompson  entranced  lies  perhaps  in  the  modification
of  the  speech.  There  is  an  alteration  in  the  manner  and  also
in  the  facial  play,  but  both  are  less  clearly  defined,  and  liable  to
considerable  variation,  so  much  so  that  at  times  it  would  be  very
hard,  if  not  impossible,  to  say  whether  the  Nelly  manner  and
e.xpression  of  face  or  Mrs.  Thompson’s  ordinary  manner  and
expression  preponderated.  But  between  the  diction  of  Mrs.
Thompson  and  the  diction  of  Nelly  there  is  so  great  a
divergence  that  it  cannot  ever  be  open  to  doubt  as  to  which
of  the  two  is  supposed  to  be  speaking.  Mrs.  Cartwright  quite
rightly  described  Nelly  as  illiterate,  and  Nelly  recognises  and
regrets  her  inability  to  expre.ss  herself  better : “ I wish  I could
speak  more  learned  like,”  she  once  said.  Mrs.  Thompson,  on  the
other  hand,  is,  I need  hardly  .say,  nothing  of  the  kind.  She
expresses  herself  both  in  speech  and  writing,  particularly  in  the
latter,  with  intelligence  and  with  rather  more  than  ordinary


158


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PAUT


precision,  and,  if  not  with  the  grammatical  accuracy  of  a purist,
at  least  with  no  more  frequent  violations  of  the  King’s  English
than  we  may  any  of  us  be  guilty  of  from  time  to  time.  Kelly’s
blunders  are,  on  the  contrary,  committed  wholesale,  and  they  are
not  merely  the  careless  slips  of  a person  who  knows  better,  but
thorough-going  downright  barbarisms — the  barbarisms  of  the
nursery,  not  of  the  street,  however.  This  feature  of  the  Nelly
personality  seems  to  me  equally  puzzling  on  any  hypothesis.
At  the  same  time  it  would  l)e  unprofitable  to  discuss  all  the
extremely  hypothetical  points  involved,  and  I content  myself
with  directing  attention  to  the  existence  of  a problem.

Instead  of  reproducing  in  my  notes  Nelly’s  mispronunciations
and  other  grammatical  eccentricities,  I as  often  as  not  sub-
stituted for  them  the  proper  form  of  spelling  or  construction,
except  where  it  seemed  possible  that  some  importance  might
attach  to  the  misuse  of  a word  or  phrase.  It  will  be  under-
stood that  when  a recorder  has  all  his  work  cut  out  to  keep
pace  with  the  trance-utterances,  he  does  not  wish  to  add  to
the  difficulty  of  his  task  by  having  to  represent  peculiarities  of
speech  by  means  of  phonetic  spelling.  The  written  records
give,  therefore,  a rather  too  favourable  idea  of  the  correctness
of  Nelly’s  speech.  Still,  I very  often  did  have  time  to  report
Nelly  not  only  textually,  but  phonetically  too.  I quote  some
of  the  worst  specimens  of  her  phraseology  in  order  to  make
clear  how  the  illiterate  Nelly  differs  from  the  educated  Mrs.
Thompson.

“ That  makes  like  Madeira  work.”

“I  tolled  you  that  before.”  (Yet  the  same  afternoon  the
correct  form,  “ I told  you,”  had  been  used — that  is,  supposing
that  the  recorder,  Mrs.  Verrall,  who,  however,  usually  noted
Nelly’s  ‘ baby-language,’  had  not  amended  Nelly’s  grammar.)

“ He  writed  with  you  about  mesmerism.”

“ Cappychising  ” for  “ catechising,”  “ muggling  ” for  “ mud-
dling,” and  such  like  childish  coinages  are  frequent.

“ It’s  more  harder  work.”

“ Somebody  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  house  they  said.”

“ She  has  got  a very  ill  mother.”

“ X.  writed  it.”

“ Ask  this  lady  what  she  writed  in  the  train  with  this
pencil.”


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thomi^son's  Trance.


159


“He  said  he  writed  it,  and  told  the  lady  about  it.”  (“Writed”
but  “told,”  not  “ tolled.”  Yet  the  correct  form  “wrote”  is  also
used  by  Nelly,  and  always  by  the  Percival  control.)

“ She  only  thinked  it.”

“ Tell  Margaret  to  write  to  Mr.  Myers  and  cheer  him  up  like,
cheer  him  up.”

“She  wasn’t  a sort  of  consumptive  die;  much  quicker.”

“ I went,  but  it  was  a ‘ muggled  went.’  ”

These  last  two  instances  ought  not  perhaps  to  be  regarded  as
grammatical  errors,  but  rather  as  a characteristic  mode  of  speech,
and  one  not  altogether  foreign  to  Mrs.  Thompson  herself.  Such
an  expression,  too,  as  the  one  quoted  above : “ Somebody  in  Mrs.
Piper’s  house  they  said”:  is  due  probably  to  the  broken  style
of  utterance,  and  were  one  dealing  with  Thucydides  instead  of
Nelly  the  halting  construction  would  be  dignified  or  white-
washed with  the  name  of  anacoluthon.  Yet  many  and  less
glaring  errors  in  Nelly’s  speech  cannot  be  got  round  in  this
way,  and  it  is  quite  certain  not  only  that  it  would  be  impos-
sible for  the  normal  Mrs.  Thompson  to  use  such  forms  as  “ more
harder,”  “ writed  it,”  and  so  on,  but  that  generally  Nelly’s  speech
falls  very  far  below  the  level  of  Mrs.  Thompson’s.  Mrs.  Cart-
wright’s speech  neither  falls  below  nor  rises  above  the  level  of
Mrs.  Thompson’s.  Her  parlance  is  mi  generis,  and  cannot  fortu-
nately be  compared  with  Mrs.  Thompson’s.  It  might  be  termed
pedantic  were  it  not  that  pedantry  usually  connotes  an  ostenta-
tious display  of  accurate  knowledge ; the  ostentation  is  there,  but
the  accuracy  is  not,  as  I have  elsewhere  shown  (see  pp.  132-3),
unless,  indeed,  Mrs.  Cartwright’s  English,  pure  and  undefiled  at
its  source,  has  been  contaminated  in  the  process  of  passing
through  the  speech  centres  of  the  less  scholarly  medium.

I once  had  a conversation  of  some  twenty  minutes’  or  half-
hour’s  duration  with  the  “ Mr.  D.”  control,  and  though  I
purposely  recorded  only  a fragment  of  what  was  said  on  this
occasion,  1 was  much  struck  with  the  accuracy  and  refinement
of  the  speech,  and  nothing  said  by  this  control  on  other  occa-
sions in  my  hearing  has  contradicted  or  diminished  the  impression
which  I then  received.

There  was  not  enough  direct  speech  uttered  by  the  Percival
control  to  justify  any  detailed  comparison  being  drawn  between
it  and  the  speech  of  the  other  controls  or  that  of  the  medium  ;


160


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


but  so  far  as  it  went,  it  struck  me  as  being  quite  in  keeping
with  the  character  of  the  personality  which  this  control  was
supposed  to  represent.  My  contemporaneous  note  made  on  its
first  manifestation  ran  thus : — “ The  part  from  ‘ Oh ! I can’t
Itreath,’  to  ‘ my  Oxford  box  ’ [i.e.  the  utterances  of  the  Percival
control]  was  not  spoken  in  Nelly’s  voice,  nor  with  her  manner.
The  speech  was  much  slower  and  more  refined.”

1 refer  elsewhere  to  the  character  of  the  Sidgwick  control
(see  pp.  236-7),  which  was  remarkably  life-like.  The  direct
utterance,  however,  contained  one  ungrammatical  phrase  which
it  would  appear  necessary  to  assign  to  the  medium’s  own  habits
of  speech  ; “ Alice  will  know  that  it’s  me  that’s  written  it.”

Generally,  though  not  pjerhaps  invariably,  Nelly  must  be
credited  with  knowing  anything  that  is  known  to  Mrs.  Thomp-
son ; and  the  range  of  common  knowledge  includes  not  only
domestic  matters  or  matters  in  which  Mrs.  Thompson  takes  a
special  interest,  but  all  such  general  knowledge  as  may  reason-
ably be  supposed  to  be  part  of  the  intellectual  outfit  of  a
person  of  average  education.

Nelly  refers  to  mundane  affairs,  past  and  present,  with  easy
assurance,  and  has  only  once  (see  pp.  117-8)  within  my  ex-
perience thought  herself  called  upon  to  explain  how  a spirit  who,
one  must  not  say,  left  this  earth,  but,  one  may  say,  who  died  at
the  age  of  a few  months  is  as  glibly  aa  courant  of  the  affairs  of
this  mortal  life  as  if  .she  read  her  daily  newspaper.  She  nick-
names (behind  his  back)  Dr.  van  Eeden  “Brother  Boer”;  Dr.
van  Eeden’s  father-in-law  is  described  as  having  worn  “a  hat  like
Tennyson,”  and  knowledge  of  recent  Dutch  history  is  shown.
My  mother  is  said  to  have  “ had  a lot  of  people  belonging
to  her  when  alive  who  did  a lot  of  talking,  like  I’arliamentary  ;
only  they  didn’t  act  much ; they  helped  to  make  the  laws,
but  were  not  officials  like  Chamberlain,  but  like  John  Jones,
M.P.,  only  not  Cabinet  Ministers.”  A congress  was  said  to
have  been  attended  by  Dr.  van  Eeden,  and  the  place  where  it
was  held  is  thus  particularised  : — “ You  know  the  ‘ North  Pole,’
Pole  d.u  JVord,  where  iieo}»le  sing  and  dance.  Turning  out

of  the  street  in  which  was  the  ‘ North  Pole  ’ was  the  big  hall
where  the  Congress  was  held.”  She  repeats  scraps  of  Mr.
Thompson’s  conversation,  and  also  of  that  of  Mrs.  Thompson.  In
connection  with  an  object  handed  to  the  medium  she  says  : — “ I


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thom-pt^on  a Trance.


161


seem  to  liave  a feeling  of  Bruges — where  the  lace  is — where
Ostend  is.”  “How  do  you  know  it’s  Osterid  ?”  I ask.  “Oh!”
replies  Nelly,  “ I see  little  wooden  houses.”

In  one  instance  Nelly’s  memory  fails  where  probaldy  Mrs.
Thompson’s  would  not  have.  She  is  trying  to  get  hold  of  the
name  “ Guernsey,”  and  detines  it  in  this  roundabout  mannei'.
“ It’s  very  near,  near  England.  Where  does  Mr.  Marsden
[assumed  name]  live  when  not  at  Cheltenham  ? Marsden  Park?
I can’t  remember  the  name  of  the  place ; only  the  hotel
where  they  all  stayed,”  and  then  gives  the  name  of  the  hotel
correctly.  Mrs.  Thompson  had  some  time  before  this  stayed
at  the  hotel  named,  and  visited,  with  Mr.  Marsden,  Marsden
Park  ; but  though  Nelly  cannot  recall  the  name  of  Mr.  Mars-
den’s  place  for  the  moment,  it  is  clear  that  she  implies  that
she  once  had  known  it.  The  reference  to  Guernsey  occurred
in  connection  with  an  incident  which  exemplifies  another  aspect
of  the  relations  lietween  the  waking  and  the  trance  con-
sciousness.

At  the  sitting  held  on  the  afternoon  of  January  5th,  1900,
Nelly  remarked  : — “ Have  you  seen  a shipwreck  ? Because  I
can  see  it.  It  is  mixed  up  with  Mr.  Marsden.  He  is  not  in
it,  but  he  has  something  to  do  with  it.  IMr.  Marsden  is  very
ill  with  bronchitis : that’s  why  he  hasn’t  written  to  you  \i.e.
J.  G.  P.j.  It  had  got  letters  on  the  shipwreck.  It’s  very  near,”
etc.,  and  the  passage  ends  as  already  quoted.

The  early  editions  of  the  evening  newspapers  of  January
5th,  1900,  contained  accounts  of  the  shipwreck  of  the  G.W.P.
S.S.  Ihex  off  the  coast  of  Guernsey,  and  I myself  had  already
seen  the  announcements  on  the  posters.  I do  not  remember
if  the  steamer’s  name  was  given  ; if  not  it  would  account  for
Nelly  confining  herself  to  saying  that  “ it  had  got  letters  on
the  shipwreck.”

I,  however,  made  no  remark  to  Mrs.  Thompson  when  the
trance  was  over,  and  awaited  developments.  Our  next  meeting
was  on  January  10th,  and  at  the  conclusion  of  the  sitting  held
on  that  day  Mrs.  Thompson  spontaneously  told  me  that  she  had
learnt  from  Nelly  that  she  (Nelly)  had  spoken  about  the  .ship-
wreck, and  she  expressed  her  annoyance  at  Nelly’s  stupidity,
because  she  had  read  the  news  of  the  shipwreck  on  the  news-
paper posters  on  her  way  to  my  house  on  January  5th.  It


162


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


would,  in  my  view,  be  absurd  to  charge  Mrs.  Thompson  with
having  knowingly  introduced  into  the  trance-utterances  this
reference  to  the  Guernsey  shipwreck ; I entertain  too  high  an
opinion  of  her  intelligence  to  be  able  to  suppose  that  she,  who
has  every  reason  to  be  well  acquainted  with  the  methods  of
our  Society,  entertains  so  low  an  opinion  of  our  intelligence  as
to  imagine  that  she  could  pass  off  as  supernormally  acquired  this
item  of  news  which  the  very  simplest  enquiry  would  have  shown
to  have  been  within  the  range  of  her  normal  consciousness.  A
nearly  parallel  case  is  cited  below  (see  pp.  179-180),  a case
which  I equally  and  for  the  same  reasons  find  it  impossible
to  regard  as  suspicious.  The  interest  of  these  two  cases  lies
rather  in  the  fact  that  they  suggest  that  Xelly  is  not  always
aware  of  the  real  source  of  her  information,  or  as  Nelly  herself
defines  the  position,  “ AVhen  I’m  inside  Mother  and  she’s  not
right  away  I seem  to  hear  things  said  and  thought  and  don’t
know  wliether  it’s  niy  mother  or  something  else.”  Now  it  is
noticealde  that  these  two  instances  of  the  reproduction  in  Gance
of  specific  pieces  of  information  possessed  by  the  medium  in
her  normal  state  both  occurred  at  sittings  which  were  veiy
poor  in  results,  and  at  which  Mrs.  Thompson  was  in  a state
of  continual  restlessness  and  was  obviously  ill  at  ease ; a con-
dition wliich  appears  to  answer  to  what  Nelly  terms,  “ When
I’m  inside  IMother  and  she’s  not  right  away.”

At  this  same  sitting  on  January  btli,  1900,  the  following
incident  happened  : — I'here  had  been  an  interval  of  about  1 0
minutes  during  which  1 had  gone  into  the  next  room.  Soon
after  I came  back  into  the  sdance-room  Mrs.  Thompson  relapsed
into  trance,  and  I then  found  that  1 had  mislaid  my  pencil.
I exclaimed,  “ A¥here  did  I put  my  pencil  ? ” to  be  met  with
Nelly’s  instant  and  correct  rejoinder:  “In  the  next  rocm.”  I
had  mislaid  the  pencil  in  the  interval  lietween  the  trances,
and  not  during  tlie  time  that  Nelly  was  controlling.  Her
answer  may  of  course  have  been  Ijased  upon  a mere  conjecture,
or  she  may  have  derived  her  information  telepathically  from
a part  of  my  consciousness  which  may  Itave  remembered  what
I had  done  with  the  pencil : an  explanation  not  quite  so

gratuitous  as  it  may  seem,  for  I have  on  several  occasions
been  convinced  that  Nelly  has  during  the  course  of  a sitting
read  my  unspoken  thoughts,  not  obvious  thoughts  which  might


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.  163

have  been  easily  conjectured  by  any  one  present  who  was
following  the  proceedings,  but  thoughts  not  suggested  by  what
was  being  said  or  done  at  the  time.  Or,  again,  Nelly  may
have  drawn  on  Mrs.  Thompson’s  conscious  or  subconscious
knowledge  of  the  whereabouts  of  my  pencil,  or  Mrs.  Thompson
may  not  have  been  in  trance  at  all  and  made  a silly  slip.
The  last  explanation  is  the  only  one  that  does  not  recommend
itself  to  me.

Though  this  last  episode  would  lead  one  to  assume  that
Nelly  keeps  an  eye  on  what  is  going  on  just  before  and  after
trance,  an  incident  that  occurred  at  the  sitting  on  January
18th,  1900,  shows  that  she  is  sometimes  unobservant  of  matters
which  one  might  have  supposed  could  not  have  escaped  her.

Mr.  “ Wilson  ” and  I had  left  the  seance-room  together
during  an  interval  in  the  trance  in  order  to  talk  over  what
had  been  said.  On  our  return  we  found  the  medium  re-
entranced and  Nelly  talking  gaily  and  volubly  to  nobody.  I
class  this  incident  under  the  relations  of  the  trance  and  normal
consciousnesses  because  it  is  evident  that,  up  to  the  moment  of
passing  into  trance,  Mrs.  Thompson  must  have  been  aware
of  our  absence  from  the  room  and  of  the  consequent  inutility
of  the  trance-utterance  beginning  before  our  return.

At  a few  sittings  the  sitter  did  not  enter  the  sc%nce-room  until
trance  had  begun,  and  was  both  on  and  after  entering  hidden  from
the  medium  by  means  of  a screen,  and  enjoined  to  keep  strict
silence.  At  one  of  this  series  a lady  whom  I will  call  Mrs.
Scott  was  to  be  the  sitter ; and  I had  previously  arranged
with  her,  for  reasons  to  be  explained  presently,  that  when  she
came  to  the  S.P.lb  Eooms  at  19  Buckingham  Street,  where
the  sitting  was  to  be  held,  she  should  walk  into  the  Library
with  a heavy  tread  and  slam  the  door  after  her,  so  that  Mrs.
Thompson,  who  would  be  in  the  next  room,  might  hear  her
movements.  Mrs.  Scott  carried  out  these  suggestions,  and  also
when  she  came  into  the  st%nce-room  after  trance  had  l)egun
she  pursued  the  same  tactics.  The  Library,  it  should  be  under-
stood, was  separated  from  the  seance-room  by  a short  passage
or  lobby.  Mrs.  Scott  had  had  several  sittings  with  Mrs.
Thompson  before  this,  as  had  also  another  lady,  whom  for
the  purposes  of  narrating  this  incident  I will  call  Mrs.  Taylor.
I had  noticed  that  Mrs.  Scott  was  unusually  tranquil  and


164


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


noiseless  in  all  her  movements ; whereas  Mrs.  Taylor’s  move-
ments were  marked  by  a certain  energy  and  impetuonsness.
Accordingly  it  occurred  to  me  to  try  an  e.xperiment  by  way
of  testing  how  far  indications  afforded  to  the  waking  Mrs.
Thompson  would  be  utilised  by  the  entranced  Mrs.  Thompson.
Tlie  object  then  of  Mrs.  Scott’s  assumed  gait  was  to  copy  that  of
Mrs.  Taylor.  The  result  of  these  insidious  manoeuvres  was
interesting.

After  Mrs.  Scott  had  made  her  noisy  entry  into  the  Library,
and  before  she  entered  the  seance-room,  Nelly  said  : —

“ 1 want  to  write  to  Mrs.  Taylor.  I want  to  tell  her  lots
of  secrets.”  But  no  sooner  were  these  words  out  of  Nelly’s
mouth  than  another  control  began  to  speak,  whom  I at  once
recognised  as  tlie  control  who  purports  to  be  the  son  of  Mrs.
Scott.  Mrs.  Scott  then  entered  the  seance-room.  The  Scott
■control  had  ceased  speaking  before  she  entered,  and  Nelly,
after  what  may  have  been  a passing  allusion  to  a relation  of
Mrs.  Benson’s,  returned  to  the  subject  of  Mrs.  Taylor’s  affairs,
though  without  actually  stating,  and  peihaps  without  even
'wishing  to  imply,  that  i\Irs.  Taylor  herself  was  present.  Mean-
while in  the  intervals  of  Nelly’s  silence  the  Scott  control
ikept  intervening,  and  Nelly  gave  messages  about  or  for  both
Mrs.  Taylor  and  Mrs.  Scott  more  or  less  alternatively.  Mrs.
Thompson  then  half  awoke,  and  Mrs.  Scott  and  I retired
'.into  the  next  room.  Wlien  I returned,  alone,  to  the  seance-
)room  1 found  the  medium  in  the  middle  of  writing  the
following  sentence  : — “ I am  my  mother’s  boy.  I am  Geoffrey
Hamilton  [Christian  names,  as  surname,  fictitious]  Scott.  She
'has  gone.  I know  my  . . .”

When  the  Geoffrey  Scott  control  had  plainly  shown  that
the  identity  of  the  sitter  was  discovered,  the  screen  was  re-
moved, and  consequently  Mrs.  Scott  exposed  to  the  medium’s
view.  Thereupon  the  following  occurred : —

Nelly : — “ If  Mrs.  Scott  were  to  come  and  talk  to  me
properly.”

(Mrs.  Scott  then  spoke  to  Nelly.)

“ You  were  really  there  all  the  time  ? What  was  it  made
me  know  it  was  Mrs.  Scott  ? Geoffrey’s  locket  told  me.  It’s
dn  a box,  with  the  glass  broken.”

Nelly  claimed  to  have  known  that  Mrs.  Scott  was  behind


XLvn.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thomioson’ s Trance.  165

the  screen ; but  though  I thiuk  she  was  gradually  feeling  her
way  towards  this  discovery,  she  did  not  definitely  announce  it.
She  does  not,  it  is  true,  actually  assert  that  she  had  stated
who  the  sitter  was ; only  that  she  knew  that  it  was  Mrs.
Scott,  which  might  be  taken  to  mean  that  she  had  had  an
underlying’  suspicion  that  Mrs.  Scott  was  present,  and  this  I
think  there  is  some  evidence  to  show  that  she  did  have,  or
perhaps  I ought  rather  to  say  that  she  was  hesitating  between
Mrs.  Scott  and  Mrs.  Taylor,  inclining,  though,  if  anything,  more
to  the  latter  than  the  former.  But,  however  this  may  be,  it  is
rather  strange  that  she  should  attribute  her  alleged  knowledge
to  a locket  that  had  been  handed  to  the  medium  early  in  the
sitting  rather  than  to  what  one  would  have  fancied  would  have
been  the  more  obvious  source,  namely,  the  appearance  of  the
Scott  control,  and  this  control’s  written  and  verbal  statements.
Yet  here  again  there  is  another  puzzling  point,  for,  although  the
Scott  control  had  manifested  on  several  previous  occasions,  at
this  sitting  Nelly  did  not  recognise  who  the  control  was
until  the  full  name  was  written  just  after  the  break  in  the
trance.  This  control  was  muttering  rather  inaudibly,  and  it  did
not  at  first  give  its  name.

Nelly  repeated  one  of  the  indistinct  and  incomplete  sentences
spoken  by  the  soi-disa7it  Geoffrey  Scott  with  the  preface,
“ Somebody  says.”  Then  later,  although  1 knew  who  the  con-
trol was  supposed  to  represent,  as  I wanted  the  name  to  be
given,  I asked  who  the  control  was.  Nelly  said  : “ I shall  go
and  find  out.”  It  was  at  this  point  that  there  was  a break
in  the  trance,  and  immediately  after  its  resumption  the  Scott
control  gave  its  name  in  full,  and  Nelly  showed  that  she  had
found  out  who  it  was.

After  this  was  written  Nelly  began  to  grizzle,  and  said
tearfully  : —

“ You’ve  begun  to  cheat  me  again.  I want  Mrs.  Scott.
Geoffrey  wants  his  mother.”

When  Mrs.  Thompson  woke  from  the  trance  I asked  her  who
she  thought  was  going  to  be  the  sitter.  She  replied : — “ T
thought  it  was  Mrs.  Taylor,  because  the  door  banged,  and  also
before  I came  I thought  it  was  going  to  be  Mrs.  Taylor.”  Then,
turning  to  the  sitter,  she  added : — “ Banging  the  door  was  not  a
bit  like  you,  Mrs.  Scott.”


16(3


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Til  is  unfair  experiment,  all  the  more  unfair  when  the  con-
ditions had  already  been  rendered  sufficiently  trying  by  interpos-
ing a screen,  was,  however,  justified  by  its  results,  for  it  goes  to
support  the  view  that  the  different  controls  are  not  merely  so
many  different  dramatisations  introduced  like  the  puppets  of  a
ventrilo(|uist’s  show  merely  to  vary  wliat  might  otherwise  degene-
rate into  a monotonous  show,  but  that  in  some  sense  they  are
separate  entities,  whether  creatures  of  the  medium’s  brain  or
external  intelligences,  possessed  of  different  memories  and  em-
ploying also,  perhaps,  different  methods  of  communication  and  of
acquiring  knowledge.  And  it  also  furnished  an  example  of  Mrs.
Thompson’s  ingenuousness,  in  so  much  as  she  did  not  attempt  to
conceal  the  deductions  that  she  had  drawn  from  the  sitter’s
manner  of  entering  the  room.

It  seems  clear  that  in  the  case  under  discussion  the  Nelly
control  was  misled  either  by  Mrs.  Thomjjson’s  incorrect  anticipa-
tions as  to  who  the  sitter  would  be,  or  by  Mrs.  Scott’s  imitation
of  Mrs.  Taylor’s  way  of  walking,  or  perhaps  by  both.  But  the
Scott  control,  which  it  must  be  remembered  manifested  before
the  entrance  of  Mrs.  Scott,  was  not  misled.  One  stratum  of  the
medium’s  consciousness,  or  one  spirit,  made  a mistake  because  it
depended  for  its  information  on  the  normal  consciousness  of  the
medium ; another  stratum,  or  another  spirit,  not  depending  on
any  such  source  and  acquiring  information  in  some  more  authen-
tic manner,  and  uninlluenced  by  the  error  of  its  fellow-stratum  or
fellow-spirit,  rightly  foresaw  the  identity  of  the  coming  sitter ;
and  the  trance-personality  or  the  spirit  who  guessed  or  knew  the
truth  was,  of  the  two  concerned,  the  one  who  the  more  appro-
priately should  have  done  so.  On  the  spiritistic  theory  it  is
simple  enough  to  explain  why  one  spirit  should  be  unaware  of
the  presence  of  an  individual  bound  to  it  by  no  emotional  tie,
and  why  the  spirit  of  a dead  son  should  more  readily  detect  his
mother’s  presence  or  proximity.

I believe  that  Nelly  has  sometimes  spoken  of  things  which  the
normal  Mrs.  Thompson  would  not  have  mentioned  to  me.  It  is,
of  course,  diflicult  to  say  what  a person  will  or  will  not  be
reticent  about,  but  some  of  the  more  marked  instances  of  Nelly’s
artless  ipanclmncnt  occurred  in  the  earlier  sittings  when  Mrs.
Thompson  and  I were  comparative  strangers  to  one  another.  I
do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  Nelly  was  very  much  of  an  enfant


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


167


terrible,  but  she  told  some  tales  out  of  school  for  which  a child
less  privileged  and  one  not  removed  from  the  sphere  of  material
punishment  would,  I fancy,  have  had  to  sutler.

Still,  I should  be  doing  an  injustice  to  Nelly  if  I gave  the  im-
pression that  she  is  habitually  guilty  of  grave  indiscretions.  Her
indiscretions  were  never  blazing,  but  innocent  enough,  and  where
other  people’s  concerns  were  in  question  she  has  always  proved
herself  the  very  soul  of  delicacy  and  reserve,  I mean  in  the  sense
that  she  was  always  most  careful  to  refrain  from  talking  about
the  intimate  affairs  of  former  sitters  in  the  presence  of  strangers,
though  both  about  Mrs.  Benson’s  relations  and  my  own  she  has
expressed  opinions  the  reverse  of  complimentary  and  in  a style
quite  foreign  to  Mrs.  Thompson’s  courteous  nature.

It  will  be  obvious  that  under  this  section  many  other  incidents
of  the  sittings  should  properly  fall,  but  many  such  relevant
passages  have  been  narrated  and  discussed  in  other  sections  of
this  paper,  and,  as  it  would  be  tedious  to  go  over  old  ground
simply  to  treat  of  the  questions  involved  from  a slightly  different
standpoint,  I must  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  elicit  for  himself  the
signihcanee  of  such  other  phenomena  as  bear  upon  the  relation
between  the  waking  and  the  trance-consciousness  of  the  medium.


(5)  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Eecollections  on  Waking  from  Trance.

Of  late  years  Dr.  Hodgson  has  made  a ]jractice  of  recording
the  words  spoken  by  Mrs.  Piper  during  the  time  that  she  is
waking  from  trance  : and  so  gradual  is  tlie  process  in  Mrs.
Piper’s  case  that  Dr.  Hodgson  has  been  able  to  distinguish
two  stages  which  he  calls  “Subliminal  1”  and  “Subliminal  2.”
It  has  also  been  remarked  in  the  Piper  records  how  often
an  important  name  or  statement  has  been  shot  out  as  the
medium  was  returning  to  normal  consciousne.ss.  I have  found
no  parallel  to  this  type  of  phenomenon  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s
trance-utterances.  Her  egress  from  trance  is  as  sudden  as
her  entry  into  it.  Using  the  word  almost,  if  not  positively,
in  its  literal  sense,  one  second  Nelly  is  speaking  and  the  next
Mrs.  Thompson  is,  if  not  wide  awake,  at  least  awake  and
talking  in  her  natural  voice  and  manner.

O

M


168


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


So  far  as  my  experience  goes,  the  rule  is  for  Nelly  to  wind
up  the  seance  even  if  other  controls  have  been  talking ; and  the
approaching  end  of  the  trance  is  nearly  always  heralded  l:>y  Nelly
announcing  her  departure  and  bidding  good-bye.  Sometimes  the
leave-taking  is  prolonged,  but  as  a rule  lasts  only  a minute  or
so.  When  it  is  prolonged,  this  seems  to  me  to  have  been
due  to  one  of  two  reasons  : — either  Nelly  appears  to  be
unable  to  disentangle  herself,  so  to  speak,  from  the  medium’s
organism,  or  else  she  is  unwilling  to  go  because  she  wants
to  enjoy  a little  human  gossip.  But  when  she  does  depart  the
severance  is  instantaneous  and  complete,  and  accomplished  in
nearly  every  case  without  any  sign  of  disturbance  or  pertur-
bation, bodily  or  mental.  There  are  no  contortions,  no  groan-
ing and  travailing ; and  so,  if  we  are  to  follow  Dr.  Hodgson
in  his  estimate  of  the  character  of  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trance,  we
must  conclude  that  slie  has  missed  tliis  obvious  opportunity
for  the  display  of  effective  and  easily  simulalde  pantomime.

But  though  her  trance  presents  no  analogies  to  Mrs.  Piper’s
in  this  particular  respect,  still  her  waking  memory  is  often
affected  by  what  has  occurred  during  trance,  and  I accordingly
propose  to  put  together  all  the  instances  that  are  to  be  found
in  the  sittings  under  discussion  where  this  infiltration  of  the
normal  conscioirsness  is  exhibited.


Dr.  van  Ecdcns  sitting  cm  November  29th,  1899.

(3n  awaking  from  trance  Mrs.  Thompson  spontaneously
remarked  that  she  had  been  in  the  Jewish  sphere : “ Only
Jews  there.  Be  sure  to  tell  Mr.  Myers.”  She  added  that

she  had  been  there  once  before,  but  forgot  to  mention  it,
and  that  a lady  in  this  sphere  had  said  to  her:  “You
forgot  to  say  what  1 told  you  on  your  last  visit  liere,  that  you
had  been  very  good  to  my  relative.”  (The  message  Mr.  Myers
found  quite,  intelligible:  a Jewish  friend  of  his  had  recently
had  a good  sitting.)

Here  the  medium’s  post-trance  recollections  of  her  experiences
during  trance  were  indej^endent  of  the  trance  communications,
which  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  Jews.  Nelly  had
stated  in  the  course  of  the  sitting  that  her  mother  had  gone


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  3Irs.  Thompsons  Trance.


1G9


away  with  Mrs.  Cartwright  and  another  control  to  ‘ her  own
house,’  that  is,  the  sphere  inhabited  by  these  controls ; and
unless  we  are  to  suppose  that  after  this  visit  Mrs.  Cartwright,
^"erg■il-like,  conducted  Mrs.  Thompson  to  the  Jewish  sphere,
there  is  a contradiction  between  the  trance-dream  and  the
post-trance  memories.

Dr.  van  Eedcns  second  sitting  on  December  1st,  1899.

Xelly’s  last  words  were: — “ Why  1 That’s  ‘Talks  like  a

Dutchman.’  ” I asked  Mrs.  Thompson  when  she  awoke,  which
she  did  almost  as  the  last  word  was  uttered,  what  she  had
heard  last  as  she  came  out  of  trance.  Her  reply  was : — •
“ She’s  talking  iJouble-Dutch,  or  something  like  that.”

Dr.  van  Eeden’s  fourth  sitting  on  December  -1th,  1899.

On  awaking  the  medium  said  she  felt  as  if  at  the  top  of
a high  building.  In  the  course  of  this  sitting  the  following-
words  had  been  spoken  : — “ You  went  up  a lot  of  steps  round
and  round,  and  both  stood  at  the  top  looking.  He  was  very
fond  of  talking  and  thinking  about  stars — astrology.”  It  is

immaterial  whether  these  words  were  to  the  point  or  not : what
is  material  is  that  the  medium  received  and  retained  a sym-
pathetic physical  sensation  resulting  from  an  impression  ex-
perienced during  the  trance.

Mrs.  Benson’s  first  sitting  on  December  ISth,  1899.

This  was  one  ot  the  occasions  referred  to  above  when  Nelly
seemed  to  find  a difficulty  in  going  away.  As  there  appeared
no  chance  of  any  further  reference  being  made  to  Airs.  Henson’s
affairs  I reminded  Nelly  of  a promise  that  she  had  given  to
try  to  see  what  Air.  Alyers  was  doing  at  a given  moment
during  his  absence  abroad.

. Nelly  then  said: — “He  looks  to  me  as  if  he  was  o;oins
through  some  papers  that  he  ought  to  have  left  alone  and  not
bothered  about.  They  were  a species  of  work,  but  not  ex-
amination papers.  He’s  in  a room  with  a slippery  lloor — not
much  carpet.  ‘ Orthodox  was  one  word  on  Air.  Alyers’  papers,
and  ‘ sincerity.’  It  s like  printed  paper — not  writing ; yet  it’s
on  writing  paper.”


170


J.  G.  Fiddinyton.


[part


The  trance  soon  came  to  an  end;  and  1 told  Mrs.  Ihoinpson
that  Nelly  had  had  a vision  of  Mr.  Myers,  Imt  did  not  tell
her  any  details.  She  thereupon  said : “ I saw  him  reading
the  Times  in  an  ai'inchair  witli  plain  red  back.  I didn  t
actually  see  Times,  but  I sensed  it  was  the  limes  because  ot
the  size.  The  walls  were  in  panels,  windows  down  to  the
ground — a very  lofty  room.  He  was  wearing  his  glasses  to
read.”

Mr.  Myers  commented  as  follows  on  these  statements; —
“ True  description  of  reading  room  at  Hotel  Iloyal,  San  Itemo,
where  1 used  to  read  tlie  Times,  but  not  very  distinctive
perhaps.”

No  one  of  the  things  said  either  by  Nelly  or  by  Mrs.
Thompson,  either  about  Mr.  Myers’  occupation  or  about  the
room,  was  suHiciently  distinctive  in  my  opinion  to  warrant
attributing  any  such  correspondence  as  there  might  or  may
have  been  to  anything  more  than  guess-work  ; the  interest
lies  rather  in  the  differences  observable  in  the  two  versions
given  by  Nelly  and  Mrs.  Ihompson  respectively.

Mrs.  Thompson  supplements  Nelly’s  account,  and  in  no  par-
ticular duplicates  it,  though  she  contradicts  it  in  one  particular  :
namely,  the  subject  of  Mr.  Myers’  reading.  I have  omitted
a passage  which  followed  immediately  on  Nelly  s desciiption
of  her  vision  of  Mr.  klyers  and  immediately  preceded  the
awakening  from  trance,  because  it  relates  to  an  incident
belonging  to  the  vie  intime  of  Mr.  IMyers’  family.  It  was  just
the  kind  of  incident  that  Nelly  would  delight  to  seize  upon ;
but,  whether  from  a discreet  reticence  or  not,  Mrs.  Ihompson^
made  no  reference  to  it ; so  eitlier  she  shared  only  a part  of
Nelly’s  perception,  or  displayed  a reserve  natural  to  heisell,
Init  foreign  to  Nelly.  1 incline  to  the  second  alternative,  loi  I
have  on  several  occasions  noticed  that  Nelly  has  not  hesitated
to  divulge  matters  which  I feel  confident  the  normal  Mis.
Thompson  would  have  kept  to  herself.

Sitting  of  Janwirg  l^ih,  1900.

This  sitting  was  remarkable  as  affording  what  at  least  ^to  me
appeared  to  be  one  of  the  most  clinching  tests  ot  Mrs.  Ihomp-
son’s  supernormal  powers.  A series  ol  communications  had  pui-


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thoni'pson’s  Trance.  171

ported  to  come,  for  the  most  part  directly,  from  the  spirit  whom
I call  Mr.  D.  I had  never  heard  the  D.  control,  and  had
not  the  least  notion  at  that  time  who  it  was  supposed  to
represent.  I merely  knew  that  there  was  such  a control,  and
that  the  communications  made  Iry  him  or  relating  to  him  were
said  to  be  specially  good.

The  sitters  on  January  16th  were  Mr,  Lionel  Earle  and  a
lady,  whose  name  I did  not  and  do  not  know.  Neither  were
in  any  way  connected  with  Mr.  I).

Early  in  the  sitting  (which,  so  far  as  the  sitters  were
concerned,  was  a thoroughly  bad  one)  Nelly  said: — “Mr.  D.
has  told  Mother  a secret.  Ask  Mother  when  she  wakes  up.”

There  was  a break  in  the  trance,  and  Mrs.  Thompson,  with-
out any  question  being  put  to  her,  said  : — “ I feel  rather  muddled.
I did  see  Mr.  D,,  and  he  said  ” (certain  words).

Shortly  afterwards  the  trance  came  on  again,  and  then,
when  it  was  finally  over,  Mrs.  Thompson  stated  that  Mr.  I),
had  a certain  nervous  habit,  and  said  that  she  had  learnt
this  fact  from  Mr.  I),  directly,  who  had  shown  himself  to  her
and  exhibited  the  nervous  habit  several  times  in  order  to  im-
press it  on  her  memory.  Mr.  D.  had  further  told  her  that
“ Nellv  was  not  right  about  the  first  messao-e.”  He  “ said
that  the  first  message  had  not  been  delivered  correctly,  but
that  it  wasn’t  worth  the  trouble  of  correcting  it.”

1 applied  to  a former  sitter  whom  the  1).  communications
immediately  concerned  for  verification  of  the  statements  con-
tained in  the  two  messages.  He  replied  that,  although  tlie
first  message  seemed  to  have  been  muddled  in  transmission,  he
thought  he  understood  what  had  been  intended.  Tlie  second
message  he  declared  was  absolutely  correct,  and  he  asserted
that  in  his  opinion,  and  for  reasons  which  he  explained  to  me,
and  which  struck  me  as  well-grounded,  Mrs.  Thompson  could
not  by  any  ordinary  methods  have  been  cognisant  of  the  fact
contained  in  the  second  message.

But  I am  not  so  much  concerned  with  the  evidential  worth
of  the  messages  as  with  the  curious  aspects  of  the  medium’s
consciousness  exemplified  in  the  method  of  their  delivery.

Nelly  announces  that  Mr.  D.  has  told  her  mother  a secret,
which  she  will  repeat  when  she  awakes.  Mrs.  Thompson
delivers  the  message  when  she  wakes  for  the  first  time,  and


172


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


when  trance  comes  on  again  and  Nelly  recommences  speaking
she  does  not  enquire  if  the  message  has  been  given,  or  evince
any  curiosity  about  it ; nor  does  she  announce,  as  in  the  first
instance,  the  delivery  of  a second  message.  Mrs.  Thompson,
when  she  wakes  from  the  trance  for  the  second  and  final
time,  describes  her  interview  in  the  spirit-world  with  Mr.  D.,
and  how  she  became  acquainted  with  the  fact  of  his  having
2;)ossessed  a certain  nervous  habit.  She  then  added — and  this
is  the  curious  point — that  “ Nelly  was  not  right  about  the  first
message  ” ; Mr.  I).  “ said  that  the  first  message  had  not  been
delivered  correctly.”

There  is  a strange  confusion  here,  for  Nelly  had  nothing
to  do  with  delivering  the  first  message ; it  was  delivered  by
klrs.  Thompson  herself  when  she  awoke  from  trance.

It  may  be  that,  although  Mrs.  Thompson  actually  voiced
the  first  message,  Nelly  was  instrumental  in  impressing  it
upon  the  mind  of  her  mother  at  the  moment  of  waking.  If
this  was  the  modus  operandi  it  would  explain  the  remark
attributed  to  Mr.  I).;  though  it  would  still  remain  to  be  ex-
plained how  it  was  that  Mrs.  Thompson  did  not  detect  the
discrepancy.

Against  this  explanation  must  be  set  the  fact  that  the
first  message  referred  specifically  to  Nelly  by  name,  and  had
Nelly  known  the  purport  of  it,  to  judge  from  tlie  interest
whicli  she  has  displayed  on  other  occasions  when  any  refer-
ence has  been  made  to  herself,  she  would  not  have  passed  the
matter  over  in  silence  during  the  second  ])art  of  the  seance.

As  an  alternative  explanation,  one  might  suppose  that  the
communicating  spirit,  Mr.  D.,  was  unaware  of  the  method  of
transmission,  and  imagined  that  Nelly’s  intermediary  was
essencial.

Conjectural  hypotheses  in  this  style  might  be  extended  in-
definitely and  lead  to  notliing  profitable : 1 set  no  store  by
my  own  suggestions,  and  I make  them  more  for  the  purpose
of  laying  stress  on  the  fact  of  there  being  a difficulty  than
in  the  hope  of  solving  it.

It  could  be  argued  that  the  confusion  was  a slip  on  the
part  of  the  medium,  who  was  off  her  guard  for  a moment,  and
had  overlooked  the  fact  that  she  was  pretending  for  the  occa-
sion to  be  in  direct  communication  with  the  spirit-world  ; but


XLvn.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


173


this  does  not  appeal  to  me  as  a likely  solution,  and  the  per-
plexity appears  to  be  such  as  we  might  reasonably  expect  to
present  itself  in  a case  of  multiple  personality  like  Mrs.  Thomp-
son’s, where  the  shifting  of  the  two  predominant  centres  of
consciousness  is  effected  with  so  much  ease  and  rapidity.

Sitting  of  February  1st,  1900.

At  this  sitting  Nelly,  as  usual,  controlled  at  first.  Suddenly
in  the  middle  of  the  sitting  another  control  appeared,  spoke  a
dozen  words,  and  imomptly  gave  way  to  Nelly  again.  Nelly  at
once  said  that  Mrs.  Cartwright  would  come  to  explain  the
momentary  and  irrelevant  intrusion  of  the  unfamiliar  control.
From  that  point  to  the  end  of  the  sitting  Mrs.  Cartwright  and
Nelly  spoke  in  turns,  and  a most  amusing  scene  ensued,  Mrs.
Cartwright  casting  reflections  on  Nelly’s  way  of  doing  her  work,
and  IS  elly  bobbing  in  and  out  to  mimic  Mrs.  Cartwright’s
pompous  and  platitudinous  manner  and  diction,  and  to  complain
of  her  dictatorial  airs.

hsclly,  as  usual,  wound  up  the  sitting,  and  put  in  a parting
shot : — “ Mrs.  Cartwright  thinks  I’m  illiterate.  ‘ She  always
thought  life  not  worth  living,  if  you  weren’t  obeyed.’  Mrs.
Cartwiight  says  Ini  to  come  before  I talk  ‘insipid  nonsense’
(mimicking  Mrs.  Cartwright’s  voice  and  accent).  Her  compli-
ments come  thick  and  fast.”

Mrs.  Thompson  remarked  on  waking  “ I’ve  been  back  to  my
old  school  at  Wenlock,  where  IMrs.  Cartwright  was.  I saw  Mrs.
Cartwright.”

We  may  assume  with  confidence  that  there  was  a casual  con-
nection between  the  medium’s  trance-dream  and  the  trance-
utterances  ; but  which  was  cause  and  which  effect  may  be  open
to  discussion,  though  it  seems  more  probable  that  the  liusiness
of  the  trance-drama  suggested  the  dream  than  vice  versd.


Sitting  of  February  Qth,  1900.

Ihis  was  one  of  two  sittings  where  I was  present  alone;  the
bulk  of  the  communications  concerned  myself,  but  longish  refer-
ence was  made  to  Mrs.  Benson,  and  Nelly  also  described  a pere-
grination to  Dr.  van  Eeden’s  home,  and  spoke  briefly  of  matters
connected  with  “ Mr.  Wilson.”


174


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Actually  the  last  words  spoken  by  Nelly  were  a prediction  of
the  date  of  my  next  sitting,  but  this  was  immediately  preceded
by  the  following  : —

“ Canon,  then  Bishop,  Bowlby — he  came  and  talked  through
mother.  You  know  that  old  gentleman  Mr.  Benson  ; he  was  an
extreme  friend  of  his.  He  told  mother.  He  has  been  talkimr  to

O

mother.  He  was  very  well  known.  He  was  a friend  of  grand-
mama  Middleton.  He  was  very  pompous.  Mother  used  to
throw  chocolate-creams  about  at  his  confirmation  class.’’

A few  seconds  after  coming  out  of  trance  Mrs.  Thompson
said  : — “ I’ve  been  among  the  eminent  divines.  Canon  Bowlby
told  me  I threw  chocolate-creams  during  confirmation  class,  and
that  ‘ he  knew  Benson  ’ (repeating  the  last  tliree  words  carefully).
I saw  the  Eev.  W.  T.  Taylor,  Ptector  of  Oldbury,  and  the  other
was  Linskell,  Pector  of  Beaudesert,  in  Warwickshire.”

Altlujugh  here,  as  in  the  last  instance,  the  subject  of  the
closing  sentences  of  the  trance-utterances  and  of  Airs.  Thompson’s
waking  recollections  was  allied,  there  is  this  dilference  between
the  two  cases.

In  the  first  the  medium’s  trance-dream  corresponded  with  the
trance-drama  only  in  a general  way,  namely,  only  to  the  extent
that  she  found  herself  back  at  her  old  school  and  in  the  company
of  her  old  school  proprietress  when  Airs.  Cartwright  had  been
playing  a prominent  rdle  in  the  trance-drama ; in  this  second
instance  the  correspondence  was  detailed,  and,  allowing  for  the
characteristic  variation  in  the  versions  of  Nelly  and  of  Mrs.
Thompson,  the  trance-utterance  and  the  post-trance  memory
pertained  to  the  same  incident.  Again,  in  the  one  case  Nelly
seemed  to  be  unaware  of  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trance-dream  and
to  gather  no  information  from  it,  wliile  in  the  other  she  not  only
knew  of  it,  but  profited  by  it  to  the  extent  of  acquiring  a new
fact,  namely,  the  existence  of  some  connection  between  Bishop
Bowlby  and  Archbishop  Benson.

1 note  in  passing  an  important  and  extremely  characteristic
distinction  between  Nelly’s  version  and  Airs.  Thompson’s.  Nelly
said  that  Archbishop  Benson  was  “ an  extreme  friend  ” of  Bishop
Bowlby ’s,  whereas  Airs.  Thompson  makes  use  of  a much  less
strong  expression,  namely,  “ he  knew  Benson.”  Nelly’s  state-
ment was  untrue ; Airs.  Thompson’s  was  perfectly  correct.  Ex-
aggerated forms  of  expression  are  much  indulged  in  by  Nelly,


XLVli.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


175


and  many  of  her  statements  would  have  been  nearer  the  mark  if
she  had  exercised  a greater  reserve  in  her  language.

After  the  trance  of  April  19th,  1900,  Mrs.  Thompson  had  no
recollection  of  any  dreams.  At  a few  other  sittings  I failed  to
remember  to  ask  Mrs.  Thompson  if  she  recollected  any  experience
during  the  trance,  or,  if  I did  ask  her,  she  gave  a negative  reply
which  1 omitted  to  record.  The  interest  and  possible  importance
of  these  post-trance  memories  did  not  at  first  strike  me,  or  I
should  have  been  careful  to  interrogate  the  medium  regularly.


Dr.  van  Eedens  Seventh  Sitting  of  June,  1th  1900.

In  the  middle  of  this  sitting  Nelly  announced  that  she  was
going  away  for  two  minutes.  Thereupon  Mrs.  Tliompson  awoke
and  said: — “ I smell  some  sort  of  antesthetic  stuff  like  chloroform.
I can  taste  it  in  my  mouth.  I was  dreaming  about  being  chloro-
formed, and  your  trying  to  wake  me  up.”

Before  this  point  what  purported  to  be  the  spirit  of  a dead
friend  of  Dr.  van  Eeden’s  who  had  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt
to  commit  suicide  had  been  trying  to  control  the  medium,  thougli
with  only  partial  and  momentary  success.  IThen  the  tranCe
was  resumed  after  this  break  the  control  seemed  to  Dr.  van
Eeden  to  become  complete.

Dr.  van  Eeden  (see  Proceedings,  Part  XLIV.,  ]^.  110)  comments
on  Mrs.  Thompson’s  waking  sensation  as  follows  : — “ This  is  very
remarkable,  the  taste  being  probably  that  of  iodoform,  which  was
used  in  healing  the  wound  in  the  throat  of  my  dead  friend.
Mrs.  Thompson,  in  reply  to  imj[uiry,  said  that  she  did  not  know
the  smell  of  iodoform.”

Dr.  van  Eeden  notes  also  that  since  the  previous  sitting
two  days  before  Mrs.  Thompson  had  had  a peculiar  cough
quite  unusual  to  her  that  was  like  the  suicide’s  cough.  And
Mr.  klyers  further  noted  that  l\Irs.  Thompson  had  told  him
that  this  huskiness  began  when  she  first  saw  Dr.  van  Eeden
on  his  second  visit  to  England,  and  had  continued  throughout
his  stay,  and  went  off  half  an  hour  after  his  departure  (see
ibid.,  p.  108).

Eor  convenience’  sake  I have  classed  these  two  and  also  subse-
quent instances  of  physical  sensations  persisting  after  trance
under  the  same  head  as  post-trance  memories.  But  this  classi-


176


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


ficatioii  is  perhaps  superficial.  The  physical  sensations  would
appear  to  follow  “ possession  ” by  a soi-disant  discarnate  spirit
who  in  life  had  suffered  from  corresponding  symptoms,  whereas
the  post-trance  memories  either  bear  only  a general  afifinity  to
the  subject  matter  of  the  trance-communications  or,  as  in  one
case,  have  nothing  in  common  with  them.

The  case  where  the  medium  on  waking  felt  as  if  she  were  at
the  top  of  a high  building  seems  to  fall  into  an  intermediate  class
half  way  between  physical  sensibility  and  a purely  subjective
impression  aroused  l)y  memory.

SiUinfi  of  January  '6rd,  1901.

Edward  Horace  Percival,  son  of  iMrs.  Percival,  one  of  the
sitters  on  this  occasion,  purported  to  control  during  some  time.
He  had  died  from  an  attack  of  measles,  and,  as  was  stated  at  a
former  sitting,  his  breathing  had  been  difficult  during  the  illness.
He  controlled  on  two  occasions,  and  each  time  the  medium’s
breathing  during  trance  was  laboured,  and  she  coughed  or
wheezed  a good  deal.  On  January  3rd,  1901,  Mrs.  Thompson
awoke  from  the  trance  groaning  and  muttering,  and  said  : — “ I’m
wide  awake.  I’m  only  mattering.  I could  hear  myself  mutter-
ing. Oh  ! dear.  Pm  asthmatical.”  Shortly  afterwards  she  wrote
a message  while  awake  which  purported  to  come  from  Edward
Horace  Percival.  This  was  one  of  the  only  two  occasions  on
which  I witnessed  any  control  other  than  Nelly  bring  a seance
to  a termination.


Sitting  of  January  lltli,  1901.

In  the  first  part  of  this  sitting  Edward  Horace  Percival  con-
trolled for  a short  time,  and  while  Nelly  was  speaking  messages
were  being  written  automatically  by  IMrs.  Thompson’s  hand  and
in  her  natural  handwriting,  of  which  it  was  evidently  implied
that  he  was  the  author.  There  was  a break  in  the  middle  of  the
sitting  which  had  been  immediately  preceded,  not  lyv  the  Percival
control  but,  by  the  Nelly  control.  During  the  interval  the
sitters,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Percival,  who  had  been  hidden  from  Mrs.
Thompson’s  view  by  a screen,  retired  into  another  room.  Mrs.
'Fhompson,  hearing  some  one  coughing  in  the  next  room,  re-
marked : — “ It’s  some  one  with  a funeral  cough,  isn’t  it  ? ” Then,


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Tlionijjson’s  Trance.


177


after  speaking  of  an  imp)ressioii  which  slie  had  had  the  niglit
before,  she  said  ; — “ T feel  astlmiatical — a sort  of  tightness —
a difticnlty  in  breathing  and  cough  ” ; and  during  the  whole
interval,  which  lasted  eight  minutes,  she  exhibited  in  a slightly
modified  form  the  symptoms  of  Edward  Horace  Percival  when
controlling.

After  the  sitters  had  left,  and  without  any  break  in  the
trance  occurring,  first  a control  which  purj^orted  to  be  Ih’o-
fessor  Sidgwick  appeared  for  the  first  time,  and  then  the  control
whom  I call  Mr.  If.  spoke  and  wrote  for  about  half  an  hour,  and
lirought  the  sitting  to  a close  without  Nelly  reappearing.

When  Mrs.  Thompson  awoke  she  said  : — “ I’m  sure  that  was
Mr.  D.”

I asked  why.  “ Because  I feel  so  different,”  she  replied.  1
then  asked  if  she  remembered  anything,  to  wliich  came  the
answer: — “No.  Oh!  yes,  I do.  1 remember  hearing  Professor

Sidgwick  stuttering,  and  I thought  to  myself  he  might  have
dropped  tlie  stutter  when  he  got  to  heaven.  He  was  dressed  in
just  ordinary  clothes.”

Sitting  of  January  21st,  1901.

The  sitters  were  Mr.  and  ]\Irs.  G.  E.  Eaggett,  and  so  far  as
they  were  concerned  the  se'ance  was  an  entire  failure.  After
they  had  left,  tlie  Sidgwick  control  spoke  for  a short  time  and,
at  the  conclusion  of  a sentence  which  had  been  got  out  witli  a
seemingly  great  effort,  Mrs.  Thompson  awoke  suddenly,  and  in
reply  to  my  question  said  she  had  no  recollections,  but  was
“ happier  now.”  Nelly  reappeared  for  an  instant,  and  then  the
trance  was  finally  over.

Sitting  of  July  IGf/q  1901.

Mr.  and  jMrs.  Percival  attended  this  sittimj.  ]\lrs.  CartwriHit
controlled  throughout,  and  though  the  communications  were
almost  exclusively  concerned  with  the  Percivals’  son  he  did  not
control.

The  first  object  presented  to  the  medium  was  a boy’s  cap,  the
lining  of  which  bore  the  name  of  the  shop  at  which  it  liad  been
purchased,  “ Hookham  & Co.,  Oxford.”  Mrs.  Cartwright  said  : —
“ I am  taken  to  Oxford.”

Almost  immediately  Mrs.  Thompson  awoke  and  said  that  while


178


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


asleep  she  had  seen  herself  writing  “ Oxford.”  She  had  not
really  done  so,  nor,  indeed,  so  far  as  the  rather  scanty  record  of
the  sitting  goes  to  show,  was  any  automatic  script  executed
during  this  seance.

Parenthetically  I would  note  the  artle.ss  way  in  which  Mrs.
Tliompson  on  waking  from  trance  was  stupid  enough  (if  she  will
pardon  me  the  phrase)  to  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  an
object  handed  to  her  contained  a clue  of  which  undoubtedly  the
trance-personality  made  use,  no  matter  whether  consciously  or
unconsciously.  This  is  hardly  the  behaviour  of  an  impostor ;
but  treat  it  as  a genuine  phenomenon,  and  it  at  once  I'alls  into
line  with  other  recognised  phases  of  multiple  personality,  which
not  infrequently  manifests  an  overlapping  of  two  generally  dis-
continuous strata  of  consciousness.

The  cap  was  obviously  a boy’s  cap,  and  obviously  also  a school
cap ; and  Nelly  drew  the  correct  inference  that  the  wearer  of  the
cap  had  been  at  Oxford,  not  as  an  undergraduate,  but  as  a
school  boy.

Put  the  cap  afforded  even  another  and  more  definite  piece  of
information,  namely,  the  name  of  the  wearer,  for  clearly  marked
in  inlv  on  a tape  affixed  to  the  inside,  and  right  in  the  centre  of
the  inside,  and  in  large  bold  letters,  was  the  name,  “ E.  H
Percival.”

This,  too,  Mrs.  Cartwright’  gave  early  in  the  sitting,  though  in
the  form  Edward  Horace  Percival,  a correct  interpretation  of  the
initials.

It  was  not  till  more  than  a year  after  the  sitting  that  it  was
noticed  that  the  cap  bore  these  indications ; but  Mrs.  Thompson
could  not  have  counted  on  such  an  oversight,  or  even  if  she  had,
she  would  hardly  have  run  the  risk  of  drawing  attention  to  the
source  of  lie)’  information  by  a reference  on  waking  to  one  of  the
words  in  tlie  cap.  Although  at  the  sitting  of  -Ivdy  16th,  19  00,
the  Christian  names  Edward  Horace  were  given  in  tlieir  correct
order,  and  in  the  order  indicated  liy  the  inscription  in  the  cap,
and  though  Mrs.  Cartwright  spoke  of  him  by  the  name  Edward,
on  subsequent  occasions  the  names  occur  in  the  automatic  script
in  the  reveised  order,  Horace  Edward,  and  Nelly  speaks  always
of  Horace,  though  Edwai'd  was  the  name  by  which  the  hoy  was
called  at  least  during  the  greater  part  of  his  life  by  his  family
and  friends.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


179


This  failure  to  give  the  names  in  the  proper  order  at  later
sittings  may  liave  been  due  to  a lapse  of  memory  on  the  part
of  the  niedimn,  but  it  is  at  any  rate  worth  noting  that  the  names
were  not  correctly  given  and  then  transposed  by  the  same  trance-
personality,  but  tliat  Mrs.  Cartwright  gives  them  in  the  right
and  Nelly  in  the  wrong  sequence.  The  Percival  control  writes
his  names  in  the  wrong  order.


Sitting  of  January  1st,  1901.

This  sitting  was  a very  poor  one  as  far  as  the  sitter,  Miss
Bates,  was  concerned,  though  in  the  course  of  it  Nelly  described
two  of  her  peregrinations.

Nelly  gave  a long  account  of  an  incident  which  had  occurred
in  Palis,  and  in  which  four  persons,  including  Miss  Bates,  were
mixed  up.  After  the  sitting  Miss  Bates  pointed  out  to  me
that  Mrs.  Thompson  had  probably  learnt  of  the  incident
through  a certain  lady,  Mrs.  S.,  well  known  to  her.  On
waking  Mrs.  Thompson  exclaimed : — “ I’ve  got  a splitting
headache.”  Throughout  the  whole  seance  Nelly  had  been
extremely  cross  and  restless.

Two  days  later,  I having  made  not  the  slightest  allu.sion
to  the  matter,  Mrs.  Thompson,  before  going  into  trance  on
January  3rd,  1901,  asked  me  whether  Nelly  had  repeated
any  gossip  to  Miss  Bates  about  the  four  people  in  question,,
because  directly  she  saw  Miss  Bates  after  the  trance  when  the
screen  was  removed,  she  felt  a conviction  that  Nelly  had  been
talking  about  a matter  which  Mrs.  S.  (the  lady  mentioned  above)
had  related  to  her.  I then,  without  telling  Mrs.  Thompson
what  Nelly  had  said,  asked  her  to  give  me  Mrs.  S.’s  version
of  the  affair  ; which  she  did.  It  corresponded  fairly  closely
with  the  version  given  by  Nelly,  due  allowance  being  made  for
the  natural  difference  between  a child’s  and  a grown-up  woman’s
version  of  a piece  of  rather  silly  grown-up  gossip.

In  short,  as  Miss  Bates  rightly  conjectured,  the  incident
described  by  Nelly  was  perfectly  well  known  to  Mrs.  Thompson.

It  would  be  ludicrous  to  hold  that  repi’oduction  in  the  trance
of  knowledge  consciously  possessed  by  the  medium  is  indicative
of  fraud.  What  primA  facie  is  more  suspicious  is  the  medium’s
knowledge  of  what  had  been  spoken  about  in  the  trance.  But


180


J.  G.  Piddhigton.


[part


Mrs.  Thompson’s  suspicion  that  Nelly  had  been  repeating  a
story  known  to  herself  is  not  an  isolated  phenomenon,  as  we
have  already  seen,  but  can  be  jjaralleled  by  the  instance  just
quoted  where,  when  not  entranced,  she  remembered  seeing  herself
writing  the  word  Oxford  which  diad  been  within  her  visual
range  when  entranced  and  which  Nelly  had  previously  uttered.

Instances  have  been  or  will  be  quoted  (see  pp.  161,  224-5,
272)  where  Mrs.  Thompson  showed  knowledge  of  what  had
taken  place  in  the  trance : though  in  some  of  these  cases  she
claims  to  have  received  her  information  from  Nelly.  Complete
amnesia  then  is  not  a characteristic  of  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trance,
and  in  this  she  differs  from  Mrs.  Piper.

Now  if  Mrs.  Thompson  is  an  impostor,  it  is  fair  to  assume
that  she  wishes  to  imitate,  if  not  to  rival,  the  phenomena
of  Mrs.  Piper.  Why  then  should  she  here  have  failed  to
model  her  performance  on  this  classical  case,  and  to  imitate
this  essential  characteristic  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  ? There
are,  of  course,  many  and  important  resemblances  between  the
two ; l)ut  there  are  also  some  important  differences.  Thus,
while  Dr.  Hodgson  believes  as  the  result  of  his  long,  acute
and  searching  investigation  that  Mrs.  Piper  “ is  entirely  ignorant
■of  what  occurs  during  trance,”  the  same  cannot  be  said  of  Mrs.
Thompson.  Again  “ Phiiiuit  is,  or  pretends  to  be  equally  un-
aware of  the  knowledge  possessed  'oy  Mrs.  Piper,  and  of  the
incidents  which  happen  to  her  in  her  ordinary  life.”  Nelly
neither  is,  nor  pretends  to  be  similarly  ignorant.  But,  it  might
be  argued,  Mrs.  Thompson’s  knowledge  of  what  has  occurred
■I  hiring  trance  is  only  very  rarely  manifested,  and  she  occasionally
drops  the  pretence  of  complete  amnesia  deliberately  in  order  to
•cover  the  cases  in  which  she  lias  done  so  inadvertently.  There
would,  1 admit,  be  cause  for  such  a suspicion  if  it  were  not  that,
unlike  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Thompson  has  on  several  occasions  shown
that  trance  is  not  an  essential  condition  for  the  exercise  of  her
supernormal  faculties.  I shall  give  the  evidence  for  this  state-
ment later  on  (see  pp.  182-196),  and  in  the  meanwhile  I shall
content  myself  with  showing  the  bearing  which  this  fact  has
on  the  point  under  discussion.

If  there  is  good  evidence  to  show  that  Mrs.  Thompson  in
her  normal  state  can  possess  herself  of  knowledge  which  could
not  have  reached  her  in  an  ordinary  way,  then  there  is  nothing


XLVii.]  Fhenome-tia  in  Mrs.  Thompson  s Ti-ance.


181


inconsistent  in  her  claim  to  occasional  acquaintance  with  what
has  passed  daring  the  trance.

It  is  simpler  to  imagine  that  tlie  source  of  this  acquaintance
is  Nelly,  no  matter  whether  Nelly  be  a secondary  consciousness
or  a spirit  ; but  there  are  of  course  less  shadowy  personalities  on
whom  she  might  draw  telepathically,  namely,  the  sitter,  the
recorder  or  any  one  who  has  read  the  record  of  a sitting.

Sitting  of  December  2t)th,  1900.

As  she  was  in  the  act  of  waking  from  trance,  Mrs.
Thompson  grasped  at  some  books  lying  on  a writing-table
by  which  she  was  sitting,  and  said  in  a rather  excited  and
startled  way : — “ I saw  a hand  on  the  top  of  these  books.”

Neither  my  hand  nor  the  hand  of  the  sitter  had  been  on  the

table,  nor  had  anything  occurred  during  the  trance  to  suggest
the  idea  of  a hand.

Sitting  of  January  8th,  1901.

At  intervals  during  this  sitting  Geoffrey  Scott  was  con-
trolling, and  the  medium  was  rather  restless.  The  end  of

the  trance  was  abrupt  and  sudden.  Nelly  was  speaking
and  the  Scott  control  speaking  or  writing  short  unfinished
sentences  in  quick  succession,  and  in  the  middle  of  a written
sentence  the  medium  began  to  wake.  She  was  shuddering
and  muttering,  and,  as  she  was  at  the  point  of  regaining  con-
sciousness, she  said,  “Feef”  (pronouncing  these  three  letters
just  as  Nelly  usually  pronounces  the  first  syllable  of  the

word  “ fearfully  ”).  “ I hate  it — this  treatment  ” (very  em-

phatically). Then  when  quite  awake,  she  added : — I felt
such  a bang.  I thought  some  one  knocked  me.  I seemed
to  be  looking  somewhere,  and  then  some  one  seemed  to  shove
their  elbow  into  me  and  knock  me  away.  ’

I ought,  perhaps,  to  have  treated  this  as  a third  exception
to  the  general  rule  throughout  this  series  of  sittings  that
Nelly  brings  a seance  to  an  end ; but  I hesitated  to  do  so,
because  the  words  “ Feef — I hate  it — this  treatment  ” cannot
be  attributed  to  the  Scott  control,  and  ought,  perhaps,  to  be
ascribed  to  Nelly.  If,  however,  they  were  really  spoken  by
the  barely  conscious  Mrs.  Thompson,  then  the  Scott  control


182


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


was  the  last  to  manifest  before  the  medium  came  to ; and  it
would  then  be  rather  singular  that  these  three  exceptions
occurred  at  successive  sittings,  namely,  at  those  held  on
January  1st,  3rd,  and  8th,  1901.

Beyond  the  fact  that  the  medium  seemed  disturbed  through-
out the  trance,  and  that  Mrs.  Thompson  seemed  a little  agitated
when  she  woke  up,  she  was  not  thrown  from  her  chair,  nor
did  she  sustain  any  physical  injury  as  on  another  occasion
which  1 have  described  elsewhere  (see  pp.  147-8),  when  Nelly
atti’ibuted,  and,  as  I think,  wrongly  attributed,  the  mishap  to
the  unsuccessful  and  unskilful  efforts  of  Geoffrey  Scott  to
control.


(G)  The  Exercise  of  Supernormal  Faculty  by  Mrs.  Thompson

WHEN  NOT  Entranced.

An  instance  of  a veiidical  crystal-vision  obtained  by  Mrs.
Thompson  when  not  in  trance  has  already  l)een  recited  (see
pp.  112-114),  and  I now  proceed  to  give  another  and  in  my
opinion  much  more  remarkable  instance  of  her  accpiisition, —
I do  not  say  when  in  a normal  state,  but,  at  least,  when  not
in  trance, — of  information  which  could  not  have  reached  her
apparently  by  any  recognised  channel.  As  both  these  cases
occurred  when  Mrs.  Thompson  was  alone  at  home,  it  is,
of  course,  impossible  to  express  any  opinion  as  to  her  con-
dition at  the  time  ; but  later  other  similar  cases  will  be
described  which  took  place  in  my  presence,  and  on  these
occasions  Mrs.  Thompson  was  to  all  outward  seeming  wide
awake ; indeed  much  more  so  than  many  other  people  ever
appear  to  be,  even  at  the  best  of  times.

Incident  of  May  24/!/t,  1900,

On  May  24th,  1900,  Mrs.  Thompson  gave  a sitting  at  my
house.  Mr.  Myers  acted  as  recorder  and  I was  not  present,
and  had  not  attended  any  sitting  since  April  19th.  After
the  sitting,  Mrs.  Thompson  came  upstairs  to  the  drawing-room
to  have  tea,  and,  before  tea  was  served,  she  told  me  the  story


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thom'pson  s Trance.  183

which  is  given  below  in  her  own  words,  except  for  a few
alterations  introduced  by  myself  in  order  to  conceal  the
identity  of  a person  mentioned  by  Mrs.  Thompson.


Mrs.  Thovvpson' s Account.

]\Iay  2Uh,  1900.

On  Monday,  May  7th,  1900,  about  7.30  in  the  evening,  I
happened  to  be  sitting  quite  alone  in  the  dining-room,  and
thinking  of  the  possibility  of  my  “ subliminal  ” communicating
with  that  of  another  person — no  one  in  particular.  I was  not
for  one  moment  unconscious.  All  at  once  I felt  some  one
was  standing  near,  and  quickly  opened  my  eyes,  and  was  very
surprised  to  see — clairvoyantly,  of  course — Mr.  J.  G.  Piddington.

1 was  very  keen  to  try  the  experiment  : so  at  once  spoke
to  him  aloud.  He  looked  so  natural  and  life-like  I did  not
feel  in  the  least  alarmed.

I commenced  : —

“ Please  tell  me  of  something  I may  afterwards  verify  to
prove  I am  really  speaking  to  you.”

J.  G.  P.  : — “ I have  had  a beastly  row  with ” [naming

a specified  person].

E.  T.  : — “What  about?”  (No  answer  to  this.)

•/.  G.  P.  : — “ He  says  he  did  not  intend  to  anno}^  me,  but
I said  he  had  been  very  successful  in  doing  so,  whether  he
intended  to  or  not.”

After  saying  this  he  disappeared,  and  I began  to  wonder
if  there  was  any  truth  in  what  I had  heard  from — what
appeared  to  me  to  be — Mr.  Piddington.  I did  not  like  to  write
and  to  ask  him  if  it  was  so.  On  May  24th,  I had  an  oppor-
tunity of  telling  him,  and  was  very  surprised  to  hear  it  was
the  truth.

I also  told  him  I had  guessed  at  the  subject  of  the  “beastly
row.”  My  conjecture  was  quite  accurate.

(Signed)  Rosalie  Thompson.

P.S. — People  often  ask  me  how  I talk  with  Nelly  : just  as
I talked  with  Mr.  Piddington  on  May  7th.  I seem  to  see  and
feel  what  they  are  saying.  The  lips  appear  to  move,  but  they
make  no  audible  sound.  Yet  unless  / speak  aloud  they  do
not  seem  to  understand  me.  I have  tried  Nelly  when  she

N


1<S4  J.  G.  Piddirujton.  [part

appears  to  me  by  asking  mental  questions,  but  slie  does  not
understand  unless  I speak  aloud  and  very  clearly.

R.  T.

Writing  to  Mr.  Myers  on  May  30th,  1900,  I expressed
myself  as  follows  : —

I entirely  endorse  Mrs.  Thompson’s  account.  I made  her
describe  the  incident  in  full  before  saying  whether  the  story
corresponded  in  any  way  with  actual  facts.

One  point  I think  Mrs.  Thompson  has  omitted  from  her
account.  I feel  nearly  certain  that  she  described  herself  as
having  been  aware  that  the  quarrel  was  conducted  by  corres-
pondence, as  was  the  case,  and  not  viva  voce.  The  corres-
pondence took  place  between  April  28th  and  May  1st.  Mrs.
Thompson’s  experience  was  on  May  7th.  ...  I think  it  highly
improbable  that  Mrs.  Thompson  could  have  had  any  knowledge
of  the  “beastly  row”  in  an  ordinary  way,  and  of  the  fact  that
my  correspondent  jirofessed  to  have  had  no  desire  to  annoj^
me,  and  of  my  observation  thereon,  impossible.  I do  not
remember,  and  have  no  means  of  recalling,  what  I was  doing
about  7.30  p.m.  on  May  7th — probably  dressing  for  dinner.

It  was  this  experience  of  Mrs.  Thompson’s  which  compelled
my  belief  in  her  supernormal  powers.  At  the  time  I saw  no
way  of  getting  round  it  and  I see  no  way  now.  But  to  my
great  regret  1 do  not  feel  myself  at  liberty  to  disclose  all
the  circumstances.  The  case  must  accordingly  lose  much  of
its  evidential  value,  and  I therefore  cannot  hope  that  it  will
produce  on  others  the  same  conviction  that  it  has  on  myself.

The  quarrel,  as  has  Ijeen  .already  explained,  was  conducted
entirely  by  correspondence.  My  correspondent  is  a person  whom
i\Irs.  Thompson  has  never  seen.  He  lives  in  the  country,  and
though  he  has,  since  the  date  of  this  incident,  heard  of  Mrs.
Thompson  he  has  never  seen  her,  and  takes  no  interest  in  her
or  her  q)henomena,  and  indeed  is,  I gather,  mildly  hostile  to
pjsychical  research.  From  him  Mrs.  Thompson  most  certainly
did  not  obtain  the  facts.  Could  she  have  got  them  from  me
or  through  her  acquaintance  with  me,  or  by  j^icking  up
information  on  one  of  her  visits  to  my  house  ?

The  facts  connected  with  the  quarrel  were  known  to  only
three  or  four  persons,  of  whom  only  one  except  myself,  namely,
my  wife,  was  or  is  known  to  Mrs.  Thompson.  My  wife  did  not


185


XLVii.]  Phenoraena  in  2Trs.  Thompson’ s Trance.

mention  the  subject  to  i\Irs.  rhoinpson : and  it  is  not  a subject
which  I should  ever  have  thought  of  mentioning  to  her.  The
person  with  whom  I quarrelled  wrote  me  two  letters.  These
two  letters  were  kept  among  a mass  ot  others  in  a room  at
the  top  of  my  house  into  which  Mrs.  Thompson  has  never  been  :
she  has  never  even  been  on  the  floor  on  which  the  room  is.

My  correspondent  s statement  that  he  had  not  intended  to
annoy  me  was  contained  in  a letter  addressed  to  my  wife.  She
read  this  letter  to  me  at  breakfast  one  morning,  and  almost
immediately  afterwards  destroyed  it.  I believe  the  actual  words
that  I said  to  my  wife  when  she  read  the  phrase  from  the  letter
were : — '■  Then  he  succeeded  admirably  without  intending  to.”

It  will  be  remarked  that  Mrs.  Thompson  guessed  at  the
subject  of  the  quarrel  after  the  vision  had  passed,  and  guessed
it  correctly.  Had  Mrs.  Thompson  got  no  further  than  the  fact
and  the  subject  of  the  quarrel,  I should  not  have  thought  so
much  of  it.  Possibly  even  if  she  had  been  very  lucky  she  might
have  guessed  the  sort  of  person  with  whom  I was  at  loggerheads ;
and  though  I should  have  been  surprised,  I should  not  have
been  deeply  impressed.  Put  the  two  other  details— my  corre-
spondent s disclaimer  of  intent  to  annoy  and  my  observation
thereon  I know  she  could  not  have  learned  and  1 do  not
believe  she  could  have  guessed.

I am  only  too  conscious  of  how  this  case  suffers  from  the
reticence  with  which  the  circumstances  compel  me  to  treat  it.
But  even  had  I been  able  without  offending  contra  hoiios  mores  to
publish  the  full  details  without  reserve  or  modification,  I could
not  expect  it  to  create  on  others  the  deep  impression  that  it
did  on  me.  I can  satisfy  myself  and  yet  fail  to  satisfy  others  of
the  inaccessibility  to  Mrs.  Thompson  of  all  normal  sources  from
which  knowledge  of  the  facts  could  have  been  drawn.

But  it  is  not  only  the  veridicality  of  the  vision,  but  also
the  form  of  it  which  deserves  attention.

M ith  eyes  open  and  experiencing  no  conscious  lapse  of  con-
sciousness Mrs.  Thompson  sees  and  cross-examines  a phantasm
of  the  living.  The  phantasm  refuses  to  answer  one  question,
and  after  it  has  vanished  the  percipient  guesses — consciously
guesses  makes  a shot  at — tlie  answer,  and  guesses  right.  Was
this  mere  dramatisation  ? or  do  we  here  get  a hint  of  a com-
bination of  processes  which  may  play  a great  part  in  clairvoyant


186


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


phenomena  ? that  is,  a combined  exercise  of  supernormal  faculty
and  of  normal  inference  either  from  facts  previously  known  or
from  knowledge  just  supernormally  received  ?

It  seems  to  me  now,  and  it  seemed  to  me  at  the  time,  that  it
is  just  possible  that  when  once  Mrs.  Thompson  had  learnt  that
I had  had  “ a beastly  row  ” and  that  that  row  had  been  between
myself  and  a certain  person,  she  might  by  a lucky  shot  have  liit
on  the  subject  of  the  row.

Is  there,  though,  something  more  than  this  ? I fancy  there
may  be.  Something,  namely,  that  contirms  the  correctness  of
the  deduction  normally  arrived  at.  Thus  I imagine  that  though
Mrs.  Thompson  may  have  through  the  exercise  of  her  ordinary
mental  faculties  have  guessed  at  the  subject  of  my  cpiarrel,  some
otlier  faculty  was  called  into  play  to  contirm  the  truth  of  the
inference : and  whatever  that  other  suppositional  faculty  is,  I
conceive  that  it  is  akin  to  telepathy  and  supernormal.

hicidcut  of  October  21st,  1902.

Copy  of  a letter  addressed  Iry  me  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  on
Octolrer  21st,  at  7.15  p.m.,  and  read  l)y  him  on  October  22nd,
1902,  and  endorsed  to  that  elfect : —

I am  making  a note  of  something  that  occurred  this  after-
noon with  Mrs.  Thompson  in  the  form  of  a letter  to  you,
so  that  if  anything  further  happens,  there  will  be  evidence  to
show  what  my  recollections  and  impressions  were  this
evening.

I met  Mrs.  Thompson  by  appointment  at  20  Hanover
Square,  downstairs  in  the  front  hall,  at  5 p.m.  this  afternoon.
I came  down  from  the  S.P.R.  rooms  to  meet  her,  and  found
her,  as  arranged,  awaiting  me  in  the  hall.  At  any  rate  then
she  had  not  had  a chance  of  seeing  any  letters  written  by  or
to  Mr.  Thomas.  (You  will  see  the  bearing  of  this  remark
later  on.)  We  then  went  to  get  some  tea,  and  she  talked
on  various  suljjects.  Just  as  she  was  bidding  me  good-ljye
she  suddenly  said  : —

“What  about  Kiel?”

I said: — “What  do  you  mean?”

“ When  you  were  talking  about  going  abroad  soon  I some
how  got  an  impression  of  Kiel.”

“Well,  anything  else?”


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thoovpson’s  Trance.


187


“ So  then  I began  to  visualize,  and  I got  a picture  of  an
(I  old)  gipsy  woman  with  a (Ired)  shawl  over  her  head  (or
round  her  head).”

“Anything  more  ?”

“No;  but  does  it  mean  anything'?”

“ Yes,  it  has  some  meaning,  but  I am  not  going  to  tell
you  anything  more.  If  you  get  any  further  impressions,  let
me  know.  Anyhow,  write  it  down  as  soon  as  you  get  home,
and  send  it  to  me.  When,  by-the-way,  did  you  first  get  the
impression  1 ”

“ Oh ! when  we  were  talking  of  Polly’s  varicose  veins.”  (I
had  asked  Mrs.  Thompson  to  meet  me  in  order  to  obtain
from  her  some  information  bearing  on  a statement  made  by
Nelly  about  a lady  who  suffered  from  varicose  veins.)

Then  we  parted.

Before  meeting  Mrs.  Thompson  I had  wondered  whether
she  would  have  had  an  impression  of  Mr.  Thomas’s  anxieties,
which  are  connected  with  some  friends  living  at  Kiel,  and,
although  I did  not  actually  say  the  word  “ Kiel  ” to  myself,
Kiel  was  definitely  connected  with  my  passing  fancy.

A friend  of  Mr.  Thomas’s  has  lately  been  consulting  a
fortune-teller  at  Kiel.  I don’t  remember  Mr.  Thomas  describ-
ing the  fortune-teller  as  a gipsy  (though  he  may  have  done  so),
and  I feel  fairly  certain  that  he  never  mentioned  her  wearing
a shawl  over  her  head.

I don’t  know  if  Mrs.  Thompson  knows  of  Mr.  Thomas’s
connection  with  Kiel.  I have  never  been  there,  and  have  no
association  of  any  kind  with  the  place,  though  a few  days
ago  my  wife  and  I were  discussing  its  exact  geographical
position.

Just  before  I met  Mrs.  Thomjjson,  Mr.  Thomas  had  written
the  name  of  a member  of  the  S.P.R.  on  a scrap  of  paper  as  a
memorandum  for  me.  Wishing  to  make  a note  of  something
said  by  Mrs.  Thompson,  I took  this  scrap  of  paper  out  of
my  pocket,  and  wrote  the  note  on  it.  Mrs.  Thompson  then
wished  to  write  some  names  down  for  me,  and  took  the
scrap  of  paper  from  me  in  order  to  do  so.  I stopped  her
from  writing  on  it,  as  it  was  too  small,  and  gave  her
instead  another  piece  of  paper.  She  may  have  seen  and
recognised  Mr.  Thomas’s  handwriting,  which  was,  however,
on  the  underside,  and  not  on  the  side  on  which  I had  been


188  J.  G.  Piddincjton.  [part

wr  iting ; and  if  she  knew  of  Mr.  Thomas’s  connection  with
Kiel,  this  may  have  suggested  the  impression.

But  if  so  why  did  she  connect  iiie  with  Kiel  1 . . .

Mrs.  Tliompsoii,  on  her  return  home,  wrote  me  the  following
letter : —

October  21st,  /02.

Why  did  you  say  this  afternoon  when  I mentioned  about
Kiel,  “ I shall  not  tell  you  anything,  you  must  go  home  and
write  an  account  of  what  you  saw  and  post  it  to  me  ? ”

You  said : •*  I am  probably  going  abroad  shor  tly,  so  have
much  work  on  hand  at  present.”  Immediately  “ Kiel  ” seemed
to  flash  before  me,  and  then  I saw  an  old-looking,  but  middle-
aged,  gipsy  woman  telling  fortunes  with  a plaid  rorrnd  her,  and
I think  this  in  some  waj^  fell  over  her  head.

I have  tried  since  but  can  get  nothing  more,  it  only  seemed

a flash.  I have  never  been  in  Kiel,  and  know  nothing  of

the  place  or  its  people.  I think  I rna}'  sometimes  eat  Kiel
butter  !

The  following  note  was  written  lyy  l\Ir.  X.  Wh  Thomas,  and
is  dated  October  23rd  : —

After  hearing  J.  G.  P.’s  letter  to  l)r.  Lodge  and  Mrs.

Thompson’s  to  J.  G.  P.,  I note  the  following  froints  ;

I was  told  by  Frair  Prof.  B[ ] that  Frau  S.  (the  for-

tune-teller) had  said  she  learnt  her  fortune-telling  from  a (?  old)
gips}^  woman  when  she  was  16.  When  I saw  Frau  S.  she

wore  a red  dress,  but  no  shawl  or  plaid.

Frau  8.  is  about  40,  and  does  not  look  at  all  like  a gipsy.

N.  W.  Thomas.

On  November  5th,  1 902,  Mr.  X.  W.  Thomas  wrote: —

Friiulein  M.  B.  writes  that  she  went  to  Frau  S.  \i.c.  the
foi'tune-teller]  at  the  end  of  last  week,  and  found  her  wrajiped
in  a coloured  shawl  (over  her  head,  too,  I gathei').

On  Octolter  23rd,  1902,  Mr.  X.  AY.  Thomas  informed  me
that  he  felt  sure  that  Mrs.  Thompson  knew  nothing  of  his
connection  with  Kiel.  Airs.  Thompson  knew  that  1 visit
Brussels,  Berlin,  Paris,  and  Berne  occasionally,  but  she  could
have  no  reason  whate^'er  to  suppose  that  I was  going  to  Kiel,
as  1 have  never  been,  and  am  not  likely  to  go  there.


xlvil]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Tkomiyson  s Trance.


Ks9


At  the  time  of  this  incident  I knew  that  Fraulein  B.  was
seeing  a fortune-teller  at  Kiel,  and  that  Mr.  Thomas  was  inter-
ested in  tlie  fortune-telling,  and  was  having  proper  records
kept  of  the  fortune-teller’s  utterances ; hut,  as  stated  in  my
letter  to  Sir  O.  Lodge,  I proljably  knew  nothing  of  her  haying
learnt  her  art  from  a gipsy,  noi'  of  her  wearing  a red  or  any
sort  of  sluiwl  round  her  head.

Picichnt  of  October  IhtJi,  1902.

On  the  afternoon  of  October  l7th,  1902,  Mrs.  Thompson
had  called  at  20  Hanover  Square ; I do  not  now  remember
for  what  purpose.  Just  as  she  was  going  away  she  said
to  me  : —

“ Has  Mrs.  Finch  been  up  in  a balloon  ? Tiie  night  after
the  account  appeared  in  the  morning  papers  of  the  airship
accident  1 woke  up  thinking  that  Mrs.  Finch  was  in  the
balloon.”

l\Irs.  Finch  is  an  Australian  lady  living  in  Paris,  and  is
known  to  klrs.  Thompson  and  myself.  Although  she  is  one
of  the  last  people  in  tlie  world  whom  I should  have  thought
likely  to  make  a balloon  ascent,  I wrote  to  Professor  Charles
Pichet,  who  knows  lier  well,  to  ask  if  there  was  any  meaning
in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  dream.

It  appears  from  M.  Pichet’s  reply  that  klrs.  Finch  did
make  a balloon  ascent  in  July,  1902;  though  she  luckily  was
not  involved  in  the  fatal  accident  to  jM.  Severn’s  airship  as
Mrs.  Thompson  had  dreamt.  Mrs.  Finch’s  participation  in  a
balloon  ascent  in  July,  1902,  was  spoken  of  not  only  in  the
Paris  papers  but  also  in  the  English  papers.  One  French
paper  at  least,  Lc  TemiJs,  gave  her  name  and  nationality,  and
possibly,  even  probably,  the  English  papers  copied  both  items.

i\lrs.  Thompson  may,  of  course,  have  seen  a mention  of  a
balloon  ascent  in  which  an  Australian  lady  took  part  at  Paris,
or  she  may  have  actually  seen  it  stated  that  Mrs.  Finch
made  an  ascent,  but,  if  so,  she  had  no  recollection  on
October  l7th,  1902,  of  having  done  so.  An  incident  of  this
kind  can  never  be  evidential,  as  it  is  impossil)le  to  exclude
the  chance  of  Mrs.  Thompson  having  at  some  time  acquired
the  facts  in  a normal  way.  But  convinced  as  I am  that
IMrs.  Thompson  has  far  too  clear  a grasp  of  what  constitutes


190


./.  G.  Piddington.


[part


good  evidence  to  waste  her  time  over  concocting  lialting  little
stories  of  this  kind,  I cannot  regard  this  dream  impression  as
other  than  a perfectly  genuine  experience,  though  inconclusive
of  supernormal  faculty.  Treating  it  then  as  genuine,  I suppose
that  the  orthodox  view  of  it  would  he  something  of  this
kind  : —

i\Irs.  Thompson  had  read  in  the  English  or  French  news-
papers in  July,  1902,  of  Mrs.  Finch’s  exploit.  (If  Mrs.
Finch’s  name  was  not  given  in  any  paper  seen  by  Mrs.
Thompson,  then  it  can  l)e  supposed  that  l\Irs.  Thompson  read
an  account  in  which  j\Irs.  Finch  was  merely  descril)ed  as  “ an
Australian  lady  ” ; and  that  probalJy,  not  knowing  of  more
than  one  Australian  lady  living  in  Paris,  she  subconsciously
connected  the  balloonist  with  Mrs.  Finch.)  Three  months
later,  wlien  all  conscious  recollection  of  l\Irs.  Finch’s  balloon
ascent  has  faded  completely  away,  she  reads  of  the  Severo
airship  accident.  This  suggests  the  dream,  and  in  the  dream-
state  the  sulmierged  memory  of  j\Irs.  Finch’s  balloon  ascent
is  revived,  and  a characteristically  confused  dream  results.
Some  such  explanation  as  tliat  is  the  “ correct  ” one,  I
should  say ; it  is  the  line  I should  advise  a candidate  for  our
Piesearch  Scholarship  to  take  if  he  were  asked  for  his  comments
on  this  incident.  But  I am  by  no  means  sure  that  it  is  the
tiue  explanation.

I reject  any  explanation  which  supposes  fraud  on  Mrs.  Thomp-
son’s part,  not  only  on  general  grounds  but  also  for  reasons  which
lesult  from  an  examination  of  what  fraud  woidd  involve  in  this
instance.  Fraud  would  mean  that  Mrs.  Tlioni})son  knew  of  J\Irs.
Finch’s  lialloon  excursion : had  the  self-restraint  to  hold  this
piece  of  knowledge  in  reserve  and  to  wait  until  another
event  of  aeronautic  interest  occurred  in  order  to  liash
up  the  two  together  in  a form  which  might  perhaps
appeal  liy  its  subtlety  to  the  jaded  appetite  of  some  psychical
researcher.

I cannot  believe  that  so  intricate  a game  could  lie  thought
by  any  medium  to  lie  worth  the  candle.  But  that  consideration
apart,  no  one  would  have  been  better  aware  than  Mrs.
’riiompson  that  the  S.P.K.  could  lie  relied  on  to  enquire  if
any  knowledge  displayed  by  a medium  could  have  lieen
normally  acquired,  that  in  this  case  the  simplest  enquiry


XLVii.J  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


191


would  have  disclosed  a possible  source  of  lier  knowledge,  and
that,  this  possiljle  source  once  learnt,  her  pretended  dream-
impression  would  he  bereft  of  all  evidential  value.  Against
any  possible  value,  too,  that  she  might  hope  to  see  attached
by  a few  observers  to  this  incident  she  must  have  recognised
that  there  would  have  to  be  set  the  suspicion  of  others  of
her  having  concocted  the  whole  thing.

I reject,  then,  any  explanation  which  involves  fraud ; and
while  I do  not  reject  what  I have  called  the  orthodox  inter-
pretation, though  it  involves  several  suppositions,  which,  if
not  unlikely  taken  separately,  are  at  least  not  highly  probable
wlien  taken  cumulatively,  I am  more  inclined  to  adopt  the
following  hypothesis : — namely,  that  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Finch’s
balloon  ascent  had  Ireen  acquired  supernormally  by  Mrs.
Thompson  either  at  or  near  the  time  when  it  took  place,
or  at  any  rate  previously  to  her  dream,  and  had  lain  dormant
in  her  subconsciousness  until  awakened  by  a natural  association
of  ideas  set  in  motion  on  her  reading  about  the  accident  to
the  airship,  and  not  even  then  emerging  into  her  full  conscious-
ness, but  emerging  only  in  a hypnopornpic  dream,  and  then
again  only  with  the  confusion  typical  of  dreams.

I have  perhaps  treated  what  at  first  sight  may  have  the
appearance  of  a very  trifling  matter  at  undue  length ; but
in  the  case  of  mediums  for  the  genuineness  of  whose  phenomena
tliere  is  good  evidence,  I think  there  is  justification  for  ex-
amining closely  some  of  their  less  full-blown  manifestations,
their  casual  by-products  as  it  were,  on  the  chance  that  we
may  therefrom  gather  some  hint  of  the  obscure  laws  at  work
more  readily  than  from  the  more  w'ell-defined  phenomena.
And  if  I have  rightly  traced  the  mental  processes  which
engendered  Mrs.  Thompson’s  dream  we  have  here  in  simple
form  a case  analogous  to  some  of  the  more  complex  phenomena
of  her  trance.

Thus  here  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Finch’s  Ijalloon  adventure
reaches  Mrs.  Thompson’s  subliminal,  but  does  not  filter  into
her  supraliminal  until  after  she  has  read  about  the  air-ship
accident.  This  awakening  in  the  supraliminal  consciousness
of  so  closely  allied  a train  of  thought  appears  to  have  given
the  subliminal  a chance  to  transmit  its  knowledge  to  the
supraliminal  stratum,  not,  however,  immediately,  Imt  on  the


192


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


first  favourable  opportiinit)",  namely,  the  moment  between
sleeping  and  waking.'  Exhausted  with  its  effort,  let  us  sup-
pose, or  unintiuenced  by  the  suggestion  of  the  s&ince  room,
the  suldiniinal  is  content  to  con^'ey  its  message  in  an  un-
adorned form ; Mrs.  Thompson  merely  thinks  that  Mrs.  Finch
was  in  the  l)alloon.

In  what  I term  Nelly’s  “peregrinations,”  to  be  dealt  with
in  the  next  section,  there  is  the  same  apparently  supernormal
acc{uisition  of  knowledge  about  friends  or  acquaintances  at  a
distance,  the  same  impenetralulity  of  the  supraliminal.  Only
in  these  cases  no  favourable  opportunity  occurs  for  the  sub-
liminal to  communicate  its  knowledge  to  the  supraliminal.
The  subliminal,  however,  gets  its  chance  to  impart  its  news
during  the  trance,  and  conveys  it,  not  as  a simple  thought,
impressed  on  the  lu’ain  at  the  moment  of  waking,  but  with
appropiiate  dramatic  detail.

The  case  where  Mrs.  Thompson  when  not  in  trance  seemed
to  herself  to  Ije  holding  converse  with  my  “ astral  form  ” I
should  regard  as  intermediate  between  the  dream  about  Mrs.
Finch  and  the  “ peregrinations  ” of  Nelly.  For  in  it  we

seem  to  see  the  two  divisions  of  the  consciousness  in  syn-
chronous and  no  longer  dispai'ate  activity ; the  supraliminal
not  in  aljeyance  as  in  trance,  but  aide  to  retain  a clear
memory  of  the  sul  )liminars  proceedings ; the  subliminal  in

full  tehesthetic  ^dgour,  capable  of  a partial  dramatisation,  and
yet  unable  to  impose  on  the  alert  and  sceptical  supraliminal
the  conqilete  stage-luisiness  of  the  spiritistic  seance.

Incident  of  ■Taiumry  14//;.,  lOOib

]\Irs.  Thompson  called  at  the  Eooms  of  the  Society  on  the
afternoon  of  Wednesda.y,  January  14th,  1903,  just  as  some
thought-transference  experiments  were  being  Ijrought  to  a
close.  1 asked  her  to  try  two  experiments  with  the  subjects
with  whom  we  had  just  been  working,  and  under  the  same

conditions : namely,  pei'cipient  in  one  room  and  agent  in

another.  She  consented,  and  twr>  experiments  were  made,
Mrs.  Thompson  Ijeing  agent  in  one  and  percipient  in  the
other.  Neither  was  successful.

’\^^e  chatted  for  a moment  or  so  after  this  : other  people
joining  in  tlie  conversation.  As  slie  was  pre}»aring  to  go.


xlvil]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson' s Trance.


193


and  almost  in  the  act  of  saying  good-bye,  and  as  she  was  in
the  act  of  lea^diig  the  room,  she  tnrned  to  me  laughing  and
pointing  to  my  o^^ercoat  which  was  lying  oA’er  the  Ijack  of  a
chair  in  the  neighliourhood  of  the  door,  said ; — “ I’m  going  to
psychometrize  your  coat.  There  was  some  trouble  about  paying
for  it : some  bad  notes.”

Wliile  speaking  these  words,  in  spite  of  her  having  used
the  term  “ psychometrize,”  she  neither  touched  the  coat  nor
did  she  move  nearer  to  it.  She  was  thoroughly  wide  awake,
not  in  the  least  dreamy  or  trancitied,  but  there  was  a
symptom  which  I did  not  remark  on  the  other  occasions  on
which  when  not  in  trance  she  described  clairvoyant  impressions
and  which  I think  I may  safely  say  was  not  then  displayed.
As  she  spoke  the  few  words  quoted  above,  a tinge — a smack —
a dash — I don’t  exactly  know  what  to  call  it — of  the  Xell}‘
manner  came  over  her ; there  was  the  curious  unmistakable
and  characteristic  pulling  down  of  one  side  of  the  face,  which
always  accompanies  the  Nelly  impersonation,  and  the  half
lisp,  half  simper  which  is  the  distinguishing  mark  of  Nelly’s
utterance.  The  modification  of  the  voice  and  manner  was
momentary,  but,  though  I doubt  if  a stranger  would  ha^■e
remarked  it,  quite  unmistakalile  to  any  one  familiar  with
l\Irs.  Thompson’s  trance-state.

As  to  the  statement  about  my  great-coat,  the  coincidence
between  it  and  the  real  facts  is  not  exact,  but  too  close  to
attribute  with  conlidence  to  chance.

I had  purchased  the  coat  ready-made  at  a shop  where  1
had  not  dealt  before  and  was  consequently  unknown.  As  I
was  starting  on  a journey  the  next  day,  I wanted  it  to  fie
delivered  the  same  evening.  I offered  in  payment  a cheque,
which  I made  out  in  the  shop.  The  sum  named  in  the

cheque  contained  a numeral  of  two  syllables,  and  this  numeial
I failed  to  spell  correctly.  Feeling  doubtful  of  my  orthography
I applied  to  the  shopman  for  information,  which  he  gave  me
with  a condescending  though  pitying  smile.  But  my  failure
to  spell  a very  simple  word  had  evidently  aroused  his  sus-
picions, and  a consultation  with  the  shop-manager  ensued,

which  resulted  in  my  Ijeing  told  with  many  polite  expressions
of  regret  tliat  it  would  lie  impossible  to  let  me  have  the

coat  the  same  night.  I insisted  that  T must  have  it  the


194


./.  G.  Piddinfjton.


[part


same  night,  whereupon  another  and  longer  consultation  with
the  manager  took  place,  and  I was  eventually  infonned  that
they  much  regretted,  etc.,  etc.,  but  the  coat  could  not  be
delivered  to  me  till  the  following  day,  which  meant,  of
course,  until  there  had  been  time  to  see  if  my  checpie  was
good.  I then  said  that  I quite  understood  their  hesitation
and  the  cause  of  it,  gave  a reference  and  got  my  coat  the
same  evening.

I was  rather  amused  by  the  incident  and  told  my  wife
ad)Out  it  when  I got  home,  and  if  I told  any  one  else,  it  was
not  at  any  rate  any  one  from  whom  Mrs.  Thompson  is  likely
to  have  heard  of  it.  And  indeed  it  seems  clear  that  Mrs.
Thompson  had  not  been  told  of  this  very  trivial  episode,  for
in  so  far  as  it  had  any  interest,  the  interest  depended  on
the  details,  and  if  Mrs.  Thompson  had  heard  the  story  at
all  and  reprotluced  it,  the  reproduction  woidd  have  shown
traces  of  the  original  narrative,  whereas  the  statement  made
by  Mrs.  Thompson  on  January  14th,  190.3,  is  not  only  not
in  exact  correspondence  with  the  facts,  l)ut  is  as  l)ald  as  it
well  could  be.

i\lrs.  Thompson  spoke  of  “ bad  luAes,”  meaning  presumably
Itad  bank  notes,  whereas  I paid  by  cheque.  Without  insisting
on  the  ])oint,  which  is  a very  small  one,  1 think  it  just
worth  remarking  that  the  mention  of  notes  instead  of  a
cheque  or  cash  goes  in  favour  of  Mrs.  Thompson  having
gleaned  her  information  supernoiinally.  Bad  bank  notes  are
excessively  rare  in  England,  and  accordingly  the  chances  of  a
casual  reference  to  bad  bank  notes  having  l)een  offered  in
payment  proving  relevant  must  lie  very  remote.  If  a shot
was  going  to  l^e  made  at  all,  the  trouble  would  be  more
reasonably  assigned  to  a l)ad  cheipie,  which  is  not  an  un-
common thing.

O


Incident  of  March  1st,  1900.

Professor  C.  Moutonnier,  formerly  Professor  at  the  Ecole
dcs  haufes  Etudes  Commcrcicdcs  d Paris,  sent  to  Mr.  Myers  the
following  account  of  how  he  made  the  ac([uaintance  of  Mrs.
Thompson,  and  als(.)  a record  of  a sitting  which  he  had  with
her.  It  will  be  seen  tha.t  l’r(J'essor  Moutonnier  is  under  the
impression  tliat  i\Irs.  Thompson  ilid  not  lose  consciousness  when


XLVir.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


105


on  March  loth,  1900,  she  met  him  for  the  second  time  in
the  gardens  at  Monte  Carlo.  Hut  1 think  tliere  can  be  little
doubt  that  slie  was  really  in  trance,  and  if  she  was,  it  only
shows  how  ^'e^■y  slightly  marked  are  the  external  differences
between  her  normal  aiid  her  trance  state.

The  record  of  this  romantic  open-air  sconce  ought  strictly
not  to  come  under  the  head  of  the  “ Exercise  of  supernormal
faculty  when  not  in  trance,  ’ but  I include  it  here  Iwtli  for
its  intrinsic  interest,  and  for  convenience  of  reference,  so  as
not  to  separate  the  introductory  episode  from  its  interesting
sequel.

With  regard  to  lier  first  meeting  with  Trofessor  IMoutonnier,
Mrs.  Thompson  writes ; — ■“  I shall  never  forget  the  strange
impulse  which  made  me  attach  the  old  folks  sitting  on  the
seat  with  their  little  dog.”

Hyeres  (Var)  Villa  “Val  Fleuri,”  March  31s/,  1900.
Dear  Sir,

1 am  most  happy  to  comply  with  your  request,  and  to  give  you
a detailed  and  true  account  of  my  meeting  with  Mrs.  Thompson,
and  the  phenomenon  I obtained  through  her  mediumship.  It  wurs,
indeed,  the  most  remarkable  case  I ever  wdtnessed,  and  I hope  it
may  bring  some  new  light  to  your  investigations.

How  I became  arquaifidecl  ivith  Mrs.  Thomqmn.

On  February  the  10th,  I received  from  Prof.  C.  Eichet  an  in^■i-
tation  to  attend  some  psycliical  experiments  which  were  to  take  place
at  his  chateau  at  Carqueiranne,  together  with  Professors  Myers  and
James.  The  names  of  the  mediums  he  did  not  mention  to  me.

Such  a great  treat  I considered  most  highly,  and  anticipated  the
benefit  I would  be  able  to  derive  from  the  researches  of  three
well-known  scientists.  But,  unfortunately,  a second  letter  ansrvering
mine  came  a few  days  after,  informing  me  that  the  Professor  wms
prevented  from  coming  to  Carqueiranne,  and  I had  to  give  up  the
hope  I had  been  indulging  in  so  much.

I was  then  on  a visit  at  my  daughter’s  at  Monte  Carlo,  with  my
family,  c[uite  unaware  of  Mrs.  Thompson  being  at  the  same  jilace,
as  I did  not  know  her,  either  by  name  or  sight.

On  the  1st  of  March,  betwmen  10  and  11  A.M.,  I was  sitting  on
a bench  with  my  wife,  in  one  of  the  most  retired  spots  of  the  gardens
facing  the  Casino,  where  they  keep  the  chamois,  and  few  people  go


106


J.  G.  Pulclinyton.


[part


by.  While  we  were  chatting  together  ami  commenting  the  events
of  the  day,  I saw  coming  up  to  us  three  persons,  a gentleman  ac-
companied by  a lady  and  a little  girl,  eleven  years  old.  The  lady
addressed  us  in  English  (without  knowing  our  nationality)  as  old
friends,  and  in  such  a familiar  way  as  only  those  already  acquainted
with  the  subject  could  take  any  interest  in  her  conversation.  She
told  us,  ex  ah'upto,  and  without  being  questioned,  that  she  came
from  a chateau  at  Carqueiranne  belonging  to  Professor  Eichet,  where
she  had  been  staying  for  some  time  with  the  Professors  Myers  and
James,  and  where  Professor  Richet  was  to  meet  them  for  some
psychical  research,  but  was  afterwards  prevented  from  attending.

On  my  asking  her  whether  she  would  consider  the  fact  as  a mere
chance,  or  attribute  it  to  some  unknown  cause,  she  answered  that
she  had  been  guided  to  me  by  her  little  spirit-girl,  notwithstanding
that  her  husband  insisted  going  by  another  alley ; and  that,  as  soon
as  she  perceived  us,  she  saw  written  before  her  eyes  the  word
“ Cai'queiranne,”  which  gave  birth  to  the  whole  story  I just  related.

Great  was  her  surprise  when  I told  her  we  wmre  intimate  friends
of  Professor  Pichet,  and  greater  still  my  joy  on  learning  that  she
was  one  of  the  two  mediums  I was  to  meet  at  Carqueiranne.  We
took  leave  of  Mrs.  Thompson  and  her  family  after  having  made  an
appointment  for  a regular  seance.

A Seance  ivith  Mrs.  Thompson.

(Jur  next  meeting  took  place  on  the  13th  of  March,  at  the  same
spot  and  the  same  hour,  11  a.m.,  by  a Imautiful  sunny  day,  and  in
the  most  romantic  resort  one  could  dream  of.

Were  present:  Mrs.  Thompson  (the  medium),  and  her  husband,  my
wife  and  self,  and  my  grand-daughter,  Violet  Fenton,  aged  seventeen.

After  about  a (juarter  of  an  hour  chatting  on  different  topics,  Mrs.
Thompson — without  ^ losing  consciousness — was  all  of  a sudden  taken
hold  of  by  her  spirit-girl,  who  spoke  through  her  in  the  following
manner  and  terms,  written  down  word  by  word  as  uttered  from  the
lips  of  the  medium  : —

1.  "‘The  lady  who  is  standing  back  of  you  says  that  you  have
a ring  of  hers,  and  you  should  give  it  to  me.

2.  “ She  mentions  that  Loruj  Henry  wants  to  send  a message
to  the  one  who  was  a little  girl.

^ [In  the  original  Airs.  Thompson  had  here  inserted  and  initialled  the  word
“apparently.” — J.  G.  P.]


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


197


3.  “ The  lachj  had  white  hands,  long  fingers,  and  finger-nails
like  nut-shells.

4.  “ You  have  something  that  belongs  to  Harry  in  your
pocket.

5.  “ Long  Henry  was  very  w’eak,  and  suffered  from  the  stomach,
which  caused  him  to  stoop  a little.

6.  “ It  seems  to  me  that  he  died  in  a foreign  country ; you
remember  when  you  last  saw  him,  he  wore  a kind  of  a black
coat  and  a black  tie.

7.  “ The  lady  died  and  she  left  a little  girl,  and  she  is  going
to  have  the  ring,  but  in  a long  time  to  come.

8.  “ There  is  some  one  related  to  Long  ILenry,  and  he  asks  if
you  are  still  teaching,  as  you  could  not  very  well  take  care  of
the  babe  and  do  two  things  together.

9.  “ When  the  lady  died  she  left  a little  carved  box,  you
know,  to  put  trinkets  into  it  ■,  you  don’t  know  but  the  painting
lady  knows  all  about  it.

10.  ‘■‘Harry  says  that  you  have  a stud  that  belongs  to  him.
It  is  not  to  make  you  feel  bad ; but  he  is  very  funny,  you  know  :
he  is  rather  reserved,  dignified,  and  w^ants  to  be  somebody.

11.  “He  w'as  very  fond  of  stretching  out  his  legs,  -when  he
was  seated ; he  liked  also  sticks  and  had  some  very  funny  ones.

12.  “He  is  very  pleased  that  you  rvear  his  stud,  and  tells
you  not  to  feel  bad  about  it.

13.  “It  seems  to  me  that  he  died  very  unfortunately,  when
his  prospects  were  at  the  highest.  It  was  as  if  it  were  a pre-
mature death.

14.  “He  knew  you  to  be  very  kind,  but  never  thought  you
would  have  done  so  much  for  his  babe,  as  it  was  a very  weak
and  miserable  one.

15.  “ What  made  his  hands  shake  so  much  before  he  died  ?

16.  “He  thinks  it  is  very  romantic  for  his  spirit  to  come  in
such  a beautiful  place.

17.  “You  have  some  hair  in  your  pocket;  I wish  you  gave  it
to  me.

18.  “There  is  a Marie  connected  with  it.  Tlie  hair  was  first
browm  and  then  chestnut  color.

19.  “The  lady  died;  she  was  quite  well  and  was  not  to  die.
I cannot  understand  why  she  died.

20.  “It  seems  to  me  that  ‘the  stud’  and  ‘the  hair’’  have
some  relation  between  the  death  of  both.


198


J.  G.  Fiddington.  [part

21.  “There  is  also  a George  connected  with  it.  He  is  in  a
foreign  country  and  alive.

22.  “Now  I see  water  all  around  and  some  one  is  drowning.

23.  “It  seems  as  if  Ghe  hair’  had  been  in  the  hands  of
another  medium ; there  is  an  influence  of  a stout  lady.

24.  “ Harry  used  to  have  a seal  on  the  chain  of  his  watch.

25.  ''Harry  sa}'s  that  the  chestnut  hair  was  that  of  his  darling
wife.”

Here  ended  the  influence  and  with  it  this  interesting  phenomenon.

Explanatory  Notes.

For  the  sake  of  a better  and  clearei'  understanding  of  the  above
message,  I have  annotated  the  different  sentences.

1.  The  ring  mentioned  here  was  my  daughter’s,  and  I am
wearing  it  ever  since  her  death  on  the  little  finger  of  my  left
hand.

(I  took  it  off  and  handed  it  to  the  medium.)

2.  Long  Heirry  was  an  intimate  friend  of  ours,  a Dutchman  by
birth,  but  living  in  Paris.  He  was  very  tall  and  liked  my
grand-daughrer — then  a little  child — very  much.

3.  My  daughter’s  hands  were  of  a beautiful  shape,  white,  long
and  tapering.

4.  I had  in  the  left  inside  pocket  of  my  coat  a little  picture
of  Harry — my  son-in-law — (my  daughter’s  husband).  I handed
it  to  her ; she  put  it  on  her  forehead,  but  said  she  eould  not
get  anything  from  it.

5.  Harry  was  Mr.  Fenton’s  Christian  name.  Henry’s  health
had  always  been  very  poor,  and  his  tallness  caused  him  to  stoop
a little.  He  was  taken  veiy  ill,  two  years  ago,  and  resorted  to
his  native  country,  Holland,  where  he  died  amidst  his  relatives.

6.  When  we  last  saw  him  in  Paris — at  luncheon — he  wore  a
black  cut-away  coat  and  a black  necktie.

7.  Both  my  daughter  and  her  husband  died  leaving  a girl —
then  six  years  old,  their  only  child.

8.  The  person  alluded  to  by  Long  Henry  is  myself.  I was  then
a professor  at  the  Ecole  des  hautes  Ftudes  commerciales  at  Paris.

9.  After  my  daughter’s  death  we  found  many  little  boxes,  where
she  kept  her  jewels.  I,  of  course,  was  ignorant  of  the  fact,  but
my  other  daughter,  her  sister  (mentioned  by  the  medium  as  being
the  painting  lady,  and  who  is  in  reality  an  artist  painter)  very
likely  knew  all  about  it.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


199


10.  On  the  very  day  of  the  seance  I had  on  my  shirt,  hidden
under  my  neck-tie,  and  invisible  to  any  one,  a diamond  stud.
belonging  to  my  son-in-law.  I must  say  that  I was  quite  un-
aware having  it  on  that  day.  Harnj  was  rather  a dignified  and
veiy  ambitious  man.

11.  Like  all  Americans  when  at  leisure,  he  used  to  take  an
easy  position.  He  was  very  fond  of  sticks  and  had  kept  one
of  the  funniest  you  can  imagine  in  a trunk  in  Paris  that  belonged
to  him.

12.  He  died  from  a neglected  cold  that  settled  in  his  lungs
after  an  illness  of  eighteen  months.

13.  Pie  was  only  41  years  old  when  he  died,  and  he  had
indeed  a great  future  before  him  ; Ijeing  very  intelligent,  active
and  ambitious.

14.  He  died  first  and  his  little  girl,  my  grand-daughter,  was
then  veiy  delicate  and  weak.

15.  I could  not  answer  this  question,  as  no  one  but  his  wife
was  at  his  bedside,  when  he  lireathed  his  last.

16.  This  place  had  been  selected  by  the  medium.

17.  I had  in  the  left  inside  pocket  of  my  coat  wrapped  in
paper  and  in  an  envelope  a lock  of  my  daughter's  hair  and  a few
words  written  on  a note  signed  by  the  name  of  Marie"  (her
Christian  name).  1 handed  the  envelope  containing  the  hair
to  the  medium,  who  put  it  on  her  forehead,  holding  it  for  some
time.

18.  My  daughter's  hair  was  of  a chestnut  color.

19.  My  daughter  Marie  caught  the  influenza  from  her  sister
and  was  taken  away  in  the  course  of  five  days  by  the  dreadful
plague,  February,  ’92,  in  the  prime  of  her  life,  at  the  age  of  29.
It  was  her  death  that  caused  me  to  become  a spiritualist.

20.  The  stud  was  Harry's  and  the  hair  Maries,  as  said  before.

21.  The  person  mentioned  by  the  name  of  George  is  the  Chris-
tian name  of  my  other  son-in  law,  Mr.  Healy  (the  husband  of
the  painting  lady)  who  lives  at  Chicago  and  is  still  there.

22.  I do  not  know  how  to  account  for  this.

23.  Never  did  my  daughter's  hair  go  out  of  my  possession.

24.  Harry  may  have  had  a seal,  as  he  was  very  fond  of  wearing
little  trinkets ; but  I do  not  remember  having  seen  any,  nor  did
I find  any  after  his  death.

25.  The  hair,  as  said  before,  was  1113^  daughter’s.

As  will  be  seen  from  the  above  message  and  the  explanatory  notes,

u


•200


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


it  is  obvious  that  an  outside  influence  was  at  work  to  give  to  the
medium  all  these  minute  and  private  details  on  family  matters  only
known  to  us  and  some  of  which  none  of  us  three  were  thinking  of
at  the  moment  of  the  sitting.  Who  then  prompted  her  [to  give]
the  names  of  m}^  children — Harry,  George  (who  is  in  Chicago),  Marie,
and  most  wonderfully  ‘Mong  Henry” — and  all  the  particulars  con-
nected with  their  private  life  ? Psychonietry,  clairvoyance,  mind-reading,
tele]3athy  say  the  men  of  science ; but  I would  rather  call  it  spirit
mduenec,  a tie  of  union  between  all  the  worlds  of  the  universe.

This  is  a true  and  genuine  account  of  the  phenomena  obtained
through  the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  K.  Thompson.

I hereby  certify  that  neither  I nor  my  wife,  nor  my  grand-daughter
had  ever  seen  or  heard  the  name  of  Mrs.  Thompson,  nor  did  any
of  us  ever  suspect  her  existence.  We  were  perfect  strangers  one
to  the  other,  till  the  day  we  first  met  her,  on  the  1st  of  March — and
since  nothing  in  our  conversation  could  have  given  her  the  least
hint  to  enable  her  to  discover  anything  connected  with  my  family.

Before  closing  this  long  letter,  I must  say  that  Long  Henry  was
conversant  with  the  modern  tongues,  and  understood  and  s[)oke
English  as  well  as  any  of  us.  Moreover,  I state  that  the  message
was  given  in  a child-like  way,  and  with  the  genuine  accent  and  pro-
nunciation of  a child.

Any  other  information  you  may  need  on  this  subject  I will  be
glad  to  give  you.

With  kindest  regards,  believe  me,  Dear  Sir,  yours  truly,

C.  Moutonnier,  Prof.


(7)  The  Teregkikation.s  of  Nelly.

Mrs.  Thompson’s  trance  exhibits  a good  many  instances  of  a
very  distinctive  phenomenon,  akin  to  what  is  called  “ clair-
voyance d distance,”  or  “ travelling  clairvoyance.”  But  I shall
not  employ  the  term  “ clairvoyance  d distance,”  because  it  begs
both  the  distance  and  the  clairvoyance,  and  has  acc[uired  a
technical  meaning,  and  also  because  clairvoyance  is  frequently
used  in  two  or  three  different  senses.

1 prefer  then  to  class  these  phenomena  under  a non-
technical heatling,  and  call  them  simply  “ the  peregrinations  of
Nelly.”  It  may  l)e  objected  that  this  title  assumes  that  Nelly


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


201


peregrinates.  I,  however,  do  not  mean  to  assume  that,  Imt
merely  wish,  for  convenience’  sake,  to  label  certain  recurrent
phases  of  ]\lrs.  Thompson’s  psychical  manifestations  hy  a term
descriptive  of  their  superficial  aspect.

Although  l»y  using  tins  term  I do  not  commit  myself  to  any
particular  interpretation  of  the  facts,  I have  no  hesitation  in
.asserting  my  lielief  that  these  peregrinations  do  really  repre-
sent to  the  trance-personality  a method  of  obtaining  information
quite  distinct  from  tlie  other  processes  wliicli  Nelly  calls
“ talking  to  spirits,”  “ seeing  pictures,”  or  “ getting  things  out
of  Mother’s  stomach.”

These  other  processes  are  in  operation  during  the  trance  : but
the  peregrinations  are  represented  as  having  taken  place  pre-
vious to  the  trance,  the  knowledge  resulting  from  them  being
held  over  for  dischjsure  at  a subsequent  sitting.

Some  of  these  voyages  of  discovery  ha^'e  been  already
recorded  in  Proceedings,  Part  XLIV,  pp.  112-115,  and  are  all
connected  with  Dr.  van  Eeden.  One  wdiich  should  have  been
included  in  this  series  was  omitted  by  mistake,  and  I will
begin  with  it.

It  occurred  at  the  sitting  of  December  20th,  1900,  and  was
preceded  by  a description  of  a joint  visit  of  Nelly  and  Elsie  (a
■spirit  friend  of  Nelly’s)  to  i\Irs.  Piper,  which  is  recorded  below,
and  also  by  a true  description  of  an  incident  relating  to  my
little  girl,  wdiich  Nelly  may  have  learnt  aliout  during  a pere-
grination to  my  house,  but  wdiich  I have  not  included  in  this
series,  because  she  did  not  actually  say  that  she  had  tlius
acquired  the  information.  Mrs.  Penson  was  the  sitter,  and
•there  w^as  nothing  to  suggest  Dr.  van  Eeden.

jS  elly : — “ I went  to  see  Brother  Boer : that’s  what  Mother
calls  him  : ‘ Whiskers.’  This  was  truthfully  me,  not  Elsie,  on
Tuesday  the  18th  instant.  {Sic,  and  spoken  as  if  repeating
a lesson.)  There’s  somebody  very  ill  in  his  house — in  his
■colonisation — very  ill.”

J.  G.  P.  : — “What  illness  1”

PeUfi: — “It’s  something  that  draws  them  up  very  much.”

J.  G.  P.  : — “Man  or  woman'?”

Xellif : — “Woman.  I don’t  mean  Sam’s  mother.  She’s  very

ill.  Sam  that  was  at  Paris.  Sam  High  Street  (then  followed
attempts  at  the  name  ‘ van  Hoogstraten  ’)  not  i’s  in  it ; all  o’s


202


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


and  d’s.  It’s  no  test  to  spell  the  iiaTiie ; because  everybody
knows  it.  Sam’s  mother’s  ver}^  ill ; but  that’s  not  the  person
that’s  drawn  up.”

1 sent  a transcript  (jf  this  to  Dr.  van  Eeden.  I can  give
only  the  substance  of  his  reply,  as  unfortunately  1 have  lost  or
mislaid  the  original.  Luckily  the  main  point  does  not  depend
on  memory,  and  can  l)e  checked  by  reference  to  docuinentaiy
evidence.  Dr.  van  Eeden  found  a coincidence  in  the  fact  that
some  days  Ijefore  December  20th,  though  not  on  Deceml)er  l<Sth,
a woman  in  his  colony  at  Lnssuni  had  given  birth  to  a chikh
"When  I discovered  that  the  letter  containing  this  statement
was  missing  1 wrote  to  Dr.  van  Eeden  asking  him  if  he  re-
collected the  incident,  and  also  for  details  as  to  the  nundjer
of  men  and  women  in  his  colony.  His  answer,  dated  Septem-
ber 29th,  1903,  runs  as  follows: —

...  I remember  her  (Nelly’s)  statement  very  well,  and  the
coincidence  with  the  birth  of  a child  at  Walden.  There  were
always  between  30  and  40  persons  at  Walden,  men,  women,  and
children,  and  never  less  than  three  mariied  women.  I have  never
spoken  about  Walden  and  its  [)0{)ulation  to  Mrs.  Thompson,  as  far
as  I remember  now,  because  I always  avoided  the  subject.  But
Nelly  has  shown  knowledge  concerning  it  on  several  occasions.

I then  asked  for  the  date  of  the  l)irth  of  the  child,  and
writing  on  October  6th,  1903,  Dr.  van  Eeden  stated  that  it
was  December  9th,  1900.

If  this  case  stood  l)y  itself,  I should  not  have  thought  the
problematical  coincidence  worth  narrating ; hut  it  is  not  an
isolated  instance  of  ap])arent  perception  by  Nelly  of  what  took
place  at  Walden,  and  therefore  in  spite  of  the  error  about  the
date  and  the  lack  of  definiteness  in  her  description  of  the
illness,  it  deserves  consideration.

The  chief  difliculty  is  the  discrepancy  between  the  date
named  Ijy  Nelly  and  the  date  of  the  woman’s  illness.  Nelly
as  a rule  is  vague  in  the  matter  of  dates,  which  she  arrives  at
generally  by  saying  that  something  happened  the  same  day  as
or  a day  or  two  before  or  after  some  incident  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s
experience.  To  the  Ijest  of  my  recollection  this  is  one  of  the
only  two  occasions  on  which  she  gave  a day  of  the  month  (see
p.  252),  and  she  brought  it  out  as  a child  does  who  is  using  a


XLVir.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


203


term  which  it  knows  sounds  well,  but  of  the  meaning  of  which  it
is  not  quite  sure.  If  we  regard  the  coincidence  as  due  to
supernormal  knowledge,  it  is  possible  to  explain  the  dis-
crepancy by  supposing  that  either  as  a result  of  a peregrina-
tion or  telepathically  Xelly  on  December  18th  first  learnt  of
a past  fact,  namely,  the  illness.

Again,  if  there  is  anything  here  calling  for  an  explanation
on  supernormal  lines,  I would  note  that  Xelly’s  description  of
the  woman’s  illness  is  such  as  might  haye  been  giyen  by  a
child,  who,  ignorant  of  the  significance  of  the  symptoms  which
she  had  witnessed,  failed  to  draw  the  inference  which  an
adult  would  haye  drawn.

Between  December  9th,  the  date  of  the  confinement,  and
December  20th,  the  date  of  Xelly’s  account  of  her  peregrina-
tion, ]\Irs.  Thompson  had  giyen  two  sittings  to  i\Irs.  Verrall  on
Dec.  14th  and  17th;  but  at  neither  was  anything  said  about
a yisit  to  Dr.  yan  Eeden.  Xelly’s  silence  on  December  14th
and  17th  is  in  fayour  of  the  supposition  that  she  acquired
her  knowledge  of  the  illness  after  it  occurred,  and  after  the
sitting  of  l)ecember  l7th.

At  a sitting  held  on  January  1st,  1901,  immediately  the
trance  began,  and  before  the  sitter  had  entered  the  room,  Xelly
said  to  me  : —

“IVho  is  that  coughing,  coughing,  coughing  in  the  night — last
night — a nast}"'  sounding  cough?  I couldn’t  sleep  in  your  house.”
./.  (t.  F.  : — “Was  it  last  night?  ”

Xelhi : — “ I think  so,  but  it  was  the  night  I tried  to  sleep
at  yonr  house.”

J.  Lt.  P.  : — “ L)id  you  see  anything  or  anyboily  ? ”

Nellji \ — “I  don’t  know,  but  1 am  sure  it  was  Mr.  Bidding-
ton’s  house.  Where’s  Monro  at  your  house?  Ilaye  you  got  his
box  there  ? There’s  a Monro  box  at  your  house.  All  boxes

have  a strap  round.  It  was  a leather  portmanteau  box  with
a strap  round,  and  some  white  trousers,  like  football  or  cricket
trousers,  perhaps  sleeping  things  in  it.  I can  see  them  dis-
tinctly.”

The  facts  were  these.  On  the  irights  of  the  29th-30th
and  30th-31st  December,  1900,  I had  been  disturbed  and
kept  awake  for  an  hour  or  two  by  the  coughing  of  one  of  my


204


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


seiA'aiits  who  was  sleeping  in  tlie  room  above  mine.  On
December  31st  I spoke  to  my  wife  about  it,  ami  advised  lier
to  send  the  servant  to  see  the  doctor.  Tlie  congli  proi)al)ly
continued  for  a niglit  or  two  after  tliis,  but  I was  not  dis-
turbed on  tlie  night  of  Decemlier  31st-January  1st.  Coughs  are
common  of  course  in  December  and  January,  and  thougli  Nelly
did  not  say  that  I was  disturbed  liy  tlie  coughing,  it  is  worth
noting  that  I liave  to  the  best  of  my  recollection  been  disturbed
at  niglit  l)y  another  })erson’s  cough  only  once  since  tlie  date  of
this  sitting;  in  othei'  words,  on  only  three  or  four  nights  out
of  about  900  nigbts  would  a reference  to  some  one  coughing
in  my  house  at  night  have  had  a sjiecial  significance  for  me.
I may  add  that  since  Nelly  mentioned  this  coughing  I have
liorne  in  mind  to  note  down  any  other  occasions  on  which  1
have  lieen  disturbed  by  cougbing  at  night.

1 liad  not  seen  Mrs.  Tliompson  for  eleven  days  before  the
day  on  which  the  sitting  was  held  at  which  Nelly  mentioned
tlie  coughing,  and  I certainly  did  not  speak  to  Mrs.  Thomjison
before  the  trance  about  the  servant’s  cough ; so  she  did  not
leaiii  of  the  incident  from  me.  l\lrs.  4’hompson  also  had  not
been  to  my  house  for  several  months,  and  the  sitting  of
January  1st,  1901,  was  not  held  there,  and  so  she  could
not  have  noticed  that  one  of  my  servants  was  suti'ering
from  a cold.  It  is  not  (j^uite  clear  whether  Nelly  intended
to  convey  that  she  had  learnt  of  the  existence  of  a “ Monro
box  ” at  my  house  at  the  same  time  that  she  heard
the  coughing,  but  1 tbink  that  this  was  what  she  meant.  The
bare  fact  of  there  being  such  a box  in  my  box-room  was
true,  though  I had  no  conscious  knowledge  or  recollection  of
it.  The  otlier  details  are  probably  wrong,  except  that  there
was  a strap  round  the  portmanteau.  In  the  box-room,  wliich
is  an  out-l)uilding,  and  into  wliich  IMrs.  Thompson  has  never
been,  was  at  the  time  of  the  sitting  a portmanteau  belonging  to
Miss  Mvinro,  a sister  of  my  wife’s.  Attached  to  it  was  a label
bearinu'  the  name  and  address  of  the  owner.  1 do  not  think
that  at  any  rate  at  this  time  l\lrs.  Thompson  knew  my  wife’s
maiden  name,  and  if  she  had  heard  it  she  would  liave  heard
it  pronounced  “ Munr5,”  and  not  “ Monro  ” as  Nelly  pronounced
it.  The  box  was  a small  portmanteau,  a llimsily-lmilt  foreign-
made  tiling,  of  some  cardlioard  kind  of  material,  not  leather,


xlvil]  PJienoniena  in  Mrs.  Thompson' s Trance.  205

and  it  did  not  contain  trousers  or  anything  of  the  sort,  and  it
belonged  not  to  a man  but  to  a woman.

Immediately  after  this  Nelly  went  on  to  describe  another
peregrination,  in  this  case  involving  possession  of  a medium  in
trance.

In  the  account  which  follows  I have  substituted  fictitious
names  for  the  real  ones,  but  all  the  people  concerned  were
friends  of  Mr.  Myers’,  are  all  known  to  me  and  all  are  mem-
bers of  the  S.P.E,  The  lady  whom  Nelly  purported  to  have
controlled  is  not  a professional  medium.

]\Ir.  Myers  had  written  to  me  as  follows : —

Valescure,  Dec.  23/00.

“Miss  Rawson  is  here.  ...  A sitting  yesterday,  Dec:  22.
At  2.40  French  time  {i.e.  2.30  English)  a soi-disant  Mrs.

Thompson  possessed  Miss  R.  I don’t  want  to  ask  Mrs.  T.
about  it — perhaps  when  you  sit  next  (Jan.  1)  you  can  find
out  whether  anything  occurred  that  day  to  Mrs.  T.  She

came  only  for  a minute  and  feebly.  I will  not  tell  you  the
other  sitters  for  evidence  sake.”

Before  the  sitting  of  January  1st,  1901  began  I asked  Mrs.
Thompson  how  she  had  spent  the  afternoon  of  December  22nd,
1900.  I did  not  of  course  say  why  I asked  the  cpiestion,
nor  did  I let  her  know  that  I was  putting  the  cpmstion  on
i\Ir.  Myers’  behalf.

In  reply  to  my  question  Mrs.  Thompson  said  : — “ I was  in
the  house  the  whole  of  Saturday  afternoon,  December  22  nd,
talking  to  a lady.  I slept  for  an  hour,  probably  between  2.45
and  3.45,  in  an  arm-chair  in  front  of  the  fire  in  the  dining-
room. I remember  nothing,  and  did  not  dream,  so  far  as  I am
aware.  I don’t  think  I was  asleep  as  early  as  2.30.”  (This
in  reply  to  my  suggestion  that  she  might  perhaps  have  had  a

dream,  and  that  possibly  she  had  fallen  asleep  as  early  as

2.30.)

When  the  trance  was  over,  I explained  to  Mrs.  Thompson
why  I had  asked  the  question,  and  although  she  then  knew
that  to  bring  about  a very  pretty  coincidence  she  ought  to
have  been  asleep  by  2.30,  she  wrote  me  the  same  evening  to
the  effect  that  on  further  consideration  she  felt  sure  that  she
had  not  gone  to  sleep  before  3 o’clock.


206


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


During  the  trance,  and  immediately  after  the  statement  about
the  coughing  and  the  “Monro  box,”  (see  p.  203),  Nelly  said: —

“Where’s  Millie?  Mr.  Myers’  Millie?  Millie  hawson  ?
She  knows  all  about  me,  because  she  says  I went  to  her  house
the  other  day.”

J.  G.  P.  : — “What  day  ? ”
iVe%:— “Don’t  remember.”

J.  G.  P.  “Where  is  she?”

P'eU'i/ : — “ I don’t  know.  She  has  got  a very  ill  mother.”

J.  G.  P.  : — “Do  you  remember  going  to  her  house?”

Nelly  : — “ Yes.”

J.  G.  P. — “What  do  you  remember?”

Nelly-. — “It  was  like  this.  She  said  ‘Come  along,  Nelly,
and  tell  me  all  about  it.’  She  invited  me  to  go  to  see  her.
She  has  got  a very  ill  mother.  She  isn’t  dead ; don’t  think
she’s  dead — don’t  think  that.  She  only  thinked  it ; that’s  as
good  as  an  invitation.  Tell  her  I’ll  go  and  see  her  foi’  Mr.
Myers’  sake,  not  for  her’s.  I went,  but  it  was  a muggled
went.  I wish  you  believed  me.”

J.  G.  P.  “ Why  ? ”

Nelly. — “Because  I once  said  I wouldn’t  go  to  any  one
but  Mother:  but  I did  this  time  to  oblige  Mr.  Myers.  You
know  the  old  lady  was  lying  down  at  the  time.  ...  Yet
Mrs.  Evie  seemed  to  be  there.  Don’t  think  I mean  Mrs.
Myers.  I mean  the  one  (then  follows  a personal  description),
it  was  the  day  they  forgot  to  send  the  turkey.”

J.  G.  P.  :— “ Who  is  ‘they’?”

Nelly-. — “Mother  knows  about  it.  Don’t  put  down  about
the  turkey  : Mother  won’t  like  it.  I’ll  think  of  something  else
to  remember  the  day  by.”

J.  G.  P.  -. — “No,  the  turkey  will  do  very  well.”

Nelly : — “ Now,  I’m  happy  ; I’ve  told  you  all  the  secrets
that  were  on  my  mind.”

Then  towards  the  end  of  the  sitting  Nelly  recurred  to  the
subject  again  as  follows  : — “ I did  go  to  Millie  Rawson.  Yes,
I did.  tShe  seems  to  be  abroad.  Mrs.  Rawson  isn’t  in  that
same  bed  that  she  used  to  be.  Miss  Rawson  likes  to  talk  to
Mr.  Myers,  and  rap  the  table  at  him.  Not  at  him,  with  him.
She  always  says  I have  light  hair.  Elsie  has  light  hair,  and
I have  got  dark  and  curly  hair.  That’s  the  truth.”


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson  s Trance.


207


The  following  is  a copy  of  an  extract  from  the  notes  taken
at  the  sitting  of  December  22nd,  1900,  with  Miss  Kawson : —

“ l\Irs.  Thompson  came  with  great  difficulty  at  2.40  p.m.
(Paris  time).  ‘ I have  come  as  you  asked  me.’  ”

Xelly  fixed  the  date  of  her  visit  to  Miss  llawson  liy  saying
that  it  was  “ the  day  they  forgot  to  send  the  turkey.”  1 have
in  my  possession  a statement  signed  l>y  a lady  and  gentleman
who  were  staying  with  l\Irs.  Thompson  at  tlie  time,  and  also
a statement  signed  by  Mrs.  Thompson’s  cook  to  the  effect  that
the  “ day  they  forgot  to  send  the  turkey  ” was  Saturday,
Deceml)er  22nd.

There  was  therefore  a coincidence  in  the  dates.  There  is  also
a suggestive  resemblance  between  Nelly’s  words  : “ I w'ent,  Imt
it  was  a mugo-Jed  went  ” ; “ tell  hei'  I’ll  go  and  see  her  for
Mr.  Myers’  sake  ” : “I  once  said  1 wouldn’t  go  to  any  one  but
Mother,  but  I did  tins  time  to  oblige  i\Ir.  IMyers  ” ; and  the
independent  descriptions  of  wdrat  occurred  during  Miss  Rawson’s
trance,  namely : “ She  came  only  for  a minute  and  feebly,”  and
Mrs.  Thompson  came  with  great  difficulty,”  and  the  words
spoken  l)y  the  soi-disant  Mrs.  Thompson,  “ I have  come  as  yon
asked  me.”

On  the  other  hand  Nelly  says  she  controlled  Miss  Rawson,
whereas  Miss  Rawson  is  supposed  to  have  been  controlled  by
i\Irs.  Thompson.  Nelly  says  the  lady  whom  she  called  “ ]\Irs.
Kvie  ” was  present,  which  was  true,  l)nt  though  I did  not
actually  know  it  to  have  been  the  case,  I might  have  surmised
it  from  something  in  Mr.  Myers’  letter  to  me.  She  seems  to
imply  that  Mr.  Myers  was  present,  which  1 knew,  but  she  says
]\Irs.  Rawson  w'as  present,  when  in  reality  IMi’S.  Rawson  was
dead,  and  I had  known  she  was  dead,  though  at  the  time  of
the  sitting  I did  not  feel  sufficiently  sure  on  the  point  to
contradict  Nelly  when  she  told  me  not  to  think  that  i\Irs.
Rawson  w’as  dead  ; Nelly’s  words  seem  to  imply — what  proved
to  be  the  case — that  Mrs.  Myers  w'as  not  present,  a point  on
which  I had  no  information.  Two  other  sitters  who  were
present  at  Miss  Rawson’s  sitting,  and  of  whose  participation  in
the  sitting  T was  unaware,  Nelly  did  not  mention.

The  death  of  Mr.  Myers,  which  took  place  less  than  four
weeks  after  the  sitting,  prevented  me  from  learning  from  the
most  authoritative  source  whether  he  had  given  i\Irs.  Thompson


208


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


any  reason  to  suppose  that  somewhere  about  December  2 2nd
he  would  have  a sitting  with  Miss  Ilawsou,  and  whether  he
liad  expressed  to  Mrs.  Thompson  a wish  to  try  for  correspon-
dences Ijetween  her  and  i\Iiss  Eaw'son’s  trance  utterances.

In  October,  1903,  Mis.  Thompson  was  kind  enough  to  let
me  examine  all  the  letters  wuitten  to  her  by  Mr.  Myers
during  the  year  1900,  and  np  to  date  of  his  death,  and  in
none  of  these  letters  is  there  any  reference  to  Miss  Eawson,
or  t(j  his  having  met  her,  or  to  his  having  had  sittings  with
her,  or  to  his  having  any  prospect  of  having  sittings  with  her.
Naturally  1 did  not  give  Mrs.  Thompson  the  remotest  liint  of
my  reasons  for  wishing  to  examine  the  letters  w-ritten  to  her
by  Mr.  iMyers  dming  a certain  period.  Her  ready  acquies-
cence is  only  one  more  }»roof  of  her  good  nature  and  intelli-
gent appi-eciation  of  the  need  for  strict  methods  of  inquiry.

After  I had  read  tlirough  the  correspondence,  and  explained
matters  to  her,  she  assured  me  that  she  had  no  recollection
of  Mr.  Myers  having  ever  told  her  eitlier  that  he  had  had
sittings,  or  was  hoping  to  have  sittings  about  December  1900,
or  at  any  time  with  iMiss  liaw'son.  1 learn  further,  from  a
good  source,  that  iMiss  Ilawson  was  not  expecting  to  meet
Mr.  Alyers  in  the  South  of  France.  (See  also  p.  302.)

r>n(-  tliese  jreregrinations  do  not  ahvays  have  such  inter-
esting results.  Of  two  that  1 am  now'  going  to  relate  one
wms  abortive  and  the  other  inconclusive.

At  a sitting  held  on  December  20th,  1900,  Nelly  said: —

“Tell  Dr.  Hodgson  I know  all  about  that  Mrs.  Piper  thing
that  he  sent  to  my  mother.  I went  to  Mrs.  Piper’s  house
with  the  impiession  of  that.  And  somebody  in  Mrs.  Pijrer’s
house  they  said — ‘Well,  talk  through  Mrs.  Piper.’  I didn’t
really  talk  through  her,  hut  Elsie  to  please  me  i)recended  to
be  me.  I didn’t  talk  to  her  because  I’d  promised  Mother
never  to  talk  tlirough  any  one  but  her.  Elsie  said: — ‘Here’s
Mrs,  Thompson’s  Nelly  come.’  Yoii  see,  Mrs.  Benson,  Elsie
and  I are  regular  little  cheats,  ^¥e’re  not  really  cheats,  only
rve  cheated  that  time.  It  wasn’t  really  me.  Elsie  went  and
said  tiiat,  and  Mrs.  Piper  thought  it  was  me.  We’re  veiy  much
alike.”


<<


What  Nelly  calls  “ that  Piper  thing  ” w'as  not  really  a
Piper  thing”  at  all,  hut  an  object,  about  which  Dr.  Hodgson


XLVii.]  Phenomena,  in  Mrs.  Thompson  s Trance.


209


knew  nothing,  sent  ovei’  I.)y  him  to  Mr.  Myers  for  the  ] impose
of  an  experiment  with  iVIrs.  Thompson.  Nelly,  in  spite  of  hei'
claim,  has  failed  t(>  give  any  correct  information  ahont  this
ohject.

Dr.  Hodgson  says  that  there  is  no  trace  in  the  records  of
Mrs.  Ihper’s  sittings  of  any  such  incident  as  Nelly  describes.
Perhaps  Elsie  told  Nelly  a tarradiddle ; an  impious  suggestion
to  make  about  a spirit,  hnt  if  spirits  can  cheat,  there  is  no
saying  what  crimes  they  mayn't  commit.

The  next  instance  is  non-evidential,  but  1 cpiote  it  because
it  forms  one  of  the  series  under  discussion,  and,  in  order  to
foi'm  a jiroper  estimate  of  the  value  of  these  particular  pheno-
mena, all  must  lie  taken  into  account,  and  also  in  order  to
illustrate  the  “ automadic  romance,”  as  Tliss  Pramston  calls  it,
of  the  trance.

Nelly  opened  the  sitting  of  January  11th,  1901,  in  this
way  : —

‘‘Mr,  Piddiugton,  will  you  buy  me  a white  rabbit?  No,  not
a wliite  rabbit,  because  it  would  get  dirty  : a not-white  rabbit
to  }int  on  that  mantelpiece.  You  can  get  one  at  the  sweet
shop  at  the  corner  of  Sloane  Street.”

J.  G.  P.  : — “What  were  you  doing  in  Sloane  Street,  Nelly  1”
Nelly-. — “I  went  there  to  go  to  your  house  and  try  to  find
something  out  about  your  house.  But  I didn’t  get  there.  I
stopped  and  looked  at  tlie  rabliits  in  the  shop.”

There  were  rabliits  in  the  window  of  a sweet  shop  at  the
corner  of  Sloane  Street  at  this  time  and  liave  been  ever  since,
at  least  upi  to  July  1903,  and  the  chances  are  that  there  were
for  a long  time  liefore  the  date  of  this  sitting,  as  this  sho]i
seems  to  make  a speciality  of  toy  rabliits.  AYe  are  therefoin
at  liberty  to  assume  that  at  some  time  or  other  Mrs.  Thomp-
son had  noticed  the  rabbits.  But  the  point  to  which  1 want
to  draw  attention  is  the  extremely  happiy  touch  with  which
this  little  episode  is  treated.  All  the  other  voyages  of  dis-
covery lead,  or  were  represented  as  leading,  to  some  definite
result.  This  one  is  frustrated.  The  attractions  of  a sweet
shopi  piroved  too  much  for  Nelly,  and  science  was  deprived  perhaps
of  some  addition  to  the  stoi’e  of  evidence  for  the  existence  of
supiernormal  faculty  in  consequence.  The  whole  thing  is  so
artistically  done,  the  episode  liglitly  introduced  and  as  lightly


1210


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


dropped.  It  fits  in  properly  as  one  of  a series  of  similar
excursions,  and  at  the  same  time  delightfully  exemplifies  the
vividness  and  artlessness  of  the  child-conti’ol.

This  l)V-play,  which  al)oiinds  in  the  trance  utterances  of  Mrs.
Thompson,  produces  on  me  at  the  time  a most  vivid  impression
■of  the  reality  of  the  Nelly  control : an  ettect  which,  however
much  weakened  l)y  sul.)sequent  reflection,  is  never  entirely  dissi-
])ated.  I dare  say  as  narrated  in  l»laek  and  white  the  things  read
common])lace  enough ; but  they  are  not  in  the  least  common-
place as  they  issue  from  the  lips  of  the  medium,  when  the
spontaneity  with  which  they  are  uttered  is  surprising.


'(8)  laNOKAXCE  DISPLAYED  BY  THE  TrANCE-PeRSONALITY  OE
MATTERS  ’WHICH  ’WERE  OK  .MIOHT  HAVE  BEEN  ’WITHIN
THE  rOCNIZANCE  OF  THE  MEDIUM.

In  every  single  instance  it  stands  to  reason  tliat  the
ignorance  displayed  hy  the  trance-personality  may  have  lieen
mere  ])retence,  assumed  to  create  effect;  Imt  believing,  as  I
do,  that  the  phenomena  of  iVIrs.  Thompson’s  trance  are  genuine,
1 regard  them  as  evidence  of  discontinuity  of  memory  lietween
Nelly  and  l\Irs.  Thompson,  and  as  such  worthy  of  record
and  study.

At  the  same  time  it  seems  to  me  possible  that  in  some
cases  the  ignorance  is  assumed  I>y  the  trance-personality  either
from  a kind  of  intellectual  tic,  or  from  playfulness,  or  from
a lazy  liking  for  sticking  to  an  appellation  when  once  used,
or  from  an  instinct  for  referring  to  ])eople  hy  nicknames.

Sitting  of  October  28f/q  1899.

At  this  sitting  1 handed  to  i\Irs.  Thompson  a cigar-cutter,
tlie  cover  or  holder  of  which  was  made  of  gun-metal.  IMr.
Feilding  wlio  was  taking  notes  refers  to  it  in  them  as  a
pencil;  hut  he  was  sitting  at  some  distance  from  the  medium
and  so  did  not  sret  a close  view  of  it.  The  medium,  however,
had  it  in  her  hands  for  some  time,  and  Nelly  throughout
spoke  of  it  also  as  a pencil.  For  any  one  who  was  handling


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Tltompson  s Trance.


211


it,  and  at  the  same  time  able  to  see  it  at  close  quarters,,
it  would  have  been  difficult  to  mistake  it  for  a pencil.

At  the  same  sitting  Nelly  referred  to  Mr.  Podmore  in  a
general  way.  Mr.  Peilding  then  asked  Nelly  if  she  could  say
what  Mr.  Podmore  was  doing  yesterday.  Nelly  answered : —
“ I see  him  in  a big  sort  of  bank,  selling  money.”  Mrs..
Thompson  and  Mr.  Podmore  li\’e  not  far  apart,  and  had
Nelly  named  his  real  occupation,  her  statement  would  have
had  no  evidential  value.  AVhether  at  this  time  Mrs.  Thompson
knew  Mr.  Poilmore’s  profession  or  not  I cannot  say ; but  I
should  think  that  she  probably  did;  ami  if  she  did  not,  it  is
hard  to  understand  wh}',  if  she  is  a fraud,  she  should  have
risked  making  a shot  at  it  when  with  very  little  tinuble
she  could  have  got  certain  information.

SiUini/  of  Novnnhrr  22tk,  1899.

Towards  the  end  of  this  sitting  Nelly  said  to  Dr.  van
Eeden : — “ I promise  faithfully  to  give  you  j^ilenty  of  details
on  Friday.”  (Before  the  trance  Mrs.  Thompson  had  arranged
to  give  a second  sitting  on  the  following  Friday.  Note  the
matter-of-fact  way  in  which  Nelly  as  usual  assumes  acquaintance
with  Mrs.  Thompson’s  affairs.)  Then  turning  to  me  she
added : — “ Don’t  let  your  mother  or  lady  at  your  house  be
present  at  the  sitting.  It  would  make  Mother  nervous.”

I think  the  probabilities  are  that  at  this  period  Mrs.
Thom])Son  knew  that  “ the  lady  at  my  house  ” was  not  my
mother,  but  my  wife : l)ut  whether  that  was  so  or  not,

Nelly,  long  after  my  wife  had  made  Mrs.  Thompson’s  ac-
quaintance, continued  to  refer  to  her  either  as  “ the  lady  in
your  surroundings  ” or  as  “ the  lady  at  your  house,”  or  as
“ your  little  girl’s  mother,”  or  as  “ the  lady  with  neuralgia  in
your  surroundings,”  or  vaguely  as  “ she,”  or  in  fact  by  any
circumlocution  rather  than  as  “ your  wdfe.”  Only  once,  to
the  best  of  my  belief,  has  she  ever  made  use  of  a direct

and  natural  designation  in  speaking  of  my  wife.

Mrs.  Verrall  has  described  (see  PruceecUnijs,  I’art  XLIV,
p.  194)  a similar  though  more  complicated  example  of  this
curious  avoidance  by  Nelly  of  the  olndous  way  of  styling-
people  ; but  in  my  case  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that

Nelly  failed  to  put  two  and  two  together,  and  to  recognise


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


•212

“ the  lady  at  uiy  house,”  etc.  as  my  wife.  In  Mrs.  Verrall’s
case  it  seems  possilde  that  when  she  spoke  of  “ the  Willgar
gentleman  ” or  of  “ Arthur,”  she  failed  to  grasp  that  the
person  to  whom  tliese  appellations  referred  was  Mrs.  Verrall’s
huslmud.

In  Mrs.  Benson’s  sittings  Xelly  spoke  of  Archbishop  Benson
to  i\Irs.  Benson  first  as  “your  husl)and,”  later  as  “Mir  Bishop,”
or  as  “ the  old  gentleman,”  or  “ the  old  gentlemau  with  the
sijectacles.”  Xot  only  up  to  a certain  point  where  Mrs.
Cartwiiglit  referred  to  him  clearly  as  “ the  Archbishop  ” hut
afterwards  Xelly  seemed  to  l)e  unaware  of  the  title  iised  l>y
Mrs.  Cartwright,  and  c<jntimied  to  use  the  same  terms  as
I)efore  or  others,  such  as  “ that  old  gentleman,  Mr.  Benson,”
(3r  “ Mr.  Truro.”  Finally,  to  her  great  chagrin,  Nelly  dis-
covered that  “ i\Irs.  Benson  is  in  the  peerage,”  and  that  “ l\Irs.

( 'artwright  knows  ” who  “ the  clergyman  who  wears  the  night-
shirt over  his  clothes”  is,  and  in  a state  of  great  agitation
announces  that  she  is  not  happy  any  more  {i.c.  because  when
facts  given  in  the  trance  are  to  I)e  found  also  in  works  of
reference,  their  evidential  value  is  lost  or  dinunished),  and
that  “ it’s  no  good  any  more.”  “ Bishop — Bishop — the  Bishop
who  preached  at  St.  Paul’s  Cathedral,  Bishop  Canterbury.  I
never  knew*  before;  Mrs.  Cartwright  says  it’s  in  the  book.”
{i.e.  in  the  peerage).

Even  then  she  did  not  use  the  word  “Archbishop,”  but
“Bishop  Canterbury”;  and  though  Mrs.  Benson  had  two  more
sittings  after  Nelly  announced  her  discovery  of  the  Arch-
hisho])’s  i<lentity,  she  never  referred  to  him  by  his  proper
title,  hut  always  by  one  of  the  circumlocutions  with  which
she  had  grown  familiar,  or  added  new  ones  such  as : — “ that
gentleman,”  “ the  Bishop  gentleman,”  or  “ the  sleeve  gentle-
man.”

I agree  with  l\Irs.  Verrall  in  thinking  that  the  delilierate
maintenance  of  these  devices  could  serve  no  obvious  purpose,
and  their  only  result  would  be,  one  would  think,  to  confuse
the  medium,  who,  if  she  is  fraudulent,  must  have  quite
enough  to  do  to  keep  all  the  threads  of  her  puppets  from
getting  entangled,  without  introducing  further  and  unnecessary
complications  into  an  already  sufficiently  complicated  game.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  vn  Tlurriijmni’n  Trance.


213


Sittinf/  of  February  1900.

1 handed  to  the  medium  at  this  sitting  a double  sheet  of
illuminatetl  script  done  in  the  manner  of  the  14th  and  15  th
century.  The  text  was  in  Englisli  and  perfectly  easy  to  read ;
yet  Xelly  said  of  it: — “It’s  all  in  foreign  languages;  nobody  could
read  it.”  At  a later  sitting  1 handed  a coin  to  the  medium,
saying  as  1 did  so; — “This  belonged  to  my  mother.”  “Ah!
Yes,”  replied  ISlelly,  “ this  is  the  lady  connected  with  the  Ger-
man prayers.”  “ Why  will  you  say  German  ? ” I protested,
“ It’s  English.”  l^o  then  Nelly  conceded  the  point,  excusing  her
mistake  on  the  plea  that  “ It’s  written  in  Old  English  letters ;
that  looks  like  German.”

SUtiny  of  April  I'DtJi,  1900.

There  had  been  an  interval  of  six  weeks  Ijetween  this  and
the  last  sitting,  and  Nelly  seemed  to  have  frirgotten  who  I
was.  Speaking  about  a locket  which  had  been  handed  to  her
by  Dr.  Max  Dessoir  she  casually  asked: — “ MTiat  is  that  round
the  neck,  Mr.  Myers  ? ” “ I’m  not  Tlr.  Myers,”  I oI)jected,  to
be  met  with  the  retort : — “ I like  Mr.  IMyers  ever  so  much
better  than  you,  Imt  Mother  doesn’t.  How  do  you  explain
that  ? ”

But  in  spite  of  my  reminder  she  almost  immediately  showetl
again  that  she  failed  to  remember  me ; so  1 tried  to  recall
myself  to  her  memory,  and  this  time  with  success,  for  Nelly
greeted  me  with  the  remark : — “ Oh  ! yes ; you’re  the  one  with
Dorothy”;  a mark  of  recognition  not  perhaps  liattering,  hut
quite  conclusive;  for  at  my  first  sitting  Nelly  had  said  iliat
she  got  “ an  influence  connected  with  the  lady  at  your  house
called  Dorothy.”  In  spite  of  my  denial  of  there  being  any
person  so  named  connected  with  my  wife,  Nelly  stuck  to  her
statement,  and  the  next  day  I discovered  that  the  name  of  a
hospital  nurse  who  had  come  to  attend  my  wife  the  day
before  the  sitting  was  Dorothy.  That  the  name  was  not  a
mere  random  shot  was  shown  Ijy  sul)sequent  and  more  precise
statements  made  by  Nelly  about  Dorothy.  (See  pp.  214-220.)

If  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trances  are  fraudulent,  I do  not  see
what  was  to  be  gained  by  pretending  that  she  did  not  recognise
me  ; nor  can  I think  that  it  was  a momentary  slip  of  memory


214


J.  0.  Piddmgton.


[part


due  to  her  greater  familiarity  with  Mr.  Myers  as  a sitter  or
recorder,  for  the  mistake  was  made  twice,  and  I should
imagine  that  it  was  of  primary  im])ortance  to  a fraudvdeiit
medium  to  fix  well  in  her  mind  the  identity  of  her  sitters ;
whereas  the  same  circumspection  need  not  be  so  essential  to  a
sec(mdary  })ersonality  or  a spirit.

Nelly  always  referred  to  the  screen  used  to  hide  the  sitters
during  a certain  numl)er  of  sittings  as  “ the  umbrella  ” ; hut
this  1 fancy  was  meant  as  a term  of  reproach,  and  was  only
one  of  “ Fanny’s  little  ways.”

A much  more  curious  point  is  that  for  a short  time  after
his  death  Nelly  denied  with  ol)stinaey  that  Mr.  Myers  was
dead  ; tlmugh  the  fact  was  of  course  known  to  Mi’S.  Thoni})Son,
and  although  the  >Sidgwick  control  was  re]>resented  as  perfectly
cognisant  of  it.


(9)  An  Incident  illustrative  of  the  Gradual  Emergence
OF  Facts  in  the  Trance-Utterances.

l\'Iy  iirst  sitting  with  klrs.  Thompson  was,  as  1 have  said,
on  Uctol)er  28th,  1899,  when  1 went  to  her  house  under
an  assumed  name  with  Mr.  Feilding.

1 was  addressed  by  Nelly  in  the  course  of  the  sitting  by
my  real  name ; but  1 was  not  and  am  not  satisfied  that  Mrs.
Thompson  might  not  have  been  able  (for  reasons  into  which  1
need  not  enter)  to  make  a very  good  guess  as  to  who  1 was
without  the  aid  of  her  “ enlarged  consciousness.”  I also  think
that  a good  deal  of  what  was  told  me  at  this  sitting  was
nothing  more  than  amplifications  of,  or  inferences  from,  the
“Noel  Walker”  crystal-message.  (fSee  above,  pp.  112-119.)

But  this  sitting  contained  one  item  of  information  which  was
afterwards  in  later  sittings  more  fully  developed : and  this  I
find  it  impossible  to  consider  as  detluced  from  the  crystal-
message,  and  its  possession  by  Airs.  Thompson  can  liest  be
accounted  for  by  supposing  that  it  reached  her  through  some
supernormal  channel.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


215


While  tlie  medium  was  holding  in  her  hands  a match-box
of  mine,  and  also  a cap  and  tie  that  had  l)elonged  to  a

deceased  friend  of  Mr.  Feilding’s,  Nelly  said ; — “ I get  an
influence,  ctmnected  with  the  lady  at  your  house,  called

Dorothy.  Dorothy  also  comes  with  the  tie.”  Towards  the

end  of  the  sitting  the  medium  took  hold  of  the  cap  and  tie
again,  and  Nelly  said : —

“There  is  a Dorothy  or  a William  in  connection  with

them.  1 can’t  attach  the  cap  to  either  Mr.  Feilding  or  to
you.  It  seems  as  if  given  liy  somebody  else.”

I told  Nelly  at  the  same  time  that  the  name  Dorothy  had
no  meaning  either  for  me  or  for  the  lady  at  my  house ; and
as  the  name  I )orothy  was  also  said  to  be  connected  with  the
cap  and  tie  which  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  me,  I
took  it  to  he  merely  a name  shot  oiit  at  random  like  otliers
at  the  same  sitting.

As  a matter  of  fact,  however,  the  evening  Ijefore  this
sitting  took  place  a hospital-nurse  named  Sister  Dorothy  had
come  to  attend  upon  my  wife.  My  supraliminal  memory  was
certaiidy  not  in  possession  of  the  nurse’s  name,  though  perhaj)S
my  suljliminal  memory  was,  as  on  reflection  1 felt  almost  sure
that  the  doctor,  who  had  engaged  the  nurse  for  me,  had  some
days  previously  spoken  of  her  to  me  as  “Sister  Dorothy.”

It  was  not  till  the  morning  after  the  sitting  when  1 was
going  through  the  notes  that  it  occurred  to  me  to  encpiire
what  the  nurse’s  name  was.  1 think  I should  not  have
troulded  to  l)other  aljout  the  name  had  not  Nelly,  when  I
told  her  at  the  sitting  that  she  was  mistaken  about  Dorothy,
insisted  that  she  was  right.  This  struck  me  as  curious,  and
as  not  the  kind  of  tactics  that  a fishing  trance-personality
would  have  pursued  in  face  of  my  denial.  Having  then  dis-
covered that  there  was  a J)orothy  connected  witli  my  wife,
I waited  in  the  hope  of  getting  some  further  reference  to  her.

The  next  sitting  which  I attended  was  on  Novembei  29th,
1899.  No  mention  was  made  of  Dorothy;  but  this  was
natural  enough,  l)ecause  the  comniunicati(.ins  were  addressetl
chiefly  to  a new  sitter.  Dr.  van  Eeden,  and  were  not  concerned
with  me  in  any  way.

Two  days  later  Dr.  van  Eeden  had  a second  sitting.  If
was  held  at  my  house  for  the  first  time,  and  this  seems  to

r


./.  G.  Piddington.


210


[PAKT


liave  I’emiiideJ  Nelly  of  Dorotliy ; for  just  before  the  trance
ended  she  said  to  me : —

“Have  you  got  a Dorotliy  in  tliis  house?  Some  one  is
calling  I )o-ro-thy.  A live  lady  is  calling  Dorothy.  She
wasn’t  a foreigner — an  ordinary  lady — a very  musical  voice
calling  Dorothy.  1 )orothy  would  lie  a good  medium  for
jihysical  phenomena.  Peter  could  do  knocks  through  her.”

^\.t  this  date  the  nurse  was  no  longer  at  my  house.  I can
trace  no  meaning  in  the  musical  voice  calling  “ Do-ro-thy  ” ;
my  wife  always  called  her  “ Nurse  ” tout  court.

The  next  sitting  at  which  I was  present  was  on  December
18th,  1890.  Towards  the  close  of  it  I asked  Nelly  for  more
news  about  Dorothy.

Nelly  was  annoyed  and  testily  replieil : —

“Oh,  don’t  bother  me  aliout  Dorothy.  She’s  a very  unim-
portant person ; only  a kind  of  servant.”

“ AVell,”  I said,  “ if  she  is  so  unimportant,  why  did  you
get  a message  about  her  ? ”

“ Pecause,”  answered  Nelly,  \vithout  the  least  hesitation,
“because  she  has  a little  dead  brother,  who  wanted  to  send
a message.  AVe  call  liim  l5ob — Bobby.  He’s  got  something

wrong  with  him  in  the  neck  and  ear,  and  it  made  his  head
a little  bit  .sideways.”

I wrote  to  Sister  1 )orothy  to  eiupnre  if  there  were  any
truth  in  this  statement.  Her  reply  was  to  this  effect : that
she  had  ikj  dead  lirother  named  Bobby,  but  slie  renieml)ers
a little  boy  in  her  hospital  of  that  name,  rather  a pet  of
hers,  who  had  a diseased  bone  in  his  neck.  The  neck  was
k'ept  between  sandbags,  and  this  in  time  made  his  ears  sore.

The  identihcation  is  not  of  course  entirely  satisfactory,
Itecause  Nelly  descril:>ed  Boldpy  as  Sister  Dorothy’s  dead
brother.  But  Nelly  has  at  various  times  explained  that  she
has  to  guess  at  relationships.  She  seems  to  he  roughly

cognisant  of  the  relations  existing  between  two  individuals,
and  from  such  general  imjmessions  to  infer  the  relationship.
But,  granting  for  a moment  Nelly’s  account  to  be  the  true
one,  it  would  be  easy  to  account  for  the  error  in  question.

Let  ns  suppose  that  a little  s])irit-child,  Bobby,  was  cog-
nisant of  Sister  Dorothy’s  presence  in  my  house.  He  tells
Nelly  during  the  seance  on  November  29  : “A  lady  con-


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  TIionvpson  s Tranee.


217


nected  with  that  gentleman  has  got  Sister  Dorothy  at  her
house.”  Xelly  repeats  this  information  in  a parrot-like  way :
misnnderstands  the  use  of  the  term  “ Sister,”  and  imagines
that  heeanse  13obl)y  talks  of  ” Sister  Dorothy  ” Bobby  mnst
he  Dorothy’s  brother.

The  next  sitting  was  held  on  dannary  5th,  1900,  and
during  the  seance  proper  no  reference  was  made  to  Dorothy.
• Vfter  the  trance  was  over,  and  while  Mrs.  Thoni])Son
was  having  tea  with  my  wife  and  myself,  she  unex]»ectedly
relapsed  into  trance,  and  Nelly  began  to  chatter  away  about
matters  ipiite  unconnected  with  those  dealt  with  at  the
regular  sitting.  1 took  the  op])ortunity  to  ask  for  something
further  about  Dorothy.  Nelly  said  : — “ She  has  left  that
situation  and  gone  to  another  one.  It  is  a place  wliere
there  are  four  children.”  [See  lielow.]

Nelly  was  most  ilisdainful  alxjut  my  interest  in  Doroth}'
on  this  occasion,  too:  she  evidently  thought  that  one  ought
to  Ije  inquisitive  oidy  about  one’s  deceased  great-grandmother :
an  attitude  all  the  more  curious  because  she  usually  has  the
instincts  of  the  true  psychical  researcher  well  developed,  and
displays  a keen  grasp  of  what  is  good  cwidence  and  what
is  not.

At  the  next  sitting,  which  was  on  January  10th,  1900,
she  had  evidently  made  up  her  mind  to  ni])  any  tiresome
empiiries  in  the  luid,  for,  without  my  making  any  reference
to  the  distasteful  subject,  she  said: — “Don’t  ask  me  about
Dorothy.”  But,  undismayed  by  her  aversion,  1 ventured  to
point  out  to  her  the  importance  of  obtaining  more  informa-
tion aliout  Bol)by  and  Dorothy,  and  urged  her  to  try  to
find  Bobby  in  order  to  learn  more  about  him.  This  she
promised  to  do,  though  with  a bad  grace,  and  I fear  she
did  not  pursue  her  mission  con  aviorc.

Nothing  was  said  altout  Dorothy  at  the  next  sitting  on
January  12th,  1900,  nor  at  the  two  subse(pient  meetings.
Dn  .Tanuary  2.'>rd,  1900,  I was  not  present  at  the  sDince
until  jTist  at  the  end,  when  I again  brought  forward  the
subject  with  the  words : — “ Will  you  give  me  more  things
about  Dorothy  ? ” “ Dorothy,”  said  Nelly,  “ looks  rather  like

a hospital  nurse.  She  has  a bonnet  with  white  lace  on  it.
She  is  now  at  a house  where  some  one  is  speaking  French.”


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


21cS


1 wrote  to  Sister  Dorotliv,  and  she  replied: — “I  think
most  of  the  people  I’ve  been  with  can”  [he.  speak  French].
“ 1 do  not  jiossess  any  bonnet  with  lace  (tn  it.”

Slie  wears,  however,  a hospital-nurse’s  cap  with  long  white
strings.  1 imagine  that  the  uniform  of  no  hospital-muse
includes  a bonnet  trimmed  with  lace,  white  or  of  any
other  colour,  and  it  is  curious  that  this  unlikely  detail  of
dress  should  have  been  assigned  to  Sister  Dorothy  just  after
her  profession  had  been  rightly  named : curious,  because  not
only  has  IVIrs.  Tliompson  a most  observant  eye  for  dress,
lint  Xelly  also  shares  hei’  interest  in  frocks  and  frills.

Xothing  further  is  directly  stated  of  Dorothy,  l»ut  after  a
la])se  of  neai-ly  two  months  she  is  referred  to  indirectly  again.
As  I have  already  described  (see  p.  213)  Nelly  failed
to  recognise  me  at  the  sitting  held  on  April  19th,  1900  :
and  so  I had  to  try  to  recall  myself  to  her  memory.  In
tills  I was  successful,  for,  when  T had  finished  my  explana-
tions as  to  who  I was,  Nelly  said  in  an  off-hand  way: —
” Oil  I yes  ; you’re  the  one  with  Dorothy.”  I had  flattered
myself  that  I liad  other  claims  on  Nelly’s  recollection  than
this,  but  ci])])arentlv  1 had  not,  for  the  time  at  least.  Nelly
can  be  uncompromisingly  frank.

Later  on  in  the  same  sitting,  which  was  for  the  special
lienefit  of  Dr.  ]\lax  Dessoir,  Nelly  began  to  speak  about  my
motlier,  and  to  give  me  messages  from  her.  Among  other
things  my  mother  was  represented  as  sending  her  love  to
“a  particular  young  man  lielonging  to  you  named  Faul.”  1
was  l.)idden  to  tell  I’anl  that  he  would  be  lietter.  I there-

u])on  said  to  Nelly  : — “ Ask  my  mother  who  Paul  is  ” ; for
tlie  name  Paul  had  no  meaning  for  me.  Nelly  replied: —
“ \'our  own  s]»ecial  friend.  He  has  got  a sister  named  Alarie,
and  that  Doroth\-  seems  to  belong  to  that  Paul.”

I tlnnk  that  during  the  progress  of  the  sitting  I had  no
glimmering  who  Paul  might  be,  but  on  reading  over  mv
notes,  1 saw  at  once  that  all  the  references  to  “ I’anl  ” would
beccmie  at  once  intelligible  if  applied  to  my  wife  ; in  spite
of  the  fact  that  “Paid”  is  spoken  of  throughout  in  the
masculine  gender,  1 have  not  the  least  doubt  that  my  wife,
wliose  name  is  Panline  (her  name  must  have  been  known  to
IMi's.  Thompson),  was  intended.  Some  ten  days  later  Mr.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thoinpsons  Trance.


:>1!)


Myei’S  sent  me  a message  from  Xelly  to  say  that  “ I’aul  is
a lady,  a friend  of  l\Ir.  Piddington’s,  and  she  lielongs  to  the
lady  that  had  the  prayers  that  looked  like  (Terman  writing  ” :
i.e.  to  my  mother.

Dorothy,  therefore,  is  liidved  in  the  mind  of  the  trance-
personality  with  my  wife  and  myself  six  months  after  the
first  casnal  reference  to  her ; although  as  far  as  we  were  con-
cerned she  wonld  have  passed  out  of  onr  minds  when  her

short  visit  was  ended.

It  wonld  be  difficnlt  to  find  a l)etter  illustration  of  the
oozing  out  of  details  in  trance-utterance.  i\Irs.  Benson’s
sittings  ])i’ovided  some  good  examples  of  this  gradual  leakage,
ljut  in  that  case  the  details  which  emerged  were  kmrwn  to
the  sitter,  whereas  in  this  case  some  of  them  were  not.

I must  be  supposed  to  have  known  the  name  of  the  nurse,
and  1 knew  that  Dorothy  was  “ oidy  a kind  of  servant  ” :
and  1 had  known  all  along,  even  when  I didn’t  consciously
know  her  name,  that  a hospital-nurse  was  at  my  house.  Yet
this  last  point — the  one  thing  that  L had  known  from  the

beginning — wms  the  very  last  item  of  information  to  emerge.
If  Nelly’s  kirowledge  was  acrprired  telepathically  from  me,
it  is  to  lie  noted  that  it  took  close  on  two  months  liefore
she  succeeded  iir  tapping  my  brains  of  this  the  most
material  fact  in  the  series  of  statements.  But  the  telepathic
hypothesis  has  to  be  strained  consideralily  liefore  it  will
cover  all  the  difficulties  in  this  case.  For  one  thing,  unless
one  supposes  that  throughout  the  medium  was  tapping  the

brain  of  Sister  1 )orothy,  whom  she  had  never  seen,  never
did  see,  and  within  whose  vicinity  she,  to  the  best  of  my
belief,  never  came — unless,  I say,  one  resorts  to  such  a

strained  hypothesis  as  that — one  is  oliliged  to  assume  that
the  medium  drew  her  facts  first  from  one  source,  and  then
from  another.  1 knew  nothing  about  Bobby,  and  nothing  of
the  nurse’s  movements  after  she  left  my  house ; these  facts
must  therefore  be  supposed  to  have  lieen  derived  from  the
nurse.  Yet  Nelly,  who  is  ready  enough  at  all  times  to
volunteer  the  statement  that  she  is  “getting  things  out  of
people’s  stomaclis  ” — which  is  her  definition  of  the  telepathic
theory — would  not  offer  that  explanation  here.  The  source
of  her  information  she  maintained  was  a spirit-boy,  who  had


■220


J.  G.  Piddingtcm.


[part


appareutl}'  (li'0|)ped  in  as  it  were  at  a sitting,  attracted  thereto
by  the  presence  of  S(»ine  one  at  whose  lionse  liis  “ Sister
1 lorothy  ” was  staying.

.V  i-emarkable  point,  too,  is  Nelly’s  apparent  liolding  over
of  knowledge  within  her  possession.  Tims  at  niy  first  sitting

the  name  Dorothy  only  is  given.  Yet,  when  three  weeks
later  I asked  lier  to  ex])lain  wliat  had  led  to  her  mention  of
Dorothy,  her  answer  gives  the  impression  that  all  along  she
Inid  kiujwii  al)Out  Bobby,  and  that  Dorothy  wars  “ only  a kind  of
servant,”  but  had  suppressed  these  details  Itecause  she  thought
they  were  of  no  interest.

^Yrv  curious  also  is  the  casual  way  in  which  knowledge
of  Sister  Dorothy’s  movements  is  indicated.  On  January  5th,
1.900,  Nelly  says:  “She  has  left  that  situation  and  gone

to  another  one.  It  is  a place  where  there  are  four  children.”

The  use  of  the  term,  “ that  situation,”  seems  to  imply  that
she  knew  that  slie  had  already  not  only  left  my  house  laiit
also  been  to  anotlier  house  since,  and  left  that  as  w-ell.  This
was  really  the  case,  though  1 did  not  know  it.  In  the  house
where  Sister  Dorothy  was  on  dannary  5tli,  there  were  six,
not  four,  children.  It  was  not  till  a w'eek  later  that  she
went  to  a house  where  there  were  four  children.  It  is
conceival.)le  that  on  January  5th  Sister  Dorothy  knew,  or
some  one  knew,  that  she  was  to  go  to  a family  where  there
wei-e  four  children:  Imt  this  jioint  I have  not  been  able

to  clear  up,  as,  just  wdien  I was  about  to  make  eiujuiiies,  the
nurse  went  out  to  South  Africa  in  IMarch,  1900,  and  1 have
since  lost  sight  of  her.

Again,  on  dannary  23rd,  1 900,  Nelly  said: — “She  is  now
at  a house  where  someone  is  S])eaking  French.”  If  this  is
taken  to  mean,  as  1 think  it  fairly  may  be,  that  she  had  then
made  still  another  move  since  dannary  5th,  the  fact  was
true,  though  the  statement  about  some  one  speaking  French
has  not  been  verified.

Altogether  the  incident  is  a most  complicated  and  per-
})lexing  one : hard  to  account  for  in  my  view’  by  telepathy

alone.  The  way  in  which  the  details  dribbled  out  suggests
the  haphazard  interchange  of  information  between  intelligences
like  ourselves  rather  than  the  successful  ferreting  out  of  facts
bv  means  of  the  ]nirposeful  exercise  of  a telepathic  faculty.


XLVil.]  Fhenomeiia  in  Mrs.  Tkomi'tson’s  Trcmce.


221


(10)  Nelly’s  Associations  of  I leas.

An  interesting'  feature  of  Airs.  Tlioinpson’s  trance-plienoniena
is  tlie  way  in  wliich  proper  names  come  out.  I’nnning  associa-
tions of  ideas  seem  to  lielp  Nelly  on  to  the  right  track  more  than
anything  else.  Airs.  Verrall  has  given  one  instance  of  what  1
mean  in  her  paper  puhlished  in  IFocccdincjs,  Tart  NLlAo,  p.  20(S.
1 cpmte  the  passage : —

“ Alerrifield  was  said  to  Ije  the  name  of  a lady  in  my  famih'.
'I'lie  name  was  given  at  hrst  thus  : ‘ Alerrifield,  Alerriman,  Alerr}--
thonght,  Alerrifield.’  . . . Later  Nelly  said : — ‘ Airs.  Alerr}  -
thought,  that’s  not  quite  right:  it’s  like  tlie  name  of  a garden’;
and  after  in  vain  trying  to  give  me  the  name  exactly,  she  said  : —
‘I  will  tell  you  how  names  come  to  us.  It’s  like  a picture;  I
see  school  children  enjoying  themselves.  You  can’t  say  Alerrv-
mans,  because  that’s  not  a name,  noi'  AIerrypeo])le.’  Nelly,  latei'
on,  spoke  of  my  mother  as  ‘Airs.  Happyfield,’  or  ‘Airs.  Alerri-
iield,’  with  indifference.”

The  real  name  was  Alerrifield,  and  it  should  l)e  noted  that  the
correct  form  of  the  name  was  given  liy  Nelly  at  the  very  first
attempt,  hut  that  in  spite  of  this  she  appears  not  to  have  been
aware  of  her  success.  She  knew  apparently  that  she  had  got
somewhere  near  the  mark,  hut  not  that  she  had  liit  the  bull’s-
eye.  A picture  was  presented  to  her  which  she  recognised  as
containing  a coi'rect  clue  to  the  general  type  of  name,  but  she
was  not  confident  that  she  had  translated  the  symbolic  picture
with  precise  accuracy.

The  sittings  with  which  1 am  dealing  in  this  paper  afford
several  instances  of  a similar  kind  to  the  aho\'e,  and  in  every
instance  this  mental  trick  is  exhilhted  exclusively  by  Nelly,
and  not  at  all  Ijy  the  other  controls.

At  a sitting  held  on  February  1st,  1900,  Nelly  was  trying  to
get  the  name  of  the  deceased  lady  called  in  the  record  of  ‘ Air.
Wilson’s”  sittings  Aliss  (Tegg.  Tlie  real  name  was  a rare  one,
and  Nelly  never  actually  succeeded  in  getting  it,  though  she
eventually  got  pretty  near  it.  After  making  two  attempts  at


222


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


the  name,  she  remarketl : — “ Funny  the  way  I get  names.  I get
an  association  with  H(jwers  or  ti’ees  or  places,  or  all  kinds  of
tilings.”

J.  G.  P. : — “ How  do  you  know  when  it’s  right  ? ”

NcUjj : — “ There’s  a feeling  of  sat/isfaction  when  the  right  asso-
ciation is  found,  which  tells  me  it’s  right.”

As  an  explanation  this  is  not  very  illuminating,  lint  it  is
interesting  as  exemplifying  Nelly’s  ignorance  of  the  processes
by  which  she  acrpiires  information.  I am  sure  that  this
ignorance  is  not  assumed,  as  conceivably  it  might  lie  in  order
to  avoid  interrogatox’ies  al)Out  the  mechanism  of  the  trance-com-
munications which  it  might  tax  the  ingenuity  of  the  trance-
personality  to  meet,  and  tliat  whatever  may  lie  the  pretensions
of  the  other  controls  to  understand  the  laws  underlying  the
phenomena.,  Nelly  at  least  does  lier  work  more  or  less  lilindly
and  automatically.  Adore  than  this,  1 lielieve  she  regards  the
whole  thing  as  a game  or  puzzle  which  it  is  good  fun  to  soh'e.
Nelly  is  no  glum  archangel  ; she  never  displays  any  consciousness
of  being  engaged  on  a serious  mission,  nor  indulges  in  prayer,  pious
ejaculations,  or  sanctimonious  discoiu'se ; and  is,  in  fact,  a down-
right, unsentimental,  delionair  being.  She  is  jirepared  to  play
the  game  under  what  she  considers  the  propei'  ndes  : but  if  these
are  overstepped,  as  in  the  “screen  sittings”  (see  p.  Ibd),  she  pro-
tests and  is  inclined  to  sulk.  But  to  retmn  to  the  suliject  of
her  associations  of  ideas.

At  Dr.  van  Eeden’s  lii’st  sitting  no  atteni]»t  was  made  to  give
his  name.  At  the  second  sitting  Nelly’s  first  words  were,  “What
was  ‘Vain’?”  Then  later  on  she  made  several  unsuccessful
attempts  to  i)ronounce  the  name,  thus  : “ Whis  \hinden  ? can’t  say
it.  A^andenen  ? Begins  like  van  in  the  street ; then  enden.
Begins  with  E — Endenen — not  like  Hendon,  but  Kndenen.”

Finally  at  the  end  of  tlie  sitting  she  gave  the  name  clearly,
though  with  the  English  pronunciation: — “Do  you  know  van
Keden?”

At  the  next  sitting  she  seems  pleased  to  liave  coined  a little
]ain,  by  means  of  wliich  she  can  be  sure  of  fixing  the  strange
name  in  her  memory : — “ 1 know  your  name  is  AJr.  Bosom —
Bostim.  . . . ATm  are  Air.  Gardener  Eden  (or  Garden  of
Eden).”

ft  is  ])0ssible  that  tliere  was  more  in  this  ]mn  than  meets  the


XLVJi.J  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


223


eye,  and  that  it  was  not  simply  an  aid  to  memory,  l)nt  was  also
intended  to  convey  a new  fact.  Ijosoiii  and  llostim  were  evident
attempts  at  Ijnssnm,  where  Dr.  van  Eeden  farms  land  ; and  Nelly
may  have  meant  that  as  Adam  delved  in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  so
did  Dr.  van  Eeden  at  Bnssurn  ; or  rather,  perhaps,  slie  had  no
<lefinite  intention  of  suggesting  this,  but  the  facts  came  to  her
in  this  allegorical  fashion.

Dr.  van  Eeden’s  second  sitting  furnishes  another  very  similar
instance.  Mrs.  Tliompson  was  holding  some  hair  that  l)elonged
to  a Dutch  lady.  Meanwhile  Nelly,  who  liad  already  given
several  relevant  facts  in  connection  witli  it,  said : — “ Do  you
know  Linden  ? I associate  the  liair  with  ‘ Enter  den  Linden’—
not  with  the  place,  l)ut  with  the  name  Linden.”  Van  Lynden  is
tlie  surname  of  intimate  friends  of  the  husl»and  of  the  lady  to
whom  the  hair  belonged,  though  this  was  unknown  to  Dr.  van
Eeden  at  the  time.  But  what  I want  to  luring  out  now  is  not
tlie  relevancy  of  the  name,  l)ut  the  practical  illustration  here
furnished  of  Nelly’s  account  of  how  she  gets  names  l)y  association
with  trees  or  places.

A critic  whose  actjuaintance  with  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trance
phenomena  w'as  acrpiired  solely  through  a i)ernsal  of  tlie
records  might  perhaps  think  that  this  disconnected  w’ay  of
shooting  out  names  was  more  ingenious  tlian  ingenuous  in  that
it  gave  the  medium  more  than  one  chance  of  liitting  the
mark  ; for  instance,  in  tlie  case  of  the  name  Linden,  had  it
not  hajipened  that  the  hiisliand  of  the  owner  of  the  hair
had  friends  of  that  name,  pertinency  might  still  have  been
claimed  for  it  on  the  ground  that  the  owner  of  the  hair,  or
one  of  her  family,  had  recently  lieen  staying  in  Berlin,  or
had  some  connection  with  one  of  the  half-dozen  jilaces  called
Linden,  or  had  an  ancestor  who  had  fought  at  the  liattle  of
Hohenlinden.

Eroni  the  main  contention  that  proper  names,  shot  out  at
random,  have  a better  chance  of  applicability  than  when
connoted  of  some  definite  person  or  thing,  no  one  would  dis-
sent ; lint  if  the  records  of  the  sittings  should  create  the
impression  that  either  Mrs.  Thompson  fraudulently  or  the
trance-personality  delilierately  throws  out  proper  names  discon-
nectedly for  the  purpose  of  “ fishing,”  then  the  written  records,
as  must  often  lie  the  case,  are  misleading.


224-


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


l>enson,  who  had  a series  of  sittings  witli  Mi’s.

Thompson,  had  her  first  sitting  on  December  18th,  1899.
The  snrname  Benson  was  mentioned  for  the  first  time  on
danuary  5 th,  1900,  in  an  entirely  wrong  connection,  and
when  tlie  sitter  was  a lady  nnknown  to  and  nnassociated  with
TIrs.  Benson.  On  dannary  12th,  1900,  when  Dr.  Tnckey
was  the  sitter,  Nelly  began  to  speak  about  Mrs.  Benson,  and
went  on  to  say : — “ There’s  a place  in  Birmingham  where
Tlother  often  goes : it’s  Bensons  Limited.”

Again,  at  the  close  of  one  of  Mr.  “ Wilson’s  ” sittings  on
danuary  18th,  1900,  when  I asked  if  she  had  anything  new
to  tell  about  “ Tlartin,”  who  had  been  mentioned  at  Tlrs.

Benson’s  first  sitting,  Nelly  replied: — “The  old  lady  like
Hensons  Tdmited.  It’s  where  Tlother  goes  to  have,  dinner —
in  Birmingham — in  (low  Street — no.  Bull  Street.  It’s  like
Slatei'’s.”  She  did  not,  however,  mi  either  occasion  explain
that  liy  means  of  that  association  of  ideas  she  liad  either
got  hold  of  the  name  or  retained  it  in  her  memory  : nor
did  she  on  the  occasion  of  Mrs.  Benson’s  second  sitting  on
danuary  2drd,  1900,  when  slie  apostrophised  her  in  the
following  terms: — “My  darling  Tlrs.  Benson,  I don’t  call
you  Limited.”  Here  the  mnemonic  process  is  not  drawn
attention  to,  hut  can  he  readily  traced.  But  again,  as  in
the  case  of  “ Mr.  (Tardener  Eden,”  the  association  of  ideas

may  have  recommended  itself  as  specially  appropriate  because

it  put  Nelly  on  the  track  of  something  besides  the  mere
name  of  the  sitter.  There  was  a very  definite  connection
lietween  IMrs.  Benson  and  Birmingham,  for  her  husliand,  the
late  Archbishop,  was  a native  of  that  town.

But  there  is  another  ])oint  of  interest  in  connection  with
“ Bensons  Limiteil.”  IMrs.  Benson’s  identity  was  sup})Osed  to
he  unknown  to  Tlrs.  Thompson  both  before  and  after  the

second  sitting.  On  some  date,  however,  between  the  second
sitting  and  Feliruary  bth,  1900,  Mrs.  Orackanthorpe  hap-
])ened  to  mention  to  me  ([uite  casually,  in  the  course  of

conversation,  that  IMrs.  Thoni])son  had  told  her  that  IMrs.

Benson  was  ha^'ing  smne  sittings.  So  when  1 next  saw

IMrs.  Thompson  on  February  0th,  1 900,  1 asked  her  before
trance  if  she  remembered  the  name  of  the  lady  with  white
hair  who  had  sat  with  her  twice  recently.  IMrs.  Thompson


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thoiivpsons  Trance.


225


could  not  think  of  the  name  at  once,  hut  hnally  said  “ Mrs.
Benson.”  I then  asked  how  she  had  thought  of  the  name,
and  she  replied  that  she  had  recalled  it  by  thinking  of

Bensons  Limited,  a Birmingham  restaurant.  1 deal  elsewhere
(see  pp.  271-3)  with  the  question  im'olved  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s
knowledge  of  the  name  of  one  of  the  sitters  supposed  to  he

unknown  to  her,  and  now  draw  attention  oidy  to  the
employment  of  exactly  the  same  association  of  ideas  by  Mrs.
Thompson  awake  and  Mrs.  Thompsctn  entranced.  Bull  Street,
it  will  l)e  noticed,  was  first  called  Cow  Street ; yet  Slater’s
apparently  presented  no  difficulty.

On  .February  1st,  1900,  nine  days  after  Mrs.  Benson’s

second  sitting,  1 had  a sitting  with  ]\Irs.  Tliompson  liy

myself.  Before  the  sitting  began  Mrs.  Thompson  showed  me
an  entry  made  in  her  diary  under  the  date  of  January  31st,
1900,  which  ran  as  follows: — “Nelly  says  the  lady  witli
white  hair  [hr.  Mrs.  Benson]  has  an  old  gentleman,  the  one
with  spectacles ; and  Grandpapa  Middleton  went  to  school

with  him.”  Then  directly  trance  began  Nelly  said  : — “ You
mean  Mr.  Bishop : the  gentleman  with  the  spectacles.  That’s
why  I told  her  to  bring  his  spectacles.  I traced  that  old

gentleman  back  to  school,  and  I found  him  talking  to

Grandpapa.  He  lived  at  (pause).  You  know  Mrs.  B ’s

son.  J\Irs.  E is  Mother’s  next-dooi'  neighbour.  Mrs.

E ’s  son  has  gone  as  physical  science  master  to  Marl-
borough. I hear  IMrs.  E telling  Mother  tliat.  Then

like  that  is  the  name  of  the  place  where  IMr.  Bishop  lived.
A Church  (school,  a very  high  ecclesiastical  school.  Then  1
traced  him  to  school.  Grandfather  kliddleton  was  a smaller
l)oy  than  IMr.  Bishop.  . . . Have  you  got  King  Edward  Yl.’s
school  ? ”

The  special  point  which  I want  to  bring  out  here  is  the
reference  to  klarlborougli.  Nelly’s  “ Mr.  Bishop  ” is  undoiibtedly
meant  for  Archbishop  Benson.  Dr.  Benson  was  not  connected
with  Marlborough,  ljut  he  was  Headmaster  of  AYellington  ;
and  the  association  Isetween  tlie  names  of  the  two  greatest
English  soldiers  is  olwious,  or  at  least  it  ought  to  lie,  though  1
must  admit  I failed  to  seize  it  uutil  it  w'as  pointed  out  to  me.
Nelly  did  not  say  that  the  Archliisho[i  li\’ed  at  IMarlborough,
but  “like  that  is  the  name  of  the  place  where”  lie  lived.


220


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


The  \vli(.)le  se(|uence  tjf  ideas  in  tliis  passage  is  wortli  study.
Nelly’s  discovery  that  her  Grandfather  had  been  at  the  same
school  as  l\hs.  Henson’s  hnsl)and  starts  her  on  the  topic  of
school  generally.  She  finds  that  the  Archbishop’s  connection
with  school  did  not  terminate  with  his  scliool-days ; and  that
lie  lived  at  another  school.  She  can’t  ([uite  get  hold  of  the

name  of  this  other  school,  hut  recognises  that  a school  of
which  she  has  heard,  thi’ough  her  mothei’s  next-door  neighbour,
contains  a clue  to  the  name.

It  is  ])assages  of  this  kind  wdiich  1 think  as  much  as
anything  else  have  convinced  me  of  Mrs.  Thomjison’s  absolute
bona  Jides.  Until  some  evidence  is  fortlicoming  to  show  that
an  admittedly  fraudulent  medium  can  successfully  reproduce  a
sulitle  mimicry  of  recognised  subconscious  processes,  such  as
I believe  we  here  see  exemplified  in  l\Irs.  Thompson’s  trance,  1
shall  jn-efer  to  consider  that  such  re])roduction  is  impracticable.
( )ne  of  the  tasks  which  our  Society  has  hefore  it  is  to  try  to
find  another  1 >avey  who  will  mimic  the  trance-phenomena  of
Mrs.  Ihper  and  Mrs.  Thomjison.  I am  inclined  to  think  that
a large  amount  of  success  might  lie  obtained  by  a clever
impostor,  in  so  far  as  the  giving  of  correct  facts  about  the
sitter  or  the  sitter’s  belongings  was  concerned,  hut  what  I
greatly  question  is  wdiether,  while  the  impostor’s  attention  was
ilevoted  to  ])icking  up  hints  from  such  indications  as  his  sitter
might  afford,  and  dramatising  these  in  appropriate  fashion,  he
would  not  he  too  much  ])reoccupied  to  introduce  and  maintain
a consistent  and  convincing  ti'avesty  of  these  characteristic
traits  of  sid)conscious  action.

At  another  of  IMrs.  I>ens(jn’s  sittings,  on  May  MOth,  1 900,
another  tyjie  of  association  of  ideas  was  displayetl.

Early  in  the  sitting  General  Ihdler  was  mentioned:  thongh
the.  fact  that  he  was  known  to  i\Irs.  Benson  was  not  actually
stated.  Later  on  the  name  of  Mrs.  Benson’s  dead  son,  IMartin,
which  had  already  l)een  frequently  mentioned,  was  written  :
then  Nelly  said: — “1  seem  to  get  Sir  George  AVhite — White.”
She  then  wr<)te  “White”  after  the  “IMartin”:  or  rather  it
should  he  said  that  “ Wdnte  ” was  written,  for  Nelly  asserts
that  she  is  never  responsible  for  any  of  tlie  automatic  writing
(see  pp.  2dl-d,  24d).  The  significance  of  this  was  that  the
second  name  of  IMartin  Benson  was  AVhite.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson  s Trance.


227


Then  a little  later  Nelly  adiled: — “Von  know  Mr.  White —
military  man — far  more  anxious  to  convert  yon.”  The  only
apparent  point  in  the  allusion  to  “ Mr.  AN'hite — military  man,”
lies  in  the  fact  that  the  only  memljer  of  the  Benson  family
who  was  ever  connected  with  the  army  was  Captain  White
Benson,  after  whom  the  late  Archltishop  and  Ins  son,  Martin
Benson,  were  named.  It  is  true  that  this  fact  is  stated  in
the  Ai'chbishop’s  Zi/e,  which  had  l»een  ])ul)lished  some  months
Itefore  this  sitting  took  place,  l.)ut  1 am  not  (pioting  the  state-
ments made  by  Nelly  as  indicative  of  supernormal  knowledge,
V)ut  as  illustrations  of  the  sefpience  of  ideas  characteristic  of
the  Nelly  control.

An  instance  almost  exactly  anahjgous  to  “ Alerriheld  Merry-
mans  Happylield  ” occurred  in  another  series  of  sittings
attended  by  ]\lr.  and  Airs.  Bercival.  Their  son  was  mentioned
at  their  first  sitting,  and  reference  made  to  his  school-
life,  and  to  the  fact  of  the  school  being  situated  at  Oxford,
ljut  the  actual  name  of  the  school  was  not  mentioned.  At
their  third  sitting  Nelly  said  : — “ 1 know  where  Springfield
is.  I don’t  know  what  I’m  saying.  Yes,  that’s  wdiat  1 mean.”
And  then  later: — “Springfield,  Oxford.  Or  is  it  Highfield  ?
It’s  either  Highfield  or  Springfield  College,  Oxford.  It’s  the
truth.”  The  real  name  of  the  school  was  Summer  Fields  ; and
one  can  easily  understand  how  a,  so  to  speak,  charade-]  dcture,
syml)olising  Summer  Fields,  might  be  wu’ongiy  inter] u'eted  as
S]>ringfield ; though,  unless  the  picture  ]»resented  to  Nelly
were  of  a meadow  on  rising  ground,  it  is  not  so  easy  to  see
wliy  the  name  Highfield  should  have  been  guessed.

.Vt  a sitting  at  whicb  I alone  was  ])resent  on  February
bth,  1900,  I handed  to  the  metlium  several  objects  belonging
to  former  sitters,  and  afterwards  gave  her  some  hair  of  my
mother’s,  though  without,  so  far  as  I am  aware,  allowing
any  indication  to  escape  me  that  the  olpect  had  any  ])articular
interest  for  me  pei’sonally : all  JMrs.  Tliom])Son  could  have
normally  known  al;»out  the  lock  of  hair  was  tliat  it  had  been
handed  to  her  at  a former  sitting,  and  on  that  occasion  too
it  had  been  ]»resented  among  other  objects  belonging  to  othei'
people ; and  I may  add  that  I had  given  Mrs.  Thompson  to
understand  that  1 should  not  “ sit  ” for  communications  my-
self. After  the  hair  1 gave  some  illuminated  script  that  had


228


J.  G.  Fiddingtov.


[PAKT


I)een  painted  l»y  niy  inotliei’,  and  while  the  niedinni  was
handling  this,  Nelly  said: — “Yon  know  Leo  Myers.  There’s  a
Leo  helonging  to  this  lady.”  Tlie  only  Leo  that  conld  lie
descrilied  as  helonging  to  my  mother  is  my  own  danghter,
who  is  called  Leo.  Mrs.  Thompson  may  have  known  that
this  was  her  name,  thongh  1 donht  it,  and  it  ninst  l)e  home
in  mind  that,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  I gave  her  no  hint
that  I was  personally  interested  in  the  illnminated  script,  while
the  character  of  othei-  facts  given  l.iy  Nelly  in  connection  with
olijects  that  had  belonged  to  my  mother  mnst  also  he  considered.
(See  pp.  1 22-0,  149-1  .o4.)  Not  one  single  thing  of  those  which

4Irs.  Thompson  could  have  got  np  about  me,  my  family,  and

belongings  did  Nelly  say:  and  what  she  did  say  I have  not  the
least  hesitation  in  asserting  she  couhl  not  at  such  short

notice  as  the  circumstances  allowed, — or  indeed,  I firmly
believe,  undpr  any  ordinarily  conceivable  circnmstances, — have
learnt  by  normal  methods  of  empiiry.  But  putting  aside  the
([nestion  of  whether  the  mention  of  the  name  Leo  is  of  evi-
dential ^vorth,  the  way  in  which  the  )iame  is  led  up  to,  liy
hist  of  all  mentioning  another  Leo  known  to  i\Irs.  Thompson,
and,  if  one  may  put  it  in  that  way,  known  through  her  to
Nelly,  is  (piite  in  keeping  with  what  has  lieen  described

above.

Tlie  same  sitting,  that  of  February  Gth,  furnished  another
instance  of  a like  kind.  Nelly  said  that  a “ Kev.  John  ” had
been  a great  friend  of  my  mother’s,  and  had  done  her  some
service  for  which  she  retained  a grateful  rememlirance.  I
<lid  not,  when  this  was  said,  recognise  any  meaning  in  it,  and
I have  not  since  been  aide  to  verify  this  statement;  hut
hoping  to  get  ]ireciser  details,  1 asked; — “ AYhat  was  the  Lev.
dolni’s  name?”

Akl//j  : — “ It  was  Harper.”

J.  G.  P. : — “ How  did  yon  get  the  name  ? ”

Nelly : — “ It  was  like  the  picture  of  a man  playing  a harp,
and  as  yon  can’t  say  Haipist  1 say  Harper.”

Just  liefore  the  reference  to  the  llev.  John,  Nelly  had
been  speaking  aliout  a man  whom  she  subsequently  identified
as  my  mother’s  brother,  my  uncle.  She  fiegan  by  saying : —
“ About  a relation  of  her’s  (he.  of  my  mother’s)  that  has  been
ill  in  a foreign  country.”


XLVir.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson  s Trance.


229


J.  G.  P. “ When  ? ”

Nelly ; — “ Some  weeks  before  the  snow  came.  A long  way
off — a gentleman  not  well — not  very  ill — not  an  ordinary
country.  You  know  ‘ Maid  of  Athens  ’ : that  sort  of  country,
not  European,  not  on  the  Europe  map : where  they  ride
horses  without  saddles  on.  I don’t  mean  just  where  the

gentleman  is,  hut  near  about : not  South  Africa.  ...  It  was
a colony,  not  a foreign  country.  . . . Has  he  got  sheep  all
round  him  ? It’s  summer  time,  not  winter.  His  name  rvas
(Queensland.”

IMy  uncle  does  live  in  a colony,  though  the  name  of  the
colony  is  not  Queensland.  (“  His  name  is  (.Queensland  ” clearly
meant  that  (.-Queensland  is  the  name  of  the  place  where  he

lives.)  He  lives  in  the  Island  of  Dlauritius,  where,  to  the  best
of  my  information,  it  is  not  the  custom  to  ride  horses  without
saddles  on,  nor  do  sheep  form  a distinctive  (jr  common

feature  of  the  landscape.  The  order  in  which  the  vaiious
details  about  my  iincle’s  alleged  place  of  residence  emerges  is,
in  view  of  wdiat  has  been  said  above  aliout  Xelly’s  associa-
tions of  ideas,  extremely  suggestive ; and  1 lielieve  it  is  pos-
sible to  trace  the  origin  of  the  erroneous  details.  Three
intelligences  are  supposed  to  be  engaged  in  the  communi-
catioirs  : Xelly,  Mrs.  Cartwright,  and  my  mother.  "When
I say  “ are  supposed  ” I do  not  mean  that  it  is  directly
asserted,  for  the  participation  of  Mrs.  Cartwright  and  (,>f  my
mother  is  rather  to  be  inferred  from  internal  evidence  and
V)y  analogy  with  the  “ business  ” of  the  trance  phenomena

generally ; but  the  impression  created  is  tliat  my  mother  is
contributing  facts  which  Mrs.  Cartwright  conveys  and,  when
necessary,  translates  to  Nelly.

Now,  with  regard  to  the  statements  about  the  country
where  my  uncle  lives,  the  first  fact  given  is  that  he  is  “ in
a foreign  country  ” ; the  foreign  country  is  next  said  to  Ije
“ a long  way  off,”  and  “ not  an  ordinary  foreign  country.”
Then  follow  the  words : — “ ‘ Maid  of  Athens,’  that  sort  of
country,  not  European,  not  on  the  Europe  map  ” : which  I
take  to  mean  that,  although  Athens  is  in  Europe,  the  country
is  not  European,  but  Oriental  in  character,  like  Greece.

At  this  point,  according  to  my  surmise,  the  trance-person-
alities felt  that  it  was  desirable  to  arrive  at  a more  precise


23U


J.  G.  Piddlngton.


[part


detiiiitioii  «»f  the  foreign  country,  and  I conjecture  that  Mrs.
Cartwright  l)y  means  of  a charade-picture  tried  to  convey  to
Nelly  the  notion  of  a colon}'.  If  for  this  purpose  she,  so  to
S]>eak,  threw  upon  the  screen  a conventional  picture  of  the
English  colonist  in  a flannel  shirt,  and  wearing  a slouch  hat,
and  liestriding  a bare-l)acked  horse,  the  source  of  Nelly’s  next
phrase — “where  they  ride  horses  without  saddles  on” — can  he
accounted  for.

After  these  words  come  one  or  two  sentences  ap])licable  to
my  uncle,  but  without  l)earing  on  the  country  where  he  lives.
Then  Nelly  recurs  tn  the  subject  again  and  says: — “It  was  a
colony — not  a foieign  country  ” ; again  goes  off  to  anotfier
topic,  and  finally  says : — “ Has  he  got  sheep  all  round  him  ?
It’s  summer  time  not  winter.  His  name  was  Queensland.”
J venture  to  sxiggest  that  what  was  tine  and  what  was  false
in  these  statements  was  derived  from  one  and  the  same  source,
and  that  the  error  arose  from  misinterjiretation  of  a symbolic
picture,  and  not  because  the  sources  of  information  on  which
Nelly  was  drawing  were  unauthentic.

1 conceive  that  iUrs.  Cartwright  realised  when  Nelly  had
said  “ where  they  ride  horses  without  saddles  on  ” that  she
had  failed  to  gras])  the  intention  of  the  picture  which  had
been  employed  to  re])resent  a coloiust,  and  had  put  too
special  a construction  on  it.  So  another  attempt  was  made
to  convey  to  Nell}'  the  notion  of  a colony:  this  time  by  some
pictorial  representation  of  a land  of  the  Queens  beyond  the
seas.  The  atteni}it  proved  successful,  and  Nelly  was  enafiled
to  give  the  correct  information  “ It  was  a colony,  not  a
foreign  country.”  Then  afterwards  Nelly,  not  feeling  perfectly
satisfied  with  this,  the  correct  interpretation,  and  combining
what  1 imagine  were  the  two  separate  ])ictures  by  which
.firs.  Cartwright  sought  to  impart  the  idea  of  the  word
“ colony,”  hazarded  another  guess,  and  thus  hit  on  the  notion
of  Chu?eusland  and  the  shee}).  The  sheep  may  have  been
dragged  in  l)y  a natural  association  of  ideas  wlien  once  the
name  (Queensland  was  hit  upon,  or  perhaps  they  were  in
the  original  ]iicture  of  which  the  ty])ical  coloinal  squatter
formed  the  prominent  feature.

fly  language  here  has  been  particularly  “ anthropomorphic,”
but  it  must  be  understood  that  I describe  what  took  ydace.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson' !■<  Trance.  231

or  what  I imagine  took  place,  in  the  trance  in  these  objective
terms  merely  as  a matter  of  convenience  and  without  pre-
judice. My  attempt  to  trace  some  of  the  processes  underlying
the  operations  of  the  trance  consciousness  will  no  doubt  appear
to  many  rather  fantastical.  At  any  rate  I have  not  tiled
to  I'ead  preconceived  theories  into  the  facts ; it  is  the  facts
themselves  whicli  liave  suggested  to  me  the  theories.


(11)  The  Automatic  Wwting.

At  the  first  sitting  which  I had  with  Mrs.  Thompson  I saw
one  word  written  during  the  trance  ; it  was  not  till  more  than
two  years  later  that  I witnessed  any  automatic  writing  again.
Then  there  was  a good  deal  of  it.  One  curious  point  about  the
script  is  that  Nelly  will  not  accept  any  responsibility  for  it.  She
has  said  so  again  and  again,  usually  at  the  end  of  a sitting  during
informal  chats ; but  twice  she  has  put  in  a disclaimer  in  the
regular  course  of  a sitting.

Thus  on  January  3rd,  1901,  the  following  occurred.  Nelly
said ; — “ You  don’t  think  Mr.  Myers  is  so  ill ; he’s  much  worse.”
“Yes,”  I replied,  “but  you  wrote  to  the  contrary.”  “I  don’t
care  what  I’ve  written,”  retorted  Nelly  ; “ don’t  put  it  down  to
me.”  I had  as  a matter  of  fact  used  a somewhat  too  strong
expression,  for  nothing  had  been  written  which  actually  contra-
dicted Nelly’s  statement ; still  that  is  not  the  point,  but  rather
Nelly’s  readiness  to  hold  cheap,  or  at  least  to  accept  no  responsi-
bility for,  what  the  medium’s  hand  writes.

This  comes  out  more  clearly  in  the  next  (Quotation,  which  is
from  the  sitting  of  January  8th,  1901.  “It’s  not  me  that
writes.  It’s  always  somebody  else  that’s  writing.  Not  me,
even  if  I tell  you  so.”  Nothing  can  be  more  definite  than  this ;
and  the  concluding  words  seem  to  suggest  that  Nelly  herself  is
not  always  clear  about  the  source  of  the  automatic  script.

The  one  word  written  at  my  first  sitting  with  Mrs.  Thompson
was  my  own  name,  spelt  backwards.  During  the  wliole  of  this
sitting  there  was  no  suggestion  that  any  one  but  Nelly  was  com-
municating. The  name  was  written  immediately  after  Nelly

Q


•232


J.  G.  Fiddingion.


[PAHT


liad  addressed  me  for  the  first  time  by  my  name.  1 had  gone
under  an  assumed  name,  and  wlien  my  real  name  was  uttered
neither  iVIr.  Feilding,  who  was  present,  noi-  myself  gaAm  any
indication  that  the  name  spoken  was  right.  If  iS’^elly  was  not,
as  she  pretends,  responsible  for  the  writing,  what  part  of  i\Irs.
Thompson’s  consciousness,  one  may  ask,  was  ? And  why,  uidess
the  phenomenon  is  genuine,  shoidd  such  a gratuitous  complica-
tion 1)6  introduced  as  the  pretence  that  the  Kelly  control  has
nothing  to  do  with  the  automatic  script  ?

A pioper  name  was  on  one  other  occasion  given  backwards,
though  not  written  but  spelt  out.  Kelly  spelt  it  out,  and  when
I asked  her  how  she  got  the  letters,  she  said  that  they  had  l)een
given  her  by  another  sjjirit,  who  has  occasionally  controlled  l\Irs.
Thompson.

"J'he  control  whom  I have  previously  referred  to  as  Mr.  I),
wrote  with  great  fluency,  just  as  he  s])oke  with  great  ttuency.
T)ut  there  was  nothing  characteristic  about  his  script;  it  was  in
i\Irs.  Thompson’s  ordinary  handwriting.  The  Percival  control
also  wrote ; and  though  his  script  was  generally  almost  indis-
tinguishal)le  from  Airs.  Thompson’s  ordinary  hand,  it  here  and
there  showed  traces  of  slight  modifications — modilications  which
suggest  an  approximation  to  a half-formed  school-boy  type  of
hand.  Yet  there  wars  no  such  similarity  to  the  boy’s  own  hand-
writing as  to  strike  his  parents,  neither  (T  whom  can  be  said  to
err  on  the  side  of  over-scepticism.

E.  II.  Percival,  in  common  with  another  occasional  control,
signs  his  messages  in  a different  hand  fi/oni  that  in  whicli  the
body  of  the  message  is  written.  Put  in  neither  case  does  there
a}>pear  to  be  any  delinite  and  unmistakable  I’esemblance  to  the
signatures  of  either,  as  either  wrote  it  when  living.

After  the  sitting  of  January  3rd,  1901,  was  o\er,  and
when  Airs.  Thompson  had  been  awake  for  some  time  and  had
been  engaged  in  conversation  with  the  sitter,  Mrs.  Percival,  she
went  suddenly  to  the  writing  table,  seized  a pencil,  and  wrote
very  hurriedly  a message  which  purported  to  come  from  the
1‘ercival  control.  The  message  in  itself  was  not  in  the  least
evidential,  luff  the  writing  differed  from  the  previous  I’ercival
script  ill  that  the  school-lioy  hand  predominated  over  Airs,
d'hompson’s,  and  not  vice  versa,  as  in  tlie  script  produced  during
trance.  Put  it  cannot  he  said  that  Airs.  Thom])Son’s  automatic


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


■im


script  presents  any  specially  interesting  features  as  a general
rule.  It  is  not  the  chief  method  of  communication  as  in  Mrs.
Piper’s  case.  Still  to  this  rule  there  is  one  exception,  and  that
a most  important  one.

I have  referred  parenthetically  in  the  course  of  tins  paper  to
the  existence  of  a control  which  purports  to  represent  the  late
Ih’ofessor  Henry  Sidgwick,  whom  Mrs.  Thompson  had  met  several
times.  This  control  communicated  directly  hy  the  voice,  l:mt
also  by  means  of  \vriting.  The  matter  in  neither  case  is  of  mucli
evidential  value  ; the  manner  both  of  speech  and  of  writing  is,
however,  of  great  interest.

I shall  refer  to  the  content  of  the  communications  only  in  so
far  as  such  reference  may  be  necessary  to  elucidate  points  which
will  arise  in  connection  with  the  script.  It  will  doubtless  l)e  to
many  a disappointment  that  better  evidential  matter  is  not  to  he
found  in  the  communications  of  this  control,  from  whom  much
might  have  been  expected.  But,  on  the  assum[>tion  that  the
source  of  these  communications  is  really  what  it  is  represented
to  be  in  the  trance-messages,  I am  by  no  means  sure  that  we
ought  to  expect  evidence  of  a specially  effective  character.
little  rellection  will  show  that  a new  problem  has  arisen  in
psychical  research.  A communicating  spirit  who  has  in  life
been  a prominent  member  of  onr  Society  must  find  it  a more
difficult  task  to  prove  his  identity  through  mediumistic  utterance
or  writing  than  a layman,  using  “ layman  ” in  the  sense  of  an
individual  who  has  not  taken  a conspicuous  part  in  psychical  or
Spiritualistic  work.

IMediums,  and  for  that  matter  all  wIkj  take  any  interest
in  our  subjects,  if  they  do  not  actually  possess,  must  be
assumed  to  possess,  knowledge  of  the  careers  of  deceased
leaders  of  the  psychical  and  spiritualistic  movements.  Since
Mr.  Myers’  death,  for  instance,  a stream  of  communications,
which  purport  to  emanate  from  him,  has  Ijeen  pouring  in
from  various  sources.  With  two  exceptions,  I know  of

no  series  of  messages  which  could  not  have  been  leased
upon  common  knowledge  or  upon  information  contained  in
obituary  notices,  or  which  could  not  be  regarded  as  deduced
from  such  knowledge,  or  which  did  not  repeat  facts  given
in  his  own  writings  or  in  the  pul)lications  of  the  Society,  or
facts  which  could  easily  have  been  derived  through  con-


[part


2.'34  J.  G.  Picldington.

versatioii  with  some  uiemljer  of  his  large  circle  of  friends
or  acquaintances.

Or  again,  if  our  President  and  Mrs.  Verrall  will  forgive
the  liberty  whicli  I am  taking,  I can  illustrate  the  new
proldem  that  we  have  to  face  in  another  way.  Both  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  and  Mrs.  Verrall  have  contriljuted  to  the
Society  long  papers  on  the  phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper  and
of  Mrs.  Thompson,  which  contain  a large  number  of
details  about  their  own  personal  affairs,  about  tlieir  family
life,  and  aljout  tlieir  relations,  and  not  only  their  immediate
relations,  Imt  also  their  remote  or  collateral  kinsfolk.  When
their  time  conies — and  long  may  it  lie  deferred — to  com-
municate from  the  otlier  side,  it  is  olivious  that  every  message
purporting  to  come  from  either  of  them  which  merely  repeats
facts  already  published  in  their  own  writings,  or  which  can
be  shown  to  lie  based  on  these  facts,  will  have,  to  lie  discarded
as  evidentially  worthless.  And  I say  it  in  all  seriousness —
though  the  dictum  sounds  rather  comic — extra  patience  will
have  to  be  accorded  to  the  Psychical  Eesearcher  who  is
attempting  to  prove  his  identity.  One  can  well  imagine  the
annoyance  and  almost  despair  which  might  fall  on  such  a
communicator  should  he,  after  having  succeeded  in  getting,
through  a clear  statement  of  fact,  be  met  with  the  rejoinder
from  this  side  that  his  effort  is  of  no  avail,  because  what  he
has  said  has  appeared,  let  us  say,  in  the  Proceedings.

Even  during  his  lifetime  a psychical  researcher  is  not
entirely  exempt  from  tlie  disadvantages  resulting  from  the
pulilication  of  his  private  affairs.  Thus,  for  instance,  Nelly
has  more  than  once  referred  to  members  of  Mrs.  Verrall’s
family,  who  have  lieen  mentioned  in  the  Journed  or  Proceedings ;
not,  however,  making  any  pretence  to  have  learnt  of  their
existence  in  any  supernormal  way,  Imt  rather  taking  it  for
granted  that  1,  of  course,  knew  that  these  people  were  mentioned
in  our  publications.  In  this  way  she  spoke  on  several  occa-
sions of  Mrs.  Veri'aU’s  sister  l)y  her  Christian  name,  tout
court,  and  I hadn’t  the  least  notion  whom  she  meant,  and
thought  that  the  name  was  just  thrown  in  hap-hazard.  Many
months  passed  liefore  1 discovered  who  was  meant,  and,
when  I mentioned  my  discovery  to  Nelly,  her  first  anxiety
was  to  warn  me  against  attaching  any  importance  to  her


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


235


knowledge  of  the  name : “ Every  one  knows  who  Flora  is,”  she
i-emarked.

Kecent  phenomena  obtaiiied  l)y  Mrs.  Verrall  and  others  seem
to  suggest  that  the  dithcnlties  in  the  way  of  giving  good  proofs
of  identity  are  beginning  to  he  recognised  ‘on  the  other  side,’
and  that  an  attempt  is  lieing  made  to  furnish  evidence  of
intelligent  disearnate  action  by  the  commnnication  of  concordant
messages  through  dift'erent  living  persons.

But  to  return  to  the  subject  of  the  Sidgwick  script.  It  will
now  be  clear  why  1 propose  to  dev(.)te  myself  exclusively  to
a description  of  the  automatic  writing,  without  taking  into
account  the  content  of  the  script  or  of  the  spoken  communi-
cations.

Professor  Sidgwick  died  in  the  summer  of  1900.  1 was

to  begin  a new  series  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  towards
the  end  of  December,  1900.  After  consultation  with  Mr.

jUyers  I decided  to  invite  Professor  Sidgwick’s  sister,  Tlrs.
Benson,  to  a sitting  with  a view  to  attracting  communications
fi'om  her  brother.  She  accordingly  attended  the  first  sitting
of  the  new  series  on  December  20th,  1900.  This  was  also
the  second  sitting  at  which  a screen  was  interposed  l)etween
the  me<Iium  and  the  sitter,  and  the  strangeness  of  the  condi-
tions was  perhaps  responsil»le  for  the  poor  results.  Mrs.
Benson  brought  with  her  to  the  sitting  a paper-knife  that
had  belonged  to  her  lu'other,  and  two  letters  of  his  inside  a
covering  gummed  envelope.  Only  the  vaguest  references  were
made  to  the  owner  of  these  objects,  and  his  identity  was
not  discovered.

Three  more  sittings  were  held  after  this  one,  and  yet  not
a word  was  said  aljont  Professor  Sidgwick.  At  last,  on
January  11th,  1901  (see  also  pp.  297-8),  the  first  reference
was  made  quite  unexpectedly  at  a sitting  attended  b}'  Mr.
and  Mrs.  I’ercival.  Before  the  sitters  entered  the  seance
room,  I asked  Nelly  to  try  to  Ijring  Edmund  Gurney,  as  I
wanted  to  have  a talk  with  this  control,  which  has  occasionally
manifested  through  Airs.  Thompson.  Nelly  said  that  I had
better  wait  until  the  sitters  were  gone.  A good  deal  of  script
was  done  at  this  sitting  purporting  to  come  from  the  I’ercival
control.  Across  this  script  and  intermingled  with  it  were
written  in  a different  liandwriting,  though  in  a handwritiim’


230


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


showing  ii(.t  trace  of  resemblance  to  that  of  Professor  Sidgwick,
the  words  “ Trin  j Heniy  >Sidg.”  The  first  five  letters
seem  like  an  attem])t  at  “ Trinity,”  and  suggest  that  a reference
was  intended  to  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  On  another  page
of  the  sheet  of  foolscap  paper  on  which  the  automatic  writing
was  l)eing  done,  and  underneath  some  of  the  I’ercival  script,
and  tpiite  by  itself  and  disconnected,  was  the  word  “ paper-
cutter.”  This  was  written  T should  say  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s
natural  hand,  though  it  is  a very  scriblily  sample  of  it.  No
paper-cutter  had  been  presented  to  the  medium  at  this  sitting,
and  it  is  therefore  fair  to  conclude  that  the  appearance  on
the  same  sheet  of  paper  of  an  obvious  attempt  at  the  name
“ Henry  Sidgwick”  and  of  the  word  “paper-cutter”  was  not
accidental.

fn  the  course  of  the  sitting  f gave  the  medium  a sealed
envelope  prepared  Ijy  k'lrs.  l*ercival ; whereupon  Nelly  said : —
“ I don’t  want  any  Henry  Sidgwicks,  l)ecause  he  said  he
wants  to  tell  about  it.”  And  then  in  reph'  to  a question
fi'om  me: — “What  made  me  say  Henry  Sidgwick  is  because
he’s  nearer  to  me  than  Mr.  Gurney.”

(Curiously  enough,  the  very  next  moment  the  Percival
control  I'cappeared,  and  in  his  third  sentence  said  : — “ It  was
IMr.  Gurney  who  took  charge  of  me”;  meaning,  1 have  no
doulit,  that  Mr.  (furney  had  helped  him  to  come  to  com-
municate. Cf.  pp.  300-1.)

AMien  the  sitters  had  left  I asked  Nelly  if  Air.  Gurney
was  present.  Nelly  made  the  cryptic  answ-er : — “About  the
trio.”  “ AVIkj  are  the  trio  ? ” 1 asked.  “ Henry  Sidgwick,
Edmund  Gurney,  and  Air.  Alyers,”  replied  Nelly.  “ Henry
Sidgwick  is  here.”  The  Sidgwick  continl  then  made  its  first
appearance,  and,  though  the  words  spoken  were  few,  the  voice,
manner  and  style  of  utterance  were  extraordinarily  lifelike  ;
so  much  so  indeed  that,  had  I l^een  ignorant  of  Professor
Sidgwick’s  death  and  had  happened  to  hear  the  voice  without
being  aide  to  tell  whence  it  was  issuing,  I think  I should
have  imhesitatingly  ascribed  it  to  him.

The  next  sitting  was  on  January  21st,  1901,  and  directly
trance  came  on  and  l)efore  the  sitters  entered  the  room,
Nelly  l)egan  : — “ AVhere’s  Henry  Sidgwick  ? He’s  coming  to
talk  after  the  sitting.”  As  soon  as  the  sitters  left  the


(SCRIl'T  A.)


XLVii.]  Plhenomena  in  Mrs.  Tlumvpson  s Trancr.


237


Sidgwick  control  made  an  ineffectual  effort  to  speak.  Nelly

then  came  to  the  rescue  and  gave  the  following  message : —
“ Mr.  Piddington,  he  cant  talk.  He  wants  to  write  himself,
when  you’re  not  thinking  of  him.  . . . She  will  write  it  at
4.30.”  “Who,”  1 asked,  “will  write  it?  The  medium?”

“ Yes,”  said  Nelly.  The  Sidgwick  control  then  took  Nelly’s
place;  and  again  the  impersonation  was  most  extraordinarily
lifelike.  The  only  two  occasions  on  wliicli  I have  been

emotionyU,  or  have  experienced  the  slightest  feeling  of  uncan-
niness during  a spiritualistic  seance,  or  have  felt  myself  in
danger  of  Ijeing  carried  away,  was  during  these  two  mani-
festations of  the  Sidgwick  control.  I felt  that  I was  indeeil
speaking  with,  and  hearing  the  voice  of,  the  man  I had
known ; and  the  vividness  of  the  original  impression  has  n(.)t
faded  with  time.

After  Nelly  had  explained  that  her  mother  was  to  be

prepared  to  receive  an  automatically-written  message  the  same
afternoon  at  4.30,  the  Sidgwick  control  spoke  as  follows: —
“ He’s  not  witli  me.”  (The  “ He  ” undoulAedly  meant  Mr.
Myers.  This  sentence  and  the  next  were  spoken  with  great
emotion.)

./.  G.  P.  : — “ Is  he  resting  ? ”

H.  8. : — “ He’s  not  within  range  at  all.  . . . Alice  will
know  that  it’s  me  [sic]  that’s  written  it.  She’ll  recognise  it.
She’ll  know  it’s  my  wniting.  Tell  lier  to  compare  it  with
the  others.”

“ Didn’t  F rederic  Myers  leave  it  to  the  Society  ? The
hooks — not  those  for  you — T will  write  it.  You  always
thought  me  old  and  shabby,  but  I’m  shaljbier  now.”

The  final  sentence  was  apparently  got  out  with  immense
effort,  and  then  the  personation  stopped  with  a snap.  It  was
just  like  the  swift  and  unexpected  withdrawal  of  a magic-
lantern  slide.

While  these  words  were  being  spoken  the  script  marked
(A)  was  being  written,  the  pencil  being  held  l>y  the  medium,
as  I noted  at  the  time,  between  her  first  and  second  fingers.
I read  this  script  thus : —

“ I don’t  think  Myers  is  here,  or  (?)  we  (?)  should  see
him  before  the  8tli.  As  E.  G.  told  me  [Mr.  D.]  was  waiting  (?)
for  him.”


38


J.  G.  Picldington.


[part


The  last  foui’  words  are  plainly  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  natural
handwriting.  As  to  the  rest  of  the  writing  Miss  Alice  Johnson,
who  (as  Mrs.  Thompson  knew)  had  l.>een  Mrs.  Sidgwick’s  private
secretary  for  many  years,  and  therefore  had  every  opportunity
of  becoming  thoroughly  familiar  with  Professor  Sidgwick’s
handwriting,  and  whose  cautious  and  critical  temperament  is
known  to  members  of  the  Society,  reports  as  follows : —

“ ‘ I don’t  think  iVlyers  is  here  ’ is  very  like,  especially
‘ Myers  is.’  Then  it  tails  off.”

It  will  Ije  seen  that  the  hand  and  the  voice  are  in  part
expressing  the  same  thought,  though  in  slightly  different
language.  The  voice  says,  “ He’s  not  with  me,”  while  the

hand  is  writing,  “ I don’t  think  Myers  is  liere.”  Another

instance  of  this  automatism  within  an  automatism  occurred  in
the  next  sitting.

In  order  to  make  the  allusions  in  the  spoken  and  written
communications  intelligilJe,  it  should  be  explained  (1)  that
the  sitting  of  January  21st,  1901,  took  place  a few  days
after  Mr.  Myers’  death,  and  (2)  that  “Alice”  is  no  doubt
intended  to  refer  to  j\liss  Alice  Johnson.  The  interpretation
of  the  remainder  of  the  message  is  open  to  discussion.  The
words  “You  always  thouglit  me  old  and  shabby,  but  I’m  shabbier
now,”  may  conceivably  be  an  attempt  to  give  the  contents  of
a sealed  envelope.

With  the  evidential  side  of  the  question,  however,  1 am

not  liere  concerned : wliat  1 want  to  draw  attention  to  is

first,  that  this  short  specimen  of  the  script  was  written  under
my  eyes  in  an  ordinary  manner  (except  that  the  jiencil  was
held  in  an  unusual  and  one  would  have  thouglit  uncomfortable
fashion),  not  deliberately  nor  with  studied  effort ; and  secondly,
that  the  trance-] )ersonality  is  confident  of  having  produced  a
successful  imitation  of  the  handwriting  of  Professor  Sidgwick.

The  morning  after  1 received  the  script  nuirked  (B)  from
.Mrs.  Thonii)Son,  acconi])anied  liy  the  following  note  : —

“ 1 am  ashamed  to  say  that  I was  not  at  home  till  5 p.ni.,
Init  1 promptly  sat  down  and  lost  consciousness  after  a few
minutes  and  wrote  enclosed.  It  is  rather  a strange  writing.

1 have  never  seen  Prof.  Sidgwick’s,  but  1 think  it  would  be
very  interesting  (tliough  ])erhaps  not  evidential)  to  compare  it.”
When  the  trance  was  over  in  the  morning  of  January  21st,


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


•j38

The  last  four  words  are  plainly  in  Mrs.  Tliompson’s  natural
handwriting.  As  to  the  rest  of  the  writing  Miss  Alice  Johnson,
who  (as  Airs.  Thompson  knew)  had  been  Airs.  Sidgwick’s  private
secretary  for  many  years,  and  therefore  had  every  opportunity
of  becoming  thoroughly  familiar  with  Professor  Sidgwick’s
liandwriting,  and  whose  cautious  and  critical  temperament  is
known  to  members  of  the  Society,  reports  as  follows : —

“ ‘ I don’t  think  ]\Iyers  is  here  ’ is  very  like,  especially
‘ Alyers  is.’  Then  it  tails  off.”

It  will  l.)e  seen  that  the  hand  and  the  voice  are  in  part
expressing  the  same  thought,  though  in  slightly  different
language.  The  voice  says,  “ He’s  not  with  me,”  while  the

hand  is  writing,  “ I don’t  think  Alyers  is  here.”  Another

instance  of  this  automatism  within  an  automatism  occurred  in
the  next  sittino;.

In  order  to  make  the  allusions  in  the  spoken  and  written
communications  intelligible,  it  should  l)e  explained  (1)  that
the  sitting  of  January  21st,  1901,  took  place  a few  days
after  Air.  Alyers’  death,  and  (2)  that  “Alice”  is  no  doubt
intended  to  infer  to  Aliss  Alice  Johnson.  The  interpretation
of  the  remainder  of  the  message  is  open  to  discussion.  The
words  “ You  always  thought  me  old  and  shabby,  but  I’m  shabbier
now,”  may  conceivably  be  an  attempt  to  give  the  contents  of
a sealed  envelope.

AVitli  the  evidential  side  of  the  question,  however,  1 am

not  here  concerned : what  I want  to  draw  attention  to  is

first,  that  this  short  specimen  of  the  script  was  written  under
my  eyes  in  an  ordinary  manner  (except  that  the  pencil  was
held  in  an  unusual  and  one  would  have  thought  uncomfortable
fashion),  not  delilierately  nor  with  studied  effort ; and  secondly,
that  the  tranceqiersonality  is  confident  of  having  produced  a
successful  imitation  of  the  handwriting  of  Professor  Sidgwick.

The  morning  after  I received  the  script  marked  (B)  from
Airs.  Thompson,  accompanied  by  the  following  note  : —

“ I am  ashamed  to  say  tliat  1 was  not  at  home  till  5 p.m.,
l)iit  1 promptly  sat  down  and  lost  consciousness  after  a few
minutes  and  wrote  enclosed.  It  is  rather  a strange  writing.

1 have  never  seen  Prof.  Sidgwick’s,  but  I think  it  would  be
very  interesting  (though  peihaps  not  evidential)  to  compare  it.”
When  the  trance  was  over  in  the  morning  of  January  21st,


(SCRIP'l'  15.)


i


I

1

,j


I--.


(Script  C.)


triD  yV^


Jy^  ,f  y ' ^


^ h"


VV^'^I


oV


J


^s*’


. L>^


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


239


1901,  I communicated  to  i\lrs.  Thompson  the  intention  of  the
Sidgwick  control  to  write  through  her  hand  when  she  was
alone  at  home.

The  script  (marked  B)  reads  as  follows : —

“ Late — late — late  hour.  Tell  me  why.  Late — late  hour.

Late — late — late  hour.

Myers  is  elsewhere,  I think.  Should  1 find  him  here,  I

will  turn  up  the  Thursday  afternoon,  and  therefore  you  had
better  agree  to  meet,  as  I may  have  [i;ndecipherahle  word]
only  I think  you  probably  find  I have.  Will  you  do  for  H.  S.

I go  for  must  go  till  Thursday  31,  ^ to  5.  H.  S.  Certainly
I go  for  F.  W.  H.  IMyers,  and  may  [?]  tell  you  aljout  me.

Trevelyan’s  transferred.”

Then  followed  in  i\lrs.  Thompson’s  ordinary  handwriting: —
^Yes,  yes.  I want  to  know  what  Fred  told  you  to  remember.”

The  last  sentence  I am  disposed  to  attribute  not  to  the
Sidgwick  control,  but  to  the  control  called  in  this  paper

Mr.  B.”

With  regard  to  this  script  Miss  Johnson  comments: —

“As  to  the  writing  done  after  the  sitting  by  Mrs.  Thompson

alone:  I think  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  resemblance

is  not  accidental  . . . and  the  words  tliat  are  most  like  his
[i.e.  Professor  Sidgwick’s]  writing  are  more  like  it  than  any
in  [script  A].  The  first  ‘ Thursday,’  ‘ had  better  agree,’
‘ probably,’  ‘ H.  S.,’  ‘ certainly  ’ and  ‘ Trevelyan,’  seem  to  me
almost  exactly  as  he  would  have  written  them.  Almost  the
whole  from  ‘ Myers  is  elsewhere  ’ to  ‘ Trevelyan’s  transferred  ’
is  wonderfully  like.”

The  next  sitting  was  on  Jauuarv  29th,  1901.  I had  gone
out  of  the  room  for  a few  minutes  in  order  to  tell  the
sitters  to  go  away,  as  Jlrs.  Thompson  thought  she  woukl  not
go  into  trance  a second  time.  Un  my  leturn  1 found  her
entranced,  and  on  the  point  of  completing  the  following
sentences  {v.  script  marked  C) : —

“ I am  sure  I can  give  if  they  find  my  diary.  iked
knows  and  helps.  H.  S.  Yes,  but  why  did  you  II.  Sidgwick
tell  Myers  he  isn’t  here.  I read  his  letter  to  the  Council.”

I have  given  the  words  as  tliey  appear  in  the  script,  but  judg-
ing from  the  variations  in  the  pencilling  the  signature  “ II.
Sidgwick”  really  came  after  “my  diary.”  “ AVhy  did  you  tell


240


J.  G.  Fiddinfjton.


[part


Myers  he  isn’t  here  ?”  obviously  means  “'Why  did  yon  say  Myers
isn’t  here  ? ”,  Nelly  having  several  times  declared  her  conviction
that  Mr.  IVIyers  was  not  really  dead.

On  the  completion  of  the  automatic  writing  Nelly  said  : —

“ Mr.  Sidgwick  has  been  writing.  He  was  talking  to  me  and
writing  at  the  same  time,  and  said,  ‘ Why  did  you  keep  on  say-
ing Myers  isn’t  here  ? ’ and  he  couldn’t  help  writing  it.  [For
a scnnewhat  similar  phenomenon,  v.  Frocecdings^  XXXIII.,
Y>p.  420-1.]  Then  he  said,  ‘I  read  the  letter  to  the  Council,
and  everyl)ody  thought  “Good”  (or  “Great”)  Heavens!  Myers
writing  and  Sidgwick  reading  . . .’  (Here  I failed  to  catch  the
remainder  of  the  sentence,  and  suggested  a paraphrase,  which,
however,  Nelly  did  not  accept.)  No.  He  sort  of  said,  ‘ Humph  !
hut  I read  the  letter  straight  off  to  the  Council.’  He  said  it  w^as
a letter  from  the  abroad  country,  and  my  mother  wars  abroad  too,
so  she  coiddn’t  know  aljout  it.  How'  many  struggled  to  read  it
first  ? Then  he  read  it  quite  well.  He  wants  to  tell  you  it’s
outside  the  possil:>ility  of  Mother  knowing.  . .

The  incident  here  referred  to  really  took  place  as  describeil,
l)Ut  1 have  to  repeat  that  this  is  not  the  occasion  to  discTiss  the
evidential  value  of  the  communications.  The  point  to  notice
is,  hrst,  this  the  sec(md  instance  of  an  automatism  within  an
automatism,  “ Ilut  why  did  you  tell  IMyers  he  isn’t  here  ? ”
and,  sectmdly,  Nelly’s  amplifica.tion,  and  correct  amplhicatioii,
of  the  episode  only  uutliiied  in  the  script,  namely,  the  reading
of  the  letter  at  the  Council  (cf.  p.  24(3).

On  January  30th,  1901,  the  day  after  this  sitting,  i\Irs.
Thompson  was  at  home  engaged  in  writing  a letter  to  a friend.
Hut  1 had  better  (piote  her  own  account  contained  in  a letter
addressed  to  me  the  same  day ; —

“ I sat  down  to  write  a letter  to  a friend.  The  table  was
strewn  with  papers,  etc.,  and  1 suppose  1 went  into  trance.  Any-
way I was  alone,  and  as  the  writing  is  muddled  up  with  the
letter,  I thought  it  would  be  l»est  to  send  yoii  my  letter  just  as
I found  it  when  I awoke.”

The  letter  which  Mrs.  Thompson  enclosed  broke  oft'  in  the
middle  of  the  second  page  in  the  middle  of  a sentence.  Tlien
came  a scrawl  in  ink,  and  below  the  scrawl  the  word  “Pencil”
written  in  ink.  The  script  proper  written  in  pencil  then  begins,
and  runs  as  follows  (see  sciipt  I).); —


c/'  n


(ScRirT  D.)


l^


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.


2-H


“ ]\Iay  I come?  Trevelyan’s  Trevelyl^ans  [sic],  l.oO,  May  7 th
[or  perhaps  “the”],  /75  H.S.  S.  [or  J.]  [?]  change  letter  [or
“ better  ”]  to  Miss  J.

“ iMyers  Xorth  must  he  here  again  on  Thursday.”

[Here  was  a line  drawn  from  page  two  to  page  three  of  the
sheet  of  note-paper,  as  if  to  show  the  se(pience  in  which  the
remaining  part  of  the  writing  was  to  be  read.]

“ He  will  not  now  change,  may  be  opening,  am  inclined  to
say  so.”

Then  came  two  signatures.  The  hrst  that  of  H.  Sidgwick  (?),
the  second  that  of  T.  W.  H.  iMyers.

In  tlie  first  signature  the  initial  letters  H.  8.  aie  clearly  and
Ijoldly  formed,  Imt  they  are  followed  by  a cramped  and  un-
decipherable scribble.  This  scribble  may  possil)ly  be  an  unsuc-
cessful attempt  to  write  the  last  seven  letters  of  the  name
Sidgwick,  but  I think  they  represent  an  attempt  at  the  initials
“ F.  W.  H.  i\L,”  and  that  the  Sidgwick  signature  is  confined,  as
in  some  other  instances  in  the  script,  to  the  initials  H.  S.  The
second  signature,  “ F.  Mb  H.  klyex's,”  appeals  underneath  the  first
and  right  in  the  extreme  right-hand  corner  of  the  paper  in  an
entirely  different  handwriting.  It  is  badly  and  weakly  written,
and  would  not,  I imagine,  be  considered  a good  imitation  of  Mr.
Myers’  ordinary  signature ; Imt  it  is  extraordinarily  like  some
specimens  of  Mr.  Myers’  signatures  as  he  wrote  them  in  the  last
few  weeks  of  his  life.  I have  unfortunately  destroyed  the  letters
which  I received  from  Mr.  Myers  during  the  period  of  his  last
illness,  lint  I have  a most  clear  and  Auvid  recollection  of  the
increasing  deterioration  in  his  handwriting,  and  particularly  in
the  signature.

AboA^e  the  sentence  beginning  “He  Avill  not  now  change”  Avas
Avritten  the  following  : —

“ iMyers  says  certainly  go  Myers  says  better  go  go  out  of
town  not  noAv  not  noAv  the  day  not  here.”

This  ends  the  SidgAvick  script.  Mrs.  Verrall  had  a sitting
the  day  after  this  last  specimen  Avas  Avritten,  but  though
Nelly  gave  messages  from  I’rofessor  Sidgwick  and  conveyed
explanations  from  him  about  the  last  piece  of  automatic  script,
he  neither  directly  spoke  nor  wrote.

iMiss  Alice  Johnson’s  estimate  of  the  resemlJance  of  the
script  to  Professor  SidgAvick’s  liandAvriting  has  already  been


'J42


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


■quoted.  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  in  a letter  addressed  to  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  speaks  of  “ the  unmistakable  likeness  of  the  hand-
writing ” ; and  i\Irs.  Henson  in  a letter  addressed  to  me  after
■examining  the  various  sheets  containing  the  script,  says  of
them : — “ The  more  I look  at  them,  the  more  I am  struck
with  the  likeness.”

I showed  specimens  of  the  script  to  one  or  two  people  who
were  well  ac(piainted  with  Professor  Sidgwick’s  handwriting,
without  of  course  giving  any  hint  of  what  answer  1 was  ex-
pecting, and  asked  them  to  cast  just  a cursory  glance  at
them,  and  then  say  whose  handwriting  it  was.  In  each  case
the  answer  came  witliout  hesitation,  to  the  effect  that  it  w'as
Professor  Sidgwick’s  writing.  T give  re[)r(.)ductions  (if  specimens
of  his  |)encil  waiting  (taken  from  a book  of  rough  notes  on

many  different  subjects,  and  marked  1,  2,  .3,  4),  also  some
reproductions  of  his  signature,  taken  from  letters,  in  order
that  the  reader  may  compare  the  automatic  script  with
them.  As  evidence  foi'  identity  the  script,  remarkable
Lhougii  it  is,  seems  to  me  w’orth  little  or  nothing.  I am

not  much  of  a dreamer,  and  at  best  am  not  a vivid  one,
and  I am  aliout  as  poor  a visualiser  as  could  be  found,  yet
in  my  dreams  1 have  more  tlian  once  dreamt  that  1
have  received  letters  from  a friend  or  ac(piaintance,  and  in
the  dream-letter  the  characteristic  handwriting  of  my  di'eam-
correspondent  has  been  depicted  to  the  life.  If  so  poor
a visualiser  as  myself  can  in  sleep  summon  up  so  clear  a
jdcture  of  another’s  handwriting,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose
that  Ml’S.  'I'liompson  in  trance  enjoys  at  least  an  equal
ca[»acity,  and  there  seems  to  me  to  be  but  a small  ste])  between
such  ca])aeity  foi-  visualisation  and  the  pow’er  of  making  a

grajdiic  reproduction  of  the  visual  image.

It  is  true  that  i\lrs.  'riiompson  says  that  she  has  never

seen  Professor  fsidgwick’s  handwriting;  and  I entirely  acce]it
that  statement  if  it  is  taken  to  mean  (and  Airs.  Thompson,
I should  say,  meant  no  more  than  this  by  it)  that  she  has
no  conscious  recollection  of  having  seen  it.  But  it  is  possible
that  either  at  ]\lr.  i\lyers’  house,  or  at  some  other  house  at
Cambridge,  some  specimen  may  have  come  within  her  range
of  vision.

Nelly  said  to  Mrs.  Verrall  on  January  Jlst,  1901; —


Reproductions  of  Professor  Sidgwick’s  Handwriting.


4


i


! "


Reproductions  of  Professor  Sidgwiek’s  Handwriting.


XLvn.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.


24.;^

“ JMother  looked  on  his  photograph  {i.e.  a signed  photograj)!!
of  Mr.  Sidgwick)  to  see  if  the  signature  were  the  same,  and
did  not  tliink  the  ‘ Sidgwick,’  written  full,  like.  She’s  not
got  any  writing  of  his.”

d'he  possibility  of  forgery  must  suggest  itself  to  every
mind ; but  only  in  my  opinion  to  be  instantly  dismissed
after  a careful  study  of  the  documents,  after  consirleration  of
the  fact  of  at  least  some  portion  of  the  scrii)t  liaving  l)een
produced  mrrentc  ccdamo  l>efoi'e  a witness,  and  then  with  the
pencil  held  in  an  unusual  fashion,  and  also  on  general  grounds.

Sitting  of  June  'Ind,  1900.

In  spite  of  Nelly’s  denial  of  responsibility  for  any  of  the
automatic  script,  there  is  one  instance  wliere  it  is  extremely
difficult  to  suppose  that  she  was  not  the  author  of  it.

At  this  sitting  a lady  had  entered  the  seance-room  towards
the  end  of  the  trance ; and  after  Nelly  had  made  one  or
two  slight  references  to  her,  the  following  sentences  were
written : — “ Don’t  ask  me  any  more  questions.  I hate  the
blue  blouse.”  The  lady  in  question  was  wearing  a blue
blouse.  Now,  throughout  this  sitting  there  was  not  the
slightest  indication  that  any  control  other  than  Nelly  was
concerned  in  the  communications ; and,  even  apart  from  that
fact,  the  context  indisputal:)ly  shows  that  the  “ I ” must  refer
to  Nelly.  The  phraseology,  too,  is  characteristic  of  her,  and
not  at  all  of  the  other  controls.  Nor  coidd  this  exception
be  explained  away  as  an  automatism  in  accord  with  other
automatisms  dis]Dlayed  elsewhere  in  the  course  of  these
phenomena,  for,  where  it  has  sometimes  happened  that  a
control  has  unconsciously  resorted  to  automatic  writing,  the
writing  has  been  produced  simultaneously  wdth  the  expression
by  means  of  direct  speech  of  similar  sentiments.  The
simplest  explanation  of  the  exception  here  to  the  general  rule
laid  down  by  Nelly  is  that  she  wrote,  instead  of  spoke,  her
feelings  in  order  to  avoid  giving  offence.  Still  the  fact
remains  that  this  instance  invalidates  Nelly’s  definite  pro-
nouncement : — “ It’s  not  me  that  writes.  It’s  always  somebody
else  that’s  writing.  Not  me,  even  if  I tell  you  so.”


244


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Sitting  of  January  1st,  1901.

Miss  Bates  was  the  sitter  on  this  occasion,  and,  directly
she  entered  the  room,  Xelly  implied  that  the  Geoffrey  Scott
control  was  waiting  and  anxious  to  communicate.  Now,
although  Miss  Bates  did  not  come  to  the  sitting  with  the
intention  of  getting  communications  from  or  almut  the  Scott
control,  still  it  is  not  inconceivalde  that  there  was  a certain
signihcance  in  his  appearance  on  the  scene,  for  she  had  not
long  hefore  Ijeen  staying  with  i\lrs.  Scott,  and  had,  I l.)elieve,
talked  over  with  her  the  communications  purporting  to  come
from  tins  conti'(jl.  Not  that  I am  inclined  to  attach  any
weight  to  the  coincidence,  such  as  it  is,  for  it  was  a defect,
in  my  opinion,  of  a large  number  of  the  sittings  with
d’hompson  that  the  sitters  were  chosen  from  far  too  circum-
scribed a circle : so  circuni'scribed  that  statements  about  one
individual  family  or  set  of  people  had  a good  chance  of
]:>roving  to  have  some  applicability,  more  (jr  less  remote,  to
more  than  one  sitter.  Still  the  coincidence  existed,  and  it  is
therefore  only  fair  to  mention  it.  1 had  handed  to  the

medium  a silk  muffler  belonging  to  a brother  of  i\liss  Bates ;
whereupon  Nelly  said : — “ Haven’t  you  got  the  book  ? a little
wet  book  helonu'inu’  to  this  ? a little  hook  that  has  been  wet?”
This  book  had  already  been  mentioned  before  in  connection
with  the  (deofffey  Scott  control,  and  consequently  I under-
stood to  whom  Nelly’s  next  remark  was  meant  to  refer ; —
“ Never  mind.  (five  him  a pencil  and  let  him  write.  I
can  tell  you  the  things,  and  he  wants  to  write  himself.”

,7.  7.  p.;_“Who  is  he?”

Nelly  : — “ The  young  man  belonging  to  this  {i.e.  the  muffler).
It  doesn’t  seem  a stranger.  It  seems  as  if  he  wants  to
write.  He  wants  to  write,  and  I want  to  talk.”

The  medium  then  l)egan  to  write  a message  evidently
intended  to  proceed  from  the  Scott  control.  Nelly  did  not
on  this  occasion  speak  while  the  writing  was  being  done,  Imt
waited  until  it  was  completed.

Then  the  Scott  control  spoke  directly : to  be  followed

immediately  by  Nelly  again,  who  appeared  to  be  rather  cross
.at  his  intrusion.  After  the  Scott  control  had  used  the  direct
voice,  Nelly  lecognised  who  he  was;  though  it  will  he


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  ThompsoiL  s Trance.


245


observed  that  before  the  completion  of  the  script  she  seemed
to  be  unaware  of  who  the  spirit  was.

If  one  is  justified  in  holding  that  Xelly  represents  her
own  experiences  as  they  represent  themselves  to  her,  that  is,
if  the  alleged  phenomena  of  the  trance  are  genuine  and  not
pretence,  one  must  conclude  that  a spirit  is  “near”  enough
to  employ  both  direct  writing  and  direct  speech  as  a method
of  communication,  and  yet  not  neai'  enough  for  another  and
presumalily  simultaneously  controlling  spirit  to  recognise  ; or,  if
these  controls  are  no  more  than  secondary  personalities,  that
of  two  separate  personalities  in  simultaneous  or  almost  simul-
taneous activity,  personality  A.  can  be  aware  of  the  activity
of  personality  B.,  while  yet  unable  or  unwilling  to  recognise
the  identity  of  its  fellow-personality.  If  the  whole  thing  is
humbug,  what  stupid  humbug  it  is  !


Sitting  of  Janv.ary  Srd,  1901.

If  the  last  episode  might  strike  a sceptic  as  stupid  humbug,
one  which  is  to  be  found  in  this  sitting  would  on  the  contrary
have  to  be  rated  as  decidedly  ingenious,  and  as  a happy
imitation  of  authentic  automatism.  The  Percival  control  had
written  a sentence  or  two,  and  had  also  used  the  direct  voice.
Xelly  also  had  been  speaking.  I was  engaged  in  taking
some  objects  out  of  a case  which  had  Ijelonged  to  Edward
Horace  I'ercival  before  presenting  it  to  the  medium,  when
Nelly  broke  in  with  ;

“ Take  his  photo,  out  too.  I know  what  he’s  like.  He
has  been  here  writing.  (In  this  case  Nelly  was  able  to
recognise  a spirit  who  had  been  writing.)  Take  your  secrets
with  you.  He  was  writing  because  Mr.  Stainton  IMoses
said : — ‘ "Write,  lad,  and  I’ll  help  thee.’  ”

J.  G.  P. : — “ He  spoke  also.”

JSfeUy : — “I  didn’t  know  he  spoke.”

The  medium  then  wrote : — “ Eog  Percy  (or  I’erciv)  Ann  my
nrot.”

J.  G.  P. : — “ What  is  written  ? ”

Nelly : “ He  wrote  and  said : ‘ IVIy  mother  has  my  photo-

graph.’ I*’raps  that’s  nothing.”

It  will  be  seen  tliat  the  words,  “ i\Iy  mother  has  my


24G


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


photograph,”  had  not  been  written,  only  “My  mot,”  and
Nelly  apparently  completed  the  sentence  (cf.  p.  240).  The
letters  “ Ann  ” prol)ahly  were  the  first  three  letters  of  the
word  Aunt.  E.  H.  Percival’s  aunt  was  present  at  the  sitting,  and
l)efore  the  sitters  had  entered  the  room  the  following  had  been
written  : — “ Aunt  and  my  mother  want  to  come  together.”

It  is  altogether  a very  complex  phenomenon,  for  Nelly  knows
that  the  control  has  been  writing,  while  ignorant  of  his  having
also  spoken,  and  states  that  he  has  written  a sentence  of
which,  as  a matter  of  fact,  only  one  word  and  a lialf  actually
was  completed.

According  to  my  notes  Nelly  is  made  to  use  the  al)breviation
“ photo.”,  whereas  she  is  made  to  report  tlie  Percival  control
as  using  the  word  “ photograph.”  I cannot  absolutely  guarantee
the  exactitude  of  my  record  on  this  point,  but  1 feel  fairly
confident  tliat  the  full  word  was  employed  on  one  occasion,
and  tlie  abln-eviated  fonn  on  the  other.  If  this  really  was
so,  it  is  but  another  illustration  of  the  consistent  and  apparently
undesio'ned  maintenance  of  characteristic  shades  of  difl'erence

O

in  the  speech  of  the  various  controls.


(12)  Prophecies.

Nelly,  like  the  controls  of  most  mediums,  revels  in  pre-
dictions. A statement  put  in  the  form  of  a prediction  has
this  great  advantage  over  statements  which  are  referred  to
the  ])resent  or  past  that,  unless  tlie  prophet  is  indiscreet
enough  to  define  the  period  within  whicli  fulfilment  is  to  take
place,  there  is,  if  not  all  eternity  ahead,  at  least  many  years
in  which  to  await  verification.

The  dominant  note  of  a large  jiroportion  of  Nelly’s  pro-
phecies is  their  gloom,  their  appalling  gloom.  I have  noted
in  all  25  predictions  in  the  series  of  sittings  under  discussion,
and  out  of  these  eleven  are  of  a luguluious  character.  Some
are  neither  cheerful  nor  the  reverse ; the  most  inspiriting  one
that  I can  find  is  to  this  effect,  namely,  that  some  one


XLvn.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.  247

who  is  dead  would  have  been  better  off  {i.e.  would  have
come  ill  for  money)  had  he  lived.  Xelly  takes  the  most
dismal  views  of  people’s  health.  On  several  occasions  she
has  shown  anxiety  to  number  my  days ; not  that  I’ve  ever
allowed  hei’  to  get  so  far,  because  happily  I have  foreseen
what  was  coming  (I  have  learnt  to  recognise  the  sympathetic
voice  and  manner  with  which  she  prophesies  evil  things),
and  stopped  her  in  time.  I will  show  a similar  consideration  for
those  whose  unhappy  future  Xelly  has  presaged  by  refraining
from  quoting  their  names;  but  I will  cite  the  predictions  in
full  for  fear  of  being  thought  to  have  overstated  the  case.

Of  A.  she  said  on  January  10th,  1900,  and  she  had
already  said  the  same  thing  liefore : — “ 1 don’t  think  [A]  will
be  bettei  at  all.  Tie  will  have  to  go  away  from  [his  present
place  of  residence].  . . . He  went  to  Brighton,  and  won’t
be  better  when  he  comes  l^ack.”

So  far  I am  glad  to  say  A.  is  better.

Of  B.  Xelly  said  on  January  16th,  1900: — “Something
is  going  to  happen  to  her.  Somebody  belonging  to  her  is

going  to  be  seriously  ill,  a lady,  an  elderly  lady.”"

B.  has  no  elderly  lady  in  her  immediate  surroundings,  and
so  no  elderly  lady  belonging  to  her  has  been  seriously  ill.

Tor  the  sister  of  a lady  from  whom  communications  pur-
ported to  come  deatli  by  accident  was  predicted.  “This  lady
has  a sister  alive,  and  she  will  die  just  tlie  same  way.  Her
leg  was  IJeeding  so,  like  internal  exhaustion.”  This  was  given
on  February  6th,  1900,  and  the  lady’s  sister  has  escaped
her  fate  so  far.

Of  C.,  to  whom  Xelly  frequently  alluded  in  desponding  terms,
she  said  on  December  20th,  1900:— “You  know  [C.]  says
he s Clued.  He  isn  t,  its  all  nonsense;  he’ll  break  out  worse
than  ever.  Since  this  prediction,  with,  I believe,  the  excep-
tion of  one  slight  and  short  relapse,  C.’s  health,  which  Mrs.
Thompson  knew  to  be  very  bad  at  the  time,  has  maintained
a steady  improvement,  and  he  has  not  broken  out  worse  than
ever.

On  October  28th,  1899,  Xelly  predicted  of  I),  that  she
was  “ going  to  be  very  ill  : a downright  prostration ; ill
enough  not  to  be  able  to  do  anything  or  take  any  interest
in  anything.  Xothing  of  the  kind  happened.

R


248


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Some  months  before  1).  had  been  ill,  and  the  illness
resulted  in  a certain  amount  of  prostration ; but  apart  from
the  fact  that  Xelly’s  words,  if  applied  to  D.’s  past  state  of
health,  would  Ije  too  strong,  the  cause  of  L).’s  illness  was  a
specific  disease,  and  not  merely  general  ill-health.  Had  Nelly
predicted  that  D.  would  suffer  from  this  specific  disease,  one
might  have  been  justified  in  supposing  that,  in  spite  of  the
wrong  time-relation,  this  was  an  instance  of  supernormally
acquired  knowledge.

But  this  was  not  the  emf  of  poor  D.’s  troubles.  Not  only
was  she  to  l)e  ill,  luit  her  illness  was  to  be  caused  by  a domestic
trouble : — “ 1 think  she  will  have  a shock  in  the  near  future —
by  Christmas — caused  by  something  to  happen  in  her  family ;
not  a death  or  monetary  loss,  Init  some  family  matter.  The
shock  will  quite  prostrate  her,  but  the  illness  will  not  be
dangerous.  There  is  an  M.P.  who  belongs  to  her  family,  and
some  one  between  her  and  the  M.J*.  will  l)e  the  object  of  the
shock.  Cecil  is  the  name,  or  anyhow  some  name  beginning
with  a C.”

J).  experienced  no  shock  liy  Christmas,  nor  after  it.  She
was  not  juostrated,  and  no  member  of  her  family  is  a M.P.

In  the  course  of  one  of  Mrs.  Benson’s  sittings  on  Decem-
lier  18th,  1899,  K,  between  whom  and  Mrs.  Benson  there
is  no  connection,  was  favoured  with  a gloomy  forecast,  shot
out  in  the  most  casual  and  almipt  manner.

“A  great  shock,”  exclaimed  Nelly,  “coming  to  1C.,”  and  no
more  was  said  about  E.  at  that  sitting.

Some  months  before  tliis  sitting  E.  had  received  what  might
undoubtedly  be  termed  “a  great  shock”  from  seeing  a

friend  killed  l>efore  his  eyes,  as  the  result  of  a terrible  acci-
dent. Eighteen  months  after  the  prediction  E.’s  mother  died,

after  a short  illness,  but  as  E.’s  mother  was  in  her  68th
yeai'  when  she  died,  it  is  a debataltle  point  whether  her
death,  though  preceded  by  only  a slujrt  illness,  could  be

regarded  as  a great  shock.  And  in  any  case  the  words  used
by  Nelly  are  too  vague,  and  shocks  great  and  small  too
frequent  in  this  transitory  life  to  allow  of  any  success  being
claimeil  for  the  prediction.

At  the  same  sitting  Nelly  said  to  F. : — “ Have  you  got  a lot
of  cotton-wool  ? like  rolls  of  cotton-wool.  Perhaps  it’s  coming.


XL VII.]  Phenomena  hi  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


249


Packets  of  cotton-wool.  Going  to  lie  nsed  for  some  one  who

is  ill  in  1)0(1.”

F.’s  wife  had  some  six  months  previously  undergone  a
•slight  operation,  for  which  large  quantities  of  cotton-wool  had
been  employed.

Xelly,  it  will  lie  noticed,  does  not  refer  this  event  with
certainty  t(.)  the  future,  and  so,  if  her  statement  is  referred
to  the  past,  it  has  some  significance : hut  operations  are
undergone  by  a not  inconsiderable  proportion  of  the  popula-
tion, and  cotton-wool  is  enqdoyed,  I suppose,  in  many  of
them,  and  as  the  patient  was  not  indicated,  such  coincidence
as  there  is  is  wortli  next  to  nothing.

No  sooner  were  the  words  about  rolls  of  cotton-wool  out
of  her  month  than  there  was  l)orne  in  upon  Nelly’s  boding
mind  some  vague  presentiment  of  black  fate  broo(.ling  over
Mrs.  Thompson’s  head.

“ You’ll  see,  something  dreadful  is  going  to  happen  to
IMother.  1 see  black  all  round  her  head.  As  long  as  it's  not
Vict(U’,  it  doesn’t  matter.  Something  to  come  after  Christmas.”
i\Irs.  Thompson  must  be  acquitted  of  having  taken  steps
to  bring  about  a fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  for  to  the  best
of  my  knowledge  nothing  dreadful  happened  to  her.  Her  son
Victor  had  chicken-pox  aliout  danuary  12th,  but  the  attack
was  not  dangerous,  and  so  his  illness  could  not  have  been
described  as  “ something  dreadful.”

About  G.,  whom  Mrs.  Thompson  knew  to  lie  seriously  ill,
Nelly  uttered  the  following  prophecy  on  danuary  12th,

1900: — “Ho  you  think  G.  is  going  to  have  a fit?  Looking
blue  : he  seems  to  be  put  on  a leather  sofa — not  in  a
station — dark  American  leather — very  dark — shiny.  1 can’t
hear  any  trains,  1 can’t  see  any  familiar  faces.”

The  ascription  of  this  event  to  the  future  is  somewhat

hesitating,  and  had  G.  had  a fit  under  the  circumstances

descril)ed,  and  could  the  fact  have  been  shown  to  have  been

outside  i\lrs.  Thompson’s  cognisance,  some  weight  might  have
been  accorded  to  Nelly’s  statement.  But  to  the  liest  of  my
belief  G.  had  no  experience  either  before  or  after  January
12th,  1900,  whicli  in  any  way  tallied  with  Nelly’s  impression.

On  April  19th,  1900,  H.  was  told  that  he  “is  going  to
have  a terrible  disappointment.  He  won’t  get  something  he


250


J.  G.  Piddingtov.


[part


has  set  liis  lieart  n])OU.”  More  than  three  yeai’S  have  passed
since  April  1900,  hnt  so  far  the  prophecy  remains  imfnltilled.

On  January  18th,  1900,  the  following  cheering  statement
was  addressed  l)y  Nelly  to  Mr.  “ Wilson,”  who  had  recently
been  in  great  tronhle : — “Yon  mnstn’t  be  sad  in  your  heart.
You’ve  got  a much  greater  trouble  ahead  of  you  than  you
think.”  This  may,  of  course,  prove  true,  hut  so  far  it  has
not.

This  ends  my  list  of  Nelly’s  gloomy  forebodings,  and  so
far  for  not  one  of  them  can  success  he  claimed.  One  is  almost
tempted  to  deduce  from  them  a law  (“  Nelly’s  law  ”),  that  if
anything  un])leasant  is  foretold  it  is  sure  not  to  come  off.

I may  he  accused  of  treating  this  ]>art  of  the  subject  with
undue  lli[ii)ancy.  If  my  liip])ancy  will  only  induce  a flippant

attitude  in  the  victims  of  pessimistic  prophecies,  its  object
will  haA'e  been  attained.

Record  predictions  with  the  utmost  care,  date  them,  and
get  them  countersigned  by  responsil)le  ])ersons;  place  the
record  in  a sealed  envelope,  and  de))Osit  it  in  a bank ; do
anything  with  them  y(.)U  like,  e.vcept  allow  yourself  to  be
influenced  by  them.  The  )»ad  effects  that  predictions  can  pro-
duce on  nervous  pe(J})le  aie  too  obvious  to  need  insisting  on.
A man  sound  in  body  and  mind  might  listen  unmoved  to  a
prediction  of  the  date  -and  cause  of  his  own  death,  mock  at
it,  and  disregard  it.  But  illness  comes  and  upsets  the  healthy
bodily  and  mental  balance,  and  what  then  ? The  prediction
which  sounded  so  absurd  a few  months  back  has  now  become
rather  disturbing,  until  at  last  it  grii)s  the  man’s  imagination
and  thus  may  well  secure  its  fulfilment.

Ur,  another  possibility,  X.  is  told  that  he  will  be  involved
in  a bad  carriage  accident.  Some  time  after  he  is  out
driving,  the  liorses  are  frightened  liy  a passing  motor-car,
the  prediction  suddenly  flashes  across  X.’s  mind,  his  nerve
is  momentarily  shaken  liy  the  recollection,  he  loses  his  head
for  an  instant,  and  an  accident  results,  which,  but  for  the
paralysing  effects  of  the  prediction,  would  have  never  occurred.

The  danger  may  not  now  ajipear  very  serious;  but  we  can
already  note  how  gravely  S])iritualists  and  others  who  lielieve
in  the  reality  of  psycliic  phenomena  treat  previsions;  and  as
time  goes  on,  and  as  credence  in  telepathy  and  in  other


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


251


similar  matters  grows,  the  utterances  of  mediums  will  1)6
more  highly  prized,  and  no  matter  whether  better  evidence
is  forthcoming  or  not  for  previsions,  prevision-stocks  will
improve  in  sympathy  wdth  the  general  tone  of  the  market.

Had  T now  under  my  eyes  the  most  abundant  and  posi-
tive ])roof  of  the  existence  of  a precognitive  faculty,  T should
not  tone  down  my  caution  by  a word ; for  proof  of  the
possilnlity  of  ])revision  could  not  alter  the  fact  that  it  is
only  a stray  prophecy  here  and  there  that  “ comes  off  ” out
of  Heaven  knows  how  vast  a total.

B\it  to  pass  on  to  Nelly’s  other  predictions : —

On  November  29th,  1899,  Nelly  said  to  Dr.  van  Eeden  : —
“ ’Ibis  gentleman  thinks  he  is  going  back  on  a certain  day ;
hut  there  will  l)e  some  commotion,  which  will  make  him
change  the  date  of  departure — either  one  day  earlier  or
later.”

The  date  of  Dr.  van  Eeden’s  departure  was  not  fixed  at
the  time  of  this  sitting,  l)ut  he  left  England  several  days
later  than  he  had  intended  originally.  Thus  the  main  point
of  the  prediction  was  fulfilled,  hut,  as  usual,  the  details  lacked
fulfilment ; for  there  was  no  commotion,  and  the  departure
was  neither  delayed  nor  advanced  Ipy  one  day,  ljut  delayed
by  several  days.

A somewhat  similar  prediction  was  uttered  on  Eebruary
6 th,  1900,  concerning  Mr.  Myers,  who  was  then  abr(jad
“ Mr.  Myers,”  said  Nelly,  “ won’t  come  home  lief  ore  the
second  week  in  April.”

i\Ir.  iMyers’  note  on  this  is  as  follow : — “ I then  felt  certain
of  returning  March  81st,  or  April  2nd  at  latest.  My  wife’s
illness  delayed  me  till  April  l7th.”  Nelly’s  actual  words
could  apply  correctly  to  April  1 7 th  ; Init  their  more  natural
meaning  is  that  Mr.  Myers  would  return  in  the  course  of
the  second  week  in  April  : which  he  did  not  do.

But  whatever  interpretation  is  put  upon  the  words,  neither
this  prediction,  nor  that  about  Dr.  van  Eeden’s  return  liome,
strikes  me  as  at  all  remarkaltle.  Travellers’  plans  are  so  often
upset,  and  the  dates  of  de}»ai’tures  and  returns  so  freipiently
modified  that  it  would  be  a safe  shot  to  make  in  a large
proportion  of  cases,  especially  where  peoj)le  are  travelling  for
pleasure  or  health,  and  are  not  l)Ound  down  l)y  the  restric


252  J.  G.  Piddinfjton.  [part

tioiis  of  return  tickets  of  slujrt  validity,  that  the  return  lunne
would  not  take  place  ([uite  so  soon  as  was  expected.

A definite  date  is  assigned  in  another  prediction  which
followed  close  on  the  heels  of  the  last.  Towards  the  close  of
the  sitting  of  Fehruary  6th,  1900,  the  last,  as  Mrs.  Thompson
knew,  which  she  would  be  aide  to  give  for  some  time,  Xelly  said
to  me: — “I  shall  see  you  on  the  4th  of  April.”  (See  p.  202.)
But  the  next  sitting  which  I had  with  ]\Irs.  Thompson  was
on  April  19th.  Airs.  Thompson  was  at  home  on  April  4th,
and,  “that  the  })ro])hecy  niiglit  he  fulfilled  which  was  spoken
by  the  mouth  of”  Nelly,  coidd  have  offered  me  a sitting  on
that  day,  which  1,  having  forgotten  all  about  the  prediction,
should  have  guilelessly  accepted.  As  a matter  of  fact,  having,
as  1 said,  forgotten  the  prophecy  entiiely,  1 went  on  April  5th
to  Hampstead  on  the  chance  of  finding  Airs.  Thompson  at
home.  1 met  her  in  the  street  on  her  way  to  keep  an
engagement,  and  there  was  no  sitting.  L am  glad  that  I
did  not  go  on  April  4th,  or  my  subliminal  would  have  l)een
accused  of  having  by  an  unworthy  underhand  trick  attempted
to  scoie  a success  for  Nelly.

As  it  was,  the  suldiminal  Ijehaviour  of  Airs.  Thompson  and
myself  was  beyond  reproach.

Another  prediction  of  Nelly’s  Mrs.  Thompson  could  have
fulfilled  had  she  wished  to,  instead  of  which  she  prevented
its  fulfilment.  The  prediction  concerned  a partictdar  dress
which  wvas  to  he  worn  by  Airs.  Thompson’s  daughter.  Airs.
Thompsf)!!  gave  away  the  dress  and  so  her  daughter  never
w'ore  it.

On  llecember  18th,  1899,  Nelly  said  in  the  course  of
one  of  Airs.  Benson’s  sittings  which  was  held  at  my  house : —
“ AVhat  has  Airs.  Finch  to  do  with  this  room  ? There  is
sometliing  which  muddles  up  Airs.  Finch  with  tliis  room”

J.  G.  F. : — “ I mentioned  to  your  mother  that  Airs.  Finch
was  coming.”

Ndly : — “ No,  not  that.  It’s  like  a feeling  of  Airs.  Finch
with  a cloak  on  with  fur  inside.”

Later  Nelly  referred  again  to  the  same  subject,  this  time
putting  her  statement  into  the  form  of  a prediction.

“ Airs.  Finch  will  come  here  with  a fur  cloak.  Alother
hasn’t  got  one.  Bed  colour  outside.”


XLvii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.  253

On  the  occasion  of  her  second  visit  to  niy  house  Mrs.

Finch  wore  a fur  cloak,  but  the  colour  outside  was  not  red,
but  brown.  In  any  case,  even  had  the  prediction  been  verihed,
it  would  have  been  worth  little  or  nothing,  because  as  Mrs.

Thompson  was  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Finch,  she  might  have

know'll  that  she  possessed  a fur  cloak  of  the  kind  described,
and  also  because  fur  cloaks  are  worn  by  many  people  in  the
winter,  and  I suppose  a good  many  are  red  outside.  But
Nelly’s  statement  goes  some  way  to  show  that  j\Irs.  Thompson
does  not  devise  prophetic  utterances  from  facts  within  her
conscious  knowledge.  Indeed,  I think  this  is  sufficiently
clear  already  from  the  gloomy  anticipations  which  Nelly  ex-
pressed about  the  health  of  two  persons  known  to  Mrs.

Thompson.  They  were  l)Oth  in  a bad  state  of  health,  as
Mrs.  Thompson  knew  quite  well,  liut,  so  far  as  I can  form
an  opinion,  there  does  not  appear  to  me  to  have  been  any
reason  to  regard  their  condition  despondently,  nor  do  I believe
that  Mrs.  Thompson  was  in  possession  of  any  sjiecial  information
which  would  have  led  her  to  form  a less  hopeful  view  of
their  prospects  of  recovery  than  I for  instance  did.  i\Irs.
Thompson  often  spoke  to  me  in  a perfectly  open  and  natural
way  about  the  two  invalids,  and  never,  so  far  as  1 remember,
did  she  express  opinions  about  their  state  of  health  which
coincided  with  those  expressed  by  the  ti’ance-personality.  To
the  approaching  dissolution  of  another  individual  known  to
myself  and  also  to  Mrs.  Thompson  Nelly  often  alludes.  This
individual  is  in  average  good  health,  and  not  at  all  old,  is
if  anything  in  an  improved  state  of  health  now,  and  1 cannot
imagine  why  Nelly  looks  forward  to  his  approaching  end  with
so  much  apparent  certitude.  It  may  lie  that  this  tendency
to  kill  off  people  is  a “ note  ” of  automatic  romance.  I think
I have  noticed  in  my  own  dream-fancyings  a tendency  to
kill  off  my  friends  and  acquaintances  with  an  indelicate  pre-
cipitancy quite  unwarranted  by  their  actual  jdiysical  condition.

Though,  as  I have  said,  Mrs.  Thompson  in  trance  does  not
as  a rule  devise  prophetic  utterances  from  facts  normally
known  to  her,  there  are  two  apparent  exceptions : though

even  of  these  one  only  came  true.

Both  referred  to  the  Bsychological  Congress  held  at  Baris  in
1900,  which  Mrs.  Thompson  attended,  and  at  the  time  the


254


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


predictions  were  given,  I think  she  knew  she  either  was

going  to  attend  it  or  was  likely  to.  The  two  sitters  concerned
were  L)r.  van  Eeden  and  Dr.  Max  1 )essoir ; and  although  I
see  no  reason  for  supposing  that  Mrs.  Tliompson  was  aware
of  the  identity  of  either,  yet  before  trance  began  she  must

have  I'ecognised  by  their  accent  that  Ixjth  were  foreigners,

and  it  would  be  a natural  enough  assumption  that  any  foreign

gentleman  who  came  to  have  a sitting  with  her  would  very
likely  be,  if  not  one  of  our  corresponding  members,  at  least
some  one  with  an  interest  in  psychology,  and  as  such  likely
to  attend  the  Congress  in  Paris.

To  Dr.  van  Eeden  Nelly  said  on  December  1st,  1899; — “You
are  going  to  see  my  mother  in  Paris  next  year.  You  will  be
wearing  a lighter-coloured  felt  hat  at  Paris  than  you  are  wearing
now.  Put  if  you  remeniljer  this  prophecy,  you  must  not  go  and
buy  one  on  purpose.”  Dr.  van  Eeden  did  meet  Mrs.  Thompson
at  the  Congress  the  next  year,  Imt  he  followed  Nelly’s  wise
advice,  and  did  not  go  and  l)uy  a lighter-coloured  hat.

To  Dr.  Max  Dessoir  Nelly  said  on  April  19th,  1900: —
“ When  he  sees  me  the  next  time  he  w<m’t  recognise  me.  1
shall  see  him  at  Professor  Richet’s.  Pluno — and  Professor

Richet  will  be  altogether.  Professor  Richet,  Mr.  Myers,  and
you  {i.c.  Dr.  Dessoir),  and  ‘ AVhiskers,’  and  Flumeroy.

J.  G.  P.\ — “ Flournoy?”

Nelly  : — “ No,  not  Elournoy.’

J.  G.  F. : — “ Flammarion  ? ”

Nelly  : — “ Not  Flammarion — will  be  at  Richet’s.”

As  a matter  of  fact  Dr.  I >essoir  was  not  at  the  Paris  Congress
and  even  if  he  had  been,  and  had  Mrs.  Thompson  met  him  there
at  Professor  Richet’s  house  in  the  company  of  Mr.  Myers,  the
])redicti(m  would,  of  course,  have  l)een  worth  nothing.

I cannot  attach  much  greater  imjiortance  to  another  ]»rediction
of  Nelly’s  which  did  indeed  come  true,  and  which  at  first  sight
is  rather  striking.  A very  effective  prediction  I should  term  it
but  a little  reflection,  together  with  some  manvaise  volontd
depreciates  its  charms.  It  has  already  been  recorded  in  Fro-
ceedvtiys,  Part  XLIV.,  p.  95.  Nelly  said  to  Dr.  van  Eeden  at
the  close  of  his  second  sitting: — “Don’t  have  any  of  that  red
sauce  with  fish  at  Cambridge.  It  won’t  suit  you.”

At  the  time  Mrs.  Thompson  knew  that  she  was  going  to  meet


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.


255


Dr.  van  Eeden  at  Cambridge  in  the  cour.se  of  a day  or  two  at
Mrs.  Verrall’s.  It  is  a natural  assnmption  that  ti.sh  will  form
one  of  the  courses  at  dinner,  and  fish  sauces  are  nsnally  either
red,  white,  yellow,  or  green,  and  of  the  four,  white  and  red,  1
should  say,  are  the  commoner.  When  Mrs.  Tliompson  and  Dr.
van  Eeden  dined  at  iMrs.  Verrall’s  the  hsh  sauce  was  red.  Nelly
rather  cunningly  remarked  at  a sitting  held  after  the  dinner : —
“ It  is  funny  you  had  red  sauce  with  white  hsh.  At  Mother’s
house  you  would  have  had  white  sauce.”

When  Dr.  van  Eeden  asked  Nelly  why  she  had  advised  him
not  to  take  the  sauce,  she  replied : — “ AVell,  don’t  you  feel
thirsty?”  Dr.  van  Eeden  denied  the  suggestion,  and  then
Nelly  at  once  asked: — “Are  you  a vegetable  man?”  Dr.  van
Eeden  is  a vegetarian,  and  this  was  no  doubt  what  Nelly  wished
to  convey.  Dr.  van  Eeden  considers  that  the  likeliest  explana-
tion of  the  a])parently  irrelevant  juxtaposition  of  the  references
to  tlie  unsuitability  of  the  red  hsh-sauce  and  to  his  vegetarianism
is  to  lie  found  in  the  fact  of  the  sauce  havins:  been  coloured  with
cochineal,  a process  repugnant  to  stiict  vegetarian  principles.

Hut  if  sauce  coloured  with  cochineal  is  an  unsuitable  diet  for
a vegetarian,  a fortiori  the  fish  would  lie  tf)0.  Dr.  van  Eeden’s
exegesis  appears  to  me  too  subtle,  and  it  is  easier,  I think,  to
.suppose  that  the  original  reference  to  the  fish-sauce  and  its
unsuitability  was  only  Nelly’s  roundaliout  way  of  saying : —
“ You’re  a vegetarian,  and  you’re  going  to  stay  at  a house  where
you  won’t  get  a vegetarian  diet ; ” in  otlier  words,  the  red  fish-
sauce  was  used  symbolically.  The  actual  words  used  should  be
noted.  They  were : — “ That  red  sauce  with  fish.”  The  accent
seems  to  be  on  the  sauce,  but  it  would  be  (]uite  in  keeping  with
Nelly’s  phraseology  to  take  the  words  to  mean  no  more  than
“ fish  with  red  sauce.”

iMy  conclusion,  then,  is  that  Nelly’s  warning  to  Dr.  van  Eeden
need  not,  and  indeed  should  not,  be  treated  as  precognitive,  lint
simply  as  a specimen  of  the  dramatic  utilisation  of  knowledge
supernormally  acijuired  from  the  sitter.

Three  more  unsuccessful  prophecies  remain  to  be  lecorded.
On  January  .ath,  1900,  Nelly  said  to  Mrs.  X.: — “ Tt  seems
to  me  you  will  go  abroad  in  the  spring.  I don’t  know  what  it
would  be  for  you  would  go  aliroad.”

Mrs.  *T.: — “Ear  abroad?”


256


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


AMlg : — “ Yes,  it  would  be  just  the  Continent.”

j\Jany  people  go  abroad  to  the  Continent  in  the  spring  and  at
other  seasons  of  the  year ; so,  even  had  the  prediction  come  true,
it  would  not  have  been  remarkable;  but  Mrs.  X.  was  disol^liging
enough  not  to  do  so,  nor  at  the  time  of  the  sitting  did  she  think
there  was  any  likelihood  of  her  doing  so,  so  Nelly’s  remark  could
not  be  put  down  to  her  having  read  some  project  latent  in  Mrs.
X.’s  mind.  Her  liusband  was  lighting  in  South  Africa  at  the
time,  and  if  she  were  to  take  a journey  abroad  at  all  she  may
well  have  fancied  that  her  destination  would  be  Soutli  Africa.
Hence,  1 imagine,  the  (question,  “ Far  abroad  ? ” : to  winch  Nelly
ought  of  course  to  have  reY)lied  if  she  had  any  respect  for  pro-
fessional |>recedent : — “ Oh,  yes  ; far,  far  aln-oad  ; I see  you  on  a
big  ship,  etc.,  etc.”

The  next  prophecy  was  given  in  what  seemed  to  l)e  the
most  gratuitous  manner.  On  January  10th,  1900,  Nelly  said
casually ; — “ You  know  so  and  so  (naming  a well-known  per-
sonage). They  call  her  F.  in  private.  I’m  going  to  talk  to
her  one  of  these  days.  She  isn’t  hard  in  her  heart.”  And
then  almost  directly  afterwards : — “ What  I saw  was  [the  great
personage’s]  photo. — then  the  letter  .F.”

The  medium  was  holding  a letter  signed  F.  which  had  been
given  her  at  the  jirevious  sitting,  and  given  in  such  a way  that
she  C(juld  have  seen  the  signature.  The  ])ersonage’s  name

also  began  with  F.,  and  tins  aj)])ears  to  have  been  the  only
foundation,  not  only  for  the  association  of  ideas,  but  also  for
the  ])rediction,  which,  though  it  may  of  course  come  Hue  one
of  these  days,  has  not  come  true  so  far,  and  is  not,  1 think,
ever  likely  to.

Then  again  on  April  19th,  1900,  Dr.  Max  Dessoir  was
told  that  “ he  will  have  cause  for  rushing  up  against  van
Itenterghem,  both  in  body  and  opinions.”  Nelly  had  intro-
duced the  subject  by  saying,  “ I want  to  say  that  name
van  lienterghem.  1 don’t  want  to  call  this  gentleman  {i.e.
Dr.  Dessoir)  by  that  name.”  This  prediction  is  similar  in

character  to  two  ])redictions  already  mentioned,  in  which
Nelly  told  hrst  Dr.  van  Eeden  and  later  Dr.  Dessoir  that
they  would  meet  her  or  her  mother  at  the  Paris  Congress

of  Psychology,  ami  a sinular  explanation  of  the  train  of

reasoning  which  gave  rise  to  these  two  predictions  can  be


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


257


applied  here.  Dr.  van  Eenterghem,  a well-known  physician
at  Anisterdain,  who  l:>oth  practises  and  has  written  about
hypnotism,  had  l:»een  associated  by  Nelly  with  L)r.  van  Eeden,
and  rightly  so.  Before  associating  Dr.  Dessoir  with  l)r.  van
Kenterghem,  Nelly  had  recognised  Dr.  Dessoir  as  a hypnotist.
Mindful,  it  may  l)e,  of  the  frequency  of  controversy  lietween
brothers  of  the  same  craft,  Nelly  hazards  the  not  uidikel}'
guess  that  two  fellow  hypnotists  would  “rush  up  against  one
another  Ijotli  in  body  and  o]jinions,”  a forceful  expression
not  entirely  unsuitable  to  many  a fray  where  doctors
disagree.  Happily,  in  tliis  case,  our  two  distinguished
foreign  mend>ers  have  Intherto  failed  to  live  u}>  to  the  pre-
diction.

t)n  December  20th,  1900,  Nelly  predicted  who  woidd  he
the  sitter  at  the  next  sitting.  “ I’m  going  to  see  you  with  that
spectacled  gentleman  the  next  time.  I don’t  know  who  it  is.
But  it  down  for  the  truth.”

1 put  it  down  for  the  truth,  and  took  no  measures  eithei'
to  help  or  to  impede  the  truth  coming  true.

Unhappily,  instead  of  a spectacled  gentleman,  the  next  sitter
was  a lady  wearing  pince-nez.  Nelly  pointed  out  the  failure
herself : — “ The  gentleman  with  the  spectacles — I told  you  he
was  coming.  You  see  it  isn’t  a gentleman  with  spectacles
on.”  She  was  not  in  the  least  disconcerted,  nor  did  she  try
to  explain  away  the  non-success  of  her  prediction.  In  fact  the
failure  of  her  predictions  does  not  seem  to  worry  her;  1
suppose  she  has  the  good  sense  to  set  no  great  store  by  them.
And  yet,  as  my  last  two  instances  will  show,  some  of  her
prophecies  are  veridical.

Thus  on  February  1st,  1900,  Nelly  remarked  ai  'passant: —
“ Why’s  Colin  Campbell  wiltten  (ui  your  head  ? He’s  coming.
I’ve  got  to  talk  to  him  one  of  these  days.”

Mr.  Myers,  when  he  saw  the  record  of  this  sitting,  wrote
the  following  comment : “ I have  a friend  of  tliat  name  wliom
I have  since  inde'pe'ndently  thought  of  asking  to  a seance.”  By
the  words  “ since  independently  ” i\Ir.  Myers  evidently  meant
“ since  the  prediction  was  given,  and  l)efore  I saw  the  record.”

It  is  true  that  Colin  Campbell  is  connected  by  Nelly  with
me,  and  not  with  Mr.  Myers ; I)ut  if  ]\Ir.  Myers’  friend  had
had  a sitting  with  Mrs.  Thompson  about  this  time,  it  is  pro-


258


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


bable  that  I should  have  been  present  as  recorder.  I cannot
prove,  of  course,  that  Mrs.  Thompson  did  not  know  that  Mr.
Myers  knew  Mr.  Colin  Canipl:)ell.  She  may  have  known  it
and  done  no  more  than  make  a lucky  guess.  Nor  must

we  assume  that,  l.iecause  Mr.  Myers  did  not  consciously
remend)er  having  thought  of  Mr.  Colin  Campljell  as  a
possible  sitter  until  after  Nelly’s  statement  had  been  made,
subconsciously  he  had  not  already  contemplated  asking  him
to  come  to  a sitting.  Still,  if  we  regard  the  incident  as
indicative  of  supernormal  faculty  of  some  kind,  we  cannot
anyliow  class  it  as  a case  of  true  prevision,  for  Mr.  Colin

Campl)ell  never  did  attend  a sitting,  a.nd,  so  far  as  I am  aware,
he  was  not  even  invited.

But  whatever  doubts  1 have  about  tins  case,  1 have  no
hesitation  in  dismissing  guess-work  or  normal  processes  of

obtaining  information  as  inadequate  to  explain  the  final
instance  on  my  list.  Towards  the  end  of  a sitting  held  on
January  drd,  1901,  nothing  liaving  occurred  to  suggest  the

remark,  Nelly  said  : —

“ Will  you  give  my  love  to  her — i\Ir.  Ernest  Bennett — you
know  who  1 mean.  I’m  talking  to  you  (be.  J.  G.  P.) — not
about  the  boolc.  He’s  going  to  tell  you  a lot  of  things.
(Tins  was  repeated.)

Wliat  made  me  tliink  of  it  (this  in  answer  to  a question
asked  by  d.  G.  P.)  was  1 saw  a lot  of  people  dressed  up  like
ghosts,  and  then  1 could  hear  you  and  Mr.  Bennett  laughing —
and  then — and  tlien  you  seem  to  have  indigestion  after.”

J.  G.  F.\ — “Is  it  future  or  past?”

Ndlij : — “ After ; it’s  what  you’ve  got  to  come  to.”

Now  the  facts  'wdiich  seem  to  me  to  correspond  with
Nelly’s  words  too  closely  to  l)e  explained  by  chance  coinci-
dence were  these.

The  sitting  ended  al)Out  5 p.m.,  and  after  it  1 went
straight  home.  Being  overtired,  and  as  a cmisequence  of  the
over-fatigue  sutlering  from  indigestion,  1 lay  down  on  my
bed  in  order  to  rest.  1 had  Ijeen  resting  some  twenty
minutes  or  so  when  Mr.  Ernest  Bennett  called  to  see  me.  I
had  no  idea  he  was  going  to  call,  nor  did  1 know  any  par-
ticular reason  why  he  should.  1 asked  him  to  come  and  talk
to  me  in  my  bedroom,  so  that  1 might  remain  lying  down.


XLVir.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thomj^son’s  Trance.


I mention  this  detail  in  order  to  show  that  the  attack  of
indigestion  was  of  a sufficiently  definite  character  to  make
me  receive  a caller  in  my  hedroom.  Of  course,  as  soon  as
I was  told  that  Mr.  Bennett  had  called,  Xelly’s  prediction
came  into  my  mind ; hut  I was  careful  to  avoid  leading  the
conversation  in  any  way  which  might  bring  about  a fulfil-
ment. ]\Ir.  Bennett  at  once  explained  the  <jl>ject  of  his  visit,
which  was  to  tell  me  of  his  experiences  at  a haunted  house
in  the  "West  of  England.  I liad  been  investigating  the  case,
and  I knew  that  Mr.  Bennett  was  also  interested  in  it,  and
that  lie  proposed  to  go  and  stay  in  the  haunted  house  on  the
first  convenient  opportunity.  1 could  not  at  the  time
remember  with  certainty  whether  I had  known  that  he  had
visited,  or  was  shortly  going  to  visit  the  liouse  ; niy  impression
was  that  I was  unaware  of  his  having  actually  carried  out  his
projected  visit.  I am  inclined  to  think  that  this  impression
was  correct,  l)ecause,  when  Mr.  Bennett  called  at  my  house,
I had  not  any  notion  wliat  he  cordd  be  coming  to  talk  about ;
and  also  when  Nelly  spoke  about  Mr.  Bennett  and  people
dressing  up  as  ghosts  it  suggested  nothing  to  my  mind.

A good  many  different  phenomena  were  said  to  have  taken
place  at  the  haunted  house  in  cpiestion.  I was  inclined  at  the
time  to  set  down  the  tales  of  haunting  to  hallucinations  pro-
duced by  fright  on  young  people  of  highly  nervous  tempera-
ments, and  had  not  thought  of  attributing  them  to  practical
joking.  Mr.  Bennett,  in  the  course  of  narrating  his  experi-
ences, expressed  the  opinion  that  one  of  the  alleged  phenomena
was  due  to  a servant’s  practical  joke.

It  is  true  that  we  had  a good  laugh  over  this  and  other
matters ; but  I think  Mrs.  Thompson  either  knew  or  knew  of
kir.  Ernest  Bennett,  and  if  so,  I cannot  attach  much  imjjortance
to  Nelly  having  said:  “Then  1 could  hear  you  and  Mr.
Bennett  laughing.”  Mr.  Bennett  will,  1 hope,  forgive  me,  if
I say  that,  as  a rule,  where  he  is,  there  too  is  laughter,  and
often  “ laughter  holding  both  her  sides.”

So,  too,  it  may  not  have  needed  any  supernormal  faculty  to
surmise  that  1 shoidd  suffer  from  indigestion  within  an  hour
or  so  of  the  sitting ; but  it  was  not  said  that  Mr.  Bennett  would
“ tell  me  a lot  of  things  ” within  the  next  hour  or  two,  and
our  conversation  and  my  fit  of  indigestion  were  foretold  as


J.  G.  Piddington.


200


[part


nearly  contemporaneous  events,  to  happen  at  some  quite
nmletined  future  time.

Again,  Mr.  Bennett  and  myself  Ijeing  Ijoth  psychical  re-
searchers, it  may  be  urged  that  there  was  nothing  extra-
ordinaiy  in  prophesying  that  at  some  future  time  he
would  “ tell  me  a lot  of  things,”  and  that  among  the  lot  of
things  ghosts  and  practical  j'oking  would  he  referred  to.  Or
again,  it  may  he  olijected  that  Nelly  did  not  categorically  say
that  Mr.  Bennett  wcjuld  talk  al)out  people  dressing  up  as
ghosts,  and  that  all  she  said  was : — “ I saw  a lot  of  people
<lressed  u]»  like  glKJsts,  and  then  I could  hear  you  and  Mr.
Bennett  laughing.”  That  is  true  enough,  but  though  each
separate  statement  made  l)y  Nelly  can  l:)e  whittled  away  in
some  such  fashion,  we  have  not  to  consider  only  each  com-
ponent statement  se[)arately,  but  also  the  whole  compound
statement.  And  here,  for  my  (jwn  part,  I feel  compelled
to  have  recourse  to  an  explanation  involving  some  form  of
supernormal  faculty.

The  mannei'  in  which  the  message  emerged  rather  suggests
that  the  source  of  Nelly’s  knowledge  was  telepathic.  First
she  seems  to  he  in  communication  with  Mr.  Bennett.  She
■disc(jvers  tliat  he  is  going  to  “ tell  me  a lot  of  things,”  and
that  the  subject  of  his  communication  is  ghosts,  and  that  it
is  provocative  of  mirth.  All  these  three  facts  were  almost
•certainly  in  Mr.  Bennett’s  thoughts  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.

“ And  then  you  seem  to  have  indigestion.”  Here  she  appears
to  enlarge  her  survey  of  the  eventuality  l;>y  drawing  on  my  own
knowledge  of  my  ])hysical  condition,  or  perhaps  by  her  own
perception  of  it.  The  words,  “ and  then  ” — repeated — may
})crhaps  indicate  a fresh  source  of  information.  A tele])athic
explanation  will  suthce ; hut  I own  that  I felt  at  the  time
that  Nelly  was  not  l>y  any  complicated  process  deducing  the
future  from  present  knowledge,  hut  really  watching  and
descrilnng  an  event  in  the  future  as  it  presented  itself  de
toute  pike  before  her  eyes.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson' s Trance.


261


(13)  A Pet  Subject  of  Xelly’s.

There  is  one  string  on  which  Nelly  harps  with  snch  per-
sistency that  I grew  to  listen  for  the  familiar  twang  at  each
sitting.  Babies — babies  who  died  at,  or  before,  or  soon  after
birth,  are  a subject  of  irresistible  attraction  to  Nelly.  What
one  may  ask  can  be  the  reason  of  this  dichi  ? It  can  hardly
be  for  the  sake  of  scoring  an  easy  hit,  for  Nelly  has  a very
clear  notion  of  what  is  evidentially  telling,  and  more  than  once,
after  making  some  obvious  statement,  she  has  pulled  herself  up
and  spontaneously  deprecated  any  value  being  allowed  to  it.
Nor  does  it  seem  probable  that  this  tendency  to  saddle  sitters
with  dead  little  brothers  or  sisters  or  children  is  a method  of
“ fishing,”  for  even  if  the  sitter  owns  to  the  fact,  how  can
the  admission  afford  any  further  clue  likely  to  Ije  of  assistance,
or  what  pregnant  inference  can  be  drawn  from  it  ?

It  may  be  that  the  explanation  must  be  looked  for  in  the
particular  circumstances  of  the  life-history  of  the  real  Nelly,
Ml'S.  Thompson’s  daughter  Nelly  died  when  only  a few  months
old,  and  her  own  brief  span  of  earth-life  may  perhaps  account
for  her  interest  in  “the  fate  of  the  unbaptised.”  This  hypothesis
will  hold  good  whichever  view  is  taken  of  the  nature  of  the
Nelly  control ; for  if  Nelly  be  no  more  than  the  heroine  of  a
work  of  trance-fiction,  she  is  a life-like  creation,  and  to  invent
for  her  this  sympathetic  interest  in  those  who  had  suffered  a like
fate  to  tliat  of  her  own  pr(Aotype  would  be  a faithful  touch  no
whit,  I suppose,  beyond  the  powers  f>f  secondary  personality.
Or,  again,  it  may  be  a “ note  ” of  trance-connnunications : for
though  I cannot  pretend  to  have  analysed  the  Piper  records
ad  hoc,  I think  I am  justified  in  saying  that  with  Iffiinuit,  too,
infantum  animae  are  a favourite  topic,  though,  by  the  way,
he  and  Nelly  are  far  from  representing  them  as  flrntes  in  limine
prirno.

Whatever  be  the  true  explanation,  considering  the  very
large  proportion  of  families  which  must  number  among  their
dead  some  member  whose  lease  of  life  lapsed  after  a few  sliort


J.  G.  Piddingtov .


262


[part


hours  or  weeks,  the  references  made  by  Nelly  to  deaths  in
l)abyho(jd  met  with  relatively  only  small  success.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  (see  Froceedijigs,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  450)  has
iKjticed  that  Phinuit  “ seems  to  l)e  under  some  compulsion  not
to  1)6  silent,”  and  he  thinks  tliat  a good  deal  of  his  conversation
is  introduced  as  a stop-gap.  Possibly  under  this  head  should
fall  many  of  Pliinuit’s  references  to  dead  l^abies.  Nell}’,  so  far
as  my  observation  goes,  does  not  exhibit  any  signs  of  l)eing  under
any  compulsion  to  talk  ; at  the  end  of  a sitting  when  the  serious
work  is  over  she  will  chatter  like  a magpie,  luit  during  tlie
serious  business  of  the  seance  she  does  not  appear  to  he  under
any  necessity  to  s])eak  without  intermission.  Sometimes  she
will  go  awa}'  f(jr  a few  minutes ; at  others,  maintain  silence
for  a minute  or  tw(_).  So  1 do  not  fancy  that  Nelly  inter-
polates statements  al))_)ut  l)abies  in  order  to  mark  time.

Throughout  spiritualistic  trance-communications  may  be
observed  a uniformly  latitudimirian  strain  : an  emphatic  ])ro-
test  against  theological  bigotry  a,nd  dogmatism  of  all  kinds
iriespective  of  any  [)articular  creeil  or  sect.  1 suppose  that
nothing  has  been  more  afihorrent  to  the  modern  conscience
than  certain  eschatological  teachings  about  the  fate  of  unbaptised
children;  and  it  is  conceivable  that  the  insistence  both  of
Phinuit  and  of  Nelly  upon  the  presence  of  babies  in  the  same
splieres  of  existence  which  the  adult  dead  inhabit  should  be
traced  to  a conim(.)ii  desire  to  protest  against  this  damnable
dogma.

Silting  of  Novcmher  1 899.

This  was  Dr.  van  Eeden’s  lirst  sitting,  but  the  trance-utter-
ances were  not  entirely  con  lined  to  his  aliaii’S  : references  being
also  made  to  IT'ofessoi’  William  dames,  and  to  a former  sitter
called  1)}'  Nelly  “ Kaymond’s  mother.”  liaymond  was  the  dead
son,  and  about  him  Nelly  had  at  former  sittings  given  many
correct  details.  On  tins  occasion  she  added  a few  more,  one
of  which  ultimately  proved  to  be  true,  although  the  mother
was  not  able  to  verify  it  at  the  time,  and  in  fact  had  never
known  it.  In  the  course  of  the  additional  statements  about
i;aym<.)nd  the  following  occurred  : — “ llaymond  said  there  was
a little  baby  belonging  to  ‘ them  ’ that  wasn’t  grown  up,  and
it  has  not  got  a name  at  all.”


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thom'psons  Trance.  263

With  regard  to  this  point  Eaymoiid’s  mother  wrote  to  me
on  February  11th,  1900: — “This  is  very  puzzling,  and  I can
only  think  of  the  fact  that  my  mother  died  in  premature  child-
birth more  tluin  20  years  ago.  Xelly  has  each  time  claimed
my  mother’s  care  as  being  given  to  my  little  boy.”

r>ut  obviously  so  indirect  a correspondence  as  this  cannot
possibly  count.

Sitting  of  December  1st,  1899.

Dr.  van  Eeden  had  handed  to  the  medium  a box  containing
the  hair  of  a dead  gentleman.  The  box  had  been  in  the
possession  of  his  widow  for  several  years.  Several  correct
statements  were  made  about  both  the  husband  and  the  wife,
though  there  was  a certain  amount  of  confusion,  facts  being-
predicated  of  the  man  which  would  have  been  true  of  the
woman  and  vice  versd.  There  was  a break  in  the  trance,  and
the  second  part  of  the  sitting  Xelly  opened  with  these  words : —
“ What  was  that  dead  baby  associated  with  the  hair-lady  ? It
was  not  properly  born.”  Dr.  van  Eeden  said  : — “ I don’t  know  ” ;
and  for  the  moment  Nelly  dropped  the  subject.  But  a few
minutes  later  she  reverted  to  it  saying  to  Dr.  van  Eeden : — “ I
wish  you  would  think  about  the  dead  baby.  The  hair-lady
has  the  entire  management  of  the  dead  baby.”

The  “ hair-lady  ” was  not  dead,  and  so  could  not  have  the
management  of  a dead  baby,  even  had  there  been  a dead  baby
to  manage,  and,  so  far  as  Dr.  van  Eeden  could  discover,  there
was  no  dead  baby  which  could  be  said  to  be  associated  with
either  the  lady  or  her  husband.

The  first  reference  to  the  baby  formed  the  introductory  words
of  the  second  part  of  the  sitting,  so  in  this  instance  there  was
no  need  for  “ gagging,”  for,  if  Nelly  ever  does  “ gag  ” in  the
Phinuit  manner,  she  would  hardly  do  so  immediately  on
resuming  after  a recuperative  interval,  but  by  way  of  pulling
herself  together  for  a fresh  eftbrt : havardcr  pour  mieiix  parlcr.


Sitting  of  January  i)tli,  1900.

Four  persons  were  present  at  the  beginning  of  this  sitting,
but  the  principal  sitter  was  a lady  whom  I call  Miss  Gordon.
In  the  course  of  it  Nelly  said  to  Miss  Gordon : — “ This  all

s


J.  G.  Piddington.


264


[part


comes  thiough  a little  girl  who  died  long  ago — your  sister.
8he  is  now  grown  np.”

i\Iiss  Gordon  never  had  a baby  sister,  or  a sister  who  died
young.  A brother  died  two  hours  after  birth.


Sitting  of  January  ISth,  1900.

]\lr.  “ Wilson  ” was  the  sitter  on  this  occasion.  Early  in  the
sitting  Xelly  gave  a personal  description  of  a girl,  which  Mr.
AVilson  regarded  as  “ a very  good  description  ” of  a girl  cousin
of  a dead  lady  to  whom  had  belonged  a stocking  which  he
had  just  presentetl  to  the  medium.  This  identification  is  sup-
ported by  the  fact  tliat  throughout  Mr.  "Wilson’s  sittings  many
other  references  were  made  which  can  be  aptly  applied  to  the
cousin.  Eollowing  directly  on  tlie  personal  description  came
these  words : — “ She  seems  to  be  taking  charge  of  a little  Ijoy,
a tiny  lu’otlrer  or  baby  who  died  a long  time  ago.”  “ The
l)aby  looks  up  to  her  not  as  a mother,  l)ut  as  to  an  elder
sister.”

Now  the  “ she  ” would  at  first  sight  seem  to  refer  to  the
cousin  whose  personal  appearance  had  just  before  been  sketched,
but,  althougli  Nelly  had  not  up  to  this  point  mentioned  the
lady  called  in  the  pulfiished  report  of  these  sittings  ]\Iiss  Clegg,
both  Mr.  "Wilson  and  myself  understood  the  “ slie  ” to  refer  to
a new  clraracter ; and  anyhow  it  was  clear  from  what  was
said  later  that  the  dead  baity  was  not  associated  in  Nelly’s
mind  with  the  cousin,  but  with  iMiss  Clegg.  This  second  re-
ference made  just  before  a break  in  the  trance  ran  as  follows : —
“She  {ix.  Miss  Clegg)  has  got  a dead  Italiy  with  her’.  I’ve  got
one  of  Mother’s  dead  babies  at  our  house.  Mother  doesn’t
think  it  was  a little  live  boy,  but  it  was.”  And  later  she
added : — “ You  worddn’t  mind  me  saying  that  there  is  a dead
baby  in  connection  with  the  stocking.”  It  will  be  noticed  that
the  “ little  boy,  a tiny  brother  or  hairy”  has  become  a mere
“ dead  Iraby  ” of  undefined  sex.  In  reality  a sister  of  Miss
Clegg’s  had  died  in  babyhood.


Sitting  of  January  2bth,  1900.

TJiis  was  Mr.  "Wilson’s  second  sitting.  No  further  reference
was  made  to  the  baby  associated  with  Miss  Clegg,  but  Nelly


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.  265

said : — “ I couldn’t  find  the  lady  {i.e.  Miss  Clegg)  anywhere.  I
could  only  find  a brother  of  this  gentleman  {i.e.  Mr.  Wilson)
who  died  when  he  was  quite  a tiny  microbe  baby.”  A
brother  of  Mr.  Wilson’s  had  died  within  a few  hours  after  its
birth.

Sitting  of  May  ?>0th,  1900.

In  the  course  of  this  sitting  Xelly  said  to  Mrs.  Benson :
“ AVhen  I died,  a little  baby — little  baby  boy  died  belonging  to
you.  He  died  when  he  was  a tiny  boy.  He  loves  you  just
the  same.”

This  statement  is  not  correct.

Sitting  of  June  '2nd,  1900.

Towards  the  end  of  this,  Dr.  van  Eeden’s  fifth  sitting,  a lady
staying  in  the  house  where  the  seance  was  held  entered  the
room,  coming  in  from  behind  the  medium.  According  to  her
own  assertion  Mrs.  Thompson  had  not  previously  met  her
about  the  house.  Before  coming  into  what  would  appear  to  be
the  medium’s  range  of  vision  Xelly  said : — “ I can  see  her : she
has  a light  drab-coloured  skirt.  She  has  a brother  in  our
house.  (Here  the  lady  signified  her  dissent.)  I am  quite
sure  about  it.  He  has  died  perhaps  as  a baby.”

This,  I must  admit,  is  in  the  true  Bhinuitesque  manner.

Sitting  of  June  ’1th,  1900.

At  this.  Dr.  van  Eeden’s  sixth  sitting,  he  asked  Xelly  for
more  information  about  this  lady’s  little  brother,  and  the
answer  came  again  in  the  typical  Phinuit  style : — “ It  was  a
grown  lip  man  saying  ‘ This  is  my  sister.’  ”


(14)  Xelly  ox  Physical  Phenomena.

Mrs.  I’iper  has  never,  I believe,  claimed  to  produce
physical  phenomena : and  among  a certain  school  of  psychical
researchers  this  failure  to  sound  “ toute  la  lyre  ” of  mediumship


266


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[PAirr


has  1)6011  counted  unto  her  for  riuhteousness.  Having  a

o o

sneaking  affection  for  physical  phenoniena,  I am  glad  that
Nelly  has  the  courage  of  her  opinions  and  boldly  proclaims
their  feasiliility,  and  further  lays  claim  to  having  produced
such  things  herself.

So  in  this  matter  too  we  note  a distinction  lietween  the
phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  those  of  Mrs.  Thompson ; and
it  is  a distinction  which  Mrs.  Thompson,  were  she  an  im-
postor, and  well  acquainted  as  she  is  with  the  attitude  of
many  meniljers  of  this  Society  towards  physical  phenomena,
would  have  taken  good  care  not  to  ha’S'e  invented,  and  certainly
not  to  have  emphasised.


Sitting  of  November  2^tli,  1899.

Nelly : — “ That  gentleman  \i.c.  Dr.  van  Eeden]  has  been  to  a
materialising  seance.”

Fr.  ran  Eeden  : — “ AVhen  ? ”

Nelly : — “ A short  time  ago.  There  is  a strong  influence  of
somebody  cheating  all  the  time : taking  off  clothes  and  so  on  :
fraudulent  throughout.”

This  statement  was  not  applicable  to  Dr.  van  Eeden ;
though  it  would  have  l)een  to  myself,  the  recorder.

1 then  asked  Nelly  to  tell  me  what  she  thought  about
materialisations : were  they  occasionally  genuine  ? In  reply
she  gave  this  message  from  Mrs.  Cartwright : — “ Whenever  a
spirit  materialises  it  is  quite  a spontaneous  thing.”

Nelly  proceeded  to  explain  this  by  saying: — “It  can’t  be
done  to  order  once  a week”;  and  added,  “Mrs.  Cartwright
dictated  that  lut  ” (meaning  the  dictum  about  materialisation
being  a spontaneous  thing),  “ and  also  about  Alice  James  ”
(referring  to  a previous  incident  in  the  sitting).

Very  soon  after  this  Dr.  van  Eeden  asks  Nelly  if  she  can
appear  to  people  in  dreams,  and  gets  the  reply : — “ I never
tried  except  with  klother.  Pm  going  to  mate-rialise  one  day
for  Father  to  show  him  the  colour  of  my  hair : IJack  curly
hair,  not  light  like  Mother’s.”

“ kir.  Thurstan’s  sister  came  and  talked  at  Mother’s  house.
She  was  materialised.”  (This  was  (pioted  as  an  instance  of
a non-fraudulent  materialisation.)


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  Trance.


2G7


“ Corner  once  was  properly  materialised — about  three

years  ago — at  a lady’s  house.”


Sitting  of  January  11th,  1901.

“ Mr.  Gurney  went  and  talked  to  Miss  Eawson.  He
doesn’t  even  mind  knocking  a talde  for  her.”

Vnfortunately  I have  not  had  access  to  all  the  records  of
i\liss  Rawson’s  trances,  which,  moreover,  have  not,  I believe,
been  very  methodically  kept,  and  I cannot  therefore  speak
with  complete  certainty,  but  from  the  best  information  that
I have  been  able  to  obtain  it  appears  that  a soi-disant  Edmund
Gurney  does  play  some  part  in  Miss  Eawson’s  trance-phenomena,
though  it  is  not  certain  that  this  control  has  ever  })urported
to  communicate  by  means  of  raps  in  her  case.  For  a fuller
discus.sion  see  pp.  301-2.


Sitting  of  January  I'lth,  1900.

A propos  of  Mrs.  Benson  Xelly  said : — “ Tliere’s  a place  in
Birmingham  where  IMother  often  goes:  it’s  ‘Bensons  Limited.’
I knocked  and  shook  a table  in  that  shop  before  I knew  Mr.
Myers.”


(1.5)  The  “ Susaxxa  I’aukes”  Case.

I offer  no  apology  for  including  in  this  report  another  incident
which  cannot  be  treated  as  evidential,  Ijecause  my  main  aim
throughout  has  been  not  so  much  to  bring  forward  ‘ evidential  ’
facts  as  by  applying  the  test  of  classification  to  see  how  far
the  phenomena  present  a consistent  character,  such  as  we
should  expect  to  result  from  an  examination  of  genuine,  and
not  from  an  examination  of  spurious  phenomena.

The  incident  in  question  belongs  to  a class  which  lends
itself  readily  to  the  ridicule  of  the  man  who  prides  himself
upon  his  common-sense.  I have  a good  deal  of  sympathy


268


/.  G.  Piddington.


[PAKT


with  tiiat  type  of  person,  perhaps  more  because  he  is  sucli
a refreshing  contrast  to  the  man  who  seems  to  pride  himself
upon  the  want  of  it  than  from  any  deep  admiration  for  his
intellectual  penetration.  There  is  a certain  danger,  too,  in
allowing  weight  to  a type  of  phenomenon  which  can  not  only
be  aped  by  the  dishonest  with  the  greatest  ease,  but  which  can
also  be  used  to  explain  away  many  a suspicious  circumstance.
Yet,  if  the  objections  of  the  common-sense  man  had  always
been  listened  to,  there  would  have  been  no  psychical  research.
I venture  therefore  to  proceed,  after  warning  the  man  of
common  common-sense  off  this  section.

The  facts  of  the  case  were  reported  in  writing  to  Mr.
Myers  by  Mr.  Thompson  as  long  ago  as  November  27  th,

1899:  a point  of  some  importance ; for,  had  nothing  been
heard  of  the  matter  before  the  publication  of  Dr.  Hodgson’s
report  on  his  six  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  or  before,  at
any  rate,  it  was  known  that  he  was  not  satisfied  of  her  hona
fides,  it  would  have  been  a reasonalde  suggestion  that  the

following  story  had  been  concocted  for  the  purpose  of  throw-
ing a favouraljle  light  on  those  circumstances  of  klrs.  Barker’s
sittings  which  aroused  Dr.  Hodgson’s  suspicions.

I append  Mr.  Thompson’s  report,  which  is  dated  November
27th,  1899

Fu:  Control  Susanna  Parkcs.

On  Monday,  26tli  June,  1899,  Mrs.  Thompson  was  suddenly  con-
trolled by  what  purported  to  be  an  old  lady.  Certainly  Mrs.

Thompson’s  face  was  very  drawn,  and  she  looked  quite  different

whilst  influenced  to  speak  to  any  time  previously.  I quite  felt  at
the  time  it  was  an  old  person  speaking : her  voice  and  manner
were  just  those  of  an  old-fashioned  country  person.  I put  the
following  questions  : —

1.  Who  are  you?

With  great  difficulty  the  control  said:  “Susanna  Parkes.”

2.  Where  did  you  live  when  on  earth  ?

“ Birmingham.”

3.  How  old  were  you  when  you  died  ?

“ Sixty-nine.”

4.  What  ailment  caused  your  death  1

“ Great  sufferer,  great  sufferer.”

(I  could  not  get  any  other  reply  than  this.)


XLvn.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thomjyson’s  Trance.


269


5.  Are  you  any  relation  of  our  old  friend  Miss  Parkes  1 I cannot
think  of  an}^  one  else  of  that  name.

“ Yes,  I am  her  mother.  She  is  my  only  child  Mary,”

6.  Have  you  any  message  for  Mary  1 though  I fear  now,  through
age,  she  would  not  understand  a message,  if  you  sent  one  to  her.
She  has  lost  her  memory.

“I  have  no  message.  I was  buried  at  All  Saints’  Church.”

Directly  she  had  finished  saying  this  Airs.  Thompson  awoke.  I
told  her  what  had  taken  place,  read  my  notes  aloud,  and  asked
her  if  she  knew  these  facts  : the  very  old  lad}^.  Miss  Parkes,  being
more  a friend  of  Mrs.  Thompson’s  than  of  mine.

She  replied: — “I  do  not  know  an}'thing  of  Miss  Parkes’  rela-
tives, except  that  she  had  a blind  father.  I only  knew  Miss
Parkes  in  1886,  and  she  was  nearly  seventy  then.  I know  she
was  an  only  child,  and  that  she  had  no  living  relatives;  that  when
her  parents  were  alive  they  lived  in  Birmingham ; but  I never
remember  her  speaking  of  the  place  where  her  mother  was  buried
or  of  her  age.”

Miss  Parkes  lives  still  in  Birmingham,  but  is  too  old  to  be
questioned,  so  we  let  the  matter  drop  until  one  day  in  September,
1899,  Mrs.  Thompson  found  a very  old  diary  of  1855  in  a play^-
closet  amongst  the  children’s  toys,  etc.  She  found  out  it  had  been
given  in  December,  1888,  to  one  of  the  children  by  Miss  Parkes:
the  child  having  visited  the  old  lady,  it  had  been  given  him  to
play  with.  Mrs.  Thompson  opened  the  diary,  and  the  first  thing
she  saw  was  an  entry  of  Miss  Parkes’  mother’s  death.

You  will  notice  the  old  lady  who  controlled  Mrs.  Thompson
gave  no  details  except  what  was  uritten  down.

IMrs.  Thompson  says  she  is  positive  she  had  never  seen  or  known
of  the  existence  of  that  diary;  it  being  folded  up  in  a case  similar
to  a Banker’s  ))ass  book,  in  darkish  red  leather,  and  was  certainly
not  an  ordinary  every-day  looking  thing.

Mis.  Thompson  and  myself  were  the  only  people  who  knew  ot
the  Susanna  Parkes  incident,  but  Mrs.  Thompson  wishes  me  to  write
out  these  details  as  being  of  interest  with  regard  to  the  question  :
“ Are  names  and  facts  which  have  been  written  easier  for  a spirit
to  see  than  when  they  only  exist  in  one’s  memory  1 ”

I am  rather  inclined  to  think  they  are.  Of  course  this  does  not
alter  the  fact  that  the  controls  or  spirits  very  often  give  accounts  of
things  neither  written  or  in  one’s  memory  : prophecies  of  the  future,
for  instance.


270


J.  G.  Piddington,


[part


With  this  report  Mr.  Thompson  sent  tlie  leaf  from  the
almanack  containing  the  entry  of  the  death. . The  date  of  the
almanack  is  1855,  and  the  entry  made  under  the  date  of
February  loth,  runs  as  follows: —

“Friday,  13th,  1857.  My  Mother  died  at  1 in  the  morning  after
9 months’  suffering  and  was  hurried  [sic]  at  All  Saints’  Church  tlie
15,  aged  69.  Susanna  Parkes,”

It  will  he  seen  that  Mr.  Thompson  was  not  quite  right  in
stating  that  the  control  gave  no  iletails  except  such  as  were
written  in  the  almanack.  In  the  trance  the  name  of  Susanna
Parkes’  daughter  was  given  as  Mary,  the  latter  was  said  to  l>e  an
oidy  daughter,  and  the  place  where  the  former  lived  was
given  as  Birmingham.  But  these  details,  winch  were  not  con-
tained in  the  entry  in  the  almanack,  were  prolmhly  all  known
to  Mrs.  Thompson,  or  if  not  known,  could  have  Ijeen  guessed.
]\Irs.  Thompson  knew  that  i\Iiss  Parkes  was  an  only  child,
and  that  lier  parents  lived  in  Birmingham,  and  it  is  safe
to  assume  that  she  knew  Miss  Parkes’  Christian  name  to  he
Mary.

Whatever  view  is  taken  of  the  character  of  the  control  in
this  case,  it  would  be  difficult  to  deny  that  the  sul)ject-matter
of  the  communication  was  drawn  from,  or  based  on,  or  sug-
gested by,  the  entry  in  the  almanack.

I asked  Nelly  about  this  incident  at  the  sitting  of  Novem-
l)er  29th,  1899,  and  Nelly  gave  the  following  explanation:
— that  “ Auntie  Parkes  was  really  controlling  her  mother ;
that  the  spirits  did  not  get  at  the  infoimation  contained  in
the  almanack,  hut  Susanna  Parkes  was  led  to  give  the  same
information  as  in  the  almanack  ‘ l)y  association.’  ”

This  comment  is  not  illuminating,  and  it  in  some  degree
clashes  with  a remark  made  by  Mrs.  Cartwright  in  the  course
of  Mrs.  Barker’s  second  sitting  (see  Proceedings,  I’art  XLIV.,
p.  151):  “The  worst  is  we  read  the  contents  of  a letter  with-
out getting  the  message  of  the  spirit.”

5"et  this  case  is  not  entirely  unparalleled : the  familiar  ex-
perience of  tliinking  of  a person  while  a letter  from  this
person  is  lying  in  your  letter-l)OX  has  some  points  in  common
with  it ; and  sometimes  under'  these  circumstances  even  the
contents  of  the  unopened  letter  appear  to  enter  the  mind  of


xlvil]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.  271

the  atldressee.  For  instances  of  this — instances,  however,  so  far
very  rare — see  Human  Personality,  A^ol.  I.,  sections  42 IH  and
J,  and  65GB  of  the  Appendices.

If  there  is  snch  a faculty  as  clairvoyance,  and  l^y  clairvoy-
ance I mean  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge  under
circumstances  where  telepathy  from  the  mind  of  a living  or
dead  being  , is  excluded,  belief  in  such  a phenomenon  as  the
one  under  consideration  does  not  present  so  great  difficulty
as  it  must  if  telepathy  is  the  only  process  by  which  a mind
can  receive  impressions  otherwise  than  through  the  organs  of
sense.  Unfortunately  the  evidence  for  clairvoyance  is  weak,
and  so  it  seems  the  wiser  course  to  content  ourselves  with
recording  cases  of  this  kind,  and  to  wait  patiently  in  the  hope
of  fresh  evidence  pointing  in  the  same  direction.

Yet  the  mere  contiguity  of  a thing — of  a material  thing —
does  appear  to  facilitate  the  reception  of  (presumably)  telepathic
messages ; for  otherwise  why  is  it  the  almost  universal,  or  at
least  the  favourite,  custom  of  mediums  to  hold  an  object  con-
nected with  the  person,  whether  living  or  dead,  about  whom
communications  are  sought  for  ? And  the  psychometrist  too
seems  unable  to  get  to  work  at  all  without  handling  a material
object.

In  the  case  of  an  entranced  medium,  or  of  a clairvoyant
or  psychometrist,  it  is  possible  to  suppose  that  the  handling
of  an  object  has  a subjective  effect  on  the  imagination  of
the  sensitive,  and  in  this  way  helps  towards  a successful
result ; hut  such  an  explanation  would  hardly  hold  water  in
this  ease,  since  Mrs.  Thompson  was  unaware  of  the  existence
of  the  almanack.  If  the  almanack  had  anything  to  do  with
the  trance-utterance  (and  it  is  well-nigh  impossible  to  imagine
that  it  had  not)  the  effect  produced  I)y  it  must  lie  put
down  to  its  contiguity,  or  perhaps  one  should  say  to  the  fact
of  the  medium  having  lieen  in  its  vicinity.


(16)  “Suspicious  Cikcumstaxces.”

1 have  already  mentioned  (see  p.  224)  that  Airs.  Thompson
once  displayed  knowledge  of  the  name  of  one  of  her  sitters,  Mrs.
Benson,  who  at  the  time  was  supposed  to  he  unknown  to  her.


272


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


At  Mrs.  Benson’s  first  sitting,  on  December  18th,  1899,  her
name  was  not  mentioned ; but  by  the  time  that  her  second
sitting  (Jaiiuary  23rd,  1900)  was  held  ISTelly  had  talked  about
her  by  name  frequently.  In  the  first  few  days  of  February,
1900,  I happened  to  be  calling  on  Mrs.  Crackanthorpe,  a lady
whom  Airs.  Thompson  knows  well.  She  mentioned  to  me  quite
casually  in  the  course  of  conversation  that  Mrs.  Thompson  had
told  her  that  she  had  been  giving  sittings  to  a Mrs.  Benson.
So  on  the  earliest  opportunity  I asked  Mrs.  Thompson  if  she
remembered  the  name  of  the  lady  with  white  hair  who  had  had
two  sittings  with  her  lately.  Airs.  Thompson  could  not  recall
the  name  at  once,  but  finally  said  “ Mrs.  Benson,”  and  when  I
further  asked  her  how  she  had  succeeded  in  recalling  the  name,
she  said  she  had  done  so  by  thinking  of  “ Bensons  Limited,”  a
restaurant  in  Birmingham  (see  p.  225).  In  reply  to  my  further
questions  she  went  on  to  explain  that  she  had  learnt  the  name
through  Mr.  Thompson,  who  had  been  told  it  l:)y  Nelly.  Mr.
Thompson  had  asked  Nelly  for  communications  on  his  own
account,  and  on  Nelly  excusing  herself  on  the  plea  of  having  a
lot  of  work  to  do  for  other  sitters,  he  had  playfully  taunted  her
with  lieing  too  much  taken  up  with  “ all  these  grand  people  ”
and  refusing  to  take  any  trouljle  for  her  own  father.  To  this
Nelly  had  replied : — “ Oh  ! it’s  only  Mrs.  Benson ; she  isn’t  a
grand  person ; she’s  only  an  old  lady  with  grey  hair.”

After  the  trance  Mr.  Thompson  had  given  an  account  to  his
wife  of  what  Nelly  had  said.

Now,  it  is  quite  evident  that,  if  Nelly  knows  either  the  name
of  or  any  other  fact  aljout  a sitter,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent
Iier  from  communicating  lier  information  to  Airs.  Thompson,
either  directly  in  some  clairvoyant  manner,  or  by  using  Mr.
Thompson  as  an  intermediary.  As  a matter  of  fact  I do  not
believe  that  this  is  a general  practice  of  Nelly’s,  but  if  she
acted  in  this  way  once  she  may  do  it  always.  I have  quoted
various  instances  of  Airs.  Thompson  acquiring  information  from
Nelly  when  at  home  about  things  that  have  occurred  at  sittings;
and  these  instances  show  that  Airs.  Thompson’s  explanation  of
her  knowledge  of  Airs.  Benson’s  name  involved  the  dragging  in
(jf  no  new  type  of  psychical  experience,  and  that  it  was  no
hastily  vampetl  up  excuse  invented  on  the  spur  of  the  moment
to  cover  a slip  on  her  part.  I may  add  that  her  whole  manner


XLVil.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


273


during  our  conversation  was  perfectly  easy  and  natural,  and  not
in  the  least  that  of  a person  who  has  been  cornered.  Nor  did
she  pretend  for  one  moment  tliat  she  did  not  know  Mrs.  Benson’s
name ; it  was  clear  that  she  knew  she  knew  it,  and  that  her  only
hesitation  was  caused  by  a momentary  inability  to  recall  the
actual  name.  But,  it  may  be  asked,  why  did  not  Mrs.  Thompson
herself  spontaneously  tell  me  that  she  liad  learnt  the  name,  as  on
other  occasions  she  had  told  me  of  information  imparted  to  her
by  Nelly  ?

Apart  from  the  question  of  whether  it  would  have  seemed  to
Mrs.  Thompson  a matter  of  importance  to  let  me  know  that  she
knew  that  Nelly  had  said  that  a sitter’s  name  was  so  and  so,  I
doubt  if  I gave  her  much  opportunity  for  avowing  her  knowledge,
for  I questioned  her  on  the  sulqect  on  the  first  occasion  that  I
saw  her  after  I had  seen  Mrs.  Crackanthorpe,  that  is  on  February
6th,  1900,  and  I put  my  questions  before  trance  began,  and  as
soon  as  we  had  both  settled  down  to  prepare  for  the  oncoming  of
the  trance  after  the  ordinary  greetings  were  over.

If  Mrs.  Thompson  had  learnt  of  the  identity  of  her  sitter  in
some  underhand  way,  it  would  stand  to  reason  that  she  would
take  care  to  conceal  her  knowledge.  Yet  what  do  we  actually
find  her  doing  ? Letting  out  the  fact  that  she  knows  a name
which  she  would  be  supposed  not  to  have  known,  and  letting  it
out,  not  to  some  one  who  woxdd  be  safe  not  to  come  in  contact
with  her  investigators,  but  to  a lady  whom  she  knew  I knew,  a
lady,  too,  who  was  a member  of  our  Society,  and  the  wife  of  a
member  of  our  Council.

There  were  other  circumstances  connected  with  Mrs.  Benson’s
sittings  which  I propose  to  deal  with  here  under  the  head
of  “ suspicious  circumstances,”  though  the  term  is  inept,  or  at.
least  must,  to  have  any  aptitude  at  all,  be  understood  in  a Idck-
wickian  sense,  for  the  circumstances  do  not  really,  or  ought  not
to,  cast  suspicion  on  Mrs.  Thompson.  I am  liy  no  means  sure
that  they  ought  not  rather  to  Ixe  discussed  under  a heading
entitled  “ Stupidities  of  Investigators,”  and  followed  by  com-
ments by  Mrs.  Thompson  herself.  Tlie  circumstances  were  these.

The  first  object  handed  to  Mrs.  Thompson  at  IMrs.  Benson’s
first  sitting  was  a ring,  and  this  ring,  I greatly  regret  to  say,
I failed  to  observe  was  inscribed  inside  with  the  fidl  names
of  a dead  son  of  IMrs.  Benson ; Martin  White  Benson.


274


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


After  tills  it  is  perhaps  almost  superlluous  to  add  the
following : — On  the  occasion  of  the  second  sitting  (Jannary
23rd,  1900)  l\Irs.  Benson  and  1 were  talking  in  my  dining-
room, where  the  seance  was  to  lie  held,  before  the  arrival  of
Mrs.  Thompson.  The  dining-room  opens  into  the  hall,  and
the  door  of  the  dining-room  happened  to  he  slightly  ajar.
Neither  Mrs.  Benson  nor  I heard  the  bell  ring  or  the  front
<loor  open,  and  at  the  moment  when  the  servant  was  opening
the  door  in  order  to  show  iMrs.  Thompson  into  the  room,  I
addressed  i\Irs.  Benson  by  name.  A few  seconds,  however,
elapsed  liefore  Mrs.  Thompson  entered  the  room.  I do  not
think  that  she  could  have  normally  heard  me  utter  the  name,
hnt  hy[)eraisthetic  andition  cannot,  of  course,  lie  excluded.

]\Iy  carelessness  having  thus  twice  provided  i\Irs.  Thompson
with  a possilile  clue  to  the  identity  of  her  sitter,  and  that
sitter  happening  to  he  the  widow  of  the  late  Archbishop  of
Canterbury,  and  herself  a well-known  woman,  and  also  Mr.
Arthur  Benson’s  Life  of  the  Archbishop  having  appeared  liefore
the  first  sitting  took  place,  I need  scarcely  say  that  it  is
practically  impossible  to  treat  any  statements  made  by  the
medium  in  trance  relating  to  the  past  history  of  Mrs.  Benson
and  her  family  as  evidence  for  supernormal  faculty.  \'et  I
cannot  regret  that  these  sittings  were  continued,  for  not  only
did  they  furnish  some  points  of  great  psychological  interest,
referred  to  in  previous  sections,  hut  also  some  exceptionally  good
evidence  for  supernormal  faculty.  This  latter  1 propose  to
give  in  detail,  not  only  for  its  intrinsic  interest,  lint  also  in
order  to  forestall  what  might  under  the  peculiar  circumstances
lie  a natural  conclusion,  namely,  that  normal  causes  would
suhice  to  explain  nil  the  phenomena  of  Mrs.  Benson’s  sittings.

1 fully  appreciate  how  vexatious  it  must  he  to  mediums
“ when,”  as  IMrs.  Thompson  has  herself  expressed  it,  (see  the
Journal,  S.B.Bi.  for  Novemlier,  1001)  “statements  made
liy  them  in  trance  have  lieen  deprived  of  their  proper  evidential
value  through  laxity  in  the  conditions.”

Vet  at  the  same  time  I woidd  add  in  self-defence  that  1
iloulit  if  any  one  can  realise  without  prolonged  experience  how
difficult  a matter  it  is  to  guard  against  each  and  every  pos-
silile  kind  of  laxity  in  the  conditions  of  ;i  seance,  and  how
easy  it  may  be  for  an  experimenter  or  observer  while  fully


XLVir.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


275


on  the  alert  for  the  less  ol)vious  sources  of  error  to  overlook
the  most  obvious.  Our  insistence  on  the  great  allowance  to
be  made  for  maloljservation  has,  more  than  anything  else,
brought  on  ns  the  remonstrances  of  Spiritualists ; but  such
remonstrances  would,  1 think,  have  been  less  vigorously  ex-
pressed if  they  had  Init  realised  that  it  is  our  own  personal
and  sad  experiences  which  liave  largely  contributed  to  our
recognition  of  the  mi  trustworthiness  of  human  observation.
Such  attention  as  the  work  of  the  S.IMI.  has  met  with  from
critical  minds  is  perliaps  due  to  a large  extent  to  onr  frank
recognition  of  our  own  fallilnlity.

Extract  from  Mrs.  Benson's  second  sitting  held  on
J anuctry  2 ord,  1900.

(A  sealed  packet  handed  to  the  medium.  Mr.s.  Benson  writes  in
reference  to  this  incident  as  follows  : — “ I gave  the  sealed  packet,
sealed  by  my  daughter  ill  at  the  time  at  home,  to  the  medium.
At  her  wish  I broke  the  seal  and  gave  it  her  back.  She  unwrapped
it,  and  as  her  lingers  touched  the  tissue  paper  in  which  the  brooch
was,  she  exclaimed,  ‘The  person  who  wrapped  this  up  was  ill.’

“ My  daughter  had  taken  the  brooch  out  of  a red  silk-lined  dressing
case,  and  wrapped  it  up.  When  I saw  it  unwrapped  in  the  medium’s
hand  I misfoolc  it  for  another  brooch  which  I myself  possess,  which
was  not  in  a rosewood  box.

“ The  brooch  belongs  to  my  daughter.  It  was  put  together  b}'
the  nurse  of  the  whole  family  while  she  was  living  with  my  mother
before  I married.  It  contains  the  hair  of  my  mother  and  my  three
brothers  and  myself,  as  well  as  that  of  a brother  and  sister  who
died  as  children.”)

Nelly-. — “Mother’s  brooch.  This  was  her  brooch,  and  belonged  to
more  than  one  generation — a lad}^ — two  children  died — her  own
hair  and  two  dead  children’s  hair  made  into  a brooch.

“ The  lady  seems  to  be  the  third  generation — grandmother,  mother,
grand-children.  Mrs.  Cartwright  said,  ‘ Mother’s  brooch.’  Some  one
telling  me  to  say  it  was  her  mother’s,  [lb]

“ The  person  who  wrapped  it  up  was  not  well  when  they  wrapped
it  u}).  [R.]  Inanition.  [Great  point  of  treatment  of  the  invalid

who  wrapped  uj)  the  package  was  to  take  as  much  nourishment  as
possible,  unusually  much  for  fever.]  Delicate,  not  well  at  all,  wants
nourishment.  Mrs.  Cartwright  used  the  word.  I don’t  know.”


J.  G.  Piddington.


276


[part


[Nelly  j)i'obably  meant  the  word  “ inanition,”  and  wished  to  exjdain
her  use  of  such  a long  word.]

“ I feel  rather  sick.  She  must  have  felt  rather  sick.  [R.]

“It  was  packed  up  at  a veiy  windy  place.  Ask  the  lady”  [Notice
the  correct  progression:  “the  person,”  “she,”  “the  lady,”]  “if
something  was  banging  the  night  before  she  packed  it  up.  She
was  disturbed  b}'  the  wind.  A windy  town,  not  London.”

[Mrs.  Benson  comments:  “The  wind  was  so  high  the  night  before
my  daughter  packed  it  up  that  for  the  first  time  during  a fortnight’s
illness  the  shutters  were  barred  all  the  night.  N.B. — I did  not

know  this  at  the  time  of  seance.  It  was  not  a town.”]

“The  lady  that  has  this  brooch  was  next  generation.  There  was
a work-box — rosewood  work-box — little  silk  places  where  you  keep
silks  and  ribbons.”

[Mrs.  Benson  writes:  “Rosewood  dressing  case  from  which  brooch
was  taken  belonged  to  my  daughter’s  sister’s  godmother.  After  a
hunt  for  brooch,  it  was  found  in  a drawer  in  the  dressing  case,
the  only  one  which  was  lined  in  red  silk.”]

“She’s  not  ill,  but  just — inside  her  inside  she’s  got  a collection
that  she  ought  to  spit  away.”  [Lungs  clearing  after  congestion.]


Eidract  from  Mrs.  Benson’s  third  sitting  held  on
May  1st,  1900.

(A  sealed  packet,  the  contents  of  which  had  been  selected  and
packed  up  by  Aliss  Benson,  was  then  given  to  medium.)

Nelly: — “Do  you  understand  what  I mean  by  the  brooch-lady  1
Mr.  Dlyers,  you  can  talk.  Very  delicate,  thin  lady.  Seems  like
mother’s  hair;  ljut  there’s  a youth  about  that  lady — younger.  She
never  seemed  to  have  any  strength  at  all,  like  a green-house  plant.
All  needed  careful  tending.”  (Medium  undoes  the  packet.)

[Comments  from  this  point  ey  Miss  Benson.]

[I  had  previously  .sent  a brooch  to  be  handed  to  Mrs.  Thompson,
which  she  had  described  as  “ Mother’s  brooch.”  I am  delicate,
but  not  thin ; the  rest  true.  The  sealed  packet  contained  a bangle
and  a ring ; bangle  had  belonged  to  Agnes  Tait,  who  had  worn
it,  and  given  it  to  me.]

“ A sort  of  .sister  Edith  belonging  to  it,  and  a lot  more  trinkets
besides  this.  This  lady  only  had  a few.”  [Agues  Tait  had  sister
Edith,  and  has  many  “more  trinkets.”  I have  “only  a few.”]


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


277


“ There  are  two  things  here.  One  has  been  worn  by  the  lady
who  sent  it.  |^R.  The  bangle.]  The  other  she  hasn’t  worn,  as
if  it  had  been  lying  by.”  [I  only  wore  the  ring  once;  it  has  been
lying  by.]

“ Delicate,  nervons ; even  now  she  isn’t  so  strong  as  she  ought
to  be.  [R.]  Got  no  appetite.”  . [Not  directly  true,  but  I am  always
advised  by  doctors  to  eat  as  much  as  possible.]  “Languid  sort  of
feeling.  Bracing  wants  to  be  for  her.  [R.]  She  has  black  and
white  silk  in  front  of  her  dress  (touching  her  chest).”  [Black  and
white  chiffon,  not  sill:,  on  yoke.]  “Brown  hand  lad}^  like  one  that’s
dead.”  [True  both  of  m3'  sister  and  me.]  “Has  she  got  any  tendency
to  hip  disease  ? which  lying  down  is  a cure  for.  She  doesn’t  want
to  be  limp;  ought  not  to  be  an  invalid,  but  take  sufficient  rest  to
do  her  good.”  [Not  hip  disease,  but  have  to  lie  down  and  rest.]
“Very  devoted  to  Margaret.  I’m  not  talking  about  Maggie,  but
Margaret.  I am  very  devoted  to  Margaret.  It  is  the  dead  lad}'
which  was  the  beginning  of  ring.”  [My  name  is  Margaret.  I am
called  Maggie.  I don’t  know  the  previous  histor}’  of  the  ring.]
“Bub.  They  all  know  Bob  in  that  family.  Don’t  like  feel  of  it.
Don’t  feel  comfortable.”  [Reference  to  Bob  unrecognised.]


Extract  from  Mrs.  Benson’s  fourth  sitting  held  on
May  30th,  1900.

idelly : — “ I made  mother  tell  }'ou  at  twelve  minutes  past  two.  1
was  anxious  to  impress  mother  with  some  little  detail  that  was
going  on.”  [When  I arrived  Mrs.  Thompson  was  there,  and  said
she  knew  I had  to  leave  at  4.30.  I was  surprised,  as  I had  no
engagement  till  five ; but  it  happened  that  a lad}'  with  whom  I
had  lunched  had  said  at  the  end  of  the  lunch,  “Do  come  back  to
tea.  Do  you  leave  Mrs.  Thompson  at  4.30?”  So  I then  asked
Mrs.  T.  when  she  had  this  conviction,  and  she  said  at  2.12,  when
she  had  looked  at  the  clock  that  she  might  be  in  time ; so  the
times  corresponded,  hhote  by  Mrs.  Benson.]

. . . “ Mrs  Benson  darling,  will  you  come  every  time,  every  week,
every  day  ? Never  mind  what  Mr.  Myers  says.  Will  you  come
and  see  Mother  ? ” [This  very  curious,  as  Mr.  ^Myers  and  I had
talked  at  Cambridge  the  day  before  on  the  point  that  it  would
not  be  right  to  the  Society  for  me  to  go  on  having  seances  with
Mrs.  Thompson  unless  their  results  were  useful.  I quite  agreed
with  this  view.  Bfofe  by  Mrs.  Benson.]


278


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


As  tlie  details  of  these  various  incidents  are  ratlier  difficult
to  follow,  1 append  Mrs.  Benson’s  own  account  of  and  coin-
inentary  on  them  : —

. . . The  condition  of  my  daughter’s  health  is  characteristically
described  in  very  unmedical  language.  At  the  time  of  my  second
sitting,  January  23rd,  1900,  ni}-  daughter  was  recovering  from  an
attack  of  pneumonia,  which  Mrs  Thompson  described,  speaking  of
the  patient  as  my  daughter.  Later  on,  on  being  given  a packet

sealed  up  by  my  daughter,  she  went  on  describing  symptoms,
touching  on  the  point  that  food  was  of  much  importance,  and  added
that  it  was  windy  the  night  before  the  packet  was  sealed.  I had
not  remembered  this,  though  I must  have  known  it ; and  my
daughter  corroborated  it  by  the  fact  that  her  shutters  were  barred
for  tlie  first  time  during  a fortnight’s  illness.  At  the  sitting  on
May  1st,  1900,  in  connection  with  another  sealed  packet  from  my
daughtei',  she  described  the  general  state  of  her  health,  and  after
speaking  of  her  as  being  delicate,  nervous,  and  obliged  to  lie  down,
added  she  “doesn’t  want  to  be  limp:  ought  not  to  be  an  invalid,
but  take  sufficient  rest  to  do  her  good  ” : all  of  which  were  char-
acteristic, as  well  as  true,  touches  about  my  daughter’s  general
health.  She  also  made  one  or  two  fairly  accurate  statements  about
my  daughter’s  dress,  etc.

There  are  further  facts,  some  known  to  me,  others  not  known
or  forgotten,  which  still  more  evidently  the  medium  could  not  have
received  through  normal  channels : e.g.  that  one  emerald  of  my
engagement  ring  had  once  come  out ; that  we  had  kept  an  unneces-
sarily large  number  of  old  books.  Two  other  incidents  of  this  kind
are  of  special  interest.  On  May  30th,  when  I arrived,  Mrs.
Thompson  told  me  that  she  had  been  careful  to  be  punctual,  as
she  knew  1 had  to  leave  at  4.30.  I asked  her  when  she  knew
this,  and  she  said  at  2.12.  I had,  previously  to  coming  up  to
London,  had  no  engagement  till  5 o’clock,  but  a lady  with  whom
I was  lunching  said  at  the  end  of  lunch,  “Do  come  back  to  tea —
do  you  leave  Mrs.  Thompson  at  4.30  ?”  “Nelly”  alluded  to  this
during  the  sitting.  . . .

But  the  things  of  most  evidential  value  are  those  concerned  with
matters  which  I myself  did  not  know.

(1)  One  is  the  point  about  the  shop  where  we  got  our  potatoes
at  Winchester.  I do  not  suppose  I ever  knew  it,  but  Mrs.  Thomp-
son described  it  as  double-fronted  and  served  by  one  man  and  two
women,  adding  other  details  unverified.  I found,  however,  on


xlvil]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


279


asking  a servant  who  had  been  with  us  at  Winchester  that  it
stood  at  a corner  with  a window  each  way,  and  was  served  by
one  man  and  two  women.

(2)  My  daughter  sent  up  twice  a sealed  packet,  putting  in  each
packet  things  which  she  did  not  show  me.  I undid  each  packet
and  handed  the  things,  wrapped  up,  to  the  medium,  but  did  not
myself  see  them,  and  should  not  have  recognised  them.

Each  time  Mrs.  Thompson  described  (see  above)  with  considerable
accuracy  my  daughter’s  condition,  adding  the  first  time  the  details
about  the  wind}"  night.  She  then  stated  (making  very  few  incorrect
statements  at  the  same  time)  that  the  brooch  belonged  to  more  than
one  generation,  that  my  daughter  was  the  third,  that  it  contained
the  hair  of  a lady  and  of  two  of  her  children  who  had  died  ;
that  “ there  was  a workbox — rosewood  workbox — little  silk  places
where  you  keep  silks  and  ribbons”;  the  truth  being  that  the
brooch  contained  the  hair  of  my  mother  and  my  brothers  and
sister,  two  of  whom  had  died  as  children;  that  it  had  been  given
to  my  daughter  by  her  old  nurse,  who  had  also  been  our  nurse ;
that  it  came  out  of  an  old  rosewood  box,  half  workbox,  half
dressing-case,  lined  with  red  silk,  which  had  been  given  to  my
elder  daughter  by  her  god-mother.  The  brooch  had  never  been
worn  ; the  box  had  passed  straight  to  my  second  daughter ; I could
not  have  seen  either  of  these  things  for  years  and  had  forgott*'n
their  existence.

(■!)  The  second  sealed  packet  contained  a garnet  ring  and  a silver
bangle,  given  to  my  daughter  by  a friend  who  had  a sister  Edith.
My  daughter  had  worn  the  bangle  often,  though  some  years  ago.
Again  I did  not  recognise  the  things,  but  Mrs.  Thompson  stated,
“ A sort  of  sister  Edith  belonging  to  it,  and  a lot  more  trinkets
besides  this.  This  lady  had  only  a few.  There  are  two  things
here  : one  has  been  worn  by  the  lady  who  sent  it,  the  other  she
hasn’t  worn — as  if  it  had  been  lying  by.”  All  these  points  are
true,  except  that  my  daughter  had  worn  the  ring  once.

(f)  A still  more  curious  point  is  that  at  the  sitting  of  May  30th,
1900,  Mrs.  Thompson  suddenly  said,  “Your  daughter  is  thinking
about  giving  a wedding  present  to  somebody.  She  seems  to  be
very  careful  with  her  money.  (A  little  laugh.)  Oh,  I can  see  her
looking  at  her  money  and  thinking  about  the  wedding  present.”

On  returning  home  I found  my  daughter  had  been  going  very
carefully  over  her  accounts ; she  did  not  understand  the  allusion
to  the  wedding  present  until  she  remembered  having  considered  a

T


J.  G.  F iddington.


280


[part


memorandum  of  a wedding  present  already  given  jointly  with  me,
her  share  in  which  she  had  not  yet  j)aid.

i\[rs.  Henson  further  remarks  that  the  facts  of  which  she
herself  had  no  knowledge,  and  which  the  medium  could  not
have  known  in  any  noi'inal  manner,  “ were  perhaps  more  clearly
given  than  any  other,  and  more  free  from  confused  and  in-
accurate detail.”

x\.  large  number  of  the  statements  about  j\Irs.  Benson’s
family  wliich  it  is  possilde  to  assume  Mrs.  Thompson  could
have  known  or  learnt  in  a normal  way  were  given  with  much
confusion.  W e are  accordingly  faced  with  the  prol)lem  : How
is  it  that  the  facts  which,  it  would  appear,  could  not  have
been  learnt  normally,  were  given  more  clearly  than  the  facts
which  were  normally  ascertainable  ? A solution  is  not  rendered
easier  when  we  take  into  accmint  that  the  most  telling  of  the
former  class — namely,  the  statements  made  when  the  medium
was  handed  the  two  sealed  packets — -were  given  definitely  in
connection  with  certain  objects,  and  were  particularly  relevant
to  the  past  history  of  the  objects  themselves,  or  to  their  p>ast
or  present  owners ; whereas  the  latter  class  of  facts,  as  often
as  ni.)t,  were  not  given  in  connection  with  any  particular
(ibjects,  but  were  scattered  over  ten  sittings,  at  six  of  which
Mrs.  Benson  herself  was  not  present,  and  wlien  no  olpect
connected  with  her  was  in  the  room.

Mrs.  Benson  has  expressed,  in  a letter  addressed  to  Sir
Oliver  Lodge,  the  eftect  produced  on  her  by  her  sittings  with
Mrs.  Thorn]  )Son.  1 am  glad  to  be  able  to  reproduce  this  letter
here,  because  it  embodies  tire  opinion  of  a keen  observer,  and
also  because  it  gives  expression  to  a view  of  Mrs.  Thompson
upoir  which  in  my  opinion  too  much  emphasis  cannot  be
placed  : namely,  her  abnormal  power  of  normal  olrser'vation,  if
I may  so  express  it.  Mrs.  Benson  seems  to  limit  this  ex-
aggerated perceptive  faculty  to  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trance-state,
l)ut  that  may  be  due  to  a concise  style  of  writing.  Anyhow
1 worrld  prrt  rro  such  linritatiorr  on  Mrs.  Thompson’s  powers
of  observatiorr.  “ A snapper-irp  of  rrnconsidererl  trifles,”  “ sharp
as  a rreedle,”  “’cute  as  nails,”  “see  through  a Irrick  wall”:
all  srrch  proveririalisrrrs  I woirld  apply  without  hesitatiorr  to
]\Irs.  Thonrirson  in  her  normal  state,  and  with  a few  ex-
cej^tiorrs,  where  Nelly  has  rrot  accepted  the  broadest  of  hints.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thovvjoson’s  Trance.  281

to  her  trance-state.  Women  are  proverbially  swift  at  seizing
what  tlie  duller  man  would  treat  as  impalpable  indications ;
but  after  making  every  allowance  for  her  sex,  I still  think
that  Mrs.  Thompson  displays  this  perceptive  faculty  in  a
superlative  degree.  At  the  same  time  I do  not  think  however
highly  developed  her  normal  powers  of  observation  and
inference  may  be  that  they  will  explain  all  her  phenomena.
I most  emphatically  disclaim  any  sucli  assertion,  but  I do
maintain  that  a very  large  discount  must  be  made  before  any
of  her  phenomena  are  attributed  to  supernormal  faculty.

I cannot  help  wondering  whether  this  peculiarity  of  Mrs.
Thompson  may  not  Ire  typical  of  mediums  in  general.  It  has
not  been  noted,  and  is,  I believe,  markedly  absent  in  the
case  of  Mrs.  Piper ; but  that  does  not  necessarily  negative
my  suggestion.  This  heightened  power  of  normal  observation,
which  Mrs.  Thompson  displays  lioth  in  and  out  of  trance,
may  in  Mrs.  Piper’s  case  l)e  confined  to  her  entranced  state ;
and  if  this  is  the  case,  it  would  Ire  only  one  more  indication
of  the  complete  disseverance  of  the  normal  from  the  trance
consciousness  of  Mrs.  Piper-,  and  of  the  lack  of  any  such
hard  and  fast  cleavage  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Thompson.  Ybt
fundamentally  the  mental  process  in  either  case  may  Ire
identical,  although  the  occasion  of  its  display  may  not  Ire.

Mrs.  Benson,  writing  privately  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  answer
to  some  rpiestions,  says  ; —

“October  28th  [1903].

“ . . . I should  like  to  explain  a little  my  position  toward  Mrs.
Thompson.  I enjoyed  the  sittings  with  her  extremely,  and  certainly
had  some  very  interesting  experiences — especially  one  of  clairvoj^-
ance  at  the  last  sitting.  But  nothing  occurred  which  tended  to
alter  the  view  with  which  I began  the  sittings — that  the  phenomena
did  not  need  to  be  accounted  for  by  an  external  intelligence.

“ I told  Mr.  Myers  this  fi’om  the  first,  and  it  almost  seemed  to
me  towards  the  end  of  the  sittings  that  Mrs.  Thompson  herself  tended
to  drop  the  ‘Nelly’  theory.^  As  you  say,  we  had  many  interesting

' I understand  that  Mrs.  Benson’s  meaning  is  not  that  Mrs.  Thompson  in
her  normal  state  was  disposed  to  drop  the  ‘ Nelly  ’ theory,  but  that  in  the  later
sittings  Nelly  retreated  more  or  more  into  the  background,  and  the  medium
tended  to  act  as  her  own  spokesman  without  a go-between.  I myself  have
observed  no  such  tendency  ; though  Nelly  is  ready  enough  at  any  time  to
.suggest  or  admit  that  her  information  may  have  been  derived  from  her


J.  G.  P'uldhujion.


[part


28:>

things;  but  none  of  them  were  accompanied  by  any  of  the  fine
shades  and  nuances  of  which  you  speak — nothing  occurred  which  led
me  to  feel  that  vivid  touch  of  personality  which  is  the  touch  of  all
recognition — wherever  she  strayed  beyond  m}^  ken,  it  was  always
wildly  inappropriate.  Her  power  seemed  to  me  to  lie  in  telepathic
grasp — with  me,  and  also  with  my  daughter  whom  she  had  never
seen,  and  whom  I had  never  called  by  that  name.

“ I always  thought  she  was  in  good  faith,  as  far  as  her  will  and
consciousness  were  concerned,  but  more  and  more  I felt  that  the
jisychical  part  of  her  was  so  much  more  developed  than  any  other
that  she  perceived  indkat'wni  almost  as  a highly-trained  animal
does,  far  beyond  and  outside  the  regions  I had  access  to — and  in
this  subliminal  consciousness  a certain  amount  of  acting  might  go
on,  for  which  one  could  not  hold  her  responsible,  but  which  required
to  be  met  by  extreme  carefulness.  Therefore  the  fact  of  having  sup-
plied her  most  unfortunately  at  the  very  beginning  with  a consider-
able clue  which  her  subliminal  could  follow  out  with  extraordinary
cleverness,  seems  to  me  to  nullify  the  trustworthiness  of  her
abnormal  powers  to  a veiy  great  degree.

“ 1 should  value  more  than  I can  say  some  more  sittings  with
her,  because  I should  like  to  try  some  safeguards  that  I had  in  my
mind  after  the  last  sitting.  1 know  that  this  is  extremely  impro-
bable, but  1 Old}'  say  it  to  show  you  how  far  removed  I am  from
doubting  her  .s;(pYtliminal  good  faith.”

The  second  case  involving  “ sns])icious  circuinstances  ” is  rather
coni])licated,  ami  as  1 am  compelled  to  conceal  the  identity  of

mother’s  hrain.  The  normal  Mrs.  Thompson  has  an  equally  open  mind
with  regard  to  the  source  of  her  trance-utterances,  and  holds  no  passionate
conviction  as  to  the  nature  of  the  Nelly  control.  When  Mrs.  Piper  ex-
pressed an  opinion  about  her  owm  phenomena  it  W'as  generally  agreed  that
she  was  one  of  the  last  persons  qualified  to  form  an  estimate  of  her
ow'n  case.  I would  not  go  as  far  as  this  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Thompson,
for  not  only  has  she  a clear  grasp  of  some  of  the  problems  involved,  but  in
view  of  the  fact  tliat  complete  amnesia  does  not  always  follow  her  trance,  and
that  she  has  psychical  experiences  of  an  apparently  supernormal  kind  w'ithout
lapsing  from  ordinary  consciousness,  her  subjective  feelings  ought  not  to  be
entirely  disregarded.  Yet  I find  that  Mrs.  Thompson’s  opinion  about  her
familiar  control  fluctuates  ; at  one  time  she  seems  overborne  by  a conviction
of  the  separate  existence  of  Nelly,  and  at  another  half  disposed  to  think  that
Nelly  is  no  more  than  her  own  subliminal  : a state  of  indecision  faithfully
reflected  in  my  own  mind,  though  1 sometimes  incline  towards  a third  alter-
native ; namely,  that  Nelly  is  “a  bit  of  both.”


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.  283

the  persons  concerned  by  adopting  pseudonyms,  and  by  svib-
stituting  fictitious  though  analogous  details  for  the  real  ones,
the  difficulty  of  clear  exposition  is  rendered  all  the  harder.
In  making  these  necessary  changes  I have  been  most  careful
to  avoid  selecting  analogies  which  might  allow  a more  favour-
able construction  to  be  placed  on  the  incident  than  the  original
record  warrants,  and  in  one  instance  from  inalfility  to  hit
upon  a completely  representative  parallel  I have  adopted  one
which  does  not  give  Mrs.  Thompson  the  benefit  of  the  doubt.

I was  aware  that  Mrs.  Thompson  was  well  acquainted  with
the  relations  and  history  of  a certain  individual  whom  1 shall
call  Mr.  Wilfred  Strong.  It  accordingly  occurred  to  me  that
an  interesting  experiment  would  be  to  l)ring  as  a sitter  to

i\Irs.  Thompson  some  intimate  friend  of  the  dead  man,  if  one
coidd  be  found  who,  as  far  as  could  lie  ascertained  after  careful
enquiry,  should  be  entirely  unknown  to  the  medium  ; the  object
of  the  experiment  being  to  see  whether  appropriate  communica-
tions would  be  given,  and,  if  so,  how  such  knowledge  of  Mr.
Strong  as  might  be  shown  l;>y  Mrs.  Thompson  in  trance  would
compare  with  knowledge  which  I knew,  or  had  reason  to

suppose  that  Mrs.  Thompson  normally  possessed  aliout  him.
I knew  at  the  time  that  under  no  circumstances  would  it
be  possilile  to  publish  for  evidential  purposes  whatever  might

be  the  results  of  the  sitting,  and  I tried  it  solely  for  my

own  edification.

It  may  seem  in  now  citing  the  results  of  this  sitting
under  the  heading  ‘ suspicious  circumstances  ’ to  lay  myself
open  to  a charge  of  taking  a mean  advantage  of  a lady  who
was  deserving  of  considerate  and  fair  dealing.  As  a matter
of  fact  I had  at  the  time  of  the  seance  no  insidious  inten-
tions. It  must  be  understood  that  the  carelessness  of  the
conditions  which  obtained  at  this  sitting  is  not  typical  of  the
conditions  of  the  other  sittings  where  evidnitial  phenomena
were  sought.  The  laxity  was  not  precisely  intentional,  but
the  seance  was  allowed  to  become  rather  a ‘ go  as  you
qilease  ’ affair,  as  unless  Mr.  Strong’s  identity  was  discovered
by  the  medium  the  chief  object  of  the  experiment  would
not  have  been  attained.

So  far  as  I could  then  ascertain — and  nothing  has  occurred
since  to  modify  my  opinion — the  sitter  whom  I selected,  and


J.  G.  Pkldington.


284


[part


wlioin  I shall  call  Miss  Gordon,  satisfied  in  every  respect  the
re(|nirements  of  the  case.

To  the  sitting  Miss  Gordon  brought  three  objects  connected
with  Mr.  Strong : {a)  A single  sheet  of  notepaper,  on  which
were  eleven  words  in  Mr.  Strong’s  handwriting.  Xo  proper
name  was  on  the  sheet  of  paper.  The  words  were  these : —
“ From  the  condnctor  to  his  little  fairy  god-sister.  September
189—.”

(b)  A letter  written  Ijy  Mr.  Strong  to  Miss  Gordon,  and
covering  four  sides  of  notepaper.  It  was  handed  open  to  the
medium,  hut  folded  in  two:  the  fourth  (last)  page  being  outer-
most. On  the  lower  half  of  the  last  })age  were  the  words :
“ off  the  grass,  and  when  in  doubt  ask  a policeman.  Always
A'our  devoted  brother  F.  Edinburgh,  October  1.”

(c)  A half  length  photograph  of  Mr.  Strong.  There  was  no

signature  on  the  photograph,  but  (jii  the  Ijack  was  the  name
and  address  of  the  photographer,  “ Tondin,  London  and  Scar-
borough.” It  was  handed  to  the  medium  in  a large  open

envelope.

In  connection  with  object  (n),  which  was  the  first  to  be
handed  to  the  medium,  five  statements  were  made ; two  of
which  were  right,  one  probalTy  right,  and  two  probably  wrong.
The  two  light  statements  might  have  been  inferred  from  the
writing  and  the  words  on  the  paper.  The  one  statement
which  was  }»robably  right  was  not  very  distinctive.

After  making  the  five  statements  referred  to  aliove  in  con-
nection with  («)  Nelly  asked  to  lie  given  another  letter  “ from
the  same  Itrother.”  Mr.  Strong  was  in  reality  a brother-in-
law  of  Miss  Gordon’s.  On  the  single  sheet  of  pajier  {a)

occurred  the  words,  “ to  his  little  fairy  god-sister.”  If  the

medium  read  these  words  she  may  have  inferred  from  them

that  the'  writer  was  a lirother  of  the  sitter ; but  1 think  it
will  lie  admitted  that  such  an  inference  is  not  the  natural
one,  and  that  the  natural  inference  would  rather  he  that  the
term  was  a playful  one,  and  that  accordingly  the  writer  and
the  sitter  were  not  related.

In  connection  with  oliject  {h)  the  following  statements  were
made,  though  interspersed  among  them  were  remarks  addressed
to  other  persons  who  were  present  during  the  early  part  of
the  seance : —


xlvil]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson' s Trance.


285


“ Who  was  rrank  ? not  quite  Frank.  ...  It  wasn’t
Frank:  more  Francis:  Imt  that’s  not  quite  right.  I’m  talk-
ing of  the  lady’s  lu'other.”

[The  letter  was  signed  “ brother  F.”  Mr.  Strong’s  name
was  Wilfred ; but  he  was  usually  called  and  signed  himself
Fred.  Tlie  Frank  and  Francis  are  apparently  guesses  suggested
Ijy  the  letter  F.]

“ It  says  something  al)Out  ‘ tell  a policeman.’  I can  see
‘policeman’  written  there.  No,  you  liave  got  to  ‘ask  a
policeman  ’ : that  is  what  he  says  wlien  he  writes.”

[The  words  “ off  the  grass,  and  when  in  doubt  ask  a
policeman  ” were  on  the  fourth  page,  and  it  is  impossible  to
assert  that  they  were  not  within  the  medium’s  range  of  vision.]

A break  in  the  trance  took  place  at  this  point.  During
the  interval  the  letter  was  hidden.  On  resuming  the  seance
Nelly  said  : —

“ I want  something  to  hold  belonging  to  brother  Ferdy.”

[Ferdy  is  apparently  another  attempt  to  interpret  the
initial  F.  Though  Nelly  seems  to  be  making  shots,  the  fact
of  her  making  several  shots  suggests  that  she  was  not  satis-
fied with  any  one,  I do  not  tliink  that  any  indication  was
given  from  which  the  medium  could  have  gathered  that  the
shots  were  incorrect.]

In  connection  with  object  (c)  twenty  statements  in  all
were  made.  Of  these  twenty  statements  six  were  right,  two
were  probably  right,  and  of  the  rest  nine  were  wrong,  one
probably  wrong,  and  two  doubtful.  Of  the  right  statements
two  were  of  facts  certainly  known  to  Mrs.  Thompson ; one
of  a fact  almost  certainly  known  ; one  very  possibly  known  ;
and  two  could  have  been,  and  in  my  opinion  were,  derived
from  the  photograph  handed  to  the  medium.

Of  the  two  statements  which  were  probably  right,  one  was
possil)ly  known  and  the  other  very  possibly  known  to  the
medium.

Of  the  nine  wrong  statements  five  would  have  been  cer-
tainly known  to  be  wrong  by  the  normal  Mrs.  Thompson.
The  remaining  four  the  normal  Mrs.  Thompson  may  or  may
not  have  known  to  be  wrong,  and  the  same  remark  applies
to  the  one  probably  wrong  statement,  and  also  to  the  two
doubtful  statements.


•286


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


After  ten  statements  out  of  the  twenty  had  lieen  made  in
connection  with  tlie  photograph,  Nelly  asked  me  to  go  out  of
the  room.  In  my  absence  she  made  only  two  statements  that
seem  to  be  meant  to  apply  to  the  photograph : one  of  these
two  was  a wrong  statement,  and  a statement  which  the
normal  Mrs.  Thompson  would  have  known  to  be  wrong  of  Mr.
Strong ; and  the  other  was  to  this  effect : “ I seem  to  get  the
name  of  Benson.”

There  was  no  connection  whatever  l)etween  Mrs.  Benson
and  Miss  Gordon.  Mrs.  Benson’s  first  sitting  had  taken  place
two  or  three  weeks  before  Miss  Gordon’s  sitting,  but  this  was
the  first  mention  of  her  name.  During  my  absence  from  the
room  Miss  Gordon  thinks  that  Mrs.  Thompson  had  ample
opportunity  for  looking  at  the  photograph  while  she  was  taking
notes,  and  1 agree  with  her,  for  after  my  return  Nelly  gave
a perfectly  accurate  description  of  Mr.  Sti’ong’s  personal  ap-
pearance, and  gave  the  name  and  address  of  the  photographer.
The  personal  description  and  the  name  and  address  of  the
)ih(.)tographer  I have  included  in  the  list  of  riglit  statements,
cnuntmg  them  as  two.

Just  as  Mrs.  Cartwright  did  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Barker’s
sitting  of  August  8th,  1900  (see  Proceedings,  Part  XLIV.,  p.  154),
and  just  as  the  medium  herself  did  in  the  case  of  one  of  Mrs.
Percival’s  sittings  (see  above,  pp.  177-8),  so  here  Nelly  drew
attention  in  what  it  is  possible  to  regard  either  as  an  ingenuous  or
as  a disingenuous  way  to  the  source  of  her  information.  4’hus
with  reference  to  Mr.  Strong’s  photograph,  she  remarked,  before
giving  his  })ersonal  description  and  the  name  and  address  of
the  photographer : —

“ The  photograph  seems  to  help  me  more  than  the  letter,
but  1 will  get  it  all  distinct.”  ...  “ Did  I look  at  that

photograph  ? Because  1 see  it  distinctly.  No,  it’s  the  gentle-
man himself  that  1 see.”

It  is  absolutely  certain  that  the  normal  Mrs.  Thomi)SO]i
would  have  recognised  the  photograph  as  a portrait  of  Mr.
Strong  at  the  first  glimjtse.  At  the  time  of  the  sitting  I
thought  it  probable  that  his  handwriting  would  equally  have
been  known  to  her,  but  1 have  since  had  reason  to  alter  my
opinion,  and  I now  consider  that  she  probably  had  no  normal
means  of  recognising  the  identity  of  the  writer  of  the  letters


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson  s Trance.


287


presented  to  her  until  the  photograph  came  within  her  range
of  vision.

If  therefore  we  suppose  that  i\Irs.  Thompson  was  not  in
trance  at  all,  and  deliberately  looked  at  the  portrait,  it  follows
that  she  purposely  introduced  a relatively  large  proportion  of
what  she  knew  to  be  incorrect  statements  about  Mr.  Strong.
This  course,  one  must  imagine,  recommended  itself  to  her  as
one  likely  to  divert  suspicion,  and  one  must  also  suppose  that
she  suspected  that  a tra]j  had  l^een  laid  for  her.  But  not  only
are  the  correct  statements  outnumbered  l)y  the  incorrect,  but
excepting  the  personal  description  of  Mr.  Strong  and  the  name
and  address  of  the  photographer,  the  incorrect  facts  also  out-
weigh the  correct  ones  in  definiteness.  Again,  if  on  this  occasion
i\Irs.  Thompson  was  shamming  trance,  I can  only  say  that  there
was  no  perceptible  difference  l)etween  this  trance  and  her  other
trances,  and  unless  one  supposes  that  her  trance  is  always
assumed  and  that  consecpiently  various  observers,  such  as  Mr.
Alyers,  Dr.  van  Eeden,  Mrs.  Verrall,  Mr.  “Wilson”  and  others,
have  been  misled  into  thinking  that  Mrs.  Thompson  in  trance
displays  knowledge  that  she  could  not  normally  have  possessed,
it  must  follow  that  Mrs.  Thompson  can  imitate  knowingly  and
consciously  her  genuine  unconscious  trance.

At  the  time  I regarded  this  sitting  of  Miss  Gordon’s  as
suspicious,  but  I was  even  then  inclined,  and  I am  now,  to
return  a verdict  of  “ Not  proven.”  There  is  al)Solutely  no
proof  of  fraud ; that  is  the  one  positive  statement  that  can
be  made  with  confidence  about  the  matter.  My  own  belief
now  is  that  Mrs.  Thompson  was  in  trance,  and  that  the
trance-personality  saw  the  woi-ds  written  on  the  paper  wliich
was  first  handed  to  the  meilium,  saw  the  lower  half  of  the
fourth  page  of  the  letter,  and  saw  the  photograph.  Tlrs.
Thompson  uses  her  normal  faculties  during  trance : she  can
get  her  handkerchief  out  of  her  skirt  pocket  (a  sufficiently
complicated  liusiness  requiring  skill  and  concentration,  if  one
may  judge  from  the  manceuvres  which  this  act  demands  in
the  case  of  other  ladies) : I have  seen  her  get  up  in  the  middle
of  a trance  and  open  the  door  when  some  one  knocked  ; I have
seen  her  search  about  for  a pencil  with  which  to  write,  and
generally  behave  like  a person  with  most  of  his  faculties  about
him.  I therefore  find  nothing  incongruous  in  her  using  her  eye-


288


J.  0.  Piddington.


[part  '


sight  to  read  writing  and  to  look  at  a photograph.  The  whole
question  resolves  itself  into  this  : Does  Mrs.  Thompson,  in
addition  to  exercising  her  normal  senses,  display  snch  know-
ledge as  to  compel  belief  in  her  possession  of  supernormal
faculty  ? Tlie  problem  is  not ; Does  Mrs.  Thompson  ever
exercise  her  normal  faculties  when  in  trance  f

There  is  one  small  point  which  goes  in  favour  of  the  trance
liaving  been  genuine  on  this  occasion.

The  paper  first  handed  to  the  medinm  contained  the  words : —
“ From  the  conductor.”  After  the  photograph  had  been  in
the  medium’s  hands  a long  time  Nelly  speaking  of  the  one
man  with  whom  she  connected  all  three  ol.tjects  said : —

“ The  young  gentleman  was  very  musical.  I want  to  play
the  piano  and  compose  as  I go  on ; because  he  would  rather
do  tlmt  than  play  other  people’s  music.”  Mr.  Strong  was  not
musical,  did  not  play  the  piano,  and  consequently  did  not
improvise.  Nelly  seems  to  have  inferred  from  the  word  “con-
ductor ” that  Mr.  Strong  was  a musician : an  inference  quite
in  keeping  with  Nelly’s  style.  As  a matter  of  fact  the  word
conductor  had  no  musical  significance.  I l)elieve  tliat  Mrs.
Thompson  would  almost  certainly  have  known  if  Mr.  Strong-
had  had  musical  abilities.

As  has  already  been  remarked,  Nelly’s  utterances  were  not
confined  to  Miss  Gordon,  hut  she  addressed  remarks  to  two
other  people  who  were  present  at  the  beginning  of  the
sitting,  and  she  also  descriljed  one  of  her  “ peregrinations.”
Tlie  peregrination  in  question  was  not  one  of  the  most  strik-
ing : yet  it  has  a certain  value  as  forming  one  of  a series  in
which  none  were  entirely  unsuccessful.  Nor  are  the  remarks
adilressed  to  the  two  other  sitters  particularly  striking,  yet  one
of  them  is  rather  good,  and  if  it  is  not  to  be  explained  as
due  to  normal  knowledge  or  to  chance,  it  introduces  a further
obstacle  against  l)elieving  that  the  trance  was  fraudulently
assumed ; for  it  is  almost  impossible  to  suppose  that  Mrs.
Thompson  goes  hopping  into  and  out  of  trance,  and  is  at  one
moment  genuine  and  the  next  not.

To  one  of  the  sitters,  Mrs.  Z.,  Nelly  said ; —

“ What  is  this  old  Theodore  doing  ? He  wants  to  help
yon.  You’re  very  sorry  in  your  heart  about  something  1 won’t
say  before  all  these  people.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson' s Trance.


289


Mrs.  Z. : — “ Yes,  you  may.”

Nelly : — “ Old  Theodore  wants  to  lielp  : not  young  Tlieodore.
You  want  to  go  somewhere.  He  says  you  are  to  go.”

Mrs.  Z. : — “ Who  was  old  Theodore  ? ”

Nelly : — “ He  was  an  old  gentleman,  when  you  were  young.
I think  he  was  a doctor.  He  was  very  much  mi.xed  up  in
hringing  you  up.”

With  regal'd  to  this  statement  Mrs.  Z.  wrote  : — “ Aliout  two
years  ago  I knew  a “ young  Tlieodore.”  His  father  who  had
been  dead  some  little  time  I had  never  known.  He  was  a
doctor  of  letters  and  master  of  a well-known  college.  This  is
interesting  to  me,  though  there  is  a wi'ong  statement  here  and
there.”

lleceutly  Mrs.  Z.  wrote  me  as  follows : — “ 1 think — as
much  as  one  can  be  certain  of  anvthing  where  human  minds
are  concerned — 1 can  safely  say  positively  that  Mi'S.  Thompson
could  not  have  discovered  by  normal  means  the  incident  of
‘ Theodore.’  ‘ Theodore’s  ’ father’s  name  was  also  ‘ Theodore.’  ”

At  this  point  in  the  sitting  Xelly  was  speaking  so  rapidly,
and  changing  the  subject  so  frerpiently,  that  I was  unable  to
record  all  she  said.  Mrs.  Z.  thinks  that  another  correct  state-
ment was  made  about  “ young  Theodore,”  which  has  not  been
noted.

In  the  sittings  under  review,  and  in  Mrs.  A’^errall’s  sittings,
the  name  Theodore  has  only  twice  been  mentioned  by  Nelly,
and  so  far  as  1 am  aware  it  has  not  been  mentioned  in  other
sittings.  Nelly  rightly  connected  a Theodore  with  IMrs.  Yerrall,
and  here  she  rightly  connects  two  Theodores — a father  and
a son — with  Mrs.  Z.  Three  times,  then,  the  uncommon  Chris-
tian name  of  Theodore  is  given  liy  Nelly,  and  each  time  hits
the  mark.  Mrs.  Verrall’s  Theodore  is  not  the  same  person  as
either  of  Mrs.  Z.’s  Theodores,  nor  a memher  of  the  same
family.

A few  days  after  this  sitting  1 again  handed  the  letter  (b)
to  iMrs.  Thompson  when  in  trance.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  my
wife  were  present.  I placed  the  open  letter  in  a plain  envelope
under  a thick  cloak  which  Mrs.  Sidgwick  held  tightly  over
IMrs.  Thompson’s  lap.  The  medium  was  allowed  to  finger  the
letter,  but  it  was  quite  impossible  for  her  to  have  read  a
single  word  of  it.  Nelly  at  once  recognised  the  letter,  a feat


290


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


demanding  no  great  acuteness.  I think  anylmdy  could,  under
tlie  circumstances,  have  recognised  it  liy  the  shape,  size,  folding
and  feel  of  the  paper.

Nelly  then  said : — “ It  has  been  in  a good  many  hands,  1
Itelieve.  Have  you  got  the  photo  Ijelonging  to  this?  I had
this  once  l)efore.  Put  ‘ policeman  ’ down.  ‘ When  you’re  in
doulit  ask  a policeman.’  ”

An  apparent  reference  is  tlien  made  to  Mr.  Strong’s  death,
and  after  going  off  on  another  tack  suggested,  it  would  seem,
hy  the  initial  “ F,”  with  which  the  letter  was  signed,  Nelly
said : — “ Fred.  1 shan't  say  it  till  I’m  obliged.  [This  was
the  first  time  that  Mr.  Strong’s  nickname  was  correctly  given.]
Something  makes  me  say  DeiFy,  not  the  town,  but  there’s  a
Derliy  association  with  this  letter,  rather  like  a peer,  but  not
(pute  that.”  Then  followed  a statement  which,  if  referred  to
Mr.  Strong,  was  sufficiently,  though  not  absolutely  accurate,
and  it  was  said  that  “ belonging  to  ‘ Fred’s  ’ relations  was  a
Walter — Walter  Stanley,  or  Stanley  WMlter.”

Now  with  regard  to  these  statements,  there  are  three  points
to  notice  which,  though  I do  not  pretend  that  they  tell
strongly  yet,  tell  somewhat  in  favour  of  the  genuineness  of
the  ])henoniena.

( 1 ) “ \\’hen  you’re  in  doubt  ask  a ])oliceman.”  At  the
former  sitting  when  the  letter  was  within  the  range  of  vision
of  the  medium,  these  words  were  given  as:  “tell  a police-
nuui.”

. . . No,  you  have  got  to  “ ask  a policeman.”  At  this  sitting
when  the  letter  was  not  within  the  medium’s  range  of  vision,
the  original  y)hrase  as  it  occurred  in  the  letter — “ when  in  doulA
ask  a policeman  ” — is  given  with  the  addition  of  the  word
“ you’re.”  One  might  have  expected  that  the  full  phrase
would  have  been  ([noted  when  the  letter  could  have  l)een  seen
by  the  medium,  and  that  when  she  had  to  rely  on  her
memory  only  the  shorter  form  would  have  been  given.

(2)  There  was  a “Herby  association”  with  the  letter,  for
the  envelo[)e  that  had  originally  contained  it,  but  which  had
not  been  within  Mrs.  Thompson’s  range  of  vision  at  either
sitting,  bore  an  address  in  which  the  word  Derby  occurred,
not  as  the  name  of  the  town,  but  as  the  name  of  the  Terrace
in  which  Miss  Gordon  had  at  one  time  resided.


xlvil]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson  s Trance.


29T


(3)  Neither  Walter  Stanley  nor  Stanley  Walter  was  a rela-
tion of  Mr.  Strong,  but  he  had  had  a great  friend  of  the  surname
Stanley,  though  tlie  Christian  name  was  not  Walter.  The
family  name  of  the  Earl  of  Derby  is  Stanley,  and  Nell}'
would  seem  to  have  been  put  on  the  track  of  tliis  fact  l>y
means  of  this  association  of  ideas.


(17)  Makkei)  Failubes  in  the  case  of  Sitters  'vvitm  wuiom
]\'Irs.  Thompson  avas  personally  acquainted.

In  five  cases  I was  completely  and  beyond  all  possilile
manner  of  doubt  satisheil  that  the  medium  could  not  b}'
normal  means  have  been  accpiainted  with  the  identity  of  tlie
sitters.  In  two  of  these  cases — those  of  “ Mr.  MTlson  ” and
Dr.  van  Eeden — the  sittings  were  successful.  In  the  three
other  cases  the  results  were  very  poor : but  in  two  out  of
these  three  there  were  circumstances  which  may,  in  my
opinion,  have  been  unfavourable  to  success,  and  possibly  also
in  the  third.

I must  not  lie  understood  to  imply  that  in  other  cases  I
think  that  Mrs.  Thompson  knew  who  her  sitters  w'ere,  but
only  that  I do  not  feel  the  same  absolute  assurance  to  the
contrary.

But  one  of  the  most  remarkable  facts  about  the  medium-
ship  of  Mrs.  Thompson,  so  far  as  it  has  come  under  my
observation,  is  her  failure  to  give  successful  sittings  to  people
about  whom  she  must  have  known  a good  deal,  and  about
whom  she  could  have  worked  uji  more,  and  about  whom  her
enlarged  consciousness  ought  to  have  been  able  to  tell  even
more  still.

In  the  first  place  there  were  my  own  sittings.  Mbth  cer-
tain exceptions,  dealt  with  on  pp.  116-119,  hardly  one  single  fact
which  Mrs.  Thompson  did  know,  or  could  have  been  supposed
to  know  about  me  and  my  belongings,  was  given  in  the  trance  :
and  the  true  facts  which  were  given  related  almost  entirely  to
my  mother,  who  died  twenty  years  before  I met  Mrs.  Thom])-


292


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


sou  ; and  of  tliese  facts  she  C(juld  not,  1 bt  lieve,  have  got  up
l)y  eiKpiiiy  a single  one;  and  some  of  them  she  could  not
have  learnt  from  myself,  as  1 did  not  know  them.  And
further,  the  communications  wei'e  connected  with  a period  of
my  mother’s  life  aliout  which  1 had  only  vague  knowledge,  and
generally  with  matters  which  were  not  occupying  my  conscious
thoughts,  until  my  mind  was  hy  reason  of  the  trance-utterances
naturally  directed  tliereto.  The  things  which  1 consciously
was  thinking  about  were  not  even  touched  on.

It  is  rather  Irisli  to  class  Mrs.  Thompson’s  success  in  my
case  under  the  liead  of  failures,  hut  I do  so  in  order  to  direct
attention  to  her  avoidance  of  topics  which  were  within  her
noimal  range  of  knowledge.

My  wife,  who  shared  a sitting  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  was  told
hardly  one  single  relevant  fact ; indeed,  I am  not  sure  that
there  was  one.  Naturally  it  would  have  lieen  perfectly  easy
for  Mrs.  Thompson  to  have  got  up  plenty  of  information  about
my  wife.  Instead  (jf  there  lieing  the  very  slightest  trace  of
her  having  dune  so,  there  was  not  even  any  reproduction  of
what  was  normally  known  to  her.

.lust  the  same  occurred  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  exce)»t  that
there  was  one  reference  to  a relation  of  hers  wlioin  Mrs.
Thom})Son  has  met.

In  the  joint  sitting  at  which  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  my  wife
were  present,  there  is  not  a single  statement  whicli  can  with
confidence  Ije  said  to  he  right,  and  such  as  had  })0ssihly  some
significance  are  the  sort  of  things  which  would  he  likely  to
have  some  significance  for  nine  peoj)le  out  of  ten.  Nelly
opened  the  trance  with  the  remark  : “ I’m  not  going  to  he
good  to-day.  Mother’s  l)ody  doesn’t  feel  clear  and  clean”;  and
she  certainly  fulfilled  that  prediction.

Dr.  Tuckey  also  had  a had  sitting,  though  not  (piite  so
had  as  the  one  just  mentioned,  for  one  fact  was  mentioned
hy  Nelly  in  the  course  of  it  which  Dr.  Tuckey  ultimately  found
was  true,  tliough  at  the  time  he  stated  tliat  it  was  wrong ;
and  one  other  fact  was  stated  of  a relation  of  his  which
though  marked  hy  himself  as  inct)rrect,  I have  from  personal
observation  sul)se(piently  discovered  to  Ije  true.

(duly  one  fact  was  asserted  of  Dr.  Tuckey  himself,  and  that
was  to  the  effect  that  he  had  “ drawing  cords  in  his  inside  ” :


XLVii.]  Ph.enoinena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


293


whatever  that  may  mean  ; and  when  Nelly  said  that  a clergy-
man was  associated  with  Dr.  Tnckey’s  father  (from  whom  the
communications  purported  to  come),  she  was  careful  to  add
that  though  she  had  mentioned  the  clergyman  it  was  not  liecause
before  the  trance  Dr.  Tuckey  had  spoken  about  a brother  of
his  who  is  in  Holy  Orders  : in  other  w'ords,  she  drew  attention
to  the  fact  that  the  allusion  to  a clergyman  must  not  lie
considered  evidential.

The  fact  noted  as  wrong  at  the  time  which  was  verified
three  months  later  was  this :

Ndh/ : — •“  1 want  to  say  a lot  of  tilings.  Something  about
chloroform,  not  giving  it  but  taking  it.  . . . It  was  a sen-
sation of  the  gentleman  associated  with  this  {i.c.  a wooden
stethoscope  that  had  belonged  to  Dr.  Tuekey’s  father)  having
chloroform  himself.”

More  than  three  months  after  the  sitting  Dr.  Tuckey  wrote
to  me  to  say  that  he  had  recollected  that  at  one  time  his  father
was  in  the  habit  of  taking  a drachm  of  cidoroforni  to  induce
sleep,  and  that  his  sister  remembered  that  her  father  discon-
tinued the  habit  at  her  “ earnest  solicitation.”

The  other  statement  which  l)r.  Tuckey  dismissed  as  wrong,
and  which  I afterwards  verified  as  correct,  was  to  this  etfect : —

“Somebody  lielonging  to  the  old  gentleman  {i.c.  Dr.  Tuckey ’s
father)  who  has  a nervous  twitch  in  the  left  eye ; now  and
then,  not  always.”

1 do  not  of  course  maintain  that  two  such  hits  as  these
are  beyond  chance,  especially  as  they  were  isolated  hits
among  a good  many  misses ; but  either  on  the  liypothesis  of
fraud  or  of  what  I would  term  the  selective-contessenitive-
telepathy  theory,  it  is  hard  to  explain  why  something  lietter
than  this  was  not  produced.

And  the  same  remarks  would  apjily  to  the  sitting  of
December  20th,  1900,  to  which  Mrs.  Jjenson  brought  objects
that  had  belonged  to  her  dead  brother.  Professor  Sidgwick.


294


J.  G.  Fiddington.


[part


(18)  CUOSS-COKKESPONOENCES  BETWEEN  THE  TrANCE-UtTEKANCES
AND  Script  of  Mrs.  Thompson  and  those  of  other  Mediums.

rndev  the  “ Peregrinations  of  Nelly,”  reference  has  been
made  to  two  instances  where  Nelly  has  claimed  to  have
iiilluenced  the  phenomena  of  two  other  mediums : Mrs.  I’iper
and  “ Miss  Pawson.”  In  one  case  the  claim  was  not  sub-
stantiated, in  tlie  other  there  was  an  nndonhted  correspondence.
These  incidents  were  treated  as  ])eregrinations  heeanse  Nelly
professed  to  have  visited  and  directly  controlled  the  metliums ;
hut  there  are  a few  other  instances  of  apparent  concordance
between  the  trance-utterances  of  Mrs.  Thompson  and  those  of
i\Iiss  Pawson  and  the  automatic  wilting  of  the  lady  whom  I
call  Mrs.  Scott,  of  which  the  facie  explanation  is  eitlier

that  Mrs.  Thompson  in  trance  becomes  aware  of  the  content  of
their  automatic  speech  or  script,  or  that  one  and  the  same
control  has  conveyed  similar  communications  through  two
different  mediums.  No  “ psychical  excursion  ” on  the  part  of
Nelly  seems  involved.  So  far  was  1 (except  in  one  case)
from  susjiecting  that  these  correspondences  had  occurred,  that
it  was  more  or  less  by  accident  that  I discovered  them  in  the
summer  and  autumn  of  1903.

Of  j\liss  Pawson’s  trance-utterances  no  adecpiate  record  has
unfortunately  been  kept.  Miss  Pawson  is  not  a professional
medium,  nor  lias  she  consented,  like  Mrs.  Thompson,  to  submit
her  phenomena  to  any  strict  investigation.  She  sits  only  with
a small  circle  of  relations  and  intimate  friends,  and  as  the
memliers  of  tins  circle  have  long  l)een  convinced  of  the  extra-
mundane  source  of  her  communications,  the  records  of  her
utterances  have  been  made  more  for  edification  than  for  a
scientiiic  pur])ose ; and  as  the  swuices  were  held  in  tlie  dark,
still  furtlier  allowance  must  he  made  for  the  deficiencies  of
the  records.

Mrs.  Scott  is  a memlier  of  the  Society  who  has  for  some
years  ]>ast  done  a good  deal  of  autonmtic  writing,  and  between
her  script  and  Mrs.  Verrall’s  there  have  been  some  interesting
and  fairly  numerous  correspondences.  I am  very  glad  to  say
that  she  is  now  keejiing  a careful  record  of  what  she  writes,


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’ s Trance.  295

but  at  the  time  that  the  correspondences  occurred  between
her  script  and  Nelly’s  utterances  she  was  not  sufficiently  con-
fident of  her  powers,  nor  sufficiently  alive  to  the  value  of  her
plienoniena  to  trouble  about  noting  them  systematically.

I give  first  some  similar  trance-utterances  by  Miss  Kawson,
who  was  then  in  the  south  of  France,  and  Mrs.  Thompson.


Mrs.  Thompson,

(1)  Jan.  11,  1901.

Mr.  D.  control  speaking  of  H.
Sidgwick  :


Miss  Rawson.

(1)  Dec.  22,  1900.

A control  speaking  for  and  of
H.  Sidgwick :

“ He  knows  his  wife  is  pre-
paring memorials.”

Jan.  11,  1901.

{H.  S.  controlling  directly.)

■‘Tell  mv  fi’iend  Myers  to  tell
my  wife  not  to  put  in  the  whole
of  the  last  chapters  of  the  book
she  is  finisliing.  She  will  know
the  passages  she  feels  doubtful
about.  Tell  him  it  is  really  I
who  am  here.”

(2)  Jan.  2.3,  1901.

H.  S.  controlling  directly :

“I  have  not  seen  my  dear
friend  Myers  yet,  but  I am
more  thankful  than  I can  say
that  he  has  come  here.  The
circle  above  has  been  waiting
for  him,  and  will  with  great  joy
welcome  him.”


“ He  says  : ‘ Eleanor  might  re-
member, because  she.’  ...  He
. . . Eleanor’s  writing  his  Life.
He  doesn’t  want  her  to  make
him  ‘ a glorious  personage.’
You’re  to  give  her  that  message.
He  said  : ‘ Eleanor  has  gone

abroad  to  prepare  my  Life.’”
Before  the  Mr.  D.  control  spoke,  a
control  that  purported  to  be
Henry  Sidgwick  had  appeared
for  the  first  time.

(2)  Jan.  21,  1901.

H.  S.  controlling  directly :

“He’s  {i.e.  F.  W.  H.  Myers)
not  with  me.  He’s  not  within
range  at  all.”

TFritten  during  seance  : H.  S.  script :
“ I don’t  think  Myers  is  here,
or  we  should  see  him  before  the
8th,  as  E.  H.  told  me  [Mr.  D.]
was  waiting  for  him.”

JFritten  by  Mrs.  Thompson  the  same
day  some  hours  after  the
stance:  (//.  S.  script):

“ Myers  is  elsewhere,  I think.
Should  I find  him  here,  I will
turn  up  on  the  Thursday  after-
noon.”


u


296


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


(3)  Jan.  29,  1901.

II.  S.  script  ivritten  during  slance  :
“Fred  knows  and  helps.  H.  S.
Yes,  hut  why  did  you  tell  Myers
H.  Sidgwick  he  isn’t  here.”

Nelli/ : — “ I haven’t  seen  Mr.
Myers.  I haven’t,  really.  Pro-
fessor Sidgwick  says  he  has  seen
him  : but  I haven’t.”

H.  S.  script,  written  Jan.  30,
1901  :

“ Myers  North  must  be  here
again  on  Thursday.  He  will  not
now  change  may  be  opening  am
inclined  to  say  so.  Myers  says
certainly  go.  Myers  says  better
go,  go  out  of  town.  Not  now,
not  now,  the  day  not  here.”

H.  S.  [scrawl].

F.  W.  H.  Myers.

Two  points  should  Ije  borne  in  mind  in  comparing  these
extracts:  the  first  that  the  three  sittings  of  January  11th,
21st,  and  29th,  1901,  from  which  the  extracts  have  been

taken,  were  the  only  sittings  given  by  Mrs.  Thompson  during
tlie  period  of  eighteen  days  covered  by  these  dates,  and  those
of  January  11th,  23rd,  and  26th,  1901,  were  the  only  sittings
of  Miss  Rawson  between  January  11th  and  29  th.  In  other
words,  these  sittings  have  not  been  selected  from  two  series  of
a dozen  or  more  sittings.

The  second  point  is  that  the  extracts  from  the  scanty
records  of  Miss  Rawson’s  sittings  do  not  represent,  as  might
he  thought,  an  infinitesimal  portion  of  a large  number  of  utter-
ances purporting  to  come  from  the  late  Professor  Sidgwick.  The
records,  as  1 say,  are  scanty,  and  more  may  have  l)een  said
by  the  Sidgwick  control,  and  by  other  controls  about  him,
than  has  been  preserved ; but  the  extracts  (pioted  above
represent  a consideral)le  proportion  of  the  total  record.
J’hus  the  passage  cpinted  from  Miss  Rawson’s  trance-utterances
of  January  11th  constitutes  the  -whole  record  of  this  sitting,
with  the  exception  of  two  lines,  which  state  that  a regular


(3)  Jan.  26,  1901.

G control  speaking  of  F.  W.  H.

Myers  :

“ He  has  sent  a message  to
the  other  side  (Mrs.  T.)  but
came  here  himself”

[The  notes  of  the  sitting  give
the  words,  “ Mrs.  T.,”  meaning
Mrs.  Thompson,  in  brackets:  in
explanation,  as  the  recorder  in-
formed me,  of  the  phrase,  “the
other  side.”

Before  these  words  were
spoken,  a soi-d-isant  Myers  con-
trol had  communicated.]


XLVir.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.  297

control  of  Miss  Eawson’s  introduced  the  Sido-wick  control  with

O

these  words : — “ The  spirit  of  an  elderly  man  is  here,  very
anxious  to  speak.”  Again,  the  passage  cpioted  from  the  sitting
of  January  23rd,  constitutes  all  the  record  of  Miss  Eawson’s
trance-utterances  on  this  date,  except  seven  lines,  in  which  in
reply  to  a question  from  the  sitters,  the  Sidgwick  control
explains  what  the  functions  of  the  “ circle  above  ” are.

Miss  Eawson’s  seance  on  January  26  th,  began  with  direct

speech  from  a Myers  control,  which  consisted  entirely  of  non-
evidential  matter,  and  then  followed  a few  words  from

another  control,  who  spoke  about  Mr.  Myers.  Eothing  in
the  utterance  of  either  control  contains  any  verifiable  state-
ment, except  the  part  which  I have  quoted.

I cannot  state  with  confidence  whether  the  sitting  of
December  22nd,  1900,  contained  the  first  reference  in  Miss
Eawson’s  trance-utterances  to  Erofessor  Sidgwick,  but  I am

informed  by  the  recorder  (a  member  of  the  Society  well

known  to  me,  whose  name  I do  not  reveal,  only  because  in
so  doing  I should  disclose  the  identitv  of  Miss  Eawson  to
many  people)  that  January  11th,  1901,  was  the  occasion  of
the  first  appearance  of  a direct  Sidgwick  control : a control,
he  tells  me,  extraordinary  life-like.

It  will  be  remembered  that  Mrs.  Benson  had  been  invited
to  a sitting  with  Mrs.  Thompson  on  I)ecember  20th,  1900,
with  a view  to  attracting  communications  from  or  about  Mr.
Sidgwick ; but  his  name  was  not  even  mentioned,  and  practi-
cally not  a single  statement  was  made  in  connection  with
objects  that  had  belonged  to  him  which  can  be  unhesitatingly
set  down  as  relevant.  On  any  theory  of  the  phenomena  this
silence  seems  strange,  nor  was  the  silence  broken,  so  far  as
TIrs.  Thompson’s  trance-utterances  are  concerned,  until  January
11th,  1901  (although  there  had  been  sittings  on  January  1st,
3rd,  and  8th),  except  that  at  sittings  previous  to  December
20th,  1900,  at  which  Mr.  Myers  was  present,  a few  passing-
references  to  Mr.  Sidgwick  of  an  unverifiable  nature  had  been
made  by  one  of  the  controls  to  the  effect,  for  example,  that
he  was  quick  at  learning  the  “ language  of  the  other  side,”
and  that  he  soon  would  be  able  to  commimicate.  Even  if  we
suppose  that  the  delay  in  the  appearance  of  the  control  was
due  to  Mrs.  Thompson’s  secondary  self  not  feeling  confident  of


298


J.  G.  Piddi'ngton.


[part


liavilig  worked  iip  a sufficiently  plausible  personation,  and  that
the  reference  to  Mr.  Sidgwick  hy  Miss  llawson  in  trance  on
l)eceniher  22nd,  was  due  to  Mr.  Myers  having  told  her  of  what
had  been  said  about  him  at  IMrs.  Thompson’s  sittings,  there  yet
remains  to  explain  not  only  the  coincidence  between  the  state-
ments of  the  two  mediums  on  January  11th,  1901,  but  also  the
fact  that  a Sidgwick  control  manifested  itself  on  the  same  day,,
January  11th,  1901,  duriug  the  trance  of  Mrs.  Thoni})son  in
Ijondon  and  during  the  trance  of  Miss  llawson  in  the  South
of  France,  and  that  up  to  a given  point  of  time,  namely
January  11th,  1901,  messages  only  purported  to  come  from  Mr.
Sidgwick,  to  be  followed  l»y  the  simultaneous  development  of
a direct  Sidgwick  control  through  both  mediums.  There  does
not  appear  to  be  much  signilrearree  in  the  coirtent  of  the
messages.  The  fact  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick  having  goire  abroad  was
}»rol)ably  krrown  to  l»oth  ladies.  She  was  rrot,  however,  their
engaged  on  a Life  of  her  husl.»and,  but  was  getting  ready  for
priWication  some  of  his  posthumous  works.  Still,  she  had  had
under  consideration  the  eventual  preparation  of  a Life.  More-
over', though  the  references  to  the  writing  of  the  Life  are
not  in  themselves  evidential,  the  independent  reference  to  the
same  subject  in  the  trance-uttei'ance  of  two  mediums  on  the
same  day  is  not  without  interest.  In  Miss  llawson’s  case  it
appears  to  have  been,  if  not  the  only,  at  any  rate  the  chief
subject  of  the  trance-utterance.  In  the  case  of  Mrs.  Thompson
the  utterance  of  the  direct  Sidgwick  control  was  confined  to
answering  questions  put  by  myself;  but  Mr.  1).,  who  followed
the  Sidgwick  control,  conveyed  two  messages  which  he  gave
me  to  understand  were  volunteered  by  the  soi-clisant  Henry
Sidgwick ; namely  the  one  quoted  above  about  “ Eleanor’s
writing  his  Life','  and  another  to  this  effect : “ He  wants  to
know  if  Kolrin  has  gone  with  Eleanor — Iris  wife,  you  know  ” ;
“gone”  meaning  olrviously  “gone  abroad.”  Of  the  two  volun-
teered messages,  therefore,  one  was  directly  and  the  other
indirectly  concerned  with  the  same  subject  as  was  the  only
I'ecorded  uttei'ance  of  the  Sidgwick  control  through  Miss
llawson.  If  the  utterances  of  these  two  mediums  are  only
the  outcome  of  self-suggestion,  I find  it  difficult  to  understand
what  prompted  them  froth  to  hit  on  this  particular  topic,  a
topic  which,  so  far  as  I can  judge,  was  not  very  likely  to


XLVii.]  PJienomena  hi  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.


299


conunend  itself  to  either,  whether  from  an  evidential,  an
emotional,  or  a dramatic  point  of  view.

The  coincidence  between  the  extracts  from  the  sittings  of
January  21st  and  of  January  23rd  is  plain.  As  Miss  Eawson’s
sitting  on  January  23rd  was  the  first  after  Mrs.  Thompson’s  on
January  2 1st,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  same  spirit  takes  the
earliest  opportunity  to  repeat  through  a second  medium  a
statement  very  similar  to  that  already  made  through  a first.

In  my  transcript  of  the  Sidgwick  script  I have  put  a query
against  the  word  “ waiting  ” : hut  I may  remark  that  I had

thus  deciphered  the  word  more  than  three  years  before  I saw

or  knew  of  the  existence  of  the  notes  of  Miss  Ilawson’s  sittings.
Such  coincidence  then  as  there  may  be  I have  not  manu-
factured ; nor  has  the  recorder  of  Miss  Ilawson’s  utterances,
for  he  had  not  seen  my  record  until  I saw  his.  The

expression  “ the  circle  aljove  ” strikes  one  as  odd ; but  ]\Ir.
Myers  used  to  refer  to  Mr.  D.,  Mr.  Gurney,  and  others  as
“ the  governing  group  ” in  ]\lrs.  Thompson’s  ease,  and  in  this
group  Mr.  1).  played  a prominent  role ; so  if  we  take  “ the
circle  above  ” as  an  equivalent  to  “ the  governing  group,”  there
is  a correspondence  between  the  two  statements : The  circle

above  has  been  waiting  for  him  ” and  “ Mr.  1).  was  waiting  for
him.”  But  I do  not  really  think  that  between  these  two

phrases  there  is  a real  agreement.  The  natural  meaning  of
the  “ circle  above  has  been  waiting;  for  him.  and  will  with
great  joy  welcome  him”  is  that  “the  circle  above,  of  which
I,  Henry  Sidgwick,  am  one,  has  been  and  still  is  waiting  to
greet  IMyers  ” ; whereas  “ Mr.  1).  was  waiting  for  him  ” implies
that  Mr.  D.  is  no  longer  waiting  because  he  has  now  met  him.

AVith  regard  to  the  correspondence  between  the  utterances
and  script  of  January  26th,  1901,  and  those  of  January  29th
and  30th,  1901,  I would  observe:  that,  though  the  statement
made  liy  the  Sidgwick  control  through  Miss  Eawson,  “ He
{i.e.  IMyers)  has  sent  a message  to  the  other  side  {i.c.  Mrs.
Thompson)  ” is  not  strictly  l)orne  out  liy  the  facts,  it  can  Ije
reconciled  with  the  facts  in  a natural  way.

Thus,  one  of  Aliss  Eawson’s  controls  on  January  2Gth,  says
that  Mr.  Myers  “ has  sent  a message  to  Airs.  Thompson.”  Xo
message  purporting  to  come  from  Air.  Alyers  was,  however,  given
through  Airs.  Thompson  till  January  29th;  but  be  it  observed


300


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


-lanuaiy  29tli  was  the  tirst  occasion  after  January  21st  (and
therefore  also  after  January  26th)  on  which  Mrs.  Thompson
went  into  trance.  Mr.  Sidgwick  may  therefore  be  supposed  to
liaAm  seized  on  January  29th  the  first  opportunity  to  deliver
a message  given  him  l.)y  Mr.  Myers  before  January  26th;  the
control  of  Miss  Ilawson,  in  speaking  of  the  message  as  having
been  sent,  may  be  supposed  either  to  have  meant  only  that
i\Ir.  Myers  had  then  on  January  26th  entrusted  a message  to
]\Ir.  Sidgwick  for  future  delivery  and  not  to  liave  meant  to
state  positively  that  it  had  l)een  delivered : or  this  control
may,  unaware  of  no  opportunity  liaving  occurred  for  the
delivery  of  the  message  tliroi;gh  Mrs.  Thompson,  be  supposed
to  have  taken  the  will  for  the  deed  and  concluded  that  the
message  had  already  been  delk'ered.

The  utterances  most  closely  resembling  one  another  are
those  given  on  January  11th.  Besides  this  it  is  difficult  to  see
what  common  train  of  phantasy  could  have  led  two  mediums
to  agree  in  confining  their  references  to  one  spirit  (]\Ir.
Sidgwick)  to  messages  about  and  from  him  from  otlaer  spirits
for  more  than  four  months  after  his  death,  and  then  to  agree  in
representing  this  spirit  as  directly  controlling  them  on  one  and
the  same  day ; wliereas  they  let  a post-mortnn  interval  of  but
9 days  in  one  case  and  13  days  in  another  elapse  before
another  spirit  (Mr.  klyers)  communicates  directly : (for  the

signature  F.  AV.  H.  Alyers  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  script  of  January
30  th  must  be  regarded  as  intended  to  imply  the  direct
personal  operation  of  Air.  Alyers).

Or,  again,  wliat  led  l.)otli  to  agree  in  representing  that  up  to  a
certai]!  date  a spirit  A.  has  not  met  a spirit  B.  in  tlie  spirit
world,  and  after  that  led  one  medium  (Aliss  llawson)  to  repre-
sent I),  as  directly  speaking,  and  the  other  (Airs.  Thompson)  to
state  that  A.  has  met  B.  and  to  re])resent  B.  as  writing  directly?

The  words  “ Alyers  North,  etc.,”  followed  by  the  signature
11  AV.  H.  Alyers,  involve  a contradiction,  for  they  were  un-
doubtedly intended  to  convey  that  Air.  Alyers’  consciousness
was  pre-occupied  elsewhere  {i.c.  in  tlie  north  of  England),  and
that  therefore  he  could  not  manifest  then  tlirough  Airs.  Tliomp-
son,  and  yet  the  next  minute  the  signature  of  the  absent  spirit
is  written.  Superficially,  at  least,  there  is  a confusion  here,  yet
the  case  is  not  unparalleled,  and  not  inconsistent  with  similar


XL VII.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsons  Trance.  301

(see  pp.  164-5,  244-5  ; and  cf.  p.  236)  incongruities  observable
elsewhere  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trance- drama— in  the  case  of
Xelly  and  Gleoffrey  Scott.  But  if  I am  right  in  my  interpreta-
tion of  the  order  in  which  the  script  of  January  30th  should  be
read,  it  would  appear  that  when  once  the  Myers’  signature  has
been  written  the  Sidgwick  control  is  aware  of  his  presence.


Sitting  of  January  11th,  1901.

Nelly : — “ Mr.  Gurney  went  and  talked  to  Miss  Eawson.  He
doesn’t  even  mind  knocking  a table  for  her.”

So  far  as  I can  discover  only  two  references  occur  about
this  time  to  Edmund  Gurney  in  the  records  of  Miss  Eawson’s
trance-phenomena.  On  December  23rd,  1900,  i.c.  nearly

3 weeks  before  Nelly’s  statement  was  made,  one  of  Miss
Eawson’s  controls  said : “ Gurney  is  here,”  and  “ Edmund
Gurney  is  here  now ; he  is  too  high  to  speak.”  On  February
7th,  1901,  nearly  four  weeks  after  Nelly’s  statement.  Miss
Eawson  in  trance  saw  the  form  of  Edmund  Gurney,  who
conversed  with  her  by  waving  his  hand  as  she  repeated  the
letters  of  the  alphabet,  and  afterwards  directly  controlled  her.
Obviously  the  value  of  such  coincidence  as  there  is  depends
upon  whether  Mrs.  Thompson  knew  that  a Gurney  control
occasionally  manifested  through  Miss  Eawson.

A letter  which  I received  from  Miss  Eawson,  dated
October  20th,  1903,  which  was  written  in  answer  to  my
request  for  information  on  the  points  involved,  makes  it  clear
that  it  would  not  have  been  by  any  means  a safe  statement
to  make  at  random  that  a Gurney  control  had  been  mani-
festing through  Miss  Eawson,  and  incidentally  it  also  makes  it
practically  certain  that  Mrs.  Thompson  did  not  know  that
Mr.  Myers  had  had  some  sittings  with  IMiss  Eawson  in
December,  1900  (see  pp.  207-8).

Miss  Eawson’s  letter  is  as  follows : —

As  far  as  I can  remember,  Edmund  Gurney  has  been  to  us  several
times  for  many  years,  but  only  ever  when  Mr.  Myers  was  “ sitting  ”
with  us,  and  no  notes  were  taken,  as  Mr.  Myers  considered  every-
thing said  to  him  by  Mr.  Gurne}'  as  most  confidential,  and  asked  us
never  to  speak  about  it  to  any  one ; but  I know  that  Mr.  Myers
himself  was  absolutely  satisfied.  I believe  the  last  time  we  ever  had


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


anything  from  Mr.  Gurney  was  in  December  1900,  [This  is  not  the
case,  as  I have  seen  records  of  sittings  with  Miss  Rawson,  in  which
a Gurney  control  appeared  on  two  occasions,  in  February  1901  ; but
it  is  noticeable  that  on  each  of  these  two  occasions  his  utterances
were  confined  to  speaking  about  Mr.  Myers. — J.  G.  P.]  but  I am  quite
unable  to  say  when  the  other  messages  were  sent.  It  may  be  we
had  three  or  four  within  the  last  ten  years,  but  I could  not  be
certain.

M'^e  did  not  know  Mr.  Myers  would  be  at  Valescure,  as  we  went
out  there  quite  suddenly.  . . .

I cannot  remember  if  Edmund  Gurney  ever  tilted  the  table,  but
1 almost  think  so.

Standing  by  itself  this  incident  would  be  worth  little  or
nothing ; but  it  must  not  be  considered  apart  from  the  other
correspondences  described  above  and  in  the  section  on  iSTelly’s
peregrinations,  and  especially  not  apart  from  other  coincidental
statements  made  al)Out  Mr.  Gurney  at  the  sitting  of  January
11th,  1901,  which  I now  proceed  to  quote.


Mrs.  Thompson  and  Mrs.  Scott.

Sittioig  of  January  8 th,  1901.  Present : Mrs.  Scott.

The  following  was  spoken  by  Xelly  after  the  removal  of  the
screen  which  had  previmisly  concealed  tlie  sitter.

“ Geoffrey  says  he  wrote  through  his  mother’s  hand,  and  said
he’d  rather  not  come  when  you’re  here,  Mr.  Piddington.  Mrs.
Scott  wouldn’t  tell  you  that ; she  wouldn’t  like  to.  (To  Mrs.
Scott)  Mr.  Piddington  will  excuse  you.”

At  the  close  of  the  sitting  the  following  was  written  through
Ml’S.  Thompson  by  the  Geoffrey  Scott  control: — “Yes,  I was  in
the  little  I’oom  yesterday  wdien  you  wu’ote.”

These  quotations  show  that,  no  matter  whether  the  normal
Mrs.  Tliompson  knew  at  this  time  that  Mrs.  Scott  wrote  auto-
matically, the  trance-personality  knew.


Sitting  of  Jamiary  llth,  1901.  Sitters:  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Pcrcival.

“ Mr.  Gurney  did  write  a long  message.  Mrs.  Scott  received  a
long  message  for  you  from  Mr.  Gurney.  Geoffrey  did  wuite  and
explain  to  his  mother  after  she  went  home  the  reason  why  he  was


xi.vii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompson’s  Trance.


803

so  vexed.  . . . Mr.  Gurney  went  and  talked  to  Miss  Rawson.  He
doesn’t  even  mind  knocking  a table  for  her.”

J.  G.  P.\ — (To  Mr.  D.  control)  “Tell  Edmund  Gurney  I wish  he’d
come  and  give  messages  about  people  who  are  not  sitting  at  the
time.”

Mr.  Jj.: — “He’s  hel[iing  the  s,  jmu  see.  . . .”

J.  G.  R. : -“Does  E.  G.  know  about  the  screen?”

Mr.  1>.: — “He  doesn’t  understand;  but  Ell  tell  him,  aiid  he’ll
wi'ite.”

“ Mr.  Gurney  did  write  a long  message.  Mrs.  Scott  received
a long  message  for  you  from  Mr.  Gurney.  Geoffrey  did  write
and  explain  to  his  mother  after  she  went  home  the  reason  why
he  was  so  vexed.”

On  January  13th,  1901,  I sent  a co])y  of  these  words  to
Mrs.  Scott,  and  her  reply,  dated  January  12th  [1901],  was  as
follows  : —

As  \mu  ask  me,  I send  you  a message  I received  purporting  to
come  from  Mr.  Gurney.  1 had  written  it,  of  course,  before  your
letter  came  ; but  I do  not  as  a rule  like  speaking  of  any  messages
received  in  this  way,  as  they  can  be  of  little  use  as  evidence.  Some
time  ago  I had  a very  urgent  message  from  both  Mr.  Gurney  and
my  son,  telling  me  the  latter  could  not  “sit”  [i.e.  control  at  a sitting]
with  you ; but  I felt  it  best  to  disi'egard  it.  1 am  glad  1 did,  for
it  is  interesting  that  it  slioidd  have,  been  verified  in  this  way.

Mrs.  Scott  wrote  to  me  on  -Inly  17th,  1903,  as  follows:

I am  sorry  to  say  that  I do  not  keep  a journal,  and  I have  no
record  of  the  script  you  speak  of.  I wish  it  had  more  evidential
value.  I remember  at  the  time  thiid^ing  the  message  too  valueless
to  be  worth  sending  you,  and  1 left  it  in  the  book  I was  reading  until
your  letter  came  asking  for  it.  I have  oidy  my  own  recollections  to
give  you  now,  which,  of  course,  are  worth  little ; but  I give  them  as
you  may  have  my  letter  written  at  the  time  [i.e.  the  letter,  quoted
above,  of  January  12th,  1901]  to  compare  them  with.  I had  been  in
London  a few  days  liefore.  I think  you  came  to  see  me,  and  we
had  a sitting  with  Mrs.  Thompson  together — an  unsuccessful  one
comparatively.  [Mrs.  Scott’s  recollections  I can  confirm. — J.  G.  P.]

On  the  day  I received  the  message  I went  out  hunting,  starting


304


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


early,  probably  about  9 A.M.,  and  returning  about  3.454  I changed
my  habit  and  came  down  rather  tired  to  the  drawing-room,  where
I sat  down  by  the  fire  with  a book  to  wait  for  tea.  I had  a strong
impulse  to  write  almost  directly,  and  I took  a scrap  of  paper  and
tried  the  experiment  without  leaving  my  chair.  The  result  was  the
message  I sent  you.  Seeing  that  there  was  nothing  “evidential”  in
it,  and  feeling  great  repugnance  to  sending  you  any  suggestions  about
work  which  you  must  feel  were  an  impertinence  unless  the}"  were
attested  as  coming  from  a source  beyond  myself,  I slipped  the  paper
between  the  pages  of  the  book  I was  reading,  and  meant  to  take
no  further  notice  of  it.  Besides  the  message  it  was  scribbled  over,
as  almost  all  my  script  is,  with  half  messages  and  words,  purporting
to  come  from  my  son ; and  was  destroyed  when  the  copy  was
made.

This  happened  before  tea  : which  fixes  the  time  as  before  4.30  P.M.
At  9 P.M.  your  letter  came  with  the  coffee  after  dinner.  I did  not
date  the  copy,  I suppose  because  I give  its  history  in  the  letter  I
wrote  enclosing  it.  I feel  sure  I must  have  written,  because  the  in-
cident impressed  me.  I knew  the  first  quiet  moment  had  been  taken
advantage  of,  and  it  seemed  to  me  even  more  interesting  than  if  the
time  had  corresponded  to  Mrs.  Thompson’s  trance:  which  it  obviously
did  not  do.

I do  not  know  if  Mrs.  Thompson  knew  normally  of  my  writing
purj)orting  to  come  from  E.  G.  I do  not  know  what  Mr.  Myers
may  have  told  her  about  me.  But  in  one  of  my  sittings  with  her
she  gave  me  in  trance  a long  message  purporting  to  be  from  E.  G.;
indeed  she  was  “ controlled  ” by  him.

. . . The  chief  fact  about  the  message  which  impressed  me  was
that  a message  had  purported  to  be  for  yoti  (which  was  a new  ex-
perience), and  that  “Nelly”  had  told  you  before  it  came  that  there
w'ould  be  one.  [“Mr.  Gurney  did”  (not  will)  “write  a message”
were  Nelly’s  actual  words.]  Also  this  was  a solitary  experience  to
the  best  of  my  belief.  I have  not  had  any  other  message  sent  direct
to  you ; and  1 had  no  reason  to  expect  one.

1 am  leaving  out  of  account  Nelly’s  statement  that  “ Geoffrey
did  write  and  explain  to  his  mother  after  she  went  home  the
reason  why  he  was  so  vexed,”  because  though  it  appears  to

' 1 venture  to  direct  the  attention  of  a certain  Continental  school  of  psycho-
physiologists  to  the  fact  that  we  produce  here  in  England  a fox-hunting  type
of  automatic  writer.  Fox-hunting  must  in  future,  I .suppose,  be  added  to  their
lengthy  list  of  “notes"  of  degeneracy.


XLVii.]  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  Thompsoihs  Trance.


305


1)6  true,  it  might  easily  be  explained  away  as  a guess  on  tlie
part  of  iSTelly.  The  sitting  was  bad,  and  the  Geoffrey  Scott
control  appeared  to  be  vexed,  and  as  Nelly  was  appare)itly
aware  that  Mrs.  Scott  received  automatic  messages  from  her
son,  she  might  readily  have  surmised  that  he  would  explain
the  cause  of  his  vexation  to  his  mother.

But  I cannot  regard  Nelly’s  statement,  “ Mr.  Gurney  did
write  a long  message.  Mrs.  Scott  received  a long  message
for  you  from  Mr.  Gurney  ’’  as  due  to  a lucky  guess.  It  is  true
that  at  the  time  that  Nelly  spoke,  and  spoke  in  tlie  past
tense,  the  message  had  not  l:»een  written  I >y  Mrs.  Scott ; but,
as  I have  suggested  in  the  foregoing  instance,  Nelly  may  liave
taken  the  intention  for  the  deed,  or  the  message  may  have
been  already  “ delivered,”  and  have  Ijeen  lying  latent  in  Mrs.
Scott’s  subconsciousness  until  a favourable  opportunity  occurred
for  it  to  emero'e.

O

(_)r  again  ; it  will  l)e  noticed  that  after  Nelly  had  said  that
Mr.  Gurney  had  sent  a message  to  me  througli  Mrs.  Scott,  1
asked  the  Mr.  I),  control  if  Edmund  Gurney  knew  about  the
screening  of  the  sitter  from  the  medium,  and  got  the  reply :
“ He  doesn’t  understand ; lint  I’ll  tell  liim  and  he’ll  write.”

(I  should  explain  liere  that  Nelly’s  statement  that  Mr.
Gurney  had  written  me  a message  through  Mrs.  Scott  did
not  suggest  the  question  that  I put  to  Mr.  I).  I much
doubt  if  when  I asked  the  question  I remembered  anything
about  Nelly’s  statement.  At  the  very  beginning  of  the  sit-
ting I had  asked  Nelly  to  fetch  Edmund  Gurney.  I had
never  seen  this  control,  and  the  only  reason  why  1 wanted  it
to  appear  was  in  order  to  give  a message  to  it  entrusted  to
me  by  another  person.)

Now  the  message  written  by  Mrs.  Scott,  which  purported
to  come  from  Edmund  Gurney  for  me,  began  in  this  way : —
“ I wish  you  to  tell  Piddington  that  I see  his  point  ; Imt
there  is  danger  of  losing  the  light.”

This  reads  like  an  answer  to  my  question  addressed  to  Mr.
I) : “ Hoes  Edmund  Gurney  know  about  the  screen  ? ”,  and
unless  it  was  an  answer  to  this  question  about  the  screen,
the  words  have  no  significance  for  me,  as  I had  not  submitted
any  other  point  to  the  Gurney  control.  Mrs.  Scott  knew
nothing  of  my  having  put  this  question,  nor  of  my  having


300


J.  G.  Piddington.


[I’ART


gone  on  to  explain  to  Mr.  D.  my  views  about  concealing  the
sitter  from  the  medinm,  as  I sent  her,  after  the  sitting  of
Jannary  11th,  1901,  only  ISTelly’s  words  about  Mr.  Gnrney
and  her  son  having  written  messages.  Even  now  Mrs.  Scott
does  not  know  about  my  question  and  Mr.  D.’s  reply.

At  first  sight,  if  the  opening  words  of  Mrs.  Scott’s  message
are  taken  to  refer  to  what  passed  between  Mr.  T).  and
myself  at  the  sitting  of  Jannary  11th,  it  seems  inconsistent
with  the  view  that  Nelly’s  words  can  also  be  referred  to  the
same  message,  and  also  to  the  hypothesis  that  Nelly  may
have  been  j'nstitied  in  speaking  of  the  Gnrney  message  in
the  past  tense ; bnt  1 think  it  conceivable  that  the  script

written  by  Mrs.  Scott  on  Jannary  12th,  the  day  after  the
sitting,  may  represent  an  amalgam  of  a message  received  Ijy
her  subconsciousness  some  time  before  Nelly’s  statement  was
made,  and  remaining  latent,  with  a second  message  impressed  on
her  mind  after  Mr.  1 ).  had  said  that  he  would  tell  Edmund
Gnrney  about  the  screen,  and  that  he  (E.  G.)  wonld  write.

T knew  that  Mrs.  Scott  did  antomatic  writing,  bnt  I did

not  know  that  some  of  it  was  supposed  to  come  from  the

late  Mr.  Gnrney.  1 had  never  seen  any  of  her  script,  and

nothing  was  further  from  my  thoughts  than  that  she  should
send  me  a message  purporting  to  come  from  Edmnnd  Gnrney,
or  any  one  else,  for  that  matter.

Since  Jannary  12th,  1901,  np  to  the  present  date  (October
IGth,  19  03),  Mrs.  Scott  has  not  written,  or  at  least  has  not  sent
me,  any  other  message  addressed  to  me  either  l)y  Edmnnd
Gnrney  or  any  other  control.  The  message  written  by  Mrs.  Scott
on  January  12tli,  1901,  consisted  of  1G3  words,  and,  judging
from  the  average  length  of  Mrs.  Scott’s  and  others’  automatic
script,  it  was  perhaps  correctly  descril)ed  as  a “ long  ” message.

1 have  now  recorded  every  instance  ^ that  has  occurred  in

‘ The  E.  H.  Percival  control  claimed  to  have  tried  to  semi  a message  (auto-
matically written)  through  his  aunt,  but  as  ho  at  the  same  time  said  that  he
was  aware  of  having  failed,  1 have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  include  this
instance.  It  was  true,  and  1 believe  unknown  to  Mrs.  Thompson,  that  the
aunt  writes  automatic  script  w’hich  purports  to  come  from  her  nephew.  On
one  other  occasion  Nelly  arranged  a test  experiment  ! (She  wrote  down  a mes-
sage and  told  me  to  keep  it  hidden,  and  said  that  on  a certain  day  E.  H.  Percival
would  wu’ite  the  same  message  through  Ids  aunt.  The  aunt  obtained  a few
words,  but  they  did  not  tally  with  w'hat  Nelly  hail  written.


XLvii.J  Phenomena  in  Mrs.  TJiompson’s  Trance.


307


the  series  of  sittings  under  consideration  where  acquain-
tance has  been  claimed  with  phenomena  occurring  through
mediums  otlier  than  Mrs.  Thompson,  and  in  only  one  case — •
Xelly  and  Elsie’s  visit  to  Mrs.  Ihper — is  there  no  corre-
spondence.

The  resemblances  quoted  above  are  far  from  complete ;
they  are  suggestive  rather  than  indicative  of  supernormal
agency ; yet  I cannot  ascribe  them  to  chance.  If  they  are
not  supernormal,  I would  attribute  them  to  tlie  minds  of
both  automatists  having  developed  from  similar  data  in  their
common  possession  similar  fantasies,  accordant  with  the  general
trend  of  ideas  that  runs  through  spiritistic  manifestations.
But  at  least  I claim  for  them  serious  study,  for  could  we  be
fortunate  enough  (and  I am  rather  sanguine  that  we  may  he)
to  multiply  analogous  and  more  clinching  instances  of  the
same  phenomenon,  it  would  open  up  one  of  the  most  promis-
ing lines  for  observation,  and  even  perhaps  for  experimentation.


308


John  Honeyynan.


[PAKT


II.


ON  CEliTAIN  rNUSlTAL  rSYCHOLOOICAL


PHENOMENA.


Py  John  Honey.man,  K.S.A.


'LJie  following  account  of  certain  hallucinations  or  illusions
will  be  valuable  to  many  psychologists,  l)oth  l)ecause  the
appearances  themselves  were  characterised  by  several  unusual
features,  and  also  because  the  subject  affected  was  free  from
any  physiological  or  morbid  condition  likely  to  affect  his
natural  powers  of  oljservation  or  his  intellectual  equilibrium,
lie  was  thus  able  to  recognise  the  nature  of  the  appearances
and  calmly  to  note  the  various  points  of  interest  in  the
appearances  themselves  and  the  circumstances  connected  with
them.

The  sul  ject,  whom  we  sliall  call  iMr.  A.,  was  a gentleman
nearly  7 0 years  of  age,  whose  left  eye,  destroyed  by  glaucoma
about  thirty  years  previ(jusly,  was  excised  about  three  years  and  a
half  ago  and  wh(.)se  right  eye,  slightly  myopic,  was  defective.
It  would  l)e  interesting  to  know  in  connection  with  what  is
to  follow  what  was  the  exact  nature  of  the  defect  in  the  right
eye,  but  various  oculists  of  eminence,  wdio  had  been  consiilted,
differed  in  their  opinion,  and  we  may  therefore  take  it  that
the  case  was  somewhat  complicated.  The  media  of  the  eye
remained  perfectly  clear,  the  extent  of  the  field  of  vision  w'as
normal  and  remained  unrestricted.  The  eye  was  defective,  chiefly
in  the  visual  axis,  where,  within  an  area  defined  by  an  angle
of  about  30°,  the  sight  was  obscured  as  if  l>y  a thick  mist
(relative  scotoma),  wliile  outside  this  limit  the  obscuration  was
not  nearly  so  dense.  AYe  may  add  that  the  tension  of  the  eye


XLVii.]  On  Certain  Psychological  Phenomena.  309

(about  21)  was  successfully  kept  in  check  and  about  normal
by  the  use  of  eserine.

In  April,  1900,  Mr.  A.,  walking  on  a country  road,  saw  on
his  left  a new  rubble  wall  brightly  illuminated  by  the  sun,
and  to  his  amazement  he  saw  it  perfectly  distinctly.  He  could
see  every  separate  stone  and  the  mortar  joints  surrounding  it,
the  smooth  faces  of  the  water-worn  l)oulders,  and  the  texture
of  stones  broken  to  form  a face.  In  particular  he  was  struck
with  the  frequent  recurrence  of  broken  granite  stones,  in  whicli
he  could  distinctly  see  the  hornWend,  the  felspar,  and  tlie
quartz  and  mica  reflecting  the  sun’s  rays.  Indeed,  he  thought
he  had  never  been  able  to  see  a wall  so  minutely  l:»efore  while
passing  it.  He  did  seem  to  be  passing  it  quite  in  a natural
way,  but  presently  coming  to  a part  of  the  road  where  lie
knew  there  was  no  wall,  but  only  an  iron  railing  on  a low
parapet,  and  finding  the  wall  still  there  and  no  railing  visible,
it  occurred  to  him  that  he  might  see  this  wall  just  as  well  if
he  shut  his  eyes  altogethei’,  and  on  doing  so  he  found  this  to
be  the  case : the  wall  was  still  there,  with  the  sun  shining
on  it  as  brightly  as  ever.

Finding  that  his  available  sight  was  greatly  interfered  wdth
by  the  intrusion  of  this  subjective  sight,  he  had  to  give  up  his
intention  of  going  further  and  return  home.  The  wall  shortly
afterwards  disappeared,  but  a great  variety  of  other  images
appeared  at  fre(iuent  intervals  throughout  the  day.  These  "all
showed  two  characteristics,  brightness  (amounting  almost  to
luminosity),  and  distinctness — not  the  slightest  trace  of  the
haze  affecting  the  natural  sight  being  observable.  The  image
most  frequently  recurring  (though  with  infinite  variations)  was
a surface  decorated  with  groups  of  flowers.  Sometimes  these
flowers  were  painted,  sometimes  embroidered,  but  in  every  case
the  minutest  details  were  distinctly  seen,  even  to  the  stitches
of  the  embroidery.  Minor  changes  were  constantly  occurring ;
for  example,  the  different  groups  were  sometimes  connected
with  one  another  by  cords  of  various  designs;  at  first  of  silk,
a cord  would  gradually  change  to  plush,  with  all  the  colours
of  the  rainbow  shining  brightly  on  it;  then  it  would  be  trans-
formed to  gold  or  silver  and  assume  the  form  of  a serpent
covered  with  gold  scales.  Then  suddenly  dozens  of  these
serpents  would  be  seen,  with  heads  erect  and  jewels  flashing


310


John  Honeyman.


[part


from  their  eyes.  They  were  standing  out  in  relief,  perhaps  for
about  a third  of  their  length,  but  gradually  the  mouth  opened
wide  and  the  eye  cavity  became  empty,  and  the  whole  thing
was  seen  to  be  merely  a thin  skin  of  metal.

In  such  cases  the  drawing  of  tlie  empty  head  was,  like
everything  else,  perfect,  and  so  was  the  perspective  of  the
protruding  coils.  Sometimes  these  serpents  were  jmre  white
with  round  red  spots  all  over  tliem  at  regular  intervals,  and
at  other  times  white  with  black  spots,  but  they  were  never
coloured  “ proper.”  Occasionally  a human  head  gradually
emerged  from  a flower  and  developed  to  life  size,  and  then
the  rest  of  the  picture  vanished.  In  that  case  the  head  was
perfectly  natural  in  colour  and  in  every  other  respect — it  was
simply  impossible  to  distinguish  it  from  an  actual  living
head ; it  had  every  appearance  of  being  substantial  and
tangilile.  After  a brief  interval  it  gradually  changed ; at  first
a perfectly  proportioned  and  lieautiful  head,  sometimes  male
and  sometimes  female — “ never  the  head  of  any  one  Mr.  A.
had  ever  seen  ” — it  began  to  get  withered  and  contorted  and
wrinkled,  and  finally,  as  a rule,  disappeared  as  if  smothered
in  the  innumerable  frills  of  a cap,  which  kindly  hid  it  from
view.

Such  appearances  continued  at  intervals  for  several  days,
and  did  not  recur,  except  on  one  or  two  isolated  occasions,
till  June,  1901,  when  Mr.  A.  was  again  visited  by  experiences
similar  to  those  of  the  previous  year,  extending  over  several
consecutive  days.  The  appearances  were  generally  similar  to
those  already  described,  only  the  designs  were  frequently
more  elaliorate  and  elegant,  and  the  harmonious  combinations
of  Inilliant  colours  more  remarkable.  There  was  one  new
type  of  image,  however,  which  must  be  noted,  namely,  the
complete  human  form,  which  aqipeared  repeatedly  under  the
following  cii'cumstances.

On  the  first  occasion,  when  hurrying  along  a quiet  street
towards  a railway  station,  Mr.  A.  suddenly  checked  his  pace
and  said  to  his  companion,  “ Don’t  keep  me  so  close  to  her,
rather  get  in  front.  I was  nearly  on  her  skirt.”  He  was
told  that  there  was  no  one  in  front  of  him  and  no  woman
visible  at  the  time  on  the  same  pavement.  What  Mr.  A.
saw  as  distinctly  as  anything  he  had  ever  seen  in  his  life


XLVn.]


On  Certain  Psi/eholofficat  Fkenwn.e'na.


;:u


(if  not  more  so)  was  the  figure  of  a female  walking  closely
in  front  of  him,  so  that  he  could  hardly  step  out  without
treading  on  her  skirt.  The  skirt  was  of  red  cloth  with
groups  of  white  lines  (a  l)road  line  with  two  very  thin  lines
on  each  side  of  it)  crossing  eacli  othei-  at  frequent  intervals,
as  in  a tartan,  and  over  this  was  a Idack  silk  jacket  or  sh(u-t
cloak.  The  dress  was  heautifullv  illuminated  with  smdight
and  moved  naturally  in  response  to  the  motion  of  tlie  tigure,
while  the  light  silk  jacket  was  occasionally  lifted  as  if  hy  the
breeze.  Mr.  A.  made  a motion  of  putting  the  skirt  out  of
his  way  with  his  umbrella,  l)ut  of  course,  as  lie  knew,  there
was  nothing  there.  Having  occasion  to  cross  to  the  shady
side  of  the  street,  Mr.  A.  lost  sight  of  the  tigure  for  a few
moments,  I:mt  it  soon  reappeared  right  in  front  of  liim,  with
the  sun  still  shining  on  it : but  this  time  she  had  changed
her  skirt  and  wore  a rich  silk  tartan,  the  prevailing  colour
of  which  was  green.  She  was  seen  not  very  distinctly  in  the
booking-office,  and  finally  disappeared  for  the  day  when  the
platform  was  reached.  This  kind  of  apparition,  with  differences
in  detail,  chiefly  in  the  colour  and  texture  of  the  clothing,
but  sometimes  also  in  the  fasliion  of  her  garments,  was  seen
several  times.

Subsequently,  in  November,  1902,  on  a return  of  this  type
of  hallucination,  Mr.  A.  noticed  that  the  size,  which  wa.s
less  than  natural  when  the  eye  was  turned  towards  the
ground,  increased  as  the  eye  was  directed  upwards.  On  this
occasion  the  appearance  of  the  female  figure  was  \ery  similar
in  attire,  as  far  as  the  form  was  concerned,  but  entirely
diffeient  in  colour  and  texture  from  what  it  was  on  the  first
occasion : besides,  when  first  observed,  thei'c  was  not  one

figure,  as  before,  but  three,  and  all  of  them  were  apparently
clothed  in  very  rich  and  lustrous  red  silk,  without  any  white
lines  u]am  it,  the  tone  of  colour  of  the  figure  on  the  right
being  several  shades  darker  than  those  on  the  left,  and  it
may  be  added  that,  although  the  ilay  was  cloudy,  the  figures
were  lighted  up  Iry  brilliant  sunshine,  as  before.  In  a few
minutes  after  observing  the  vision,  the  figure  on  the  extreme
left  vanished,  leaving  two  only,  and  for  a time  these  twrr
remained,  and  a change  occurred  on  the  dresses,  each  of  them
being  divided  perpendicularly  by  a difference  in  the  tone  of


■/ ohn  H o'lu’ijia  an .


:H2


[takt


ihe  colour,  one  half — the  half  on  the,  left- — being  consideral)lf
lighter  than  the  half  on  the  right.  Shortly  afterwards  the
colon]-  of  the  dress  of  the  tiguie  on  the  left  changed  to  a
hlnish-)]n)-ple,  and  very  shortly  after  that,  that  figure  also
vanished  and  there  remained  mily  one  tigure.  After  a lirief
interval  the  dress  of  that  hgure  also  changed  somewhat,  and
was  crosseil  by  lines  of  white,  dividing  it  into  S(juares  of
about  two  incdies  each  way.  < )n  that  occasion,  on  entering
the  house,  the  other  variety  of  images  appeared  with  ^■ery
much  the  same  chaiacter  as  those  already  desciibed,  the
groundwork  of  the  images  l)eing  apparently  a v^ery  delicately-
tinted  purplish  silk  texture  with  a trellis-work  of  white  lines,
on  which  hung  the  groups  of  flowers  of  rich  and  varied
colouring,  and  occasionally  both  the  seipent  forms  with  rubies
for  eyes,  and  the  human  heads,  which,  howe^■el•,  seeine<l
more  evanescent,  changing  ra,]udly  and  generally  ending  in
gi’otesijues.

A cii'cumstance  connected  with  the  two  kinds  of  hallucina-
tion exhibited  in  this  case  must  he  not(?d  as  very  remarkable,
namely,  the  limitation  of  both  varieties  within  what  can  only
be  desci'ibeil  as  the  visual  field  of  the  left  eye.  But  this

difference  between  the  two  mainfestations  was  noticeable.
In  the  case  of  the  first  vai'iety,  the  whole  visual  area  was
occu})ied  by  the  illuminated  trellis-w'<)rk,  which  had  the

appeai'anee  (jf  being  fixed  as  on  a wall.  In  this  respect  the
hallucinations  exactly  lesemltled  images  of  exteiaial  objects
occuj>ying  the  right  visual  held,  in  that  they  appeared
stati(]nary  when  the  position  of  the  Held  was  altered.  For
exani]>le,  if  the  head  was  turned  on  its  axis  from  left  to
right  or  vice -versa,  the  central  S]il)jective  image  would  retain
its  position,  and  those  to  the  left  of  it  also  retaining  their  ])Osition
were  successively  lost  as  the  field  moved  round,  wdiile  to
the  light  fresh  images  appeared,  jneeisely  as  in  ordinary
circumstances  objects  of  a similar  desci-iption  do,  as,  for

example,  if  we  look  at  an  iron  railing.  In  the  case  of  the
second  vaiiety,  the  Hgure  always  moved  along  with  what
should  liave  been  the  eye.  This  difference — the  apparent

stability  of  the  one  set  of  subjective  images  and  the  mobility
of  the  other — leads  up  ejuite  naturally  to  the  extraordinary
phenomenon  that  while  the  mobile  Hgure  always  kept  out


XLVII.]


On  Certain  Psychological  Phenomena.


313

of  A.’s  reach,  the  apparently  stationary  images — the  fields
and  fences  and  walls  and  trees  in  a landscape  seen  by  A.
as  lie  travelled  either  slowly  on  foot  or  rapiilly  in  a train —
invariably  maintained  their  proper  relationship  and  per-
spective, changing  their  relative  positions  as  the  olijects  in

a landscape  appear  to  do.  The  extraordinary  and  apparently
inexplicable  thing  here  is  that  the  images  so  acting  in

obedience  to  the  laws  of  jierspective  had,  in  fact,  no  existence,

excejjt  within  the  brain  or  mind  of  the  observer.  We  have

thus  one  hallucination  based  on  another,  the  second  being
much  tlie  more  wondei'ful  of  the  two,  as  where  this  pheno-
menon was  ol  (Served,  tliere  were  neither  green  fields,  walls,
nor  trees.  I’erhaps  the  most  remarkable  thing  in  the  above
connection  is  that,  although  lioth  kinds  of  hallucinations  were
entirely  independent  of  external  things,  and  therefore  unre-
stricted by  any  olistruction  calculated  to  produce  the  usual
limitation  of  the  field,  that  limitation  was  still  scrupulously-
respected.  The  one  field  overlapped  tlie  other,  lait  only  to
tlie  usual  extent.

The  first  observation  wliich  tlie  foregoing  narrative  suggests
is  tliat  the  sympathetic  action  of  the  twai  eyes  through  tlieir
innumerable  nerves  is  not  so  intimate  as  is  generally  supposed  ;
for  here  we  have  at  the  same  instant  one  eye  helplessly  sul)ject
to  liallucination  and  the  other  proof  against  it,  and  constantly
retaining  its  olijective  vision.  The  fact  that  there  is  actually  no
eye  in  Air.  A.’s  case  but  only  the  nervous  mechanism  of  what  was
once  an  eye,  seems  to  make  it  all  the  more  likely  that  the
sympathetic  infiuence  of  the  existing  eye  should  prevail,  but
in  effect  we  find  that  while  the  physiological  conditions  affect
the  sensory  nerves  on  the  right  side,  they  have  no  infiuence
on  the  left,  either  sympathetic  or  otherwise  If  we  are  to
assume  with  Professor  dames,  that  no  visualisation  is  possilde
without  the  excitation  of  sensory  centres  in  the  cortex,  we
must,  to  explain  the  phenomena  exhiliited  in  this  case,  believe
that  there  exists  in  connection  with  the  eye  a centre  of
hallucination;  but  no  such  centre  has  lieen  localised  by  any
of  those  who  have  devoted  most  attention  to  this  special
sul)ject,  and  if  it  had  l)een,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  any
stinndus  could  be  conveyed  to  it  through  the  physical  mechanism
of  an  organ  which  had  no  existence.  It  is  ([uite  evident  that

X 2


314


John  Honcyman.


[part


if  we  suppose  and  get  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  such  a
centi'e,  where  hallucinations  of  all  kinds  in  all  their  complicated
details  are  manufactured  and  ready  for  use,  whenever  certain
conditions  come  into  play,  we  get  rid  of  an  immense  difficidty,
whicli,  notwithstanding  the  patient  researches  of  the  past  lialf
century,  still  remains  and  must  do  so  for  ever — or  at  least
till  the  mystery  of  Life  is  solved.  In  this  case,  even  had
such  a hallucinatory  centre  existed,  it  is  to  be  oljserved  that
the  suljjective  and  ol)jective  centres  were  entirely  dissociatetl.

The  hallucination  could  not  possil)ly  l)e  suggested  by  anything
witliin  sight  of  Mr.  A.,  or  even  l>y  the  memory  of  anytlung
he  had  ever  seen.  AVhat  he  could  see  at  the  time  was  only
an  occasional  lamp-post,  and  a muddy  street  in  tlie  dull  light
of  a rainy  day.  But  what  he  saw  at  the  same  moment
consisted  of  the  delicately  tinted  silken  robes  of  a female
Hasliing  in  brightest  sunshine.

The  truth  seems  to  be  tliat  subjective  visualisation  is  cpiite
independent  of  physical  mechanism,  wliile  still  in  some  degree
affected  by  physical  conditions.  The  mind  cannot  possibly
present  to  itself  images  of  things  which  have  no  existence,
through  the  medium  of  tlie  senses.  Attempts  to  demonstrate
the  contrary  have  failed  and  must  inevitaljly  fail.  Such
rnainfestations  are  entirely  s])ontaneous ; they  are  the  creation
of  the  mind,  and  hardly  a trace  of  suggestion  is  to  lie  found.
It  may  here  lie  observed  in  passing  that  this  would  reasonably
lead  to  the  inference  tliat  liallucinations  and  dreams  have  the
same  ultimate  cause,  and  are  indeed  practically  identical
phenomena,  any  difference  being  dne  to  the  interference  with
the  ordinary  evolution  of  perce])tion  by  a state  of  dream
consciousness.

It  thus  appears  that  not  only  do  we  find  nothing  in  tlie
circumstances  related  to  suggest  the  existence  of  a hallucinatory
centre,  but  the  fact  that  the  hallucinations  oliserved  occu])ying
the  left  visual  field  were  much  more  distinct  than  the  olijective
images  in  the  right  field  seems  rather  to  favour  the  view  that,
whereas  the  form  and  colour  of  olijective  images  are  conveyed
to  the  mind  most  distinctly  where  the  brain  jirocesses  are  in
full  develo])ment  and  vigour,  the  sulijective  inventions  of  the
mind  are  most  distinctly  seen  where  the  physical  conditions
are  (piite  the  o]>i)osite,  where  the  brain  processes  are  completely


XLVll.]


On  Certain  Fsijcholoijical  Phenomena.


315


inactive.  And  hence  we  may  legitimately  infer  that  if  the
mind  were  entirely  freed  from  its  corporeal  environment,  it
wonld  bo  in  the  higliest  degree  tittecl  for  the  enjoyment  of
hallucinations.

The  most  elaborate  systems  of  nervous  distribution  and
cereljral  receptivity  can  never  produce  sight.  The  living  mind
alone  can  do  so,  using  the  exquisite  physical  mechanism  at  its
disposal  to  modify  or  define  the  appearance  of  external  oljjects,
not  intuitively  but  l)y  progressive  experience.

lint  it  is  quite  evident  that  for  visions  of  its  own  creation,
such  physical  aids  are  not  re(pured,  for  without  the  visualisation
the  subjective  image  has  no  existence,  and  the  creati(jn  and
simultaneous  visualisation  are  absolutely  independent  of  physical
apparatus,  while  still  in  a manner  inexplicable,  and  yet
influenced  by  physiological  or  pathological  conditions.

This  view  is  quite  consistent  with  Idirish’s  theory  of  dis-
sociated consciousness  so  far  as  illusions  regarding  external
objects  are  concerned,  but  no  further.  For  we  can  quite  well
conceive  that  a current  of  energy,  diverted  from  its  normal
course  into  an  unusual  group  of  distributing  nerves,  must  lead
to  totally  unex])ected  and  abnormal  results.  This  is  due
to  the  nund  being  misled  by  the  abnormal  action  of  the
material  apparatus,  on  whose  fidelity  it  has  been  accustomed
t(.)  rely,  but  in  the  case  of  hallucinations  it  is  not  a mere
distortion  of  some  object  transmitted  by  the  retina  to  the
mind  diverted  from  its  proper  course,  as  Parish  suggests,  ljut
a distinct  image  visualised  apparently  without  the  aid  of  any
physical  mechanism  whatever.  In  fact  we  may  say  that
the  intensity  (jf  the  visuality  in  a case  of  hallucination  increases
just  as  the  energy  of  supposed  material  agencies  decreases  in
power ; thus  we  have  the  dreams  in  ordinary  sleep,  and  in
the  complete  hypnotic  state  visions  more  remarkalde.

Flven  the  case  l)efore  us  seems  to  favour  this,  for  the
reason  why  the  subjective  images  seen  in  daylight  are  so
remai'kably  distinct  and  bright  probably  is  that  the  organ
of  vision  is  entirely  absent.

If  as  Parish  admits  {Hallucinations  and  Illusions ; by  Edmund
Parish  : English  translation,  London,  Walter  Scott,  Ltd.,  p.  148)
a perception  is  possible  without  an  objective  basis,  the  fact
greatly  strengthens  the  view  that  in  the  case  of  pure  hal-


316


John  Honey  man.


[part


liiciiiatioiis  the  mind  takes  the  initiative  and  acts  and  visualises
its  subjective  images  without  the  intervention  of  the  sensory
system  at  alld

Further,  if  it  be  granted  that  the  elaborate  researches  of
.Billet  and  others,  who  have  specially  devoted  themselves  to
the  study  of  the  mechanism  of  the  brain,  have  established
the  fact  that  there  exist  cerebral  centres  communicating  directly
with  the  organs  of  sight,  hearing,  etc.,  by  countless  nerves
adapted  to  the  purpose  and  even  that  tliere  am  separate

centres  for  the  retention  of  every  ditferent  kind  of  sensation,
it  must  after  all  be  left  to  the  imagination  to  discover  liow

the  complex  mechanism  can  lie  made  to  serve  the  ordinary

purposes  of  the  human  intellect  by  any  combination  of  physical
means ; for  example,  to  enable  the  mind  to  perceive  an

external  object,  by  transmitting  through  the  retina  a correct
image.  It  could  not  he  recognised  unless  tlie  visual  centre
were  put  into  immediate  communication  with  the  visual
memory  centre  and  so  on.

And  even  if  we  grant  that  the  perfect  working  of  this
pliysical  mechanism  is  possible,  it  can  hardly  be  so  if  it  is
in  any  measure  thrown  out  of  gear.  In  view  of  the  infinite
complexity  of  the  nerve  system  suggested  here,  Hoppe’s  theory
that  visuality  is  produced  by  a physical  substance  being  pro-
jected from  the  retina  through  the  nerve  tracks  to  the
sensory  centres  of  the  cortex  seems  hardly  worthy  of  con-

sideration and  in  fact  is  disproved  by  the  condition  in  Mr.  A.’s
case.

Hoppe’s  words  are  : —

“ This  liallucination  matter,  which  is  either  hallucina-
tion itself  or  the  raw  material  <.)f  hallucination,  must,

as  it  is  something  physical,  occupy  some  place  and
this  place  is  assigned  to  it  in  the  retina  itself.”  (See
Hallucinations  and  Illusions,  by  Edmund  Barish,  Eng.  trans.
p.172.)

Xow  in  A.’s  case  no  I’etina  existed,  and  if  Hoppe’s  localisa-
tion be  correct,  no  such  physical  substance  existed  either.  On

' For  discussions  of  this  point,  see  the  chapter  on  ‘ ‘ Hallucinations  ” in
Phantmnvi  of  the  Living,  (Vol.  I.,  (Jhap.  X.,)  and  the  section  on  the  “ Physiology
of  Hallucinations”  in  the  “ Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations”  (Proceedings
S.P.R.  Vol.  X.,  pp.  i;i4-148).— A’d.


XLVll.]  On  Certain  Psjjcholoyical  Phcnumcna.  317

the  other  hand,  the  more  intelligible  tlieory  of  rarish — the
theory  of  dissociation — as  to  the  canse  of  hallucinations  appears
to  l:)e  inadequate  and  indeed  inconsistent  with  observed  facts,
for  if  dissociation  occurs  through  the  haphazard  increase  or
diminution  of  tension  in  certain  groups  of  elements,  the
result  woidd  be,  not  the  production  of  a recognisable  image,
but  an  inextricable  confusion  of  images,  and  the  hypothetical
theory  could  not  possibly  account  for  the  phenomena  referred
to  towards  the  beginning  of  the  narrative  (p.  313  ante)  where
one  hallucination  apparently  is  superimposed  on  another  witli
perfect  and  invariable  consistency.

1 have  used  the  term  hypothetical,  as  it  seems  to  be
appropriate  in  this  case ; and  hence  another  reason  for  re-
jecting Parish’s  theory  of  dissociation,  for  stimulus  cannot
exist  without  a cause  and  in  this  case  no  physical  cause
can  be  found.  Under  normal  conditions,  the  existing  cause
of  visual  sensations  is  from  without,  through  the  medium  of
the  retina ; but  in  this  case  where  there  is  no  retina  the

stimulus,  if  such  exists,  must  obviously  come  from  within.

The  theory  of  sight  through  physical  agencies  is  intelligible,
but  it  must  he  remembered  that  the  proper  use  of  that

agency  has  to  be  learned : it  is  not  intuitive.  But  the
acquisition  of  the  power  correctly  to  visualise  a hallucination
requires  no  sucli  education : it  is  therefore  intuitive — if  we

can  use  such  a term,  and  if  its  use  be  ever  legitimate  it

seems  to  be  in  a case  such  as  this,  because  it  is  evident

that  in  the  case  of  hallucination,  conception,  visualisation  and
perception  occur  simultaneously.  This  is  a distinction  of
considerable  importance  in  any  attempt  to  trace  its  origin.

As  we  have  already  seen,  there  is  no  evidence  of  any
sympathetic  co-operation  between  the  right  eye  and  the
remaining  nerve  connections  of  the  left.  This  complete
absence  of  any  evidence  of  sympathetic  action  (in  connection
with  vision  at  least)  must  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  most
interesting  peculiarities  of  the  case.

It  is  as  if  we  had  two  entirely  independent  sides  in  the
same  individual — the  visual  field  on  the  left  side,  when
occupied  at  all,  invariably  filled  with  images  purely  sub-
jective, whiie  that  on  the  right  is  simultaneously  and  invariably
filled  with  oljjective  images,  except  when  under  the  influence


318


John  Honcyvum.


[part


of  sleep.  There  is  one  phenonienoii  which  could  not  he

oliserved  except  in  such  a case  as  this,  where  we  may

regard  the  two  Helds  as  entirely  separate  from  each  other,

and  that  is  the  struggle  for  supremacy  where  the  two  Helds
overlap.  Here  the  right  side,  even  though  ahnormally  dim,
has  invariably  the  best  of  it;  external  objects  are  seen,
though  faintly,  through  the  more  luminous  and  perfect  repre-
sentation of  the  subjective  images.  On  no  occasion  has

hallucination  occupied  the  right  visual  Held,  except  to  the
point  alreatly  indicated,  where  it  is  overlapped,  but  not
oliliterated,  by  a part  of  the  hallucination  of  the  left  side.

It  has  always  been  possible  to  see  external  objects  through
the  hallucination  even  at  that  point.  This  is  another  signi-

ticant  indication  that  these  independent  sensations  spring  from
two  totally  distinct  sources.

Our  case  undoubtedly  exhibits  two  kinds  of  perception,
essentially  dift'erent,  never  showing  the  least  tendency  to  com-
hine,  but  each  maintaining  its  prerogative  within  its  own
natural  ^irovince,  even  within  the  limited  area  where  the
boundaries  overlap.  J>ut  whereas  any  opaque  substance,  such
as  a thin  sheet  of  metal,  held  in  front  of  the  right  eye
put  an  end  to  the  vision  there,  such  oljstruction  on  the  left
side  made  no  diH'erence  whatever,  and  the  vision  was  as  bright
when  both  eyes  w'ere  shut  as  when  open.  Or,  again,  if  the
oljstruction  were  placed  in  front  of  and  with  its  edge  on
the  centre  of  the  nose,  it  at  once  cut  off  the  images  on  the
left  section  of  the  right  visual  Held,  l)ut  it  had  no  effect
whatever  on  the  corresponding  right  section  of  the  field ;
images  there  remained  as  distinct  as  ever,  as  might  have  been
expected.

The  intuitive  perception  of  what  never  existed  cannot  l)e
ju’oduced  by  any  physiological  process.  It  may  possibly  in
some  measure  be  modified  l)y  individual  idiosyncrasies  or
])athological  conditions,  but  it  is  a purely  psychical  phenomenon.
Even  James  seems  to  admit  that  hallucinations  are  beyond
the  hitherto  recognised  limits  of  mental  science ; when  quoting
the  dictum  of  Locke,  he  says :

“ Locke’s  main  doctrine  remains  eternally  true,  however
hazy  some  of  his  language  may  have  been,  that,  though
there  may  be  a great  nund.»er  of  considerations  wherein


XL  VII.]


On  Certain  Psychological  Phenomena.


?.19


tilings  may  l)e  compared  one  with  another,  and  so  a
multitude  of  relations,  yet  they  all  terminate  in,  and
are  concerned  about,  those  sim|)le  ideas  either  of  sensa-
tion or  reflection,  which  I think  to  he  the  whole

materials  of  all  our  knowledge.  The  simple  ideas  we
receive  from  sensation  and  reflection  are  the  boundaries
of  our  thoughts,  l)eyond  which  the  mind,  whatever  efforts
it  would  make,  is  not  able  to  advance  one  jot ; nor
can  it  make  any  discoveries  when  it  would  pry  into  the
nature  and  hidden  causes  of  those  ideas.”  (See  Principles
of  Psychology,  by  William  James,  A"ol.  II.,  p.  6.)

It  does  not  however  follow  that  because  mental  science

with  Locke’s  limitations  cannot  fathom  the  mystery  of  halluci-
nations, the  mind  itself  is  unable  to  do  so,  or  even  that  it

cannot  create  what  it  is  unable  to  explain.  The  pure,  spon-

taneous invention  would,  we  should  think,  he  an  easier
achievement  than  the  successful  manipulation  of  the  compli-
cated physical  machinery  slightly  out  of  gear,  which  Larish
supposes  to  1)6  at  its  disposal  for  the  puipose.  Lut  as  we
have  seen,  Parish  himself  admits  the  possibility  of  perception
without  physical  l)asis,  and  the  experience  of  Mr.  A.  seems
strongly  to  confirm  this  view.

It  may  here  he  noticed  that  during  the  existence  of
hallucination  the  will  appears  to  he  entirely  inoperative,  for
as  Mr.  A.  pursued  his  way  along  the  lonely  street  with  his
phantom  female  before  Inm,  he  wished  with  all  his  strength
of  will  that  she  would  get  behind  him  or  vanish,  Imt  she  did
neither  till  she  thought  proper  herself  and  then  without  any
conscious  wish  on  his  part.  This  would  seem  to  indicate
that  while  objective  vision  is  subject  to  physical  conditions,
subjective  vision  is  not  only  independent  of  these,  hut  is  also
independent  of  at  least  one  important  element  f>f  mind,
namely,  the  will,  which  was  exercised  in  vain,  either  to  sto])
hallucination  or  to  modify  it  to  the  extent  that  the  images
seen,  and  especially  the  visages  seen,  should  Ijear  some
resemblance  to  others  which  Mr.  A.  had  seen  before.  In  no
instance  was  the  wish  gratified  or  the  will  otherwise  able
to  assert  itself  throughout  the  whole  series  of  hallucinations.

Of  course  one  instance  will  not  establish  a fact  any  more
than  one  witness,  hut  these  circumstances  seem  well  wmrthy


John  Honcyman.


320


[part


of  notice,  as  tlie  opportunities  for  making  snch  observations
are  of  rare  occurrence.

It  may  perhaps  lie  thought  that  the  state  of  matters  dis-
closed in  tliis  case  tends  to  confirm  Professor  James’  theory  of
the  duality  of  tlie  mind,  but  a still  greater  than  James  has
said  that  a doulile-minded  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways ;
and  in  view  of  tlie  interdependence  and  necessary  co-operation
of  tlie  mind’s  various  constituents — irrespective  of  sight — in
the  ])roduction  of  even  one  concejition,  even  a modern  psycho-
logist may  be  prepared  to  admit  that  it  would  be  impossible
always  to  prevent  conflict  along  the  frontier  line  of  the  two
provinces,  and  that  you  could  not  anticipate  as  a result  an
evenly  balanced  mind.  lint  why  stop  at  duality?  All
analogy  and  the  whole  oi’ganisation  of  things  animate  and
inanimate  should  lead  us  to  anticipate  that  the  constitution
of  the  nund  should  be  exceedingly  complex,  with  a variety
and  subtlety  of  detail  which  must  foi'  ever  defy  analysis  and
remain,  like  the  omnipresent  source  of  all,  foi’  ever
unsearchal  ile.

No  doubt  tbe  fact  that  the  mind,  by  an  effort  of  the  will
and  the  aid  of  memoi’y,  can  recall  perce])tions  with  snch

exactness  that  the  hand  may  accurately  portray  them,  although
the  mind  remains  unable  to  visualise  them,  seems  rather  to
favour  Parish’s  view  that  certain  physiological  conditions  are
necessary  to  account  for  visualisation.  Put  on  the  other
hand,  if  the  mind  aided  by  these  forces  cannot  visualise

perceptions  founded  on  actual  sensations  transnutted  liy  the
ordinary  channels  of  communication  with  external  things,  how
much  less  can  it  achieAm  this  result — the  excitation  of  the
hypothetical  stimnlus  of  the  sensory  nerves — without  the  aid
of  either  memory  or  the  will  (which  at  least  in  some  cases  f)f
hallucination  ap])ears  to  lie  dormant)  I The  supposition  that  it
does,  brings  us  face  to  face  with  the  alternative  that  instead  of
the  mind  creating  hallucinations,  they  are  created  by  only
one  element  of  mind,  viz.,  the  imagination,  capable  of  inde-
jiendent  action  and  localised  in  a certain  set  of  nerve

centres.  In  short,  that  what  we  designate  mind  is  not  a

distinct  entity,  but  a comjilex  confederation,  the  component
parts  of  which,  though  closely  related,  have  each,  not  merely
a separate  function,  but  also  a se])arate  habitat  within  the


XLVll.]


On  Certain  F&yelwhnjical  Phemrnena,


321


bniin’s  ]teii])hei y.  l>ut  even  if  we  were  to  go  tliis  length,
the  inipeneti'alile  mystery  (jf  how  the  imagination  gets  hold
■of  its  various  subjective  images  and  a])))lies  the  corres])onding
stimulus  to  the  particular  ner\e  track,  shunting  it  oft  at
the  propel-  switch  to  a jimcess  of  irradiation,  cayiable  of  pro-
ducing the  desireil  effect,  although  not  the  course  intended
fiy  the  imagination  ; — all  this,  we  say,  would  remain  a mystery,
unsolved  and  insoluble.

‘ the  most  inpiortant  conclusion  to  which  the  narrative

related  afiove  points,  appeai-s  to  be  that  the  sources  from
which  objecti\'e  vision  and  hallucinatoiy  vision  spring  are
essentially  different  and  inde])endent.  The  first  is  initiated

by  external  stimuli,  acting  on  the  sensory  mechanism  of  the
brain,  resulting  in  a definite  sensation  which  the  individual
perceives,  and  which  \ve  call  sight,  while  the  second  cannot
be  called  a sensation,  as  the  sensory  physical  apparatus  cannot
be  influenced  liy  what  has  no  existence,  and  there  apyiears
to  lie  no  chance  of  the  intervention  of  the  ordinary  yu’oeesses
-of  sensation,  a,s  the  hallucination  is  not  only  perceived  Imt
■conceived  at  the  same  instant,  while  the  machinery  of  sensa-
thjii  is  simultaneously  fully  occupied  by  objective  excitations,
and  where  there  is  no  eiiergy  there  can  be  no  y)hysical

action.  The  source  of  hallucinatory  vision  therefore  must
be  within,  and  must  be  regarded  as  a purely  spiritual

process.


X ( »TK.

[The  following  note  on  Mi-.  A.’a  case  has  kindly  lieen
contriliuted  by  a Member  of  our  Society  and  well-known  oculist,
Mr.  d.  Mackenzie  Davidson,  iVI.kk,  ( '.M.,  (Aberd).]

-Mr.  John  Honeyman’s  communication  on  certain  unusual
Psychological  Phenomena  is  very  interesting,  the  more  so  since
the  observations  are  so  accurately  recordeil.  Tlie  salient  yioint
that  strikes  one  is  that  while  the  ])henomena  are  purely
sulijective,  yet  in  certain  lespeets,  e.e/.  in  the  change  of  size  of
the  images  seen,  they  varied  as  if  the  visual  impressions  had
Iteen  produced  liy  external  objects.

It  must  be  remembered  that  what  is  seen,  in  the  sense  of
the  mind  lorming  a conception  of  the  size,  .shape,  and  colour


John  Honcyma n


of  oi)jects,  is  due  to  a variety  of  impulses  co-ordinated  to  produce
the  final  mental  impression.  To  illustrate  this  there  is  ne
better  way  than  to  produce  on  the  eyes  a good  after-image,
— say  of  the  incandescent  filament  of  an  electric  lamp,
viewed  at  a distance  of  a foot ; and  if  then  the  after-image  is
reproduced  on  a screen  held  a foot  from  the  eyes,  the  apparent
size  of  the  after-image  will  l)e  exactly  the  same  size  as  the
original  oljject  (the  filament)  which  produced  it.  But  if  the
screen  l>e  gradually  taken  further  away,  the  after-image  will
increase  in  size,  and  if  one  looks  at  the  sky  or  any  distant
object,  the  image  will  have  increased  enormously.  In  this  way
the  after-image  can  be  made  to  appear  i inch  long  or  20  feet
long  according  to  the  position  of  the  eyeballs.  In  this  case
the  impression  ]>roduced  on  the  retinae  is  of  a fixed  size  and
unalterable,  and  the  impression  on  the  centre  for  vision  of
the  retinae  must  also  be  unalteiable : l)ut,  and  this  is  the
point  of  importance,  tlie  mental  conception  of  the  actual  size
by  the  higher  visual  centre  is  modified  by  the  position  of  the
axes  of  tlie  eyeljalls,  whether  the}'  are  convergent  or  parallel.

It  is  therefore  conceivalile  that  the  jjhenomena  recorded  irt
Mr.  Honeyman’s  papei'  may  be  partly  explained  by  the  position
of  the  eyes  and  head,  etc.,  for  it  is  recorded  “ Mr.  A.  noticed
that  the  size,  which  was  less  than  natural  when  the  eye  was
turned  towards  the  ground,  increased  as  the  eye  was  directed
upwards.”  This  is  exact!}’  what  would  happen  with  an  after-
image.

dAs.  M.\CKF:Nzih:  Davidson.


KDITOBTAI,  noth;

It  was  intendeti  to  include  in  tins  Fart  of  the  l^oceedin/fs  a
review  of  Di:  BrainweU’s  recent  book  on  Hypnotism,  Imt  the
review  which  was  prepared  was  unfortunately  lost  in  the  post.
It  has  therefore  l)een  necessary  to  f)Ostpone  its  appearance  till
the  next  Fart.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  XLVIII.

March,  1904.


ADDRESS  BY  THE  PRESIDENT.
Professor  W.  E.  Barrett,  E.R.S.
January  2^th,  1904.


My  first  duty  is  to  thank  you  most  heartily  for  the  honour
you  have  conferred  upon  me  to-day.  When  I recall  the  names
of  the  illustrious  men  who  have  preceded  me  in  this  chair,  1
can  only  ask  your  indulgence  for  the  deficiencies  of  which  I am
very  conscious  and  express  the  hope  that  our  Society  may  not
suffer  Irom  having  chosen  as  its  President  one  from  a remote
distance,  and  who  can  lay  no  claim  to  the  eminence  of  his
predecessors.

It  has  not  been  the  custom  formally  to  move  a vote  of
thanks  to  our  out-going  President,  but  I am  sure  you  would
desire  me  to  voice  the  grateful  appreciation,  which  we  all
sincerely  feel,  of  the  great  services  which  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  has
rendered  to  the  Society  during  his  three  years’  tenure  of  office.
In  his  presence  I cannot  express  all  I would  like  to  say,  but
this  much  perhaps  he  will  permit,  that  during  his  Presidency,
his  intluence  and  high  position  in  the  ranks  of  science  have
been  of  inestimable  value  to  the  Society,  whilst  his  simple  and
unaffected  courage  has  been  a noble  stimulus  to  us  all.

Y'


*?24  Address  hy  the  President,  [part

Here  too,  perhaps,  you  will  allow  me  to  say  liow  much  we
owe  to  the  ungrudging  and  arduous  labour  of  our  Hon.  Sec.  Mr.
Piddington,  and  to  the  skill  and  care  with  which  our  Hon.
Treasurer  Mr.  H.  A.  Smith  has,  almost  from  the  foundation  of
the  Society,  conducted  its  finances,  and  to  the  legal  advice  and
assistance,  in  the  incorporation  of  the  Society  and  other  matters,
which  Mr.  Smith  and  Mr.  S.  C.  Scott  have  freely  given  to  us.
Though  I am  quite  sure  they  would  deprecate  any  allusion  to
their  services,  yet  I know  you  will  join  with  me  in  expressing
our  most  grateful  and  cordial  thanks  to  each  and  all  of  these
gentlemen.


This  month  we  enter  upon  the  23rd  year  of  our  existence,  and
in  spite  of  the  irreparable  losses  we  have  suffered  in  the  past
through  the  removal  from  this  life  of  those  who  seemed  to  be
the  very  pillars  on  which  the  Society  rested,-— Gurney,  Sidgwick,
Myers, — losses  which  naturally  gave  rise  to  many  gloomy  fore-
bodings— nevertheless  we  have  no  reason  for  despondency,  on
the  contrary  the  present  ilourishing  condition  of  our  Society  far
exceeds  that  which  even  I,  the  most  .sanguine  of  its  founders,
could  have  anticipated.  Both  numerically  and  financially  we
are  stronger  than  we  have  at  any  time  been;  the  number  of
our  Members  and  Associates  throughout  the  United  Kingdom,
after  eliminating  all  losses  tlirough  death,  etc.,  is  832  ; in
addition  we  have  530  Members  and  Associates  in  the  American
Branch,  and  on  the  Continent  kindred  societies  are  springing  u)!.

As  you  will  see  by  the  printed  statement  of  accounts,  our
linancial  condition  is  also  satisfactory,  and  we  have  in  addition,
thanks  to  a generous  legacy,  a considerable  reserve  fund,  which
we  hope  the  liberality  of  our  membei-s  will  increase.  The
Council  have  placed  this  reserve  fund  in  the  hands  of  Trustees
and  have  determined  to  appropriate  the  interest  of  it,  when
it  reaches  the  sum  of  £8000,  to  the  purpose  of  experimental
research  in  such  subjects  as  fall  within  the  scope  of  our  Society.

It  is  true  that  no  original  research  of  any  value  can  ever
be  made  to  order.  The  progress  of  knowledge  in  psychical
science,  as  elsewhere,  must  in  the  end  rest  upon  the  self-
sacriticing  and  intelligent  work  of  those  in  whom  a keen  interest
for  a ])articular  branch  of  enquiry  has  been  excited,  and  whose
enthusiasm  is  not  stimulated  by,  nor  can  it  be  repaid  in,  coin


xlviil]


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.B.S.


325


of  the  realm.  But  the  investigator  has  to  live,  and  to  enable
him  to  do  so  whilst  he  is  conducting  any  hopeful  encpiiry,
sanctioned  by  the  Council,  a modest  sum  will  be  appropriated
to  him  as  a sirant  in  aid.

O

We  hope  to  receive  from  time  to  time  applications  from
competent  enepurers  of  either  se.v  who  will  undertake  special
lines  of  investigation.  It  might  also  be  desirable,  though  here
I speak  my  own  opinion  only,  to  follow  the  examples  of  the
older  scientific  societies  and  award  medals  or  premiums  for  any
good  piece  of  original  work.  There  is  an  immense  field  for
investigation ; psychical  research  is  almost  virgin  ground  as  far
as  strict  scientific  encpiiry  is  concerned,  and  though  the  worker
is  irot  likely  in  this  generation  to  meet  with  much  encouragement
from  the  world  at  large,  and  still  less  any  benefit  to  himself,
he  may  be  sure  his  toil  will  not  be  in  vain.  I would  therefore
earnestly  appeal  to  any  members  or  friends  of  our  Society  to
give  us  what  help  they  can ; if  personal  assistance  is  not  possible,
their  contributions  to  the  completion  of  our  research  fund  will
be  gratefully  welcomed.^

And  this  brings  me  to  a point  to  which  for  a moment  it
is  desirable  to  refer.  The  work  of  the  Society  has  hitherto
been  in  comparatively  few  hands,  and  the  centre  of  gravity
of  the  Society  inevitably  falls  in  that  place  (such  as  Cambridge)
where  the  most  active  workers  are  or  have  been  found.  This
has  led  some  of  our  members  to  feel  perhaps  a little  aggrieved
that  the  centre  is  not  within  their  own  precincts,  that  they
are  not  more  in  touch  with  the  work  of  the  Society,  and  that
matters  of  great  interest  may  be  occupying  attention  at  head-
cp;arters  and  yet  no  information  may  reach  them.  If  this
represents  any  general  feeling,  is  not  the  remedy  to  be  found
in  wider  and  more  earnest  co-operation  in  our  work  on  the
part  of  the  members  generally  ? The  Journal  of  the  Society
was  established  to  encourage  this  and  to  be  an  organ  of  com-
munication  between  the  members.  I should  be  glad  to  see
it  more  freely  used  for  this  purpose,  and  for  the  speedy  publica-
tion of  any  first-hand  evidence  that  our  members  may  possess ;

' In  consequence  of  this  appeal  two  members  of  the  Society  wrote  to  me  that
they  would  contribute  £50  each  if  eighteen  others  would  do  the  same  so  as  to
make  up  £1000  in  the  present  year  ; £113  3s.  has  since  been  received,  and  p>erhaps
some  readers  may  feel  moved  to  contribute  towards  the  completion  of  the  sum.


o26  Address  hy  the  President,  [part

and  also  for  the  prompt  communication  of  information  from
headquarters  which  would  be  of  interest  to  members  generally.
I hope,  therefore,  without  any  departure  from  the  caution  and
reserve,  which  are  so  necessary  in  dealing  with  the  phenomena
that  engage  our  attention,  we  may  be  able  to  have  a more
frequent  interchange  of  thought  and  opinion  between  the  Council
and  the  body  of  our  members,  and  I shall  be  glad  if  I can  Ije
of  any  service  in  promoting  this.

As  regards  wider  co-operation  in  our  work,  I would  venture
to  suggest  loccd  groivps  should  be  formed,  meeting  weekly  or
monthly  for  investigation  or  discussion.^  If  you  ask  me  what
work  can  be  done  by  these  local  groups,  a beginning  might  be
made  in  the  determination  of  two  problems,  which  though
they  may  be  simple  and  dull,  are  nevertheless  of  considerable
importance,  and  which  can  only  be  settled  by  wide-spread
assistance.

One  of  these  problems  may  be  stated  thus :

( 1 ) Assuming  tlie  existence  of  telepathy,  is  the  transference
of  tliought  from  one  person  to  another  independently  of  the
recognised  channels  of  sensation,  a faculty  in  some  slight
degree  possessed  hy  cdl,  or  is  it  confined  only  to  a few  ? Prof.
Kichet  and  others  have  made  experiments  on  this  question,  but
it  is  still  an  open  one.  It  is  very  easy  to  devise  methods  of
experiments  between  two  persons,  choosing  the  simplest  form,
such  as  tossing  a coin,  and  noting  whether  the  right  guesses
in,  say  every  100  trials,  somewhat  exceed  the  number  which
chance  alone  would  indicate.  But  patience  is  necessary  in  all
investigations  to  make  the  result  of  any  value,  and  also  pre-
cautions with  which  no  doubt  you  are  familiar,  such  as  the
avoidance  of  facial  or  other  indications.  There  are  other  ques-
tions in  connection  with  telepathy  which  need  elucidation  to
which  1 will  refer  presently.

The  other  problem  is  :

(2)  To  what  extent  is  motor-automatism  common  among
mankind  ? By  motor  automatism  is  meant  the  purposive
movement  of  one’s  voluntary  muscles  without  any  intention  or
conscious  effort  on  our  part.  The  simplest  and  most  sensitive

' No  member  of  the  Society  has  done  more  in  this  direction  than  Colonel
Taylor,  R.K.,  and  I hope  his  example  and  admirable  method  of  investigation
will  be  widely  followed.


XLVIII.]


Professor  W.  P.  Barrett,


test  is  to  hold  a forked  twig  in  your  hand  after  the  manner
of  a dowser,  and  see  if  the  twig  curls  up  of  its  own  accord
when  you  walk  round  your  garden,  or  go  in  search  of  some
hidden  object.  Some  one  or  more  members  of  your  investi-
gating circle  will  probably  succeed,  in  spite  of  their  incredulity.
Now  it  is  important  to  know  (1st)  the  percentage  of  success
among  all  our  friends,  and  (2nd)  whether  other  phenomena  of
motor  automatism  occur  with  the  same  individual,  such  as  the
movement  of  the  pendule  explorateur,  automatic  writing,  etc.,
and  (3rd)  whether  these  movements  are  merely  fortuitous,  or
whether  they  are  veridical,  that  is  to  say,  do  they  give  us
truth-telling  information  of  something  the  individual  could  not
have  ascertained  by  the  use  of  his  ordinary  perceptive  powers  ?

Now  these  problems  require  the  willing  co-operation  of  a
number  of  intelligent  investigators,  but  they  do  not  require
costly  apparatus  nor  any  particular  training  beyond  that  of
careful  observation ; nor  are  these  experiments  in  the  least
injurious  to  the  operator,  nor  likely  to  excite  any  opposition
even  from  a hyper-sensitive  conscience.  It  is  true  they  may  seem
trivial  and  tiresome ; if  any  person  think  so,  I am  afraid  they
would  think  the  details  of  all  scientitic  investigation  trivial
and  tiresome.  The  work  of  a bricklayer  or  a hodman  in
building  a house  would  seem  to  be  very  monotonous,  if  we
did  not  regard  the  end  in  view.


I am  sometimes  asked  what  our  Society  has  already  achieved,
what  has  it  done  to  justify  its  existence  ? The  reply  to  this
is  found  in  the  eighteen  closely  printed  volumes  of  our
Proceedings,  and  the  eleven  volumes  of  our  Journal,  containing
an  immense  mass  of  evidence,  the  record  of  carefully  sifted
observations  or  of  stringent  experiments.  These  form  a store-
house of  material  which  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  will
become  increasingly  valuable  to  students  both  of  psychology
and  philosophy  in  the  not  distant  future.  Unquestionably  a
change  of  opinion  is  gradually  coming  about  through  the  work
of  our  Society.  The  widespread  and  unreasoning  prejudice
which  25  years  ago  existed  against  all  psychical  enquiry  is
breaking  down.  This  is  seen  in  the  list  of  distinguislied  men
who  have  become  members  of  our  society,  and  here  I desire  to


328


Address  ht/  the  President,


[part


welcome  one  of  our  great  English  savants,  a man  of  European
reputation,  who  has  recently  joined  our  ranks,  and  this  coinci-
dently  with  his  election  to  the  high  position  of  joint  Hon.
Secretary  to  the  Royal  Society.

But  although  there  is  a more  open  mind  on  the  part  of
science  towards  psychical  research,  it  must  be  confessed  it  is  still
looked  at  somewhat  askance  by  the  leaders  and  organs  of  official
science.  It  is  worth  a moment’s  attention  to  consider  why  this
should  be.  No  one  asserts  that  the  knowledge  we  are  seeking
to  obtain  is  unimportant,  for  as  the  learned  Dr.  Glanville  said
200  years  ago  about  similar  subjects  to  those  we  are  studying,
“ These  things  relate  to  our  biggest  interests ; if  established
they  secure  some  of  the  outworks  of  religion.”  Nor,  so  far  as
I know,  does  any  one  assert  we  are  hasty  and  incautious,  or
unscientific  in  our  method  of  investigation.  No  doubt  one
reason  for  the  present  attitude  of  official  science  towards  us
has  been  the  prevalence  and  paralysing  influeiice  of  a material-
istic philosophy,  which  denies  the  possibility  of  mind  without
a material  brain,  or  of  any  means  of  access  from  other  minds
to  our  mind  except  through  the  recognised  channels  of
sensation.  Both  these  propositions  are  of  course  denied  liy
our  religious  teachers,  who  assert  that  a spiritual  world  does
exist,  and  that  the  inspired  writings  were  given  supersensuously
to  man.  Nevertheless  as  a body,  though  with  some

notable  exceptions,  even  then  welcome  us  with  open

arms.  The  common  ground  and  official  view  of  both  science  and
religion  is  that  all  extension  to  our  existing  knowledge  in  their
respective  departments  can  only  come  through  the  channels
recognised  by  each ; in  the  one  case  tlie  channel  is  bounded
by  the  five  senses,  and  in  the  other  case  it  is  that  sanctioned
by  authority.  We  must  all  admit  that  even  unconsciously

authority  has  a large  share  in  moulding  our  convictions  and
determining  our  conduct,  in  fact  we  cannot  emancipate  our-
selves from  its  subtle  influence.  As  a rule  this  is  beneficial,
unless  it  can  be  shown  that  authority  is  untrustworthy ; but
the  attempt  to  prove  that  it  is  so  is  sure  to  be  an  un-
gracious and  difficult  task,  and  almost  certain  to  bring  odium
to  bear  ui)on  those  who,  if  they  eventually  prove  to  be  right,
are  in  a subsequent  generation  hailed  as  benefactors  of  the  race.

Some  years  ago  that  most  learned  man,  the  late  Prof,  von


XLVII].]


Professor  Jf'.  F.  Barrett,  F.lt.S.


32!)


Helmholtz,  visited  Dublin.  I had  then  recently  published  a
paper  giving  for  the  first  time  facie  evidence  of  some-

thing new  to  science,  called  thought-transference,  now  known
as  telepathy.  Helmholtz,  who  was  a great  physiologist  as  well
as  physicist,  had  some  conversation  with  me  on  the  suliject,
and  he  ended  by  saying : “ I cannot  believe  it.  Neither  the
testimony  of  all  the  Fellows  of  the  Eoyal  Society,  nor  even  the
evidence  of  my  own  senses,  would  lead  me  to  believe  in  the
transmission  of  thought  from  one  person  to  another  independently
of  the  recognised  channels  of  sensation.  It  is  clearly  im-
possible.” The  respect  that  is  due  to  so  great  a man  renders  it
necessary  to  show  in  a few  words  why  this  statement  (one  that
u.sed  to  be  common  enough)  is  wholly  indefensible.  First,  the
phenomena  in  question,  and  all  the  phenomena  within  the  scope
of  our  Society,  are  not  contradictions,  but  merely  extensions  of
our  existing  knowledge  ; they  may  be  strange  and  inexplicable,
but  that  merely  indicates  that  the  evidence  in  support  of  tlie
new  facts  must  be  recognised  as  calccjucdc.  As  Laplace  long
ago  said  in  his  Theory  of  Frohcdnlities : “ AVe  are  so  far

from  knowing  all  the  agents  of  nature,  and  their  various
modes  of  action,  that  it  would  not  lie  philosophical  to  deny
any  phenomena  merely  because  in  the  actual  state  of  our

knowledge  they  are  inexplicable.  This  only  ought  we  to  do
- — in  proportion  to  the  difficulty  there  seems  to  be  in  ad-

mitting the  facts  should  be  the  scrupulous  attention  we  bestow
on  their  examination.”^  That  this  is  the  true  spirit  may  be
seen  from  the  recent  discoveries  in  connection  with  Eadiuni.
These  facts  appeared  even  to  contradict  some  of  our  previous
knowledge.  AVe  always  thought  of  an  atom,  as  Lucretius  did,

“ strong  in  solid  singleness,”  as  the  most  immutable  and  im-

mortal thing  in  the  physical  universe.  Now  it  appears  to  be
capable  of  disintegration  and  transmutation,  and  the  views  of  the
alchemists  are  beginning  to  revive : soon  we  may  be  looking
for  the  “ philosopher’s  stone  ” — the  substance  that  by  its
presence  enables  the  transmutation  of  other  heavy'  atoms  to
come  about.  Thus  does  the  whirligig  of  time  bring  its  revenges.

But  to  return.  There  is  another  fallacy  in  the  scientific  view-
expressed  by  Helmholtz.  He  said,  as  many  do,  that  nothing
could  make  him  believe  in  such  phenomena.  But  belief  is  not

’Laplace,  Theoric  Analytiqve  Prohal>i/ifi‘S,  Introd.,  p.  43.


330  Address  hy  the  President,  [i>akt

a voluntary  act  of  the  mind,  it  cannot  be  given  or  withheld
at  pleasure ; it  is,  obviously,  an  involuntary  state,  which  follows
if  our  judgment  considers  the  evidence  adduced  both  adequate
and  conclusive.  We  can,  of  course,  as  many  do,  refuse  to  listen
to  the  evidence  ; and  it  is  worth  noticing  that  in  all  our  minds
there  is  a tendency  to  repel  the  intrusion  of  any  ideas  unrelated
to  our  usual  habits  of  thought,  and  which  therefore  involve  an
uncomfortable  dislocation  of  our  mind : so  that  attention  to
evidence  of  this  character  is  a difficult  act  of  self-conquest.
Hence  every  new  departure  in  thought  has  to  encounter  great
mental  inertia,  and  wisely  so,  as  preventing  hasty  and  foolish
aberrations  of  mind.  But  when  attention  is  given,  and  the
evidence  considered  adequate,  it  is  sheer  nonsense  to  say  you
won’t  believe  it.

Is  there  then  any  other  ground  why  science  should  not
ungrudgingly  recognise  the  evidence  so  amply  given  in  our
Proceedings  ? I have  recently  made  enquiries  among  some  of
my  scientific  friends  who  stand  aloof  from  us,  to  know  what
is  their  reason  for  so  doing.  Of  course  life  is  short,  the  claim
of  each  particular  branch  of  scientific  investigation  becomes
increasingly  exacting,  and  l)ut  few  have  time  to  consider  the
evidence.  That  is  obvious,  but  why  do  they  shrug  their
shoulders  when  you  mention,  say,  telepathy,  or  the  faculty  of
dowsing  ? Their  attitude  reminds  me  of  an  anecdote  told  by
that  remarkable  woman.  Miss  Caroline  Fox,  and  which  I think
is  mentioned  in  the  memorials  of  her  life.  The  charming
residence  of  Miss  Fox  in  Cornwall  was  the  meeting  ground  of
many  famous  men  of  the  last  generation.  On  one  occasion  that
great  Irishman,  Sir  W.  Eowan  Hamilton,  there  met  Sir  G.
Airy,  the  then  Astronomer-Eoyal.  Hamilton  had  just  pub-
lished his  famous  mathematical  discovery  of  quaternions,  and
was,  I believe,  explaining  it  to  Airy.  After  a short  time
Airy  said,  “ I cannot  see  it  at  all.”  Hamilton  replied,  “ I have
been  investigating  the  matter  closely  for  many  months,  and  I
am  certain  of  its  truth.”  “ Oh,”  rejoined  Airy,  “ I have  been
thinking  over  it  for  the  last  two  or  three  minutes,  and  there
is  nothing  in  it.”  This  is  why  some  of  our  scientific  friends
shrug  their  shoulders  at  our  researches.  They  feel  competent,
after  a few  minutes’  consideration,  to  reject  conclusions  which
may  have  cost  us  years  of  investigation.


XLvm.]


Frofcssor  IT.  F.  Barrett,  F.F.S.


331

In  fact,  nine-tenths  of  the  positive  opinions  we  are  accus-
tomed to  hear  about  psychical  research  are  given  judicially.
That  is,  the  objector  speaks  of  liis  conclusions  as  positively  as
if  it  were  his  office  to  know  the  truth,  and  implies  that  any
opposition  is  a thing  for  him  to  judge  of.  “ He  is  annihilated,”
as  Professor  I)e  Morgan  pointed  out  some  time  ago,  “ f)y  being
reduced,  no  matter  liow  courteously,  from  judge  to  counsel.
But  this  is  what  must  be  done.  The  jurisdiction  must  be
denied.  The  great  art  is  not  to  pull  him  off  the  bench  without
ceremony,  but  to  pull  tlie  bench  from  under  him,  without  his
exactly  seeing  how  he  came  to  tumble,  and  without  proceeding
to  sit  upon  it  younself.”


Encpiiry  among  my  scientific  friends  has  shown  me  that  the
root  of  much,  perhaps  most,  of  the  scientific  scepticism  towards
our  work  is  not  because  the  phenomena  are  startling  or  inex-
plicable, but  because  they  cannot  be  repeated  at  pleasure ; hence
so  very  few  scientific  men  have  the  opportunity  of  verifying
the  observations  some  of  us  have  made.  They  do  not  doubt
our  good  faith,  but  tliey  think  we  may  have  been  mistaken  in
our  conclusions,  and  until  we  can  reproduce  the  phenomena
before  them,  they  feel  justified  in  distrusting  our  results.  This
might  well  give  ground  for  suspense  of  judgment,  but  surely
not  for  any  liostile  attitude.  It  is,  of  course,  most  desirable
to  be  able  to  repeat  our  experiments  at  pleasure,  but  the  very
nature  of  our  enquiry  precludes  this.  We  do  not  refuse  to
believe  in  the  fall  of  meteoric  stones  unless  we  can  see  one
falling.  We  may  require  a good  deal  of  well-attested  evidence
for  their  fall,  but,  once  the  fact  is  established,  the  stringency
of  the  evidence  demanded  immediately  relaxes.  Now,  unques-
tionably there  are  at  present  more  capable  witnesses  who  can
speak  from  ])ersonal  and  careful  enquiry  as  to  the  fact  of
telepathy,  or  of  what  is  called  spiritualistic  phenomena,  than
there  are  persons  living  who  can  testify  to  having  seen  the
actual  fall  from  space  of  meteoric  stones.

The  fact  is,  our  scientific  friends  do  not  realise  the  profound
difference  that  exists  between  the  conditions  of  a physical  and
of  a psycliical  experiment.  We  know  what  conditions  are
requisite  in  the  former  case,  we  do  not  know  what  they  are  in


Address  bij  the  President,


[part


the  latter,  and  hence  the  difficulty  of  all  psychical  investigation
and  the  uncertainty  of  the  reproduction  of  any  given  phenomenon.

A moment’s  consideration  shows  that  the  demand  made  upon
us  by  science  for  the  demonstration  at  any  moment  of  a par-
ticular psychical  phenomenon  is  inconsistent  with  the  very
object  of  our  eiujuiry.  Psychical  experiments  depend  on  the
mental  state  of  the  subject ; you  may  tell  a person  to  do
sometliing,  but  whether  he  does  it  or  not  depends  on  the
person  addressed.  Physical  experiments  are  independent  of  our
volition  ; a magnet  attracts  iron,  or  sets  itself  in  the  magnetic
meridian,  irrespective  of  our  mental  condition.  This  obvious
difference  between  tlie  two  sets  of  phenomena  is  constantly
overlooked.  Physical  science  excludes  from  its  survey  the
element  of  personality,  with  which  we  have  to  deal  and
over  which  we  have  little  or  no  control.  It  regards  all  phe-
nomena as  strictly  impersonal,  and  finds  abundant  field  for
investigation  within  the  narrow  limits  it  has  marked  out  for
itself : these  things  it  regards  as  real,  the  rest  as  shadowy,
d’he  truth  is,  of  course,  exactly  the  reverse.  The  reality  of
which  we  are  conscious  is  our  self,  our  personality.  It  is  the
phenomena  of  external  nature  which  are  shadowy  ; shadows  cast
by  some  reality  of  which  our  senses  tell  us  absolutely  nothing.

There  is,  however,  no  reason  why  the  methods  so  successfully
pursued  by  science  should  not  also  be  pursued  in  the  study  of
the  complex  and  shifting  phenomena  of  human  personality.
Now  this  is  precisely  the  object  of  our  Society — the  accurate
investigation  of  that  wide  range  of  obscure  but  wonderful  powers
included  within  the  mysterious  thing  we  call  ourself.  Albeit
we  are  but  at  the  beginning  of  a task  so  vast  that  it  may,  in
time  to  come,  make  all  the  discoveries  of  physical  science  seem
trivial,  all  its  labours  seem  insignificant  in  comparison  with
the  stupendous  problems  that  are  before  us.

We  need,  therefore,  much  more  experimental  evidence  in  every
department  of  our  work.  So  long  ago  as  1870,  in  a paper
read  before  the  Pritish  Association  in  that  year,  I stated  that
before  science  could  attack  with  any  hope  of  success  the  in-
vestigation of  alleged  spiritualistic  phenomena,  we  must  know
whether  defitiite  ideas  can  unconsciously  be  communicated  from
one  person  to  another : whether  such  a thing  as  thought-

tramsference  does  really  exist.  Evidence  was  adduced  in  favour


xlviil]


Professor  ir.  F.  Barrett,  F.P.S.


o o
O O O


of  this  hypothesis.  We  have  clone  much  since  then,  but  mucli
remains  to  be  done  before  telepathy  can  take  its  place  as  an
accepted  axiom  of  scientific  knowledge.


I referred  at  the  beginning  of  my  address  to  some  problems
in  connection  with  telepathy  that  await  solution.  Permit  me
for  a few  moments  to  return  to  this.

There  is  one  question  in  regard  to  telepathy  and  similar
psychical  phenomena,  which  is  likely  to  remain  an  outstand-
ing difiiculty.  By  what  process  can  one  mind  affect  another
at  a distance  ? Physical  science  teaches  us  that  there  is
no  such  thing  as  “ action  at  a distance.”  Energy  at  a distance
reaches  us  either  by  the  translation  of  matter  through  space,
like  a flying  bullet,  which  carries  the  energy ; or  by  the
intermediary  action  of  some  medium,  like  the  transmission  of
sound-bearing  waves  through  the  air,  or  of  luminiferous  waves
through  the  ether,  the  energy  being  handed  on  from  wave
to  wave.  We  may  talk  of  brain  waves,  but  that  is  only
unscientific  talk,  we  know  of  nothing  of  the  kind.  Neither
do  we  know;  how  gravitation  acts  across  space : by  what  means
such  tremendous  forces  as  bind  the  solar  system  together  are
either  exerted  or  transmitted  we  know  absolutely  nothing.
We  don’t  talk  of  gravitation  waves,  we  wait  for  further  know-
ledge on  this  mysterious  problem ; and  in  like  manner  we
must  patiently  wait  for  more  light  on  the  mode  of  transmission
of  thought  through  space.  It  may  well  be  that  thought  tran-
scends both  matter  and  space,  and  has  no  relation  to  either.
That  mass,  space,  and  time,  may  only  be  but  the  mental
symbols  we  form  of  our  present  material  system,  and  have
no  ultimate  reality  in  themselves.

Another  question  is  as  follows : May  not  the  uncertainty
and  difficulty  of  our  experiments  in  thought-transference  partly
arise  from  the  fact  that  we  are  not  going  to  work  the  right
way  ? We  try  to  ofttain  evidence  of  the  transmission  of  a
\vord  or  idea  through  some  conscious  and  voluntary  act  on
the  part  of  the  percipient.  We  wait  for  a verbal  or  written
response.  Is  not  this  a mistake  ? Ought  we  not  rather  to
seek  for  evidence  of  thought-transference  in  the  region  of  the
sub-conscious  life  ? I believe  in  the  case  of  lioth  the  agent


Address  hj/  the  Fresklcnt,


[I’ART


:334

and  percipient  the  conscious  will  plays  only  a secondary  part.
This  is  also  true  1 think  in  all  cases  of  suggestion,  and  of
the  therapeutic  effect  of  suggestion.  It  is  notably  seen  in
the  cures  wrought  by  what  is  known  as  Christian  Science.
I happen  to  have  had  occasion  to  study  these  somewhat
carefully  of  late,  and  undoubtedly  remarkable  cures  are  effected,
it  may  be  by  suggestion,  but  without  the  usual  suggestive  treat-
ment ; the  only  formula  is  the  “ Allness  of  God,”  and  the
“ non-existence  of  disease.”  But  the  healing  processes  are  set
going  by  a purely  sub-conscious  act.  And  so  in  telepathy,
we  need  to  hand  (wer  the  whole  matter  to  the  subliminal

activities.  The  difficulty  is  how  to  do  this.  Hypnosis  is
one  way.  And  in  the  ordinary  waking  state,  the  agent,  wlu)
makes  the  suggestion,  or  transmits  the  idea,  would  I lielieve
do  so  more  effectively  if,  after  the  intention  had  soaked  into
his  mind,  he  left  it  alone,  so  far  as  any  conscious  effort  was
■concerned.  And  the  percipient  should  be  as  passive  as
]<ossible,  make  no  effort  to  guess  the  word,  but  allow  the

perception  to  reveal  itself  through  some  involuntary  action.
Automatic  writing  would  be  the  most  effective,  but  that  is
not  very  common ; the  twisting  of  the  forked  dowsing  twig
might  be  utilised,  indicating  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  by
its  motion ; or  in  other  ways.  In  the  historical  researclies  I
have  made  on  the  so-called  divining  rod,  1 found  it  was  used

in  this  very  manner  two  centuries  ago.  In  fact  what  we

need  to  learn  is  the  language  of  the  subliminal  life,  how  it
speaks  to  us,  Iiow  we  can  speak  to  it.  The  voluntary  action
of  the  muscles  in  speech  or  gesture  is  the  language  of  our
conscious  life ; the  involuntary  action  of  our  muscles,  and
emotional  disturbance,  appear  to  be  the  language  of  the  sub-
conscious life.

Then  another  point  should  l)e  noticed,  the  frequent  lugghui
of  the  impression  in  the  percipient.  I observed  this  again
and  again  in  my  first  experiments  in  thought-transference  25
years  ago.  The  correct  reply  to  a previous  experiment  would
sometimes  come  in  answer  to  a later  and  different  experi-
ment. I have  noticed  the  same  thing  also  in  dowsing,  with
some  dowsers  the  motion  of  the  twig  lags  beliind  the  moment
of  the  impression ; it  turns  after  the  dowser  has  passed  a
little  beyond  the  right  spot.  We  have  precisely  similar  phe-


XLVIII.]


Professor  JT.  F.  Barrett,  F.ll.S.


. > O 0


nomeua  in  physical  science.  The  magnetic  state  of  iron  lags
a little  behind  the  magnetising  force  it  is  subjected  to ; this
is  known  as  hysteresis,  from  a Greek  word  signifying  to  lag
behind.  So  I believe  there  is  a psychical  as  well  as  a physical
hysteresis,  and  if  so,  it  should  be  reckoned  with  in  our  experi-
ments. It  is  improbable  that  any  psychical  action,  even  of
telepathy,  occurs  without  some  preceding  change  in  the  nerve
tissues ; in  technical  phraseology  neurosis  must  always  precede
psychosis ; and  then  this  change  must  rise  till  it  is  of  suffi-
cient magnitude  to  create  the  retlex  that  moves  the  muscles.
And  all  this  involves  time,  which  may  he  greater  or  less,,
and  so  account  for  the  occasional  lag  we  observe.

Other  questions  suggest  themselves.  Is  it  the  idea  or  the
woi’d,  the  emotion  or  the  expression  of  the  emotion,  that  is
transmitted  in  telepathy  ? Probably  the  idea.  If  so  it  affords
a hint  towards  the  interchange  of  thought  amongst  the  race
in  spite  of  differences  of  language.  Language  is  but  a clumsy
instrument  of  thought,  and  quite  incommensurate  to  it ; its
arbitrary  signs  show  it  to  be  but  the  rudiments  of  a system
which  the  evolutionary  progress  of  the  race  may  lead  us  to
hope  will  be  more  perfect  in  the  future.  How’  much  more
accurately  should  we  be  able  to  transmit  complex  ideas  and
subtle  emotions  if  thought  could  evoke  thought  without  the
mechanism  of  speech.  This  may  now  be  the  case  in  the
state  of  life  in  the  unseen.  The  sanctity  and  privacy  of  our
minds  will,  however,  require  to  be  protected  from  unwelcome
intrusion,  and  this,  so  far  as  our  conscious  life  is  concerned,
will  doubtless  be  within  our  own  power  to  effect,  so  long
as  we  retain  control  over  our  self-hood,  our  true  personality.^

Then,  again,  may  not  animals  share  with  man  this  telepathic
power  ? They  have  in  some  directions  keener  perceptive  facul-
ties than  man,  and  there  is  evidence  that  they  are  strongly
affected  by  what  we  call  apparitions.  It  may  be  that  animals,
and  insects  like  the  ant  and  the  bee,  do  communicate  with
each  other  by  some  process  analogous  to  telepathy.  It  is  worth
trying  to  find  out  whether  say,  a favourite  dog  can  respond
to  a telepathic  impact  from  his  master.  In  centuries  to  come

1 In  that  remarkable  book  published  some  70  years  ago,  Isaac  Taylor’s
Phy-iical  Theory  of  Another  Life,  Chap,  viii.,  will  be  found  a prevision  of
telepathy  and  of  some  of  the  ideas  contained  in  the  foregoing  paragraph.


336


Address  hy  f,hc  President,


[part


it  is  just  possible  that  thi’ough  some  such  interchange  of  feelings
we  m:iy  get  into  closer  communion  with  all  sentient  things.

There  is  one  argument  in  favour  of  the  existence  of  some-
thing analogous  to  thought-transference,  which — so  far  as  I
know — has  not  been  used,  and  it  is,'  I think,  a legitimate
argument,  for  it  is  based  upon  the  underlying  unity  that
exists  throughout  Nature.  The  tlieory  of  gravitation  teaches
us  that  every  grain  of  sand  on  every  seashore  in  this  world,
every  particle  of  salt  in  every  salt  cellar,  is  for  ever  pulling
every  grain  of  sand  or  salt,  not  only  on  this  earth,  but
on  every  planet,  or  star,  in  the  whole  Universe.  And  vice
versa,  for  there  is  a reciprocal  influence  ever  going  on  between
these  myriads  of  remote  things.  Nay,  more,  such  is  the
solidarity  of  the  Universe  that  an  interchange  of  radiation,
as  well  of  attraction,  is  ever  taking  place  between  things  on
this  earth,  and  also  between  our  planet  and  every  member
of  the  solar  system.  No  fact  in  phy.sical  science  is  more
certain  than  this.  May  not  this  “ theory  of  exchanges,”
this  mobile  equilibrium,  extend  to  the  psychical  as  well  as
the  physical  universe  ? Tennyson,  with  poetic  prescience,  asks
in  ^Ly liner's  Field  :

“Star  to  star  vibrates  light,  may  .«oul  to  soul
Strike  thro’  a liner  element  of  her  own?”

Certainly  it  seems  very  probable  that  every  centre  of  conscious-
ness is  likely  to  react  telepathically  upon  every  other  centre.^

' Since  this  address  was  delivered  my  attention  has  been  drawn  to  Mrs.
Browning's  striking  sonnet  on  “ Life,”  wherein  the  same  idea  is  elaborated  :
poets  are  certainly  wonderful  ])ioneers  of  thought  ; before  telejjathy  was
thought  of  INIrs.  Browning  wrote  :

Each  creature  holds  an  insular  point  in  space  ;

Yet  what  man  stirs  a finger,  breathes  a sound.

But  all  the  multitudinous  beings  round

In  all  the  countless  worlds,  with  time  and  place

Eor  their  conditions,  down  to  the  central  base.

Thrill,  haply,  in  vibration  and  rebound.

Life  answering  life  across  the  vast  profound.

In  full  antiphony,  l>y  a common  grace  ?

I think  this  sudden  joyaunce  which  illumes
A child’s  mouth  sleeping,  unaware  may  run
From  some  soul  newly  loosened  from  earth’s  tombs;

I think  this  passionate  sigh,  wdiich  half  begun
I stifle  back,  may  reach  and  stir  the  plumes
Of  Ood's  calm  angel  standing  in  the  sun.”


XLVlii.]  Professor  Jl\  F.  Barrett,  F.It.S.  337

It  is  hard  to  believe  that  the  play  of  vital  forces  should  be
more  restricted  than  that  of  the  'physical  forces ; that  radio-
activities should  be  confined  to  inanimate  matter.  If  this
unconscious  radiation  and  reaction  is  going  on  lietween  mind
and  mind,  then  observed  cases  of  telepathy  would  simply  mean
the  awakenino-  of  consciousness  to  the  fact  in  certain  minds.

O

Why  some  and  not  all  minds,  and  why  so  fitfully  the.  conscious
perception  should  be  aroused,  are  problems  we  must  leave  to  the
future,  they  are  quite  consistent  with  what  we  find  everywhere
in  nature.  For  my  own  part,  I am  disposed  to  think  this  inter-
change is  common  to  the  race,  and  is  the  chief  reason  why
all  men  are  insensibly  moulded  by  their  environment.  Only,
as  I said  just  now,  I believe  the  telepathic  exchange  emanates
from  and  affects  the  sub-conscious  part  of  our  jjersonality.  It
is  potentially  conscious,  and  may,  and  probably  will  eventually
become  an  integral  part  of  our  self-consciousness.

We  know  as  a matter  of  fact  that  a vast  number  of  im-
pressions are  constantly  being  made  upon  us,  of  which  we  take
no  heed  ; they  do  not  interest  us,  or  they  are  not  strong  enough
to  arouse  consciousness.  But  the  impressions  are  there,  they
leave  a mark  upon  us  though  we  are  not  aware  of  it,  and
they  may  float  to  the  surface,  or  be  evoked  at  some  future  time.
One  of  the  most  certain  and  striking  results  of  the  investigations
made  by  our  Society  is  that  the  content  of  our  sub-conscious
life  is  far  greater  than  that  of  our  conscious  life.  Our  minds
are  like  a photographic  plate,  sensitive  to  all  sorts  of  im-
pressions, but  our  ego  develops  only  a few  of  these  impressions,
these  are  our  conscious  perceptions,  the  rest  ai’e  latent,  awaiting
development,  which  may  come  in  sleep,  hypnosis,  or  trance,  or
by  the  shock  of  death,  or  after  death.

But  even  here  and  now  this  sub-conscious  radio-activity  of
thought  may  already  play  some  part  in  the  growing  sense  of
sympathy  and  humanity  we  find  in  the  race.  And  what  a
change  would  be  wrought  if  it  were  suddenly  to  become  an
element  of  consciousness  among  mankind.  To  realise  the  brother-
hood of  the  race  would  not  then  be  a pious  aspiration  or  a
strenuous  effort,  but  the  reality  of  all  otliers  most  vividly  before
us ; involuntarily  sharers  in  one  another’s  pleasures  and  pains,
the  welfare  of  our  fellow-men  would  be  the  factor  in  our  lives
which  would  dominate  all  our  conduct.  What  would  be  the


•:>oy  Address  hy  the  Fresklmt,  [part

use  of  a luxurious  club  and  Parisian  cooks  if  the  privation  and
suffering  of  the  destitute  were  telepathically  part  and  parcel
of  our  lives  ? Slowly  the  race  does  seem  to  be  awakening  to
the  sense  of  a larger  self,  which  embraces  the  many  in  the  One,
to

“ A heart  that  beats
In  all  its  ])utses  with  the  common  heart
Of  humankind,  which  the  same  things  make  glad.

The  same  make  sorry.”

The  instinct  of  true  religion,  like  the  insight  of  the  true  poet,
arrives  at  some  great  verity  without  the  process  of  reasoning  or
the  need  of  proof.  Thus  it  has  been  with  the  belief  in  prayer
and  in  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  Scepticism  scoffs  at  a mystery
which  involves  the  direct  action  of  mind  on  mind  and  the  still
greater  mystery  of  the  movement  of  the  Infinite  by  the  finite, —
but  faith  remains  unshaken.  For  us  wayfaring  men,  however,
reason  needs  some  help  in  climbing  the  steeps  attained  by  faith.
And  is  not  this  help  afforded  by  the  steps  slowly  being  cut
in  the  upward  path  by  means  of  psychical  research  ? What
is  telepathy  but  the  proof  of  the  reasonableness  of  prayer  ?
No  longer  need  our  reason  rest  content  with  the  plausible  ex-
planation that  prayer  can  do  no  more  than  evoke  a subjective
response  in  the  suppliant,  that  it  is  inconceivable  how  the  Infinite
and  the  finite  mind,  the  One  manifest  in  the  many,  can  have
any  community  of  thought.  On  the  contrary,  if  telepathy  be
indisputable,  if  our  creaturely  minds  can,  without  voice  or  sensa-
tion, impress  each  other,  the  Infinite  mind  is  likely  thus  to  have
revealed  itself  in  all  ages  to  responsive  human  hearts.  Some  may
have  the  spiritual  ear,  the  open  vision,  but  to  all  of  us  there
comes  at  times  the  echo  of  that  larger  Life  which  is  slowly
expressing  itself  in  humanity  as  the  ages  gradually  unfold.  In
fact  the  teachiim-  of  science  has  ever  been  that  we  are  not

O

isolated  in,  or  from,  the  great  Cosmos ; the  light  of  suns  and
stars  reaches  us,  the  mysterious  force  of  gravitation  binds  the
whole  material  universe  into  an  organic  whole,  the  minutest
molecule  and  the  most  distant  orb  are  bathed  in  one  and  the  self-
same medium.  But  surely  l)eyond  and  above  all  these  material
links  is  the  solidarity  of  Mind.  As  the  essential  significance
and  unity  of  a honeycomb  is  not  in  the  cells  of  wax,  but  in
the  common  life  and  purpose  of  the  builders  of  those  cells,  so  the


XLViii.]  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.P.S.  339'

true  signiticauce  of  nature  is  not  in  the  material  world  but  in
the  Mind  that  gives  to  it  a meaning,  and  that  underlies  and
unites,  that  transcends  and  creates,  the  phenomenal  world  through
which  for  a moment  each  of  us  is  passing.  “ The  things  which
are  seen  are  temporal,  but  the  things  which  are  unseen  are
eternal.”


I will  now  turn  for  a few  minutes  to  another  branch  of  our
researches,  which  has  special  interest  for  me  as  it  w^as  tliis
subject  that  first  aroused  my  interest  in  experimental  psycho-
logy and  to  which  I gave  many  months  of  experiment  long
before  our  Society  was  founded.  I refer  to  Hypnotism.

There  are  no  doubt  many  present  who  remember  the  outcry
that  was  once  raised  against  the  investigation  of  hypnotism,  then
called  mesmerism.  Constant  attacks  were  made  by  the  medical
and  scientific  world  on  the  one  hand,  and  by  the  religious  world
on  the  other,  upon  the  early  workers  at  this  subject.  They  were
denounced  as  impostors,  shunned  as  pariahs,  and  unceremoniously
pitched  out  of  the  synagogues  both  of  science  and  religion  ; and
this  within  my  own  memory.  Physiological  and  medical  science
can  only  hang  its  head  in  shame  when  it  looks  back  upon  that
period.  What  do  we  find  to-day — the  subject  of  hypnotism  and
its  therapeutic  value  recognised  ! It  has  now  become  an  integral
part  of  scientific  teaching  and  investigation  in  several  medical
schools,  more  especially  on  the  Continent.  I think  our  Society
may  fairly  lay  claim  to  have  contributed  to  this  change  of  view,,
and  the  work  of  our  members,  Edmund  Gurney,  and  Doctors
Arthur  Myers,  Milne  Bramwell  and  Lloyd  Tuckey,  has  added
much  to  the  knowledge  of  a subject  the  importance  of  which  it
is  difficult  to  overrate.  It  is  also  worthy  of  note  how  the  former
neglect  of  this  subject  by  science  relegated  it  to  the  ignorant
and  the  charlatan,  and  its  practice  to  mysterious  and  often
mischievous  public  amusements.  These  are  now  less  common ;
and  though  the  public  apprehension  of  the  dangerous  abuse  of
hypnotism  is  grossly  exaggerated,  for  it  is  less  open  to  abuse
than  chloroform,  I,  for  one,  am  strongly  of  opinion  that  we,
as  a Society,  should  discourage,  and  (as  in  many  Continental
countries)  get  the  legislature  to  forbid  the  practice  of  hypnotism
except  under  proper  medical  supervision.


340  Address  by  the  President,  [part

Xow  I think  it  is  the  duty  of  our  Society  to  cherish  the
memory  of  these  courageous  seekers  after  truth,  who  were  the
pioneers  in  this  and  other  branches  of  psychical  research.  The
splendid  and  self-sacrificing  labours  of  those  distinguished
physicians,  Doctors  Elliotson  and  Esdaile,  in  the  fields  of
hypnotic  therapeutics  and  painless  surgery  under  hypnosis  should
never  be  forgotten,  any  more  than  the  later  work  of  Dr.  Braid
of  Manchester.  Dr.  Elliotson,  though  at  the  head  of  his  pro-
fession, sacrificed  everything  for  the  advancement  of  this  branch
of  knowledge.  The  mesmeric  hospital  in  London,  and  the
similar  hospital  founded  in  Calcutta  by  an  enlightened  Governor-
General  and  placed  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Esdaile,  did  remarkable
work,  too  little  known  at  the  present  day.  I am  therefore  glad
to  see  in  Dr.  Milne  Bramwell’s  mayrntm  o-pm  on  hypnotism
that  he  draws  special  attention  to  the  labours  of  Elliotson,
Esdaile  and  Braid.  And  it  is  to  be  regretted  how  completely
these  pioneers  are  ignored  in  the  works  on  suggestive  thera-
peutics by  Dr.  Bernheim,  Dr.  Licdjeault,  Dr.  Schofield,  and  some
others.


Leaving  this  part  of  our  subject,  now  within  the  purview  of
science,  let  us  pass  to  the  extreme  or  advanced  wing  of
psychical  research ; to  that  part  of  our  work  on  which  con-
siderable differences  of  opinion  exist  even  within  our  Society.
I refer  to  spiritualistic  phenomena.  With  regard  to  these  we
must  all  agree  that  indiscriminate  condemnation  on  the  one
hand,  and  ignorant  credulity  on  the  other,  are  the  two  most
mischievous  elements  with  which  we  are  confronted  in  connec-
tion with  this  subject.  It  is  because  we,  as  a Society,  feel
that  in  the  fearless  pursuit  of  truth  it  is  the  paramount  duty
of  science  to  lead  the  way,  that  the  scornful  attitude  of  the
scientific  world  towards  even  the  investigation  of  these  phe-
nomena is  so  much  to  be  deprecated.  Hence,  as  in  the  case
of  those  who  were  the  pioneers  in  the  study  of  hypnotism,  we
ought  not  to  forget  the  small  band  of  investigators  who
before  our  time  had  the  courage,  after  patient  enquiry,  to
announce  their  belief  in  what,  for  want  of  any  better  theory,
they  called  spiritualistic  phenomena.  No  doubt  we  can  pick
holes  in  their  method  of  investigation,  but  they  were  just  as


xLviir.]


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.E.S.


341


honest,  just  as  earnest  seekers  after  truth,  as  we  claim  to  be,
and  they  deserve  more  credit  than  we  can  lay  claim  to,  for
they  had  to  encounter  greater  opposition  and  vituperation.
The  superior  person  then,  as  now,  smiled  at  the  credulity  of
those  better  informed  than  himself.  I suppose  we  are  all  apt
to  fancy  our  own  power  of  discernment  and  of  sound  judgment
to  be  somewhat  better  than  our  neighbours’.  But  after  all  is
it  not  the  common-sense,  the  care,  the  patience,  and  the
amount  of  uninterrupted  attention  we  bestow  upon  any
psychical  phenomena  we  are  investigating,  that  gives  value  to
the  opinion  at  which  we  arrive,  and  not  the  particular  clever-
ness or  scepticism  of  the  observer  ? The  lesson  we  all  need  to
learn  is  that  what  even  the  humblest  of  men  affirm  from  their
own  experience,  is  always  worth  listening  to,  but  what  even
the  cleverest  of  men,  in  their  ignorance,  deny  is  never  worth  a
moment’s  attention.

The  acute  and  powerful  intellect  of  Professor  De  Morgan,
the  great  exposer  of  scientific  humbug,  long  ago  said,  and  he
had  the  courage  publicly  to  state,  that  however  much  the
Spiritualists  might  be  ridiculed,  they  were  undoubtedly  on  the
track  that  has  led  to  all  advancement  in  knowledge,  for  they
had  the  spirit  and  method  of  the  old  times,  when  paths  had  to
be  cut  through  the  uncleared  forests  in  which  we  can  now
easily  walk.^  Their  spirit  was  that  of  universal  examination
unchecked  by  the  fear  of  being  detected  in  the  investigation
of  nonsense.  This  was  the  spirit  that  animated  the  Floren-
tine Academicians  and  the  first  Fellows  of  the  Eoyal  Society
250  years  ago;  they  set  to  work  to  prove  all  things  that  they
might  hold  fast  to  that  which  was  good.  And  their  method
was  that  of  all  scientific  research,  viz.,  to  start  a theory  and
see  how  it  worked.  Without  a theory  “ facts  are  a mob,  not  an
army.”  Meteorology  at  the  present  moment  is  buried  under  a
vast  mob  of  observations  for  want  of  ingenuity  in  devising
theories ; any  working  hypothesis  is  better  than  none  at  all.
And  so  I agree  with  De  Morgan  that  the  most  sane  and
scientific  method  in  psychical  research  is  not  to  be  afraid  of  pro-
pounding a theory  because  it  may  seem  extraordinary,  but
have  courage  to  do  so  and  see  if  it  works.  The  theory  of
thought-transference  led  to  the  accumulation  of  evidence  which

’ See  Preface  of  From  Matter  to  Spirit,  p.  xviii.


342  Address  by  the  President,  [part

bids  fair,  sooner  or  later,  to  place  telepathy  among  the  estab-
lished truths  of  science.

The  amusing  feature  in  the  progress  of  knowledge  is  that,
usually,  critics  who  resist  as  long  as  they  can  a new  theory  are
apt  afterwards,  when  the  theory  becomes  widely  accepted,  to  use
it  indiscriminately,  as  if  it  covered  all  obscure  phenomena ; and
so  it  becomes  a kind  of  fetish  in  their  thoughts.  We  are  all
familiar  with  the  imposture  theory,  with  the  coincidence  theory,
and  with  the  telepathic  theory ; each  excellent  in  their  way,
but  most  foolish  and  unscientific  if  we  allow  any  one  of  them
to  obscure  our  vision  or  paralyse  our  investigation.  What  is
to  be  reprobated,  as  De  Morgan  said,  “ is  not  the  wariness
which  widens  and  lengthens  enquiry,  but  the  assuw^^twi  which
prevents  and  narrows  it.”

Instances  are  well  known  of  the  most  acute  and  careful
enquirers,  trained  psychical  detectives  we  might  call  them,  who
having  begun  with  a priori  reasoning  and  resolute  scepticism,
when  tliey  have  thrown  aside  their  preconceived  assumptions,
and  given  the  necessary  time  and  patience  to  the  investigation
of  one  particular  case,  have  gone  over  to  the  spiritualistic  camp.
They  may  he  right  or  wrong  in  tlieir  present  opinion,  but  we
must  all  admit  they  have  far  better  reasons  for  forming  a
judgment  than  any  of  us  can  have.  If  they  are  right  it
follows  that  the  particular  case  they  have  investigated  is  not
likely  to  be  a solitary  one,  but  typical  of  similar  cases  with  us
as  well  as  with  them.

Pray  do  not  suppose  I hold  a brief  on  behalf  of  spiritualism
either  as  a practice  or  a religion.  On  the  contrary,  to  my
mind  few  things  are  more  dismal  than  the  common  run
of  spiritualistic  seances.  Sometimes  they  revolt  one’s  feelings,
and  always  they  are  a weariness  to  the  flesh.  Perhaps
the  manifold  experiences  I have  had  have  been  unfortu-
nate, and  I freely  admit  my  remarks  apply  more  particularly
to  sittings  with  professional  mediums,  where  what  are  called
physical  manifestations  take  place,  which  always  seem  to  be  on
a lower  plane,  even  where  the  possibility  of  fraud  has  been
carefully  excluded.  Nevertheless,  if  we  can  get  at  truth,  what
does  it  matter  whether  we  draw  it  from  a well  or  drag  it
from  a bog  ?

It  is  impossible,  however,  not  to  feel  some  sympathy  with


XLVIII.]


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.B.S.


343


the  common  objection  of  the  doubter  that  the  phenomena  are  of
so  paltry  a character.  But  we  cannot  prescribe  to  nature,  we
cannot  get  rid  of  the  leprosy  of  doubt  by  choosing  rivers  of
our  own  to  wash  in.  And  so  we  must  be  content  with  what
we  find.  After  all,  from  a scientific  point  of  view,  nothing  can
be  paltry  or  mean  that  manfests  life.

Bacteriologists  spend  their  days  searching  for  evidence  of  the
lowest  forms  of  life.  And  surely  any  evidence  of  personality  that
gives  us  the  faintest,  rudest  sign  that  life  still  persists  though
the  clothing  of  the  body  be  gone,  is  worth  infinite  trouble  to
attain.  Though  it  may  be

“Only  a signal  shown  and  a voice  from  out  of  the  darkness,”

it  IS  not  paltry.  In  fine,  it  is  this  natural  human  longing
that  renders  a dispassionate  consideration  of  the  facts,  a calm
and  critical  weighing  of  the  evidence,  so  difficult  and  yet  so
imperative.


We  must,  however,  bear  in  mind,  as  was  pointed  out  by  the
present  Prime  Minister  in  the  remarkable  address  he  delivered
from  this  chair,  that  if  science  had  first  attempted  to  include
in  its  survey  not  only  physical  but  psychical  phenomena  it
might  for  centuries  have  lost  itself  in  dark  and  difficult
regions,  and  the  work  of  science  to-day  would  then  have  been
less,  not  more  complete.^  This  is  very  true,  the  foundations  of
our  faith  in  the  undeviating  order  of  nature  had  to  be  laid
by  the  investigation  of  the  laws  of  matter  and  motion  and  by
the  discovery  of  the  orderly  evolution  of  life.  What  science
has  now  established  is  that  the  universe  is  a cosmos,  not  a
chaos,  that  amidst  the  mutability  of  all  things  there  is  no
capriciousness,  no  disorder  ; that  in  the  interpretation  of  nature,
however  entangled  or  obscure  the  phenomena  may  be,  we  shall
never  he  put  to  intellectual  confusion.

Now,  if  instead  of  investigating  the  normal  phenomena  of
the  world  in  which  we  live,  science  had  first  grappled  with
supernormal  phenomena,  it  would  not  have  reached  so  soon
its  present  assured  belief  in  a reign  of  law.  We  believe  that
fuller  knowledge  of  the  obscure  phenomena  we  are  investigat-
ing will  in  time  come  to  us,  as  it  has  in  other  branches  of


^Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.,  p.  5.


344  Address  hy  the  President,  [part

science,  but  the  appearances  are  so  elusive,  the  causes  so
complex,  the  results  of  work  sometimes  so  disheartening,  that
we  need  the  steadying  influence  of  the  habit  of  thought
engendered  by  science  to  enable  us  patiently  and  hopefully  to
pursue  our  way.

Possibly  historical  research  amongst  the  most  ancient  records
may  give  us  fragments  of  unsuspected  information  ; for  it  is  very
probable  that  many,  if  not  all  the  psychical  phenomena  we
are  now  investigating  were  known,  and  the  knowledge  jealously
guarded,  in  ages  long  past.  The  very  high  civilisation  which
is  now  known  to  have  existed  thousands  of  years  before  Christ
in  the  earliest  Egyptian  dynasties,  makes  it  almost  inconceiv-
able to  imagine  that  subjects  of  such  transcendent  interest  to
mankind  were  not  then  part  of  the  learning  of  the  few,  part
of  “ the  wisdom  of  Egypt.”  The  seizure  of  this  knowledge  by
the  priestly  caste  and  its  restriction  to  themselves,  with
penalties  to  all  intruders,  was  the  natural  sequence  of  the
lower  civilisation  that  followed.  Thus  psychical  phenomena
became  veiled  in  mystery,  and  ultimately  degraded  to  a mis-
chievous superstition.  Mystic  rites  were  added  to  impress  the
multitude ; Anally  divination,  enchantment,  augury,  and  necro-
mancy became  methods  of  wielding  a mysterious  power  held
by  the  few.  But  such  practices  “ wearied  the  people’s  intellect,
destroyed  their  enterprise  and  distorted  their  conscience.”  ^ The
industry  and  politics  of  the  people  became  paralysed  by  giving
heed  to  an  oracle,  or  to  gibbering  spirits,  rather  than  to
reason  and  strenuous  endeavour.  The  great  Hebrew  prophets,
the  statesmen  of  their  day,  saw  this  clearly  and  had  the
courage  to  denounce  such  practices  in  unmistakable  terms ;
warning  the  people  that  by  using  these  things  as  an  infallible
guide,  or  as  a religion,  they  were  being  misled,  and  reason
was  being  dethroned  from  her  seat.  And  so  the  burden  of
their  speech  was,  “ Thy  spells  and  enchantments  with  which
thou  hast  wearied  thyself  have  led  thee  astray.”^  Hence  these
practices  were  prohibited,  as  a careful  study  of  the  whole
subject  shows,  because  they  enervated  the  nation,  and  tended
to  obscure  the  Divine  idea ; to  weaken  the  supreme  faith  in,
and  reverent  worship  of,  the  one  omnipotent  Being  the  Hebrew

* Prof.  G.  A.  Smith  in  liis  brilliant  and  scholarly  work  on  Isaiah,  vol.  2.,  p.  199.

'^Cf.  latter  half  of  Isaiah,  47  ch.


xlviil]


Professor  JT.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


345


nation  was  set  apart  to  proclaim.  With  no  assured  know-
ledge of  the  great  world-order  we  now  possess,  these  elusive
occult  phenomena  confused  both  the  intellectual  and  moral
sense,  and  so  they  were  wisely  thrust  aside.  But  the  danger
at  the  present  day  is  very  different.  Instead  of  a universe
peopled  with  unseen  personalities,  the  science  of  to-day  has
gone  to  the  other  extreme,  and  as  Mr.  Myers  once  eloquently
said,  we  are  now  taught  to  believe  “ the  Universe  to  be  a
soulless  interaction  of  atoms,  and  life  a paltry  misery  closed
in  the  grave.”  Were  the  Hebrew  prophets  now  amongst  us,
surely  their  voice  would  not  be  raised  in  condemnation  of
the  attempts  we  are  making  to  show  that  the  order  of
Nature  contains  an  even  vaster  procession  of  phenomena  than
are  now  embraced  within  the  limits  of  recognised  science,
and  that  behind  the  appearances  with  which  science  deals
there  are  more  enduring  and  transcendent  realities.


I have  ventured  upon  this  digression  in  the  hope  that  1
may  remove  the  misgivings  with  which  a part  of  our  work
is  regarded  by  some  leaders  of  religious  opinion,  who  from
time  to  time  have  been  in  communication  with  me.  Perhaps

I may  also  add  that  the  aversion  which  some  feel  towards
any  enquiry  into  spiritualistic  phenomena  arises  I think  from
a misapprehension.  With  what  is  spiritual,  with  religion,
these  phenomena  have  nothing  in  common.  They  may  afford
us  a rational  belief  in  the  existence  of  life  without  a visible
body,  of  thought  without  material  protoplasm,  and  so  become
the  handmaid  of  faith.  But  they  belong  to  a wholly  different
order  from  that  of  religious  faith.  Our  concern  is  solely  with
the  evidence  for  certain  phenomena ; and  as  Professor  Karl
Pearson  has  said,  “ Wherever  there  is  the  slightest  possibility
for  the  mind  of  men  to  hnoio,  there  is  a legitimate  problem
for  science.”  Hence  all  appearances,  whether  of  microbes  or
of  men,  are  legitimate  subjects  of  investigation.  Because  they
happen  to  be  fitful,  or  phenomena  occurring  in  an  unseen
environment,  does  not  render  the  investigation  improper  or
unscientific,  though  it  makes  it  considerably  more  difficult.

Now  the  investigations  we  have  published  undeniably
establish  the  fact,  that  human  personality  embraces  a far  larger


346


Address  by  the  President,


[part


scope  than  science  has  hitherto  recognised.  That  it  partakes
of  a hoo-fold  life,  on  one  side  a self-consciousness  which  is
awakened  by,  and  related  to  time  and  space,  to  sense  and
outward  things ; on  the  other  side  a deeper,  slumbering,  but

potential  consciousness,  the  record  of  every  unheeded  past
impression,  possessing  higher  receptive  and  perceptive  powers
than  our  normal  self-consciousness,  a self  that,  I believe,
links  our  individual  life  to  the  ocean  of  life,  and  to  the
Source  of  all  life.  It  is  a remarkable  fact  that  long  ago
the  philosopher  Kant  instinctively  stated  the  same  truth.
He  says : “ [It  is  possible  that]  the  human  soul  even  in
this  life  stands  in  indissoluble  community  with  all  im-
material natures  of  the  spirit  world,  it  mutually  acts  upon

them  and  receives  from  them  impressions,  of  which,  how-
ever, as  man,  it  is  unconscious  as  long  as  all  goes  well.”  ^

This,  of  course,  was  Swedenborg’s  view.  He  frequently  tells
us,  “ Man  is  so  constituted  that  he  is  at  the  same  time  in  the
spiritual  world  and  in  the  natural  world.”  Plotinus,  who  lived  in
the  third  century,  held  a similar  belief,  this  was  in  fact  the  view
of  the  Neo-Platonists  and  of  the  later  mystics  generally.^  In
connection  with  this  subject  may  I commend  to  you  the
perusal  of  Dr.  Du  Prel’s  Fhiloso2yhy  of  Mysticism,  which  has  been
translated  with  loving  labour  by  one  of  the  earliest  and  best
friends  of  our  Society,  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey : perhaps  the  most
valuable  part  of  the  work  being  the  suggestive  introduction
which  Mr.  Massey  has  himself  added.^

^ “ Es  wire!  kiinftig,  icli  weiss  nicht  wo  oder  wann,  noch  bewieseii  werden,  dass
die  menschliche  Seele  auch  in  diesen  Leben  in  einer  unauflbslich  verknupfteii
Geineinschaft  mit  alien  immateriellen  Naturen  der  Geisterwelt  stehe,  dass  sie
wechselweise  in  diese  wirke  und  v'on  ihnen  Eindriicke  empfange,  deren  sie  sich
als  Mensch  nicht  bewusst  ist,  so  lange  alles  w'ohl  steht.”  (Kant’s  Sa7nmtUche
Werke,  Hartenstein’s  Edition,  1867,  vol.  ii.,  p.  341.)

^Vaughan’s  “Hours  with  the  Mystics,”  vol.  i.,  contains  an  excellent  sum-
mary of  the  views  of  the  Neo-Platonists.  Philo  JikIebus  writing  from  Alexandria
a few  years  B.c.  says,  “This  alliance  with  an  upper  world,  of  which  we  are
conscious,  would  be  impossible,  were  not  the  soul  of  man  an  indivisible  portion
of  the  divine  and  blessed  spirit.”  See  also  Thomas  Taylor’s  translation  of  some
of  the  works  of  Plotinus.

^ Here  perhaps  I may  add  one  line  expressive  of  my  own  indebtedness  to
and  affectionate  regard  for  my  dear  friend  C.  C.  Massey,  whose  knowledge  of
all  that  relates  to  the  higher  problems  before  our  Society  is  more  profound
than  that  of  any  one  1 know.


XLVIII.]


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


347


There  is  one  interesting  point  in  connection  with  spiritualistic
phenomena  which  is  worth  a little  attention.  As  we  are  all
aware,  the  production  of  these  phenomena  appears  to  be  in-
separably connected  with  some  special  person  whom  we  call
“ mediumistic.”  This  fact  affords  perennial  amusement  to  the
man  in  the  street.  But  from  a purely  scientific  standpoint
there  is  nothing  remarkable  in  this.  Eecent  discoveries  have
revealed  the  fact  that  a comparatively  few  substances  possess
what  is  called  radio-active  power.  Unlike  ordinary  forms  of
matter,  these  radio-active  bodies  possess  an  inherent  and  peculiar
structure  of  their  own.  There  is  therefore  nothing  absurd  in  sup-
posing that  there  may  be  a comparatively  few  persons  who  have
a peculiar  and  remarkable  mental  structure  differing  from  the
rest  of  mankind.  Moreover,  the  pathologist  or  alienist  does  not
refuse  to  investigate  epilepsy  or  monomania  because  restricted
to  a limited  number  of  human  beings.

Furthermore,  physical  science  gives  us  abundant  analogies  of
the  necessity  of  some  intermediary  between  the  unseen  and  the
seen.  Waves  in  the  luminiferous  ether  recpiire  a material
medium  to  absorb  them  before  they  can  be  perceived  by  our
senses.  The  intermediary  may  be  a photographic  plate,  a
fluorescent  screen,  the  retina,  a black  surface,  or  an  electric
resonator,  according  to  the  length  of  those  waves.  But  some
medium  formed  of  ponderable  matter  is  absolutely  necessary
to  render  the  actinic,  luminous,  thermal,  or  electrical  effects  of
these  waves  perceptible  to  our  senses.  And  the  more  or  less
perfect  rendering  of  the  invisible  waves  depends  on  the  more
or  less  perfect  synchronism  between  the  unseen  motions  of  the
ether  and  the  response  of  the  material  medium  that  absorbs  and
manifests  them.

Thus  we  find  certain  definite  physical  media  are  necessary
to  enable  operations  to  become  perceptible  which  otherwise
remain  imperceptible.  Through  these  media  energy  traversing
the  unseen  is  thereby  arrested,  and,  passing  through  ponderable
matter,  is  able  to  affect  our  senses  and  arouse  consciousness.

Now,  the  nexus  between  the  seen  and  the  unseen  may  be
physical  or  psychical,  but  it  is  always  a specialised  substance,
or  living  organism.  In  some  cases  the  receiver  is  a body  in
a state  of  unstable  equilibrium,  a sensitive  material- — like  one
of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge’s  receivers  for  wireless  telegraphy — and  in


348  Address  hy  the  President,  [part

that  case  its  behaviour  and  idiosyncrasies  need  to  be  studied
Ijeforehand.  It  is  doubtless  a peculiar  psychical  state,  of  the
nature  of  which  we  know  nothing,  that  enables  certain  persons
whom  we  call  mediums  to  act  as  receivers,  or  resonators,  through
which  an  unseen  intelligence  can  manifest  itself  to  us.  And
this  receptive  state  is  probably  a sensitive  condition  easily
affected  by  its  mental  environment.

We  should  not  go  to  a photographer  who  took  no  trouble
to  protect  his  plates  from  careless  exposure  before  putting  them
in  the  camera.  And  I do  not  know  why  we  should  expect
anything  but  a confused  result  from  a so-called  medium  (or
automatist,  as  Myers  suggested  they  should  be  called)  if  the
mental  state  of  those  present  reacts  unfavourably  upon  the
sensitive.  Infinite  patience  and  laborious  care  in  observation
we  must  have  (as  in  all  difficult  investigation),  but  what  good
results  from  any  scientific  research  could  we  expect  if  we  started
with  the  presumption  that  there  was  nothing  to  investigate  but
imposture  ?

In  connection  with  this  subject  of  mediumship,  it  seems  to
me  very  probable  that  a medium,  an  intermediary  of  some  sort,
is  not  only  required  on  our  side  in  the  seen,  but  is  also  required
on  the  other  side  in  the  unseen.  In  all  communication  of
thought  from  one  person  to  another  a double  translation  is
necessary.  Thought,  in  some  inscrutable  wajq  acts  upon  the
medium  of  our  brain,  and  becomes  expressed  in  written  or
spoken  words.  These  words,  after  passing  through  space,  have
again  to  be  translated  back  to  thought  through  the  medium  of
another  brain.  That  is  to  say,  there  is  a descent  from  thought
to  gross  matter  on  one  side,  a transmission  through  space,  and
an  ascent  from  gross  matter  to  thought  on  the  other  side.
Now,  the  so-called  medium,  or  automatist,  acts  as  our  brain,
translating  for  us  the  impressions  made  upon  it  and  which  it
receives  across  space  from  tlie  unseen.  But  there  must  be  a
corresponding  descent  of  thought  on  the  other  side  to  such  a
telepathic  form  that  it  can  act  upon  the  material  particles  of
the  brain  of  our  medium.  It  may  be  even  more  difficult  to
find  a spirit  medium  there  than  here.  No  doubt  wisely  so,  for
the  invasion  of  our  consciousness  here  might  otherwise  be  so
frequent  and  troublesome  as  to  paralyse  tlie  conduct  of  our
life.  It  is  possible  therefore  that  much  of  the  difficulty  and


XLVIII.]


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.P.S.


349


confusion  of  the  manifestations  which  are  recorded  in  our  Pro-
ceeclings,  and  in  the  very  valuable  contribution  which  Mr.
Piddington  has  just  given  us  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  are
due  to  ine'vitable  difficulties  in  translation  on  both  sides  ? ^

Furthermore,  if  my  view  be  correct,  that  the  self-conscious
part  of  our  personality  plays  but  a subordinate  part  in  any
telepathic  transmission,  whether  from  incarnate  or  discarnate
minds,  we  shall  realise  how  enormously  complex  the  problem
becomes.  So  that  the  real  person  whom  we  knew  on  earth
may  find  the  difficulty  of  self-manifestion  too  great  to  over-
come, and  only  a fitful  fragment  of  their  thoughts  can  thus
reach  us.

There  is,  however,  another  view  of  the  matter  which  to  me
seems  very  probable.  The  transition  from  this  life  to  the  next
may  in  some  respects  resemble  our  ordinary  awakening  from
sleep.  The  discarnate  soul  not  improbably  regards  the  circum-
stances of  his  past  life  “ in  this  dream-world  of  ours,”  as  we
now  regard  a dream  upon  awakening.  If,  even  immediately
upon  awakening,  we  try  to  recall  all  the  incidents  of  a
more  or  less  vivid  dream,  we  find  how  difficult  it  is  to
do  so,  how  fragmentary  the  whole  appears ; and  yet  in
some  way  we  are  conscious  the  dream  was  a far  more
coherent  and  real  thing  than  we  can  express  in  our  waking
moments.  Is  it  not  a frequent  and  provoking  experience  that
whilst  some  trivial  features  recur  to  us,  the  dream  as  a whole
is  elusive,  and  as  time  passes  on  even  the  most  vivid  dream
is  gone  beyond  recall  ? May  it  not  be  that  something  analogous
to  this  awaits  us  when  we  find  ourselves  amid  the  transcendent
realities  of  the  imseen  universe  ? The  deep  impress  of  the
present  life  will  doubtless  be  left  on  our  personality,  but  its
details  may  be  difficult  to  bring  into  consciousness,  and  we  may

^ Miss  Jane  Barlow,  who  has  made  a close  study  of  these  communications,
writes  to  me  on  this  point:  “The  almost  unimaginable  difficulty  in  com-
municating may  account  for  many  of  the  failures,  mistakes,  and  absurdities
we  notice.  I think  we  are  apt  to  lay  too  much  stress  on  the  want  of  memory.
Apart  from  purely  evidential  considerations,  there  seems  a tendency  to  regard
it  as  a larger  and  more  essential  element  of  Personality  than  it  really  is.  In
my  own  case,  for  instance,  any  trivial  cause— a headache,  a cold,  or  a little
flurry — scatters  my  memory  for  proper  names.  I can  easily  imagine  myself
forgetting  my  own  name  without  suffering  from  any  serious  confusion  of  intellect
in  other  respects,  or  the  least  decay  of  personality.”


350  Address  hj  the  President.

find  them  fadins;  from  us  as  we  wake  to  the  dawn  of  the
eternal  day.

Whatever  view  we  take,  the  records  of  tlrese  manifestations
in  our  Proceedings  give  us  the  impression  of  a truncated  per-
sonality, “ the  dwindling  remnant  of  a life,”  rather  than  of  a
fuller,  larger  life.  Hence,  whilst  in  my  opinion  psychical
research  docs  show  vs  that  intelligence  can  exist  in  the  unseen,
and  personality  can  survive  the  shock  of  death,  we  must  not
confuse  mere,  and  perhaps  temporary,  survival  after  death  with
that  higher  and  more  expanded  life  which  we  desire  and  mean
by  immortality,  and  the  attainment  of  which,  whatever  may  be
our  creed,  is  only  to  Ije  w'on  through  the  “ process  of  the
Cross.”  For  it  is  l)y  self-surrender,  tire  surrender,  that  is,  of
all  that  fetters  “ What  we  feel  within  ourselves  is  highest,”
that  we  enter  the  pathway  of  self-realisation.  Or  as
Tennyson  expresses  it : —

“ Thro’  loss  of  Self

The  gain  of  sueh  large  life  as  inatcli’d  with  ours
Were  Sun  to  spark — unshadowable  in  words.

Themselves  Imt  shadows  of  a shadow-world.”

‘ So  also  Goethe  :

“ Und  so  laiig  du  das  nicht  hast
Dieses:  ‘stirl)  und  werde’!

Bist  du  nur  ein  triilier  gast
Auf  del'  dunken  Erde.  "

which  a friend  has  rendered  as  follows  :

“Whoso  heeils  not  this  helie.st
‘Die  to  win  new  birth.'

Lives  but  as  a liapless  guest
On  a darkening  earth."


PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  XLIX.

OCTOBEI!,  1904.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.

The  122nd  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  in  the  Hall,
at  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.,  on  Friday,  January  29th,
1904,  at  8.30  p.ni. ; Sm  Oliver  Lodge  in  the  Chair.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  delivered  a Presidential  Address,
which  has  since  appeared  in  Proceedings,  Part  XLViii.


The  123rd  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on
Monday,  March  21st,  1904,  at  8.30  p.m. ; the  President,
Professor  Barrett,  in  the  Chair.

Dr.  Albert  Wilson  read  part  of  the  paper  on  “ A Case  of

Multiple  Personality,”  which  is  printed  below.

2a


352


Dr.  Albert  Wilson,


[part


I.

A CASE  OF  MULTIPLE  PERSONALITY.
By  Albert  Wilson,  M.D.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

Page


Introduction,  -----------  3.j2

History  of  the  Case,  3.35

Theory  of  Cerelu'al  Changes  connected  with  Changes  of  Personality,  380
Appendix  I.  :

Writings  of  the  different  personalities,  -----  387

Comments  on  the  Writings  and  Drawings  of  the  Secondary

Personalities.  By  Alice  Johnson,  -----  393

Diary  of  appeaiances  of  different  ]>ersonalities,  - - - 398

Diai’y  of  a.()pearances  of  the  normal  state,  - - - - 40O

Description  of  illustrations, 402

Appendix  II.  :

Letter  from  Mr.  Piddington  to  Dr.  Wilson,  - - - - 405

Comments  by  Dr.  U Lloyd  Tnckey,  -----  412

Comments  by  Dr.  Robert  .Tones,  - - - - - - 413


Introduction.

Before  giving  an  account  of  this  remarkable  and  almost  unique
case  of  Multiple  Personality,  I propose  to  call  attention  to  a
few  details  of  the  mechanism  of  the  Nervous  System,  some
understanding  of  which  is  essential  for  a clear  grasp  of  the
main  object  which  I have  in  view.

My  object  is  to  demonstrate  that  the  mind  or  personality
which  we  call  the  “ Ego,”  the  grand  sum  total  of  our  character
and  individuality,  is  capable  of  disintegration  into  minor
personalities,  good  and  bad,  dependent  on  the  condition  of  the
body  that  sustains  them.

It  follows,  therefore,  that  temporary  or  permanent  brain
conditions  may  have  an  important  bearing  on  the  great  C[uestion
of  individual  responsibility.


XLix.]  A Case  of  Mvltiple  Personality.  353

We  have  within  us  three  Nervous  Systems.  The  lowest  is
the  Sympathetic  system.  It  consists  of  two.  chains  of  ganglia
inside  the  body,  in  front  of  the  spine : also  three  principal
ganglion  masses,  one  for  the  heart,  another  for  the  digestive
organs,  and  a third  lower  down.  The  sympathetic  nervous
system  controls  all  our  inner  organs,  but  it  specially  governs
the  circulation  of  the  blood,  down  to  the  smallest  blood-vessel,
and  so  controls  the  supply  of  nutriment  to  each  organ.  It
resembles  the  Commissariat  Department  of  an  Army.

The  second  nervous  system  consists  of  the  spinal  nerves,
which  are  concerned  with  the  movements  of  the  body  and
limbs.  This  represents  the  Combatant  Force  of  the  Army.
The  sensory  nerves  are  like  Scouts,  while  the  motor  nerves
and  muscles  represent  the  Fighting  Battalions.

The  third  nervous  system  is  the  Brain,  which  reaches  its
highest  development  in  man,  after  rising  in  gradations  from
the  fish  and  amphibian  types  through  the  reptiles  and  birds
up  to  the  mammals.  It  is  the  Cerebrum,  or  upper  brain,
that  we  may  take  to  represent  the  Intelligence  Department,
with  the  General  and  his  Staff,  in  a large  Army  Corps.  Just
as  these  higher  Officers  depend  for  their  existence  on  the
Commissariat,  so  the  Brain  depends  for  its  healthy  action  on
the  Sympathetic  nervous  system.  It  is  this  system  in  disorder
which  I describe  here.

So  closely  are  these  Nervous  systems  interwoven  that  each
depends  on  the  other,  and  any  disunion  or  want  of  harmony
between  them  upsets  the  whole  organism.

The  surface  of  the  Brain  has  been  mapped  out  by  Ferrier
and  others  into  areas  for  the  various  functions  of  sight,  touch,
taste,  smell,  hearing,  and  motion.  This  outer  surface,  called
the  Cortex,  for  the  depth  of  about  an  eighth  to  a quarter  of
an  inch  is  of  a grey  colour,  and  contains  the  nerve  cells
which  form  the  organic  basis  of  Mind.  Under  the  microscope
there  are  seen  five  distinct  layers  of  nerve  cells  in  the  cortex
both  of  man  and  of  other  mammals.  These  develop  gradually
from  within  outwards,  from  which  one  would  infer  that  the
inner  or  deeper  layers  are  related  to  the  voluntary  protective
instincts  of  the  lower  animal  life.  Such  is  actually  the  case,
and  it  has  been  shown  by  Dr,  G.  A.  Watson  that  in  lower
animals,  such  as  the  rabbit  and  hedgehog,  the  more  superficial


354


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


layers  are  much  less  developed  proportionately  than  the
deeper  ones.  Dr.  Watson  also  showed  that  in  the  lower

animals  the  superficial  layer  (which  from  the  peculiar  shape
of  the  cells  in  it  is  called  the  Pyramidal  layer)  becomes
thicker  as  the  animal  rises  in  intelligence ; and  in  man,  where
intellect  prevails  over  instinct,  the  Pyramidal  layer  is  highly
developed,  and  considerably  thicker  than  in  any  of  the  lower
animals.  The  extensive  researches  of  Dr.  J.  S.  Bolton  have
further  shown  that  in  man  the  thickness  or  depth  of  this
pyramidal  layer  bears  a distinct  relationship  to  intelligence.
He  found  that  in  idiots,  who  from  birth  never  enjoyed  reason,
this  layer  was  relatively  very  shallow  ; while  in  the  demented
there  is  a decay  or  dissolution  of  the  pyramidal  layer.

Xow,  healthy  brain  action,  or  Mentation,  can  only  occur  if
the  brain  receives  a proper  supply  of  blood,  both  in  quantity
and  quality.  The  quantity  is,  as  I have  said,  regulated  by
the  Sympathetic  nerves.  But  the  quality  may  be  bad,  as  in
poisoning  by  gout,  alcohol,  morphia,  impure  air,  or  mal-
nutrition.

Those  whose  functions  are  judicial  ought  fully  to  estimate
these  statements  as  facts,  not  theories.  The  brain,  if  poisoned
by  excessive  alcoholism,  is  damaged,  and  such  damage  prevents
the  proper  functioning  of  the  individual’s  original  Ego,  and
leads  to  the  formation  of  a new  personality,  associated  with
damaged  structure  and  of  lower  type,  more  nearly  approaching
the  brute  creation.  Our  daily  observations  are  thus  scientifically
explained.

The  Brain  is  nourished  by  the  Blood,  and  receives  its

supply  chiefly  from  the  carotid  arteries  in  front,  but  also
from  the  vertebral  arteries  behind.  These  large  arteries

divide  and  subdivide  into  smaller  Ijranches  and  twigs  (as  an
oak  tree  divides  into  branches  and  twigs),  penetrating  into

the  brain.  The  finest  arteries  or  capillaries  in  the  brain  will
only  allow  the  blood  corpuscles  to  pass  along  in  single  file,

since  they  are  only  about  -swo  of  an  inch  in  diameter;  but

doubtless  there  is  a still  finer  circulation  which  our  microscopes
have  not  yet  been  able  to  reveal.

Bearing  in  mind  this  simile  of  the  branches  and  twigs  of
a tree,  one  can  easily  imagine  how  paralysis  or  loss  of  function
of  any  particular  brain  area  may  occur  if  the  branch  or  artery


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multi2)le  Personality.  355

supplying  that  area  is  blocked  from  any  cause.  Thus  we
find  in  disease  that  a clot  may  shut  off  the  area  of  speech,
or  the  area  of  movement  of  a leg  or  arm,  or  both.  These  are
instances  of  permanent  destruction  or  paralysis.

The  Sympathetic  nerves  are  vaso-motor,  and  have  the  power
of  either  contracting  or  dilating  the  arteries.  Thus  in  blushing,
the  capillaries  dilate.  We  may  also  notice  in  some  nervous
people  peculiar  flushes  or  blotches  come  and  go,  usually  about
the  neck  or  face.  Dilatation  of  the  arteries  of  the  brain  pro-
duces headache  and  throbbing ; or  if  it  occurs  in  the  psychic
area,  delirium  or  mania.  A very  common,  I might  say  popular,
disease  is  sick  headache  or  megrim.  Here  the  carotid  or  other
large  arteries  are  in  a state  of  spasm  or  contraction,  partly
shutting  off  the  blood  supply  to  the  brain,  perhaps  for  hours.
The  face  then  becomes  cold  and  pale,  and  temporary  blindness
and  nausea  also  occur.

In  other  disturbances  of  the  sympathetic  nerves  we  have
“ dead  fingers,”  chilblains,  and  frost  bites  from  arterial  spasm.
There  is  a disease,  called  after  Keynaud,  in  which  by  the
contraction  of  the  arteries  the  fingers  become  blue  or  purple,
and  if  it  continues,  gangrene  may  result  from  arrest  of  the
circulation.

If  then  we  can  trace  the  effects  of  the  vaso-motor  action
of  the  Sympathetic  nervous  system  in  coarse  structures  like
the  skin,^ — when  it  occurs  in  a delicate  organ  like  the  brain,
and  in  its  most  highly  developed  and  sensitive  part,  we  must
expect  a great  variety  of  mental  symptoms.


History  of  the  Case.

The  patient,  Mary  Barnes,  who  is  the  subject  of  this
paper,  was,  when  I first  saw  her,  aged  12  h years,  having
been  born  in  October,  1882.  She  always  appeared  healthy
in  mind  and  body,  and  was  a well-developed  child.  Her
mother  is  a remarkably  healthy  woman ; her  father  also  is
healthy  and  well  built ; the  other  three  children  are  in
every  way  fine  specimens.

In  April,  1895,  she  caught  a chill  and  developed  influenza.


356


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


and  was  in  bed  for  ten  days.  She  then  went  out,  for  the
first  time  after  her  illness,  on  Easter  Monday ; but  the
weather  was  cold  and  a relapse  ensued,  and  she  had  to  return
to  her  bed  the  next  day.  On  the  Saturday  she  complained
of  extreme  headache,  which,  though  at  first  relieved  by  pressure,
became  worse,  until  she  screamed  with  the  pain,  and  as  the
symptoms  were  aggravated  by  light  and  sound,  she  had  to  be
kept  in  a dark  room.  She  became  very  weak,  was  feverish,
and  had  “ tache  cerebrate.”  In  the  second  week  there  was

less  pain,  and  the  attacks  became  intermittent,  and  “ shaking
fits,”  not  rigors,  occurred.  During  the  second  week  she  grew
so  weak  that  she  had  to  be  fed  with  a spoon,  and  often  was
unable  to  swallow.  Eor  two  days  she  was  supposed  to  be
dying ; and  once  she  was  thought  to  be  dead,  and  a woman
was  sent  for  to  lay  her  out.  This  death-like  collapse,  which
occurred  again  on  two  more  occasions,  would  seem  to  have
been  a phase  of  one  of  the  abnormal  personalities.

In  the  light  of  subsequent  events,  and  knowing  what  we
do  of  similar  cases  of  trance,  we  may  suppose  that  she  really
was  near  to  dying.

In  the  third  week  the  pain  ceased,  but  she  was  still
sensitive  to  light,  and  therefore  kept  in  the  dark.  In  addition,
she  appeared  to  be  blind,  and  at  times  was  able  to  recognise
her  parents  only  by  their  voices,  or  by  touch,  feeling  their
faces  or  even  their  ears.

(i)  During  this  third  week  delirium  developed,  lasting  about
a fortnight.  As  explained  below,  I call  this  condition  Bl.
The  chief  characteristic  was  intense  fear  of  every  one,
including  her  parents ; she  called  people  “ snakes,”  and
said  she  felt  them  biting  her.  Her  facial  expression  was
terril)le.  In  her  ravings  she  knew  no  one,  and  often  hid  her
face  in  the  pillow  when  any  one  approached.  It  was  not  an
imaginative  delirium  of  the  delusional  type,  nor  were  there
hallucinations  (erroneous  mental  impressions  without  external
cause),  but  illusions  (misinterpretation  of  external  objects).
Thus,  if  she  saw  a fold  in  the  sheet,  or  touched  a hand,  she
at  once  screamed  out  “ snakes,”  and  tried  to  get  away  from  it.
She  showed  extraordinary  strength  in  these  attacks,  which
was  in  curious  contrast  to  her  dying  condition  of  a few  days
previous.  She  also  developed  jerking  or  choreic  movements


XLix,]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  357

of  the  legs  and  arms,  and  at  times  general  rigidity  with
opisthotonos,^  accompanied  by  lividity,  and  even  coma.  She
might  have  ten  to  twenty  attacks  a day.  The  marvel  was
how  her  strength  lasted  out.  This  mania,  we  afterwards  dis-
covered, was  characteristic  of  the  abnormal  personality,  Bl.

(ii)  In  the  fifth  week  all  these  symptoms  subsided,  but  her
manner  changed  into  that  which  I afterwards  called  B2.
Her  intelligence  was  good  and  all  headache  had  disappeared,
so  that  she  was  thought  to  be  recovering.  She  was  still  in
bed,  as  she  could  not  stand,  hut  otherwise  had  full  use
and  control  of  her  muscles.  She  now,  however,  took  to
nicknaming  all  her  friends.

She  called  her  father — Tom.

her  mother — Mary  Ann.

her  sister  F. — The  gigger  (supposed  to  be  giggler),
the  nurse — Susan  Jane,
her  sister  A. — Sally,
her  brother  F. — George.

Dr.  H. — The  Jim.

Dr.  T. — The  Sam.

This  curious  stage  was  led  up  to  in  the  first  instance  by
the  following  incident : — One  day  whilst  reading,  or  playing
with  dolls,  she  began  shaking,  then,  pushing  everything  away
from  her  so  as  to  clear  a space,  said,  “It  is  coming,”  and
after  turning  a somersault  on  the  bed,  sat  up  and  called  out
“Hullo!”  while  those  around  her  noticed  an  altered  facial
expression.  She  would  address  her  family  and  others  by  the
above  nicknames,  and  talked  in  a babyish  manner,  clipping
her  words.  She  also  had  a childish,  simple,  almost  silly
manner,  giggling  when  spoken  to.

It  was  Cjuite  apparent  that  this  babyish  mood  marked  the
emergence  of  a new  personality,  for  her  memory  of  past  events
was  completely  obliterated,  nor  did  she  know  the  names  of
ordinary  objects.  The  “ fit  ” passed  off  in  about  half  an  hour.
Her  exjrression  would  alter,  and  she  frowned  and  seemed
very  angry.  There  would  also  be  sighing  and  difficult
respiration  for  about  a minute,  when  suddenly  she  would  look

^Opisthotonos  occurs  in  lockjaw  and  some  convulsive  seizures.  The  muscular
rigidity  is  so  great  that  the  patient  rests  on  the  heels  and  the  back  of  the  head,
the  body  being  arched.


358


Dr.  Albert  Wilson,


[part


up  with  her  own  natural  facial  expression  and  go  on  as  if
nothing  had  happened.  These  fits  recurred  several  times  a
day  with  increasing  frequency,  and  lasted  from  ten  minutes  to
an  hour.  There  were  no  premonitory  symptoms  beyond  those
described.  As  days  and  weeks  wore  on,  the  normal  state  was
of  shorter  duration ; and  indeed  so  prolonged  was  the
abnormal,  that  I visited  her  almost  daily  for  ten  weeks  before
I saw  her  in  her  normal  condition.

For  the  sake  of  simplicity  I will  here  give  further  particulars
of  this  abnormal  phase.  The  patient  became  childish,  clipped
her  words,  and  had  no  knowledge  of  ordinary  names,  nor  of
her  ordinary  surroundings.  Thus  she  did  not  know  the
meaning  of  the  word  “ legs,”  and  if  you  explained,  she  would
say,  “ Legs,  what  legs  ? What  dat  mean  ? Dese  sings  ? Dese
long  sings?”  and  so  on.  When  I said,  “I  want  you  to  walk,”
she  replied,  “ Walk  ? What  dat,  what  walk  mean  ? ” I said,
“ Get  on  your  feet,”  pointing  to  them.  “ Get  on  them  things  ?
Tliose  feet?  What  feet?  Walk,  mean  get  on  those  things?
Can’t  do  it !”  So  I lifted  her  on  to  her  feet,  but  she  could
not  stand.  Her  feet  gave  way,  turning  outwards.  But  some
things  she  appeared  to  know ; thus,  she  would  call  a drawing
slate  “ a jawing  skate,”  and  yet  if  I touched  her  nose  and
asked  what  it  was  called,  she  either  might  not  know  or  would
call  it  her  ear.  But  if  I .said  it  was  the  nose,  she  would
argue  before  she  understood.  Similarly  she  called  her  mouth
her  nose,  and  her  chin  her  mouth,  and  her  ears  were  her
eyes.  This  habit  of  misnaming  things  disappeared  in  a month
or  two;  probably  she  heard  the  right  names  from  those  about
her,  for  in  this  abnormal  condition  she  would  be  quite  lively
and  Imight,  though  restless.  She  would  turn  over  books,
looking  for  N’s  and  O’s.  P she  called  H,  and  E,  B.  She

also  reversed  colours,  seeing  the  complementary  colour.  Black
she  called  white,  green  red,  and  vice  versa.  She  wrote  her
words  backwards,  beginning  at  the  tail  of  each  word,  and
writing  it  from  right  to  left,  but  to  the  right  of  the  word

preceding  it,  so  that  she  had  to  calculate  what  space  would

be  wanted  for  each  word,  which  she  did  with  very  fair  correct-
ness, as  may  be  seen  from  the  specimen  reproduced  (Plate  I.).
This  writing  was  done  with  ease  and  ordinary  rapidity,  and
the  total  effect  of  it  does  not  differ  from  ordinary  writing.


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  359

She  also  wrote  figures  backwards.  She  could  not  at  first
write  to  dictation  nor  originate  a word,  behaving  as  if  the
word-centre  in  the  brain  were  switched  off  from  the  writing-
centre.  She  could  only  copy, — the  writing-centre  communi-
cating with  the  word-visual-centre.

But  as  weeks  rolled  on  and  as  her  education  improved,  she
acquired  the  power  of  writing  from  her  own  ideas  or  to
dictation.  This  may  suggest  that  in  the  abnormal  state  her
store-house  of  word-memories  was  not  empty,  but  that  she  lacked
the  power  of  association  of  names  with  objects.  At  the  same
time  as  this  new  personality  appeared,  that  is  in  the  fifth
week  of  her  illness,  catalepsy  occurred.  The  cataleptic  fits

came  on  no  matter  whether  she  was  in  the  normal  or
abnormal  mental  condition.

As  the  abnormal  personality  B2  was  a psychic  condition,
while  the  catalepsy  was  a condition  of  the  muscles,  the  two
conditions  are  clearly  not  to  be  regarded  as  identical.  Any
excitement,  such  as  a knock  at  the  door,  or  even  the  noise  of
my  carriage  entering  the  street,  would  provoke  a cataleptic
attack.  The  feet  and  legs  first  became  rigid,  usually  extended,
seldom  flexed.  Or  it  mic;ht  be  first  one  le"  and  then  an  arm.
The  rigidity  usually  travelled  to  all  the  muscles  of  the  body,
except  the  face  and  neck.  Sometimes  she  would  be  fixed  up
like  a ball,  so  that  she  could  be  lifted  all  of  a piece  by  one
limb.  Or  an  arm  might  become  fixed  in  the  attitude  of
feeding  when  such  an  act  was  in  process.  I have  seen  both
arms  and  hands  fixed,  holding  the  cup  and  spoon,  which
could  not  be  released.  She  called  the  attacks  “ brackets,”  and
they  were  evidently  painful  and  frightened  her,  and  during
them  she  dreaded  being  touched.  In  five  to  ten  minutes
the  muscles  relaxed  spontaneously,  and  then  she  was  much
exhausted.  These  cataleptic  fits  were  very  constant  for  about
six  weeks  to  two  months,  and  then  became  less  frequent,  so
that  weeks  might  pass  without  an  attack.  Finally  after  two
years  they  disappeared.

It  was  not  until  July  20th,  1895,  that  I saw  her  in  the
normal  condition.  Her  father  had  brought  her  to  my  house
in  a bath  chair,  as  she  could  not  stand.  She  seemed  com-
pletely lost,  and  understood  nothing.  These  vacant  periods
were  very  common,  and  may  have  been  either  phases  in  the


3G0  Dr.  Albert  Wilson.  [part

couditions  just  described,  or  forerunners  of  another  abnormal
sub- stage,  in  which  she  was  quite  an  idiot.  I now  incline  to
the  latter  view.

During  her  visit  to  my  house  she  suddenly  retunred  to  the
normal.  Her  appearance  then  was  that  of  a modest,  pleasant-
faced girl.  She  said  “ Good  morning,  sir,”  and  talked  quietly
and  rationally  for  about  five  minutes.  She  told  me  she  knew
nothing  of  the  attacks  or  of  what  she  said  or  saw  in  them.
She  said  she  had  only  seen  me  once  before  (this  was  one  day
when  she  was  passing  from  the  normal  to  the  abnormal  as  I
entered  her  bed-room),  though  she  knew  from  the  others  that
I went  to  see  her.  Then  just  as  suddenly  her  expression
and  manner  changed.  She  looked  angry  and  frowned,  pouting
and  wearing  a much  annoyed  expression.  After  that  her
features  relaxed ; she  smiled  and  again  assumed  the  vacant
childish  look,  and  began  talking  baby  talk.  She  said  Mary
Barnes  (giving  her  proper  name)  had  gone,  and  she  hated
Mary  Barnes,  because  people  liked  Mary  Barnes  better  than
herself.  While  normal  she  had  risen  from  her  seat  and  stood
in  an  ordinary  way ; but  as  soon  as  the  new  personality  came
on  she  lost  the  support  of  her  ankles,  and  her  father  had  to
prevent  her  falling  to  the  ground.

Let  me  now  review  the  first  three  months  of  her  illness.
I propose  to  call  her  normal  state  (Mary  Barnes)  A.  The
abnormal  condition  I call  B.  But  there  were  ten  abnormal
states,  more  or  less  different  from  one  another.  These  I will
call  Bl,  B2,  to  BIO.

The  illness  began  with  influenza,  essentially  an  acute  nerve
disease : it  passed  on  to  meningitis.  The  highest  brain  cells
we  may  assume  were  damaged,  perhaps  from  the  toxin,  perhaps
in  their  nutrition,  or  from  both  causes.  My  first  impulse  was
to  call  it  a case  of  Hystero-epilepsy,  which  loose  term  covers
a great  variety  of  conditions,  but  affords  no  explanation  of
any  of  them.

A medical  confrtrc  suggested  that  she  had  at  some  time  been
hypnotised,  but  this  was  not  the  case,  and,  as  I shall  show  later,
attempts  to  hypnotise  her  entirely  failed.  Yet  her  condition
resembled  that  of  somnambulism  or  hypnosis ; for  her  normal
state  A knows  nothing  of  the  abnormal  B,  while  the  abnormal
B has  a faint  glimmer  of  the  existence  of  A and  of  what  she


XLix.]  A Case'  of  Multiple  Personality.  361

does.  ' I observed  later  that  though  at  first  no  abnormal  stage
knew  anything  of  any  other  abnormal  stage,  yet  after  a time,
probably  through  hearing  conversations,  one  sub-stage  would
learn  a little  of  another  sub-stage  (see,  c.g.  in  Appendix  I.,
p.  392,  a letter  written  by  B9  on  Xovember  22nd,  1896,  re-
ferring to  an  incident  that  had  happened  to  B2).

Yet,  in  spite  of  the  failure  of  the  attempts  to  hypnotise
her,  her  father  could  often  by  suggestion  bring  her  from  the
abnormal  to  the  normal.  By  caressing  her  and  addressing  her
by  name  in  a coaxing  manner,  he  would  bring  her  to  her  normal
self,  though  she  always  relapsed  quickly,  perhaps  in  ten  minutes
or  perhaps  in  three  minutes.  As  months  rolled  on,  it  became
more  difficult  and  finally  impossible  to  effect  these  brief  re-
coveries.

B1  was  a condition  of  acute  mania,  accompanied  by  intense
fear,  amounting  to  terror,  with  illusions  of  snakes,  psychical
blindness,  and  great  thirst  and  craving  for  oranges  and  lemonade.
These  symptoms  enabled  us  to  diagnose  it,  not  as  ordinary
mania,  but,  from  its  sudden  recurrence  and  disappearance,  as
a distinct  phase  of  alternating  personality.^

B2  was  a stage  in  which  she  became  a simple  child,
requiring  education  in  every-day  details,  and  also  reversing
ideas  or  conditions,  as  in  writing,  perceiving  colours,  etc.
When  addressed  by  her  proper  name,  she  said  it  was  not
her  name,  nor  could  we  find  a name  to  please  her ; she  said
she  had  no  name — she  was  “a  thing.”  So  we  called  her
in  this  stage  “a  thing,”  or  “good  thing,”  and  she  always
responded  to  it.“


^In  acute  mania  there  is  overactivity  of  the  pyramidal  layer,  with  con-
gestion of  the  capillaries.

- In  this  condition  spasm  of  the  anterior  cerebral  artery  would  deprive  the
prefrontal  area  of  nourishment ; also  the  motor  area  of  the  foot,  w'hich  was
always  paralysed.  The  prefrontal,  as  the  highest  psychic  and  association  area,
might  thus  misinterpret  all  external  impressions.  Some  might  explain  it  as  a
derangement  of  the  mind,  reversing  objects  and  misapplying  names.  The
memory  of  wmrds  and  names  existed,  but,  if  I may  so  put  it,  the  labels  had
got  mixed.  Perhaps  the  inaction  of  the  prefrontal  area  would  account  for
all  the  phenomena.  Another  explanation  might  be  that  the  more  recently
educated  pyramidal  cells  were  shut  off  by  deprivation  of  blood  supply  and
the  deeper  layers  which  had  been  educated  up  to  the  age  of  four  or  five
left  intact,  for  she  now  resembled  a young  child  in  every  way.


362


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


(iii)  On  July  24th,  1895,  she  passed  out  of  B2  into
a third  abnormal  stage  B3,  which  her  parents  named  “ Old
Nick,”  because  she  was  very  passionate  and  bit  her  clothes.
After  the  anger  passed  off  she  was  very  sorry  and  would  say
it  is  “a  naughty  man,”  and  that  he  only  comes  for  a minute
and  would  not  bite  “ them  things,”  touching  her  face  and  hands.
B3  differed  from  “a  thing”  or  B2  in  being  more  educated,  for
“ Nick  ” could  read  and  write  and  had  better  physical  health
than  the  other  personalities.  B3  was  a frequent  visitor,  staying
for  several  weeks  at  a time,  and  I will  later  give  a more  complete
account  of  her  doings  in  this  stage.

(iv.)  In  the  B4  substage,  which  occurred  first  in  August,
1895,  she  was  a deaf  mute.  During  the  attacks  she  took  no
notice  of  loud  noises  ciose  to  her  ear : and  communicated  by
talking  on  her  fingers,  which  method  she  understood  slightly
in  the  normal  state.  This  B4  state  came  on  after  a prolonged
catalepsy,  but  passed  off  Cjuite  suddenly,  changing  to  B2.  But
in  September  she  was  again  deaf  and  dumb  for  a fortnight.^
She  changed  back  from  B4  to  B2,  “ a thing.”

One  Sunday  in  October,  1895,  when  she  was  rolling  on  the
floor  as  B2,  crying  with  toothache,  I resolved  to  extract  the
tooth  under  chloroform.  The  late  Dr.  Althaus  had  come  out
to  see  her.  After  I had  extracted  the  molar,  she  was
pleased  to  be  relieved  of  the  pain.  Her  father  now  brought
her  round  to  the  normal  A.  She  was  greatly  surprised  at
the  blood  and  gap  in  her  jaw  and  asked  how  it  was,  as  she
never  as  Mary  Barnes  had  felt  any  toothache  and  knew
nothing  of  the  chloroform  or  extraction.

So  A was  unconscious  of  B’s  physical  suffering.

(v)  The  B5  substage  appeared  only  on  one  occasion,  Novem-
ber 26th,  1895,  and  lasted  until  December  20th.  In  this  condition
she  had  attacks  of  paralysis  in  the  legs,  became  deaf  and  dumb  for
about  an  hour  at  a time,  and  lost  all  memory  of  events  which
had  occurred  more  than  three  days  before.  She  said  she  had
“ only  been  here  three  days  ” and  was  “ only  three  days  old.”
As  1 had  not  seen  her  for  three  days,  she  consequently  did
not  know  me.  She  also  reversed  things.  She  called  the  flanie
of  the  fire  or  gas  black,  black  white,  and  a fat  pug  thin.  She

^ The  spasm  of  branches  of  the  middle  cerebral  artery  would  shut  off  the  blood
supply  to  the  centres  of  speech  and  liearing.


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multiiile  Personality.  363

spelt  backwards  but  wrote  forwards.  Otherwise  she  understood
everything  in  the  house  and  gave  no  trouble.  She  complained
of  pain  in  the  left  temple,  which  suggests  spasm  of  the  middle
cerebral  artery.

On  December  20th  her  condition  changed  very  suddenly.
Though  just  previously  paralysed  in  the  legs,  she  jumped  up
and  ran  upstairs  to  her  bed.  Here  she  commenced  turning
quickly  round  and  round  on  her  back  and  shoulders  with  her
legs  in  the  air.  She  also  had  a peculiar  way  of  resting  on
her  head  and  trying  to  walk  up  the  wall.  She  executed  all
these  movements  on  her  bed,  and  so  peculiar  and  rapid  were
they  that  they  resembled  an  acrobatic  performance.  Then
came  the  fear  of  snakes  and  thirst  and  we  recognised  the  sub-
stage Bl.  This  was  its  first  appearance  since  the  meningitis
in  May,  1895.  This  Bl  substage  of  mania  lasted  three  weeks,
till  January  13th,  1896.  There  was  an  exact  repetition  of
the  May  symptoms,  and  she  remembered  exactly  all  the  events
of  May  when  she  had  the  fever  and  influenza,  while  she  knew
nothing  of  subsequent  events.  She  also  complained  of  headache,
and  asked  for  the  cold  water  coil  which  she  had  had  then.
In  her  extreme  thirst  she  would  eat  any  number  of  oranges  in
a ravenous  fashion,  one  after  the  other,  though  at  no  other
period  has  she  cared  to  eat  oranges.  She  also  asked  for  the
nurse  who  attended  her  in  her  first  illness  and  whom  she  had
not  seen  since.  After  about  a fortnight  these  symptoms  passed
off  and  she  was  able  to  go  out  in  a bath  chair,  but  her  mind
was  still  a blank  as  far  as  the  events  of  the  past  seven  months
were  concerned.

One  curious  phenomenon  occurred  on  the  eveiring  of  January
12th,  1896.  Her  memory  went  back  to  April,  1895,  to  the
early  stage  of  the  influenza,  when  she  had  pains  in  her  head,
but  not  the  severe  symptoms.  She  said  she  was  Mary
Barnes — for  in  mid-April  the  dual  personality  had  not  been
recognised.  It  was  an  exact  repetition  of  the  symptoms,  for
when  she  was  ill  in  April  she  did  not  show  the  normal
intelligence  of  Mary  Barnes.  At  3 a.m.  on  the  following
morning  she  became  normal  for  about  an  hour,  all  symptoms
of  influenza  disappearing,  and  again  between  8 and  9 a.m.,
after  which  she  changed  to  B2,  and,  except  for  a few
normal  intervals,  remained  so  for  three  weeks  until  February


364


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


7th,  1896.  On  January  28th,  1896,  she  wrote  as  B2  a letter
to  her  father  (see  Appendix  I,,  p.  387).  The  letter  was

childish  and  the  words  were  spelt  phonetically.  It  is  how-
ever written  forwards,  for  as  the  result  of  education  B2  now
wrote  forwards  usually.  On  January  22nd,  1896,  she  was
shown  to  the  Clinical  Society  and  seen  by  Drs.  Jones,  Savill,
Mickle,  Bramwell,  Althaus,  Lloyd  Tuckey,  and  Mr.  Barrett.  She
was  then  B2,  but  her  father  twice  brought  her  to  the  normal.
Great  efforts  were  made  to  hypnotise  her,  even  with  the  help  of
chloroform,  but  all  efforts  failed  and  she  became  much  exhausted,
sighing  deeply  and  flushing,  as  in  hysteria.  On  March  6th,
1896,  she  had  an  attack  of  mania — substage  Bl.  It  came  on
very  suddenly,  when  she  was  in  the  B2  condition.  About  8 p.m.
she  had  said  to  her  father  that  she  felt  very  ill  and  wanted
to  go  upstairs,  and  although  she  then  occupied  the  front  bedroom,
she  ran  into  the  back  room  which  she  had  occupied  in  May,
1895,  when  she  had  the  first  attack  of  delirium.

I saw  the  whole  attack.  She  was  jumping  on  her  hands
and  knees  on  the  bed,  calling  out  “ snakes,”  “ nakes,”  and  was
greatly  terrified.  The  pupils  were  widely  dilated,  the  face  flushed,
the  pulse  very  rapid  and  feeble,  together  with  breathlessness  and
constantly  great  exhaustion.  She  would  bury  her  head  in  the
pillow  as  if  to  avoid  the  snakes ; or  at  other  times,  kneel  and
say  her  prayers.  If  we  touched  her,  she  called  us  “ great  big
nakes.”  I tried  to  fix  her  gaze,  but  it  frightened  her  and
she  put  her  hand  over  my  eyes  saying,  “ take  them  away.”
She  devoured  oranges  like  an  animal,  biting  off  the  peel  and
throwing  it  away.  The  fruit  she  swallowed  greedily  in  lumps,
calling  out  “ more,  more.”  Suddenly  the  excitement  ceased  and
she  sat  on  the  bed,  placed  on  the  pillow  in  front  of  her  a small
box,  and  on  the  box  a book  and  an  orauge.  She  imagined
herself  a fisherwoman,  for  she  called  out  “ Fish ! fish  ! fish !
Shrimps  Ml.  each,”  and  putting  the  pillow  with  its  load  on  her
head,  called  out  “ Wiio’ll  buy  my  fish  ? ” Then  she  threw  down
“ the  fish  ” and  tried  to  walk  up  the  wall,  resting  first  on  her
back,  then  on  her  shoulders  and  finally  on  her  head.

I tried  to  rouse  her  by  making  as  much  noise  as  I could
close  to  her  head  with  a large  key  and  a tin  tray.  It  frightened
her  and  she  grabbed  the  key  and  threw  it  away.  Next  I
shouted  to  her  to  wake  up : she  said  she  was  awake,  but  took


XLix.]  A Case,  of  Multiple  Personality . 365

very  little  notice  of  anything  going  on  about  her.  Another
sudden  change  and  she  looked  round  the  room  with  an  air
of  curiosity  and  said  “ This  is  not  my  room,”  and  as  she  could
not  walk,  crawled  on  her  hands  and  knees  into  the  front  bed-
room and  climbed  on  to  the  bed.  As  soon  as  she  got  on
the  bed  in  the  front  room  she  changed  to  the  B2  of  June,
1895.  She  lost  the  wild  maniacal  look  for  the  simple  childish
face.  She  saw  me  looking  round  the  door  and  said  “ Hullo,
there  is  the  new  gentleman,”  which  was  my  appellation  in
June,  1895,  nine  months  earlier.  She  said  she  had  seen  me
that  morning  for  the  first  time.  She,  however,  had  not
seen  me  that  morning,  and  was  probably  referring  to  some
remote  memory  of  one  of  my  visits  in  June,  1895,  for
she  said  I then  had  on  a black  waistcoat  with  green  spots.
In  reality  that  June  I had  on  a white  waistcoat  with  red  spots,
the  complementary  colours  of  what  she  imagined.  She  was
very  amiable  and  asked  for  a pencil  and  paper  and  began
writing  backwards,  as  in  June,  1895.  She  called  her  mouth,
eyes,  and  her  nose,  eyes.  She  said  she  had  no  mouth.  Though
very  much  exhausted  during  the  B1  state  of  mania,  she  seemed
quite  fresh  after  she  changed  to  the  B2  personality.  The  next
morning  she  knew  nothing  of  the  mania  and  continued  in  the
B2  stage.  On  April  4th  she  had  a violent  epileptic  convulsion,
which  was  followed  by  one  or  two  slighter  fits  at  long  intervals.

(vB  On  May  6 th  the  sixth  personality  appeared.  We  called
her  “ pretty  dear  ” or  “ good  creature  ” in  this  stage,  as  she
was  a very  sweet  amiable  child,  though  very  ignorant.  She  had
to  be  taught  to  spell,  read  and  write.  She  denied  ever  having
seen  me  before.  She  was  rather  like  B2  (“  a thing  ”),  but  more
tractable.  B2  sometimes  showed  a mischievous  disposition,  c,^.,
breaking  window  panes  or  putting  mustard  in  her  younger
sister’s  eye.  B6  on  the  contrary  is  very  kind.  Another  point
of  distinction  was  shown  later  on  in  that  B6  learned  a little
French  from  her  father,  while  neither  B2  nor  A could  learn
French.

B6  was  rather  an  important  personality,  for  now  the  normal
A became  a very  rare  visitor,  putting  in  an  appearance  perhaps
only  once  a week,  while  B6  became  more  permanent,  until
finally  after  two  years  it  remained  constant  and  all  other  per-
sonalities disappeared.  Usually  B6  has  no  motor  paralysis.


366


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


and  is  domesticated  and  hel23S  her  mother.  B6  is  rather  a
subdivided  personality,  for  as  “ good  creature  ” she  can  walk,
but  as  “ 2Jretty  dear  ” she  cannot.  “ Pretty  dear  ” occasionally
loses  the  use  of  her  hands.

(vii)  In  another  six  days,  on  May  12th,  the  7th  ‘personality
appeared.  She  called  herself  “ Adjuice  Uneza.”  She  only  came
once  and  lasted  ten  days  to  a fortnight,  meanwhile  alternating
with  B2  and  gradually  fading.  The  special  features  of  B7
were  that  she  had  a clear  memory  of  small  events  of  her  early
childhood,  while  all  memory  of  and  since  her  illness  was  obliter-
ated. Thus  she  spoke  of  going  on  a tram  to  the  London  Hospital
to  see  her  father,  a thing  which  she  really  had  done  in  April,
1885,  when  two  and  a half  years  old,  and  remembered  her
mother  being  ill  with  diphtheria  when  she  was  under  two.  She
also  remembered  the  first  part  of  the  influenza  and  also  a visit

to  L , but  nothing  of  the  relapse  or  meningitis  which

followed  in  A^^ril  and  May,  1895.  B7  could  not  stand
or  walk.^

On  May  31st  her  father  brought  her  to  my  house  as  B2  :
an  hour  later  B7  appeared  suddenly  and  was  unable  to  walk.
Her  father  brought  her  back  to  my  house  in  a bath  chair,  and
on  her  second  visit  she  had  no  memory  of  having  been  in  my
house  an  hour  before.  When  B7  appeared  her  mind  was  quite
a blank  as  to  recent  events.  Thus  she  did  not  remember  me
for  some  time.

(viii)  On  June  20th  another  severe  fit  of  convulsions  occurred,
in  which  she  never  bit  her  tongue,  though  violent  during  them
and  much  dazed  on  recovery.  The  following  morning,  June
21st,  she  woke  up  greatly  confused  and  knew  no  one.  She
said  she  was  only  born  last  night  and  so  how  could  she  know
anything  ? However,  she  knew  her  father  as  “ Tom,”  and  her
mother  as  “ Mary  Ann.”  She  was  very  like  B5  (which  a^jpeared
on  November  26th,  1895),  but  could  not  be  the  same,  as  there
was  an  entire  absence  of  associated  memories.  This  state  lasted
for  about  three  days  and  never  appeared  again.  It  may  have


^ We  know  that  in  some  cases  of  senile  decay  the  memory  of  early  childhood
stands  out  clearly.  Does  not  the  substage  B7  somewhat  correspond  to  this  ? I
would  suggest  that  from  arterial  spasm  the  more  superficial  cortical  layers  are
weakened  or  paralysed,  wliile  the  deeper  layers  with  earlier  memories  are
•stimulated.


XLix.J  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  367

been  no  more  than  a post-epileptic  confusion  or  it  may  have
been  another  personality,  B8.

A prolonged  observation  of  the  case  has  led  me  to  feel  sure
that  A or  Mary  Barnes,  the  normal  child,  knows  nothing  of
what  happens  in  any  of  the  abnormal  states.  Whereas  in
some  of  the  abnormal  states,  as  in  B2,  there  is  a faint
glimmer  of  knowledge  of  the  normal  A.  This  knowledge  of
the  normal  does  not  begin  at  once  after  the  transition,
but  develops  later.  June,  1896,  was  a trying  month,  for
she  constantly  shifted  about  from  one  personality  to  another,
perhaps  three  or  four  times  a day,  once  manifesting  three  per-
sonalities in  five  minutes.  They  also  seemed  modified  at  times.
On  July  8th,  B3  or  “Nick”  returned  quite  suddenly;  she  could
then  as  B.3  walk  or  read  or  write.  It  was  the  first  time
she  had  been  able  to  walk  properly  since  May  31st.  “Nick”
was  healthier  than  any  other  sub-stage.  The  normal  A,  Mary
Barnes,  only  came  momentarily  to  the  surface ; “ Nick  ” stayed
ten  weeks  and  showed  very  interesting  phases.  As  “ Nick  ”
she  went  in  July,  1896,  to  the  seaside  and  stayed  there  about
five  weeks,  getting  much  stronger  on  her  legs,  though  this
temporary  improvement  was  followed  by  motor  paralysis  for
five  or  si.x  weeks.  “ Nick  ” said  that  she  had  never  seen  the
sea  before  this  visit,  although,  as  a child,  j\Iary  Barnes  had
stayed  at  the  seaside.

On  August  14th,  when  at  the  seaside,  her  mother  was  ill
in  bed.  Her  father  cuddled  her  and  called  her  by  name,  and
thus  brought  her  back  to  the  normal  state,  when  she  ex-
pressed surprise  at  seeing  her  mother  in  bed,  and  exclaimed,
“ What ! dear  mother ; not  out  of  bed  yet ! ” This  is  a striking
fact,  for  in  the  abnormal  B3  stage,  as  “Nick,”  she  had  been
nursing  her  mother  very  attentively,  and  also  had  showed  great
distress  at  her  mother’s  illness.  The  next  day  she  returned
home,  being  still  “ Nick  ” on  the  journey.  When  home  her
father  brought  her  to  the  normal  A : Mary  Barnes  was  greatly
surprised  to  find  herself  at  home,  having  been  unconscious  of
the  journey.  Also  whilst  normal  she  remembered  the  normal
stage  of  the  previous  day  and  seeing  her  mother  in  bed.  She
returned  to  the  seaside  in  a week,  and  it  was  noticed  that  the
normal  A,  now  so  rare  a visitor,  began  to  come  more  frequently,
and  that  when  going  down  a particular  road.  So  her  parents

2b


3G8


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


began  to  suggest  to  “Nick”  that  Mary  Barnes  should  come  as
soon  as  they  reached  this  road.  This  “ Nick  ” resented,  and
looking  cross  would  walk  on  so  as  not  to  hear ; but  in  two  or
three  minutes  she  would  run  back  with  her  arms  out  to  embrace
her  father,  so  pleased  to  be  back  again  in  the  normal  state,
clothed  and  in  her  right  mind.  In  August,  1896,  she  bathed
in  the  sea.  As  a child  she  had  done  so  before : but  now  as
“ Nick  ” she  bathed  for  the  first  time.

Sub-stage  B3  or  “ Nick  ” continued  from  July  8th  to  Sep-
tember 20th.  On  Sunday,  September  20th,  “Nick”  left  at
2 p.M.  diu’ing  her  dinner.  The  new  state  was  a variation  of  B6
and  was  called  “ Tom’s  Darling,”  Tom  being  her  father’s  nick-
name  in  nearly  all,  if  not  all,  abnormal  stages  : this  being  about
the  only  common  link,  in  fact,  between  the  many  sub-stages.
In  this  new  state  as  I saw  her  on  the  21st,  she  had  no  name;
everything  was  upside  down,  she  could  not  read  or  write  or
walk.  She  was  very  ignorant  of  ordinary  things  and  did  not
remember  her  visit  to  the  seaside.  It  oltcn  happened  when  a
new  sub-stage  appeared  that  the  mind  was  an  absolute  blank
at  first.  On  the  23rd  she  called  herself,  in  answer  to  cpies-
tions,  “Tom’s  Darling.”  On  September  26th  “Nick”  returned
for  half  an  hour  and  got  her  mother’s  tea  ready.  A few  days
after,  when  “ Tom’s  Darling,”  B6,  she  described  to  me  the
incident  of  September  20th;  she  said  “in  the  middle  of  dinner
on  Sunday  ‘ Old  Nit  ’ went  away  and  ‘ Tom’s  Darling  ’ came.
‘ Nick  ’ was  very  kind  and  left  me  half  the  dinner.”  “ Nick  ”
ate  a very  good  dinner  until  the  change ; but  the  nevv  person-
ality would  not  finish  the  dinner,  being  dazed  and  mentally
blank  with  altered  facial  expression ; she  also  lost  the  use  of
her  feet,  after  having  been  able  to  walk  for  two  months.  “ Tom’s
Darling  ” said  the  fire  w'as  in  the  bedroom  before,  so  the  Tom’s
darling  personality  evidently  must  have  appeared  at  some  previous
time,  and  we  believe  she  was  a modification  of  B6,  “ Good
thing  ” or  “ Good  creature.”  It  appeared  that  two  or  three
sub-personalities  sometimes  merged  into  one,  as  in  this  instance.

(ix)  On  October  10th  “Tom’s  Darling  ” gradually  left  and  a new
personality  arrived,  B9.  The  transition  seemed  to  occupy  the
whole  day  and  was  not,  as  usual,  accompanied  by  any  sudden
physical  disturbance.  She  had,  however,  fits  of  temper,  chasing
her  younger  sister  about,  and  trying  to  beat  her  with  a stick.


XLix.]  A Case,  of  MultiiAe  Personality.  369

She  talked  like  a baby,  could  not  walk  properly  and  could
only  manoeuvre  about  with  a chair.  She  also  tried  to  hit
every  one  with  a strap,  watching  her  opportunity,  and
attempted  to  lock  herself  into  the  room.  She  spoke  of  things
which  had  happened  in  her  illness  of  April,  1895  ; so  she
must  have  been  here  before,  and  as  her  parents  remember
similar  incidents  lasting  off  and  on  for  some  days,  it  is  clear
that  this  was  not  the  first  development  of  B9.  Her  mind
was  a blank.  She  said  she  had  no  name  and  did  not  know
me.  She  wrote  and  spelt  backwai’ds  like  B2.  This  state
lasted  in  1896  for  about  a week.

Knowing  how  they  worried  “ Tom  L)odd  ” (her  father),  she
tried  to  give  up  her  naughty  ways.  She  could  speak  a little
French,  but  did  not  know  how  she  had  learnt  it.  It  so  happens
that  only  B6  and  not  even  A,  Mary  Barnes,  knew  French.  She
talked  of  when  she  was  here  before,  and  said  she  was  in
bed  and  that  “Jinp”  as  she  called  a particular  doctor,  used
to  come  and  see  her,  thus  recalling  events  which  had  happened
in  April,  1895.  We  evidently  had  not  recognised  this  person-
ality in  the  early  mental  tumult.  Another  doctor,  whom  she
called  “ Sam,”  and  whom  she  very  much  disliked,  also  came  to
her  memory.  She  happened  at  this  time  to  see  him  in  the
street  and  in  temper  shook  her  fist  at  him,  which  at  once
brought  on  an  attack  of  catalepsy.  She  knew  nothing  of  any
events  in  her  life  previous  to  October  10th,  1896,  except
such  as  had  happened  in  April,  1895,  during  her  acute
meningitis  (?)

She  at  first  would  read  backwards  from  right  to  left,  making
nonsense ; but  her  father  soon  taught  her  to  read  in  tlie  proper
way.  Although  she  regained  at  times  the  power  of  walking,
she  might  be  temporarily  attacked  by  paralysis,  not  only  of
the  legs  but  of  the  arms.

A new  feature  occurred — a tendency  to  kleptomania,  which
she  defended  on  the  principles  of  common  and  modern  socialism ;
“ if  people  don’t  give  you  things,  why,  nick  it ; quite  right
too ! ” One  day  when  in  the  village  she  took  an  apple  at
a shop  door,  but  seeing  a policeman  she  went  back  and  re-
placed it.  She  was  always  threatening  to  steal,  but  after  a
time,  on  being  told  it  was  wrong,  was  sorry.  During  this  sub-
stage B9,  “Nick,”  or  B3,  appeared  for  a day  in  October  16th.


370


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


After  “ Nick  ” left,  though  confused,  she  seemed  to  know  that
she  had  been  in  a different  condition.  This  might  be  aided
by  the  free  amount  of  talking  around  her.  The  same  evening
she  walked  up  to  my  house  as  B3  or  “ Nick.”  She  wished
to  show  me  a present,  a toy  wigwam,  which  had  been  given
her  an  hour  before.  Suddenly  B9,  the  retrograde  state,  arrived.
Her  face  altered,  and  she  would  have  fallen  from  the  chair

but  for  help,  as  she  had  lost  the  power  in  her  legs.  The

toy  fell  from  her  hands,  and  when  the  first  dazed  condition
had  passed  off,  I picked  it  up  and  tried  to  interest  her  in  it,

but  she  did  not  care  for  it,  and  said  she  had  never  seen  it

before.  When  the  former  state  Bo  returned,  she  again  was
interested  in  the  toy.  The  next  day  she  was  B9,  and  so
remained  for  another  fortnight.  If  asked  her  name  she  said
she  had  no  name.  She  was  frightened  by  thunderstorms,  and
after  one  had  an  attack  of  catalepsy.  Yet  B3,  “ Nick,”  likes
thunderstorms.

On  October  31st  she  awoke  in  the  B1  or  maniacal  state.  She
was  dazed  and  knew  no  one.  She  had  intense  headache,  beating
her  head  and  screaming  with  the  pain.  She  jumped  about  the
bed,  and  was  violent,  even  breaking  things.  There  was  also
catalepsy.  In  one  severe  attack  the  feet  and  legs  were  drawn
up  behind  over  the  back,  and  the  arms  over  the  shoulders,  so
that  she  caught  hold  of  her  toes  with  her  fingers.  She  screamed
with  the  pain,  but  we  could  not  loosen  her.  Strange  to  say
she  slept  well.  One  peculiar  feature  was  the  approximation
of  B1  to  B9.  The  numbering  of  the  sub-stages  is  not  correct
according  to  their  appearance  in  time.  We  had  not  recognised
B9  till  autumn,  1890  ; but  it  had  in  reality  existed  in  April,
1895,  just  before  Bl  appeared  in  the  same  month.  So  the
sequence  was  like  the  repetition  of  a cycle,  yet  not  an  orderly
successive  repetition.  From  Bl  she  changed  to  B2,  and  in
the  B2  state  she  had  toothache,  and  for  the  second  time  I
gave  her  chloroform  and  drew  the  offending  molar.  Previously
as  B2  she  took  chloroform  well,  but  this  time  there  was
respiratory  spasm  and  collapse,  requiring  artificial  respiration.
There  was  some  discharge  excited  from  the  motor  centres  as
evinced  by  muscular  spasms  and  general  rigidity  and  opistho-
tonos, the  patient  rising  on  her  heels  when  we  tried  to  hold
her  on  the  couch.  The  great  effort  produced  collapse,  when


XLIX,]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  371

she  fell  back  livid  and  respiration  ceased.  She  soon  recovered
with  the  help  of  artificial  respiration  and  was  quickly
conscious.

As  confirming  the  theory  of  the  repetition  of  former  cycles,
she  passed  gradually  from  B1  to  B2  during  November  19th
or  20th.  She  called  herself  “A  thing,”  and  had  the  same
childish  way  as  previously  described,  and  also  the  same
memories.  For  the  space  of  about  a fortnight  she  was  very
ill  and  unsettled,  changing  without  apparent  rhyme  or  reason
from  B1  to  B2  or  B9,  occasionally  becoming  cataleptic  and
adopting  all  sorts  of  attitudes  and  manifesting  cutaneous
hypertesthesia,  the  slightest  tickling  causing  pain.  The  normal
A appeared  occasionally  for  about  five  minutes  at  a time,  and
then  disappeared.  When  calm,  the  patient  could  now  walk
or  sit  for  two  or  three  hours  at  needlework,  drawing,  reading
or  writing.  She  talked  baby  talk  like  B2,  and  called  herself
“ nothing  ” like  B2.  Then  the  destructive  fits  would  come
on  (B9)  and  she  called  herself  “ the  dx’eadful  wicked  creature.”
Apparently  she  regretted  doing  wrong,  but  could  not  help  it,
though  she  knew  at  the  time  the  evil  thereof.  Are  we  not
all  built  on  the  same  lines  ? As  “ wicked  creature,”  B9,  she
would  hit  any  one  near  her,  or  push  them  aside  if  in  her
way.  She  was  also  destructive,  especially  putting  articles
like  slippers  in  the  fire.  At  a later  period  when  in  this  con-
dition she  tried  to  put  her  little  sister  on  the  fire,  and
would  have  succeeded  if  her  mother  had  not  entered  the
room.  Does  not  this  show  how  mental  lapses  may  remove
consciousness  of  surroundings  and  responsibility  ? From
November  1st  to  December  10th,  1896,  she  was  generally
B2,  “good  thing,”  or  B9  ; from  December  10th  to  29th,  she
was  B6.

(x)  In  the  evening  of  December  29th,  1896,  she  gradually
changed.  She  sat  on  the  hearth-rug,  was  cross  and  stupid,
and  finally  her  mind  became  a blank.  This  condition,
which  I have  called  sub-stage  BIO,  developed  in  the  course
of  the  next  two  or  three  days  till  she  became  a blind
imbecile.  There  was  now  no  excitement,  only  apathy.  She
sat  quiet  by  the  hour,  absolutely  blind,  with  a vacant,
stupid  expression.  She  understood  nothing,  and  at  times

appeared  to  be  deaf.  Her  speech  was  incoherent,  and  she


372


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


used  very  few  words.  She  called  out : “ Mutter,”  “ Tom  ” (her
father),  and  also  “ Pieters.”  There  seemed  to  be  paralysis  of
the  ocular  muscles,  as  the  eyes  protruded  and  stared,  and  the
pupils  were  widely  dilated.  She  was  guided  only  by  touch
and  sound.  If  I handed  her  a piece  of  paper  the  rustle

guided  her,  and  she  grabbed  at  it.  Sometimes  she  would
sit  for  hours  rolling  beads  on  a tray.

On  January  3rd,  1897,  about  2 p.m.,  she  was  observed
to  be  drawing  with  a pencil.  As  she  was  drawing  correctly,
it  was  thought  that  sight  had  returned.  But  it  was  not  so.

It  is  remarkable  that  while  Mary  Barnes,  the  normal  A,

never  could  draw  at  all,  this  blind  personality,  BIO,  could
draw  perfectly.  Was  this  a hereditary  ancestral  faculty
suddenly  called  into  exercise,  or  an  unknown  latent  power  ?
She  used  to  draw  the  fashion  plates  or  pictures  which  one

sees  in  the  illustrated  papers.  They  were  very  well  done,

even  to  small  details  of  laces  and  patterns,  etc.  At  a
later  stage  she  began  colour-drawing  with  crayons.  She
was  absolutely  blind,  as  was  proved  by  placing  books
between  her  eyes  and  the  paper,  which  made  no  difference
either  to  the  rapidity  or  accuracy  of  her  performance.  We
also  proved  that  she  was  guided  by  touch.  If  the  drawing
was  pulled  away,  she  would  put  out  her  left  finger  and  ask
for  it  to  be  placed  on  the  part  she  had  been  drawing  by
calling  out  the  name,  say  the  veil  or  nose.  Then  if  her

finger  was  so  placed,  she  would  resume.  Later  she  became
so  sensitive  that  she  could  herself  detect  by  touch  where
the  pencil  marks  were,  and  if  the  paper  was  shifted  could
begin  again  correctly.^

In  lact,  ten  weeks  after  the  blindness  came  on  she  was  able
to  copy  by  touch.  Her  general  intelligence  was  then  improved,
tliough  the  blindness  continued.  If  one  drew  a pencil  line

1 Anatomically  we  must  divide  sight  into  two  elements,  sensory  and  psychic.
In  this  stage,  BIO,  the  area  of  sensory  vision  was  quite  paralysed.  Extreme
action  of  the  sym23athetic  would  cause  dilatation  of  the  pupil,  and  if  it  also  con-
stricted the  circulation  in  the  area  supplied  by  the  posterior  cerebral  artery,  it
would  shut  off  the  corpora  quadrigemina  and  the  lower  part  of  the  occipital  lobe
and  calcarine  areas,  whicli  are  connected  with  sensory  vision.  Whereas,  since
she  could  draw,  she  must  have  been  guided  in  so  doing  by  her  psychic  visual
centre,  which  is  situated  in  the  occipital  area,  this  being  supplied  by  the  middle
cerebral  artery.  (See  Plate  IX.)


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  373

across  her  picture,  she  would  detect  it  by  touch  and  rub  it
out.  It  was  very  strange  to  see  her  feeling  the  copy  with
the  left  fingers  and  drawing  with  the  right.  She  copied
writing  in  the  same  way.  She  could  feel  the  red  ink  lines
ruled  on  foolscap.  Sometimes  we  thought  she  could  see,  for
in  drawing  in  colours  she  would  hold  the  crayons  so  close  to
the  eye  that  they  would  sometimes  touch  the  cornea,  which
at  this  stage  was  completely  insensitive.

She  would  also  write  verses  and  names  from  memory,  as  if
the  word  memory  centre  was  restored  to  her.  Yet  she  had  no
memory  of  past  events  or  of  spelling.  One  day  when  she
seemed  brighter  and  I said  to  her  write  “ L-A-lJ-Y,  Lady,”
she  wrote  “ Lady,”  and  said,  “ It  is  not  L-A-D-Y,  it  is  Lady.”
She  could  write  her  name  in  a block,  but  mentally  did  not
disconnect  or  isolate  the  letters.  In  other  words,  she  could
not  spell.  One  day  in  January  she  completely  and  suddenly
regained  her  sight  for  about  two  minutes.  She  called  to  her
sister,  “I  can  see  you.”  Her  sister  said,  “What  am  I doing?”
she  replied  correctly,  “ You  are  combing  your  hair.”  Her
intelligence  with  regard  to  her  surroundings  improved,  but  she
was  practically  an  idiot.  If  I called  to  her  loudly  “ Wake
up,”  she  laughed  vacantly  and  replied,  “ Is  awake.”  If  I
said,  “ You  are  asleep,”  she  replied  with  apparent  indifference,
“ Hot  sleep.”  She,  however,  did  not  know  what  hands  and
feet  were.

On  January  16th,  1897,  the  normal  A appeared  three  or
four  times  for  about  two  minutes  at  a time.  She  could  see,
but  could  not  walk,  though  normal.  Once  she  said  she  felt  so
well  and  comfortable.  Is  that  not  incomprehensible  ? Another
time  she  told  her  mother  she  felt  “ sometimes  to  be  dying
and  to  go  right  away.”  This  was  said  in  an  abnormal  state,
and  appeared  to  refer  to  the  changing  period,  either  from
normal  to  abnormal,  or  vice  versa.

She  has  always  called  me  “ the  voice  ” when  in  this
“ imbecile  ” state : perhaps  because  I shouted  at  her.  She
wrote  me  several  letters  signed  “Toni’s  Lamb.”  On  January
25th,  when  she  was  unable  to  stand,  I commanded  her  very
firmly  and  persistently  to  do  so,  and  with  success.  After
this  the  power  gradually  returned  after  an  absence  of  three
to  four  weeks.


374


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


Towards  the  end  of  January,  1897,  after  four  weeks’  blind-
ness, she  began  to  improve,  not  only  in  intelligence,  but  also
in  sight.  She  was  very  short-sighted,  but  could  see  colours
and  pictures  at  a distance  of  three  inches.  She  could  not
see  about  a room,  and  had  to  feel  where  she  was  going.  This
we  proved  by  several  games  at  hide  and  seek,  which  did  not
please  her  when  she  was  tricked.  She  was  sufficiently  blind
to  walk  against  the  wall.  Ophthalmoscopically  the  eye  is  and
was  normal.  Mr.  Tw^eedy  kindly  examined  her  eyes,  and
wrote  the  following  report  of  them ;

Feb.  m,  [1897].

I have  examined  Miss  [Barnes’s]  eyes.  The  media  are  clear,  the
discs  and  fundus  healthy ; the  refraction  of  the  eyes  is  also  prac-
tically normal,  there  being  merely  a slight  degree  of  myopia  in  the
left  eye.  The  eye-lids  were  widely  open  and  seemed  spasmodically
retracted,  as  in  cases  of  ex-ophthalmic  goitre.  The  child  seemed
unable  to  see  anything  at  more  than  2 feet  away,  but  she  could
read  words  of  the  smallest  print  (No.  1 Jaeger)  at  about  3 inches
from  the  eye.  There  is,  however,  nothing  in  the  eye  to  explain
the  peculiar  nature  of  her  sight.

J.  Tweedy.

When  using  the  ophthalmoscope,  if  the  light  appeared  to
focus  on  the  yellow  spot,  the  normal  A,  Mary  Barnes,  returned,
but  only  momentarily.  “ A ” still  came  occasionally,  and  saw
and  walked  quite  well.  BIO  was  still  very  ignorant, — for
instance,  not  knowing  what  a horse  or  dog  was.  Nor  was  she
anxious  to  learn,  usually  answering  “ nothink  ” to  any  c[uestion.
She  knew  the  parts  of  her  face,  but  not  her  legs  or  arms.
She  was,  however,  very  amiable,  and  had  a good  memory  for
things  happening  daily.  In  February  she  was  able  to  go  about
the  house,  though  supervision  was  necessary.  BIO  differed
from  all  other  sub-stages,  in  that  she  did  not  know  her  way
about  the  house.  This  is  a special  point  which  distinguishes
BIO  from  the  other  personalities.  She  had  to  learn  not  only
the  position  of  the  rooms,  but  also  the  position  of  the
furniture.  Before  she  learned  this  she  was  once  stopped  from
walking  down  the  cellar  stairs,  which  she  thought  were  on
level  ground.

Her  method  of  counting  was  unique.  Her  numerals  were
limited  to  1-2,  1-2,  1-2.  She  counted  in  pennies,  which  she
called  “ brownies,”  up  to  a shilling,  or  a shilling  and  so  many


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multijde  Personality.  375

“ brownies.”  I asked  her  how  much  is  twice  six.  She  worked
it  out  on  paper  tlms :

1.2  1.2

1.2  1.2

and  then  said  a shillino;.  If  I asked  her  how  much  is  twice
eight,  she  would  work  out  the  answer  as  a shilling  and  four
“ brownies.”  It  was  a little  complicated.

Once  when  I asked  her  very  quickly  to  count  her  fingers,
she,  automatically  touching  each  finger,  said  1,  2,  3,  4,  5 ; but
quickly  corrected  herself  and  said,  '‘No,  that’s  wrong;  1,  2;
1,  2;  1,  2.”  Seeing  that  it  did  not  fit,  she  began  again,
“ 1,  2,”  then  a pause,  repeating  “3,”  adding,  “three,  what’s
that?”  then  she  added  “four,”  and,  surprised  at  herself,  said
“five.”  Apparently  the  automatic  sub -consciousness  was
aroused.  But  if  one  gave  her  four  biscuits,  she  would  count
them  “1,  2,  1,  2.”

A curious  link  with  her  past  memory  occurred  in  the  fol-
lowing incident : She  was  very  constipated,  and  asked  that
“ the  voice  ” (that  is,  myself)  would  give  her  something,  but
not  salts.  As  BIO  she  had  no  knowledge  of  salts,  but  she
had  had  salts  about  a year  earlier,  I cannot  say  in  what
personality.  I hoped  to  show  her  in  this  state  to  the
Clinical  Society,  but  she  had  altered  to  B6  or  B2,  it  was
not  quite  clear  which.  This  was  on  February  26th,  1<S97.
But  in  the  middle  of  March  she  returned  to  the  imbecile
state  BIO,  and  was  even  worse  than  before  ; for  she
was  paralysed,  blind,  deaf  and  dumb.  She  kept  on  mut-
tering “ do,  do,  do.”  The  only  way  to  feed  her  was  to
touch  her  with  a tray ; she  would  then  feel  for  and
pick  up  the  food : sometimes  she  would  feel  for  her  mouth

and  guide  it  in.  At  other  times  she  would  miss  her  mouth

and  get  the  food  over  her  shoulder,  which  made  her  very  cross.
We  find  the  same  feature  in  disseminated  sclerosis,  where

there  in  an  interrupted  communication  between  the  nerve

roots  in  the  bulb  and  the  motor  centres  which  ought  to  act
in  harmony.  In  such  cases  vision  plays  an  important  part.
Here  such  aid  was  absent.  The  parents  used  to  place  her
left  hand  to  the  mouth,  and  with  the  right  she  would  feel  the
way  along  her  fore  arm.  In  three  or  four  days  she  began


376


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


drawing  again,  her  touch  for  guiding  and  cop}dng  being  more
acute  than  before  (see  Plates  IV.,  Y.,  and  VI.  for  reproduc-
tions of  drawings  made  during  this  period).  On  March  25th
she  left  off  drawing  and  took  to  sewing,  working  till  she
was  exhausted.  She  then  altered  during  the  next  days.  For
two  days  her  jaws  were  tightly  closed  ; then  she  became  limp,
and  had  no  power  in  any  part.  In  whatever  pose  any  limb
was  placed,  so  it  remained.  Often  she  could  not  swallow,  and
sometimes  she  was  comatose.  This  resembled  her  state  during
the  second  week  of  the  influenza,  when  she  was  laid  out  as
dead.  When  she  was  in  one  of  these  exhausted  conditions
on  April  4tli,  the  nurse  was  in  the  next  room  and  heard  her
call  out,  “What  am  I in  bed  for?”  Nurse  ran  to  her,  and
the  patient  said  again,  “ What  am  I in  bed  for  ? Don’t  you
know  I am  Nick  ? ”

Nick  had  left  six  and  a half  months  before,  on  September
20th,  1896,  at  2 p.m.,  in  the  middle  of  the  family  dinner
downstairs.  It  was  now  about  two  in  the  afternoon,  and  also
Sunday,  and  the  family  were  at  dinner  downstairs.  She  smelt
the  dinner,  and  thought  it  was  the  same  dinner  she  had  left  on
September  20th.  It  was  a curious  coincidence  that  both  days
happened  to  be  Sundays,  and  the  hour  the  same.  She  wanted
to  go  down  to  finish  her  dinner,  and  said  to  her  parents,
“ You  have  been  quick  in  getting  my  nightgown  on.  What
am  I in  bed  for  ? I am  quite  well.”  She  had  been  so  criti-
cally ill,  half  an  hour  before  that,  though  she  was  very  hungry,
they  only  gave  her  very  little  food.  In  the  afternoon  she  got
up,  dressed,  and  walked  about,  but  was  weak,  not  having  been
able  to  stand  for  three  weeks  (since  March  14th).

Two  or  three  features  in  this  incident  are  very  striking.
Thus  in  one  personality,  BIO,  she  is  exhausted  and  collapsed,
with  no  appetite,  hardly  able  to  swallow,  and  unable  to  stand.
The  instant  that  the  new  personality  B3  is  switched  on,  the
exhaustion  disappears ; she  is  very  hungry,  and  can  walk.
Again,  whereas  BIO  could  draw  beautifully,  B3  as  “Nick”  did
not  possess  the  art,  and  could  only  make  ugly  scrawls,  and
even  these  were  rather  forced  from  her  (see  Plate  VI  I.,  Fig.  1).

We  always  found  that  the  memory  of  one  personality  con-
tinued from  the  last  appearance  of  that  same  personality.
There  was  thus  a continuity  of  the  same  personality ; but


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  377

each  one  was  ignorant  of  every  other  one.  To  test  this,  her
father  brought  out  the  wigwam  toy  when  she  became  “ Nick.”
She  at  once  recognised  it.  It  will  be  remembered  that  she
had  it  at  my  house  on  October  16th,  1896,  and  changed  her
personality  while  playing  with  it,  at  the  .same  time  throwing
it  down.  She  now  said,  “ Oh  yes,  I remember  now ; I have
been  here  once  since  I went  to  sleep  on  the  Sunday,  and  I
went  to  sleep  again  at  Dr.  Wilson’s.”  The  former  date  was
Sunday,  September  20th,  and  the  return  (at  my  house)  was  on
October  16th,  1896.

On  May  13th,  1897,  she  changed  from  “ Nick  ” or  B3,  to
B6  or  “good  creature.”  She  remembered  meeting  me  in  the
street  on  her  way  from  church,  and  gave  the  details.  It  re-
ferred to  my  meeting  her  on  December  27th,  1896,  when  she
was  B6.  She  said  now,  that  to-day  was  Monday  and  that  yester-
day she  went  to  church  alone  and  met  me  as  she  came  home.
Evidently  that  was  the  last  time  she  had  been  B6  or  “ good
creature.”  I thought  there  was  a mistake  on  her  part,  as
Sunday  was  December  2 9th  ; but  there  was  no  mistake,  and  the
incident  as  she  described  it  was  correct.  We  found  that  she
remembered  nothing  after  Sunday  evening,  December  29th,
when  she  had  been  put  to  bed  early,  as  she  was  poorly.  A
change  in  personality  was  developing.  This  personality  could
only  draw  imperfectly,  and  could  not  equal  the  performance  of
the  blind  stage  (see  Plate  VIL,  Fig.  2).  After  she  had  drawn  a
picture  we  brought  her  to  the  normal  A,  when  she  expressed
surprise,  and  said  she  never  knew  she  could  draw.  “ Nick  ”
would  not  try  to  draw,  except  once  or  twice.

As  B6,  the  “good  creature,”  she  went  to  the  Jubilee  Proces-
sion in  June,  1897,  and  took  an  intelligent  interest  in  it.
One  of  my  assistants,  Dr.  Taylor,  of  Perth,  who  knew  her  well
during  the  first  year,  before  B6  appeared,  saw  her  there,  but
she  never  remembered  having  seen  him  before.

Though  the  date  was  June  27th,  she  maintained  that  it
was  only  about  a month  since  Christmas,  the  reason  being
that  it  was  Christmas  time  when  she  was  last  in  this  B6
personality,  and  she  had  now  been  about  five  weeks  in  the
same  personality.  This  shows  again  how  each  sub-stage  is  con-
tinuous with  the  same  and  ignores  the  intervening  events.
She  also  said  that  she  could  not  understand  there  being  flowers


378


Dr.  Albert  Wilson,


[part


in  January,  so  near  Christmas,  and  why  people  would  say  it
was  June ; that  she  had  never  seen  the  sea,  but  had  heard
about  it,  and  would  like  to  go  there.  She  never  had  been  B6
at  the  seaside.  She  deeply  resented  an  effort  made  at  this
time  to  get  her  into  a hospital  for  observation,  and  as  a con-
sequence became  very  ill  and  changed  to  a state  of  dementia.
She  declared  she  was  quite  well,  and  resented  the  idea  of  the
hospital.

Four  days  later  (on  June  30th)  she  changed  to  “Nick”  or
B3,  about  tea  time.  She  at  once  asked  why  the  lamps  were
not  lit,  because  when  “Nick”  left  on  May  13th  it  was  9.30
P.M.,  and  the  lamps  were  lit.  She  also  said  that  her  father
called  Mary  Barnes,  and  so  she  went  to  sleep  (on  May  13th),
and  woke  up  to-day  (June  30  th).  She  seemed  usually  to  have
the  idea,  when  one  personality  left,  that  she  had  gone  to  sleep :
but  when  she  went  to  sleep  on  May  13th  it  was  9.30  p.m.,
and  her  father  was  having  his  supper.  She  said  when  she
woke  up  there  was  a different  tea  on  the  table,  and  Tom
(her  father)  was  gone.

She  continued  as  J13  or  “ Nick  ” through  August,  and  went
to  the  same  seaside  resort  as  before.  She  was  the  same  per-
sonality as  when  at  the  sea  the  year  before,  and  now  learned
to  swim.

On  August  22nd  she  changed  without  any  physical  disturb-
ance to  the  normal  A,  and  then  to  “ good  creature,”  or  B6.
She  then  referred  to  having  seen  me  with  my  assistant.  Dr.
Taylor,  and  spoke  as  if  this  had  occurred  the  previous  night,
whereas  in  reality  it  was  on  dune  25th,  on  which  date  B6
had  been  in  evidence.  But  tbe  memory  of  her  visit  to  the  sea-
side this  month  was  entirely  obliterated.  She  said  that  she
had  never  bathed  for  fear  of  being  drowned.

She  argued  that  she  was  only  two  years  old  (about  the
length  of  time  B6  had  been  present),  and  could  not  under-
stand people  saying  she  was  15.  She  only  remembered  two
Christmas  days.

In  November  she  had  another  attack  of  mania  (B1 ) which
lasted  a fortnight.  Then  she  became  “good  creature”  again,
and  remained  so  until  March  24th,  1898,  when  she  altered  to
the  demented  state  B9.  B9  lasted  three  or  four  weeks,  when
she  again  became  B6  or  “good  creature.”  We  could  not  now


XLIX.]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  S79

induce  A to  return.  If  her  father  tried  she  became  uncon-
scious and  fell  down ; so  we  feel  we  have  said  good-bye  to  the
normal  “ A ” or  Mary  Barnes,  and  ever  since  she  has  been
“ good  creature  ” or  B6.  She  is  intelligent,  and  has  learned
typewriting,  and  is  making  her  own  way.

Summing  up  the  relationship  of  the  different  stages  to  one
another,  we  may  say  that  B2  represents  a rough  child,  almost
a waif,  of  3 or  4 years  old.  B6  seems  like  the  same  child,
more  advanced  in  intelligence  and  refinement,  though  young
for  her  age.  B4  and  B8  are  like  first  cousins.  Bo  and  B7
also  seem  closely  related,  but  complementary  to  one  another,
as  B7  remembers  very  remote  incidents  and  B5  only  very
recent  ones.  B9  is,  I think,  an  offshoot  of  Bl.  B3  and

BIO  stand  by  themselves.

About  1900  I met  Mary  Barnes  with  her  father.  Her
manner  was  childish,  like  that  of  B6.  When  I asked  her  if
her  name  was  Mary  Barnes,  she  said  she  supposed  so,  as  her
father  said  that  was  her  name,  and  at  the  present  time
(February,  1904)  she  continues  to  say  that  she  is  Mary

Barnes.

She  is  now  to  all  appearances  a healthy  normal  young  woman.
She  is  quite  intelligent,  and  all  her  ideas  are  refined ; but  on
examination  one  finds  her  memory  is  very  bad,  and  though  she
remembers  as  far  back  as  1898,  nearly  all  her  previous  life
is  a blank,  including  the  years  before  her  illness.  I tested  her
memory  as  to  various  events  which  happened  in  the  abnormal
stages  other  than  B6,  and  she  had  apparently  no  recollection
of  them ; whereas  events  which  happened  in  the  B6  stage
she  now  remembers.  Thus  she  clearly  remembers  having  seen
L)r.  Tuckey  when  she  was  B6  : but  she  does  not  remember

Dr.  E.  Jones,  or  Dr.  Savill,  Dr.  Mickle,  Dr.  Bramwell,  Mr.

Barrett,  Mr.  Tweedy,  Dr.  (now  Sir)  T.  Barlow,  who  saw  her
when  she  was  B2,  and  B3,  and  B9.  Also  she  knows  a
little  French,  which  is  as  it  should  be,  since  B6  was  the  only
personality  besides  B9  who  knew  any  French.  She  does  not
remember  the  acute  illness  which  started  the  alternations  of
personality ; nor  does  she  remember  her  childhood  before  then.
Her  father  said  in  1900  that  she  did  not  know  her  old
schoolfellows,  and  her  memory  of  school  was  a confused


380


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


blank.  Of  course,  many  impressions  of  her  childhood  have
now  Ijeen  revived  by  intercourse  and  associations  since  she
became  B6  ; but  this,  after  all,  only  serves  to  make  her
memory  of  the  past  even  more  confused.


Theory  of  Cerebral  Changes  connected  with
Changes  of  Personality.

Wliilst  many  theories  have  been  suggested  to  explain  the
psychical  aspect  of  multiple  personality,  I am  anxious  to  put
forward  some  evidence  of  a pathological  disturbance  of  the
Sympathetic  nervous  system,  which  may  throw  some  light  on
its  physical  aspect.  To  comprehend  this  subject  we  must
consider  some  of  the  facts  of  brain  evolution  and  development.

The  most  recent  and  reliable  data  we  have  are  due  to  the
researches  of  Dr.  Bolton  and  Dr.  G.  A.  Watson.  Some  of  their
work  is  at  present  unpublished,  but  I have  permission  to  use
their  results  for  this  paper.

I must  lirst  explain  that  a typical  section  through  the  cortex
of  the  brain  shows  us  five  distinct  layers  of  different  kinds  of
cells,  as  indicated  in  Plate  VII L These  layers  are  only

from  i to  ] of  an  inch  thick.  So  tliey  literally  resemble
the  rind  or  bark  of  a tree,  hence  the  term  “ cortex.”  Under
the  microscope  one  sees  in  them  cells  of  varying  shapes  giving
off  fibres.  At  one  time  these  cells  used  to  be  compared  to
electric  batteries,  where  an  impulse  passes  to  a cell  by  a
wire,  and  the  cell  discharges  force  through  another  wire.

The  simile  remains  sufficiently  good  for  purposes  of  popular
demonstration.

It  has  been  shown  that  the  general  evolution  of  the

cortex  is  from  within  outwards,  the  inner  or  deeper  layers

being  the  first  to  be  developed,  both  in  the  vertebrates

as  a whole,  and  also  in  the  individual.  Dr.  Watson,  who
has  especially  studied  mammals  in  this  respect,  finds  that
in  them  the  deepest,  i.c.,  the  polymorph,  layer  is  highly  developed.
The  higher  pyramidal  layer  (so  called  from  the  shape  of  its
cells),  which  relates  to  intellect,  is  comparatively  undeveloped  ;
it  contains  few  cells ; they  are  irregularly  distributed,  and  many


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  381

of  them  are  of  the  embryouic  type,  suggesting  possibilities  not
yet  achieved.  In  the  Eabbit,  the  layer  is  specially  poor ; in
Carnivora,  it  is  more  highly  evolved,  and  in  monkeys  still
more  so  (see  diagram  of  sections  through  the  corte.x  of  man
and  of  the  rabbit,  Plate  VIII.).

In  Man  the  polymorph  layer  is  much  the  same  as  in  the
lower  animals,  showing  that  we  are  no  better  equipped  than
they  for  a merely  animal  existence, — this  layer  being  concerned
with  the  instincts  for  self-preservation,  and  so  on.  In  extreme
dements,  who  had  lost  all  their  normal  instincts.  Dr.  Bolton
found  that  the  polymorph  layer  was  in  process  of  decay.

On  the  other  hand,  in  passing  from  the  lower  animals  to-
man, Dr.  Watson  found  a progressive  evolution  in  the  pyrainidat
layer,  which  is  related  to  intellectual  development.  Dr.  Bolton
found  this  layer  very  thin  and  shallow  in  imbeciles  and  the
first  to  decay  in  dements.  It  represents  the  higher  iirtellectual
control  over  the  lower  strata,  which  are  devoted  to  the  instincts
and  the  senses.  But  in  the  human  brain,  on  the  more  superficial
or  outer  part  of  this  layer,  as  if  suggesting  future  evolution,
there  are  many  rudimentary  or  half-developed  cells  of  what
is  called  the  embryonic  type.  Dr.  Watson  considers  that  this
indicates  that  the  human  brain  has  not  yet  reached  its  highest
development,  and  is  capable  of  higher  evolution,  the  longer
the  human  race  persists.  To  his  opinion  I would  add  the
clause : provided  our  social  and  educational  conditions  are

improved,  especially  by  putting  a check  on  the  drinking  habits
so  prevalent  now  in  all  classes,  and  so  potent  a cause  of  nerve
degeneration.  But  whilst  offering  possibilities  of  higher  educa-
tion or  development,  these  embryonic  cells  are  likewise  the  first
to  decay,  being  more  or  less  unstable.

Now  if  we  suppose  the  same  general  principle  of  growth
that  governs  the  whole  cortex  to  apply  also  to  the  pyramidal
layer,  it  will  contain,  say,  10  strata  of  cells,  of  which  Nos.  1,
2,  and  3 (counting  from  within  outwards  or  below  upwards)
are  more  ancestral  or  ancient  than  Nos.  8,  9,  and  10,  and
therefore  more  stable.  Against  this,  some  will  argue  that  at
birth  all  strata  are  laid  down  simultaneously.  But  functionally
8,  9,  and  10  are  delayed,  for  they  contain  many  of  these
embryonic  cells,  which  are  not  apparent  in  Nos.  1,  2,  and  3,
and  which  in  some  people  continue  embryonic  in  type  per-


382


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


manently.  Also  in  incipient  dementia  and  in  an  alcoholic
case  which  I examined,  where  brain  power  was  failing,  it  was
the  top  layers,  10,  9,  and  8,  which  were  disappearing.  In  the
alcoholic  case,  these  external  cells  of  the  pyramidal  layer  had
been  destroyed.  At  the  same  time  the  patient  had  become
depraved.  Her  higher  mental  ideation  or  true  Ego  had  dis-
appeared. She  had  stepped  down  from  her  original  personality
to  a much  lower  grade.

This  is  an  extreme  case,  but  it  suggests  a physical  explanation
of  mental  deterioration  and  altered  personality,  with  loss  of
responsibility.

Applying  these  facts  to  the  case  of  the  B6  personality,  then,
I would  consider  that  the  influenza  toxin  or  the  meningitis
had  damaged  the  extreme  surface  or  top  of  the  pyramidal  layer,
and  so  prevented  the  higher  mental  development  which  occurs
between  puberty  and  adolescence.  The  case  now  resembles  one
of  neurasthenia.  The  patient  complains  of  bodily  weakness ;
she  soon  gets  tired ; there  is  loss  of  memory ; brain  fag ;
exhaustion  after  mental  effort,  and  want  of  power  of  application  ;
yet  her  intelligence  and  moral  faculties  are  unimpaired.  Does
not  this  case  throw  some  light  on  the  condition  of  neurasthenia,
for  we  know  that  the  latter  often  occurs  through  derangement
of  internal  organs  which  are  controlled  by  the  sympathetic
nerves?  Just  as  the  finger  tips  in  neurasthenic  people  are
benuml)ed  by  arrested  circulation,  so  the  sympathetic  disturbance
in  the  brain  circulation  may  arrest  the  functional  activity  of
what  we  may  provisionally  term  the  “ brain  tips,”  or  most
distant  and  external  parts  of  the  brain.

The  chief  features  of  scientific  interest  in  this  case  are :

(1)  That  the  normal  A was  absolutely  ignorant  of  the
abnormal  1>,  and,  on  the  whole,  vice  versa,  although  the  ab-
normal B sometimes  showed  a glimmer  of  knowledge  of  the
normal  A.

(2)  Among  the  many  abnormal  sub-stages,  each  sub-stage
was  a separate  personality,  continuous  with  itself  throughout
its  different  appearances,  and  originally  ignorant  of  every  other
sub-sta«e,  though  sometimes  learning  a little  about  the  incidents
of  other  stages,  probably  through  hearing  conversations.

(3)  These  personalities  were  switched  on  and  off  without
any  apparent  rhyme  or  reason.  During  the  process  of  change


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  383

there  was  generally  some  physical  disturbance,  such  as  shock,
pallor  or  Hushing,  and  alteration  of  facial  expression.

Some  would  call  this  a case  of  somnambulism,  and  would
maintain  that  the  normal  A is  now  merely  asleep.  This  is
not  my  view.  I hold  that  each  of  the  sub-stages  is  as  much

an  individual  or  character  as  the  normal  A,  each  of  them
being  merely  a fraction  of  the  complete  personality  or  Ego.
From  this  point  of  view,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  case  throws
new  light  on  the  mechanism  of  the  brain,  and  its  relation  to
mind  and  personality.

It  is  generally  known  that  the  brain  is  mapped  out  into
functional  areas,  viz..  Sensory  areas  receiving  impressions  of
smell,  sight,  taste,  touch,  and  heariug ; also  Motor  areas  to
direct  the  movement  of  different  parts  of  the  body.

Tliere  are  besides  three  areas  called  association  centres :
the  frontal,  the  temporal,  and  the  parieto-occipital  area  behind.
As  the  name  indicates,  these  associate  or  bring  into  harmonious
co-operation  the  other  active  nerve  groups  (see  Plate  IX.,
Fig.  1).

The  association  areas  represent  the  higher  intellectual  or

mental  grades,  and  Dr.  Bolton  considers  that  they  are  the  first
to  decay.  These  higher  centres  contain  a large  proportion  of
embryonic  or  rudimentary  cells,  showing  that  they  are  still  in
process  of  evolution.  Dr.  Watson  has  shown  that  the  cortex
of  the  human  and  the  rabbit’s  brain  are  about  equal  ui  depth,
except  in  the  association  areas,  which  in  the  rabbit  are  only
half  the  depth  or  thickness  of  similar  parts  in  man.

My  hypothesis  assumes  that  the  pyramidal  layer  of  the
brain  may  be  divided  as  a whole  or  in  part  into  “ districts.”
Diagrammatically  we  may  conceive  of  these  districts  as
being  different  levels  in  the  cortex,  especially  in  the  asso-
ciation areas,  the  deeper  inner  ones  representing  more
developed  stages  than  the  upper  levels,  because  they  are

lunctionally  older.  Thus  we  may  suppose  there  is  a low
level  or  district  corresponding  to  the  age  of  three  or  four ;
higher  up  would  be  the  district  coming  into  play  at  the

age  of  twenty ; a still  higher  one  would  become  active  at
thirty,  and  so  on ; each  in  turn  superseding  and  taking
command  of  the  lower  districts.  In  senile  decay  we  see

the  reverse  process  occurring ; the  upper  layers  decaying

•2  c


SS'i  Dr.  Albert  Wilson.  [part

or  falling  out  of  use,  and  the  lower  ones  coming  into  play
again.

Now  these  different  districts  may  be  supposed  to  correspond
to  different  personalities.  As  a rule  there  is  no  apparent
break  in  character  as  the  individual  grows  up,  because  the
change  from  each  district  to  the  next  is  gradual  and  con-
tinuous. But  morbid  conditions  in  the  brain  may  throw  back
the  individual  to  earlier  stages,  from  which  he  may  suddenly
revert  to  others,  or  the  later  stages  may  be  prevented  by
morbid  causes  from  developing.

In  the  case  of  ]\Iary  Barnes,  Bl,  the  stage  of  mania,  might
be  caused  by  congestion  of  the  smaller  blood-vessels,  giving
rise  to  an  over-stimulation  of  the  cortex.

In  B2  spasm  of  the  anterior  cerebral  arteries  would  shut
off  the  frontal  association  centre,  and  paralyse  the  foot
(see  diagram  of  arterial  blood-supply,  Plate  IX.,  Pig.  2).
Intellectually  B2  was  a child  of  three  or  four.  Though  she
had  a storehouse  of  words,  she  could  not  use  them  or  associate
them  with  their  proper  meanings.

B4,  the  deaf-mute  stage,  might  be  caused  by  spasm  of  the
middle  cerelmal  arteries,  supplying  the  centres  for  hearing  and
speech — perhaps  only  on  the  left  or  active  side.

B7  resembled  a state  of  senile  decay.  If  the  recently  educated
layers  were  paralysed,  tlie  lower  cells  with  their  early
memories  might  become  active.

BIO  is  easily  explained  by  the  shutting  off  of  the  blood
supply  to  the  sensory  visual  apparatus,  the  p.sychic  visual
centre,  which  has  a different  blood  supply,  being  undisturbed.
Hence  she  could  originate  the  remarkable  pictures  described
above.  BIO  gives  strong  support  to  my  vascular  theory.

In  B9,  where  the  lower  animal  instincts  prevailed,  there
was  probably  uncontrolled  activity  of  the  deeper  layers  of  the
cortex  with  temporary  paralysis  of  the  upper  layers.  The
theory  would  support  the  view  that  all  our  bad  impulses  are
relics  of  our  earliest  ancestral  development ; or,  in  other
words,  the  power  of  animal  instincts  and  passions  over  intellect.
On  the  other  hand,  the  present  stage  of  B6,  which  seems,
intellectually  at  least,  to  be  in  some  respects  more  highly
developed  than  the  original  normal  stage  A,  may  only  Ije
the  normal  increase  of  brain  activity  during  the  last  three  or


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  385

four  years.  We  must  also  remember  that  B6  is  an  arrested

development.  Now  in  1904  Mary  Barnes  is  actually  21
years  of  age,  but  she  is  intellectually  only  about  1 6 years
old.  In  theory  one  would  expect  that  the  outer,  less  stable
cortical  cells,  which  are  also  embryonic  and  poorly  developed,
have  not  arrived  at  their  full  and  normal  activity.  Vascular
changes  in  the  sympathetic  might  retard  their  development.

The  whole  conception  is  consistent  with  Mr.  Myers’s  theory
of  the  constitution  of  the  Ego,  according  to  which  only  a
portion  of  it  is  manifest  to  us  in  our  present  life.  While  the
whole  Ego  remains  intact,  one  portion  or  another  may  become
manifest  according  to  different  physical  conditions  and  the
environment  of  the  individual,  so  presenting  the  appearance
of  a truncated  personality  or  shifting  series  of  personalities.
What  has  to  be  attempted,  then,  in  our  present  life  is  to
facilitate  the  manifestation  of  the  best  personality  of  each  Ego.

If  so  be  that  the  mind  comprises  so  many  personalities,
good,  bad,  and  indifferent,  does  it  not  shed  light  on  the  duties
of  those  who  have  the  training  of  the  young  ?

This  case  having  led  us  to  the  belief  that  the  varying
personalities  may  to  some  extent  be  explained  by  a fuller
knowledge  of  the  structure  of  the  brain  cortex,  also  throw's
new  light  on  the  psychical  question  of  habit.

The  more  recent  ideas  on  habit  are  that  it  represents  the
path  of  least  resistance  along  nerve  channels.  It  is  thought
that  constant  use  overcomes  nerve  resistance  both  in  the  fibres
and  at  the  junctions  or  synapses  of  the  different  neurones.

This  theory  is  based  on  the  knowledge  that  sensory  tracts
leading  to  the  brain  do  not  become  active  or  insulated  (myelin-
ated) until  stimulated  from  without.  It  is,  however,  contrary  to
the  laws  of  conductivity  and  resistance  in  copper  and  other  metals.

But  if  we  consider  habits  involving  skill,  such  as  writing
or  piano  playing  or  carving,  are  we  to  suppose  that  the  optic
nerves  conduct  better  after  two  or  more  years’  practice  ? Is
it  not  rather  that  the  visuo-psychic  areas  are  more  educated  ?
Do  the  nerves  from  the  cortical  motor  areas  really  conduct  to
the  hand  and  fingers  with  more  facility  after  years  of  practice  ?
Or  are  not  the  motor  cells  moi’e  educated,  and  does  not  their
increased  functional  activity  direct  and  originate  the  more
complex  movements  ?


386


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


If  my  view  be  correct,  habit  is  of  the  same  nature  as  a
personality.  Habit  may  be  regarded,  then,  as  belonging  to  a
brain  area  or  district,  or  as  a personality  which  is  specially
educated  at  some  period  of  life.  When  the  higher  Ego  is
feeble  or  inactive,  habits  of  lower  type  and  absence  of  skill
obtain.  It  is  only  by  close  attention  or  the  inhuence  of  the
highest  intellect  that  good  and  skilled  habits  develop,  which
place  the  personality  in  a higher  sphere  of  life.

This  subject  merits  the  attention  of  those  who  have  to
educate  the  young,  and  aid  them  in  the  formation  of  char-
acter, which  is  perhaps  but  a personality.

In  science  we  speak  of  the  mind  possessing  the  power  of
inhibition.  In  popular  language  we  call  it  self-control,  or  the
power  to  resist  immediate  gratification  for  the  sake  of  future
good.  But  do  we  resist  evil  ? or  do  we  not  rather  flee  from  it
and  turn  our  Iracks  on  it  ? An  evil  personality  may  be  tend-
ing to  get  the  upper  hand.  Should  we  allow  it  to  remain
and  fight  it  ? or  should  not  the  process  rather  be  that  of
striving  to  pass  to  another  and  nobler  personality  ? Bather
than  a mere  negative  inhibition,  is  it  not  a power  of  switch-
ing off  the  vital  current  from  the  bad  district  or  personality,
and  turning  it  into  a more  desirable  channel  ?

If  we  go  among  the  masses  we  find  adverse  circumstances
working  terrible  havoc  among  the  children,  such  as  bad  air,
malnutrition,  sickness  from  improper  exposure,  brain  attacks,
or  meningitis,  fits,  and  above  all,  bad  heredity  due  to  drunken
parents.  The  children  that  survive  are  liable  to  become
abnormal,  even  degenerate  and  criminal.  But  we  cannot
regard  them  as  fully  responsible  for  their  actions  and  ten-
dencies. We  have  to  remember  that  they  have  never  had
a fair  chance  of  developing  their  normal  personality  or  their
highest  Ego.  Circumstances  over  which  they  have  no  control
have  switched  them  on  to  a wrong  path  physically  at  the
beginning  of  their  lives,  and  prevented  them  from  acquiring
the  self-control  of  the  properly  civilised  man.

The  case  I have  described  illustrates  the  dependency  of  the
mind  on  the  body.  From  this  we  may  infer  the  impossibility
of  overcoming  adverse  physical  conditions  after  they  have
reached  a certain  point  and  with  this  fact  before  us,  it
follows  that  our  first  duty  to  the  race  is  to  attempt  to


XLix.]  A Case  of  Mxdtrple  Personality . 387

ameliorate  those  social  conditions  which  now  so  largely
handicap  it.


APPENDIX  I.

Writings  of  the  Different  Personalities.^

The  following  is  a selection  from  some  of  the  letters  written

O

by  the  different  personalities  :

(1)

[To  her  father;  written  forwards  by  B2,  January  28th,  1896.]
i\[y  own  dear  farser,

on  is  de  versy  best  darlint  in  all  de  weald  dere  is  no  vone
in  de  weald  like  you  ou  is  doing  to  have  a bath  /witch  I hope
on  vill  enjoy  ve  did  go  to  see  de  dear  doctor  Vilson  and  lady
Yilson  but  dey  "was  jist  doing  out  so  I could  oney  just  peak  to
dem  Goodbye  my  dardint

/oil’s  oving  ittle

daughter  Good  Shrine.

(2)

[To  Dr.  Wilson;  written  backwards  by  B2,  March  18th,  1896.]
the  nice  doctor

if  you  is  coming  to  see  me  to  night  i wull  be  good  if  you  do  not
hit  a fing  on  me  you  was  a bit  naugthy  wlien  you  did  that  you

know  old  jim  did  not  do  that.  the  dear  tom  and  mary  ann  say

you  is  a nice  man  and  i say  you  is  and  every  body  else

(3)

[To  Dr.  Wilson,  to  whom  she  now  applied  the  name  she  had
before  given  to  a doctor  who  had  attended  her  during  the
influenza;  written  backwards  by  B2,  November  1st,  1896,  during
the  mania  state.]

My  dear  old  jim

you  may  expect  a good  old  Wowing  up  for  not
coming  to  see  me  today  i was  going  to  give  you  a grape  but  I
wont  now  because  you  are  a very  wicked  boy  not  to  come  and  see
me

good  thing

'For  reproductions  of  some  of  the  writings  and  drawings  see  Plates  I. -VII.


388


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


(4)

[To  Dr.  AVilson ; written  forwards  by  B2,  probably
in  February,  1897.]

For  the  new  jim  or  rather  the  gentleman  who  says  he  is  a jim
and  who  says  he  is  jims  brother  but  he  is  not  because  he  has  not
got  a gammy  leg  and  my  jim  was  only  a lean  short  man  and  this
one  is  a big  tall  man

good  thing  to  Jim


(5)

[Postcard  written  by  B3,  addressed  to  her  father,
from  M — — , August  7th,  1896.]

My  Pet

I wish  you  would  bring  those  oil  skins  down  with  you  as
we  have  spoken  to  a boatman  about  them  and  he  knows  how  to
cure  them  and  will  be  glad  of  them  Mr.  Hanley  our  boatman
Goodbye  dear  I shall  soon  see  my  darling  God  bless  him

Old  Nick

(6)

[To  Dr.  AA^ilson  j written  by  B3,  August  2Gth,  1896.]

M , Essex.

Dear  Sir,

Just  a line  to  tell  you  I am  not  in  L but  at  AI

with  my  dear  old  Tom.

I am  very  sorry  I did  not  write  you  the  Post  card  you  asked
me  to  but  I went  away  on  the  Saturday  and  quite  forgot  all
about  it  but  I know  you  will  forgive  me  and  I hope  this  will  do
as  well.

The  dear  doctor  AA^ilson  I am  enjoying  myself  lovely  with  boat-
ing bathing  and  paddling  going  on.

The  dear  old  Tom  and  me  are  just  going  out  to  get  the  dinner
so  I have  not  any  more  time  to  say  any  more  but  I remain

Your  ever  loving


in  Haste.


Old  Nick.


XLIX.]


A Gcise  of  Multiple  Personality.


389


0)

[Written  by  B3.  Received  April  6th,  1897 ; see  above,  p.  376.]

In  Bed

3 hours  after  I woke  up

My  dear  Dr.  Wilson

I am  writing  you  a few  lines  to  let  you  know  Poor
old  Nick  has  woke  up  I will  tell  you  all  about  it  I woke  up
all  at  once  at  about  | to  2 o’clock  & found  myself  in  bed  with
the  room  all  dark  & with  my  night  dress  on  & with  Bottles  on
the  drawers  & all  kinds  of  things  that  people  would  have  if  they
were  ill.  I was  all  by  myself  & the  place  dreadfully  quiet  so
I called  out  “ Why  have  you  put  me  in  bed  ” then  I really
had  to  laugh  till  the  tears  ran  down  my  cheeks  because  it  was
so  strange  and  funny.  Then  Tom  & Munger  & Giggler  came
in  all  looking  dazed  & Frightened  & I was  so  surprised  that  we
did  not  know  what  to  say  for  quite  a little  while.  Do  you  know
I felt  so  strange  because  I went  to  sleep  in  September  & now
they  tell  me  it  is  April  1897  instead  of  September  1896.  I
cant  make  it  out  I dont  know  that  I can  believe  but  that  it
is  the  same  day  as  when  I went  to  sleep  because  you  know  I
went  to  sleep  on  Sunday  at  the  same  time  as  I woke  up.  I went
to  sleep  you  know  when  we  were  having  dinner  one  Sunday  it

1 woke  up  on  Sunday  when  they  were  having  the  same  dinner
you  know  Mutton  & Potatoes  & greens  all  the  very  same  except
Fruit  Pudding  it  seems  so  funny  to  go  to  sleep  such  a very
long  time  Every  thing  was  the  same  except  I was  in  bed  all
cuddled  up  in  wraps  & Hot  water  bottle  at  my  feet  & every
think  so  funny.  1 feels  quite  strong  & cannot  make  out  why  I
am  in  bed.  But  I am  going  to  get  up  tomorrow  I feel  so  very
disapointed  you  are  away  but  I hope  very  much  you  are  enjoy-
ing your  self  & that  you  will  soon  behome  because  I have  gallons
of  news  to  tell  you.

I have  done  you  a drawing  and  I am  sending  it  to  you  with

2 of  the  others  that  another  critter  tom  Tells  me  did  for  you
while  I have  been  asleep  I will  tell  you  that  there  are  a whole
Pile  of  Drawings  here  that  she  has  done  for  you  & there  are  2
beautiful  Pictures  here  that  she  has  done  for  you  Proper  Pictures
I mean  with  ladies  & Birds  & Trees  & Fence  all  colored  in  too
you  know  [see  Plate  IV.  for  reproduction  of  picture  referred  to].


390


lh\  Albert  Wilsor.


[part


I have  a little  more  to  tell  you  & that  is  that  came  for  a

few  minutes  almost  directly  after  I woke  up.  I think  I can  tell

you  no  more  until  you  come  home

I remain  your  Loving  little  Friend

Poor  old  Nick


(8)


[Written  by  B3.]


Aug.  12th,  1897.


Dear  Dr.  Wilson,

I daresay  you  will  lie  surprised  to  hear  that  I am  in

M and  am  enjoying  myself  exceedingly.  You  told  me  you

kept  the  other  letters  I sent  you  so  I thought  I would  send  you
another  as  I want  to  tell  you  how  I can  swim  and  float  and
dive.  I go  in  the  water  nearly  every  day  for  I like  being  in
the  water  verj"  much  indeed.  Dear  Dr.  Wilson  last  time  I saw
you,  you  were  in  your  carriage,  and  you  had  Mrs.  Wilson  with
you  and  she  had  some  thing  on  her  eye  and  I want  to  know  if
she  has  hurt  it  very  much  and  if  it  is  better  I do  hope  so.  We

have  been  in  M- nearly  a fortnight  now  and  we  have  got

to  go  home  at  the  end  of  next  week.


Hoping  you  are  cjuite  well

Your  sincere  little  friend


Old  Nick.


(9)

[Written  by  Bfl.]

2nd  June,  [1898].

Dear  Dr.  M'ilson

I am  writing  you  a letter  to  tell  you  how  I am  enjoying

myself  in  M . It  is  such  a glorious  place  I have  never  been

to  such  a lovely  place  before,  [see  B3’s  letters  of  Aug.  26th,  1896,
and  Aug.  12th,  1897,  written  from  M ]

W^e  are  having  such  dreadfully  bad  weather  here,  we  have  hardly
had  a fine  day  yet,  and  it  is  that  bitterly  cold  here,  that  I have
not  been  able  to  bathe.

Tomadod  said  that  if  I went  in  perhaps  I should  have  a very
great  breckart  and  then  get  drowned  so  that  he  could  never  see
me  any  more.  I have  not  given  up  all  hopes  of  going  in  the
water  yet  as  Munger  says  that  if  a very  very  warm  fine  day  was  to


XLIX.]


391


A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.

come  she  would  let  me  go  in  I should  so  love  to  go  in  because  I
believe  I can  swim  and  j-et  cannot  be  quite  sure  until  I have  tried.
Dear  Dr.  Wilson  I have  enjoyed  m}'self  so  much  this  Whitsun  for
on  Monday  Ave  went  out  all  day  to  a beautiful  place  called  Mill
Beach  and  on  Tuesday  we  went  for  a drive  but  it  came  on  to  rain
in  the  afternoon  very  badly  I think  this  is  all  I have  to  say  so
Goodbye  your  ever  loving  little  friend

Critter  B.vrnes.

[Correct  surname  given  in  original.]

(10)

[Written  by  B6  October  9th,  1898.]

Dear  Dr.  Wilson

I daresay  you  Avill  be  ver}-  much  surprised  to  hear  that
I am  staying  in  Sufiblk  for  another  Holiday  I daresay  this  rvill
be  the  last  this  summer  so  I am  going  to  stay  for  a fortnight
or  a little  over.  I am  enjo3'ing  mj’self  immensly  and  I went
blackberrying  this  morning  and  I daresay  I gathered  two  or  three
lbs.  I am  staying  with  one  of  Mother’s  friends  she  is  such  a nice
lady  and  she  keeps  a farm  house  there  are  plenty  of  Horses  Ducks
Chickins  Pigs  Bullocks  Etc  and  I am  feeling  A1  and  I am
getting  quite  a country  girl  I shall  soon  know  how  to  feed  chickens
and  all  kinds  of  things.  I think  this  is  all  at  present  so  Goodbye
Hoping  you  are  Cjuite  well

1 remain  yours  Trulj'

M.  Barxe.s.

[Correct  initials  and  surname  given  in  original.]

(11)

[To  her  father;  written  backwards  bj"  B9,  October  12th,  1896.]
the  dear  tomadod  just  a line  to  you  to  tell  you  how  much  I
wdsh  you  Avas  here.  I hope  there  is  something  in  j’our  pocket
to  night  I remain  yours  trulj’

I dont  knoAv  Avho  I am  so  I cant  Put  my  name

(12)

[Another  letter  Avritten  backAvards  on  the  same  day,  October  12th,

1896,  Avas  as  folIoAvs  ;]

My  dear  tom

I have  just  got  up.  I hope  you  are  not  Avorried.  I
shall  be  glad  Avhen  you  come  home  so  you  can  give  me  some
broAvns.


392


Dr,  Albert  Wilson.


[part


(13)

[Letter  addressed  by  B9  on  Xovember  22nd,  1896,  to  Dr.  Wil-
son, to  whom  the  name  “Jim”  had  been  transferred  at  this
stage.  It  refers  to  the  incident  of  B2  having  a tooth
extracted  early  in  the  same  month.  This  letter  was  written
forwards.]

The  dear  Jim

I thought  I would  write  you  just  a line  to  let  you  know
I really  do  begin  to  like  you  very  much,  after  what  you  did  to
me  three  Tuesdays  ago.  You  know  what  I mean  when  you  brought
that  other  naughty  wicked  man  in  your  beautiful  carriage.  I can
assure  you  I wish  he  was  here  now  so  that  I could  fight  him  like
he  fighted  me.

I remain  Your  little  friend

The  Dreadful  Wicked  Creature.

The  Jim.

(14)

[To  Dr.  Wilson  ; written  by  BlO.J

Februgesy  the  fourteenth
18  ninty  seven
Sunday

The  dear  voice  I am  writting  a letter  to  tell  you  lots  of  things
you  come  to  see  me  last  night  and  I was  so  jedfulls  pleased  and  I
did  like  the  doctor  Cross,  when  I went  out  this  morning  I was
listening  all  the  time  to  see  if  1 could  hear  you  but  I couldnt  and
I shall  like  to  go  there  to  London  soon  because  I like  to  ride  quick
goodby  dear  voice  I hope  I shall  soon  see  you  I am  the  Toms  lamb
and  I have  nearly  made  that  sock  what  I showed  you  Goodbye
dear  voice  Toms  Lamb

Febugesy

(15)

[Written  by  B6  in  March,  19Uf.]

Dear  Dr.  Wilson,

I am  writing  to  say  that  I shall  be  able  to  keep  ap-
pointment for  next  Monday,  if  you  will  write  me  full  particulars.

Thanking  you  very  much  for  all  your  kindness.

Believe  me  yours  sincerely.


XLIX.]


A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.


393


Comments  on  the  "Writings  and  Drawings  of  the
Secondary  Personalities.

By  Alice  Johnson.

The  letters  and  drawings  of  the  different  personalities  of
Mary  Barnes  show  in  many  respects  curious  analogies  with
the  trance  or  automatic  performances  of  mediums.  It  often
happens  with  mediums  who  write  automatically  that  the
handwriting  differs  from  their  ordinary  hand  and  varies
greatly  at  different  times,  and  often  the  different  handwritings
are  associated  with  different  supposed  “ controls.”  Sometimes,
even,  the  handwriting  resembles  more  or  less  closely  that
of  some  deceased  person  who  is  thought  to  be  controlling
{c.g.  in  the  case  of  Mile.  Helene  Smith,  who  wrote  signa-
tures resembling  those  found  in  some  old  documents,  as
recorded  by  Prof.  Flournoy  in  iJcs  hides  d la  PlanHe  Mars,
p.  409  ; and  in  a case  occurring  among  the  trance  pheno-
mena of  Mrs.  Thompson  described  in  the  Proceedings,  Part
XLYII.,  pp.  235-243),  I need  not  here  discuss  the  question
— which  must  obviously  depend  on  the  circumstances  of  each
particular  case — whether  such  resemblance  affords  evidence  of
the  agency  of  the  deceased  person ; liut  the  fact  of  the
variety  of  handwriting  being  found  in  a case  of  secondary
personality  shows  that  for  this  feature,  at  least,  we  need  not
seek  for  a cause  outside  the  individuality  of  the  writer.  It
affords,  in  fact,  another  link  between  the  phenomena  of  trance
and  of  secondary  personality.

For  this  reason  it  seems  worth  while  to  analyse  the
writings  of  Mary  Barnes  in  some  detail,  and  in  order  that
the  reader  may  follow  the  description,  several  specimens  taken
from  the  letters  quoted  above  in  full  are  here  reproduced.

Several  distinct  styles  of  handwriting  are  shown  which,
however,  are  not  consistent  in  their  connection  with  the
different  personalities.  The  principal  styles  are  as  follows : —

(1)  The  backwards  writing  in  which,  while  the  whole  runs
from  left  to  right,  each  word  is  written  from  right  to  left.
Both  B2  and  B9  at  first  wrote  in  this  way  (see  repro-
ductions in  Plate  I.  and  Plate  III.,  Fig.  1).  Indications  of  the


394


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


way  the  writing  was  done  may  be  seen  in  three  cases  in
which  the  last  letter  or  letters  of  a word  were  first  written
and  then  crossed  out,  and  followed  by  the  whole  word  (see
“ gt  ” for  “ night  ” in  Plate  I.,  and  “ n ” for  “ in  ” and  “ nr  ”
for  “your”  in  Plate  III.,  Fig.  1).  The  backwards  writing  of
P2  was  closely  similar  to  that  of  B9,  but  when  they  wrote
forwards  in  the  ordinary  manner,  their  writings  were  quite
different.  The  forwards  writing  of  B2  in  letter  (4)  is  very
much  like  her  backwards  writing,  but  more  regular ; in  letter

(1)  her  writing  is  like  that  of  B7,  to  be  next  described.

(2)  Writing  of  B7.  This  is  a fully  formed  hut  uneducated-
looking  hand,  characterised  by  superfluous  tags  at  the  beginnings
and  superfluous  flourishes  at  the  ends  of  words ; also  by  the  indi-
vidual letters  being  compressed  from  side  to  side,  while  the
strokes  joining  them  are  disproportionately  drawn  out.  The  same
characteristics  are  ibund  in  much  of  the  writing  of  the  blind  BIO.


(3)  Writing  of  B3.  There  are  several  different  specimens
of  this,  the  earliest  being  the  postcard  addressed  to  her
father  on  August  7th,  189G,  and  quoted  above.  In  this  the
style  is  much  more  childish  than  that  of  B7,  but  contains
slight  traces  both  of  the  flourishes  and  of  the  compression  of
the  letters  found  in  the  latter  style.  The  writing  is  very
careless  and  irregular.  The  next  specimen  was  the  letter
written  to  Dr.  Wilson  soon  after,  on  August  26th,  1896,
evidently  written  with  much  more  care.  B9’s  letter  (No.  13),
written  forwards  on  November  22nd,  1896,  is  very  similar
to  the  third  specimen  of  B3,  which  was  written  on  April
4th,  1897,  and  part  of  which  is  reproduced  in  Plate  II.,
Fig  I.  This  is  a clear  round  childish  writing,  containing  a
rather  peculiar  form  of  the  letter  “ k ” which  does  not  occur
in  any  other  of  the  writings.  The  latest  specimen  of  B3  is
dated  August  12th,  1897.  It  retains  the  round  childish
character,  each  letter  being  formed  with  care  and  correctness,
but  the  capital  “ D’s  ” take  on  the  form  of  those  of  B6  (see
Plate  II.,  Fig.  2)  in  that  the  return  upward  stroke  stops
short  of  the  initial  downward  stroke.  The  whole  writing  of
P>3,  in  fact,  is  similar  to  the  early  writings  of  B6,  as  may  be
seen  by  comparing  (1)  and  (2)  on  Plate  II.  Later  B6  writes
more  flowingly  and  the  letters  become  less  correctly  formed,
the  style  developing  into  that  shown  in  Plate  IIP,  Fig.  2.


XLix.]  A Case  of  Midti-ple  Personality.  395

(4)  Writing  of  BIO.  This  varies  a good  deal.  The  earliest
specimens  are  dated  January  3rd,  1897  (the  BIO  personality
having  first  appeared  on  December  29th,  1896);  some  of
these  resemble  planchette  writing,  being  large  and  sprawling
and  characterless ; other  parts  are  like  the  writing  of  B7,
already  described ; in  others  again  the  letters  are  long  and
.sloping,  like  the  writing  reproduced  in  Plate  IT,  Fig.  3,  which
was  done  a few  weeks  later,  on  February  14th,  when  she
could  see  a very  little,  whereas  at  the  beginning  of  January
she  was  cpiite  blind.

With  regard  to  the  contents  of  these  writings  a few  points
may  be  noted  :

B2’s  first  letter  to  her  father  (iSTo.  1 above)  dated  January
28th,  1896,  shows  an  excessively — not  to  say  artificially —
childish  style  of  phonetic  spelling ; it  is  noteworthy  that  in  two
cases  a word  is  begun  with  the  right  spelling  and  then  the
correct  initial  letter  is  crossed  out,  and  the  word  finally
spelt  wrong she  begins  to  spell  “ which  ” with  a “ w,”  then
crosses  it  out  and  writes  “ vitch  ” ; and  later  on  begins
your  ” with  a “ y,”  then  crosses  it  out  and  writes  “ oil’s.”
The  whole  performance  suggests  not  so  much  a child  as  an
elder  person  imagining  herself  to  be  a child ; as  if  the  normal
consciousness  were  deliberately,  and  not  quite  successfully,
trying  to  suppress  itself  to  give  full  play  to  the  dramatic
instincts  of  the  subliminal.  So  little,  indeed,  in  this  case  was
the  normal  consciousness  submerged  that  it  cropped  up  spon-
taneously and  required  no  external  suggestion  or  artifice  to
elicit  it,  such  as  was  used  in  the  incident  of  the  correct
counting  to  which  ]\Ir.  Piddington  has  drawn  attention  (see
below,  p.  411)  when  BIO  could  only  count  1,  2,  1,  2;  but
was  suddenly  surprised  into  counting  up  to  5.

In  a 2iiece  of  writing  by  B7  there  are  indications  of  the
opposite  extreme,  explicit  knowledge  being  shown  of  a fact
which  the  normal  Mary  Barnes  had  probably  forgotten,  or
perhaps  never  consciously  known.  B7  wrote :

March  16th,  1895.

The  dear  old  Dada  and  Mother.  The  dear  old  Doctor  H .

The  dear  old  doctor  G . The  dear  doctor  Wilson.  The  dear

old  nurse  who  came  from  the  Union  to  nurse  mama  when  she  had
diptheiria.  Mlss  Mlarian  Bearnet.


396


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


The  date  given  at  the  top  of  this  writing  was  incorrect ;
it  was  really  written  on  May  13th,  1896,  on  the  back  of  a
ticket  for  a public  meeting  at  the  Mansion  House  on  May
12th,  1896.  March  16th,  1895,  was  before  the  illness
which  started  the  series  of  varying  personalities,  and  the
mention  of  this  date  is  perhaps  another  indication  of  the  fact
that  the  memory  of  B7  included  incidents  in  the  life  of  the
normal  personality  A.  This  extended  memory  is  shown  in  the
interesting  reference  to  her  mother’s  illness  which  occurred
when  Mary  Barnes  was  under  two  years  old  ; in  the  reference
to  her  parents  as  such,  instead  of  as  Tom  and  Mary  Ann ;
in  the  use  of  the  correct  names  of  the  doctors ; and  again  in
the  signature  “ Miss  Mlarian  Bearnet,”  ^ an  obvious  variant
of  the  real  name.

It  may  be  remembered  that  Ansel  Bourne  adopted  during
his  secondary  personality  a similar  variant  of  his  real  name,
calling  himself  A.  J.  Brown.

At  a later  stage,  B6  signed  herself  “ Critter  Barnes,”  but
only  after  she  had  been  taught  what  her  real  surname  was.
Finally  she  dropped  the  “ Critter,”  and  used  her  proper  signa-
ture, after  having  been  taught  it.

The  drawings  illustrate  the  development  of  faculties  latent
in  the  normal  personality,  and  it  is  curious,  though  (as  Mr.
Ihddiugton  points  out,  p.  408)  not  without  parallel,  that  they
began  in  the  blind  stage,  BIO.

BIO  having  first  appeared  on  December  29th,  1896,
began  to  draw  on  January  3rd,  1897,  when  completely  blind,
and  a large  number  of  drawings  were  executed  on  that  day.
The  first  ones  represent  faces,  drawn  on  a large  scale  and  in
bold  outlines.  Dr.  Wilson  notes  that  to  produce  these  she
felt  her  own  face,  and  then  drew  her  pictures  by  touch.  The
first  of  all  is  drawn  in  profile,  the  length  of  the  face  being
about  5 inches.  There  are  also  four  large  full-face  drawings,
closely  resembling  one  another,  the  faces  being  from  8 to  9
inches  long.  ISText  comes  a half-length  figure- — apparently  of
a man — and  another  large  profile  face,  with  very  elaborate
head  gear.  After  this,  the  fashion-plate  type  shown  in  Plate
V.  predominates,  and  there  are  about  half-a-dozen  half  or  full

' Tlie  signature  actually  written  was  as  much  like  the  real  name  as  “Mlarian
Bearnet”  is  like  “Mary  Barnes.”


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  397

length  figures  of  elaborately-dressed  ladies — -one,  marked  “ Bride,”'
with  a veil,  others  with  elaborate  coiffures,  and  one  with  a
hat  and  veil.  In  this  last  case,  the  veil  is  described  as  added
after  the  rest  of  the  figure  was  drawn.  A note  on  it  states

that,  as  she  could  not  see,  she  asked  for  her  forefinger  to  be
placed  on  the  neck  of  the  figure,  and  then  drew  a veil  in
the  correct  position.  On  one  of  the  other  drawings,  it  is
noted  that  her  father  moved  the  paper  as  she  was  in  the
middle  of  drawing,  so  that  the  skirt  was  drawn  at  a con-
siderable distance  from  the  upper  part  of  the  figure.  Dr.
Wilson  states  that  later  on  her  sense  of  touch  became  much
more  acute,  so  that,  if  the  paper  was  moved  while  she  was  in
the  middle  of  drawing,  she  could  find  out  for  herself,  by  feeling
it,  where  to  continue  the  lines.

These  early  drawings  are  mixed  up  with  a good  deal  of
writing,  either  mere  lists  of  names  and  words,  or  apparently
casual  remarks, — possibly  referring  to  conversations  going  on
around  her, — or  fragmentary  reminiscences  of  music-hall  songs,-
such  as  the  following :

Dear  Father

I want  some  pudding  Toms  Lamb

She  was  a dear  little  dickey  Bird
Chip,  Chip,  Chip  she  went

Sweetly  she  sang  to  me  till  all  my  monej’  was  S2)ent

She  went  of  song  we  parted  on  fighting  terms

For  she  was  one  of  the  eary  birds  and  I was  one  of  the  worms.

We  will  retire  to  the  other  room  for  a short  interval  to  discuss
nessessary  matters  Old  Sam.

The  writing,  both  in  form  and  contents,  strongly  resembles
the  elementary  stages  of  automatic  w'riting  with  which  psychi-
cal researchers  are  familiar.

A series  of  pictures  executed  about  a month  later  are  much
better  drawn  ; the  faces  are  more  correct,  and  have  a certain
variety  of  expression,  though  fundamentally  similar  and  all
in  2>rofile.  The  figures,  again,  are  of  the  fashion-^ilate  ty^ie.
They  are  drawn  in  pencil  and  coloured  with  chalks.  At  this
time  BIO  had  begun  to  recover  her  sight,  but  was  extremely
short-sighted,  not  being  able  to  see  anything  clearly  more
than  about  three  inches  from  her  eyes  (see  Dr.  Tweedy’s  report).


398


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


Her  habit  of  occasionally  holding  up  the  crayons  to  her  eye,
so  close  that  they  sometimes  touched  the  cornea,  suggested,
however,  that  for  practical  purposes  she  could  not  see  at  all,
and  L)r.  Wilson  thought  that  these  drawings,  too,  were
really  executed  by  touch.  It  was  a significant  feature  of
this  condition  that  the  cornea  was  completely  insensitive,  as
sometimes  occurs  with  subjects  in  a deep  state  of  trance.

Later  in  February,  as  described  in  Dr.  Wilson’s  account,
the  B6  or  B2  personality  appeared  again  ; but  in  the  middle
of  March  the  imbecile  state,  BIO,  returned,  and  was  even
worse  than  before,  being  paralysed,  blind,  deaf,  and  dumb.
Her  sense  of  touch  in  guiding  the  pencil  and  copying  was
now  even  more  acute  than  before,  and  the  drawings  were
still  better  executed.  It  is  to  this  period  that  the  two  draw-
ings reproduced  on  Plates  V.  and  VI.  belong.  The  one  given
on  I’late  IV.  belongs  to  a slightly  earlier  period,  March  7th
to  14th,  when  BIO  was  alternating  with  B2,  and  it  shows
more  imagination  and  power  of  composition  than  any  of  the
other  specimens.


Diary  of  Appearances  of  Different  Personalities.


A = Normal  state.

B = Abnormal  state,  of  which
there  were  ten  varieties,  as
follows  :

B1 — ^Mauia  of  3rd  and  4th  weeks
of  the  acute  illness.

Bh^ — Coma  cephalgia  of  the  2nd
and  3rd  weeks  of  illness  in
1895.

B2 — Childish;  “a  thing,”  “good
thing.”

B3— “Nick.”


Bl — Deaf  and  dumb.

B5 — Thinks  herself  only  3 days


old.


B6 — “ Pretty  dear,”  “ good  crea-
ture,” or  “ Tom’s  darling.”

B7 — “ Adjuice  Uneza.”

B8 — Thinks  she  was  only  born
last  night.

By — V arious  degeneracies,

“dreadful  wicked  creature.”
BlO — Blind,  and  draws;  “Tom’s
Lamb.”


In  the  following  table,  the  first  appearance  of  each  personality  is
indicated  by  the  black  type.  When  no  date  is  given,  the  personality
is  continued  from  the  last  date  mentioned.  Details  of  A are  given
separately  beloAV.


189.Y

Easter,  . . Influenza.

Belapse.

Ap.  21-Mav  5,  .

May  6-19,  . Bl.


May  20-26, . . B2.

Alay  and  dune  1
to  July  20,  I •

July  20-23,  . . B2.

July  24- Aug.  8,  . B3.


XLIX.]


A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.


399


Aug.  8,  .

. B4.

to  Aug.  1,  .

. B3.

Aug.  and  Sept.
Oct.  and  Nov.

. B4  and  B2.

. B4  for  14  days

July  18  and  ]
Aug.  8,  J

Bl  for  few  minutes.

and  B2.

Aug.  1-Sept.

20,

. B3.

Oct.  27,

1st  tooth  extrac-

Sept. 20,

. B6.

tion.  B2.

Sept.  26,

. B3  and  B6.

to  Nov.  26,  .

. B2.

Oct.  10,

. B6,  B7,  B9.

Nov.  26  to  Dec.  20  B5.

Oct.  10-16,  .

. B9.

Dec.  20  to  Jan.

. Bl.

Oct.  16,  B9,  B3  for  half  hour.

1896.

Oct.  17,

>5

Oct.  18-30,  .

. B9.

Jan.  12

. Bl,  BD.

Oct.  31,

. Bl.

Jan.  14-Feb.  7

.B2.

Nov.  1-20,  .

B2.  2nd  tooth

Jan.  22,

Shown  at  Clinical

extraction.

Societju  B2.

Nov.  20-Dec.

10,

. B9  and  B2.

Feb.  7,

. Bl  and  BD.

Dec.  10,

. B6.

Feb.  9-22,  .

. B2.  Seen  by

Dec.  29,

. B6-B9.

Dr.  Savill.

Dec.  29,

. BIO.

Feb.  26,  . Seen  by  Drs.  Jones,

Meikle,  Bramwell,

1897.

Barrett  as  B2.

B2  changing  to  Bl
. Bl  and  B2.

. . Bl, finally  B2.

. B2.

. B2,  Bl'^  for
half  hour.

. B2,  Bl^  for
half  hour.
B2,  convulsions.
. B3.

. B2.

. Bl^.

. B6.


Mar.  1,

Mar.  1-4,

Mar.  6,

Mar.  7,

Mar.  7-18,

Mar.  18-27,

to  Apr.  4,

Apr.  18-23,

Apr.  23,

May  5,

May  6,

May  7,

May  11,

May  12,

May  17-30,

May  31,

June  7-13,

June  14-20,

June  20,

June  21-24,  . B8.

June  24-30,  . B7  and  B9.

July  3,  . B6.  Dr.  Tuckey’s  visit.
July  6,  . . B6-B2.

July  8,  . . B3.

(Paralysed  in  legs  from  May
31  to  July  8.)


Jan.  31,


Dr.


Feb.  13,
Feb.  26,


BIO.  Seen  by
Enraght.

BIO.  Seen  by  Dr.

Gradually  B6  or  B2.
Shown  at  Clinical  Society.
March  14,  . . BlO.

Mar.  25-Apr.  4,  BlO  with  coma.
April  4,  . . B3.

May  3,  B3.  Seen  by  Dr.  Cross,

May  12,  . . B3.

May  13- June  26,  . B6.

June  26-30,  . Bl.  Seen  by

Dr.  Barlow.


. B2.

June  30,

. B3.

. BD.

Aug.  22,

. B6.

. B6  and  B7.

Nov.  9,

. B6.

. B7  leaving.

Nov.  9-19,  .

. BD.

B2  coming.

Nov.  20,

. B6.

. B2  and  B7.

1898.

. B7-B6-B2.

to  March  24,

. B6.

. B4-B6.

March  24-31  ]

like  B9

April  7-10,  .
From  this


Changing  to  B6.


VIZ.


three


after  the  illness  began.


date,

years

B6  continued  for  the  next  six
years,  up  to  the  present  date,
1904,  and  seems  now  to  have
become  permanent.


41)0


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


Diary  uf
1895.

May  20.  .

Jul}^  6.

Aug.  8.

Oct.  27.  .

Dec.  20  .


1896.

Jan.  13.  .

Jan.  18.  .

Jan.  26  to  Feb.  1.
Feb.  2 to  Feb.  8.
Feb.  9 to  Feb.  15.
Feb.  16  to  Feb.  22.
Feb.  28.  .

Mar.  7.

Mar.  8 to  14.  ' .

Mar.  20  to  21.  .
Mar.  27.  .

Mar.  29  to  Apr.  4.
Apr.  5 to  11.

Apr.  12  to  Apr.  18.
Apr.  19  to  25.  .
May  1.

May  2 to  9.

May  17  to  30.  .
June  7 to  13.  .


Appearances  of  the  Normal  State  A.


. B2  arrives.  A comes  for  2 to  6 or  7 hours.

. A less  frec[uent  and  shorter,  appears  only  3 or  4
times,  and  lasts  5 minutes  to  2 hours.

. A comes  more  often,  but  not  for  longer  periods.

. A less  frequent ; may  be  absent  for  2 or  3 days.
Father  can  call  A back.

, A very  irregular.  Perhaps  once  a day  or
misses  3 or  4 days,  and  only  comes  for  a few
minutes  at  a time.


. A came  back  at  3 A.M.,  and  twice  at  8 and
9 A.M.

. A came  lately  many  times,  but  for  a few
minutes  only.

. A came  only  once,  and  for  10  minutes.

. A came  only  once,  and  for  2 minutes.

. A did  not  come  once.

. A came  only  twice,  for  a minute.

. A came  four  or  five  times,  once  for  half  an  hour.
. A came  several  times,  once  for  twenty  minutes.

. Frequently!  normal.  Her  father  brings  A back
by  cuddling.

. Frequently  A.

. Seldom  A.

. Seldom  A.

. Not  once  A.

. Not  once  A.

. Not  once  A.

. A for  1 hour.

. Not  once  A.

. Very  seldom  A.

. A comes  often  ; may  be  able  to  walk  or  may  be
paralysed.

. A for  2 hours.


June  13.  .


XLTX.]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality . 401


July  3.  . . .

A came  for  half  an  hour.  Has  been  absent
many  days.

July  7.  .

A came  for  1 minute.

July  19  to  Aug.  1.  .

A comes  only  for  a moment,  and  is  brought  by
caressing.

Aug.  18.  .

A is  only  brought  by  caressing.

Aug.  23  to  Sep.

A comes  frequently  for  about  2 minutes  in  a
particular  road  at .

Sejj.  4 and  5.  .

A comes  often  after  bathing,  often  for  10
minutes,  once  for  an  hour  and  a half.

Sep.  6 to  19.

A not  often.

Oct.  and  Nov.  .

A is  very  rare,  and  can  only  be  brought  by
caressing.

Dec  27.  .

A comes  nearly  every  day  since  11th  for  3 or  4
minutes,  sometimes  spontaneously,  sometimes
brought  by  caressing.

1897.

Jan.  14.  .

A came  for  4 minutes  during  the  blind  stage.

Jan.  16  and  23.

A came  3 or  4 times  for  a few  minutes ; and
momentarily  on  several  other  days  towards
the  end  of  January.

Jan.  31.  .

A came  when  blind,  being  induced  by  use  of
the  ophthalmoscope.

Feb.  and  Mar.  .

A almost  entirely  absent.

May  3.  . .

A will  not  come  now,  not  even  in  place  where
she  used  to  come  in  a certain  road.  Resists
her  father’s  calling.

May  13.  .

A came  after  B3,  and  was  succeeded  by  B6.

June,  July,  and  Aug.

A almost  always  absent  now.  The  patient
was  at , but  A came  very  seldom.

Aug.  22.  .

A came  once  for  4 minutes.

Oct.  30.

I tried  to  photograph  A,  but  failed.

1898.

Mar.  24.  .

A practically  gone.  If  A is  called,  the  patient

resists  and  strikes  out.

May  24.  . . . When  father  calls  A,  the  patient  falls  down

unconscious.


402


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


Description  of  Illustrations.

Plates  I.-III.  Reproductions  of  handwritings  of  the  different
personalities.

Plate  I.

Writing  by  B2.  In  the  original  each  word  was  written  back-
wards, i.e.  from  right  to  left.


Plate  II.

(1)  Writing  by  B3,  (2)  by  B6,  (3)  by  BIO.

Plate  III.

(1)  Writing  by  B9  (in  the  original  each  word  was  written  back-
wards), (2)  writing  by  B6,  in  March,  1904.

Plates  IV.-VI.  Reproductions  of  drawings  by  the  different
personalities.

Plate  IV.

Drawing  by  the  blind  personality,  BIO,  during  the  week  March
7th  to  14th,  1897 ; reduced  from  the  original,  which  is  17  ins.
by  111  ins.

Plate  V.

Drawing  by  the  blind  personality,  BIO,  on  March  18th,  1897  ;
reduced  from  the  original,  which  is  about  6 ins.  by  10  ins.


Plate  VI.

Drawing  by  BIO  on  March  22nd,  1897,  reduced  from  the
original,  which  is  about  6 ins.  by  10  ins.;  intended  to  represent  the
nurse  who  attended  her  in  that  stage,  but  not  at  all  like  her.
The  nurse  said  she  would  like  to  be  drawn  holding  a bottle  in
her  hand ; so  BlO  asked  to  be  allowed  to  feel  the  bottle,  and
then  drew  it.  She  made  five  other  drawings  on  the  same  day.


Plate  VII.,  Fig.  1.

Drawing  by  B3  or  “ Nick.”  This  took  two  days  to  do — April
11th  and  12th,  1897.


XLIX.]


A Case  of  MuUiple  Personality.


403


Plate  VII.,  Fig.  2.

Drawing  by  B6,  or  “Good  Creature,”  on  May  13th,  1897.  When
she  drew  this,  she  burst  out  laughing  at  the  picture  “Nick”  had
drawn  on  April  11th  and  12th.


Plate  VIII.

Diagram  of  sections  through  the  cortex  of  the  human  and  the
rabbit’s  brain,  reproduced  by  the  courtesy  of  Dr.  G.  A.  Watson.
The  cortex  in  both  is  divided  into  five  layers  (marked  here
I,  II,  III,  IV,  v)  which  develop  from  below  upwards.  At  birth  all
layers  are  already  formed.  The  deepest  layer  (v)  is  called  the  poly-
morphic from  the  varying  shapes  of  its  cells.  It  is  the  first  to  develop,
and  with  layer  IV  appears  about  the  sixth  month  of  foetal  life.  The
pyramidal  (il)  and  other  layers  appear  about  the  7th  to  8th  month  of
foetal  life.  They  are  then  about  three-quarters  of  their  depth  in  the
adult.  At  birth  the  polymorphic  and  layer  IV  are  not  quite  their  final
thickness,  while  the  granular  layer  (ill)  is  only  three-quarters  of  its
final  thickness,  and  the  pyramidal  layer  only  one  half.  These  details
illustrate  the  fact  that  the  course  of  development  is  from  below
upwards  or  from  within  outwards.  We  can,  therefore,  safely  infer
that  the  functional  activity  of  the  layers  comes  into  play  in  the  same
order.

The  polymorphic  layer  is  as  large  or  thick  in  animals  as  in  man.
In  this  diagram  it  is  seen  to  be  even  thicker  in  the  rabbit  than  in  man.
For  the  rabbit  has  but  little  intelligence,  and  therefore  has  to  rely  on
well-developed  instincts.

The  granular  layer  (ill)  does  not  demand  special  notice  here.  It
receives  impressions  from  the  sensory  organs.

The  pyramidal  layer  (ll)  is  the  most  important  one  for  us  to
consider  here.  It  is  the  last  to  develop,  and  the  first  to  go  in
dementia.  It  also  decays  first  on  the  outer  surface,  for  in  this  part
many  of  the  cells  have  not  reached  perfection,  being  of  the  type
called  embryonic.

Compare  the  depth  of  this  layer  in  the  normal  human  brain  as
shown  in  the  diagram  (-86  mm.)  with  its  depth  in  the  rabbit
(T4  mm.).  It  is  thus  six  times  as  thick  in  the  human  as  in  the
rabbit’s  brain,  which  alone  indicates  an  enormous  difference  in
intellectual  power.


404


Dv.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


Plate  IX.  Fig.  1.

Right  side  of  the  brain,  showing  the  association  and  sensori  motor
areas  of  the  certex.  M is  the  motor  area.  The  foot  centre  is  at
the  top,  and  the  lips  and  speech  centres  at  the  bottom  ; other  centres
intervene.  H points  to  the  centre  of  hearing ; V to  the  sensori-visual
centre,  that  is,  the  centre  where  the  images  of  objects  seen  and  focussed
by  the  eye  acting  as  a photographic  camera  are,  so  to  speak,  finally
developed  or  perceived.  In  the  blind  imbecile  the  pyramidal  layer
is  here  undeveloped  and  thin  (according  to  Bolton).

The  clear  spaces  P,  OT  and  F represent  the  association  areas,
which  associate  the  impressions  received  in  the  sensory  areas  for
purposes  of  higher  mentation.

Drs.  G.  A.  Watson  and  J.  S.  Bolton  regard  the  visuo-sensory  area
(V)  as  of  relatively  little  psychic  value,  comparing  its  development
in  the  human  and  other  “seeing”  animals  with  the  much  larger
visual  psychic  or  association  area  (P)  which  surrounds  the  visuo-sensory.

In  this  visuo-psychic  area  all  sight  impressions  are  stored  and  analysed.
In  copying  or  drawing  from  a copy  or  painting  from  nature,  the  image
of  the  object  is  focussed  by  the  eye,  which  is  like  a camera,  with  the
retina  as  a screen.  From  the  eye  the  image  is  impressed  on  the  visuo-
sensory  area  (V)  and  thence  it  is  analysed  and  stored  in  the  association
centre  P.  From  the  visuo-psychic  area  (P)  messages  for  guidance  as  to
the  form  and  colour  of  the  drawing  are  sent  to  the  hand  centre  in  M.

Plate  IX.,  Fig.  2.

Right  side  of  the  brain,  showing  the  arterial  blood  supply.  There
are  three  areas,  marked  PC,  MC  and  AC,  supplied  bj^  three  arteries.
Posteriorly  (PC)  the  blood  supply  comes  from  the  posterior  cerebral,  a
branch  of  the  vertebral  artery.  Anteriorly,  and  along  the  top  of  the
brain  (including  the  foot  centre)  in  the  region  marked  AC,  the  blood
supply  comes  from  the  anterior  cerebral  artery.  In  the  middle  region
marked  MC,  which  includes  the  large  motor  area,  and  also  the  hearing
and  taste  centres,  the  blood  supply  is  from  the  middle  cerebral  artery.
The  two  last  are  both  branches  of  the  carotid  artery.  But  all  these
arteries  intermingle  in  the  capillaries.  The  anterior  association  centre,
which  is  the  highest  psychic  centre,  is  supplied  by  the  anterior  cerebral
artery.  The  posterior  association  or  visuo-psychic  centre  is  supplied  by
the  posterior  cerebral  artery.  The  middle  cerebral  artery  divides  up  into
many  arteries  supplying  several  different  centres.  Thus  speech  and
hearing  may  be  shut  off  by  one  large  branch  being  narrowed  ; the  optic
mechanism  by  another,  the  hands  by  another,  and  the  legs  by  another.


XLIX.]


A Case,  of  Multiple  Personality.


405


APPENDIX  IP

Letter  from  Mr.  Pjddington  to  Dr.  Wilson.

Since  reading  yonr  paper,  I have  noted  a few  resemblances,
and  also  one  or  two  differences,  between  the  case  of  Mary
Barnes  and  other  cases  of  dual  or  multiple  personality.

Some  years  ago  I read  at  one  of  the  meetings  of  the  S.P.E.
Dr.  Morton  Prince’s  preliminary  report  on  the  “ Beauchamp  ”
case ; and  I well  remember  how,  at  the  close  of  the  meeting,  a
lady  member  of  our  Society  asked  me  what  I thought  of  the
paper ; and  how,  after,  I suppose,  I had  made  some  banal  reply
such  as:  “It’s  very  interesting,”  she  retorted:  “'Well,  / don’t
believe  a word  of  it ! ”

Now,  although  I do  not  imagine  that  many  of  your  audience
the  other  night,  or  that  many  of  your  futui’e  readers  will  share
this  lady’s  scepticism,  and  although  your  case  is  not  such  a
“tall”  one  as  Dr.  Morton  Prince’s,  still  some  amount  of  incre-
dulity is  not  unnatural  when  people  learn  of  these  things  for
the  first  time  and  are  unaccpiainted  with  the  literature  of  the
subject.  Nor  do  I imagine  that  scepticism  in  the  matter  would
be  entirely  confined  to  the  lay  reader,  but  might  be  found
even  in  the  ranks  of  your  own  profession.

If,  then,  some  undesigned  coincidences  can  be  shown  to
exist  between  your  case  and  other  recorded  cases  of  a similar
type,  they  might  serve  as  an  “ aid  to  faith  ” ; and  in  any  case
the  comparison  may  have  some  little  interest  even  for  those
who  readily  accept  the  facts.

I think  I am  justified  in  speaking  of  the  coincidences  as

undesigned  for  two  reasons.  In  the  first  place  because,  as  I

think  any  fair-minded  critic  will  allow,  it  is  ridiculous  to

suppose  that  a girl  of  the  age,  station  in  life,  and  education  of
Mary  Barnes  could  or  would  have  read  up  the  subject  of

multiple  personality,  and  on  the  strength  of  her  acquired
knowledge  have  maintained  a plausible  and  wearisome  imita-
tion of  this  form  of  mental  instability  during  several  years.


40G


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


In  the  second  place,  because  the  appearance  of  the  coinci-
dental symptoms  cannot  be  ascribed  to  your  suggestion ; and
this  for  the  very  good  reason  that,  although  you  were,  of  course,
aware  of  the  alleged  existence  of  cases  of  dual  personality,  you
were  not,  as  I know  from  your  own  assurance,  acquainted
with  the  details — nor,  for  that  matter,  even  with  the  broad
oixtlines — of  the  classical  cases  of  alternating  personality.
And  it  is  to  coincidences  in  little  details  and  not  to  the
salient  points  of  resemblance,  such  for  instance  as  the  epilepti-
form attacks,  or  the  mutually  exclusive  mexnories  of  the
various  personalities,  that  I refer.

The  coincidences  are  not  many ; but  then  I do  not  pretend
to  have  made  an  exhaustive  list,  for  my  collation  has  been
little  better  than  cursorily  made ; and,  moreover,  the  recorded
cases  of  dual  and  multiple  personality  ai’e  not  numerous,  and
but  two  have  been  described  with  anything  approaching  even
tolerable  adequacy.  Not  that  I imagine  that  such  cases  are
really  so  very  rare ; but  that  their  apparent  rarity  is  due  to
the  rarity  of  intelligent  observers.  This  infrequency  of  recorded
cases,  however,  helps  my  argument ; for  it  leaves  only  a narrow
held  for  chance  coincidence  to  disport  itself  in,  and  if  the  re-
semblances cannot  be  assigned  to  chance  or  design,  then  it  is
reasonable  to  attribute  them  to  some  common  spontaneous
cause  which  is  at  work  in  all  the  cases ; or,  in  other  wordsj
they  tell  against  the  view  that  the  phenomena  are  spurious.

This  is  a very  long  overture  to  a very  small  body  of  facts,
but  I want  to  explain  the  object  which  I have  in  view  in
comparing  the  case  of  Mary  Barnes  with  others.

The  case  may  be  compared :

(1)  With  that  of  Mary  Keynolds ;

In  her  secondary  state  Mary  Reynolds  did  not  recognise  her
parents,  brothers,  sisters,  or  friends ; and  “ she  was  very  slow  to
learn,  and  indeed  never  did  learn,  or,  at  least,  never  would
acknowledge  the  ties  of  consanguinity,  or  scarcely  those  of
friendship.”  These  words  might  not  apply  with  absolute  exact-
ness to  Mary  Barnes ; yet  I take  it  that  her  nicknaming  of
her  father,  mother,  family,  and  of  yourself  and  other  doctors  who
visited  her  implies  a loss  of  memory,  not  perhaps  so  complete,
but  similar  in  tendency.

Mary  Reynolds  and  Mary  Barnes  both  had  to  be  re-taught


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multiplp  Personality.  407

reading  and  writing  ; and  both  acquired,  or  rather  re-acquired
these  arts  within  a far  shorter  period  than  is  needed  in  the
case  of  children  learning  them  for  the  first  time.

Mary  Eeynolds’  was  a case  of  dual  personality  only,  and  not
of  multiple  personality,  and  she  did  not  therefore  display  the
multifarious  changes  that  your  patient  did.  Still,  both  finished
up  by  remaining  permanently  not  in  their  normal,  but  in  an
abnormal  state ; for  after  alternating  between  her  two  states
for  a period  of  15  or  16  years,  Mary  Eeynolds  at  the  age  of
36  settled  down  for  good,  namely,  for  the  last  25  years  of
her  life,  into  her  secondary  condition.  This  secondary  con-
dition was  undoubtedly  superior  to  her  original  normal  person-
ality. This  cannot,  it  is  true,  be  said  of  Mary  Barnes’  present
and  apparently  permanent  state,  for  I understand  that  B6  is
not  superior  to  the  original  normal  personality  as  it  existed
before  her  illness ; but  at  any  rate  B6  is  vastly  superior  to
several  of  the  other  personalities.

(2)  With  that  of  Miss  Beauchamp :

You  narrate  one  instance  in  your  paper  where  one  of  the
abnormal  personalities  recalled  an  incident  which  had  hap-
pened when  Mary  Barnes  was  only  two  years  and  a half  old ;
and  in  conversation  you  told  me  that  you  thought  that  there
was  some  reason  for  supposing  that  her  memory  in  one  of  her
stages  went  back  even  earlier  than  this.  I know  that  you  do
not  attach  much  weight  to  this  point,  because  you  recognise
the  enormous  difficulties  of  excluding  the  possibility  of  such
memories  of  babyhood  being  really  due  to  imagination,  or  to
the  girl  having  heard  her  elders  recount  incidents  belonging  to
the  time  when  she  was  a tiny  child.  Nevertheless,  though  of
course  the  same  objections  apply,  it  strikes  me  as  rather  re-
markable that  Dr.  Morton  Prince  believed  that  the  personality
whom  he  christened  Sally  remembered  events  of  her  babyhood,
such,  for  instance,  as  learning  to  walk ; and  at  any  rate  she
professed  to  remember  all  this  long  way  back.  That  you  and
Dr.  Morton  Prince,  both  in  entire  ignorance  of  each  other’s
case,  should  have  been  led  to  the  same  surmise  about
two  different  subjects,  lends  some  mutual  confirmation  to  the
observations  of  both.  There  is,  however,  one  point  of  differ-
ence between  these  two  cases.  The  otherwise  omniscient,  or
nearly  omniscient,  Sally  did  not  know  French  or  other  foreign


408


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


languages  with  which  the  nornial  Miss  Beauchamp  was  familiar  ;
whereas  while  the  normal  Mary  Barnes  knew  no  French,  and
would  not  learn  it,  and  could  not  draw,  B6  and  B9  knew  some
French,  and  BIO  could  draw.

(3)  With  that  of  Lurancy  Vennum :

The  phenomena  were  entirely  of  a spiritualistic  type,  the
various  personalities,  in  this  case  styled  “ controls,”  purporting
to  be  the  spirits  of  deceased  persons.  With  the  exception  of
one  “ control,”  and  that  the  most  persistent,  there  does  not
appear  to  be  any  evidence  to  show  that  these  controls  were
anything  more  than  secondary  personalities.  Yet  in  spite  of
the  wide  divei'gences  between  the  symptoms  recorded  of  Lurancy
Vennum  and  those  of  your  patient,  1 note  one  little  point  in
common.  When  supposed  to  be  controlled  l)y  the  spirit  of  a
woman  named  Katrina  Hogan,  Lurancy  Vennum  called  her
father  “ Old  Black  Dick,”  and  her  mother  “ Old  Granny  ” : much
as  Mary  Barnes  nicknamed  her  parents  and  other  members  of
her  family.

(4)  With  that  of  Miss  Anna  Winsor  (“Old  Stump”):

“Old  Stump”  (which  was  the  name  given  by  Miss  Winsor

to  what  was  really  her  right  arm,  though  she  refused  to  recognise
it  as  such)  executed  a series  of  drawings ; whereas  Anna  Winsor
in  her  normal  state  never  learnt  to  draw,  nor  cared  to  try  to
draw.  A parallel  is  to  be  found  in  the  performances  of  BIO.

“Old  Stump”  wrote  poetry,  and  it  is  stated  that  the  hand-
writing of  the  different  pieces  of  poetry  “ differs  greatly”  : another
point  of  contact,  and  that  in  a most  interesting  particular,
with  one  of  the  phenomena  which  you  were  fortunate  enough
to  witness  in  the  case  of  Mary  Barnes.

Again,  it  is  recorded  of  Miss  Winsor : “ She  became  blind,
4th  of  January;”  [1861:  nearly  six  months,  that  is,  after  the
first  manifestation  of  her  peculiar  symptoms]  “ is  still  blind,”
[“  still  ” meaning  two  months  later]  “ sees  as  well  with  eyes
closed  as  open ; keeps  them  closed  much  of  the  time.  Beads
and  draws  with  them  closed.  Draws  in  the  dark  as  well  as
in  the  light ; is  clairvoyant.”

Leaving  aside  the  clairvoyance,  which  Dr.  Isa  Barrows,
Miss  Winsor’s  medical  attendant,  so  airily  disposes  of  in  a
couple  of  words,  there  are  two  points  of  resemblance  to  your
case : namely,  the  psychical  blindness,  and  the  drawing  in  the


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  409

dark  or  with  the  eyes  closed.  I do  not  know  whether
Mary  Barnes  actually  executed  any  of  her  drawings  in  the
dark ; but  she  was  able  to  copy  written  words  and  to  copy
fashion-plates  under  conditions  which  seem  to  have  excluded
dependence  upon  her  sense  of  sight.

I remark,  however,  one  point  of  difference  in  connection
with  the  blindness,  or  rather  with  the  recovery  of  the  siglit.
Thus  when  Anna  Winsor  recovered  her  sight  after  eighteen
months  of  “ erratic  vision,”  she  found  the  light  painful  to  her
eyes,  and  in  consequence  the  room  in  which  she  lived  had
to  be  darkened.  When  Mary  Barnes  recovered  her  sight,  she
seems  to  have  experienced  no  painful  sensations.

One  point  which  you  have  recorded  of  “ Xick  ” interested  me
greatly,  because  a parallel  to  it  can  be  found  in  a most
unexpected  quarter.

Professor  A¥illiam  James  quotes  in  The  Varieties  of  Pidigio'as
Experience  the  personal  narratives  of  a certain  number  of
people  who  have  i;ndergone  “ religious  convex’sion  ” ; and  one
of  the  leading  characteristics  of  the  converted  state,  of  the
“ new  man,”  as  exemplified  in  these  narratives,  is  not  only  a
magnified  appreciation  of  nature,  but  a perfect  tranquillity
in  the  presence  of  nature  in  her  savage  moods.

One  convert  writes : — “ AVhen  a boy,  I was  standing  under
a tree  which  was  struck  by  lightning,  and  received  a shock,
from  the  effects  of  which  I never  knew  exemption  until  I
had  dissolved  partirership  with  worry.  Since  then  lightning
and  thunder  have  been  encountered  under  conditions  which
would  formerly  have  caused  great  depression  and  discomfort,
without  [my]  experiencing  a trace  of  either.”

And  another  says : — “ And  scarce  anything,  among  all  the
works  of  nature,  was  so  sweet  to  me  as  thunder  and  lightning;
formerly  nothing  had  been  so  terrible  to  me.  Before,  I used
to  be  uncommonly  terrified  with  thunder,  and  to  be  struck
with  terror  when  I saw  a thunderstorm  arising ; but  now,  on
the  contrary,  it  rejoices  me.”

This  latter  is  the  declaration  of  Jonathan  Edwards : and,
the  phraseology  apart,  might  have  been  made  by  “Xick”;
■except  that,  for  all  we  know,  “Xick”  was  unaware  of  Mary
Barnes’  fear  of  thunderstorms  and  Mary  Barnes  of  “ Xick’s  ”
•enjoyment  of  them.


410


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


We  may  perhaps  compare  with  this  relief  from  physical
fear  what  is  described  of  Mary  Eeynolds  in  her  secondary
state : — “ She  knew  no  fear,  and  as  bears  and  panthers  were
numerous  in  the  woods  ....  her  friends  told  her  of
the  danger  to  which  she  exposed  herself ; but  it  produced
no  other  effect  than  to  draw  forth  a contemptuous  laugh,  as
she  said,  ‘ I know  you  only  want  to  frighten  me  and  keep
me  at  home,  but  you  miss  it,  for  I often  see  your  bears,  and
I am  perfectly  convinced  that  they  are  nothing  more  than
black  hogs.’  ” One  day  she  encountered  a “ black  hog  ” when
riding ; tlie  horse  was  frightened  and  refused  to  move ; so
Mary  Eeynolds  dismounted,  and  stick  in  hand  went  close  up-
to  the  l)ear,  which  “ walked  away,  slowly  and  sullenly.”

There  may  be,  and  indeed  is,  an  important  difference  here
between  the  fearless  behaviour  of  Mary  Eeynolds  in  the
presence  of  a bear  and  that  of  “ Nick  ” during  a thunder-
storm ; for  “ Nick  ” did  not  mistake  the  thunderstorm  for
anything  less  terrifying,  while  Mary  Eeynolds  seems  to  have
owed  her  absence  of  fear  to  an  opportune  and  protective

illusion.  And  as  regards  the  feeling  of  security  typical
of  the  religious  convert  and  the  fearlessness  of  “ Nick  ” and
Mary  Eeynolds,  the  latter  should  perhaps  be  attributed  to

what  Myers,  commenting  on  the  case  of  Mary  Eeynolds,  calls
“ the  childish  insouciance  of  the  secondary  state,”  that  is

to  a lower  stage  of  intellectual  development ; while  the  former
one  is  rather  inclined  to  ascribe  not  to  an  intellectual
inability  to  recognise  the  risk  of  danger,  but  to  a higher^
or  at  any  rate  altered,  condition  of  the  moral  character,  in
which  the  individual  finds  himself  in  perfect  tune  with  all

the  manifestations  of  nature,  and  welcomes  and  enjoys  them
as  the  workings  of  a loving  God.

Still  the  interesting  fact  remains  that,  in  these  various  ca.ses
of  altered  personality  of  widely  divergent  origin,  this  sense  of
fearlessness  crops  up  often  enough  to  warrant  one  in  regarding
it  almost  as  a typical  symptom.

Wliile  on  this  topic  I might  add  that  the  first  oncoming  of
Miss  Beauchamp’s  changes  of  personality  dated  from  a thunder-
storm. An  incident  of  a painful  character  was  in  progress,
and  this  alone  may  have  been  sufficient  to  have  upset  her
ecpiililnium ; but  the  thunderstorm  may  also  have  played  a


XLix.]  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  411

part.  “ The  surroundings,  too,”  writes  Dr.  Morton  Prince,
were  dramatic.  It  was  night,  and  pitch  dark,  but  a storm
was  coming  up,  and  great  peals  of  thunder  and  flashes  of
lightning  heightened  the  emotional  effect.  . . . From  that
time  she  was  changed.”

I cannot  find  that  Miss  Beauchamp  either  before  or  after
this  time  is  said  to  have  shown  fear  of  thunderstorms,  though,
as  she  seems  to  have  been  of  a timid  disposition,  it  would  not
be  surprising  if  she  had.  Nor  can  I find  it  noted  that  in  any
of  her  abnormal  states  she  showed  delight  in  them ; though  it
would  be  quite  consistent  with  the  character  of  that  saucy
young  secondary  personality  Sally  Beauchamp  to  snap  her
fingers  in  the  face  of  even  Nature  with  a capital  N.  But  I
am  getting  too  fanciful,  and  will  trouble  you  with  only  one
more  observation.

I cannot  help  regretting  that  you  have  not  in  your  paper
laid  greater  stress  on  one  incident  that  you  dismiss  in  a sen-
tence or  two.  You  record  how  on  one  occasion,  when  your  patient
was  in  a particular  phase  in  which  she  did  not  count  beyond
two,  you  asked  her  “ very  quickly  ” (the  “ very  quickly  ” is
the  pith  of  the  statement)  how  many  fingers  there  were  on
her  hand,  and  although  she  was  supposed  at  this  time  not  to
count  above  two,  she  replied  “ five.”  It  is  true  that  she  at
once  corrected  herself  and  started  counting  again  on  her  “ one,
two  ” system ; but  the  correction  came  too  late,  and  I would
say  that  the  romancing  secondary  personality  had  given  itself
away.  In  other  words,  you  surprised  her  momentarily  into  her
normal  state.  I wish  that  you  had  made  other  attempts  to
catch  her ; not,  of  course,  by  direct  questions,  but  by  employ-
ing artifice.  I do  not  mean  that  I think  that  Mary  Barnes
was  shamming ; I think  nothing  so  foolish.  But  it  does  look
as  if  the  normal  personality  is  not  really  ol^literated  or  entirely
unconscious  during  such  times  as  the  abnormal  personalities
are  active,  but  as  if  it  is  really  there  all  the  time,  only  sent  to
Coventry  by  the  usurping  secondary  personality.  If  this  really
was  the  case,  then  the  mental  phenomena  exhibited  by  your
patient  would  accord  with  what  I cannot  help  believing  is
really  true  of  all  hypnotised  subjects : namely,  that  whatever  the
subjects  themselves  may  assert,  or  whatever  conclusions  their
observers  may  draw  from  their  b.ehaviour,  the  normal  person-


412


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


ality,  although  in  abeyance  and  although  difficult  to  get  at,
is  never  really  extinct.  I should  be  inclined  to  say  that  by
your  sudden  question  you  provoked  an  automatism  of  the  normal
consciousness.

J.  G.  PiDDINGTON.


Comments  by  Dr.  C.  Lloyd  Tuckey.

I saw  “ Mary  Barnes  ” some  years  ago  with  Dr.  Wilson.
She  then  called  herself  “ Poor  Thing,”  and  had  the  manners
and  speech  of  a child  of  six  or  seven,  though  she  was  twice
that  age.  I tried  to  hypnotise  her,  but  failed,  and  other
operators  had  also  found  her  insusceptible.  This  was  unfor-
tunate, for  hypnotism  would  probably  have  supplied  a bridge
of  memory,  and  enabled  us  to  establish  a connection  between
the  various  personalities,  as  in  the  case  of  Ansel  Bourne  re-
corded by  Prof.  William  James  and  Dr.  E.  Hodgson,^  and  in  a
recent  case  of  my  own.  The  latter  was  that  of  a bank  clerk,,
and  was  investigated  by  Dr.  Leaf,  Miss  Goodrich  Freer,  and
myself.  The  subject  disappeared  from  the  bank  on  a Friday  about
mid-day  and  “ woke  up  ” late  on  Saturday  night  in  a strange
hotel  at  Southampton.  He  could  not  give  any  account  of  how
he  had  passed  the  36  intervening  hours  until  he  was  thrown
into  a deep  hypnotic  trance.  He  then  answered  questions^
and  gave  a complete  history  of  his  proceedings.  Subsequent
investigation  proved  the  truth  of  his  story,  and  that  his  actions
in  the  “ second  state  ” were  quite  purposeful.  The  man  was
neurotic  and  given  to  occasional  alcoholic  excess,  and  in  two  or
three  of  the  other  cases  I have  seen  there  was  a history  of
epilepsy  or  aggravated  hysteria.  The  most  recent  case  I have
come  across  was  that  of  an  Oxford  undergraduate,  who  after  a
period  of  overwork  disappeared  from  his  home  without  warning
and  telegraphed  ten  days  after  from  Malta  for  money  to
bring  him  back.  It  appeared  that  he  “ woke  up  ” on  board  a
steamer  at  Tunis  in  the  act  of  knocking  a man  down  who
had  tried  to  steal  his  portmanteau.  The  excitement  seems  to

'111  Froceediiif/-i,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI[.,  p.  ‘221.


XLIX.]


A Case  of  Multiple  Personality.


413


have  brought  him  roimd,  perhaps  by  shifting  the  connection
of  the  neurones.  He  knew  nothing  of  what  had  happened  during
the  ten  days,  but  his  actions  had  evidently  been  rational  or
he  would  have  been  arrested.  We  hoped  to  obtain  a key  by
hypnosis,  but  unfortunately  the  young  man,  on  the  advice  of
an  eminent  brain  specialist,  refused  to  be  operated  on,  so  we
may  have  lost  an  interesting  story.

There  is  a good  deal  of  literature  on  the  subject  since  the
publication  of  Professor  Azam’s  exhaustive  monograph  ^ in
1887.  The  S.P.E.  did  much  to  elucidate  this  fascinating  and
puzzling  problem  at  a time  when  its  importance  was  not
generally  recognised.  Members  will  recall  papers  by  the  late
Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  and  a recent  one  by  Dr.  Morton  I’rince.'^
Now  the  subject  is  often  referred  to  in  the  daily  papers,  and
cases  of  lapsed  memory  and  dual  consciousness  are  discussed
by  the  man  in  the  street.

The  physiological  explanation  put  forward  by  Dr.  Wilson
is  a most  valuable  contribution  towards  the  scientific  under-
standing of  the  subject.  The  case  is  one  of  the  most  striking
hitherto  recorded,  and  it  is  most  fortunate  that  it  has  been
under  the  notice  of  such  a painstaking  and  accomplished
investigator.


Comments  by  Dr.  PiObert  Jones.

Dr.  Wilson  seems  to  me  to  have  made  an  able  and  careful
summary  of  many  observations  in  an  almost  unique  case.  It
had  been  suggested  that  “ Mary  Barnes’  ” different  states  might
be  due  to  hypnotic  conditions,  but  it  is  obvious  that  they
are  rather  to  be  looked  upon  as  cataleptic  or  in  some  way
related  to  that  post-epileptic  trance  condition  described  as  post-
epileptic automatism,  and  one  which  is  familiar  to  those  who
have  the  care  of  the  insane.  The  stages  may  also  remind  us
of  the  imitative  aptitudes  of  children,  which  cause  them  to
acquire  ideas  and  ways  of  acting  current  in  the  community
to  which  they  belong,  and  in  this  case  there  was  no  stage

’ Hypnotitme,  Double  Conscience  et  Alterations  de  la  Personncditi,  Paris,  1887.

‘^Proceedings,  S.P.lt.,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  466.


4U


Dr.  Albert  Wilson.


[part


which  was  foreign  to  the  natural  experience  of  the  ages  through
which  Mary  Barnes  had  passed.  As  to  the  reality  or  unreality
of  these  personalities,  when  the  attention  is  engrossed  upon
one  line  of  thought,  there  is  generally  a forgetfulness  of  other
states,  arising  from  the  fulness  of  concentration.  As  is  known,
in  health  the  life-history  of  every  individual  consciousness  embraces
many  diverse  and  often  incongruous  states  and  tendencies,  and
all  self-consciousness  implies  a possibility  of  a division  of  the
total  self,  so  that  there  is,  so  to  speak,  one  self  and  many
selves.  At  any  moment  of  time  the  attention  may  be  fixed
upon  one  or  other  of  these  “ selves,”  and  only  in  so  far  as
they  differ  from  each  other  and  the  'present  self  do  they  seem
separate  states  or  stages,  and  we  regard  them  accordingly  as
distinct  selves ; for  instance,  the  self  of  dreams  is  regarded  as
quite  distinct  from  the  waking  self,  and  the  man  sober  can
refiect  upon  the  man  drunk  and  draw  many  lessons  and  resolu-
tions from  the  revived  disgrace  and  the  remembered  reproach.
After  having  been  overcome  by  some  sudden  and  exceptional
condition  in  which  he  is  impelled  to  act  injuriously  to  the
interests  of  another,  he  may  refuse  to  recognise  the  lower
self  and  explain  it  away  under  the  excuse  that  he  was  not
master  of  his  actions.  Also  in  states  of  mental  conflict
when  moral  principle  struggles  against  temptation,  two  per-
sonalities may  be  assumed,  the  one  the  higher  self,  the  other
what  appears  to  be  a foreign  and  intrusive  personality.

Cases  of  double  personality  are  not  to  be  confused  with  the
ordinary  delusions  of  insanity  ; for  in  the  latter  case  there  are
not  two  separate  threads  of  memory,  but  the  memory  is  con-
tinuous in  the  intervals  of  the  delusion.  Thus  I have  at  the
present  time  in  the  London  Asylum,  Claybury,  one  patient  who
believes  that  he  is  taken  out  every  night  against  his  will,  and
also  against  his  will  is  compelled  to  work  in  an  adjoining
brickfield.  His  tired  sensations  in  the  morning — possibly  the
effect  of  rheumatism — confirm  his  delusions,  and  no  reasoning
as  to  the  absence  of  clay  or  the  want  of  confirmation  of  his
story  by  others  who  slept  in  the  next  bed  are  of  any  avail.
Other  characters  are  assumed  by  other  persons  : the  prophet
Daniel,  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  the  King,  and  Miss  Hickman —
all  these  figure  as  altered  personalities.  The  present  is  with
these  persons  so  persistent  and  over-powering  and  engrossing


PLATES  L— IX.


a;


Plate


Plate  II.


(1)

cJi'OAJ  OULyOL/tJ


ol)


C/"  (XryyxJ  ^o-cxP

1.  _JiJ  nj^  o-tAy  A^myAyyf  ^ayyAfJ

0^  A/!CyKyh^4

uJ  Oc/£y  Ck^lj^-O-uJ^y  yL-{^/  (/  CuZyEy


iS".


(2)


f '^Cjoj^o  -^}y  \\jJLh^rpfO


a Jmxjij^^  1:^  JbJX

:'€xr>.^ylAiy^^  ' -/Vu  v jV


<y  cx^rrru  yf^

-^'ixTUX  ^ (X'^'Y'yxj


Plate  III.


(2)


CU^


Q


>4


O /)  ■


Plate  IV.


Plate  V,


Plate  VI


Pi. ATE  VII.


H


»v

£1


M


->r


c

a

Oj>

Q

(T

a ^ ~

j,®  ~
^ <!)  ^
s>  (b


t>

’>.  <


(-  O.  0


Qi


I .

.J2

4

> ■

_/3

*,


CS?


o "t-  o ^\


V


V ^

<a  V

^ ^ V

<a  °

^ ^ 'T'


U^

to


M M N fe
N • ^


vO

CO

•

o

w

c«

«

C

K-

r -<T  — c^

« o -

O o
.?A  o

' .-t  ""  o

'

n

¥

■ ■ Cr  ’

^ c

--fe>  ^

. V ^ -

t>  .

® 'i  ^ ,

t

■ , , . 0

<?

_<CV  '

Q » f ’

■ 9 '

^ ^ ’

r<3  '

h

CD

tD

<


\


<>»  i3

Nrt


Plate  VIII.


human  j.^s  Total  -©5

mm.  33  e'Jjp  K.  m m


Plate  IX.


Fig.  1.


Fig.  -1


XLIX.]


A Case  of  Mxdtiple  Personality.


415


that  the  past  is  ignored  ; but  this  is  mere  temporary  forget-
fulness of  the  past,  and  does  not  involve  the  formation  of

a completely  separate  chain  of  memories  referring  to  the
delusional  state  alone,  and  carried  on  from  one  to  the  next

appearance  of  the  state.

The  organic  sensations,  i.c.  the  emotional  tone,  probably

has  much  to  do  with  these  cases  of  delusion.

Dr.  Wilson’s  physiological  explanation  of  the  alternating
personalities  seems  to  be  a theory  well  worth  considering.


416


F.  C.  S.  ScJtiller.


[part


II.

THE  ANSWERS  TO  THE  AMERICAN  BRANCH’S
QUESTIONNAIRE  REGARDING  HUMAN  SENTIMENT
AS  TO  A EUTURE  LIFE.^

By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


It  is  my  purpose  in  this  paper  to  discuss  the  results  of  the
inquiry  into  the  actual  state  of  human  sentiment,  which  Dr.
Richard  Hodgson  and  the  American  Branch  of  our  Society
undertook  about  three  years  ago,  only  in  so  far  as  these  results
have  a special  beai’ing  on  the  methods  of  the  S.P.R.  Although
the  idea  underlying  this  inquiry  was  novel,  the  material  collected
by  it  has  proved  to  be  of  great  psychological  interest  and
immensely  suggestive  in  a variety  of  ways ; but  I intend  to
discuss  its  psychological  aspects  in  another,  and  I hope  more
systematic,  form.  Even  from  the  point  of  view  of  this
Report,  however,  I shall  have  to  begin  by  explaining
the  aim  of  what  must  doubtless  have  appeared  to
many  a particularly  puzzling  and  unintelligible  bit  of
psychical  research.  I feel  indeed  that  those  who  have
been  good  enough  to  help  us  hy  answering  our  questions  and
by  procuring  answers  from  others,  must  have  done  so  largely
from  faith  in  a useful  purpose  they  could  not  see.  A demand
for  such  faith  is  always  more  or  less  involved  in  the  question-
naire method  of  investigation,  because  the  point  to  be  tested
must  always  be  so  concealed  as  not  to  arouse  partisan  spirit
for  or  against.  It  is  better  to  run  the  risk  of  having  the  whole
affair  regarded  as  pointless  and  insignificant  than  that  of  collect-
ing answers  modified  to  suit,  or  to  thwart,  a detected  purpose.

1 The  essential  parts  of  this  paper  were  read  to  a General  Meeting  of  the
Society  on  November  14th,  1902.


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.


417


The  time  however  has  come  to  justify  the  modicum  of  faith
accorded  us  by  explaining  the  point  of  the  inquiry,  and  I am
confident  that  its  importance  will  then  be  recognised.


I.

I must  admit  then,  in  the  first  place,  that  it  is  a very
belated  inquiry.  In  strict  logic  it  should  have  come  twenty
years  ago,  at  the  very  outset  of  the  Society’s  career.  Tor
regarded,  not  as  a piece  of  general  scientific  work,  i.e.  as  psycho-
logical investigation,  but  in  its  special  relation  to  the  S.P.E.’s
work,  it  is  essentially  an  attempt  to  test  the  social  atmosphere
in  which  the  Society  must  live  and  operate.  By  social
atmosphere  I mean  the  attitude  which  people  at  large  maintain
towards  any  subject  and  those  interested  in  it.  We  are  all
of  us  in  all  our  pursuits  infiuenced  by  such  an  atmosphere.
Its  presence  is  always  more  or  less  felt ; it  stifles  or  stimulates
every  form  of  intellectual  life,  although  its  effects  differ  accord-
ing as  it  is  denser  or  rarer,  favourable  or  the  reverse.  Moreover
some  subjects  are  hardy  enough  to  flourish  in  almost  any  climate.
But  I know  only  of  one  case  in  which  the  social  atmosphere
may  be  said  not  to  act : we  can  thinh  what  we  like,  no  matter
what  others  may  think  about  what  we  think,  provided  that  we
keep  our  thoughts  strictly  to  ourselves,  and  do  not  act  on  them.
As  soon  as  we  begin  to  act  on  our  thoughts,  society  begins
to  guess  at  them ; as  soon  as  we  begin  to  express  them,  we  have
to  take  into  consideration  what  others  will  think  of  them.
And  thus  the  social  atmosphere  will  check,  or  promote,  or  direct,
our  growth,  and  the  place  of  Mrs.  Grundy  in  scientific  research
is  just  as  real  and  as  worthy  of  study  as  in  matters  of  morals
and  manners.

Now  in  Psychical  Eesearch  we  are  as  yet  peculiarly  sensitive
to  the  condition  of  the  social  atmosphere.  It  is  still  a new
subject,  and  a new  subject  always  has  a hard  struggle  to  get
acclimatised,  and  probably  demands  a certain  amount  of  readjust-
ment in  the  atmospheric  conditions.  There  is  however  an  obvious
advantage  in  effecting  this  readjustment  as  gently  as  possible.
We  want  to  raise  a wind  without  provoking  a storm;  to  remove
the  stagnant  air  which  broods  oppressively  over  the  subjects


418


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part


society  is  content  to  leave  nntonched  without  invoking  a cyclone.
The  very  formation  of  a Society  for  Psychical  Eesearch  is  in
a way  a proof  of  this  contention  ; for  it  involves  an  attempt
to  make  a social  atmosphere  of  a local  kind  which  may  be
favourable  to  the  proper  stndy  of  subjects  which  could  not  be
pursued  by  individuals  in  the  open.  But  even  then  the
prosperity  of  the  Society  will  depend  on  the  attitude  of  the
larger  society  around  it.  If  it  is  favourable  to  our  work,  it
can  assist  us  in  myriad  ways ; it  can  supply  us  with  money,
information,  recruits ; in  fact  do  everything  for  us  except  make
the  scientific  discoveries  them, selves.  If  it  is  indifferent,  it  can
indefinitely  retard  our  progress.  If  it  is  actively  against  us,
it  can  thwart  us  in  an  infinity  of  ways,  persecute  us  until
we  desist,  nay  ultimately  suppress  us,  and  bury  us  and  our
•discoveries  in  oblivion.

Xow  the  remarkable  men  who  founded  the  S.P.R.  seem  to
me  to  have  unconsciously  made  a very  definite  assumption  with
respect  to  the  social  atmosphere.  They  knew,  of  course,  that
they  would  have  to  deal  inter  alia  with  subjects  reputed  to
be  of  an  interesting,  nay  of  an  exciting,  character,  with  evidence
which  seemed  to  deal  with  the  2^ost  mortem  fortunes  of  mankind.
And  it  was  natural  enough  to  assume  that  their  enterprise
would  be  regarded  with  favour.  Would  not  everybody  welcome
an  honest,  scientific  and  dispassionate  investigation  of  the  dark
■corners  of  human  psychology,  of  an  intelligent  cprestioning  of
the  gibbering  ghosts  that  had  flitted  so  enigmatically  before  the
eyes  of  untold  generations  ? Was  not  everybody  really  anxious
for  light  upoir  the  mystery  of  human  fate,  and  really  desirous
■of  the  assurance  that  death  was  not  the  inexorable  end  of  all,  if
only  that  assurance  could  be  made  with  scientific  certainty  ?
They  were  aware,  of  course,  with  what  scorn  materialists  and
agnostics,  seated  many  of  them  in  the  high  places  of  the
intellectual  world,  looked  down  upon  everything  that  savoured
of  superstition,  and  with  what  nervous  disapproval  they  regarded
any  trafficking  with  the  accursed  thing.  But  they  generously
attributed  these  hostile  prejudices  to  a quixotically  lofty  devotion
to  scientific  truth,  to  a sternly  stoic  reluctance  to  yield  to
the  allurements  of  desire,  to  a profoundly  reasoned,  and  so  far
reasonable,  conviction  of  the  impossibility  of  discovering  aught.
'They  might  well  hope  therefore  that  by  producing  an  abundance


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  41  &

of  good  work,  prosecuted  in  a scientific  temper  and  verified
by  scientific  methods,  they  would  win  pardon  for  their  audacity
from  the  scientific  opposition,  and  perhaps  even  gratitude
from  a world  eagerly  desirous  of  relief  from  the  agonies  of
doubt.

If  however  there  was  any  serious  error  in  this  estimate  of
the  condition  of  the  social  atmosphere,  this  whole  policy  was
foredoomed  to  more  or  less  disappointment.  What  if  there
were  no  widespread  desire  for  a proof  of  a future  life,  or  even
for  a scientific  investigation  of  the  apparent  evidence  ? What
if,  consequently,  this  aspect  of  the  Society’s  undertaking  were
socially  unwelcome  ? What  if  its  scientific  critics  were  inspired,,
not  by  too  jealous  a regard  for  truth,  but  by  personal  dislike
of  the  Society’s  aims  and  a lurking  fear  lest  it  should  reveal
truths  which  would  involve  a radical  readjustment  of  inveterate
opinions  and  ingrained  habits  ? If  such  were  predominant,  or
even  common,  sentiments  among  men,  the  appeal  to  scientific
evidence  would  be  bound  to  fail.  For  it  would  not  meet
with  the  receptiveness  and  open-mindedness  towards  new  truth
which  all  scientific  discovery  demands.  No  evidence  can  even
begin  to  produce  logical  conviction  until  there  is  psychological
willingness  to  receive  it.  This  applies  even  to  the  abstract
truths  of  e.g.  arithmetic ; it  is  impossible  to  prove  even  that
2 + 2 = 4 to  one  who  is  unwilling  to  add.  Far  more  signally
does  this  hold  good  of  inductive  researches  like  ours,  where
it  would  be  childish  to  expect  to  prove  anything  beyond  cavil
by  a single  effort,  where  proof  must  be  gradual  and  cumulative,
and  repose  on  the  growing  coherence  of  the  new  truth  in  a
mind  disposed  to  admit  it.  A mind  unwilling  to  believe,  or
even  undesirous  to  be  instructed,  our  weightiest  evidence  must
ever  fail  to  impress.  It  will  insist  on  taking  that  evidence
in  bits,  and  rejecting  it  item  by  item.  The  man  therefore  who
announces  his  intention  of  waiting  until  one  single  absolutely
conclusive  bit  of  evidence  turns  up,  is  really  a man  not  open  to
conviction  ; and  if  he  is  a logician,  he  knows  it.  For  modern
logic  has  made  it  plain  that  single  facts  never  can  be  “ proved,”
except  by  their  coherence  in  a system.  But  as  all  the  facts
come  singly,  any  one  who  dismisses  them  one  by  one  is
destroying  the  conditions  under  which  the  conviction  of  new
truth  could  arise  in  his  mind.


420


F.  a S.  Schiller.


[part


In  other  words,  the  discovery  of  truth  presupposes,  at  least
and  in  the  first  place,  a ivill  to  knoiv.  It  becomes  therefore
a vital  question  to  what  extent  we  may  presuppose  such  a
will  to  know.  It  seemed  impossible  to  take  this  for  granted.
For  the  surface  indications  were  ambiguous.  On  the  one  side
indeed  there  was  an  almost  overwlielming  tradition  that  the
problems  of  death  and  immortality  were  one  of  man’s  chief
preoccupations  in  all  ages,  climes,  races  and  religions.  But
on  the  other  there  were  the  facts  that  at  all  times  and  in
all  places  there  had  been  an  enormous  gap  between  professions
and  actions,  that  everywhere,  in  spite  of  the  most  divergent
beliefs,  men  have  acted  much  in  the  same  way,  and  have
shown  much  the  same  absorption  in  this  world  and  its  tri-
vialities. And,  what  was  still  more  puzzling,  there  was  the
extraordinary  fact  that  never  yet  throughout  the  ages  had  any
systematic  attempt  been  made  to  investigate  the  problem.  No
doubt  this  neglect  was  coexistent  with  a widely  prevalent  belief
that  it  was  impossible  to  know  ; but  then  this  same  pretext  had
been  made  into  an  excuse  for  never  attempting  a real  investiga-
tion. Hence  the  question  arose  whether  no  one  had  tried,
because  it  was  impossible,  or  whether  it  was  thought  impossible,
because  no  one  had  ever  tried  ?

Again,  there  were  copious  symptoms  that  the  social  atmosphere
neither  was,  nor  ever  had  been,  wholly  favourable  to  such
attempts.  A large  number  of  people  still  seem  to  regard
psychical  research  much  as  their  ancestors  a few  generations
back  regarded  witchcraft.  It  is  not  so  very  long  ago  that  to
be  suspected  of  psychic  powers  was  considered  sufficient  proof
of  an  unholy  alliance  with  the  enemy  of  mankind,  and  that
the  burning  of  witches  was  deemed  an  entertaining  addition  to
a popular  holiday.  The  uniformity  with  which  at  all  times,  in
all  countries  and  under  every  variety  of  religious  belief,  the
persons,  whom  for  lack  of  a more  definitely  descriptive  name
we  now  call  'psychics,  were  subjected  to  atrocious  persecution  is
one  of  the  most  remarkable  features  in  social  history.  One
can  only  suppose  that  in  some  obscure  way  they  always  excited
dislike,  that  dislike  led  to  persecution,  and  that  the  various
theoretical  reasons  alleged  in  justification  of  their  treatment  were
an  afterthought,  based  on  the  principle  of  first  giving  a dog  a
bad  name  when  you  mean  to  hang  him.  Now  human  nature


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  421

changes  very  slowly,  and  it  seemed  unlikely  that  an  instinctive
antipathy  of  this  sort  would  entirely  die  out  in  the  course  of
a couple  of  centuries.  If,  therefore,  it  still  persisted,  under
different  forms  and  with  different  pretexts,  now  sheltering  itself
perhaps  under  the  cloak  of  science  just  as  formerly  under  the
aegis  of  religion,  it  would  still  be  potent  to  thwart,  and  if
unrecognised,  perhaps  to  wreck,  the  arduous  enterprise  to  which
we  stood  committed.

A friori  speculation,  then,  left  doubtful  the  real  character
of  the  social  atmosphere.  But  being  professionally  a speculative
philosopher  myself,  I was  too  well  aware  of  the  limits  of  its
value  to  content  myself  with  unverified  speculation.  So  I
ventured  to  suggest  to  the  S.P.E,  that  it  should  try  to  find
out  what  the  facts  really  were.  Bortunately  Dr.  Hodgson
saw  the  vital  importance  of  the  question,  and  the  American
Branch  undertook  the  enquiry.

My  first  point  then  is  this.  It  is  all-important  for  us  to
know  the  condition  of  the  social  atmosphere,  in  order  to  know
what  tactics  we  must  adopt,  and  what  we  must  do  to  alter
it.  If  e.g.  we  find  that  there  exists  a strong  prejudice  against
our  investigations  on  sentimental  and  emotional  grounds,  we
shall  have  to  postpone  the  idea  of  adducing  convincing  evidence.
It  is  a waste  of  time  to  bombard  with  facts  minds  firmly  closed
against  their  admission,  and  determined  to  quibble  about  their
reception.  We  shall  first  have  to  strike  deeper,  at  the  roots  of
the  primitive  prejudices  which  obstruct  our  way.  If,  again,  we
can  show  that  the  social  bias  is  not  for  us  but  rather  against
us,  we  can  make  an  appeal  to  the  instinct  of  fair  play.  If  we
can  show  that  the  survival  of  primitive  superstitions  is  not
the  real  basis  for  Psychical  Research,  because  the  people  who
cherish  them  have  no  desire  to  test  them,  if  we  can  show
that  the  traditional  “ desire  for  immortality  ” is  a very  doubt-
ful ally,  because  it  craves  not  knowledge  but  assurance,  and
resents  the  cautious  advance  of  science,  we  can  better  claim
the  support  of  that  scientific  curiosity  which  has  done  so  much
for  the  advancement  of  knowledge,  with  a confidence  we  could
never  have  demanded  so  long  as  it  seemed  as  though  all  the
forces  of  superstitious  obscurantism  were  arrayed  on  our  side.
And  so  finally  it  may  come  to  be  admitted  that  in  this  field
also  the  true  obscurantists  are  those  who  declare  a priori


422


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


that  knowledge  is  impossible  and  all  inquiry  wicked  and

futile,  as  much  when  they  repose  on  the  fcmteuils  of  the  Eoyal
Society,  as  when  their  indolence  has  taken  shelter  beneath  the
altars  of  some  spiritual  organisation.

But,  it  may  be  said,  even  granting  this  point,  were  not

your  questions  absurd  ? Is  it  not  grotesque  to  institute  a
2)lehiscite  on  questions  of  scientific  fact  ? Of  what  value  can
the  opinion  of  Tom,  Ihck,  and  Harry  be  on  such  a subject  ?
And  you  did  not  even  ask  for  their  02nnions,  you  asked  for
their  sentiments.  You  asked  them  what  they  wished,  as  if
you  could  supply  them  with  spiritual  refreshment  according
to  ta.ste,  as  if  at  the  tnhle  cVliotc  of  life  we  could  order  what
we  wanted,  and  our  wishes  made  any  difference  to  the  stereo-
typed menti  of  what  we  got.  Could  you  really  suppose  that
wishing  could  make  us  immortal,  or  that  even  the  universality
of  a wish  would  constitute  a real  argument  for  immortality  ?
Has  not  common-sense  long  ago  disposed  of  such  vagaries  of
human  conceit  by  the  proverbial:  “If  wishes  were  horses

then  beggars  would  ride  ” ?


II.

I hope  that  I shall  not  seem  to  have  understated  this
indictment,  and  that  I shall  he  permitted  to  explain  how  it
brings  me  to  my  second  point.  It  must  be  confessed  in  the  first
place  that  a great  assumption  underlay  the  form  of  our  C[ues-
tions.  We  assumed  that  men’s  sentiments  were  usually  more
potent  in  swaying  their  action,  more  truly  significant,  than
their  opinions.  By  that  assumption  hangs  a whole  philosophy,
which  it  is  not  the  place  here  to  justify.  But  whether  or  not
the  voluntarist  view  of  human  nature  is  truer  and  deeper
than  the  intdkctualist,  I think  sufficient  independent  reasons
may  he  given  for  asking  for  sentiments  rather  than  opinions.
We  realised,  in  the  first  place,  that  whatever  we  asked  for,
we  should  inevitably  get  plenty  of  opinions  as  well.  It  is  so
much  easier  to  give  opinions,  which  can  be  picked  up  any-
where, than  to  analyse  oneself  and  realise  one’s  inner  senti-
ments. And  secondly,  opinions  are  so  much  cheaper  and
better  known  and  less  interesting.  Had  we  asked  for  opinions,
we  should  have  got  only  the  stereotyped  formula.s,  taken


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Fatiire  Life.  423

from  books,  sermons,  and  newspapers,  whicli  shed  so  little

light  on  the  motives  that  really  actuate  men.  Thirdly,  most

people’s  o'pinions  are  worthless  on  most  subjects,  and  on
this  particular  subject  it  seemed  that  the  j)eople  who  had
done  anything  to  entitle  their  opinions  to  scientific  respect

mmht  be  counted  on  the  fingers  of  one  hand.  Again,  if.  as
we  assumed,  it  was  typical  of  human  nature  for  opinions

to  be  adopted  under  the  propulsion  of  sentiment,  it  was
clear  that  in  asking  for  the  sentiment  we  were  getting  at

the  real  psychic  force.  And  lastly,  even  in  the  cases  where
people’s  opinions  really  produced  their  sentiments,  it  seemed
that  they  affected  their  actions  through  the  latter,  so  that
the  only  case  that  might  conceivably  elude  our  inquiry  was
that  of  people  who  feel  one  way  and  think  another.  But

this  state  of  things  is  usually  revealed  in  the  answers  to
Questions  lie.  and  III.,  and  appears  to  be  rare.

These,  then,  were  the  reasons  for  preferring  to  ask  for
sentiments  rather  than  opinions.  As  for  the  bearing  of  our
wishes  on  our  future,  I should  have  thought  that  what  is
called  “ the  argument  from  universal  consent  ” was  suffici-
ently well  known  to  appear  to  give  point  to  an  inquiry  into
the  actual  universality  of  that  consensus.  But  this  was
neither  our  whole,  nor  our  real  point.  Our  real  point  was
apparently  too  subtle  to  be  perceived.  It  can,  however,  be
made  plain.  Let  us  examine  “ if  vnshes  were  horses  then
beggars  umdcl  ride  ” a little  closer ; for  like  all  proverbs  it

probably  requires  more  scrutiny  than  it  will  bear.  In  this
case  it  should  strike  us  at  once  that  even  though  beggars
do  not  yet  prance  about  on  horses,  working  men  very

commonly  ride  bicycles.  And  the  bicycle  seems  to  be  a
means  of  locomotion  vastly  superior  to  the  antiquated  quad-
ruped which  was  the  summit  of  man’s  ambition  in  this
respect  when  some  forgotten  sage  devised  the  proverb,  and
before  a more  progressive  age  had  elaborated  the  railway,
the  steamship,  and  the  motor-car.  I observe  similarly  that
flying,  which  was  long  a proverbial  impossibility,  has  now
become  a question  of  persevering  experiment,  and  bids  fair
to  become  a commercial  success  in  our  life-time.  And  when
I am  asked  how  these  observations  should  be  interpreted,  I
am  forced  to  answer  as  follows.  The  world  is  so  con-


424


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


structed  that  though  it  yields  nothing  to  idle  wishing,  it
will  yield  even  what  seemed  most  hopelessly  impossible  to
strenuous  and  intelligent  efforts  to  realise  the  objects  of  our
desire.  All  our  inventions,  therefore,  the  whole  fabric  of
applied  knowledge  which  renders  civilised  man  master  of  the
earth,  are  the  embodied  realisations  of  human  desii’es,  wrought
out  by  the  unremitting  efforts  of  generations.  Why  then  should
we  not  apply  this  principle  to  the  matter  in  hand  ?

May  we  not  infer  that  this  problem  of  a future  life  will
prove  no  exception  to  the  rule  of  the  efficacy  of  the  right
sort  of  wishing,  that  we  can  dissi]Date  the  clouds  that  seem
so  impenetrably  to  shroud  the  facts,  if  only  we  desire  to
find  ovt,  and  will  set  to  work  with  the  same  patient  and
business-like  persistence  we  have  shown  everywhere  else  ?
But — and  this  is  our  primary  (piestion — do  we  desire  to  find
out  ? Is  our  professed  desire  genuine  ? Is  it  extensive  and
intense  enough  ?

Hence  my  second  point : even  though  it  were  quite  true
that  our  desires  do  not  affect  the  facts,  and  if  I were
discussing  the  subject  exhaustively  ^ I should  have  some

1 When  we  regard  the  matter  with  any  subtlety  it  is  by  no  means  self-evident
that  our  desires  make  no  difference.  On  the  contrary,  it  will  seem  probable
that  our  desires  may  make  a great  difference,  alike  whether  we  argue  from
(1)  the  analogy  of  the  present  life,  or  (2)  the  assumption  of  a cosmic  prin-
ciple, more  or  less  sympathising  w’ith  us  and  our  feelings.  Under  (1)  consider
e.g.  the  fact  that  we  can  extinguish  our  life  here,  if  we  will.  Might  there
not  be  analogous  possibilities  in  other  worlds  ? If  so,  repeated  suicide
might  acliieve  the  extinction  desired.  Again,  we  find  our  conditions  here
largely  plastic  ; we  can  largely  mould  ourselves  as  we  will.  We  can  will  to
remember  and  to  forget,  to  continue  or  to  disavow  our  past,  to  reknit  or  to  sever
our  social  ties.  If  then  in  our  life  here  every  mental  activity  is  intimately  bound
up  with  the  character  of  our  volition,  is  it  not  psychologically  plausible  to  suppose
that  this  will  continue  to  be  the  case,  and  that  the  question  of  the  continuance  or
evanescence  of  the  mental  life  we  have  known  may  depend,  wholly  or  in  part,
on  our  own  action  ? If  it  is  true  that  every  function  in  life  waxes  and  wanes
according  as  it  is  exercised,  why  should  not  this  law  hold  of  life  itself  as  a
whole  ? In  short,  so  soon  as  we  abstain  from  rashly  committing  ourselves  to
the  antirpiated  metaphysic  wdiich  remlered  the  soul’s  existence  dependent  on
that  of  an  immutable  “substance,”  which  was  supposed  to  underlie  its  mani-
festations, and  conceive  it  as  consisting  essentially  in  the  flow  of  its  con-
sciousness, it  becomes  almost  undeniable  that  our  consciousness  (ajid  therefore
our  existence)  must  be  affected,  and  may  be  controlled,  by  our  own  actions
to  an  indefinite  extent.  Seeing  that  the  soul’s  flow  to  some  extent  directs
itself,  may  it  not  choose  to  flow  either  into  arid  regions  in  which  the  stream


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.


425


questions  to  raise  on  this  subject,  they  are  yet  germane  to
the  facts.  For  it  is  certain  that  our  desires  vitally  affect
our  knowledge  of  the  facts.  With  a desire  not  to  know,  the
discovery  and  communication  of  knowledge  are  absolutely
impossible ; with  no  desire,  there  is  no  probability  of  know-
ledge ; with  desire,  there  is  no  impossibility  of  knowledge,  or
none,  at  least,  that  can  be  entertained  leforc  inquiry.

III.

^^Having  shown  that  the  possibility  of  knowledge  is  con-
ditioned by  the  desire  for  it,  and  that  the  desire  is  its
presupposition  and  a first  step  to  knowledge,  we  may  now
proceed  to  the  inductive  investigation  of  the  desire  and  the
way  in  which  the  questions  were  intended  to  elicit  its
character.

Question  inquires  broadly  whether  a desire  for  a future
life  in  general  is  felt.

Question  II.  gives  an  opportunity  of  stating  more  precisely
the  conditions  under  which  the  desire  flourishes.

of  consciousness  loses  itself  and  is  dried  up,  or  into  well-watered  districts  in
which  it  is  swollen  to  many  times  its  former  volume  by  the  accretion  of
spiritual  tributaries.  These  possibilities  would  become  still  stronger  if  we
entertained  the  thought  of  a deeper  soul-current  of  which  our  phenomenal
consciousness  formed,  as  it  were,  a surface-eddy.  In  that  case  the  mundane
consciousness  might  or  might  not  penetrate  and  perpetuate  itself  into  a future
life,  more  or  less  recoguisably,  according  to  its  action  in  cultivating  its
memories,  affections,  spiritual  value  and  so  forth.

(2)  Again,  assuming  the  existence  of  a Deity  capable  of  sympathetic
personal  relations  with  us,  it  would  seem  to  follow  at  once  that  our  relations
must  be  affected  by  our  wishes,  prayers,  and  aspirations.  According  as  we
behave  we  shall  be  treated.  And  if  we  prefer,  or  fit  ourselves  for,  annihila-
tion, there  is  nothing  absurd  in  the  supposition  that  means  may  exist  for
giving  us  our  deserts.  Even  in  theology  the  thought  has  not  infrequently
been  expressed  that  we  are  not  naturally  or  intrinsically  immortal,  but
become  so  through  accepting  salvation  by  Christ.  It  is  evident  both  that
this  doctrine  is  morally  superior  to  that  of  the  eternal  damnation  of  the
reprobate,  and  also  that  it  reuders  a future  life  so  dependent  on  our  own
action,  that  no  one  could  have  it  inflicted  on  him  against  his  wish.  Of  course
all  these  speculations  must  not  be  taken  for  more  than  they  are  worth,
but  they  suffice  to  show  that  we  are  not  entitled  to  take  it  for  granted  a
priori  that  our  wishes  and  our  actions  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  “facts”
which  affect  us.

^ The  questionnaire  is  reprinted  in  full  in  the  Appendix,  see  p.  450.


426


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part


Question  II.  (a)  “ Do  yo%i  desire  a fvMire  life  whatever  the
conditions  might  he  ?”  is  intended  for  a desire  strong  enough  to
demand  a future  life  under  any  conditions.  The  existence  of  this-
desire  has  been  treated  as  an  absurdity,  or  at  least  as  a logical
anomaly.  How  can  any  one  really  prefer  hell  to  annihilation  ?
Indeed  a distinguished  philosopher  argued  that  all  the  answers
to  the  Questionnaire  would  be  the  same,  because  all  rational
beings  would  prefer  heaven  to  annihilation,  and  annihilation  to
hell.  Nevertheless  our  philosopher  was  wrong.  He  had  not
made  sufficient  allowance  for  the  ability  of  human  psychology
to  overcome  difficulties  which,  as  stated  abstractly,  seem  to
logic  sheer  absurdities.  And  so  it  turns  out  that  not  only  is

a real  desire  for  the  heaven  of  what  used  to  be  thought
orthodoxy  decidedly  rare,  but  that  a good  many  actually  have
so  strong  an  objection  to  it  that  they  assert  that  they  would
prefer  annihilation.  Moreover  22  per  cent. — 739  out  of  3321  —
of  the  answers  agree  with  Huxley  and  Milton’s  Satan  in
desiring  a future  life  at  all  costs.  Nor  is  there  anything  in
this  preference  which  should  be  really  unintelligible  to  a
sympathetic  psychologist.  When  taken  in  its  context  it
usually  appears  to  be  due  ( 1 ) to  a strong  feeling  of  repug-
nance to  annihilation;  or  (2)  to  an  instinctive  love  of  life  so-
intense  as  to  carry  with  it  an  emotional  assurance  that  its
possessor  at  least  mtist  survive  death;  or  (3)  to  a conviction
often  expressed  by  spiritists,  that  they  hnow  the  conditions  of
the  future  life  sufficiently  to  take  all  risks ; (4)  to  a general
confidence  in  one’s  ability  to  render  the  conditions  tolerable
(which  appears  to  have  been  the  source  of  Huxley’s  preference);.
(5)  to  the  confidence  sometimes  expressed  by  liberal  Christians
that  the  conditions  may  be  left  to  a benevolent  God  who
“ will  not  toss  to  hell  the  luckless  pots  he  marred  in  making  ” ;.
and  lastly  (6),  in  a few  cases  to  the  overwhelming  impression
made  by  a recent  bereavement.  It  appears,  therefore,  that
all  these  answers  are  interesting  and  intelligible,  and  that  this
question  was  not  asked  in  vain.

(juestion  II.  {h)  “ What  wovld  have  to  he  the  character  of  a
future  life  to  medx  the  prospect  seem  tolerahle  Woukl  you,  e.g.,
he  content  with  a life  more  or  less  lilce  your  present  life  ? ” was
so  phrased  in  order  to  discover  what  are  the  least  favourable
conditions  which  would  appear  tolerable.  It  contains  an


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  427

invitation  to  compare  the  future  life  desired  with  the  actuality
experienced.  Do  people  want  something  like  it  or  something
different  ? Do  they  insist  on  something  better,  or  would
they  prefer  a future  life  of  the  same  sort  to  extinction  ?

The  answers  are  to  some  extent  marred  by  a tendency  to
state  rather  the  maximum  which  is  desired  than  the  minimum
which  would  be  accepted.  Still  it  is  clear  that  the  answers
to  this  question  throw  some  light  on  the  state  of  feeling
with  regard  to  the  value  of  this  life.  Those  who  answer  yes,
and  they  seem  to  be  a large  majority,  take  an  optimistic
view  of  its  value ; while  those  who  say  no  may  do  so  either
because  they  have  very  exalted  notions  of  what  the  future

life  should  be,  or  a very  low  opinion  of  what  the  present
life  is.  Their  other  answers  usually  enable  one  to  decide
this  point.

Question  II.  (c)  “ Can  you  say  loliat  elements  (if  any)  are
felt  hy  you  to  call  for  the  i^^W^Ldty  of  life  ” was  added  at
the  suggestion  of  the  great  psychologist,  William  James.  It
aims  at  discovering  what  reasons  people  give  to  themselves
for  desiring  a future  life.  But,  unfortunately,  it  has  not
worked  very  well,  partly  because  it  is  too  difficult  to  be

readily  answered  by  people  who  have  given  very  little  thought
to  the  matter,  partly  because  so  many  put  down  not  so  much
what  they  feel,  but  what  they  think  they  ought  to  feel.  This
latter  is  of  course  a natural  tendency  of  the  human  mind
against  which  all  such  inquiries  have  to  struggle  throughout ;
it  ordinarily  requires  considerable  education  and  some  practice
in  introspection  to  distinguish  between  the  two  even  in  one’s
own  mind.  And  in  this  case  the  temptation  to  put  down
what  tended  to  edification  was  increased  by  an  ambiguity  in

the  question,  which  might  be  understood  to  ask  not  for  the

elements  in  life  which  made  the  answerer  desire  perpetuity,
but  those  which  in  his  opinion  rendered  it  objectively  desiralle
(a  very  different  thing).

The  answers  therefore  were  very  various,  the  incompleteness
of  earthly  life  and  the  need  of  justice  and  reunion  being
perhaps  the  most  prominent  grounds  assigned  by  those  who
answered  affirmatively.  The  chief  reasons  assigned  in  the
negative  answers  (I)  were  the  misery  of  this  world,  (2)  the
inconceivableness  of  another.  I have  not  had  time  to  work


428


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part


out  the  exact  figures  of  the  answers  to  this  question,  but
have  been  somewhat  impressed  with  the  comparative  rarity
of  the  demand  for  selfish  pleasure  or  even  happiness : unless
those  who  answered  were  an  unusually  high-minded  set  of
peojde,  it  would  seem  that  moralists  must  have  libelled  human
nature  somewhat  grossly  in  assuming  the  practical  universality
of  hedonistic  motives.

Question  III.  “ Can  you  state  why  you  feel  m this  loay  as
regards  Questions  I.  and  II. V'  The  answers  to  this  question
run  very  much  into  those  to  Question  II.  (c),  and  are  not
worth  discussing  apart.  The  question  itself  was  inserted
simply  and  solely  to  provide  for  those  who  thought  that  their
sentiments  were  determined  by  their  religious  or  scientific
convictions,  in  order  that  they  might  state  that  in  their  case
sentiment  and  belief  were  not  discordant.  In  spite,  however,,
of  the  emphasis  on  this  point  in  the  preamble,  a good  many
persons  complained  that  they  could  not  properly  answer  the
questions  because  their  sentiments  did  agree  with  their  con-
victions, and  some  even  made  it  into  their  excuse  for  declining
to  answer  altogether.  One  can  only  suppose  that  they  either
did  not  read  the  preamble  at  all,  or  did  not  read  it  to  the
end,  for  of  course  the  section  in  the  preamble  asking  for
sentiments  as  far  as  possible  separated  from  convictions  was
only  intended  (1)  to  enable  people  to  avoid  expressing  their
convictions  by  asking  only  for  the  (less  compromising)  sentiments,
(2)  to  draw  their  attention  to  the  fact  that  their  sentiment
might  not  at  all  accord  with  their  beliefs.  Of  course  this
confession  was  frequently  made  in  the  answers,  but  on  the
whole  the  question  was  a failure.  A great  many  answered  no,
and  the  answers  were  mostly  much  the  same  as  those  to
II.  (c).  Eeligion  was  alleged  as  the  ground  of  sentiment  more
rarely  than  might  have  been  expected,  perhaps  in  consequence
of  misunderstanding,  but  its  influence  upon  sentiment  appeared
to  be  much  greater  than  that  of  science.

Question  IV.  “ Do  you  now  feel  the  question  of  a future,
life  to  he  of  itrgent  importance  to  your  mental  comfort  V’  brings
us  to  the  cardinal  point  of  the  questionnaire.  The  answers  to
the  first  question  supplied  an  inadequate  test  of  the  desire  for
a future  life,  in  that  everybody  who  had  a preference,  however
faint  and  occasional,  for  continuance  would  answer  it  aflirma-


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  429

tively,  especially  as  the  second  question  enabled  him  to  name
his  own  conditions.  Practically  all  except  tho.se  who  did  not
want  a future  life  at  any  price  could  answer  the  first  two
questions  by  a more  or  less  qualified  affirmative.  Hence
many  who  gravely  doubted,  or  quite  disbelieved,  the  possi-
bility of  a future  life  answered  these  questions  in  the  affirma-
tive. But  such  persons  would  not  usually  admit  that  the
question  possessed  urgency  for  their  mental  comfort.  Accord-
ingly we  get  here  a considerable  predominance  of  nocs  (1314
yes  out  of  3321),  and  these  are  often  of  a very  decided
character,  ‘ not  at  all,’  ‘ not  in  the  least,’  ‘ never  think  about  Uf
being  common  phrases.

A certain  difficulty  was  caused  by  those  who  had  never
entertained  a doubt,  or  had  trained  themselves  to  regard  a
future  life  as  certain,  and  then  dismissed  the  matter  from
their  minds.  On  the  whole  these  had  to  be  counted  as  yeses,
especially  when  it  was  expressly  stated  that  though  a future
life  might  not  be  often  thought  of,  yet  to  lose  this  assurance
would  amount  to  a spiritual  catastrophe.  On  the  other  hand,
some  of  those  who  attribute  to  themselves  a faith  so  firm  that
they  ‘ never  think  about  it,’  seem  to  be  making  their  ‘ faith  ’
an  excuse  for  a practical  neglect  of  such  spiritual  matters.

On  the  whole  the  answers  to  this  question  seem  distinctly
unfavourable  to  the  doctrine  that  the  interest  actually  taken
in  the  matter  of  a future  life  is  commensurate  with  its
spiritual  importance,  or  that  the  question  looms  as  large  on
our  mental  horizon  as  tradition  had  assumed.  Nor  is  this
psychologically  at  all  surprising.  We  could  not  do  our  work
efficiently  here  if  our  concern  about  the  future  were  to  become
seriously  distracting.  But  there  are  many  ways  (as  we  saw)
of  preventing  such  concern  from  reaching  a dangerous  intensity.
Indeed  it  is  rather  the  frequency  of  utter  absorption  in  worldly
affairs  that  gives  one  a sort  of  testhetic  shock.

Question  V.,  inquiring  into  the  changes  in  people’s  feelings,,
was  something  of  a disappointment  to  me  personally.  Before
seeing  the  results,  I had  argued  in  the  Fortnightly  Bevieio,
September,  1901  (p.  439),^  that  the  reason  why  the  feeling  of
the  literature -producing  minority  as  to  the  importance  of  the
future  life  had  imposed  itself  on  the  masses  was  partly  that  the

' In  an  essay  reprinted  in  Humanism,  p.  24:?,


430


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


latter  were  too  indifferent  to  contradict  them,  partly  that  at  one
time  or  other  nearly  every  one  did  get  stirred  up  about  it,  and
that  the  memory  of  this  phase  of  opinion  disposed  to  ready
acquiescence  in  the  assertion  of  the  immense  importance  of  the
question.  But  it  appears  that  a large  proportion  (probably  more
than  half)  deny  that  their  feelings  have  changed  in  any  important
degree.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  even  in  questioning  its
universality  I still  exaggerated  the  extent  of  the  real  interest  in
the  question  when  I supposed  that  nearly  everybody  must  have
felt  at  least  a temporary  concern  about  it.  I did  not  allow
sufficiently  for  the  prevalence  of  sheer  thoughtlessness  and  inertia,
nor  for  the  number  of  those  who  have  never  cared  to  go  into  the
grounds  of  their  belief.

It  is  possible,  however,  in  this  case  to  go  behind  the  actual
returns,  and  to  doubt  whether  on  this  point  they  fairly  represent
the  actual  facts.  There  is  a natural  tendency  to  represent
oneself  in  memory  as  more  consistent  than  contemporary  docu-
ments would  quite  warrant,  and  one  cannot  but  suspect  that
phrases  like  ‘not  raatcricdlyi  ‘only  development^  ‘not  change  hut
groivth'  may  really  cover  very  substantial  altertitions  of  belief
and  sentiment.  Again,  answers  like,  ‘ not  that  I can  remember,’
‘ not  as  far  as  I know’  sound  suspicious,  and  it  seems  not
improbable  that  in  the  course  of  years  many  considerable  changes
may  have  been  forgotten.

Still,  I must  admit  that  the  returns  show  comparatively  little
evidence  of  great  spiritual  revolutions,  and  still  less  of  any  con-
siderable or  lasting  mental  aimuish  connected  with  them.  The
appai'ent  absence  of  any  widespread  spiritual  distress  is  certainly
very  striking  and  surprising,  though  here  again  this  might  per-
haps have  been  inferred  from  the  surface  indications  of  general
placidity  and  contentment.  It  would  seem  that  spiritual  crises
and  prolonged  I’eligious  excitements  are  the  prerogative  of  ex-
ceptional temperaments ; ordinary  persons  seem  to  adjust  them-
selves easily  and  rapidly  to  their  definitive  attitude.^

Question  VI.,  again,  is  very  important,  as  inquiring  directly
into  the  existence  of  a will  to  know.  Indeed  it  is  the  compari-
son of  the  answer  to  this  question  with  that  to  Question  IV.

’ This  fact,  if  such  it  be,  should  evidently  be  borne  in  mind  in  reading  studies
•of  the  e.xtremer  forms  of  spiritual  temperament,  e.g.  James’s  Varieties  of  Religious
Experience.  , . .


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  431

which  will  usually  determine  the  character  of  the  answer.  The
alternatives,  “ would  you  ])refcr  to  know  for  certain  or  to  leave
it  a matter  of  faith  ? ” are  not  of  course  exhaustive  ; and  they
may  even  be  taken  in  a sense  in  which  they  are  not  exclusive.
Indeed,  like  all  the  words  of  ordinary  language,  the  terms
‘ knowledge  ’ and  ‘ faith  ’ are  very  ambiguous.  This  was  not
infrequently  pointed  out  in  rejilies  which  held  that  ‘ faith  ’ was
practically  ‘ knowledge,’  or  included  ‘ knowledge,’  or  was  higher
than  ‘ knowledge,’  and  it  was  of  course  perfectly  well  known  to
us.  But  we  wanted  to  suggest  to  them  a choice  between  the
two  alternatives  which  we  believed  would  at  first  sight  most
readily  present  themselves.

At  first  sight  the  results  may  seem  excellent  from  an  S.P.R.
point  of  view,  and  be  supposed  to  show  the  existence  of  a decided
preference  for  knowledge.  For  out  of  a total  of  about  3218  replies
a clear  majority  of  1706  seem  to  vote  for  ‘knowledge,’  as  against
‘faith,’  749;  ‘ignorance,’  etc.,  415;  and  ‘indifference,’  107.
Of  course,  however,  the  question  remains  how  far  these  figures
can  be  accepted  as  representative.  But  apart  from  this  it  is
evident  that  large  deductions  have,  unfortunately,  to  be  made
from  the  figures  as  they  stand.  It  is  morally  certain,  e.y.  that
a large  number  of  indifferents  have  put  themselves  down  as
desiring  to  know  and  as  possessing  faith,  and  that  to  obtain
a trustworthy  indication  of  the  desire  to  know,  we  must  try
to  weed  them  out,  in  order  to  find  out  how  many  really  desire
to  know.

Of  those  who  voted  for  ‘ knowledge  ’ we  strike  out  there-
fore (1)  those  who  showed  a negative  or  indifferent  attitude
towards  the  first  question  and  who,  therefore,  would  like  to
know  only  that  there  was  no  future  life,  and  sometimes  state
this  expressly  (225).  We  may  dismiss  (2)  those  who  only  want
to  know  on  general  grounds  or  use  phrases  indicating  that
their  preference  for  knowledge  is  very  slight  or  doubtful  (123).
We  may  eliminate  (3)  those  who  would  like  to  know  but
think  knowledge  impossible,  and  seem  too  contented  with  this
state  of  things  to  be  credited  with  any  but  a conditional
desire  to  know  (64).  Deducting  these,  our  majority  disappears,
and  our  numbers  are  reduced  to  1294.  (4)  We  can  hardly

rely  without  reservation  on  the  desire  to  know  of  those  who
stipulate  that  they  want  assurance  only  of  the  fact  of  a future


432


F.  a S.  Schiller.


[part


life,  or  of  its  2^icasantncss,  even  though,  if  they  really  tried  to
know,  they  might  discover  that  to  know  the  ‘ fact  ’ they  needed
also  to  establish  a great  many  of  the  details  (102).  (5)  And

lastly,  those  (511)  who  would  prefer  knowledge  after  answering
C)uestion  IV.  in  the  negative,  can  hardly  in  the  vast  majority
of  cases  be  supposed  to  have  a very  keen  desire  for  scientific
certainty  on  the  subject.  Answers  of  this  type  coming  from
members  of  the  S.P.E.,  or  showing  other  internal  evidence
of  a genuine  desire  to  know,  have,  however,  been  retained
in  the  list  of  those  who  desire  to  know.  Nor  (6)  can  we
appeal  to  those  (178)  who  are  already  certain  that  there  is
a future  life  to  support  a scientific  investigation  of  its  existence.
(7)  On  the  other  hand,  we  may  add  to  the  effective  desire  to
know  the  votes  of  the  very  few  who,  though  personally  satis-
fied with  faith,  desire  scientific  proof  for  the  sake  of  their
weaker  brethren.

Making  these  alterations  and  throwing  out  some  answers
(42),  in  which  insufficient  details  are  given  to  determine  the
nature  of  the  desire  to  know,  we  find  that  681  out  of  3218,
i.e.  rather  over  21  per  cent.,  may  be  credited  with  a real
desire  for  scientific  knowledge  of  the  possibility  of  a future
life.^  That  still  seems  fairly  satisfactory,  but  I fear  that  even
so  these  figures  enormously  exaggerate  the  actual  importance
of  this  desire.  For  they  doubtless  include  the  votes  of  many
whose  desire  to  know,  though  real  enough,  is  not  very  strong,
and  would  not  impel  them  to  inconvenience  themselves  in  order
to  satisfy  it.  And  moreover,  I shall  have  to  admit  that  there
is  a probability  that  the  questionnaire  has  unduly  selected  those
who  desire  to  know,  so  that  about  one  out  of  five  indicates
the  maximum,  but  not  the  probable,  strength  of  the  desire.

IV.

Provisionally,  however,  and  until  better  ones  are  attainable,
let  us  accept  tliese  figures,  and  proceed  to  ask,  what  do  they
qyrove  ? How  far  can  they  be  trusted  to  give  a true  picture
of  the  state  of  human  sentiment  generally  ?

The  question  needs  careful  consideration,  because  it  is  mainly
at  this  point  that  the  value  of  our  results  will  be  impugned,

1 See  Appendi-N.  for  the  detailed  table  of  figures.


433


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.

especially  by  those  who  do  not  like  the  conclusions  to  which
they  point.

Let  us  admit  in  the  first  place  that  the  results  are  incom-
plete. At  best  they  represent  the  sentiment  only  of  an  infinit-
esimal fraction  even  of  English-speaking  humanity.  But  I would
beg  to  point  out  that  such  incompleteness  is  inevitable,  and
inseparable  not  merely  from  all  such  statistical,  but  also  from
all  inductive  inquiry.  All  the  great  inductive  generalisations
rest  in  the  first  instance  on  samples  selected  from  a vastly
more  extensive  material.  The  geographer  maps  out  the  ocean
floor  by  taking  soundings  every  ten  miles,  or  infers  its  character
from  little  samples  of  the  abysmal  mud.  The  doctor  describes
the  symptoms  of  a disease  from  a few  cases.  The  chemist
describes  the  properties  of  the  rarer  and  more  difficult  chemicals
on  the  basis  of  a few  experiments,  repeated  perhaps  at  intervals
of  a generation.  The  psychologist  in  his  generalisations  about
human  nature  has  hitherto  rested  on  little  but  introspection  of
himself,  and  even  in  the  new  experimental  school  he  is  making
inductions  from  a few  dozen  or  hundred  pupils  whom  he  can
test  in  his  laboratories.  And  so  forth  throughout  the  sciences.

The  value  of  such  reasonings  depends  entirely  on  the

question  whether  we  have  secured  fctir  savi2)les  of  a mate-

rial which  it  is  impossible  to  examine  exhaustively.  And  thus
the  only  really  relevant  question  as  to  our  results  is : Can
they  he  regarded  as  “fctir  samples  ” of  human  desire  ?

(I.)  I hope  it  will  be  admitted  that  the  questions  them-

selves were  fair,  and  gave  no  indication  of  any  bias  or
tendency.  Not  of  course  that  they  escaped  criticism  on  this
account.  But  the  criticisms  about  cancel  each  other.  Some

thought  that  the  answer  yes  was  desired  to  the  first  question,
others  the  answer  no,  some  that  we  were  too  scientific,
others  that  we  were  not  scientific  enough.  Here  e.g.  are
the  comments  of  a widow  lady  of  mature  experience : “ I
can  never  sympathise  with  any  Psychical  Eesearch  Society
while  it  is  conducted  on  the  present  highly  emotional  lines
that  tend  to  hysterical  illusions.”  I hope  that  this  judg-
ment will  make  a proper  impression  on  our  sceptics,  and
induce  them  to  abstain  from  pampering  such  illusions  in
future  I

The  religious  bearing  of  the  questions  has  been  variously


434


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part


construed  in  much  the  same  way.  To  scientific  materialists
the  mere  tact  that  they  emanated  from  Psychical  Eesearch
circles  has  seemed  sufficient  to  condemn  them ; over-anxious
believers  have  expressed  their  fears  that  their  effect  must  be
anti-religious,  that  only  infidels,  agnostics,  and  heretics  would
answer  them,  that  no  orthodox  Christian  would  stand  such
searching  interrogation,  and  that  refiection  was  sure  to  be
detrimental  to  faith.  As  I shall  presently  show  how  ground-
less these  apprehensions  were,  I shall  now  merely  point  out
that,  whatever  might  he  read  into  them,  the  (juestions  them-
selves were,  and  were  intended  to  be,  wholly  impartial  and
devoid  of  tendency  either  for  or  against  any  religious  view.
And  on  the  whole  they  were  so  miderstood  and  answered
freely  by  all  sorts  of  men,  including  a considerable  number
of  clergymen  of  all  denominations,  without  leading  to  any  diffi-
culties. Indeed,  although  we  did  not  ask  for  it,  we  obtained
far  more  information  as  to  our  correspondents’  religious  opinions
than  we  had  expected.

(II.)  As  to  the  distribution  of  circulars.  Questionnaires
were  sent  to  the  members  of  the  American  Birmich  of  the
S.r.li.,  of  the  A.mcrican  Psychological  Association,  and  of  the
Mind  Association.  Appeals  were  also  inserted  in  the  S.P.E.’s
Journal,  the  International  Journcd  of  Ethics  and  Mind.  In
America  a number  of  copies  were  sent  also  to  the  daily
press.  In  the  September  1901  number  of  the  Fortnightly
Pcvicw  I sought  to  raise  the  cpiestion  in  an  article  entitled,
ilo  men  desire  immortality  M ^ This  brought  me  in  a large
amount  of  correspondence,  and  a certain  amount  of  notice  in
the  press.  Mr.  E.  J.  Padshah  reprinted  the  Questionnaire  in
Bombay,  and  circulated  it  in  India,  especially  among  the  Parsis ;
Mr.  Stanton  Coit  reprinted  it  in  Ethics,  and  circulated  it  among
the  members  of  Ethical  Societies.  We  are  greatly  indebted
to  both  of  these  gentlemen  for  valuable  and  interesting  batches
of  answers,  whose  type  differed  materially  from  the  rest,  and
served  the  purpose  of  ‘ control  ’ experiments.  The  editor  of
the  Jewish  Quarterly  wrote  an  interesting  discussion  in  his
October  1901  number  and  himself  answered  the  questions,  and
there  were  more  or  less  complete  translations,  with  more  or  less
•comment,  in  a considerable  number  of  foreign  papers  (especially
'Since  then  included  in  my  Humanism  (1903).


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  435

spiritistic)  in  most  civilised  countries,  except  Germany.  On
the  whole,  however,  it  cannot  be  said  that  we  succeeded  in
arousing  any  considerable  interest  in  the  press,  and  it  is
quite  possible  that  the  able  editors  who  deemed  the  subject
unworthy  even  of  a ‘ silly  season  ’ discussion,  correctly  gauged
the  extent  of  public  interest  in  the  matter.  Meanwhile,
copies  of  the  Questionnaire  were  freely  issued  to  any  one
who  desired  to  answer,  and  was  willing  to  collect  answers
from  others,  and  this  method  on  the  whole  proved  the
most  satisfactory.  Altogether  about  10,000  copies  were
circulated.  It  will  be  seen,  however,  that  mainly  owing  to  the
slenderness  of  our  resources,  the  distribution  must  be  pro-
nounced to  have  been  quite  random  and  unsystematic.

Xow,  would  this  distribution  be  likely  to  induce  a selection  and
bias  in  the  answers  obtained  ? I am  afraid  this  question  must
be  answered  in  the  affirmative.  (1)  The  agency  of  the  S.P.E.
w'as  undoubtedly  prejudicial  in  scientific  circles,  in  w’hich  both
bias  and  occupation  would  most  dispose  towards  negative  answers,
and  de  facto  only  a comparatively  small  number  of  answers
were  returned  thence.  (2)  A disproportionate  number  of
answers  came  from  the  Society’s  members,  e.g.  from  248,  i.e.
about  half,  of  the  American  Branch.  And  in  them  the  desire
to  know  was  very  markedly  greater  than  in  the  average
answers,  and  rose  to  over  50  per  cent.^  (3)  Probably  the
spiritists  were  over-represented  in  the  answers,  not  so  much
because  they  were  more  disposed  to  answer,  as  because  so
many  spiritist  papers  reprinted  the  questionnaire.  And  they
were  nearly  always  either  ‘ certain  ’ or  desirous  of  knowing.

It  is  clear,  however,  that  the  whole  of  this  preferential
collection  or  bias  would  tend  to  increase  the  number  of  yeses
to  Q.  I.,  IV.  and  VI.  {a).  In  other  words,  the  desire  to  know
can  hardly  be  stronger  than  is  indicated  by  the  returns ; it
may  be  rcry  imicli  vjeaher.  As  far  as  the  Society,  therefore,
is  concerned,  the  social  situation  cannot  be  more  favourable,

ft

and  may  be  indefinitely  less  so.

(III.)  As  to  the  question  of  vjliat  sort  of  people  answered.
Here,  again,  we  were  favoured  with  many  forecasts,  which,  as
usually  happens  to  such  a priori  efforts  of  the  imagination

^ Even  so,  as  only  about  one  half  of  the  members  answered,  this  would
not  necessarily  represent  more  than  a quarter  of  the  Branch.


436


F>  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part


were  on  the  whole  mistaken.  If  I had  to  answer  in  a single
phrase  I should  have  to  say  that  all  sorts  of  iKople  answered  ;
i.e,  the  answers  exhibited  an  astounding  variety  of  sentiment,
far  greater  than  anything  we  had  expected,  prepared  though
we  were  for  a good  deal.  In  reading  them  one  could  not
help  wondering  how  persons,  whose  sentiments  were  so  radi-
cally different,  yet  managed  to  live  together  in  the  same
world,  and  felt  assured  that  a real  and  literal  uniformity  of
belief,  the  idol  to  which  bigots  and  fanatics  have  offered
such  inhuman  sacrifices,  was  rendered  impossible  by  the
psychological  constitution  of  human  nature  itself.  For  even
when  two  can  be  found  to  subscribe  to  the  same  intellectual
formulas,  the  spiritual  atmosphere  in  which  they  are  bathed
is  different.  Duo  si  dicunt  {faciunt)  idem  non  est  idem.

Not  that  there  could  not  be  made  out  certain  well-marked
types  of  sentiment,  or  that  the  different  types  were  ecpially
disposed  to  answer.  In  some  there  was,  of  course,  as  we
expected,  a good  deal  of  reluctance.  The  questions  were
bound  to  seem  novel  and  unusual,  unpractical,  nay,  useless.
Even  to  experts  in  introspection  and  self-examination  they
presented  considerable  difficulty,  which  might  lead  to  the
unpleasant  discovery  that  one  did  not  have  the  beliefs  and
sentiments  one  would  like  to  have,  or  supposed  oneself  to
have.  And  apart  from  the  particular  questions,  one  knew,
of  course,  that  some  are  as  immovably  unwilling  to  answer
personal  questions  as  others  are  eager  to  oblige  the  world
with  their  personal  reactions.  The  sulqect  of  inquiry  in  such
cases  is  quite  a secondary  consideration.  If  you  got  up  an
inquiry  into  what  size  of  liats,  or  what  shape  of  boots  people
wore,  persons  of  the  first  type  would  refuse  on  the  ground
that  the  subject  was  “ too  sacred,”  while  those  of  the  second
would  hasten  to  write,  “ You  will  be  interested  to  know  that
I wear  T/V  hats,  and  abhor  pointed  toes.”  The  great  mass
of  mankind,  however,  is  intermediate  between  these  extremes,
and  while  reluctant  to  put  itself  to  any  appreciable  trouble
or  expense  for  the  sake  of  science,  can  be  induced  to  answer,
if  pressed,  and  in  order  to  olilige  a friend,  and  I should
judge  that  the  great  bulk  of  our  answers  came  from  people
of  this  sort.  At  all  events  the  opinimis  held  do  not  seem
to  have  seriously  hindered  any  one  in  answering,  provided  that


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  437

anything  else  disposed  him  to  do  so.  Answers  came  whicli
illustrated  every  conceivable  variety  of  opinion,  and  some
which  one  would  hardly  have  deemed  conceivable.  Hence
I am  inclined  to  think  that  even  types  of  sentiment,  which
usually  resulted  only  in  refusals,  were  occasionally  represented
in  the  answers  of  people  who  only  just  consented  to  answer.
Consider  e.y.  the  following  answers : I.  Yes,  if  agrccaUc.

11a.  Certainly  not.  II6.  Yes.  He.  Too  corngMcatccl.  III.  Too
lo.zy  to  think  it  oiU.  IV.  Not  at  all.  V.  Never  thought  about  it.
VI.  Noiv  that  attention  is  called  to  it,  umdd  like  to  know.
Eemarks:  “A  shipid  and  useless  inquiry.”  This  set  of  answers
seems  to  me  to  throw  a Hood  of  light  on  a state  of  mind
which  is  probably  very  common,  but  only  rarely  finds  such
racy  expression.  Again,  let  us  see  what  we  can  make  of
the  common  sentiment  that  the  subject  is  “ too  sacred  ” to
be  talked  about.  As  a rule  people  who  feel  in  this  way
will  refuse  to  answer,  but  occasionally  they  analyse  their
sentiment  for  us  first.  E.g.  a collector  reports  the  refusal  of
a lady  who  said  it  was  “ too  sacred,”  hot  immediately  afterwards
she  honestly  added,  “ besides  iny  feelings  fiuctuate  too  much  ; lohen
I am  ill  or  unheop-py  I long  for  annihilation,  ivhen  I com  stronger
(ond  happwr  I would  prefer  to  live  after  decoth.”  Here  the
question  evidently  stimulated  to  the  analysis  of  a sentiment,
which  in  the  great  majority  of  such  cases  would  have  been
accepted  at  its  face  value.  Here  is  another  analysis,  not  so
frank,  though  perliaps  on  a somewhat  higher  plane  of  feeling.
A literary  man  writes  in  answer  to  Q.  VI.  “Even  a proof  of
immortality,  supposing  that  proof  to  take,  let  us  say,  the  form
of  a mathematical  demonstration,^  would  seem  to  me  to  have
something  revolting  about  it,  something  that  in  an  indefinable
way  oftends  the  finer  feelings,  something  that,  for  lack  of  a
better  term,  I may  call  ‘ impious.’  In  attempting  to  answer
this  question  I feel  myself  somewhat  in  the  state  of  mind
that,  I fancy,  moves  many  of  those,  to  whom  this  set  of
questions  is  submitted,  to  refuse  to  answer  any  of  them.”

It  is  clear  that  such  types  of  sentiment  though  they  may
be  common  enough,  will  occur  but  rarely  in  the  answers.

^This  notion,  that  complete  proof  would  assume  the  form  of  mathematical
demonstration,  occurs  very  commonly.  It  sliows  tliat  modern  logic  has
not  penetrated  far  beyond  professional  circles.


438


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


Again  there  are  indications  that  negative  answers  to  Question
I.  were  harder  to  poll  than  affirmative.  This  is  natural  enough,
seeing  that

(1)  Almost  without  exception,  those  who  do  not  desire  a
future  life  would  be  indifferent  about  it  and  do  not  care  to
inquire  into  it.

(2)  They  would  suspect  a ‘psychical  research’  questionnaire.

(3)  They  might  still  be  sufficiently  impressed  by  the  con-
ventional belief  to  shrink  from  an  avowal  that  their  desire
conflicted  with  it.  And

(4)  in  spite  of  the  unreserved  candour  of  many  of  the
negative  answers,  there  were  signs  in  others  of  attempts  to
conceal  their  real  tendency.

(5)  It  was  quite  in  accordance  with  these  indications  that
the  scattering  answers  volunteered  from  out  of  the  way  and
non-English  speaking  places  in  French,  Spanish,  Italian,  Dutch,
Belgian,  Eussian,  Polish,  etc.,  were,  with  hardly  an  exception,
enthusiastically  affirmative.  People  did  not  similarly  write  from
the  ends  of  the  earth  to  tell  us  that  they  did  not  want  to
live  after  death.

As  regards  the  religiously  “ orthodox,”  I think  it  probable
that  they  also  did  not  poll  their  full  vote,  though  there  were
plenty  of  answers  animated  by  various  forms  of  Christian
sentiment.  Here  again  there  are  intelligible  reasons.

(1)  Faith  in  its  weaker  forms  seems  hardly  capable  of
articulate  expression,  and  indeed  will  hardly  bear  inspection
even  by  its  possessor :

(2)  It  is  often  used  as  a sort  of  anodyne  and  excuse  for
not  troubling  further  about  matters  ‘ best  left  to  God.’

(3)  Possibly  the  robuster  forms  of  religious  faith,  which
would  be  glad  of  an  opportunity  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth,
are  not  now  so  common  as  one  imagines  they  once  were.

But  even  if  the  returns  fail  to  give  ‘ orthodox  ’ sentiment
its  proper  weight,  the  correction  which  must  be  made  on  this
score  will  only  strengthen  the  argument.  For  inasmuch  as
those  who  have  it  almost  invariably  prefer  ‘faith’  to  ‘know-
ledge ’ in  answering  Question  A^I.,  it  is  manifest  that,  like  the
agnostics  and  indifferents,  their  answers  would  only  have  reduced
the  percentage  of  those  interested  in  finding  out,  more  or  less
scientifically,  whether  there  is  not  a future  life.


xLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.


439


V.

With  regard  to  the  tone  of  the  answers  there  was  a commend-
able absence  of  jocosity.  Whether  it  was  that  the  subject  was
too  solemn  even  for  the  funny  men  or  that  they  did  not  know
in  what  direction  fun  could  be  made  of  it,  it  is  hard  to  say  ;
I can  only  report  the  almost  total  absence  of  buflbonery  and
even  of  deliberate  flippancy.  ‘ Crank  ’ effusions  also  were  com-
paratively rare,  and  easily  detected  by  their  inability  to  answer
the  questions  at  all.  In  general  the  tone  of  the  answers  was
distinguished  by  a high  degree  of  sincerity,  frequently  attaining
to  extraordinary  heights  of  frankness.  In  saying  this  I do
not  of  course  mean  to  affirm  that  the  psychological  self-analysis
was  always  correct : I mean  to  say  only  that  people  generally
seemed  to  express  as  far  as  they  were  able  what  seemed  to
them  the  truth  about  their  feelings.  Even  therefore  where  the
analysis  was  probably  wrong  or  incomplete,  it  yielded  psycho-
logical facts  of  a sort.  For  a man’s  estimate  of  himself  is
an  important  fact  about  him  and  a factor  in  his  actions.

On  the  whole  we  may  draw  this  conclusion,  that  though
the  answers  may  not  reflect  the  actual  distribution  of  the  various
types  of  sentiment,  they  may  yet  be  taken  to  be  a fair  sample
for  the  purpose  of  the  main  problem  of  this  inquiry.  Or
rather  it  is  an  unfair  sample,  in  that  it  exaggerates  the  extent
of  the  desire  for  knowledge  of  a future  life ; but  in  spite  of
this  unfairness,  the  returns  show  a hitherto  hardly  suspected
weakness  of  this  desire,  and  thereby  answer  the  question  into
which  it  was  necessary  for  the  S.P.E.  to  inquire.  This  con-
clusion may  be  regarded  as  fairly  probable,  if  not  as  strictly
demonstrated  : it  is  at  all  events  more  probable  than  any  other,
and  if  any  one  desires  to  contest  it,  it  is  incumbent  on  him  to
amass  more  numerous,  exact  and  decisive  data  than  those  we
have  been  able  to  obtain.  I can  only  wish  him  God  speed
and  joy  of  the  labour.  For  the  present  the  results  of  the
Questionnaire  afford  a definite  basis  of  psychological  fact  for
arguing  the  question  such  as  has  not  hitherto  existed.  And
further,  we  are,  I think,  henceforth  entitled  to  put  in  a warning
and  a protest  against  the  fruitless  discussion  of  such  questions
on  grounds  of  mere  a priori  probabilities,  or  literary  traditions.
While  admitting  that  these  always  afford  a certain  measure  of


440


F.  a S.  Schiller.


[part


truth,  and  while  deeply  impressed  by  the  way  in  which  a literary
tradition  tends  not  only  to  perpetuate,  but  also  to  verify,  itself,
I must  contend  that  such  grounds  of  argument  are  esshntially
unsafe  until  supplemented  and  confirmed  by  a first  hand  in-
vestigation of  the  actual  facts,  wherever  this  is  possible.

And  I may  add  that  many  other  ethical  and  resthetical
discussions  appear  to  me  to  flounder  in  quagmires  of  this  sort.

VI.

I shall  only  permit  myself  to  discuss  one  more  point  in
this  paper,  viz.  whether  any  practical  corollary  can  be  drawn
from  these  scientific  results.  And  1 may  begin  by  admitting
that  a very  specious  plea  may  be  put  in  against  proceeding  to
any  practical  inferences.  For  why  not  let  the  matter  rest
there  ? Is  not  everything  for  the  best  in  the  best  of  all  possible
worlds  ? On  your  own  showing  all  or  nearly  all  seem  admirably
adjusted  to  the  present  situation,  and  to  have  just  that  degree
of  knowledge  or  lack  of  knowledge  which  suits  them  and  which
they  desire.

For  consider : those  who  ‘ know  ’ that  there  is,  or  is  not,
a future  life  are  content  with  their  inward  conviction  or  scientific
reasoning.  Those  who  ‘ have  faith  ’ can  feel  that  it  is  far  higher
and  holier  and  more  meritorious  than  the  vulgarities  of  scientific
knowledge ; and  they  too  are  satisfied.  Those  who  delight  in
uncertainty  and  the  play  of  fancy,  can  indulge  in  these  to  their
heart’s  content.  Those  who  are  addicted  to  a 2^'i'iori  demonstra-
tions either  way  can  construct  them  without  stint  or  fear  of
verification.  The  great  army  of  the  indifferent  can  afford  to
remain  neutral  towards  the  inconclusive  combats  of  the  fanatics
on  either  side.  The  matter-of-fact  and  worldly-minded  have  a
right  to  ignore  a future  too  uncertain  to  affect  reasonable  action.
Even  those  who  desire  to  know  are  but  rarely  distracted  by
a painful  craving,  and  are  usually  easy  to  convince  that  so
perilous  a knowledge  is  wisely  withheld  from  them.  Even  those
who  {unreasonably)  fear  lest  knowledge  should  blast  their  hopes
are  at  least  secured  against  the  fore-knowledge  of  their  vanity.
It  is  true  that  a few  still  exhibit  a divergence  between  desire
and  expectation,  but  experience  shows  that  such  discrepancies
are  essentially  temporary,  and  that  the  one  or  the  other  always


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  441

adjusts  the  other  into  harmony  with  itself,  by  a process  which  is
usually  rapid  and  painless  and  unaccompanied  by  any  lasting-
distress.  In  fact,  amid  all  the  various  phenomena  of  human
psychology,  distress  due  to  uncertainty  about  one’s  fate  after
death  seems  to  be  one  of  the  rarest.

An  optimistic  defender  of  the  status  quo  might  proceed  to
adorn  his  picture  of  the  general  satisfaction  with  loftier  appeals
to  philosophy  and  religion.  He  would  doubtless  improve  the
occasion  to  enlarge  on  the  limitations  of  human  faculty  and
the  presumption  of  seeking  to  comprehend  the  unknowable.
Or  again,  he  would  castigate  the  impiety  of  desiring  a know-
ledge which  the  Divine  Wisdom  had  withheld  from  us,  and
urge  that  if  God  had  intended  us  to  know  He  would  have
rendered  the  fact  of  immortality  more  evident  to  us,  by  reason,
revelation,  or  experience.

It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  a very  strong  case  can  be
made  out  against  the  scientific  research  to  which  we  are  pledged,
and  I am  quite  sure  that  however  strenuously  we  may  impugn
the  reasons  advanced,  we  can  do  but  little  to  mitigate  the
prejudice  from  which  they  spring.  The  great  forces  which
impel  men  are  not  in  their  essence  rational,  but  inasmuch  as
it  is  only  by  reasoning  that  they  are  accessible,  they  must
be  argued  with  as  best  we  can.

I must  remaik,  then,  in  the  first  place  that  a substantially
similar  case  might  have  been  made  out  against  any  attempt
at  advancing  knowledge.  For  whatever  our  ignorance,  there
always  exists  a certain  contentment  with  it,  a sort  of  social
equilibrium  or  adjustment,  which  it  is  inconvenient  and  distress-
ing to  disturb.  And  this  mood  of  acquiescence  in  the  actual
will  always  seek  to  appear  respectable  by  appealing  to  higher
considerations.  The  classical  example  of  tliis  attitude  towards
the  restless  progressiveness  of  scientific  research  is  the  famous
letter  of  the  Cadi  of  Bagdad  to  Sir  A.  Layard  in  reply  to
a request  for  statistics  concerning  the  trade  and  population
of  his  province.^  Alike  for  exquisiteness  of  phrasing  and  piety
of  sentiment  I have  not  found  anything  to  touch  it  in  Occidental
literature  or  in  the  questionnaire  answers.  And  certainly  no  other
document  reveals  so  plainly  and  delightfully  how  many  of  these
ebullitions  of  piety  really  spring  from  the  abysses  of  indolence,
^ Quoted  by  William  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  Vol.  II.  p.  640.


442


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


and  are  inspired  by  aversion  from  what  seems  uninteresting
and  unprofitable  knowledge.  Against  the  Cadi  of  Bagdad,
however,  I should  venture  to  quote  the  truer  and  nobler
doctrine  of  Xenophanes :

ov  rot  utt’  TrdvTa  6eol  Oi'proLs  Trape8a.^av

clXXd  XpOVM  ^pTOVVT€<;  i(j)evpL(TKOV<TlV  dp(.iVOV.

“ Surely  the  gods  have  not  displayed  all  things  to  men  from
the  beginning,  but  they,  in  time,  hy  seeking,  find  out  a better
way.”  On  its  intrinsic  merits  of  course  this  pseudo-religious
argument  against  research  hardly  deserves  refutation.  It  is
essentially  the  argument  of  the  Peculiar  People  against  the
study  and  practice  of  medicine.  Nor  do  I think  that  it  is
much  more  plausible  to  argue  that  if  God  had  intended  us
to  know  He  would  have  spared  us  the  trouble  and  the  discipline
of  finding  out,  than  to  say  that  if  God  had  meant  us  to  wear
clothes  we  should  have  been  born,  like  the  angels,  with  becom-
ing costumes.

With  the  plea  of  merely  philosophic  agnosticism  it  is  possible
to  make  short  work.  It  suffices  to  say  that  no  one  can  know
where  the  limits  of  the  possible  are  laid  down  until  he  has
tried.  And  in  this  case  no  one  has  tried  in  any  rational  or
persistent  manner.  No  one,  therefore,  has  a right  to  declare
this  particular  knowledge  impossible  a priori.

On  the  other  hand,  I should  like  to  appeal  for  support  to
the  general  desire  for  knowledge  as  such.  But  I fear  it  may
be  too  rare  and  faint  a feelinq  to  bear  the  burden  of  so  qreat
an  enterprise.  Moreover,  those  who  are  capable  of  feeling  it
are  for  the  most  part  already  absorbed  in  other  subjects  of
research,  easier  and  more  directly  profitable,  if  less  momentous,
than  ours.  Nevertheless,  it  should,  I think,  be  borne  in  mind
that  the  success  of  this,  as  of  otlier  branches  of  the  Society’s
work,  must  continue  to  depend  somewhat  on  the  ‘ disinterested  ’
assistance  of  those  who  seek  knowledge  ‘ for  its  own  sake.’
But  I feel  that  their  might  is  as  nothing  compared  with  that
of  the  ancient,  and  deep-seated  distrust  of  knowledge,  of  the
social  instinct  which  in  the  past  has  immolated  on  a thousand
pyres  the  psychics  it  had  turned  into  ‘ witches  ’ and  the  men
of  science  it  had  decried  as  ‘ mao'icians.’  Here  as  elsewhere

O

we  should  deprecate,  now  as  ever,  its  subtle  and  nefarious


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  443

influence.  Experience  has  always  so  far  shown  it  to  be
groundless.  Instead  of  being  a source  of  incalculable  dangers,
knowledge  has  always  issued  in  unexpected  ameliorations  of
human  life.  All  analogy,  therefore,  would  lead  one  to  suppose
that  a gradual  and  dearly-bought  acquisition  of  progressive
knowledge  of  the  laws  regulating  our  post-mortem  careers  would
be  predominantly  good  and  useful,  bracing  and  invigorating.

For  real  knowledge  can  only  confirm,  it  cannot  destroy,  our
hopes.  A disproof  of  a future  life  must,  it  seems,  be  a priori,
and  on  that  breeding-ground  of  subtle  fallacy,  the  a priori  realm,
the  most  ingenious  intellects  may  be  defied  to  discover  anything
really  cogent.  As  soon  as  we  consent  to  appeal  to  evidence,
on  the  other  hand,  a good  deal  will  depend  on  the  sort  of
evidence  to  which  we  choose  to  appeal.  Hitherto  our
science  has,  by  accident  quite  as  much  as  by  preference,
dwelt  on  the  physical  and  physiological  considerations
which  render  the  notion  of  a future  life  for  the  individual
so  remote  and  improbable  as  necessarily  to  drive  it  from
the  foreground  of  consciousness.  But  an  absolute  disproof
of  the  doctrine  by  such  methods  seems  to  be  logically  in-
conceivable, for  reasons  I have  elsewhere  developed  at  some
length.^  The  effect  of  all  psychic  research,  on  the  other  hand,
must  be  to  keep  the  mind  open  to  possibilities  of  a very
different  order.  Psychical  science,  in  so  far  as  it  leads  to

results,  can  only  confirm  the  belief  in  a future  life.  But
science  is  always  gradual ; its  advances  are  as  slow,  though
not  as  inevitable,  as  the  mills  of  the  gods.  There  is  no  fear
of  our  finding  out  all  at  once.  To  demonstrate  immortality
by  a single  dramatic  co^lp  cle  tlUdtre  is  impossible.  Even  if  a
case  could  be  produced  so  complete  as  to  lack  no  element  of
logical  conclusiveness  it  would  convince  none  but  those  who
came  prepared  to  be  convinced.  For,  as  we  have  seen,  a great
many,  perhaps  a majority,  are  not  psychologically  disposed  to
be  convinced.  They  have  not  cultivated  a mind  open  for  the
reception  of  such  novelties.  Their  old  prejudices  must  be
ploughed  up  before  the  new  knowledge  can  take  root  in  their
mind.  And  this  is  a long  and  difficult  process.  There  is  no
fear,  therefore,  that  the  millennium  will  come  upon  us  in  the

^ Humanism,  p.  288  ; [Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XV.  p.  63),  and  Riddles  of  the
Sphinx,  pp.  393-4.


444


F.  a S.  Schiller.


[part


twinkling  of  an  eye.  There  will  always  be  scope  for  our  hopes
to  guide  our  researches,  for  our  faith  to  outstrip  our  knowledge.
Our  metaphysicians  will  still  be  able  to  skirmish  in  advance
of  the  serried  ranks  of  our  scientists,  and  indeed  may  con-
ceivably be  stimulated  to  more  effective  speculations  by  the
discovery  of  more  copious  and  trustworthy  data.

Nor  do  I think  that  an  advance  of  psychical  knowledge
such  as  we  have  contemplated  would  really  detract  from  the
value  of  Faith.  Those  who  now  content  themselves  with
“ faith,”  whether  it  takes  the  form  of  religious  conviction  or
of  an  immediate  inner  consciousness  (which  we  may  call
mystical,  if  we  define  as  the  essence  of  mysticism  the  power  of
dispensing  with  reasoning  processes  in  attaining  certainty),  appear
to  reach  a degree  of  certainty  which  seems  quite  to  transcend
scientific  knowledge  and  makes  it  look  hopelessly  humdrum  and
superfluous.  It  seems  a profanation  to  patch  upon  the  radiant
robes  of  faith,  upon  the  seamless  splendour  of  a speckless
assurance,  a sordid  backing  laboriously  woven  of  the  grey,
tenacious  threads  of  scientific  inference.  Yet  these  glorious
fabrics  of  faith  are  not  e.xempt  from  mortal  weakness.  Just  in
proportion  as  they  transcend  the  support  of  logic  they  become
exposed  to  incalculable  dangers.  They  suffer  from  the  vicissi-
tudes of  faith  in  the  extra-logical  realm  in  which  they  float.
The  spiritual  forces  that  generated  them  so  unaccountably  may
as  unexpectedly  destroy  them.  And,  socially,  they  all  exhibit
one  fatal  and  fundamental  flaw.  They  are  individual  and
incommunicable;  their  raptures  and  their  restfulness  cannot  be
transferred  to  others.  Nay,  regarded  in  the  cold  cruel  light
of  a sceptical  reason,  their  magic  sheen  appears  to  leave  them.
They  look  rather  like  paltry  gossamer,  flimsy  structures  of  a
futile  imagination,  and  piteously  unfit  to  clothe  the  human
spirit  in  a work-a-day  world.

And  so  the  science  of  the  day  writes  down  our  various  faiths
as  curious,  and  mainly  pathological,  products  of  the  imagination,
and  passes  sternly  on,  in  silent  condemnation.  This  utter
deprecation  of  their  spiritual  experiences,  which  is  implied  in
the  methods,  far  more  than  it  is  expressed  in  the  dogmas,  of
positive  science,  is  felt  of  course  in  various  ways  by  the
possessors  of  these  forms  of  faith.  In  some  it  produces
alienation  from  science  and  all  its  ways.  Others  content


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a.  Future  Life.  445

themselves  with  their  self-centred  and  subjective  certainty.
Others  more  unselfishly  declare  that  they  would  like  knowledge
to  be  added  to  faith  for  the  sake  of  less  richly  favoured
souls.  Others  again,  and  theirs  is  perhaps  the  most  pathetic
case  of  all,  experience  in  their  own  persons  the  precariousness
of  what  science  so  far  will  not  treat  as  more  than  a subjective
phenomenon.  The  pressure  of  an  unsympathising  social  atmo-
sphere drives  them  into  a critical  attitude  towards  their  owui
‘ intuitions.’  They  feel  them  to  be  only  subjective  experiences  j
they  begin  to  doubt  whether  they  are  not  phantoms  of  their
imagination,  indications  merely  of  the  intensity  of  their  longing.
In  one  most  interesting  case  this  process  of  self-criticism  went
to  such  lengths  that  a man  who  in  the  fervour  of  a Methodist
conversion-crisis  had  actually  perceived  a vision  of  his  Saviour,
lapsed  insensibly  into  agnosticism  in  a non-religious  environ-
ment, and  was  only  brought  back  into  touch  with  his  religious
past  by  a study  of  the  miracles  of  ‘ Theosophy.’

On  the  whole,  therefore,  it  would  seem  that  reliance  upon
Faith  alone  is  not  free  from  serious  drawbacks,  and  that  it
would  be  impolitic  to  oppose  Faith  to  Psychical  Eesearch.  To.
me  it  seems  rather  that  each  needs  the  other,  and  that  together
they  might  transfigure  the  face  of  life.

I pass  from  the  loftiest  to  the  lowest  form  of  opposition  to-
psychical  exploration,  that  of  those  who  think  that  one  world
at  a time  is  enough,  and  find  their  present  business  and  amuse-
ments too  absorbing  to  bestow  any  attention,  and  still  less  any
favour,  upon  anything  that  might  distract  them  from  their
chosen  pursuits.  Now  it  will  probably  be  agreed  that  this
objection  of  practical  common-sense  to  our  researches  is  most
formidable,  and  should  if  possible  be  mitigated,  if  it  cannot
wholly  be  removed.  It  rests  moreover  on  a sound  instinct.
We  naturally  try  to  circumscribe  the  universe  with  which
man  has  to  sustain  relations,  because  happiness  requires  adapta-
tion to  environment,  and  the  more  extensive  the  environment,
the  more  various  and  complex  must  our  activities  become,
and  the  more  difficult,  ceteris  paribus,  the  achievement  of  adapta-
tion. P)Ut  your  practical  man’s  objection  to  taking  too  wide  and
visionary  a view  of  life  is  apt  to  degenerate  into  a sentimental
repugnance  to  anything  which  threatens  to  expand  his  immediate
horizon.  The  intensity  of  this  feeling  is  what  has  hardly


446


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part


yet  l)een  realised.  In  its  more  flippant  forms  it  issues  in  the
declaration  that  Mrs.  Piper’s  mediumship  has  added  a new
terror  to  death,  in  its  more  strenuous  it  rises  to  an  utter
loathing  of  psychical  research  and  hatred  of  psychical  researchers.
Altogether  it  forms  a mass  of  prejudice  almost  impervious  to
argument,  so  that  all  I can  urge  against  it  will  probably
be  vain.  I must  point  out,  however —

(1)  That  if  another  world  can  be  scientifically  discovered,
the  two  worlds  will  become  one  and  continuous  to  a greater
or  less  extent,  and  be  included  in  the  same  natural  universe.^
This  will  reduce  the  supposed  antagonism  between  them  to
that  which  always  exists  to  some  extent  between  the  present
and  the  future.

(2)  Looking  ahead  to  the  future  is  a characteristic  which
has  been  more  and  more  deeply  impressed  on  the  human  mind
by  the  teachings  of  experience ; and  forethought  and  fore-
knowledge is  in  all  other  departments  of  knowledge  eagerly
desired  and  conspicuously  useful.  In  fact  our  mental  power
and  progress  seem  to  be  largely  measurable  by  this  capacity  to
look  ahead."  The  discovery  of  a future  life,  therefore,  would
seem  to  contain  the  possibility  of  accomplishing  the  conscious
guidance  of  our  present  life  in  a completer  and  more  perfect
way.

(3)  Human  sentiment  would  soon  grow  adjusted  to  the  new

situation,  even  in  those  who  now  hate  to  look  ahead  and
anticipate  trouble.  They  would  lie  awake  of  nights,  thinking

of  what  they  should  do  a thousand  years  hence,  as  little  as
now.  Forethought  would  be  tempered  witli  the  reflection  that
“ sufficient  for  tlie  day  is  the  evil  thereof,”  into  a working  com-
promise at  least  as  conducive  to  efficiency  as  the  present  tacit
convention  to  think  as  little  as  may  be  of  the  fact  that  all
human  undertakings  must  be  cut  short,  and  perhaps  be  rendered
futile,  by  death.  And  so  the  certainty  of  a future  life  would
impair  our  activities  as  little  as  the  certainty  of  death  does
now.  At  present  our  attitude  towards  death  is  the  most
marvellous  triumph  of  psychological  necessity  over  logic.
Everybody  admits  it,  but  no  one  allows  it  to  paralyse  his
action.  Whatever  revelations,  therefore,  psychical  science  may

’ Cp.  Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XV.  p.  50.  Humanism,  pp.  276-7.

^ Cp.  Humanism,  p.  257.


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  447

have  in  store  for  us,  it  is  not  credible  that  they  would  unnerve
us  or  impair  our  capacity  to  carry  on  the  business  of  life.  At
worst  they  might  hold  out  the  prospect  of  a distressing  or
distasteful  future.  But  we  do  not  find  that  during  the  dark
ages,  when  men  professed  to  believe  that  eternal  torture  was
the  inevitable  lot  of  the  vast  majority  of  their  kind,  the  gaiety
of  nations  was  eclipsed  or  their  ferocious  energy  diminished.
At  hcst  we  miaht  o’ain  cognizance  of  a light  that  would  illumine
the  rough  places  of  this  world  and  guide  our  stumbling  foot-
steps. But  a miraculous  transformation  seems  as  unlikely  as
a moral  cataclysm.  Human  nature  after  all  is  the  main  factor
in  our  calculations.  And  plastic  though  it  be,  it  changes  very
slowly.  It  would  be  quixotic,  therefore,  to  suppose  that
Psychical  Kesearch  will  work  a sudden  revolution.  Even  if
in  the  next  decades  sufficient  evidence  should  accumulate  to
convince  the  most  obdurate  of  the  truth  of  spirit  communica-
tions, the  ordinary  business  of  life  would  go  on  much  as  before.
People  would  eat,  drink,  sleep,  work,  marry,  and  amuse  them-
selves as  before.  There  would  be  no  slump  in  Consols,  nor
even  any  perceptible  decline  in  fashionable  frivolity.  For  it
is  highly  improbable  that  those  who  could  not  be  broken  of
the  habit  of  living  in  and  for  the  moment  even  by  their
unqirestioning  acceptance  of  the  prospect  of  eternal  damnation
will  cease  to  play  about  on  the  surface  of  things,  whatever
evolutions  may  proceed  down  in  the  depths  of  thought.

VII.

But,  after  all,  I do  not  know  why  we  should  display  such
exclusive  solicitude  about  the  feelings  of  those  who  enjoy  the
existing  uncertainty.  Some  consideration  surely  is  due  also  to
those  who  would  sincerely  like  to  know,  and  to  whom  the
lack  of  knowledge  causes  grave  distress.  I have  admitted,  and
even  emphasised,  that  at  any  given  time  they  form  a minority,
it  may  be  a small  minority.  But  there  is  also  evidence  to
show  that  at  some  time  or  other  in  their  lives  a large  majority
pass  through  a period  when  the  mystery  of  existence  oppresses
their  spirit  and  torments  them  with  fears  and  perplexities
which  real  knowledge  would  almost  certainly  show  to  be
groundless.  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  such  periods  of  anxiety

2g


448


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


seem  usually  to  be  short,  aud  that  after  a few  years  people
find  quite  comfortable  beliefs  which  at  first  had  seemed  un-
bearable. Ill  the  aggregate,  however,  the  amount  of  spiritual
distress,  in  periods  of  bereavement  and  mental  development,
caused  by  the  present  state  of  affairs  must  be  enormous.  It
forms  so  needless  a blot  upon  civilisation  that  it  seems  a
thousand  pities  that  attempts  at  the  recording  and  scientific
exploration  of  the  fieeting  clues  that  float  into  our  view  should
not  be  prosecuted  with  something  like  the  ardour  aud  per-
sistency which  mankind  has  displayed  in  dealing  with  the
other  difficulties  of  human  life.

The  first  and  immediate  step,  however,  must  be  to  arouse
a will  to  hnoiu  adequate  to  the  success  of  this  enterprise.  AVe
need  to  arouse  towards  Psychical  Eesearch  the  feeling  which
Francis  Bacon  aroused  towards  physical  research.  Whether
or  not  Bacon  was  secretly  the  greatest  of  poets,  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  he  was  not  a great  man  of  science,  nor  himself
a discoverer  of  new  truth.  His  services  to  science  were
immense ; but  they  were  those  of  a lawyer  with  a genius  for
epigram.  He  was  also  a Lord  Chancellor.  In  virtue  of  these
qualities,  and  in  spite  of  these  defects,  he  did  for  physical
science  (in  England  at  least)  what  no  man  of  science  could
have  done.  He  drew  general  attention  to  its  possibilities ;
he  preached  physical  research  with  such  eloquence  and  assiduity
that  he  actually  changed  the  social  atmosphere,  and  made  men
desire  the  physical  knowledge  which  they  had  until  then
distrusted  and  despised.

Now  the  last  point  I wish  to  insist  on  in  this  paper  is
that  in  all  probability  it  was  chiefly  the  absence  of  such-
desire  for  knowledge  which  formed  the  ultimate  reason  for
the  stagnation  of  science  during  the  Middle  Ages.  It  was
not,  certainly,  the  obscurantism  of  the  Christian  Church,  as  is
currently  alleged ; for  Greek  science  had  been  languishing  for
some  centuries  before  the  establishment  of  Christianity,  which
itself  was  one  of  the  results  of  a general  movement  away  from
science  and  towards  a certain  type  of  religion.  For  nearly  2000
years  few  or  none  seem  to  have  desired  scientific  knowledge,
and  therefore  scientific  knowedge  made  iro  progress.

The  only  suggestion  I can  make  in  explanation  of  this
strange  phenomenon  is  that  scientific  knowledge  had  ceased


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  449

to  seem  desirable.  The  immense  authority  of  Aristotle  had
bullied  the  ^world  into  the  belief  that  pure  science  was
utterly  useless,  and  much  too  lofty  to  concern  itself  with
the  good  for  mand  Naturally  enough  the  average  man
retaliated  on  the  inhumanity  of  science  by  turning  away
to  intellectual  inc|uiries  which  seemed  to  promise  more
for  his  interests.  Intellectual  interest  was  transferred  first
to  the  ethical,  and  subsequently  to  the  religious,  questions
debated  among  the  Stoics,  Epicureans,  and  Neoplatonist  philo-
sophers, and  the  adherents  of  the  Judaic,  Mithraic,  and
Christian  religions.  Thus  the  social  atmosphere  became
unfavourable  to  scientific  research,  and  stified  whatever
germs  thereof  sprang  up  in  individual  minds.  A great
genius  did  indeed  arise,  before  this  process  had  gone  far,  who
did  not  scorn  to  apply  scientific  knowledge  to  practical  needs.
But,  unfortunately,  Archimedes  was  butchered  in  the  sack  of
Syracuse  by  the  Eomans,  and  with  him  jrerished  in  all  proba-
bility all  prospects  of  a school  to  undo  the  mischief  wrought
by  Aristotle’s  superstitious  reverence  for  useless  knowledge.
Else  modern  science  might  have  leapt  into  existence,  and
started  on  its  beneficent  career  2000  years  ago.

As  it  was  we  had  to  wait  for  Bacon.  Bacon  succeeded
in  transforming  the  social  atmosphere.  He  proclaimed  that
knowledge  was  power,  and  that  physical  science,  systematically
studied,  would  give  to  each  his  heart’s  desire.  And  in  spite
of  the  disgust  of  pedants  and  obscurantists,  and  the  futile
quibbling  of  metaphysicians,  men  were  glad  to  follow  his
inspiring  lead ; they  were  encouraged  to  set  to  work  and  to
obtain  the  sort  of  knowledge  they  desired.  And  we  all  know
how  plentifully  the  slowly-ripening  fruits  of  science  have
rewarded  their  labours.  But,  after  all,  the  dark  cloud  of
ignorant  contentment  was  lifted  only  in  part.  To  this  day  it
has  brooded  over  another  portion  of  the  field  of  knowledge.
The  desire  for  knowledge  does  not  yet  extend  to  the  subjects  of
psychical  investigation.  These  are  still  regarded  as  uncanny,
dangerous,  unknowable,  rxseless,  and  what  not.  They  still
await  the  redeeming  advent  of  a Bacon  to  bid  men  open  their
ears  and  their  eyes,  and  put  forth  their  strength  to  sow  and
reap  a fresh  and  no  less  precious  crop  of  knowledge.

^ Cp.  my  essay  on  “Useless  Knowledge”  in  Humanism,  p.  18.


450


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part


Our  first  task  thus  becomes  that  of  finding  such  a second
Bacon,  such  a “ trumpeter  of  a new  era  ” of  research,^  who
can  stir  up,  if  not  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men,  at  least
a sufficient  number  of  competent  and  intelligent  men  to
those  sustained  and  systematic  efforts  which  deserve,  and
usually  achieve,  success.  Shall  we  find  him  in  our  Society  ?
I do  not  dare  to  prophesy,  but  when  I look  at  the  list  of
our  Council  I do  not  despair.  For  it  seems  to  me  that
among  our  Presidents,  past  and  present,  we  have  men  of  the
requisite  calibre.  And  the  indifference  of  a Lord  Chancellor
may  be  more  than  outweighed  by  the  support  of  a Premier.


Appendix.

The  questionnaire  used  in  the  inquiry  was  as  follows :

INQUIRY  INTO  HUMAN  SENTIMENT  WITH  REGARD
TO  A FUTURE  LIFE.

There  is  a widespread  literary  tradition  that  men  naturally  desire
a future  life.  From  this  assumed  fact  it  has  been  variously  argued
that  (1)  such  a universal  desire  cannot  be  destined  to  disappoint-
ment, and  (2)  it  must  vitiate  convictions  and  engender  illusory
evidence  in  its  own  support.

But  there  is  some  reason  to  suppose,  both  from  the  ordinary
conduct  of  men  and  from  sporadic  declarations  of  individuals,  that
this  tradition  is  very  far  from  accurately  representing  the  facts,
and  that  these  are  actually  more  vaiious  and  complicated.  More-
over, it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  in  India  the  literary  tradition
seems  to  be  exactly  reversed,  and  it  is  assumed  that  men  naturally
crave  for  extinction  or  absorption  in  the  Absolute.

It  becomes  a cpiestion,  therefore,  what  the  actual  sentiments  of
men  are,  and  what,  consequently,  is  the  actual  bias  with  which

’^Buccinator  novi  tcm2Joris.  It  is  a curious,  but  most  welcome,  coincidence
that  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  though  not  present  when  this  paper  was  read  to  the
Society  and  unaware  of  its  arguments,  should  have  arrived  at  a very  similar  view
of  Bacon’s  epocli-making  exhortations.  See  Proceedings  S. P.R.,  Vol.  XVIII.,
pp.  3-6.


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.


451


they  are  likely  to  receive  the  doctrines  and  the  evidence  that  bear
on  the  subject.

Both  these  questions  are  capable  of  being  determined  with  suffi-
cient precision  by  instituting  a statistical  inquiry  over  a sufficiently
wide  field — -collecting  answers  until  it  becomes  evident  that  the
percentages  of  the  various  types  of  answer  have  become  constant.

To  determine  the  nature  of  men’s  actual  sentiments  and  actual
bias  should  be  a matter  of  great  interest,  not  only  to  the  S.P.E.
and  jisychologists  generally,  but  also  to  every  religious  organisation.
For  both  the  scientific  labours  of  the  former  and  the  moral  exhorta-
tions of  the  latter  are  likely  to  be  in  some  degree,  at  least,  ineffectual,
so  long  as  they  are  conducted  in  ignorance,  and  so  in  disregard,
of  what  men  really  want.  It  is  only  when  the  facts  have  been
ascertained  that  they  can  be  argued  from  for  the  various  purposes
of  the  scientist,  the  philosopher  and  the  theologian.

First  of  all,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  discover  the  nature  of
human  sentiment ; and  to  obtain  it  in  its  purity,  it  is  desirable
to  exclude,  as  far  as  possible,  all  extraneous  infiuences,  whether
of  a religious  or  of  a scientific  kind.  It  is,  of  course,  recognised
that  these  may  and  often  do  influence  sentiment,  that  they  may
engender  or  check  it,  as  also  that  there  may  be  a marked  divergence
between  conviction  or  belief  and  sentiment.  But  as  it  is  primarily
the  nature  of  the  sentiment  which  has  to  be  determined,  these
other  considerations  should  be  excluded  as  far  as  possible.

Hence  the  subjoined  questions  should  he  understood  as  directly  referring
only  to  the  personal  preferences,  sentiments  or  desires  of  those  who  answer
them,  quite  irrespective  of  their  religious  faith  or  reasoned  convictions,  the
influence  of  which,  where  it  exists,  may  be  recorded  in  answer
to  Question  III.

Please  return  this  questionnaire  when  answered  to

Dr.  bichard  HODGSOX,

5 Boylston  Place,

Boston,  Mass,  U.S.A.

N.B. — All  names  will  he  regarded  as  strictly  confidential.


QUESTIONS.

I.  Would  you  prefer  (a)  to  live  after  ‘ death  ’ or  {h)  not  ?

II.  («)  If  I.  {a),  do  you  desire  a future  life  whatever  the  conditions
might  be  1


452


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part


(b)  If  not,  what  would  have  to  be  its  character  to  make  the

prospect  seem  tolerable?  Would  you,  e.g.  be  content
with  a life  more  or  less  like  your  present  life  ?

(c)  Can  you  say  what  elements  in  life  (if  any)  are  felt  by  you

to  call  for  its  perpetuity  ?

III.  Can  you  state  ichy  you  feel  in  this  way,  as  regards  questions

I.  and  lU

IV.  Do  you  NOW  feel  the  question  of  a future  life  to  be  of  urgent

importance  to  your  mental  comfort?

V.  Have  your  feelings  on  questions  L,  II.  and  IV.  undergone
change  ? If  so,  when  and  in  what  ways  ?

A^I.  (a)  Would  you  like  to  know  for  certain  about  the  future  life,
or  (5)  would  you  prefer  to  leave  it  a matter  of  faith?


HINTS  FOR  COLLECTORS.

1.  Answers  should  be  collected  b}^  preference  from  educated  adults.

2.  Collectors  should  fill  up  their  own  papers  first,  and  get  the

others  answered  independently.

3.  Any  answer,  AFFIUMATIVE  OK  NEGATIVE,  is  valuable  as  a psycho-

logical fact.

4.  Even  a refusal  to  answer  is  a valuable  indication  of  feeling,  which  it

is  important  to  record.  In  such  case,  the  collector  should,  if
possible,  ask  the  reason  of  the  refusal,  and  should  then  fill  up  a
census  paper  with  the  name,  etc.,  of  the  refuser,  inserting  the
reason  given  for  refusing  under  the  head  of  Remarks.


State  : — Fame

Address.


Age .Sex

Nationality  .

Rrofession

Date


ANALYSIS  OL  THE  ANSWERS  TO  QUESTION  VI.


XLix.]  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life.  -ioS


•ivxox

G8I

511

123

102

415

107

749

178

63

63

3281

O 1 G<J

”

- - 1

2

4

8

CO

001

•oog  -ouua

O'!  ft

X ^

CM

X CM
CO  — CM

^ 1

r-M  1

193

•s^aapn^g
eSapoQ  U0niy

CC  Rt  tt  w

1 1

Rt  1— 1 J>.

1 1 1

-f

X

•ussy

’{oqo^sj  MSiuy

CC  -tl  1

^ 1

1

O [ e.

1-1

O'!

■

•qouR.ig
•jamy  'a'dl'S

CO  o o
ttQ  -f  —

1 i

lO  CO  X

2

X

CM

•UROiaamy

283

275

74

47

5 s ^

CM  CO  Ct
O O X
CM  CO

-t*  a a

X ^ G<1

1569

•IBUIOIOQ

20

8

! ” i

8

1

20

i:^  ^ O'!

1

1%  1

•URtpUI

^ ^
CO

^ ® 1-1

8

4

41

X o

170

■qspug

153

97

30

25

CO  o

oi  id  -H

C CO  ct
CO  ct

RO  -t  C
-r  0-1  .-H

820

1.  “Knowledge”  : T(«  to  ().  IV.,  -

2.  „ : No  „ . . -

3.  ,,  ; ‘ on  general  ]iriiiciples,’ etc.,

4.  ,,  : if  there  is  a future  life  and

it  is  pleasant.

5.  ,,  : but  think  it  impossible,

6.  ,,  ; negative  or  doubtful  answers

to  Q.  I.,

7.  ,,  : if,  or  that,  there  is  ;io  future

life.

8.  Not  knowledge,  ------

9.  ‘Indifferent,’  ------

10.  ‘Faith,’  -------

11.  Certain  there  is  a future  life,  - . .

12.  ,,  ,,  no  ,,  - . -

13.  Not  answered,  ------

In  addition  there  were  42  American  answers  to  differently-worded  (simplified)  questions,  which  afforded  in-
sufiicient  data  for  analysis  and  have  therefore  been  excluded.


454*


Andreiv  Lang.


[part


III.

THE  POLTEEGEIST  AT  CIDEVILLE.

By  Andrew  Lang.

In  the  history  of  the  Poltergeist,  the  case  of  the  Presbytere
of  Cicleville  (1850-1851)  is  best  known  through  Mr.  Dale
Owen’s  Footfalls  on  the  Boundary  of  Another  World  (London,
1861,  pjr.  195-203).  The  author  cited  M.  de  Mirville’s
Fragment  d’un  Ouvrage  Inklit,  a pamphlet  which  I have  failed
to  procure.  By  the  kindness  of  the  Marepns  d’Eguilles, — a
descendant  of  the  French  envoy  who  accompanied  Prince
Charles  from  Edinburgh  to  Derby  and  Culloden, — the  Society
has  received  an  authenticated  copy  of  the  original  documents
of  what  was  practically  a trial  for  witchcraft  before  the  Juge
de  Paix  of  Yerville  in  1851.  To  the  present  Juge  de  Paix
we  owe  the  privilege  of  having  the  records  viewed  and  tran-
scribed. It  will  be  remarked  that  Mr.  Dale  Owen  omitted
the  negative  evidence,  and  certain  rulings  of  the  court,  un-
favourable to  the  innocence  of  the  alleged  sorcerer,  who  appeared
as  plaintiff  in  a case  of  libel  against  M.  Tinel,  Cure  of  Cideville.
Public  judicial  proceedings  began  on  January  7tb,  1851,  before
M.  Eolloppe,  Juge  de  Paix.  Thorel,  a shepherd  swain,  sum-
moned M.  Tinel  for  defamation  of  character.  M.  Tinel  had
described  various  phenomena  of  the  usual  sort,  invading  his
house,  and  persecuting  two  boys,  his  pupils.^  They  included  a

^ “Thus,  according  to  [M.  Tinel],  sharp  and  distinct  raps  would  be  heard
behind  the  wainscot  of  his  apartments  ; a voice,  responding  to  the  summons  of  two
young  children,  his  pupils,  would  converse  with  them,  make  promises  or  threats,
and  sing  various  airs,  notably  that  of  Maltre  Corheau.  Now  shovels  and
tongs,  having  got  tired  of  the  hearth,  would  give  themselves  up  to  wild  dances,
afterwards  returning  quietly  to  resume  their  accustomed  places ; now  tables
and  chairs  would  stamp  and  spin  round,  running  all  over  his  house  as  if  they
wmre  playing  at  prisoner’s  base  or  hide-and-seek,  never  ceasing  from  their


XLIX.]


The  Poltergeist  at  Cideville.


455


black  hand  which  slapped  one  of  the  boys.  He  accused  Thorel
of  producing  these  phenomena,  declared  that  Thorel  knelt  and
begged  his  pardon,  and  he  induced  Pain,  a sheep  farmer,  to
discharge  Thorel.  He  also  beat  Thorel  with  a stick  “ to  the
effusion  of  blood.”

Tinel  replied  that  he  only  charged  Thorel  with  “ arrogating
to  himself  the  quality  of  sorcerer,”  and  that  he  struck  Thorel
in  self-defence.

The  judge  adjourned  the  case  to  January  28th,  1851,  for
evidence  to  be  collected.

The  first  witness  for  the  plaintiff,  Bezuel,  spoke  to  much
hearsay  matter.  He  had  visited  M.  Tinel’s  house,  in  his

absence,  M.  Tinel  inviting  him  to  stay  for  a fortnight.  He

did  not,  but  visiting  the  place  with  M.  Eobert  de  Saint  Victor
(brother  of  Paul  de  Saint  ATctor  ?),  he  witnessed  nothing
unusual.

Andrieu,  the  next  witness,  had  heard  of  the  affair  from
Tinel,  and  other  hearsay  matter.  He  had,  however,  heard
raps  produced  at  the  order  of  the  younger  pupil,  whom  he
placed  “ in  a position  in  which  he  could  not  produce  any
noise  by  himself.”  He  heard  a M.  Fontaine  call  from  the
window  (he  himself  being  in  the  garden)  that  he  had  caught
the  boy  cheating.  The  boy  bellowed  that  he  had  not  cheated,
and  offered  to  stand  on  the  window  sill,  where  he  could
not  touch  a table  which,  according  to  Fontaine,  he  had  moved
in  a normal  way.

jMasson,  a gendarme,  was  told  that  objects  hew  about  and
broke  the  windows.  He  himself  saw  nothing  occur  during

an  hour  and  a half  of  observation.

Bourrienne,  also  a gendarme,  had  the  same  negative
experience.

Stanislas  Huet  had  only  hearsay  matter.


gamliols  until  covered  with  perspiration  and  worn  out  with  fatigue.  Sometimes
knives  lying  on  a table  would  be  hurled  by  some  occult  and  irresistible  force,
and  bury  themselves  deep  in  the  walls.  Sometimes  penknives  or  inkstands
would  be  suddenly  seized  with  a desire  to  frolic,  and,  dashing  against  the
windows  of  the  presbytery,  would  break  the  panes,  tifterwards  returning
ashamed  to  ask  the  forgiveness  of  their  young  owners.  Sometimes,  finally,  a
distinctly  visible  liand  belonging  to  some  invisible  body  would  inflict  the  most
pirodigious  blows  on  the  cheeks  of  the  two  young  acolytes.”  (From  the  charge
brought  by  Thofel  against  Tinel.)


45(3


Andrew  Lcmg.


[PAKT


Gustave  Lemonnier,  the  younger  of  M.  Tinel’s  pupils,  aged
twelve,  told  his  story.  Eaps  began,  when  he  was  alone,  on
November  26th,  and  continued.  All  sorts  of  objects  flew
about.  A black  hand  struck  the  witness.  He  was  haunted

liy  a spectre  in  a blouse.  A child’s  voice  was  heard  by  him.
He  did  not  ask  to  be  allowed  to  go  home.  Meeting  Thorel,
when  with  Tinel,  he  recognised  in  Thorel  the  spectre  in
the  blouse.  The  boy  spoke  about  the  incident  of  Fontaine’s
accusation  of  cheating.

Bunel,  aged  fourteen,  the  other  pupil,  corroborated  Lemonnier,
who  “ lost  consciousness  ” and  “ had  a nervous  attack  ” after
meeting  Thorel.  The  witness  showed  a black  eye,  caused  by
a stamping  iron  which  flew  at  his  face.  He  attested  many
eccentric  movements  of  objects.

Thorel  then  asked  that  nine  cpiestions,  partly  as  to  Fontaine,
might  be  put  to  witness.

The  Judge  disallowed  them  as  “ contrary  to  the  dignity  of
justice,”  and  adjourned  the  court.

The  next  witness,  M.  de  Bagneux,  spoke  to  M.  Tinel’s  anxiety
to  have  the  affair  investigated.  He  himself,  alone  with  the
boy,  heard  “ the  noise  ” beat  several  tunes : he  could  not
“ discover  the  cause.”

Auguste  Huet,  the  next  witness,  by  his  request  had  raps
struck  under  his  fingers  on  a table.  He  was  “ convinced
that  it  was  not  the  boy  who  did  it,  nor  any  of  the  people
of  the  house.”  The  boy’s  arms  were  folded  at  the  time.  A
tune  was  I'apped  out  by  his  request.

Maxime  Henry,  as  to  the  phenomena,  spoke  only  from
hearsay.

Cheval  spoke  to  the  scene  in  which  Thorel  knelt  to  Tinel,
and  was  beaten  by  him.  He  mentioned,  on  hearsay,  that
Thorel  had  boasted  of  his  sorceries,  and,  by  way  of  an  evidence,
had  caused  a person  to  fall  down  whenever  he  struck  a blow
against  his  hut.  He  then  said  that  he  had  not  seen  but
heard  of  the  kneeling  and  beating  incident.  But  he  did  see
tlie  tongs  and  shovel  at  the  house  of  M.  Tinel  “ leave  the
hearth  and  go  into  the  middle  of  the  room.”  They  were  put
back,  and  rushed  out  again.  “ My  eyes  were  fixed  on  them
to  see  what  moved  them,  but  I saw  nothing  at  all.”  (This
witness  was  a farmer,  aged  forty.)  He  saw  “ a stocking  dart


XLix.]  The  Poltergeist  at  Cideville.  457

like  a thunderbolt  from  beside  the  bed  on  which  the  children
were  sleeping,  to  the  opposite  end  of  the  room.”  Lying  in
bed  with  the  boys,  his  hands  on  their  hands,  and  his  feet  on
their  feet,  he  “ saw  the  coverlet  dart  away  from  the  bed.”

Leroux,  Cure  of  Saussay,  aged  thirty,  said  :

I have  to  add  that  when  at  the  Presbytery  of  Cideville,  I saw
things  which  I have  been  unable  to  explain  to  myself.  I saw  a
hammer,  moved  by  some  invisible  force,  leave  the  spot  where  it  lay
and  fall  in  the  middle  of  the  room  without  making  more  noise  than
if  a hand  had  gently^  laid  it  down ; a piece  of  bread  lying  on  the
table  darted  under  the  table ; and  we  being  placed  as  we  were,  it
was  impossible  that  any  of  us  could  have  thrown  it  in  that  way.
I also  saw,  after  the  Cure  of  Cideville  and  I had  shaved,  all  the
things  we  had  used  for  the  purpose  placed  as  if  by  hand  on  the
floor ; the  young  pensionnaire  of  M.  Tinel  having  called  our  attention
to  this,  M.  Tinel  and  I went  upstairs  to  assure  ourselves  of  the  fact.
Perhaps  the  child  had  had  time  to  do  this ; but  on  coming  away
again,  we  had  scarcely  descended  six  steps  of  the  stairs  when  the
child  told  us  that  everything  had  been  put  back  in  its  place.  I
went  back  alone,  and  found  everything  was,  in  fact,  in  its  place,
with  the  exception  of  the  mirror,  and  I am  certain  that  the  child
could  not  have  put  everything  back  in  its  place  in  that  way  in  so
short  a time.  It  seems  to  me  inexplicable.  Since  that  I have  heard
noises  at  the  Presbytery  at  Cideville.  I took  every  precaution  in
listening  to  them,  even  placing  myself  under  the  table  to  make  sure
that  the  children  could  do  nothing,  and  yet  I heard  noises,  which
seemed  to  me,  however,  to  come  more  especially  from  the  wainscot.
I said  in  connection  with  this  that  the  noises  seemed  to  me  so
extraordinary  that  I would  vouch  for  them  with  my  blood.  I noticed
that  M.  Tinel  seemed  to  be  somewhat  exasperated  at  these  noises
and  at  their  persistence,  especially  on  several  nights  during  which
I slept  with  him,  when  he  woke  up  frightened  about  it  all.

The  Judge  disallowed  a question  to  this  witness,  with  the
usual  formula.  Much  frivolous  hearsay  evidence  followed,  and
need  not  be  repeated.  Somebody  had  heard  somebody  say
that  M.  Tinel  said  that  the  two  boys  made  the  noises.

For  the  defence  M.  de  Mirville,  aged  forty-eight,  was  called,
and  said :

Last  Wednesdays  I went  to  the  Presbytery  of  Cideville  and  said
to  the  ‘ cause,’  “ When  you  wish  to  reply  affirmatively  rap  once ;


458


Andreiu  Lang.


[part


when  you  wish  to  reply  negatively  rap  twice.”  Immediatel}'  a
rap  was  heard,  “ Then  you  will  be  able  to  tell  me  how  many
letters  there  are  in  my  name  1 ” Eight  raps  were  heard,  the  last
more  distinct  than  the  others,  apparently  to  make  one  understand
that  it  was  the  last.  “ My  baptismal  name  now  1 ” Reply,  five

raps.  “ And  now  my  fore-name  which  figures  on  the  register  of
the  Civil  List,  and  which  no  one  has  hitherto  called  me  by.”
Immediately,  seven  raps ; “ and  the  names  of  my  children,  first  the
eldest?”  Five  raps, — quite  correct,  she  is  called  Aline.  “That
of  the  youngest?”  Nine  raps,  a mistake,  immediately  rectified,  for
seven  raps  were  struck.  She  is  called  Blanche.  “ Now  let  us  pass
to  my  age  ; strike  as  many  raj)S  as  I have  j^ears.”  Instantly  the

raps  succeeded  each  other  witli  such  rapidity  that  I was  obliged
to  stop  them  in  order  to  count  them,  and  I demanded  more
slowness;  forty-eight  raps  were  then  heard  very  distinctly,  the  forty-
eighth  being  more  accentuated  than  the  others.  “That  is  not  all.
How  many  months  do  you  reckon  between  the  first  of  January
of  this  year,  and  the  moment  I shall  be  forty-nine  ? ” Three  very
loud  raps  and  one  faint  one  followed.  “ What  does  the  faint  one
mean  ? probably  half  a month  ? ” One  rap.  “ Good  ! but  it  is  not
finished.  How  manj^  days  now  between  that  half  month  and  my
birthday?”  Nine  raps,  the  last  being  more  accentuated.  Perfectly
correct,  I shall  be  forty-nine  on  the  24th  of  April  of  this  year.  . . .
“ Let  us  pass  on  to  the  place  of  my  abode.  How  many  letters

are  there  in  its  name?”  Eight  raps;  “and  in  the  name  of  my

Commune  ? Be  careful  not  to  make  the  usual  mistake.”  Ten  raps
were  heard.  Now  I live  in  the  Commune  of  Gomerville,  the  name

of  which  is  often  written  with  two  m’s,  a mistake  not  made  by

the  ‘cause.’  It  was  demonstrated  to  me  by  this,  that  I had  to

do  with  an  old  acquaintance — I hope  not  a friend.  “Let  us  pass

to  music ; you  are  said  to  be  a musician,  the  other  day  you  sang
the  first  part  of  Rossini’s  Stahat,  they  say ; since  jmu  know  the
first  part  you  ought  to  know  the  second  part,  the  bass  part  Pro
peccatis  suae  gentis ; let  me  hear  it.”  Instantly  the  mysterious
agent  rapped  the  rhythm  of  the  first  two  bars  correctly  enough,
but  in  the  third  committed  an  irregularity  which  slightly  spoiled  the
rhythm.  On  my  remarking  this,  it  began  again,  corrected  the  mis-
take, and  the  passage  was  recognisable.  Two  or  three  popular
airs,  such  as,  J’oA  du  bon  Tahac,  MaUre  Corbeau,  etc.  . . . were
articulated  rapidly  and  without  any  mistake.  The  other  pieces
from  the  Italian  repertoire  which  I demanded,  were  perfectly  nn-


XLIX]


The  Poltergeist  at  Cideville.


459


known  to  it.  “Come,”  I said  to  it,  “ jmu  are  a poor  dilettante.
Now  follow  me  if  you  can.”  I then  hummed  a waltz  from  Guillaume
Tell.  It  listened  at  first  without  doing  anything ; then  followed
me  exactly  while  I sang  it ; and  several  times  during  the  morning,
when  we  were  no  longer  thinking  of  it,  it  came  back  to  the  same  piece
and  tried  to  execute  it  alone.  The  pupils,  while  this  was  going  on,
had  not  discontinued  their  work ; I don’t  think  the  Cure  came  into
the  room  during  the  whole  time,  but  I must  admit  I did  not  attach
much  importance  to  this  point.  I have  said  that  I was  not  a wit-
ness to  material  facts,  but  I must  add  that  one  of  the  children  said
to  me,  “ Look,  Sir,  look  at  this  desk  knocking  against  the  other  ”■
but  as  the  child  was  in  front  of  the  desk  I did  not  attach  much
importance  to  this  fact, — not  that  I believed  him  to  be  the  cause  of
it.  My  not  mentioning  this  at  first  was  because  I wished  to
observe  the  most  scrupulous  exactitude.  [To  the  interpellation  of
the  defendant  with  a view  to  knowing  whether  the  witness  believed
the  Cure  of  Cideville  might  be  the  author  of  these  facts,  he  replied] :
I should  be  much  surprised  if  any  one  within  these  walls  coidd
seriously  believe  that.  I do  not  believe  it  possible  to  produce  these
lihenomena  by  natural  means,  and  the  cause  must  be  supernatural.
By  supernatural  causes  I mean  an  intelligent  force  surpassing  that
of  man  and  of  nature,  [The  witness  being  interpellated  by  the
plaintiff  with  a view  to  knowing  if  he  thought  these  phenomena
could  be  produced  by  a poor  shepherd  unable  to  read  or  write,
replied],  I do  not  think  he  could  produce  them  by  himself,  but
he  might  with  the  assistance  of  an  occult  and  supernatural  cause.
I am  the  author  of  one  work  only,  entitled,  Les  pennies  et  les
Savants  en  rnatiere  de  religion.  [The  witness  was  interpellated  as
to  whether  he  had  received  a visit  from  the  Cure  of  Cideville  on
the  8th  day  of  January  last,  when  the  latter  was  seen  in  company
with  another  priest  at  the  landing  stage  of  Nointot,  12  kilometres
(Ih  miles)  from  Gomerville.  He  replied],  I never  saw  the  Cure  of
Cideville  before  Wednesday  last,  and  I was  completely  ignorant  of
the  existence  of  a Commune  of  the  name  of  Cideville.

Madame  de  Saint  Victor,  aged  fifty-six,  said  :

Being  at  the  Presbytery  I heard  some  ‘cause’  which  was  unknown
to  me  make  raps  intelligently.  The  Angelas  was  ringing  and  I said
to  the  ‘ cause,’  “ Rap  the  tune  of  the  Angelas,”  and  the  tune  was
rapped.  I also  heard  the  tune  of  MaUrc  Corbeau  rapped  out  and
that  of  Drinn  Drinn,  c^uite  perfectly.  I think  it  was  on  the  8th


460


Andreev  Lang.


[part


December  before  mass  at  Cideville  that  I saw  the  child,  who  said
he  had  received  a slap  from  an  invisible  hand.  The  same  da}'  after
Vespers,  when  I was  at  the  Presbytery  of  Cideville  standing  Cjuite
apart  from  the  other  people  there,  I felt  an  invisible  force  seize
me  by  the  mantle  and  give  me  a vigorous  shake.  The  same  day
also  I saw  three  persons  sitting  on  a small  table  in  the  Presbytery
and  it  moved  along  the  floor  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  two  people
to  hold  it  back.  Several  people  were  there,  amongst  others  my
femme  de  chamhre,  but  I cannot  precisely  say  who  the  others  were.
Another  day  I saw  the  child  sitting  on  a chair  with  his  feet  off
the  ground  and  his  back  not  leaning  on  the  chairback,  yet  the
chair  rocked  with  a movement  which  the  child  could  not  have
given  it,  ending  with  the  chair  falling  in  one  direction  and  the
boy  in  another.  The  child  was  much  frightened  at  this.  A week
ago  when  I was  alone  with  the  children  I saw  the  two  desks  at
which  they  were  working  fall  over  and  the  table  on  the  top  of
them.  The  same  day  I took  the  children  some  St,  Benoist  medals
in  which  I had  faith,  and  every  time  the  medals  were  placed  on
the  desks  not  the  least  sound  was  produced  there,  the  noise  then
being  heard  behind  me  in  the  wall  cupboard  ; but  as  soon  as
the  medals  were  withdrawn  from  the  desks  the  noise  was  heard
again  in  the  desks.  The  same  day  the  noise  rapped  out  the  tune
of  Maitre  Corbeau,  and  on  my  remarking,  “Do  you  know  nothing
but  that,  then?”  it  sang  the  air  of  xiu  dair  de  la  lune,  and  that
of  Lai  du  bon  Tabac.  Yesterday,  again,  I saw  a candlestick  leave
the  chimneypiece  in  the  kitchen  and  go  and  hit  the  back  of  my
femme  de  chambre,  and  a key  lying  on  the  table  struck  the  child’s
ear.  I must  say  that  I cannot  tell  precisely  where  the  key  was,
as  I did  not  see  it  start  on  its  flight,  but  only  saw  it  arrive.  I
was  not  frightened,  only  surprised.  My  son  was  with  me  when
I heard  the  Angelas  as  well  as  the  two  children  and  the  Cur(3,  but
durine  the  other  airs  I was  alone  with  the  children.  It  was  not
possible  for  the  children  to  do  these  things ; I watched  their  feet
and  their  hands,  and  could  see  all  their  movements.  I think  the
shepherd  Thorel  could  not  have  done  them  unless  he  had  made
a compact  with  the  devil ; for  it  seemed  to  me  there  was  some-
thino-  diabolical  in  it  all.

O

M.  Robert  de  St.  Victor,  aged  twenty-three,  said :

I was  a witness  at  the  Presbytery  of  Cideville  of  things  I cannot
explain  to  myself.  I heard  a ‘ cause  ’ unknown  to  me  make  raps.


XLIX.]


The  Poltergeist  at  Cideville.


461


particularly  rapping  the  tune  Mattre  Corheau,  and  the  rhythm  of
the  Angelus.  I asked  this  ‘cause’  to  rap  Rossini’s  Stahat  Mater;
the  tune  was  exactly  rendered.  A week  ago  I went  again  to  the
Presbytery,  and  was  alone  with  the  children  and  the  old  servant
maid ; I placed  one  of  the  children  in  each  of  the  windows  of  the
room  upstairs,  I being  outside,  but  in  a position  to  observe  all  their
movements  in  the  position  they  were  placed  in  ; besides,  they  could
not  have  moved  much  without  risk  of  falling,  and  I then  heard  raps
struck  in  the  room,  similar  to  those  of  a mallet.  I went  up  to  the
room  and  I saw  one  of  the  children’s  desks  coming  towards  me,  with
no  visible  force  to  push  it ; however,  I did  not  see  it  at  the  moment
of  its  starting.  I am  convinced  that  the  children  had  nothing  to  do'
with  this,  since  they  were  still  standing  in  the  windows.  Being  one
day  at  the  Presbytery  with  the  Mayor,  I heard  several  loud  blows
such  as  the  children  could  not  have  produced.  I put  my  hand  and
ear  against  the  wainscot,  and  very  distinctly  felt  the  vibrations  and
the  place  where  the  blows  were  struck.  I was  present  several  times
at  the  scenes  at  the  Presbytery.  It  seems  to  me  impossible  that  the
Cure  could  have  produced  them.  Often  he  was  not  in  the  Presbytery,,
and  when  he  was  there  he  was  seated  beside  me.  [The  witness  being-
interpellated  as  to  whether  he  thought  it  possible  that  the  shepherd
was  the  author  of  these  phenomena,  replied].  No,  I do  not  even,
know  this  shepherd.

The  fourth  witness,  Bouffay,  said  :

Being  at  the  Presbytery  of  Cideville,  1 saw  M.  Tinel  put  his  hand
lightly  on  Thorel’s  shoulder,  saying,  “You  have  spoken  very  impru-
dently ; I should  not  be  surprised  if  you  know  something  about
what  is  happening  at  the  Presbytery,”  and  the  child  then  said,  “ I
know  this  man  to  be  the  one  who  has  been  followins:  me  about  for
a fortnight.”  M.  Tinel  told  Thorel  to  go  on  his  knees  and  ask  the-
child’s  pardon.  Thorel  fell  on  his  knees  and  begged  pardon,  saying,.
“I  don’t  know  what  for.”  While  on  his  knees,  Thorel  put  out  his
hand  as  if  with  the  intention  of  taking  hold  of  the  child’s  blouse  in
diabolical  mischief.  I know  nothing  of  the  facts  referred  for  proof,
that  is,  nothing  personally,  only  from  hearsay.  I went  several  times
to  the  Presbytery  at  Cideville ; the  first  time  the  noise  was  continual
in  those  rooms  only  where  the  children  were,  both  in  the  church
and  at  the  Presbytery.  The  ‘ noise  ’ was  intelligent  and  obedient
only  on  this  first  visit.  The  noise  was  sometimes  so  loud  that  once
when  I was  lying  in  the  same  room  with  the  cliildren  I thought


462


Andreiu  Lang.


[part


the  ceiling  would  come  down.  When  day  came  the  idea  occurred
to  us  of  knocking  nails  in  the  spot  where  there  was  rapping ; and
a very  plaintive  voice  was  heard,  the  sounds  of  which  were  unintelli-
gible. I also  saw,  both  upstairs  and  downstairs,  the  perfectly  isolated
table  move  without  any  force  that  I could  see  to  cause  the  movement.
On  the  second  visit  I scarcely  saw  anything.  On  the  third  visit  I
saw  pretty  much  the  same  things  as  on  the  first.  I noticed  that
the  children  were  perfectly  motionless  when  the  sound  was  produced,
so  could  not  have  made  it  themselves.  I heard  it  when  the  Cure
was  absent  from  the  Presbytery  as  well  as  in  his  presence.  It  was
impossible  that  either  he  or  the  children  should  have  had  anything
to  do  with  the  noise,  because  it  was  too  loud.  I forgot  to  say  that
when  the  child  heard  a voice  begging  his  pardon,  we  all  fell  on  our
knees  and  prayed  God  to  forgive  those  who  were  persecuting  us.

[Being  interpellated  by  the  plaintiff  as  to  whether  the  witness
thought  the  shepherd  could  have  produced  these  phenomena,  he
replied  that  he  did  not  know  the  shepherd’s  capabilities.  Being
interpellated  by  the  defendant,  the  witness  said  that  when  he  returned
with  M.  Tinel  and  the  children  from  the  house  of  one  of  the  in-
habitants of  the  Commune,  where  they  had  slept  on  account  of  the
noises  at  the  Presbytery,  just  as  the  children  were  going  up  to
their  room  to  ascertain  if  all  was  at  an  end,  he  saw  a phantom-
like vapour  go  with  great  rapidity  through  the  kitchen  door  towards
the  room  where  the  children  were.  When  the  shepherd  Thorel
came  to  the  Presbytery  and  threw  himself  on  his  knees  to  M.  Tinel
he  said  he  had  come  to  fetch  an  organ.]

The  sixth  witness,  Breard,  said :

1 )nring  December  last  I passed  two  nights  at  the  Presbytery  of
Cideville.  On  the  first  I heard  an  irritating  noise  during  part  of
the  night  which  prevented  my  sleeping.  The  next  morning  at  break-
fast, being  at  table  in  company  with  M.  Tinel  and  the  Abbb  Bouffay,
I heard  an  alarming  knock  struck  on  the  floor  beneath  the  table.
I am  certain  that  it  was  neither  the  children  nor  M.  Tinel  who
did  this,  any  more  than  the  shepherd,  whom  I do  not  know.  When
I had  returned  to  Bouen,  I received  a letter  from  M.  Tinel  asking
me  to  get  M.  Pressier,  professor  of  physics,  to  come  and  look  into
the  phenomena  which  were  being  produced  at  the  Presbytery  of
Cideville.  I saw  i\I.  Pressier,  but  he  could  not  come.

I cite  this  witness  to  show  that  M.  Tinel  appealed  to
science,  and  that  he  appealed  in  vain  !


XLIX.J


The  Poltergeist  at  Cideville.


463


Evidence  to  threats  by  Thorel  against  Tinel,  in  the  menacing
style  of  the  Drummer  of  Tedworth,  was  given  by  a hearer
of  the  same,  Varin,  aged  thirty-seven,  grocer ; by  Le  Tellier,
twenty-seven,  farrier ; Grenet,  aged  fourteen ; Foulogne,  aged
forty-eight ; du  Forestel,  a weaver,  aged  thirty-seven,  and  others.

Judgment  was  pronounced  on  February  15th,  1851,  after
hearing  counsel.  The  learned  judge  said,  “The  most  clear  result
of  all  the  evidence  is  that  the  cause  [i.e.  of  the  extraordinary
events  at  the  Presbytery  of  Cideville]  remains  unknown.”

As  the  plaintiff  had  himself  spread  the  report  that  he
caused  the  occurrences,  and  had  shown  contrition  on  two
occasions,  the  defendant  had  done  him  no  technical  wrong.
In  thumping  the  plaintiff,  who  tried  to  handle  him,  the
defendant  acted  in  legitimate  self-defence.  Thorel  was  non-
suited, and  had  to  pay  about  £6  in  costs.

Dale  Owen  quotes  de  Mirville  to  the  effect  that  the  boys
were  removed  to  another  Presbytere,  behaved  well,  and  were
not  attended  by  the  Poltergeist,  “ as  far  as  appears.”

The  experienced  reader  will  see  that,  in  the  seventeenth
century,  Thorel  would  have  been  burned,  on  the  “ spectral
evidence  ” of  the  appearances  to  the  younger  boy.  The
sceptic  will  be  sure  that  the  boys  caused  all  the  trouble
because  they  were  tired  of  staying  with  M.  Tinel.  The  claim
of  Fontaine  to  have  caught  the  younger  boy  in  the  act  of
cheating  will  be  accepted,  and  all  the  affirmative  evidence  will
be  dismissed  in  the  usual  way.  The  present  writer  cannot
form  a conjecture  as  to  how  the  things  were  done,  or  made
to  appear  to  be  done,  but  they  are  the  ancient  traditional
things,  quae  semper,  cguae  uhique,  quae  ah  omnibus.  They  are
attested  on  oath  by  persons  of  various  ranks,  ages,  and  educa-
tion, and  the  evidence  is  not  remote  from  the  time  of  the
events.  My  one  wish  is  that  somebody  would  ffnd  a boy  or
girl  who  will,  at  least,  attempt  to  produce  the  phenomena  in
the  presence  of  a committee  of  the  Society.  If  the  things
can  be  done  so  easily,  will  no  young  person  do  them  ?


2 H


464


Dr.  J.  0 rasset.


[part-


supplement.


I.

THE  HISTORY  OF  A HAUNTED  HOUSE.
llcj^orted  by
Dp.  J.  0-pa.s.set,

(Frofesseur  de  Clinique  Medicale  a VUniversite  de  Montpellier)
in  “ Ze  Sinritisrne  demnt  la  Science.'’  (pp.  11-65).^

Translated  and  cdiridyed.  by  Vera  Larminie.

The  materia]  for  the  following  study  was  furnished  by  the  case  of
a patient  who  passed  some  weeks  in  our  wards,  a young  girl
suffering  from  hysteria,  and  closely  connected  wuth  the  tragi-comic
history  of  this  “ haunted  house.”  It  is  a curious  story,  and  I am
justified  in  treating  of  it  here,  as  it  shows  the  interest  of  these
questions  for  medical  men,  since  it  is  the  physician  who  has

oftenest  to  confront  the  difficulties  to  which  such  facts  give  rise,
and  to  treat  the  maladies  they  engender  or  stimulate.

It  will  be  seen,  moreover,  how  such  a story  at  once  suggests  and
brings  into  conflict  the  three  great  rival  theories  of  fraud,  spiritism,
and  a magnetic  fluid,  all  equally  false  in  my  view  if  one  attempts
to  ajrply  them  to  all  cases  of  the  kind.  These  are  the  three  prin-
cipal theories,  however,  to  which  accounts  of  haunted  houses  and

various  alleged  supernatural  manifestations  are  immediately
referred,  the  sceptics  maintaining  that  all  are  due  to  fraud

and  trickery,  the  mystics  invoking  the  agency  of  the  dead,  of

' This  translation  is  made  hy  the  kind  permission  of  Dr.  Grasset.  The  narrative
in  Le  Spirilimie  drvant  la  Science  is  reprinted  from  pp.  .379-414  of  Dr.  J.  Grasset’s
Le(;ons  de  Clinique  Medicale  fades  d I'Hojiital  Saint-Eloi  de  Montpellier.  Avril
1898  a Decembre  1902.  4eme  Serie  (Montpellier  and  Paris,  1903).


XLIX.]


History  of  a Haunted  House.


465


augels  or  of  demons,  and  the  spiritists  holding  to  the  theory  of
emanations  of  a magnetic  fluid.

In  the  following  account  I shall  endeavour  to  show  that  the
scientific  truth  does  not  lie  in  any  one  of  these  three  theories ;
that  the  whole  is  not  due  to  fraud,  but  that,  without  the  interven-
tion of  either  spirits  or  fluids,  there  remain  certain  facts  as
to  automatic  movements  both  unconscious  and  involuntary,  which
form  a coherent  chapter  of  science  and  physiology.  The  facts  of
this  case  are  taken  from  the  very  careful  and  detailed  notes  of  my
colleague.  Dr.  Calmette,  and  must  be  given  at  some  length  to
make  the  account  sufficiently  precise  and  complete.

The  scene  of  the  disturbances  is  an  unimportant  town,  which  for
convenience  we  may  call  Daimonopolis,  in  the  Grand  Duchy  of

Gerolstein.  In  a suburb  of  this  town  lives  the  family  A ,

consisting  of  the  father  and  mother,  with  their  six  children,  and
the  paternal  grandfather.

The  grandfather,  a day  labourer  by  occupation,  is  an  honest  man,
albeit  a trifle  superstitious.  His  son,  the  father  of  the  family,  is
an  agricultural  labourer,  aged  thirty-one,  a man  of  mild  and  rather
nervous  disposition  and  the  second  husband  of  his  wife,  who  is
an  intelligent  woman  of  forty,  southern,  vivacious,  and  very
garrulous.

Of  the  six  children,  two,  Jean  and  Jeanne,  are  by  the  first  mar-
riage ; the  former,  aged  twenty,  is  a day  labourer,  a quiet  young
man,  going  out  very  little  except  during  working  hours,  and  of  a
slightly  childish  disposition ; the  latter,  Jeanne,  is  the  patient  who
is  being  treated  for  hysteria  in  the  Achard-Esperonnier  ward  up  to
the  present  time.  She  is  fifteen  years  of  age,  frank-looking  and
intelligent,  but  with  atrocious  morals.  We  shall  return  to  her
later  on.  The  remaining  four  children  are  by  the  second  marriage
and  are  aged  respectively  eight,  six,  four,  and  two  years  old.

The  A.’s  inhabit  two  small  houses,  separated  from  one  another
by  a garden.  House  No.  1 looks  out  on  one  side  into  the  road
and  on  the  other  into  the  garden,  and  consists  of  a ground  floor
only,  comprising  a suite  of  four  rooms — the  kitchen  (A),  a large
room  (B)  where  Jean  sleeps,  a small  room  (C)  occupied  by  the
grandfather,  and  a store-room  (D),  where  a goat  and  some  fowls
are  kept.  The  three  rooms  A,  B,  and  C communicate  with  each
other,  but  only  one,  the  kitchen  (A),  has  a door  oj^ening  upon  the
terrace,  facing  the  garden,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  reach  either
of  the  other  two  rooms  without  first  passing  through  the  kitchen.


466


Dr.  J.  Grasset.


[part


Room  B is  lighted  by  a window  overlooking  the  terrace,  and  the
grandfather’s  room  (C)  by  a tiny  dormer  window.  There  is  no
communication  between  any  of  the  rooms  and  the  road.  The
garden  surrounding  the  house  is  enclosed  by  a wall  which  has  two
openings,  one  into  the  road  and  the  other  into  the  waste  land  on
which  stands  House  No.  2.

This  second  house,  like  the  first,  has  no  upper  storey,  and  con-
tains four  rooms,  arranged  as  follo^vs : A kitchen  (E),  facing  House
No.  1 ; behind  this  two  rooms  divided  by  a partition,  the  dining-
room (F)  and  a bedroom  (G),  in  which  sleep  M.  and  Mme.  A ,

with  the  three  youngest  children  ; and  behind  these  again  a fourth
room  (H),  shared  by  Jeanne  and  her  eight-years-old  sister.  The
kitchen  (E)  has  a large  glass  door,  whence  can  be  seen  through  the
opening  in  the  boundary  wall  House  No.  1 and  its  terrace  opposite.
This  room  communicates  both  with  rooms  F and  G,  and  both  the
latter  open  into  room  H.

The  A.’s  rent  No.  2,  but  the  owner  of  No.  1,  pending  the  sale
or  letting  of  this  house,  allows  them  to  occupy  it  free  of  rent.
Some  time  ago  its  probable  sale  was  talked  of,  which  would  have
entailed  the  departure  of  the  A.’s,  who  thus  saw  before  them  the
j3rospect  of  having  to  leave.  Shortly  afterwards  the  phenomena
about  to  be  described  broke  out.

The  grandfather  and  the  eldest  son,  Jean,  go  to  their  work
regularly  every  morning,  taking  their  mid-day  meal  with  them,  and
only  returning  in  the  evening  for  supper.

On  December  4th,  1901,  Jeanne  went  into  her  grandfather’s  room
after  he  and  her  brother  had  gone  out,  to  fetch  some  linen,  when,
according  to  her  own  account,  she  noticed  nothing  unusual.  When

Mme.  A went  in  to  make  the  bed  in  the  afternoon,  however,

she  was  astonished  to  find  the  bed  upset,  Avith  the  mattress  rolled
up  at  the  foot  and  the  bed-clothes  in  disorder  on  the  fioor.  She
asked  Jeanne  if  it  Avas  she  Avho  had  done  this,  but  Jeanne  denied
having  touched  the  things.  Her  mother  thereupon  took  her  into
the  room  and  shoAved  her  Avhat  had  happened.  Jeanne  said  that  it
had  not  been  in  that  state  in  the  morning,  and  that  it  could  not
be  her  grandfather’s  doing,  as  the  bed  had  not  been  touched  Avhen
she  Avent  in  earlier  in  the  day.  Notwithstanding  this,  Avhen  her

father-in-laAV  came  home  that  evening,  Mme.  A accused  him  of

having  upset  his  bed  by  Avay  of  a joke.  In  great  astonishment  he
declared  that  he  had  not  touched  the  bed  after  getting  up,  and
thought  the  phenomena  must  be  of  supernatural  origin,  probably


XLIX.]


History  of  a Haunted  House.


467


caused  by  the  spirits  of  his  son  and  daughter  returning  to  torment
him.  (One  of  his  sons  had  died  in  1895,  and  his  daughter  in  1887.)
When  Jean  came  home  in  his  turn  he  'n-as  told  of  what  had  occurred,
and  his  grandfather  repeated  his  theory  of  supernatural  intervention,
and  was  anxious  to  have  a (Mass  said  for  the  souls  of  his  children  ;
but  Jean  merel}’  laughed  at  this  explanation,  saying  that,  if  none  of
the  household  had  touched  the  bed,  it  must  be  a practical  joke  on
the  part  of  some  one,  as  it  could  not  have  upset  itself.

On  the  morning  of  December  5th,  after  the  men  had  gone  to

work,  (Mme.  A called  Jeanne,  who  was  not  j’et  up,  to  come

and  see  if  the  grandfather’s  bed  had  again  been  disturbed.  They
crossed  the  garden  together  to  the  other  house  (Xo.  1),  and  going
into  the  grandfather’s  room  found  the  bed-clothes  in  confusion  in
the  middle  of  the  room.  Jeanne  said  that  her  grandfather  must

have  done  it  for  his  own  amusement;  and  Mme.  A , being  of

of  the  same  opinion,  in  order  to  give  him  a lesson,  did  not  remake
the  bed,  but  left  things  as  they  were.

In  the  evening  she  reproached  her  father-in-law  with  some  warmth,
saying  that  he  should  not  have  done  it,  as  he  might  have  frightened
the  children.  He,  however,  denied  having  done  anything,  and  Jean
took  up  his  defence,  asserting  that  they  had  gone  out  together  that
morning,  and  that  when  the}’  left  the  bed  had  not  been  disturbed.
Upon  this  the  grandfather  reverted  to  his  original  hypothesis,  and
reproached  his  daughter-in-law  for  not  having  had  Masses  said  to
pacify  the  spirits,  but  Jean  and  his  father  laughed  this  idea  to
scorn.

On  the  morning  of  the  6th,  however,  as  Mme.  A continued

to  accuse  him,  the  grandfather  sent  Jean  to  fetch  her,  so  that  she
might  satisfy  herself,  before  he  went  out  to  his  work,  as  to  the

state  of  his  room.  M'hen  Mme.  A came  over  with  Jeanne  from

the  other  house  (Xo.  2),  everything  was  in  order  in  the  room  (C),
and  the  grandfather  himself  was  in  the  kitchen  preparing  the  soup  for
breakfast,  but  keeping  an  eye  on  his  room  through  the  open  doors
of  Jean’s  room  (B).  The  latter  was  also  working  in  the  kitchen,
while  Jeanne  and  her  mother  were  washing  clothes  in  the  garden.

All  at  once,  the  grandfather  on  turning  round  saw  the  bed-clothes
and  eiderdown  quilt  of  his  bed  lying  in  the  middle  of  his  room.  He

drew  Jean’s  attention  to  the  fact,  and  Mme.  A was  called,  when

on  going  into  the  room  (C)  they  found  the  bed  upset,  and  the  quilt,
etc.,  thrown  into  the  middle  of  the  room,  as  on  the  previous  day.

Xot  knowing  how  to  explain  this  phenomenon,  (Mme.  A accused


4G8


Dr.  J.  Gr asset.


[part


them  both  of  amusing  themselves  at  her  expense;  but  Jean  de-
clared that  his  grandfather  had  not  left  the  kitchen,  where  he  was
making  the  soup,  and  that  he  himself  had  been  at  work  in  the
same  room.

The  things  were  then  put  in  order  again,  and  they  went  away  to
their  work.  The  father  of  the  family  was  also  working  out  of  the
house,  but  started  earlier,  coming  home  as  they  did  in  the  evening,
and  Jeanne  went  daily  to  take  him  his  dinner.  On  this  particular
day  she  started  with  it  as  usual  at  a quarter  to  twelve.  At  noon

Mme.  A dined  with  the  other  children  in  Jean’s  room,

and  when  she  went  into  the  grandfather’s  room  afterwards  every-
thing was  in  its  place.  She  then  left  the  children  to  play  in
the  kitchen  (A),  and  went  to  visit  a neighbour.

In  the  course  of  their  play,  the  two  children  of  six  and  eight
years  old  went  into  the  room  B,  where  they  were  much  astonished
to  find  the  bed-clothes  and  a mattress  on  the  floor,  and  ran  to  fetch

their  mother.  At  this  moment  Jeanne  returned  ; Mme.  A met

her  at  the  garden-gate,  and  they  entered  the  house  together.  Every-
thing was  in  confusion  in  room  C,  and  the  bedding  (mattress,  eider-
down quilt,  etc.)  had  been  carried  thence  into  room  B.

Jeanne  said  that  her  grandfather  must  be  right  after  all,  and  that
they  had  better  have  a Mass  said.t

Having  put  things  once  more  in  order,  Mme.  A left  Jeanne

with  the  children  in  the  kitchen  (A),  and  went  out  again,  but  a few
minutes  later  they  came  to  fetch  her  in  a state  of  great  alarm,  as
the  bed-clothes  had  been  taken  a second  time  into  Jean’s  room  (B),
where  they  now  lay  in  complete  confusion.

Mme.  A put  everything  back  in  its  place,  and  established

herself  with  her  work  in  the  kitchen  (A)  to  watch  the  adjoining
room.

Nothing  unusual  then  occurred.  In  the  evening,  when  the
family  were  all  together,  it  was  decided  henceforward  to  cook  and
eat  their  meals  in  the  other  house  (No.  2).

Towards  six  o’clock,  having  ascertained  that  all  was  in  order,

Mme.  A was  herself  the  last  to  leave  No.  1,  when  she  shut  the

door  of  the  kitchen,  but  did  not  lock  it,  since  the  lock  had  been
out  of  order  for  a long  time  past.

The  entire  family  were  now  established  in  house  No.  2,  with  the

exception  of  M.  A , who  never  came  home  until  seven  o’clock.

A little  parsley  being  needed  in  the  preparation  of  the  supper,
Mme.  A asked  her  father-in-law  to  fetch  her  some  from  the


XLIX.]


History  of  a Haunted  House.


469


garden-plot  near  the  terrace  of  the  other  house.  It  was  dark,  how-
ever, and  as  he  was  afraid  to  go  out  alone  so  close  to  No.  1,  she
finally  went  with  him  herself,  and  having  cut  the  parsley,  expressed
a desire  to  go  in  and  see  rvhether  the  bed  had  been  disturbed.  The
grandfather  said  that  they  could  not  expect  it  to  have  been  touched

already,  but  Mme.  A replied  that,  as  it  had  been  done  three

times  before  that  day,  it  might  very  well  have  been  done  a fourth
time.  They  went  in  accordingly,  and  were  astounded  to  find  all
the  bed-clothes  of  Room  C in  Room  B.

i\Iuch  alarmed,  the  grandfather  refused  to  sleep  any  longer  in
this  room,  and  asked  to  have  a bed  made  up  for  him  in  the  other
house,  but  to  this  Mme.  A—  demurred,  saying  that  if  he  really
were  haunted  by  spirits  he  would  bring  them  with  him.  Jean
brought  the  discussion  to  a satisfactory  conclusion  by  proposing  to
share  his  own  bed  with  his  grandfather,  with  the  remark  that  it
would  be  a means  of  finding  out  whether  it  was  against  the  latter
personally  that  the  spirits  bore  a grudge,  as  in  that  case  his  bed
would  now  be  disturbed.  During  the  night  of  the  6th  to  the  7th
nothing  unusual  occurred  in  the  grandfather’s  room,  and  on  the
morning  of  December  7th,  having  left  everything  in  order  in  the
house,  they  came  to  breakfast  in  the  kitchen  of  No.  2.

Mme.  A went  in  the  meantime  into  No.  1,  and  found  every-

thing in  confusion  in  Room  C.  She  returned  to  tell  her  father-in-law
and  Jean,  and  they  went  back  together  to  No.  1,  where  they  found
to  their  amazement  that  not  only  the  grandfather’s  room,  but  also
Jean’s  bed  had  been  disturbed,  and  the  bed-clothes  moved  into  the

middle  of  the  room,  much  to  Mme.  A ’s  astonishment,  as  she  said

that  a moment  before  oidy  the  grandfather’s  bed  had  been  touched.

They  put  everything  in  order  again,  and  dispersed  to  their  several

occupations,  but  when  Mme.  A went  into  the  house  at  eleven

o’clock  in  the  morning,  she  found  the  sheets,  blankets,  quilts,  and
mattresses  from  the  beds  in  both  rooms  (B  and  C)  piled  up  in  the
kitchen  (A).  She  then  gave  up  setting  things  in  order,  and  returned
to  the  other  house,  where  Jeanne  was,  and  ten  minutes  later  the
latter,  looking  in  the  direction  of  house  No.  1,  saw  the  bedding  of
the  two  beds  out  on  the  terrace.  She  went  hurriedly  to  tell  her
mother,  and  came  back  with  her ; but  on  reaching  the  door  of  the
kitchen  (E),  which  was  within  sight  of  the  terrace,  she  uttered  piercing

cries  for  help,  and  when  Mme.  A ran  to  her  in  great  alarm  to

know  what  the  matter  was,  declared  that  she  had  seen  a skeleton
stretched  out  on  the  mattress  on  the  terrace.


470


Dr.  J.  Gr  'asset.


[part


Mme.  A was  as  much  terrified  as  her  daughter,  and  not

daring  to  remain  any  longer  even  in  house  Iso.  2,  she  left  every-
thing and  went  with  the  children  to  a neighbour’s  house,  while
Jeanne  went  to  take  her  father  his  dinner.

The  facts  now  soon  got  abroad ; the  story  spread  through  the
neighbourhood  of  the  town,  and  caused  a great  deal  of  gossiji,  each
person  interpreting  the  phenomena  in  his  own  way.  Amongst  them,
however,  they  somewhat  reassured  Mme.  A , and  she  was  accom-

panied home,  and  helped  to  put  things  in  order.  Nothing  further

occurred  that  day,  but  in  the  evening  M.  A decided  to  keep  a

vigilant  -watch  on  the  Sunday  following,  with  several  of  his  friends,
so  that  should  the  affair  be  a practical  joke,  they  might  be  sure
of  catching  its  perpetrators.  That  night,  the  grandfather  again
slept  with  Jean.

On  Sunday  (December  8th),  at  seven  o’clock  in  the  morning,  M.

A and  two  of  his  friends  established  their  watch  in  the  kitchen

of  No.  1 . At  eight  o’clock,  not  having  seen  anything  suspicious,
they  went  to  breakfast  in  No.  2,  without  taking  the  precaution  of
locking  the  doors  behind  them,  and  when  they  returned  at  about  8.30

the  beds  had  been  upset.  They  were  re-made,  and  at  noon  M.  A

and  his  friends  locked  the  door  between  the  grandfather’s  and  Jean’s
rooms,  but  were  unable  to  lock  the  kitchen  door,  as  the  lock  was
out  of  order.  They  then  went  to  lunch.  On  their  return  they  found
the  inner  door  between  rooms  E and  C broken  open,  the  lock  torn
off,  and  everything  in  confusion  in  the  two  rooms.

On  Monday,  the  9th,  and  Tuesday,  the  10th,  the  same  phenomena
occurred,  and  a priest  who  was  called  in  to  “exorcise  the  spell’'
had  no  opinion  to  give  as  to  the  cause  of  the  objects  being
transported.

On  Wednesday,  the  llth,i  a neighbour,  M.  E , a Parisian,

and  worker  in  ivory,  advised  them  to  set  a trap  in  the  two  rooms
in  which  the  phenomena  occurred,  with  a view  to  ascertaining  whether
they  were  or  were  not  of  supernatural  origin.  At  his  suggestion  they
fastened  the  bed-clothes  by  means  of  threads  to  the  bedsteads,  affixed
seals  in  various  places,  and  strewed  the  floor  with  sawdust.  Eoth
the  rooms  (E  and  C)  were  prepared  in  this  manner,  and  it  was  thought
that  any  one  entering  them  would  necessarily  leave  footmarks  in
the  sawdust,  and  would  be  obliged  to  break  the  seals,  or  cut  the
threads  in  order  to  disturb  the  beds.

'[In  the  original,  Wednesday  is  called  the  12th,  and  the  following  days  are
similarly  incorrectly  dated. — Traxsl.vtok.]


XLIX.]


History  of  a Haunted  House.


471


Tlie  inhabitants  of  Daimonopolis  grew  more  and  more  excited,
and  came  from  all  directions  to  see  the  “haunted  house,”  while

Mme.  A informed  eveiy  one  that  they  had  set  traps  to  catch

the  culprits,  for  she  now  gave  out  that  the  whole  thing  was  the
work  of  practical  jokers.

AVheu  the  evening  came,  the  entire  family  slept  in  house  No.  2.
Everything  remained  undisturbed  in  No.  1.

On  Thursday,  the  12th,  and  Frida}',  the  13th,  nothing  unusual

occurred,  and  on  the  Friday  Mme.  A cut  the  threads  and

swept  up  the  sawdust,  and  Jean  and  his  grandfather  slept  each  in
his  own  bed.

On  Saturday,  the  14th,  nothing  particular  happened,  but  on  Sun-
day, the  15th,  Mme.  A found  that  the  two  rooms  were  again

upset.  She  remade  the  beds  and  put  down  fresh  sawdust,  and  the
rest  of  the  day  passed  without  incident.

On  Monday,  the  16th,  after  making  the  beds,  she  was  careful  to
scatter  sawdust  on  the  floor,  but  during  the  morning,  in  spite  of
these  precautions,  everything  was  again  upset.  No  footprints  were
to  be  seen,  as  the  bed-clothes  and  mattresses  had  been  dragged  into
the  kitchen,  taking  up  in  their  passage  the  sawdust  strewn  on  the
floor.  On  the  same  day  a lock  was  put  on  the  outer  door  of  the
kitchen.

On  Tuesday,  the  17th,  they  shut  the  watch-dog  into  the  house,
leaving  the  inner  doors  open,  so  that  he  might  go  about  into  all
three  rooms ; the  outer  kitchen  door  was  locked,  and  the  key  re-
moved. The  dog  was  an  extremely  savage  one,  and  was  usually  kept
chained  up,  as  he  barked  at  the  slightest  sound,  and  did  not  always
recognise  even  his  own  masters.  About  an  hour  after  he  had  been
shut  up,  Mme.  A saw  the  dog  reappear,  and  called  out  in  as-

tonishment to  her  father-in-law  that  some  one  must  have  let  him
out.  The  grandfather  hurried  to  the  door,  and  found  it  locked.
When  he  opened  it  and  went  in,  he  saw  that  everything  in  the  two
rooms  had  again  been  upset,  while  the  dog  had  not  barked  at  all,
or  they  -would  have  heard  him.

On  the  same  day  they  put  sawdust  down  again  in  the  rooms,  and
left  the  dog  tied  up  in  the  garden ; later  on  he  was  found  at  liberty,
and  the  rooms  had  again  been  thrown  into  confusion.

In  the  course  of  the  next  few  days  a part  of  the  arbour  was
destroyed,  shutters  were  torn  off,  and  a washtub  and  various  articles
of  furniture  were  heaped  up  on  the  terrace,  but  no  one  ever  wit-
nessed the  phenomena  at  the  moment  of  their  actual  occurrence.


472


Dr.  J.  Grasset.


[part


On  Saturday,  December  21st,  toward  half-past  six  in  the  morn-
ing, after  M.  A had  gone  to  work,  Mme.  A , while  still  in

bed,  heard  a knocking,  and  called  out  to  Jeanne,  who  slept  with

her  sister  in  the  next  room,  to  ask  if  she  heard  it.

Jeanne  said  she  did,  and  they  heard  the  raps  again  several  times,
but  could  not  make  out  whether  they  were  on  the  door  or  on
the  window.  The  sounds  alarmed  them,  and  when  they  grew  louder

Mme.  A rose  to  go  in  to  her  daughter.  She  had  hardly  entered

the  room  when  Jeanne  began  to  cry,  saying  that  her  hair  had  just
been  cut  off ; in  fact,  she  showed  her  mother  the  plait  that  had
been  cut  off,  but  could  not  explain  how  it  had  been  done,  as  she
had  felt  nothing,  and  seen  no  one,  nor  had  her  little  sister,  aged
eight,  who  was  sleeping  in  the  same  room,  seen  any  one  cutting  off
her  hair.

The  jrlait  was  taken  to  a priest,  to  whom  they  told  the  story,

inquiring  if  this  were  not  a manifestation  of  some  supernatural

force.  He,  hov/ever,  thought  the  proof  of  demoniacal  agency  in-
sufficient, while  it  appears  that  Jean  said  laughingly  on  the  follow-
ing day  that  it  was  his  mother  who  had  cut  off  Jeanne’s  hair.

On  the  Saturday  night  all  the  family  slept  under  the  same  roof,
and  on  the  Sunday  morning  (the  22nd)  a series  of  raps  were  heard
in  different  parts  of  the  house,  which  ceased,  however,  as  soon
as  they  got  up,  and  no  one  was  to  be  seen  outside.

The  raps  came  again  on  Monday  morning  (the  23rd),  and  when

M.  and  Mme.  A set  out  to  market,  the  little  girl  ran  after

them  with  her  father’s  purse  which  she  had  just  found  in  the  vine.
He  was  greatly  astonished,  as  he  had  put  the  purse  in  his  trousers-
pocket  the  evening  before,  and  had  not  been  out  since.  He  could
not  understand  how  it  came  to  be  in  the  vine ; moreover,  the  sum
of  4 fr.  50  c.  which  it  had  contained  was  missing.

On  every  one  of  the  following  days  Jean’s  room  and  his  grand-
father’s were  upset;  plants  were  torn  up  in  the  garden,  and  Jeanne
and  her  small  brother,  aged  six,  saw  a cuplioard  open  and  the  linen

come  out  of  its  own  accord.  Mme.  A also  was  very  cleverly

robbed  of  her  purse.  She  had  gone  to  bed  with  it  under  her  pillow,
and  just  as  she  was  getting  up  ascertained  that  it  was  still  there.

She  got  out  of  bed,  looked  for  it  under  the  pillow  and  found  it

gone.  Jeanne  had  been  in  the  room  a moment  before.  Mme.

A was  very  much  annoyed,  as  the  purse  had  contained  17  fr.

AVhen  she  went  out,  the  purse  was  lying  in  front  of  the  door,  but
with  no  money  in  it.


XLIX.]


History  of  a Haunted  House.


473


About  tliis  time,  M.  C , a hairdresser,  wrote  to  the  principal

editor  of  a paper  in  Gerolstein,  called  the  “ Messager  de  I’oceuUe,”  to
ask  for  an  explanation  of  these  phenomena.  His  letter  was  dated
from  Daimonopolis,  Jan.  3rd,  1902,  and  contained  an  account  of  what

had  taken  place  at  the  A ’s  house,  adding  that  a trap  had  been

set  by  laying  down  sawdust,  affixing  seals,  etc.,  and  that  while  the
rooms  were  in  this  state  the  abnormal  occurrences  had  ceased,  but
had  commenced  directly  the  seals,  etc.,  were  removed.  He  stated
that  the  three  children,  aged  respectively  15,  5,  and  4 years  old,
said  they  had  seen  a wardrobe  open  and  its  contents  fall  out  at
their  feet,  and  that  they  had  seen  the  plants  in  the  garden  being-
broken,  but  did  not  see  any  one  doing  it.  Eaps  had  been  heard
at  night  on  the  walls  and  on  the  furniture,  and  he  had  himself
twice  visited  the  house,  and  had  seen,  as  had  many  other  persons,
the  bed-clothes  in  the  garden,  the  furniture  upset,  and  the  plants
torn  up.

The  Editor  replied  in  a letter,  also  published  in  the  “ Messager
de  I’occidte,”  ascribing  the  phenomena  to  the  presence  of  some  medium,
mediums  being,  he  asserted,  a kind  of  human  battery,  generating  a
species  of  electricity : hence  the  noises,  breakages,  and  various

other  phenomena.  The  letter  concluded  by  advocating  the  piercing
of  the  air  with  some  pointed  steel  object,  on  the  theory  that  the
steel  Avould  act  as  a lightning  conductor,  and  so  put  a stop  to
the  phenomena.

M.  C.  — , in  replying,  said  that  the  A ’s  already  suspected

their  daughter  Jeanne  to  be  in  some  way  connected  with  the
phenomena,  and  he  thought  that  her  brother,  aged  six,  must  also
be  a medium,  as  each  of  them,  when  alone,  had  seen  the  phenomena
taking  place.  He  also  recounted  the  incident  of  the  glass  of  water
(see  below),  and  stated  that  some  days  before  a fork,  spoon  and
knife,  and  a nail,  had  been  found  in  Jeanne’s  bed,  and  that  the
girl  herself  was  growing  thin,  and  losing  her  appetite.

Jeanne  was,  in  fact,  beginning  to  look  ill,  and  Dr.  E (the

name  is  only  withheld  to  avoid  disclosing  the  name  of  the  town
in  which  these  events  actually  took  place),  who  saw  her  casually,
advised  her  parents  to  send  her  to  the  hospital,  adding  that  her
removal  would  enable  them  to  judge  of  her  influence  on  the
phenomena.  After  her  admission  to  the  hospital,  an  attemj^t
was  made  to  hypnotise  her,  but  she  resisted,  and  in  the  evening
had  an  attack  of  h}^steria,  with  hallucination,  believing  that  she
saw  a skeleton  in  front  of  her.  During  the  night  she  crawled


474  Dr.  J.  Grasset.  [part

about  on  all  fours  under  the  beds  of  the  ward,  eventually
returning  to  her  own  bed.

During  her  absence  from  home,  nothing  unusual  occurred  at

the  A ’s,  but  when  on  the  eighth  day  she  left  the  hospital

and  came  home,  the  original  phenomena  immediately  began  again.

She  now  suffered  from  frequent  attacks  of  hysteria,  and  Mrae.
A , in  hopes  of  finding  a cure,  went  to  consult  a somnambulist.

The  somnambulist  declared  without  hesitation  that  Jeanne  was
persecuted  by  some  one  who  had  “bewitched”  her,  and  said  that
she  would  show  the  girl  who  this  person  was.  Jeanne  was  taken  to
see  her,  and  the  somnambidist  gave  her  a glass  of  water  on  a white
plate,  and  told  her  to  look  at  the  bottom  of  the  glass.

Jeanne  did  so,  but  saw  nothing.  On  being  told  to  look  again,
she  still  saw  only  the  white  plate,  but  on  a third  trial,  being
asked  if  she  did  not  see  a figure,  she  said  she  seemed  to  see  a
head,  and  in  answer  to  a further  question,  described  it  as  that
of  an  old  woman,  wrinkled,  with  decayed  teeth  and  a snub-nose,
and  wearing  a black  bonnet.  She  was  then  asked  if  she  would
recognise  her  if  she  met  her,  and  said  “ yes.”

Her  mother  was  anxious  to  see  the  old  woman  for  herself,  but
when  she  looked,  saw  only  the  white  plate.  The  somnambulist
told  them  to  repeat  the  experiment  at  midnight,  when  Jeanne
would  be  able  to  describe  the  woman  more  clearly  ; at  midnight,
accordingly,  she  was  again  given  a glass  of  water,  when  she  saw
the  old  woman  very  distinctly,  and  described  her  in  detail,  from
her  dirty  skirt  and  apron,  and  black  bodice  striped  with  red,
down  to  her  rings,  in  one  of  which  was  a garnet.

After  this  there  could  no  longer  be  any  doubt  but  that  they
were  persecuted  by  an  old  woman  who  wished  the  family  ill ;
it  only  remained  to  discover  who  was  the  woman  described  by

Jeanne,  and  this  Mme.  A was  not  long  in  doing.  She  re

called  an  old  story  which  she  had  told  her  family  more  than
once,  of  how  her  mother  had  sutt'ered  for  a long  time  before  her
death,  and  how  this  prolonged  agony,  being  thought  unnatural  by
those  about  her,  was  looked  upon  as  the  work  of  some  one
desirous  of  revenge,  who  prevented  the  dying  woman  from  draw-
ing her  last  breath.  A neighbour  had  told  them  that  to  discover
who  this  person  was,  they  should  burn  two  vine-shoots  in  the  form
of  a cross,  with  salt  upon  them,  when  she  would  shortly  appear.
This  was  done,  and  soon  afterwards  a friend  of  the  sick  woman,
who  had  heard  of  her  hopeless  condition,  came  in  to  see  her.  But


XLIX.]


History  of  a Haunted  House.


475


on  her  approaching  the  bed  and  crossing  herself,  the  patient  had
made  a grimace,  whereupon  the  family  had  seized  the  false  friend
and  driven  her,  not  without  some  ill-treatment,  out  of  the  house.
The  dying  woman  then  immediately  expired.  ISTothing  further
had  since  been  heard  of  this  woman,  but  she  was  still  alive,  and
living  in  Daimonopolis,  in  the  Rue  de  la  Colline ; might  it  not
therefore  be  she  who  was  now  taking  her  revenge  by  causing  these
phenomena  1

In  order  to  find  out,  it  was  decided  to  question  the  rapping
spirits.  These  raps  were  never  heard  in  the  daytime,  nor  during
the  night,  but  always  in  the  early  morning  when  every  one  was
still  in  bed.

One  morning,  then,  when  the  raps  were  heard  on  the  partition
separating  Jeanne’s  room  from  her  parents’,  while  the  family  were
all  in  bed,  they  entered  into  conversation  with  the  spirit,  and  in
answer  to  questions  were  informed  that  the  only  person  against
whom  it  bore  a grudge  was  Jeanne,  not  on  account  of  anything
she  had  done,  but  for  vengeance  on  behalf  of  an  old  woman
living  in  the  Rue  de  la  Colline.  They  asked  if  by  beating  or
killing  her  the  phenomena  would  be  put  an  end  to.  The  answer
to  this  was  “ no.”

If  they  did  nothing,  would  they  cease?  “Yes.”

Would  the  money  and  other  articles  which  had  disappeared  be
returned?  “No.”

Numerous  other  questions  were  put,  the  raps  in  reply  to  all  of
which  were  struck  close  to  the  bed  in  which  Jeanne  slept.

Mme.  A was  now  sure  of  their  tormentor,  but  in  order  to

discover  whether  she  was  the  woman  seen  by  Jeanne  in  the  glass
of  water,  she  decided  to  show  her  to  her  daughter  and  see
whether  the  latter  would  recognise  her.

O

Accordingly  they  went  together  one  day  to  the  Rue  de  la
Colline,  where,  amidst  a group  of  women  gossipping  in  the  road,
she  saw  the  supposed  enemy  of  the  family,  and  called  Jeanne’s
attention  to  the  group.

The  girl  cried  out  in  alarm  that  it  was  she,  and  on  her  mother’s
feigning  ignorance  and  asking,  “Who?”  said  that  it  was  the  old
woman  she  had  seen  in  the  glass,  and  begged  her  to  come  away,
as  she  was  frightened.  This  was  conclusive,  and  it  only  remained
to  discover  what  could  be  done  against  their  tormentor.

New  phenomena,  in  fact,  were  now  added  to  the  old  ones.
The  grandfather,  on  going  into  his  room  one  evening,  found  all


476


Dr.  J.  Grasset.


[part


the  candles  alight,  and  a crown  and  several  crosses  made  of  dried
grasses  on  his  bed.  A basket  and  various  other  articles  dis-
appeared, and  some  squares  of  flannel,  with  pins  stuck  through
them,  which  had  been  placed  on  the  mantelpiece,  were  subsequently
found  in  holes  in  the  garden-wall,  but  without  the  pins.

Jeanne,  while  sleeping  with  her  mother,  felt  herself  pricked  in

different  parts  of  the  body,  and  Mme.  A found  among  the  sheets

pins,  forks  and  nails,  which  nobody,  she  said,  had  put  there.

It  was  now  decided  to  put  into  practice  the  method  suggested
by  the  editor  of  the  Messager  de  VoccuUe  in  his  letter  of  Jan.  5th
{viz.  the  use  of  pointed  steel  to  draw  off  the  electric  currents
generated  by  the  medium),  and  this  was  done  under  the  following
circumstances.

One  morning,  Mme.  A , who  was  sleeping  with  Jeanne,  felt

the  bed  shaking  under  her.  She  made  Jeanne  get  up,  and  re-
mained in  it  alone  to  defy  the  spirits.  The  bed  began  to  tremble
more  violently  than  before,  and  she  accused  the  children  of  shak-
ing it;  they  all  denied  it,  however,  and  to  make  sure  that  no  one

was  touching  it,  she  sent  for  her  father-in-law  and  had  the  bed  put

out  in  the  middle  of  the  room  and  surrounded  by  her  family,  while
the  grandfather,  armed  with  a sword-stick,  stood  ready  to  carry
out  the  editor’s  instructions.

As  the  bed  now  ceased  to  shake,  Mme.  A deemed  herself

victorious,  and  began  to  defy  and  abuse  the  spirits  in  the  most
vigorous  language ; the  bed  was  then  violently  agitated,  and  the
grandfather  cut  and  thrust  with  his  sword  in  all  directions,
round  and  even  under  it.

He  stopped  at  length,  exhausted,  and  they  anxiously  awaited

the  result,  but  the  bed  still  shook,  and  Mme.  A got  up,

much  discouraged  by  the  failure  of  the  experiment.

As  all  their  troubles  were  occasioned  by  the  old  woman  in  the
Rue  de  la  Colline,  the  best  course  now  seemed  to  come  to  some

understanding  with  her ; but  as  Mme.  A was  unwilling  to

seek  her  in  her  own  house,  she  consulted  the  somnambulist
as  to  the  possibility  of  inducing  her  to  come  to  theirs.
This,  she  was  assured,  was  quite  simple ; they  had  only  to

shut  themselves  up  in  the  house  and  burn  a cat  alive  on  the  hearth
towards  eleven  o’clock  at  night ; but  rvhatever  happened,  under
no  pretext  whatsoever  was  any  one  to  leave  the  house,  nor  was  it
necessary  to  leave  a door  open,  as  she  knew  perfectly  well  how
to  come  in  without  that.


XLIX.]


History  of  a Haunted  House.


477


When  the  evening  came,  M.  A informed  one  of  his  friends,.

and  they  shut  themselves  up,  and  towards  eleven  o’clock  burned
the  cat.  At  that  moment  a loud  noise,  like  a clap  of  thunder,  was
heard  outside,  but  despite  their  astonishment  they  followed  the
somnambulist’s  advice,  and  no  one  left  the  house.  Loud  knocks
were  heard  on  the  door  and  on  the  partition,  and  they  were
awaiting  the  appearance  of  the  old  woman,  when  Jeanne,  who  was
in  bed,  uttered  a loud  cry.  She  had  a feeling  of  strangulation,,
screamed  and  struggled  violently,  and  was  evidently  suffering  from
an  attack  of  hysteria.  Her  parents,  who  saw  her  for  the  first
time  in  this  state,  were  greatly  alarmed  and  feared  for  her  life.
The  doctor  who  was  called  in  advised  their  sending  her  to  the
hospital  at  Montpellier,  which  they  did,  in  spite  of  the  distance,
and  she  was  admitted  on  February  20th,  1902.

[A  brief  account  of  Jeanne’s  condition  since  her  admission  to  the
hospital  is  here  given,  of  which  the  following  is  the  substance]  ;

Between  February  20th  and  March  18th  the  patient  had  three-
violent  hysterical  attacks.  These  attacks  lasted  from  10  to  20  minutes,
and  were  accompanied  by  a sensation  of  strangulation,  when  the
breathing  was  suspended,  the  face  congested,  and  the  eyes  convulsed.
Clonic  convulsions  followed,  with  loud  outcries,  and  at  this  stage
the  patient  became  cataleptic,  retained  any  attitude  in  which  she
was  put,  and  was  completely  insensible.  The  loss  of  consciousness
was  absolute.  She  also  had  slighter  attacks,  accompanied  by  con-
vulsive movements,  but  without  loss  of  consciousness.  She  had
no  hallucinations  since  entering  the  hospital  As  regards  the
sensory  condition,  there  was  conjunctival  and  pharyngeal  anaesthesia^
and  also  variable  and  transitory  anaesthesiae  of  many  other  parts  of
the  body;  three  different  examinations  all  giving  different  results.

In  each  of  the  examinations  the  anaesthetic  parts  were  insensible
to  touch,  to  temperature  and  to  pain ; but  notwithstanding  the
complete  anaesthesia  of  the  left  hand,  the  patient  was  able  to
distinguish  the  forms  of  objects,  and  to  recognise  them.  With
her  eyes  closed  she  knows  when  her  legs  are  stretched  out  or
brought  near  together,  but  if  they  are  crossed  one  above  the  other
she  invariably  makes  a mistake,  and  asserts  without  hesitation  that
the  left  is  over  the  right,  when  the  right  is  over  the  left,  or  vice
versa ; and  if,  when  her  eyes  are  closed  and  her  legs  crossed,  one  of
her  feet  is  pricked,  she  localises  the  prick  in  the  other  foot.

With  regard  to  sight,  there  was  restriction  of  the  visual  field
of  both  eyes.  For  colours  the  sight  of  the  left  eye  was  normal.


478


Dr.  J.  Grasset.


[part


but  there  was  dyschromatopsia  of  the  right  eye ; she  saw  red  as
violet.  Her  hearing  was  normal ; motility,  normal  except  during
the  crises ; and  reflexes,  normal.

Her  intelligence  was  normal  ; her  moral  sense,  very  weak.  She
stole  money  and  various  articles  from  her  companions,  and  was
extremely  untruthful,  inventing  all  manner  of  scandalous  stories
of  which  she  herself  was  the  heroine.

She  amused  herself  at  first  by  rapping  on  her  table  during  the
night,  to  induce  a belief  in  the  presence  of  spirits,  and  asked  the
nurse  if  she  did  not  hear  the  raps.

She  was  put  under  a tonic  regime,  with  treatment  by  electricity,
etc.  At  the  present  time  she  no  longer  has  attacks,  is  much
improved  in  health,  and  her  character  has  changed  for  the  better.

The  first  impression  produced  by  this  long  and  curious  story
is  that  there  was  obviously  a mixture  of  fraud,  h3^steria,  and
credulity.

The  fraud,  to  begin  with,  is  evident.  We  have  seen  the  interest
which  these  good  people  naturally  had  in  preventing  the  house
from  being  sold  or  let,  and  that  no  serious  attempt  was  ever  made
to  guard  against  practical  joking.  There  were  either  no  locks  on  the
doors,  or  they  were  found  torn  off  when  the  phenomena  occurred.
A savage  dog  was  shut  into  the  house,  and  was  found  at  large,
without  his  having  barked.  Evidently  the  door  had  been  opened,
and  that  by  one  of  the  household.  When  the  precaution  of  using
threads  and  seals  was  taken,  nothing  happened.  When  sawdust
was  put  down,  the  spirit  swept  it  up  with  the  mattresses  so  that
no  footprints  might  be  seen.

Granted  the  fraud,  then,  who  were  its  authors  1 It  is  hardly  to
be  supposed  that  the  entire  family  were  implicated ; the  younger
children  probably  were  not,  nor  the  grandfather.

It  is  clear  that  Jeanne  was  the  principal  figure  in  the  affair.
Her  morals  were  detestable,  as  was  proved  at  the  hospital  by  the
phenomena  of  rapping,  purse-stealing,  etc.;  here,  however,  she  was
obliged  to  confess  to  fraud.

Whether  she  had  accomplices  or  not  it  is  difficult  to  say.

Mme.  A ’s  account  is  very  clear,  very  detailed,  and  neither

dates  nor  facts  are  omitted,  but  this  is  not  conclusive.  Moreover,
it  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  have  established  the  fact  that
there  was  fraud,  and  that  Jeanne,  with  or  without  assistance,  was
its  chief  perpetrator.


XLIX.]


History  of  a Haunted  House.


479


But  was  the  affair  all  fraud  t Certainly  not.  Jeanne’s  hysteria
was  undoubtedly  genuine,  the  attacks,  hysterogenetic  zones,  etc.,
were  typical.  One  peculiarity  of  the  tactile  anaesthesia  of  both
hands  may  be  noted,  that  while  they  were  insensible  to  the  sharpest
pricks,  she  was  yet  able  to  recognise,  with  her  eyes  closed,  a brooch
put  into  her  hand,  and  to  fasten  it  very  deftly  into  her  bodice,
also  to  take  down  and  put  up  her  hair,  etc.

The  allochirical  error  which  induced  her  to  localise  in  the  left
foot  the  sensations  of  the  right  when  her  legs  are  crossed,  is  even
more  curious,  and  very  characteristic  of  hysteria.

It  is  possible  also  that  some  of  the  raps  and  movements  of
objects  were  not  fraudulent,  especially  the  raps  which  replied  to
the  questions  about  the  old  woman.  Ochorowicz  has  said  that
fraud  is  inseparable  from  mediumism  as  simulation  is  inseparable
from  hypnotism,  but  that  science  ought  to  study  both.  Some  of
Jeanne’s  seances  may  come  under  the  head  of  unconscious  fraud,
notably  the  one  in  which,  after  burning  the  cat,  they  awaited  the
arrival  of  the  old  woman.  They  were  all  in  a state  of  strained
expectation ; she  rapped  as  the  thunder  rolled,  and  the  scene  ended
in  loud  cries  and  a violent  attack  of  hysteria.  The  raps  in  this
case  were  probably  produced  involuntarily,  and  it  is  these  uncon-
scious frauds  that  stand  out  from  the  deliberate  trickery  and  are
deserving  of  study.

The  vision  in  the  glass  of  water  was  also  probably  a genuine  case
of  crystal  vision.

If  we  now  come  to  consider  the  psychological  environment  of  the
case,  we  find  that  the  children  of  eight  and  six  years  old  said  that
they  had  seen  the  wardrobe  open  and  the  linen  come  out,  the  plants
torn  up,  etc.  Now,  it  is  a matter  of  common  knowledge  how  little
childish  testimony  is  to  be  trusted.  No  doubt  they  saw  the  clothes
on  the  ground  and  the  devastation  in  the  garden,  and  by  dint  of
constant  discussion  on  the  subject  ended  by  thinking  they  had
actually  seen  the  transport  of  the  linen  and  other  objects.

Next  comes  the  grandfather,  with  his  hypothesis  of  spirit-inter-
vention ready  to  hand  upon  the  first  appearance  of  the  phenomena,
and  the  pseudo-scientific  barber,  who  reads  the  Messarjer  de  VoccuUe
and  knows  that  nowadays  all  these  things  are  amenable  to  scientific
methods.  He  understands  the  theory  of  the  sword-points,  and  knows
that  it  is  a truly  scientific  remedy  and  not  one  of  the  old  wives
fables  that  held  currency  in  the  earlier  centuries.

Beyond  all  these  there  remains  the  crowd, — the  credulous,  sheep-like

2i


480


Dr.  J.  Grasset.


[part


cro^yd, — brought  together  by  curiosity,  whose  one  idea  is  that  there
must  be  an  author  of  the  mischief,  and  that  he  mrrst  be  punished.
Well  was  it  for  the  old  woman  they  accused  that  the  burning  of
a cat  sufficed  them.  Had  the  remedy  been  her  own  death,  there
would  have  been  five  hundred  arms  ready  iir  an  instant  to  fling
her  into  the  canal.  Yet  not  one  of  these  persons,  left  to  his  own
devices,  would  so  much  as  have  harmed  a fly.  It  was  the
gregarious  instinct  exciting  them,  and  the  gregarious  spirit  is  both
puerile  and  brutal.  Such  is  the  psychology  of  the  crowd


XLIX.]


Revieiv.


481


II.

REVIEWS.


Hypnotism:  its  History,  Practice,  and  Theory.  By  J.  Milne  Bram-
WELL,  M.B.,  C.M.  (London:  CIrant  Richard.s.  1903.  8vo.,  pp.  478.

Price  18s.  net.)

This  is  a remarkable  book — remarkable  not  only  for  what  it
says,  but  even  more  for  what  it  abstains  from  saying.  Dr.  Bramwell
is  best  known  perhaps  as  a distinguished  practitioner,  who  has  had
no  small  share  in  raising  hypnotism  to  the  recognised  and  almost
orthodox  position  which,  after  many  decades  of  calumny,  is  now
accorded  to  it  by  the  medical  profession  in  Great  Britain.  This
alone  would  entitle  him  to  our  attention.  But  he  is  more  than
this ; he  is  an  active  and  acute  enquirer.  He  has  made  himself
the  historian  of  hypnotism,  and  has  been  the  first  to  bring  fully  to
light  the  splendid  work  of  his  countryman  and  predecessor,  James
Braid ; work  which  had  been  too  long  ignored,  and  must  now  take
its  place  among  the  most  original  and  illuminating  contributions  of
Great  Britain  to  mental  and  medical  science.  And  he  is  beside  a
keen  and  trenchant  psychologist — not  merely  a critic  of  the  theories
of  others,  but  the  author  of  a remarkable  series  of  experiments
which  have  done  much  to  throw  fresh  light  on  the  theory  of  his
craft.  And  yet,  after  many  years  of  practice,  of  research,  and
reflection,  he  ends  with  a confession  of  ignorance ; he  leaves  us  face
to  face  with  a mystery;  he  has  no  theory  to  give  us  of  the  means
by  which  he  attains  his  ends,  or  of  the  physiological  or  psychical
processes  which  they  involve.

This  attitude  is  at  first  sight  perhaps  rather  disappointing ; but  it  is
no  small  gain  that  the  question  should  at  length,  and  perhaps  for  the
first  time  in  its  history,  be  removed  from  the  heated  atmosphere  of
rash  assertion,  blind  prejudice,  and  more  than  theological  persecu-


482


Dr.  Walter  Leaf.


[part


tion  ill  which  it  has  passed  its  stormy  and  none  too  healthy
infancy.  It  is  one  of  the  hardest  of  scientific  lessons  to  learn  to

state  mere  facts  uncoloured  by  preconceived  ideas,  and  it  is  at  least
a proof  of  courage  that  Dr.  Bramwell,  in  spite  of  all  temptations,
should  have  held  fast  to  this  attitude  of  detachment.  He  practically
demolishes  all  previous  theories,  and  allows  us  to  start  fresh  with  a
tabula  rasa ; we  can  turn  our  backs  on  the  errors  of  the  past,  and
cultivate  that  coolness  which  may  help  us  to  build  something
more  or  less  enduring.

Bramwell  deals,  as  his  title  tells  us,  with  the  history,  practice,
and  theory  of  hypnotism.  Of  these  three,  the  first  is  briefly  treated
in  a single  chapter  and  an  Appendix ; but  these  are  of  great  interest,
both  from  the  account  they  give  of  the  “scientific,”  or  rather  pro-
fessional, persecution  to  which  Elliotson  was  subjected,  and  of  the
later  and  little  known  researches  of  Braid.  One  would  gladly  let
tlie  moral  tortures  of  the  medical  “ Holy  Office,”  as  administered  to
Elliotson,  and  in  some  degree  to  Esdaile,  fall  into  oblivion,  were  it
not  that  the  spirit  which  prompted  them  is  still  notoriously  in
existence.  It  would  be  a comfort  to  think  that  blind  intolerance
and  absolute  refusal  to  investigate  may  be  a necessary  test  for  the
purging  of  false  doctrine ; but  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  any  help
was  given  to  the  cause  of  truth  by  Elliotson’s  professional  ruin,  or
that  the  delay  of  some  forty  years  in  the  acceptance  of  so  much  of
his  doctrines  as  has  proved  true  can  be  a gain  to  science,  outweighing
both  the  suffering  which  might  have  been  saved  to  patients  and
the  undoubted  moral  harm  done  by  a perverse  refusal  to  face  un-
familiar fcvcts.  The  action  of  the  British  Medical  Association  in
referring  back  the  report  of  its  own  very  strong  Committee  so
recently  as  1892  shows  that  the  spirit  of  professional  obscurantism
dies  hard,  even  in  the  temples  of  science.  As  for  Braid,  though  he
was  not  tabooed  as  his  two  contemporaries  were,  he  was  ignored
till  his  discoveries  were  made  over  again  across  the  Channel.  How-
ever, he  may  be  content  to  share  the  fate  of  Newton,  who,  as  we
now  know  from  his  unpublished  papers,  anticipated  many  conse-
quences of  his  theories,  which  were  loudly  proclaimed  as  new  and
brilliant  discoveries  by  the  Epigoni  of  mathematical  astronomy.
Bramwell  has  shown  that  the  most  advanced  theories  of  the  famous
Nancy  workers  are  often  to  be  found  not  merely  in  embryo,  but  often
in  a fuller  and  more  satisfactory  form,  in  Braid’s  latest  work,  some  of
which  remains  still  in  MS.

About  half  of  the  book,  pages  41  to  272,  deals  with  practical


XLIX.]


Revieiu.


483


hypnotism,  \vith  a series  of  successful  cases,  mostly  from  Bramwell’s
own  practice,  illustrating  the  great  therapeutic  value  of  the  method.
With  these  we  need  not  here  deal,  as  they  are  largely  of  a technical
character,  and  do  not  produce  much  novelty.  Dr.  Bramwell  is,  how-
ever, particularly  to  be  congratulated  on  the  success  with  which  he
has  tackled  nervous  cases  on  the  borderland,  if  not  actually  in  the
domain,  of  insanity — cases  which,  from  previous  experience,  might
have  been  supposed  absolutely  refractory.  It  will  be  found,  too,
that  there  is  no  ground  whatever  for  the  idea  which  at  one  time
found  supporters  of  a superior  susceptibility  of  the  Latin  race  to
suggestive  treatment.  Dr.  Bramwell’s  figures  on  this  head  are  most
interesting.  Attention  may  particularly  be  called  to  the  marked
difterence  he  found  between  the  susceptibility  of  the  patients  from
his  general  practice  at  Goole,  where  he  failed  to  affect  only  two
out  of  500  cases,  and  those  which  came  to  him  as  a consulting
specialist.  Of  the  first  100  cases  of  the  latter,  no  less  than  22
proved  refractory.  This  is,  of  course,  due  to  the  fact  that  this
latter  group  were  almost  always  difficult  nervous  cases  onlj"  brought
to  him  in  advanced  stages,  vdiere  ordinary  therapeutic  means  had
already  failed.

But  to  Psychical  Researchers  it  is  Bramwell’s  long  and  important
chapter  xii.  which  will  have  the  most  immediate  interest,  and  with
this  we  now  propose  to  deal.  The  two  C[uestions  discussed  in  it  are
vital ; what  is  the  nature,  the  differentia,  of  the  hypnotic  state  1
And  what  is  the  mechanism  by  which  this  state  can  be  artificially
induced  1

We  can  put  aside  at  once  the  earlier  transcendental  answers,  and
the  rash  theories  of  magnetic  and  odylic  force;  a sufficient  answer
to  them  has  been  long  since  found.  The  theories  which  have  of
late  years  been  current  have  mostly  supposed  that  the  hypnotic
state  means  an  inhibition  of  normal  faculties,  produced  either  by
physical  stimulation  (Heidenhain)  or  by  partial  mental  fatigue  or
concentration.  The  typical  state  has  been  taken  to  be  one  of  som-
nolence, and  it  is  on  this  assumption  that  the  very  name  of
hypnotism  was  invented  by  Braid,  though,  as  Bramwell  shows,  he
subsequently  gave  up  both  the  assumption  and  the  name,  for  which
he  substituted  Monoideism.  Braid  had,  in  fact,  made  the  important
observation,  wdiich  has  only  been  slowly  rediscovered,  that  somnol-
ence is  only  an  unessential  and  subsidiary  symptom  of  Avhat,  for  the
sake  of  convenience,  wm  must  still  call  the  hypnotic  condition.  The
essential  phenomena  can  in  fact  be  produced  without  exception  in  a


484


Dr.  W alter  Leaf.


[part


state  which  is  one  of  alertness,  or  at  all  events  involves  neither  un-
consciousness nor  amnesia.  Thus  the  problem  of  the  difference
between  hypnotic  and  ordinary  sleep  loses  the  importance  which  was
once  attached  to  it,  and  becomes  only  part  of  a larger  question.

What,  then,  in  Bramwell’s  opinion  is  the  nature  of  the  “ hypnotic  ”
state  1 He  gives  no  formal  answer  to  this  question.  He  speaks
indeed  of  the  normal  and  hypnotic  states  as  “ practically  identical  ”
(p.  333),  though  immediately  correcting  this  by  admitting  the  in-
creased suggestibility  of  the  hypnotic  subject.  But  on  the  negative
side  he  brings  all  his  arguments,  and  much  fresh  material,  against
the  idea  of  automatism.  The  subject  is  not  the  mere  tool  of  the
operator.  The  willingness  of  the  subject  to  accept  and  carry  out
suggestion  is  limited  (p.  337)  by  the  important  condition  that  the
suggestion  must  not  be  “ criminal  or  improper.”  It  would  also
appear  that  it  must  not  be  disagreeable — a vague  and  further  reach-
ing word.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  though  I do  not  find  any
absolute  definition,  that  Bramwell  regards  the  hypnotic  state  as  one
of  increased  obedience  to  neutral  suggestions,  i.e.  to  those  which  in
the  normal  state  would  not  be  regarded  as  either  disagreeable  or
wrong.  It  might  seem,  indeed,  that  this  hardly  covers  the  obedience
which  is  shown,  let  us  say,  in  public  exhibitions.  One  would  not
a 'priori  have  supposed  that  the  ordinary  undergraduate  in  his
normal  state  would  consent  to  chew  a tallow  candle  under  the  idea
that  it  was  sugar  candy,  or  nurse  a handkerchief  among  the  derisive
cheers  of  his  friends  when  told  that  it  was  a baby.  Bramwell
would,  I gather,  include  such  displays  among  those  which  afford  us
the  pleasure  of  “ showing  off  our  various  gifts  and  attainments  ”
(p.  327),  though  the  undergraduate,  if  proud  of  his  capacity  of  feed-
ing a handkerchief  from  an  imaginary  pap-bottle,  would  appear  in
ordinary  life  laudably  anxious  to  deny  himself  the  public  gratifica-
tion of  this  particular  vanity.  In  fact,  I cannot  help  thinking  that
Bramwell  is  inclined  to  minimise  the  increased  suggestibility  of
hypnosis.  Even,  however,  if  this  be  so,  he  makes  it  very  clear  that
the  Nancy  practitioners  have  on  the  other  hand  enormously  ex-
aggerated the  possibilities  of  induced  “ automatism.”  We  may  well
admit  on  the  one  hand  that  the  boundary  of  acts  which  the  subject
regards  as  neutral  can  be  shifted  in  the  automatic  state  so  as  to
include  many  which  in  ordinary  life  would  be  considered  disagree-
able, without  impairing  the  power  of  resistance  to  those  which
involve  an  absolute  offence  to  tlie  moral  nature.  And  by  his
resolute  insistence  upon  the  retention  of  this  power,  Bramwell  has


XLIX.]


Revieiv.


485


rendered  an  immense  service  to  students  of  the  subject.  He  speaks
with  the  authority  of  enormous  experience  when  he  tells  us  that,
so  far  as  he  has  seen,  improper  suggestions  are  invariably  rejected ;
and  he  can  justly  appeal  to  the  fact  that,  after  all  the  years  in
which  hypnotism  has  been  a matter  of  public  marvel  and  ignorant
exaggeration,  there  has  not  been  found  a single  proved  case  of
erime  effected  by  means  of  it.  This  conclusion  is  one  of  the

most  solid  results  of  his  book.

One  word  more  on  this  question  of  suggestion.  Bramwell  hardly
treats  with  sufficient  seriousness  some  of  Bernheim’s  arguments,
notably  the  purely  psychological  theorem  that  “an  idea  has  a tend-
ency to  generate  its  actuality.”  He  argues  that,  on  the  contrary
(1)  “A  suggested  idea  has  generally  a tendency  to  generate  noth-
ing. (2)  A suggested  idea  has  frequently  a tendency  to  generate
its  opposite.  (3)  A suggested  idea  rarely  tends  to  generate  its

actuality.”  But  the  arguments  he  adduces  in  favour  of  this  whole-
sale negation  are  really  hardly  worthy  of  the  book.  For  (1)  he

only  urges  that  “ a very  casual  glance  at  the  events  of  everyday

life  would  compel  us  to  conclude  that  this  class  is  the  commonest
of  the  three.  This  is  evident  if  we  think  of  the  numberless  things
ineffectually  suggested  in  the  family  circle  to  domestics,  workmen,
tradespeople,  friends,  acquaintances,  etc.”  (p.  331).  This  is,  of
course,  only  chaff ; but  it  hardly  seems  to  be  in  place.  It  is
true  that  the  butcher  may  bring  a rump-steak  when  the  cook  has
“ suggested  ” a mutton-chop ; but  it  is  only  in  her  least  scientific
moments  that  the  housewife  would  venture  to  say  that  the  order
to  bring  the  chop  produced  “ no  result  ” in  a majority  of  cases.
So,  too,  as  an  instance  where  suggestion  produces  a result  opposite
to  that  intended,  Bramwell  instances  the  thief  who  only  runs
away  the  faster  when  told  to  stop.  But,  of  course,  neither
Bernheim  nor  any  one  else  has  asserted  that  suggestion  always  pro-
duces the  effect  intended,  and  it  is  illogical  to  argue  that  because
the  effect  has  not  been  produced,  there  has  been  no  tendency  to
produce  it.  Obviously  in  the  case  of  the  thief  the  tendency  is
counteracted  by  other  motives ; but  if  Bramwell  were  to  say
“Stop”  to  20  passers-by  in  Piccadill^q  it  is  highly  probable  that  19
of  them  would  give  a momentary  obedience.  Indeed,  no  better  wit-
ness to  the  truth  of  the  theorem  impugned  is  needed  than
Bramwell  himself.  He  is  accustomed  to  make  to  patients  in  the
normal  state  a particular  suggestion,  that  of  rest.  He  tells  us  that
in  from  75  to  100  per  cent,  of  his  cases  the  idea  generates  its


486


Dr.  Walter  Leaf.


[part


actuality,  and  (p.  333)  that  “ the  tendency  must  be  in  favour  of
the  results,  which  are  numerically  the  greater  of  the  two.”  In
fact,  if  he  denies  the  fundamental  proposition  that  an  idea  tends
to  generate  its  actuality,  it  is  hard  to  see  what  meaning  is  left
to  the  word  “ suggestion  ” at  all,  or  why  any  one  should  ever  take
the  trouble  to  suggest  anything,  either  in  ordinary  life  or  medical
practice.

But  leaving  persiflage  aside,  with  this  protest,  we  come  to  the
serious  and  solid  conclusion,  which  may  now  be  regarded  as  estab-
lished, that  so  far  as  suggestibility  is  concerned  there  is  no  great
difference  between  the  normal  and  hypnotic  states  ; that  the  differ-
ence lies  in  the  temporary  removal  of  motives  tending  to  counteract
the  suggestion ; and  finally,  that  this  removal  does  not  imply  any
inhibition  of  faculty.  Here  Bramwell  is  really  in  serious  conflict
with  the  Nancy  observers ; he  boldly  asserts  that  there  is  not  only
no  inhibition,  but  an  actual  extension,  or  perhaps  we  should  rather
say  a liberation,  of  faculty.  This  is  the  position  which  constitutes
the  second  notable  point  in  the  book.  It  is,  of  course,  not  novel.
It  means  that  Bramwell  accepts,  at  least  in  large  measure,  Myers’s
theory  of  the  subliminal  self.  Though  he  does  not  regard  this
theory  as  a complete  explanation  of  the  fircts,  he  holds  that  it  is
the  nearest  approach  to  one  that  has  yet  been  made.  This  is  the
more  noteworthy  because  he  is  distinctly  sceptical  as  to  the  exist-
ence of  any  transcendental  powers  in  the  subliminal  self.  He  has,
for  instance,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  no  sufficient
evidence  for  telepathy.  It  is  hardly  fair  to  enter  into  an  argument
with  him  here  on  what  is  merely  an  obiter  dictum,  nor  can  we
admit  that  the  experiments  of  Gurney  and  others  can  be  dismissed
as  founded  on  errors  of  observation.  But  it  is  just  as  well  that  we
should  have  the  testimony  of  so  impartial  and  sce])tical  an  observer
to  the  importance  of  Myers’s  general  theory,  even  when  stripped  of
that  on  which  the  theory  is  commonly  supposed  to  rest  entirely.
What  Bramwell  does  hold  is  that  the  hypnotic  state  shows  just
such  extension  of  faculty  as  Myers  postulates  for  the  subliminal
self.  Bramwell  has  himself  added  much  to  our  knowledge  of  this
extended  faculty  by  his  remarkable  series  of  experiments  on  time
appreciation,  where  orders  were  carried  out  at  the  expiration  of
such  periods  as  20,290  minutes  from  the  giving  of  the  order —
periods  which  in  her  normal  state  his  subject  was  incapable  of
correctly  calculating,  and  even  in  the  hypnotic  could  reduce  to  days
and  hours  only  with  errors.  Strange  to  say,  even  when  she  made


XLIX.]


Review.


487


an  error  in  the  former  calculation,  the  order  was  none  the  less
carried  out  at  the  expiration  of  the  correct  period.  From  this
Bramwell  draws  the  conclusion,  inevitable  as  it  would  seem,  that
below  the  stratum  of  consciousness  brought  to  the  surface  by
hypnotism,  there  is  a “ sub-subliminal  ” stratum  intellectually  more
capable  than  either  of  the  two  above  it.  But  he  only  admits  this
with  great  reserve.  He  includes  it  among  the  theories  which  can-
not be  considered  satisfactory  (p.  418),  and  still  maintains  a purely
negative  attitude  with  regard  to  any  general  explanation  of  hypnotic
phenomena.  Of  course  such  a suspension  of  judgment  is  from  the
strictly  scientific  point  of  view  unassailable ; but  it  has  the  dis-
advantage of  not  giving  any  assistance  in  the  further  investigation,
and  one  cannot  but  be  somewhat  disappointed  at  it.

After  a careful  study  of  the  book,  I feel  that  it  has  produced  more
definite  conclusions  in  my  owui  mind  than  in  its  author’s.  Perhaps
I may  be  permitted  to  sketch  these.  We  will  take  the  question  on
p.  416  to  which  Bramwell  says  that  “no  reasonable  answer  has  }'et
been  given.”  JFhat  is  the  connexion  between  hijimotic  methods  and  the
imoduction  of  hypnotic  phenomena  ? “ Personally,”  saj's  Bramwell,  “ I

can  see  no  logical  connexion  between  the  acts  of  fixed  gazing,  of
concentration  of  attention,  or  of  suggested  ideas  of  drowsy  states,
and  the  wide  and  varied  phenomena  of  hypnosis.”  But  all  the
hypnotic  methods  have  one  thing  in  common,  the  diversion  of  attention
from  the  insistenc}^  of  external  surroundings ; and  in  Bramwell’s  own
belief — and  I agree  with  him — the  hypnotic  state  has  one  broad
characteristic,  the  working  of  a subliminal  consciousness  in  directions
unusual  in  ordinary  life.  Surely  there  is  a logical  connexion  between
the  two ; it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  subliminal  self  may
require,  with  the  help  of  the  suggesting  operator,  to  shake  off  the
urgent  claims  of  conscious  life,  before  it  can  devote  itself  to  the
hidden  processes  of  the  unconscious.

Suggestion  seems  in  fact  to  be  throughout  of  the  nature  of  good
advice  which  the  unconscious  self  is  very  glad  to  take.  The  operator’s
first  advice,  in  whatever  form  it  is  given,  comes  to  this,  “Be
abstracted ; do  not  think  of  what  is  outside  you.”  Then  follow  the
positive  suggestions,  “Think  of  your  malady,  and  see  if  j'ou  cannot
make  things  work  right,”  or  whatever  they  may  be.  One  effect  of
abstraction,  even  when  it  is  not  the  result  of  external  suggestion,  is
to  produce  indifference  to  some  matters  which  in  ordinary  life  seem
important,  e.g.  the  fear  of  ridicule.  The  abstracted  philosopher  may
do  things  publicly  as  absurd  as  the  undergraduate  on  the  platform ;


488


Dr.  Walter  Leaf.


[part


and  public  exhibitions  do  not  as  a rule  rise  above  the  display  of
this  particular  quality  of  abstraction.  We  are  certainly  not  justified
by  anything  that  we  know  in  supposing  that  mere  abstraction  will
produce  indifference  to  deeply  seated  feelings,  such  for  instance  as
a woman’s  modest}^ ; and  in  fact  Bramwell  brings  very  strong  evidence
to  show  that  it  does  not.  All  that  suggestion  does  is  to  set  the
unconscious  but  veiy  rational  self  working  on  fresh  lines.  It  is
capable  of  judging  if  the  advice  which  the  operator  is  giving  is  good
or  otherwise,  and  of  selecting  the  good.  It  has  in  fact  a fresh
purview  of  life,  part  of  which  is  for  the  conscious  self  only  obscured
by  the  light  of  common  day,  and  for  that  very  reason  when  revealed
seems  supernormal.  Bramwell  is  no  doubt  right  in  objecting  to
Braid’s  later  term  “ Monoideism,”  on  the  ground  that  the  hypnotised
subject  has  a wide  range  of  ideas.  A better  and  not  much  uglier
name  would  be  Ileteroideism.  The  mind  is  concentrated  not  on  one
idea,  but  on  a whole  field  of  ideas  which  are  not  those  of  common
life.  Braid,  in  fact,  if  he  did  not,  as  in  so  many  things  he  did,  quite
hit  the  mark,  was  very  near  it.  All  seems  to  point  to  the  theory
that  the  mind  has  only  a limited  amount  of  attention  to  dispose  of,
but  has  much  freedom  as  to  the  direction  of  this  attention.  Hypnotism
means  the  direction  of  attention  upon  a region  chosen  by  the  mind
itself,  under  the  influence  of  external  suggestion.  How  the  suggestion
acts  is  of  course  a master-problem,  which  we  are  not  yet  in  a position
to  answer ; how  one  mind  can  influence  another  at  all  is  at  least
as  dark  as  the  sister  question  how  the  mind  can  influence  the  body.
When  we  can  answer  it  we  “shall  know  what  God  and  man  is.”
But  Bramwell’s  contribution  to  the  knowledge  of  Self  seems  to  me
invaluable,  mainly  because  it  puts  aside  all  the  mechanical  theories
which  have  hitherto  held  the  field  in  fa.shionable  science,  and  leaves
us  no  choice  but  to  turn  to  a view  which  strengthens  the  moral
significance  of  the  hidden  workings  of  the  mind,  and  deepens  our
sense  at  once  of  individual  responsibility  and  mutual  influence.

The  diversion  of  the  attention  of  the  self  to  the  operations  of  the
subliminal  region,  though  it  does  not  explain  the  power  of  time-
appreciation,  does  something  to  render  it  less  marvellous.  I have
myself  often  noticed,  during  a long  and  monotonous  tramp,  how  my
own  sense  of  time  was  heightened,  so  that  befoi’e  taking  out  my
watch  I have  been  able  to  tell  almost  to  a minute  where  the  hands
would  be.  As  to  the  mechanism  bj'  which  this  was  done,  I have
not  the  least  idea ; but  it  is  obvious  that  the  rhythmical  pacing  gives
an  approximate  standard  of  measurement  which  was  entirely  absent


XLIX.]


Review.


489


in  the  case  of  Dr.  Bramwell’s  snlrject.  The  accuracy  of  her  calculations
therefore  still  remains  astounding,  though  only  greater  in  degree
than  our  normal  powers.  It  is  noticeable  that  her  ability  seems  to
have  been  capable  of  improvement  b}^  training,  again  offering  an
analogy  to  the  operations  of  conscious  life.  It  is  possible  to  train
oneself,  as  most  photographers  know,  to  a very  fair  appreciation  of
short  periods  of  time,  say  from  5 to  10  seconds.  If  I may  again
refer  to  my  own  experience,  I find  that  I can  do  this  by  repeating
monotonously  the  words  “ rickety  dickety  dick,”  which  take  exactly
one  second  for  clear  enunciation.  The  muscles,  if  rhythmically  moved,
soon  accjuire  the  right  pace,  and  will  keep  it  up  with  reasonable
uniformity  for  a short  time,  if  the  attention  is  directed  to  them.
Another  possible  standard  is  that  of  the  heart-beats ; but  it  must
be  confessed  that  there  is  a difficulty  in  imagining  any  subject  so
steady  of  nerve  and  so  uniform  in  health  that  these  would  serve
for  a time-piece  over  periods  of  several  days.  In  short,  Bramwell’s
time  experiments  seem  likely  to  afford  a puzzle  which  it  will  take
much  more  knowledge  and  experiment  to  solve,  even  roughl}^.  Here
again  he  has  made  a solid  and  most  suggestive  contribution  to
science.

Finally,  one  word  may  be  added  to  what  Bramwell  has  said  about
the  supposed  dangers  of  hypnotism.  AVhile  fully  and  gladly  accepting
what  he  says  about  the  impossibility  of  imposing  criminal  or  dis-
honourable actions  upon  an  unwilling  subject,  I am  inclined  to  think
that  there  is  a more  subtle  risk  which  must  not  be  cjuite  left  out
of  sight.  This  arises  from  the  w’ay  in  which  hypnotism  has  been
made  the  object  of  popular  discussion.  Few  patients,  probably,  come
before  a medical  hypnotist  without  strong  preconceived  and  wholly
erroneous  ideas  as  to  the  nature  of  the  process.  A large  number  of
them  will  include  among  these  the  belief  that  there  is  something
uncanny  in  the  method,  and  in  particular  that  the  operator  gains
something  in  the  nature  of  a mystical  influence.  If  the  prejudice
against  the  treatment  is  overcome,  this  belief  is  still  ver}'  apt  to
remain,  and  it  is  so  closely  analogous  to  the  deeper  instincts  to  which
we  have  already  referred,  that  it  is,  as  I have  had  occasion  to  observe,
extremely  difficult  to  uproot,  even  with  all  the  precautions  taken  by
Bramwell  himself.  And  the  belief,  however  unfounded,  that  such  an
influence  exists,  is  in  itself  the  possible  source,  not  perhaps  of  real
danger,  but  of  a state  of  mind  which  is  at  least  very  undesirable  in
a nervous  patient.  This  is  a serious  obstacle  in  the  way  of  all
hypnotic  practice,  and  one  hardly  sees  how  it  is  to  be  entirely


490


Dr.  Walter  Leaf.


[part


removed  save  by  the  slow  and  patient  education  of  public  opinion,
both  professional  and  lay.  The  average  medical  man,  no  less  than
the  average  patient,  needs  to  have  the  whole  subject  stripped  of  the
supernatural  and  abnormal,  and  put  before  him  in  the  driest  light
of  dispassionate  science  ; and  perhaps,  for  the  benefit  of  sufferers  at
least,  Bramwell’s  chief  service  is  that  he  should  so  resolutely  have
struck  out  of  his  book  anything  that  has  the  least  savour  of  the
uncanny  or  abnormal  or  sensational,  and  given  us  a treatise  which
ofiers  little  for  the  paragraphist  of  the  halfpenny  press,  but  infinite
interest,  not  only  to  the  scientific  thinker,  but  to  every  one  who
desires  to  know  more  of  the  workings  of  that  extraordinary  complex
which  we  call  Self.  Walter  Leaf.


Les  Phhiomhies  Psychiqnes : Eecherches,  Observations,  Methodes,  Par  le
Dr.  J.  Maxwi<:ll.  Preface  du  Professeur  Ch.  Picket.  (Felix  Alcan,
Bibliotheque  de  Philosophic  contemporaine  Paris,  1904.  1 vok,

8vo.  5 fr.)

The  chief  obstacle  to  the  establishment  of  any  kind  of  recognised
scientific  basis  for  the  class  of  phenomena  known  as  psychic  is  of
course  to  be  found  in  the  universal  disinclination  which  exists  to
accept,  as  of  any  cogency  towards  the  formation  of  one’s  own  opinion
regai’ding  these  phenomena,  the  experience  of  another  observer,  how-
ever well  accredited  and  competent.  While  we  are  probably  all
personally  conscious  of  this  tendency,  it  is  not  very  easy  to  account
for  it.  In  other  branches  of  science  it  is  but  necessary  to  announce
some  new  discovery  for  it  to  be  accepted,  without  undue  surprise,
by  the  uncritical  public,  however  greatly  it  may  transcend  their
own  personal  experience ; and  a failure  to  regard  even  the  wildest
hypothesis  concerning  it  as  a possible  contribution  to  truth  is  held
a mark  of  a very  lamentable  lack  of  intellectual  elasticity.  But  in
psychic  phenomena  the  observations  of  the  very  same  individual
whose  opinions  in  any  other  sphere  would  be  received  with  universal
respect,  are  dismissed  as  unworthy  of  serious  attention,  and  the  only
emotion  aroused  is  one  of  general  regret  that  another  good  man
should  have  gone  wrong.  Against  this  attitude  Professor  Richet,  in
his  preface  to  the  remarkable  book  before  me,  makes  strong  appeal.
“My  advice  to  the  reader,”  he  says,  “may  be  summed  up  in  a few
words.  This  is  a book  to  be  approached  without  prejudices,  fearing
neither  that  which  is  new  nor  that  which  is  unforeseen.  In  other
words,  while  preserving  the  most  scrupulous  respect  for  the  science


XLIX.]


R('vieiu.


491


of  to-day,  one  should  be  thoroughly  convinced  that  such  science,
whatever  measure  of  truth  it  may  contain,  is  nevertheless  terribly
incomplete.  Those  imprudent  spirits  who  occupy  themselves  with
the  ‘ occult  ’ sciences  are  accused  of  overthrowing  Science,  and  of
destroying  the  laborious  edifice  raised  by  thousands  of  toilers,  at  the
cost  of  immense  labour,  during  the  last  three  or  four  centuries.  This
reproach  seems  to  me  cjuite  unjust.  No  one  is  able  to  destroy  a
scientific  fad.  ...  If,  as  appears  more  and  more  likely,  those  facts
which  are  called  occult  come  to  be  established,  one  need  in  no  way
disturb  oneself  as  to  the  fate  of  classical  science.  Unknown  or  new
facts,  however  strange,  are  not  going  to  destroy  the  truth  of  old
ones.  To  take  an  example  from  M.  Maxwell’s  work,  suppose  we  admit
that  the  phenomenon  of  ‘ raps  ’ — that  is  to  say,  audible  vibrations  in
wood  or  other  substances — is  a real  phenomenon,  and  that  in  certain
cases  there  may  be  blows  which  no  mechanical  force  known  to  us
can  explain,  would  the  science  of  physics  be  overthrown  ? It
would  indeed  be  a new  force  exercised  on  matter,  but  the  old  forces
would  none  the  less  preserve  their  activity,  and  it  is  even  likely  that
the  transmission  of  vibrations  by  means  of  this  new  force  would
follow  the  same  laws  as  other  vibrations,  and  that  temperature,  pres-
sure, and  the  density  of  the  air  or  of  the  wood  might  continue  to
exercise  their  usual  influence.  Is  there  a single  man  of  science  worthy
of  the  name  who  can  affirm  that  there  are  no  forces,  hitherto  un-
known, at  work  in  the  world  ? Just  in  the  same  way  that  science
is  unconquerable  when  it  establishes  facts,  so  is  it  miserably  subject

to  error  when  it  seeks  to  establish  negations.  . . . Thus  it  becomes

a true  scientist  to  be  at  once  very  modest  and  very  bold ; veiy

modest,  for  our  science  is  but  a little  thing ; very  bold,  for  the  vast

regions  of  the  worlds  tinknown  lie  open  before  him.  Audacity  and
prudence  ■,  these  are  indeed  the  two  qualities,  in  no  wise  contra-
dictory, of  M.  Maxwell’s  book.  AVhatever  be  the  fate  in  store  for
the  ideas  which  he  bases  upon  his  facts,  one  may  rest  assured  that
the  facts,  which  have  been  well  observed  by  him,  will  remain.  I
conceive  that  in  these  are  to  be  found,  however  inchoate  as  yet  the
sketch  may  be,  the  lineaments  of  a new  science.”

Professor  Richet  is  indeed  an  optimist  if  he  means  by  these  words
to  express  his  belief  that  facts  of  this  character,  however  temperately
stated,  however  carefully  observed,  will  be  accepted  by  the  scientific
world,  or  by  any  considerable  section  of  the  public,  in  the  spirit
of  open-mindedness  which  he  claims  as  their  due.  M.  Maxwell
himself  is  under  no  delusions  on  the  subject.  He  says  (p.  293),


492


Hon.  Everard  Feilding.


[part


“My  judgment  will  convince  no  one;  in  such  matters  as  this  one
must  see  for  oneself  before  one  will  be  convinced.”  And  yet  if  there
was  a book  which,  by  reason  of  the  competency  and  general  claim
to  credibility  of  its  author,  his  scientific  status  and  his  intellectual
capacity,  should  merit  the  attention  of  even  the  most  prejudiced
critic,  it  is,  I venture  to  think,  the  work  under  consideration.
M.  Maxwell  began  his  investigations  wholly  unbiassed  in  favour
of  the  phenomena  which  form  the  subject  of  them.  “I  had
always,”  he  says  (p.  14)  “considered  them  as  unworthy  of  any
examination,”  and  it  was  apparently  merely  his  wish  to  study  the
reasons  for  the  prevalence  of  the  mystical  movement  in  modern
times  which  at  first  directed  his  attention  to  the  matter.  Oppor-
tunities for  experiment  soon  offered  themselves  and,  astonished  at
the  issue  of  certain  of  these  experiments,  he  engaged  in  a series
extending  over  the  last  nine  or  ten  years,  the  results  of  which  he
now  lays  before  the  public.  M.  Maxwell  early  determined  upon
the  subjects  most  suitable  for  experimental  observation,  and  the
conditions  under  which  alone  he  would  consider  evidence  as  merit-
ing serious  attention.  The  phenomena  open  to  research  may  be
divided  into  two  classes,  material  and  intellectual.  Under  ‘material
and  physical  phenomena’  are  comprised  (1)  raps;  (2)  movements
of  objects  (a)  without  contact  or  (b)  only  with  such  contact  as  is  insuf-
ficient to  effect  the  particular  movement  in  cjuestion ; (3)  airports,
i.e.  the  production  of  objects  by  some  supernormal  agency ; (4)
visual  phenomena,  i.e.  the  appearance  of  lights  and  of  forms,  lumi-
nous or  otherwise,  including  among  the  latter  the  class  of  alleged
phenomena  known  as  materialisations;  and  (5)  phenomena  leaving
some  permanent  trace,  such  as  imprints  or  ‘direct’  writings  or
drawings,  etc.  Under  the  class  of  ‘intellectual  phenomena’  may  be
included  such  occurrences  as  automatic  writing,  table  tilting,  i.e
messages  produced  by  the  tilting  of  a table  with  contact,  telepathy,
clairvoyance  of  past,  distant,  or  future  events,  etc.  This  enumera-
tion, I should  perhaps  say,  does  not  strictly  coincide  with  M.
Maxwell’s,  whose  classification  appears  to  me,  I confess,  somewhat
arbitrary.  Although  the  first  class  of  phenomena  are  of  rarer

alleged  occurrence  than  the  second,  M.  Maxwell  decided  that  they
were  susceptible  of  more  exact  investigation,  and  to  them  accordingly
he  has  mainly  directed  his  researches.  As  to  conditions,  he  has
acted  rigorously  on  the  principle  that  no  conditions  can  be  regarded
as  satisfactory  where  there  is  not  sufficient  light  adequately  to
control  the  experiments,  and  that  no  phenomena  occurring  in


XLIX.]


Revievj.


493


the  absence  of  this  primary  requisite,  no  matter  how  perfect  the
control  may  in  other  respects  seem  to  be,  ought  to  count  towards
the  formation  of  his  judgment  or  be  quoted  in  support  of  his  con-
clusions. Acting  upon  this  rule,  he  has  almost  invariably  insisted  on
conducting  the  experiments  in  the  light,  sometimes  broad  daylight,
sometimes  daylight  tempered  by  Venetian  blinds  or  otherwise,
and  sometimes  lamp-light.  It  is  true  that  in  the  case  of  luminous
phenomena  an  exception  had  to  be  made,  such  phenomena  being  onlj^
visible  in  the  dark.  Under  these  conditions,  then,  he  has  arrived  at
certain  definite  conclusions,  conclusions  which  he  announces  as  being  in
his  own  opinion  absolutely  beyond  controversy.  He  states  (p.  23)  that
he  has  attested,  in  a manner  which  appears  to  him  certain,  the
phenomena  of  ‘ raps,’  of  the  movement  of  objects  both  without  any
form  of  contact  whatever  and  with  contact  of  a kind  insufficient  to
effect  the  particular  movement,  and  also  certain  luminous  phenomena.
In  discussing  the  value  of  his  conclusions,  M.  Maxwell  says  (p.  26),
“I  have  to  defend  myself  against  only  two  enemies,  the  fraud  of
others  and  my  own  illusions.  I am  convinced  that  I have  not  been
the  victim  either  of  the  one  or  the  other.  When,  for  example,  I
have  observed  in  broad  daylight  the  moving  of  a piece  of  furniture
in  a cafe,  a restaurant,  or  railway  refreshment  room,  I have  certainly
the  right  to  believe  that  I am  not  in  the  presence  of  an  apparatus
got  up  for  the  purpose  of  producing  such  effects.  When  the  un-
foreseen character  of  the  experiment  excludes  the  hypothesis  of
preparation,  and  when  the  absence  of  any  contact  between  the
experimenters  and  the  object  moved  is  manifest  both  to  sight
and  touch,  I have  sufficient  reason  for  excluding  the  hypothesis  of
fraud.  When  I measure  the  distance  between  the  objects,  both
before  and  after  the  displacement,  I have  also  sufficient  reason  for
excluding  in  its  turn  the  hypothesis  of  the  illusion  of  my  senses.
If  I am  refused  this  right,  I ask  how  indeed  is  it  then  possible  to
observe  any  fact  whatever  1 No  one  is  more  convinced  than  myself
of  the  frailty  of  our  impressions  and  the  relativity  of  our  perceptions ;
nevertheless,  there  must  be  some  way  of  perceiving  a phenomenon
in  order  to  present  it  to  impartial  observation.  The  objection
which  I have  supposed  cannot  indeed  be  made  in  any  universal
manner,  for  to  admit  its  validity  would  be  to  remove  any  foundation
for  our  sciences.  It  can  only  be  made  to  me  in  my  particular
capacity,  and  I admit  very  willingly  that  it  is  impossible  for  me  to
exculpate  myself.  I might  vainly  plead  that  I am  persuaded  of
the  regularity  of  my  perceptions,  vainly  assert  that  I discover  in


494


Hon.  Everard  Feilding.


[part


myself  no  tendency  to  illusions,  and  my  testimony  will  remain  none
the  less  suspected.  I have  only  one  defence  to  make  against  those
who  mistrust  my  qualifications  as  an  observer,  and  that  is  to  invite
them  to  take  the  trouble  of  experimenting  on  their  own  account,
and  to  employ  the  same  method  as  myself.  ...  If  I am  unable
solemnly  to  affirm  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  observed  by  me,
I can  at  all  events  affirm  my  personal  conviction  of  their  existence.
Perhaps  in  thus  affirming  only  my  subjective  conviction  and  in  not
venturing  to  assert  with  a like  energy  the  objective  reality  of  the
things  which  I have  attested,  I am  showing  an  exaggerated  distrust
of  myself.  I hope  at  all  events  that  no  one  will  blame  me  for  my
prudent  reserve.  Who  is  there  among  men  who  can  assert  that
he  has  not  been  deceived  ? But  in  any  case  I cannot  admit  the
right  of  any  one  to  criticise  my  observations  Avithout  his  having  put
himself  in  the  conditions  which  have  enabled  me  to  make  them.
Nothing  could  be  more  unreasonable  than  an  attitude  of  this  kind,
and  I cannot  recognise  the  competency  of  judges  who  will  decide
without  preliminary  information.  For  the  rest,  I am  not  concerned
with  converting  any  one  to  my  views,  and  I remain  indifferent —
respectfully  indifferent  if  you  will — to  the  judgment  which  may  be
formed  about  me.”  I have  quoted  M.  Maxwell  thus  at  some  length
in  support  of  Professor  Richet's  claim  that  audacity  joined  with
prudence  are  the  marks  of  his  work.

I will  now  proceed  to  consider  some  of  the  actual  occurrences
which  have  led  M.  Maxwell  to  his  conclusions.  Let  me  say  here
that  unquestionably  in  his  manner  of  reporting  them  M.  Maxwell
lays  himself  open  to  the  criticism  that  in  but  few  cases  does  he
give  such  details  of  the  conditions  as  Avould  be  sufficient  to  enable
a reader  to  form  his  own  judgment  as  to  their  adequacy.  It  is
true  that  in  abstaining  from  furnishing  a complete  account  of  the
details  in  the  form  of  a proces-verhal  M.  Maxwell  says  he  acts  advisedly,
on  the  ground  that  it  is  absolutely  impossible  in  fact  to  give  such  an
exhaustive  statement  of  the  conditions  as  would  suffice  to  bring  con-
viction to  any  non-observer,  and  he  points  out  that,  notwithstanding
the  laboriously  detailed  reports  of  the  Piper  phenomena,  they  yet
have  not  resulted  in  convincing  every  reader,  though  in  the  opinion
of  tlie  author.  Dr.  Hodgson,  they  ought  to  furnish  irrefragable  proof
of  spiritistic  origin.  However  full  the  report,  the  imagination  of  a
subsequent  critic  will  see  in  the  omission  to  state  some  particular
precaution  endless  sources  of  error,  which  actual  observers  will  never-
theless know  not  to  have  been  present.  As  a reviewer,  I am  indeed


XLIX.]


Revieiv.


495


grateful  to  M.  Maxwell  for  his  abstention  from  any  such  portentous
undertaking,  for  his  book  might,  as  literature,  have  become  absolutely
unreadable ; as  a critic,  I cannot  but  express  a regret  that  he  has
not,  in  at  least  one  or  two  cases,  given  us  specimens  of  the  exact
order  and  circumstances  of  his  experiments.  As  he  has  not  done
this,  I am  spared  the  task  of  attempting  to  criticise  the  experiments
themselves,  in  the  manner  in  which  Dr.  Hodgson  so  laboriously
criticised  Dr.  Oliver  Lodge’s  report  of  the  Eusapia  sittings  at  the
He  Roubaud.  The  value  of  the  experiments  must  depend  wholly
on  the  estimate  which  each  reader  will  form  of  the  capacity  of  the
observer.  It  is,  however,  fair  to  ask  objectors  who  will  refuse  even
to  consider  (I  do  not  say  be  convinced  by)  evidence  such  as  this,
what  would  be  their  attitude  if  confronted  by  a j^’^'oces-verhal  of  such
elaborate  completeness  as  to  be  found  proof  against  even  the  most
ingenious  criticism,  a proch-verbul  which,  if  true,  must  inevitably
establish  the  existence  of  some  hitherto  unrecognised  force  of  a
supernatural  character.  I think  that,  if  candid,  99  out  of  100  such
critics  would  admit  that  they  would  say  that  the  proces-verhal  was
probably  not  true,  while  the  remaining  one  would  put  it  from  his
mind  and  forget  about  it  as  soon  as  possible.  M.  Maxwell,  there-
fore, will  probably  not  lose  many  converts  by  his  failure  to  provide
a target  for  the  shafts  of  his  opponents.  Let  me  pass,  then,  to  a
few  of  the  experiments  themselves,  and  seek  to  give  some  account
of  them  in,  as  far  as  possible,  the  author’s  own  words.

(1)  Raps  (p.  67  and  seq^.).  “As  a rule,  raps  appear  to  resound

on  the  top  of  a table,  but  this  is  not  always  the  case.  They  are
often  heard  on  the  ground,  on  the  sitters,  or  on  the  furniture,  walls,
or  ceiling.  I have  only  heard  authentic  raps  on  the  table,  the
ground,  the  walls,  and  on  furniture  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
medium  ; and  I have  often  heard  them  outside  regular  seances.  . . .

I have  heard  them  so  frequently  in  the  brightest  light  that  I doubt
whether  darkness  is  so  favourable  to  their  production  as  it  is  to
certain  other  phenomena.  . . . Contact  of  the  hands  is  not  necessary
for  their  production.  If  one  has  succeeded  in  obtaining  them  with
contact,  one  of  the  surest  ways  of  doing  so  without  contact  is  to  let

the  hands  rest  for  a certain  time  on  the  table,  and  then  to  raise

them  very  slowly,  palms  downw’ards,  and  the  fingers  loosely  extended.
It  is  rare  that  under  these  conditions  the  raps  do  not  continue  to
be  heard  for  at  least  a certain  time.  . . . With  certain  mediums
the  energy  liberated  is  great  enough  to  act  at  a distance ; and  I
have  heard  raps  sound  on  a table  about  two  yards  away  from  the


496


Hon.  Everard  Feilding.


[part


medium.  With  a certain  [non-professional]  medium  I have  obtained
raps  in  restaurants  and  in  railway  refreshment  rooms,  and  it  suffices
to  have  experienced  the  raps  produced  by  this  medium  under  the
conditions  indicated  to  be  convinced  of  their  reality.  The  unusual
noise  of  the  raps  attracted  the  attention  of  persons  present,  and
greatly  embarrassed  us.  The  results  surpassed  our  expectations,
and  the  more  we  were  confused  by  the  noise  of  our  raps,  the  more
were  the  latter  multiplied,  as  though  they  were  being  produced
by  some  teasing  creature  which  was  amusing  itself  at  our  ex-
pense. . . . More  rarely  I have  heard  raps  produced  on  stuffs,
either  on  the  persons  of  the  medium  or  of  sitters,  or  else  on
furniture.  I have  heard  them  on  pieces  of  paper  placed  on
the  seance  table,  or  on  books,  the  walls,  tambourines,  and  small
wooden  objects.  . . . The  variety  in  the  character  of  the  raps

is  not  less  than  that  of  the  objects  on  which  they  sound,  . . . and
their  tonality  varies  according  to  the  object.  It  is  easy  to  distinguish
between  raps  sounding  on  wood,  paper,  and  stuff.  . . . The  sound  of
an  ordinary  rap,  on  a table,  is  rather  like  that  of  an  electric  spark,

. . . but  the  type  varies  greatl}^,  . . . and  the  sound,  instead  of
being  crisp  and  short,  may  be  dull,  and  resemble  the  impact  of  some
soft  body,  or  the  noise  made  by  a mouse,  a saw,  or  the  finger-nails
tapping  on  wood  or  scratching  a piece  of  stuff”  M.  Maxwell  explains
that  the  raps  generally  represent  themselves  by  some  alphabetical
code  as  proceeding  from  some  particular  intelligence  or  personification,
and  each  personification  manifests  itself  by  a special  type  of  rap.
“ Sometimes  different  raps  will  reply  to  one  another,  and  one  of  the
most  interesting  experiences  that  one  can  have  is  to  hear  these  raps,
clear,  dull,  diy,  or  soft,  sounding  simultaneously  on  the  table  and
the  floor,  and  on  the  wood  or  stuff  or  furniture  respectively.”

M.  Maxwell,  as  the  result  of  a close  study  of  this  curious  pheno-
menon, hazards  certain  conclusions,  of  which  he  says  the  most  certain
is  the  close  connection  of  the  raps  with  muscular  movements  on  the
part  of  the  sitters.  Every  muscular  movement,  even  a slight  one,
appears  to  be  followed  by  a rap.  Thus  if,  without  any  one  neces-
sarily touching  the  table,  one  of  the  sitters  frees  his  hand  from  the
chain  made  round  the  table  by  the  others,  moves  it  about  in  a
circle  over  the  surface  of  the  table,  then  raises  it  in  the  centre  and
brings  it  down  towards  the  table,  stopping  suddenly  within  a few
inches  of  it,  a rap  will  be  produced  on  the  table  corresponding  with
the  sudden  stoppage  of  the  hand.  Similarly,  a rap  will  be  produced
by  a pressure  of  the  foot  on  the  floor,  by  speaking,  by  blowing


XLIX.]


Revieiv.


497


slightly,  or  by  touching  the  medium  or  one  of  the  sitters.  Raps
produced  in  this  way  by  the  sitters  are  often  stronger  than  those
produced  by  the  medium  himself.  M.  Maxwell  suggests  as  a working
hypothesis  that  there  is  a certain  accumulated  force,  and  that  if  its
equilibrium  be  suddenly  disturbed  by  the  addition  of  the  excess  of
energy  required  for  the  movement,  a discharge  takes  place  producing
the  effect.  I confess  it  produces  a somewhat  bizarre  impression  on
the  mind  to  read  M.  Maxwell’s  precise  instructions  concerning  phe-
nomena the  very  existence  of  which  is  to  most  of  us  so  obscure  or
which,  if  described  by  any  one  less  apparently  well  equipped  than
the  author  for  making  accurate  observations,  one  would  dismiss  with
the  ruck  of  occult  twaddle  with  which  our  experience  is  so  abun-
dantly blighted.  Yet  M.  Maxwell  writes  with  a full  knowledge  of
the  fraud  to  be  encountered,  and  describes  in  detail  the  various
methods  by  which  the  alleged  phenomena  may  be  imitated,  many  of
which  have  come  under  his  own  observation.  And  when  he  writes
that  the  facts  for  which  he  claims  attention  took  place  under  conditions
when  such  methods  were  inapplicable,  that  it  is  im]5ossible  to  imitate
exactly  raps  produced  without  contact  on  the  table,  that  the  raps  are
easily  localised  and  their  vibrations  perceptible  by  auscultation  of  the
table  itself,  it  is  not  too  much  to  ask  that  judgment  may  at  least
be  held  suspended  as  to  the  validity  of  his  conclusions.

(2)  Movements  of  objects  without  contact,  or  with  such  contact
only  as  would  be  normally  insufficient  to  produce  the  results
obtained.  These  again  are  to  be  numbered  among  the  phenomena
as  to  the  occurrence  of  which  M.  Maxwell  claims  to  have  reached
absolute  conviction.  And  it  is  in  his  account  of  these,  given  for
the  most  part  in  merely  general  terms,  that  a reader,  anxious  for
material  to  enable  him  to  form  a standard  of  criticism  with  which
to  test  the  value  of  the  author’s  observations,  will  find  chief  cause
for  disappointment.  Here  is  a sample  (p.  86)  of  the  more  than
airy  way  in  which  M.  Maxwell  relates  the  occurrence  of  these
portentous  events.  The  case  in  question  is  one  of  a series  of

experiments  made  with  Eusapia  Paladino.  “ It  was  about  five

o’clock  in  the  evening,  and  there  was  broad  daylight  in  the
drawing-room  at  I’Aguelas.  We  were  standing  around  the  table.
Eusapia  took  the  hand  of  one  of  our  number  and  rested  it  on
the  right  hand  corner  of  the  table.  The  table  was  raised  to  the
level  of  our  foreheads,  that  is,  the  top  reached  a height  of  at  least
4|  feet  from  the  floor.  ...  It  was  impossible  for  Eusapia  to

have  lifted  the  table  by  normal  means.  One  has  but  to  consider


498


Hon.  Everarcl  Feilding.


[part


that  she  touched  only  the  corner  of  the  table  to  realise  what  the
weight  must  have  been  had  she  accomplished  the  feat  by  muscular
effort.  Further,  she  never  had  sufficient  hold  of  it.  It  was  clearly
impossible  for  her,  under  the  conditions  of  the  experiment,  to  have
used  any  of  the  means  suggested  by  her  critics,  straps,  or  hooks
of  some  kind.”  I confess,  I think  M.  Maxwell  might  advan-
tageously have  given  such  critics  a little  more  opportunity  of
appreciating  exactly  what  these  conditions  amounted  to.  The  effect,
therefore,  of  this  portion  of  his  book  is  mainly  cumulative,  and
independent  of  the  importance  to  be  attached  to  any  one  of  the
reported  occurrences.  The  author  speaks  of  many  instances  of
movements  of  objects  without  anj^  contact  whatever  occurring  in
broad  daylight,  of  curtains  shaken,  tables  lifted,  moving  to  and  fro
along  the  floor  at  command,  chairs  sliding,  etc.  Perhaps  one  of
the  most  interesting  cases  is  the  following  (p.  93).  M.  Maxwell
wished  to  repeat  a particular  experiment,  the  successful  perform-
ance of  which  elsewhere  had  been  notified  to  him  (see  Avnales  des
Sciences  Fsychiques,  1896,  p.  50).  This  consisted  of  the  depression,
without  contact,  of  the  scale  of  a letter  balance.  M.  Maxwell
purchased  a letter  balance  and  took  it  from  its  box  just  prior  to
the  experiment.  There  was  sufficient  light  to  enable  him  to  read
the  indistinctly  marked  divisions  of  the  scale.  “ Before  our  eyes,
Eusapia  repeatedly  made  it  go  down  by  raising  and  lowering  her
hands,  palms  downwards.  Her  hands  were  from  10  to  15  cen-

timetres [nearly  4 to  G inches]  from  the  plate  of  the  letter
balance,  and  the  movements  were  made  without  her  relinquishing
the  hands  of  her  neighbours  to  right  and  left.  It  must  be
noticed  that  we  several  times  obtained  the  depression  of  the  plate
of  the  machine  while  we  varied  the  position  of  the  medium’s  hands,
placing  them  in  front  of  the  machine  so  as  to  form  a triangle,  of

which  the  plate  was  the  apex,  and  bringing  the  hands  together  so

that  the  angle  at  the  apex  became  very  acute.  The  object  of
this  procedure  was  to  obviate  the  possibility  of  the  medium  pro-
ducing the  effect  by  means,  for  example,  of  a hair  between  her
hands.  And  in  order  to  make  my  account  complete,  I must  add
that  a hair  would  have  been  visible.  By  reversing  her  hands,

so  that  the  palms  were  upwards,  the  medium  also  raised  the
plate,  on  which  a pocket-book  had  been  placed.  We  ascertained
by  measuring  the  oscillation  of  the  index  needle,  that  the  force
developed  sent  it  sometimes  to  the  limit  of  its  run,  and  that  it
was  therefore  greater  than  90  grammes  [3-^-  ounces].”


XLIX.]


Revieto.


499


It  was  through  the  mediumship  of  Eusapia  Paladino  that  M.
Maxwell  obtained  the  niajorit}'  of  the  phenomena  of  the  kind
under  consideration.  He  was  a member  of  a committee  which  met
in  1896  to  investigate  this  medium,  immediately  after  the  series
held  in  Cambridge  under  the  auspices  of  this  Society,  the  issue  of
which,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  absolutely  unfavourable  to  her
claims.  The  general  results  of  the  Cambridge  seances  w'ere  com-
municated to  the  French  Committee,  who  were  therefore  made
aware  of  the  fraudulent  devices  which  the  Cambridge  investigators
claimed  to  have  ascertained.  Their  report  wu’ll  be  found  in  the
Annales  des  Sciences  Psijchk[ues  for  1896,  and  I recommend  all  who
believe  that  Dr.  Hodgson  and  his  Cambridge  colleagues  have  had
the  last  word  in  the  controversy  concerning  the  genuineness  of
Eusapia’s  mediumship  to  read  it.  The  French  investigators  arrive
at  conclusions  in  direct  conflict  with  those  of  the  English  sitters.
They  state  that  they  had  long  been  aware  of  the  tricks  ‘ dis-
covered ’ at  Cambridge,  and  took  adequate  means  to  guard  against

them,  and  M.  Maxw'ell  devotes  a considerable  portion  of  his  book
to  an  indictment  of  the  Cambridge  method  of  controlling  the
medium,  which  consisted,  for  part  of  the  time  at  least,  in  affording
the  medium  opportunities  to  cheat  with  a view  to  ascertaining
whether  she  would  avail  herself  of  them,^  a complaisance  of
which  she  took  the  fullest  advantage.  Against  this  method  M.

Maxwell  protests  with  much  vigour.  A medium,  especially  an  un-

educated medium,  does  not  distinguish,  with  the  scientific  precision
of  her  investigators,  between  normal  and  abnormal  methods  of
producing  some  given  phenomenon.  The  exercise  of  abnormal
power  is  always,  ex  lujpothesi,  harder  or  less  certain  than  that  of
normal  power.  Hence,  supposing  the  problem  set  is  to  move  a
table,  and  it  is  open  to  her  to  move  it  either  by  abnormal  agency
or  by  means  of  her  toe,  she  will  inevitably  choose  the  toe.  The
use  of  the  latter  does  not  of  itself  demonstrate  the  non-existence
of  the  former.  The  true  method  of  investigation  is  first  to  ascer-
tain all  possible  normal  agencies,  and  then  to  take  steps  to  eliminate
them,  pointing  out  frankly  to  the  medium  the  while  that  they  are
valueless.  For  my  own  part,  I am  not  disposed  to  challenge  the
soundness  of  M.  Maxwell’s  contention,  and  trust  that  a further
opportunity  may  present  itself  to  English  investigators  to  check  his
conclusions  with  regard  to  this  medium  on  the  lines  he  has  indicated.

There  is  much  else  of  interest  in  the  book  upon  which  I should

^ See  Editorial  Note  on  p.  .301.


500


Hon.  Everard  Feiklivfj.


[part


have  liked  to  touch,  but  I have  already  trespassed  far  beyond  the
space  allotted  to  me.  One  word,  in  conclusion,  on  M.  Maxwell’s
own  attitude  towards  the  phenomena  of  which  he  writes.  It  is
certain  that  while  spiritists  may  congratulate  themselves  on  his
testimony  in  support  of  the  facts  on  the  reality  of  which  they
base  their  creed,  they  will  find  but  little  direct  encouragement  from
him  for  the  theory  of  spiritistic  agency  by  which  they  account  for
these  facts.  “I  believe,”  he  says  (p.  1.3)  “in  the  reality  of  certain
phenomena,  of  which  I have  repeatedly  been  a witness.  I do  not
consider  it  necessary  to  attribute  them  to  a supernatural  inter-
vention of  any  kind,  but  am  disjjosed  to  think  that  they  are
pi’oduced  by  some  force  existing  within  ourselves.”

In  the  same  way  as  certain  psychical  phenomena,  such  as  auto-
matic writing,  trance  “ controls,”  crystal  vision,  and  so  forth,  in
which  an  intelligence  seems  to  be  present  independent  of  the
intelligence  of  the  medium,  can  be  shown  beyond  dispute  to  be
merely  manifestations  of  his  subliminal  intelligence,  frequently  taking
the  form  of  a dramatic  personification  ; so  may  the  agency,  revealing
itself  in  raps,  movements  of  objects,  and  other  phenomena  of  a
physical  character,  perhaps  be  traceable,  not  to  any  power  external
to  the  medium  and  the  sitters,  but  merely  to  a force  latent  within
themselves,  and  may  be  but  an  exteriorisation  in  a dynamic  form,
in  a way  not  yet  ascertained,  of  their  collective  subliminal  capacities.
Fanciful  as  this  theory  may  seem  to  those  who  feel  that
unconsciousness  of  such  capacity  is  sufficient  warrant  of  its  non-
existence, M.  Maxwell  (p.  100  et  seq.)  cites  several  observations
in  its  support.  The  apparent  suggestibility  of  the  personification
and  the  frequency  with  which  the  activity  of  the  dynamic  agency
may  be  determined  by  movements  on  the  part  of  the  assistants,
whether  by  an  appropriate  action  of  the  hand,  a contraction  of  some
muscle,  a sudden  exhalation,  or  perhaps  a mere  word, — these  seem
to  point  to  a closer  connection  between  the  operative  force  and  the
personality  of  the  sitters  than  would  be  expected  were  the  agency
due  to  a source  external  to  themselves.  These  observations  are  o
the  highest  interest,  and  though  they  have  some  of  them  been
made  before,  at  least  in  the  case  of  Eusapia  Paladino — as  where,
for  example,  it  has  been  noticed  that  a movement,  without  apparent
contact,  of  a table  has  been  accompanied  by  synchronous  con-
tortions of  the  medium — it  has  been  merely  with  the  view  of
establishing  fraud  or  the  emjdoyment  of  .some  invisible  contrivance
whereby  the  movement  was  effected.  M.  Maxwell  is  continuing


XLIX.]


Revieiv.


501


his  investigations : let  us  hope  that  in  his  account  of  them  he
will  furnish  us  with  the  means  of  determining  which  of  the  com*
peting  explanations  is  the  true  one.  Meanwhile,  his  present
contribution  is  of  much  importance,  and  merits  the  closest  atten-
tion of  all  who  are  interested  in  the  subject.

Everakd  Feilding.

Note.

M.  Maxwell  appears  to  be  under  a misapprehension  as  to  the
methods  of  investigation  adopted  at  the  Cambridge  sittings  with
Eusapia  Paladino.  When  she  first  came  to  Cambridge,  a number
of  plans  were  suggested  for  making  the  control  of  the  experiments
as  satisfactor}'  as  possible,  e.g.,  the  use  of  netting,  either  for  con-
fining the  medium  or  separating  her  from  objects  which  it  Avas
ho})ed  might  be  moved  without  contact ; various  methods  of  tying
her ; and,  above  all,  sufficient  light  in  the  seance  room.  She
refused  to  submit  to  any  of  these  conditions.  The  investigators,
however,  long  persevered  in  making  the  control  in  every  case  as
complete  as  she  would  allow  it  to  be.  They  pressed  her  at  each
sitting  to  allow  some  light  in  the  room,  and  a very  faint  light  was
generally  permitted  at  the  beginning ; but  soon  she  Avould  insist
on  complete  darkness,  and  the  touches  were  never  felt  until  after
the  light  was  completely  extinguished.

The  only  method  of  control  then  allowed  was  the  holding  of
the  medium  by  the  sitters,  and  they  Avere  accustomed  to  hold
her  as  firmly  and  continuously  as  possible.  When  she  resisted  this
every  kind  of  persuasion  short  of  actual  physical  force  Avas  em-
ployed to  induce  her  to  submit  to  it.  It  was  not  until  the  sitters
Avere  convinced  of  the  constant  fraud  practised  that  their  efforts
were  relaxed,  and  she  Avas  alloAved  to  take  her  own  way  Avithout
remonstrance  d Editor.

Humanism:  Philosophical  Essays.  By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller.  (London:
Macmillan  and  Co.  1903.)

A metaphysical  discussion  in  these  pages  Avould  be  an  offence
devoid  alike  of  precedent  and  of  justification.  Unable  here  to  join
issue  Avith  Mr.  Schiller  on  the  details  of  his  invigorating  manifesto,
I must  content  myself  with  drawing  the  reader’s  attention  to  the
main  principles  of  the  neAV  empiricism  which  the  eternal  unfitness

^ See  letter  from  Mr.  Myers  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  November,  1895  (Vol.
VII.,  p.  164).


502


F.  X.  Hales.


[part


of  things  has  called  into  life  in  the  very  home  and  stronghold  of
Absolutism.  Oxford,  which,  in  the  heyday  of  John  Mill’s  influence
and  popularity,  led  the  attack  upon  the  Sensationalism  of  Locke
and  Hume,  appears  to  be  reverting,  with  all  the  ebullient  ardour
and  combative  enthusiasm  characteristic  of  that  ancient  seat  of
learning,  to  the  ver}"  principles  which  Green  and  his  more  brilliant
successors  flattered  themselves  they  had  for  ever  discredited.  Yet
the  new  empiricism  is  by  no  means  identical  with  the  old.  The
supposed  “ devotion  of  the  philosopher  to  the  memory  of  ancient
errors,”  prevents  him  at  least  from  repeating  obsolete  mistakes
in  discredited  terms.  Professor  William  James — the  real  author  of
the  new  doctrine — has  baptised  it  Pragmatism.  Mr.  Schiller  j^refers
to  label  it  Humanism.,  as  at  once  a more  general  and  a more  attractive
title.

Some  months  ago,  a volume  of  essays  by  members  of  an  Oxford
philosophical  club  opened  the  campaign  against  the  prevalent  Oxonian
philosophy  of  the  Absolute.  The  enterprise,  more  novel  at  Oxford
than  elsewhere,  attracted  and  deserved  the  attention  of  the  limited
public  to  which  it  appealed.  Mr.  Schiller,  himself  the  contributor
of  a noteworthy  chapter  on  “ Axioms  as  Postulates,”  formulated
(rather  than  proved)  a thesis  which,  if  capable  of  demonstration,
would  revolutionise  the  Theory  of  Knowledge.  In  the  present  volume
he  has  brought  together  a number  of  essays,  collected  for  the  most
part  from  sources  hardly  accessible  to  the  general  public,  which
explain  and  develop,  for  the  benefit  of  the  non-technical  reader,
difl'erent  aspects  of  his  fundamental  doctrine.  Humanism  is  not  a
connected  treatise.  Tlie  argument  does  not  claim  to  be  exhaustive.
There  are  gaps  in  the  exposition  which  the  critic  would  like  to  see
supplied,  and  which  the  author,  as  I understand,  would  gladly  supply
if  he  could  find  the  leisure.  His  Humanism  aims  to  be  humane ;
and  in  his  sedulous  avoidance  of  scholastic  jargon,  he  lias  been  tempted
to  smoothe  over  difficidties  none  the  less  imperative  for  being  scholastic.
The  book  must  be  regarded  as  a programme  rather  than  as  a proof.
But  it  is  addressed  to  a popular  audience,  and  as  such  it  must  be
judged.  Vigorous  in  style,  uncompromising  in  statement,  it  affords,
if  not  a vindication  of  the  pragmatist’s  position,  at  least  a lively
reflection  of  the  true-born  pragmatist’s  character.

All  philosophies  necessarily  start  from  human  experience,  and
reconstruct  it  in  various  ways.  Sensationalism  overlooked  pure
thought.  A priorism  has  overlooked  everything  but  pure  thought.
The  pragmatist’s  claim  is  that  he  accepts  all  features  of  experience


XLIX.]


Review.


503


without  distorting  any,  and  takes  into  account  the  whole  of  the

concrete  nature  of  man.  He  recognises  the  reality  and  validity  of

the  thought-process  which  interprets  and  welds  into  a systematic
whole  the  data  of  sense,  but  he  claims  that  the  thought-process  is
purposive  in  character  and  teleological  in  its  methods.  “Pure”

thought  for  him  is  a “ non-existent  and  impossible  process.”  Con-
demning the  aloofness  of  an  “abstract,  arid,  abstruse,  and

abhorrent  philosophy  ” from  the  world  of  action,  he  reverts  to  the
old  doctrine  of  Protagoras  that  “ man  is  the  measure  of  all  things,”
and  seeks  to  co-ordinate  the  plain  man’s  practical  beliefs.  Logic  has
indeed  for  him  a perfectly  valid  function.  A syllogistic  chain  is
none  the  less  cogent  because  it  appears  to  conflict  with  some  vital
human  interest.  But  the  ultimate  principles  which  form  the  basis
of  all  reasoning,  according  to  Mr.  Schiller’s  doctrine  in  his  earlier
essay,  are  neither  logically  proved  nor  amenable  to  proof.  They  are
postulates ; they  are  matters  of  faith.  In  all  knowledge  faith  and
reason  are  indivisibly  implied  : Faith  in  the  postulates  which  underlie
all  reasoning,  and  which  we  have  chosen  to  believe  without  proof ;
Reason  which  moulds  ideas  into  conformity  with  these  postulates.
“In  principle,”  says  Mr.  Schiller,  “Pragmatism  overcomes  the  old
antithesis  between  Faith  and  Reason.”  The  whole  of  our  thought,
according  to  Pragmatism,  is  controlled  and  inspired  by  jjiactical
interests,  although  we  may  frequently  “ fail  to  detect  the  hidden
interest  which  incites  the  reason  to  be  dispassionate.”  Instead,  there-
fore, of  seeking  to  base  Ethics  upon  Metaphysical  results,  regulating
jDractice  in  accordance  with  principles  derived  from  the  exercise  of
pure  thought.  Pragmatism  founds  Metaphysics  upon  Ethics,  thought
upon  the  practical  needs  Avhich  incite  to  action.  To  commence  the
exposition  of  a system  of  jrhilosophy,  as  Mr.  Schiller  does,  with  a
chapter  on  the  Ethical  Basis  of  Metaphysics  majq  in  fact,  prove  to
be  the  intolerable  paradox  it  seems.  Yet  it  is  a j^aradox  by  the
truth  or  falsity  of  which  the  whole  pragmatist  doctiine  is  bound  to
stand  or  fall.

Into  the  examination  of  this  doctrine  on  its  general  merits  I do
not  propose  to  enter.  I must  confine  myself  to  noticing  some  con-
clusions Mr.  Schiller,  with  most  creditable  consistency,  is  driven  into
in  the  chapters  which  may  be  supposed  to  interest  more  particularly
readers  of  these  Proceedings.  Chapter  XIII.,  on  the  Desire  for
Immortality,  is  a reprint  of  the  well-knoAvn  article  in  which  Mr.
Schiller  questioned  the  assumed  general  desire  for  personal  immor-
tality, and  initiated  a very  important  enquiry,  since  then  concluded.


504


F.  N.  HaUf<.


[part


into  the  actual  state  of  human  sentiment  with  regard  to  a future
life.  Of  Chapter  XV./  on  Philosophy  and  the  Scientific  Investigation
of  a Future  Life,  I need  say  little  beyond  reminding  our  readers  of
the  main  points  of  the  argument ; that  neither  philosophy  nor  science
can  effectually  disprove  the  possibility  of  a future  life,  that  its  nature
can  only  be  investigated  by  scientific  methods  ; that  no  investigation,
and  consec{uently  no  definite  knowledge  about  it  whatever  is  possible,
unless  the  hypothetical  future  life  h,appens  to  be  in  some  sense  con-
tinuous with  the  present  form  of  consciousness,  and  in  important
respects  akin  to  our  present  existence.

It  is  in  Chapter  XIV.  that  the  fundamental  paradox  of  Pragmatism
comes  to  light  in  a particularly  glaring  fashion,  and  challenges  dis-
cussion in  these  pages.  Mr.  Schiller  argues  first  that  Immortality  is
an  ethical  postulate,  and  from  the  irresistibility  of  the  postulate  he
infers  the  reality  of  the  thing  postulated.  I do  not  in  the  least  wish
to  question  the  first  step  in  the  argument,  essentially  open  to  C{uestion
though  I believe  it  to  be.  If  the  first  step  in  the  argument  is
illegitimate,  the  supposed  proof  of  the  conclusion  vanishes  into  thin
air.  But  even  if  we  grant  the  legitimacy  of  a doubtful  postulate,
the  argument  is  surely  vitiated  by  a new  form  of  a very  ancient
fallacj^  The  plain  man  is  painfully  aware  of  the  difference  between
the  100  dollars  he  would  like  to  have  in  his  wallet  and  the  actual
dollars  which  too  often  are  not  there.  Admit  that  theoretical  con-
struction, the  whole  universe  of  organised  knowledge,  is  controlled
through  and  through  by  practical  needs,  articulated  by  postulates
which  we  will  to  believe,  and  it  may  still  be  quite  possible  to  co-
ordinate at  every  moment  the  particulars  of  our  present,  our  past,
and  our  future  experience  (to  some  extent),  for  our  possible  future
experience  is  in  some  sense  predetermined  by  that  which  is  present
and  actual.  But  Pragmatism  does  not,  on  the  one  hand,  seem  to
afford  any  means  of  transcending  actual  experience,  nor  of  setting
any  limits  to  the  variations  in  the  postulates  which  we  may  find
it  convenient  to  make ; and  on  the  other  hand  it  seems  plain  that
the  hypothetical  future  life  can  no  more  enter  into  our  actual  experi-
ence than  Mr.  Schiller’s  experience  of  the  cogency  of  his  argument
enters  into  my  actual  experience.  F.  N.  Hales.


^ First  published  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XV^.,  pp.  53-64.


XLIX.]


Officers  and  Council  for  IQOIf..


505


FORMER  PRESIDENTS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL

RESEARCH.


Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  . . . .

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  -
Professor  Henry'  Sidgw'ick,  - . . .

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  -
Professor  William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.,

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  - - - -

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  . . - - -

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.E.S.,


1882-1884.

1885-1887.

1888-1892,

1893.

1894-1895.

1896-1899.

1900.

1901-1903.


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1904.


PRESIDENT.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


VICE-PRESIDENTS.


The  Right  Hon.  A.  .J.  Balfour,
M.P.,  F.R.S.

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Ph.D.
Professor  W.  .James,  Harvard,

U.S.A.


Professor  S.  P.  JjAngley,  Smith-
souiaii  Institution,  Washington,
U.S.A.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of
Ripon.


COUNCIL.


W.  W.  Baggally'.  I

The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  M.P.
Ernest  N.  Bennett.  i

.1.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.  I

Montague  Crackanthorpe,  K.C.  [

The  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Bal-  |

CARRES,  K.T.,  F.R.S.

Hon.  Everard  Feilding.

F.  N.  Hales.  j

Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.

Sir  Lawrence  J.  .Jones,  Bart.  j

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.  !

W.  M‘Dougall,  M.Sc.,  M.B.  I

J.  G.  PiDDINGTON.


St.  George  Lane  Fo.x  Pitt.
Frank  Podmore.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

1^.  C.  S.  .Schiller.

Sydney'  C.  Scott.

A.  F.  Shand.

Mp„s.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Litt.D.

H.  Arthur  Smith.

Sir  a.  In.  Stephenson,  K.GB.,
K.C.

Lieut. -Col.  G.  L.  Le  M.  Taylor.
Professor  .J.  .J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.
Charles  Lloy'd  Tuckey',  M.D.
Mrs.  a.  W.  Verrall.


HON.  TREASURER.

H.  Arthur  Smith,  7 Queen’s  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.


HON.  SECRETARIES.

J.  G.  PiDDINGTON,

Hon.  Everard  Feilding,  5 John  St.,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

SECRETARY  AND  EDITOR.

Miss  Alice  Johnson,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

HON.  SECRETARY  FOR  RUSSIA.

Michael  Petrovo-Solovovo,  6 Qnai  Fran9ais,  St.  I’etersburg.

SECRETARY  AND  TREASURER  OF  THE  AMERICAN  BRANCH.

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  5 Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.


506


Members  and  Associates.


[part


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

October,  1904.


President — Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Vice-Presidents.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  10  Downing  Street,  S.W.
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S. , 7 Kensington  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City.
Professor  William  James,  Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  The  University,  Birmingham.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.

The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon.

Honorary  Members.

Professor  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  6 De  Yesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,
Co.  Dublin.

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7 Kensington  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
Alfred  Russel  \Vallace,  F.R.S.,  Corfe  View,  Parkstone,  Dorset.

Corresponding  Members.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  Rio  Janeiro.

Professor  H.  Beauni.s,  Villa  Josephine,  Route  d’Antibes,  Cannes,
France.

Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Profe.ssor  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  University,  New  York,  LkS.A.
Dr.  Dariex,  6 Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  31  Goltz  Strasse,  Berlin,  AV.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


507


Dr.  F6re,  22  Avenue  Bugeaud,  XVD.  Arrt.,  Paris.

Professor  Th.  Flournoy,  The  University,  Geneva.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany.

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  Eue  Barbet  de  Jouy,  21,  Paris.

Professor  J.  Liegeois,  Xancy,  France.

Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43  Corso  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy.

Newbold,  Wm.  Romaine,  Ph.D.,  Univ.  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  Philusophique,  Paris.

Professor  Charles  Richet,  15  Rue  de  I’Universite,  Paris.

Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  2 Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.
Professor  N.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.

Dr.  Otto  G.  Wetterstrand,  Stockholm.

Dr.  G.  C.  W^ittig,  22  Kornerstrasse,  Leipzig.

Honorary  As.sociates.

Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Upsala,  Sweden.

Bennett,  E.  T.,  The  Rock,  Port  Isaac,  N.  Cornwall.

Coleman,  William  Emmette,  Chief  Quartermaster’s  OfEce,  Phelan
Building,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  lustituto  Tecnico,  Alessandria.
Finzi,  Dr.  George,  11  Monte  di  Pieta,  Milan.

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  2 Newport  Road,  Cardiff.

Grubb,  Edward,  Devonshire  Chambers,  Bishopsgate  Without,
London,  E.C.

Ochorowicz,  Dr.  J.,  23  Rue  Vladimir,  Warsaw.

Robertson,  Miss  N.,  31  Cissbury  Road,  Hove,  Brighton.

Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  London,  N.
Sage,  M.,  33  Rue  des  Coulmiers,  XIV'.  Arrt.,  Paris.

Young,  James  F.,  Bryntesog  Villa,  New  Rd.,  Llanelly,  S.  Wales.

Members  and  Associates.

An  asterisk  is  ’prefixed  to  the  names  of  Members.

Abernethy,  Mrs.,  10  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.

Adair,  Desmond,  Bank  of  England,  Plymouth.

Adams,  Mrs.,  4 Brookside,  Cambridge.

Adamson,  Rev.  H.,  P.O.  Box  241,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
Alexander,  Prof.  S.,  The  Owens  College,  Manchester.


508


[part


Members  cmd  Associates.

Allen,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  Hereford  House,  Clifton  Down,  Bristol.

Allin,  Rev.  Thomas,  Chelston  Mount,  Torquay,  Devon.

Amery,  W.  C.,  34a  Corporation  Street,  Birmingham.

Anderson,  Jos.,  jun..  The  Lodge,  Clayton,  Manchester.

Anesaki,  M.,  Koishikawa  Sasugaya  78,  Tokyo,  Japan.

Appleyard,  Walter,  Endcliffe  Crescent,  Sheffield.

Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  Lady  Margaret  Hall,  Oxford.
Argoutinsky-Dolgoroukoff,  Prince  Wladimir,  11  Millionaia,  St.
Petersburg.

Armstrong,  Miss  C.  M.,  31  Hereford  Square,  London,  S.JV.

Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.Mhl.

Astley,  Miss,  9 Tite  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.Mh
*Astor,  William  Waldorf,  Cliveden,  near  Maidenhead.

*Auden,  Harold  A.,  Westwood,  Grassendale,  Liverpool.

■*'Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  Beaumont  House,  26  Grand  Parade,  Brighton.

Baggally,  Mrs.  W.  W.,  Beaumont  House,  26  Grand  Parade,  Brighton.
*Bagnell,  Mrs.,  c/o  Miss  Spencer,  25  York  Street,  Portman  Square,
London,  W.

*Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  South  Cliff  Hotel,  Southbourne-on-Sea,  Christ-
church, Hants.

*Baker,  Mrs.  Duff,  4 Chesterfield  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
'^Balfour,  The  Eight  Hon.  A.  J.,  ALP.,  F.R.S.,  10  Downing  Street,
London,  S.W.

■^Balfour,  The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.,  ALP.,  Whitehall  Court,  London,  S.W.
*Balfour,  Miss,  10  Downing  Street,  London,  S.W.

Ballard,  Rev.  Frank,  Crescent  Road,  Sharrow,  Sheffield.

*Barber,  Mrs.  Hugh,  Grosvenor  Crescent  Club,  Hyde  Park  Corner,
London,  S.W.

Barclay,  Rev.  Chas.  W.,  The  Vicarage,  Hertford  Heath,  Hertford.
■^Barclay,  Edwyn,  Urie  Lodge,  Ridgway,  Wimbledon.

Barclay,  Miss  Marion  F.,  Kylemore,  Wimbledon.

Barkworth,  Mrs.,  Hash  Court,  Marnhull,  Dorset.

Barlow,  Miss  Jane,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  Co.  Dublin.

^Barlow,  Rev.  J.  W.,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  Co.  Dublin.

^Barrington,  Sir  Eric,  62  Cadogan  Place,  London,  S.W.

Barrow,  Aliss,  Eureka,  Up  Park  Camp,  P.O.,  Jamaica.

^Barry,  Major  S.  L.,  Oakdene,  South  Earnboro.

Baruch,  Edgar,  c/o  American  Beet  Sugar  Co.,  123  California  Street,
S.  Francisco,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Bates,  Col.  C.  E.,  c/o  London  and  County  Bank,  1 Connaught
Street,  London,  Mh


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


509


*Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.

Baudains,  Miss  G.  M.,  Parade  House,  Jersey.

Bayfield,  Bev.  Matthew  A.,  Helmdon  Rectory,  Brackley,  North-
amptonshire.

Bean,  Rev.  Edwin,  The  School  House,  Brentwood.

Beck,  Rev.  John  Henry,  Chaplain  H.M.  Government  of  India,
Camp  Ahmedabad,  India.

Behrens,  Noel  Edward,  Burlington  Chambers,  180  Piccadilly,
London,  W.

*Begbie,  Harold,  9 Tanza  Road,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

*Bell,  Miss  A.  E.,  5 Gray’s  Inn  Square,  London,  W.C.

Bell,  Charles  W.,  J.P.,  D.L.,  1.3  Grosvenor  Crescent,  Hyde  Park
Corner,  London,  S.W.

Bellasis,  Major  G.  M.,  Young’s  Point,  Ontario,  Canada.

^Bennett,  Arthur  G.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  St.  Ann’s  Hill,  Cork.
Bennett,  Ernest  N.,  Hertford  College,  Oxford.

Benson,  Miss  Annette,  M.D.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  & Co.,  65
Cornhill,  London,  E.C.

’ ‘ '4

*Benson,  Mrs.,  Tremans,  Horsted  Keynes,  Sussex.

*Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  14  Princes  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Bergen,  Axel  von.  Abbey  Road,  Darlington.

^Berry,  Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson,  M.D.,  21  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.
Best,  Robert,  146  Hamstead  Road,  Handsworth,  Birmingham.
Bevan,  Miss  N.  H.,  9 Hans  Mansions,  London,  S.W.

Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9 Rutland  Gate,  London,  Mb
Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.
^Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonards  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.

Beverley,  Mrs.,  Nascot  Lodge,  Watford,  Herts.

Bharda,  K.  B.  Khursedji,  3 Slater  Road,  Bombay,  India.

Bicknell,  Rev.  Clarence,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.

■^■Bidder,  Mrs.,  10  Queen’s  Gate  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Cavendish  Corner,  Hills  Road,  Cambridge.
Biddulph,  The  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19  Ennismore  Gdns.,  London,  S.W.
*Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  2 York  Terrace,  Regent’s  Park,  London,  N.W.
^Binney,  Rev.  Maximilian  F.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Richmond,  Surrey.
Birrell,  Mrs.,  42  Gwydyr  Mansions,  Hove,  Brighton.

Blackburn,  E.  M.,  79  The  Drive,  Hove,  Brighton.

Blathwayt,  W.,  Eagle  House,  Batheaston,  Bath.

Bois,  H.  G.,  c/o  J.  M.  Robertson  & Co.,  Colombo,  Ceylon.

Bonazza,  Carlo,  Hotel  Cavour,  5 Via  Proconsolo,  Florence,  Italy.
*Bond,  Frederick  Bligh,  16  Brook  Street,  Bath.


510


Members  ami  Associates.


[part


Booth,  Miss  Eva  Gore,  83  Heald  Place,  Rusholme,  Manchester.
Berwick,  Lady,  16  Berkeley  Square,  London,

Bott,  Mrs.,  Somersal,  Derby.

Bowden,  Ernest  M.,  35  Bedford  Place,  London,  W.C.
Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Careys,  Brockenhurst.

*Bower,  Miss,  32  Halsey  Street,  Lennox  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Bower,  James  Garton,  Junr.,  Earlham  House,  Norwich.

Bowness,  Wm.  Wilson,  26  Campden  Grove,  Kensington,  London,  ML
Box,  Alfred  Marshall,  c/o  Cooper,  Box  & Co.,  Ltd.,  69  Alderman-
bury,  London,  E.C.

Bozzano,  E.,  Piazza  S.  Anna,  74,  Genoa,  Italy.

Brabrook,  Edward  W.,  C.B.,  178  Bedford  Hill,  Balham,  London,
S.Mh

Bradgate,  Mrs.,  1 23  Hamlet  Gardens,  Chiswick,  London,  W.
Bramston,  Miss  A.  E.,  Witham’s  Close,  Manchester.

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  St.  Grimbald’s,  Manchester.

*Bramwell,  J.  Milne,  M.B.,  33  M^impole  Street,  London,  Mk
Brandreth,  Henry  S.,  Fairholme,  Weybridge.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brewster,  Bertram,  Mostyndale,  Merton  Park,  M^imbledon.

Brewster,  Mrs.  F.,  21  Park  Valley,  Nottingham.

Brodrick,  Mrs.  Alan,  31  Green  Heys  Koad,  Liverpool  (Oct.-Apr.)

and  Western  Holm,  Hoylake  (Apr.-Oct.).

Brooke,  Miss  Emma  F.,  10  Abingdon  Mansions,  Kensington,
London,  M^.

Brooke,  Col.  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,

S.W.

Brooke,  Mrs.,  33  Acomb  Street,  Greenheys,  Manchester.
*Brookes-Smith,  Mrs.  E.,  Olrig  House,  St.  Marychurch,  Torquay.
Brown,  Haydn,  L.E.C.P.,  Moorcote,  Eversley,  Hants.

Brown,  Miss  May,  62  Carlisle  Mansions,  MYstminster,  London,  S.W.
Browne,  Edward  G.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.

Browne,  Mrs.  M^.  P.,  Bidston,  97  Gipsy  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,
London,  S.E.

Browning,  Oscar,  King’s  College,  Cambridge.

' Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15  Campden  Hill  Square,  London,  W.
*Bubb,  Henry,  J.P.,  Ullenwood,  near  Cheltenham.

*Bulley,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Ness,  Neston,  Cheshire.

Bulman,  H.  F.,  Barcus  Close,  Burnopfield  K.S.O.,  Co.  Durham.
Burghard,  Mrs.,  86  Harley  Street,  London,  M^.

Bury,  H.,  Esq.,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham.


XLIX.]


Memhers  and  Associates.


511


Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  Maytield  House,  Farnham,  Surrej'.

*Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  Harro\v-on-the-Hill.

*Butt,  Lady,  1 Via  Pompeo  Magno,  Rome.

Buttemer,  Robert  Wm.,  St.  Mary’s,  Godaiming.

Cade,  F.  J.,  Teighmore,  Cheltenham.

*Cadman,  Harold  Carlier,  M.B.,  Park  Road,  Barnoldswick,  Yorks.
*Caillard,  Sir  Vincent,  Wingfield  House,  near  Trowbridge,  Wilts.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Colintrave,  Argyllshii’e,  N.B.
Campbell,  Charles  A.,  22  Queen’s  Gate  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Campbell,  Colin  E.,  34  Lower  Belgrave  Street,  London,  S.W.
Campbell,  Capt.  N.  D.  H.,  Cavalry  Club,  Piccadilly,  London;  W.
Campbell,  Rev.  R.  J.,  The  City  Temple,  and  Hill  Lodge,  Enfield,
London,  1ST.

Campbell-Lang,  Miss,  c/o  Prof.  Brunton,  LL.B.,  48  West  Regent
Street,  Glasgow.

*Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37  Commercial  Road,  London,  E.

Capper,  Thomas,  Kingston,  Jamaica,  W.I,

*Carbutt,  Lady,  19  Hyde  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.

Carmichael,  Rev.  Canon,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  10  Sallymount  Avenue,
Tesson  Park,  Dublin.

^Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13  Berkeley  Scpiare,  London,  W.

Carnsew,  Miss  Rosamund,  New  Century  Club,  13  Old  Bond  St.,
London,  W.

Casey,  The  Hon.  J.  J.,  C.M.G.,  K.C.,  Bjricawe,  Acland  Street,  St,
Kilda,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Cathels,  Rev.  David,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  N.B.

*Cave,  Charles,  J.P.,  Binsted,  Cambridge.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham.

*Centeno,  Mrs.  A.,  25  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Charlton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  38  Victoria  Road,  Kensington  Palace,
London,  W.

Chattock,  Prof  Arthur  P.,  24  Royal  York  Crescent,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Cheyne,  C.  A.,  Richmond,  Natal,  South  Africa.

Childers,  Miss  F.  L,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,
Hants.

Chitty,  Hubert,  5 Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.

Clapham,  J.  H.,  13  Beechgrove  Terrace,  Leeds,  Yorks.

*Clarke,  Mrs.  M.  J.,  West  Grange,  Cambo  R.S.O.,  Northumberland.
Clarke,  Miss  Isabel,  65  Holland  Park  Avenue,  London,  W.

Clarke,  J.  F.  Howard,  M.D.,  M.R.C.S.,  99  Shaftesbury  Avenue,
London,  W.


512  Members  and  Associates.  [part

Clark-Kennedy,  The  Rev.  A.  E.,  Ewhurst  Rectory,  Guildford,
Surrey.

*Clavering,  Miss  A.  M.  V.,  Callaly,  Sunningdale,  Berks.

Clayton,  Charles  E.,  152  North  Street,  Brighton.

Clissold,  Edward  M.,  Ravensworth,  Cheltenham.

■*'Clive,  The  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Coghill,  Col.  Kendal,  C.B.,  Castle  Townshend,  near  Skibbereen,
Co.  Cork.

Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.

Collingwood,  Miss  A.  M.,  6 Powis  Square,  Bayswater,  London,  AV-
Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Claremont,  Esher.
Collison,  Mrs.  Henry  C.,  13  Albemarle  Street,  London,  W.

Collyns,  Miss  E.,  Oakhurst,  Abbey  Park  Road,  Great  Grimsby.
Colquhoun,  Daniel,  M.D.,  M.R.C.P.,  High  Street,  Dunedin,  New
Zealand.

Compton,  Lady  Alwyne,  7 Balfour  Place,  London,  AV.
*Condenhove-Kalergi,  Count  Henry,  LL.D.,  Ronsperg,  Bohemia,
Austria.

Constable,  F.  C.,  AAbck  Court,  near  Bristol.

Conway,  Lady,  Red  House,  Hornton  St.,  Kensington,  London,  AV.
Cooper,  E.  G.,  Courts  Office,  Savanna  la-Mar,  Jamaica.

Cooper,  Mrs.  M.  A.,  AA^oodville,  London  Road,  Gloucester.

*Cooper,  Sir  W.  E.,  C.I.E.,  Hume  Towers,  Bournemouth.

Copley,  Alfred  B.,  York  Villa,  Belvoir  Drive,  Old  Aylestone,
Leicester.

Corrance,  Henry  C.,  30  AVilbury  Gardens,  Hove,  Brighton.

Corry,  Miss  Lucy,  Rosenheim,  Croydon,  London,  S.E.

Cort  van  der  Linden,  Dr.  P.  AA^.  A.,  Ministre  de  Justice,  Suriname
Street,  The  Hague,  Holland.

Cotesworth,  Miss  Lilias  E.,  45  Westminster  Mansions,  Great  Smith
Street,  London,  S.AA^.

Coulthard,  Rev.  H.  R.,  St.  Aubyn’s  A^icarage,  Devonport.

*Cowan,  AV.  H.,  11  Marlborough  Road,  Bournemouth.

Cowasjee,  Bomanjee,  24  Merchant  Street,  Rangoon,  Burmah.
*Cowper-Coles,  S.  O.,  Artillery  Mansions,  Victoria  Street,  London,  S.W.
Coxe,  Henry  R.  H.,  Indian  Civil  Service,  United  Service  Club,
Calcutta.

Coxeter,  Harold,  iB  Holland  Park  Road,  Kensington,  London,  AY.
*Crackanthorpe,  Montague,  K.C.,  65  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.
■*^Cra,wford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S.,  2 Cavendish
Square,  London,  AA^.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


513


Crawford,  W.  C.,  1 Lockharton  Gardens,  Colington  Kd.,  Edinburgh.
*Cricliton-Browne,  Sir  James,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Crindau,
Dumfries,  N.B.

Crickmay,  Miss  Ellen  F.  St.  A.,  6 St.  James’s  Park,  Croydon,
London,  S.W.

^Crookes,  Lady,  7 Kensington  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.

Currie,  Mrs.,  22  Ufer  Strasse,  Heidelberg,  Germany.

■"Curtois,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  15  Barton  Street,  Westminster

London,  S.W.

Dahl,  Miss  F.,  11  Worcester  Terrace,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey.

Dallas,  Miss  H.  S.  A.,  116  King  Henry’s  Road,  South  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.

Daniell,  Mrs.  Averell,  12  Caclogan  Mansions,  London,  S.Mk
Dartnell,  George  E.,  Abbotsfield,  Stratford  Road,  Salisbury.

Darton,  Hugh,  Beninghoe,  Hertford.

^Davidson,  J.  Mackenzie,  M.B.,  C.M.,  76  Portland  Place,  London,  W.
Davie,  Miss,  The  Elms,  Bishops  Tawton,  Nr.  Barnstaple,  Devon.
Davies,  Benjamin,  c/o  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  The  University,  Birmingham.
Davis,  A.  P].,  F.R.C.S.  (PM.),  20  Great  George  Scjuare,  Liverpool.
Davis,  Joseph  T.,  Holly  Bush,  Snaresbrook,  Essex.

Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  Trelinda,  St.  JMerryn,  Padstow,  Cornwall.
*Davison,  Miss  Annie.

Davison,  Mrs.  Munro,  57  Dora  Road,  Coventry  Road,
Birmingham.

Davy,  Mrs.  E.  M.,  43  Clanricarde  Gardens,  London,  W.

Dawson,  Lt.-Col.  Henry  P.,  Hartlington,  Burnsall,  Skipton.
Deinhard,  Ludwig,  Georgenstrasse,  13/2,  Munich,  Germany.
Densham,  William,  40  Grosvenor  Road,  Gunnersbury,  London,  W.
*Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  N.B.
Dickinson,  Miss,  10  Stanhope  Place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  King’s  College,  Cambridge.

Dicksee,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  Greville  House,  3 Greville  Place,  St.  John’s
Wood,  London,  N.W.

Dill,  J.  Pb  Gordon,  M.B.,  6 Brunswick  Place,  Brighton.

*Dixon,  Edward  T.,  Racketts,  Hythe,  Hants.

Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  F.L.S.,  Wickham  House,  East  Park  Parade,
Northampton.

Dixon,  Prof.  W.  Macneile,  LL.B.,  Litt.D.,  43  Norman  Road,
Northfield,  Birmingham.

Dobbie,  A.  W.,  Gawler  Place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.


514


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Dodge,  Miss  Mary  H.,  56  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.

Donne,  Miss  A.  G.  M.,  93  Via  Babuino,  Rome,  Italy.

Donne,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  & Co.,  3 Whitehall  Place,  London,
S.W.

Dougall,  Miss  Lily,  East  Underclift',  Exmouth.

Douglas,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  W.,  Tuxedo  Park,  New  York,  U.S.A.
*Douglas-Pennant,  The  Hon.  Violet,  Mortimer  House,  Halkin  Street,
London,  S.W.

Doveton,  F.  B.,  Karsfield,  Torquay.

Dowson,  Mrs.,  L.R.C.P.I.,  L R.C.S.I.,  Merry  Hall,  Ashtead,  Surrey.
■*'Doyle,  Sir  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Hasleniere,  Surrey.

*Drew,  Professor  Eric,  Sullivan’s  Gardens,  Madras,  India.

Drewry,  Mrs.  George,  Melrose,  Buxton.

Dulley,  Rev.  B.,  St.  Peter’s  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.
*Duncan,  Harold  M.,  171  Queen’s  Gate,  Alexandra  Court,  London,
S.W.

■^Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom  Road,  Guildford.

*Duuham,  Miss  Helen,  c/o  Messrs.  Baring  Bros.  & Co.,  London,  E.C.
Dyce,  Captain  Cecil,  69  Linden  Gardens,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Dyson,  Rev.  W.  H.,  Roseleigh,  Egerton,  Huddersfield.

Eagle,  Frederick,  Devonia,  St.  Andrew’s  Road,  Henley-on-Thames.
Eardley,  Lady,  4 Lancaster  Street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Edelsten,  John  A.,  Norton  Lodge,  Halton,  Cheshire.

Eeden,  Frederik  van,  M.D.,  Walden,  Bussum,  Holland.

Egerton,  Miss  Mary  L.,  The  Clifi’,  Torrington,  York.

*Elder,  Frederick,  21  Cleveland  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Elliot,  Miss  A,  I.  M , Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

Elliot,  Gilbert  C.,  10  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

Ellis,  Mrs.  Edward,  Shadingfield  Hall,  Wangford  R.S.O.,  Suffolk.
Emson,  Charles  W.,  Torrington,  Ditton  Hill,  Surrey.

Engall,  John  S.,  62  Goldsmith  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.
Esterhazy,  Count  Michel,  Rue  Kossuth  5,  Budapest  IV.,  Hungary.
*Eno,  J.  C.,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

*Evans,  Frank  Gwynne,  33  St.  Martin’s,  Stamford.

Evison,  Mrs.,  Upward  House,  near  Huntingdon.

Evreinolf,  A.,  The  Russian  Embassy,  Constantinople.

Fairbanks,  Mrs.  Kama,  Wallot  st.  8 pt.,  Grunewald,  Berlin,  Germany.
'^Farrer,  The  Lady,  3 Whitehall  Court,  Loudon,  S.W.

*Fawsett,  Thomas,  97  Philbeach  Gardens,  Earl’s  Court,  London,  S.W.

Feilding,  Hon.  and  Rev.  Basil,  D.D.,  Minerva  Lane,  Wolverhampton.
■^Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5 John  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


515


Feikling,  The  Lady  Louisa,  Broome  Park,  Betchworth,  Surrey.
Fermaud,  Senor  D.  Julio,  Polar  incendios,  Bilbao,  Spain.

Field,  Allan  B.,  Hoath,  Crowborough  Cross,  Sussex.

Finch,  H.  Wynne,  The  Manor  House,  Stokesby  R.S.O,,  Yorks.
Fisher,  Rev.  J.  Hartman,  Nassau,  N.P.,  Bahamas.

Fitzgerald,  Desmond  G.,  Stanhope  Villa,  Ashen  Road,  Clare,  Suffolk.
■*^Fletcher,  Mrs.,  98  Harley  Street,  London,  IV.

^Fletcher,  Rowland  H.,  M.R.C.S.,  25  Chichele  Road,  Cricklewood,
London,  N.W.

^Florence,  Ernest  B.,  5 Pump  Court,  The  Temple,  London,  E.C.
Ford,  Miss  Emily  S.,  44  Glebe  Place,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Forrester,  Mrs.,  Tullibody  House,  Cambus,  by  Stirling,  N.B.
^Foster,  Rev.  J.  Edgar,  Lindsey  Vicarage,  Ipswich.

Fotberingham,  AV.  B.,  19  St.  John’s  Rd.,  Southend-on-Sea,  Essex.
Fraser,  Col.  A.  T.,  R.E.,  Junior  Athenaeum  Club,  Piccadilly,
London,  W.

J'reeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C.,  Belgrave  Mansions,  Grosvenor  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

Freeman,  Rev.  H.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Burton-on-Trent.

*Frost,  Miss  Annie,  Carnelloe  Cottage,  Zennor,  Nr.  St.  Ives,  Corn-
wall.

*Fry,  Lewis  George,  Stonycroft,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.

Fuller,  A.  G.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.

Garcke,  Emile,  Ditton  House,  Near  Maidenhead.

Gardiner,  Mrs.,  c/o  Charles  Mote,  Esq.,  29  Queen  St.,  London,  E.C.
Garth,  Dr.,  4 Harrington  Street,  Calcutta,  India.

^Geikie,  Sir  Archibald,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  10  Chester  Terrace,  Regent’s
Park,  London,  N.W.

George,  AVilliam  H.,  57  Neville  Street,  Cardiff.

Ghosh,  Rai  Kali  Prasanna,  Dacca,  Bengal,  India.

Gibbon,  I.  G.,  170  Leander  Road,  Brixton  Hill,  London,  S.W.
Gilmour,  R.  W.,  St.  Luke’s  Hospital,  Old  Street,  London,  E.C.
Gittermann,  Rudolph  C.,  Odessa,  Russia.

Gomery,  Percy,  Eastern  Township  Bank,  Montreal,  Canada.

Gooch,  G.  P.,  South  Villa,  Campden  Hill  Road,  Loudon,  W.
Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  Lambourne  Rectory,  Romford.

Gordon,  George  H.,  1 Clare  Road,  Bristol.

Gordon,  Mrs.,  19  Victoria  Road,  Upper  Norwood,  London,  S.E.
■*Gordon-March,  G.,  Maclea  House,  Emsworth,  Hants.

Gover,  John  M.,  LL.D.,  5 New  Sq.,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Govett,  The  Ven.  Archdeacon,  Gibraltar.


51G


Memhers  and  Associates.


[PAKT


Govett,  F.  Molyneux,  Chalet  Ketterer,  Clarens,  Switzerlaud.

Gower,  Dr.  John  H.,  Northington,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Grablachoff",  W.,  Kustendil,  Bulgaria.

Graham,  J.  W.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester
Green,  Alan  B.,  M.D.,  .31  Cheyne  Court,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Green,  Mrs.  Alan  B.,  31  Cheyne  Court,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Green,  Miss  Marian,  St.  Aidan’s,  AVinchmore  Hill,  London,  N.
Greg,  Miss  Mary  S.,  23  Kensington  Gate,  London,  W.

Grenfell,  Mrs.,  62  Holywell,  Oxford.

Gribble,  Miss  F.  M.,  32  Chester  Terrace,  Regent’s  Park,  London,

N.M-.

*Grignon,  Rev.  Mb  S.,  30  Blenheim  Gardens,  AVillesden  Green,
London,  N.M".

Grignon,  Miss  A.  E.,  30  Blenheim  Gardens,  Willesden  Green,
London,  N.W.

*Grinsell,  Mrs.  T.  B.,  Fernhill,  St.  Beinard’s  Rd.,  Olton,  Birmingham.
Grosvenor,  Hon.  Mrs.  Richard,  St.  Cross  Lodge,  AVinchester.
*Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Southwold,  Sufi'olk.

Guinness,  Miss,  Tibradden,  Rathfarnham,  Dublin.

Gurney,  Miss  Sybella,  The  Weirs  Cottage,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
■^Gwyn,  W.  J.,  8 Netherhall  Gardems,  South  Hampstead,  London,
N.Mh

Hackett,  James  T.,  95  King  William  Street,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Haig,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Orchardwood,  Ascot  Heath,  Berks.

Hales,  Frank  N.,  5 Clement’s  Inn,  Strand,  London,  W.C.

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.,  24  Holland  Street,  Campden  Hill,
London,  W.

Hall,  Wilfred,  Dilston  Hall,  Corbridge-on-Tyne.

Hall,  Mrs.  Vi.  C.,  3 St.  Alban’s  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Halls,  Robert,  77  Queen’s  Road,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

*Hambro,  Mrs.  Eric,  70  Princes  Gate,  London,  S.W.

^’Hamilton,  W.  Bernard,  The  Dale  House,  Hassocks,  Sussex.
■‘'■Hamilton,  W.  H.,  Glenburnie,  Werter  Road,  Putney,  London,
S.W.

Hamilton,  Col.  G.  Rowan,  Killyleagh  Castle,  Co.  Down,  Ireland.
Hamilton,  J.  J.,  70  Cecile  Park,  Crouch  End,  London,  N.
■^■Hannah,  Robert,  82  Addison  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Hannay,  Hugh  B.,  Waterloo  Villas,  M^ellington  Road,  Bromsgrove.
Hansford,  Charles,  3 Alexandra  Terrace,  Dorchester.

■“■Harding,  G.  Palmer,  Golfers’  Club,  Whitehall  Court,  London,  S.Mh
Hargreaves,  Miss,  Oakhurst,  AVaterloo  Road,  Birkdale,  Lancashire.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


517


Harraden,  Miss  Beatrice,  3 Cantley  Mansions,  Fairhazel  Gardens,
South  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Harris,  Alan  Campbell,  c/o  J.  S.  Morgan  & Co.,  22  Old  Broad
Street,  London.

Harris,  Capt.  C.  S.,  90  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Harris,  Henry  B.,  37  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.

*Harris,  Hon.  J.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.  James’s
Square,  London,  S.W.

*Hart,  Colonel  H.  H.,  R.E.,  c/o  Messrs.  King,  King  & Co.,
Bombay,  India.

Hastie,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Street,  30  Cornhill,  London,  E.C.

Hayes,  Frederick  Mk,  12  Westcroft  Square,  Ravenscourt  Park,
London,  W.

*Heard,  George  Henry,  Norfolk  Villa,  Alma  Road,  Plymouth.
Hebert,  P.  Z.,  M.D.,  L.R.C.P.,  16a  Old  Cavendish  Street,  Caven-
dish Square,  London,  W.

Helm,  W.  E.,  Granville  House,  Granville  Street,  Shrewsbury.
Henderson,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Avenue  House,  West  Drayton.
Hennell,  Mrs.,  125  Victoria  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1 Argyll  Villas,  Cheltenham.

Herbert,  Hon.  Auberon,  Burley,  Ringvvood,  Hants.

Hermon,  Mrs.,  Doublebois,  Liskeard,  Cornwall.

Herschel,  Col.  John,  Royal  Engineers,  Slough.

Hewitt,  Mrs.,  Wollaston  House,  Hunstanton,  Norfolk.

*Hichens,  Rev.  Thomas  S.,  Guilsborough  Vicarage,  Northampton.
Hielle,  Robert,  xix/1  Karl  Ludwig  Street,  62,  Vienna.

Hildyard,  F.  W.,  Sagamore,  Ashtead,  Surrey.

Hill,  Frank,  The  Manor  House,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.

Hill-Tout,  Charles,  Bucklands,  Abbotsford,  British  Columbia.

Hoare,  F.  H.,  20  Montagu  Street,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.
Hoare,  Mrs.  Heniy,  20  Montagu  St.,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.
Hocken,  Thomas  M.,  M.R.C.S.,  Moray  PI.,  Dunedin,  New  Zealand.
Hodding,  Miss,  The  Close,  Salisbury.

Hogg,  Sir  Frederick  Russell,  Oriental  Club,  Hanover  Sq.,  London,  W.
*Hogg,  Henry  R.,  6 Clanricarde  Gardens,  London,  W.

Holder,  Lady,  Pitmaston,  Moor  Green,  Birmingham.

Holland,  Miss,  Niddry  Lodge,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.

Holland,  Otho,  1 Wharncliffe  Villas,  Wharncliff'e  Rd.,  Boscombe,
Hants.

Hollander,  Bernard,  L.R.C.P.,  62  Queen  Anne  Street,  Cavendish
Square,  London,  W.


518


Members  and  Assocmtes.


[part


Hollins,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  Painswick,  Stroud,  Gloucestershire.

■’‘'Holland,  John  E.,  c/o  Miss  E.  M.  Every,  18  Montagu  Street,
Portman  Square,  London,

Holmes,  Edmond  G.  A.,  G Eslington  Eoad,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Homan,  C.  H.,  21  Oscarsgade,  Christiana,  Norway.

■’‘"Home,  Mrs.  Robert,  Beaufort  House,  Montpelier,  Cheltenham.
Hommel,  P.  A.,  c/o  The  Hidalgo  Mining  Co.,  Parral,  Est.  de  Chih.,
Mexico.

Hood,  Mrs.,  115  St.  George’s  Road,  London,  S.W.

Horridge,  Miss  J.  G.,  5 Radnor  Place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
^Hoskins,  Edmond  J.,  M.D.,  Haramam  Chambers,  76  Jermyn  St.,
London,  S.W.

Howard,  Hon.  Hugh  M.,

Huddleston,  Mrs.,  Llwynderw,  "Welshpool,  Montgomeryshire.
Hudson,  Morris,  The  Hermitage,  Guildford.

Hughes,  Major  H.  M.,  E.R.G.S.,  Swiss  Cottage,  Birchington-on-Sea.
*Hume,  Mrs.  H.  S.,  5 The  Cloisters,  Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.
Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  The  Pines,  Worcester  Park,  Surrey.

Hunt,  G.  Angus,  M.R.C.S.,  Stoneleigh  House,  Clissold  Park,
London,  N.

Huntingford,  Miss,  North  End  House,  IVinchester.

Husani,  M.  S.,  Municipal  Office,  ■ Madras,  S.  India.

Hutchinson,  F.  IV.  H.,  Brooklands  Avenue,  Cambridge.

Hyamson,  Albert  M.,  Secretary’s  Office,  General  Post  Office,
London,  E.C.

Infield,  H.  J.,  130  North  Street,  Brighton.

Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Ingram,  Hon.  .Mrs.  Meynell,  Temple  Newsam,  Leeds.

*Isitt,  Frank  S.  N.,  Devonshire  Club,  St.  James’s,  London,  S.W.
Jackson,  Wm.  H.,  Pen  Wartha,  Weston-super-Mare.

^Jameson,  Mrs.  T.  M.,  Colterbrooke  Grange,  Northampton.

Jaye,  W^illiam  R.,  Springwood  Lodge,  Oakfield  Road,  Clapton,
London,  N.E.

■’‘■Jeakes,  Rev.  James,  4 Cornwall  Terrace,  Regent’s  Park,  London,  N.AV.
■’‘Jebb,  H.  S.  F.,  17  Lexham  Gardens,  London,  "W.,  and  Tuliich
Lodge,  Ballater,  N.B.

■’‘■Jenkins,  A.  Stuart,  Villa  Maryland,  Montreu.x,  Switzerland.

Jevons,  F.  B.,  Litt.D.,  Hatfield  Hall,  Durham.

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

■’‘■Johnson,  G.  Lindsay,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.,  Cortina,  24  Netherall
Gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,  N.Mh


XLIX.]


Memhcrs  and  Associaies.


519


Johnston,  Miss  M.  F.,  Tlie  Writers’  Chib,  Hastings  House,  Norfolk
Street,  Strand,  London,  AV.C.

*Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

Jones,  Miss  Lilian  J.,  120  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

■*Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.
Jones,  Lady,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.

Jordan-Smith,  Benjamin,  A.R.C.S.,  .58  King’s  Road,  Reading.
Kaindl,  Alois,  Graben  No.  11,  Linz  a.  Donau,  Austria.

Keene,  The  Most  Rev.  J.  B.,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Meath,  Navan,  Co.
Meath.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  26  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.
■’^Kelso,  Commander,  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester.

Ker,  Thomas  R.,  Dougalston,  Milngavie,  N.B.

’’^Kerr,  George,  M.B.,  6 St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.

Kingston,  H.  D.  R.,  M.D.,  Macra,  Eltham,  Kent.

Knight,  Charles  N.,  36  Kensington  Park  Road,  London,  W.

Knox,  Nathaniel,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Kothen,  Baron  Axel  von,  27  Mikealsgaten,  Helsingfors,  Finland.
Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford.

^Lafone,  A.  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.

Laing,  R.  M.,  Boys’  High  School,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
^Lamarre,  L.  B.  de.  Hotel  Cecil,  London,  W.C.,  and  Beaulieu,
Trinidad,  B.W.I.

Lambert,  Miss  Beatrice,  The  Empress  Club,  Dover  Street,  Picca-
dilly, London,  W.

■"■Lambert,  E.  W.,  F.R.G.S.,  52  Abingdon  Court,  Kensington,

London,  W.

Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  Rokeby  Rectory,  Barnard  Castle.

■"Lang,  Andrew,  1 Marines  Road,  London,  W.,  and  Alleyne  House,
St.  Andrews,  Scotland.

Lauritzen,  Severin,  Holte,  Denmark,

Laver,  John,  Broken  Hill  Chambers,  375  Flinders  Lane,  Melbourne,
Australia.

Layard,  Lady,  3 Saville  Row,  London,  W.

Lazzaro,  Cleon  Page  H.,  Salonica,  Turkey  in  Europe.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  M'oodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.

Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough.

■^■Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  6 Sussex  Place,  Regent’s  Park,  Ijondon,  N.W.
Leaf,  jVIrs.  Walter,  6 Sussex  Place,  Regent’s  Park,  London,  N.W.
Lee,  Rev.  A.  H.  E.,  3 Cambrian  Terrace,  Holbeck  Moor,  Leeds.
Leedham,  Isaac  S.,  1 The  Cloisters,  Temple,  London,  E.C.


520


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Lees-Milne,  A.  M.,  Crampton  Hall,  Shaw,  Lancashire.

Lefebure,  E. , 94  Kue  de  Lyon,  Alger-Mustapha,  Algeria.

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  Hartfield,  lioehampton,  London,  S.W.

*Leigh,  Mrs.  Gerard,  Kidbrooke  Park,  Forest  Row,  Sussex,

Leon,  Mrs.  Philip,  13  Cleveland  Square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Leopold,  Dr.  H.  M.,  13  Bijde  Put,  Leeuvvarden,  Holland.

Levy,  Mrs.,  16  Campden  House  Road,  Catnpden  Hill,  London,  W.
Lewis,  Francis  B.,  Box  5,  Maraisburg,  Transvaal,  South  Africa.
Lewis,  Miss,  33  Hans  Place,  London,  S.W.

*Leycester,  Mrs.,  6 Cheyne  AValk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Librarian  (Hon)  of  the  Constitutional  Club,  Northumberland  Ave.,
London,  AAkC.

Librarian,  Grosvenor  Library,  c/o  Mr.  B.  F.  Stevens,  4 Trafalgar
Square,  London,  W.C.

Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.C.

Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial  Street,  Leeds.

Librarian,  New  York  Library,  c/o  Mr.  B.  F.  Stevens,  4 Trafalgar
Square,  London,  W.C.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Librarian,  Theosophical  Society,  28  Albemarle  Street,  London,  W.
Librarian,  University  of  Paris,  j^er  H.  Welther,  4 Rue  Bernard,
Palissy,  Paris.

Librarian,  Dr.  AVilliams’s  Library,  Gordon  Sq  , London,  W.C.
Lindsay,  R.,  L.R.C.S.,  M.B.,  The  Oaks,  Botley,  Hants.

Lloyd,  Colonel  Francis,  22  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.M".

Lloyd,  Thomas  Edward,  J.P.,  Coedmore,  Cardigan.

^Lockhart,  Lady,  187  Queen’s  Gate,  London,  S.W.

*Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  Birming-
ham.

Lodge,  Robert,  Compton  M^ood,  28  Carlisle  Road,  Eastbourne.
Loewenstein,  E.,  43a,  Maria-Louisen  Street,  Hamburg,  Germany.
Lomax,  Arthur,  Heilbron,  Orange  River  Colony,  S.  Africa.

Lucas,  Henry,  Hilver,  St.  Agnes  Road,  Birmingham.

Lund,  Percy,  43  Athol  Road,  Manningham,  Bradford.

Lyall,  Sir  Alfred  Comyns,  F.R.S.,  18  Queen’s  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Lyell,  D.,  P.O.  Box  5228,  Johannesburg,  South  Africa.

Lyster,  Mrs.,  A Q)uarters,  A^ictoria  Barracks,  Sydney,  New  South
Wales,  Australia.

Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred,  16  Great  College  Street,  AA'estminster,
London,  S.AAk


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


521


Lyttelton,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Arthur,  Perrystone  Court,  Ross,  Here-
fordshire.

Macaura,  Dr.  Gerald  J.,  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Macdonald,  Miss  Isabelle  M.,  47  Seymour  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.

Macmillan,  Mrs.  Alexander,  c/o  Madame  Bougoiiin,  6 Tsukiji,  Tokio,
Japan.

Macnaughtan,  Miss,  61  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.

*Macran,  Professor  H.  S.,  Trinity  College,  Dublin.

Madocks,  Major  H.  J.,  32  Eaton  Place,  London,  S.W.

Maidlow,  William  Harvey,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.,  Ilminster,  Somerset.

Mallet,  Miss  A.  V.,  Anlaby  House,  25  Highbury  New  Park,  Lon-
don, N.

Mallet,  Louis,  215  King’s  Road,  Chelsea,  London,  S.AV.

Mann,  Rev.  Frederick,  Temple  Ewell  Adcarage,  Dover.

Man  tell.  Miss  Bertha,  6 Shalston  A^illas,  Ewell  Road,  Surbiton  Hill,
Surrey.

*March-Phillipps,  Mrs.,  2 Kilchberg  A^illas,  St.  Luke’s,  Cheltenham.

Marchant,  Rev.  James,  Worcester  House,  AVest  Hill  Road,  Bourne-
mouth.

Markle,  George  B.,  Hazleton,  Pennsylvania,  U.S.A.

Alarsh,  Edward  H.,  3 Gray’s  Inn  Place,  London,  AA^.C.

Marshal],  AVilliam  Cecil,  28  Bedford  Square,  London,  AA".C.

*Marston,  Lieut.  G.  N.,  R.N.,  United  Service  Club,  Pall  Alall,  Lon-
don, S.W.

*Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78  A^anbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.

Alarten,  R.  H.,  Allensmore,  Swansea.

Alartin,  Miss  A.  E.,  15  Thurloe  Square,  South  Kensington,  London,

S.W.

Alartin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  Norton  Park,  Bredon’s  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury,  AAMrcestershire.

Alartineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Lahore,  Punjab,  India.

Alaryon,  Aliss,  Holly  Imdge  Studio,  Seymour  Place,  Fulham  Road,
London,  S.AA".

Alaskell,  Aliss  E.  AL,  32  Nightingale  Square,  Balham,  London,  S.AA.

Alason,  Miss  AI.  H.,  Local  Government  Board,  AA^hitehall,  London,  S.AV.

*AIassey,  Charles  C.,  124  A^ictoria  Street,  London,  S.AAk

*Alathews,  Airs.,  15  Stanley  Gardens,  London,  AA".

Alatthews,  F.  H.,  91  Hartfield  Road,  AAJmbledon.

*AIaxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  AI.P.,  48  Belgrave  Square,  Lon-
don, S.AAk


522


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Maxwell,  Joseph,  37  Rue  Thiac,  Bordeaux,  France.

Mayor,  R.  G.,  22  Sussex  Villas,  Kensington,  London,  W.

M'Clure,  Henry,  M.D.,  36  Weymouth  Street,  London,  W.
M'Connel,  H.  W.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich.
M'Dougall,  William,  M.Sc.,  M.B.,  Foxcombe  Hill,  near  Oxford.
M‘Dougall,  Isaac  S.,  The  Orchard,  off  Arthog  Road,  Hale,  Cheshire.
M‘Kewan,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  & Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,
London,  S.W.

M'Laren,  Lady,  43  Beigrave  Square,  London,  S.W.

M‘Lean,  Mrs.,  Hyde  Park  Court,  Albert  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Meek,  Maximilian  von,  Russian  Legation,  Cettigne,  Montenegro.
Medeiros  e Albuquerque,  Jose  de,  Rua  S.  Christovam,  36,  Rio
Janeiro,  Brazil.

Meebold,  Alfred,  Heidenheim,  Wurtemberg,  Germany.

Mellone,  Rev.  Sydney  Herbert,  D.Sc.,  Hollywood,  Co.  Down.
Metcalf,  Rev.  F.  'W.,  Southborough,  Tunbridge  Wells.

Metzger,  Daniel,  12  Boulevard  des  Franchees,  Geneva,  Switzerland.
Meyer,  Rev.  F.  B.,  Christchurch,  Westminster  Bridge  Road,  Lon-
don, S.'W.

^Micklethwait,  Richard  K.,  Ardsey  House,  Barnsley.

*Miles,  Miss,  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Milton,  John  Penn,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  13  North  Par.ade,  Penzance.
Mitchell,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  Jesmond  Towers,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
*Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett.

Monteagle,  The  Lord,  K.P.,  Mount  Trenchard,  Foynes,  Co.  Limerick.
Montebello,  La  Marquise  de,  44  Rue  Copernie,  Paris.

Montgomery,  Mrs.,  9 Hartley  Road,  Exmouth.

*Morell,  Mrs.  Waldo,  Hall  Bank,  Manchester  Road,  Rochdale,  Lancs.
Moreton,  Lady  Evelyn,  7 Barkston  Gardens,  South  Kensington,
London,  S.Mh

Morison,  Mrs.  Miller,  4 Randolph  Cliff,  Edinburgh ; and  Morison
House,  Hetland,  Ruth  well,  N.B.

M orries,  J.  M.,  Gogar  House,  Stirling,  N.B.

Moulton,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  Credit  Lyonnais,  19  Boulevard  des  Italiens,
Paris.

Moultrie,  Miss  A.  J.  C.,  11  Burstock  Road,  Putney,  London,  S.W.
Muirhead,  Prof.  John  Henry,  1 York  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
Musschenbrock,  P.  van,  S.  f.  Soerawinangeen  (Ploembon),  Cheribon,
Java.

*Muriay,  Donald,  3 Lombard  Court,  London,  E.C.

■''■Murray,  Gilbert,  LL.D.,  Barlord,  Churt,  Farnham.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


523


Murray,  K.  G.  V.,  R.I.E.C.,  Cooper’s  Hill,  Englefield  Green,
Staines.

Murray,  Oswald,  3 Compayne  Gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,

N.W.

Murray,  T.  Douglas,  Kunnymede  Park,  Englefield  Green,  Staines.
Muschik,  Dr.  0.  E.,  12  Marble  Arch,  London,  Mb
Musgrove,  Geo.  H.,  Clear  Cottage,  Grena  Road,  Richmond,
Surrey.

Myers,  Dudley  B.,  6 Middleton  Street,  Calcutta,  India.

*Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Nascimento,  Mario,  12  Gloucester  PI.,  Portman  Sq.,  London,  Mb
Nash,  Joseph,  Wheatcroft,  Bradwell,  Great  Yarmouth.

Neate,  P.  J.,  F.G.S.,  Belsize,  \Vatts  Avenue,  Rochester.

^Newcastle,  The  Duke  of.  Clumber,  Worksop,  Notts.

Newill,  George  E.,  48  Wheeleys  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
■*^Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84  Newman  Street,  London,  W.

Nichol,  H.  Ernest,  67  Park  Avenue,  Hull.

^Nicoll,  Mrs.  Delaney,  Mundymere,  Southampton,  Long  Island,  U.S.A.
Nicolls,  Mrs.,  Nicosia,  Cyprus.

Nicholson,  Sir  A.,  K.C.I.E.,  C.M.G.,  British  Legation,  Tangier,
Morocco.

*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  4 Summerhill  Grove,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

*Noel-Cox,  H.  L.,  29  Vicarage  Road,  Eastbourne.

*Norman,  Mrs.  H.  G.,  42  Chester  Square,  London,  S.W.

^Norris,  Professor  Richard,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E.,  The  Laboratory,  Yardley
Fields,  Yardle^q  Birmingham.

Northcote,  The  Hon.  Amyas  Stafford,  Thorns  Barton,  Great  Berk-
hamsted.

*Nugent,  Mrs.  Arthur,  5 Temple  Gardens,  Brighton.

Nunn,  Mrs.  Bindley,  Coddenham,  Ipswich.

Oclgers,  Miss  M.  E.,  c/o  Rev.  A.  D.  Paterson,  Bettencourt,  Caminho,
Pilar,  Funchal,  Vladeira.

O’Donnell,  Elliott,  Clifton  House,  St.  Ives,  Cornwall.

*Ogilvie,  Mrs.  Robert,  c/o  R.  G.  Ross,  Esq.,  5 Queen  Street,  Edin-
burgh.

*Ogilvy,  Mrs.  N.  Hamilton,.  Biel,  Prestonkirk,  East  Lothian,  N.B.
Oman,  Charles  W.  C.,  39  St.  Giles’,  Oxford.

Opie,  Edward  A.  D.,  J.P.,  Pirie  Street,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Ormrod,  Miss  Winifred,  Pen-y-lan,  Ruabon,  North  Wales.

*Orr,  A.  AY.,  15  Moorland  Road,  Didsbuiy,  near  Manchester.
*0’Toole,  Edward,  152  Wauxhall  Bridge  Road,  London,  S.AV.


524


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Pack  Beresfoi'd,  Denis  R.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagnalstown,  Co.  Carlow.
Paetow,  F.  C.,  24  Queen  Anne’s  Grove,  Bedford  Park,  London,  AV.
Pagan,  Miss  C.,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.

Palliser,  Arthiu’,  jun.,  AVharton  Cottage,  Ascot,  Berks.

Parry,  Mrs.  C.  M.,  1 1 Hertford  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  AA^.
*Parsons,  d.  Denham,  58  St.  Oswald’s  Road,  AA^est  Brompton,
London,  S.W.

■*Passingham,  Mrs.,  9 Cedric  Road,  AA^estgate-on-Sea,  Thanet.
Patterson,  C.  B.,  11  East  32nd  Street,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Patterson,  John  E\,  74  Grand’  Rue,  Montreux,  Switzerland.
■’’■Payne,  Ernest,  Hatchlands,  Cuckfield,  Sussex.

Pedley,  Charles  Herbert,  Ferney,  Queen’s  Park,  Chester.

Pegram,  Henry  A.,  36  Marlborough  Hill,  London,  N.AV.
Pemberton,  Miss  Hilda,  66  Glebe  Place,  Chelsea,  London,  S.\A^
Pennington,  Mrs.  Heniy,  AA^oodhurst,  Shorne,  Kent.

Percival,  Mrs.,  2 Southwick  Place,  London,  W.

*Perdicaris,  Ion,  El  Minzah,  Tangier,  Morocco.

^Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  Teneriffe,  Canary  Isles.
Perkins,  Mrs.,  3 Eaton  Place,  Grange  Road,  Guernsey.

Perry,  Sir  E.  Cooper,  AI.D.,  Superintendent’s  House,  Guy’s
Hospital,  London,  S.E.

^Petrovo-Solovovo,  Michael,  6 Quai  Framjais,  St.  Petersburg.
Pethybridge,  AA^alter,  3 Rhodesia  Road,  Clapham  Rise,  London,  S.AV.
Phelips,  H.  V.  M.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  & Co.,  9 Pall  Mall,
London,  S.AA^

Phillimore,  Mrs.,  Kendals,  Elstree  R.S.O.,  Herts.

Pickering,  J.  AY.,  D.Sc.,  S3'lvadene,  Cumberland  Road,  Bromley,
Kent.

*Piddington,  J.  G.

Pidgeon,  Mrs.  D.,  3 Pembroke  Road,  Kensington,  London,  AA^.
^Pilcher,  Captain  A.  J.,  R.E.,  62  The  Common,  AA^oolwich.

^Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  29  Dawson  Place,  London,  AAh
*Ping,  AY.  B.,  2 Mayfield  Avenue,  Chiswick,  London,  AA^

Pinsent,  Mrs.  Hume,  Lordswood,  Ilarborne,  Birmingham.

Piper,  John  E.,  LL.B.,  16  Middleton  Road,  New  AA^'ands worth,
London,  S.AY.

*Pitt,  St.  George  Lane  Fox,  48  Glebe  Place,  Chelsea,  London,  S.AY.
*Podmore,  Frank,  6 Holly  Place,  Hampstead,  London,  N.AA^.
Ponsonby,  Hon.  Mrs.,  14  \AYst  Halkin  Street,  London,  S.AA^.
Ponsonby,  Miss,  Rye  Yale,  Leixlip,  Co.  Kildare.

*Pontifex,  Dudley,  73  Alleyne  Park,  AATst  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


ozo


Pope,  C4eorge  H.,  Merchant’s  Hall,  Bristol.

Popoff,  General  James,

Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  Ilurstbourne  Park,  Whitchurch,
Hants.

Powell,  Miss  Constance  M.,  5 Carnpden  Hill  Square,  London,  W.
*Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  9 Queen’s  Gate  Place,  London,  W.

Powys,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  2.3  Albion  Street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Prager,  Arnold,  L.D.S.,  8 Portman  Square,  London,  W.

Pratt,  Frederick,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.  James’s
Square,  London,  S.  W.

Pratt,  Herbert  A.,  The  Shrubbery,  Tooting  Graveney,  London,  S.W.
Pribitkoff,  V.,  Pedaction  du  Rebus,  dom  Michke,  No.  8,  Smolensky
Boulevard,  Moscow,  Russia.

Priestly,  J.  H.,  72  AVaverley  Road,  Redlands,  Bristol.

Prosser,  R.  A.  S.,  M.R.C.S.,  20  Lozells  Road,  Birmingham.

Pullen,  Miss,  Milton  View,  Elsecar,  Barnsley,  Yorks.

Pumphrey,  Mrs.,  Derwent  Hill,  Ebchester,  Co.  Durham.

Purdie,  Mrs.,  27  Palace  Court,  London,  ’W.

Purgold,  Thomas,  108  Princes  Road,  Liverpool.

Radnor,  Countess  of,  12  Llpper  Brook  Street,  London,  W.

Raggett,  Mrs.,  70  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Raikes,  Mrs.,  The  Leat  House,  Malton,  Yorkshire.

*Raikes,  His  Honour  Judge,  K.C.,  The  Leat  House,  Malton,  Yorks.
Raines,  Lady  Julius,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Ramsden,  Miss,  Bulstrode,  Gerrard’s  Cross,  Bucks.

Rao,  D.  R.  Balaji,  High  Court  Vakil,  Singrachari  Street,  Triplicane,
Madras.

Raper,  R.  W.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.

♦Rashdall,  Rev.  Hastings,  New  College,  Oxford.

Rathbone,  John  S.,  Mystic,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Raupert,  J.  G.  F.,  30  Belsize  Square,  London,  N.W.

■^Raworth,  Edwin,  5 South  Park  Road,  Harrogate.

Reade,  Herbert  V.,  32  Palace  Gardens  Terrace,  Kensington,
London,  W.

*Rendall,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  H.,  Charteihouse,  Godaiming,  Surrey.
Renterghem,  A.  W.  van,  M.D.,  1 Van  Breestraat,  Amsterdam.
Reynolds,  Mrs.,  Millington  House,  Thelwall,  near  Warrington.
Richardson,  Frederick  W.,  Oak  Lea,  Menston-inAVharfedale,  Yorks.
*Ridley,  Henry  N.,  Singapore,  Malay  Peninsula.

^Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham  Gardens,  London,  N.W.

Roberts,  Bertrand,  Kensington  House,  Kensington  Court,  London,  W.


526  Members  and  Assocmtes.  [part

Roberts,  Rev.  “Wb  W.,  76  Kensington  Gardens  Square,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Robertson,  George  M.,  M.B.,  The  Copse,  Larbert,  N.B.

Robertson,  Mrs.,  Nether  Seale  Hall,  Ashby  de  la  Zouch.

^Robinson,  H.  Perry,  15  Tavistock  Street,  Covent  Garden,
London,  W.C.

Robinson,  George  R.,  31  James  Street,  Liverpool.

^Rogers,  Rev.  E.  H.,  Foxley  Lodge,  West  Worthing,  Sussex.
^Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  4 King’s  Parade,  Cambridge.

Rogers,  T.  Percival,  7 Saville  Place,  Clifton,  Bristol.

*Rohde,  Miss,  20  Delamere  Street,  Paddington,  London,  W.

Rolleston,  T.  W.,  104  Pembroke  Road,  Dublin.

^Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5 Hamilton  Place,  London,  W.

Ritcker,  Miss,  4 Vanbrugh  Terrace,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.
*Rucker,  Sir  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  19  Gladhow  Gardens,  London,  S. W.
*Rumsey,  Charles  Almaric,  33  Hawke  Road,  Upper  Norwood,
London,  S.E.

Rushton,  Charles  H.,  8 Billiter  Square,  London,  E.C.

Russell,  Rev.  T.  H.,  St.  Martin’s  Vicarage,  Gospjel  Oak,  London,

N.W.

Ryves,  Miss  Evangeline,  4 Bawtree  Road,  Uxbridge.

Ryves,  Miss  Miriam  G.  B.,  4 Bawtree  Road,  Uxbridge.

Sadgrove,  W.  Arthur,  The  Knowle,  Normanton  Road,  South  Croy-
don, London,  S.E.

Sampson,  Col.  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Hayward’s  Heath.
Sanders,  Mrs.,  33  Buckingham  Palace  Mansions,  Grosvenor  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

^Sarawak,  Ranee  of.  Grey  Friars,  Ascot,  Berks.

^Savory,  Mrs.  Agnes  R.,  31  Bramham  Gardens,  South  Kensington,
London,  S.W.

*Scatcherd,  Miss  F.  R.,  Ringmore  House,  Quarry  Road,  Hastings.
*Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.

Schmidt,  Julius,  Cornwall  Cottage,  582  Woolwich  Road,  Charlton,
London,  S.E.

Schreiner,  Miss  Julia,  56  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.

Schultze,  Dr.  Otto,  Markt  4,  Merseburg,  Germany.

Schuster,  Miss,  Cottenham  House,  Wimbledon.

Schwabe,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  Lieut.-Governor’s  House,  Chelsea  Hospital,
London,  S.\V.

*Scott,  Sydney  C.,  Hatherleigh,  28  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill,  London,
S.E.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


527


Scull,  Mrs.,  The  Pines,  2Langland  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.^Y.
Selous,  Mrs.,  15  Fitzgerald  Avenue,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Seliin,  Professor  Carl  AY.,  Holsteinische  Str.  30,  AYilmersdorf,
Berlin,  Germany.

Servante,  Rev.  C.  W.,  Junior  Conservative  Club,  Albemarle  Street,
London,  AY.

Seymour,  Admiral  Sir  E.  H.,  G.C.B.,  9 Ovington  Square,  London,
S.AAC

Sliadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  Trewollack,  Bodmin.

Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1 Edwardes  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.
^Sharpe,  J.  AA^,  AAModroffe,  Portarlington  Road,  Bournemouth.

Shaw,  Rev.  Charles  J.  M.,  The  Vicarage,  Margate.

Shaw,  Mrs.  AA''.  N.,  10  Moreton  Gardens,  London,  S.AA^.

*Shove,  Miss  E.,  M.B.,  25  St.  Mark’s  Crescent,  Regent’s  Park,
London,  N.AA".

Shuttle  worth,  Miss  C.  J.,  10  Cottesmore  Gardens,  Kensington,
London,  AAh

■*^Sidgwick,  Arthur,  64  AVoodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Edward,  25  Collingham  Road,  London,  S.AA^.
^Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  Kewnham  College,  Cambridge.

^Silver,  Airs.,  142  Ebury  Street,  London,  S.AA'’.

Singh,  Amar,  Hoshiarpur,  Punjab,  India.

Sivudu,  Rayasam  Venkata,  Rajah’s  College,  Parlakimedi  (Dt.  Gan-
jam),  Madras  Presidency,  India.

Skeffington,  Joseph  B.,  LL.D.,  AA^aterford,  Ireland.

Slater,  Leigh,  Lillicroft,  Disley,  Cheshire.

*Sloane,  George  G.,  Cleeve  Lodge,  Earls  Road,  Bournemouth  AYest.
Slole}^  Aubrey  L.,  Savanna  la  Mar,  Jamaica,  AA^.I.

Smith,  Adolphe,  12  Crookham  Road,  Fulham,  London,  S.AY.

Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
*Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  7 Queen’s  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  AY.
Smith,  H.  Babington,  General  Post  Office,  London.

Smith,  D.  R.  Crawfurth,  1 AAJiitehall  Place,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  G.  Albert,  St.  Ann’s  AYell,  Brighton.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Scarborough.

Smith,  Reginald  A.,  78  Cranwich  Road,  Amherst  Park,  London,  N.
Smith,  Rev.  Sydney  M.,  Hebden  Bridge  Vicarage,  Yorkshire.

Smith,  AAC  Johnson,  Pengelly  House,  Beaulieu  Road,  AYestbourne,
Bournemouth.

Smithson,  Mrs.,  42  Tilehouse  Street,  Hitchen.

Snape,  Mrs.,  St.  Bees,  Beachy  Head  Road,  Eastbourne.


528


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Snovv,  Chester  A,,  523  Ninth  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Sodemann,  Carl,  47  Mark  Lane,  London,  E.C.

Sparrow,  G.  W.  S.,  Albrighton  Hall,  near  Shrevvsbur3^

*Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.
^Spencer,  Cyril  E.,  Nicosia,  Cyprus.

Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  25  York  Street,  Portman  Square,
London,  W.

Stackelberg,  Baron  Charles  de,  3 Moschkow  pereonlok,  St.  Peters-
burg, Russia.

Stange,  Miss,  16  Lauderdale  Mansions,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
Stannard,  Mrs.  J.,  New  County  Club,  21  Hanover  Square,
London,  W.

Stansfeld,  Miss,  Artillery  Mansions,  Victoria  Street,  London,

S.W.

Stapleton,  Mrs.,  4G  Montagu  Square,  London,  W.

*Stapley,  Richard,  33  Bloomsbury  Square,  London,  AV.C.

Stead,  William  T.,  Cambridge  House,  M^imbledon.

Steen,  Miss  Maud,  Sharvagh,  Bushmills,  Co.  Antrim.

Stephens,  Mrs.,  41  Harrington  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Stevenson,  Andrew,  16  Warrender  Park  Crescent,  Edinburgh.
Stewart,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.

Stout,  Professor  George  F.,  Craigard,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.

Strachey,  Charles,  Colonial  Office,  Downing  Street,  London,  S.W.
*Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  Spectator  Office,  1 Wellington  Street,
Strand,  London,  W.C.

Stratton,  F.  J.  M.,  Raymead,  14  Harborne  Road,  Edgbaston,
Birmingham.

Strong,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  St.  Kilda  East,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Sturge,  IMiss  M.  Carta,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,
Hants.

Sumner,  Mrs.,  35  Palliser  Road,  West  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Sutton,  Mrs.,  49  Lexham  Gardens,  London,  W.

Sweeney,  Hubert  J.  P.,  4 Estelle  Road,  Gospel  Oak,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.

Sweetman,  G.  Drysdale,  Windsor  House,  St.  Thomas  Street,  Ryde,

I.W.

Swiie,  Commander  H.,  R.N.,  Clifton  Lodge,  Grosvenor  Road,

Weymouth.

Szentirmay  de  Darvasto,  Bela  Maria  Joseph  de,  Austro-Hungarian
Consulate,  Cairo,  Egypt.

Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  Northsyde,  High  Street,  Teddington.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


529


^Talbot,  Lady  Edmund,  1 Buckingham  Palace  C4ardens,  London,
S.W.

Talbot,  Major  Frederick  G.,  Pifle  Brigade,  Khartoum,  Egypt.

Tate,  T.  B.,  Allerburn,  Alnwick.

^Taylor,  Eev.  Charles  J.,  Ashlawn,  Blandford  Ed.,  Eeigate,  Surrey.

Taylor,  Thomas,  Church  Street,  Boston  Spa,  Yorkshire.

*Taylor,  Lieut.-Col.  G.  L.  Le  M.,  6 College  Lawn,  Cheltenham.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Eede  Hall,  nr.  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.

Temple,  Eeginald  \Y.,  Ashley  House,  Shaftsbury  Avenue,  London,
W.C.

Tennant,  Mrs.  C.  C.,  5 Sloane  Court,  Lower  Sloane  Street,
London,  S.W.

Thomas,  Eev.  C.  D.,  2 Maison  Dieu  Eoad,  Dover.

*Thomas,  J.  W.,  Overdale,  Shortlands,  Kent.

Thomas,  Northcote  W.,  7 Coptic  St.,  London,  W.C.

^Thompson,  Eobert  A.,  2 Westleigh  Eoad,  Narboro  Eoad,  Leicester.
Thompson,  Mrs.  Edmond,  87  South  Hill  Park,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.

*Thomson,  Edward  J.,  Western  Club,  Glasgow,  X.B.

Thomson,  W.  B.,  22  Wallwood  Eoad,  Leytonstone,  Essex.

Thornhill,  Miss,  The  Hautboy  Hotel,  Ockham,  Surrey.

Thornley,  Miss  F.  J.,  36  Downleaze,  Stoke  Bishop,  Bristol.
Thornton,  W.  M.,  D.Sc.  (Viet. ),  Durham  College  of  Science,  New-
castle-on-Tyne.

Thurn  and  Taxis,  H.I.H.  The  Princess  Alexander  of,  Lautschin,
Nimburg,  Bohemia,  Austria.

Thurstan,  F.  W.,  Eiverfield,  Old  Windsor.

*Torre,  Mrs.  E.  F.,  9 Cumberland  Terrace,  Eegent’s  Park,  London,
N.W.

Trafford,  Mrs.  Galfrid  de,  13  Albemarle  Street,  London,  W.
Trevelec,  Eev.  Marquis  de.,  F.E.G.S.,  Claygate,  Surre3^

*Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  88  Park  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,
London,  W.

Turnbull,  Mrs.,  11  Bentinck  Street,  Cavendish  Square,  London,  W.
Turner,  Sydney,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.

*Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Balquholly,  Turriff,  N.B.

Tyndall,  Arthur  M.,  31  Eedland  Grove,  Bristol.

Tyrone,  Jorge  O’Neill  de,  59  Rua  das  Flores,  Lisbon.

Unwin,  Mrs.,  Avenue  House,  Aspley  Guise  E.S.O.,  Bedfordshire.
Van  der  Veer-Green,  Mrs.,  4k,  Bickenhall  Mansions,  Gloucester
Place,  London,  W.


530  Members  and  Associates.  [part

Velsen,  Dr.  Prosper  van,  Godefroi  de  Bouillon,  61,  Brussels,
Belgium.

Venables,  Rev.  Herbert  A.,  28  Yiale  Principe  Amedeo,  Florence.
Venning,  Rev.  C.  H.,  41  Estelle  Road,  Gospel  Oak,  London,  N.W.
*Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  5 Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26  Gloucester  Place,  Brighton.

Vesnie,  Cesar  Baudi  de,  6 Rue  Saulnier,  Paris,  France.
Vian-Williams,  Rev.  H.,  3 Waterloo  Place,  North  Shields.

Vickers,  Mrs.,  35  Park  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  W.
Villamarina,  The  Marchesa  di,  Palazza  Reale,  Quirinale,  Rome.
^Vincent,  W.  James,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  South  Yorkshire
Asylum,  AVadsley,  Sheffield.

Vogan,  Randal,  The  Beeches,  Guildown  Road,  Guildford.

AVakefield,  Captain  H.  G.  R.,  Prince  of  AVales  Leinster  Regiment,
Junior  Naval  and  Military  Club,  Piccadilly,  London,  AV.

AA'alker,  Miss  Madeline  J.,  107  Queen’s  Gate,  London,  S.AV.

AA^all,  Miss  M.  Mack,  17  Somerset  Terrace,  Duke’s  Road,  London,
W.C.

^AA'^allace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  39  Harley  Street,  London,  AA".

AVard,  The  Hon.  Kathleen,  Castle  AA^ard,  Downpatrick.

*Warndorfer,  A.,  Muhlgasse  50,  Baden,  nr.  Vienna,  Austria.
AA^arrender,  Miss  Margaret,  87  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.  W.

AVassell,  H.  A.,  Addenbrook  Villa,  Old  Swinford,  Stourbridge.

AA^ebb,  Mrs.,  Chadmore,  Cheltenham.

Weblier,  Mrs.,  25  Tedworth  Square,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

AVedd,  N.,  King’s  College,  Cambridge.

*AA^ells,  E.  P.,  The  Limes,  94  Larkhall  Rise,  Clapham,  London,  S.AA^.
*Westcott,  AA^.  AA^ynn,  M.B.,  D.P.H.,  396  Camden  Road,  London,  N.
*AA^estlake,  Ernest,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.

AA'estropp,  A.  S.  A.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.
James’s  Square,  London,  S.AV.

AVetherall,  George  B.,  Severus  Mount,  Merriman’s  Hill,  AA^orcester.
AVhall,  AATlliam  B.,  11  Linkheld,  Musselburgh.

AAJiamond,  J.  Robbie,  15  Langland  Gardens,  Finchley  Road,
London,  N.AA^.

AA^heatley,  G.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  & Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,
London,  S.AA^.

Wheeler,  C.  Bickersteth,  7 St.  Stephen’s  Crescent,  Bayswater,
London,  AV.

AA'hitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.

*AVhite,  Leedham,  16  AVetherby  Gardens,  London,  S.W.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associaies.


531


White,  Miss,  70  West  Street,  Brighton.

White,  Mrs.,  133  Lordship  Road,  Stoke  Newington,  London,  N.
*Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  The  Clrove,  Newnham,  Cambridge.
Whitehurst,  The  Rev.  J.  B.  Howes,  Farnborough  Rectory,  Wantage,
Berks.

'^Whiting,  J.  Markby,  17  Copse  Hill,  Wimbledon,  London,  S.W.
Wigan,  Rev.  Herbert,  Diinsden  Vicarage,  Reading.

Wigan,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone.

AVild,  Ernest  E.,  1 Garden  Court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Wilkins,  Mrs.,  40  Harcourt  Street,  Dublin.

Willett,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindfield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
AVilliams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  52  King  William  Street,  London,  E.C.
Williams,  C.  Hanbury,  Windham’s  Club,  St.  James’s  Square,
London,  S.W.

^Williams,  Sir  Hartley,  Queen  Anne’s  Mansions,  London,  SAV.
*Williams,  Colonel  S.  de  la  Grange,  Broomie  Close,  Sutton  Coldfield,
Birmingham.

Wilson,  Miss  C.  M.,  40  AVestbourne  Grove,  Scarborough.

AAJlson,  Airs.  A.  E.,  Little  AA'elbourne,  Pagham,  near  Bognor.
AAJlson,  Mrs.  C.  Stuart,  Trematon,  The  Thicket,  Southsea.

VAJlson,  Mrs.  H.  J.,  12  Cheyne  Court,  Chelsea,  London,  S.AA^.
*AAJlson,  Robert,  7 St.  Andrews  Place,  Regent’s  Park,  London,  N.W.
*AAJnckworth,  Airs.,  12  Kensington  Alansions,  Earl’s  Court,  London,
S.AV.

AAJnder,  AA^.  Gilgross,  12  Grange  Road,  Sharrow,  Sheflield.

AAJngate,  D.  C.,  Cornborough,  Abbotsham,  North  Devon.

AAJngfiekl,  H.  E.,  M.D.,  25  St.  Swithun  Street,  AAJnchester.

AA  ingfield,  Aliss  K.,  7 Barkston  Gardens,  S.  Kensington,  London,

S.W.

AATtherby,  Arthur  George,  7 Essex  Street,  Strand,  London,  AAJC.
AA^itt,  Mrs.  R.  C.,  8 Greycoat  Gardens,  London,  S.AA^.

AA^olfi;  The  Baroness  Kitty,  7 Basseinaia,  St.  Petersburg,  Russia.
AVood,  Lionel,  4 Simonside  Terrace,  Heaton,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
■*’AAmod,  R.  H.,  2k  Hyde  Park  Alansions,  London,  N.AV.

AVoodhull,  Miss  Zula  AI,  Norton  Park,  Bredon’s  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury,  Worcestershire.

*AA^oods,  Miss  Alice,  3 North  Alansions,  Burton  Road,  Kilburn,
London,  N.W.

*AVoods,  John  F.,  AID.,  29  Queen  Anne  Street,  Cavendish  Square,
London,  AV.

AVoodward,  Aliss  Alabel,  18  Harborne  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.


532


Members  and  Associates.


[part


^Wooldridge,  H.  B.,  Oaklands,  Hatfield  Heath,  Harlow,  Essex.
Woollett,  Major  W.  Charles,  13  Lansdowne  Road,  Aldershot.
Woolley,  V.  J.,  King’s  College,  Cambridge.

*Worsfold,  Mrs.  Basil,  Star  P.G.,  Box  1014,  Johannesburg,  S.  Africa.
*Wrey,  Miss  Florence,  Falklands,  Fleet  R.S.O.,  Hants.

Wrey,  Mrs.,  Tawstock  Rectory,  Barnstaple,  N.  Devon.

Wright,  William,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.,  The  University,  Birmingham.
Wyld,  George,  M.D.,  79  Mount  Ephraim,  Tunbridge  "Wells.

Wyld,  Mrs.,  3 Savile  Row,  London,  W.

*"Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44  Belgrave  Square,  London,  W.
Yaroschenko,  Madame,  c/o  E.  E.  Berry,  Esq.,  Banca  et  Agrenzia
Inglese,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Yegounofll',  Mademoiselle  Nina,  Zverinskaia,  17a,  Logement  37,
Peterburgskaia  Storona,  St.  Petersburg,  Russia.

*Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  10  Granville  Place,  London,  "W.

Young,  Rev.  Henry,  28  Moore  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Young,  Prof.  H.,  883  East  Main  Street,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Zahn,  G.  P.  H.,  Biltstraat  151,  Utrecht,  Holland.

Zaguiy,  Leon,  12  Emanuel  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


533


MEMBP:RS  and  associates  of  the  AMERICAN

BRANCH.

(October,  1904.)


An  asterisk  is  prefixed  to  the  mnnes  of  Members.


All  Addresses  are  “ U.S.A.”  except  where  another  country  is  named.

Adamowska,  Madame  S.,  163  Walnut  Street,  Brookline,  Mass.
Adams,  George  S.,  M.D.,  Insane  Hospital,  \Vestboro,  Mass.
Agelasto,  Michael  A.,  Box  485,  Norfolk,  Va.

Albree,  John,  Junr.,  Swampscott,  Mass.

Albree,  Ralph,  187  "Western  Avenue,  Alleghen}',  Pa.

Aldrich,  AV.  F.,  Rajah  Lodge,  Aldrich,  Alabama.

Allen,  B.  B.,  125  South  Spruce  Street,  Nashville,  Tenn.

Allen,  C.  S.,  Rooms  114-115,  Burr  Block,  Lincoln,  Neb.

Ames,  Miss  Evelyn,  355  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Anderson,  Prof.  A.  AV.,  Macalester  College,  St.  Paul,  Minn.
Anderson,  0.  W.,  512  Masonic  Temple,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Argiielles,  Don  Pedro,  Gobernador  del  Estado  de  Famaulipas,
C.  Victoria,  Mexico.

Arnold,  Alfred,  c/o  Mrs.  G.  Tilbury,  24  Calle  Mendoza,  Quiapo,
Manila,  P.I.

Arnold,  Miss  Fannie,  323  North  17th  Street,  Omaha,  Neb.

Atwater,  Horace  G.,  Norfolk,  St.  Lawrence  Co.,  N.Y.

*Bailey,  Joseph  T.,  P.O.  Box  266,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  2641  Prairie  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Baker,  W.  H.,  341  Jersey  Street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Baldwin,  A.  E.,  M.D.,  1013  Venetian  Building,  34  Washington  Street,
Chicago,  111.

Ballantine,  Mrs.  Richard  H.,  48  Buckingham  St.,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Bancroft,  Miss  M.,  Haddonfield  Training  School,  Haddontield,  N.J.
^Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  3914  Ellis  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Barnum,  Starr  H.,  20  Whitney  Ave.,  New  Haven,  Conn.

Barrett,  Harrison  D.,  Canaan,  Maine.


534


Members  and  Associate'-^.


[part


^Barrows,  C.  M.,  386  Newbury  Street,  Boston,  ^lass.

*Bartlett,  James  W.,  211  Central  Avenue,  Dover,  N.H.

Bassett,  Mrs.  E.  J.,  1923  8th  Avenue,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Batcheller,  Mrs.  Francis,  270  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Bates,  Delevan,  Aurora,  Neb.

Bates,  Mrs.  Katharine,  5 Locke  Street,  Andover,  Mass.

Bay  ley,  Mrs.  Emily  E.,  1438  Poplar  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
*Bayley,  Weston  D.,  M.D.,  S.E.  cor.  L5th  and  Poplar  Streets,
Philadelphia,  Pa.

Beam,  Mrs.  J.  V.,  Jr.,  80  Madison  Avenue,  New  York  City.
Beaver,  Mrs.  Mary  Patterson,  Conshohocken,  Pa.

Beebe,  C.  E.,  408  West  9th  Street,  Chattanooga,  Tenn.

Beeson,  Hannibal  A.,  INl.D.,  Leesburg,  Ohio.

Belden,  Mrs.  Amanda  W.,  Kenwood  Hotel,  Kenwood  Avenue  and
47th  Street,  Chicago.  111.

Bell,  Clark  (summer),  Dundee,  N.Y. ; (winter)  Medico-Legal  Journal,
39  Broadway,  New  York  City.

Benjamin,  Mrs.  Charles  A.,  5419  Germantown  Av.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Benskin,  Frederick  G.,  1410  Fulton  Street,  Canton,  Ohio.

Bentley,  Cyrus,  215  Dearborn  Street,  Chicago,  111.

Berg,  Philip,  Taylor,  Wisconsin.

Berryhill,  Mr.s.  James  G.,  1101  Pleasant  Street,  Des  Moines,  Iowa.
Biglej^,  M.,  731  Joplin  Street,  Joplin,  Mo.

Blaine,  Mrs.  Emmons,  5 The  Raymond,  M^alton  Place,  Chicago,  111.
Blair,  Mrs.  C.  J.,  c/o  Monroe  & Co.,  7 Rue  Scribe,  Paris,  France.
Block,  Louis,  211  Main  Street,  Davenport,  Iowa.

Blodgett,  Mrs.  C.,  272  M^alnut  Street,  Holyoke,  Mass.

Blossom,  Miss  Mary  C.,  226  MYst  58th  Street,  New  York  City.
Boardman,  Hon.  W.  F.,  Department  of  the  Interior,  Ottawa,  Canada.
Borum,  Miss  Addie  A.,  Rural  Route  1,  Attica,  Indiana.
Both-Hendriksen,  Miss  Louise,  150  Lefterts  Place,  Brooklyn,  N.'Y
Bourne,  Mrs.  C.  Gri.swold,  1 "West  68th  Street,  New  York  City.
Bourns,  Miss  Florence,  4 Bronson  Place,  Toledo,  Ohio.

*Bowditch,  C.  P.,  28  State  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bowen,  Miss  Anna  C.,  210  E.  Main  Street,  Batavia,  N.Y.
♦Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.

Bradley,  Arthur  C.,  Newport,  New  Hampshire.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama.

Brooks,  Henry,  24  Milk  Street,  Room  902,  Boston,  Mass.

Broomell,  Geo.  D.,  496  W.  Monroe  Street,  Chicago,  111.

Brown,  Alfred  S.,  160  "West  76th  Street,  New  York  City.


XLTX.]


Members  and  Associates.


535


Brown,  Miss  Ella,  Canaan,  Conn.

Brown,  Henry  T.,  Hillcrest,  Winchester,  Mass.

Brown,  Mrs.  H.  T.,  Hillcrest,  Winchester,  Mass.

Brown,  Kev.  Howard  N.,  P.O.  Box  91,  South  Framingham,  Mass.
^Brown,  Mrs.  Samuel  R.,  2501  Farnam  Street,  Omaha,  Neb.
Brundage,  J.  M.,  Andover  State  Bank,  Andover,  N.Y.

Brush,  W.  Franklin,  16  East  37th  Street,  New  York  City.

Bulfet,  Edward  P.,  804  Bergen  Avenue,  Jersey  City  Heights,  N.J.
Bullard,  Dr.  'VV.  N.,  89  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bulley,  R.  H.,  Canton,  Ohio.

Bullock,  Arthur  R.,  P.O.  Box  138,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

Bundy,  Mrs.  John  C.,  624  Sheridan  Square,  Evanston,  111.

Burgess,  Dr.  0.  0.,  373  Geary  Street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Butin,  Dr.  J.  L.,  B.  Street,  Madera,  Cal.

Capron,  Mrs.  Cynthia  J.,  340  S.  Galena  Avenue,  Freeport,  111.
Card-Catlin,  Mrs.  Lovisa,  726  French  Street,  Erie,  Pa.

Carey,  Mrs.  A.  A.,  144  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Carpenter,  Prof.  G.  R.,  Columbia  University,  New  York  City.

Carr,  Lucien,  163  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Carr,  ”\Y.  K.,  1413  K.  Street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.

Carrington,  Hereward,  321  5Yest  42nd  Street,  New  York  City.
Casey,  Theodore  B.,  83  Equitable  Building,  Boston,  Mass.

Cassatt,  Miss  Mary,  10  Rue  de  Marignan,  Paris,  France.

Chapman,  Hon.  Geo.  T.,  290  Pearl  Street,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

Chard,  Thomas  S.,  534  North  State  Street,  Chicago,  111.

Chase,  G.  N.,  Neosho,  Missouri.

Chase,  Harvey  S.,  27  State  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Chase,  Thorington  C.,  College  Gardens,  Hongkong,  China.

Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  126  Commonwealth  Av.,  Boston,  Mass.
Cheney,  W.  T.,  Box  184,  Rome,  Ga.

Clarke,  A.  H.,  Room  27,  St.  Nicholas  Bldg.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
*Clarke,  Mrs.  Alice  J.,  506  North  Seventh  Street,  Vincennes,  Ind.
Clarke,  Eugene  M.,  28  Union  Avenue,  Mount  Vernon,  N.Y.

Clarke,  M.  L.,  150  Wellington  Street,  W.,  Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada.
Clarke,  Miss  Rebecca  S.,  Box  212,  Norridgewock,  Maine.

*Clawson,  G.  W.,  206  North  3rd  Street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Cleaveland,  Rev.  Willis  M.,  Winn.,  Me.

Closson,  Dr.  James  H.,  53  West  Chelten  Ave.,  Germantown,  Pa.
Closson,  Miss  Olivia  T.,  1359  Columbia  Road,  Washington,  D.C.
Clough,  Albert  L.,  Box  114,  Manchester,  N.H.

Coe,  Miss  M.  A.,  96  Chesnut  Street,  Boston,  Mass.


536


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Coffin,  Abraham  B.,  Box  131,  Winchester,  Mass.

Cole,  Mrs.  E.  E.,  19  Grove  Street,  Concord,  N.H.

Coleman,  George  E.,  1726  West  23rd  Street,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.
Coleman,  Dr.  H.  L.,  Box  29,  Farragut,  Iowa.

Collins,  AVilliam  G.,  261  West  85th  Street,  New  York  City.

Cook,  Rev.  C.  H.,  Ph.D.,  1906  Pearl  Street,  Denver,  Colo.
Coolidge,  J.  T.,  Junr.,  114  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Cope,  Porter  F.,  4806  Chester  Avenue,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Coryell,  V.  M.,  151  Linden  Avenue,  Flatbush,  N.Y.

Cox,  J.  Cromwell,  181  Waller  Street,  Ottawa,  Canada.

Cox,  Miss  Jean  AY.,  The  Lindens,  Haddonfiekl,  N.J.

Cox,  Mrs.  Rowland,  310  AA^est  7th  Street,  Plainfield,  N.J.

Cozens,  J.  C.,  Amsterdam,  N.Y.

Craige,  AVm.  C.,  409  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

*Crandall,  AV.  S.,  253  Broadway,  New  York  City.

Crane,  xA.  J.,  218  AA^alnut  Street,  Montclair,  N.J.

Crawford,  Mrs.  Andrew,  109  Pine  Grove  .4ve.,  Lake  View,
Chicago,  111.

Cross,  Mrs.  R.  J.,  Bearfort  House,  Newfoundland,  N.J.

Crothers,  Dr  T.  D.,  AA^alnut  Lodge,  Hartford,  Conn.

Crutcher,  Ernest,  M.D.,  Great  Falls,  Montana.

Currier,  Mrs.  Moody,  Manchester,  N.H.

*Curtis,  AAb  E.,  27  AA^est  47th  Street,  New  York  City.

Cushman,  Dr.  Allertoii  1751  N.  Street,  AA'ashington,  D.C.

Dailey,  Judge  A.  H.,  16  Court  Street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Dale,  Allan,  110  St.  Nicholas  Avenue,  New  York  City.

Daugharty,  Allan  H.,  5450  Michigan  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.
David.son,  H A.,  177  VIoutague  Street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Dawson,  Miles  Al.,  11  Broadway,  New  York  City.

Delabarre,  Prof.  E.  B.,  9 Arlington  Avenue,  Providence,  R.I.
Delgado,  F.  Cadenas,  Caracas,  A^enezuela,  South  America.

Demining,  Beiij.  AA^.,  Harrisburg,  Pa.

Derby,  Major  George  McC.,  Room  425,  Custom  House,  Louisville,  Ky.
Derby,  Dr.  Hasket,  182  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Devine,  Andrew,  145  Broadway,  New  York  City.

De  AAJtt,  Mrs.  Harriet,  Braadmoor,  Colorado  Springs,  Colo.

Dickey,  Calvin,  Rooms  45-46  Lenox  Building,  90  AA^ashington
Street,  Chicago,  111.

Doane,  Mrs.  AV.  E.,  Stocklrridge,  Mass.

Dodge,  Mrs.  J.  T.,  203  AVest  AA'ashington  Avenue,  Madison,  AA^is.
Donaldson,  James  AAA,  Ellenville,  N.Y.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


537


Dorr,  George  B.,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Dow,  Alexander,  47  West  43rd  Street,  New  York  City.

Drake,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  Auburndale,  Mass.

*Draper,  George  Otis,  Hopedale,  Mass.

Duggin,  Mrs.  Chas.,  25  East  38th  Street,  New  York  City.

Dutton,  E.  E.,  Lincoln,  Neb.

Dyer,  Walter  H.,  South  Portland,  Maine.

Eager,  George  E.,  Auburndale,  Mass.

Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  5 Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.

Egner,  Frederic,  Norfolk,  Ya.

Eldridge,  Prof.  E.  H.,  Simmons  College,  30  Huntington  Avenue,
Boston,  Mass.

Eldridge,  John  E.,  M.D.,  1060  K.  Street,  Fresno,  Cal.

Elinore,  Miss  Kate,  c/o  Elinore  Sisters,  402  Sackett  Street,
Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Elliott,  Miss  Alma  C..  167  South  Water  Street,  Chicago,  111.

Ely,  Eobert  E.,  23  West  44th  Street,  New  Fork  City.

Esty,  Prof.  M"m.  C.,  Amherst  College,  Amherst,  Mass.

Evans,  Miss  Ella  K.,  186  North  Street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Evans,  Mark  G.,  409  Mining  Exchange  Building,  Denver,  Colo.
Fay,  Prof.  Charles  E.,  53  Irving-  Place,  New  York  Citv.

Feudner,  J.,  Eushville,  Indiana.

Fillebrown,  Thos.,  M.D.,  D.M.D.,  157  Newbury  St.,  Boston,  Mass.
Finnigan,  John,  1207  M‘Kinney  Avenue,  Houston,  Texas
Fisher,  L.  S.,  Sparta,  Wisconsin.

Flower,  Sydney,  30-31  The  Auditorium,  Chicago,  111.

Flower,  Mrs.  George  W.,  615  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York  Cit}'.

Folts,  A.  F.,  20th  and  P,  Streets,  Lincoln,  Neb.

Forbes,  John  M.,  Morristown,  N.J.

*Forman,  G.  A.,  824  Delaware  Avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Frankland,  Frederick  W.,  Herston,  Foxton,  Manawater,  New  Zealand.
Franklin,  Mrs.  Anne  E.,  2015  Nebraska  Ave.,  Tampa,  Florida.
Freas,  W.  E.,  1212  Sergeant  Street,  Phila.,  Pa.

Freeman,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Box  322,  Hinsdale,  111.

Funk,  Dr.  I.  K.,  195  Washington  Park,  Brooklyn  N.Y.

Fyke,  E.  E.,  M.D.,  Centralia,  111.

*Gage,  Hon.  Lyman  J.,  45  Wall  Street,  New  York  Citjv
*Gale,  Prof.  Harlow  S.,  Universitj-  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
*Gardiner,  Prof.  J.  Hays,  18  Gray’s  Hall,  Harvard  University,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Gardiner,  Prof.  H.  N.,  23  Crafts  Avenue,  Northampton,  Mass.


538


[part


Members  and  Associates.

Garvin,  M.  T.,  Lancaster,  Pa.

Gateley,  Mrs.  J.  P.,  Hotel  Lafayette  Brevoort,  8th  Street  and  5th
Avenue,  New  York  City.

Gehring,  Albert,  109  Edge  water  Street,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

Gehring,  Dr.  J.  G.,  Bethel,  Maine.

*Gerrish,  Dr.  F.  H.,  675  Congress  Street,  Portland,  Maine.

Gibbs,  Mrs.  Ellen,  3001  Dwight  Way,  Berkeley,  Cal.

Goddard,  George  A.,  10  Tremout  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

GoodnoAv,  H.  E..,  95  Eiverside  Drive,  New  York  City.

Gower,  Dr.  John  H.,  Denver,  Colo.

Gray,  Henry  G.,  161  Madison  Avenue,  New  York  City,

Gra}^,  Mrs.  John  C.,  176  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Alass.

Green,  Ealph  K.,  310  Fernwell  Building,  Spokane,  Wash.

Greene,  Bertram,  Central  Aguirre,  Porto  Eico.

Gridley,  J.  N.,  Virginia,  111.

Griffing,  Mrs.  Jane  E.,  1729  Amsterdam  Avenue,  New  York  City.
■^Grower,  George  G.,  Ansonia  Brass  & Copper  Co.,  Ansonia,  Conn.
Gunn,  Franklin  F.,  Glens  Falls,  N.Y.

Haines,  Oliver  S.,  M.D.,  137  North  15th  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Hanna,  Carl  L.,  102  N.  Jefferson  Street,  Newcastle,  Pa.

Hanson,  H.  P.,  Box  48,  E.  F.  D.,  Eoute  No.  2,  Harlan,  Iowa.
Hardaway,  W.  A.,  M.D.,  2922  Locust  Street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Harman,  J.  M.,  Millville,  Pa.

Harnly,  H.  J.,  A.M.,  Ph.D.,  M'Pherson,  Kansas.

Harriman,  T.  G.,  B S.,  M.D.,  Hampton,  Iowa.

Harris,  F.,  1303  North  Garrison  Avenue,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Harris,  John  S.,  Eoom  156,  Pennsylvania  Building,  Butte,  Montana.
Hart,  The  Very  Eev.  H.  Martyn,  The  Deanery,  Denver,  Colo.
^Hartness,  James,  Springfield,  Vermont.

Harts,  H.  B.,  225i  South  5th  Street,  Springfield,  111.

■^'Hartshorn,  Miss  Cornelia,  Milton,  Mass.

Hartshorne,  Charles  H.,  239  Washington  Street,  Jersey  City,  N.J.
Haubens,  Henry,  1547  North  20th  Street,  Omaha,  Neb.

Haworth,  Mrs.  George  D.,  Decatur,  111.

Hayes,  Eev.  C.  H.,  Gen.  Theological  Seminary,  Chelsea  Scjuare,
New  York  City.

Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Ma.ss.

Hayward,  Mrs.  Alvinza,  San  Mateo,  Cal.

Heath,  Mrs.  Caroline  P.,  348  Alarlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
Hebard,  Charles,  M.D.,  Mondovi,  Wis.

Heilner,  Eev.  S.  A.,  D.D.,  137  East  Tabor  Eoad,  Philadelphia,  Pa.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


539


*Hemenway,  Augustus,  Eeadville,  Mass.

Henrici,  Jacob,  6126  Penn.  Avenue,  Pittsburg,  Pa.

Henshaw,  Mrs.  Harriet  A.,  1760  N,  Street,  Washington,  D.C.
Hess,  David,  Brook,  Ind.

Heysinger,  Dr.  Isaac  W..  1521  Poplar  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Hicks,  Benj.  D.,  Old  Westbury,  Queen’s  Co.,  N.Y.

*Higbee,  Colonel  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa.

Hillman,  Hugh  H.,  Bank  of  Commerce  Building,  Oklahoma,  O.T.
Hobson,  A.  E.,  International  Silver  Co.,  Factory  A,  Box  617,
Meriden,  Conn.

Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5 Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.
Hodgson,  Dr.  Thomas,  Gertrude  Street,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Hoffman,  Prof.  F.  S.,  Union  College,  Schenectad}^,  N.Y.

Hoffman,  Dr.  J.  C.,  46  Van  Buren  Street,  Chicago,  111.

Hogg,  Andrew,  537  West  9th  Street,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.

^Holbrook,  Levi,  P.O.  Box  536,  New  York  Cit)^

Holdt,  A.  E.,  Box  551,  Atlanta,  Ga.

Holmes,  Dr.  H.  P.,  512  Second  Avenue,  Troy,  N.Y.

Holmes,  Prof  Jesse  H.,  »Swarthmore  College,  Swarthmore,  Pa.
*Holt,  Mrs.  A.  Stewart,  224  West  132nd  Street,  New  York  City.
*Holt,  Henry,  29  West  23rd  Street,  New  York  City.

Holt,  Dr.  L.  E.,  14  West  55th  Street,  New  York  City.

Hopkins,  E.  S.,  Jr.,  241  West  24th  Street,  New  Y'ork  City.
Horgan,  A.  J.,  124  West  7 1st  Street,  New  York  City.

Hornsby,  W.  G.,  812  6th  Avenue,  Dayton,  Ky.

Hubbell,  G.  G.,  1101  State  Street,  Erie,  Pa.

Huckel,  Rev.  Oliver,  1515  Linden  Avenue,  Baltimore,  Md.
Huidekopee,  Mrs.  Arthur  C.,  Meadville,  Pa.

Hume,  W.  Hector  H.,  62  West  9th  Street,  New  York  City.

Hunt,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  165  State  Street,  Portland,  Maine.

Huse,  William,  The  JFaiine  Herald,  Wayne,  Neb.

Husted,  A.  D.,  M.D.,  73  Allen  Avenue,  Pittsburg,  Pa.

*Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City.
*Ireland,  Gordon,  Holyoke  House  21,  Cambridge,  Mass.

*James,  Dr.  H.  F.,  331  N.  Euclid  Avenue,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

*James,  Professor  William,  95  Irving  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Jamison,  Dr.  A.  B.,  43  West  45th  Street,  New  York  City.
^Jefferson,  J.,  Buzzard’s  Bay,  Mass.

*Jenks,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  290  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
Johnson,  Charles  R.,  Box  492,  405  Main  Street,  Worcester,  Mass.
Johnson,  H.  P.,  Ithaca,  N.Yf


540


[part


Members  and  Associates.

JohnsoD,  Prof.  Roger  B.  C.,  Miami  University,  Oxford,  Ohio.
Joline,  Mrs.  Adrian  H.,  1 West  72nd  Street,  New  York  City.
Jones,  C.  H.,  c/o  J.  P.  Willis  & Bro.,  Galveston,  Texas.

Jones,  Francis  R.,  84  State  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Jones,  Mrs.  Gilbert  E.,  222  Madison  Avenue,  New  York  City.
Joss,  Rev.  A.  A.,  Bisraark,  N.D.

Judah,  Noble  B.,  2701  Prairie  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Kennedy,  Harris,  M.D.,  Readville,  Mass.

Kilpatrick,  Mrs.  W.  F.,  340  West  85th  Street,  New  York  City.
*Kimball,  Miss  Hannah  P.,  317  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
Kingsbur\%  Hon.  B.  B.,  Box  1107,  Defiance,  Ohio.

Kinraide,  T.  B.,  38  Spring  Park  Avenue,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Kirkwood,  W.  P.,  1 625  ^Vesley  Avenue,  St.  Paul,  Minn.

Kline,  Wm.  W.,  725  North  Fifth  Street,  Reading,  Pa.

Knowles,  Hon.  Hiram,  Butte,  Montana.

Kohnstamm,  Emil  V.,  Hotel  Endicott,  Columbus  Avenue  and  81st
Street,  New  York  City.

Kopta,  Madame  F.  P.,  129  Hyde  Street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Krebs,  G.  W.  C.,  404  Laurens  Street,  Baltimore,  Md.

Krebs,  Rev.  Stanley  L.,  Greensburgh,  Pa.

*Laflin,  Louis  E.,  66  Wabash  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.

^Laflin,  Mr.s.  Louis  E.,  66  Wabash  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Lamb,  Miss  Rose,  129  Mount  Vernon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
Lanahan,  Mrs.  Charles,  1209  St.  Paul  Street,  Baltimore,  Md.
Langley,  Prof.  S.  P.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.
Latshaw,  Allen,  38  North  36th  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

"’^'Lawrence,  A.  E.,  53  Devonshire  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Lawton,  Miss  Elizabeth,  176  West  87th  Street,  New  York  City.
Lawton,  Mrs.  Ella  Beckwith,  516  Abercoi’n  Street,  Savannah,  Ga.
Layman,  Alfred,  M.D.,  1630  North  18th  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Leavitt,  Dr.  Sheldon,  4665  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.

Lee,  Blewett,  111.  Central  R.R.  Co.,  1 Park  Row,  Chicago,  111.
Leonard,  Thomas,  628  North  22nd  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Librarian,  Adelbert  College  of  Western  Reserve  University,  Colum-
bus, Ohio.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine.

Librarian,  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pa.

Librarian,  Cambridge  Public  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.

Librarian,  Dover  Public  Library,  N.H.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


541


Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Libraiy,  of  Baltimore  City,  Balti-
more, Md.

Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Librarian,  Lowell  City  Library,  Lowell,  Mass.

Librarian  (L.  I).  Carver),  Maine  State  Library,  Augusta,  Maine.
Librarian,  Malden  Public  Librar}',  Malden,  Mass.

Librarian,  Mercantile  Library,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Librarian,  Michigan  State  Library,  Lansing,  Mich.

Librarian,  Minneapolis  Athenaeum,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Librarian  (Arthur  H.  Chase),  New  Hampshire  State  Library,
Concord,  N.H.

Librarian  (Galbreath),  Ohio  State  Library,  Columbus,  Ohio.
Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.

Librarian,  Somerville  Public  Libiary,  Somerville,  Mass.

Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.

Librarian,  University  of  Maine,  Orono,  Maine.

Librarian,  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Librarian,  University  of  Nebraska,  Lincoln,  Neb.

Lindsey,  Judge  Ben.  B.,  1343,  Ogden  Street,  Denver,  Colo.
Lindsley,  Dr.  De  Courcey,  3894  AVashington  Boulevard,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Lindsley,  J.,  c/o  Milton,  Mass.

*Logan,  W.  S.,  27  AAilliam  Street,  New  York  City.

Lombardi,  C.,  735  Irving  Street,  Portland,  Oregon.

Long,  George  E.,  Box  D.,  Jersey  City,  N.J.

Long,  W.  E.,  1107  Second  Avenue,  Sterling,  HI.

Lovett,  George  O.,  Madison,  Kansas.

Lovett,  Mrs.  \Yatkins  P.,  Mobley,  Georgia.

Low,  Clarence  F.,  14  Audubon  Place,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.
Lukens,  Dr.  Anna,  485  Central  Park  West,  New  York  City.
Lurton,  Judge  H.  H.,  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals,  Nashville,  Tenn.
Lyons,  Edward  Lane,  Jr.,  1716  North  25th  Street,  Phila.,  Pa.
Mackenzie,  George,  M.D.,  Somerton,  35th  Ward,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Madden,  W.  J.,  220  Garfield  Place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Mallory,  Dr.  William  J.,  Manila  Civil  Hosjrital,  Manila,  P.I.
Malusecki,  Rev.  Fr.  Adalbert,  236  South  12th  Street,  Reading,  Pa.
Manley,  R.  M.,  554  Springfield  Avenue,  Summit,  New  Jersey.
Mann,  Rev.  Arthur  S.,  13  Vick  Park  B.,  Rochester,  N.Y.

Marshall,  Mrs.  L.  C.,  49  West  71st  Street,  New  York  City.
Martin,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  The  Washington,  Seattle,  AVash.

Martin,  Mrs.  Emma  H.,  29  Lake  View  Park,  Rochester,  N.Y.
Mason,  Amasa,  1 West  131st  Street,  New  York  City.


542


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Mason,  Mrs.  R.  Osgood,  33  West  69th  Street,  New  York  City.
M‘Beath,  J.  D.,  176  Washington  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

M‘Clellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  5336  Cornell  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.
M‘Clung,  W.  E.,  Indianola,  Neb.

M‘Ewen,  Alfred,  565  Dearborn  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.

M'Ewen,  Mrs.  D.  C.,  160  Stirling  Place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

McGehee,  L.  P.,  Chapel  Hill,  N.C.

M'Intosh,  Herbert,  M.D.,  9 Harvard  Avenue,  Allston,  Mass.
M‘Lougblin,  Miss  E.  V.,  640  North  32nd  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Mead,  Theodore  H.,  Elmdon,  Tarrytown-on-Hudson,  N.Y.

Means,  Miss  Evelyn  B.,  Asheville,  N.C.

Meissner,  Mrs.  de,  2928  P.  Street,  N.^V.,  Washington,  D.C.
Meyer,  J.,  45  South  3rd  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Michael,  Dr.  Helen  Abbott,  140  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
Miller,  John  W.,  Snohomish,  Wash.

Miller,  C.  A.,  30  Genesee  Street,  Utica,  N.Y^

Millet,  Josiah  B.,  150  Charles  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Milliken,  Dr.  Geo.  G.,  1524  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
*Milliken,  John  T.,  1150  Belt  Avenue,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Mills,  Rev.  B.  Fay,  Oakland,  California.

Moffett,  F.  L.,  312  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Montalvo,  Madame  de,  c/o  Miss  Snyder,  Lakewood,  N.J.

Morgan,  Charles  C.,  6 Manchester  Street,  Nashua,  N.H.

Morgan,  W.  E.,  M.D.,  2909  Groveland  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Morgenthau,  M.  L.,  206  West  79th  Street,  New  York  City.
Morris,  Charles,  2223  Spring  Garden  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Morris,  Edward  L.,  97  Summer  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Morris,  Mrs.  F.,  The  Vendome,  Boston,  Mass.

Moses,  E.  J.,  Glenwood,  Hongkong,  China.

Murphy,  Hon.  Franklin,  1027  Broad  Street,  Newark,  N.J.

Myrick,  Mrs.  Herbert,  Stamford,  Conn.

Narregang,  S.  W.,  Aberdeen,  S.D.

Neeld,  A.  D.,  1300  Locust  Street,  Allegheny,  Pa.

Newberne,  Dr.  Robert  E.  L.,  Board  of  Health,  Manila,  P I.
Newell,  Mrs.  John  E.,  West  Mentor,  Ohio.

Newhall,  Charles  L.,  125  Main  Street,  Southbridge,  Mass.

Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  D.D.,  East  Hampton,  N.Y.

Nims,  F.  A.,  Muskegon,  Mich.

*Norbury,  Mrs.  J.  F.,  Ellen ville,  Ulster  Co.,  N.Y.

North,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  4815  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Norton,  Mrs.  F.  L.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


543


*Numi,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  5 East  York  Street,  Savannah,  Georgia.
Nye,  Mrs.  W.  B.,  Chestnut  Hill,  Mass.

Oakes,  L.  W.,  100  Main  Street,  Bradford,  Pa.

Odeneal,  E.  P.,  M.D.,  Jackson,  Miss.

Oliver,  G.  S.  J.,  Box  23,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.

Olmstead,  Prof.  E.  W.,  730  University  Avenue,  Ithaca,  N. Y.
*Osborn,  General  F.  A.,  43  Milk  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Ostby,  Dr.  O.  A.,  815  16th  Avenue,  S.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Pace,  Prof.  E.  A.,  Catholic  University  of  America,  Washington,
D.C.

Paddock,  Frank  S.,  1 Paddock  Building,  Watertown,  N.Y.

Palmer,  Rev.  Millie  Renouf,  1208  Master  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Pardridge,  C.  W.,  5242  Michigan  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Park,  Dr.  Roswell,  510  Delaware  Avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Parker,  Edward  W.,  Little  Rock,  Ark.

Parsons,  A.  J.,  1818  N Street  Washington,  D.C.

Parsons,  Mrs,  Frank  N.,  Franklin,  N.H.

Parsons,  Herbert,  Racquet  and  Tennis  Club,  27  West  43rd  Street,
New  York  City.

Parsons,  John  E.,  M.D.,  3 Pleasant  Street,  Ayer,  Mass.

Parsons,  Dr.  Ralph  Lyman,  Greenmont-on-Hudson,  Ossining  P.O.,

N.Y.

Pattison,  Mrs.  E.  E.,  2928  Kenmore  Avenue,  No.  Edgewater,
Chicago,  111.

Patton,  Mrs.  Margaret,  929  North  6th  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Paulding,  J.  K.,  130  East  24th  Street,  New  York  City.

Pavey,  Henry  A.,  Hillsboro,  Ohio

Paxton,  Miss  Josephine  E.,  24  N.  College  Street,  Carlisle,  Pa.
*Peabody,  Mrs.  A.  P.,  47  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Peckham,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111.

Pellew,  Mrs.  H.  E.,  1637  Massachusetts  Avenue,  Washington,  D.C.
Perkins,  Albert  S.,  70  Lyndhurst  Street,  New  Dorchester,  Mass.
Perkins,  Sydney  B.,  142  Meigs  Street,  Rochester,  N.Y.

Perrin,  Prof.  Marshall  L.,  Wellesley  Hills,  Mass.

Perry,  Hon.  A.  A.,  291  Broadway,  Somerville,  Mass.

Perry,  John  G.,  M.D.,  48  East  34th  Street,  New  York  City.

Perry,  Ralph  Barton,  Ph.D.,  Little’s  18,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Perry,  Thos.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Peters,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  362  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
Peterson,  Mrs.  Fred.  H.,  Mutual  Life  Building,  Seattle,  Wash.


544  Members  and  Associates.  [part

Philipse,  Miss  Margaret  Gouverneur,  27th  East  22nd  Street,  New
York  City.

Phillips,  Mrs.  J.  C.,  Junr.,  299  Berkeley  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
Pierce,  Prof.  Arthur  H.,  20  Franklin  Street,  Northampton,  Mass.
Pinchot,  Gifford,  1615  E.I.  Avenue,  Washington,  D.C.

Pincoffs,  P.  A.,  2 Stone  Street,  New  York  City.

Pitman,  J.  E.,  Andover,  Mass.

Platt,  J.  C.,  333-335  Fourth  Avenue,  New  York  City.

Pope,  Arthur  U.,  39  Hope  College,  Brown  University,  Providence,  R.L
Pope,  Miss  Theodate,  Box  176,  Farmington,  Conn.

Porter,  H.  F.  J.,  c/o  Nernst  Lamp  Co.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.

*Post,  C.  W.,  Battle  Creek,  Michigan.

Post,  Mrs.  Mhn.,  Bo.x  241,  Buckhannon,  W.  Ya.

Powers,  Mrs.  Ellen  F.,  c/o  Townsend,  Mass.

■^Pratt,  Alfred  F.,  16  Almira  Street,  Bloomfield,  N.J.

*Pray,  E.  E.,  447  West  7th  Street,  Plainfield,  N.J.

President,  Board  of  Trustees,  Free  Public  Library,  Jersey  City,  N.J.
Preston,  Dr.  E.  G.,  Waterville,  Wash.

Prez,  Eugene  de,  1612a  Semple  Avenue,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Price,  Mrs.  H.  E.,  P.O.  Box  126,  Woodside,  Long  Island,  N.Y.
Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  458  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Purington,  W.  A.,  Riverside,  Cal.

Putnam,  Miss  Annie  C.,  63  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
Putnam,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  63  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
Putnam,  George,  90  Ames  Building,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Miss  Irene,  Bennington,  Vt.

Putnam,  Dr.  James  J.,  106  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
Quackenbos,  John  D.,  M.D.,  331  West  28th  Street,  New  York  City.
*Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.

*Quincy,  Josiah  P.,  82  Charles  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
*Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Woodstock,  Ulster  Co.,  N.Y.

Ransom,  Frank  H.,  137  Main  Street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Raynor,  Charles,  5211  Catherine  Street,  W.  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Reece,  Mrs.  Marietta  S.,  Rock  Ledge,  West  Manchester,  Mass.
Rees,  Mrs.  Janet  E.  Ruutz,  331  West  83rd  Street,  New  York  City.
Reiff,  Josiah  C.,  247  5th  Avenue,  New  York  City.

Reyburn,  Amedee  V.,  Junr.,  13  Hortense  Place,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Reynolds,  Mrs.  James  B.,  29  Washington  Square,  New  York  City.
Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall,  2 Wellington  Terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.
Richardson,  M.  T.,  Box  236,  Ridgewood,  N.J.

Ridgon,  Chas.  Wm.,  c/o  J.  A.  Ridgon,  Hibernian  Bank,  Chicago,  111.


XLIX.]


545


Members  and  Associates.

■^■Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  91  Newbury  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Roberts,  B.  L.,  Canton,  Miss.

Robinson,  Mrs.  C.  B.,  Anchorage,  Ky.

Robinson,  Nelson  L.,  46  East  21st  Street,  New  York  City.

Roe,  A.  N.,  The  Pines  House,  Branchville,  N.J,

Rogers,  Dr.  Oscar  H.,  346  Broadway,  New  AMrk  City.

Ronte}g  A.  M.,  506  First  Avenue,  New  York  City.

Rose,  Byron,  North  Attleborough,  Mass.

Rosenberger,  James,  Sellersville,  Bucks  Co.,  Pa.

Royall,  Miss  Jennie,  Goldsboro,  N.C.

Mloyce,  Professor  Josiah,  103  Irving  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Russell,  Miss  Marguerite  J.,  College  Gardens,  Hongkong,  China.
Rutherford,  Wm.  H.  A.,  Loretto,  Hennepin  Co.,  Ylinn.

Salter,  George  F.,  123  North  16th  Street,  E.  Orange,  N.J.

Samuels,  Maurice  V.,  The  University,  106  and  108  West  47th  Street,
New  York  City.

Saunders,  W.  E.,  B.S.,  E.M.,  Riovista,  Torresdale,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
*Savage,  Rev,  Dr.  M.  J.,  Church  of  the  Messiah  Study,  34th  Street
and  Park  Avenue,  New  York  City.

Sawin,  Luther  R.,  S.B.,  Box  11,  Katonah,  N.Y.

Schlicht,  Paul  J.,  149  Broadway,  New  York  City.

Scott,  Clinton  C.,  Philippine  Bureau  of  Education,  Ilo-ilo,  Panay,  P.I.
Sears,  Mrs.  J.  M.,  12  Arlington  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Sedgwick,  Mrs.  H.  D.,  Junr.,  120  East  22nd  St.,  New  York  City.
S.  G.,  Miss,  c/o  Dr.  R.  Hodgson,  5 Boylston,  Place,  Boston,  Mass.
Shackleford,  Judge  Thomas  M.,  Tallahassee,  Fla.

Shalders,  C.  G.  S.,  Caixa  67,  Sao  Paulo,  Brazil,  S.A.

Sharp,  Mrs.  Kate,  c/oDresdener  Bank,  Pragerstrasse,  Dresden,  Germany.
Shaw,  Yliss  Emma  G.,  2 Dunreath  Street,  Roxbury,  Mass.

Sheets,  J.  C.,  c/o  Cincinnati  Sanitarium,  College  Hill,  Station  K.,
Cincinnati,  Ohio.

Sherman,  Mrs.  B.  W.,  Box  404,  Riverside,  Cook  Co.,  111.

Shuman,  Frank,  3400  Disston  Street,  Tacony,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
*Siegel,  Mrs.  Henry,  26  East  82nd  Street,  New  York  City  (Oct.-June);
Marmaroneck,  N.Y.  (June-Oct.).

Slingerland,  Mrs.  Anna  L.,  Kasson,  Minn.

Smith,  Miss  Agnes,  P.O.  Box  340,  Romeo,  Michigan.

*Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  264  Summer  Street,  Bulfalo,  N.Y.

Smith,  S.  M.,  c/o  Trust  Co.  of  Dallas,  Dallas,  Texas.

Smith,  Mrs.  W.  Hinckle,  2025  Locust  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  and
Box  102,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pa.


2n  2


546


Members  and  Associates.


[PAllT


Smith,  W.  Lincoln,  Concord,  Mass.

Snyder,  D.  Lafayette,  M.A.,  M.D.,  1635  Girard  Avenue,  Phila.,  Pa.
Sparhawk,  Dr.  Sam.,  Burlington,  Vermont.

Spinello,  Anthony,  730  Chapel  Street,  New  Haven,  Conn.

Sprague,  E.  W.,  618  Newland  Avenue,  Jamestown,  N.Y.

Sproull,  Miss  Kate  C.,  Helena,  Arkansas.

Stanton,  Eev.  Horace  C.,  Clifton  Springs,  N.Y.

Stebbins,  Mrs.  John,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.

Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  M.D.,  2803  Pine  Street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Stein,  Dr.  S.  G.,  Muscatine,  Iowa.

Stephenson,  E.  P.,  117  West  58th  Street,  New  York  City.

Sterling,  Mrs.  E.  C.,  Crescent  Avenue,  Redlands,  Cal.

Stevens,  Dr.  J.  E.,  Lincoln,  Neb.

Stewart,  J.,  P.O.  Dept.,  Washington,  D.C.

Stewart,  Mrs.  K.  G.,  Hillsborough,  111.

Stickney,  Mrs.  Mary  W.,  338  Richmond  Avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Stockton,  John  P.,  76  Montgomery  Street,  Jersey  City,  N.J.
*Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  118  East  22nd  Street,  New  York  City.

*Stone,  C.  W.,  86  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Stone,  Mrs.  Richard,  18  Chestnut  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Stranahan,  J.  J.,  Supt.  U.S.  Fish  Commissioners,  Bullockville,  Ga.
Street,  Miss  Ida  M.,  62  Farwell  Avenue,  Milwaukee,  Wis.

Stricklei’,  O.  C.,  M.D.,  Post  Office,  New  Ulm,  Minn.

Strong,  Mrs.  WL  W.,  268  Park  Place,  Kenosha,  Wis.

Sturgis,  Chas.  R.,  63  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Swift,  Wm.  H.,  Wilmington,  Del.

Symonds,  Brandreth,  M.D.,  Garden  City,  Long  Island,  N.Y.
Tappan,  Miss  M.  A.,  44  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Taylor,  Richard  Baker,  Box  618,  Norfolk,  Virginia.

*Thaw,  A.  Blair,  M.D.,  Montecito,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.

*Thaw,  Mrs.  A.  Blair,  Montecito,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.

Thompson,  E.  H.,  10  W^inthrop  Street,  Watertown,  N.Y.

Thompson,  Robert  J.,  1604  Wellington  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Thomson,  Dr.  W.,  1426  W^alnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Thorndike,  S.  Lothrop,  62  Devonshire  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Thorp,  Rev.  Willard  Brown,  3977  Drexel  Boulevard,  Chicago,  111.
Tower,  C.  B.,  28  Albion  Street,  Hyde  Park,  Mass.

Tralles,  Wm.  A.,  1189  West  Avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Trimble,  R.  T.,  M.D.,  New  Vienna,  Ohio.

Tucker,  James  W.,  Cooperstown,  N.Y.

Tuttle,  James  Horton,  Croton-on-Hudson,  N.Y.


XLIX.]


Members  and  Associates.


547


Tyler,  Miss  Amelia,  Patent  Office,  Washington,  D.C.

Tyler,  Mrs.  Moses  Coit,  Ambleside,  Willard  Avenue,  Ithaca,  N Y.
Tyson,  Mrs.  George,  314  Dartmouth  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

Ullman,  Mrs.  Mary  B.,  Meza,  Arizona.

Van  Leer,  Miss  Mary  T.,  East  Downingtown,  Chester  Co.,  Pa.
*Van  Norden,  fiev.  C.,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  1003  K Street,  Sacramento,  Cal.
Varney,  Rev.  Charles  E.,  Clinton,  Illinois.

Veazey,  I.  Parker,  Great  Falls,  Montana.

Vermilye,  Daniel  B.,  36  Waverley  Place,  Orange,  N.J.

Vrooman,  Carl  S.,  c/o  Rev.  Hiram  Vrooman,  Roxbury,  Mass.
Wadsworth,  E.  A.,  Grinned,  Iowa.

Wait,  Marshall,  5144  Madison  Avenue,  Hyde  Park,  Chicago,  111.
Waite,  Mrs.  Florence  B.,  1809  Berks  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Walker,  John  A.,  260  Montgomery  Street,  Jersey  City,  N.J.

Wall,  The  Hon.  Judge  Joseph  B.,  Tampa,  Fla.

Wallace,  Mrs.  G.  H.,  627  West  Woodruff'  Avenue,  Toledo,  Ohio.
M^alsh,  Correa  M.,  Bellport,  Long  Island,  N.Y.

AValsh,  J.  A.  1107  Commerce  Street,  Tacoma,  AVash.

AA'ard,  Mrs.  L.  A.  Coonley,  620  Division  Street,  Chicago,  111.
AA'arren,  Lyman  Otis,  112  Academy  Hill  Road,  Brighton,  Mass.
AA'^aters,  John  R.,  46  Cedar  Street,  New  York  City.

AA'atson,  Prof.  Wm.,  107  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

AA'atts,  H.  M.,  “ The  Press,”  Philadelphia,  Pa.

AVay-Allen,  Mrs.  E.,  The  Wayside,  AA^alpole,  Mass.

AA^ebb,  Mrs.  AA^.  G.,  40  Avenue  Henri  Alartin,  Paris,  France.
AVeber,  Mrs.  Nita  B.,  735  Esplanade  Street,  New  Orleans,  La.
Weeks,  Rufus  AA^,  Pocantico  Hills,  N.Y.

AVells,  David  W.,  M.D.,  The  Westminster,  Copley  Square,  Boston,
Alass.

AVelsh,  Mrs.  Edward  L.,  1422  Spruce  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
AVest,  Redffeld  B.,  M.D.,  Fair  Street,  Guilford,  Conn.

Wheeler,  AA^m.,  Concord,  Mass.

AVhipple,  L.  E.,  14  East  60th  Street,  New  York  City.

AAJrite,  Miss  Catherine  P.,  c/o  Alonzo  Brinkman,  General  Delivery,
Alobile,  Ala.

AAJiite,  H.  Lawrence,  75  Genesee  Street,  Utica,  N.Y.

*AVhiting,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Brunswick,  Back  Bay,  Boston,  Mass.
AATitman,  AV.  C.,  Atlanta  Milling  Co.,  Atlanta,  Ga.

AVhiton,  Rev.  J.  M.,  Ph.D.,  287  Fourth  Avenue,  New  York  City.
Wilbur,  Mrs.  Benjamin  F.,  P.O.  Box  65,  Little  Compton,  R.I.
AVilkins,  A.  H.,  416  Main  Street,  Dallas,  Texas.


548


Members  and  Associates.


[part  xlix.]


Willard,  Miss  Susanna,  3 Berkeley  Place,  Cambridge,  Mass.
AVillianis,  C.  R.,  Indianapolis  News,  Indianapolis,  Ind.

Williams,  E.  B.,  354  Hall  Street,  Portland,  Oregon.

Mdlliams,  J.  E.,  Plumb  Opera  House,  Streator,  111.

Williams,  AVm.  G.,  M.D.,  Westside,  Claibourne  Co.,  Mississippi.
AVilliamson,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  10  S.  10th  Street,  Richmond,  Ind.
IVillis,  Grant  B.,  1313  Logan  Avenue,  Canton,  Ohio.

■^Wilmarth,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  The  Auditorium  Annex,  Chicago,  111.

"Wilson,  Dr.  Laura  Jane,  306  Scioto  Street,  Urbana,  Ohio.

*Mung,  Isaac  H.,  Bayfield,  Mdsconsin.

Winston,  Frederick  S.,  576  North  State  Street,  Chicago,  111.
*MMod,  John  B.,  Box  705,  Riverside,  Cal.

Wooding,  Dr.  B.  E.,  9 and  10  Brown  Palace,  Denver,  Colo.
Woodward,  Fred.  E.,  Box  832,  MAshington,  D.C.

AVyllys,  Miss  R.,  18  Louisburg  Square,  Boston,  Mass.

IVyinan,  Walter,  M.D.,  Stoneleigh  Court,  Washington,  D.C.

Wynne,  Mrs.  M.  Y.,  63  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
Yandell,  Miss  Maud,  1305  Third  Street,  Louisville,  Ky.
Zimmerman,  George  P.,  422  AVoodward  Building,  Birmingham,  Ala.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  of  the  American  Branch,  are  requested  to
send  notice  of  amj  chamje  of  address  to  the  Secretary,  5 Boylston
Place,  Boston,  Mass.


PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  TO  VOL.  XVIII

(PARTS  XLVI-XLIX)


1903-1904.


A.


A.,  Mr.,  Account  of  Certain  Unusual  Phenomena,  in  the  Case

of,  by  John  Honeyman  --------  308

Aksakotf,  Alex.  N.,  Legacy  left  by,  to  the  Society  for  Psychical

Research  - --  --  --  --  - 8,  324.

Alternating  Personality.  See  Personality.

American  Branch  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  List  of  Mem-


bers and  Associates  -------

„ Questionnaire  regarding  Unman  Sentiment  as  to  a Future
life,  by  F.  C.  S.  Schiller  -------

Appendix  to  ------  - 450

Animals,  possibility  of  telepathically  affecting.  Prof.  W.  F.  Barrett  on
Articles  brought  to  sittings  to  assist  communications

118,  119,  128,  129,  141,  143,  148,  149,  160,  198,  199,  210,  213,  215,
227,  235,  244,  245,  256,  263,  264,  273,  275,  278-80,  284,  289,  293.
Automatic  MTiting.  See  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Thompson.

„ Facsimiles  of  Automatic  Script  -----  236

„ See  also  Personality,  Problems  of.

Azam,  Prof.,  on  Hypncitism  and  Multiple  Personality  - - -


533


416

-453

335

223,


243

413


B.

Babinsky,  Dr.,  On  Hysteria  --------  48

Bacon,  Influence  of,  on  the  progress  of  Physical  Science  - 3,  4,  448-450


11


Index  to  Vol.  XVIII.


349

352

355


393


Barlow,  Miss  Jane,  On  Mistakes  and  Confusion  in  Mediumistic
Messages

“ Barnes,  Mary,”  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality,  i)r.  Albert  Wilson  on
,,  History  of  the  Case  -------

„ Appendix  I.

,,  Johnson,  Alice,  On  the  Writings  and  Drawings  of  the

Secondaiy  Personalities  ------

„ Appendix  II.  ------  405,  412,  413

Barrett,  Prof.  W.  F.,  Presidential  Address  -----  323,  351

Bates,  Miss,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  - - - - - 179,  244

“ Beauchamp,  the  Misses,”  A Case  of  Multiple  Personality — Analogies

between  and  that  of  Mary  Barnes  - - - 405,407,410,411

Bennett,  E.  N.,  Communication  concerning.  See  Trance  Phenomena
of  Mrs.  Thompson — Incidents.

Benson,  Archbishop.  See  Communicators  (Mrs.  Thompson).

Benson,  Martin  White.  See  Communicators  (Mrs.  Thompson).

Benson,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  129,  137,  141,  142,  155,

169,  201,  212,  214,  224,  225-27,  235,  272-82,  293,  297
“ Bensons  Limited.”  See  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Thompson — Incidents.

Bernheim,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Researches  of 48,  340,  485

Binet,  Dr.,  On  the  Mechanism  of  the  Brain  - - - - - 316

Bolton,  Di-.  J.  S.,  Researches  of,  in  Cerebral  Physiology  - - 354,  380

Boutfay,  M.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Cideville  Disturbances  - - 461,  462

Braid,  James,  Hypnotic  Researches  of  - - - - 340,  483,  488

Bramwell,  J.  Milue,  Hypnotic  Researches  of  - - 105,  322,  340,  481

“ Hy}>notism  ; its  History  and  Practice  ” — by.

Review  of  ------  - 481

Breard,  M.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Cideville  Disturbances  - - - 462


t;.

Campbell,  Colin,  Communication  concerning.  See  Trance  Phenonema
of  Mrs.  Thompson — Incidents.

Carrington,  Hereward — The  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Pijier.  Prof.

Hyslop’s  Re])ly  to  ---------  79

Carruthers,  James.  See  Communicators  (Mrs.  Piper).

Cartwright,  Mrs.  (Control).  See  Trance  Personalities  of  Mrs.
Thompson.


Cheval,  Evidence  as  to  the  Cideville  Disturbances  - - - - 455

Child  Agents.  See  Poltergeist  Phenomena.

“Christian  Science,”  Alleged  healing  by  ------  334

Cideville  Distuibauces,  The  --------  454

“Clegg,  Miss.”  See  Communicators  (Mrs.  Tlionipson).

Coincidences,  Cross  Corre.spondences  between  the  Trance  Phenomena

of  Mrs.  Thompson  and  those  of  other  Mediums  - - - - 294

Communications  through  a Tube,  Prof.  Hyslop’s  Experiments  in  - 81,  99


Index  to  Vol.  XVII 1.


iii


Communicators,  Chief  references  to.

(Through  Mrs.  Piper.)

Carruthers,  James  -----

Cooper,  J.  & S.  - - -

Hyslop,  Annie,  ------

„ Charles  ------

„ Robert  ------

M‘Clellan,  Jame.s  -----

Pelham,  George  (G.  P.)  - . - -

(Through  Mrs.  R.  Mr.  H.  Wedgwood’s  Cases.)
Gurwood,  Col.

(Through  “ -l/m  Raivson  ” and  “ Mrs.  Scott.’'
Thompson’s  cases.)

(Through  Mrs.  Thompson^)

Benson,  Archbishop  - - - 138-142,

„ Martin  White  - - - -

“ Clegg,  Miss  ” - - - - - , -

Gurney,  Edmund  ------

„ (Also  through  “ J/fto'  Raivson”)

„ ( „ “ Mrs.  Scott  ”)  -

- James,  Alice  ------

Merrifield,  Mrs.  - - -

Myers,  F.  W.  H.  -


- 81-84,  87

85,  86
79

- 84,  93,  97
- 82,  83,  84,  92,  93

86,  92
57,  59,  60,  69

-/4,  /5

See  below — Mrs.


155,  16.9,  174,  224-26,  274
224,  226,  227,  273,  274
136,  137,  221,  264,  265
- 235,  236,  267,  301-7

300-307
302-307
127,  128,  266
221,  227
-233,241,296-301


(Also  through  “ J/i's.s  - - - 296-307


Parkes,  Susanna  ---------  - 267

Percival,  G.  H.  - - - - - 145-148,  156,  159,  160,  176,

177,  227,  232,  235,  245,  306,  307

Piddington,  Mr.  J.  G.,  relations  of  118,  122-26,  130,  131,

140,  141,  149-158,  160,  218,  228,  229,  291,  292
Samuel  (Suicide  Case;  --------  144,  175

“ Scott,  Geoffrey  ” - - - 164,  165,  181,  244,  246,  302,  .304,  305

Sidgwick,  Prof.  -----  160,  177,  233,  235-243,  295-301

„ (Also  tliTOUgh  Miss  Raivson)  - - - - 296-298

“ Strong,  Wilfred  283-91

Theodores,  the  Two  --------  288-289


X.Y.  -----------  147,  148

Coopers,  J.  & S.  See  Communicators  {21  rs.  Piper).

Council  and  Officers  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  - - 505

Crookes,  Sir  William,  A Theory  of  Telepathic  Propagation  - - 73,  76

Crystal  Vision  (Mediumistic)  ------  113,474,479


D.

■“  D.,  Mr.”  (Coxtrol).  See  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Thomiwon,
Personalities.

Daiimonopolis,”  Disturbances  at  ------


464


1\-


Index  to  Vol.  XVI II.


Davidson,  J.  Mackenzie,  Note  on  “Certain  Unusual  Psycholof;ical

Plienomena,”  by  John  Honeynian  321

Dessoir,  Dr.  Max,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  ThomjDson  120,  140,  213,  254,  256-257
Divining  Rod  Experiments,  Prof.  W.  F.  Barrett  on  - - - - 314

“Dorothy  Incident,”  Tlie.  See  Trance  Plienomena  of  Mrs.  Thompson.
Dowsing,  Phenomena  of.  See  Divining  Rod.

Dreams  and  Hallucinations,  Connection  between  - . - . 314

E.

Editorial  Note.s  ---------  322,  501

„ On  the  Cambridge  Expeiiments  with  Eusapia

Paladino  501

Eeden,  Dr.  E.  van.  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson

129,  134-1.36,  144,  168.  175,  201-20.3,

211,  215,  216,  222,  22.3,  251,  254,  255,  262-266
Elliotson,  Dr.,  Hyjmotic  Researches  of  -----  340,  482

Elsie  (Control).  See  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Tliompson.,  Personalities.
Esdaile,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Researches  of  - - - - - - 340,  482


F.

Faith  and  Mind  Cures,  alleged  cases  of  -----  - 334

Feilding,  The  Hon.  Everard—

Review  of  “ Les  Phenomhnes  Psychiques,”  by  Dr.  J.  Maxwell  - 490

Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  - - - - - - 116,  119

Flournoy,  Prof.  Th.,  Review  of  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers’s  “ Human  Person-
ality and  its  Survival  of  Bodily  Death  ” -----  42

Fontaine,  M.,  Evidence  on  the  Cideville  Disturbances  - - 455,  463

Future  Life,  The  American  Branch  of  the  S.  P.  R.’s  Questionnaire

regarding  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a - - 416

A]i])arent  weakness  of  the  Tiaditional  Claim  of  a

desire  for  418-422,  429,  430,  439,  440,  503,  504

,,  Appendix  to  - 450-53

„ Consideration  of  the  effects  of  a scientific  proof  of

440-450

„ Methods  of  distributing  the  (Questionnaire  - 434,  448

,,  Review  of  Answers  to  - - - - - 425-438

,,  „ Tabular  Analysis  -----  453

„ Barrett,  Prof.  M.  F.,  on  - - - - - 349,  350

„ F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  the  Survival  of  Human  Pei’sonality.

Flournoy,  Prof.,  on  ------  42

Leaf,  Dr.  W.,  on  - - - - - - - 53


(t.

General  Meetings,  Proceedings  of  - - - - - - 103,  351

“ Gordon,  Miss,”  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  - - - 263,282-291


Index  to  Vol.  XVII 1.


V


“Grey  Lady,”  The,  (Control).  See  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Thompson.
Grasset,  D.  J.,  The  History  of  a Haunted  House,  . . - . 4fj4

Gurney,  Edmund,  Alleged  Communications  from.  See  Communicators
(“Miss  Eawson,”  and  “ Mrs.  Scott,”  and  Mrs.  Thompson).

Gurwood.  Col.  See  Communicators  (Mrs.  E.)


H.


Hales,  F.  N.,  Eeview  of  “ Humanism  : Philosophical  Essays,”  by  F.


C.  S.  Schiller  ----------  501

Hallucinations,  Subjective —

An  Account  of,  in  a Normal  Subject,  by  John  Honey-

man  ----------  308

Limited  to  the  Defective  Eye  - - - - - 312

Non-Physical  Basis  of  - - - - - - - 315-319

Super-imposed  on  one  another  -----  313^  317

Harrison,  Frederic,

Eeview  of  “ Human  Personality,”  by  F.  IV.  H.  Myers,

Andrew  Lang  on  --------  62

Hathaway  Family.  See  M'Clellan,  John.

Haunted  House,  History  of  a,  from  the  French  of  Dr.  J.  Grasset  - 464

Heidenhain,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Eesearches  of  - - . - - - - 483

Helmholtz,  Prof,  von,  on  Telepathy  ------  328-329

Honeyman,  John,  On  Certain  L^nusual  Psychological  Phenomena  - 308

Hoppe,  Theory  of  Hallucination  -------  316

Hudson,  Th.  Jay,  on  “ Psychic  Phenomena  ” -----  34

“ Humanism  : Philosophical  Essays,”  by  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  Eeview  of  - 501

Hvpnagogic  Illusions  - - 308-321

Hypnotism  : Prof.  Barrett  on  the  Present  Position  of  - - 339-340

,,  Curative  Effects  of  -------  433

„ E.xtensions  of  Faculty  in  - - - - - - 486,  488-9

,.  Hypnotic  State,  Genesis  and  Nature  of  - - - 483-487

„ Legal  and  Moral  Aspects  of  - - - 484,  485,  488,  489

,,  Suggestion  and  - - . - - - 484-487


,,  Eesistance,  Subject’s  power  of  -

„ Time,  Subliminal  Appreciation  of

Hyslop  Family,  chief  references  to —

,,  Frank  ------

„ George  ------

,,  See  also  Communicators  {Mrs.  Piper.)

Hvslop,  Prof.  J.  H.


484,  489
486,  487,  488,  489


80

92


,,  Experiments  in  Identification  - - - 60,  81,  99

„ Eeport  on  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.

Eeply  to  Mr.  Podmore’s  Criticisms  - - 78

„ Reply  to  Analysis  of  the  Discussion  of  Statistical

Evidence  ------  99-101

Hy-steria,  Poltergeist  Disturbances  connected  with  a Case  of  Acute  - 464


VI


Index  to  Vol.  XVI II.


I.

Idextificatiojj,  Prof.  Hyalop’s  Experiments  in  - - - 60,  80,  81,  99

Identity,  Temporary  Losses  of  Personal  -----  412-413

See  also  the  Case  of  Mary  Barnes  and  Problems  of  Personality.
Incidents,  Marked,  in  Trance  Communications.  See  Trance  Pheno-
mena of  Mrs.  Thompson.

Insanity,  Conditions  of  Memory  during  -----  414-415

.1.

James,  Alice.  See  Communicators  (Mrs.  Thompson).

James,  Prof.  William,  Exjieriments  as  to  the  Trance  Condition  of  Mrs

Thompson  - - - - - - 106

„ „ on  Hallucinations,  - - - 313,  318,  319,  320

„ „ Review  of  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers’s  “ Human  Per-

sonality and  its  Survival  of  Bodily  Death”  22
,,  ,,  The  Scope  of  the  Subliminal  Consciousness

22-30,  32,  33,  64

„ „ “Varieties  of  Religious  Exiieriences,”  by,

references  to  - - - - - 409-430

Johnson,  Alice,  on  the  Writings  and  Drawings  of  the  Secondary  Per-
sonalities in  the  Case  of  “ Mary  Barnes  ” - - 393

,,  „ Note  on  the  Automatic  Script  of  Mrs  Thompson  238-239

Jones,  Dr.  Robert,  Comments  on  the  Case  of  “Mary  Barnes”  - - 413

K.

Kiel  Incident,  The.  See  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Thompson.


L.

Lang,  Andrew,  “The  Nineteenth  Century”  and  Mi'.  Frederic  Myers  62
„ The  Poltergeist  at  Cideville  - . - . . 454

Larminie,  Vera,  Translation  of  the  “History  of  a Haunted  House,”

by  Dr.  J.  Grasset  ---------  464

Leaf,  Dr.  Walter,  Reviews  b_v —

“Human  Personality  and  its  Survival  of  Bodily  Death,”  by

F.  W.  H.  Myers 53

„ Discussion  of  the  Book  as  an  -4rgument  for  a Future

Life - 53-61

,,  Theory  of  the  Possible  Survival  of  a Slowly  Dis-
integrating Personality  after  Death  - - - 57-61

“ Hypnotism,  its  History  and  Practice,”  by  J.  Milne

Brain  well,  - - - - - - - - -481

Lemonnier,  Gustave,  and  the  Cideville  Poltergeist  Disturbances

456,  460,  461,  462,  463

Leroux,  M.,  on  the  Cideville  Disturbances  ------  457

Locke,  on  the  Limitations  of  Thought  -----  318-319

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  Presidential  Address  (1903)  -----  1


Index  to  Vol.  XV II I.


vii


Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  Review  of  “ Huniaii  Personality  and  its  Survival  of

Bodily  Death,”  Ijy  F.  W.  H.  Myers  - - - 34

Genei'al  Survey  and  Estimate  of 34-41

Malloek,  W.  H.,  oil  “ Human  Personality  and  its  Survival  of  Bodily
I )eatli,”  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers —

Andrew  Lang’s  Reply  to  ------  - 34,  02

Maxwell,  Dr.  J.,  “ Les  Phenomenes  Psych icpies,”  by.  Review  of  - - 490

,,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumshi])  of  Eusapia  Pala-
din o -------  495,  497-499

„ On  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper  - - - 494

M'Clellan,  James.  See  Communicators  {Mrs.  Piper).

„ John,  chief  references  to  ------  - 86,  92

Members,  Associates,  and  Honorary  Members  of  the  Society  for  Psy-
chical Research,  List  of  - --  --  --  - 506

„ ,,  „ ,,  of  the  American  Branch  533

Merrifield,  Mrs.  See  Communicators  {Mi's.  Thompson).


Mirville,  J.  E.  de.  Evidence  as  to  the  Cideville  Disturbances,  457-459,  463
Motor  Automatism —

Suggested  Experiments  in  - - - - - 326,  327,  334

Moutonnier,  Prof.  C.,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Thompson  - - 194-200

Multiple  Personality.  See  Personality.

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Alleged  Communications  from.  See  Communicators
(“  i/i'ss  Ran'son'"  and  Mrs.  Thompson).

„ ,,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Thompson

112,  113,  205-210,  213-251

,,  „ “ Human  Personality  and  its  Survival  of  Bodily

Death,”  by.  Reviews  of  - - 22,  34,  42,  53,  62

.,  ,,  „ Bearing  of  the  Book  on  the  Question

of  a Future  Life  - - 42-52,  53-61

,,  ,,  On  Subliminal  Consciousnes.s —

6,  22-30,  32-34,  36-38,  46-51,  54,  55,  64,  72-77
„ „ ,,  Hysteria,  View  of  - - - - 47-48

,,  ,,  ,,  Vital  Faculty,  Scheme  of  - - - 29,  40

N.

“Nineteenth  Century,”  The,  and  Mr.  Frederic  Myers,  by  Andrew

Lang  ------------  34,  62


P.

Paladino,  Eus-YPia,  Alleged  Mediumship  of  - 495,  497,  498,  499,  501

„ Editorial  Note  ---------  501

„ Exposure  of  Fraudulent  Methods  (Cambridge  Experi-
ments) --------  499-501

Parish,  Edmund,  on  Hallucinations  -----  315-317,  320

Parkes,  Susanna.  See  Communicators  {Mrs.  Thompson).

Percival,  G.  H.  See  Communicators  {Mrs.  Thompson).


Vlll


Index  to  Vol.  XVIII.


Percival,  Mr.  and  Mrs..  Sittings  witli  Mrs.  Thompson

145,  146,  176,  177,  227,  232,  235,  302
“ Personality,  Human,  and  its  Survival  of  Bodily  Death,”  by  F.  W.

H.  Myers,  Pieviews  of  - - - - 22,  34,  42,  53,  62

„ Dr.  Leaf  on  the  Possible  Survival  after  Death  of  a


5?


Slowly  Disintegrating  57-61


Problems  of,  - - . . 57-(;p  352-404,  405-415

Education  and  -------  ,385,  386

Trance  Phenomena  and  ------  393

See  al.%0  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  Mrs.
Thompson.

Multiple,  a Case  of,  (Mary  Barnes),  by  Dr.  Albert
Wilson.

„ Ap])endices  to  - - - 393,  405,  412,  413

„ Cataleptic  Attacks  - 359,  362,  369,  370,  371,  376
,,  Cerebi-al  (Langes,  Theory  of.  Connected  with

Changes  of  Personality  - - 380-387,  413,  415

,,  Diary  of  Appearances  of  the  Different  Person-
alities ------  398,  399

„ ,,  Of  Emergencies  of  the  Normal  State  - 400

,,  Extensions  of  Faculty  in  369,  372,  377,  398,  407-409
,,  Hyperaesthesia,  Tactile

371,  372,  373,  376,  397,  398,  409
„ Hypnotism,  Insensibility  to  - - 360,  364,  412

„ Identity,  Apparent  Comjdete  Loss  of  the


Original  -----  379,  383,  400

Illusions  during  - - 356,  361,  363,  364,  410

Illustrations  of  Writings  and  Drawings  402-404
Memory,  Conditions  of  357,  360-376,  377-380,


382,  395,  396,  406,  407,  411,  414
,,  Discontinuous  between  the  Different

Personalities  - - - 376,  377

Psychical  Blindness

371-374,  376,  397,  398,  408,  409


Secondary  Personalities —

Mental  and  Moral  Characteristics  of  - 356-390

Writings  and  Drawings  of

358,  359,  364,  372,  376,  387,  393,  394


“ Phantasms  of  the  Living,”  Discussion  of  Hallucinations  given  in  - 316

Phinuit  (Control).  See  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.

“ Physical  Phenomena.”  See  Poltergeist  Disturbances.

Piddington,  . I.  G.,  On  the  Case  of  “ Mary  Barnes ” . - - - 405

„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  - - - 116-293

,,  Types  of  Phenomena  Displayed  in  Mrs  Thompson’s

Tiance  -------  ifj4,  105,  349

„ „ Table  of  Contents  -----  lu4


Index  to  Vol.  XVIII.


IX


5]

78

03,  69,  74

- 57-61

- 494

78


78

454


Piper,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of —

„ Flournoy,  Prof.  Th.,  on  -

,,  Hyslop,  Prof.  J.  H.,  on  -----

,,  Lang,  Andrew,  on  -

.,  Leaf,  Dr.  Walter,  on  -------

,,  Maxwell,  Dr.  J.,  on  -------

„ Podmore,  Fi-ank,  on  -------

See  also  Communicators,  and  Trance  Phenomena.

Podmore,  Frank,  Criticism  of  Prof.  Hyslop's  Eeport  on  the  Trance
Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.

,,  Reply  to,  by  Prof.  J.  H.  Hysloj)  - - . -

Poltergeist,  Andrew  Lang  on  the,  at  Cideville  -----

,,  General  Disturbances  -----  454-463,  464-480

„ Hysteria,  Acute,  Connected  with  - - 464,  465,  477-480

,,  Judicial  Enquiry  into  ------  454-63

Predictions,  Mediumistic.  See  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Thompson.

,,  Sir  Oliver  Lotge  on  the  Study  of  - - - - - 17,  18

Presidential  Addresses —

By  Prof.  W.  F.  Barrett  -------  323

By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  --------  1

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  A Case  of  Multi})le  Personality  (the  “ Misses

Beauchamp”)  ------  405^  407,  408,  410,  411

Psychical  Research,  and  the  Inquiry  into  Human  Sentiment  as  to  a

Future  Life,  F.  C.  S.  Schiller  on  416-450,  503,  504
„ Sir  Oliver  Lodge  on  Future  of  - - - - 1

,,  Suggestions  as  to  a Research  Scholarshii)  - - 8

Psychological,  Phenomena,  On  Certain  Unusual,  by  John  Honeyman,

R.S.A.  308


R.

Raggett,  Mr.  .and  Mrs.  G.  F.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  - - 177

Rawson,  Miss,”  Automatic  Script  and  Trance  Phenomena  of

205,  210,  267,  294-302

„ Cross-correspondences  between aird  the  Medium-

ship  of  Mrs.  Thompson  . - - - 294,  302

Reeve,  Norman,  Case  contributed  by  - - - - - - - 107

Reviews  - - - - - - - 22,  34,  42,  53,  62,  481,  490,  501

Reynolds,  Mary,  A Case  of  Dual  Personality,  Analogies  between  the

Case  of,  and  “ Mary  Barnes  ” -----  406,407,410

Richet,  Prof.  Ch.,  On  Psychic  Phenomena  -----  490,  491

S.

S-AiNT  Victor,  M.  R.,  and  Madame  tie.  Evidence  as  to  the  Cideville

Disturbances  - --  --  --  --  459-461

“Samuel”  (Suicide  Case).  See  Communicators  {Mrs.  Thompson).


X


Index  to  Vol.  X VIII.


Scl.iller,  F.  C.  S.—

,,  Answers  to  the  Ainei'iciui  Branch’s  Questionnaire  regarding

Human  Sentiment  as  to  a Future  Life  - - 416,503

Analysis  of  the  Answers  - . . . 425-438,  453

Apparent  Weakness  of  the  Traditional  Claim  of  a desire

for  - - - - 418-422,  429,  430,  439,  440,  503,  504

Appendix  to  -------  - 450-53

Consideration  of  the  Eft'ects  of  a Scientific  Proof  of  - 440-50

“ Social  Atmosphere,”  Effects  of,  in  Scientific  Inquiry

417-425,  448-450

,,  “Humanism:  Philosophical  Essays,”  by Ilevdew  of  - 501

“Scott,  Geoffrey.”  See  Communicators  (J/rs.  Thompson).

Scott,  Miss  M.  W.,  Case  contributed  by  ------  72

“ Scott,  Mrs,”  Cross-corres]jondences  between  the  Automatic  Script  of

and  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs  Thompson

294,  302-307

,,  Sittings  with  IMrs.  Thompson  - - - . 163-167

Self-Suggestion,  Phenomena  of — Insensibility  to  Pain  - - 108,  110

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  Sittings  with  IMrs.  Thompson  - - - 292

,,  Prof.  H.,  Alleged  Communications  from.  See  Communi-
cators V Miss  Jia>cso7i”  and  “ J/rs.  Thompson”).

“ Smith,  Helene,”  Case  of  Characteristic  Handwriting  - - - 393

Society  for  I’sychical  Eesearch,  Endowment  Fund  for-  - 8-11,  324,  325

„ „ Present  Position  and  Future  Work  of

1,  324,  327-350

,,  ,,  Proposed  Eesearch  Scholarship  - - 8

“ Spirit  Identity,”  Indications  of,  by  Characteristic  Handwriting  236-243,  393
See  also  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  Mrs.


Thompson.

Spiritualism,  Prof.  Barrett  on  -------  - 340

,,  Dr.  J.  Maxwell  on  -------  - 490

„ Physical  Phenomena  of  -----  - 490-501

“Strong,  WTlfred.”  (See  Communicators  (J/r5.  Thonqosoa).

Subliminal  Consciousness,  Prof.  Barrett  on  - - - - 333-339

,,  ,,  F.  W.  H.  INlyets  on

6,  22-38,  46,  51,  54,  55,  64,  72-77
,,  ,,  Time,  Consciousness  of  the  lapse  of  - 486-489

„ ,,  See  also  Hyjmotism  and  Personality,  Prob-

lems of.

Suggestion,  Bearing  of,  on  the  Study  of  Criminology  - - - - 15

„ Dr.  Milne  Bramwell’s  Theory  of  - - - - 484-490

T.

Taylor,  Is.\ac,  Ph  i/sical  Theory  of  Another  JAfe  -----  335

‘‘ Taylor,  Mrs.,”  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  - - - - 163-167

Telejjathy,  Barrett,  Prof.  W^.  F.,  on  - - - - - 326,  333-335


Index  to  Vol  XVI II.


XI


Telepathy,  Crookes,  Sir  W.,  on  -
„ Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  on  -

„ Experimental,  At  Close  Quarters

,,  „ At  a Distance

„ Suggested  Experiments  in  -

Theodores,  The  Two.  See  Communicators  {Mrs.  Thompson).
Thomas,  N.  W.,  Case  confirmed  by  -
Thompson,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  -

„ Trance  Phenomena  of — Benson,  Mrs.,  on  -

,,  ,,  Piddington,  J.  G.,  on

, ,,  A'errall,  Mrs.,  on  -


- 73,  76

- 19,  20

- 192-4

18,  19,  169,  170,  182-86

- 326


188

- 109
278-282
104,  349

- 221


See  also  Trance  Phenomena.

Thorel,  and  the  Poltergeist  at  Cideville  — Judicial  Enquiry

into  - --  --  --  --  --  - 4.54

Time,  Subliminal  Comsciousness  of — Hypnotic  - - -486,  487,  488,  489

„ „ Normal  - - - - 488,  489

Tinel,  M.,  Evidence  on  the  Cideville  Disturbances  - 454,  455,  456,  457,  461
Trance  Phenomena,  Connection  between  and  those  of  Multiple

Personality  -------  393

„ {Mrs.  Piper).

„ Hyslop,  Prof.  J.  H.,  on  - - - - - 78

,,  Alleged  Influence  of  the  “Nelly”  Control

201,  208,  294,  307

„ Differences  between,  and  that  of  Mrs  Thompson

180,  265,  266,  281


>5


Dramatic  Play  of  Personality  - - - 59^  79^  iqo

Fraud,  (,)uestion  of  - - - 81,  83,  85-87,  90-101

Identity,  Criterions  of  - - - - 80,  81,  98

“ Incidents,”  Eeferences  to  Chief  (Prof.  Hyslop’s

Eeport)  -----  84,  92,  93,  100

Mistakes  and  Confusions  - 59,  60,  61,  78-80,  87,  88,  100
Personalities,  Chief  references  to —

“ G.  P.”  -----  57,  59,  60,  69


“ Imperator  ”
“ Phinuit  ”

“ Eector  ” -


59

58,  59,  79,  261,  262
59


Mental  and  Moral  Characteristics  of  - - 58,  59

Spiritistic  Hypothesis,  Facts  bearing  on

78,  84,  87,  88,  92,  98,  99
,,  Characteristic  Phrases  84,  92,  98,  99,  101
Telepathic  Hypothesis

57-60,  91,  92,  98,  101,  348,  349
Unconscious  (Subliminal)  Telepathy  60,  91,  92,  98
{Mrs.  Thompson) —

Piddington,  J.  G.,  On  the  Types  of  Pheno-
mena displayed  in  - . - 104,  349


Index  to  Vol.  XVITI.


xii


Trance  Phenomena  Thompson)
„ Amjjlifications


of  Knowledge  possessed  by
Medium  or  Trance  Personality  - - - 116

Anaesthesia,  Indications  of  - - - 106,  107

Automatic  Writing  - - - - 231-246,  294

,,  Characteristic  - - - - 236-43


„ Specimens  of  - - - - 236-43

Crystal  Vision  - - - - - - 113,  116

Cross-Correspondences  between — and  that  of

other  Mediums  -----  294-307  '

Differences  between — and  that  of  Mrs.  Piper

180,  265,  266,  281


Dramatic  Play  of  Personality

126,  148,  149,  157,  166,  167,
171,  173,  209,  210,  236,  237,  261,  268
Failures,  Marked,  with  Sitters  known  to  the

Medium  -------  291

Fraud,  Question  of

105,  111,  112,  115,  178-180,  190,  191,  194,
210-215,  223,  226,  232,  243,  252,  253,  256,  271-91


Ignorance  of  Trance  Personality  as  to  Matters


known  to  the  Medium

210

Incident  illustrative  of  the  gradual

emergence

of  Facts  - - - -

Incidents — Chief  Refei'ences  to —

- 214

Bennett,  E.  N.  -

258-260

“ Bensons,  Limited  ” -

224,  225,  271-273

Campbell,  Colin  -

- 257

Dorothy  - - - -

213-220

Kiel  Incident,  The

186-189

“Trevelyan’s  Transferred ”

157,  239,  240

Inconclusive  Character  of  the  Hodgson-Barker

Sittings  - - - - - - - 105

Identity,  Difficulties  of  i^roving  - - 234,  235

Memory,  Conditions  of  - - - 157,  167,  210

Mistakes  and  Confusions  - 284-291,  300,  301,  348,  349
Normal  and  Trance  Consciousness,  relations

between  -------  157

Personalities,  Chief  references  to —

Mrs.  Cartwright  126-134,  157,  159,

173,  174,  177,  212,  229,230,  266
“Mr.  D.”  126,133,141,159,

171,  172,  177,  232,  237,  298,  303,  305
“Elsie”  ------  201,307

“Grey  Lady,  The”  - - - - 142,  147

Nelly  113-124,  126-167,  170,  174,

200,  211,  212,  221,  261-265,  280-282,  292-307


Index  to  Vol.  XVIII.

xiii

Trance  Phenomena,  Personalities,  Chief  references  to —

„ Nelly,  Association  of  Ideas  -

-

- 221

,,  Peregrinations  of

-

- 200

„ Pet  Subject  of  -

-

- 261

,,  On  Physical  Phenomena

-

- 265

„ Mental  and  Moral  Characteristics  of

126-135,  157-159,  217,  221,  222,  243,  261
„ Prophecies  - - - - - 118,  246,  257-60

„ “Spirit  Identity,”  Facts  bearing  on

131,  146,  148, 149-54,  160,  166,

171,  175-179,  196-200,  236-43,  292-307
,,  Characteristic  Hand-writing  - 236-43

„ Supernormal  Faculties  when  not  Entranced

107-111,  182,  281,  282

„ “ Susanna  Parkes  Case,”  The  - - - - 267

„ “ Suspicious  Circumstances  ” - - - - 271

„ Telepathy,  Facts  bearing  on  122,  157,  169,  170,

182-186,  187,  188,  192-194,  200,  257-260,  275-282
„ Trance,  Characteristics  of  the  - 105-107,  287,  288

Tuckey,  Dr.  C.  Lloyd,  Comments  on  the  Case  of  “Mary  Barnes”  - 412

„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  - - - 292,  293

Tweedy,  J.,  Report  on  the  Case  of  “ Mary  Barnes  ” - - - 374,  397

V.

Vennum,  LuRANcr,  Analogies  between  the  Case  of — and  “ Mary

Barnes”  ------  _ - - - 408

Verrall,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  - 211,  212,  221,  234,  235,  241


W.

Walker,  Dr.  De  Noe,  Communications  concerning  (3Irs.  IVtompso/i)

112-119,  214

Watson,  Dr.  G.  A.,  Researches  in  Cerebral  Physiology  - - 353,380

Wilson,  Albert,  M.D.

A Case  of  Multiple  Personality  (“Mary  Barnes”)  - - 351,  352

„ Introduction-  352

„ History  of  the  Case  -------  355

„ Theory  of  Cerebi'al  Changes  ------  38O

„ Appendix  I.  --------  - 387

„ Appendix  II.  --------  405

“Wilson,  J.  0.,”  Sittings  with  Mrs  Thompson

136,  137,  163,  221,  224,  250,  264

Winsor,  Miss  Anna,  Analogies  between  the  Case  of — and  “Mary

Barnes  ”------ 408

X.

X.,  Y.  See  Communicators  {3Irs.  Thompson).

X.,  Miss.  See  “ Beauchamp,  the  Misses.”

Z.


Z.,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson


288,  289
