Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. X (1894)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1894 London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. edition (Part XXVI) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc10soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUME  X.
(CONTAINING PART  XXVI.)
1894.


London  :

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER and CO.,  Limited,
CHARING CROSS  ROAD.
1894.


Digitized  by  the.  Internet  Archive
in  2015


https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc10soci


CO.N  TENTS.


PAGE


4-General  Meetings

I.  Address  by  the  President,  the  Right  Hon.  Arthur  J.  Balfour,
M.P.,  F.R.S

II.  On  the  Difficulty  of  Making  Crucial  Experiments  as  to  the  Sources
of  the  Extra  or  Unusual  Intelligence  Manifested  in  Trance-
Speech,  Automatic  Writing,  and  other  States  of  A25parent
y  Mental  Inactivity. By  Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S.

''lIII.  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  By  Professor
^  Sidgwick's  Committee


14


25


J


PAGE

Chapter I. — Introductory... ... ... ... ...  25

,, II. — Method  of  Conducting  the  Enquiry  and

General  Results ... ...  33

,, III. — Discussion  of  the  Trustworthiness  of  our

Results  ... ... ... ...  54

,, IV.  — Hallucinations  and  Pseudo-Hallucinations  70

,, V. — The  Relation  of  Illusions  to  Hallucinations  94

,, VI. — Form  and  Development  of  Hallucinations  113

,, VII. — Physiology  of  Hallucinations ... ...  134

,,  VIII. — Age,  Sex,  Heredity,  Nationality,  and
Health.  Recurrent  Hallucina-
tions 149

,, IX. — Mental  and  Nervous  Conditions  in  con-
nexion with  Hallucinations  ...  166
,, X. — Expectancy  and  Suggestion ... ...  174

,,  XL — Organic  Effects  accompanying  Hallucina-
tions 198

^ ,, XII.— Death-Coincidences 207

,, XIII.— Chance  Coincidence... ... ... ...  245

,,  XIV. — Veridical  Hallucinations  continued  :  Fur-
ther Coincidental  Cases . . .  252

,, XV.— Collective  Hallucinations .303

,, XVI. — Premonitions  and  Local  Apparitions ...  .331

,,  XVII. — Phantasms  of  the  Dead ... ... ...  364

Conclusion ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  392

Appendix ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  402

Supplement.

Review  : — Mr. Andrew Lang's "  Cock Lane  and  Common
Sense." By  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.

SujDplementary  Catalogue  of  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library

List  of  Members  and  Associates

List  of  Members  and  Associates  of  the  American  Branch


423
427
431
454


< c c  e  c  c


< C c  < « ***■  «! # •  c


*


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  63rd  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall  on  Friday,  January  26th,  at  3  p.m. ;  the  President,
Mr.  a.  J.  Balfour,  in  the  chair.

The  President  gave  an  address,  printed  below,  on  the  relation  of
the  work  of  the  Society  to  the  general  course  of  modern  scientific
investigation.

Mr.  W.  Leap  read  a  paper  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  entitled  "  Cock
Lane  and  Common  Sense."


The  64th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,,
March  9th,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Mr.  Pearsall  Smith  in  the  chair.

Mr.  F.  Podmore  read  a  paper  on  "Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-
Transference  at  a  distance."

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  addressed  the  meeting  on  the  subject  of  the
Automatic  "Writings  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses.  The  substance  of  his
speech  will  be  included  in  a  paper  to  be  published  in  a  future  number
of  the  Proceedings.


The  65th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
April  27th,  at  4  p.m. ;  Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Mr.  Myers  announced  the  foundation  of  a  new  Anglo-French
Psychological  Society,  which  he  invited  Members  and  Associates  of
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  to  join.

Mr.  Myers  then  gave  an  address  on  "  Retrocognition,"  which  will
appear  in  a  future  number  of  the  Proceedings.


The  66th  General  Meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place  on  Friday,
June  8th,  at  8.30  p.m. ;  Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Professor  Sidgwick  announced  that  a  legacy  of  £3,000  had  been
left  by  the  late  Dr.  Myers  to  the  President  of  the  S.P.R.  for  the  time
being,  in  trust  for  the  purposes  of  the  Society.

"  Miss  X."  read  a  paper  on  "  The  Apparent  Sources  of  Super-
normal Experiences,"  which  will  be  published  in  a  future  number  of
the  Proceedings.

Mr.  Myers  discussed  "  The  Evidence  for  Continued  Identity  con-
tained in  Mr.  Stainton  Moses'  Automatic  Script,"  being  a  further  part
of  his  paper  on  the  subject,  to  appear  in  a  future  number  of  the
Proceedings.

B


2


President's  Address.


I-

ADDRESS  BY  THE  PRESIDENT,
The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.

Ladies  and  Gentlemen, — In  accordance  with  precedent,  I  have  to
begin  my  observations  to  you  by  calling  to  your  recollection  the
melancholy  fact  that  since  last  there  was  a  meeting  of  this  Society
we  have  lost  two  of  our  most  important  and  most  valued  members.
Less  than  a  fortnight  ago,  Dr.  Arthur  Myers,  a  member  of  the  Council,
and  not  only  a  member  of  the  Council,  but  one  who  ever  since  the
inception  of  this  Society  has  done  admirable,  and,  indeed,  invaluable
work  in  conection  with  its  labours,  passed  away.  The  loss  which  his
friends  have  sustained  by  his  death  it  would  not  be  proper  for  me  on
such  an  occasion  to  dwell  upon, — however  much,  as  one  of  the  oldest  of
those  friends,  whose  friendship  dated  from  Cambridge  days,  now  twenty
years  ago,  I  might  be  tempted  to  do  so.  But  it  is  strictly  within  the
scope  of  my  duties  to  remind  you  of  the  admirable  aid  which  he  has
given  to  our  investigations,  of  the  untiring  zeal  which  he  has  thrown
into  all  the  matters  that  came  before  him,  of  his  self-sacrificing  energy,
and  the  liberality  with  which  he  spent  in  our  service  both  time  and
money.

We  have  lost  another  distinguished  member  of  our  body — not  in  this
case  one  who  was  associated  very  closely  with  our  work,  but  one,  never-
theless, who  by  the  lustre  of  his  name  added  dignity  to  our  proceedings
and  who  might,  had  his  life  been  spared,  have  largely  helped  us,  I
believe,  in  experimental  investigations — I  allude  to  Professor  Hertz,  a
corresponding  member  of  our  body.  As  those  of  you  will  know  who
have  had  the  opportunity  of  following  recent  developments  of  physical
science,  he  was  the  fortunate  individual  who  demonstrated  experi-
mentally the  identity  of  light  and  of  certain  electro-magnetic  phe-
nomena. This  identity  had  been  divined,  and  elaborated  on  the  side
of  theory,  by  one  of  the  greatest  of  English,  I  ought  perhaps  to  say
of  Scotch,  men  of  science,  Clerk  Maxwell,  but  it  had  never  been
conclusively  proved  until  Professor  Hertz,  about  five  years  ago,
startled  Europe  by  the  experimental  identification  of  these  physical
forces.  The  extraordinary  interest  and  the  far-reaching  importance
of  a  discovery  like  this  will  not  perhaps  be  appreciated  by  every  one
of  my  audience,  but  all  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  such  subjects
will  see  that  by  this  stroke  of  expei-imental  genius  a  very  large  stride


President's  Address.


3


has  been  made  towards  establishing  the  unity  of  the  great  physical
powers  of  nature.

The  mention  of  a  great  physical  discovery  like  this,  made  by  one
of  our  own  body,  naturally  suggests  reflections  as  to  our  actual
scientific  position.  What,  we  feel  tempted  to  ask,  is  at  the  present
time  the  relation  of  such  results  as  we  have  arrived  at  to  the  general
view  which  hitherto  science  has  taken  of  that  material  universe  in
which  we  live  ?  I  must  confess  that,  when  I  call  to  mind  the  history
of  these  relations  in  the  past,  the  record  is  not  one  on  which
we  can  dwell  with  any  great  satisfaction.  Consider,  for  example,
the  attitude  maintained  by  the  great  body  of  scientific  opinion,
whether  medical  or  physical,  towards  the  phenomena  which  used
to  be  known  as  mesmeric,  but  which  have  now  been  re-baptised,
with  Braid's  term,  as  hypnotic.  As  most  of  you  ai'e  aware,  it  is
very  little  more  than  a  century  since  the  public  attention  of  Europe,
and  especially  of  certain  parts  of  the  continent,  was  called  to
these  extraordinary  phenomena  by  the  discoveries— if  I  may  call
them  discoveries,  for,  after  all,  they  were  known  long  before  his  time
— of  Mesmer.  Mesmer  produced  hypnotic  phenomena,  which  are  now
familiar  to  everybody,  and,  not  content  with  that,  he  invented  a
theory  to  account  for  them.  The  theory  is  an  extremely  bad  one,  and
I  imagine,  has  fallen  into  the  disrepute  which  it  deserves ;  for  Mesmer
committed  the  error,  which  has  been  repeated  now  and  then  since,  of
trying  to  find  an  explanation  for  strange  and  unaccountable  facts  by
simply  describing  them  as  the  effect  of  some  equally  strange  and
unaccountable  cause.  He  declared  that  there  was  a  kind  of  magnetic
fluid  to  the  operations  of  which  the  results  that  he  obtained  were
due  ;  and  he  undoubtedly  did  his  reputation  much  disservice  in  the
minds  of  the  scientific  experts  of  the  time  by  associating  his  discoveries
with  speculations  which,  after  all,  did  not  at  the  time  stand,  anc^
have  not  since  stood,  the  test  of  critical  investigation.  Nevertheless,
the  facts  that  Mesmer  brought  forward  could  be  proved  in  the  last
century,  as  they  can  be  proved  now,  by  experimental  evidence  of  the  most
conclusive  character.  It  can  be  shewn  that  they  are  neither  the  result
of  deliberate  fraud  nor  unconscious  deception,  and,  accordingly,  there
was  here  a  problem  presented  for  solution  which  it  was  plainly  the
duty  of  men  of  science  in  general,  and,  probably,  of  the  medical  pro-
fession in  particular,  to  examine  and  probe  to  the  bottom  ;  to  explain
if  they  could,  but  not  to  explain  away  if  they  could  not.  Their  actual
course  was  a  very  different  one.  There  were,  indeed,  a  good  many
doctors  and  other  men  of  science  who  could  not  refuse  the  evidence
of  their  senses,  and  who  loudly  testified  to  the  truth,  the  interest,
and  the  importance  of  the  phenomena  which  they  witnessed.  But  if
you  take  the  body  of  opinion  of  men  of  science  generally,  you  will  be

B  2


4


President's  Address.


driven  to  the  conclusion  that  they  either  denied  facts  which  they  ought
to  have  seen  were  true,  or  that  they  thrust  them  aside  without  con-
descending to  consider  them  worthy  of  serious  investigation.  There
were,  I  believe,  no  less  than  two  or  three  Commissions  of  enquiry — -
three,  I  think — instituted  in  France  alone,  one  in  Mesmer's  lifetime,
and  the  other  two,  unless  my  memory  deceives  me,  after  his  death.
The  amount  of  evidence  collected,  at  all  events  by  one  of  those  Com-
missions, composed  of  some  of  the  most  eminent  scientific  men  in
France,  should  have  been  enough  to  call  the  attention  of  all  Europe  to
the  new  problems  thus  raised.  The  report  which  embodied  this
evidence  was,  nevertheless,  allowed  to  lie  unnoticed  upon  the  shelf ;
and  it  has  only  been  by  a  gradual  process  of  re-discovery,  a  constant
and  up-hill  light  on  the  part  of  the  less  prejudiced  members  of  the
community,  that  the  truths  of  hypnotism,  as  far  as  they  are  yet
attained,  have  reached  something  like  general  recognition ;  even  now,
perhaps,  their  full  importance — whether  from  a  therapeutic  or  a
psychological  point  of  view  —  has  not  been  sufficiently  acknow-
ledged.

What  I  have  just  very  briefly  and  rudely  sketched  out  to  you  is
the  history  of  an  investigation  into  one  small  section  of  these  alleged
phenomena  which  fall  outside  the  ordinary  field  of  scientific  investiga-
tion. If  we  took  it  by  itself  we  should  say  that  scientific  men  have
shown  in  connection  with  it  a  bigoted  intolerance,  an  indifference  to
strictly  scientific  evidence,  which  is,  on  the  face  of  it,  discreditable.  I,
however,  do  not  feel  inclined  to  pass  any  verdict  of  so  harsh  a
character  upon  the  action  of  the  great  body  of  scientific  men.  I  believe
that,  although  the  course  they  pursued  was  not  one  which  it  is  very
easy  rationally  to  justify,  nevertheless  there  was  a  great  deal  more,  of
practical  wisdom  in  it  than  might  appear  at  first  sight.  I  have  always
been  impressed  by  the  lesson  -  taught  us  by  the  general  course  of
history,  that  you  cannot  expect,  either  of  any  single  nation  or  of  any
single  age,  that  it  will  do  more  than  the  special  work  which  happens,
so  to  speak,  to  be  set  before  it  at  the  moment.  You  cannot  expect
men,  being  what  they  are,  to  labour  effectively  in  more  than  one
relatively  restricted  field  at  the  same  time ;  and  if  they  insist  on
diffusing  their  energies  over  too  wide  a  surface,  the  necessary  result,  as
I  believe,  will  be  that  their  labours  will  prove  unfruitful.  Now  just
consider  what  it  is  that  men  of  science  have  done  in  the  century  which
has  elapsed  since  the  first  French  Commission  investigated  Mesmer's
discoveries.  I  do  not  believe  it  would  be  going  too  far  to  say  that  the
whole  body  of  the  sciences,  with  the  exception  of  mechanics,  especially
mechanics  as  applied  to  celestial  motions — that  the  whole  body  of
the  sciences  outside  that  limited  sphei-e  has  been  reconstructed  from
top  to  bottom. Our  leading  ideas  in  chemistry,  our  leading  ideas  in


President's  Address.


5


physics,  the  theory  of  light,  the  theory  of  sound,  the  whole  of  geology,
the  great  generalisation  known  as  the  conservation  of  energy,  and  all
the  speculations  and  extensions  which  have  succeeded  that  great
generalisation,  the  whole  theory  of  natural  selection  and  of  biological
evolution,  are  all  the  birth  of  the  hundred  years  which  have
elapsed  since  first  Mesmer  made  hypnotic  phenomena  notorious  through
Europe.  I  think  if  scientific  men,  looking  back  upon  the  past,  choose
to  set  up  for  themselves  this  defence,  that  after  all  only  one  thing  can
be  done  at  a  time,  that  they  were  occupied  in  co-ordinating  within
certain  lines  the  experimental  data  then  availaljle,  and  that,  in  harmony
with  a  given  conception  of  the  material  world,  they  were  laying  deep
the  foundations  of  that  vast  and  imposing  fabric  of  modern  science,
I  for  one  should  accept  the  plea  as  a  bar  to  further  proceedings.  For
the  men  who  did  that  work  could  not  have  done  it,  I  believe,  unless
they  had  rigidly  confined  themselves  to  one  particular  conception  of
the  world  with  which  they  had  to  deal.  If  they  had  insisted  on  inclu-
ding in  their  survey  not  merely  the  well-travelled  regions  of  everyday
experience,  but  the  dark  and  doubtful  territories  within  which  our
labours  lie,  their  work  would  have  been  worse,  not  better ;  less,  not
more  complete.  They  may  have  been  narrow  ;  but  their  narrowness
has  been  our  gain.  They  may  have  been  prejudiced ;  but  their  pre-
judices have  been  fruitful,  and  we  have  reaped  the  harvest.  I  have
often  thought  that  when,  on  looking  back  over  the  history  of  human
speculation,  we  find  some  individual  who  has  anticipated  the  discoveries
of  a  later  age,  but  has  neither  himself  been  able  to  develop  those  dis-
coveries nor  yet  to  interest  his  contemporaries  in  them,  we  are  very
apt  to  bestow  on  him  an  undue  meed  of  honour.  "Here,"  we  say,  "was
a  man  before  his  time.  Here  was  a  man  of  whom  his  age  was  not
worthy."  Yet  such  men  do  very  little  indeed  for  the  progress  of  the
world  of  which  at  first  sight  they  would  appear  to  be  among  the  most
distinguished  citizens.  There  is  no  use  in  being  befoi'e  your  age  after
such  a  fashion  as  this.  If  neither  you  nor  those  to  whom  you  speak
can  make  use  of  the  message  that  you  thus  prematurely  deliver,  so  far
as  the  development  of  the  world  is  concerned  you  might  as  well  have
not  lived  at  all.  When,  therefore,  we  are  asked  to  put  our  hands  in
our  pockets  and  subscribe  towards  the  erection  of  memorials  to
half  forgotton  worthies  like  these,  by  all  means  let  us  do  it.  It  is
natural  and  even  praiseworthy.  But  do  not  let  us  suppose  that  those
whom  we  thus  honour  really  stand  out  among  the  benefactors  of  our
species. They  are  interesting ;  but  hardly  useful.

This,  however,  is  merely  a  parenthetical  reflection,  to  which  I  do
not  ask  your  agreement,  and  which,  after  all,  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  general  drift  of  the  argument  that  I  desire  to  lay  before  you.  The
ijuestion  I  now  wish  vou  to  con;;ider  is :  Granting  to  men  of  science  that


6


President's  Address.


i/hey  had,  if  not  a  theoretical  and  speculative  excuse,  still  a  practical
justification,  for  the  course  they  have  adopted  in  regard  to  these  obscure
psychical  phenomena  during  the  last  hundred  years,  is  that  justifiation
still  valid  ?  For  myself,  I  think  it  is  not.  I  think  the  time  has  now
come  when  it  is  desirable  in  their  own  interests,  and  in  our  interests,
that  the  leaders  of  scientific  thought  in  this  country  and  elsewhere
should  recognise  that  there  are  well-attested  facts  which,  though  they
do  not  easily  fit  into  the  framework  of  the  sciences,  or  of  organised
experience  as  they  conceive  it,  yet  require  investigation  and  explana-
tion, and  which  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  science,  if  not  itself  to  in-
vestigate, at  all  events  to  assist  us  in  investigating.

I  am,  of  course,  aware  that  there  are  necessarily  connected  with
our  work  diflicvilties  and  obstructions  in  the  way  of  experiment
with  which  scientific  men  are  not  familiar,  and  which  not  unnaturally
rouse  in  their  minds  both  dislike  and  suspicion.  To  begin  with,  there
is  the  difficulty  of  fraud.  The  ordinary  scientific  man  no  doubt  finds  the
path  of  experimental  investigation  strewn  with  difliculties,  but  at  least
he  does  not  usually  find  among  them  the  difliculty  presented  by  human
fraud.  He  knows  that,  if  he  is  misled  in  any  particular,  it  is  the  fault
of  the  observer,  and  not  the  fault  of  the  observed.  He  knows  that,  if
his  cross-examination  of  nature  fails  to  elicit  anything,  it  is  because
he  has  not  known  how  to  cross-examine,  not  because  nature  when  put
in  the  witness  box  tells  untruths.  But  unfortunately  in  the  matters
with  which  we  have  to  deal  this  is  not  the  case.  We  have  come
across,  and  it  is  inevitable  that  we  should  come  across,  cases  where
either  deliberate  fraud  or  unconscious  deception  makes  observation
doubly  and  trebly  difficult,  and  throws  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the
investigator  which  his  happier  brother  in  the  region  of  material  and
physical  science  has  not  to  contend  with.

And  there  is  yet  another  difficulty  in  our  work  from  which  those
who  cultivate  physical  science  are  happily  free.  They  have,  as  the
ultimate  sources  of  their  knowledge,  the  "five  senses"  with  which  we
are  all  endowed,  and  whicli  are  the  only  generally  recognised  inlets
through  which  the  truth  of  external  nature  can  penetrate  into
consciousness.  But  we  of  this  Society  have  perforce  to  deal  with  cases
in  which  not  merely  the  normal  five  or  six  senses,  but  some  abnormal
and  half-completed  sense,  so  to  speak,  comes  into  play ;  in  which  we
have  to  work,  not  with  the  organisations  of  an  ordinary  and  normal  type,
but  with  certain  exceptional  organisations  who  can  neither  explain^
account  for,  nor  control  the  abnormal  powers  they  appear  to  possess.

This  is  not  only  a  special  difficulty  with  which  we  have  to
contend ;  it  is  the  basis  of  a  serious  objection,  in  the  eyes  of
many  scientific  men,  to  the  admission  of  the  subject  matter  of  our
I'esearches  into  the  sphere  of  legitimate  investigation. These  critics


President's  Address.


7


seem  to  think  that  because  we  cannot  repeat  and  verify  our  experi-
ments as  we  will  and  when  we  will — because  we  cannot,  as  it  were,  put
our  phenomena  in  a  retort  and  boil  them  over  a  spirit  lamp  and
always  get  the  same  results — that  therefore  the  phenomena  themselves
are  not  worth  examining.  But  this  is,  I  venture  to  say,  a  very
unphilosophic  view  of  the  question.  Is  there,  after  all,  any  inherent
a  priori  improbability  in  there  being  these  half -formed  and  imperfectly
developed  senses,  or  inlets  of  external  information,  occasionally  and
sporadically  developed  in  certain  members  of  the  human  race  ?  Surely
not.  I  should  myself  be  disposed  to  say  that  if  the  theory  of  develop-
ment be  really  sound,  phenomena  like  these,  however  strange,  are
exactly  what  we  should  have  expected.  For  what  says  the  theory  of
natural  selection  1  Why  this,  among  other  things  :  that  there  has
gradually  been  elaborated  by  the  slaughter  of  the  unfit  and  the  sur-
vival of  the  fit,  an  organism  possessed  of  senses  adapted  to  further  its
success  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  To  suppose  that  the  senses
elaborated  in  obedience  to  this  law  should  be  in  correspondence  with
the  whole  of  external  nature,  appears  to  me  to  be  not  only  improbable
but,  on  any  rational  doctrine  of  probability,  absolutely  impossible.
There  must  be  countless  forms  of  being,  countless  real  existences
which,  had  the  line  of  an  evolution  gone  in  a  dilFerent  direction,  or
had  the  necessities  of  our  primitive  ancestors  been  of  a  different  kind,
would  have  made  themselves  known  to  us  through  senses  the  very
character  of  which  we  are  at  present  unable  to  imagine.  And,  if  this  be
so,  is  it  not  in  itself  likely  that  here  and  there  we  should  come  across
rudimentary  beginnings  of  such  senses  ;  beginnings  never  developed
and  probably  never  to  be  developed  by  the  operation  of  selection  ;
mere  by-products  of  the  great  evolutionary  machine,  never  destined  to
be  turned  to  any  useful  account  1  And  it  may  be — I  am  only  hazard-
ing an  unverifiable  guess — it  may  be,  I  say,  that  in  these  cases  of  the
individuals  thus  abnormally  endowed,  we  really  have  come  across
faculties  which,  had  it  been  worth  Nature's  while,  had  they  been  of
any  value  or  purpose  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  might  have  been
normally  developed,  and  thus  become  the  common  possession  of  the
whole  human  race.  Had  this  occurred,  we  should  have  been  enabled
to  experiment  upon  phenomena,  which  we  now  regard  as  occult  and
mysterious,  with  the  same  confidence  in  the  sources  of  our  information
that  we  now  enjoy  in  any  of  our  ordinary  enquiries  into  the  laws  of  the
material  world.  Well,  if  there  be,  as  I  think,  no  great  antecedent  im-
probability against  there  being  these  occasional  and  sporadic  modifica-
tions of  the  organism,  I  do  not  think  that  men  of  science  ought  to
show  any  distrustful  impatience  of  the  apparent  irregularity  of  these
abnormal  phenomena  which  is  no  doubt  one  of  their  most  provoking
characteristics.


8


President's  Address.


But  there  is  another  and  a  real  difficulty,  from  the  point  of  view
of  science,  attaching  to  the  result  of  our  investigations,  which  is  not
disposed  of  by  the  theory  which  I  have  suggested  of  imperfectly
developed  senses.  Such  senses,  if  they  exist  at  all,  may  evidently  be
of  two  kinds,  or  may  give  us  two  kinds  of  experience.  They  may
give  us  a  kind  of  experience  which  shall  be  in  perfect  harmony  with
our  existing  conception  of  the  physical  universe,  or  they  may  give  us
one  which  harmonises  with  that  conception  imperfectly  or  not  at  all.
As  an  example  of  the  first  I  might  revert  to  the  discovery,  previously
referred  to,  of  Professor  Hertz.  He,  as  I  have  already  told  you,  has
experimentally  proved  that  electro-magnetic  phenomena  are  identical,
as  physical  phenomena,  with  ordinary  light.  Light  consists,  as  you
all  know,  of  undulations  of  what  is  known  as  the  luminiferous  ether ;
well,  electro-magnetic  waves  are  also  undulations  of  the  same  ether,
differing  from  the  undulations  which  we  call  light  only  in  their
length.  Now  it  is  easy  to  conceive  that  we  might  have  had  a  sense
which  would  have  enabled  us  to  perceive  the  long  undulations  in  the
same  way  as  we  now  perceive  the  short  ones.  That  would  be  a  new
sense,  but,  though  new,  its  deliverances  would  have  fitted  in  with  the
existing  notions  which  scientific  men  have  framed  of  the  universe.
But  unfortunately  in  our  special  investigations  we  seem  to  come  across
experiences  which  are  not  so  amenable.  We  apparently  get  hints  of
the  existence  of  facts,  which,  if  they  be  well  established,  as  they
appear  to  be,  cannot,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  by  any  amount  of
squeezing  or  manipulation  be  made  to  fit  into  the  interstices  of  our
accepted  view  of  the  physical  world  ;  and,  if  that  be  so,  then  we  are
engaged  in  a  work  of  prodigious  difficulty  indeed,  but  of  an
importance  of  which  the  difficulty  is  only  a  measure  and  an  indicator.
For  we  should  then  be  actually  on  the  threshold,  so  to  speak,  of
a  region  ordered  according  to  laws  of  which  we  have  at  pi-esent
no  cognisance,  and  which  do  not  appear  to  harmonise — I  do  not
say  they  are  in  contradiction  to,  but  at  least  they  do  not  appear
to  harmonise — with  those  which  govern  the  regions  already  within
our  ken.

Let  me  dwell  on  this  point  a  little  more,  as  it  is  one  of  central
interest  to  all  who  are  engaged  in  our  special  investigations.
What  I  am  asserting  is  that  the  facts  which  we  come  across  are  very
odd  facts,  and  by  that  I  do  not  mean  merely  queer  and  unexpected  :  I
mean  "  odd "  in  the  sense  that  they  are  out  of  harmony  with  the
accepted  theories  of  the  material  world.  They  are  not  merely  dramatic-
ally strange,  they  are  not  merely  extraordinary  and  striking,  but  they  are
"  odd  "  in  the  sense  that  they  will  not  easily  fit  in  with  the  views  which
physicists  and  men  of  science  generally  give  us  of  the  universe  in
which  we  live.


President's  Address.


9


In  order  to  illustrate  this  distinction  I  will  take  a  very  siruple
instance.  I  suppose  everybody  would  say  that  it  would  be  an  extra-
ordinary circumstance  if  at  no  distant  date  this  earth  on  which  we
dwell  were  to  come  into  collision  with  some  unknown  body  travelling
through  space,  and,  as  the  result  of  that  collision,  be  resolved  into  the
original  gases  of  which  it  is  composed.  Yet,  though  it  would  be  an
extraordinary,  and  even  an  amazing,  event,  it  is,  after  all,  one  of  which
no  astronomer,  I  venture  to  say,  would  assert  the  impossibility.  He
would  say,  I  suppose,  that  it  was  most  unlikely,  but  that  if  it  occurred
it  would  not  violate,  or  even  modify,  his  general  theories  as  to  the  laws
which  govern  the  movements  of  the  celestial  bodies.  Our  globe  is  a
member  of  the  solar  system  which  is  travelling  I  do  not  know  how
many  miles  a  second  in  the  direction  of  the  constellation  Hercules.
There  is  no  a  priori  ground  for  saying  that  in  the  course  of  that
mysterious  journey,  of  the  cause  of  which  we  are  perfectly  ignorant,
we  shall  not  come  across  some  body  in  interstellar  space  which  will
produce  the  uncomfortable  results  which  I  have  ventured  to  indicate.
And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the  course  of  the  last  two  hundred  years,
astronomers  have  themselves  been  witness  to  stellar  tragedies  of  incom-
parably greater  magnitude  than  that  which  would  be  produced  by  the
destruction  of  so  insignificant  a  planet  as  the  world  in  which  we  happen
to  be  personally  interested.  We  have  seen  stars  which  shine  from  an
unknown  distance,  and  are  of  unknown  magnitude,  burst  into  sudden
conflagration,  blaze  brightly  for  a  time,  and  then  slowly  die  out  again.
What  that  phenomenon  precisely  indicates,  of  course,  we  cannot  say,
but  it  certainly  indicates  an  accident  of  a  far  more  startling  and
tremendous  kind  than  the  shattering  of  our  particular  world,  which  to
us  would,  doubtless,  seem  exti'aordinary  enough.

This,  then,  is  a  specimen  of  what  I  mean  by  a  dramatically  extra-
ordinary event.  Now  I  will  give  you  a  case  of  what  I  mean  by  a
scientifically  extraordinary  event,  which  as  you  will  at  once  perceive
may  be  one  which  at  first  sight,  and  to  many  observers,  may  appear
almost  common-place  and  familiar.  I  have  constantly  met  people  who
will  tell  you,  with  no  apparent  consciousness  that  they  are  saying
anything  more  out  of  the  way  than  an  observation  about  the  weather,
that  by  the  exercise  of  their  will  they  can  make  anybody  at  a  little
distance  turn  round  and  look  at  them.  Now  such  a  fact  (if  fact  it  be)
is  far  more  scientifically  extraordinary  than  would  be  the  destruction
of  this  globe  by  some  such  celestial  catastrophe  as  I  have  imagined.
How  profoundly  mistaken,  then,  are  they  who  think  that  this
exercise  of  will  power,  as  they  call  it,  is  the  most  natural  and  most
normal  thing  in  the  world,  something  that  everybody  would  have
expected,  something  which  hardly  deserves  scientific  notice  or  requires
scientific  explanation. In  reality  it  is  a  profound  mystery  if  it  be  true.


10


President's  Address.


or  if  anything  like  it  be  true ;  and  no  event,  however  startling,  which
easily  finds  its  appropriate  niche  in  the  structure  of  the  physical
sciences  ought  to  excite  half  so  much  intellectual  cui'iosity  as  this  dull
and  at  first  sight  common-place  phenomenon.

Now  do  not  suppose  that  I  want  you  to  believe  that  every  gentle-
man or  lady  who  chooses  to  suppose  him  or  herself  exceptionally
endowed  with  this  so-called  will-power  is  other  than  the  dupe  of  an
ill-regulated  fancy.  There  is,  however,  quite  apart  from  the  testimony
of  such  persons  a  vast  mass  of  evidence  in  favour  of  what  we  now  call
telepathy  ;  and  to  telepathy  the  observations  I  have  been  making  do  in
my  opinion  most  strictly  apply.  For,  consider  !  In  every  case  of
telepathy  you  have  an  example  of  action  at  a  distance.  Examples  of
real  or  apparent  action  at  a  distance  are  of  course  very  common.
Gravitation  is  such  an  example.  We  are  not  aware  at  the  present
time  of  any  mechanism,  if  I  may  use  the  phrase,  which  can  transmit
gravitational  influence  from  one  gravitating  body  to  another.  Never-
theless, scientific  men  do  not  rest  content  with  that  view.  I  recollect
it  used  be  maintained  by  the  late  Mr.  John  Mill  that  there  was  no
ground  for  regarding  with  any  special  wonder  the  phenomenon  of
action  at  a  distance.  I  do  not  dogmatise  upon  the  point,  but  I  do  say
emphatically  that  I  do  not  think  you  will  find  a  first-rate  physicist
who  is  prepared  to  admit  that  gravity  is  not  a  phenomenon  which  stid
wants  an  explanation.  He  is  not  I'eady,  in  other  words,  to  accept
action  at  a  distance  as  an  ultimate  fact,  though  he  has  not  even  got  the
first  clue  to  the  real  nature  of  the  links  by  which  the  attracting  bodies
mutually  act  upon  one  another.

But  though  gravitation  and  telepathy  are  alike  in  this,  that  we  are
quite  ignorant  of  the  means  by  which  in  either  case  distant  bodies  in-
fluence one  another,  it  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  the
two  modes  of  operation  are  equally  mysterious.  In  the  case  of  tele-
pathy there  is  not  merely  the  difficulty  of  conjecturing  the  nature  of
the  mechanism  which  operates  between  the  agent  and  the  patient,
between  the  man  who  influences  and  the  man  who  is  influenced ;  but
the  whole  character  of  the  phenomena  refuses  to  fit  in  with  any  of  our
accepted  ideas  as  to  the  mode  in  which  force  may  be  exercised  from
one  portion  of  space  to  another.  Is  this  telepathic  action  an  ordinary
case  of  action  from  a  centre  of  disturbance  1  Is  it  equally  diffused  in
all  directions  ?  Is  it  like  the  light  of  a  candle  or  the  light  of  the  sun
which  radiates  equally  into  space  in  every  direction  at  the  same  time  1
If  it  is,  it  must  obey  the  law — at  least,  we  should  expect  it  to  obey  the
law — of  all  other  forces  which  so  act  through  a  non-absorbing  medium,
and  its  effects  must  diminish  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance.
It  must,  so  to  speak,  get  beaten  out  thinner  and  thinner  the  further
it  gets  removed  from  its  original  source. But  is  this  so? Is  it  even


President's  Address.


11


credible  that  the  mere  thoughts,  or,  if  you  please,  the  neural  changes
corresponding  to  these  thoughts,  of  any  individual  could  have  in  them
the  energy  to  produce  sensible  effects  equally  in  all  directions,  for
distances  which  do  not,  as  far  as  our  investigations  go,  appear  to  have
any  necessary  limit  ?  It  is,  I  think,  incredible  ;  and  in  any  case  there
is  no  evidence  whatever  that  this  equal  diffusion  actually  takes  place.
The  will  power,  whenever  will  is  used,  or  the  thoughts,  in  cases  where
will  is  not  used,  have  an  effect,  as  a  rule,  only  upon  one  or  two
individuals  at  most.  There  is  no  appearance  of  general  diffusion.
There  is  no  indication  of  any  disturbance  equal  at  equal  distances  from
its  origin,  and  radiating  from  it  alike  in  every  direction.

But  if  we  are  to  reject  this  idea,  which  is  the  first  which  ordinary
analogies  would  suggest,  what  are  we  to  put  in  its  place  ?  Are  we  to
suppose  that  there  is  some  means  by  which  telepathic  energy  can  be
directed  through  space  from  the  agent  to  the  patient,  from  the  man
who  influences  to  the  man  who  is  influenced  ?  If  we  are  to  believe  this,
as  apparently  we  must,  we  are  face  to  face  not  only  with  a  fact  extra-
ordinary in  itself,  but  with  a  kind  of  fact  which  does  not  flt  in  with
anything  we  know  at  present  in  the  region  either  of  physics  or  of
physiology.  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  we  do  know  plenty  of  cases
where  energy  is  directed  along  a  given  line,  like  water  in  a  pipe,  or
like  electrical  energy  along  the  course  of  a  wire.  But  then  in  such
cases  there  is  always  some  material  guide  existing  between  the  two
termini,  between  the  place  from  which  the  energy  comes  and  the
place  to  which  the  energy  goes.  Is  there  any  such  material  guide  in  the
case  of  telepathy  1  It  seems  absokxtely  impossible.  There  is  no  sign
of  it.  We  cannot  even  form  to  ourselves  any  notion  of  its  character,
and  yet,  if  we  are  to  take  what  appears  to  be  the  obvious  lesson  of
the  observed  facts,  we  are  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  in  some
shape  or  other  it  exists.  For  to  suppose  that  the  telepathic  agent
shoots  out  his  influence  towards  a  particular  object,  as  you  shoot  a
bullet  out  of  a  gun,  or  water  out  of  a  hose,  which  appears  to  be  the
only  other  alternative,  involves  us  seemingly  in  greater  difficulties
still.

Here  then  we  are  face  to  face  with  what  I  call  a  scientifically
extraordinary  phenomenon,  as  distinguished  from  a  dramatically  extra-
ordinary one.  Anyone  who  has  endeavoured  to  wade  through  the
mass  of  evidence  collected  by  our  Society  on  the  suljject  will  be
prepared  to  admit  that  it  is  not  exciting  or  interesting  in  itself,  that  it
does  not  arouse  a  foolish  wonder,  or  appeal  unduly  to  any  craving  for  the
marvellous.  But  dull  as  these  experiments  may  seem,  dull  indeed  as
they  often  are,  their  dullness  is  really  one  of  their  great  advantages.  It
effectually  excludes  some  perturbing  influences  that  might  otherwise
affect,  or,  which  is  nearly  as  bad,  be  supposed  to  affect,  the  cool


12


President's  Address.


analysis  of  the  experimental  data ;  and  in  consequence,  it  makes  these
investigations,  in  my  judgment,  the  best  starting  point  from  which  to
reconsider,  should  it  be  necessary,  our  general  view,  I  will  not  say
of  the  material  universe,  but  of  the  universe  of  phenomena  in  space
and  time.

I  am,  of  coui'se,  aware  that  probably  a  very  large  number,  perhaps
the  majority,  of  the  members  of  this  Society  are  accustomed  to  consider
the  subjects  with  which  we  deal  from  a  somewhat  different  point  of
view  from  that  which  I  have  adopted  this  afternoon,  and  it  is  well  that
this  should  be  so.  All  arbitraiy  limitations  of  our  sphere  of  work  are
to  be  avoided.  It  is  our  business  to  record,  to  investigate,  to  classify,
and,  if  possible,  to  explain,  facts  of  a  far  more  startling  and  impressive
character  than  these  modest  cases  of  telepathy.  Let  us  not  neglect
that  business.  And  if  beyond  the  mere  desire  to  increase  knowledge
many  are  animated  by  a  wish  to  get  evidence,  not  through  any  process
of  laborious  deduction,  but  by  direct  observation,  of  the  reality  of
intelligences  not  endowed  with  a  physical  organisation  like  our  own,  I
see  nothing  in  their  action  to  criticise,  much  less  to  condemn.  But
while  there  is  sufficient  evidence,  in  my  judgment,  to  justify  all  the
labours  of  our  Society  in  this  field  of  research,  it  is  not  the  field  of
research  which  lies  closest  to  the  oi'dinary  subjects  of  scientific
study,  and,  therefore,  this  afternoon,  when  I  was  led  to  deal  rather
with  the  scientific  aspects  of  our  work,  I  have  deliberately  kept  myself
within  the  range  of  the  somewhat  ixnpicturesque  phenomena  of  tele-
pathy. My  object  has  been  a  very  simple  one,  as  I  am  desirous
above  all  things  of  enlisting  in  our  service  the  best  experimental
and  scientific  ability  which  we  can  command.  I  have  thought
it  best  to  endeavour  to  arrest  the  attention,  and,  if  possible,  to
engage  the  interest  of  men  of  science  by  pointing  to  the  definite  aaid
very  simple  experiments  which,  simple  as  they  are,  yet  hint  at  conclu-
sions not  easily  to  be  accommodated  with  our  habitual  theories  of
things.  If  we  can  repeat  these  experiments  sufficiently  often  and
under  tests  sufficiently  crucial  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  ei'ror,  it  will
be  impossible  any  longer  to  ignore  them,  and,  willingly  or  unwillingly,
all  interested  in  science  will  be  driven  to  help,  as  far  as  they  can,  to
unravel  the  refractoiy  class  of  problems  which  this  Society  is  endeavour-
ins  to  solve.  What  success  such  elforts  will  be  crowned  with,  I  know
not.  I  have  already  indicated  to  you,  at  the  beginning  of  my  remarks,
the  special  class  of  difficulties  which  beset  our  path.  We  have  not  at
our  command  the  appropriate  physical  senses,  we  have  not  the  appro-
priate materials  for  experiment,  we  are  hampered  and  embarrassed  in
every  direction  by  credulity,  by  fraud,  by  prejudice.  Nevertheless,  if  I
rightly  interpret  the  results  which  these  many  years  of  labour  have
forced  upon  the  members  of  this  Society  and  upon  others  not  among


President's  Address.


13


our  number  who  are  associated  by  a  similar  spirit,  it  does  seem  to  me
that  there  is  at  least  strong  ground  for  supposing  that  outside  the
world,  as  we  have,  from  the  point  of  science,  been  in  the  habit  of  con-
ceiving it,  there  does  lie  a  region,  not  open  indeed  to  experimental
observation  in  the  same  way  as  the  more  familiar  regions  of  the
material  world  are  open  to  it,  but  still  with  regard  to  which  some
experimental  information  may  be  laboriously  gleaned ;  and  even  if  we
cannot  entertain  any  confident  hope  of  discovering  what  laws  these
half-seen  phenomena  obey,  at  all  events  it  will  be  some  gain  to  have
shown,  not  as  a  matter  of  speculation  or  conjecture,  but  as  a  matter
of  ascertained  fact,  that  there  are  things  in  heaven  and  earth  not
hitherto  dreamed  of  in  our  scientific  philosophy.  (Cheers.)


14


Professor  0.  J.  Lodge.


II.

ON  THE  DIFFICULTY  OF  MAKING  CRUCIAL  EXPERIMENTS
AS  TO  THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  EXTRA  OR  UNUSUAL  INTEL-
LIGENCE MANIFESTED  IN  TRANCE-SPEECH,  AUTOMATIC
WRITING,  AND  OTHER  STATES  OF  APPARENT  MENTAL
INACTIVITY.

By  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.


It  has  long  been  known  that  in  order  to  achieve  remarkable  results
in  any  department  of  intellectual  activity,  the  mind  must  be  to  some
extent  unaware  of  passing  occurrences.  To  be  keenly  awake  and  "  on
the  spot "  is  a  highly  valued  accomplishment,  and  for  the  ordinary
purposes  of  mundane  affairs  is  a  far  more  useful  state  of  mind  than  the
rather  hazy  and  absorbed  condition  which  is  associated  with  the  quality
of  mind  called  genius ;  but  it  is  not  as  effective  for  brilliant  achieve-
ment.

When  a  poet  or  musician  or  mathematician  feels  himself  inspired,
his  senses  are,  I  suppose,  dulled  or  half  asleep  ;  and  though  probably
some  part  of  his  brain  is  in  a  great  state  of  activity,  I  am  not  aware
of  any  experiments  directed  to  test  which  that  part  is,  nor  whether,
when  in  that  state,  any  of  the  more  ordinarily  used  portions  are  really
dormant  or  no.  It  would  be  interesting,  but  difficult,  to  ascertain  the
precise  physiological  accompaniments  of  that  which  on  a  small  scale  is
called  a  brown  study,  and  on  a  larger  scale  a  period  of  inspiration.

It  does  not  seem  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  state  is  some-
what allied  to  the  initial  condition  of  anfesthesia — the  somnambulic
condition  when,  though  the  automatic  processes  of  the  body  go  on
with  greater  perfection  than  usual,  the  conscious  or  noticing  aspect  of
the  mind  is  latent,  so  that  the  things  which  influence  the  person  are
apparently  no  longer  the  ordinary  events  which  affect  his  peripheral
organs,  but  either  something  internal  or  else  something  not  belonging
to  the  ordinarily  known  physical  universe  at  all.

The  mind  is  always  in  a  receptive  state  perhaps,  but  whereas  the
business-like,  wide-awake  person  receives  impressions  from  every  trivial
detail  of  his  physical  surroundings,  the  half-asleep  person  seems  to
receive  impressions  from  a  diffei'ent  stratum  altogether  ;  higher  in
some  instances,  lower  in  some  instances,  but  different  always  from
those  received  by  ordinary  men  in  their  every-day  state.

In  a  man  of  genius  the  state  comes  on  of  itself  and  the  results  are
astounding.  There  exist  occasionally  feeble  persons,  usually  young,
who  seek  to  attain  to  the  appearance  of  genius  by  the  easy  process


On  the  Difficulty  of  Making  Crucial  Experiments,  &c.  15


of  assuming  or  encodragmg"  an"  attitude  of  vacanty  and  uselessness.
There  may  be  all  grades  of  result  attained  while  in  this  state,  and  the
state  itself  is  of  less  than  no  value  unless  it  is  justified  by  the  results.

By  experiment  and  observation  it  has  now  been  established  that  a
state  very  similar  to  this  can  be  induced  by  artificial  means,  e.g.,  by
drugs,  by  hypnosis,  by  crystal  gazing,  by  purposed  inattention  ;  and
also  that  the  state  can  occur  occasionally  without  provocation  during
sleep  and  during  trance.

All  these  states  seem  to  some  extent  allied,  and,  as  is  well  known,
Mr.  Myers  has  elaborated  their  relationship  in  his  series  of  articles  on
the  subliminal  consciousness.

Well  now,  the  question  arises,  What  is  the  source  of  the  intelli-
gence manifested  during  epochs  of  clairvoyant  lucidity,  as  sometimes
experienced  in  the  hypnotic  or  the  somnambulic  state  or  during  trance,
or  displayed  automatically  1

The  most  striking  cases  of  which  I  am  now  immediately  or
mediately  cognisant,  are  the  trance  state  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  auto-
matism of  such  writers  as  the  wife  of  the  late  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham.^
Without  any  apparent  lulling  of  attention  at  all  I  am  experimentally
assured  of  the  possibility  of  conveying  information  between  one  mind
and  another  without  the  aid  of  ordinary  sense  organs ;  but  the  cases
mentioned  are  especially  striking  and  will  serve  to  narrow  the  field  to
what,  after  all,  may  be  considered  at  present  the  main  points.

Mrs.  Piper  in  the  trance  state  is  undoubtedly  (  I  use  the  word  in
the  strongest  sense  ;  I  have  absolutely  no  more  doubt  on  the  subject
than  I  have  of  any  friend's  ordinary  knowledge  of  me  and  other  men),
— -Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality  is  undoubtedly  aware  of  much  to
which  she  has  no  kind  of  ordinarily  recognised  clue,  and  of  which
in  her  ordinary  state  she  knows  nothing.  But  how  does  she  get
this  knowledge  1  She  herself  when  in  the  trance  state  asserts  that
she  gets  it  by  conversing  with  the  deceased  friends  and  relatives  of
people  present.  And  that  this  is  a  genuine  opinion  of  hers,  i.e.,  that
the  process  feels  like  that  to  her  unconscious  or  subconscious  mind,  the
part  of  her  which  calls  itself  Phinuit,  I  am  fully  prepared  to  believe.
But  that  does  not  carry  us  very  far  towards  a  knowledge  of  what  the
process  actually  is.

Conversation  implies  speaking  with  the  mouth,  and  when  receiving
or  asking  information  she  is  momentarily  in  a  deeper  slumber,  and
certainly  not  occupied  in  speech.  At  times,  indeed,  slight  mutterings  of
one-sided  questions  and  replies  are  heard,  very  like  the  mutterings  of  a
person  in  sleep  undergoing  a  vivid  dream.

Dream  is  certainly  the  ordinaiy  person's  nearest  approach  to  the

1  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.  p.  63.


16  ^  Professor  0.  J.  Lodge.

Phinuit  condition,  And '  the  fading  of  x'ecollection  as  the  conscious
memory  returns  is  also  paralleled  by  the  waking  of  Mrs.  Piper  out  of
the  trance.  But,  instead  of  a  nearly  passive  dream,  it  is  more
nearly  allied  to  the  somnambulic  state,  though  the  activity,  far  from
being  chiefly  locomotory,  is  mainly  mental  and  only  partially  muscular.

She  is  in  a  state  of  somnambulism  in  which  the  mind  is  more  active
than  the  body ;  and  the  activity  is  so  different  from  her  ordinary
activity,  she  is  so  distinctly  a  different  sort  of  person,  that  she  quite
appropriately  calls  herself  by  another  name.

It  is  natural  to  ask,  Is  she  still  herself  1  but  it  is  a  question  difficult
to  answer,  unless  "herself"  be  defined.  It  is  her  mouth  that  is
speaking,  and  I  suppose  her  brain  and  nerves  are  working  the  oral
muscleSj  but  they  are  not  worked  in  the  customary  way,  nor  does  the
mind  manifested  thereby  at  all  resemble  her  mind.  Until,  however,
the  meaning  of  identity  can  be  accurately  specified,  I  find  it  difficult
to  discuss  the  question  whether  she  or  another  person  is  really
speaking.

On  this  point  the  waking  experience  of  Mrs.  Newnham  and  of
other  automatic  writers  is  of  assistance.

In  their  case  the  mouth  does  not  speak,  but  the  hand  writes  ;  and
it  writes  matter  not  in  the  writer's  mind  and  which  he  does  not  feel
that  he  is  writing.  His  hand  is  writing  and  he  is  in  some  cases
taking  the  attention  of  his  own  conscious  mind  away  from  his  hand  and
letting  it  be  guided  by  his  subconscious  or  by  some  other  mind.

The  instructive  feature  about  tliis  phenomenon  is  that  the  minds
apparently  influencing  the  hand  are  not  so  much  those  of  dead  as  of  living
people.  The  great  advantage  of  this  is  that  they  can  be  catechised
afterwards  about  their  share  in  the  transaction  ;  and  it  then  appears
that  although  the  communication  purporting  to  be  from  them  really
does  convey  what  they  were  doing  or  thinking,  in  fact  what  they  might
have  written,  yet  actually  they  know  nothing  about  the  writing,
neither  the  muscular  fact  nor  the  intelligent  substance.  It  does  not  do
to  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  this  will  always  be  the  case  ;  that  the
connection  is  never  consciously  i-eciprocal,  as  when  two  persons  are
talking  ;  but  it  shows  that  at  any  rate  it  need  not  be  so.  Since  the
living  communicant  is  not  aware  of  the  fact  that  he  is  dictating
the  handwriting,  so  the  dead  person  need  not  be  consciously  opera-
tive ;  and  thus  conceivably  the  hand  of  the  automatist  may  be
influenced  by  minds  other  than  his  own,  minds  both  living  and  dead
(by  one  apparently  as  readily  as  by  the  other),  but  not  by  a  con-
scious portion  of  the  mind  of  anyone  ;  by  the  subconscious  or  dreamy
portion,  if  by  any  portion  at  all.

When  Phinuit  then,  or  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  trance  state,  reports  con-
versations which  she  has  had  with  other  minds  (usually  in  Phinuit's


On  the  Difficulty  of  Makitig  Crucial  Experiments,  &c.  17

case  with  persons  deceased),  and  even  when  the  voice  changes  and
messages  come  apparently  from  those  very  people  themselves,  it  does
not  follow  that  they  themselves  are  necessarily  aware  of  the  fact,  nor
need  their  conscious  mind  (if  they  have  any)  have  anything  whatever
to  do  with  the  process.

The  signature  of  an  automatist's  hand  is  equivalent  to  the  asser-
tion that  Miss  X.,  for  instance,  is  deliberately  writing  ;  Phinuit's
statement  is  equally  an  assertion  that  Mr.  E.  is  deliberately  speaking ;
and  the  one  statement  may  be  no  more  a  lie  than  the  other  is  a
forgery,  and  yet  neither  need  be  what  is  ordinarily  called  "  true."

That  this  community  of  mind  or  possibility  of  distant  interchange
or  one-sided  reception  of  thoughts  exists,  is  to  me  perfectly  clear  and
certain.  I  venture  further  to  say  that  persons  who  deny  the  bare  fact,
expressed  as  I  here  wish  to  express  it  without  any  hypothesis,  are
simply  ignorant.  They  have  not  studied  the  facts  of  the  subject.  It
may  be  for  lack  of  opportunity,  it  may  be  for  lack  of  inclination  ;  they
are  by  no  means  bound  to  investigate  it  unless  they  choose ;  but  any
dogmatic  denials  which  such  persons  may  now  perpetrate  will  hence-
forth, or  in  the  very  near  future,  redound  to  the  discredit,  not  of  the
phenomena  thus  ignorantly  denied,  but  of  themselves,  the  ovei'-
confident  and  presumptuous  deniers.

We  must  not  too  readily  assume  that  the  apparent  action  of  one
mind  on  another  is  really  such  an  action.  The  impression  received
may  come  from  the  ostensible  agent,  but  it  may  come  from  a  third
person  ;  or  again  it  7nay,  as  some  think  more  likely,  come  from  some
central  mind  or  Zeitgeist,  to  which  all  ordinary  minds  are  related  and
by  which  they  are  influenced.  If  it  could  be  shown  that  the  action  is
a  syntonic  or  sympathetic  connection  between  a  pair  of  minds,  then  it
might  be  surmised  that  the  action  is  a  physical  one,  properly  to  be
expressed  as  occurring  directly  between  brain  and  brain,  or  body  and
body.  On  the  other  hand,  the  action  may  conceivably  be  purely
psychological,  and  the  distant  brain  may  be  stimulated  not  by  the
intervention  of  anything  physical  or  material  but  in  some  more
immediate  manner,  irom  its  psychological  instead  of  from  its  physio-
logical side.

The  question  is  quite  a  definite  one  if  properly  expressed  ;  Does
the  action  take  place  through  a  physical  medium  or  does  it  not  ?

Guesses  at  a  priori  likelihood  are  absolutely  worthless  ;  if  the
question  is  to  be  answered  it  must  be  attacked  experimentally.

Now  the  ordinary  way  in  which  A  communicates  with  B  is  through
a  certain  physical  mechanism,  and  the  thought  of  A  may  be  said  to
exist  for  a  finite  time  as  an  etherial  or  aerial  quiver  before  it  repro-
duces a  similar  thought  in  the  mind  of  B. We  have  got  so  accus
tomed  to  the  existence  of  this  intermediate  physical  process  that

c


18


Professor  0,  J.  Lodge.


instead  of  striking  us  as  roundabout  and  puzzling  it  appeals  to  us  as
natural  and  simple  ;  and  any  more  direct  action  of  A  on  B,  without  a
physical  mechanism,  is  scouted  as  absurd  or  at  least  violently  impro-
bable. Well,  it  is  merely  a  question  of  fact,  and  perhaps  it  is  within
the  range  of  a  crucial  experiment.

But  it  may  be  at  once  admitted  that  such  an  experiment  is  difficult
of  execution.  If  the  effect  is  a  physical  one  it  should  vary  according
to  some  law  of  distance,  or  it  should  depend  on  the  nature  of  the
intervening  medium ;  but  in  order  to  test  whether  in  any  given  case
such  variation  occurs  it  is  necessary  to  have  both  agent  and  percipient
in  an  unusually  dependable  condition,  and  they  should  if  possible  be
unaware  of  the  variation  which  is  under  test.

This  last  condition  is  desirable  because  of  the  sensitiveness  of  the
sub-consciousness  to  suggestion  :  self-suggestion  and  other.  If  the  per-
cipient got  an  idea  that  distance  or  interposed  screens  were  detrimental,
most  likely  they  would  be  detrimental ;  and  although  a  suggestion  might
be  artificially  instilled  that  distance  was  advantageous,  this  would  hardly
leave  the  test  quite  fair,  for  the  lessened  physical  stimulus  might  pei'haps
be  over-utilised  by  the  more  keenly  excited  organism.  Still  that  is  an
experiment  to  be  tried  among  others ;  and  it  would  be  an  instructive
experience  if  the  agent  some  day  was,  say,  in  India  when  the  per-
cipient thought  he  was  in  London,  or  vice  versa.

It  is  extremely  desirable  to  probe  this  question  of  a  physical  or
non-physical  mode  of  communication  in  cases  of  telepathy,  and  if  the
fact  can  be  established  beyond  doubt  that  sympathetic  communication
occurs  between  places  as  distant  as  India  or  America  and  England,  or,
say,  the  terrestrial  antipodes,  being  unfelt  between,  or  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  source,  then  I  should  feel  that  this  was  so  unlike  what
we  are  accustomed  to  in  Physics  that  I  should  be  strongly  urged  to
look  to  some  other  and  more  direct  kind  of  mental  relationship  as  the
clue.

This,  then,  is  the  first  question  on  which  crucial  experiments  are
desirable  though  difiicult.

(1)  Is  the  mechanism  of  telepathy  physical  or  not  1

The  second  question  of  which  I  am  thinking  is  one  less  easy  to  state
and  far  less  easy  (as  I  think)  to  resolve.  It  may  be  stated  thus,  in
two  parts,  or  as  two  separate  questions  : —

(2)  Is  the  power  of  operating  on  the  minds  of  terrestrial  persons
confined  to  living  terrestrial  people  1

(3)  Is  the  power  of  operating  on  or  interfering  with  the  rest  of  the
physical  universe  confined  to  living  material  bodies?

I  should  conjecture  that  an  affirmative  answer  to  Question  1  would
render  likely  an  affirmative  answer  to  Questions  2  and  3  ;  but  that  a
negative  answer  to  Question  1  would  leave  2  and  3  entirely  open,


On  the  Difficidty  of  Making  Cr  ucial  Experiments,  etc.  19

l)ecause,  so  far  as  we  at  present  know,  terrestrial  people  and  people  with
material  bodies  may  be  the  only  people  who  exist.

It  is  this  possibility,  or,  as  many  would  hold,  probability  or  almost
certainty,  that  renders  the  strict  scientific  statement  of  Questions
2  and  3  so  difficult.  Yet  they  are  questions  which  must  be  faced,  and
they  ought  to  be  susceptible  in  time  of  receiving  definite  answers.

That  there  are  living  terrestrial  people  we  know,  we  also  know  that
there  is  an  immense  variety  of  other  terrestrial  life  ;  though,  if  we  were
not  so  familiar  with  the  fact,  the  luxuriant  prevalence  and  variety
of  life  would  be  surprising.  The  existence  of  a  bat,  for  instance,  or  a
lobster  would  be  quite  incredible.  Whether  there  is  life  on  other
planets  we  do  not  know,  and  whether  there  is  conscious  existence
between  the  planets  we  do  not  know  •  but  I  see  no  a  priori  reason  for
making  scientific  assertions  on  the  subject  one  way  or  the  othei*.  It
is  only  at  present  a  matter  of  probability.  J ust  because  we  know  that
the  earth  is  peopled  with  an  immense  variety  of  living  beings,  I
myself  should  rather  expect  to  find  other  regions  many-peopled,  and
with  a  still  more  extraordinary  variety.  So  also  since  mental  action  is
conspicuous  on  the  earth  I  should  expect  to  find  it  existent  elsewhere.
If  life  is  necessarily  associated  with  a  material  carcase  then  no  doubt
the  surface  of  one  of  the  many  lumps  of  matter  must  be  the  scene
of  its  activity  ;  but  if  any  kind  of  mental  action  is  independent  of
material  or  physical  environment  then  it  may  conceivably  be  that  the
psychical  population  is  not  limited  to  the  material  lumps,  but  may
luxuriate  either  in  the  interstellar  spaces  or  in  some  undimensional
form  of  existence  of  which  we  have  no  conception.

Were  it  not  for  the  fact  of  telepathy  the  entire  question  would  be
an  idle  one,  a  speculation  based  on  nothing  and  apparently  incapable
of  examination,  still  less  of  verification  or  disproof.

But  granted  the  fact  of  telepathy  the  question  ceases  to  be  an  idle
one,  because  it  is  just  possible  that  these  other  intelligences,  if  they  in
any  sense  exist,  may  be  able  to  communicate  with  us  by  the  same  sort
of  process  as  that  by  which  we  are  now  learning  to  be  able  to  commu-
nicate with  each  other.

Whether  it  be  true  or  not,  it  has  been  constantly  and  vehemently
asserted  as  a  fact  that  such  communications,  mainly  from  deceased
relatives,  but  often  also  from  strangers,  are  occasionally  received  by
living  persons.

The  utterances  of  Phinuit,  the  handwriting  of  Miss  A.,  Mr.
Stainton  Moses,  and  others,  abound  with  communications  purporting
to  come  from  minds  not  now  associated  with  terrestrial  matter.

Very  well  then  ;  is  a  crucial  or  test  experiment  possible  to  settle
whether  this  claim  is  well  founded  or  not  1

Mere  sentimental  messages,  conveying personal traits of  the

c  2


20 '  Professor  0.  J.  Lodge.

deceased,  though  frequently  convincing  to  surviving  friends,  cannot
be  allowed  much  scientific  weight.  Something  more  definite  or
generally  intelligible  must  be  sought.

Of  such  facts  the  handwriting  of  the  deceased  person,  if  reproduced
accurately  by  an  automatist  who  has  never  seen  that  handwriting,  seems
an  exceptionally  good  test  if  it  can  be  obtained.  But  the  negative  proof
of  ignorance  on  the  part  of  the  writer  may  be  diSicult.

At  first  sight  facts  known  to  the  deceased  but  not  known  to  the
automatist,  if  reported  in  a  correct  and  detailed  manner  so  as  to
sui-pass  mere  coincidence,  would  seem  a  satisfactory  test,  but  here
telepathy,  Avhich  has  stood  us  in  good  stead  so  far,  begins  to
operate  the  other  way  ;  for  if  the  facts  are  known  to  nobody  on  earth
they  cannot  perhaps  be  verified,  and  if  they  are  known  to  somebody
still  alive — however  distant  he  may  be — it  is  necessary  to  assume
it  possible  that  they  were  unconsciously  telepathed  from  his  mind.

But  a  certain  class  of  facts  may  be  verified  without  the  assistance
or  knowledge  of  any  living  person,  as  Avhen  a  miser  haAang  died  with
the  sole  clue  to  a  deposit  of  "  valuables,"  an  automatist's  hand,  over
the  miser's  signature,  subsequently  describes  the  place;  or  when
a  sealed  document,  carefully  deposited,  is  posthumously  deciphered  ;
the  test  in  either  of  these  cases  is  a  better  one.  But  still,  living
telepathy  of  a  deferred  kind  is  not  excluded  (though  to  my  thinking  it
is  rendered  extremely  improbable),  for,  as  Mr.  Podmore  has  often
urged,  the  person  writing  the  document  or  burying  the  treasure
may  have  been  ijyso  facto  an  unconscious  agent  on  the  minds  of
contemporaries.

Postponement  of  the  apparently  posthumous  action  for  more  than  a
century,  so  that  all  contemporaries  are  necessarily  dead,  strains  this
sort  of  telepathic  explanation  still  more — in  fact  to  breaking  point;  but
such  an  event  is  hardly  within  the  reach  of  purposed  experiment  :  the
other  is  ;  and  responsible  people  ought  to  write  and  deposit  specific
documents,  for  the  purpose  of  posthumously  communicating  them  to
someone  if  they  can,  taking  all  reasonable  precautions  against  fraud  and
collusion ;  and  also,  which  is  perhaps  a  considerable  demand,  taking
care  that  they  do  not  forget  the  contents  themselves.

But  after  all,  even  if  this  were  successfully  achieved,  the  proof
to  us  of  mental  action  on  the  part  of  the  deceased  "agent"  is  still
incomplete,  for  it  may  be  that  telepathy  is  not  the  right  kind  of
explanation  of  these  things  at  all  ;  it  may  be  that  they  are  done
by  clairvoyance  ;  that  the  document,  though  still  sealed  or  enclosed
in  metal,  is  read  in  some  unknown  or  fourth-dimensional  manner  by
the  subliminal  self.

The  existence  of  such  a  power  as  this,  however,  can  be  separately
tested,  because,  if  straightforward  clairvoyance  is  possible,  things  un-


On  the  Difficulty  of  Mahing  Crucial  Experiments,  &c.  21


known  to  any  person  living  or  dead  may  be  read  or  inspected.  And  in
trying  this  expei'imcnt  a  negative  conclusion  must  not  be  jumped  at
too  readily.  A  positive  answer  might  be  definite  enough  ;  a  negative
answer  can  only  be  a  probability.  Moreover,  it  would  be  wise  not  to
tell  an  automatist  who  is  endeavouring  to  decipher  the  unknown
figures  that  in  that  collocation  they  have  never  been  inspected  by
man,  lest  the  knowledge  should  act  as  a  gratuitously  hostile  or  debili-
tating suggestion.

As  to  the  third  question  I  must  defer  its  consideration,  as  this
paper  is  too  long. I  pass  to  a  fourth  : —

(4)  Is  it  possible  to  become  aware  of  events  before  they  have
occurred  ?

The  anticipation  of  future  events  is  a  power  not  at  all  necessarily
to  be  expected  on  a  Spiritistic  or  any  other  hypothesis ;  it  is  a
separate  question  and  will  have  important  bearings  of  its  own.  An
answer  to  this  Question  4  in  the  affirmative  would  vitally  affect  our
metaphysical  notions  of  "  Time,"  but  they  will  not  of  necessity  have  an
immediate  bearing  on  the  existence  in  the  universe  of  intelligences
other  than  our  own.  A  cosmic  picture  gallery  (as  Mr.  Myers  calls  it),
or  photographic  or  phonographic  record  of  all  that  has  occurred  or  will
occur  in  the  universe,  may  conceivably  in  some  sense  exist,  and  may  be
partly  open  and  dimly  decipherable  to  the  lucid  part  of  the  automatist's
or  entranced  person's  mind.

But  the  question  for  us  now  is  whether  we  can  obtain  clear  and
unmistakable  proof  of  the  existence  of  this  foreseeing  power  in  any
form.  It  is  not  an  easy  thing  to  establish  beyond  any  kind  of  doubt.
Casual  and  irresponsible  critics  (like  Mr.  Taylor  Innes  in  the  Nineteenth
Century)  frequently  urge  that  documentary  evidence,  such  as  a  post-
mark on  a  letter  which  detailed  an  event  either  not  yet  happened  or
certainly  not  known  by  ordinary  methods  at  the  date  of  the  postmark
(like  a  recent  shipwreck  in  mid-ocean  for  instance),  would  be  proof
positive  to  them  of  something  occult.  Mr.  Innes  goes  so  far
as  to  say  that  a  document  thus  officially  verified  by  a  Post  Office
clerk  would  be  worth  thousands  of  pounds  to  the  British  Museum.
If  so  it  would  be  singularly  easy  to  get  rich.  I  believe  that  a  postmark
on  an  envelope  would  satisfy  some  of  these  critics,  but  a  postmark  on
the  document  itself  would  be  entirely  convincing.

I  wonder  some  enterprising  Pigott  has  not  endeavoured  to  gull  a
leading  journal  by  an  elaborate  account,  say,  of  the  Victoria  disaster,
or  the  Santander  explosion,  written  on  foolscap  paper  transmitted  blank
through  the  post,  at  small  cost,  in  preparation  for  any  such  striking
event ;  or  perhaps  on  paper  subsequently  covered  with  previous  post-
marks by  a  genial  Post  Office  friend,  and  decorated  with  red  tape  by  a
live  Government  clerk  !  '


22


Pro'^essor  0.  J.  Lodge.


The  feeling  that  everything  done  by  a  Post  Office  official  is  conclu-
sive is  of  the  same  order  as  the  opinion  that  barristers  or  criminal
judges  or  medical  practitioners  are  the  only  people  fit  to  investigate
unusual  mental  phenomena,  because  their  practice  makes  them  familiar
with  the  warpings  of  the  human  mind.

But  to  consider  the  case  of  a  medical  practitioner  ;  as  I  understand
a  doctor's  business,  it  is  to  cure  an  abnormality  if  he  can,  not  to  pro-
long and  investigate  it.  True,  a  doctor  may  be  a  scientific  man  in  ad-
dition, but  qua  physician  he  is  out  of  his  element  as  a  general  investi-
gator, and  as  a  leading  practitioner  he  has  very  little  spare  time.  Were
it  not  so,  the  record  against  the  profession — the  attitude  the  main  body
of  doctors  has  taken  to  everything  new — would  be  not  only  pitiful,  as
it  is,  but  essentially  disgraceful.

To  this  day  I  feel  sure  that  many  promising  subjects,  some  for  in-
vestigation and  some  for  psychical  cure,  are  being  lost  both  to  science
and  to  themselves  within  the  walls  of  our  asylums.

But  about  this  question  of  postmarks.  Let  it  not  be  thought  that
I  claim  that  their  evidence  is  worthless.  As  evidence  subsidiary  to
testimony  they  may  be  very  valuable,  and  every  effort  should  be  made
to  get  them ;  my  contention  only  is  that  they  do  not  dispense  with
testimony.

This  I  hold  is  the  function  of  all  circumstantial  evidence,  or  of  any
automatic  record  ;  it  lessens  the  chance  of  self-delusion  or  over-exuberant
imagination,  it  can  never  can  be  held  to  guard  against  fraud.

If  a  couple  of  friends  by  interchanging  letters,  with  their  dates
verified  in  some  cold  blooded  official  manner,  are  able  to  establish
foreknowledge  of  events  such  as  could  liardly  be  guessed  or  inferred,
then  their  testimony  is  strengthened  by  the  date  marks  to  this  extent : —
Either  the  things  happened  as  they  say,  or  they  are  in  some  sort
of  collusion  to  bear  false  witness  and  deceive.  One  could  only  grant
them  the  loophole  of  self-deception  on  the  alternative  of  something
very  like  insanity.

That  is  how  these  automatic  records,  photographs  and  the  like,  may
be  so  valualile — as  supplementary  to  human  testimony — never  as  sub-
stitutes for  it.

A  word  before  concluding  as  to  Question  3,  whether  direct  mental
action  can  ever  physically  aSfect  matter.

Conspicuously  it  can  affect  and  move  some  matter,  viz.,  the  matter
forming  part  of  a  living  organism  ;  but  is  it  possible  to  move  dead  or
inorganic  matter  without  contact,  direct  or  indirect,  between  our
bodies  and  it ;  that  is,  in  short,  without  any  recognised  medium  of  con-
nection or  known  method  of  action  ?

Can  an  entranced  or  any  other  person  raise  a  chair  or  table  with-
out pressing  it  up  and  without  conjuring  ?


On  the  Difficulty  of  Making  Crucial  Experiments,  dx.  23


Assertions  that  such  events  publicly  occur  are  innumerable,  and
the  recognised  possible  explanation,  after  fraud  and  imposture  are
eliminated  (not  by  any  means  an  easy  matter),  is  collective  hallucina-
tion or  collective  hypnotism  by  the  operator.  This  is  supposed  to  be
guarded  against  by  photography.  If  a  person  with  a  camera  could
photogi'aph  the  table  while  in  the  air  with  nobody  touching  it,  or
with  only  a  few  persons  standing  free  and  holding  their  fingers  down-
wards to  it,  a  sceptic  would  be  satisfied.  But  ought  he  to  be
satisfied  1

A  crucial  experiment  is  seldom  so  easy  as  that;  True,  one  is  not
likely  to  be  able  to  hypnotise  a  photographic  plate,  but  if  a  company
can  be  hallucinated  so  as  to  see  the  table  rise  where  it  does  not  rise,
they  can  likewise  be  hypnotised  not  to  see  the  operator  place  con-
venient plate-glass  supports  under  the  table  legs  just  before  the  photo-
graphic gentleman  is  ready  to  begin.

[Photographs  of  a  table  in  the  open  air  and  off  the  ground  without
visible  means  of  support  were  here  shown.]

So  also  with  Indian  jugglery.  If  the  audience  cannot  be  trusted
to  perceive  what  they  see  (and  I  by  no  means  say  that  they  can),
neither  can  the  bald  record  of  the  camera  be  trusted,  with  all  ante-
cedent cii'cumstances  omitted  or  at  best  given  in  patches.

Of  all  the  many  defects  of  observation,  that  of  lapsed  attention  is
one  to  which  the  camera  is  pre-eminently  subject.  A  camera  simply
cannot  look  continuously,  at  the  best  it  can  only  take  a  series  of
tableaux  vivants,  and  for  all  the  intervening  acts  we  are  dependent  on
testimony.

A  crucial  experiment  in  this  case  also  is  difficult,  and  for  myself  I
would  prefer  to  trust  my  own  observation  rather  than  any  amount  of
second-hand  testimony,  fortified  by  the  assurance  of  any  number  of
Kodaks.

I  do  not  say,  therefore,  that  photographic  records  are  useless :  as
supplementary  evidence  they  may  be  highly  valuable  and  they  should
always  be  obtained  when  possible.  All  these  experiments  should  be
tried,  and  their  concurrent  evidence  may  do  much,  though  their  in-
dividual cogency  is  incomplete.

So  also  it  may  be  desirable  to  get  a  phonographic  record  of  the
speech  of  a  ghost,  if  it  can  be  done.  But  (even  eliminating  fraud)
there  would  be  nothing  crucial  about  it,  unless  one  can  be  sure  that  the
ghost-seer  has  not  in  a  somnambulic  state  spoken  the  necessary  words
into  the  instrument  itself.

Meanwhile,  it  seems  to  me  probable  that  in  this  department  of
science,  as  in  every  other,  the  wholesome  and  valuable  part  of  scep-
ticism will  ultimately  be  broken  down,  if  at  all,  not  by  any  one  conclu-
sive experiment,  but  by  converging  lines  of  testimony  coming  in  from


24


Professor  0.  J.  Lodge.


many  and  unexpected  quarters  ;  and  the  breach  will  be  assisted  by  the
gradual  perception  that  such  psychical  actions  as  are  pi'oved  to  occur  are
not  portents  or  ruptures  in  the  order  of  nature  but  are  natural  and  simple
outgrowths  from  what  science  already  knows ;  they  are  first-fruits  from
a  promised  land  which  has  been  seen  from  the  hills  but  has]  not  yet
been  explored.

It  is  a  most  unpardonable  blunder  for  a  scientific  man  to  suppose
that  everything  that  can  be  known  is  already  more  or  less  within  his
cognisance  ;  and  his  least  justifiable  attitude  is  that  which  holds  that
there  are  certain  departments  of  truth  in  the  universe  which  it  is  not
lawful  to  investigate.

The  same  Lord  Kelvin  who,  in  a  moment  of  aberration  (I  hope),
wrote  this  very  year  that  "  one-half  of  hypnotism  and  clairvoyance  is
imposture  and  the  rest  bad  observation,"!  uttered  also  the  worthier
sentiment  that  "  Science  is  bound  by  the  everlasting  law  of  honour  to
face  fearlessly  every  problem  which  can  fairly  be  presented  to  it."-


'  Stead's  Borderland. No.  1.

2  Presidential  Address  to  the  British  Association,  Edinburgli.  B.  A.  Report
187],  or  "Popular  Lectures  and  Addresses,'  (Macmillan),  Vol.  II.,  p.  200.


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


25


III.

KEPORT  ON  THE CENSUS OF  HALLUCINATIONS.


Chapter  I.

INTRODUCTORY.

The  statistical  inquiry  into  the  spontaneous  hallucinations  of  the
sane,  of  which  the  results  are  here  given,  was  undertaken  in  1889
by  the  Committee  which  now  presents  its  final  report.  It  will
be  convenient,  for  brevity,  to  refer  to  this  inquiry  as  "The  Census."
The  undertaking  received  the  approval  of  the  International  Congress
of  Experimental  Psychology,  held  in  Paris  in  1889  under  the
presidency  of  Professor  Ribot ;  and,  in  its  present  form,  the  inquiry
may  be  said  to  date  from  this  Congress,  which  formally  entrusted  it  to
Professor  SidgNvick's  direction.

For  though,  as  we  shall  presently  explain,  the  investigation  was
originally  started  with  a  special  view  to  the  aims  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  the  interest  taken  in  it  at  this  general  Congress  of
Experimental  Psychologists  led  the  Committee  somewhat  to  enlarge  its
scope.  Accordingly,  in  tabulating  our  returns  and  stating  the  general
conclusions  that  may  l^e  drawn  from  them,  we  have  taken  pains  to  note,
and  treated  more  fully  than  we  should  otherwise  have  done,  such
points  as  seemed  likely  to  interest  psychologists  generally  who  might
be  studying  the  phenomenon  of  hallucination, — apart  from  the  special
question  of  the  "  veridicality  "  of  some  hallucinations,  on  which  the
Census  was  primarily  designed  to  throw  light.

AVe  were  confirmed  in  our  choice  of  this  more  comprehensive  treat-
ment of  our  results  by  our  experience  of  the  labour  involved  in  the
investigation  ;  which  renders  it,  in  our  opinion,  very  doubtful  whether
any  equally  extensive  statistical  inquiry  into  the  charactei'istics  and
conditions  of  this  class  of  phenomena  will  ever  again  be  undertaken,
unless  with  some  such  special  interest  as  that  which  prompted  our
researches.

The  plan  of  our  Report,  thus  enlarged  in  its  scope,  divides  itself
naturally  into  three  parts.  First,  in  Chapters  II.  and  III.,  we  explain
the  method  of  inquiry,  present  the  chief  statistical  results  in  a  tabular
form,  and  then  give  a  full  discussion  of  possible  sources  of  error  and
endeavour  to  estimate  the  extent  of  their  operation.  Then — in
Chapters  IV.-XI.  inclusive — we  deal  mainly  with  topics  interesting  to
psychologists  generally,  and  only  connected  in  a  subordinate  way  with


26  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


the  primary  aim  of  our  inquiry.  "We  discuss  the  characteristics  by  which
sensory  halkicinations  are  to  be  distinguished  from  cognate  phenomena,
especially  from  mere  illusions  of  the  senses  :  the  chief  forms  of
hallucinations — especially  of  the  visual  type — and  the  stages  in  which
they  are  sometimes  developed  :  the  physiological  processes  involved  in
them  and  their  physical  effects  on  percipients  so  far  as  reported  :  and
the  influence,  favourable  or  the  reverse,  of  certain  general  physical  con-
ditions,— such  as  age,  sex,  health  and  heredity — and  certain  special  men-
tal conditions  such  as  grief,  anxiety,  nervous  overstrain,  abstraction,
and  expectancy.  Then,  finally,  in  Chapter  XII.,  we  enter  upon  the
special  subject  which  supplied  the  original  motive  for  undertaking  the
work  of  the  Census,  and  justifies  its  publication  in  these  Proceedings, —
the  examination  of  the  evidence  for  telepathy  furnished  by  the  results
of  the  present  inquiry  ;  and  from  this  point  to  the  end  of  the  Report
our  attention  is  concentrated  on  that  portion  of  our  phenomena  which
there  is — -or  may  appear  to  be — any  reason  to  refer  to  a  supernormal
cause.

In  order  to  explain  clearly  the  principal  question  on  which  we  endeav-
our to  throw  light  in  this  concluding  portion  of  the  Report,  it  will  be
convenient  briefly  to  review  the  whole  evidence  for  telepathy  hitherto
collected  by  our  Society,  so  as  to  show  the  relation  of  this  particular
question  to  the  general  course  of  our  investigations.

The  word  Telepathy  was  bi'ought  into  use  by  us  to  express  the
(scientifically  speaking)  novel  conclusion — which  several  different  lines
of  inquiry  have  tended  to  establish — that  thoughts  and  feelings  in  one
mind  are  sometimes  caused  by  the  influence  of  another  mind,  conveyed
somehow  otherwise  than  through  the  recognised  channels  of  sense.  The
word  by  its  derivation  suggests  that  the  influence  in  question  operates
across  a  considerable  distance  of  space  :  and  this  is  ordinarily  the  case
in  the  instances  of  telepathic  phenomena  with  which  the  present
Report  is  concerned ;  but  it  has  been  found  convenient  to  use  the  term,
for  scientific  purposes,  as  merely  connoting  the  exclusion  of  recognised
channels  of  sensation,  and  not  necessarily  implying  any  definite
interval  of  space  between  the  persons  Avhose  states  of  mind  are
telepathically  connected.

Now,  there  can  be  no  doul^t  that  the  general  acceptance  of
Telepathy,  in  this  sense,  as  a  fact  of  nature,  must  importantly  modify
the  current  scientific  view  of  the  relation  of  mind  to  matter.  But  it
may  conceivably  modify  this  view  in  either  of  two  different  ways,
respectively  important  in  very  different  degrees.

{a)  It  may  lead  to  the  ultimate  discovery  of  some  physical  process
hitherto  unknown,  hy  which  the  psychical  state  of  one  human  being  (A)
influences  the  psychical  state  of  another  human  being  (B)  through  the
corresponding  physical  states  of  the  two  human  organisms  concerned.


I.]  Beport  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  27

Or  (b),  it  may  lead  ultimately  to  the  conclusion  that  the  causal
relation  between  the  two  psychical  facts  telepathically  connected  is
independent  of  any  such  physical  process.

It  is  obvious  that  the  modification  of  received  views  involved  in  the
acceptance  of  the  second  alternative  would  be  far  greater  and  more
fundamental  than  that  involved  in  the  acceptance  of  the  first.  We
may  therefore  assume  that,  if  the  fact  of  telepathy  were  once  accepted
by  the  scientific  world  as  completely  established,  the  efforts  of  scientific
men  to  explain  the  fact  would— at  any  rate  at  first — take  the  direction
suggested  by  the  first  alternative  :  i.e.,  they  would  try  to  discover  the
physical  process  involved  in  telepathy, — -unless,  indeed,  other  strange
facts  should  be  simultaneously  established  clearly  cognate  to  telepathy^
and  clearly  not  admitting  of  any  such  physical  explanation.

But  we  now  refer  to  this  only  to  say  that  no  attempt  of  this  kind — to
discover  the  physical  basis  of  telepathy — has  been  made  in  the  present
Report :  since  no  indication  of  any  such  basis,  or  of  the  direction
in  which  (if  at  all)  it  is  to  be  sought^  appears  to  us  to  be  afforded  by
any  of  the  lines  of  investigation  so  far  pursued, — including  such
examination  as  the  present  inquiry  has  enabled  us  to  make  of  the
empirical  causes  and  concomitants  of  hallucinations.  In  dealing  there-
fore with  the  hallucinations  ^jrima  facie  telepathic,  reported  to  us
in  the  course  of  the  Census,  we  have  been  mainly  concerned  to  examine
carefully  their  value  as  evidence  of  the  general  fact  that  the  psychical
state  of  one  human  being  may  influence  the  psychical  state  of  another,
under  conditions  which  satisfactorily  exclude  all  known  physical
processes  by  which  such  influence  might  be  conveyed.

Now,  when  we  consider,  from  this  evidential  point  of  view,  the
whole  work  of  investigation  carried  on  by  our  tSociety,  we  find
that  it  has  divided  itself  into  two  main  parts  :  (1)  Experiments  on
persons  prima  facie  susceptible  of  telepathic  influence,  whether  in  the
hypnotic  or  in  a  normal  condition  ;  and  (2)  the  collection  and  exami-
nation of  accounts  of  phenomena  ^jrwna  facie  telepathic,  which  have
been  produced  not  experimentally,  but  spontaneously.  It  will  easily
be  understood  that  the  problems  presented  by  these  two  lines  of
investigation  are  to  a  great  extent  dissimilar.  For  the  most  part —
though,  as  will  presently  appear,  not  entirely— it  has  l)een  only  found
possible  to  perform  telepathic  experiments  successfully  when  the
persons  between  whom  the  telepathic  influence  operates  are  separated
by  a  comparatively  small  interval  of  space  ;  and  in  such  cases  it  has
usually  been  a  matter  of  some  difliculty  to  render  the  exclusion  of
kno\vn  processes  of  sense  quite  certain.  And  this  has  often  been  the
only  difficulty  :  since,  in  the  experiments  which  we  regard  as  successful,
it  is  often  quite  obviously  undeniable  that  there  is  some  causal
connexion  between  the  similar  ideas  in  the  two  minds  concerned ;  the


28


Report  on  the  Census  of  Halliccinations.  [chap.


only  possible  question  is  whether  that  causal  connexion  is  telepathic.
The  opposite  is  more  often  the  case  with  the  non-experimental
evidence ;  the  distance  between  the  two  persons  concerned  is  often  so
great  that  if  any  causal  connexion  can  be  established  between  a
particular  experience  of  one  mind  and  the  corresponding  experience  of
another — say,  between  the  death  of  A.  in  England,  and  the  apparition
■of  A.  to  B.  in  Australia — there  will  be  no  dispute  that  the  causation
lies  outside  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense.  Thus,  while  practically  the
main  point  in  experimenting  is  to  exclude  known  modes  of  causation,
the  main  point  in  dealing  with  the  non-experimental  evidence  is  to
ascertain  whether  there  is  any  causal  connexion  at  all.

It  should  be  added  that  in  the  former  case  the  psychical  elFect
telepathically  produced  is  in  most  cases  not  a  hallucination  :  whereas
in  the  latter  case  hallucinations  constitute  the  larger  part  of  the
phenomena  prima  facie  referable  to  telepathy,  and  the  part  that  is,
generally  speaking,  evidentially  most  important.

The  difference  between  these  two  portions  of  our  evidence  is  so
marked  that  some  critics,  not  altogether  unfriendly  to  our  investi-
gations, have  been  disposed  to  regard  as  forced  and  artificial  the
connexion  that  we  have  tried  to  establish  between  them.  "  Granted,"
they  say,  "  that  you  have  managed  to  transfer  diagrams  and  numbers
in  some  unknown  way  to  the  mind  of  a  person  sitting  a  few  feet  off :
granted,  again,  that  your  well-attested  appearances  of  dying  persons  to
friends  in  remote  places  can  hardly  be  explained  as  merely  subjective
hallucinations  :  still,  the  phenomena  are  too  dissimilar  in  their  nature
and  circumstances  to  justify  even  a  hypothetical  reference  of  them  to
the  same  cause."

To  this  objection  there  are  two  answers.  Firstly,  apparitions  or
other  sensory  hallucinations  are  not  the  only  kind  of  spontaneous
experiences  in  which  the  influence  of  one  mind  on  another  is  found
operating  at  a  distance  far  beyond  the  limits  within  which  our  suc-
cessful experiments  in  telepathy  are  ordinarily  confined.  A  number  of
instances  may  be  found  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (Chaps.  V. — VII.)  of
sensations,  emotional  states,  ideas  and  mental  images,  and  impulses  to
action,  produced  in  a  manner  which  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  other
than  telepathic,  if  telejoatliy  be  once  admitted  as  a  real  cause.  It
is  true  that  these  phenomena  are,  for  the  most  part,  evidentially  less
important  than  those  with  which  we  are  concerned  in  the  present
Report ;  but  they  cannot  be  disregarded  in  considering  the  whole
evidence  for  telepathy,  and  they  form  a  natural  link  between  the
spontaneous  hallucinations  and  the  experimental  cases  of  thought-
transference.

A  more  important  link,  however,  is  furnished  by  a  portion  of  our
experimental  evidence — comparatively  small in bulk  but  good  in


I.]  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  29


quality — Ashich  has  a  special  affinity  to  the  subject  of  the  present
inquiry.  "We  refer  to  cases  in  which  the  percipient  sees  an  apparition
of  some  one  who  is  trying  to  transfer  an  idea  of  himself — or  of  some
other  human  being — to  the  percipient's  mind,  without  any  previous
knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  latter  that  such  an  attempt  was  being
made.  There  are  15  successful  experiments  of  this  kind  already
recorded  l:>y  our  Society,  in  which  ten  different  experimenters  have
taken  a  part :  the  records  are  all  at  first-hand,  and  in  every  case  the
evidence  of  the  percipient  has  been  obtained,  as  well  as  that  of  the
experimenter.  Thii'teen  of  these  experiments  were  made  during  the
years  1878-1890,  and  were  recorded  less  than  2  years  after  the  event;
and  in  6  of  them  a  record  was  made,  either  by  the  experimenter
before  learning  the  result  of  the  experiment,  or  by  the  percipient  while
ignorant  that  an  experiment  had  been  made.  It  is  also  noteworthy
that  seven  out  of  the  ten  experimenters  appear  to  have  succeeded  on
the  first  trial.  ^

The  experiments  may  he  divided  into  three  classes.  (1)  In  the
great  majority  of  cases  the  experimenter  was  trying  to  make  himself
visible  to  the  percipient,  at  or  near  the  time  at  which  the  effect  was
produced  on  the  latter.  But  (2)  there  are  two  cases  in  which  the
percipient  saw  an  apparition  of  the  experimenter  when  the  latter  was
merely  trying  to  make  the  percipient  think  of  him  :  and  these  are
noteworthy  as  having  a  closer  resemblance  than  the  first  class  to  the
ordinary  non-experimental  apparitions  of  living  jjersons.  (3)  Finally,
we  have  an  old,  but  well  attested,  record  of  a  unique  case,  in  which
the  experimenter  transferred  to  two  percipients  an  apjDarition  of
a  third  person.  An  account  of  this  case  was  given  in  our  Pro-
ceedings, Part  XVI.,  Vol.  VI.,  p,  287  :  it  is  interesting  as  pi-esent-
ing  more  than  one  point  of  analogy  to  certain  classes  of  spontaneous
apparitions,  which  at  first  sight  appear  not  easily  susceptiljle  of  a
telepathic  explanation,  though  it  is  difficult  to  regard  them  as  purely
subjective.

An  examination  of  these  experimentally  produced  hallucinations
will,  we  think,  render  it  easier  to  enter  into  the  point  of  view  from
which  we  regard  the  non-experimental  evidence  for  telepathy  with

^  Ten  of  these  cases  are  recorded  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (see  Vol.  I.-,  p.
Ixxxi.  and  pp.  103-100,  and  Vol.  II.,  pp.  671,  675)  ;  and  five  in  the  Journal  of  the
S.P.R.  (see  Vol.  III.,  p.  307,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  218,  and  pp.  321-326,  and  Vol.  V.,  pp.
23-4).  The  two  cases  last  mentioned  are  included  in  the  Census,  and  will  be  found  in
Chap.  XIV.  It  is  noteworthy  that,  in  the  majority  of  these  cases,  the  experimenter
was  either  asleep  or  hypnotised  when  his  apparition  was  seen,  having  fallen  asleep  (or
into  the  hypnotic  state)  with  his  mind  fixed  on  the  determination  to  appear.

It  may  be  added  that,  while  this  Chapter  was  passing  through  the  press,  we
received  information  of  another  successful  attempt  of  the  same  kind.


30  Report  on  the  Census  of  Ilalliccinations.  [chap.


Avhich  the  present  Report  is  concerned.  This  evidence  consists — as  has
been  indicated — largely,  though  not  solely,  of  accounts  of  apparitions
of  human  beings,  who  are  afterwards  ascertained  to  have  been  dying —
or  passing  through  some  crisis  other  than  death — elsewhere,  at  or
about  the  time  at  which  the  apparition  is  seen  ;  the  seer  of  the
apparition  not  having  at  the  time  any  knowledge  of  this  fact,  other
than  what  is  conveyed  by  the  ajsparition  itself.  We  speak  of  these
phenomena  as  "coincidental"  or  "veridical"  hallucinations.  The
latter  of  the  two  terms  has  been  sometimes  criticised,  on  the  gi'ound
that  the  meaning  of  the  adjective  is  inconsistent  with  the  received
sense  of  the  substantive ;  but  it  seems  to  us  that  the  combination
exactly  expresses  the  mingling  of  truth  and  error  in  the  apparent
perception  of  objective  fact  which  the  phenomenon  involves.  We
regard  the  phenomenon  as  a  "  hallucination,"  because  it  is  an  apparent
perception  of  a  body  occupying  a  portion  of  space,  under  conditions
which  render  it  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  this  portion  of  space
really  was  so  occupied  :  at  the  same  time,  we  call  it  a  "  veridical
hallucination,"  because,  so  far  as  it  suggests  that  the  person  in  question
is  dying  or  passing  through  some  other  crisis  at  the  time,  it  repre-
sents a  real  fact  otherwise  unknown  to  the  percipient.

We  need  hardly  remind  our  readers  that  the  labours  of  our  Society
during  the  last  twelve  years  have  brought  before  the  world  a  consider-
able number  of  such  experiences,  recorded  at  first  hand  and  with
corroboration  by  intelligent  witnesses  whose  good  faith  is  unim-
peached.  And  they  will  now,  I  trust,  be  willing  to  regard  it  as  at  least
an  obvious  and  natural  explanation  of  these  phenomena,  when
considered  in  the  light  of  the  expeiiments  before  described,  to  suppose
that  the  apparition  is  an  effect  somehow  telepathically  caused  by  the
contemporaneous  crisis  in  the  life  of  the  person  that  it  represents ;
in  the  same  manner  as  the  experimentally  induced  hallucination  is
somehow  telepathically  caused  by  the  attempt  of  the  experimenter  to
influence  tlie  percipient.  Certainly,  if  all  hallucinations  that  occur  other-
wise than  experimentally  were  as  clearly  veridical  or  coincidental  as
many  that  have  been  narrated  in  our  publications,  this  explanation —
or  some  other  equally  alien  to  the  view  of  ordinary  science — would  be
seen  to  be  inevitable  :  since  in  that  case  it  would  be  evident,  at  first
sight,  that  the  coincidence  of  these  numerous  hallucinations,  occurring
quite  independently  of  one  another,  with  critical  events  in  the  lives  of
the  persons  represented  could  not  possibly  be  due  to  chance.  But  this
is  not  the  case:  common  experience  makes  us  familiar  with  the  fact
that  similar  apparitions  of  living  persons  occur  when  nothing  particular
is  happening  to  the  persons  that  they  represent.  Let  us  call  these
"  non-coincidental "  :  it  is  easily  seen  that  if  they  are  sufficiently
numerous  in  proportion  to  the  veridical  or  coincidental  ones,  the


I.]  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallminations.  31


coincidences  in  the  latter  class  of  cases  may  be  reasonably  regarded  as
purely  accidental,  and  could  furnish  no  evidence  for  telepathy.  Before,
therefore,  we  can  come  to  a  final  conclusion  as  to  the  telepathic
character  of  these  phenomena,  we  must  form  some  estimate  of  the
proportion  of  non-coincidental  to  coincidental  cases.

This  is  the  point  of  view  from  which  the  question  was  treated  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Chap.  XIII.. Here,  in  arguing  against  the
theory  of  chance  coincidence,  as  applied  to  apparitions  prima  facie
veridical,  Mr.  Gurney  employed  a  calculation  framed  on  the  basis  of  a
Census  similar  to  ours  ;  and  obtained  the  result  that  chance  could
not  account  for  the  number  of  coincidences. He  was,  however,  unable
to  obtain  answers  from  more  than  5,705  persons,— a  number  too
small  to  enable  him  to  draw  inferences  as  to  the  proportion  of
coincidental  cases  from  these  answers  alone. Accordingly,  in  order
to  arrive  at  a  conclusion,  while  he  inferred  the  fi'equency  of  sub-
jective hallucinations  within  a  certain  period  of  time  fi'om  his  Census,
he  had  to  infer  the  frequency  of  coincidental  hallucinations  from
the  best-authenticated  cases  given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  making
certain  assumptions  as  to  the  size  of  the  circle  from  which  all  the
cases  there  given  were  drawn. It  was  always  his  wish  that  a  more
extensive  inquiry  should  be  undertaken,  by  which  a  sufficient  number
of  answers  might  be  obtained  to  enable  the  investigator  to  infer  the
general  proportion of  coincidental to  non-coincidental cases  from
these  answers  alone. The  number  of  our  informants  in  the  present
Census  is,  we  think,  sufficiently  large  to  justify  us  in  adopting  this
simpler  and  more  satisfactory  method ;  which  is,  accordingly,  applied
in  Chapters  XII.  and  XIII.  of  the  present  Report,  to  that  group
of  coincidental  cases  in  respect  of  which  the  probability  of  chance
coincidence  is  capable  of  being  calculated  with  numerical  exactness.
Then,  in  Chapter  XIV.,  we  illustrate  and  discuss  the  rest  of  the
evidence  for  telepathy  furnished  by  our  Census. In  Chapter  XV.,  we
deal  with  the  cases  of  shared — or,  as  we  find  it  convenient  to  call  it,
collective — hallucination^  the  explanation  of  which  presents  peculiar
difficulties. Finally,  in  Chapters  XVI.  and  XVII.,  we  consider  how
far  the  operation  of  other  causes  of  a  supernormal  kind  is  required  to
explain  any  part  of  the  phenomena  reported  to  us.

It  only  remains  to  explain  how  the  labour  and  responsibility  of  our
work  has  been  distributed  among  difi'erent  members  of  the  Committee.
The  Report  has  been  in  the  main  drawn  up  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and
Miss  Johnson,  with  special  assistance  from  Professor  Sidgwick,  who  has
acted  throughout  as  Chairman  of  the  Committee.  But  the  plan  on
which  it  has  been  drawn  up  was  considered  and  determined,  in  a  series
of  meetings,  by  the  Committee  Jointly,  who  also  discussed  together  the
evidential  value  of  the  cases  prima  facie  telepathic  :  and  the  other


32  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


members  of  the  Committee — Mr.  Myers  and  Mr.  Podmore — have
read  all  the  chapters  in  proof  and  recommended  additions,  omissions,
and  modifications,  and  have  taken  part  in  the  personal  interrogation  of
important  witnesses.  The  lamented  death  of  one  member  of  the  Com-
mittee— Dr.  A.  T.  Myers — deprived  ns  of  his  aid  before  the  final  Report
was  composed  ;  but  he  had  been  able  to  consider  the  statistical
evidence  obtained  by  us  as  to  the  influence  of  ill-health  in  causing
hallucinations,  and  to  give  advice  as  to  the  manner  in  which  it  should
be  treated.

*»*  A  complete  Table  of  Contents  will  be  found  at  the  end  ot  the  Rej^ort,  before-
the  Appendix.


Method  of  Conducting  the  Enquiry.  33


Chapter  TI.

method  of  conducting  the  enquiry  and  general  results.

As  has  been  already  explained,  our  general  aim  was  to  ascertain
what  proportion  of  persons  have  had  sensory  hallucinations  while
awake,  and  not  suffering  from  delirium  or  insanity  or  any  other  morbid
condition  obviously  conducive  to  hallucination ;  and,  further,  to
enquire  into  the  nature  of  these  hallucinations  and  the  conditions
under  which  they  occur.  We  determined,  however,  to  limit  ourselves
to  halkicinations  of  sight,  of  hearing,  and  of  touch,  and,  in  the  case  of
hearing,  to  sounds  suggesting  the  human  voice  ;  because,  while  we  thus
included  most  of  the  more  interesting  and  important  sensory  halluci-
nations, we  not  only  reduced  the  labour  of  the  investigation,  but
avoided  certain  difficulties  in  obtaining  definite  statistical  results.  For
the  phantasmal  character  of  supposed  hallucinations  of  the  other  senses
— of  taste,  of  the  muscular  sense,  of  smell, — and  of  those  representing
non-vocal  sounds,  is  more  often  uncertain  than  that  of  the  hallucinations
to  which  we  have  confined  our  attention.  If  any  one  sees  distinctly  a
human  figure  near  him  in  a  well-lighted  room,  where  it  is  certain  that
there  is  nobody  but  himself, — if  he  hears  a  familiar  voice  speaking  to
him  when  its  owner  is  miles  away,  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that
the  experience  is  hallucinatory,  in  the  sense  explained  in  the  preceding
chapter.  But  if  he  hears  in  a  house  a  sound  of  footsteps  which  all
efforts  fail  to  explain,  it  still  remains  very  doubtful  whether  the
impression  was  not  after  all  caused  by  a  real  sound,  of  which  he  has
merely  failed  to  discover  the  origin  owing  to  his  incomplete  knowledge
of  the  acoustical  properties  of  the  building  and  of  the  possible  source
of  the  sound.  Some  persons  would,  we  found,  in  such  a  case  answer
our  question  negatively,  and  others  affirmatively,  so  that  a  collection  of
their  answers  would  be  of  little  statistical  value.

Method  of  Conducting  the  Enquiry.

The  question  put  to  all  the  persons  who  are  included  in  our
statistics  was  :  —

Have  you  ever,  when  believing  yourself  to  he  completely  awake,  had  a
vivid  impression  of  seeing  or  being  touched  by  a  living  being  or  inani-
mate object,  or  of  hearing  a  voice  ;  which  impression,  so  far  as  you  could
discover,  was  iiot  due  to  any  external  physical  cause  ?

This  question  we  shall  speak  of  as  "the  Census  question."  It  was
printed  at  the  head  of  a  schedule,  marked  A,  with  spaces  for  twenty-
five  answers  and  for  the  names,  occupations,  etc.,  of  the  persons  answer-
ing. The  A  schedules  were  entrusted  to  persons  who  volunteered  to
collect  answers,  and  the  collectors  were  asked  to  put  the  question,

D


34 ■ Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


impartially  and  unselectively,  to  persons  over  the  age  of  21.  An  expla-
nation of  the  object  of  the  enquiry,  and  instructions  as  to  the  method
to  be  followed  in  collecting  answers,  were  printed  on  the  back  of  the
schedule,  which  is  reproduced  in  Ap2)eiidix  A.

The  Census  question  is  obviously  not  free  from  ambiguities,  and,  as
worded,  would  be  likely  to  bring  in  some  affirmative  answers  not  refer-
ring to  phenomena  which  we  wished  to  include  in  our  statistics  ;  ^
but  ic  was  necessary  to  make  it  short  and  to  avoid  technicalities,  and
it  seemed  difficult  to  make  it  more  precise  consistently  with  these
conditions.  We  believed,  too,— and  experience  has  on  the  whole  justified
the  belief — that  the  particulars  given  by  our  informants  would  enable
us  to  reduce  the  returns  to  uniformity.

For  those  who  answered  the  question  of  schedule  A  in  the  affirmative,
a  second  schedule,  marked  B,  was  provided,  containing  questions,  with
spaces  for  answers.  The  questions  on  this  schedule  are  also  re-
printed in  Appendix  A.  They  were  intended  to  bring  out  the  most
important  and  essential  features  of  the  hallucination,  together  with
such  points  as  the  date  of  its  occurrence,  the  conditions  under  which  it
was  experienced,  whether  any  notes  had  been  made  at  the  time,  and
whether  the  percipient  had  had  any  similar  experiences.  In  order
that  the  percipients  should  not  be  deterred  by  the  fear  of  publicity
from  giving  information,  both  A  and  B  schedules  had  printed  clearly
on  them  the  words  "  No  names  or  addresses  will  be  published  without
special  permission."

The  information  given  about  the  hallucinations  was,  of  course,  not
necessarily  limited  by  the  questions  on  the  B  schedule.  Many  in-
formants volunteered  further  details,  some  preferred  to  write  their
accounts  in  a  narrative  form,  and  in  a  very  large  number  of  cases  we
elicited  further  details  by  correspondence, — either  directly  with  the
percipient  or  more  often  through  the  collector, — and  obtained  corrobo-
rative evidence.  In  a  considerable  number  of  cases  a  member  of  the
Committee  has  seen  the  percipient  and  talked  over  the  particulars  of
his  experience  with  him.

The  Collectors.

The  collectors,  who  aided  us  in  carrying  out  the  enquiry,  were  410
in  number,  223  women  and  187  men.  More  than  a  quarter  of  them
were  friends  or  acquaintances  of  members  of  the  Committee,  and  some  of
these  again  induced  friends  or  acquaintances  of  their  own  to  become
collectors.  About  a  third  of  all  the  collectors  are  members  of  the
S.P.R.,  while  about  another  sixth  are  friends  of  theirs.  Further

1  Strictly  intertsreted,  for  instance,  it  may  be  held  to  include  impressions  occurring
during  sleep,  if  the  percipient  while  asleep,  believed  himself  to  be  awake  ;  and  a,
few  of  those  who  answered  understood  the  phrase  in  this  sense.


II.]


Method  of  Conducting  the  Enquiry.


35


■assistance  in  the  enquiry  was  obtained  by  a  special  appeal  to  psycholo-
gists made  by  Professor  Sidgwick  in  Mind,  and  through  articles  by  him
and  other  members  of  the  Committee  published  in  various  more  popular
periodicals  {Nineteenth  Century,  New  Revieiv,  Murray''s  Magazine,  the
Review  of  Revieivs).  Through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  W.  T.  Stead,  copies
of  the  A  and  B  schedules  were  circulated  with  one  number  of  the
Review  of  Reviews,  and  40  collectors,  who  obtained  between  them  936
answers,  were  thus  added.  A  more  complete  analysis  showing  how  the
services  of  the  collectors  have  been  obtained,  with  some  particulars  of
the  number  of  answers  collected  through  the  different  sources,  and  the
status  and  profession  of  the  collectors,  will  be  found  in  Ap'pendix  B.
It  will  be  observed  that  the  great  majority  (about  nine-tenths)  are
educated  people,- — educated,  that  is,  up  to  the  standard  of  the  pro-
fessional classes, — and  correspondence  with  nearly  all  has  given  us  an
opportunity  of  judging  of  the  bona  fides  and  intelligence  of  collectors
not  personally  known  to  members  of  the  Committee.

The  work  of  all  the  collectors  has  been  entirely  gratuitous,  and  we
take  this  opportunity  of  thanking  them  for  the  care  and  energy  that
they  have  displayed  in  carrying  out  a  piece  of  work  which  has,  we
fear,  often  turned  out  to  be  much  more  troublesome  than  they  had
anticipated, — involving,  as  it  has  done,  a  good  deal  of  correspondence
with  ourselves,  as  well  as  persistent  questioning  of  their  informants.
The  amount  of  work  done  by  some  collectors  has  been  very  large
indeed,  as  will  be  seen  by  reference  to  the  Appendix.

Classes  of  Persons  Inchided  in  the  Statistics.
As  far  as  intellectual  status  is  concerned,  the  collectors  are  fairly
representative  of  the  persons  answering  the  Census  question  ;  as  each
has,  as  a  rule,  collected  among  his  own  friends  and  acquaintances.
There  is,  however,  a  somewhat  larger  proportion  of  uneducated  persons
among  those  answering  than  among  the  collectors,  because  a  few  of
the  educated  collectors — and  especially  some  among  the  large  collectors
— have  worked  a  good  deal  among  uneducated  people,  and  a  good  many
collectors  have  asked  the  servants  of  their  own  or  their  friends'  house-
holds. Notwithstanding  this,  the  preponderance  of  educated  persons
ainong  our  informants  remains  too  great  for  our  statistics  to  afford  a  good
basis  for  ascertaining  the  distribution  of  the  phenomena  investigated
among  different  social  grades.  But  so  far  as  they  throw  light  on  the
question,  they  point  to  the  conclusion  that  differences  of  educa-
tion and  occupation  lead  to  no  material  difference  in  tendency  to
hallucinations.

Number  of  Informants.

The  collection  was  carried  on  for  a  little  over  three  years,  having
been  begun  in  April,  1889,  and  ended  in  May,  1892. When  the  time

D  2


36


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap..


announced  for  closing  it  arrived,  we  had  nearly  17,000  answers,  and,
by  including  belated  schedules  as  they  came  in,  we  made  up,  for  con-
venience, a  round  numbei",  stopping  when  we  had  reached  exactly
17,000.

Pro2Jortion  of  Affirmative  Ansivm^s.

Of  the  17,000  answers,  2,272  were  in  the  affirmative;  but  it
appeared  on  examination  that  important  deductions  had  to  be  made
from  this  number.  In  some  cases  the  scope  of  the  question  asked  had
not  been  fully  attended  to  by  our  informants,  and  the  experiences
described  {e.g.,  dreams,  or  the  hearing  of  mysterious  footsteps),  clearly
did  not  come  within  it.  Affirmative  answers  relating  to  such  cases
must  of  course  be  counted  as  negative. Their  number  is  353.

There  are  certain  other  experiences  as  to  which  it  is  doubtful
whether  they  come  within  the  scope  of  the  Census  question  or  not.  We
find,  as  might  be  expected,  that  persons  who  have  had  such  experiences
sometimes  answer  "  yes  "  and  sometimes  "  no,"  according  to  their  in-
terpretation of  the  exact  meaning,  of  the  question.  This  may  have
happened  to  a  much  larger  extent  than  we  can  discover,  because  when
a  person  answers  "no  "  no  further  information  is  generally  given.  For
statistical  purposes,  therefore,  it  would  have  been  useless  to  take  count
of  these  experiences,  and  the  best  plan  seemed  to  be  to  exclude
them,  in  order  to  secure  uniformity  of  result.  We  have  for  this  reason
counted  affirmative  answers  as  negative  when  the  experiences  on
which  they  were  based  belonged  solely  to  one  or  other  of  the  following
types  : —

( 1 )  Hallucinations  occurring  either  during  illnesses  of  a  kind  in  which
delirium  is  known  often  to  occur  (e.g.,  scarlet  or  typhoid  fever),  though
there  is  no  proof  that  there  was  delirium  in  the  particular  case ;  or
while  the  percipient  was  suffering  from  the  effects  of  temporary  injury  to
the  brain  {e.g.,  after  a  blow  on  the  head). (Number  of  answers,  18.)

(2)  Dream-images  and  nightmares,  even  when  persisting  into  the
waking  state. (Number  of  answers,  7.)

(3)  Voices  or  touches  rousing  the  percipient  from  sleep,  but  not
continuing  when  he  wakes. (Number  of  answers,  21.)

(4)  Visions  of  objects  seen  with  closed  eyes.  (Number  of  answers,  3.)

(5)  Visual  experiences  of  the  type  called  "  illusions  liypnagogiques  "
— objects  seen  in  going  to  sleep  or  awaking,  in  the  dark,  and  with-
out reference  to  actual  space  {e.g.,  "  Faces  in  the  dark  ").  (Number  of
answers,  4.)

(6)  Apparent  illumination  of  the  place  where  the  percipient  was,
or  of  real  objects  in  his  field  of  view. (Number  of  answers,  11.)

(7)  Sounds  as  of  the  human  voice  other  than  speech — viz.,  laughing,
sighing,  coughing, singing crying, groaning, sobbing,  whistling.


11.]  MetJtod  of  Conducting  the  Enquiry.  37


screams  or  shrieks  ;  also  whispering  when  no  distinct  woi'ds  can  be
heard,  but  not  sounds  as  of  speaking  aloud,  even  though  the  words  are
not  distinguished. (Number  of  answers,  24.)

(8)  Tactile  impressions  not  involving  a  sense  of  contact  with  any
definite  object,  e.g.,  feelings  of  pressure  through  the  bedclothes,  or  of
the  bedclothes  being  moved,  shaking  of  the  bed  in  which  the  percipient
was,  cold  breezes. (Number  of  answers,  10.)

(9)  Lights  seen  at  some  little  distance  out  of  doors,  and  thus
under  conditions  in  which  it  is  almost  necessarily  impossible  to  exclude
the  hypothesis  of  their  being  real  lights  (9  answers) ;  and

(10)  Objects  seen  sideways  out  of  the  corner  of  the  eye,  and  never
brought  within  the  field  of  direct  vision,  when  there  is  consequently  a
■special  probability  of  illusion  (5  answers).

(11)  After  excluding  these  well-defined  classes  of  experiences,  there
remain  others  about  which  serious  doubt  must  be  felt  as  to  whether
they  were  really  waking  sensory  hallucinations  at  all.  A  considerable
number  1  of  such  doubtful  experiences  are  included  in  our  tables,
because  in  view  of  the  numerical  comparison  to  be  made  of  seemingly
veridical  hallucinations  with  those  which  are  to  be  taken  as  purely
subjective  (see  Chapter  XIII.),  it  is  important  to  be  sure  of  not
understating  the  number  of  the  subjective  cases  ;  but  the  Committee
have  felt  justified  in  cutting  out  certain  cases  where,  after  careful  con-
sideration, the  reasons  for  regarding  the  experience  as  hallucinatory
seemed  to  them  altogether  inadequate.  In  each  case  thus  omitted
they  have  endeavoured  to  give  full  weight  to  the  percipient's  own
opinion,  but  this  is  often  very  dubious.  Forty-seven  afiirmative  answers
have  been  counted  as  negative  under  tliis  head — namely,  15  as  not
truly  externalised,  and  32  as  either  mere  illusions,"  or  cases  of  mis-
taken identity.

Experiences  of  some  of  the  above  types  are  often  interesting,  and
some  of  them  will  be  discussed  further  on,  although  we  have  excluded
them  from  the  numerical  tables.

The  number  of  answers  transferred  from  the  "yes"  to  the  "no"
list  under  all  the  above  heads  is  522, ^  or  26  per  cent,  of  the  cases  in
which  those  who  have  answered  "  yes  "  have  given  particulars  of  their
experiences.^

1  An  outside  estimate  of  this  number  would,  we  think,  be  W  per  cent,  see  p.  100.

-  The  distinction  between  illusions  and  hallucinations  is  explained  in  Chap.  V.
For  f urcher  analysis  of  these  transferred  answers,  see  Appendix  C.

^  Quite  apart  from  this  changing  of  the  answer  from  "yes"  into  "no,"  21  persons
who  answered  "  yes "  have  been  excluded  altogether  from  the  Census,  because  the
account  given  of  their  experiences  was  such  as  to  make  it  almost  certain  that  they
should  have  been  counted  as  answering  "no,"  but  was  too  vague  for  us  to  feel  quite
justified  in  counting  them  so-


38  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


But  256  persons  have  given  the  answer  "yes"  and  withheld  all
information  as  to  the  nature  of  their  experiences.  Various  causes  have-
led  to  this— sometimes  merely  negligence,  indolence,  or  shyness  on  the
part  of  collector  or  percipient — sometimes  disinclination  in  the  per-
cipient to  confide  in  the  collector — sometimes  the  vagueness  or  remote-
ness of  the  experience,  making  it  difficult  for  the  percipient  to  describe
or  remember  details,  or  its  triviality,  making  him  think  it  not  worth
recording, — sometimes  the  intimate  nature  of  the  expei'ience  and  the
emotions  connected  with  it.  All  these  causes,  we  know,  have  operated,
and  there  may  have  been  others.  We  have  as  far  as  possible  tried
to  overcome  these  difficulties  by  corresponding  ourselves  with  the
percipients  who  had  given  no  particulars,  and  have  in  39  cases  obtained
information  from  them.  From  the  accounts  received,  together  with
information  given  in  some  other  cases  by  collectors,  we  have  come  to
the  conclusion  that  the  general  character  of  the  experiences  which  are
not  desciibed,  is  not,  on  the  whole,  different  from  that  of  the  described
experiences.  We  have  accordingly  felt  justified  in  assuming  that  the
proportion  of  affirmative  answers  which  should  have  been  negative
is  about  the  same  among  the  undescribed  cases  as  among  those  which
are  described,  and  therefore  26  per  cent,  of  those  who  have  answered
"  yes  "  and  given  no  particulars,  have  been  transferred  to  the  "  no  "
column.  ^

With  these  corrections,  our  answers  are  found  to  be  divided  as
shown  in  Table  I.  The  number  of  experiences  which  led  to  the  affirma-
tive answers  are  shown  in  Tables  II.  (with  Supplement),  IV.,  V.,  VI.,
VII.  and  VIII.,  classified  under  different  heads,  according  to  the
sense  affected,  the  natui-e  of  the  percept,  the  date  of  the  occurrence,
and  certain  conditions  of  the  percipient  at  the  time.  Table  III.  is  a
kind  of  Supplement  to  Table  I.,  relating  to  the  answers  of  informants
who  have  had  more  than  one  experience.  Table  IX.  gives  the  results
of  Tables  I.  and  II.,  divided  according  to  the  nationality  of  the  infor-
mants ;  Table  X.  the  results  obtained  in  certain  specially  selected
portions  of  the  collection  ;  and  Table  XI.  the  present  ages  of  our
informants,  and  the  distribution  of  the  hallucinations  according  to  the
age  of  the  percipient  at  the  time  of  the  experience.

The  Tables  are  followed  by  further  explanations.

1  Of  the  522  answers  transferred  from  the  "  yes  "to  the  "no"  list  on  account  of
experiences  not  coming  within  the  scope  of  the  Census  question,  198  were  from  men
and  324  from'women.  Thus,  of  the  whole  number  of  persons  who  hare  answered
"yes"  and  given  particulars  of  their  experiences,  25 J  per  cent,  of  the  men
and  26  per  cent,  of  the  women  should  have  answered  "no."  Of  the  256  persons
answering  "yes"  and  giving  no  particulars  of  their  experiences,  102  were  men
and  1.54  women.  Of  these,  therefore,  25^  per  cent,  (i.e.,  26)  of  the  men  and  26  per
cent,  (i.e.,  40)  of  the  women  are  counted  as  having  answered  "no."


II.]


General  Results.


39


TABLE  I.

Showing  the  number  of  negative  and  affirmative  answers  and  the
proportion  of  atiirmative  answers  to  the  whole.


[ Number  answering  "  Yes."

Number
answering
"No."

Particulars

given  at
first-hand.

Particulars
given  at
second-
hand.

No
particulars
given.

Totals.

Total
number  of
1  answers.

§  C  2
gSE  =

Ph

Men.

7,717

496

83

76

655

!

8,372

7-8

Women.

7,599

753

162

114

1,029

8,628

12-0

Totals

15,.316

1,249

245

190

1,684

17,000

9-9

Note. — The  answers  included  in  the  third  column  of  figures  in  Table  I.  are  g^ven
at  first  hand,  but  the  particulars  about  the  e.xperiences  which  led  to  the  answer  "  yes  "
in  these  24.5  cases  are  given  at  second-hand,  or  in  7  cases  at  third  or  fourth-hand.
The  second-hand  accounts  are  usually  written  by  the  collector,  who  received  them
orally  from  the  percipient.  We  have,  of  course,  always  obtained  the  accounts  at
first-hand  when  it,  seemed  possible  to  do  so.  All  the  accounts  in  the  succeeding
chapters  are  given  at  first-hand,  except  one  or  two  in  which  the  opposite  is  expressly
mentioned.


40  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.

'.  TABLE
Hallucinations  classified  according  to  the  sense


(1)  (2)  (3)  (4) (5)  (6)


Realistic  Human  Phantasms

Incom-
pletely
developed
appari-
tions.

Visions

Angels

and
re)i2ious
phan-
tasms

of  living
persons.

of  dead
persons.

unrecog-
nised.

1st  2nd
hnd.  hnd.

1st  2nd
hnd.  hnd.

1st  2nd
hnd.  hnd.

1st  2nd
hnd.  hnd.

1st  2nd
hnd.  hnd.

1st  2nd
tind.  hnd.

Visual

Visual  and  Auditory  (vocal)...
Visual  and  Auditory  (non-vocal)

Visual  and  Tactile

Visual  and  Auditory  (vocal)  |

and  Tactile /

Visual  and  Auciicoiy  i^noii-  i

vocal)  aiid  Tactile ...  J

Auditory  (vocal)

Auditory  (vocal)  and  Tactile  ...

Tactile

Tactile  and  Auditory  (non-  (

vocal) 1

Totals

296  36
30  1
7  —
13  —

5  —

1  —

172  42

6  —
6  —

105  22

41  3
4  —

7  2

6  1

57  13
4  —

8  2

272  47
10  —
24  2
4

■1  —

1  —

144  58
1  —
55  12

5  —

120  12

1  —
13  —

5  3

2  —

A  —

18  9
—  1
3  —


10  3
1  —

1  —

4  3

536  79

232  43

520  119

143  15

21  10

16  6

Note. -To  obtain  the  corrected  totals  given  in  column  (15),  the  190  affirmative
proportionately  to  the  totals  of  visual,  auditory,  and  tactile  cases  given
(16)  are  calculated  on  the  corrected  totals.


SUPPLEMENT  TO
Showing  the  number  of  groups  of


(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

/Many

\isual •■•  (several

Auditory  ...-^ge^eral

_  (-Many

Tactile  ...{several

Undescribedj^j^'^y^l  -  -

3  1
7  2
18  4
38  7
1  —

7  —
6  2

5  2

6  1
1  —
1  1

9  2
13  2
18  13
33  13

9  8
13  5

2  —
5  —

3  —

—  1

Totals

67  14

25  6

95  43

7  -

3  —

—  1

II.]  General  Results.  41

II.

AFFECTED  AND  ACCORDING  TO  THE  KIND  OP  PERCEPT.


(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

Grotesque
horrible,
or

monstrous
appari-
tions.

Animals.

Definite
inanimate
objects.

Lights.

In-
definite
objects

or
touches.

Insuffi-
ciently
described

for
classifica-
tion.

Totals.

Totals.

Cor-
rected
Totals.

;r  of  HaUuci-
3  per  cent,  of
3  answering.

1st  2nd
hnd.  hnd.

1st  2nd
hnd.  hnd.

1st  2nd
hnd.  hnd.

1st  2nd
luid.  hnd

1st  2nd
hnd.  hnd.

1st  2nd
hnd.  hnd.

1st  2nd
hnd.  hnd.

1st  2nd
lind.  hnd.

1st  &2nd
hnd.

a.2  5

gll

23  6
1  —

7  —

22  11

3  —

10  2
3  —

14  1

2  —
1  —

14  —

1  —

2  1

8  12

912  161
87  5
67  3

\

2  —

—  —


1  —

—  —

—  —

—  —

31  5
19  1

4  —

1120  175

JL  -1.  ^  W -1-1  "

1

1422

8-4

2  1

2  —

35  14
1  —

377  116
11  —
108  29

6  —

}  388  116
1  114  29

553
157

3-3
•9

33  6

27  12

16  2

17  1

53  15

8  12

1622  320

1622  320

answers  relating  to  which  no  particulars  have  been  given  (see  Table  I.)  are  divided
in  column (14)  and added to these totals. The  percentages in  column


TABLE  II.

UNENUMERATED  HALLUCINATIONS.


(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12

(13)

4  1
2  1

2  2
1  5

1  —

2  -
1  —

1  —

11  1

18  5

42  7
53  17
41  19
77  22
11  8
16  6

1  —
3  1

1  —
3  1

6  2

4  7

3  —

1  —

33  7

244  80

42


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap;


TABLE  III.

Number  of  Persons  who  have  had  more  than  one  Hallucination,,
classified  according  to  the  number  they  have  had  and  the

sense  affected.


Sense  affected.

Number  of  Hallucinations.
3 4 5 6  Indefinite.

Totals.

All  Visual

88

18

5

4

1

81

197

Some  Visual  and  some  Auditory

26

6

9

2

1

22

66

Some  Visual,  some  Auditory,

and  some  Tactile

4

4

Some  Visual  and  some  Tactile

12

6

18

All  Auditory

14

4

89

107

Some  Auditory  and  some  Tac-

tile

5

9

14

All  Tactile

6

15

21

Totals

151

28

14

6

2

226

427

Number  of  the  above  Persons  ^
who  have  seen  apparitions  >
of  recognisedliving  persons.  J

40

6

6

1

2

31

86

Note. — Table  III.  includes  only  the  persons  who  have  had  more  than  one
hallucination  and  who  give  some  account  at  first-hand  of  their  experiences  (their
total  number,  427,  being  thus  comparable  with  the  number  of  persons  included  in  the
second  column  of  Table  I. )

In  classifying  the  hallucinations  they  have  had  according  to  the  sense  affected,
the  term  "  all  visual  "  means  that  all  their  hallucinations  affected  the  sense  of  sight ;
the  term  "  some  visual  and  some  auditory  "  means  that  some  of  their  hallucinations
were  visual  and  some  auditory,  and  so  on.  Thus  the  second  line  in  the  Table  gives
the  information  that,  out  of  the  151  persons  who  have  each  had  two  hallucinations,
26  have  each  had  one  visual  and  one  auditory  hallucination  ;  out  of  the  28  persons
who  have  each  had  three  hallucinations,  6  have  each  had,  either  two  visual  and  one
auditory,  or  one  visual  and  two  auditory  ;  and  so  on.


II.]


General  Results.


43


Q

a

>

h"

<!

w

Eh
O
»

<!


pq


M

!z;

m
«

K
o

H
S
O


0)

I— I
u


K

02

O

w

Eh

12

Q
O


O

5
M

<
02


Q

P3
O


c3

-a
s


S2  (2

<a  O
go"

O  rH


lOO^^CMi— ICOCM.— li— ti— I
00  I— ( 00  I


CiOOlOiOOOOOO^DCO

CI


O OD ^ t-  T— I  <M


(M 'ID O 00  CO <M lO <M  00

lO O CI  O


/s

O

r— 1

00

00

CO

00

00

<M
I — 1

CI

o

[-

I — 1

CO

1 — 1

I-H

CD

00
1 — 1

to

CO

>n

] — 1

1 — 1

00

1 — 1

1 — 1

1 — 1

CO

lO
1 — 1

CI

I-H

05

) — i

o

1 — 1

CO

T— 1

CO

CI

1 — 1

1— t

CI  CO  I  I

I  CI  I  ,— I  ^

I  I  ^  CO  I

I  CI  I  CI  I

I— I  CI  I  I-H  CI

I  I  I  I— I  CI


o


o


t3


o
o

s


.2

cS
c3


pi


c3
<D

P5


in
Ph

a
o


g

3

o


O


3

P

o


3


'-+3


Oh


03

o

to


o


CO

o
o


c3


c3


•a

t3


o

•  I — »

o


CC


CO


"*H tjH  tW

O o  o


CO

bp

a,


CO
CI


CI


o

CO


CI
CO


00
CI


C5
CI


CI


OS
CO


00


c5

o
H


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap


o


(M  CO

O O  ^

CO  T— (  CO


CO


CM  T— I


CO
CO


CO  o


<M (M  CO


O


O  X!


o


C5

T— I  o


CO


CO  ^


o


)CO


l1  £

8

g  p  fi


c  ^1  *
§5  =«  c


C3  5;  hb
'O


CI

^


CO


00


o


to

CO


I— I


o


O
m

<»
&(


=♦-1

o


c3
c3


a


03
Pi

o


0)

o


o
o


c3


O


a
o

o


CO  CI


^ O  I-H


O CO  CM  1— I


CO


O


<1


00
CO


OS
(M


OS


CO


O


Ph
Ph

c3

'5b


o
O


03

a;
o


03  a)


03


tc  o


03

o

03
•  >— s

O

03


03
O


c3
O

H


c3

Ph


II.]  General  Results.  45

TABLE  VI.


Visual  Hallucinations  (combining  Tables  IV.  and  V.).


]

Within

the  last

A  VPfl  TC!

More
than  10
years
ago.

Undated.

Totals.

Realistic  Human  Apparitions

Of
living  ;
Persons

Immediately  after
Awake  in  bed

Up

Out  of  doors

Unstated

31
78
31
1

24
43

64
31
4

3

3
7

8
8

43

77
149
70
13

Totals

157

166

29

352

Of
dead  ,
Persons

Immediately  after

waking

Awake  in  bed

Up

Out  of  doors

Unstated

19
26
9
3

3

25
42
10
5

2
6

8

8

46
74
19
16

Totals

62

85

16

163

Unrecog-
nised

Immediately  after
Awake  in  bed

Up

Out  of  doors

^  Unstated

}-

31
47

30

10

54
42
33
1

8

5
22

4
10

36

90
111
67
11

Totals

126

140

49

315

Incompletely
developed
apparitions

'  Immediately  after
waking

Awake  in  bed

Up

Out  of  doors

\  Unstated

19
23
5
1

12

29
20
12
1

2

4
2

1

24

50
47
19
3

Totals

60

74

9

143

All  other
Visual
hallucinations

'  Immediately  after
waking

Awake  in  bed

^  Up

Out  of  doors

\  Unstated

3
27
14

2

5

24
22
12
1

4

4
8

4

18

31
57
26
7

Totals

55

64

20

139

Report  pn  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Totals

CD  CD  tH
O  T-H  CO

Totals.

Undated

More  than
10  years  ago

00  00

(M  O  CO
iH  CO

With'in  the
last  10  years

CO  (M  C~

CO  CD

CI  CO  ICS


iH  (M  tH
CO


,-1

IC  CO


Totals


CD  CO  O
T-l  CO  C<1


Undated

More  than

10  years  ago

Within  the
last  10  years


(M  CO  J>.

CO  CD  <M

T-H  T-l  iH


be  OJ  &

P3  ^


Totals


CO  Oi  CO


Undated

More  than
10  years  ago

Within  the
last  10  years


I— I  CO  lO
CO  00  I
00  tH


•5  g


bo  Q


Total:


(M  CD  CO


Undated

More  than
10  years  ago

Within  the
last  10  years


lO  »0  CD
T-l  (M


CD  CO


CO  CO  i£5
rH  CO


a

3


O  CO


(1^


CO  CO  lO

CO  IM


Th  -*  CO
(M  iH

1-1  T-l

lO  O  iH


CO  O

CO


I  i
tH  O


<>J  o

<M  tH


CO

CO  (M


(M  CO

CD  O
tH  iH


03

s


2(ii


03

o


f-t

O


03

03
&
X

03

o


tJ^  CD  "tJI

T— 1  CO  CO

IN  CO  O

CO

CO

CO

T-l

lO  I— 1

CO

!>•  tH  CO

CO

(M

oq

O  O  CO

o

oq

T— I

<M  Cvl  r-l

tH

CO

T— 1  ^

o

CO  CO  1— 1

CO

O  O  00

T-l

o

T— 1

1  CO  CO

m

tH

CO  1

CO

iO

Oq  CO  1

lO

I.^  00

lO

iH

oq

j  CO  CO

o

CO

CO

iO

(M  (M  «<1

05

I-l

03  -


o  o

03

.15  w

II

a:

CO  03
03  TTj
O

'o


11.]


General  Results.


pq


O

a

>

a


xa


o

M
H
Oh

&<
O


O
O

o

o  5
g  8


Q


O
«

Q

O
15


o

HH

EH

3

■<
1-3

EH

O
-<!
H


Q
B3
O

o


o
p


c5


O
o

03

32


03

o

'  Totals.

CO  CO  !>■ ^ 1  1

00  1-1  II

1—1

Undated.

(M  CD  CO  III
i-l  tH  III

1—1

More  than
10  years  ago.

I— 1  £^  tH CO I  1
(M  tH I  !

Within  the
last  10  years.

O  O  CO CO 1  I
^  O  11

CD

a

Indefinite.

Totals.

r-H  CC  O  III
7-1  tH  1-1  III

CO

Undated.

lO 00  III

00

1-1

More  than
10  years  ago.

(M  CO  tH I I  I

CD

Within  the
last  10  years.

00  iH  III

CO
iM

Tdudi  of  an
animal  or
inanimate
object.

Totals.

CM  CO 1  III

lO

Undated.

1^1  Ml

1— i

More  than
10  years  ago.

1-1  i-i  1  III

cq

\v  itnin  tne
last  10  years.

^^1  III

(M

Touches  associated  witii  Human  Beings.

Unrecognised.

Totals.

Cl  00 1  1
C<1  JO  II

00
1^

Undated.

Tt<  00  O  III

— '

More  than
10  years  ago.

i^OS 1 1  1

iH

Within  the
^ last  10  years.

00  T-l  <M CO 1  1
T-l  0^ 1  i

I*

Dead.

Totals.

lO  1-1 1 1-1 1  1
T-l  r-l 1  II

Undated.

oq  j  III

More  than
10  years  ago.

lO  iH 1  '"'11

»viinin  bue
last  10  years.

00  00  1  III

CO

rH

Living.

Totals

1-1  rH 1  II

CO
1—1


Undated.

^11  III

More  than
10  years  ago.

CD  CO 1  ^11

o

rH

Within  the
, last  10  years.

*2 1  III

1-1

03  bD

■a.s

if.  O
^  S


o


48


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


!z;
<!
OS
O

Ph

O

H  O

-  5^  3
M  2  -S

I— I  H  <u


9  =  =  S


CO


00  (M


50


t1(  o


CO  Ol
00  ^


a  u  a


05


(^1


c4


CO


o

=4


!5


o
o
o

<^

02

«

<1

w
w

CS
g

5

>

ft


o
o

CD


"2 c3  ^


1§


CO  £^


03
CO


O  CO


CO


O  CO


c  2  c

S  dJ  "


05


00


o


tH  O  Ol  Ol OI  tH


CO


1>.  (M

CO


Percentage
of

affirmative
answers.

O  rH
tH  (M

Ol

lb

ifcr  answering.

Totals,

CO  ^
CO  CO

o

00
CO

Yes.  j

CO

00

o

tH

Numb

No.

O  <M

o

CO  C-l

Ol

in

,2  ^-S

03  O  >


t3  C
ffi  1)  O


00


CO


c3

 M


Ol


Ol  t-
Ol


CO  1>-  Ol  CO  Ol
00  T-H


Ol  I  CD  iH  05
O]  I


CO  -*


.2  "3


CO

CO  o
Ol

1^  CO


Ol


o

Ol
lO


1^  Ol

CO  CO
lO  Ol


Ol


CD

tH  Ol
1.^


2  S  2P
.2  "^--S

c3  O  ^


00


O  Ol
CO


Ol

o


1*  05
CO  CO


CO  l-O  Ol  1^  lO  Ol
Ol Ol  Ol

^ T-l  iH


a

o

i-H

3


o


o


,1)  ...

•vocal)

-vocal)

(voca
(non-

ory  (vo(

(non

•  O  O  OJ  -!£  •

•  -kJ  •

m  m  xn  ^  m  ^


•  eg

o
o
>


>5

O


CD O  O  y


o  o

-i  11111

<»1  <!i H  P


-aj  CD


O  Ol

■si'

an-

2  fi:
H  2

.  s

c

cc  H
_>  cS

^  O'

c3  C

m  0)

3  -t^


=3  _


S  u.

C3


C  0)
cS  ^

o
r,  -4->


P  o


11.]


General  Results.


49


50  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


TABLE  XI.

Number  of  Hallucinations  Experienced  at  Different  Ages,
AND  Ages  of  Informants.

(Second-hand  Cases  are  Included.)


Ages.

Un-

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Un-

J.  o  tais

der

to

to

to

to

to

to

and

sta-

10

19

29

39

49

59

69

Over!  ted

Visual

72

217

300

143

81

40

22

5

415

1295

Auditory  . . .

3

42

91

38

21

14

5

290

504

Tactile . . .

1

11

32

17

14

3

1

64

143

All  Halluci-
nations

76

270

423

198

116

57

28

5

769

1942

Number  of  Infor-^
mants  of  differ-  l

4927

4278

3316

2338

1419

722

17000

ent  present  ages.  J

Hallucinations
per  1000  of  \
Informants.  J

7

26

48

33

31

29

32

Note. — The  two  last  lines  of  this  Table  are  estimates  ;  the  way  in  which  the
estimates  are  obtained  is  explained  on  p.  53.  The  "  present  ages  "of  informants  means
their  ages  at  the  time  they  answered  the  Census  question.


General  Explanation of  the  Tables.

Explanation  of  the  Headings  of  Table  II.

In  Table  II.  the  first  three  columns  and  columns  (8)  and  (9)  contain  the
cases  which,  according  to  the  percij^ients'  accounts,  appear  to  have  belonged
to  the  most  completely  externalised  class — those  which  look  just  like  human
beings,  animals,  or  things  forming  part  of  the  real  world.  In  column  (1)  we
include  with  living  persons  those  who  are  not  known  to  the  percipients  to  be
dead,  and  who  have  not,  in  fact,  been  dead  for  more  than  twelve  hours.
In  doing  so,  we  have  followed  the  plan  adopted  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
for  reasons  there  explained,  and  further  discussion  of  the  subject  will  be
found  in  Chapter  XVII  of  the  present  Report.  The  number  of  ap-
paritions thus  included  of  persons  who  are  definitely  reported  as  dead  at
the  time  is  nine,  and  the  number  of  apparitions  of  persons  who  died  at  or
near  the  time  their  apparition  was  seen — but  about  whom  it  'cannot  be
affirmed  that  they  were  at  the  moment  either  living  or  dead — is  56.  Column
(4)  contains  visual  hallucinations  of  a  less  realistic  kind,  being  apparently
imperfectly  developed.  They  are  either  shadowy,  vague,  transparent,  or
colourless  ;  or  they  represent;  part  only  of  the  human  form,  the  rest  being
conspicuously  absent  (not  merely  apparently  hidden  by  intervening  objects).
All  appearances  of  a  hand,  or  hand  and  arm  only,  14  in  number,  are  also


II.]


Explanation  of  Tables.


51


placed  in  this  column,  as  are  veiled  and  shrouded  apparitions  even  when
quite  solid  looking.  Examples  of  this  class  are  discussed  in  connection
with  the  development  of  hallucinations  in  Chapter  VI.  By  "Visions,"  which
occupy  column  (5),  we  mean  scenes  or  pictures  or  sometimes  single  figures  or
faces,  which  do  not  seem  to  belong  to  the  percipient's  actual  surroundings.
For  a  discussion  of  this  class,  see  Chapter  IV.  In  columns  (6)  and  (7)  are
apparitions  of  persons  or  things  which  we  should  not  expect  to  meet  with  in
the  real  world  ;  for  examples,  see  Chapters  VI.  and  VIII.  In  column  (11)  we
have  placed  hallucinatory  objects  which  our  percipients  did  not  see  distinctly
enough  to  identify  as  anything  in  particular,  or  could  not  give  a  name  to.
With  these  we  have  included  apjoearances  as  of  smoke  and  two  cases  of  dark
shadows  between  the  percipient  and  the  lamp  or  candle.

These  definitions,  of  course,  apply  also  to  the  other  Tables  relating  to
visual  hallucinations.

Mode  of  Counting  the  Hallucinations.

The  total  numbers  of  Table  II.  do  not,  of  course,  correspond  with  those  of
Table  I.,  because,  while  Table  I.  gives  the  number  of  persons  answering
*' yes,"  Table  II.  gives  the  number  of  specified  hallucinations,  and  a  large
number  of  our  informants  (see  Table  III. )  have  had  more  than  one  hallucina-
tion, the  number  they  have  had  varying  from  two  to  an  indefinitely  large
number.  The  degree  of  minuteness  with  which  these  are  either  described  or
enumerated  varies  very  much,  and  some  difiiculty  has  thus  been  introduced
into  the  tabulation  of  hallucinations.  The  plan  we  have  finally  adopted  is
as  follows : —

Every  experience  individually  mentioned,  described,  or  enumerated  has
been  counted  in  Table  II.  in  its  appropriate  line  and  column. ^  When  a
general  description  is  given  of  a  type  of  hallucination  which  has  been  ex-
perienced more  than  once,  but  the  number  of  occasions  on  which  it  occurred
is  not  stated  definitely,  the  description  is  taken  for  the  purposes  of  Table  II.
as  applying  to  one  individual  experience.  The  case  is  also  put  down  under
its  own  head  in  the  Supplement  to  Table  II.,  the  object  of  which  is  to  give
such  data  as  there  are  for  a  correction  of  Table  II.  on  account  of  those
hallucinations  which  are  mentioned  only  in  a  general  manner  in  groups,  and
not  enumerated.  We  have  divided  these  groups  into  groups  of  "several"
and  of  ' '  many. "  Our  informants  do  not,  of  course,  always  use  the  words
"  several  "  or  "  many"  in  their  account,  but  we  think  that  the  words  they  use
may  fairly  be  classed  under  these  two  heads.  Thus,  expressions  like  "on
other  occasions,"  "  a  few  times,"  "  two  or  thi-ee  times,"  "  more  than  once  "
(or  any  indefinite  number  apparently  not  exceeding  10),  are  taken  as
equivalent  to  "  several  times  "  ;  and  "  often,"  "frequently,"  or  any  indefinite
number  apparently  exceeding  10  {e.g.,  "almost  nightly  for  about  three
months  "),  are  taken  as  equivalent  to  "  many  times."

Some  examples  will  make  the  mode  of  counting  clearer.

No.  422.22,  whose  narrative  is  prmted  in  Chapter  XVII. ,  saw  apparitions
of  a  deceased  person  known  to  him. He  describes  four  separate  occasions,

1  Hallucinations  said  to  have  affected  two  or  more  percipients  at  the  same  time  are
counted  once  for  each  percipient  included  in  the  Oensvis.

E  2


52


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


[chap.


but  says  that  there  were  many  others.  The  collector  further  informs  us  that
he  has  had  other  hallucinations.  His  experiences  apjaear,  therefore,  in  Table
II.  as  4  cases  of  apparitions  of  a  dead  person,  and  in  the  Supplement  to  Table
II.  as  (a)  one  case  of  "many  "  apparitions  of  a  dead  person,  and  (6)  one  case
at  second-hand  1  of  "several"  hallucinations  insufficiently  described  for
classification.

No.  484.22  frequently  saw  an  apparition  of  his  father  (then  living)
standing  by  his  study  door,  with  his  face  looking  livid  and  a  dark  bruise
on  his  left  temple.  This  is  counted  in  Table  II.  as  one  case  of  an  appari-
tion of  a  living  person,  and  in  the  Supplement  to  Table  II.  as  one  case  of
"  many  "  such.

No.  698.23  (see  Chapter  XVI.)  saw  many  times  an  apparition  of  an  old
man  with  bright  blue  eyes,  di'essed  in  a  black  coat  and  white  riding  breeches,
and  also  saw  many  times  an  apparition  of  a  certain  deceased  person.  This
case  is  counted  in  Table  II.  as  («)  one  unrecognised  human  apparition  and
(6)  one  apparition  of  a  dead  person,  and  in  the  Supplement  to  Table  II.  as
one  case  of  "many  "  under  each  of  these  two  heads.

No.  .^5.1  often  heard  his  name  called — generally  in  his  mother's  voice —
both  before  and  after  her  death,  sometimes  in  the  voice  of  other  friends.
This  appears  in  Table  II.  as  (a)  one  auditory  hallucination  of  the  voice  of  a
living  person  and  (6)  one  auditory  hallucination  of  the  voice  of  a  dead
person,  and  in  the  Supplement  to  Table  II.  as  one  case  of  "  many  "  auditory
hallucinations  under  each  of  these  two  heads.

The  cases  of  "several  "  or  "  many  "  hallucinations  in  the  Supjjlement  to
Table  II.  do  not  include  hallucinations  repeated  once  or  more  at  such  short
intervals— one  or  two  days  at  most — as  to  suggest  that  the  appearances  after
the  first  are  merely  recrudescences  of  the  first.  These  cases,  of  which  there
are  about  20,  are  included  only  in  Table  II.,  and  there  counted  each  as  one
case,  unless  there  are  some  special  features  of  difi'erence  between  the
diff'erent  appearances.  Thus  No.  340.  19,  in  which  the  ijercijjient  saw  a
figure  in  a  grey  cloak  at  the  end  of  a  lighted  passage,  and  saw  it  again  in  the
passage  half  an  hour  later,  is  counted  as  one  case.  In  a  few  of  the  cases,  the
same  figure  appears  many  times  at  short  intervals  during  the  course  of  one
or  two  days.  Instances  of  this,  quoted  below,  are  Mr.  Beer's  experience.
No.  645.11,  in  Chapter  XII.,  and  Miss  M.'s  experience.  No.  740.9,  in
Chapter  XVII.

The  mode  of  counting  hallucinations  adopted  in  Table  II.  is  also  used  in
all  the  tables  that  follow  ;  but  in  Tables  IV.,  V.,  VI.,  VII., and  VIII.  second-
hand cases  are  not  included,  nor  the  experiences  included  in  column  (12)  of
Table  II.  as  "  insufficiently  described  for  classification."

In  the  Supplement  to  Table  II.,  and  in  Tables  III.,  X.,  and  XI.,  the
term  "  visual  hallucinations  "  includes  all  the  cases  where  some  other  sense
than  sight  was  affected  at  the  same  time  ;  the  term  "  auditory  hallucination  "
includes  only  cases  where  the  sense  of  hearing  alone,  or  of  hearing  and  touch

'  Column  (12)  in  Table  II.  includes  only  single  cases  of  hallucinations  insufficiently
described  to  be  classified.  When  it  appears  that  a  percipient  has  had  an  indefinite
number  of  experiences  thus  insufficiently  described,  they  are  included  only  in  the
Supplement  to  Table  II.


Explanation  of  Tables.


53


together,  were  affected  ;  and  the  term  "tactile  hallucination"  includes  only
cases  where  the  sense  of  touch  alone  was  affected.  The  total  numbers
given  under  these  heads  are,  therefore,  to  be  compared  with  the  total
numbers  in  columns  (14),  (15)  and  (16)  of  Table  II.

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  Tables  relating  to  hallucinations  of  each  sense
by  itself,  viz..  Tables  IV., V.,  VI.,  VII.,  and  VIII.,  the  term  "  visual  hallucina-
tion "  is  used  in  the  same  way  as  just  explained,  but  the  auditory  Table
also  includes  cases  where  some  other  sense  than  that  of  hearing,  and  the
tactile  Table  cases  where  some  other  sense  than  that  of  touch,  was  affected
at  the  same  time,  so  that  the  "  bisensory  "  and  "trisensory  "  hallucinations
are  counted  for  each  sense  affected  in  these  Tables,  which  consequently
overlap  to  some  extent.

Explanation  of  the  Estimates  in  Table  XI.

The  periods  we  have  taken  (except  the  last)  are  each  ten  years  long  ;
thus  the  heading  "  10  to  19  "  means  10  years  old  and  upwards,  but  under  20,
and  so  on.  As  the  Census  question  was  only  to  be  put  to  persons  over  21,
the  period  headed  "20  to  29,"  as  far  as  the  ages  of  informants  are
concerned,  is  really  a  period  of  nine  years,  from  21  years  of  age  upwards.

The  last  line  but  one  of  Table  XI.  is  arrived  at  by  assuming  that  the
6,521  informants  (1,447  of  those  who  answered  "yes,"  and  5,074  of  those
who  answered  "no")  whose  age  at  the  time  they  answered  the  Census
question  was  stated,  either  by  themselves  or  by  the  collector,  are  fairly
representative  of  the  17,000  persons  included  m  the  Census,  and  therefore
that  the  number  of  informants  of  each  age  multiplied  by  gives  the

number  of  that  age  for  the  whole  Census.  The  numbers  so  multiplied  are
what  we  give  in  the  line  in  question.

The  average  present  age  of  the  6,521  informants  was  40  years,  which  we
may  assume  to  be  the  average  present  age  of  all  the  persons  included  in  the
Census.

The  last  line  of  the  Table  is  arrived  at  by  distributing  the  769  hallucina-
tions which  occurred  at  unstated  ages  proportionately  among  the  different
age  periods  and  dividing  the  totals  thus  obtained  by  the  estimated  number
of  persons  who  have  had  a  chance  of  experiencing  a  hallucination  within
that  period.  The  number  of  possible  percipients  for  any  particular  period
is  estimated  by  taking  the  arithmetic  mean  between  the  number  of  persons
whose  age  exceeds  the  highest  age  included  in  the  period  and  the  number  of
those  who  have  not  yet  attained  the  lowest  age  included  in  it.


54  Re'port  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Chapter  III.

DISCUSSION  OF  THE  TRUSTWORTHINESS  OF  OUR  RESULTS.

"We  have  now  to  consider  how  far  the  proportions  of  the  affirmative
answers  in  Table  I.  and  of  the  different  kinds  of  hallucinations  in  the
other  tables  represent  fairly  the  true  proportions  in  the  circles  from
which  our  information  is  drawn.

Several  possible  sources  of  error  need  discussion.

Possibility  of  Deception.

(1)  There  is  first  the  possibility  that  some  of  the  affirmative  answers
received  have  been  intentionally  deceptive,  and  some  of  the  accounts
of  hallucinations  fictitious.

This  may  have  occurred  occasionally,  but  it  has  not,  we  feel  sure,
occurred  to  any  appreciable  extent.  The  method  of  collecting  was
calculated  to  guard  against  it,  both  by  providing  that  the  question
should  only  be  put  to  persons  of  mature  age,  (over  21), — who  are
certainly  less  likely  to  romance,  on  the  whole,  than  children, — and  also
that  it  should  be  asked  through  collectors.  The  answers  on  Schedule
A  were  attested  by  the  name  and  generally  by  the  signature  of  the
informant,  and  always  by  that  of  the  collector  ;  and  the  collectors
being,  as  a  rule,  if  not  friends,  at  least  acquaintances  of  the  persons
asked,  would  have  some  means  of  judging  whether  they  could  be  relied
on,  while  there  would  also  be  less  likelihood  of  informants  giving  an
untrue  answer  when  it  would  involve  deceiving  a  friend  or  acquaint-
ance, and  not  merely  a  stranger.

If,  notwithstanding  this,  there  were  deception,  the  following  up  of
the  details  of  the  hallucinations  would  be  pretty  sure  to  reveal  it.
Apart  from  the  improbability  of  deception  thus  secured,  and  the
absence  of  any  motive  for  it,  we  think  that  the  general  style  and
character  of  the  accounts  received  are  clearly  indicative  of  genuineness.
The  cases  quoted  in  the  course  of  our  report  will  give  the  reader  an
opportunity  of  forming  an  opinion  on  this  point  for  himself.

(2)  We  have  been  so  far  discussing  the  question  whether  "yes  "  has
been  untruthfully  said  for  "  no,"  but  it  is  also  possible  that  "no"  has  been
untruthfully  and  deliberately  said  instead  of  "  yes."  We  know  of  eight
cases  in  which  the  collector,  rightly  or  wrongly,  concluded,  from  infor-
mation received,  that  this  had  happened. ^  If  these  persons  ought  to
have  answered  "yes,"  they  presumably  answered  "no"  because  they

'  Two  of  these  eight  answers  were  cut  out  by  the  collector.  The  other  six  remain
in  our  tables  as  negative  answers,  since  we  do  not  know  enough  of  the  details  to  justify
us  in  changing  them.


III.]


Refusals  to  Answer.


55


resented  being  asked,  or  wished  to  avoid  further  questioning, — perhaps
owing  to  the  presence  of  others.  Of  course  we  cannot  assume  that  we
have  heard  of  all  the  cases  where  "  no "  has  been  given  instead  of
"  yes,"  especially  as  the  collector  would  not  always  suspect  it ;  but  it
is  unlikely  that  there  are  many,  since  it  was  obviously  open  to  anyone
either  to  refuse  to  give  an  answer,  or  to  answer  "  yes,"  and  refuse  to
give  details.

Refusals  to  Answer  the  Census  Question.

(3)  The  next  possibility  is  that  those  who  have  refused  to  answer
either  "  yes  "  or  "  no  "  to  the  Census  question  may  include  a  materially
larger  or  smaller  proportion  of  those  who  should  have  said  "  yes "
than  the  proportion  of  affirmative  answers  in  our  Tables.

We  have  received  information  from  a  good  many  collectors  as  to  the
refusals  they  have  met  with,  the  results  which  they  thought  were  pro-
duced on  their  own  collections  by  them,  and  the  motives  which  they
thought  influenced  the  refusals.  Two  or  three  persons  have  been  dis-
couraged from  collecting  altogether  on  account  of  refusals  to  answer,
and  it  is  very  probable  that  many  other  refusals  have  not  been  reported
to  us  at  all ;  but  we  think  that  those  reported  are  most  likely  fairly
I'epresentative.  In  about  51  cases  (reported  by  19  collectors)  the  col-
lector knew,  or  had  reason  to  think,  that  the  person  who  refused  should
have  answered  "  yes  "  ;  and  in  a  few  of  these  we  know  further  that  the
refusal  arose  from  the  intimate  or  painful  nature  of  the  experience.  In
9  cases  (reported  by  4  collectors)  it  was  believed  that  the  answer  should
have  been  "no."  In  about  16  cases  (reported  by  8  collectors),
the  collector  had  no  grounds  for  any  opinion  as  to  what  the  answer
should  have  been.

We  have  also  received  some  general  statements  from  other
collectors  with  regard  to  refusals  to  answer.  As  regards  affirmative
answers,  one  collector  linds  great  difficulty  in  persuading  people  who  have
had  experiences  to  answer  "yes,"  "as  they  seem  to  have  a  great
horror  of  being  questioned  on  the  subject,  or  of  having  their  names
published."  Another  says,  "  Many  refused  on  the  ground  that  they
had  seen  or  heard  something."  Another  "is  convinced  that  those  who
could  answer  '  yes  '  frequently  refuse  to  answer  at  all."  On  the  other
hand,  the  following  opinions  of  collectors  seem  to  indicate  the  with-
holding of  negative  answers.  One  says  "Many  objected  for  trivial  reasons."
Arjother  "  found  it  difficult  to  induce  people  to  interest  themselves  in  the
subject  sufficiently  to  give  their  signatui-es."  A  third  concluded,  from  re-
marks he  overheard  about  another  collector,  that  "a  great  many  persons
whose  answer  would  be  '  no  '  refuse  to  sign  from  mere  contempt  for  the
whole  subject,  whereas  those  who  have  had  any  experience  of  the  kind,
however  slight,  are  impressed  with  the  seriousness  of  the  enquiry,  and


56


Report  on  the  Gens^is  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


moFe  ready  to  take  the  trouble  to  enter  their  names."  A  fourth  says
"Most  of  my  acquaintance  object  to  even  writing  'no.'"  A  fifth
finds  "  some  people  strangely  reluctant  to  sign  anything."  Another
writes  :  "  Several  people  have  declined  to  answer,  for  they  said  they
could  not  feel  sure  whether  they  had  seen  something  or  not."  Another
found  that  "  there  were  two  classes  of  people  who  ridiculed  the  idea  ;
namely,  those  who  read  little  or  nothing  outside  newspapers  .  .  .
and  also  Spiritualists,  who  seemed  to  take  it  as  a  deliberate  insult." ^

The  Committee  have  themselves  met  with  9  persons  who  refused
to  answer,  out  of  594  asked.  In  two  of  these  cases  the  collector  felt  no
doubt  that  the  answer  should  have  been  "yes,"  and  they  have  accor-
dingly been  counted  as  undescribed  affirmative  answers.  In  four  cases
the  collector  was  doubtful  what  the  answer  should  be,  and  in  the
remaining  three  it  was  nearly  certain  that  it  should  have  been  "no."
It  may  be  instructive  to  examine  the  last  seven  in  more  detail.  Of  one
nothing  is  known,  but  the  collector  gathered  from  the  manner  of  the
person  asked  that  he  had  had  some  psychical  experience,  though  it  may
not  have  been  a  hallucination.  One  person  asked  to  take  the  paper
away  with  him,  promising  to  think  it  over  and  send  in  his  answer
later  ;  this  never  came,  in  spite  of  reminders,  and  the  collector  thought
that  the  evasion  probably  arose  from  an  unwillingness  to  give  details.
Another  similarly  evaded  a  direct  reply,  apparently  from  a  general
aversion  to  the  subject.  A  fourth  was  not  sure  whether  what  she  had
seen — two  vague  white  figures  in  a  garden  at  night — was  an  apparition
or  real  persons.  Of  the  three  persons  who,  the  collector  thought,  should
have  answered  "  no,"  one  referred  to  a  childish  experience  which  he  is
now  sure  was  not  hallucinatory,  though  he  thought  differently  at  the
time,  and  the  other  two  thought  that  all  the  enquiries  of  the  S.P.R.
tended  to  foster  superstition,  and  therefore  would  have  nothing  to  do
with  any  of  them.

Besides  the  reasons  for  refusals  to  answer  already  mentioned,  the
idea  that  sensory  hallucinations  are  symptoms  of  insanity  and  a  con-
sequent shrinking  from  mentioning  them  have  probably  operated  to
some  slight  extent.  This  has  been  mentioned  to  us  as  one  of  the
obstacles  met  with  by  two  persons  in  collecting.  Neither  of  these,
however,  sent  in  any  returns.

It  will  be  seen  that  it  is  very  difficult  or  impossible  to  make  a
numerical  estimate  of  the  total  error  that  has  been  introduced  into

'  This  is  the  only  instance  reported  to  us  of  a  collector  who  has  found  any  dif-
ficulty in  working  among  Spiritualists,  though  several  persons  expressed  to  us  before-
hand their  fear  that  Spiritualists  and  others  who  believed  their  experiences  to  be
veridical  would  be  repelled  by  the  terms  used  in  our  schedules— especially  the  use  of
the  word  "  hallucination."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  many  Spiritualists  have  been  included
in  the  Census,  and  several — notably  Mr.  Aksak off— have  assisted  us  as  collectors-


III.]


Danger  of  Selection.


57


our  statistics  by  refusals  to  answer.  But  the  small  proportion  of
refusals  experienced  by  the  Committee,  together  with  the  conflicting
reasons  for  refusals  reported  by  other  collectors,  lead  us  to  believe
that  this  error  is  not  very  important.  So  far  as  it  goes,  it
probably  tends  to  reduce  unduly,  but  only  to  a  small  extent,  the  pro-
portion of  affirmative  answers,  and  especially  those  relating  to  ex-
periences which  affect  the  percipient  emotionally,  such  as  phantasms  of
dead  and  dying  persons  closely  connected  with  him,  and  religious
phantasms.

Danger  of  Selectio7i.

(4)  Another  cause  of  eri'or  requiring  careful  consideration  lies  in
the  possibility  that  the  collector  may  have  selected  the  persons  to  be
asked  according  to  what  they  were  likely  to  say,  either  through  his
greater  interest  in  obtaining  one  form  of  answer  rather  than  another,
or  on  some  other  ground.  We  adopted  two  precautions  with  a  view  to
avoiding  this  particular  source  of  error.  First,  we  printed  instructions
to  collectors  on  this  point  (see  Apjyendix  A).  Secondly,  we  did  not
receive  isolated  answers,  but  asked  for  25.^  To  collect  25  answers  is
a  sufficiently  difficult  task  to  make  collectors  unwilling,  as  a
rule,  to  neglect  opportunities  of  obtaining  any  of  either  sort.  We
believe  that  most  of  our  collectors  have  understood  the  importance  of
avoiding  any  kind  of  selection,  and  in  many  cases  we  have  definite
evidence,  through  our  correspondence  with  them,  that  this  is  so.  Still,
we  have  evidence  of  some  selection.  In  fact,  13  collectors — out  of
410 — have  used  expressions  which  have  made  us  think  that  they,  or
friends  collecting  for  them,  had  allowed  themselves  to  be  biassed  by
a  desire  to  obtain  affirmative  answers,  as  being  more  interesting.
Between  them,  they  collected  898  answers,  of  which  14  per  cent,  were
affirmative ;  so  that,  as  the  average  proportion  is  9-9  per  cent.,  they
would  seem  to  have  had  some  success  in  this  illegitimate  endeavour,
though  not  enough  to  affect  materially  the  total  result.

On  the  other  hand,  some  affirmative  answers  which  would  naturally
have  come  in  have  been  omitted.  Thus,  four  collectors  whom  we  know
to  have  had  hallucinatory  experiences,  or  experiences  which  at  one  time
they  believed  to  be  so,  have  omitted  to  put  down  their  own  answers  in
their  lists,  and  in  one  case,  a  collector,  who  thought  his  proportion  of
affirmative  answers  was  getting  too  large,  abstained  from  asking  some
persons  who,  he  thought,  would  answer  "  yes."

On  the  whole,  we  should  conclude  from  our  communications  with
collectors,  and  our  examination  of  their  returns  that,  while  pursuit  of
affirmative  answers  has  certainly  taken  place  to  some  extent,  its

'  A  few  of  onr  collectors  have  not  sent  in  the  full  25,  but  have  probably  at  least
made  an  effort  to  do  so.


58  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


operation  has  been  too  limited  to  cause  any  considerable  increase  in
the  general  proportion  of  affirmative  to  negative  answers.  But  to
obtain  greater  certainty  on  this  point,  we  adopted  two  methods  of
checking  the  general  result.

(a)  With  a  view  to  judging  whether  selection  were  exercised,  we  asked
collectors,  in  our  instructions,  to  mark  the  names  of  persons  in  their
lists  whose  answers  they  could  have  foretold.  Unfortunately,  all  our
collectors  have  not  attended  to  this  instruction,  and  the  check  thus
afforded  would  have  been  in  any  case  only  partial,  because  previous
knowledge  of  an  answer  would,  of  course,  be  no  proof  that  it  was
selected  ;  the  person  giving  it  might  be  one  whom  the  collector  would
naturally  ask  in  any  case.i

(6)  A  more  efficient  means  of  judging  of  the  combined  effects  of  selec-
tion and  refusals  to  answer  was  obtained  by  means  of  answers  from
complete  groups  of  persons,  the  groups  being  defined  in  some  way  quite
unconnected  with  the  investigation.  Thus  all  the  members  of  a  house-
hold, including  servants,  would  form  such  a  group,  or  all  the  members
of  a  committee  (not  formed  for  purposes  of  psychical  research),  or  all
the  persons  present  at  a  dinner  party,  or  all  the  persons  who  happened
to  be  together  in  a  room  at  a  given  time.  Groups  of  this  kind  will
obviously  be  entirely  unselected  in  respect  of  experience  of  hallucina-
tions, and  they  also  cannot  be  affected  by  refusals  to  answer,  since  such
a  refusal  from  any  one  pe^'Son  would  simply  exclude  the  whole  group  as
incomplete.  A  comparison  of  the  answers  obtained  from  these  groups
with  the  whole  number  of  answers  gives,  therefore,  a  means  of  judging
how  far  the  proportion  of  affirmative  to  negative  answers  has  been
affected  on  the  whole  by  these  two  sources  of  error.  The  answers  of
peisons  included  in  these  groups,  classified  as  in  Tables  I.  and  II.,  but
with  less  detail,  are  shown  in  Division  A  of  Table  X.  above.
They  are  not  so  numerous  as  we  could  have  wished,  but  this  mode
of  collecting  is  rather  troublesome,  and  not  very  easy  to  explain  to
collectors  by  correspondence,  and  the  Committee  have  had  to  rely  on
themselves  for  a  large  part  of  this  division.

In  Table  X.  we  also  show  (in  Division  B)  all  the  answers  collected
by  members  of  the  Committee  and  (in  Division  C)  the  answers  collected
by  persons  who  have  had  systematic  training  in  medicine  or  psychology,
whose  collections  have  been  kept  distinct  in  accordance  with  a  desire
strongly  expressed  at  the  Paris  International  Congress  of  Experimental
Psychology.  It  was  in  order  to  make  this  portion  of  the  collection  as  large
as  possible,  that  Professor  Sidgwick  made  his  special  appeal  for  the
co-operation  of  psychologists  in  Mind,  of  October,  1889.  Speaking

'  Nor  would  comparison  of  the  number  of  marked  "  yeses  "  and  marked  "  noes  "  help
us,  since  a  collector  could  hardly  ever  be  sure  that  any  answer  would  be  negative.


HI.]


Danger  of  Selection.


59


broadly,  we  may  presume  that  these  specially  trained  collectors  were
specially  on  their  guard  against  any  tendency  to  selection.

Division  B  of  Table  X.,  collected  by  the  Committee,  is  perhaps  of
less  interest  to  others  than  to  ourselves ;  but  we  are,  of  course,  in  a
position  to  make  more  positive  statements  about  these  answers  than
about  other  parts  of  the  collection.  We  are  certain,  as  regards  this
set  of  answers,  that  they  are  unselected,  either  as  to  the  kind  of
answers,  or  the  kind  of  hallucinations,  included.  We  believe  also  that
errors  due  to  hasty  and  insufficiently  considered  answers,  and  to  neglect
of  trivial  cases,  occur  less  among  the  answers  collected  by  the  Com-
mittee than  in  the  average  of  the  whole  collection.

In  using  the  results  of  these  special  sets  of  answers  to  control
the  results  of  our  general  collection,  comparison  ought  to  be  made
with  that  pai"t  of  the  general  collection — neai-ly  16,000 — which  was
obtained  from  English-speaking  persons  (see  Table  IX.),  since  it  was
from  these  that  all  the  answers  in  Table  X.,  except  3  per  cent,  of
Division  0,  were  obtained.

On  making  this  comparison,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  percentages  of
affirmative  answers  in  Table  X.  are  throughout  above  the  average.
It  may  therefore  be  inferred  that  the  operation  of  selection  in
increasing  affirmative  answers  in  the  general  collection  must  have  been
more  than  counterbalanced  by  some  other  cause.  A  comparison  in
more  detail  between  the  special  sets  of  answers  and  the  general
collection  shows  that  the  percentage  of  visual  experiences,  though  on
the  whole  higher  in  the  special  sets  of  answers,  cannot  be  said  to  differ
in  any  very  marked  degree  from  the  general  average,  and  in  the  set
collected  by  the  Committee  is  almost  identical  with  it ;  so  that  the
trustworthiness  as  regards  the  number  of  visual  experiences  of  the
collection  in  general  receives  decided  confirmation  from  the  special  sets
of  answers.  On  the  other  hand,  the  proportion  of  a^iditory  and
tactile  experiences  is,  in  the  special  sets  A  and  B,  double  that  in  the
whole  collection.  This  we  believe,  however,  to  be  mainly  due  to
another  source  of  error  which  will  be  considered  below  :  viz.,  that
auditory  and  tactile  experiences  are  apt  to  be  trivial  and  unimpres-
sive, and  thus  easily  forgotten  or  ignored,  unless  special  care  is  taken
in  enquiring  about  them.

Proportion  of  Collectors  tvho  have  had  Hallucinations.

(5)  Before  leaving  the  subject  of  selection,  it  may  be  well  to
discuss  another  form  of  it.  It  has  been  suggested  that  persons  who
have  had  experiences  of  their  own,  or  whose  intimate  friends  have  had
them,  would  thereby  be  led  to  take  an  interest  in  the  subject,  and  con-
sequently to  serve  as  collectors ;  and  that  this  natural  selection  of  collec-
tors would  lead  to  our  collection  being  made  in  circles  in  which  there  is  a


60


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


greater  tendency  to  hallucinations  than  among  the  average  of  man-
kind. This  predicted  selection  of  collectors  has  perhaps  operated  to  a
certain  extent,  for  of  the  326  collectors^  whose  answers  are  included
in  the  Census,  either  in  their  own  lists  or  in  those  of  other  collectors,
68,  or  about  21  per  cent.,  answered  "yes."  Moreover,  it  is  probably
true  that  a  tendency  to  hallucinations  sometimes  runs  in  families, ^  and
also  that  a  habit  of  attaching  importance  to  them  either  fosters
a  tendency  to  them,  or  brings  persons  who  have  the  tendency  together.
A  collector  who  himself  answered  "  yes  "  might  therefore  possibly  be
apt  to  obtain  more  affirmative  answers  than  one  who  himself  answered
"  no."  But  the  whole  effect  thus  produced  can  only  have  been  small,
and  for  evidence  tending  to  show  that  it  is  practically  unimportant  we
may  refer  again  to  Table  X., — since  only  one  member  of  the  Com-
mittee can  answer  the  Census  question  in  the  affirmative,  and  that  one
only  on  account  of  a  trivial  and  uninteresting  tactile  experience  ;  nor
has  the  interest  of  its  members  in  the  subject  been  fostered  by  the  ex-
periences of  their  i^elatives  and  friends,  so  that  division  B  is  free  from
suspicion  of  the  source  of  error  here  discussed.

(6)  So  far  we  have  considered  sources  of  error  in  our  statistics  which,
though  feared  or  suspected,  appear  either  to  have  had  no  material
eifect,  or  to  have  counteracted  each  other.  The  case  is  very  different
as  regards  that  now  to  be  considered— namely,  forgetfulness.  This  may
be  of  two  kinds.

Superficial  Forgetfulness.

There  is  first  the  temporary  forgetfulness  which  comes  from
mere  carelessness  or  want  of  sufficient  thought,  with  which  may
be  classed  a  neglect  to  answer  affirmatively  arising  from  the  view
that  certain  experiences  were  too  trivial  to  be  worth  mentioning.
It  may  be  instructive  to  quote  some  of  the  opinions  expressed  by
collectors  as  to  the  effect  of  this  kind  of  foi-getfulness  on  the
statistics.  One  says  "  it  is  rather  common  for  a  person  to  answer  '  no  '
at  once ;  while  if  you  go  on  speaking  to  them  a  little,  they  will  say
'  I  once  had  a  queer  sort  of  experience,  but  it  is  not  worth  relating.'
Then  if  you  press  them,  you  may  find  it  is  just  the  sort  of  thing  which
you  are  asking  about."  Another  remarked  that  most  people  hesitated
before  they  could  say  "  no,"  only  those  who  were  apparently  not
inclined  to  very  deep  thought  gave  a  decided  negative.  A  third  says
"  one  difficulty  is  that  many  entirely  forget  anything  of  the  kind  and  it
is  only  by  an  effort  and  often  after  some  time  that  they  can  recall  them."

1  The  remaining  84  collectors  gave  no  answer,  or  at  least  we  have  failed  to  trace
their  answers  among  the  17iOOO.

2  For  evidence  on  this  question  afforded  by  the  present  collection,  see
Chapter  VIII.


III.]


Forgetfulness.


61


Two  others  find  that  people  often  say  "  no  "  at  first  and  then  change  to
"yes"  when  they  go  on  talking  and  explaining  to  them  what  is  wanted.
Two  others  think  that  trivial  experiences,such  as  hearing  voices,  are  very
common  and  perhaps  not  always  included.  Another,  who  has  collected
accounts  of  supernormal  occurrences  for  many  years,  is  persuaded  that
the  answer  should  often  be  "  yes  "  when  it  is  put  down  as  "  no  " — much
oftener  than  the  reverse.

The  following  is  a  description  of  his  methods  and  conclusions  given
by  another  collector,  who  has  had  special  opportunities  of  making  the
enquiry  in  an  important  Government  office  : —

"  I  have  had  225  answers  in  all  from  two  different  offices,  125  from  one,
and  100  from  the  other.  In  each  case  I  went  round  the  office  asking  every-
body of  the  required  age,  without  selection,  until  I  had  completed  the
required  number. . . . Out  of  the  125,  I  have  17  '  yeses,'  one  doubtful.

"In  the  other  office,  out  of  100,1  have  only  eight  '  yeses,'  and  of  these  one
is  a  'non-Census'  'yes,'  and  two  others  seem  doubtful  cases.  I  am
unable  to  account  satisfactorily  for  the  smaller  proportion  here.  The
men  belong  almost  entirely  to  what  is  called  the  Second  Division  of  the
Civil  Service — i.e.,  they  entered  by  a  very  simple  competitive  examination,
and  are  mostly  below  the  standard  of  University  education.

' '  I  am  not  so  well  known  in  the  office  as  in  my  own — not  known  even  by
sight  to  many  of  the  men — and  it  is  possible  that  these  men  may  have  been
less  careful  to  answer  the  question  of  a  stranger.  Again,  I  think  it  possible
that  fear  of  ridicule  may  have  withheld  some  from  answering  'yes.'  Neither
cause  would  be  likely  to  lose  us  any  very  striking  hallucinations  ;  but  both,  I
think,  may  have  operated  to  exclude  some  auditory  and  tactile  cases.  I  am
convinced,  from  the  result  of  the  enquiry,  that  to  answer  the  question  fully
requires  a  pretty  careful  and  prolonged  interrogation  of  memory  :  a  task
which  my  questionees  were  in  most  cases  probably  unwilling  to  undertake.
Some  asked  to  keep  the  paper,  and  sent  in  their  reply  a  day  after.  But
this  source  of  error  (which  would  only  exclude  unimportant  '  yeses  ')  has
probably  affected  my  answers  less  than  those  of  other  collectors.  The  ques-
tion was  in  all  cases  asked  personally,  and  an  interval  of  about  five  minutes
left  for  reply.  (My  plan  was  to  come  into  a  room,  distribute  a  Census  paper
to  each  of  four  or  five  persons,  and  then  go  round  and  talk  and  answer  ques-
tions until  one  or  other  was  ready  with  his  answer. )  In  very  few  cases  did  a
man  reply  '  no  '  at  once.

' '  Still,  I  feel  almost  sure  that  if  I  could  have  discussed  the  matter  for
20  mmutes  with  each  individual,  I  should  have  had  a  larger  proportion  of

'  yeses.' For  instance,  wrote  '  no  '  first,  and  some  ten  minutes  later,

in  a  discussion  on  the  general  subject,  mentioned  his  experiences,  '  which,  of
course, were  only  the  result  of  dyspepsia,and  not  worth  putting  down. '  I  think,
therefore,  that  though  the  present  collection  may  perhaps  be  more  accurate
than  that  of  the  average  collector — not  only  from  absence  of  selection,  but
from  the  exceptional  facilities  which  I  had  for  securing  the  attention  of
my  questionees  (the  subject  being  regarded  as  a  welcome  relief  to  the
monotony  of  office  work,  and  the  men  having  no  other  occupation,  beyond


62


Rejjort  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


the  work  aforesaid,  to  distract  them) — it  is  still  by  no  means  complete  as
regards  the  less  impressive  experiences."

It  will  be  noticed  that  almost  all  the  collectors  quoted  believe  that  it  is
the  trivial  experiences — auditory  and  tactile  ones  generally — which
have  been  ignored.  That  these  should  be  the  ones  ignored,  one  would
naturally  expect,  since  trivial  experiences, — e.g.,  hearing  one's  name
called  from  a  distance  when  no  one  is  calling, — often  make  little
impression,  because,  from  their  nature,  they  are  apt  to  leave  the  pei'-
cipient  himself  in  doubt  as  to  whether  they  are  really  hallucinatory,  or
only  misinterpretations  of  real  sounds.

The  correctness  of  the  view  that  trivial  auditory  and  tactile  expe-
riences have  been  a  good  deal  ignored  is  confirmed,  we  think,  by
Table  X.  The  Committee  have  been  careful  as  far  as  possible  to  pre-
vent the  ignoring  of  these  experiences  in  their  own  collection,  and  it
is  probably  owing  to  this  that  they  have  obtained  so  high  a  percentage
compai-ed  with  the  average.  If  we  may  judge  from  Talkie  X.,  it  would
appear  that,  roughly  speaking,  the  inclusion  of  unimpressive  auditory
and  tactile  experiences  which  have  been  neglected  in  the  whole  col-
lection, would  have  about  doubled  the  number  of  auditory  and  tactile
experiences  recorded  :  while  the  same  comparison  would  show  that  no
material  loss  of  this  kind  has  occurred  in  visual  experiences.

Permanent  Forgetfulness.

But  there  is  a  more  serious  and  complete  oblivion  which  no  care  or
thought  will  ovei'come — the  forgetfulness  which  in  course  of  time  effaces
some  experiences  from  the  mind  altogether — at  least  so  far  as  conscious
memory  is  concerned.  This  kind  of  forgetfulness  will  affect  the  work
of  all  collectors,  and  the  answers  of  all  groups  of  informants,  alike,  and
cannot  be  checked  by  the  special  collections  shown  in  Table  X.  We
must,  therefore,  adopt  some  other  method  for  estimating  the  extent  of
its  operation.

In  considering  this  question  we  will  confine  our  attention,  in  the
first  instance,  to  visual  hallucinations  ;  the  record  of  which,  as  we
have  just  seen,  is  not  materially  affected  by  any  of  the  sources  of
error  so  far  considered  ;  while,  as  will  hereafter  appear,  they  are  of
special  importance  in  estimating  the  evidence  for  telepathy.

In  order  to  judge  of  the  effect  of  lapse  of  time  on  the  number  of  visual
hallucinations  reported  to  us,  and  to  discover,  as  far  as  is  possible  from
the  reported  number,  what  the  true  number  should  be,  we  have  in
Table  IV.  divided  the  reported  number  according  to  the  length  of
years  that  had  in  each  case  elapsed  since  the  occurrence,  when  the
percipient  answered  the  Census  question.

As  all  our  informants  are  over  20  years  of  age,  they  have  all  had
more  than  10  years  in  which  to  experience  hallucinations. If  there-


III.]


Forgetfidness.


63


fore  they  were  sufficiently  numerous  for  accidental  variations  to  be
eliminated,  and  if  hallucinations  occurred  with  equal  frequency  at  all
ages,  the  same  number  would  have  occurred  to  our  informants  during
each  of  the  last  10  years.  But  an  inspection  of  Table  IV.  at  once  shows
that  this  is  not  the  case  with  those  reported.  On  the  contrary,  they  ex-
hibit a  more  or  less  systematic  variation ;  the  number  for  the  most  recent
year  being  comparatively  very  large,  the  annual  number  decreasing
rapidly  at  first  as  the  years  become  more  remote,  and,  when  we  reach
8,  9  and  10  years  ago,  being  less  than  half  what  it  is  at  first.  This
variation  is  fa,r  too  systematic  to  be  accounted  for  by  accident,  and  any
error  in  our  assumption  that  hallucinations  are  equally  numerous  at  all
ages  will  affect  the  number  occurring  annually  but  little,  if  at  all,  being
neutralised  by  the  variety  in  the  ages  of  our  informants.  It  is  clear,
therefore,  that  as  the  years  recede  into  the  distance  the  proportion  of
the  hallucinations  that  occurred  in  them  to  those  which  are  forgotten,
or  at  least  ignored,  is  very  large.

If  we  could  assume  that  the  number  reported  for  the  most  recent
year  was  correct — that  memory  has  been  trustworthy  for  a  year — we
could  infer  the  total  number  from  it  by  multiplying  it  by  the  mean
number  of  years  during  which  our  informants  have  lived.  But  when
we  analyse  the  experiences  reported  for  the  last  year,  we  find  the
difference  between  the  recent  and  remote  portions  of  it  even  more
marked  than  that  between  the  last  year  and  10  years  ago.  Out  of
the  87  visual  hallucinations  reported  for  the  last  year,  42  are
stated  to  have  occurred  within  the  most  recent  quarter,  and  of  these
19  within  the  most  recent  month,  and  12  within  the  most  recent
half -month  ;  numbers  which  correspond  approximately  to  168,
228,  and  288  per  annum  instead  of  87.  This  kind  of  difference
extends  through  all  classes  of  visual  hallucinations  (though  it  is  less  in
degree  in  some  than  in  others),  and  this  confirms  the  view  that  it
cannot  be  accidental.  At  the  same  time  we  have  now  come  to  sub-
divisions too  small  for  us  to  rely  on  the  exact  numbers,  not  only
because  the  numbers  are  too  small  for  accidental  variations  to  be
eliminated,  but  because  any  error  in  them  is  very  largely  multiplied
in  the  fin^l  result.^  If,  therefore,  we  are  to  infer  the  whole  number
of  hallucinations  from  the  number  within  a  given  recent  period,  it  is
a  matter  of  some  difficulty  to  determine  what  the  length  of  the  recent

1  Suppose,  for  instance,  that  we  wish  to  infer  from  the  number  within  the
most  recent  half-month  how  many  occurred  altogether.  Then,  since  the  average
age  of  our  informants  is  40  years  (see  p.  53)  we  must  multiply  12  —  the
number  within  the  half-month — by  24  times  40,  which  makes  11,520.  But  if
there  has  been  a  mistake,  and  one  of  those  said  to  have  occurred  v\dthin  the
half-month  occurred  IG  days  ago,  then  the  whole  number  would  be  reduced
by  xV  or  960.


64<  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


period  should  be :  since,  if  it  is  too  long,  the  numbers  are  reduced  by
forgetfulness  ;  while  if  it  is  too  short,  we  are  liable  to  largely  magni-
fied errors  in  the  result.

In  deciding  on  the  period,  we  have  been  influenced  by  another
consideration — viz.,  that  oblivion  appears  to  have  specially  affected
doubtful  hallucinations,  or  alleged  hallucinations  eri'oneously  regarded
as  such.

"We  are  led  to  this  view  by  examining  the  42  cases  in  the  most
recent  quarter  individually,  and  observing  how  many  exhibit  certain
specified  and  easily  defined  characteristics  suggestive  of  possible  mistake
as  to  their  hallucinatory  nature.

We  find  that  («)  in  7  cases,  4  of  them  in  the  most  recent  half-
month,  the  figure  was  seen  at  some  distance,  either  out  of  doors,  or  in
a  public  room — circumstances  which  make  a  mistake  of  identity  not
improbable.^

Again  (6)  in  2  cases,  both  within  the  most  recent  half -month,  the
figure  was  seen  passing  outside  the  door  of  the  room  in  which  the
percipient  was,  or  was  seen  inside  the  room  as  the  percipient  passed
the  door— circumstances  which  allow  of  only  a  momentary  view,  and
suggest  illusion  as  an  explanation.

Thirdly  (c)  in  3  cases,  of  which  one  occurred  within  the  most
recent  half-month,  the  light  was  bad  and  the  circumstances  not  such  as
on  other  grounds  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  mistakes.

Thus  altogether  12  cases  out  of  the  42  must  on  the  specified  grounds
be  regarded  as  doubtfully  hallucinatory.  "We  will  call  these  "  the
suspicious  cases."  If  we  omit  them,  we  get  30  as  the  number  in  the
most  recent  quarter,  1 2  in  the  most  recent  month,  and  5  in  the  most
recent  half-month  ;  numbers  which  correspond  to  120,  144,  and  120
per  annum  respectively.  From  the  approximate  agreement  of  these
numbers  we  infer  that,  apart  from  the  suspicious  cases,  there  was  no
material  forgetfulness  within  three  months  ;  and  we  think  that  this
period  is  not  too  short  to  be  used  as  a  basis  for  an  approximate
estimate  of  the  whole  number  of  hallucinations  that  actually  occur.
To  be  on  the  safe  side,  let  us  take  140  as  the  number  of  visual
hallucinations  that  occur  annually,  omitting the  suspicious  cases.

1  In  one  of  the  7  cases,  the  figure  was  unrecognised,  and  the  proof  of  its
being  hallucinatory  was  merely  its  unexplained  disappearance  while  the  per-
cipient was  looking  away.  A  similar  mysterious  disappearance  either  behind  an
obstacle,  or  while  the  percipient  was  not  looking,  occurred  in  3  out  of  the  6
recognised  cases,  but  the  evidence  in  such  cases  that  a  real  person  could  not  thus
have  been  lost  sight  of  can  seldom  be  made  strong.  It  is  worth  noting  that  in
at  least  4  of  the  (5  recognised  cases  the  percipient  was  expecting  the  person  he
believed  he  saw,  which  would  tend  to  make  him  accept  too  uncritically  the  impression
that  he  saw  him.


III.]


Forgetfidness.


66


In  estimating  the  whole  number,  it  is  convenient  to  limit  our-
selves to  those  which  occurred  since  the  age  of  10  years,  be-
cause memory  is  undoubtedly  comparatively  untrustworthy  at  very
early  ages,  and  hallucinations  must  be  assumed  to  share  the  oblivion
which  overtakes  most  of  the  events  of  our  earliest  years  ;  moreover,
the  power  of  distinguishing  hallucinations  from  real  objects  is  probably
undeveloped  in  small  children.  Now  our  informants  have  on  an  average
lived  for  30  years  since  they  were  10  years  old,  so  that  the  number  of
visual  hallucinations  they  will  have  experienced  since  that  age,  at  the
rate  of  140  Tpev  annum,  is  4,200.  But  the  whole  number  they  have
reported  is  1,112,  and  of  these  we  infer  from  Table  XI.  that  a  little
over  8  per  cent.,  or  about  90,  occurred  under  tlie  age  of  10.^  De-
ducting these,  we  are  left  with  1,022,  which  we  may  take  as  roughly
about  one-fourth  of  the  4,200  which  we  estimate  as  the  true  number.
We  arrive  at  the  conclusion,  then,  that,  roughly  speaking,  the  number
of  visual  hallucinations  reported  must  be  multiplied  by  four  to  arrive
at  the  true  number  experienced  over  the  age  of  10,  omitting  the  sus-
picious cases  of  the  specified  types  ;  and  we  propose  to  adopt  this
estimate  in  dealing  with  the  theory  of  chance  coincidence  in  Chapter
XIII.

At  the  same  time,  it  is,  of  course,  improbable  that  none  of  the
suspicious  cases  were  genuine  hallucinations  ;  and,  though  other  so-
called  hallucinations  not  included  in  our  limited  class  of  suspicious
cases  may  not  be  genuine,  it  is  perhaps  unsafe  to  assume  that  the
suspicious  cases  afford  a  true  measui'e  of  the  number  of  experiences
mistakenly  regarded  as  hallucinatory.  If  we  include  the  suspicious
cases,  we  shall  obtain  an  outside  estimate  by  calculating  the  whole
number  of  visual  hallucinations  on  the  basis  of  the  number  reported
\vithin  the  most  recent  month.  We  thus  get  6,840  as  the  whole  number,
which  is  equal  to  about  6i  times  the  reported  number.  We  may
assume  that  the  truth  lies  somewhere  between  the  two  limits  thus
found,  and  nearer  to  the  lower  limit  than  the  higher ;  but,  with  the
data  at  our  disposal,  it  does  not  seem  possible  to  arrive  at  a  more
accurate  estimate.

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  experiences  of  which  the  hallucinatory
character  is  open  to  doubt  on  the  grounds  we  have  named,  are  reported
in  a  much  larger  proportion  for  the  most  recent  year  than  for  more
remote  periods.  Thus,  among  the  particular  class  of  realistic  apparitions
of  li^^ng  persons  which  furnishes  the  largest  proportion  of  such  sus-
picious cases,  we  find  them  distributed  as  follows  over  the  last  10
years. The  first  column  gives  the  number  of  suspicious  cases,  and  the

1  We  infer  this  number,  instead  of  counting  it,  because  in  some  cases,  even  when
dated,  the  age  of  the  percipient  is  not  given.

P


66  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallncinations.  [chap.


second  the  whole  nixmber  of  realistic  apparitions  of  living
corresponding  to  the  first  line  of  Table  IV.

In  the  most  recent  quarter . . . •  ^
In  the  previous  3  quarters  of  the  most

recent  year
Over  1  year  but  not  over  2
2  years
3


persons.


4
5
6
7


3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10


1J.  1

o
O

1  Ok

01

15

1

13

1  Fi

1

13

52

17

2

12

1

8

0

10

36

157

Totals  during  most  recent  10  years  .

The  falling-off  of  reports  of  such  doubtful  hallucinations  after  a  short
time  shows  that  they  are  apt  to  be  less  impressive  than  more  clearly  hal-
lucinatory experiences.  Either  they  are  for  this  reason  more  quickly
forgotten,  or  else  a  suspicion,  often  felt  by  the  percipient  from  the  first,
that  what  he  saw  was  a  real  person  or  thing,  becomes  intensified  as  the
first  impi'ession  of  the  oddness  of  what  has  occurred  wears  off.  The  pre-
valence of  this  type  of  experience  among  the  recent  cases  partly
accounts  for  the  disproportionately  large  number  of  recent  cases,
especially  among  recognised  apparitions  of  the  living.

We  shall  deal  more  briefly  with  the  case  of  auditory  and  tactile
hallucinations.  Of  the  auditory  hallucinations  reported,  65  occurred
within  the  last  year,  and  of  the  tactile,  21.  The  proportion  of  these
numbers  to  the  total  numbers  reported  (494  and  179  respectively),  and  to
the  numbers  within  the  most  i-ecent  ten  years  (see  Tables  VII.  and
VIII.)  shows  that  the  forgetfulness  of  auditory  and  tactile  hallucinations
is  more  rapid  than  that  of  visual  cases,  so  that  a  considerably  larger
correcting  factor  would  be  required.  But  the,  in  general,  less  careful
reports  of  the  auditory  and  tactile  cases,  as  well  as  the  smaller
numbers  we  have  to  deal  with,  make  any  calculations  respecting  them
less  reliable,  and  it  seems  hardly  worth  while  to  go  into  further  detail  ;
especially  as  we  should  further  have  to  take  into  account  the  operation
of  what  we  have  called  "  superficial "  forgetfulness  (see  p.  60).

Our  readers  may  be  inclined  to  ask  what  precise  value  is  to  be
attached  to  the  statistics  in  our  tables,  if  so  large  a  correction  has  to  be


1  These  numbers  each  indude  a  "  collective  "  case  in  which  the  experiences  of  the
two  percipients  concerned  are  counted  separately  (see  p.  51,  foot-note).

-This  number  includes  a  "collective"  case,  in  which  the  experiences  of  the  three
percipients  concerned  are  counted  separately.


III.]


Forgetfulness.


67


made  for  forgetfulness.  To  fhis  the  answer  is  twofold.  In  the  first
place,  they  furnish  a  fairly  accurate  record  of  the  number  of  hallucina-
tions which  are  remembered — i.e.,  of  those  which  are  either  recent  or
have  strongly  impressed  the  percipient — and  of  the  proportion  in  which
these  remembered  hallucinations  are  divided  under  the  various  heads.
In  the  second  place,  they  give  us  the  means  of  comparing  the  number
and  the  impressiveness  of  dififerent  kinds  of  hallucinations.

We  can  tell,  for  instance,  from  Table  IV.  that  apparitions  of  the
dead  are  better  remembered  than  apparitions  of  the  living,  because
more  in  proportion  of  the  former  than  of  the  latter  are  reported  for  the
period  more  than  ten  years  distant.  And  this  being  so,  we  may  infer
further  that  the  memory  correction  for  apparitions  of  the  dead  should
be  somewhat  below  the  average,  while  that  for  apparitions  of  the  living
should  be  slightly  above  it.  The  comparatively  small  number  of
apparitions  of  the  dead  reported  in  our  Census  may  therefore  be  taken
to  correspond  to  the  facts,  not  only  as  regards  hallucinations  remembered,
but  as  regards  hallucinations  experienced.  We  may  also  infer  that  the
more  rapid  forgetfulness  of  apparitions  of  the  living  depends  mainly
on  the  inclusion  among  them  of  trivial  cases  ;  for  if  we  omit  the  36
suspicious  cases  enumerated  above  for  the  most  recent  ten  years —
diminishing  in  number  as  the  years  become  more  remote — we  find  that
the  proportion  of  apparitions  in  the  most  recent  ten  years  to  those  that
occurred  more  than  ten  years  ago  is  almost  exactly  the  same  for
apparitions  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead  respectively.

There  is  one  natural  inference  from  Table  IV.  against  which  we
must  guard,  viz.,  that  the  small  class  of  "Grotesque"  apparitions  is
better  remembered  than  any  other.  For  here  the  disproportionately
large  number  of  remote  cases  is  in  the  main  due  to  hallucinations  of  this
class  being  to  a  large  extent  experienced  by  children.  Of  the  33
reported,  14  occurred  not  only  to  children,  but  to  children  under  11
years  old,  and,  owing  to  the  limit  of  age  fixed  for  informants,  all
hallucinations  experienced  under  11  years  old  belong  to  the  remote
period.

Passing  to  Table  VII ,  we  may  obsei've  that  hallucinations  of  the
voices  of  dead  persons  are  somewhat  better  remembered  than  other
vocal  hallucinations.

Turning  from  the  form  of  the  hallucination  to  the  conditions  of
perception,  we  infer  on  the  same  principle  from  Table  VI.  that
apparitions  seen  when  the  percipient  is  fully  awake  in  bed  are
somewhat  better  remembered  than  those  seen  when  he  is  up.
It  seems  likely  that  the  freedom  from  external  distraction,  which
we  conjecture  to  be  one  reason  why  lying  in  bed  is  favourable  to
hallucinations  (see  Chapter  IX.),  also  leads  to  their  being  better  remem-
bered. It  is  also  worth  noticing  that  there  are  probably  fewer  oppor-

F  2


68  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


tunities  for  a  I'eal  person  to  be  mistaken  for  a  hallucination  under
these  circumstances  than  when  the  percipient  is  up  ;  and  any  suspicion
of  a  possible  mistake  probably  tends,  as  we  have  said,  to  diminish  the
impressiveness  of  an  experience.

Hallucinations  of  the  most  impressive  class  will  not  only  be  better
remembered  than  others,  but  will,  we  may  reasonably  suppose,  be
more  often  mentioned  by  the  percipients  to  their  friends.  There  is
some  interest  therefore  in  trying  to  ascertain  what  kinds  are
most  talked  about  and  seeing  how  far  these  are  also  those  shown
by  the  tables  to  be  the  best  remembered.  So  far  as  there  is  agree-
ment, the  inference  as  to  impressiveness  drawn  fi'om  the  tables  will
receive  confirmation.

Now  it  is,  of  course,  the  kinds  most  talked  about  that  will  be
most  often  known  beforehand  to  our  collectors ;  and  though  our
instruction  to  mai'k  the  answers  previously  known  to  them  has  not,
as  we  have  already  remai'kcd,  been  completely  carried  out,  still  the
marking  that  has  been  done  gives  us  important  information  on  the
subject.  Analysing  the  affirmative  answers  which  are  stated,  by
marking  or  otherwise,  to  have  been  previously  known  to  the  collectors,
we  find  that  of  the  reported  realistic  apparitions  of  dead  persons  14  per
cent,  were  known ;  of  similar  apparitions  of  living  persons  1 1  per  cent. ;
of  all  other  kinds  of  visual  hallucinations  10"5  per  cent.  ;  of  auditory
hallucinations  6  per  cent.  ;  and  of  tactile  hallucinations  6  per  cent.^
The  actual  numbers  are  not  to  be  taken  as  accurate,  because  we  have
not  got  complete  information  as  to  previous  knowledge.  But  there  is
no  reason  to  think  that  further  information  would  affect  the  order  of
interest,  and  therefore  of  impressiveness,  thus  indicated  ;  and  this,  as
regards  the  superior  impressiveness  of  visual  hallucinations  over
auditory  and  tactile  ones,  and  among  visual  ones,  of  apparitions  of  the
dead,  is  the  same  as  the  order  of  impressiveness  indicated  by  amount
of  recollection.

Possible  Omission  of  Ilalhicinations  xmder  the  age  of  21.

(7)  A  seventh  source  of  error  in  the  statistics  has  to  be  mentioned.
We  have  reason  to  believe  that  some  of  our  collectors  and  informants
— probably  not  many — interpreted  the  instruction  not  to  receive
answers  from  persons  under  21  to  mean  that  we  wished  to  exclude  hal-
lucinations that  occurred  when  the  percipient  was  under  that  age.  If  this
error  had  been  at  all  widespread,  it  might  have  seriously  reduced  the

1  In  4  cases  of  affirmative  answers  stated  to  have  been  known  beforehand,  no
details  are  given,  and  29  others  belong  to  experiences  of  kinds  not  included  in  the
•Census,  about  6  per  cent,  of  these  being  thus  stated  to  have  been  previously  known.


III.]


Trustworthiness  of  Results.


69


number  of  affirmative  answers  as  regards  youthful  experiences.^  Owing
to  the  age  of  our  informants,  however,  it  cannot  practically  have  affected
the  most  recent  month  or  quarter,  which  has  afforded  the  basis  for  our
estimate  of  the  whole  number  of  hallucinations,  and  therefore  its
effect  will  be  merged  in  that  of  forgetfulness,  and  the  correction  applied
for  the  latter  will  cover  both.

Summary  of  Chapter.

Summing  up  now  the  results  of  this  investigation  into  the  trust-
worthiness of  our  statistics,  we  find  that,  out  of  seven  sources  of  error
which  we  have  thought  of  and  discussed,  five  have  had  on  the  whole
no  appreciable  effect.  The  sixth,  however  (namely,  forgetfulness),
possibly  in  combination  with  the  seventh,  has  had  a  very  large  effect
indeed,  larger  probably  than  most  people  would  expect.  We  estimate
that,  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  true  number  of  visual  hallucinations
experienced  by  our  informants  since  the  age  of  10,  the  reported
number  must  be  multiplied  by  some  number  between  4  and  6J,
and  that,  in  the  case  of  auditory  and  tactile  hallucinations,  a  still
larger  correction  would  be  needful.


Note. — The  accounts  of  their  experiences  given  by  our  informants
are  for  the  most  part  written  on  copies  of  Schedule  B  (see  Appendix
A)  in  answer  to  the  specific  questions  there  asked,  and  only  exception-
ally in  an  ordinary  narrative  form.  The  accounts  quoted  are  verbatim
reproductions  of  those  given  by  the  percipients,  any  changes  or  inter-
polations—  required  to  bring  them  into  a  narrative  form  —  being
indicated  by  the  use  of  square  brackets.


1  This  may  partly  account  for  the  small  proportion  of  hallucinations  at  early  ages
shown  by  Table  XI.  We  shall  recur  to  the  subject  of  youthful  hallucinations  later  (see
Chapter  VIII).


70


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Chapter  IV.

HALLUCINATIONS  AND  PSEUDO-HALLUCINATIONS.

In  the  discussion  which  occupies  this  and  the  following  seven
chapters,  we  shall  not  distinguish  between  veridical  and  merely
subjective  hallucinations.  The  discussion  of  veridical  cases  as  such  is
deferred  to  Chapters  XII.  et  seq.  Further,  we  shall  discuss  chiefly
hallucinations  aiJecting  the  sense  of  sight,  as,  besides  being  the
most  numerous,  they  show  much  more  variety  than  auditory  or
tactile  hallucinations,  and  what  has  to  be  said  about  hallucina-
tions in  general  can,  therefore,  usually  be  best  illustrated  from
this  class.

In  this  and  in  the  next  chapter  we  shall  be  mainly  engaged  in
explaining,  and  illustrating  from  the  cases  in  our  Census,  the  most
important  lines  of  distinction  between  sensory  hallucinations  and  other
phenomena  with  which  they  are  liable  to  be  confounded.  These  other
phenomena  may  be  divided  into  four  classes.

1.  Ordinary  sense-perceptions  :

2.  Dreams :

3.  Mental  images  recognised  as  such,  including  what  are  hereafter
called  "pseudo-hallucinations  :  "

4.  Illusions.

Under  the  first  two  heads  there  is  not  much  that  needs  to  be  said.

(1)  We  follow  the  authors  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living,^  in  distin-
guishing sensory  hallucinations  from  ordinary  sense-perceptions — as  well
as  from  ordinary  mental  images — by  the  characteristic  that  the  halluci-
natory percept  -  "  lacks,  but  can  only  by  distinct  reflection  be  recognised
as  lacking,  the  objective  basis  that  it  suggests."  In  most  cases  the
application  of  the  distinction  is  simple  and  obvious  :  but  occasionally
the  process  of  subsequent  reflection,  by  which  a  percipient  convinces
himself  of  the  lack  of  objective  basis,  is  of  doubtful  certainty  :  as  (e.g.)
when  a  figure  seen  at  some  distance  out  of  doors  is  inferred  to  have
been  hallucinatoi-y  because  it  disappeared  in  what  the  percipient
regards  as  an  inexplicable  manner.  We  have  already  had  occasion  to
notice  this  soui'ce  of  uncertainty  in  speaking  of  "  suspicious  cases  "  in

1  Vol.  I.,  Chapter  X.,  page  459.

-We  have  allowed  ourselves,  for  convenience,  to  use  the  term  "hallucination"
sometimes  for  the  experience  of  apparently  perceiving  a  physical  fact  that  is  not
really  presented,  sometimes  for  the  object  apparently  perceived  ;  for  the  latter  use,
hovirever,  we  have,  to  prevent  confusion,  occasionally  substituted  the  term  "  halluci-
natory object"  or  "  percept."


rv.] Hallucinations  and  Pseivdo-Hallucinations.  71


the  preceding  chapter ;  and  we  shall  give  further  illustrations  of  it  in
the  one  that  follows.

(2)  The  distinction  between  dreams  and  sensory  hallucinations  is
different.  In  a  wide  sense  of  the  term,  indeed,  dreams  of  the  sensoi'y
sort  may  be  regarded  as  "  pure  cases  of  hallucination "  ^ :  since  the
dream-perceptions,  like  waking  hallucinations,  are  at  the  time  believed
to  have  an  objective  basis,  which  they  really  lack.  But  in  this  Census
we  have  confined  ourselves  to  hallucinations  in  the  ordinary  sense,  dis-
tinguished from  dreams  by  occurring  in  the  waking  state.  Ordinarily,
of  course,  this  distinction  is  quite  clear  :  each  person's  dream-scenes
are  separated  from  our  common  physical  world  by  an  unmistakable
chasm,  which  he  ci'osses  in  the  conscious  transition  from  sleep  to
waking.  There  are,  however,  a  small  number  of  exceptional  cases  in
which  we  have  found  some  difficulty  in  drawing  the  line.  Thus — as
was  stated  in  Chapter  II.,  p.  36 — we  have,  in  seven  answers,  had
reports  of  dream-images  and  nightmares  persisting  into  the  waking
state,  and,  in  twenty-one  answers,  of  voices,  or  touches,  rousing  the
percipient  from  sleep ;  which  we,  after  consideration,  decided  to  exclude
from  the  Census,  as  belonging  to  the  phenomena  of  sleep.  On  the
other  hand,  we  have  included  a  small  number  of  hallucinatory
experiences  at  the  moment  of  waking  which  were — manifestly  or  pro-
bably— connected  with  antecedent  dreams ;  either  because  there  was
a  distinct  difference  in  nature  between  the  sleeping  and  the  waking
phenomenon,  or  because  the  dream-image  persisted  under  conditions
of  marked  waking  activity.  Of  the  three  instances  that  follow,  the
first  exemplifies  the  excluded  cases,  while  the  second  and  third  are
specimens  of  those  included.

(257.  3.)  2  From  Miss  M.  H.  M.

February,  1890.

"  About  fifteen  years  ago,  ....  I  had  gone  to  sleep  without
knowing  it,  a  fire  burning  opposite  the  foot  of  my  bed.  Thinking  I  was
awake,  I  thought  I  saw  standing  before  my  fire,  at  the  right  hand  side,
looking  into  it,  with  her  back  turned  to  me,  so  that  I  could  not  see  her  face,
an  elderly  woman,  rather  stout,  and  dressed  like  an  old-fashioned  nurse  or
housekeeper,  in  a  black  cap  tied  close  round  the  ears,  and  a  large-checked
shawl.  The  check  was  about  four  inches  square,  and  black,  pink,  white  and
grey,  the  pink  squares  being  specially  distinct.  Wondering  what  she
was  doing  there,  I  sat  up  in  bed  to  look  at  her,  and  the  action  of  doing  so
woke  me. I  was  fully  conscious  of  suddenly  waking,  fully  conscious  that

1  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  460.

"  The  numbers  in  brackets  at  the  beginning  of  the  cases  indicate  their  place  in
the  collection.


72  Report  on  the  Gensus  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


I  had  been  asleep,  and  had  awoken  with  a  shock,  yet  I  still  saw  the  woman  dis-
tinctly, with  my  eyes  open  and  wide  awake.  She  faded  gradually.  My  heart
beat  for  a  moment ;  but  I  thought  it  was  only  the  impression  of  a  dream  still
remaining  in  my  brain  that  appeared  to  be  seen  with  my  eyes.  So  I  lay
down  and  went  to  sleep  again,  and  saw  no  more."

(733.  5.)  From  Mrs.  S.

March  2Wi,  1892.

"  I  once  dreamed  that  a  large  black  butterfly  was  hovering  over  my
husband  as  he  lay  in  bed.  I  awoke  and  saw,  by  the  aid  of  the  nightlight,
the  butterfly  of  my  dream  lluttering  over  him.  I  called  the  servant  and
together  we  tried  to  kill  it.  I  struck  at  it  with  my  handkerchief  and
apparently  succeeded  in  my  object,  but  all  our  endeavours  to  find  the  body
of  the  insect  failed.  The  doors  and  windows  were  all  closed  and  it  could
not  have  escaped.  It  was  very  large  and  could  not  have  remained  invisible.
The  black  woman  saw  the  butterfly  as  I  did,  till  I  struck  at  it.  We  are  of
opinion,  as  we  searched  so  carefully,  that  it  was  merely  hallucinatory."

(We  need  not  here  discuss  the  alleged  sharing  of  the  hallucination  by
the  black  woman,  of  which  we  only  know  at  second-hand.  Shared  or
"  collective  "  hallucinations  are  treated  of  in  Chapter  XV.)

With  regard  to  the  form  taken  by  the  hallucination,  the  collector.
Professor  Alexander,  writes  :  —

' '  According  to  a  superstition  widely  spread  in  Brazil  the  black  butterfly
is  supposed  to  be  a  sign  of  death.  I  have  heard  several  tales  similar  to  the
account  given  [here]  that  tend  to  show  that  hallucinations  are  often
shaped  by  popular  beliefs."

(729.  17.)  From  Dr.  J.  P.

February  20th,  1892.

' '  I  woke  one  night  hearing  the  words,  '  John,  don't  you  know  me  1 '  I
opened  my  eyes  and  saw  a  Mr.  L.,  who  had  died  some  years  before,  and
with  whom  I  had  been  very  familiar.  I  got  out  of  bed  and  followed  the
form  from  the  bedroom  into  the  dining-room,  where  it  disajjpeared.  This-
happened  in  the  month  of  .June  or  July  of  1871.

"  Health  good. No  grief  or  anxiety. Age  49.

"■  I  was  drowsy,  even  though  I  got  out  of  bed."

As  the  abrupt  oblivion  of  dreams  on  waking  is  a  familiar  occurrence,
it  seems  not  improbable  that  the  apparition  of  Mr.  L.,  in  the  last  case,
was  a  persistent  dream-image  :  and  this  may,  of  course,  be  the  case
with  other  apparitions  seen  immediately  after  suddenly  waking.  But
where  we  have  no  positive  evidence  of  such  a  connection,  we  have  not
hesitated  to  include  these  among  hallucinations.

(3)  The  third  distinction  presents  greater  difficulties.  Between
the  vivid  hallucination  which  looks  in  all  respects  like  a  real
person  or  object,  apparently  occupying  space,  reflecting  light,  and
hiding  objects  behind  it,  and  the  mere  memory  image  or  mental


IV.] Hallucinations  and  Pseudo-Hallucinations.  73


picture,  there  are  intermediate  phenomena,  which,  as  we  shall
find,  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  distinguish  and  classify.  We
propose,  accordingly,  in  the  remainder  of  the  present  chapter,
to  discuss  and  illustrate  fully  this  line  of  distinction  ;  leaving  the
line  between  hallucinations  and  illusions  to  be  drawn  in  the  next
chapter.

We  will  begin  by  giving  typical  instances  of  unmistakable
hallucinations  ;  taking  them  from  the  class  of  realistic  hallucinations
representing  human  beings,  which,  it  will  be  observed,  are  far  the
most  numerous  in  our  collection.  We  take  specimens  from  all  the
three  classes  into  which  we  have  divided  these  apparitions,  namely  :
apparitions  of  the  living,  of  the  dead,  and  of  unrecognised  persons.

(284.  23.)  From  Mr.  Joseph  Kirk.

2,  Ripen  Villas,  Upper  Ripon-road,  Plumstead, April,  1890.

"  My  experience  occurred  about  four  years  ago,  at  the  house  I  now
occupy,  and  in  daylight.  I  have  always  had  an  objection  to  a  servant  having  to
go  out  for  anything  before  breakfast.  But  at  this  time  it  frequently  happened
that  the  milkman  was  not  jjunctual  to  time,  and  milk  had  to  be  sent  for.
This  was  a  cause  of  annoyance  to  us,  because  I  was  compelled  to  leave  home
by  9.30  a.m.,  and,  after  waiting  for  the  milkman  to  the  last  moment,  tlie  girl
had  to  run  out  in  a  liurry.  I  was  always  made  aware,  while  still  in  my  dress-
ing-room, when  this  was  the  case.  Tlie  latch-lock  of  the  front  basement
door  was  out  of  order,  and  a  strong  pull  from  outside  was  necessary  to  shut
it. This  always  resulted  in  a  loud  hantj. (Note  the  bang.)

"On  the  morning  I  experienced  the  hallucination,  I  was  in  my  dressing-
room,  and  was  about  half-way  through  the  process  of  dressing  when  I  heard
the  sound  T  was  so  familiar  with — this  hang — and  concluded  that  the  milk-
man was  again  too  late,  and  that  the  girl  had  once  more  to  go  for  milk.  I
experienced  a  momentary  feeling  of  annoyance  only,  so  far  as  I  can  re-
member ;  at  any  rate,  I  had  forgotten  the  subject  before  I  left  the  room.

"  My  dressing-room  is  on  the  first  floor  at  the  back  of  the  house,  and  I
have  only  to  step  out  of  it  and  at  once  descend  a  flight  of  stairs  to  reach  the
basement.  The  breakfast-room  is  in  front  of  the  house  on  this  basement,
and  there  is  a  superior  kitchen  behind  it.  At  this  time  it  was  a  weekly
custom  to  have  the  breakfast-room  thoroughly  over-hauled  early  in  tlie
morning,  and  the  breakfast  laid,  for  that  morning,  in  the  kitchen.  It  was
so  this  morning. The  foot  of  the  stairs  is  close  to  the  kitchen  door.

"As  I  descended  the  stairs  to  breakfast,  I  saw  Mary  (the  servant)  approach-
ing me  from  the  basement  door,  dressed,  as  usual  when  on  an  errand,  in  her
brown  straw  hat,  black  cloth  jacket,  and  light  print  frock  ;  and  I  had  only
just  time  to  reach  the  kitchen  door  to  permit  her  to  |jc(ss  behind  me,  without
stopping,  on  her  way  towards  the  scullery.

"  The  instant  I  entered  the  kitchen  I  observed  to  my  wife,  '  So  Mary  has
had  to  go  for  milk  again.'  'No,'  she  replied,  'she  has  not.'  'But,'  I
exclaimed,  '  I  have  just  seen  her,  dressed,  come  from  the  front  door  ;  and
besides,  I  heard  the  door  banged  as  she  went  out.' '  It  is  your  fancy,'  she


74  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


returned.  '  Mary  has  not  been  out  this  morning,  and  she  is  now  in  the  break-
fast-room  at  work.'

"  There  was  no  doubt  that  such  was  the  case,  and  that,  instead  of  having
seen  the  real  Mary,  I  had  had  a  very  vivid  and  life-like  hallucination  of  her.
It  would  be  natural  to  suggest  that  it  was  the  girl  herself  I  had  seen,  and  that
she  had  merely  left  the  breakfast-room  for  something  she  wanted  from  the
scullery.  But  servants  do  not  usually  set  about  in-door  work  dressed  in  out-
door costume  ;  and,  had  she  not  seemed  to  me  to  be  wearing  her  hat  and  jacket,
I  should  simply  have  thought  it  was  the  girl  herself,  and  made  no  remark."

In  the  following  case  the  apparition  represented  the  percipient
herself.  1

(555.  5.)  From  Miss  A.  B.  0.

January,  1892.

"  In  June,  1889,  about  8-9  p.m.,  [it]  being  qviite  light  at  the  time,  I  saw,

near  in  Scotland,  a  figure  approacliing  me,  which,  on  coming  near,  I

discovered  was  the  double  of  myself,  except  that  the  figure,  which  wore  a
white  dress,  had  a  charming  smile.  I  also  wore  a  white  dress  ;  the  figure
had  black  on  its  hands,  whether  gloves  or  mittens  I  do  not  know.  I  had
neither.  It  was  out  of  doors,  coming  down  a  garden  walk.  On  holding
out  my  hand  to  it,  the  figure  vanished.  [I  was]  24  years  old,  in  robust
health,  and  not  in  anxiety  or  grief  at  the  time."

(19.  23.)  From  Miss  C.  C.

May,  1889.

' '  I  was  writing  in  my  sitting-room  at  our  home  in  Derbyshire  one  after-
noon in  summer.  My  table  faced  the  open  door.  I  looked  up  and  saw  my
father  coming  in  with  papers  in  his  hand,  big  blue  official  looking  papers,
and  a  look  in  his  face  I  had  seen  a  thousand  times,  a  sort  of  amused  look,  as
if  some  one  had  been  very  funny,  in  the  uncon.scious  way  people  are  funny,
and  he  was  coming  to  share  the  amusement  with  me.  For  an  instant  I
forgot  he  was  no  longer  on  the  earth,  and  I  looked  up  expecting  him  to
speak,  and  half  rose  to  push  across  to  him  the  chair  he  liked  to  use — when
there  was  just  nothing. There  is  nothing  for  evermore.

"  That  is  all.  Just  a  vivid  dream,  I  suppose,  not  worth  speaking  of,  and  I
never  have  spoken  of  it  to  anyone.  You  ask  for  a  date.  My  father  left  us
on  April  12th,  1883,  and  it  was  in  the  summer  of  1884,  about  June,  I  think,
tliat  I  thought  I  saw  him,  as  I  have  said.  I  think  he  did  speak,  but  if  so,  it
was  only  to  call  my  name  or  to  claim  my  attention,  just  as  a  man  would  do  on
entering  the  room  with  his  mind  full  of  something  he  wished  to  impart."

(661.  5.)  From  Mr.  R.  H.  H.

(The  account  is  a  copy  of  notes  made  about  an  hour  after  the  occurrence.)

Aiyril  2Uh  [1892],  9 p.m.
"  Saw  standing  in  front  of  fire-place  a  tall  well-proportioned  man,  in
loud  check  suit  (drab  and  black),  very  pale,  dark  hair  parted  in  the  middle

1  Such  apparitions  of  the  "double"  are  rare.  We  have  only  seven  instances
in  the  Census.


IV.] Hallucinations  a/ad  Pseudo-Hallucinations.


75


and  plastered  down  ;  seemed  thoughtful,  and  gaze  was  not  directed  towards
me.  The  impression  lasted  about  five  seconds,  but  was  vivid,  and  I  experienced
a  strange  feeling  all  over  me— unlike  former  feelings,  when  I  had  distinct
consciousness  of  a  presence,  ^  but  saw  none.  I  was  too  much  astonished  to
speak.  He  looked  like  a  fairly  well-to-do  mechanic  in  his  best  suit  ;  age
about  thirty-five.

"The  impression  faded,  or  rather  seemed  to  collapse,  very  quickly,  and
in  about  two  seconds  had  entirely  disappeared.  Total  length  of  view  about
five  seconds."

(Note  added  a  few  days  later.)  "Distance  between  figure  and  myself
14  feet  ;  room  well  lighted  by  lamps  and  two  candles,  but  a  lamjj  above
mantelpiece  projecting  from  wall  by  a  sconce  was  hidden  by  figure  :  lamp
not  lighted.  I  was  coming  out  of  my  bedroom  ;  in  good  health  and  not  in
trouble  of  any  sort. 1  am  nearly  25  years  of  age."

To  these  we  may  add  a  case  from  another  class, — what  we  have
called  "  incompletely  developed  hallucinations," — in  which,  though  the
resemblance  to  any  real  object  in  nature  is  incomplete,  still  there  is  no
question  about  the  hallucination  taking  its  place  among  these  objects,
and  being,  so  far  as  sensation  is  concei'ned,  of  the  same  kind.

(527.  4.)  The  following  account  is  given  by  a  medical  man,  Mr.  C.  T.  G. : —

April  lUh,  1892.

"  About  six  months  ago,  in  small  hours  a.m.,  I  thought  I  saw  a  figure  of
a  young  man.  [I  was]  in  very  good  health,  no  anxiety  ;  not  the  slightest
fright  at  the  appearance. I  awoke  suddenly,  feeling  absolutely  awake.  .  .  .

"I  saw  the  figure  in  bright  mooidight.  Moon  nearly  vertically  overhead,
so  that  it  could  not  shine  on  any  part  of  me. The  blind  was  drawn  fully  up.

"I  could  see  it  was  figure  of  a  man  dressed  in  black  morning  coat,  no
hat ;  figure  was  turned  towards  the  window,  so  that  I  only  could  see
a  three-quarter  back  view  and  not  the  face.  I  hoped  and  wished  it  would
move  and  turn  round  and  become  more  distinct  ;  it  did  none  of  these.  Time
seen  seemed  about  a  minute  or  two — probably  only  a  few  seconds.  I  could
see  part  of  the  window-sill  through  body  of  figure.

"It  appeared  of  same  semi-opacity  all  the  time  it  was  visible.  It
gradually  faded. I  must  have  gone  to  sleep  again  very  shortly  afterwards.

"  Age,  28  years.

"  I  attached  little  importance  to  my  hallucination,  though  I  can't  explain  or
find  any  reason  for  my  awaking  suddenly  and  finding  myself  looking  directly
at  the  figure."

In  cases  such  as  these  the  percipient,  while  experiencing  the
hallucination,  is  at  the  same  time  normally  perceiving  real  objects
within  his  range  of  vision,  and  the  hallucinatory  percept  is  brought
into  relation  with  these,  so  as  to  occupy  apparently  as  definite  a  place
in  the  field  of  vision.  The  phantasm  appears  to  stand  side  by  side
with  real  objects,  and  the  percipient  is  usually  deceived  for  the


1  For  other  experiences  of  the  same  percipient,  see  p.  86.


76  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


moment  into  thinking  it  as  real  as  they.  The  conviction  that  it  is  not
real  is  due,  not  to  a  difference  in  the  hallucinatoiy  percept,  but  to  an
exercise  of  the  reflective  judgment.  The  mode  of  appearance  and  dis-
appearance, the  appeal  to  another  sense,  the  impossibility  that  a  real
person  should  have  been  there — points,  in  short,  which  are  only
apprehended  by  reflection — are  the  considerations  on  which  the  judg-
ment depends.

To  cases  such  as  these,  and  they  form  the  majority  of  our  collection,
there  is  no  difliculty  in  applying  the  definition ;  the  experience  is
clearly  a  hallucination.  But  in  a  certain  number  of  cases  there  is  a
difliculty  in  deciding  whether  the  phantasmal  object  appeared  sufli-
ciently  external  for  the  experience  to  l)e  regarded  as  strictly  a  halluci-
nation, or  whether  it  rather  belonged  to  the  type  conveniently  called
by  Kandinsky  "  pseudo-hallucinations."^

Pseudo-hallucinations  may  be  defined  as  having  all  the  character-
istics of  hallucinations,  except  that  of  complete  externalisation.  They
ai'e  unlike  the  ordinary  images  of  fancy  or  memory,  which  we
voluntarily  call  up,  in  being  spontaneous,  and  in  being  more  vivid  and
detailed,  and  moi"e  steady.  Like  hallucinations,  they  cannot  be  called
up,  nor  their  form  altered,  at  will.  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  unlike
hallucinations  proper,  in  not  seeming  to  the  percipient  to  be  perceived
through  the  senses.  It  is  with  the  eye  of  the  mind,  not  the  bodily
eye,  that  he  seems  to  see  them ;  with  the  mental,  not  the  bodily,  ear
that  he  seems  to  hear  them ;  and  accordingly  they  do  not  even  suggest
the  presence  of  a  corresponding  corporeal  reality.  The  difference
between  pseudo-hallucinations  and  hallucinations  proper  is  well  brought
out  by  the  following  description,  sent  to  us  by  a  lady  who  had
experienced  both  kinds.

From  Miss  C.  B.  M.
(This  case  did  not  come  to  us  through  the  Census.)

' '  When  I  first  saw  persons  who  I  knew  were  not  creatures  of  imagina-
tion, nor  yet  corporeally  present,  they  seemed  to  be  pictured  just  within,
instead  of  before  my  eyes.  One  afternoon  in  the  fall  of  1863,  while  engaged
in  some  household  work,  an  elderly  woman  suddenly  appeared  to  me  in  that
manner.  She  wore  spectacles,  was  plainly  dressed,  and  had  an  unsightly
bend  in  the  front  of  her  bonnet,  which  showed  she  had  not  put  it  on  before
a  mirror.  She  stood  a  few  feet  below  my  level,  and  her  face  wore  a  look  of
anxious  inquiry  as  she  tipped  back  her  head  to  scan  me  through  the
spectacles.  She  remained  several  minutes  witli  no  change  of  attitude  or
expression. With  my  eyes  open  or  closed,  she  was  there.

"During  the  last  six  years,  these  phantoms  have  usually  been  projected
into  space,  and  I  seem  to  see  them  by  tlie  ordinary  method  of  vision.  I
have  been  near-sighted  from  birth  and  experience  the  same  difficulty  in

1  Krttischc  und  Uinischc  Betrachtwugen  ini  Gebicte  dcr  Sinnestdusehungen^ — ■
Berlin,  1885.


IV.] Hallucinations  and  Pseudo-Hallucinations.  77


■discerning  the  unreal  that  I  do  when  viewing  real  objects  ;  unless  the
persons  come  near,  I  cannot  clearly  distinguish  their  features.  However
real  the  apparitions  at  first  appear,  a  close  inspection  reveals  that  they  have
no  solidity  ;  other  objects  can  be  seen  through  them.

"The  persons  and  places  makmg  up  some  scene  of  everyday  life  are
■generally  enclosed  in  globes,  I  call  them  for  convenience,  which  are
apparently  of  the  consistency  of  a  soap  bubble.  Tlieseare  sometimes  white,
sometimes  shado-svy,  but  oftener  show  one  of  the  prismatic  colours,  like  a
dew-drop  in  the  sunlight.  The  first  that  I  noticed  was  in  the  evening,  after
the  light  was  extinguished.  In  tlie  dark,  they  have  a  semi-transparent
whiteness,  yet  are  illuminated  within,  so  that  what  they  picture  is  distinctly
visible.  This  one  revolved,  not  very  rapidly,  from  west  to  east,  one  side  in
shadow,  the  other  showing  glimpses  of  trees,  houses,  &c.  By-and-bye  it
steadied  itself,  as  if  it  had  been  unrolling  a  coil  and  had  reached  the  end.
Then  I  saw  a  large  house  and  a  leafless  tree  at  one  end  of  it.  A  window  in
the  second  storey  was  uncurtained,  and  within,  at  a  table  on  which  a  lamp
was  burning,  sat  a  man  writing.  His  back  was  toward  me.  He  now  and  then
paused  and  raised  his  head  as  if  following  some  errant  thought,  showing  by
Tiis  movements  as  well  as  by  his  figure  and  heavy  suit  of  dark  hair,  that  he
was  young  and  athletic.  While  studying  this  new  phase  of  appearances,  I
felt  some  one  near,  and  turning  my  head  saw  close  by  my  side  an  old  lady  in
a  poke  bonnet.  Her  features  were  small  and  she  fixed  a  pair  of  very  black
eyes  long  and  searchingly  on  my  face.  As  I  moved  again,  directly  in  front
of  me  was  a  young  girl  clad  in  white  ;  her  face  was  exquisitely  fair  and
sweet.  At  the  time  I  had  an  odd  suspicion  that  these  were  conned  ed  with
the  writer  in  the  upper  room,  that  somehow  he  had  sent  them.

' '  Not  long  after,  while  conversing  with  friends,  and  seated  where  the  rays
(if  the  sun  came  full  into  the  room  from  an  opposite  window,  a  transparent
globe  sailed  in  on  a  beam  of  light  with  active  persons  inside,  but  I  could  not
watch  them  without  attracting  attention.  From  that  time,  in  the  dark  and
in  the  broad  glare  of  day,  I  have  seen,  enshrined  in  the  globes,  images  of
towns,  cities,  lakes,  river.s,  boats,  ships,  the  interior  and  exterior  of  churches,
workshops,  dwellings,  houses,  carriages  ;  in  short,  all  the  busy  scenes  of  life
and  labour  in  their  most  intense  activity.  These  pictures — as  I  believe,  of
actual  life— seem  literally  borne  on  '  the  wings  of  the  wind.'  Often  when  a
door  is  opened,  they  rush  in  like  messengers  in  haste.  One  November
afternoon  in  1882,  on  looking  from  my  bedroom  window,  I  saw  a  huge  globe
whirhng  rapidly  in  a  dark  cloud  far  away  in  the  north-east.  There  was  no
breeze  stirring  outside  then,  but  five  minutes  later  a  strong  wind  from  that
du-ection  swept  down  the  street.  The  globes  have  four  apparent  motions  ;
they  revolve,  move  forward  or  backward  in  a  direct  line,  vibrate  as  a  pendu-
lum, or  spring  up  and  down  like  a  catch  ball  attached  to  an  elastic  cord.
Their  size  seems  to  depend  mainly  upon  distance,  being  largest  at  the
farthest  point,  diminishing  in  size  as  they  approach.  ...  I  have  never
by  an  effort  of  will  been  successful  in  summoniiag  any  apparition.  They
come  and  go  in  their  own  way.  It  is  when  I  am  at  my  best  physically,  and
my  mental  faculties  keenly  interested  in  something,  that  the  pictures  are
most  frequent  and  vivid.  They  are  mostly  quite  the  antipodes  of  my
mental  occupation."


78  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


With  the  first  experience  described  by  Miss  M.,  may  be  compared
a  veridical  experience  (No.  27)  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,
p.  209,  which  the  percipient  thus  describes  : —

.  "I  was  dressing  one  morning  in  December,  1881,  when  a  certain  con-
viction came  upon  me  that  someone  was  in  my  dressing-room.  On  looking
round  I  saw  no  one,  but  then,  instantaneously  (in  my  mind's  eye,  I
suppose),  every  feature  of  the  face  and  form  of  my  old  friend,  X.,  arose.
This,  as  you  may  imagine,  made  a  great  impression  on  me. . .  ."

Kandinsky  thinks  the  two  phenomena,  pseudo-hallucination  and
hallucination  proper,  so  fundamentally  different  that  if  a  percipient
knows  by  his  own  experience  what  a  genuine  hallucination  is,  it  is
quite  impossible  for  him  to  mistake  a  pseudo-hallucination  for  it.i

We  are  inclined  rather  to  think  that  there  are  circumstances
where  even  a  person  accustomed  to  both  experiences  may  be  in
doubt.2  But  in  any  case,  as  our  informants  have  not  generally  had
both  experiences,  and  as  pseudo-hallucinations  are  sometimes  very
impressive  phenomena,  it  is  necessary  to  scrutinise  the  descriptions
with  care,  lest  any  pseudo-hallucinations  have  crept  in  unawares.

The  diflaculty  in  drawing  the  line  occurs  especially  in  two  classes  of
cases.

(1)  Apjxmtions  Seen  in  the  Dark.

The  first  of  these  is  the  class  of  apparitions  seen  in  the  dark  when
the  percipient's  real  surroundings  are  invisible,  so  that  the  phantasm
cannot  stand  among  them  and  be  compared  with  them  in  the  same  way
as  in  the  light.

With  sane  and  healthy  people,  mental  images  which,  from  their
involuntariness  and  vividness,  may  be  called  pseudo-hallucinations,  are
not  uncommon  in  the  period  between  sleeping  and  waking,  or  of  com-
posing themselves  to  sleep— they  are  then  the  iUusions  hypnagogiques
of  Maury.  These  would,  of  course,  generally  occur  with  closed  eyes,
and  therefore,  would  be  excluded  from  our  tables,  as  explained  on
p.  36,  even  if  reported  as  hallucinations.  This  rule  we  adopted,  not
because  we  regarded  a  genuine  visual  hallucination  with  closed  eyes  as
an  impossibility,  but  because  the  great  majority  of  the  phenomena  of
this  kind  are  at  most  pseudo-hallucinations  ,  and  we  could  not  expect
either  to  distinguish  true  hallucinations  from  the  others  by  means  of
the  descriptions  given  or  to  obtain  a  sufficiently  complete  record  of
them  to  serve  any  statistical  purpose.

Things  seen  in  actually  complete  darkness,  but  with  eyes  open— as

1  He  believes  that  the  two  phenomena  are  physiologically  different,  a  part  of  the
l)Tain  coming  into  operation  in  hallucinations  which  does  not  play  any  part  in  pseudo-
hallucinations.

-  Kandinsky  seems  practically  to  admit  this  in  another  part  of  his  essay.


IV.] Hallucinations  and  Pseudo-Hallucinations.  79


the  percipient  believed — belong  to  a  somewhat  different  category,  and
have  required  careful  consideration.  Some  of  them  are  undoubtedly
hallucinations,  but  in  other  cases  there  is  some  uncertainty.  On  the
■whole,  we  have  decided  that  apparitions  which,  notwithstanding  the
darkness,  seemed  to  the  percipient  to  be  seen  occupying  a  definite  place
in  his  room — standing  by  his  bed,  for  instance — should  be  classed  as
genuine  hallucinations,  and  that  others  were  to  be  regarded  as
probably  pseudo-hallucinations.  The  number  of  apparitions  seen  in
the  dark  thus  included  in  our  tables  is  .30.^

In  17  of  the  30  cases,  the  figure  alone  appeared  illuminated,
sometimes  seeming  phosphorescent  or  emitting  a  special  light  of  its
own,  as  in  No.  607.  1  (see  p.  117);  sometimes  surrounded  by  a
luminous  aura  or  halo,  as  in  the  case  next  to  be  quoted  ;  sometimes
merely  appearing  as  a  real  person  would  in  the  light,  but  with  nothing
else  visible  round  it,  as  in  ISTo.  192.  21  (see  p.  139)  ;  and  No.  740.  9
(Miss  M.'s  case,  Chapter  XVII).

(37.  13.)  From  Miss  H.  WUson.

October  ISth,  1887.
"  A  long  time  ago  I  was  lying  asleep,  or  nearly  so,  one  night,  when  I  felt
a  hand  laid  gently  on  my  shoulder.  I  was  not  surprised  or  frightened.  I
thought  it  was  my  sister  Alice,  who  sliared  the  same  room  with  me,  and  I
was  too  sleepy  to  rouse  myself  till  I  felt  the  hand  pressing  more  heavily  as
if  to  wake  me  ;  then  I  said,  '  What  is  it,  Alice  1  What  do  you  want  ? '  and
at  the  same  time  opened  my  eyes.  No  candle  or  lamp  was  in  the  room,  it
was  quite  dark  ;  but  close  to  my  bedside  stood,  enveloped  in  light,  a  figure
like  my  sister — it  seemed  my  own  sister  Alice  ;  there  was  the  golden-brown
hair,  blue  eyes,  and  fair  complexion,  and  yet  it  looked  like  a  being  from
another  world,  standing  in  light  unlike  any  earthly  light— a  beautiful
glorified  being  !  It  stood  for  a  few  moments,  then  vanished,  and  the  room
was  all  darkness  again. I  felt  deep  awe,  but  no  fear."

In  12  other  cases  out  of  the  30  the  room  appeared  illuminated,
though  it  was  really  dark  ;  in  three  of  these  the  figure  seemed  to
emit  the  light  {e.(/.,  No.  33.25,  a  case  published  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,-
Vol.  v.,  p.  462)  ;  in  the  others,  the  room  and  figure  both  seemed  to  be
lighted  in  an  ordinary  manner,  as  in  the  following  : —

(196.  17.)  From  Miss  E.  M.  J.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)
"  One  night  in  the  year  1882  or  1883,  I  awoke  completely  and  sat  up  in
bed. There  was  light  enough  in  the  room  to  see  all  the  objects  in  it

1  In  the  g^eat  majority  of  cases  of  hallucinations  ezperienced  when  the  percipient
was  in  bed,  the  room  was  not  completely  dark.

-  Eighteen  persons,  whose  experiences  had  previously  been  published  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living  or  the  Proceedinr/s  S.P.R.,  happen  to  have  been  included  in  the  Census.


80  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


distinctly.  My  bed  faced  the  door.  Coming  from  the  door,  which  was  shut,
I  saw  distinctly,  and  noticed  the  dress  she  had  on,  a  lady  friend  staying  in
the  house.  She  was  advancing  on  her  hands  and  knees.  My  first  thought
was  that  she  had  suddenly  lost  her  reason.  I  asked  her  what  she  wanted.
She  did  not  answer  but  disappeared  under  the  bed.  I  leaned  over  the  side
of  the  bed  to  see  if  I  could  see  her,  believing  her  really  to  be  there  ;  almost
immediately  the  room  became  quite  dark.  I  had  no  feeling  of  fear,  and  I
am  sure  that  I  was  wide  awake.  I  was  teacliing  at  the  time,  and  had  been
overworking.  I  was  in  the  habit  of  seeing  the  lady  almost  daily,  and  had
done  so  for  some  years.  She  was  presumablj'  asleep  in  bed  at  the  time  on
the  other  side  of  the  jjassage. I  was  alone."

The  remaining  case,  which  follows,  seems  intermediate  between  these
two  types.

(53.  21.)  From  Miss  F.  D.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

"  I  saw  two  figures  dressed  in  brown,  monkish  habits,  with  cowls  over
their  heads,  and  long  grey  beards.  They  a^Dpeared  to  come  out  of  a  cup-
board in  my  room  and  walk  to  the  bedside.  I  had  been  asleep,  but  awoke
in  fright.  Opposite  the  bed  was  a  recess  in  the  wall,  not  deep,  which  was
illuminated  by  a  phosiDhorescent  light.  The  apparition,  both  of  figures  and
light,  continued  for  some  minutes,  until  I  had  time  to  light  a  candle,
-when  it  disappeared. This  took  place  in  the  year  1879."

If  the  following  specimen  of  what  we  regard  as  a  pseudo-hallucina-
tion— and  therefore  do  not  include  in  our  statistics — be  compared  with
the  cases  just  quoted,  the  difference  will  be  clear.

(37.  23.)  From  Mr.  J.  W.  A.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

' '  Over  and  over  again  I  have  seen  faces  in  the  dark.  Lying  in  bed,
broad  awake,  faces  have  come  out  suddenly  in  the  darkness  near  my  bed,
appearing,  some  hideous,  some  beautiful,  and  generally  extremely  vivid.
Here  is  a  particular  instance.  I  had  been  reading  of  Brynhilda  and  lay
in  bed  thinking  about  her  life  ;  when  out  there  came  on  the  darkness  a
grand  face — worth  anyone's  toil  to  transfer  to  canvas — and  so  vivid  that
now,  after  several  years'  interval,  I  could  make  a  picture  of  it  if  I  could  only
draw.  In  general,  however,  these  faces  seem  to  have  no  connection  with
any  particular  person  or  name.  They  occur  most  commonly  when  I  am
very  tired."

It  may  interest  our  readers  to  give  here  two  other  instances  of
pseudo-hallucinations  between  sleeping  and  waking,  which  illustrate
different  types.

(38.  11.)  From  Professor  M.

May  25th,  1889.

"  My  imagination  was  vividly  impressed  by  the  Exhibition  of  1851,  and  for
long  after,  perhaps  a  year  or  more,  I  used  to  like  to  shut  my  eyes  when  I


IV.] Hallucinations  and  Pseudo-Hallminations.  81


went  to  bed  and  keep  very  still,  and  gradually  out  of  the  darkness  there
would  come  rolling  towards  me  a  gorgeous  billow  covered  with  bright
objects,  and  then  another,  and  then  another  ;  and  they  would  get  brighter
and  brighter  and  then  gradually  fade  away.  In  this  sense  I  had  no  control
over  them,  that  I  never  knew  what  was  coming  next,  and  the  first  time  they
came  it  must  have  been  entirely  without  any  willing  on  my  part.  But
afterwards  my  will  used  often  to  help  them  on.  I  recollect,  however,  that
I  could  not  always  get  them  when  I  wanted.  (The  billow  shape  of  the
appearances  probably  had  its  origin  in  those  long  trestles,  covered  generally
with  red  cloth,  and  laden  with  all  manner  of  goods,  that  are  to  be  seen  at
exhibitions.)  I  was  in  delicate  health,  subject  to  headaches  of  a  severity
which  is,  I  believe,  very  rare,  and  apt  to  have  my  sensitiveness  to  outward
impressions  vary  very  much."

(478.  4.)  From  Miss  M.  Bramston.

41,  Dingwall-road,  Croydon, October  13th,  1892.

"  On  the  night  of  Thursday,  October  6th,  as  I  was  settling  to  sleep,  I  saw
before  my  eyes  a  jDicture  of  two  strips  of  still  shining  water,  witli  trees  on
their  banks  reflected  in  them,  one  behind  the  other ;  the  trees  seemed  to  change
as  I  looked,  being  sometimes  ordinary  hedgerow  trees,  then  pollard  willows,
then  hedgerow  trees  again.  I  watched  the  picture  with  great  pleasure,  think-
ing with  my  waking  senses  how  pretty  it  was.  The  next  day  I  was  returning
from  Folkestone  to  London,  and  the  floods  were  out  in  places  beside  the  line.
I  saw  two  strips  of  shining  water,  one  behind  the  other,  with  trees  reflected
in  them,  just  as  in  my  hypnagogic  picture.  As  the  train  went  on  the  tree
reflections  changed,  and  one  strip  of  flood  on  the  other  side  of  the  train  had
pollard  willows  reflected  in  it.  I  had  not  consciously  realised  that  the  rain
we  had  been  having  was  likely  to  j^roduce  floods,  but  certainly  the  i-eality
seemed  curiously  to  correspond  to  the  hypnagogic  picture.

"M.  Bramston."

Returning  to  fully  externalised  hallucinations  seen  in  the  dark,
the  apparent  illumination  of  the  real  objects  in  the  room,  which,  as  we
have  seen,  accompanies  many  of  them,  is  a  noteworthy  phenomenon.
It  seems  possible  that  it  is  of  the  same  nature  as  an  experience  which
is  not  uncommon  with  some  persons,  namely,  that  on  waking  in  the
dark  the  whole  room  appears  light  for  a  short  time.  One  informant
who  has  several  times  experienced  this,  describes  the  impression
as  "  a  momentary  flash  "  ;  in  other  cases  there  is  merely  a  vague  im-
pression of  dazzling  light  on  first  opening  the  eyes.  It  has  been
suggested  that  such  experiences  may  be  due  to  hyperesthesia — a
greater  sensitiveness  to  light,  and  consequent  power  of  seeing  in  what
ordinarily  appears  to  be  darkness — just  at  the  moment  of  waking,  after
the  eyes  have  been  for  some  time  in  a  condition  of  repose.^ Cases  like

1  Eight  out  of  the  nine  cases  in  which  the  room  seemed  illuminated  and  a  figure
appeared  in  it  occurred  within  a  few  moments  after  waking,  and  in  three  of  these
cases  the  experience  recurred  several  times  in  the  same  way  to  the  same  percipient.

G


82


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


that  of  Miss  Mason,  one  of  our  informants  (quoted  in  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  372),  who  saw  her  room  as  it  really  was,  but  not
as  she  imagined  it  to  be,  certainly  suggest  the  hypothesis  of  real  vision
of  real  objects ;  and  there  is  an  analogous  case  (not  in  our  present
collection)  where  the  light  accompanying  an  apparition  revealed  an
object — a  gun — in  the  place  it  really  occupied,  but  not  where  the
percipient  fancied  it  was.  This,  however,  is  no  proof  that  the  vision
of  it  was  not  an  externalised  memory  image,  as  the  percipient^
having  placed  his  gun  in  that  particular  position  himself,  must  have
been  subconsciously  aware  of  its  true  position,  which  was,  in
fact,  that  in  which  he  had  last  actually  seen  it.  A  hypothesis
which  involves  the  assumption  that  an  abnormal  experience  is  in  part
hallucinatory,  and  in  part  due  to  a  hyperajsthetic  condition,  seems
somewhat  strained  in  the  absence  of  any  direct  evidence  of  a  connec-
tion between  hypersesthesia  and  hallucination.  It  seems  simpler  to
suppose  the  room  to  be  seen  hallucinatorily,  like  the  figure  in  it,  the
illuminated  room  being  an  externalised  memory  image,  suggested  by
the  percipient's  consciousness  of  where  he  is.  There  seems  no  reason
to  assume  a  fundamental  difference  between  an  apparent  illumination
of  the  real  room  in  which  the  percipient  is,  and  a  vision  of  an
illuminated  room,  like  the  following  : —

(421.  9.)  From  Mr.  A.  C.  B.

March  7th,,  1891.

"  From  the  time  when  I  was  about  12  years  old  to  my  present  age  (22),
I  have  often,  when  waking  in  middle  of  the  night,  found  the  room  apparently
blazing  with  light,  heard  loud  music,  generally  of  a  band,  and  seen  a  number
of  men  and  women,  generally  dancing  or  in  rapid  motion  ;  men  and  women
in  evening  clothes,  women  in  white.  This  has  gradually  disappeared  in
about  5  to  10  seconds  from  the  time  when  I  awoke.  Sometimes  the
impressions  were  very  distinct,  sometimes  weak.  But  I  was  always  wide
awake  when  they  occurred,  and  often  made  distinct  attempts  to  recognise
faces,  unsuccessfully,  and  to  remember  distinctly  the  impressions.  Once
about  three  years  ago,  after  the  usual  impression  had  faded  away,  I  saw  a
man  in  a  brown  dress  of  last  century  at  the  foot  of  my  bed.  I  did  not
recognise  his  face,  and  there  was  nothing  remarkable  about  him.  These
impressions  never  made  me  at  all  afraid.

"Age  from  12 — 22.  The  impressions  have  lately  occurred  less  frequently.
My  health  has  always  been  good,  though  1  am  sliglitly  nervous.  I  have  never
suffered  from  any  particular  grief  or  anxiety."

Mr.  B.  writes  further  :  —

"  As  to  the  light,  1  did  not  see  the  room  by  it  as  it  is,  but  a  completely
different  room,  of  which  I  had  only  a  very  vague  impression.  There  was
always  a  mirror,  the  most  luminous  thing  in  the  room,  directly  opposite  me,
though  there  might  be  no  real  glass  in  the  room  at  all.  There  is  no  un-
familiar position  of  a  familiar  object.  I  imagine  the  light  is  altogether  a
part  of  the  hallucination,  which  is  of  course  purely  subjective."


IV.] Hallucinations  and  Pseudo-Hallucinations.  83


(2)  Visions.

The  second  class  of  cases  in  which  the  line  between  hallucinations
and  pseudo-hallucinations  is  often  peculiarly  difficult  to  draw  is  the
class  which  we  have  called  "Visions."  By  "  visions,"  as  already  said
in  explaining  the  tables,  we  mean  scenes  or  pictures,  or  sometimes
single  figures  or  faces,  which  do  not  seem  to  belong  to  the  percipient's
actual  surroundings.

There  is  no  question  that  the  vision  is  adequately  externalised  when
it  is  quite  definitely  located  among  the  percipient's  actual  surroundings
as  seen  at  the  time  ;  for  instance,  when  it  is  seen  on  a  reflecting  or  other
surface,  as  in  No.  406.  25.  (see  p.  106)  ;  or  when  the  wall  seems  to  open
and  the  vision  to  be  seen  through  it,  as  in  No.  442.  1-5  (Mrs.  B.'s  case
in  Chapter  XVII).  In  other  cases,  the  relation  of  the  hallucinatory
object  to  the  percipient's  surroundings  is  less  definite,  but  the  re-
semblance of  the  apparent  perception  to  ordinary  vision  is  still
unmistakable  ;  the  case  given  on  the  preceding  page,  No.  421.  9,  is
an  instance  of  this.  But  between  these  and  mental  pictures  many
gradations  seem  to  occur,  and  neither  the  percipients  nor  ourselves
can  always  feel  sure  on  which  side  of  the  line  dividing  externalised
from  non-externalised  visions  particular  cases  should  come.  A  couple
(jf  cases  will  illustrate  the  difficulty.  The  following  is  one  which,
after  some  hesitation^  we  have  decided  was  a  pseudo-hallucination,  and
have  accordingly  not  included  in  our  tables.

(42.  25.)  From  Miss  C.  P.  M.  C.

(The  account  was  written  in  the  beginning  of  June,  1889.)

' '  I  distinctly  saw  a  person  whom  I  knew  (M.  T. )  lying  in  bed,  and  the
room  and  furniture  exactly  as  I  last  saw  it.  I  had  tlie  impression  of  hearing
her  voice.  The  impression  was  so  vivid  that  for  the  time  it  stopped  my
reading,  and  I  remember  being  surprised  at  it  and  wondering  whether  the
woman  were  alive  or  dead.  I  had  had  a  letter  three  days  previously  saying
she  was  dying.  She  had  been  an  invalid  when  I  first  saw  her,  so  that  I  never
knew  her  otherwise  than  in  bed.

"  Place  :  probably  in  the  Geological  Museum.  Date  :  May  14th,  1889,
Tuesday,  in  the  morning.

"  I  was  reading  geology  [at  the  time].  I  was  not  out  of  health,  but  I
was  in  anxiety  on  (£uite  a  different  subject.

"  I  did  not  know  the  woman  very  well,  and  did  not  see  her  often.

"  She  died  that  day,  but  I  do  not  know  the  hour.

"  No  [other  persons  were  present  at  the  time].

"I  have  had  many  such  impressions,  probably  quite  as  vivid,  but  none
that  I  remember  much  about,  as  at  the  time  I  took  no  notice  of  them.  Once,
when  a  child,  being  in  bed  but  certainly  awake,  I  remember  hearing  voices
of  people  I  knew  well  who  were  far  away  at  the  time."

Miss  C.  gave  an  account  of  this  experience  verbally  to  the  collector.
Miss  Alice  Johnson,  before  writing  it  down.  For  the  exact  date  she  referred

G  2


84  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


to  a  small  diary,  in  which  she  had  noted  some  incident  that  she  remembered
had  happened  on  the  same  day  as  her  vision.

We  find  from  the  Register  at  Somerset  House  that  M.  T.  died  at  the
Hospital  for  Incurables,  Heaton  Norris,  Stockport,  on  May  14th,  1889.

Miss  C.  explained  that  the  other  "impressions"  she  mentioned  were  of
the  nature  of  vivid  visualisations.  She  describes  these  further  in  a  letter
written  some  time  later  : — •

My  9th,  1892.

"  I  perfectly  well  remember  telling  you  my  experience  of  having  had
a  '  vision, '  as  you  call  it.  The  incident  itself  I  still  remember  vividly,
though  the  surroundings  are  rather  dimmed.  It  happened  one  morning
that  I  was  doing  practical  work  in  the  Laboratory.  ^  Suddenly,  as  by  a
sort  of  flash,  I  saw  M.  T.  before  me,  lying  in  bed  as  I  had  seen  her  last,
and  I  remember  thinking  and  wondering  was  she  dead  ;  and  it  struck  me
then  how  strange  it  was  it  should  flash  across  me  so  suddenly,  when  I  was
intent  upon  my  work  ;  it  required  a  considerable  efibrt  of  will  to  return  to
my  work  afterwards.  Of  course  it  must  be  remembered  that  I  knew  she
was  very  ill  and  likely  to  die  ;  she  was  in  an  incurable  hospital,  and  I  had
been  interesting  myself  a  few  months  previously  in  getting  her  elected  as
a  free  inmate.

"  So  much  for  the  facts.  I  don't  think  I  have  ever  had  any  other  such
experience  which  impressed  me  so  much  and  of  which  I  remember  the
details  so  well.  This  one  occurred  at  the  very  time  Miss  T.  died,  or  with-
in half-an-hour  of  it.  I  think  I  told  you  I  had  a  faint  recollection  of  some-
thing like  it  having  happened  when  I  was  a  school-girl,  but  no  distinct
impression  remains.  It  seems  to  me  that  everybody  can  more  or  less
voluntarily  visualise  persons  and  scenes.  T  can  do  it  so  that  the  people  are
very  nearly,  if  not  quite,  as  vivid  as  if  they  were  actually  before  me,  and  I
can  hold  imaginary  conversations  with  them.

"It  sometimes  happens  that  while  I  am  quite  occupied,  spontaneously
some  one  comes  up  befox-e  me  whom  I  have  not  seen  or  thought  about
at  all  for  a  long  time.  I  tliink  about  them  for  a  little  time,  possibly  saying
to  myself,  '  Wliy  do  I  tliink  of  so  and  so  now  ? '  and  then  I  quite  naturally
cease  to  think  of  tliem,  l)ut  I  have  never  before  found  that  anything
happened  to  these  people  at  these  times.

"[The  case  of]  Miss  T.  impressed  me  so  much,  first,  because  it  was
so  vivid  ;  second,  because  I  heard  a  day  or  two  afterwards  that  she  had
died  at  that  time.  You  hapjjened  to  speak  to  me  about  the  psychological
investigations  soon  afterwards,  otherwise  it  would  pi'obably  have  faded
from  my  memory.  Of  these  vivid  impressions  of  people  I  have  just  men-
tioned, I  remember  only  two  for  certain  since  Easter  ;  others  may  have
occurred,  but  no  impi'ession  remains."

On  the  other  hand,  we  have  decided  to  class  as  a  hallucination
the  following  case  of  a  dream-like  apparition,  because  the  feeling  of
spatial  relation  to  the  vision  was  prominent  in  the  percipient's  mind.

1  Doubtless  a  mistake  from,  lapse  of  memory,  as  the  previous  account  says,  "in
the  museum."  Miss  C.  was  in  the  habit  of  worlcing  in  both  places  about  that
time. [A.  J.]


IV.] Halliicinations  and  Pseudo-Hallucinations.  85


(660.  12.)  From  Miss  C.  M.  Campbell.

[This  case  has  already  been  printed  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII,,
p.  324,  in  the  Record  of  a  Haimted  Bouse,  by  Miss  R.  C.  Morton  ;  but  as
it  is  the  best  illustration  in  the  Census  of  the  particular  point  in  question,
we  have  thought  it  desirable  to  repi'int  it  here.]

77,  Chesterton-road,  North  Kensington,  W.,  March  olst,  1892.

"  On  the  night  on  which  Miss  Morton  first  spoke  to  the  figure,  as  stated
in  her  account,  I  myself  saw  her  telepathically .  I  was  in  my  room  (I  was
then  residing  in  the  North  of  England,  quite  100  miles  away  from  Miss
Morton's  home),  preparing  for  bed,  between  12  and  half -past,  when  I  seemed
suddenly  to  be  standing  close  to  the  door  of  the  housemaid's  cupboard,
facing  the  short  flight  of  stairs  leading  to  the  top  landing.  Coming
down  these  stairs,  I  saw  the  figure,  exactly  as  described,  and  about
two  steps  behind  Miss  Morton  herself,  with  a  dressing-gown  thrown
loosely  round  her,  and  carrying  a  candle  in  her  hand.  A  loud  voice
in  the  room  over-head  recalled  me  to  my  surroundings,  and  although  I  tried
for  some  time  I  could  not  resume  the  impression.

"  The  black  dress,  dark  head-gear,  widow's  cuffs  and  handkerchief  were
plainly  visible,  though  the  details  of  them  were  not  given  me  by  Miss  Morton
till  afterwards,  when  I  asked  her  whether  she  had  not  seen  the  apparition
on  that  night.

"CM.  Campbell."
Miss  Morton  adds  : —  ' '  Miss  Campbell  was  the  friend  to  whom  I  first
spoke  of  the  apparition.  She  suggested  to  me  that  when  next  I  saw  her  I
should  speak  ;  but  of  course  she  had  no  idea  when  this  would  be.  She  wrote
an  account  to  me  the  next  day  of  what  she  had  seen,  and  a.sked  me  if  I  had  not
seen  the  figure  that  night ;  but  naturally  did  not  know  that  I  had  done  so,
until  she  received  my  reply.  Miss  Campbell  asks  me  to  say  that  this  is
the  only  vision  she  has  had,  veridical  or  otherwise."

Sense  of  Presence.

"We  pass  to  consider  a  kind  of  experience  the  discussion  of  which
will  further  illustrate  the  difficulties  of  classification  with  which  we  are
now  dealing.  This  is  an  impression  of  the  near  presence  of  someone,
in  which  no  sensation,  either  of  sight,  hearing,  or  touch,  appears  to  be
involved.  We  cannot  regard  it  as  strictly  a  sensory  hallucination,  and
accordingly  we  have  not  included  any  instance  of  it  in  our  Tables ;  still,
it  involves  a  more  or  less  definite  quasi-perception  of  the  occupation  of
space  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  percipient.  The  impression,  in  a
slight  degree,  is  familiar  to  most  people,  and  is  pi'obably  sometimes
caused  by  slight  sounds,  movements  of  the  air,  etc.,  of  which  the
origin  is  undetected,  and  the  existence  perhaps  not  consciously  per-
ceived. But,  in  the  degree  in  which  we  are  now  concerned  with  it,  the
impression  does  not  seem  explicable  in  this  way,  and  it  is  often  so
strong  as  to  appear  to  the  percipient  a  very  sti'iking  phenomenon,  and
to  produce  a  great  effect  on  his  mind.


86  Report  on  the  Cemus  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Professor  J ames,  who  has  met  with  a  good  many  instances  of  it
among  the  affirmative  answers  to  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  in
America,  says  (Princi2)les  of  Psychology,  Vol.  11.^  p.  322) : —

"  From  the  way  in  which  this  experience  is  spoken  of  by  those  who
have  had  it,  it  would  appear  to  be  an  extremely  definite  and  positive
state  of  mind,  coupled  with  a  belief  in  the  reality  of  its  object  quite  as
strong  as  any  direct  sensation  ever  gives.  And  yet  no  sensation  seems
to  be  connected  with  it  at  all.  .  .  .  The  phenomenon  would  seem
to  be  due  to  a  pure  conceptio7i  becoming  saturated  with  the  sort  of
stinging  urgency  which  ordinarily  only  sensations  bring."

The  effect  of  the  experience  on  the  percipient  may  be  the  greater
from  its  being  completely  non-sensory,  since  this  would  make  it  appear
more  unaccountable.  Similarly,  voices  or  sounds  coming  from  nothing
visible  are  often  more  startling  than  visual  hallucinations,  as  being
prima  facie  more  unaccountable.  This  is  perhaps  the  reason  why  stories
of  "  haunted  houses  "  in  which  nothing  happens,  except  that  mysterious
noises  are  heard,  appeal  so  strongly  to  the  popular  imagination  ;  and
when  an  impression  is  produced  of  the  presence  of  an  object  imper-
ceptible by  any  sense,  the  mysterious  effect  is  heightened  still  further.

The  narrative  that  follows  describes  a  series  of  such  impressions,
occurring  to  the  percipient  of  case  (661.5)  quoted  above  (see  p.  74).

(661.  5) Mr.  H.  writes  :—

February  29th,  1892.
"In  September,  1890, 1  was  reading  for  entrance  [to  the  University].  About
11  p.m.  I  was  engaged  with  Cicero, De  SenectH.te,u\  a  little  room  I  have  formerly
used  as  a  snug  and  studio  for  painting.  I  suddenly  became  conscious  of  a  feeling
that  some  one  else  was  present..  I  looked  round,  expecting  to  see  my  mother,
who  had  occasionally  come  in,  for  I  had  several  times  left  the  lamp  burning
all  night ;  but  I  saw  no  one.  I  examined  the  room,  measuring  about  16
feet  X  8  feet.  I  expected  to  find  my  mother  hid  behind  a  large  studio  easel ;
she  is  fond  of  practical  jokes.  There  was  no  one  there.  Very  jjuzzled,  I
commenced  reading,  or  rather  tried  to  do  so,  for  I  had  only  time  to  place  the
book  in  front  of  me  when  I  became  convinced  of  some  one  looking  over  my
shoulder.  I  took  an  old  constable's  staff  which  I  used  for  a  ruler,  as  though
I  intended  to  use  it,  and  suddenly  turned  round  and  saw — no  one.  At  this
time  1  never  gave  spiritual  phenomena  a  thought.  I  went  round  the  room
again  and  off  to  bed,  very  puzzled  indeed.  About  a  little  more  than  a  year
afterwards — Oct.,  1891 — I  was  smoking  in  another  man's  rooms  here.
1  was  alone,  and  was  leisurely  turning  over  Thomson's  Lawi  of  Thonglit,
and  I  experienced  the  same  feeling  very  intensely.  I  did  not  at  the  moment
think  of  my  former  experience,  but,  being  a  freshman,  I  naturally  thought
of  some  trick,  but  I  found  no  one.  I  then  began  to  feel — sliall  I  .say
knotv? — that  a  woman  was  present.  I  put  it  down  to  hallucination  and  went
down  into  the  town.  About  June  last  year,  after  mature  consideration,  I
came  to  believe  that  there  was  evidence  enough  to  grant  the  possibility  of
spirit  phenomena.  Since  then  1  have  had  several  most  vivid  returns  of  similar


IV.] Hallucinations  and  Pseudo-Hallucinations.  87


experiences,  one  when  out  for  a  walk,  the  rest  being  in  my  rooms  at  brief
intervals,  and  always  this  woman.  Why  do  I  say  it  is  a  woman  ?  And  yet
I  know  it  is  ;  I  do  not  believe,  I  Jctiow — always  when  not  thinking  about  it.
The  last  was  after  a  card  party  in  my  rooms. I  was  rather  irritated  at  the

time,  and  I  am  afraid  said  very  sharply,  "  Oh  go  to  the  !  "  Whether

this  adjuration  was  entirely  efficacious  remains  to  be  proved,  but  the  feeling
of  the  presence  suddenly  ceased.  If  it  was  a  spirit,  she  did  not  even  give
ime  an  opportunity  for  an  apology.

"  About  a  week  after  this — I  cannot  ascertain  at  this  moment  the  exact
date — I  was  in  the  Assembly  Rooms,  directly  opposite  the  gates,  listening  to
Arthur  Helmore  in  some  of  his  sketches.  I  suddenly  became  seized  with
the  idea  that  an  old  man  in  last  century  costume  was  present  on
the  stage,  and  he  gradually  passed  through  the  wings.  I  could  have  stood  at
■an  easel  and  painted  it,  yet  I  did  not  see  him.  This  was  the  most  vivid
of  all.

"  I  am  often  conscious  of  presences,  though  sometimes  very  vague,  some-
times in  the  air,  sometimes  walking  about,  very  seldom  standing  still.  In
every  case  my  attention  is  called — shall  I  say,  by  the  magnetic  influence  ?  I
mever  fancy  there  is  something,  and  then  believe  there  is  a  visitor.  My  first
experience  of  [these]  sensations  was  in  1887.  All  were  out  of  the  house  but
myself,  even  servants.  I  was  cataloguing  my  late  father's  library.  I  distinctly
heard  the  front  door  open,  some  one  come  down  the  hall,  go  upstairs.  I  went
to  the  door  of  the  room,  expecting  to  see  some  one  going  upstairs  ;  there
was  no  one  there,  and  the  front  door  was  bolted.  It  was  the  spring  race
meeting  in  the  towii.  I  thought  that  possibly  some  one  might  have  walked
in.  I  went  upstairs — no  one  there  I  During  the  writing  of  this,  I  have  been
conscious  of  a  draped  figure  coming  in  at  the  door  and  making  a  circle  round
the  room  and  disappearing  behind  my  back.  Its  colour  was  a  delicate  raw
umber,  almost  the  tone,  but  not  the  shade,  of  the  ground  of  a  plover's  egg.

"I  am  healthy,  and  take  an  enormous  amount  of  exercise,  and  am  con-
sidered an  exceptionally  strong  man.  I  cannot  put  it  down  to  hallucination,
and  yet  how  is  it  that  I  should  know  the  colours  ?  I  have  stood  in  my  room
and  called  upon  them  to  appear,  and  they  would  not  favour  me.  I  once
walked  up  to  one,  or  rather  tried  to,  and  it  backed  through  an  india-
rubber  plant,  through  an  engraving  of  Sir.  F.  Leigh  ton's  "Solitude,"  and
the  wall — and  yet  I  did  not  see  it."

In  this  case,  we  see  the  experience  in  various  forms,  from  the  mere
sense  of  presence,  unaccompanied  by  distinct  sensory  impressions  or
images,  and  not  very  definitely  localised  in  space,  to  the  figure  occupy-
ing a  perfectly  definite  place  in  the  real  surroundings,  and  whose  form
and  colour  is  clearly  apprehended  by  visual  images,  which,  however,
were  not  externalised.  It  is  important  to  notice  that  Mr.  H.  is  a  good
judge  of  this,  as  he  has  experienced  a  complete  visual  hallucination
as  well,  and  can  compare  them.  Compare  with  this  a  case  quoted  in
Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  53,  where,  however,  the  impression
was  dispelled  by  looking  at  the  place  where  the  figure  was  supposed  to
be  seated.


88


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


[chap.


Visual  hallucinations  which  are  undoubtedly  fully  externalised  are
sometimes  complicated  by  a  non-externalised  element.  Thus,  Mrs.
Verrall  in  her  experiments  in  crystal  vision  (see  Proceedings,  S.P.R.,
Vol.  VIII.,  p.  474)  is  sometimes  aware  that  certain  objects  in  the
vision  have  certain  colours,  while  conscious  of  not  seeing  the  colour.

Auditory  pseudo-hallucinations — ^sometimes  described  as  the  hear-
ing of  inner  voices,  which  seem  to  be  heard  by  the  mind,  and  not  by
the  ear — are  not  uncommon  experiences  with  some  persons.  A  striking
instance  is  given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (Vol.  I.,  p.  481,  footnote).
Some  of  these  auditory  cases,  like  some  of  the  visual  ones,  seem  to  be
on  the  verge  of  externalisation,  and  the  percipient  himself  cannot
always  say  whether  they  are  externalised  or  not.  Occasionally,  even
in  cases  that  seem  externalised,  there  is  some  quality  that  difierentiates
them  from  real  external  sounds.

Thus  one  percipient,  Mrs.  G.,  (682.  5.)  writes  : —

"The  hallucination  consisted  in  hearing  myself  being  called  by  name,  so
distinctly  that  I  have  looked  around  to  hear  whom  the  sound  came  from  ;
though,  whether  from  imagination  or  the  remembrance  of  this  having
occurred  before,  the  voice,  if  I  may  call  it  so,  had  a  quite  indefinable  quality,
which  invariably  startled  me  and  separated  it  from  any  ordinary  sound.
This  lasted  for  several  yeai'S.  I  am  quite  unable  to  explain  the  circum-
stances, or  that  which  impressed  them  upon  me  after  '  the  voice '  ceased."

It  occasionally  happens  that  a  visual  hallucination  is  associated  with
an  auditory  pseudo-hallucination  ;  a  completely  externalised  apparition
seeming  to  communicate  something  in  wox'ds  which  the  percipient
apprehends,  but  without  seeming  to  hear  them.  We  have  no  case
of  the  converse  kind — i.e.,  of  a  voice  heard  and  felt  to  proceed  from  a
pseudo- hallucinatory  apparition.

[The  following  account,  which  was  received  independently  of  the  Census,
is  taken  from  notes  made  by  a  member  of  the  Committee  during  an  interview
with  the  percipient,  Miss  G.,  who  having  almost  lost  her  eyesight,  was  unable
to  write  it  herself. She  has  had  several  other  visual  hallucinations.]

December  20th,  1891.

"  Miss  G.  had  once  living  with  her  as  lady  companion  a  Mrs.  V.,  who
died  of  consumption  in  a  home  at  Bournemouth  on  Nov.  25,  1888.  Mrs.  V.'s
two  children,  who  had  died  before  her,  were  buried  in  the  Norwood
Cemetery,  and  Miss  G.  had  promised  that,  if  she  went  to  the  cemetery,  she
would  look  at  their  graves  and  see  that  they  were  in  good  condition.  On
Monday,  May  11th,  1891,  she  had  an  opportunity  of  going  to  the  cemetery
in  the  morning,  and  found  the  graves  well  kept,  as  it  turned  out  that  a  re-
lative of  Mrs.  V.'s  had  looked  after  them  ;  so  she  felt  no  more  responsibility
about  them,  and  thought  no  more  about  them.  She  came  home  to  luncheon,
and  afterwards  her  cousin  Miss  B.  was  reading  aloud  to  her,  when  she
suddenly  saw  Mrs.  V.  standing  against  a  dark  part  of  the  wall,  about  10  feet
from  her,  in  a  black  serge  dress,  dark  blue  cloth  jacket,  like  one  Mrs.  V.


IV.] Hallucinations  and  Pseudo-Hallucinations.  89

had  made  herself,  a  hat  which  she  was  familiar  with,  and  tan  gloves,  like
some  Mrs.  V.  had  once  bought,  but  with  plain  silk  stripes  on  the  back,
instead  of  little  tufts  which  the  original  gloves  had  had.  Miss  G.  recognised
deiinitely  all  these  articles  of  dress  and  looked  up  at  the  figure,  expecting
it  to  speak.  She  heard  the  words,  "  Thank  you  for  going  to  see  my  babies."
The  voice  seemed  to  come  from  the  figure  and  was  distinctly  recognised  by
Miss  G.  as  Mrs.  V.'s  voice,  but  yet  it  was  not  exactly  audible  like  a  real
sound,  so  that  she  would  not  have  expected  another  person  to  hear  it, — she
thought,  because  the  lips  of  the  figure  did  not  move.  On  the  other  hand,
the  figure  itself  was  so  clearly  visible  that  she  did  expect  her  cousin  to
see  it,  but  she  did  not.  It  was  perfectly  natural  and  life-like — with  sunny
hair  and  bright  colour  like  a  consumptive  person  ;  the  right  hand  was
crossed  over  the  left,  the  figure  was  tall  and  broad.  Mrs.  V.  had  been
a  rather  striking-looking  person.  The  attitude  of  the  hands  was  charac-
teristic.

"At  this  time  Miss  G.  was  nearly  blind,  but  could  see  the  apparition  quite
as  clearly  as  a  rather  short-sighted  person  would  ever  have  seen  a  real  person
at  that  distance,  viz.,  about  10  feet."

An  instance  where  the  idea  of  the  tactile  and  muscular  sense  comes
similarly  into  play  in  a  pseudo-hallucinatory  manner,  without  actual
sensation,  and  yet  with  a  spontaneity  and  insistance  quite  unusual  in
imagined  sensations,  is  the  following  : —

(446.  25.)  From  Mrs.  W.

(The  account  was  written  in  1891.)

"  A  few  years  ago  I  received  a  letter  from  one  of  my  sons,  who  was  seeing
America  for  the  first  time  on  his  way  to  the  Rocky  Mountains.  Amongst
other  things  he  described  his  visit  to  Niagara.  It  had  evidently  impressed
him  with  the  greatest  admiration  and  delight,  so  that  he  could  hardly  tear
himself  away  from  the  position  he  had  taken  above  the  Falls.  His
description  was  not  minute,  but  the  few  words  he  did  say  were  very  expressive,
so  that  I  seemed  to  know  a  little  wliat  it  was  like,  and  what  it  was  like  to
him  as  he  stood  there.  I  generally  read  my  children's  letters  two  or  three
times,  and  I  am  almost  sure  that  it  was  not  at  my  first  reading  of  this
letter,  but  at  a  second  reading  of  it  in  the  afternoon,  and  certainly  in  a  room
by  myself,  that  I  found  myself  experiencing  a  very  extraordinary  sensation
of  what  I  suppose  I  should  have  felt  if  I  had  been  with  my  son  at  Niagara,
and  of  Tfhat  I  suppose  he  felt.  It  was  not  seeing  or  hearing,  not  even
feeling  the  spray  as  if  actually  wetting  my  face,  but  I  should  describe  the
sensation  as  the  half-exhausting  and  yet  delightful  exhilaration  and
breatldessness  produced  by  high  wind  and  dashing  water.  I  had  made  no
effort  to  realise  so  completely  what  my  son  had  seen  and  felt.  The  sensation
distinctly  came  to  me,  and  was  such  a  very  palpable  impalpability  that  I  stood
or  sat  quite  still,  recipient  of  this  strange  eSect,  anxious  to  lose  none  of  it.

"  I  do  not  remember  the  actual  eflfect  upon  me  of  any  fine  waterfall,  not
having  seen  any  for  a  great  many  years,  and  never  any  very  remarkable
one,  so  that  the  effect  of  the  dash  and  grandeur  of  a  high  sea  is  the  nearest


90  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


likeness  I  know  to  what  I  felt  on  this  occasion.  I  stood  still  in  fear  of
losing  any  of  the  strange  visitation,  until  it  began  to  lose  power  and  to
become  only  a  faint  effect,  and  then  ceased,  either  because  it  had  exhausted
itself  or  because  my  receiving  jjower  was  exhausted.

"Then  I  moved  across  the  room,  and  I  remember  trying  whether  I  could
revive  the  effect — make  it  return — having  the  lately-read  letter  with  me  all
the  time,  no  doubt.  But,  to  measure  the  power  of  the  feeling  in  the  form
ia  which  my  mind's  eye  has  clothed  it  ever  since  (and  no  doubt  did  at  the
time),  what  had  been  an  airy,  cloudy  column  of  force  a  foot  and  more
high,  would  now  only  rise  half  a  foot  or  less,  then  sink,  then  be  renewed  at
my  desire,  only  in  smaller  height  (so  my  imagination  described  to  me  the
lesser  degree),  then  in  smaller  still,  I  suppose  (though  this  third  degree
I  cannot  distinctly  recall),  and  then  no  more,  or  I  gave  up  the  attempt.
I  felt  no  sensation  of  spray  dashed  up  upon  me,  and  actually  wetting  me,
but  all  that  was  not  palpable  of  it  I  felt.  I  was  not  made  actually  breath-
less, but  had  the  sensation  of  it,  without  the  actual  thing."

We  will  conclude  this  section  with  two  cases,  included  in  our  Tables,
which  seem  to  be  on  the  line  between  hallucinations  and  pseudo-
hallucinations.  The  first  we  are  disposed  to  regard  as  a  pseudo-hallu-
cination at  the  outset,  turning  into  a  fully  externalised,  though
momentary,  hallucination  of  the  ordinary  type  at  the  end.

(584.  24.)  1  From  Miss  S.

January  22nd,  1892.
"  Six  years  ago  at  Gibraltar,  when  standing  washing  her  hands  in  dressing-
room  at  A,  with  her  back  to  C,  Miss  S.
'  saw  with  her  eyes '  (she  knows  this
was  impossible  because  of  the  wall  on
either  side  of  C,  but  she  can  only
describe  it  that  way)  a  friend  of  hers,
then  living  in  the  West  of  Scotland,
walk  in  at  the  door  B,  having  a  strange
set  smile  on  liis  face,  and  walk  across
the  room,  and  stand  in  doorway  C.  She  then  turned  round  and  looked  at
him.  She  had  only  a  glimpse  of  him  after  turning  round,  and  then  he
vanished.  She  learned  afterwards  that  he  had  died  at  that  hour  on  that
day.  She  mentioned  what  she  had  seen  to  no  one  beforehand.  She  was  in
very  good  health  at  the  time."

The  difficulty  in  classifying  the  earlier  part  of  this  experience  lies
in  the  expression  "  saw  with  her  eyes,"  since  this  quality  of  seeming  to
be  seen  with  the  bodily  eyes  is  precisely  the  quality  which  is  lacking  in

1  This  case  is  strictly  speaking  at  second-hand,  but  the  collector  is  very  well  known
to  us,  has  been  a  collaborator  in  various  departments  of  Psychical  Research  work,
and  is  known  by  us  to  be  careful  and  accurate,  and  acquainted  with  the  questions  at
issue.  Failing  to  get  the  percipient  to  write  an  account,  or  to  agree  to  sign  it,  she
wrote  it  herself,  after  hearing  it  from  her  and  questioning  her  about  it.


A


C


IV.] Hallucinations  and  Pseudo-Hallucinations.  91


pseudo-hallucinations.  We  are  disposed,  however,  to  think,  notwith-
standing this  expression,  that  the  first  part  of  the  experience  was  not
an  apparent  sense-perception,  since,  if  the  percipient  really  felt  as
though  she  saw  the  figure  with  her  eyes,  why  did  she  turn  round  to
look  at  it  ?i

The  next  case  is  a  vision  of  great  vividness,  but  it  is  somewhat
difficult,  at  any  rate  in  retrospect,  to  say  whether  it  appeared  to  be
seen  with  the  bodily  eyes.

(38.  24.)  From  Mr.  A.  D.

Angiist  8th,  1889.

"The  details  of  the  illusion  are  very  simple.  I  was  lying  in  bed,  on  a
Sunday  morning  in  November,  1876,  quite  awake  and  as  well  as  usual  at
that  time.  The  door  between  the  bedroom  and  the  keeping-room  was  shut,
and  the  position  in  which  I  was  lying  would  have  made  it  impossible  to  see
anything  in  the  adjoining  room,  even  had  the  door  been  open.  Suddenly
I  saw  on  the  table  there  a  row  of  letters,  laid  one  below  the  other,  so  as  to
leave  the  addresses  and  the  stamps  in  sight.  Their  exact  number  I  have
forgotten,  and  it  is  of  no  consequence.  The  handwriting  on  the  envelopes
was  in  each  case  unknown  to  me,  but  the  post-marks,  which  were  all  un-
usually distinct — as  clear  as  the  Bath  stamp,  if  you  have  ever  noticed  that —
all  bore  the  names  of  places  where  the  few  relations  I  have  were  then  living,
and  at  once  I  knew  that  the  letters  contained  the  news  of  their  death.  For
some  time  T  lay  there  thinking,  not  in  the  dreamy  and  half-conscious  state
which  sometimes  comes  from  a  sudden  shock,  but  with  a  full  and  vivid  sense
of  what  had  happened  and  of  the  difference  which  it  would  make  in  my  life.
At  last,  with  a  great  effort,  I  got  up,  determined  to  read  the  details  and  to
know  the  worst.  I  dressed  first,  and  then  went  into  the  next  room  to  get
the  letters.  I  cannot  describe  the  effect  of  going  to  the  table  and  finding
nothing  except  the  breakfast  things.  There  was  no  feeling  of  relief  ;  it
seemed  as  if  some  violent  convulsion  were  tearing  one's  whole  structure  in
pieces,  and  for  some  minutes  after  that  I  can  remember  nothing.  Even
then  the  illusion  did  not  pass  away.  All  that  day  I  waited  in  suspense  for
the  letters  of  the  next  day,  expecting  the  news  to  come  then ;  and  with  the
force  gradually  failing,  the  same  idea  lasted  on  through  the  week,  till  at  last
it  passed  into  a  shadow  and  vanished  away.

"The  vividness  of  the  thing  you  will  best  understand  from  this— that
1  have  entirely  forgotten  the  size  and  shape  of  the  rooms,  the  arrangement
of  the  furniture,  and  all  the  other  details  connected  with  them,  except  so
far  as  they  relate  to  this  one  incident.  Where  the  bookcases  were  placed,  and
the  position  of  the  couch  and  the  easy  chairs,  I  could  not  tell,  but  the  bed,
the  door  between  the  rooms,  and  the  table,  I  could  mark  down  to  an  inch."

Mr.  D.  adds,  in  answer  to  questions  : —

"  I  was  certainly  awake,  and  with  my  eyes  open,  when  the  vision
occurred.  Looking  back,  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  there  was  any
consciousness  of  what  was  really  before  me,  but  my  impression  is  that

1  Compare  a  case  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.,  p.  114.


92


Meport  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


foi-  the  moment  everything  but  the  sight  of  the  table  and  the  letters  was
absolutely  wiped  out."

Visualising.

It  seems  appropriate  to  consider  in  connection  with  the  question
of  externalisation,  whether  there  is  any  relation  between  visualising
power  and  hallucination.  The  power  of  visualising — that  is,  calling
up  vivid  and  distinct  mental  images  of  objects  thought  of — varies
greatly  with  different  individuals,  as  we  know  from  Mr.  Galton's
investigations. (Enquiries  into  Human  Faculty,  pp.  83-114.)

MM.  Binet  and  Fere  ascertained  (Animal  Magnetism,  p.  221)
that  most  of  the  persons  with  whom  they  tried  experiments  in
hypnotically  induced  hallucinations  were,  in  the  waking  state,  good
visualisers,  and  they  believe  that  persons  who  have  the  power  of
visualising  are  more  susceptible  of  visual  hallucinations  than  others.
The  two  things,  however,  do  not  necessarily  go  together.  One  of
the  ladies  Avhose  crystal-seeing  experiments  Mr.  Myers  gives  in
Proceedings,  S.P.E..,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  499. — Miss  A. — who,  moreover,
has  frequently  spontaneous  visual  hallucinations  as  well  as  those
she  induces  in  the  crystal,  tells  us  that  she  is  not  a  good  visualiser  ;
and  many  good  visualisers  do  not  see  hallucinations.  We  should
have  liked  to  ascertain  what  proportion  of  the  persons  who  have
reported  visual  hallucinations  to  us  are  good  visualisers ;  but
the  question  seemed  scarcely  simple  enough  to  put  indiscriminately  and
without  oral  explanation  to  those  who  had  not  thought  of  it  before ;
and  we  "were,  moreover,  afraid  of  its  increasing  the  trouble  already  im-
posed on  our  informants,  so  that  we  have  not  attempted  any  statistical
inquiry  on  the  subject.  The  accounts,  however,  which  we  have
received  from  some  of  our  informants  lead  us  to  conclude  that  the
power  varies  considerably,  not  only  in  different  individuals,  but  in  the
same  individual  at  different  times.  It  has  been  especially  noticed  by
some  persons  that  they  have  it  in  a  much  greater  degree  just  before
going  to  sleep,  and  in  the  condition  between  sleeping  and  waking.
Mr.  Galton  gives  two  instances  of  this  from  bad  visualisers.  (Op.  cit.,
p.  91.)  The  following  communications  have  been  received  by  ourselves
on  the  subject.

November  2Sth,  1891.

"Dear  Me.  Myers, — Since  hearing  your  paper  on  the  Subliminal  Self,  I
have  been  making  observations,  as  you  suggested  one  should,  on  my  power
of  visualising  just  before  going  to  sleep,  and  I  find  that  at  this  time  the
power  is  extraordinarily  increased,  so  that  scenes  which  at  ordinary  times
present  themselves  to  me  in  fragments  appear  as  if  they  were  really  before
me  :  I  was  myself  quite  surprised  at  the  result.

"C.  C."


IV.] Hallucinations  and  Pseudo- Hallucinations.  93


"When  falling  asleep,  and  especially  when  dozing  in  a  chair,  my
visualising  powers  are  raised  abo^'e  their  normal  level.  Visualised  scenes,
of  the  nature  of  dreams,  but  partly  under  control,  take  the  place  of  what  is
going  on  in  the  room,  or  mix  themselves  up  with  it.

"  H.  Babington  Smith."

Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  writes  : —

"My  ordinary  visual  mental  images  are  extremely  vague.  They  exist, — it
is,  for  instance,  often  by  a  vague  visual  impression  of  its  place  in  a  shelf
that  I  can  find  a  book, — but  they  are  fragmentary  and  indefinite.  I  cannot
recall  clearly  the  faces  most  familiar  to  me.  (Jccasionally,  however,  when
half  asleep,  I  have  a  flash  of  good  visualisation.  I  remember  one  occasion.
I  was  half  asleep  and  had  before  me  the  usual  vague  kind  of  image  of  a
number  of  persons,  and,  among  them,  one  whose  aspect  I  was  very  familiar
with  ;  when  suddenly,  and  for  a  brief  moment,  this  person's  image  came  to  my
mental  vision  in  a  perfectly  distinct  and  definite  form,  as  clear  and  detailed
as  if  he  had  been  actually  before  me  in  the  flesh,  and  altogether  diSerent
from  the  previous  vague  image  of  him.  This  instance  was  more  or  less  in-
voluntary, and  verges,  therefore,  I  suppose,  on  a  pseudo-hallucination  ;  but
I  also  am  sometimes  able  when  half  asleep  to  call  up,  voluntarily,  clearer
visual  images  than  my  ordinary  waking  ones."

This  increase  of  visualising  power  under  conditions  known  to  be
favourable  to  pseudo-hallucinations  looks  as  if  the  two  things  were
related,  at  least  to  some  extent,  but  it  would  not  necessarily  follow
that  genuine  hallucinations  were  also  related  to  general  visualising
power.


94  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Chapter  V.

THE  RELATION  OF  ILLUSIONS  TO  HALLUCINATIONS.

In  the  last  chapter  we  had  to  distinguish  between  hallucinations
and  non-externalised  mental  images.  In  this  we  have  to  deal  with
the  limits  of  the  class  of  hallucinations  on  the  other  side,  and  to
discuss  those  cases  where  the  doubt  is  not  as  to  externalisation,
but  as  to  whether  what  is  experienced  is  not  merely  an  illusion,  in
which  some  real  object  is  perceived,  but  misinterpreted  as  something
else.i

The  following  are  good  instances  of  well-observed  illusions.  As
such  they  would,  of  course,  be  excluded  from  our  statistics.

(703.  5.)  From  Professor  W.  R.  Sorley.

Cardiff,  Jxtly  29th,  1891.

"Lying  in  bed,  facing  the  window,  and  opening  my  eyes  voluntarily  in
order  to  drive  away  the  imagery  of  an  unpleasant  dream  which  was  begin-
ning to  revive,  I  saw  the  figure  of  a  man,  some  three  or  four  feet  distant
from  my  head,  standing  perfectly  still  by  the  bedstead,  so  close  to  it  that
the  bedclothes  seemed  slightly  puslied  towards  me  by  his  leg  pressing
against  them.  The  image  was  perfectly  distinct— height  about  live  feet
eight  inches,  sallow  complexion,  grey  eyes,  greyish  moustache,  short  and
bristly,  and  apparently  recently  clipped.  His  dress  seemed  like  a  dark  grey
dressing-gown,  tied  with  a  dark  red  rope.

"My  first  thought  was,  'That's  a  ghost'  ;  my  second,  'It  may  be  a
burglar  whose  designs  upon  my  watch  are  interrupted  by  my  opening  my
eyes.' I  bent  forward  towards  him,  and  the  image  vanished.

1  There  is  an  experience  with  which  we  are  all  familiar,  which  is  not  an  illusion
in  exactly  the  same  sense  as  the  above,  since  it  involves  no  erroneous  inference  from
what  is  seen,  but  which  is  instructive  in  considering  the  process  involved  in  such
illusions.  The  experience  we  mean  is  the  interpretation  of  a  pattern  in  either  of  two
different  ways  at  will,  as  when  we  see  a  rose  on  a  wall  paper,  either  as  a  face  or  a  rose,  as
we  choose.  The  most  striking  examples  are  the  drawings  in  black  and  white,  which  have
been  a  good  deal  sold  of  late  years,  which  are  so  drawn  as  to  represent  two  distinct
things  at  the  same  time  ;  for  instance,  one  drawing  may  be  either  seen  as  a  half-length
pictvire  of  a  coquettish  looking  young  woman,  or  as  the  head  of  a  cross  old  crone.
Having  seen  the  picture  in  one  way,  it  is  often  only  by  a  considerable  effort  that  we
can  interpret  it  in  its  other  equally  real  meaning,  and  then  it  is  only  by  a  similar
effort  that  we  can  return  to  the  first  view.

When  one  of  the  interpretations  is  unreal,  or  unintended,  as  is,  of  course,  the
case  when  we  are  concerned  with  the  ordinary  objects  or  patterns  surrounding  us,
it  may  vary  with  the  condition  of  our  eyesight,  or  other  circumstances.  A  friend  of
ours  informs  us  that  on  one  occasion,  when  lying  in  bed  unwell,  and  with
temperature  somewhat  above  the  normal,  the  patterns  on  his  wall  paper,  the  folds  of
his  curtains,  &c.,  made  themselves  up  into  numerous  very  definite  and  quite  per-
sistent figures,  which  he  was  quite  unable  to  reproduce  when  his  illness  was  over.

The  following  is  a  curious  experience  apparently  of  this  character,  in  which  the


v.]  Relation  of  Illusions  to  Hallucinations.


95


"  As  the  image  vanished,  my  attention  passed  to  a  shadow  on  the  wall,
twice  or  three  times  the  distance  off,  and  perhaps  twelve  feet  high.  There
was  a  gas  lamp  in  the  mews-lane  outside,  which  shed  a  light  through  the
lower  twelve  inches  or  so  of  the  (fii'st-floor)  window,  over  which  the  blind
had  not  been  completely  drawn,  and  the  shadow  was  cast  by  the  curtain
hanging  beside  the  window.  The  solitary  bit  of  colour  in  the  image — the
red  Tope  of  the  dressing-gown — was  immediately  afterwards  identified  with
the  twisted  mahogany  handle  of  the  dressing-table,  which  was  in  the  same
line  of  vision  as  part  of  the  shadow.

"Place  :  51  (?),  Torrington-square,  London,  W.C.  Time:  About  the
end  of  November  (?),  1886,  probably  2  a.m.

"I  had  just  had  an  unpleasant  dream  (quite  unconnected  with  the
image),  and,  on  awaking,  had  turned  round  to  lie  on  the  other  side,  thus
facing  the  window.

"If  my  recollection  serves  me  rightly,  I  had  that  evening  been  discussing
appai'itions  and  illusions  with  Professor  Croom  Robertson  and  Mr.  Carveth
Read. Age  31.

' '  I  wondered  very  much  afterwards  that  I  had  not  identified  the  image
with  my  brother,  who  is  about  the  same  general  build  and  height,  and  wears
a  short  moustache,  which  he  sometimes  clips.  Probably  the  identification
was  prevented  by  the  burglar-scare  occurring  to  me.  I  did  not  think  at  the
time  of  any  one  in  connection  with  the  image.

"  \V. R.  SORLEY."

From  Miss  W.

"  One  evening  at  dusk  I  went  into  my  bedroom  to  fetch  something  I
wanted  off  the  mantelpiece.  A  street  lamp  threw  a  slanting  ray  of  light
in  at  the  window,  just  sufficient  to  enable  me  to  discern  the  dim  outline  of
the  chief  articles  of  furniture  in  the  room.  I  was  cautiously  feeling  for
what  I  wanted  when,  partially  turning  round ,  I  perceived  at  a  short  distance
behind  me  the  figure  of  a  little  old  lady,  sitting  very  sedately  with  her  hands

influence  causing  the  illusion  is  regarded  by  the  percipient  as  telepathic.  It  reached
us  independently  of  the  Census. Mrs.  W.  writes: —

' '  In  1873  we  were  moved  to  Montsioa's  country,  my  husband  having  been
appointed  missionary  to  that  chief.  Our  home  was  at  Mafiking.  My  two  eldest
girls,  Eva  and  Jessie,  seven  and  nine  years  of  age,  were  in  Grahamstown  at  school.
While  travelling  to  the  chief's  great  place  in  July — we  were  having  breakfast— as  I
looked  at  my  little  Celia  instead  of  seeing  Celia's  face,  I  saw  my  Jessie's  face  quite
plainly,  and  wondered  at  the  time,  because  the  children  did  not  resemble  each  other,
and  I  had  not  seen  Jessie  since  August,  1872.  We  all  went  to  chapel,  and  each  time
I  looked  at  Celia,  I  saw  Jessie's  face.  I  remarked  to  my  husband  how  strange  it  was  ;
he  replied,  '  And  they  are  not  alike,  are  they  ? '  And  so  on  at  intervals  during  all
the  four  days'  journey.  I  felt  troubled  about  it,  for  we  were  so  far  from  any  post,
and  from  my  dear  child.  She  seemed  somehow  to  be  near  me.  I  began  to  wonder
why  no  letters  came.  After  a  while  I  did  not  see  her  face  so  plainly,  but  always
when  I  looked  at  Celia,  this  continued  at  intervals,  far  into  August.  In  September
we  got  letters  from  Grahamstown  telling  us  how  dangerously  ill  Jessie  had  been,
for  days  hovering  between  life  and  death  ;  how  they  would  not  write  until  they  knew
what  it  was  to  be,  life  or  death  ;  then  they  told  of  restoration  to  health.  Then  I  said
to  my  husband,  '  That  accounts  for  the  strange  feelings  I  have  had  about  Jessie,  and
seeing  her  so  often  before  me.'  I  was  always  wide  awake,  no  dreams  of  the  night.
It  is  now  nearly  19  years  ago.


96  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


folded  in  her  lap,  holding  ;i  white  pocket-handkerchief.  I  was  much  startled,
for  I  had  not  before  seen  anyone  in  the  room,  and  called  out  '  Who's  that?'
but  received  no  answer,  and,  turning  quite  round  to  face  my  visitor,  she
immediately  vanished  from  sight.  'Well,'  I  thought,  'this  is  strange!'
I  had  left  all  the  rest  of  the  household  downstairs  ;  it  was  hardly  possible
that  anyone  could  have  followed  me  into  the  room  without  my  being  aware
of  it,  and  besides,  the  old  lady  was  quite  different  from  anyone  I  had  ever
.seen.  Being  very  near-sighted,  I  began  to  think  my  eyes  had  played  me  a
trick  ;  so  I  resumed  my  search  in  as  nearly  as  possible  the  same  position  as
before,  and  having  succeeded,  was  turning  to  come  away  when  lo  !  and
behold  !  there  sat  the  little  old  lady  as  distinct  as  ever,  with  her  funny  little
cap,  dark  dress,  and  hands  folded  demurely  over  her  white  handkerchief.
This  time  I  turned  round  quickly  and  marched  up  to  the  apparition,  which
vanished  as  suddenly  as  before.  And  now  being  convinced  that  no  one  was
playing  me  any  trick,  I  determined  to  find  out,  if  possible,  the  why  and
because  of  the  mystery.  Slowly  resuming  my  former  position  by  the  fire-
place, and  again  perceiving  the  figure,  I  moved  my  head  slightly  from  side  to
side,  and  found  that  it  did  the  same.  I  then  went  slowly  backwards,  keeping
my  head  still  until  I  again  reached  the  place,  when  deliberately  turning
round  the  mystery  was  solved.

"  A  small,  polished,  mahogany  stand  near  the  window,  which  I  used  as  a
cupboard  for  various  trifles,  made  the  body  of  the  figure,  a  piece  of  paper
hanging  from  the  partly-open  door  serving  as  the  handkerchief  ;  a  vase  on
the  top  formed  the  head  and  head- dress,  and  the  slanting  light  falling  upon
it,  and  the  white  curtain  of  the  window  completed  the  illusion.  I  destroyed
and  re-made  the  figure  several  times,  and  was  surprised  to  find  how  distinct
it  appeared  when  the  exact  relative  positions  were  maintained."

With  less  good  observers,  or  less  favourable  circumstances  for
observation,  it  is  clear  that  these  illusions  might  never  have  been  re-
solved into  their  constituent  elements  and  might  have  been  permanently
taken  for  hallucinations.  It  is,  therefore,  not  improbable  that  some
of  the  cases  reported  to  us  as  hallucinations  were  really  illusions,  and,
this  being  so,  it  becomes  important  to  consider  under  what  conditions
the  mistake  is  likely  to  occur.

Imperfect  vision  of  the  object  misinterpreted  is  the  general  condi-
tion of  such  experiences,  and  this  may  occur  [a)  owing  to  the  light
being  bad,  as  in  the  cases  we  have  quoted ;  oi',  (6)  owing  to  defects  of
the  eyes,  such  as  astigmatism  and  short  sight.  For  instance,  a  short-
sighted friend  of  ours  tells  us  that  she  has  several'times  mistaken  a  cer-
tain projecting  corner  of  a  rough  stone  wall  for  a  lady  with  flounced
skirts.  The  following  account  also  illustrates  the  effect  of  short-sight,
and  gives  a  probable  explanation  of  some  curious  auditory  illusions.

(251.  1.)  From  Miss  S.  H.

November  28th,  1889.
' '  I  consider  the  whole  class  of  this  kind  of  mental  phenomena  to  be  of
the  nature  of  dreaming. I  am  constitutionally  a  regular  and  sound  sleeper.


v.]  Relation  of  Illusions  to  Hallucinations.  97

But  any  occurring  disturbance  in  health,  either  of  body  or  mind,  occasions
dreams  ;  besides  which  I  am  aware  of  an  intermediate  state  between  torpor
and  full  activity  of  functions,  which  is  apt  often  to  run  into  the  semi-
drea,ming  which  retains  consciousness  of  being  such.  And  this  midway
state  grows  upon  me  with  age.  It  chiefly  concerns  sounds,  while  for  some
little  time  past  I  have  been  tending  towards  deafness  ;  but  it  also  respects
partially  my  sense  of  sight,  while  I  have  known  myself  from  early  youth  to
be  short-sighted.  I  should  not  know  my  own  sister  by  her  features  across  a
room,  judging  people  generally  by  their  dress  and  mode  of  walking.  I  am,
however,  very  imaginative,  and  it  often  happens  to  me,  now  that  we  two  are
living  alone  together,  either  to  see  her  seated  in  a  corner  of  our  sitting-
room  as  I  enter  it,  when  she  is  not  there,  or  to  miss  seeing  her  when  she  is
there. But  I  am  much  more  affected  as  to  sounds. We  Imve  lived  at  two

houses  in  C  ,  first  at  B  ,  and  now  at  the  Cottage  ;  while  near  to  both,

but  almost  close  to  the  latter,  runs  the  N  line  of  railway,  and  many

have  been  the  startling  dreams  that  its  night-trains  have  wakened  me  up

into,  especially  if  I  have  been  weak  in  health. This  began  when  at  B  .  I

was  confined  to  bed  with  bronchitis.  I  noticed  time  after  time  that  my
sister  seemed  to  run  hastily  from  her  bedroom  straight  into  her  dressing-
room,  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall  against  which  my  own  bed  was  placed,
stop  at  her  toilet  stand,  to  fetch,  as  I  supposed,  some  medicine  or  something
wanted  by  her  husband,  and  then  return  to  him  as  hastily.  After  several
repetitions,  I  mentioned  it  to  her  ;  she  denied  having  done  anything  of  the
kind,  and  said,  '  Of  course  it  was  the  train.'  I  did  not  at  once  see  a  corre-
spondence to  my  experience,  and  knew  not  how  to  accept  her  explanation,
till  I  came  to  remember  the  bridge  that  crosses  the  road  passed  by  the  train.
Here  was  actually  the  sufficing  cause  for  the  midway  stoppage,  and  the
advancing  and  retreating  rushes  which  afforded  the  noticed  perspective  of
sound.  But  since  we  have  lived  at  the  Cottage  we  lose  the  effect  of  the
bridge,  and  have  only  the  sudden  bursting  one,  and  then  the  retreating
rush.  Soon  after  our  removal,  I  remember  in  particular  being  once
startled  up,  and  supposing  that  a  man  was  running  in  a  violent  passion
of  anger  along  the  passage  behind  my  bed.  Recently,  my  sound-delusions
attach  [themselves]  to  many  sorts  of  common  movements  ;  any  stir  of
furniture  or  blast  of  wind  supplies  to  itself  suggested  words.  I  will  now
repeat  and  analyse  [one]  special  instance  of  this  semi-dreaming  as  to  which  I
believe  I  can  safely  trust  my  memory.

' '  [It]  was  at  B  , at  a  time  when  my  bedroom  was  on  an  upper

story,  just  over  that  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.  In  the  darkness  of  early
morning  I  was  suddenly  roused  by  what  seemed  to  me  a  voice  calling,

'S  !' I  jumped  out  of  bed,  and  leaned  over  the  banister  on  the

landing,  crying  out,  '  What  is  it  ?  do  you  want  me  ? '  and  even  ran  down  and
opened  the  bedroom  door  of  my  sister,  asking  the  same  question.  '  No,'
they  had  not  called  me,  and  sent  me  back  to  bed.  And  as  I  lay  there  I
reflected  how  inevitably,  if  I  had  been  superstitious,  I  should  have  taken  it
for  granted  that  the  voice  heard  was  one  of  warning  from  my  mother,  who
had  died  some  time  before.  But  it  turned  out  that  Mr.  B.  had  that  morn-
ing risen  to  draw  up  his  window-blind,  that  he  might  be  able  to  read  in  bed
when  the  dawn  should  come.  It  must  have  been  that  blind's  drawing-up
which  I  heard  call  to  me  '  S  I  "

H


98


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Again,  (c)  the  imperfect  vision  may  be  owing  to  the  distance  of
the  object  seen.  Of  course,  distance  may  easily  lead  to  a  mistake  of
identity,  but  this  is  almost  too  obvious  to  need  saying,  and  a  percipient
M^ould  seldom  rest  his  belief  that  he  had  seen  a  hallucination  merely  on
the  fact  that  he  thought  he  saw  a  friend  who  could  not  have  been  in
the  place,  unless  the  distance  was  small  enough  to  make  any  question
as  to  distinctness  of  vision  seem  aljsurd.  But  there  is  another  way  in
which  illusions  may  arise  from  distance  ;  a  figure  may  disappear  in  a
manner  that  seems  quite  unaccountable,  when  it  has  really  only  been
hidden  by  some  object  whose  exact  relative  position  is  not  apprehended.
We  have  no  instance  of  an  illusion  proved  to  have  arisen  in  this  way,
but  the  following  case,  in  which  one  precipient  is  sure  that  the  experi-
ence can  be  thus  explained,  and  the  other  percipient  is  equally  sure
that  it  cannot,  will  serve  well  to  illustz'ate  the  point.

(.56.  18.)  From  Miss  E.  R.  B.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

"On  a  summer  evening  in  daylight,  in  or  about  the  j^ear  1867,  I  was
walking  with  my  father  and  sister  between  the  North  and  South  Camp,
Aldershot,  on  a  sandy,  open  space.  Behind  us  we  heard  footsteps,  and
looking  back  saw  a  soldier,  who  followed  us  some  few  yards,  when  we  missed
him,  and  turning  could  not  see  him,  so  went  back  to  look  for  him,  but  he
was  nowhere  to  he  seen.

"  I  was  out  for  a  walk,  in  my  usual  health  and  spirits.

"  Personally  the  soldier  was  quite  unknown.

"  My  companions  were  my  father  and  sister  ;  both  saw  what  I  did.  I
am  unable  to  say  whether  the  former  had  any  fixed  opinion  about  it.  The
latter  has  always  tliought  it  a  real  soldier  that  somehow  got  away."

[In  this  case  we  have  allowed  the  view  of  the  more  sceptical  sister  to
prevail,  and  have  not  included  the  case  in  our  tables.]

Errors  from  this  cause — vision  imperfect  owing  to  distance — are
more  likely  to  occur  when  the  percipient  is  out  of  doors  than  under
other  circumstances,  both  because  persons  are  then  liable  to  be  seen  at
greater  distances  than  they  can  be  indoors,  and  because  possible  inter-
vening obstacles  are  liable  to  be  less  known  and  familiar,  as  well  as
more  distant.

A  fourth  kind  of  imperfect  vision  (d)  is  due  to  the  object  seen
being  in  the  outer  part  of  the  field  of  sight.  We  have  probably  all
of  us  at  times  imagined  that  we  saw  some  person  or  thing  out  of  the
corner  of  our  eye,  which,  on  turning  round,  we  found  not  to  be  there.
When  a  supposed  hallucination  is  thus  seen  out  of  the  corner  of  the
eye,  it  is  generally  felt  to  be  a  trivial  and  unimpressive  experience,,
and  this,  combined  with  frequent  doubt  on  our  informant's  part  as  to-
whether  the  experience  was  a  hallucination  or  an  illusion,  has,  we


v.]  Relation  of  Illusions  to  Hallucinations.  99


believe,  led  to  very  imperfect  returns  under  this  bead.  For  this
reason  we  have,  as  explained  in  Chapter  II.,  p.  37,  left  out  of  our
tables  all  supposed  hallucinations  seen  out  of  the  corner  of  the  eye.

It  is  not  easy  to  estimate  the  extent  to  which  the  other  three
causes  of  indistinct  vision  may  have  led  to  permanent  errors.  Probably
the  second — defective  eyesight — is  the  least  important  by  itself,  as
those  who  suffer  fi'om  it  are  in  the  habit  of  mistrusting  and  correcting
their  impressions,  and,  moreover,  they  correct  the  defects  as  far  as
possible  with  glasses.  Defective  eyesight  would,  however,  sometimes
enhance  the  drawbacks  of  feeble  light.

Illusions  seem  to  be  relatively  frequent  just  after  waking  from  sleep.
The  small  amount  of  light  which  there  often  is  in  the  room  under  these
circumstances  would,  of  course,  largely  account  for  this,  but  other
causes  may  also  operate,  such  as  the  want  of  rapid  adjustment  of
the  eyes  immediately  after  waking  and  the  want  of  complete  alertness
of  the  judgment.  To  these  would  be  added  for  short-sighted  people
the  absence  of  spectacles  ;  and  for  persons  in  general  there  would  often
be  the  loss  of  the  important  aid  in  judging  of  distance  and  solidity
which  is  given  by  binocular  vision,  since,  when  a  person  lies  on  one
side,  one  eye  is  apt  to  be  buried  in  the  pillow.

On  the  whole,  it  is  obvious  that  poor  light  may  be  a  very  fruitful
source  of  error,  and  though  unmistakable  hallucinations  do  of  course
sometimes  occur  in  bad  light,  (as  for  instance  No.  192.  21,  p.  139),
all  alleged  hallucinations  occurring  under  these  circumstances  should
have  their  credentials  examined  with  especial  care.  We  cannot  say
that  this  examination  leaves  by  any  means  all  those  included  in  our
tables  free  from  suspicion.  The  following  case,  for  instance,  seems  a
somewhat  doubtful  one,  especially  as  the  percipient's  expectation  of
seeing  his  brother  would  naturally  predispose  him  to  a  particular
interpretation  of  what  he  saw.

(145.  9.)  From  Mr.  G.  M.  C.

(The  account  was  written  in  1892.)

' '  In  rooms  of  ,  Cambridge,  on  entering  room  expecting  to  meet

a  brother,  [I]  saw  him  distinctly  leaning  against  mantelpiece,  the  time
about  10  in  the  evening,  in  April,  '89,  the  room  only  lighted  by  a  fire.  On
looking  more  closely  he  was  not  there.  [I  was]  just  entering  room.  [Age]
about  19. No  [other  persons  were  present.]

"  I  was  expecting  to  see  him,  and  was  surprised  not  to  find  him."

It  appeared  to  us,  however,  that  it  would  be  useless  to  attempt
a  numerical  estimate  of  the  probable  amount  of  error  in  our  tables  due
to  this  cause,  without  a  more  accurate  knowledge  than  we  could  hope
to  obtain  of  the  exact  circumstances  of  each  case,  and  of  the  capacity
of  our  informants  as  observers. But,  after  carefully  considering  the

H  2


100  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


reports  sent  to  us,  we  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that,  in  about
ninety  per  cent,  of  the  visual  cases, — certainly  not  less — the  circum-
stances reported  afford  no  ground  for  the  supposition  that  a  real  person
or  thing  was  mistaken  for  a  hallucination.  The  proportion  of  cases
open  to  doubt  is,  as  already  stated  in  Chapter  III.  (p.  65),  consider-
ably larger  among  the  more  recent  cases  than  among  the  remoter  ones.

There  is  a  small  class  of  apparitions  in  which  the  repeated  reappear-
ance of  the  same  figure  in  the  same  place,  as  seen  from  the  same  point
of  view,  like  the  illusion  described  on  pp.  95-6,  strongly  suggests
that  some  real  effect  of  light  and  shade,  or  some  real  object,  is  con-
tinually misinterpreted  in  the  same  way,  and  that  there  is  no  genuine
hallucination. The  following  is  a  case  in  point.

(196.  2.)  From  Miss  H.  M.

{The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

"I  think  it  was  about  two  years  ago,  in  the  winter,  at  about  6.30  or
perhaps  earlier,  but  it  was  too  dark  to  distinguish  anything  clearly.  I  was
coming  up  a  steep  lonely  bit  of  road  about  300  yards  from  our  own  house,
and  I  saw  just  ahead  of  me  what  looked  like  a  person  in  some  light  clothes  ;
it  looked  like  a  man  in  a  smock-frock,  and  though  it  was  too  dark  to  dis-
tinguish details,  the  figure  was  distinctly  light  against  the  hedge  on  the  side
of  the  road.  T  watched  the  figure  walking  up  in  front  of  me,  but  thought
it  nothing  at  all  strange,  until  at  a  slight  bend  in  the  road  it  entirely  dis-
appeared, though  I  looked  all  about  for  it.  I  was  driving  with  my  sister  in
a  pony  dog-cart ;  either  she  or  I  was  driving,  I  don't  remember  which,  but
we  were  going  only  at  a  foot's  pace.

"  It  was  too  dark  to  see  anything  but  that  it  was  a  human  figure  moving
up  the  hill,  and  keeping  at  about  the  same  distance  from  us.  I  concluded  it
was  a  farm  labourer,  partly  because  this  would  be  most  probable,  and  partly
because  the  upper  part  of  the  figure  was  lighter  than  the  lower  part,  which
gave  the  impression  of  its  wearing  a  smock-frock.

"  My  sister  was  with  me  and  saw  the  figure  also.  We  knew  the  road
was  said  to  be  haunted,  but  we  are  so  accustomed  to  this  bit  of  road  at  all
hours  that  this  fact  was  not  at  all  in  our  minds.  The  figure  looked  so
absolutely  natural,  that  I  was  much  surprised  at  its  disappearance.

' '  This  is  the  only  time  I  have  had  this  experience,  though  I  have  often
come  up  the  road  in  the  dark  since,  and  have  always  looked  out  for  the
figure."

The  other  percipient,  Miss  M.  M.,  writes  : —

March  m,.  1892.

"One  night  I  was  driving  home  with  my  sister  in  a  small  pony  cart,  and
I  saw  walking  up  the  hill  in  front  of  us  what  looked  like  a  man  in  a  smock-
frock  ;  quite  suddenly  he  vanished,  and  I  thought  it  rather  odd  and  that
what  I  had  seen  could  not  have  really  been  a  man.  I  then  found  my  sister
had  also  seen  the  figure,  and  that  she  had  the  same  feeling  about  its  being
mysterious.

"  We  were  further  puzzled  by  hearing  that  my  father  and  brother  had  also
seen  the  figure,  and  that  he  always  vanished  about  the  same  place.


v.]  Relation  of  Illusions  to  Hallucinations.  101


"I  cannot  remember  who  saw  him  first,  and  I  have  never  seen  him  again."

Besides  the  above, we have  accounts  from  Mr.  M  and  his  son,

who  have  also  seen  on  different  occasions,  twice  each,  a  figure  which
they  describe  as  like  a  man  in  a  smock-frock,  in  the  same  place,  at  night,
under  similar  circumstances,  disappearing  in  the  same  mysterious  way.
Neither  of  them  had  heard  of  the  experiences  of  any  of  the  others  until
after  his  own.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  : —

Fehruarij  25th,  1892.

"I  have-  this  evening  talked  over  the  apparition  with  Miss  M.  M

and  her  father. He  has  seen  it  twice  at  least ;  she  once  with  Miss  H.

M  ,  and  her  brother  has  recently  seen  it  again. It  is  always  seen  in  the

same  place  and  disappears  suddenly  at  the  same  place.  Always  seen  in  the
evening,  but  it  has  not  been  observed  whether  it  is  always  with  the  moon  in
the  same  position,  &c.  The  darkness  has  always  been  too  great  for  distinct
vision.  It  is  diiBcult  to  suppose  it  a  shadow  because  of  the  space  over
which  it  appears  to  move.  But  that  it  is  some  effect  of  light  and  shade  is,
they  think,  considering  its  uniformly  appearing  and  disappearing  in  the
same  place  and  in  a  faint  light,  the  most  probable  hypothesis.

'*  It  seems  likely  that  others  may  have  seen  it  ;  for  once  Miss  M.  M

was  going  up  the  hill  in  a  pretty  good  light,  following  a  farmer  and  his  wife
well  known  to  her.  The  farmer's  wife  looked  round,  caught  sight  of  Miss
M  ,  and  threw  herself  into  her  husband's  arms, screaming  as  if  with  fright.

"I  went  over  the  ground  of  the  ghost  with  Miss  M  .  Certainly

seeing  the  place  does  not  explain  it ;  it  is  a  rather  open  place — hedges  on
each  side  and  only  a  few  hedgerow  trees.  The  ghost  walks  about  fifty  yards
in  front  of  the  percipients  and  continues  visible  for,  say,  one  hundred
yards,  and  then  disappears  near  some  farm  buildings.''

The  first  apparition  described  in  the  next  case  is  even  more  de-
cidedly like  the  illusion  of  pp.  95-6.  We  have  been  unable  to  obtain
first-hand  evidence  from  the  other  percipients  mentioned  in  this  narra-
tive. The  appearance  of  a  similar  figure  on  the  second  occasion  may
have  been  due  to  expectancy,  intensified  by  the  general  alarm  of  the
household.

(588.  22.)  From  Miss  F.  Lewitt.

The  Downs,  St.  Neots,  February  2nd,  1892.
"  The  following  story  has  this  morning  been  told  Miss  C.  Cochrane  [the
collector]  by  her  father's  housemaid  (lately  come),  a  quiet,  steady  young
woman  who  came  with  a  good  character,  and  appears  perfectly  truthful.
She  was  quiet  and  thoughtful  while  telling  the  story  (assisted  by  questions
from  Miss  C.  Cochrane).  Miss  Cochrane  then  arranged  the  wording  of  the
story  and  read  it  to  Fanny  Lewitt,  who  said  it  was  quite  right,  and  then
signed  it.

Fanny  Lewitt's  Story.
"  In  the  month  of  December,  1889,  I  was  living  as  nurse  with  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Bodley,  at  Alveston  Hall,  Nantwich,  Cheshire. I  was  25  years  of  age,


102


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


and  had  been  there  three  years,  first  as  housemaid,  then  as  nurse.  I  had
not  heard  anything  about  the  house  being  haunted.  One  evening,  shortly
before  Christmas,  I  was  rocking  the  baby's  cradle  in  the  night-nursery  at
about  9  p.m.,  while  the  family  were  at  dinner.  The  night-nursery  opened
into  a  passage  with  the  school-room  at  the  other  end.  The  passage  was
partly  lit  by  a  lamp  on  the  landing  below.  The  night-nursery  door  was
open  at  the  time,  and  at  the  end  of  the  passage  I  observed  a  strange  middle-
aged  lady  in  white  evening  dress,  with  her  side  face  towards  me,  standing
against  the  school-room  door,  leaning  her  face  on  her  hand.  I  watched  her
for  a  moment,  and  then  went  out  to  see  who  it  was  and  what  she  wanted,
but  as  I  drew  near  she  vanislied  away.  I  then  went  back  to  the  baby,  when
there  was  the  lady  standing  as  before  ;  I  went  out  to  her  again,  and  again
she  vanished.  After  repeating  this  a  third  time  I  felt  frightened,  and  did
not  look  towards  the  door  again,  and  T  did  not  see  the  figure  again  that
night.  When  I  went  downstairs  I  told  the  other  servants  what  I  had  seen,
and  the  housemaid  then  said  that  the  governess  had  been  complaining  that
some  one  always  shook  or  opened  her  door  when  she  was  dressing  for  dinner,
but  no  one  could  be  found  who  had  done  it.  The  next  morning,  early,  just
before  getting  up,  the  housemaid  saw  a  middle-aged  lady  in  short  petticoats,
with  something  over  Iier  head,  standing  in  the  room.  Two  other  maids  slept
in  the  room,  but  were  not  awake.  The  housemaid  watched  the  apparition  for
a  few  moments,  and  then  hid  her  head  under  the  bed-clothes.  About  this
time,  the  day  before  Christmas,  the  governess  went  away  for  her  holidays,
and  the  housemaid  shut  up  her  room  and  locked  the  door  at  night,  but  for
several  mornings  afterwards,  on  going  to  unlock  the  door,  she  found  it
already  open.  She  then  told  her  mistress,  and  Mr.  Bodley  himself  locked
the  door  that  night  and  put  the  key  away,  saying  he  would  unlock  it  in  the
morning  ;  but  in  the  morning,  when  he  went  to  do  so,  the  door  was  open,
and  the  key  in  the  lock.  The  coachman  was  then  put  into  the  room  to
watch  all  night,  and  he  said  next  morning  that  he  had  seen  nothing,  but  had
heard  loud  noises,  and  the  door  shook  and  the  crockery  rattled.  The  day
after  this,  or  the  same  evening  (T  forget  which),  at  about  5.30  p.m.,  I  again
saw  the  same  strange  lady  standing  in  the  passage  in  the  same  position,  only
this  time  she  was  near  tlie  niglit-nursery  door,  and  was  wearing  a  morning
grey  dress,  her  pi-ohle  towards  me.  I  was  carrying  some  linen  out  into  the
passage,  and  fell  back  startled  and  frightened,  when  the  figure  disappeared.
I  told  my  mistress  what  I  had  again  seen,  and  she  was  so  frightened  that
the  whole  family  and  myself  left  the  house  the  next  day,  Sunday,
January  the  1st.  1890,  and  the  servants  on  Monday,  and  did  not  retui-n  to
it  again.

"Fanny  Lewitt."

Notwithstanding  the  possibility  of  regarding  the  apparitions  in
the  two  cases  last  described  as  illusions,  we  have,  on  the  whole,
thought  it  right  to  reckon  them  as  subjective  cases  of  hallucination.^

The  two  following  cases  we  included  with  somewhat  less  hesitation ;

^  Some  cases  rather  similar  to  these  were  given  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.
v.,  pp.  323-325.


v.]  Relation  of  Illusions  to  Hallucinations.  103


although  in  the  first  there  is  the  same  feature  of  recurrence  at  a
particular  spot  as  seen  from  a  particular  point  of  view.  But  its
occurrence  in  full  daylight  makes  it  comparatively  unlikely  that  it  was
a  mere  illusion — especially  as  a  similar  condition  of  health  in  the
percipient  had  been  accompanied  by  a  hallucination  on  a  previous
occasion.

(460.  14.)  From  Professor  G.

Fehruary  llth,  1891.

"Saw  an  old  woman  with  red  cloak,  nursing  a  child  in  her  arms.  She
sat  on  a  boulder.  Place  :  a  grassy  moor  or  upland,  near  Shotts  in  Lanark-
shire. Date  :  over  twenty  years  ago.  Early  autumn,  in  bright  sunny
weather.  Made  several  attempts  to  reach  her,  but  she  always  vanished
before  I  could  get  close  up  to  the  stone.  Place  far  from  any  dwelling,  and
no  spot  where  anyone  could  be  concealed.

' '  [I  was]  walking  ;  had  been  slightly  troubled  with  insomnia — which
afterwards  became  much  worse. Age  about  30.

'•  No  one  [was  with  me].  I  heard  a  vague  report  that  a  woman  with  red
cloak  was  sometimes  seen  on  the  moor.  Can't  now  remember  whether  I  had
heard  of  that  report  before  I  saw  the  figure — but  think  I  had  not.

'  Saw  many  years  ago  (age  about  21),  a  dog  sitting  beside  me  in  my
room  :  saw  this  ouly  once  :  was  troubled  slightly  witli  insomnia  at  the
time,  which  became  worse  afterwards."

The  percipient's  own  view,  the  collector  tells  us,  is  that  the  experience
on  the  moor  was  ' '  entirely  due  to  '  nerves, '  as  both  then  and  previously
when  he  saw  the  dog,  he  had  been  much  overworked,  and  in  each  case  a
severe  illness  followed."

In  the  next  case,  the  fact  that  the  percipient  could  go  close  up  to
the  figure  without  its  disappearing,  makes  it  almost  certain  that,
notwithstanding  its  recurrence  night  after  night  in  the  same  place,  it
was  a  hallucination.  An  illusion  would  almost  necessarily  have  been
dispelled  by  so  close  an  examination,  and  so  complete  a  change  in  the
point  of  view.

(643.  22. ) From  Mrs.  Wilson,  Westal,  Cheltenham.

April  2Wi,  1892.

"I  saw  the  figure  of  a  ghost-like  transparent  draped  woman  always
standing  at  a  certain  spot  on  a  landing  near  my  room  at  night  when  I
passed.  The  apparition  was  exactly  like  a  certain  ghost  described  to  me  by
a  teller  of  ghost-stories.  The  tale  was  told  me  the  night  one  of  my  babies
was  at  death's  door.

' '  [I  was]  nursing  an  infant  of  six  months,  and  sitting  up  for  three  weeks,
in  turns  with  my  husband,  with  another  child  of  16  months,  who  was  hoije-
lessly  ill. Health  good. Age  35.

"  It  was  merely  the  form  told  of  in  the  ghastly  story,  blue,  transparent,
statuesque.


104


Report  on  the  Gemus  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


"I  was  ashamed  of  my  weakness  and  spoke  little  of  it  ;  it  stood
to  meet  me  as  I  came  out  of  my  room,  going  up  stairs,  at  any  hour  of
the  night,  to  nurse  the  baby.  I  never  asked  anyone  to  come  and  look
at  it.  I  often  went  up  to  it  and  put  my  hand  through  it,  which  assured
me  of  its  being  merely  brought  [on]  by  my  unstrung  nerves,  sorrow,
and  fatigue.

' '  I  often  think  of  it  now  as  I  pass,  and  remember  the  horror  of  it
merely  as  a  memory  ;  it  worried  me  for  some  weeks — five  or  six.

"  Mary  A.  Wilson."

This  experience  is  no  doubt  attributable  to  the  mental  and  physical
strain  under  which  the  percipient  was  living,  and  its  recurrence ^  in
the  particular  spot  would  be  accounted  for  by  association  of  ideas
and  expectancy.

Another  case  of  what  was  probably  a  hallucination,  recurring  in
the  same  spot,  will  be  found  in  A2)2)''ndix  D,  in  the  course  of  an
interesting  hallucinatory  history  to  which  we  shall  have  to  refer  more
than  once.  The  percipient,  who  was  at  the  time,  as  it  turned  out,
sickening  for  an  illness,  saw,  whenever  she  looked  towards  it,  a  black
dog  sitting  in  a  corner  of  the  stairs.  The  case,  however,  differs  from
the  last  in  that  she  appears  to  have  seen  the  phantom  only  from  a
particular  landing.

The  following  is  a  recurring  illusion  of,  we  believe,  a  rare  type,  its
recurrence  not  depending  on  a  constant  objective  basis.  The  percipient
tells  us  that  there  had  been  a  special  sympathy  between  her  and  the
sister  spoken  of.

(407.  2.)  From  Miss  M.  H.-

November  Qth,  1890.
"  Always,  in  my  room  at  night,  the  reflection  of  a  light  or  of  the  moon,
or  anything  white  against  the  darkness,  assumes  the  figure  of  a  younger
sister,  who  died  a  few  years  ago  ;  and  whether  she  seems  dressed  in  white  or
in  a  dark  brown  (and  she  is  always  in  either  one  or  the  other),  her  hair  is
long  and  flowing,  as  she  had  not  worn  it  for  several  years  before  her  death.
Except  for  this  circumstance,  which  I  noted  with  some  curiosity,  I  always
regai'ded  it  as  a  memory  '  materialising.'  "

A  case  like  this,  though  we  have  classed  it,  in  accordance  with  the
percipient's  view  of  it,  as  an  illusion  and  not  as  a  hallucination,  seems
to  be  almost  on  the  line  between  the  two,  and  we  have  introduced  it  here

1  Recurrence  is  a  feature  much  commoner  among  hallucinations  experienced
during  some  degree  of  ill-health  than  among  those  of  normal  health  (see  p.  164).

-  Miss  H,  has  also  experienced  a  visual  hallucination  of  a  dying  friend  (see
p.  250,  foot-note).


Relation  of  Illusions  to  Hallucinations.


105


to  illustrate  the  transition.^  It  is  hard  to  conceive  how  an  illusion^
produced  under  such  varying  conditions,  should  constantly  assume  the
distinct  likeness  of  a  familiar  human  figure,  unless  the  misinterpre-
tation of  sense-percepts  is  aided  by  a  tendency  to  externalize  an  image
with  which  the  mind  is  much  occupied.

The  following  case  is  similarly  transitional.

(69.  14.)  From  Mr.  W.  S.

May  2m,  1889.

"  When  I  was  about  18  or  20,  I  was  travelling  in  the  Highlands  with
my  father  and  three  other  gentlemen.  About  ten  miles  on  this  side  of
Ballachulish  ferry,  he  left  me,  saying  that  he  would  walk  on  towards  the
ferry,  with  one  of  the  gentlemen.  After  half  an  hour's  delay,  we  drove-
on  in  the  carriage,  eagerly  looking  out  for  my  father,  for  the  night  was  at
hand  ;  he  was  a  bad  walker,  and  his  comrade  was  a  very  reckless  person.
We  saw  no  sign  of  him,  nor  had  any  one  of  the  few  travellers  and  shepherds
whom  we  met.  At  last  we  got  to  Ballachulish  ;  lie  was  not  there.  I  became
painfully  anxious,  and  sat  down  for  a  minute  in  the  parlour  of  the  little-
inn  to  consider  what  we  should  do.  One  of  my  hands,  I  remember,  was
pressed  over  my  eyes.  I  took  it  away,  and  then  I  saw,  floating,  as  it  were,
between  me  and  the  mantel-piece,  the  upper  half  of  my  father's  body.

"Do  not  be  shocked  when  I  tell  you  that  the  scientific  element  in  me
was  too  nmch  for  the  religious,  superstitious,  afiectionate — or  whatever  you.
choose  to  call  it.  I  said  to  myself,  '  By  Jove  ;  here's  an  apparition  I  Let's
see  how  it  can  be  explained. '  So  I  looked  steadily  at  my  half-ghost,  and
saw  how  a  spot  in  the  mantelpiece,  a  knot  in  the  wainscot,  &c.,  &c.,  had
combined  to  produce  the  spectral  appearance.  While  I  was  doing  this,  the
outlines  became  blurred,  and  the  whole  thing  faded  away.

"Five  minutes  afterwards  my  father  arrived.  He  had  left  the  road^
gone  up  a  corrie,  bathed  in  a  linn,  and  nearly  been  drowned.

"If  he  had  been  drowned,  I  should  probably  have  believed  in  ghosts,  or-
at  all  events  in  half  ghosts,  ever  after."

In  this  case,  according  to  our  informant's  description,  the  figure
did  not  resolve  itself  into  the  marks  and  knots  on  the  background.

1  A  quasi-hallucinatory  illusion  of  this  sort  may  explain  some  of  the  e.xtra-
ordinary  recognitions  of  supposed  materialised  spirits  that  are  liable  to  occur  at
spiritualistic  st^ances.  The  following  is  an  instance  quoted  b}-  D.  D.  Home  (Li jhts
and  Shadoios  of  Spiritualism,  p.  342.)  as  the  confession  of  an  exposed  medium  : — "Th&
first  seance  I  held  after  it  became  known  to  the  Rochester  people  that  I  was  a
medium,  a  gentleman  from  Chicago  recognised  his  daughter  Lizzie  in  me  after  I  had
covered  my  small  moustache  with  a  piece  of  flesh-coloured  cloth,  and  reduced  the
size  of  my  face  with  a  shawl  I  had  purposely  hung  up  in  the  back  of  the  cabinet.
From  this  sitting  my  fame  commenced  to  spread. "

Professor  Sorley's  remarks  (see  p.  95)  as  to  the  resemblance  of  the  illusory  figure-
he  saw  to  his  brother,  for  whom  he  might  have  taken  it  if  his  mind  had  not  been
occupied  with  another  fidea — namely,  that  of  a  [)ossible  burglar— are  instructive  in
this  connection.


106  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


which  had  aided  in  its  formation,  but  remained  for  a  short  time  as  a
shadowy  image  while  the  percipient  was  contemplating  these.  The
experience  thus  had  a  distinctly  hallucinatory  element,  and  we  have
accordingly  classed  it  as  a  hallucination.

In  the  next  case,  the  hallucinatory  element  is  more  obvious  and
predominant,  though  it  is  at  first  attached  to  a  basis  of  actual
sense-perception.

(722.  5.)  From  Mme.  A.  H.

(The  account  was  apparently  written  in  1891.)

"  C'etait  en  I'annee  1884,  Mme.  A  H— — ,  alors  jeune  fille  de  20  ans,

■demeurait  avec  sa  mere,  veuve,  a  Moscou. La  soeur  amee  d'A  ,  Mme.

H  S  ,dont  le  mari  etait  malade  depuis  quelque  temps,  occupait  une

autre  maison  non  loin  de  Ik.  Le  malade  mourut  la  nuit  du  23  Mai,  et  sa
mort  attrista  profondement  toute  la  famille  qui  Fadorait. Le  lendemain  de

ce  jour,  A  se  trouvait  au  salon  de  sa  mei'e,  oil  sa  sceur  venue  chez  elles

s'etait  endormie  dans  un  fauteuil.  II  etait  environ  8  heures  du  soir,  et  le  jour
•commen9ait  a  baisser.  Les  pensees  de  la  jeune  tille  ^taient  tristes,  et  se
portaient  au  defunt,  dent  le  corps  n'^tait  pas  encore  enterrd,  et  pose  dans
son  cercueil,  restait  encore  au  logement  qu'il  avait  habite. Le  regard

d'A  tomba  sur  le  rideau  en  tulle  qui  masquait  la  fenetre,  et  dans  les  plis

de  ce  rideau  elle  vit  apparaitve  la  figure  de  son  beau-frere. L'apparition  tres

indistmcte  d'abord  se  fit  plus  nette,  et  bientot  A  vit  distinctement  son

beau-frere  de  la  tete  aux  pieds  dans  son  habit  de  tous  les  jours.  II
paraissait  regarder  sa  femme  qui  continuait  a  dormir. D'un  geste  silencieux

A  I'invita  a  s'appi'ocher  de  la  dormeuse,  mais  l'apparition  fit  de  la  tete

un  signe  negatif  et  disparut."

In  the  following  case,  analogous  to  crystal-vision,  the  same  kind  of
thing  occurs — the  real  reflections  in  the  carafe  serving  as  a  basis  for
what  ultimately  becomes  a  definite  hallucinatory  vision.  (The  first
experience  is  somewhat  different,  but  it  is  convenient  to  give  the  whole
narrative  intact).

(406.  25.)  From  Mr.  W.  A.  C.

May  9ih,  1891.

"  Some  few  weeks  ago  I  was  at  a  Spiritualist  service.  Au  uneducated  man
was  reading  a  very  long  and  rather  wearisome  account  of  how  he  felt  when
in  a  trance.  I  thought  I  would  improve  the  time  by  looking  for  visions,
which  it  seemed  a  good  Spiritualist  ought  to  see.  I  fixed  my  attention  on  a
darkened  space  under  the  table,  and  near  it  was  the  foot  of  the  reader.
This  you  can  take  as  the  suggestion,  for  suddenly  I  saw  another  foot  near  it
in  the  air.  The  upper  part  was  outlined  in  light  and  the  marks  of  the  lacing
were  also  short  lines  of  light.  The  whole  foot  was,  however,  perfectly
distinct.  It  was  not  unlike  the  real  foot  near  it,  which  was  about  eighteen
inches  distant.  I  gave  a  sudden  start,  which  showed  me  that  I  was  getting
into  a  semi-unconscious  state  with  my  eyes  open  and  fixed,  and  the  start
was  to  shake  it  oft".


v.]  Relation  of  Illusions  to  Hallucinations.  107

"  I  then  turned  my  attention  to  a  round-globed  carafe  of  water  on  the
table,  still  in  search  of  visions.  Presently  the  various  reflections  in  it
took  [a]  form,  [sketch  enclosed]  [which]  reminded  me  of  the  view  from
my  native  place  in  the  West  Indies,  only  there  should  have  been  a
line  of  sea.  This  I  looked  for,  and  presently  it  came.  While  thinking
how  remarkably  like  to  the  reality  it  was,  (and,  perhaps,  also  think-
ing of  ships  on  the  sea,  though  I  am  not  conscious  now  of  having  done
so),  I  suddenly  saw  a  vessel  which  seemed  to  be  shipwrecked.  And  now
a  curious  chain  of  thought  went  leisurely  through  my  mind,  as  I  critically
surveyed  the  scene.  The  ship  seemed  in  full  sail  and  was  heeling  over
as  shown.  Now  I  had  been  to  sea  and  I  knew  the  following.  A  sailing
ship  had  no  right  to  be  so  near  the  land  unless  an  off-shore  wind  was  blow-
ing. But  if  so,  how  did  it  get  wrecked  ?  The  only  conclusion  possible
was  that  it  had  been  sailing  near  to  the  land  with  an  off-shore  wind,  and  had
struck  on  a  hidden  rock.  This  seemed  certain,  for,  had  it  been  otherwise,
the  ship  should  have  been  heeling  over  to  the  land,  and  not  from  it.  Also,
the  wreck  was  not  caused  by  a  storm,  or  the  ship  would  not  have  been
under  fall  sail,  and  besides,  the  sea  appeared  calm.  All  seemed  to  turn
on  which  way  the  wind  had  been  blowing,  and  this  I  wanted  to  find  out.
I  turned  my  attention  to  the  dark  foreground  to  see  if  there  were  any  trees
waving  in  the  wind,  but  they  appeared  too  far  away  to  give  a  clue.  1  looked
again  at  the  ship,  still  speculating,  when  suddenly  I  saw  what  looked  like  a
small  cloud  of  vapour  streaming  from  it.  It  was  of  a  grey  colour,  though  I  do
not  think  it  was  meant  for  smoke  or  steam.  It  seemed  to  be  only  a  sign  to  me
that  the  wind  must  be  blowing  in  the  direction  in  which  it  was  drifting.

"  No  sooner  had  I  accepted  this  as  the  answer  to  my  query,  than  the  whole
scene  vanished.  All  the  lines  in  the  glass  seemed  to  run  swiftly  together,
and  as  I  looked,  they  took  the  form  of  a  face.  At  first  it  had  a  painful  look,
such  as  I  saw  once  on  the  face  of  a  drowned  man  ;  but  presently  it  got
clearer,  and  I  thought  I  knew  it.  It  was  sloping  thus.  This,"  perhaps,
directed  my  attention  to  the  fact  that  it  was  the  face  of  a  man  who  was
sitting  [on  one  side  of  it].  It  was  not  a  reflection  of  him,  for  in  a  globe
such  could  only  be  in  miniature,  and  this  filled  the  glass  ;  besides,  when  it
vanished,  as  it  did  as  soon  as  I  had  made  sure  of  it,  there  was  no  such
reflection  there,  and  I  could  not  even  imagine  one.  The  man  I  had  never
spoken  to.

"  All  the  above  happened  when  I  was  wide  awake  and  quite  conscious
of  my  whereabouts."

Cases  such  as  these  suggest  that  it  is  easier  to  build  up
a  hallucination  from  something  of  the  nature  of  an  illusion,
than  to  make  it  up  independently  of  all  external  objects.  And
experiments  support  this  view.  It  is  often  easier  to  induce  a
hypnotised  person  to  take  a  real  object  for  something  entirely
different,  which  the  hypnotiser  wishes  him  to  see  hallucinatorily,  than
it  is  to  give  him  an  independent  hallucination.  He  will  often,  too,
when  a  hallucination  is  imposed,  spontaneously  attach  it  to  something
real— to  what  MM.  Binet  and  Fere  call  a,  point  de  repere.


108


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


In  connection  with  this,  we  may  refer  to  some  experiments  which
Mr.  W.  A.  Dixey,  the  well-known  optician  of  New  Bond-street,  has
recently  carried  out  with  "  Miss  X.",  on  the  effect  of  different  kinds  of
lenses  on  her  crystal  visions,  the  conditions  being  arranged  so  that
she  did  not  know  the  normal  effects  of  the  lenses  on  real  objects.^
In  5  out  of  8  experiments,  the  crystal  pictures  changed  in  ap-
pearance in  the  same  way  that  real  objects  would  have  done  on
applying  the  lenses,  but  in  the  other  three  the  changes  that  followed
in  the  pictures  on  applying  the  lenses  were  not  those  that  would  have
been  produced  in  real  objects.

Mr.  Dixey  has  since  repeated  these  experiments,  under  as  nearly  as
possible  the  same  conditions,  with  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  found,  on  apply-
ing the  lenses,  that  her  crystal  pictures  either  disappeared  or  remained
unaffected,  except  in  one  case,  where  a  temporary  enlargement  of  the
picture — which  was  not  the  normal  effect  of  the  lens — took  place.
These  negative  results  are  of  special  interest,  because  Mrs.  Verrall,
unlike  most  crystal-seers,  is  conscious  of  using  2^oints  de  repere  in  her
visions,  and  informs  us  that  on  this  occasion  they  were  more  con-
spicuous to  her  than  usual  when  the  pictures  began  to  develop,
though,  as  usual,  she  lost  sight  of  them  when  the  pictures  became  fully
formed.

The  part  played  by  the  j^oint  de  rejjere  may  be  further  illustrated
from  some  experiments  made  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  in  1889,  and  described
from  notes  made  at  the  time,  as  follows : —

The  object  of  the  experiments  was  to  ascertain  whether  a  moving
hallucination  would  be  attached  to  a.  point  de  repere,  and,  if  so,  how  it  would
be  managed.  The  person  experimented  with  was  a  boy  named  Goade,  who
was  hypnotised  by  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith.  Goade  having  been  made  to  see  a
beetle  on  a  (real)  sheet  of  ])Iain  black  paper  spread  out  before  him,  was
asked  to  point  to  it,  upon  which  he  pointed  to  a  minute  white  speck  in  the
texture  of  the  paper.  He  was  then  with  great  difficulty  persuaded  that  the
beetle  was  running  about,  and  when  he  did  realise  this,  he  traced  its  course
from  one  tiny  white  speck  to  another. Whether  he  saw  it  between  the

1  See  Borderland  for  January,  1894.  The  lenses  were  fitted  into  four  pairs  of
eye-glasses,  and,  with  normal  binocular  sight,  their  respective  effects  on  real  objects
at  the  given  distance  would  have  been  :  (A)  to  duplicate  the  object  vertically,  (B)  to
blur  it,  (C)  no  effect,  (D)  to  duplicate  the  object  horizontally.  Mr.  Dixey  handed  the
lenses  to  "Miss  X.",  and  the  eight  experiments  were  as  follows:  (1)  A.  gavedistai)ce.
(2)  B  ,  the  picture  disappeared,  but  after  about  a  minute  the  colours  became  intenser,
and  tlie  shadows  more  defined.  (3)  C,  no  difference.  (4)  D.  duplicated  the  picture
horizontally.  (5)  A.  duplicated  it  vertically.  (6)  A.  lowered  part  of  the  picture
(7)  D.  moved  it  to  the  right.  (8)  B.  the  picture  disappeared  In  experiments  (3)
(4)  and  (.5)  the  results  were  what  they  would  have  been  on  real  objects,  while  in  (6)
and  (7)  they  were  what  they  would  liave  been  if  the  right  eye  only  had  been  looking
at  a  real  object.  In  (I)  (2)  and  (8)  the  effects  were  not  similar  to  what  would  have
lieen  produced  on  real  objects.


v.]  Relation  of  Illusions  to  Hallucinations.  109

specks  seemed  doubtful,  for  when  asked  to  follow  it  with  his  finger,  he
moved  the  finger  rapidly  in  a  straight  line  between  the  almost  invisible
white  specks  and  paused  at  the  specks.  There  was,  however,  one  thing  that
looked  as  if  he  saw  the  beetle  in  continuous  movement,  namely,  that  having
been  told  to  take  care  that  it  did  not  run  off  the  paper,  he  from  time  to  time,
while  seemingly  watching  it,  snatched  at  the  edges  of  the  paper,  as  though
to  turn  the  insect  back.  The  paper,  it  should  be  said,  was  an  ordinary
sheet  of  what  would  generally  be  called  quite  black  pajjer,  without  marks
on  it. It  required  somewhat  close  observation  to  notice  the  specks.

On  a  subsequent  occasion  Goade  was  given  a  hallucination  of  a  teeto-
tum spinning  on  a  (real)  sheet  of  white  paper  that  lay  before  him.  He  was
easily  made  to  see  the  teetotum,  and  to  revive  its  spinning  from  time  to
time  by  spinning  it  with  his  fingers.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  continues  : — "  I  asked
him  to  point  it  out  to  me,  and  he  then  identified  a  very  tiny  black  smut  as
it.  I  blew  this  away,  upon  which  he  looked  about,  saying  the  teetotum
had  disappeared.  I  advised  him  to  look  on  the  floor  for  it,  and  while  he  was
doing  so,  placed  a  scrap  of  black  paper  about  |  inch  square  on  the  white
paper,  and  said  '  Oh  !  here  it  is.'  He  accepted  it  at  once  and  said  'And  ain't
it  grown  I'  As  we  blew  the  scrap  of  paper  about,  he  followed  it  with  ex-
citement, and  when  it  fell  on  the  floor,  picked  it  up  to  replace  it  on  the
paper,  and  spun  it  in  imagination  more  than  once,  holding  his  finger  and
thumb  above  it  in  doing  so.  With  a  little  trouble,  I  succeeded  in  removing
it,  and  making  him  take  a  speck  of  dust  for  the  teetotum  instead,  and  when
that  was  blown  away,  I  pointed  to  an  empty  space  on  the  paper,  and  told
him  the  teetotum  was  there.  He  accepted  this  after  a  moment  or  two,  and
then,  I  think,  saw  his  teetotum  moving  about  freely,  and  not  attached  to
particular  specks. "

Of  course  in  experiments  of  this  kind,  it  is  a  little  difficult  to  feel
sure  how  far  the  hallucination  went,  and  how  far  it  was  supplemented
by  the  kind  of  imagination  a  child  exercises  when  it  uses  a  walking-
stick  for  a  horse.  There  was  not  such  conclusive  evidence  of
hallucination  in  this  case  as  one  sometimes  has  with  hypnotic  subjects.
The  words  and  gestures  of  Goade,  however,  left  no  doubt  at  the  time
on  the  minds  of  the  spectators  that  he  saw  a  hallucinatory  teetotum.

It  seems  not  improbable  that  the  reason  why  gazing  at  a  reflecting
surface,  or  into  a  refracting  body  like  a  crystal,  is  found  in  practice
to  be  a  way  of  inducing  hallucinations  is  that  convenient  jyoints  de
repere  without  enough  meaning  of  their  own  to  distract  attention  are  thus
obtained.  Such  reflecting  surfaces  are  also  apparently  favourable  to
spontaneous  hallucinations.  We  have  seventeen  instances  in  the  present
Census  of  hallucinations  seen  in  reflecting  surfaces,  which  seems  a
large  proportion  out  of  the  whole  number,  i

1  Of  these,  one  was  seen  in  a  ship's  compass.  No.  4.52.  10.  (see  p.  238),  one  in  a
carafe  of  water,  No.  406.  25.  (  see  p.  106),  five  in  mirrors— (for  an  instance,  spe  p.
187),  and  ten  in  windows  of  which  the  two  sides  were  unequally  Hghted,  the
figure  appearing  on  the  darker  side,  e.g.  No.  728,  16.  (see  p.  309;.


110


Report  on  the  Censios  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


But,  though  points  de  repere  may  faciUtate  the  formation  of  a
hallucination,  there  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that  every  halluci-
nation is  capable  of  being  regarded  as  a  kind  of  monstrous  illusion.
Mr.  Gurney  pointed  out  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  470-
472),  how  difficult  it  is  to  apply  such  a  hypothesis  to  a  ghost  standing
in  the  middle  of  the  room  or  moving  across  it,  and  the  present
collection  certainly  supports  the  view  that  many  hallucinations  are
entirely  independent  of  points  de  repere,  since,  in  more  than  half  of  the
■\dsual  cases,  the  figure  iS  seen  to  move  in  various  ways.

The  following  case,  which  is  quite  a  typical  one  of  a  moving
hallucinatory  figure,  may  be  taken  as  an  instance.

(400.16.)  From  Mr.  A.  E.

March  23rd,  1891.
"I  saw  my  mother  pass  from  the  hall  into  the  card-room  which  commu-
nicated both  with  the  hall  and  the  drawing-room.  This  occurred  in  1880  in
Valparaiso  (Chile),  the  time  being  about  seven  in  the  evening.  I  was  stand-
ing at  the  piano,  singing,  and  was  in  no  way  out  of  health  or  anxious.  My
age  would  be  14.  So  struck  was  I  by  her  going  into  this  room  that  I  stopped
singing  and  called  her  name  ;  oii  going  into  the  room  it  was  empty,  and  I
found  my  mother  sitting  in  the  dining-room.  My  sister  was  playing  for  me,
and  remarked  that  I  must  be  dreaming,  as  she  saw  nothing.  I  never
experienced  anything  since  or  before."

The  collector  made  further  enquiries  of  Mr.  E.  as  to  the  details  of  his
experience,  and  wrote  to  us  as  follows  : —

"Mr.  E.  was  in  the  drawing-room  [at]  the  piano,  when  his  mother  passed
witliin  a  yard  of  where  he  sat.  He  says  he  saw  her  distinctly  pass  him  and
enter  the  card-room,  which  said  card-room  led  out  of  the  drawing  [room],
the  drawing-room  itself  opening  on  to  the  hall.  The  card-room  was  in
darkness,  so  he  got  up,  followed  the  figure,  and  asked  :  '  What  are  you  doing
there  in  the  dark,  mother  ? '  No  voice  responding,  he  immediately  went
and  found  his  mother  in  the  dining-room,  which  dining-room  opened  from
opposite  side  of  hall.  She,  his  mother,  laughed,  and  told  him  he  must  have
been  dreaming  ;  but  he  certainly  was  much  impressed  by  the  vision,  and  has
still  a  most  vivid  picture  of  it  in  his  own  mind.  His  eyesight  was,  and  is,
very  good. "

The  question  whether  an  experience  is  a  hallucination  or  an  illusion
is  from  the  nature  of  the  case  more  difficult  to  decide  in  auditory  than
in  visual  cases.  Illusions  of  hearing  are  extremely  common,  partly
because  of  the  difficulty  of  localising  accurately  the  sources  of  sounds,
and  partly  because  the  acoustic  properties  of  any  locality — especially
any  building — are  so  complicated  that  it  is,  in  most  cases,  practically
impossible  to  know  what  the  limits  of  hearing  by  ordinary  means
are. One cannot in any case see through a  brick wall,  but


v.]  Relation  of  Illusions  to  Hallucinations.  Ill


whether  one  can  hear  through  it  or  not  depends  on  a  number  of  con-
ditions, which  are  not  easy  to  determine.  Further,  the  capacity  of  the
ear  for  hearing  varies  a  good  deal  at  dilFerent  times  in  the  same
person ;  and  a  hyperajsthetic  state  of  the  ear — such  as  is  reported  to
occur  sometimes  in  the  hypnotic  state,  and  in  certain  cases  of  ilhiess—
might  extend  the  ordinary  limits  of  hearing  in  a  way  that  could  not  be
paralleled  by  any  known  form  of  hypersesthesia  of  vision,  because  of
the  different  nature  of  the  obstacles  to  perception  in  the  two  cases.

We  are  therefore  inclined  to  allow  considerable  scope  to  the
possibility  that  supposed  auditory  hallucinations  are  real  sounds  mis-
interpreted. This  applies  especially,  among  the  kinds  included  in  the
Census,  to  the  type  that  we  have  distinguished  as  "voices," — i.e.,  the
hearing  of  vocal  sounds,  where  definite  words  do  not  appear  to  have
been  heard.  It  also  applies  in  some  degree  to  hearing  the  name  called,
since  we  are  so  much  accustomed  to  having  our  attention  drawn  by
this  means  that  we  are  probably  always— unconsciously — more  or  less
on  the  watch  for  it,  and  may  therefoi-e  be  lialjle  to  interpret  as  such
any  sound  indistinctly  heard.  It  should  be  observed,  however,  that
the  probability  of  illusion  is  decidedly  less  where  the  voice  heard  is
recognised — especially  if  it  is  that  of  a  deceased  or  absent  person.

In  some  tactile  cases,  it  is  also  difficult  to  draw  the  line  between
hallucination  and  illusion.  Involuntary  muscular  twitches,  for  in-
stance, may  give  rise  to  tactile  sensations  like  those  ordinarily
produced  by  contact  with  an  external  body,  and  the  absence  of  such  a
cause  for  the  sensations  could  hardly  ever  be  demonstrated.  Thus
one  percipient  (Dr.  J.  W.,  No.  81.  9.)  writes:—"!  have  felt  a  slight
sensation  as  of  my  shoulder  being  touched,  which  is  entirely  due  to
muscular  action."  The  next  case  may  also  be  very  plausibly  put  down
to  a  similar  cause,  but  as  it  is  impossible  to  prove  that  the  experience
was  thus  produced,  we  have  thought  it  best  to  include  both  these  cases
in  our  tables  as  hallucinations  of  the  purely  subjective  class.

(50.  12.)  From  Mr.  W.  B.

April  mil,  1892.

"About  2  years  ago,  age  33,  good  health,  though  working  hard,  I  was
going  home  from  college,  and  being  in  a  hurry  I  took  a  tram  car  to  within
200  yards  of  my  lodgings.  I  then  left  the  car  and  walked  smartly  about  100
yards,  when  I  thought  I  felt  some  one  touch  me  on  the  shoulder  as  if  [he]
wanted  to  speak  to  me.  The  impression  was  so  vivid  that  I  stopped
suddenly  and  looked  round,  when  there  was  no  person  even  near  me.  I
thought  it  strange  and  began  thinking  what  it  could  have  been.  So  rum-
maging through  ray  muid  for  a  physical  cause  (it  never  for  a  moment  struck
me  then,  nor  even  now,  that  it  was  ultra-physical)  I  remembered  that  I  had
sat  on  the  top  of  the  car  with  my  back  leaning  against  an  iron  bolt ;  and  so
at  once  concluded  that  it  was  simply  a  muscular  contraction  due  to  the


112  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.

pressure  of  the  bolt.  The  impression  of  being  touched  by  some  one  was  very
vivid,  and  I  remembered  it  at  once  vi^hen  the  forin  (A)  [was  put]  into  my
hand."

The  possibility  of  illusion  is  not  entirely  excluded  in  some  of  the
cases  where  the  impression  is  made  on  more  than  one  sense,  especially
when  the  affection  of  one  of  the  senses  is  of  an  indefinite  or  rudimen-
tary kind;  for  instance,  when  non-vocal  sounds,  as  foot-steps,  are  heard
accompanying  an  apparition.  In  56  out  of  these  cases,  the  sound —
of  raps,  foot-steps,  doors  being  opened,  etc. — was  heard  first,  and  we
think  it  probable  that  it  may  sometimes  have  been  a  real  sound,  which
led  to  the  seeing  of  the  apparition  through  expectancy.^  In  a  few
cases  the  probability  that  the  sounds  were  real  is  considerably  increased
by  the  fact  that  they  were  heard  by  more  than  one  person,  only  one
seeing  the  apparition  afterwards.


1  This  point  is  further  discussed,  with  illustrations  in  Chapter  X .


VI.]  Form  and  Development  of  Hallucinations.


113


Chapter  VI.

FORM  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HALLUCINATIONS.

One  of  the  facts  brought  out  most  strongly  by  our  Tables  is  the
tendency  of  hallucinations  to  assume  familiar  forms.  The  ghastly  or
horrible  apparitions  dear  to  writers  of  romance  seem  to  be  very  rare
among  healthy  grown-up  people^ — at  least,  among  those  who  are
educated.  The  great  majority  of  hallucinations  are  like  the  sights  we
are  accustomed  to  see,  or  the  sounds  we  are  accustomed  to  hear,  and
even  when  they  are  not  so,  they  often  suggest,  as  we  shall  see,  a  sort
of  incompleteness  in  a  hallucination  of  a  natural  object,  rather  than  a
hallucination  representing  something  unnatural.  In  the  exceptional
cases  where  the  hallucination  does  represent  a  non-natural  being,  we
hnd  it  assuming  the  conventional  form.  An  angel,  for  instance,  takes
the  form  with  which  art  has  familiarised  us,  and  we  should  be  sur-
prised to  find  one  appearing  to  a  grown-up  person  arrayed  in  "  blue
boots" — like  those  seen  by  Mrs.  D.  when  a  child  (see  Appendix  D.)

Most  visual  hallucinations  represent  human  beings,^  and  most  of
these  resemble  human  beings  of  the  present  day  in  all  respects.
According  to  our  statistics,  more  than  two-fifths  of  the  realistic  human
apparitions  represent  living  persons  known  to  the  percipient,  and,
of  these,  45  per  cent,  represent  inmates  of  the  same  house  as  the  per-
cipient, or  persons  frequently,  or  (in  a  few  cases)  very  recently,  seen
by  him,  while  in  another  20  per  cent,  they  represent  near  relatives  of
his  — that  is,  parents,  grandpai'ents,  children,  husbands,  wives,  brothers
or  sisters.  We  have  included  among  hallucinations  representing
familiar  figures  the  comparatively  small  class  of  cases  (seven  in  our
collection)  in  which  the  percipient  sees  his  own  apparition.  For  an
instance  of  this  see  No.  555.  5  (p.  74).

In  the  great  majority  of  realistic  cases,  the  apparition  represents  a
single  figure  only,  though  there  are  exceptions.  A  very  peculiar  case
of  the  contrary  is  No.  464.  15  (Miss  Dodson's  case  in  Chapter  XVII).

As  far  as  the  reports  as  to  dress  enable  us  to  judge,  phantoms,
botli  recognised  and  unrecognised,  generally  appear  in  ordinary  modern
dress,  and  do  not  affect  old-fashioned  costumes  any  more  than  real
people  do. When  they  move,  which,  as  we  have  said  (p.  110),  happens

1  Of  the  33  cases  classed  by  us  as  "  grotesque,  horrible,  or  monstrous,"  more  than
half  were  experienced  by  children,  and  3  others  by  persons  not  in  their  normal  state
"f  health.  Among  the  23  cases  excluded  from  the  Tables  because  they  occurred
during  illness  of  the  percipient,  4  are  "  grotesque."

2  In  the  present  collection,  830  out  of  1,112  do  so.  Mr.  Gurney  found  that  in
his  collection,  out  of  302  subjective  visual  hallucinations,  only  20  represented  objects
other  than  human  beings. (See  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  1,  p.  503).

I


114  Report  on.  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


more  often  than  not,  the  movement  is  almost  always  such  as  we  are
accustomed  to  see.  The  phantom  stands  on  the  ground  and  appears  to
walk  along  the  ground,  and  seems  to  leave  the  tield  of  vision  as  a
human  being  would,  by  walking  out  of  an  open  door  or  passing  behind
some  obstacle.  A  position  impossible  for  real  persons, — such  as  being
up  in  the  air, — when  the  tigure  is  otherwise  realistic,  is  very  rare.  We
have  only  one  instance  of  it.  The  proverbial  gliding  movement,  sup-
posed to  be  characteristic  of  apparitions,  is  rarely  reported.  (For  an
instance,  see  No.  256.  17,  p.  310.)  Appearance  or  disappearance  by
an  unrealistic  means  is  also  rare,  though  there  are  about  a  dozen
cases  in  our  collection  in  which  the  ghost  seems  to  enter  or  leave  a
room  through  a  wall,  book-case,  closed  door,  or  window,  or  by  passing
up  through  tiie  ceiling  or  down  through  the  floor.

Even  when  a  phantom  is  stationary,  it  does  not  usually  either
suddenly  appear  out  of  empty  space,  or  similarly  vanish  before
the  percipient's  eyes,  but  is  generally  seen  by  the  percipient  on  turning
his  eyes  that  way,  and  vanishes,  he  does  not  know  how,  or  when  he  is
looking  away.  There  are,  however,  instances  of  sudden  appearance
and  disappearance  in  free  space.  See,  for  instance.  No.  118.  20
(Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  462.)  Again  in  No.  338.  20  (see
p.  261),  the  percipient  "simply  ceased  to  see  the  tigure;"  and  the
following  is  another  case  of  this  sudden  disappearance,  which  happened
in  a  clear  space  and  in  good  light.

(243.  14.  j  From  Mrs.  M.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

"  At  ,  in  Dorsetshire,  at  one  o'clock  in  the  day,  about  1866,  on  going

into  my  bedroom  just  before  luncli,  I  found  an  old  gentleman  sitting  on
the  sofa,  dressed  in  a  sort  of  shooting  costume  of  grey  tweed  with  gaiters  ;
his  hands  were  clasped  in  his  lap  and  his  head  bent  down  :  the  figure
appeared  perfectly  natural,  and  I  looked  at  it  for  sevei-al  seconds  in  surprise,
thinking  it  was  someone  who  had  mistaken  the  room,  when  it  suddenly
disappeared,  which  alarmed  me  so  that  I  ran  out  of  the  room,  and  related
the  experience.

"  I  was  paying  a  visit  to  my  uncle,  who  had  lived  in  the  house  for  several
years. I  was  in  perfect  health  and  spirits.

' '  The  impression  was  that  of  a  complete  stranger.

' '  There  were  no  other  persons  present  at  the  time,  but  my  aunt  after-
wards told  me  she  had  had  a  similar  experience  in  the  same  room  ;  and  that
the  maids  would  not  enter  it  alone  because  the  bell  rang  occasionally  when
it  was  unoccupied."  1

1  As  we  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  first-hand  evidence  from  the  other  percipient
mentioned,  we  have  not  felt  justified  in  treating  this  case  as  anything  more  than  a
subjective  hallucination.


VI.] Form  and  Development  of  Hallucinations.


115


An  instance  of  a  nearly,  but  not  quite,  sudden  disappearance  of
tliis  kind  occurs  in  the  case  quoted  on  p.  74  (No.  661.  5)  and  another
will  be  found  in  the  course  of  Mrs.  D.'s  account  of  her  experiences
(A23pendix  D).

In  the  following  case,  in  which,  if  the  account  is  accurate,  the  cause
is  prima  facie  telepathic,  the  process  is  slightly  different.

(692.  2.)  From  Mr.  G.  Q.

April,  1892.

"Early  in  November,  1879,  as  I  was  walking  up  Collins-street,  Melbourne,
Australia,  about  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  I  was  amazed  to  see,  amongst
a  number  of  people  on  the  other  side  of  the  street,  a  very  intimate  friend,
whom  I  believed  to  be  in  New  Zealand  at  the  time.

"  I  ran  across  the  street  to  speak  to  him  ;  and,  as  I  neared  the  kerb-stone,
it  seemed  that  a  hand  was  passed  momentarily  before  my  eyes,  its  direction
being  downwards.  In  that  instant  my  chum  was  gone  ;  and,  though  I
looked  everywhere  round  me,  and  could  distinguish  others  I  had  seen  before
the  curious  darkness,  I  never  saw  him  again.  About  three  weeks  after,  I
learned  that  he  died  that  very  day  and  hour,  (Nov.  3rd  or  5th,  about  four
o'clock:  I  cannot  remember  the  exact  date).  I  was,  of  course,  broad  awake.
I  was  also  in  the  best  of  liealth  and  spirits  ;  not  thinking  of  my  friend,  and
never  dreaming  of  meeting  him  in  Melbourne."

Changes  of  Form.

Though  realistic  apparitions  are  usually  realistic  from  first  to  last,
some  pass  through  stages  in  the  course  of  development  or  of  dis-
appearance, which,  on  the  assumption  that  both  the  initial  and  final
stages  are  constructed  by  the  mind  of  the  percipient,  stand  in  need
of  some  explanation.

In  some  cases  it  may  be  reasonably  supposed  that  one  stage  of  the
hallucination  creates  an  expectation  of  the  next,  which  tends  to  woi'k
itself  out.  This  probably  often  happens,  for  instance,  in  cases  where
more  than  one  sense  is  affected  and  where  a  sense  of  presence  precedes
the  seeing  of  a  ghost.  The  effect  of  expectation  will  be  more  fully
discussed  in  Chapter  X.

In  other  cases,  the  whole  process  is  like  what  we  are  familiar  with
in  dreams,  one  idea  or  image  leading  on  to  another  by  transitions  out-
.side  the  conscious  thought  of  the  percipient.  The  following  are  in-
stances of  this  : —

(39.  3.)  From  Miss  E.  A.

October  2nd,  1891.
"I  saw  a  figure  standing  by  my  bed. I  had  been  awake  some  time.  It
was  a  summer  morning,  about  5  o'clock,  and  I  saw  tlie  figure  quite  distinctly.
It  was  tall  and  dressed  in  something  grey,  falling  in  long  folds. The  face  was
kind  and  I  was  not  frightened  at  first,  but  it  suddenly  changed  and  the  wliole

I  2


116


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


[chap.


figure  and  face,  as  it  were,  fell  to  jjieces  in  the  most  gliastly  manner  and
vanished. I  was  about  22. It  must  be  nine  years  since  it  [happened]."

(150.  4.)  From  Mrs.  L.  H.

November  2,  1891.

"  I  think  the  vision  that  I  ana  about  to  describe  occurred  in  March,  1891.
I  was  asleep,  when  I  woke  with  a  start,  it  then  being  early  morning.  On
looking  round  the  room,  I  distinctly  saw  the  head  of  a  skeleton  floating  in
the  air,  about  a  foot  from  the  ceiling.  I  gazed  at  it  intently  (being  now  quite
awake),  when  I  saw  it  gradually  change  to  my  mother's  head  and  face  and
float  away,  seemingly  through  the  ceiling. My  age  [was]  35."

The  process  of  develojsment  is  less  easy  to  explain  in  some  other
cases — those,  for  instance  (four  in  our  collection)  in  which  an  indefi-
nite cloud-like  form  is  first  seen,  and  then  a  clearly  defined  figure,
either  developing  out  of  it  or  appearing  in  the  midst  of  it.  It  may
perhaps  be  compared  to  the  process  of  groping  after  an  idea  in  thinking
out  a  difficult  subject ; — the  idea  comes  to  us  vaguely  at  first,  and  only
gradually  acquires  definiteness.  An  instance  of  this  is  No.  458.  9.
(see  p.  322)  and  the  following  is  another.

(495.  6.)  From  Mrs.  Gordon  Jones.

Cheam  Lodge,  Anerley,  Surrey,  November  ith,  1891.

"  In  the  autumn  of  1881  a  party  of  young  people  and  myself  determined
on  All  Hallow's  Eve  to  play  at  the  childish  game  of  sitting  separately  in  dark
rooms,  with  supper  laid  for  two,  with  the  intention  of  awaiting  the  appearance
of  a  future  husband  or  wife.  Thinking  the  whole  thing  a  joke,  and  not  in
the  least  expecting  to  see  anything — alone — I  distinctly  saw— first  a  filmy
cloud  which  rose  up  at  the  other  end  of  the  room — then  the  head  and
shoulders  of  a  man,  middle-aged,  stout,  with  iron-grey  hair  and  blue  eyes —
not  in  the  least  the  picture  which  a  young  girl  would  imagine  she  saw  on
such  an  occasion.

"  [I  was]  in  perfect  healtli  and  spirits. Age  17."

It  may  be  added  that  the  gentleman  whom  the  percipient  subsequently
married  had  no  resemblance  to  this  apparition,  not  even  in  regard  to  the
colour  of  his  eyes.  Two  or  three  years  before,  Mrs.  Jones  had  had  another
experience,  in  which  the  apparition  went  through  a  similar  process  of
gradual  development,  and  a  third  experience  of  hers  is  given  on  p.  127.  ;

A  few  more  or  less  similar  cases  are  given  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living  {e.g.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  176  and  p.  182),  and  with  some  crystal-seers
the  pictures  seen  go  through  similar  stages  of  development.  Mr.
Myers,  in  fact,  mentions  the  process  as  one  generally  characteristic  of
crystal  visions.  {Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  478.)  Miss  A.  says
{Op.  r.it.  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  500)  :  "  After  a  minute  or  two,  I  seem  to  see  a
very  bright  light  in  [the  crystal],  which  disappears  after  a  few  seconds,
and  then  the  surface  appears  cloudy  and  thick. This  mist  clears


VI.] Form  and  Development  of  Hallncinaiions.  Wi


away,  and  I  see  sometimes  views,  sometimes  faces,  sometimes  letters.
.  .  They  only  last  for  a  few  seconds  or  sometimes  minutes,  and
between  each  new  picture  I  see  the  same  light  and  then  mist."

Another  case  somewhat  similar  to  those  given  above,  but  where  the
development  is  even  more  gi-adual,  is  No.  328.  5  (see  p.  235).

In  other  cases,  a  vague  shadowy  form  is  first  seen,  which  gradually
acquires  definiteness.  Some  instances  are  given  in  Phcmtasms  of  the
Living  {e.g.,  Vol.  T.,  p.  526  and  p.  527).  The  following  is  the  only  case
exactly  of  this  kind  in  the  Census  : —

(607.  1.)  From  Mr.  T.  A.

Man  ^th,  1892.

"  I  saw  a  darkish  vapour  leave  my  father's  head  when  he  died,  about  12
years  ago,  and  it  formed  into  a  figure,  full-sized,  and  for  seven  consecutive
nights  [I]  saw  it  in  my  own  room  and  saw  it  go  each  night  into  the  next
room,  in  which  he  died.  It  became  more  distinct  each  night  and  brighter
each  night,  till  it  was  quite  brilliant,  even  dazzling,  by  the  seventh  night.  It
lasted,  say,  1^  minutes.  It  was  dark  when  the  phantom  used  to  Appear.  I
was  quite  awake,  going  to  bed  ;  [age]  32."

In  some  cases,  what  is  first  seen  is  a  glow  of  light — the  apparition
subsequently  appearing  in  it.  See,  for  example.  No.  290.  3.  (p.  293),
and  No.  33.  25.  (printed  in  Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.,  p.  462).

It  is  possible  that  in  some  cases  where  the  initial  impression  is
vague,  it  may  really  be  of  the  nature  of  an  illusion,  which  works  itself
out  into  a  definite  sensory  hallucination  owing  to  the  habitual  impulse
to  interpret  our  sensory  impressions  definitely  :  but  we  have  not  any
clear  evidence  of  this.

Gradual  disappearance  is,  perhaps,  rather  more  common  than
•gradual  appearance,  and  sometimes  similar  stages  are  passed  through,
as  will  haA'e  been  noticed  in  examples  already  quoted.  More  often  the
percipient  simply  tells  us  that  the  phantom  "gradually  disappears,"
by  which  we  must  probably  understand  a  gradual  fading  and  becoming
indistinct,  as  the  real  objects,  temporarily  obscured  for  the  mind  by
the  phantom,  reassert  themselves.  This  is  sometimes  described  by
saying  that  the  apparition  becomes  transparent.  Possibly  No.  69.  14,
{see  p.  105),  is  an  instance  of  this;  and  the  following  (a  case  originally
belonging  to  Mr.  Gurney's  Census)  is  a  very  interesting  one.

From  Dr.  H.  C.

J)ine  2Wi,  1889.

"  In  the  year  1863,  (I  think  I  could  find  out  the  very  day  and  year,  with
a  little  trouble.  It  was  a  Tuesday,  five  days  before  the  death  of  a  lady
whom  I  used  to  connect  in  my  mind  with  my  vision.  But  I  did  not  do  this
when  I  related  my  story  in  the  morning  after,  nor  till  after  the  death
of  the  lady  ;  and  I  now  reject  this  connection  as  a  fanciful  addendum,)


118  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


being  about  26  years  old,  I  was  sleeping  alone,  without  having  indulged  in
any  heavy  supper.  I  woke  up  suddenly  and  with  niy  wits  all  about  me,  but
with  a  clear  feeling  that  somebody  was  in  the  room.  There  was  enough
light  to  make  things  perceptibly  visible,  and  that  was  all.  There  was  no
moonlight  streaming  in  to  cause  lights  and  shadows.  As  I  started  up  and
raised  myself  on  my  elbow,  I  saw  a  tall  lady  in  a  rich  black  dress  (silk  I
think,  with  black  beads  and  a  train  behind, — I  knew  once,  but  I  have
forgotten,)  looking  steadily  at  me  with  a  most  gentle,  meditating  gaze.
About  40,  I  should  say.  I  now  say  that  I  [did]  not  at  all  recognise  the  face.
There  was  a  far-away  look  in  her  eyes,  and  I  felt  as  if  she  had  been  reading
me  through.  She  rested  the  elbow  of  one  hand  in  the  palm  of  the  other,
and  in  the  first  hand  there  was  a  little  duodecimo  volume  with  rubric  and,  I
think,  'black  letter.'  I  was  entirely  calm,  eagerly  interested,  but  rather
scientihcally  then  imaginatively.  I  pinched  myself  to  find  out  if  I  was  really
awake.  I  took  my  watch  and  held  it  to  my  ear  to  hear  whether  it  was  tick-
ing. I  tried  my  pulse,  which  was  normal.  I  then  said  aloud  (in  order  to  test
my  sobriety  and  calmness),  '  This  is  an  optical  delusion.  I  shall  now  put  my
hand  through  this  appearance.'  I  did  so,  and  my  hand  went  through  as  it
would  through  water,  (only  without  the  slightest  sensation,)  the  clothes
kept  their  folds  and  position  (as  water  keeps  its  level)  making  no  break.
My  hand  with  the  white  night-shirt  sleeve  was  wholly  hid,  and  when  I  with-
drew it,  there  was  no  hole  left  behind, any  more  than  when  one  withdraws  one's
hand  from  water.  After  some  40  or  50  seconds  I  saw  a  straight  white  line
crossing  the  figure.  I  could  not  make  out  what  it  was,  till  1  perceived  the
apparition  was  slowly  vanishing  away  in  its  place,  and  the  white  line  was  the
top  of  my  towel  on  the  towel-horse  behind.  Bit  by  bit  the  white  towel
and  other  dimmer  objects  in  the  room  came  into  sight,  behind  what  was
becoming  a  faint  mist. In  about  20  seconds  it  had  completely  vanished."

This  interpretation  of  gradual  disappearance — that  it  is  due  to
real  objects  of  vision  reasserting  themselves — seems  the  most  natural
one.  We  can  hardly  suppose  that  it  is  due  to  the  idea  going  through
an  indefinite  stage,  which  seems  a  possible  explanation  of  gradual
appearance.  On  the  other  hand,  the  gradual  appearance  of  a  hallu-
cination would  he  likely  to  create  an  expectation  of  its  gradual
disappearance,  and  so  bring  it  about  by  suggestion.  This  may
account  for  the  hallucinations  which  disappear  through  the  same
stages  as  those  they  pass  through  in  appearing,  as  in  No.  290.  3  (see
p.  293).  A  change  into  a  cloud-like  form  in  the  course  of  disappearance
does  not,  so  far  as  we  know,  occur  when  the  same  modification  has  not
occurred  in  the  course  of  development.

Many  hallucinations  never  attain  a  completely  realistic  form; —
their  development  is,  as  it  were,  arrested,  and  they  remain  in  some
sense  incomplete  to  the  end.  These  are  included  in  the  class  of  "in-
completely developed  apparitions "  in  our  Tables,  but  they  are  of
various  kinds.  There  are  (a)  the  transparent  or  shadowy  figures,
which  seem  to  I'epresent  a  perfectly  definite  idea,  but,  as  sensory


vl] Form  and  Development  of  Hallucinations.  119


hallucinations,  fail  to  assert  themselves  completely  among  the  real
objects  of  vision.  There  are  33  of  these  cases.  In  only  12  of  them  is
the  figure  definitely  described  as  "  transparent,"  in  whole  or  in  part ;
"  shadowy,"  however,  is  probably  sometimes  used  in  this  sense  (in  the
case,  for  instance,  of  "  a  shadowy  black  dog  ")  ;  and  possibly  "  misty  "
may  sometimes  mean  serai-transparent,  as  well  as  colourless.  It  seems
possible  that  in  some  of  the  cases  in  which  a  transparent  apparition
was  motionless, it  may  have  been  an  illusion,  rather  than  a  hallucination.
But  other  cases  of  motionless  transparent  apparitions  seem  to  be
clearly  genuine  hallucinations,  for  instance,  J^o.  643.  22  (see  p.  103)
and  No.  402.  8  (see  p.  284)  In  five  out  of  the  twelve  cases  also,
the  transparent  figure  was  seen  to  move  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it
almost  certain  that  it  could  not  have  been  an  illusion.  The  following
is  an  instance  of  this  kind  : —

(546.  19.)  From  Mr.  G.  B.  L.i

(The  account  was  written  in  1891.)

"  [I  saw]  a  figure  of  a  man  which  was  perfectly  transparent,  and  which
came  into  the  room  and  sat  down  on  a  chair  by  my  side.  It  was  about  ten
years  ago.  I  was  in  bed  and  had  been  suffering  from  severe  illness,  which
had  affected  my  head.  My  wife  [was  present].  She  saw  nothing,  though  I
mentioned  it  to  her."

For  another  case  of  a  moving  transparent  figure  see  No.
49.  5,  p.  143.2

Secondly,  there  are — among  incompletely-developed  apparitions —
(6)  cases  where  the  incompleteness  of  the  figure  seen  seems  to  be
due  to  the  vagueness  of  the  idea  underlying  it.  This  is  the  natural
explanation  of  very  rudimentary  and  vaguely  defined  figures,  such  as
No.  554.  13  (see  p.  268)  and  Nos.  49.  2  and  3  (see  p.  312).  But  it  is
probably  also  applicable  to  cases  where  the  figure  is  distinct,  but
completely  veiled  or  shrouded,  so  that  no  details  of  featui'es  or  hands
are  perceived. The  following  are  instances  : — ■

(233.  7.)  From  Miss  A.  F.  K.

May,  1889.

"  [About  14  years  ago]  I  was  awakened  in  the  middle  of  the  night  with
very  acute  pain  in  the  middle  of  my  back  ;  I  sat  up  in  bed  and  saw  a

1  This  case  is  not  included  in  our  Tables,  and,  therefore,  is  not  one  of  the  twelve
cases  just  mentioned,  because  it  occurred  during  an  illness  of  the  percipient's,  to
which  it  may  have  been  due.

"  In  another  case,  a  semi-transparent  figure,  dressed  in  a  black  hat,  surtout  and
blue  waistcoat,  was  seen  in  the  middle  of  the  day  to  emerge  from  a  wall,  cross  part
of  a  garden,  and  disappear  into  the  opposite  wall,  and  a  short  time  after  come  out
and  retrace  its  steps,  disappearing  finally  into  the  first  wall.  But  the  percipient
is  not  included  in  the  Tables,  because  he  was  only  twenty  at  the  time  he  answered
the  Census  question.


120  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap


draped  and  shrouded  figure  standing  near  me  ;  the  face  I  could  not  see,  it
was  shrouded  ;  the  arms  were  crossed  and  the  head  bent — it  did  not  move
nor  speak,  but  gradually  faded.  It  was  a  light  night  and  tliere  was  no
drapery  about  the  bed,  nor  about  the  room,  to  account  for  it.

' '  I  was  in  good  health  and  in  no  sort  of  anxiety — about  25  years  old  at
the  time.

"  As  I  could  not  see  the  face,  I  could  not  recognise  the  person  ;  but  was
so  fully  awake  that  I  thought  it  might  be  some  one  with  a  message  to  nie,
and  sat  quietly  waiting  for  it  to  speak  ;  this  it  did  not  do.

"  I  was  alone.

"  I  have  not  seen  anything  of  the  sort  at  any  other  time."

(190.  15.)  From  Miss  H.  T.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

"I  have  seen  a  figure  three  times.  I  cannot  remember  the  exact
dates  ;  the  figure  appeared  to  me  between  the  years  1867  and  '76.  The  form
appeared  each  time  directly  I  got  into  bed.  I  have  always  been  in  good
health.  [It]  always  ajjpeared  in  the  same  way  ;  that  is,  on  getting  into  bed
and  putting  the  light  out,  there  would  be  a  sort  of  movement  in  the  air,
which  gradually  took  the  form  of  mist  and  then  developed  into  a  dark  veiled
figure,  which  came  nearer  to  me  and  when  bending  over  and  about  to  touch
me  I  threw  niy  hands  into  it,  and  it  vanished.  Until  it  was  almost  touching
me,  my  terror  was  so  great  that  I  could  neither  call  my  sister,  who  was  asleep
beside  me,  nor  move  hand  or  foot.  I  am  pretty  nearly  certain  tliat  I  was  17
when  I  first  saw  the  figure  ;  the  last  time  I  do  not  remember,  excepting
that  I  was  over  18  and  most  probably  over  20.  I  don't  remember  about  the
light,  excepting  that  there  was  enough  for  me  to  see  everything  plainly."

This  last  case  is  an  interesting  example  of  gradual  development
from  the  mere  impression  of  a  movement  in  the  air  up  to  the  incom-
plete form  which  the  hallucination  finally  reaches.

A  third  group  of  incomjjletely  developed  apparitions — that,  namely,
in  which  the  face  or  head  of  the  figure  is  indistinct — seems  to  belonar
to  the  class  where  the  idea  represented  is  pi'obably  vague.  The
following  is  an  instance  : —

(68.  25.)  From  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.

March  12th,  1887.

"One  evening  about  the  middle  or  end  of  September,  1879,  as  I  was
washing  my  hands  in  a  little  room  at  the  end  of  the  passage  leading  to  the
front  door,  at  24,  Vernon  Terrace,  Brighton,  I  heard  footsteps,  and  looking
up  saw  a  little  old  lady  coming  towards  me.  She  was  dressed  in  a  dark  dress
gathered  round  the  waist  in  full  folds,  a  grey  knitted  shawl  over  her  shoulders
fastened  with  a  brooch  in  front,  and  a  cajj.  I  did  not  see  her  face,  although
she  was  walking  towards  me.  I  knew  at  once  tliat  it  was  a  hallucination,
but  was  neither  startled  nor  alarmed.  The  figure  disappeared  before
reaching  the  room  where  I  was.  During  the  next  two  or  three  weeks,  I  saw
'  my  old  lady, '  as  I  called  her,  more  than  once — always  facing  me,  and  in  the


A^i.] Form  and  Development  of  Hallucinations.


121


act  of  approaching.  I  am  not  sure  how  many  times  I  saw  her  at  Brighton,
but  I  can  distinctly  remember  three  occasions  beside  the  first,  and  have  an
impression  that  there  were  others.  I  spoke  of  her  to  my  mother  and  sister,
and  though  I  usually  saw  her  when  I  was  alone,  I  remember  once  seeing  her
when  my  sister  and  I  were  sitting  in  the  dining-room.  Gradually  I  came  to
see  further  details — the  brooch  fastening  the  shawl  was  like  a  circular  brooch
with  a  hole  in  the  centre  worn  by  my  great-grandmother,  Mrs.  Watkins,  who
had  died  some  ten  years  before.  In  the  end  I  called  the  figure  my  great-
grandmother,  but  I  never  saw  the  face.

"  I  came  back  to  Cambridge  on  October  13,  and  entirely  forgot  my
hallucination,  till  one  evening,  as  I  was  going  upstairs  to  my  room,  I  heard
footsteps  coming  along  the  passage  at  the  top  of  the  house,  and  looking  to  the
left  (instead  of  turning  to  the  right  to  my  room)  to  see  who  it  was,  saw  my
old  lady  coming  towards  me.  There  was  no  one  else  in  the  passage  ;  the  gas
was  lighted,  and  I  saw  the  figure  plainly.  This  was  the  last  time  I  saw  it.
On  the  first  and  last  occasions  of  my  seeing  the  figure,  I  had  heard  the  sound
of  footsteps,  on  the  intermediate  occasions  the  impression  was  only  visual.
The  figure  always  took  its  place  in  the  surroundings  (i.e.,  hid  the  things
behind  it),  and  was  always  in  movement —coming  towards  me  ;  the  only  odd
thing  about  it  was  that  I  never  saw  the  face  —  there  seemed  a  blank  within
the  cap.  I  ought  to  say  that  although  at  the  time  I  saw  the  figure  I  had  no
reason  to  suppose  that  I  was  not  well,  I  had  had  a  short  illness  in  Switzer-
land some  two  weeks  earlier,  due,  it  was  thought,  to  over  fatigue,  after  some
weeks  of  considerable  strain  in  other  respects.

"  M.  DE  G.  Vekeall."

Of  the  three  different  groups  which  we  thus  place  in  class  (6)  of
incompletely  developed  appai'itions,  there  are  in  our  collection  21  of
the  first,  1 9  of  the  second,  and  6  of  the  third.

The  remaining  hallucinations  included  among  the  incompletely
developed  apparitions  are  incompletely  developed  in  a  different  sense.
The  great  majority  of  them  (47  cases)  rejjresent  parts  only  of  human
bodies,  and  it  is  mei'ely  on  account  of  their  fragmentary  character  that
we  have  thus  classified  them  ;  since  the  percept,  as  far  as  it  goes,  is
distinct  and  definite,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  the  mental
impression  which  gave  rise  to  it  is  in  any  way  vague,  though  it  cer-
tainly seems  in  some  cases  to  be  freakish  and  dream-like.

Instances  in  which  the  head  or  face  is  represented  are  No.  495.  6
(see  p.  116),  No.  69.  14  (see  p.  105),  and  No.  191.  3  (seep.  240).
The  following  is  another  which  also  illustrates  a  process  of  piecemeal
development  unique  in  our  collection.

(80.  7.)  From  Miss  G.  O.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

"I  saw  in  1871  [when  aged  about  12]  the  face  of  an  aged  woman  which
was  grey  and  thin.  The  features  formed  themselves  one  by  one — first  one
eye  and  then  the  other  and  so  on. It  disappeared  in  the  way  it  came,


122  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


leaving  a  blue  mist.  The  face  was  decidedly  ugly  and  unhappy  looking.  I
had  just  got  into  bed  and  extinguished  my  candle.  ...  I  saw  in  1874
a  very  pretty  child's  face  ;  it  appeared  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  the
otlier. On  each  occasion  the  apparition  appeared  on  my  left  side."

In  15  cases  a  hand,  or  hand  and  arm  only,  are  represented  (see
No.  579.  25,  p.  241),  and  in  three  cases,  legs.  These  fragments  are
seldom  recognised  as  the  limbs  of  any  particular  person,  though
it  happens  that  the  instance  of  a  hand  quoted,  as  well  as  one
instance  of  legs,  are  exceptional  in  this  respect.  The  following  is
another  case : —

(460.  12.)  From  Dr.  C.  G.  H.

August  22nd,  1891,

"  Place,  Osmastori  Park,  Derbyshire.  Autumn  of  1870  (somewhere
about  then),  about  7  p.m.  I  was  crossing  the  park  with  my  brother,  2  years
younger  than  myself,  and  saw  distinctly  as  it  were  two  black  legs  walking
towards  us  ;  so  much  so  that  I  stopped  and  called  my  brother's  attention  to
them  ;  he  failed  to  see  anything.  I  pointed  where  they  were  and  then  they
vanished.  We  walked  to  the  spot,  as  it  appeared  to  me,  about  10  yards  off
and  could  see  nothing,  neither  did  we  hear  anything.  I  saw  the  legs  most
distinctly  and  went  next  morning  to  see  the  spot, so  vivid  was  my  recollection.
As  regards  daylight,  it  was  clear  and  only  just  getting  dusk.  [I  was]  simply
going  to  the  post,  in  good  health,  no  grief  or  anxiety  ;  17  years  of  age.

"  My  brother  could  not  see  anything,  though  I  pointed  to  the  legs  and
saw  them  at  the  time  I  pointed.

"  I  liad  time  to  see  them  and  stop  walking,  point  to  them,  and  say  to  my
brother,  '  Look  !  there  they  are,  two  legs.  Can't  you  see  them  ? '  and  they
were  then  gone."

Dr.  H.  adds  later  : —

"The  legs  ended  abrujjtly,  absolutely  abruptly.  I  could  make  out  no
body  or  sen)blance  of  one.  The  vision  was  most  vivid  and  I  have  never
experienced  anything  similar.  The  evening  was  darkish,  but  perfectly  clear
and  bright."

We  have  thought  it  convenient  to  class  with  incompletely  developed
apparitions,  instead  of  making  a  separate  heading  for  them,  five  cases
of  hallucinations  which  do  not  appear  solid,  but  are  like  a  picture,  or
seem  to  be  projected  on  a  flat  surface.  The  following  is  a  case  of  this
kind  : —

(707. 1.)  From  Mrs.  B.

December  Uth,  1891.

"  I  distinctly  saw  my  mother's  face  upon  the  wall  ;  it  smiled  and  passed
along  the  wall  and  faded  away.  The  time  was  a  little  before  eight  o'clock
p.m.,  on  August  4th,  1837.

"I  was  saying  my  prayers  before  going  to  bed.  I  was  in  good  health
and  had  no  worry. I  was  nine  years  old.


VI.] Form  and  Development  of  Hallucinations.  123


"  I  afterwards  heard  that  my  mother  died  at  that  time  in  London.  I
was  at  Ramsgate."

Mrs.  B.  states  that  this  is  the  only  hallucinatory  experience  she  has  ever
had.

Miss  Porter  writes  : —

"  I  called  upon  Mrs.  B.  on  December  18th,  [1891].  As  the  exj^erience
took  place  so  long  ago  and  no  corroboration  is  now  possible,  I  did  ]iot  ask
for  an  account  in  narrative  form.

"Mrs.  B.  described  the  apparition  as  exactly  like  a  coloured  picture  of
her  mother,  head  and  shoulders,  which  i^assed  along  the  wall  and  faded.
She  did  not  mention  what  she  had  seen  to  anyone,  and  the  following  even-
ing an  aunt  of  liers  arrived  from  London  to  tell  her  that  her  mother  was
dead.  The  aunt  had  started  that  morning  by  the  steamer,  the  death  having
taken  place  the  previous  evening.  On  her  return  home  the  child  told  her
father  what  she  had  seen.  He  asked  her  what  time  it  was,  and  on  her
replying  that  it  was  nearly  8  p.m.,  he  said  that  her  mother  died  at  a  quarter
to  eight,  and  that  the  last  thing  she  had  done  was  to  speak  of  her  one  little
daughter,  and  beg  him  to  take  care  of  her.

"Mrs.  B.  at  the  time  was  in  no  sort  of  anxiety  about  her  mother.
There  was  a  baby  expected  (which  the  child  did  not  know)  and  the  mother
had  been  unwell,  but  the  week  previously  an  aunt  had  been  at  Ramsgate
and  had  told  the  child  that  her  mother  would  now  soon  be  well  and  would
be  coming  to  stay  for  a  time  at  Ramsgate."

The  cloud-like  forms  which  hallucinations  sometimes  pass  through
in  development  suggest  that  the  experiences  which  we  have  classed  as
"  apparitions  of  indefinite  objects "  may  really  be  undeveloped
hallucinations.  We  have  only  17  instances  of  them.  They  are  vague
shapeless  forms,  not  suggesting  anything  in  particular,  sometimes
described  as  like  a  shadow,  or  puff  of  smoke,  or  cloud,  or  a  dark  mass.
They  seem  generally  to  be  visual  percepts  of  the  simplest  possible  kind,
and  show  the  power  of  the  mind  in  constructing  hallucinations  at  its
lowest  point.  Instances  are  No.  37.  13  (see  p.  313),  No.  191.  17  (see  p.
134)  and  the  following  : —

(464.  11.)  From  Miss  F.  M.  D.

September  llth,  1891.

"  One  evening  at  [my  home],  in  the  hall,  I  saw  on  the  staircase  landing
what  looked  like  a  column  of  smoke  about  two  feet  high,  nearly  white,  which
passed  into  a  room  through  an  open  door  and  then  turned  suddenly  to
the  left  out  of  sight.  I  ran  up  stairs  after  it  and  went  into  the  room,  but
could  discover  nothing.  This  was  about  five  or  six  years  ago,  but  I  cannot
remember  the  date.

"[I  was]  in  perfect  health  ;  age  about  17."

Hallucinations  of  lights,  which  are  comparatively  rare — being
only  17  in  number — may  also  be  sometimes,  as  Mr.  Gurney  suggests
{Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  73),  incipient  or  rudimentary


124


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


hallucinations  which  fail  to  reach  a  fully-developed  form.  As  we  have
seen,  hallucinations  of  realistic  human  figures  are  occasionally  evolved
out  of  vague  luminous  forms,  and  some  of  the  cases  of  hallucinatory
lights  suggest  that  the  hallucination  has  been  arrested  at  this  preli-
minary stage,  and  has  failed  to  reach  a  more  definite  form  ;  e.g.^  No.
408.  11  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  351).  But  there  are
other  cases  where  the  hallucinatory  form  is  very  definite  and  does  not
itself  suggest  that  greater  definiteness  might,  under  different  circum-
stances, have  been  attained.  The  only  reason  for  regarding  such
hallucinations  as  undeveloped  is  that  in  some  instances  we  seem  to  be
able  to  trace  them  to  suggestion,  ordinary  or  telepathic,  and  that  the
suggestion  in  question  would  naturally  be  expected,  if  it  produced  a
hallucination  at  all,  to  produce  a  human  figure.  The  following  is  a
case  in  point.

(191.  2.)  From  Miss  Williams.

"  11,  Cleveland-terrace,  Coatham,  Redcar,  Septeniber  23yd,  1889.

"I  was  living  at  home  with  my  parents  at  Eston-in-Cleveland.  There
was  a  working  man  called  Long  living  in  the  village,  not  far  from  our  house,
"ivhose  wife  was  taken  ill.  Dr.  Fulton,  who  at  tliat  time  was  staying  with
us,  came  in  one  night  between  9  and  10  o'clock  and  said  Mrs.  Long  was
dying.  After  that  we  sat  talking  over  the  fire  a  good  while,  and  then  my
sister  Isabella  and  I  went  off  to  bed.  We  slept  in  a  Vjack  bedroom,  and  after
we  got  to  this  bedroom  I  said,  '  Oh,  I've  forgotten  something  in  the  large
bedroom  !'  To  this  latter  I  proceeded  by  myself,  and,  as  I  approached  the
door,  something  seemed  to  say  to  me,  '  You'll  see  something  of  Mrs.  Long,
living  or  dead  ! '  But  I  thought  no  more  of  this,  and  entered  the  bedroom,
which  I  had  to  cross  to  the  opposite  end  for  what  I  wanted.  When  I  had
got  the  things  in  my  hand,  I  noticed  a  lovely  light  hanging  over  my  head.
It  was  a  round  light — perfectly  round.  I  had  taken  no  light  with  me,  but
went  for  the  things  I  wanted  in  the  dark.  I  looked  to  see  if  there  was  any
light  coming  in  from  the  windows,  but  there  was  none  :  in  that  direction
there  was  total  darkness.  I  grasped  one  hand  with  the  other  and  stood
looking  at  the  strange  light  to  be  sure  that  I  was  not  deceived  and  was  not
imagining  it.  I  walked  across  the  voom  to  the  door,  and  all  the  way  the
light  was  hanging  between  my  head  and  the  ceiling.  It  was  akin  to  the
electric  light  :  something  of  a  cloud,  though  every  part  of  it  was  beaming
and  running  over  with  light.  It  left  me  at  the  bedroom  door.  On  first
seeing  it  a  strange  impression  seized  me,  and  after  it  left  me  I  was  so
impressed  that  I  could  not  speak  of  it  to  anyone  for  a  day  or  two.  I
wondered  at  the  time  whether  it  had  anything  to  do  with  Mrs.  Long,  and  on
inquiry  I  found  that  she  died  just  about  the  time  when  I  saw  the  light  ■  If
there  was  any  difference,  I  judged  it  would  be  a  little  before,  but  there
would  nnt  be  much  in  it.  This  would  be  about  11  p.m  ,  and  about  four
years  ago.  It  left  an  impression  on  my  mind  which  I  have  never  forgotten,
and  never  shall  forget.  Mrs.  Long  was  not  ill  many  days — about  two  or
three  ;  she  died  rather  suddenly.  I  was  rather  interested  in  her.  I  did  not
see  her  during  her  illness,  but  had  often  seen  her  and  talked  to  her  before.


Yi.]  Form  and  Development  of  Hallucinations.


125


I  was  perfectly  -svell  at  the  time,  and  was  in  no  trouble  or  anxiety. My  age
at  the  time  was  23. I  have  had  no  experience  of  the  kind  before  or  since.
I  saw  no  figure,  only  a  lovely  light. Before  telling  my  sister  I  made  her
promise  she  would  not  ridicule  me  nor  call  me  superstitious.
"  To  the  best  of  my  recollection  this  is  a  correct  statement.

"Mahy  Helena  Williams."

*'  P.S. — The  light  which  I  saw  was  a  palish  blue.  It  emitted  no  rays,  so
that  all  the  rest  of  the  room  was  in  darkness.  Tt  was  wider  in  circumference
than  my  head,  so  that  as  I  walked  I  could  see  it  above  me  without  raising-
my  head.  As  I  left  the  room  it  remained,  and  when  I  looked  again  was
g(me.  It  was  in  a  corner,  where  the  darkness  of  the  room  was  deepest  and
the  least  chance  of  illumination  from  the  windows  on  the  right  and  left,  that
I  first  saw  it  above  my  head.  I  had  no  fear,  but  a  kind  of  sacred  awe.
The  light  was  unlike  any  other  tliat  I  ever  saw,  and  I  should  say  brighter
than  any  other,  or,  at  least,  purer.  Looking  at  it  did  not  affect  the  eyes.
It  was  midway  between  my  head  and  the  ceiling."

The  sister  who  was  with  Miss  Williams  at  the  time  corroborates  her
account  as  follows  : —

"  August  8tli,  1891.
"  I  recollect  my  sister  Lily  seeing  the  bright  light.  When  she  came  back
to  the  room  where  I  was  she  was  quite  pale,  and  sat  down  on  the  floor.  She
was  so  awe-struck  that  she  did  not  tell  us  what  she  had  seen  till  the  next
day.  I  remember  that  a  woman  who  lived  near  us  died  about  the  time  my
sister  saw  the  light,  and  that  we  connected  the  two  cii'cumstances  together.

"Isabella  Fulton."

Here,  the  hallucination,  if  not  due  to  a  telepathic  impulse,  would
seem  to  have  been  due  to  the  occupation  of  the  percipient's  mind
with  the  idea  of  the  imminent  death.  Why,  then,  should  it  take  the
form  of  a  light,  unless  this  was,  as  it  were,  a  rudimentary  condition  of
a  hallucination  which  failed  to  reach  the  human  form  1

Among  the  lights  in  our  collection,  9  are  described  as  round  or
oval  lights,  or  balls  of  light  or  fire  ;  of  these  7  are  connected  by  the
percipients  with  some  individual  who  is  stated  to  have  died  at  or
about  the  time  of  the  experience.  Of  the  remaining  8  cases  of  lights,
two  are  described  as  columns  of  light,  or  luminous  clouds  about  the
height  of  a  human  being,  3  resembled  bright  points  of  light,  as  stars
or  candle  flames,  and  3  appeared  like  a  general  glow  of  light.

Symholic  Forms.

■  The  discussion  of  lights  leads  us  naturally  to  another  cause  of  the
form  of  hallucination  which  deserves  to  be  noticed,  namely,  symbol-
ism : — as  this  would  seem  to  be  certainly  in  some  cases  an  explanation  of
lights.  The  idea  of  light  as  a  symbol  of  the  soul  or  spirit — and  conse-
quently as  associated  with  death — is  a  very  wide-spread  one.  The
"  corpse-candles  "  of  the  Celts  are  a  familiar  instance,  and  the  same


126


Re'port  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


idea  prevails  among  the  Tartars.  No  doubt,  when  a  superstition  of
this  kind  his  become  established,  it  is  likely  that  any  unexplained
phenomenon  fitting  in  with  it  will  tend  to  be  regarded  as  supernatural,
and  this  probably  accounts  for  many  of  the  Welsh  stories  of  mysterious
lights  foi'eboding  or  coinciding  with  deaths.  We  have  received  several
accounts  of  such  lights  in  the  course  of  the  present  Census,  but  most  of
them  were  seen  out  of  doors  at  night  and  some  way  off,  so  that  there
seemed  to  be  no  adequate  reason  for  regarding  them  as  hallucinatory
at  all.  But  though  real  lights  are  likely  to  be  taken  for  "  corpse-
candles  "  in  regions  whei'e  such  a  superstition  exists,  it  may  be  taken  as
certain  that  the  superstition  will  sometimes  determine  the  form  of  a  hal-
lucination which  in  other  regions  would  have  taken  an  entirely  different
form,  and  thus  the  hallucination,  whether  veridical  or  purely  subjec-
tive, may  justly  be  described  as  symbolic.  Such  symbolic  representa-
tions need  not,  of  course,  be  confined  to  uneducated  percipients,  since
the  symbolism  may  exist  in  the  minds  of  persons  who  attach  no
superstitious  value  to  it. The  following  is  a  case  in  point.

(305. 4.)  From  Mr.  P.

February,  1891.

"  Our  third  child,  a  boy,  lived  only  l(i  days.  From  the  first  it  was  evident
that  his  life  would  be  a  short  one  ;  but,  perhaps  all  the  more  on  that  account,
every  effort  was  made  to  prolong  it.  I  had  taken  a  small  share  of  the  watch-
ing, and  just  before  the  hoy  died  was  lying  on  a  sofa  in  that  state  of  wakeful
weariness  that  comes  of  death-bed  watching.  Lying  thus,  I  saw,  a  few  feet
above  my  head,  a  blue  flame.  It  was  about  an  inch  and  a  quarter  long,
and  surrounded  by  a  slight  haze  or  halo.  It  hovered  above  me  for  a  few
seconds,  then  took  an  irregular  diagonal  course  towards  the  corner  of  the
room  farthest  from  me,  finally  seeming  to  pass  through  the  ceiling.  As  it
vanished  a  voice  from  nearly  the  opposite  side  of  the  room  said,  '  That's  his
soul.'  No  person  other  than  myself  was  in  [the  room]  at  the  time.  A  few
minutes  later  the  child  died.

' '  Having  never  at  that  time  heard  or  read  of  a  similar  appearance,  I
know  of  nothing  that  could  have  predisposed  me  to,  or  in  any  way  led  up  to,
tliis  hallucination. The  date  was  .lanuary  17th,  1867."

Special  symbols,  signs,  or  warnings  are,  as  everyone  knows,
connected  with  death  in  some  families,  and  if  hallucinations  occur  to
members  of  these  families,  they  are  not  unlikely  to  take  a  form  with
the  idea  of  which  family  tradition  has  rendered  the  percipient
familiar.  W^e  have  in  the  Census  two  or  three  accounts  of  families,
several  members  of  which  have  experienced  hallucinations  of  white
animals — for  instance,  dogs  or  rabbits — which  are  regarded  as  a  family
symbol  of  death.  With  these  may  be  compared  No.  733.  5  (see
p.  72), — a  case  received  fi-om  Brazil,  where,  as  Professor  Alexander
informs  us,  a  black  butterfly  is  supposed  to  be  a  sign  of  death.


VI.] Form  and  Development  of  Hallucinations.  127


Apparitions  of  Animals.

Most  of  the  apparitions  of  animals  in  our  collection  have,  however,  no
symbolic  character,  but,  like  the  realistic  apparitions  of  human  beings,  are
hallucinatory  reproductions  of  familiar  objects.  The  25  cases  divide
themselves  into  13  cats  (for  instances  see  Nos.  535.  2  and  3,  p.  305  ;
and  ISTo.  561.  24,  see  p.  156)  4  dogs,  1  rabbit,  1  mouse,  1  bird,
1  butterfly,  1  horse  with  carriage,  besides  3  recurring  cases  in  which
the  percipient  often  saw  cats,  and  2  in  which  both  cats  and  dogs
appeared.  In  only  3  or  4  cases  was  the  animal  recognised.  No.  319.  1
(see  p.  181)  is  an  instance,  and  so  is  the  following.

(495.  6.)  From  Mrs.  Gordon  Jones.

February  22nd,  1892.

"  I  have  the  strongest  aversion  to  cats — a  tendency  which  I  have  in-
herited from  niy  father,  who  could  not  endure  a  cat's  presence.  After  my
marriage,  I  would  never  have  one  in  the  house,  until  obliged  to  do  so  on
account  of  mice.  The  one  that  I  then  allowed  to  come  was  an  ordinary  grey
and  black  striped  one — but  I  very  seldom  looked  at  it,  and  it  was  never
allowed  to  come  upstairs.

"  One  day  I  was  told  that  the  cat  was  mad  and  asked  if  it  might  be
■drowned.  T  did  not  look  at  the  animal  myself,  but  said,  yes.  I  next  heard
that  it  had  been  drowned  by  the  groom  in  a  copper.  As  the  cat  was  not  a
pet  and  had  never  been  my  comjjanion,  its  death  made  no  impression  on  me.
It  was  drowned  in  the  morning.  The  same  evening  I  was  sittmg  alone  in
the  dining-room.  I  am  sure  tliat  I  was  not  thinking  uf  the  cat  or  of  possible
apparitions.  I  was  reading  ;  presently  I  felt  impelled  to  look  up,  the
door  seemed  to  open,  and  there  stood  the  animal  that  had  been  drowned  in
the  morning  ;  the  same  cat,  but  apparently  much  thinner  and  dripping  with
water — only  the  expression  of  the  face  was  changed—  the  eyes  were  quite
human  and  haunted  me  afterwards,  they  looked  so  sad  and  pathetic.  I  felt
so  sure  of  what  I  saw  that  at  the  moment  I  never  doubted  that  it  was  the
living  cat  who  had  escaped  from  drowning.  I  rang  the  bell  and  when  the
servant  came  I  said  '  There's  the  cat,  take  it  out  ; '  it  seemed  to  me  that  she
could  not  but  see  it  too — it  was  clear  and  distinct  to  my  eyes  as  the  table  or
chairs.  But  the  servant  looked  frightened  and  said  '  Oh,  ma'am,  I  saw  the
cat  after  William  had  drowned  it — and  then  he  buried  it  in  the  garden.'
'But,'  I  said,  'there  it  is.' — Of  course  she  saw  nothing,  and  then  the  cat
began  to  fade,  and  I  saw  nothing  more  of  it."

In  an  accompanying  letter,  Mrs.  Gordon  Jones  says  that  this  incident
occurred  "two  or  three  years  ago."

Inanimate  Forms.

Of  the  remaining  classes  of  hallucinations  in  our  Tables,  visions
have  been  sufficiently  discussed  in  Chapter  IV.,  and  grotesque  appari-
tions will  be  best  considered  in  Chapter  VIII.  in  connection  with
childish  hallucinations. But  it  may  be  riientioned  that  the  "  appari-


128


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


tions  of  inanimate  objects  "  include  3  cases  of  apparent  movements  of
real  objects  (which  may,  perhaps,  have  been  mistakably  regarded  as  hal-
lucinatory) ;  2  cases  of  appearances  while  the  percipient  was  in  bed  (one
of  wings  and  one  of  an  ostrich  feather)  waving  and  growing  in  size,
which  might,  perhaps,  equally  well  be  classed  with  grotesque  cases  ;
and  9  cases  of  ordinary  realistic  inanimate  objects,  such  as  a  bird-cage,
a  chair,  flowers,  a  bonnet,  a  brass  plate  on  a  door,  a  railway  train.

Religions  Phantasms.

Several  of  the  religious  phantasms  are  more  or  less  impressive
appearances  of  angels  ;  which  in  some  cases— e. 9.,  when  they  appear
with  the  conventional  wings — may  be  regarded  as  symbolic.  But  in
other  cases,  the  experiences  are  of  so  exceedingly  intimate  a  nature
that  it  is  with  difficulty  our  informants  have  brought  themselves  to
speak  of  them  at  all,  and  in  one  instance,  at  least,  and  probably  in
others,  information  has  been  refused.  In  one  case,  at  least,  of  those
reported,  the  percipient  has  only  described  what  occurred  in  the  hope
that,  as  the  experience  had  been  of  very  great  help  to  herself  in  a
period  of  doubt  and  trouble,  the  knowledge  that  such  a  thing  has  hap-
pened might  be  of  use  to  others  ;  and  in  more  than  one  case  these  ex-
periences have  had  a  lasting  effect  on  the  convictions  and  actions  of  the
percipients.  Under  these  circumstances,  we  are  reluctant  to  print
them  in  a  treatise  such  as  this,  though  we  are  willing  to  communicate
the  most  interesting  of  them  privately,  and  without  names,  to  serious
enquirers.

We  will  here  only  mention  further  one  fact  about  such  experiences
which  is  of  interest  to  psychologists,  namely,  that  the  kind  of  vision
which  to  Roman  Catholics  takes  the  form  of  the  Virgin  Mary  will  to
Protestants  take  the  form  of  Jesus  Christ.  We  judge  this,  not  only
from  the  pi-esent  collection,  but  from  cases  received  through  other
channels.  As  it  happens,  there  are  not  in  our  Census  any  visions  of  the
Virgin  Mary,  but  our  readers  will  remember  instances  of  these  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  and  in  more  than  one  paper  in  the
Proceedings  S.P.R.

Deferred  Recognition.

In  this  chapter  on  foim  and  development,  we  must  notice  a  kind  of
gradual  development  in  hallucinations  which  is  unlike  any  that  we
have  discussed  above.  It  is  the  very  curious  featui'e  of  deferred  recog-
nition. Here  there  is  no  development  in  form,  nor,  it  would  seem,  in
the  underlying  idea.  The  figure  is  seen  quite  clearly,  but,  though
familiar,  is  not  recognised  at  once — sometimes  not  till  long  after  it  has
disappeared.  There  are  two  cases  of  this  in  our  collection,  No.  49.  5
(see  pp.  144-5),  and  No.  402.  8  (see  p.  284.)  The  phenomenon  resembles


VI.]


Form  and  Development  of  Hallucinations.


129


that  of  automatic  writing  when  the  writer  is  unaware  till  afterwards
of  what  his  hand  is  writing.  It  has  also  some  analogy  with  a  pheno-
menon observed  by  Mr.  Myers^  in  certain  cases  of  post-hypnotic
hallucinations,  when  the  idea  communicated  to  the  hypnotised  subject
is  moi'e  or  less  correctly  embodied  in  a  post-hypnotic  hallucination,
but  not  recognised  by  the  percipient.

A  sort  of  mistaken  recognition  which  seems  to  occur  in  some  coin-
cidental cases  may  be  due  to  a  similar  divergence  between  the  uncon-
scious and  conscious  working  of  the  mind — see,  for  example,  two
cases  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  428  and  429)  where
an  apparition  seen  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  one  person  was
thought  at  the  time  to  represent  another  person,  who,  however,
resembled  the  decedent.  Tn  the  following  odd  case  from  our  collection,
which  in  some  ways  resembles  these,  there  was,  however,  at  the  time,  a
sort  of  double  recognition.

(407.  3.)  From  Mrs.  H.  H.

Octoher  Uh,  1890.

"  [At]  Taunton,  Mass.,  U.S.A.,  September  9th,  1862,  about  5  a.m.  or
perhaps  a  little  later,  I  was  awakened  very  suddenly  and  sat  upright  in
bed,  thinking  that  someone  was  present ;  and  saw  by  my  bedside  the  figure
of  an  old  man,  who  was  somewhat  like  one  who  lived  in  the  same  street.
His  head  was  bound  with  a  handkerchief,  and  he  stood  gazing  at  me  for
what  seemed  to  be  a  few  seconds,  then  vanished.  Though  recognising  him
perfectly,  I  all  the  time  thought  that  it  was  my  husband.

"I  had  been  asleep  all  night,  was  in  good  health,  but  of  course  somewhat
anxious,  as  my  husband  was  in  the  war  and  in  poor  health,  owing  to
what  was  called  'swamp  fever.'  My  husband  was  at  Fortress  Monroe,
Virginia,  and  died  at  5  o'clock  on  that  day.  He  had  aged  very  much,
was  quite  gray  and  a  perfect  skeleton.  For  four  days  before  he  died,  his
memory  had  gone  altogether  and  his  only  words,  hour  after  hour,  were
'  Write  home.'

"  My  children  were  in  that  room  and  the  next,  but  were  not  disturbed,
until  I  spoke  to  the  eldest  and  asked  if  she  had  heard  anyone  about.  I
received  a  telegram  at  10.30  a.m."

1  See  his  paper  on  "The  Subliminal  Consciousness,"  in  Proceedings  S.P.R. ,  No.
XXIII.,  Vol.  VIII.,  page  459  seqq.  We  quote  one  instance  from  Mr.  Myers'
account.  It  must  be  understood  that  P.  has  been  told  that  he  will  see  the  scene  as
described,  after  he  has  been  awakened.  "  I  told  P.  (hypnotised)  the  story  of  Robin-
«onCritsoe  finding  the  footprint  and  fearing  savages.  .  .  .  Awakened  and  set  before
the  glass  of  water,  P.  at  once  exclaimed,  '  Why,  there's  Buffalo  Bill !  He's  dressed
in  feathers  and  skins  round  him ;  almost  hke  a  savage.  He's  walking  about  in  a  waste
place.  .  .  .  He  is  all  alone.  ...  I  can  see  something  else  coming  from
another  part — it's  a  blackie.  .  .  .  Look  at  them  ;  how  they  are  arguing  !
Buffalo  Bill  and  his  black  man  !  '  P.  had  read  Eobinson  C'cusoe  ;  but  Buffalo  Bill  was
fresher  in  his  memory."

K


130  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Mrs.  H.  informed  us  that  she  mentioned  her  experience  at  the  time  to
her  eldest  daughter,  who  now  remembers  it,  but  only  vaguely.  No  written
record  was  made.  .

Auditory  and  Tactile  Hallucinations.

Some  points  with  regard  to  auditory  and  tactile  as  distinct  from
visual  hallucinations  require  notice.  In  comparing  hallucinations
from  a  statistical  point  of  view,  the  most  obvious  and  striking  fact
brought  out  by  our  Tables  is  the  comparative  rarity  of  the  auditory
and  tactile  classes.  These  constitute  28  per  cent  and  10  per  cent,
respectively  of  all  the  hallucinations  reported,  the  remaining  62
per  cent,  being  visual.^  These  proportions,  however,  need  correction
on  two  accounts.  First,  we  have  already  seen  (Chapter  III.,  p.  66)
that  auditory  and  tactile  cases  tend  to  be  forgotten  considerably  more
than  visual  cases,  so  that  the  actual  frequency  of  the  auditory  and
tactile  cases  is  greater  in  proportion  to  the  visual  than  would  appear
from  the  totals  reported.  If  we  take  only  the  totals  reported  as  having
occurred  during  the  last  year,  we  tind  that  50  per  cent,  are  visual
hallucinations,  38  per  cent,  are  auditory,  and  12  per  cent,  are  tactile.
Secondly,  it  appears  from  the  Supplement  to  Table  II.  that  there  are
159  cases  where  auditory  hallucinations  have  been  experienced  more
than  once,  but  where  the  exact  number  of  times  has  not  been  reported,
so  that  they  are  counted  as  one  hallucination  only  ;  whereas  this  has
happened  in  only  119  cases  of  visual  hallucinations.  It  has  happened
also  in  a  comparatively  large  number  of  tactile  cases,  viz.,  41.

After  taking  into  consideration  these  two  points,  it  seems  to  us
that  our  statistics  do  not  justify  any  definite  conclusion  as  to  the
relative  frequency  of  the  auditoi'y  and  the  visual  hallucinations  of  the
sane,  when  we  are  considering  the  whole  aggregate  of  phenomena
classed  under  either  head.  We  think  it,  however,  legitimate  to  infer
that  impressive  hallucinations  of  the  visual  class  are  considerably  more
frequent  than  those  of  the  auditory,'-  and  that  auditory  hallucinations
in  general  are  considerably  more  frequent  than  tactile.

Among  hallucinations  of  insane  persons,  there  seems  to  be  no
doubt  that  auditory  cases  are  much  more  frequent  than  visual,  the
proportions  being  estimated  by  some  authorities  as  3  to  1,  by  others  as
5  to  1,  (see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  22). These  figures

1  These  percentages  are  calculated  from  the  totals  given  in  Tables  IV.,  VII.  and
VIII.,  which  include  under  each  sense  all  hallucinations  affecting  that  sense,  whether
or  not  any  other  sense  was  affected  at  the  same  time.

-  This  does  not  agree  with  the  conclusions  arrived  at  by  Mr.  Gurney,  in  whose
Census  the  number  of  auditory  hallucinations  was  more  than  double  the  number  of
the  visual  (see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  22).


VI.]  Form  and  Development  of  Hallucinations.  131


contrast  strikingly  with  the  proportions  among  sane  persons,  as  reported
in  the  present  Census.

As  we  have  seen,  auditory  hallucinations  are  on  the  whole  much
less  impressive  than  visual  ones.  It  appears  from  Table  VII.  that
nearly  one-half  of  those  reported  consist  in  the  percipient's  hearing
his  name  called  (including  under  the  term  "  name  "  any  title  by  which
he  is  in  the  habit  of  hearing  himself  called,  such  as — -Father,  Mother,
Madame,  etc.)  and  about  another  sixth  consist  in  the  hearing  of
"  voices "  when  no  distinct  words  are  heard — or  at  all  events  are
not  reported.  Experiences  so  trivial  as  these  usually  are  will  no
doubt  be  often  forgotten  altogether,  and  the  probability  is  that  a
very  large  part  of  those  that  have  lapsed  from  memory  are  of  this
trivial  kind.

To  hear  a  complete  phrase  or  sentence  apparently  spoken  is  no
doubt,  as  a  rule,  a  much  more  impressive  experience.  Rather  more
than  a  third  of  the  hallucinations  included  in  Table  VII.  are  of  this
type.  It  should  be  observed,  however,  that  in  only  half  of  these  cases
is  the  impression  that  of  a  voice  alone.  In  the  other  half,  the
hallucination  also  affects  the  sense  of  sight  or  of  touch,  or  both,  the
words  seeming  to  be  spoken  by  a  visible  apparition,  or  being  accom-
panied by  an  impression  of  touch.  For  an  instance  of  the  latter,  see
No.  41.  3  (p.  295).  For  a  case  of  a  sentence  alone  being  heard,  see
No.  23.  11  (p.  256).  The  aflfection  of  another  sense  at  the  same  time  is
found  much  less  often  among  the  other  classes  of  auditory  hallucinations
— there  being  89  such  cases  in  the  class  of  "  woi'ds  heard,"  and  only  28
in  both  the  other  classes  put  together.

Tactile  hallucinations  are  for  the  most  part  even  more  trivial  than
auditory  ones,  and  there  is,  naturally,  not  much  variety  in  them.
They  are  sometimes  quite  vague  tactile  impressions,  not  associated  with
any  definite  idea  of  an  external  object  {e.g.,  No.  338.  26.,  p.  258).
Sometimes,  however,  the  impression  is  more  definite  and  less  easy  to
forget :  as  in  a  few  cases  Avhere  the  feeling  is  that  of  a  kiss.  More
often  they  are  impressions  of  being  touched  by  human  hands,  as  in
the  following  case  : —

(283.  8.)  From  Mrs.  J.  H.

(The  account  was  apparently  written  in  the  early  part  of  1890.)

"  On  February  11th,  while  on  a  visit  to  my  cousin's.  Miss  O.,  at  9.45
p.m.,  while  ascending  the  stairs  to  my  bedroom  I  suddenly  felt  an  indescrib-
able feeling  of  foreboding  evil,  which  was  accompanied  by  a  distinct  feeling
of  a  hand  grasping  my  left  arm  momentarily  with  a  slight  pressure.  Within
a  few  minutes  I  rejoined  the  family  below,  to  whom  I  immediately  related
my  experience,  telling  them  I  feared  I  should  hear  of  some  bad  news,  at
which  they  pooh-poohed.

K  2


132  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


"  I  was  in  ray  usual  health,  and  in  neither  grief  nor  anxiety.

"  I  took  no  notes,  but  have  often  related  the  matter  to  my  friends,  as  at
1.30  the  same  night  I  was  fetched  home  in  consequence  of  my  father's  sudden
death  at  my  aunt's  house.  I  had  no  knowledge  until  then  of  my  father  being
ill,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  did  not  feel  unwell  until  a  few  hours  before
his  death,  which  occurred  at  9.45  p.m.  of  the  above  date,i  the  time  being
noted  by  my  uncle,  who  was  sitting  with  him  and  looked  at  his  watch.  So
sudden  and  unexpected  was  his  demise  that  my  uncle  at  first  thought  it  was
a  fit."

Mrs.  H.  says  that  she  has  had  no  other  hallucinatory  experience  besides
the  one  given.  She  wrote  to  her  cousins,  but  found  that  they  had  forgotten
her  having  told  them  of  it.

In  the  great  majority  of  tactile  hallucinations,  the  idea  produced
is  that  something  is  touching  the  percipient.  In  six  cases  only  does
the  percipient  have  the  impression  that  he  is  actively  touching  the
hallucinatory  object,  and  this  impression  is — in  all  but  one  case —
combined  with  the  affection  of  another  sense.  In  four  of  these  cases
the  percipient  sees  an  apparition  and  puts  out  his  hand  and  touches  it.
The  remaining  case  is  No.  41.  3  (see  p.  295),  already  referred  to,  where
a  voice  is  heard  at  the  same  time.  So  far  we  have  been  speaking  of
first-hand  cases  :  l^ut,  to  illustrate  tlie  combination  of  seeing  with  active
touching  of  an  apparition,  we  propose  to  give  a  second-hand  case,  which
happens  to  be  the  most  interesting  one  of  the  kind  in  our  collection.
The  account  which  we  quote  was  written  by  the  collector,  the  late
Miss  A.  J.  Clough,  the  day  after  she  had  heard  it  from  the  percipient,
an  old  housekeeper,  who,  Miss  Clough  says,  "  has  lived  in  the  same
family  3.3  years  and  has  always  told  the  same  story."  She  was  then
74  years  of  age,  and  could  not  write  easily.

(73.  20.)

July  mil,  1889.

"  E.  H.  and  her  sister  were  in  1829,  in  the  spring  of  the  year  (she  does

not  i-emember  the  day),  with  a  Mr.  and  Mrs.  ,  in  a  house  in  Little

Holland  House  grounds — in  London.  Her  mother  had  been  fully  a  year
dead.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  day  in  question,  some  people  had  been
spending  the  day,  and  she  had  been  amusing  some  boys  in  the  garden  and
very  merry  :  she  went  to  bed  rather  later  than  usual,  about  11  o'clock,  and
she  had  intended  to  get  up  early  as  she  wanted  to  do  some  fine  washing.
Her  sister  Caroline  was  sleejjing  with  her.  It  was  very  light  and  she  got  up
thinking  it  was  late.  The  moon  was  shining  and  she  went  to  the  window  to
look  out.  She  thought  perhaps  she  should  hear  the  watchman  calling  the
hour  for,  as  she  observed,  they  had  watchmen  in  those  days  in  London.
The  bed  was  directly  opposite  tlie  window. She  walked  straight  to  the  win-

1  In  a  letter  dated  March  13th,  1890,  Mrs.  H.  says  : "My  father  died  February
nth,  1885."


VI.]  Form  and  Development  of  Hcdliccinations.  133


dow,  and  then  she  turned  round  and  in  the  bed  she  saw  two  faces,  her  sister's
and  some  one  else.  She  went  to  the  bed  and  looked  ;  it  was  her  dead  mother
dozing  beside  her  sister.  She  touched  the  figure  but  it  did  not  move,  and  was
not  cold  or  hot.  There  it  lay,  there  was  the  cap  her  mother  used  to  wear
with  a  border  around  it.  She  walked  round  the  bed  and  kept  her  eye  on
the  dozing  figure  all  the  time. She  felt  afraid  it  would  follow  her,  and  she

was  dreadfully  frightened. Mr.  and  Mrs. were  sleeping  in  a  room  next

to  hers. She  went  to  their  door  and  knocked. Mrs.  opened  it.  She

went  into  the  room  and  told  her  story. Mr.  •  got  up  and  they  went  into

the  room  and  found  no  one  but  her  sister,  still  sleeping  soundly.  She  was
only  14  at  the  time.

"I heard  all  this  story  from  the  old  woman  yesterday  afternoon,  July  15,
1889. She  was  very  collected  [in]  telling  it. "

In  a  few  tactile  cases,  the  percipient  not  only  feels  a  touch,  bub  has
a  sense  of  being  pushed  or  pulled  by  an  external  force  ;  see  case  of
Mr.  B.  S.  (No.  262.  6)  in  Chapter  XVI.


134  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.

Chapter  VII.

PHYSIOLOGY  OF  HALLUCINATIONS.

In  discussing  the  physiology  of  hallucinations  we  shall  not  enter
upon  any  consideration  of  the  physiological  processes  involved  in
veridical  hallucinations  as  such  ;  since — as  has  already  been  explained
in  the  introductory  chapter — any  such  consideration  would  appear  to
us  premature  in  the  present  condition  of  our  knowledge  of  the  subject.
We  shall  confine  ourselves  to  the  phenomenon  of  hallucination,
regarded  on  its  physiological  side,  apart  from  whatever  causes  external
to  the  percipient — whether  physical  or  psychical — may  have  initiated  it.

The  first  question  of  interest  is  how  far  the  hallucination,  regarded
on  its  physiological  side,  is  generated  in  the  brain  or  in  the  special
organ  of  the  sense  affected.

There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  in  a  limited  number  of  cases,  of
special  types,  hallucinations  are  initiated  by  the  condition  of  the  sense-
organs.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  unilateral  hallucinations  (which,  if  spontane-
ous, are  probably  always  accompanied  by  pathological  conditions),  a  dis-
tinct lesion  is  sometimes  found  in  the  sense-organ  of  the  same  side,  and
the  hallucinations  often  cease  when  the  lesion  is  cured.  Also  hallucina-
tions that  move  as  the  eye  moves  probably  depend — partially,  at  least  —
on  something  in  the  eye.  This  type,  however,  is  very  rare  among  persons
in  a  normal  condition.  In  the  Census,  we  have  only  one  apparent
instance  of  it,  as  follows  : —

(191.  17.)  From  Mr.  H.  B.  K.

October  \%h,  1889.
' '  [About  20  years  ago]  I  was  walking,  about  9  o'clock  one  night  in  winter,
when  a  quadrupedal  form,  something  like  a  huge  calf,  suddenly  seemed
close  upon  me,  and  wherever  I  turned  was  always  in  front  of  me.  I  swept
round  me  freely  with  my  stick,  but  there  was  no  contact.  [It  was]  something
different  from  what  I  had  ever  seen  before.  It  approached  me  quite  closely,
but  was  shadowy,  so  that  I  could  not  tell  its  expression.  It  disappeared
down  a  lane  leading  off  at  right  angles  to  the  one  I  was  travelling.  [I]  was
well  and  free  from  trouble  ;  from  25  to  28  years  of  age."

Again,  hypnagogic  hallucinations  of  such  types  as  stars  or  luminous
points  or  objects,  arranged  as  patterns  or  designs  and  shifting  in  a
kaleidoscopic  manner,  or  in  which  the  figures  move  and  swarm  and
change,  may  sometimes  be  genuine  hallucinations  having  their  origin  in
the  "  self-light "  of  the  retina,  and  this  explanation  is  also  applicable
to  dreams  of  a  similar  nature.  On  the  other  hand,  an  observer
quoted  below  (p.  141)  who  has  recently  sent  us  an  account  of  his  own
experience  of  hypnagogic  hallucinations,  remarks  : —


VII.]


Physiology  of  Hallucinations.


135


"It  is  important  to  note  that  these  visions  are  not  betsed  on  any
affection  of  the  retina,  [since  they]  retain  what  we  estimate  to  be  their
positions  in  space,  notwithstanding  that  the  eyes  be  moved  about."

He  compares  them  in  this  respect  with  memory  images,  remarking
that  the  fact  of  both  kinds  of  images  being  unaffected  by  the  move-
ments of  the  eye  shows  that  the  train  of  physical  causes  leading  up  to
them  originates  in  the  brain.

Again,  diseases  of  the  eye  or  ear  are  sometimes  accompanied  by
visual  or  auditory  hallucinations ;  but  our  evidence  seems  to  show  that
only  a  very  small  part  of  the  phenomena  reported  to  us  can  be  I'eferred
to  this  cause.  The  seven  following  cases  are  the  only  ones  in  the
Census  in  which  any  defects  of  the  sense-organs  are  reported.

(1)  No.  607.1.  is  a  percipient  subject  to  hallucinations.  The
collector  writes  : — "  He  has  a  curious  weakness  of  the  eyes,  which  for
eleven  years,  from  17  to  28,  quite  incapacitated  him  from  reading
print.  His  sight  for  other  things,  such  as  fine  lines  in  a  drawing,  was
excellent,  but  letters  in  type  all  '  ran  together.'  He  is  better  now,  but
has  still  some  difficulty  in  reading."  It  is  not  clear  from  this  descrip
tion  exactly  what  the  defect  is,  but  it  is  most  probably  some  form  of
astigmatism,  which  is  especially  troublesome  in  reading,  and  would  not
obtrude  itself  so  much  in  looking  at  other  things,  such  as  drawings.

(2)  No.  118.21.,  who  has  sometimes  seen  phantasmal  cats  and
dogs,  is  very  short-sighted.

(3)  No.  68.25.  has  occasionally  had  both  auditory  and  visual
hallucinations.  The  two  eyes  are  of  very  different  focus,  the  left  eye
being  far-sighted  and  the  right  short-sighted,  so  that  the  percipient
cannot  use  both  at  once  without  glasses.

(4)  No.  49.9.,  while  blind  from  cataract, ' saw  phantasmal  figui'es.

(5)  No.  725.11.,  after  having  been  operated  on  for  cataract,  saw
two  figures  cross  the  room.

(6)  No.  430.15.,  who  is  quite  deaf,  frequently  imagines  that  she
hears  music,  both  vocal  and  instrumental.

(7)  No.  704.10.,  has  sometimes  fancied  he  heard  himself  called,  is
increasingly  deaf,  and  puts  the  fancies  down  to  this  cause.

The  last  four  cases  mentioned  are  not  counted  in  the  Tables,  on  the
ground  that  the  hallucinations  were  probably  due  to  the  abnormal
physical  condition  (see  Chapter  II.,  p.  36).

It  is  to  be  observed  that,  from  the  nature  of  the  ear,  many  defects
in  it,  which  from  various  causes  give  rise  to  deafness,  may  produce
vibrations  in  the  tympanum,  which  might  initiate  auditory  hallucina-
tions. This  is  much  more  probable  than  that  defects  in  the  eye  should
produce  visual  hallucinations.

Of  course,  such  common  defects  of  vision  as  those  mentioned  in  the
first  three  cases  must  exist  in  more  than  three  persons  out  of  the  1,494


136


Rei^ort  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


whose  experiences  are  included  in  our  Tables.  But  these  are  the
only  ones  who  have  thought  them  of  sufficient  importance  in  con-
nection with  their  experiences  to  mention  them.  Any  actual  disease
of  the  eye  or  ear  would  probably  have  been  recorded  in  the  majority
of  cases  where  it  was  present,  and  this  has  only  been  done,  as  stated
above,  in  the  four  cases  excluded  on  that  ground.

It  happens  that  three  of  the  crystal-seers  whose  experiences  have
been  recorded  at  length  in  the  Proceedings  have  certain  defects  of
vision.  With  Mrs.  Verrall,  the  left  eye  is  far-sighted  and  the  right
short-sighted.  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VITL,  p.  473.)  "Miss  X."  is
also  longer-sighted  with  one  eye  than  the  other.  Miss  A.  is  very
short-sighted. {Op.  cit.,  p.  499).

Now,  it  is  well  known  that  such  imperfections  of  visions  frequently
lead  to  illusions,  but  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  they  are  likely
to  produce  hallucinations,  and  it  is  very  improbable  that  the  crystal
visions  in  these  cases  are  connected  with  them.  Mrs.  Verrall  is,
however,  inclined  to  think  that  the  movements  that  occur  in  her
crystal  visions  are  due  to  the  movements  of  her  eyes  in  attempting  to
bring  the  sight  of  the  two  eyes  into  correspondence,  when  not  using
her  glasses.  She  is  able  to  see  pictures  with  either  eye,  but  she  has
observed  that  movements  in  the  picture  do  not  occur  when  she  is
looking  at  the  crystal  with  only  one  eye.  A  similar  explanation  was
suggested  by  the  lady  whose  hallucinatory  history  is  given  in  Ajypendix
D,  of  some  of  her  experiences.  Her  right  eye  is  shorter-sighted
than  her  left,  also  binocular  vision  of  any  given  object  involves  an
effort,  and  it  is  to  the  movements  of  the  eyes  in  such  vision  that
she  traces  the  movements  of  the  hallucinatoiy  cats  and  rats,  which
always  appear  to  leap  in  the  same  direction,  from  right  to  left.  If  this
explanation  is  the  true  one,  it  may  be  that  the  apparent  movement
of  real  objects  caused  by  the  movements  of  the  eyes  is  transferred
by  suggestion  to  the  hallucinatory  object,  1)ut  there  is  no  ground  for
supposing  that  the  hallucination  itself  is  due  to  the  defect  of  sight.

Our  general  conclusion,  then,  is  that  the  great  bulk  of  the  hallu-
cinations included  in  our  Census  are  not  in  any  way  dependent  on  the
condition  of  the  sense-organs  of  the  percipients.

The  view  that  many — if  not  most — hallucinations  are  originated
centrally,  in  the  brain  and  not  in  the  sense-organs,  is  that  now  generally
held  by  physiologists,  ^  as  well  as  by  psychologists.  The  chief  grounds
for  this  view  are  brought  forward  in  the  discussion  on  the  subject  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol  I.,  pp.  464-495,  and  the  great  majority
of  the  hallucinations  included  in  the  Census  exhibit  characteristics
which  are  there  shown  to  be  much  more  easily  referable  to  a  central


1  See  Foster's  Phiisiology. 5th  Edition,  p.  1270.


yii.]


Physiology  of  Hallucinations.


137


than  to  any  other  origin.  Thus,  the  percipients  are  generally,  as  far  as
we  know,  in  a  noi'mal  physical  condition  in  all  respects  ;  the  hallucina-
tions are  generally  unique  in  their  experience  ;  they  sometimes  take  a
form  which  is  undoubtedly  connected  with  some  idea  in  the  percipient's
mind  at  the  moment  (for  examples,  see  Chapter  IX.,  p.  170);  they
occasionally  develop  from  a  non-sensory  to  a  sensory  stage,  e.g.,  No.
555.  5  (see  p.  286)  ;  in  many  instances,  they  affect  more  than  one  sense
at  the  same  time,  and  it  is  very  unlikely  that  two  sense-organs  should
happen  to  be  temporarily  affected — -in  an  imperceptible  way — at  the
same  moment,  so  as  to  produce  such  a  correspondence.

Professor  Sully  thinks  that  while  vague  rudimentary  hallucinations
of  sight  and  hearing  may  most  reasonably  be  attributed  to  the  action
of  the  peripheral  parts  of  the  nervous  system,  what  he  calls  "com-
pletely developed  "  hallucinations— i.e.,  of  the  kinds  included  in  the
present  collection — are  generally  caused  by  the  automatic  activity  of
the  nerve  centres.  [Illusions,  p.  115.)  Speaking  of  persistent  dream-
images,  he  I'emarks  {Ojo.  cit.,  p.  143)  "  That  the  visual  images  of  our
sleep  do  often  involve  the  peripheral  regions  of  the  organ  of  sight  seems
to  be  proved  by  the  singular  fact  that  they  sometimes  persist  after
waking."  The  cerebral  activity  that  produces  a  hallucination  "may
probably,"  he  maintains,  "  diffuse  itself  downwards  to  the  peripheral
regions  of  the  nerves"  (p.  113),  so  that  the  sense-organs  may  thus
become  involved  secondarily.

Wundt  takes  the  same  view  of  the  physiological  action  involved  in
fully  externalised  hallucinations,^  but  he  seems  to  base  his  view  partly
on  the  assumption  that  hallucinations  move  with  the  mo^'ements  of  the
eye.  As  mentioned  above,  this  is  only  recoi'ded  in  one  out  of  our  1,295
cases  of  visual  hallucinations,  so  that  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  one  of
their  general  characteristics.

We  pass,  then,  to  consider  this  hypothesis  of  the  secondary  partici-
pation of  the  sense-organs  in  hallucinations  through  a  downward  sen-
sory impulse  from  the  brain.  We  may  begin  by  remarking  that  it
is  inconsistent  with  generally  accepted  physiological  theories  of  the
action  of  the  nervous  system  ;  or,  at  all  events,  that  no  physiological
facts  are  known  which  lend  it  any  support.  It  is  true  that  many
persons  by  dwelling  on  the  idea  of  a  sensation,  such  as  warmth,  cold,
pressure,  can  apparently  excite  the  sensation  in  any  part  of  the  skin,
accompanied  by  definite  peripheral  effects,  e.g.,  reddening  of  the  skin,

Gmndziirje  dcr  Physiologischen  Psychologic,  Vol.  II.,  p.  432.  "Visual  halluci-
nations occurring  before  going  to  sleep  are  sometimes  so  vivid  that,  as  .J.  Miiller,  H.
Meyer  and  others  have  observed,  they  may  be  followed  by  after-images.  In  such
cases,  it  seems  as  if  the  excitation  of  the  central  sensory  tracts  had  extended  itself  ta
the  retina.  The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  such  phantasms  as,  in  full  daylight,  mingle
with  external  visual  perceptions."


138  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Such  effects  give  rise  to  sensory  impulses,  which,  being  transmitted  to
the  brain,  add  to  the  vividness  of  the  sensation  perceived.  But  there
is  still  no  evidence  of  any  downward  sensory  impulse  to  the  peri-
phery :  for  all  the  peripheral  effects  may  be  accounted  for  by  motor
impulses  from  the  brain,  causing  contractions  of  the  muscles  and
dilatations  or  constrictions  of  the  blood-vessels  of  the  skin,  etc.  And
a  similar  explanation  is  still  more  obvious  in  other  cases  of  periphei'al
activity  accompanying  mental  images  like  a  faint  echo  of  the  cerebral
activity  involved — as,  for  instance,  when  the  idea  of  a  movement  is
accompanied  by  incipient  movements  of  the  kind  imagined.

The  chief  argument  for  the  existence  in  hallucinations  of  a  downward
sensory  impulse,  whereby  the  sense-organs  are  supposed  to  be  affected,
appears  to  lie  in  a  a  alleged  resemblance  between  hallucinations  and
the  retinal  after-images  which,  in  ordinary  vision,  follow  on  the  sight
of  an  object.  The  parallel  is  drawn  closer  by  showing  that  hallucina-
tions occur  corresponding  to  both  positive  and  negative  retinal  after-
images ;  the  hallucinatory  colours  in  the  latter  cases  being  comple-
mentary to  those  seen  in  an  antecedent  perception,  real  or  hallucina-
tory. Now  retinal  after-images  are  dependent — partially,  at  least —
on  exhaustion  of  the  retina  ;  hence  it  is  argued  that,  in  the  hallu-
cinations that  resemble  after-images,  the  retina  must  also  be  concerned  ;
and  that,  where  the  proximate  origin  of  the  hallucination  is  clearly
cerebral,  a  downward  sensory  impulse  from  the  brain  to  the  retina
must  be  assumed. This  argument  requires  careful  consideration.

In  ordinary  vision,  positive  after-images  of  real  objects  are  obtained
when  a  strong  stimulus  lias  been  applied  to  the  eye  for  a  short  time,
e.g.,  when  a  bright  light  is  looked  at  for  a  few  moments.  The  sensation
then  persists  for  some  time  after  the  withdrawal  of  the  stimulus,
giving  rise  to  an  after-image,  which  is  perceived  continuously,  though
it  may  wax  and  wane  in  a  rhythmical  way,  and  its  apparent  intensity
depends  partly  on  contrast  with  the  background  on  which  it  is
projected.

Now  such  after-images  might  in  all  cases  be  I'egarded  as  in  a  cer-
tain sense  hallucinatory ;  but  our  inquiry  was  framed  to  exclude
familiar  experiences  of  this  kind,  and  accordingly  they  have  not  been
reported  to  us.  It  is  held,  however,  that  a  phenomenon  similar  to
such  an  after-image  also  occurs  when  images  seen  with  closed  eyes
persist  after  the  eyes  are  opened  :  and  of  this  our  Census  does  afford
examples,  in  the  cases  of  persistent  dream-images  of  which  specimens
were  given  in  Chap.  IV.  An  account  of  Meyer's  experiments  on  this
point  is  given  in  Professor  James'  Principles  of  Psychology,  Vol.  II.,
p.  67.  After  long  practice  in  improving  his  powers  of  voluntary
visualisation,  Meyer  found  that  the  images  called  up  with  closed  eyes,
"  especially  when  they  were  bright,  left  after-images  behind  them


VII.]


Physiology  of  Hallucinations.


139


when  the  eyes  were  quickly  opened  during  their  presence.  For
example,  I  thought  of  a  silver  stirrup,  and  after  I  had  looked  at  it
a  while,  I  opened  my  eyes,  and  for  a  long  while  afterwards  saw  its
after-image."

J,  Miiller,  who  had  spontaneous  experiences  of  a  somewhat  similar
kind,  writes  ^  : — "  On  waking  in  a  dark  room,  it  sometimes  happens
that  images  of  landscapes  and  similar  objects  still  float  before  the
eyes.  ...  It  has  become  my  custom,  when  I  perceive  such  images,
immediately  to  open  my  eyes  and  direct  them  upon  the  wall  or
surrounding  bodies.  The  images  are  then  still  visible,  but  quickly
fade.  They  are  seen  whichever  way  the  head  is  turned,  but  I  have
not  observed  that  they  moved  with  the  eyes."

It  is  cases  such  as  these  that  Wundt  quotes  as  instances  where  the
central  nervous  excitation  seems  to  have  extended  itself  to  the
retina.

There  does  not,  however,  appear  to  be  any  physiological  evidence
tending  to  show  that  the  retina  is  involved  in  these  quasi-after-
images.  Moreover,  in  order  that  this  hypothesis  may  supply  a  com-
plete explanation  of  their  occurrence,  we  require  to  assume,  not  a
mere  affection  of  the  retina,  but  a  stimulus  applied  over  a  certain
definite  area  of  the  retina,  of  the  same  shape  as  the  image  seen ;  and
it  is  diflicult  to  suppose  that  such  an  effect  could  be  produced  by  a
*  downward  impulse  from  the  brain,  in  the  absence  of  any  special
mechanism  for  directing  the  stimulus  to  any  particular  part  of  the
retina.

There  is  a  still  greater  difficulty  in  supposing  the  retina  to  be
involved  in  another  class  of  cases — the  so-called  "  deferred  after-
images,"— where  a  considerable  interval  of  time  elapses  between  the
original  percept  and  the  hallucination  which  is  supposed  to  be  its
after-image.

The  following  is  the  only  clear  example  of  this  class  which  our
Census  aSbrds  :  but  it  is  not  improbable  that  this  is  the  real  explana-
tion of  the  hallucination  in  other  cases,  in  which  the  original  percept
has  been  forgotten.


"I  was  staying  at  an  hotel  at  North  Berwick,  N.B.,  in  the  autumn  of
1884.  My  daughter  had  joined  me  there,  and  we  sat  up  together  till  a  late
hour.  She  wore  a  bright  red  dress  and  sat  in  bright  gas-light,  and  as  we
talked  I  had  my  eyes  constantly  fixed  on  her.  I  had  been  sound  asleep  for
about  an  hour  when  T  woke  suddenly  and  saw  an  image,  as  it  were,  of  my
daughter  lying  beside  me,  the  bright  dress  and  complexion  illuminated  in


(192.  21.)


From  Mrs.  A.


October  21st,  1889.


'^Elements  of  Physiology. (Translation  by  W.  Baly,  London,  1842),  p.  1394.


140  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


a  bright  light.  The  figure  had  a  wooden,  rigid  look.  I  had  time  to  sit  up  in
bed  and  stretch  out  my  hand  to  light  a  match  before  the  figure  vanished.

"  I  was  not  out  of  health  or  in  grief  or  anxiety. I  was  quite  alone.

"  I  have  never  had  any  such  experience  before  or  since.

"  My  own  impression  is  that  it  was  an  optical  delusion.  I  had  had
my  eyes  fixed  for  a  considerable  time  on  my  daughter's  face,  but  then  I  had
undressed  and  been  some  time  in  my  room  before  I  went  to  sleep,  and  the
vision  was  so  clear  and  vivid,  as  it  seemed  to  lie  beside  me,  that  it  startled,
me  much."

Some  experiments,  resembling  the  case  just  quoted,  in  producing-
on  waking  in  the  morning  the  image  of  an  object  seen  just  before
closing  the  eyes  at  night,  are  described  in  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,  Yol.
VIII,  pp.  450-2.  The  plan  of  the  experimenter,  Mr.  Bakewell,  is
on  waking  to  "  open  his  eyes  on  a  plain  white  ceiling  and  instantly
close  them  again,  having  just  admitted  a  vague  flash  of  light  into  the
eye."  He  is  inclined  to  regai'd  the  images  seen  as  "secondary  or
tardy  positive  after-images  ;  as  if,  in  addition  to  the  first  positive  after-
image immediately  arising,  there  was  a  feeble  series  of  vibrations,
which,  if  left  undisturbed  by  counter-vibrations,  gradually  by  their
summation  came  to  be  of  sufficient  importance  to  give  a  bright  positive
image,  provided  any  sudden  uniform  stimulation  of  the  retina  should
set  these  banked-up  energies  off."

With  regard  to  the  part  supposed  to  be  played  by  the  retina  here,  *
it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  conditions  under  which  the  "  after-
images "  are  seen  are  exactly  the  reverse  of  those  which  favour  the
development  of  true  retinal  after-images.  The  latter  are  the  result  of
retinal  activity  and  the  stronger  the  stimulus  or  the  more  sensitive  the
retina,  the  more  vivid  is  the  image,  which  persists  for  some  time  and
then  gradually  fades.  In  Mr.  Bakewell's  experiments,  on  the  other
hand,  as  in  Mrs.  A.'s  case  quoted  immediately  before,  the  image
follows  on  a  condition  of  the  greatest  possible  repose  of  the  retina,
when  the  eyes  had  been  for  a  long  time  closed,  and  in  the  dark.  It
would  therefore  seem  much  more  probable  that  it  is  merely  a  memory-
image, — that  is,  that  it  originates  in  the  brain  and  has  nothing  to
do  with  the  retina.  This  interpretation  is  applied  by  another
percipient,  Dr.  Flournoy,  to  a  similar  set  of  experiences — hypnagogic
hallucinations  which  I'eproduced  real  objects  on  which  he  had  concen-
trated his  attention  for  a  long  time  during  the  previous  day — quoted  in
the  same  paper  {Op.  cit.,  pp.  453-4).  Dr.  Flournoy  remarks,  "  I  regard
these  hypnagogic  images  and  all  memory-images,  however  recent  and
intense,  as  radically  different  from  the  '  after-images  '  of  the  eye."
Other  instances  of  this  type  are  given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.
I,  p.  490.  The  following  case  is  taken  from  a  paper  "  On  the  Limits  of
Vision  "  by  Dr.  G.  J.  Stoney,  published  in  the  Philosojihical  Magazine


VII.]


Physiology  of  Hallucinations.


141


for  March,  1894. It  will  be  seen  that  Dr.  Stoney  takes  the  same  view
as  Dr.  Flournoy  of  the  origin  of  the  images.

"The  experience  I  had  myself  was  one  which  frequently  occurred  to  me
when  a  lad.  Several  of  us  boys  were  fond  of  witnessing  sham  fights  in
the  Phojnix  Park,  at  which  some  of  the  most  conspicuous  objects  were  the
single  horsemen  who  now  and  then  galloped  at  full  speed,  with  orders,  from
■one  part  of  the  field  to  another.  Almost  always,  after  a  day  spent  in  viewing
this  spectacle,  as  I  lay  in  bed  at  night  I  saw  vividly  what  seemed  to  be  a
tiny  horseman  gallo2:)ing  violently  from  right  to  left,  or  from  left  to  right,  as
the  case  might  be.  All  the  movements  of  the  horse  were  reproduced,  the
dashing  about  of  the  sabre-tache,  the  coloured  uniform,  the  movements  of
the  horseman.  It  cannot  have  been  in  the  retina  that  this  revival  took
place. It  must  have  been  in  a  much  more  deep-seated  part  of  the  brain."

This  explanation  seems  also  applicable  to  the  following  case  which
appeared  in  Nature  for  October  5th,  1893  : —

"  A  remarkable  case  of  resuscitation  of  an  optical  image  is  described  from
personal  experience  by  Professor  T.  Vignoli  in  a  paper  recently  commu-
nicated to  the  -Rea'e  InsUtnio  Lombardo. On  the  morning  of  July  3rd,  after
:a  railway  journey  in  a  bright  sun,  and  two  days'  walk  in  a  sufi'ocating  heat,
he  happened  to  be  in  a  room  with  several  other  persons,  and  during  conver-
sation looked  at  a  balcony  bathed  in  bright  sunlight,  but  without  taking  any
special  interest  in  it. The  balcony  was  decorated  with  trellis-woi'k  and  ivy.
Plowering  creepers  were  arranged  in  vertical  columns,  each  column  being
■crossed  below  by  the  iron  bars  of  the  balcony,  and  above  by  sticks  sup-
porting the  plants. A  cage  with  two  birds  hung  up  in  the  middle.  Two
■days  afterwards,  very  early  in  the  morning,  the  professor  was  in  bed,  but
perfectly  awake,  and  in  ordinary  health,  when,  to  his  astonishment,  he  saw
on  the  ceiling,  by  the  light  coming  through  Venetian  blinds  of  two  large
windows,  an  exact  reproduction,  in  all  its  colours  and  details,  of  the  balcony
referred  to. The  phenomenon  lasted  long  enough  to  permit  some  detailed
investigation. On  closing  the  eyes,  the  image  disappeared,  to  appear  again
when  they  were  opened. It  was  unaffected  by  regarding  it  with  each  eye
alternately. A  finger  placed  between  the  eye  and  the  image  intercepted  it
in  the  same  manner  as  it  would  any  ordinary  object ;  in  short,  the  phenomenon
obeyed  all  the  optical  laws  of  vision. And  not  only  was  the  cage  of  birds
reproduced,  but  also  its  swinging  motion  noticed  before."

Similarly,  in  the  following  case,  taken  from  our  Census,  there  is  a
considerable  interval  between  the  original  impression  and  its  hallu-
cinatory reproduction,  which  makes  it  practically  certain  that  it  could
not  have  been  due  to  retinal  action.

(733.  18.)  From  Mr.  F.  De  V.

March  29th,  1892.

' '  I  heard  a  noise  in  the  corridor,  and  on  looking  that  way  I  saw  a  man
in  grave  clothes,  standing  at  the  entrance.  1  was  much  terrified,  and
rushed  out  into  the  back  premises,  whither  my  father  followed  me  to  find


142  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  '  [chap.


me  stretched  upon  the  ground.  Place  Maceio,  capital  of  Alagoas,  Brazil,
year  1858,  8  o'clock  in  the  evening  more  or  less.  The  man  seen  had  very-
long  hair. The  impression  was  very  vivid.

"  I  was  studying,  but  was  in  a  very  nervous  state. Age  11.

' '  My  imagination  was  tormented  by  the  image  of  the  man  who  appeared
to  me.  I  knew  [him],  and  I  had  found  him  shortly  before  lying  in  his  coflBn
in  the  church.  The  sight  of  the  corpse  had  produced  a  profound  impression
on  me,  and  was  the  cause  of  my  nervousness.  The  sound  might  have  had
a  very  natural  cause.

"I  was  alone  in  the  room."

All  these  hallucinations  seem  to  be  of  essentially  the  same  type,
differing  from  one  another  chiefly  in  the  length  of  time  between  the
vision  of  the  real  object  and  that  of  its  hallucinatory  reproduction,  but
by  such  comparatively  small  degrees  that  it  would  be  arbitrary  to  draw
the  line  at  any  point,  and  to  say  that  one  of  them  was  a  retinal  after-
image and  another  a  memory -image.  In  all  cases,  the  I'etina  must  have
long  recovered  from  the  effects  of  the  original  stimulus,  and — except
when  the  hallucinations  occurred  on  waking — had  been  subjected  to  a
great  number  of  subsequent  stimuli.  There  is  nothing  in  the  physiology
of  the  retina,  so  far  as  this  is  known,  to  suggest  the  possibility  of  any
such  selective  retention  of  after-images  as  would  be  implied  in  recurring
to  a  long-past  impression,  after  passing  through  a  subsequent  series  of
impressions.  On  the  other  hand,  a  memory-image  can,  of  course,  recur
at  any  time.

The  repetition  of  a  hallucination,  after  a  shorter  or  longer  interval,
seems  to  be  a  phenomenon  of  the  same  kind.  The  second  hallucination
may  be  called  an  "  after-image  "  of  the  first,  but  is  pi'obably  nothing-
more  than  a  revival  of  memory  of  the  first,  excited  by  some  association
of  ideas,  as  that  of  being  in  the  same  place,  or  under  similar  circum-
stances again.  For  instance,  hallucinations  induced  during  one
hypnosis  may  recur  spontaneously  in  a  subsequent  hypnosis.

Some  interesting  instances  of  hallucinations  traceable  to  the  revival
of  memory  of  long  past  scenes  are  to  be  found  in  the  experiences  of
"  Miss  X."  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.,  pp.  506-510)  which  seem  to  be
of  es.sentially  the  same  nature  as  the  "  deferred  after-images  "  already
quoted,  though  the  interval  before  the  recrudescence  of  memory  was
much  longer — so  long  that  the  percipient  had  often  forgotten  the
scenes  pictured  till  she  was  reminded  of  them  by  seeing  them  again
represented.  The  first  experience  described  in  the  following  case  is
somewhat  analogous.

(49.  5.)  From  Mrs.  L.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889).
"  In  September,  1854,  I  was  thrown  from  a  dog-cart  on  to  my  head,  and
stunned. My  life  flashed  before  me,  but  the  only  thing  that  remained  was


VII.]


Physiology  of  Hallucinations.


343


the  apprarance  of  a  red  setter  dog,  running  at  me.  This  continued  many
days,  and  I  could  not  speak  of  it.  My  mother  came  and  then  I  told  her  I
feared  my  brain  was  injured,  as  I  was  haunted  by  a  red  setter  dog.  She
said  directly  that,  being  very  nervous,  she  had  not  wished  me  to  be  told  or
talked  to  about  it,  but  that,  before  I  could  speak,  the  nurse  put  me  down  on
the  lawn,  whilst  she  ran  back  to  the  house.  I  had  on  a  little  grey  fur
pelisse,  and  before  they  could  reach  me,  a  large  red  setter  dog  of  my  uncle's
had  run  at  me,  and  shaken  me  nearly  unconscious,  taking  me  for  a  rabbit.
After  this  explanation,  the  dog  never  appeared  to  me  again.''

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  : —

''July  Uth,  1S89.

"  I  saw  Mrs.  L.  yesterday  and  questioned  her  about  the  dog  case.  I

think  it  was  an  externalised  hallucination.  She  could  not  describe  the
impression  very  clearly.  A  dog's  head  at  her  side  snapping  at  her  seems  to
have  been  what  she  saw,  and  she  gave  me  the  impression  by  her  gestures
that  it  was  continually — during  the  few  days  that  she  was  haunted  by  it  —
appearing  sideways,  but  in  the  dii'ect  line  of  vision,  and  disappeai'ing  when
she  looked  full  at  it.  At  all  events  it  was  not,  apparently,  a  full  view  of  a
whole  dog  which  could  be  followed  with  the  eyes  and  taken  for  a  real  dog.
She  is  quite  clear  as  to  the  correspondence  of  her  visionary  dog  and  her
mother's  account  of  the  real  one,  but  of  course  the  recollections  are  not  now
indejjendent.  It  is  some  confirmation  of  the  correspondence,  perhaps,  that,
while  stunned  with  the  blow,  remembered  scenes  of  early  childhood  passed
vividly  before  her — in  particular  some  connected  with  the  illness  of  a
favourite  dog,  which  died  when  she  was  about  six  years  old.  These
remembered  scenes  did  not,  however,  haunt  her,  and  probably  they  were
not  fully  externalised  ;  they  occurred  during  the  more  definite  brain
disturbance  at  the  time  of  the  fall.  She  probably  had  a  slight  concussion,
but  went  about  as  usual,  though  feeling  and  looking  very  ill,  and  saw  no
doctor  till  two  or  three  days  after  the  accident,  when  her  mother  came.  It
was  during  these  few  days  that  the  dog  haunted  her  and  gave  her  the
impression  that  her  brain  had  been  injured,  till  her  mother  dispelled  it."

It  will  be  convenient  to  quote  in  connection  with  the  above
another  experience  of  the  same  lady's,  though  here  the  hallucination
was  probably  not  a  reproduction  of  anything  actually  seen,  but  of
a  scene  vividly  imagined  at  a  remote  period,  and  afterwards  recalled
through  association  of  ideas,  of  which  the  links  can  be  traced.

"  About  September,  1881,  aged  46,  and  18  months  after  the  sudden  death
of  my  mother,  which  had  shaken  my  nerves  very  much,  one  night  towards
morning,  being  awake  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  I  saw  a  woman  come  through
the  door.  Her  face  was  sideways  and  I  distinctly  saw  her  features.  She
passed  slowly  from  the  door  and  went  out  at  window  opposite,  thus  passing
across  the  foot  of  my  bed.  She  had  on  an  old-fashioned  bonnet  and  an  old-
fashioned  caped  cloak,  and  she  was  carrying  a  basket  in  front  of  her  such  as
country  women  carried  their  husbands'  dinners  in.  The  whole  figure  was
semi-opaque,  neutral  tinted,  like  thick  smoke  or  cloud.  A  great  hurricane
was  blowing. I  was  dreadfully  disturbed  and  hysterical  next  day, — the


144  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


impression  so  vivid,  and  yet  unable  to  say  who  it  was.  About  a  week  after,
the  revelation  came.  I  sat  down  to  dinner,  became  very  hysterical  and
faint,  and  went  into  another  room  alone  in  the  dark.  All  at  once  I  jumped
up  saying,  '  It  is  Mrs.  Beasant.'  Mrs.  Beasant  was  the  pretty  young  bride
of  a  farmer  with  whom  when  about  ten  years  old  we  used  to  go  and  take  tea
at  a  farm  two  or  three  miles  from  the  vicarage.  One  day  she  went  with  her
husband's  dinner  as  usual  and  he  was  felling  a  tree.  She  passed  the  wrong
way  and  the  tree  fell  on  her  and  killed  her.  I  remember  watching  her
funeral  with  my  nurse,  and  the  anguish  of  spirit  at  her  death,  but  never
remember  speaking  of  it  or  the  circumstance  since.  The  day  before  the
ajjpearance,  a  nurse  of  the  name  of  '  Beasant '  had  disturbed  and  annoyed
me.  A  few  months  before,  a  large  elm-tree  had  fallen  in  our  garden  and
partly  on  the  house.  A  hurricane  was  blowing  at  the  time,  and  I  reuiember
thinking  '  what  a  lucky  thing  that  tree  can't  fall  on  the  roof. '  I  was  sleeping
alone."

We  have  now  to  consider  the  class  of  hallucinations  that  resemble
complementary  or  negative  after-images  of  some  antecedent  hallucina-
tory percept  or  voluntarily  produced  image.  It  is  claimed  that  the
antecedent  percept  must  have  involved  an  affection  of  the  retina,  and
so  produced  a  negative  after-image  ;  and,  since  it  is  clear  in  most — if
not  all — of  the  cases  in  question  that  the  first  percept  originated  in
the  brain,  a  downward  sensory  impulse  from  brain  to  retina  has  to  be
postulated,  in  order  that  the  retina  may  be  involved.

We  will  give  examples  of  hallucinations  of  this  class  before  dis-
cussing their  explanation.  MM.  Binet  and  Fere,  who  have  tried
many  experiments  on  hallucinations  of  colour  induced  in  their  hypnotic
subjects,  with  results  more  uniform  than  those  obtained  by  most  other
observers,  say,  (Animal  Magnetism,  p.  191): — "We  have  seen  subjects
who  could  at  pleasure,  and  in  the  waking  state.  .  .  when  looking
attentively  at  a  sheet  of  white  paper,  cause  it  to  appear  red,  blue,
green,  etc.,  and  the  colour  thus  evoked  would  be  sufficiently  distinct
to  give  birth  in  due  succession  to  the  complementary  colour,  which
the  subject  could  indicate  correctly."  M.  Fere  found  that  he  could
picture  to  himself  the  idea  of  red  so  intensely  that  at  the  end  of  a  few
minutes  he  was  able  to  see  a  green  patch  upon  the  white  paper  ;  but
repeated  efforts  were  requii'ed  before  he  was  able  to  associate  an  outline
with  the  colour. {Op.  cit.,  p.  255).

With  their  hypnotic  subjects,  they  found  that  complementary  after-
images, resembling  in  all  respects  a  normal  negative  image,  followed
on  induced  hallucinations  of  colour,  and  the  experiments  were  repeated
by  Charcot.  They  state  that  these  experiments  have  always  succeeded
with  subjects  who  were  certainly  ignorant  of  the  sequence  of  com-
plementary colours,  and  the  answers  were  always  given  correctly  in
the  first  experiment.  Their  results  are  confirmed  by  previous  observa-
tions made  by  M.  Parinaud  on  the  phenomenon  of  simultaneous  con-


VII.]


Physiology  of  Hallucinations.


145


trast ;  he  found  that  a  piece  of  paper  divided  by  a  line,  on  being
presented  to  a  hypnotised  subject,  to  whom  it  was  suggested  that  one-
half  of  the  paper  was  red,  appeared  to  her  green  on  the  other  half.
{Op.  cit.,  p.  250).

MM.  Binet  and  Fere  also  experimented  on  the  mixture  of
imaginary  colours  and  found  that  it  gave  resultant  shades  which
were  in  conformity  with  optical  laws.  (Op.  cit.,  p.  256.)  Similar
experiments  have  been  tried  with  the  same  results  by  Professor
Lombroso,  who  made  his  subjects  look  through  a  glass  of  some  given
(hallucinatory)  colour  at  hallucinatory  images  of  the  solar  spectrum.
{Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  447).  So  uniform  were  the  results
obtained  by  MM.  Binet  and  Fere  that  they  generalised  from  them
thus  (in  speaking  of  after-images)  : — "  We  have  ascertained  that
hallucinatory  vision  is  subject  to  the  same  conditions  [as  ordinary
external  vision]  ]  every  hallucination  of  some  persistence  is  succeeded,
on  its  disappearance,  by  an  after-image,  just  as  in  the  case  of  ordinary
sensations  which  affect  the  retina." {Oj).  cit.,  p.  252.)

Further,  Dr.  C.  T.  G-reen,  of  Birkenhead,  records  an  experiment
with  one  of  his  hypnotic  subjects,  who,  after  being  made  to  see  a
hallucinatory  red  cross,  soon  saw  the  complementary  colour  sponta-
neously ^ ;  but  the  results  of  other  observers  and  experimenters  have
varied  a  good  deal.  Again,  with  regard  to  colours  voluntarily
visualised,  Mr.  Keulemans  {Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol  VIII.,  p.  480)
states  that  after  calling  up  mentally  a  bright  red  he  can  sometimes
see  the  complementary  colour  on  the  ceiling,  though  he  cannot  get  the
complementaries  of  pale  shades,  such  as  lemon  yellow,  and  lilac,  greys
or  brown.

A  few  cases  have  also  been  recorded  of  dream-images  persisting
with  complementary  colours.  Gruithuisen  (quoted  by  Professor  Sully,
Illusions,  p.  144),  "  had  a  dream  in  which  the  principal  feature  was  a
violet  flame,  and  which  left  behind  it,  after  waking,  for  an  appreciable
duration,  a  complementary  image  of  a  yellow  spot."  The  following
somewhat  similar  case  was  received  by  us  a  short  time  ago,  from  the
Hon.  Mrs.  Drummond  : —

"  64,  Lower  Leeson-street,  Dublin,  November  ifh,  1892.

"  I  was  dreaming  of  being  in  a  drawing-room  furnished  with  a  variety  of
knick-nacks  in  glass  and  china,  when  my  attention  appeared  to  be  arrested
by  a  large  green  vase  of  particularly  graceful  shape.  I  felt  myself  gazing
intently  at  this  object,  when  I  awoke  very  suddenly  and  completely.

"I  occupied  a  few  seconds  in  looking  about  me,  collecting  the  letters
which  had  been  brought  in,  when  a  slight  uneasiness  in  my  eyes  made  me
close  them. I  then  saw  the  vase  at  which  I  had  been  staring  in  my  dream

1  Borderland,  January,  1894,  p.  225.

L


146  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


appear  within  the  closed  eyelids  in  red,  the  complementary  colour  of  green,
exactly  as  it  would  have  done  had  I  looked  as  long  at  a  real  object  and  then
shut  my  eyes."

Mrs.  Druramond  wrote  later  : —

"  December  5th,  1892.

"I  think  tlie  incident  in  question  happened  about  four  years  ago.

"  I  regret  that  I  did  not  at  the  time  write  down  any  account  of  what  I
had  seen  ;  but  I  was  profoundly  impressed  by  the  circumstance,  the  only
one  which  ever  led  me  to  doubt  for  an  instant  that  we  are  right  in  speaking
of  '  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  dream.'

"  I  am  sure  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  room  which  could  produce  the
after-image  of  the  vase  I  had  seen  in  my  dream,  a  two-handled  vase  of  a
beautiful  and  classical  pattern.

"Adelaide  Deummond."

There  is,  therefore,  sufficient  evidence  of  the  interesting  fact  that
hallucinatory  percepts  are  occasionally  followed  by  negative  after-
images. But  the  inference  of  several  psychologists  ^  that  the  retina
must  be  involved  in  such  cases  seems  to  us  quite  unwarrantable.
As  Mr.  Gurney  points  out,  such  after-images  do  not  "  imply  more  than
the  brief  continuance  of  excitation  at  the  ce7itral  cells  "2;  and  MM.
Binet  and  Fere  themselves  do  not  think  of  inferring  from  their  experi-
ments any  affection  of  the  retina  :  they  merely  infer  from  them  that
hallucinations  involve  an  excitation  of  the  sensory  centres  in  the
brain.

It  is  probable  that  even  ordinary  retinal  after-images  of  real  objects
are  not  dependent  solely  on  fatigue  of  the  retina,^  and  Professor  Hering
leaves  the  question  open  as  to  whether  the  physiological  processes
which  he  considers  to  be  associated  with  the  formation  of  after-images
take  place  in  the  brain  or  in  the  retina.

That  cerebral  action  alone  is  at  all  events  capable  of  producing
similar  effects  seems  to  be  shown  by  some  experiments  published  by
Mr.  John  Gorham  in  Brain  (1881-2),  Vol.  IV.,  p.  465,  in  which  colour-
sensations  received  through  one  eye  modified  those  received  through  the
other. In  one  experiment,  (a)  the  effect  of  simultaneous  contrast,

1  The  views  of  Professors  Sully  and  Wundt  have  already  been  quoted.  Profeasor
James  also  says  : — (Principles  of  Psycholorjy,  Vol.  II.,  p.  70).  "  The  current  demon-
strably does  flow  backward  down  the  optic  nerve  in  Meyer's  and  Fere's  negative  after-
image. Therefore  it  can  flow  backward  ;  therefore  it  may  flow  backward  in  some,
however  slight,  degree,  in  all  imagination."  He  applies  the  same  theory  to  the  com-
plementary hallucinatory  colours  in  M.M.  Binet  and  Feri^'s  hypnotic  experiments.

-Phantasms  of  the  Living. Vol.  I.,  p.  487,  foot-note.

3  "We  have  no  right  to  suppose  that  the  exhaustion  takes  i^lace  in  the  retinal
structures  only  ;  it  may  occur  in  the  central  cerebral  structures  during  the  develop-
ment of  visual  impulses  into  sensations  ;  indeed  the  chief  part  of  it  is  probably  of
such  a  cerebral  origin." (Foster's  Physiology,  r)th  edition,  p.  12(;G.)


VII.]


Physiology  of  Hallucinations.


147


which  is  generally  associated  with  the  action  of  one  part  of  a  retina
on  another  part  of  the  same,  was  produced  by  the  apparent  action  of
one  eye  on  the  other.  "While  green  light  was  falling  into  the  right  eye,
and  white  light — through  a  pin-hole — into  the  left,  the  left  eye  seemed
to  see  a  small  pink  disc.  In  the  next  experiment  (h),  the  conditions  of
(a)  were  maintained  until  the  effect  just  described  was  produced,  and
then  the  green  light  was  removed  from  the  right  eye.  The  pink  disc
apparently  seen  by  the  left  eye  then  turned  green.  In  repeating  these
experiments,  we  have  observed  that  the  green  colour  in  experiment  (6)
is  much  more  obvious  than  the  pink  in  experiment  [a).  A  somewhat
similar  experiment,  though  with  a  different  result,  is  described  by
Professor  James  {Principles  of  Psychology,  Vol.  II,  p.  71,  foot-note).
On  looking  with  one  eye  open  at  a  coloured  spot  on  a  white  back-
ground, then  closing  that  eye  and  looking  with  the  other  at  a  plain
background,  a  colour  complementary  to  the  first  will  appear.  We
have  not,  however,  been  able  to  verify  this  result  from  personal
experience.

In  all  these  experiments,  the  appearances  seen,  as  far  as  the  eye
which  receives  only  white  light  is  concerned,  can  hardly  be  due  to  any
action  of  the  retina  of  that  eye,  and  must,  therefore,  depend  on
cerebral  action.  The  cerebral  action  is,  of  course,  initiated  by  the
stimulation  applied  to  the  other  eye;  but  the  effect, which  is  apparently
produced  on  one  eye  through  the  influence  of  the  other,  is  actually  a
cerebral  effect.

This  view  is  confirmed  by  "  Miss  X.'s "  experiences  in  crystal-
vision  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  484)  ;  of  which  a
noteworthy  feature  is  that  while  one  crystal  picture  shows  a
colour  complementary  to  that  of  the  preceding  one,  the  form  of  the
second  picture  may  be  entirely  different  from  that  of  the  first.
Thus,  a  lady  in  a  blue  gown  is  replaced  by  a  little  boy  in  a  bright
orange  garment ;  a  pale  green  picture  of  a  man  tearing  up  palings  is
followed  by  a  red  picture  of  the  corner  of  the  library.  This  pheno-
menon clearly  cannot  be  compared  with  an  ordinary  retinal  negative
after-image.  Miss  X.  also  says  that  after  staring  at  a  (real)  red  flower
she  can  see  a  green  one  in  the  crystal  (such  a  case  may,  however,  be
simply  a  negative  after-image  of  the  ordinary  kind),  and  that  on
summoning  up  a  (hallucinatory)  red  flower  in  the  crystal,  she  can  see  a
green  patch  on  the  wall,  or  in  another  crystal.  Or  a  blue  picture,
conjured  up  with  closed  eyes,  on  being  transferred  to  the  crystal,
would  appear  as  orange.  "  Or,"  she  says,  "  if  I  merely  desire  a  change
of  colour  in  a  crystal  picture,  I  find  that  blue  is  followed  by  orange,
yellow  by  purple,  green  by  red.  ...  It  may  be  worth  noting  that
a  distinct  effort  is  required  to  convert  a  scene — lighted,  for  example,
with  red — to  its  natural  colouring,  or  even  to  a  neutral  tint. It  is

L  2


148  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


necessary  to  close  the  eyes,  or  to  look  away  for  a  moment  ;  so  that
what  follows  is  a  second  edition  rather  than  a  prolongation  of  the  first
picture.  On  the  other  hand,  the  mere  desire  for  change  will  produce
a  green  light  rapidly  alternating  with  the  original  hue."  (Op.  cit.,
p.  487.)

Our  general  conclusion,  then,  is  that  the  phenomena  of  hallucination
do  not  require,  nor  in  any  degree  support,  the  difficult  physiological
hypothesis  of  retinal  action.  It  is  simpler  to  suppose  that  hallucinatory
percepts,  being  subjectively  indistinguishable  from  those  produced  by
real  objects,  involve  cerebral  activity  closely  similar  to  that  normally
excited  by  visual  impulses  from  the  retina,  and  thus  tend  to  be  followed
by  cerebral  exhaustion — similar  to  that  resulting  from  such  retinal
impulses— and  consequently  by  similar  after-images.

It  should  l^e  observed  that  the  activity  involved  is  no  less  purely
cerebral  if,  as  we  are  inclined  to  think,  in  many  of  the  cases  we  have
given,  expectation  is,  in  whole  or  in  part,  the  real  cause  of  the
phenomena.  Expectation  can  hardly  be  excluded  in  the  case  of
educated  observers,  when  their  attention  has  once  been  called  to
the  possibility  of  producing  the  complementary  colours.  Again,  the
activity  also  remains  cerebral  if,  as  is  further  possible,  the  sequence  is
due  to  another  cause,  namely,  that  the  mind  being  weary  of  seeing  one
colour,  consciously  or  unconsciously  attempts  to  call  up  for  a  relief  the
complementary  colour,  because  it  is  accustomed  to  associate  this  sequence
with  the  idea  of  relief.  Thus  "Miss  X."  found  that  the  mere  desire
for  change  in  her  crystal  pictures  would  sometimes  produce  a  green
light  rapidly  alternating  with  the  original  hue — green  being  the  colour
most  restful  to  the  eyes  and  therefore  perhaps,  by  association,  to
the  mind.


VIII.]


Age  in  Relation  to  hallucinations.


149


Chapter  VIII.

AGE, SEX, HEREDITy, NATIONALITY, AND  HEALTH.
RECURRENT  HALLUCINATIONS.

^  '  Age.

The  ages  at  which  the  hallucinations  included  in  our  Census
occurred,  range  from  about  three  to  about  eighty  years,  and  there  is  no
reason  to  doubt  that  hallucinations  may  occur  at  any  age  at  which
visual  perception  is  possible  at  all.  Nor  does  there  seem  to  be  any
much  greater  disposition  to  hallucinations  at  one  age  than  at  another,
though  it  will  be  seen  from  the  last  line  of  Table  XI  that  the  propor-
tion seems  to  be  somewhat  higher  between  20  and  30  than  at  other
ages.  It  is  noticeable  that  this  is  the  period  of  life  when  the  organism
has  reached  its  full  development,  but  has  not  yet  begun  to  decay.

As  already  stated,  however,  in  Chapter  III,  pp.  65  and  68,we  believe
our  information  to  be  specially  defective  as  regards  the  number  of
hallucinations  at  early  ages,  so  that  the  small  proportion  of  youthful
hallucinations  reported  cannot  be  taken  as  evidence  that  hallucinations
are  rare  in  early  youth.  Indeed,  it  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  know
much  as  to  the  nature  and  frequency  of  hallucinations  among  young
children.  Their  memory,  and  in  some  respects  their  observation,  is
untrustworthy,  and  when  they  are  too  young  to  express  themselves,
evidence  about  their  hallucinations — like  that  about  hallucinations
supposed  to  be  experienced  by  animals — can  only  rest  on  the  inferences
of  others  from  their  actions.  Still,  there  are  clear  cases  of  halluci-
nations being  experienced  by  children,  and  some  observers  have  even
been  disposed  to  think  that  children  are  specially  liable  to  them.
An  instance  of  an  apparition  of  a  person  recently  dead  being  seen
by  a  child  just  under  two  years  old  is  recorded  in  the  Annales  des
Sciences  Psychiques  (January — February,  1894,  p.  7).  This  is  perhaps
the  earliest  age  at  which  such  a  case  has  been  authenticated.

As  regards  the  kinds  of  hallucinations  experienced  by  children,
we  have  only  noticed  one  peculiarity,  and  that  is  the  relative
frequency  among  them,  compared  with  adults,  of  apparitions  repre-
senting grotesque  or  fanciful  objects. ^  Of  the  apparitions  in  the
present collection  classed  as  "grotesque,  horrible,  or  monstrous,"

1  The  following  is  a  rough  analysis  of  the  hallucinations  of  this  class  included  in
our  Tables  : —

Childish  cases. — Diminutive  figures  of  men  or  animals,  often  "swarming,"
5  cases.  Out-of-the-way  figures,  viz.,  Red  Indian,  Turks,  Halberdier,  4  cases.
Bedroom  frequently  peopled  with  strange  beings.  Procession  of  toy  cocks.  Pro-
cession carrying  headless  negro.  Figure  with  parasol  walking  across  sky.  Immense


150  Report  on  the  Cenm^s  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


more  than  half  occurred  to  children,  and  12  out  of  33 — or  36  per
cent. — to  children  under  10  years  old,  whereas  of  all  kinds  of  visual
hallucinations  together,  only  8  per  cent,  occurred  to  children  under  10.
The  reason,  doubtless,  is  that  children's  judgment  of  what  is  likely
to  occur  is  less  clearly  formed;  they  do  not  instinctively  draw  the  same
line  between  the  expected  and  unexpected  that  adults  usually  draw.
The  same  difference  is  shown  in  ideas  that  do  not  develop  into  halluci-
nations. An  imaginary  lion  under  the  bed  is  a  source  of  infantine
terror,  but  similar  nervousness  in  a  grown-up  person  suggests  that  there
is  a  burglar  there.  In  dreams,  when  our  judgment  is  more  or  less  in
abeyance,  and  in  delirium  and  insanity,  hallucinatory  figures  unlike
real  life  are  apt  to  occur  to  adults,  just  as  they  seem  to  do  in  ordinary
life  to  children.

The  following  are  instances  of  youthful  hallucinations  : —

(350.  18.)  From  Mr.  H.  C.

August  31si,  1890.

"  When  at  Wells,  being  at  the  time  a  schoolboy,  I  followed  a  party  of
fi'iends  to  see  the  Cathedral.  I  was  detained  by  work  a  few  minutes,  and
ran  after  the  party.  On  entering  the  Cathedral  I  found  it  quite  empty,  my
friends,  I  fancy,  having  gone  up  the  tower.  I  heard  a  noise,  and  looking  up
saw  a  figure,  dressed  in  the  armour  of  a  halberdier,  moving  along  the
gallery  above  the  arches  of  the  nave.  The  appaiition  was  only  momentary.
This  occurred  about  the  year  1865. I  was  aged  about  ten."

(324.  12.)  From  Mr.  W.  K.  S.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889).

"  Once,  when  a  very  small  child,  on  looking  out  of  the  nursery  window,
in  London,  on  a  fine  cloudless  day  (in  the  morning),  [I]  saw  a  gaily-dressed
figure,  with  a  bright-coloured  jDarasol,  walk  across  the  sky.  It  produced  a
very  vivid  impression  on  [my]  mind  at  the  time,  and  for  some  considerable
period  afterwards."

(390.  1.)  From  the  Rev.  A.  H.

January  23rd,  1891.
"Long  ago,  certainly  more  than  fifty,  probably  nearly  sixty,  years
ago,  when  I  was  a  boy — so  young  that  I  slept  in  a  little  bed  in  my  father  and
mother's  room — I  was  lying  awake  one  summer  morning,  and  there  I  sud-
denly saw  on  the  ceiling  of  the  room  a  procession  of  white  cocks.  They  were
not  jjure  white,  but  had  that  slight  tinge  of  yellow,  or  whatever  you  may

tower.  Kitchen  clock  pursuing  percipient.  Boots  trotting  across  room.  Tree  at
foot  of  bed.

Adult  cases. — Skulls  or  skeletons,  3  cases  (one  of  them  recurring).  Horrid  figures,
e.g.,  corpse,  2  cases  (one  of  them  recurring  in  various  forms).  Figures  taken  for  the
devil  or  for  an  evil  genius  as  described  by  Swedenborg,  3  cases.  Grotesque  animal,  1
case.  Queer  things  seen  in  a  bad  light  out-of-doors,  6  cases  (the  most  definite  of  these
was  a  brougham  with  a  headless  coachman.)


Till.]  Age  in  Relation  to  Hallucinations.  ■  151


•call  it,  which  appears  on  white  fowls,  and  with  red  wattles,  exactly  as
white  cocks  have.  They  glided  backwards  in  single  file  along  the  roof  before
my  eyes,  and  disappeared,  one  after  another,  behind  the  curtain  of  my
mother's  bed  without  making  any  motion,  except  that  each  cock,  just  before
it  disappeared,  went  through  all  the  motions  of  crowing,  but  emitted  no
sound.  There  must  have  been  from  8  to  12  of  them,  and  when  the  last  of
them  disappeared  behind  the  curtain  I  saw  them  no  more.  I  knew  per-
fectly well  that  they  were  not  there,  that  they  were  what  I  should  now  call
optical  delusions,  but  I  saw  them  as  plainly  as  ever  I  saw  a  real  fowl  in  my
life.  I  could  recall  them  (i.e.,  their  appearance)  whenever  I  chose,  just  as  I
can  at  the  present  day,  but  the  difference  between  the  image  which  I  called
up  and  the  delusion  which  I  witnessed  was  as  great  and  as  real  to  me  as
is  the  difference  between  the  presence  of  a  person  and  the  image  1  form  of
liim  in  his  absence.  I  was  awed  but  not  frightened  at  the  sight,  and  said
nothing  about  it  to  my  mother  or  to  anyone,  for  I  knew  I  should  be  checked  for
telling  a  story.  The  procession  lasted,  I  suppose,  for  about  a  minute,  and  I
saw  nothing  more  that  morning. I  never  saw  these  cocks  again.

Next  morning  I  am  quite  sure  I  saw  nothing  at  all,  and  perhaps  for
another  morning  or  two  T  saw  nothing,  but  soon  afterwards  I  began  to  see
on  the  ceiling  great  numbers  of  moving  figures.  The  cocks  which  I  saw
were  associated  in  my  mind  with  toy  stucco  cocks,  which  were  sold  in  the
crockery  shops,  coarse  clumsy  things  which  had  no  proper  legs,  but  stood  on
a  mass  of  stucco.  My  cocks  were  as  perfect  as  nature,  but  they,  too,  had
no  proper  legs  ;  they  had  a  mass  below  their  bodies,  which  supported  them,
and  so  I  have  no  doubt  that  these  toy-cocks  were  the  basis  of  my  vision.
The  figures  which  I  now  began  to  see  bore  a  great  resemblance  to  another
set  of  toys  which  I  used  to  see  in  the  shop  windows — i.e.,  j)ewter  soldiers,
horses,  gigs,  &c.,  &c.,  but,  unlike  the  toys,  they  were  (like  the  cocks)  per-
fect in  form,  coloured  like  nature,  and  moved  naturally.  The  horses  trotted,
the  wheels  turned  round,  the  men  walked,  and  so  on.  These  I  continued  to
see  in  great  numbers  many  days  ;  all  dread  and  awe  of  them  entirely  dis-
a^jpeared,  and  I  became  extremely  interested  in  them,  and  liked  to  watch
them.  One  thing  I  remember ;  I  had  not  the  power  of  controlling  their
motions  ;  like  my  ships,  they  went  about  where  they  liked.  They  lasted  in
the  morning  till  I  got  up,  and  I  never  saw  any  during  the  day.  I  do  not
know  how  long  these  visions  continued  ;  certainly,  however,  for  many  days
during  that  summer,  but,  though  I  could,  and  even  now  can,  recall  their
appearance  completely,  I  never  saw  any  more  at  any  other  time.

"  I  give  you  the  history  of  this  childish  hallucination  for  what  it  is  worth.
I  have  often  thought  over  it,  and  though  it  happened  so  long  ago,  I  think  you
may  rely  upon  the  absolute  accuracy  of  my  narrative."

"On  reading  the  above  to  my  son,  a  youth  of  20,  he  told  me  an  incident
of  his  childhood,  which  I  asked  him  to  write  out,  and  which  I  now  enclose.
He  was  then  a  child  in  petticoats."

The  following  is  the  account  referred  to  ^ : —

'  This  case  is  not  included  in  our  Tables,  as  the  percipient  was  under  21  at  the
time  the  account  was  sent  us.


152  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


"  One  of  my  earliest  recollections  —the  earliest  of  all,  I  think — is  a  story-
book with  a  picture  of  some  hideous  animal  on  the  cover.  Of  this  animal  I
was  much  afraid,  and  one  day,  on  going  alone  into  a  room,  I  suddenly  saw
this  animal  (about  the  size  of  the  picture)  standing  on  the  carpet.  I  pi'omptly
turned  and  fled,  and  for  a  long  time  after  nothing  would  induce  me  to  go
into  that  room.

"  E.  M.  H."

(152.  9).  From  Mr.  J.  S.

April  27th,  1892.

' '  I  am  now  on  the  verge  of  seventy-six.  About  seventy  years  ago  I  had
to  lie  on  a  board  for  two  years,  one  fold  of  blanket  under  me,  for  spinal
complaint.  Once  during  this  time  I  was  amused  by  seeing  a  number  of
little  dogs,  busily  running  in  and  out  of  holes  they  had  made  in  the  ground  ;
to  me  the  sight  was  real,  and  exceedingly  amusing.  On  another  occasion  I
saw,  or  believed  I  saw,  the  washhand-basin  on  the  table  close  to  the  window,
and  a  number  of  little  men  and  women  (black),  about  three  inches  high,
running  about  and  getting  into  and  out  of  the  water  ;  this  lasted  some  time,
to  my  great  amusement,  and  seemed  to  me  more  real  than  the  other,  my
recollection  of  both  being  very  distinct  even  now.  I  cannot  be  sure  I  had
these  delusions  more  than  once,  and  supposed  myself  wide  awake  at  the
time."

Other  cases  of  childish  hallucinations  are  Nos.  164.  20  and  164.  24
(see  p.  156),  No.  623.  9  (see  p.  181),  No.  707.  1  (see  p.  122),  and
No.  191.  3  (see  p.  240).  The  last  two  of  these  are  "  death  coinci-
dences."

Jnjiaence  of  Sex  on  Hallucinations.

It  appears  from  Table  I.  that  7'8  per  cent,  of  the  men,  and  12*0
per  cent,  of  the  women  who  have  answered  the  Census  question,  have
answered  in  the  affirmative.  From  this  we  may  infer  that,  so  far  as
our  informants  are  representative,  the  number  of  men  who  experience
sensory  hallucinations  and  remember  them  is  to  the  number  of  women
who  do  so  in  the  ratio  of  nearly  2  to  3.

Mr.  Gurney  found  that  among  509  informants  from  whom  he  had
received  accounts  of  apparently  subjective  hallucinations  of  sight  and
hearing,  the  proportion  of  males  to  females  was  almost  exactly  2  to  3,
but  among  the  527  percipients  concerned  in  the  hallucinations  of  sight
and  hearing  which  are  included  as  telepathic  evidence  in  Phantasms  of
the  Living,  about  46  per  cent,  were  males  and  only  about  54  per  cent,
females. (See  Phantasms  of  the  Liviyig,  Vol.  II.,  p.  3,  foot-note.)

Our  numbers  are  not  exactly  comparable  to  those  of  either  of  these
two  groups  of  Mr.  Gurney's  ;  because  (a)  we  do  not  know  what  was  the
proportion  of  men  to  women  among  the  persons  from  whom  Mr.Gurney's
cases  were  drawn,  and  (b)  our  answers  not  only  group  telepathic  and
purely  subjective  hallucinations  together,  but  are  not  limited,  as  his


viil]  Sex  in  Relation  to  Hallucinations.  153

were,  to  visual  and  auditory  hallucinations.  We  have,  moreover,
reason  to  believe  that  Mr.  Gurney  had  not,  among  his  purely  sub-
jective cases,  any  of  the  trivial  and  doubtful  experiences  which,  as
we  have  seen  (Chapter  III.,  pp.  64-66)  form  a  not  unimportant  per-
centage of  ours.  But  the  general  conclusion  that  women  are  more
subject  to  hallucinations  than  men,  or  remember  them  better,  receives
considerable  confirmation  from  the  fact  that  it  holds  in  Mr.  Gurney's
more  selected  types  as  well  as  in  our  wider  collection.

In  order  to  judge  whether  some  kinds  of  hallucinations  are  specially
frequent  among  women,  we  have  examined  certain  classes  in  detail.
We  find  that  the  visual  hallucinations  experienced  by  men  within  the
last  10  years  amount  to  18  per  thousand  of  our  male  informants,  while
those  experienced  by  women  are  proportionately  twice  as  numerous.
And  subdividing  further,  the  preponderance  of  those  seen  by  women  is
slightly  greater  among  apparitions  of  living  persons  and  incompletely
developed  apparitions  than  among  apparitions  of  dead  or  unrecognised
persons.  Of  40  cases  of  realistic  apparitions  of  living  and  dead  persons
which  appear  to  us  doubtfully  hallucinatory,  13  were  experienced  by
men  and  27  by  women.

If,  going  beyond  the  last  10  years,  we  take,  either  the  80  cases  of
apparitions  reported  in  the  Census  to  coincide  with  the  death  of  the
person  seen,  or  the  130  hallucinations  of  all  kinds  reported  to  coincide
with  the  death  of  an  absent  friend,  we  find  that  44  per  cent,  of  these
are  reported  by  men  and  56  per  cent,  by  women, — proportions  not  very
different  from  those  found  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (see  preceding
page), — so  that,  relatively  to  other  hallucinations,  men  report  a  large
proportion  of  these.

Men  appear  to  forget  their  hallucinations  more  rapidly  than  women,
at  least  so  far  as  the  visual  hallucinations  within  the  last  10  years  are
concerned.  Within  the  most  recent  year,  men  report  35  visual
hallucinations,  or  4-2  per  thousand,  and  women  52,  or  6'0  per  thousand.
But  for  the  previous  year  the  men  report  18,  or  only  half  of  their
number  for  the  most  recent  year,  and  the  women  39,  or  three-fourths
of  theirs ;  and  the  average  annual  number  from  five  to  ten  years  ago  is
11  for  the  men  and  24  for  the  women.

It  may  be  interesting  to  consider,  in  connection  with  the
present  section  and  the  last,  the  conclusions  arrived  at  by  Mr.  F.
Galton,  in  his  Inquiries  into  Human  Faculty,  as  to  the  variation  of
the  power  of  visualising  in  the  two  sexes  and  at  different  ages ;
although,  as  before  remarked  (see  p.  92),  it  has  not  been  shown  that
persons  who  have  strong  visualising  power  are  specially  liable  to  see
hallucinations.  Mr.  Galton's  view  is  that  there  is  no  necessary  con-
nection between  the  vividness  of  dreams  and  the  power  of  visualisation
cit.,  p.  97);  and  dreams  are,  in  some  important  respects,  analogous


154  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


to  hallucinations.  (See  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  296-
297  and  389-391).  Mr.  Galton  says  {Op.  cii.,  p.  99) :— "  The  power
of  visualising  is  higher  in  the  female  sex  than  in  the  male,  and
is  somewhat,  but  not  much,  higher  in  public  school  boys  than
in  men.  After  maturity  is  reached,  the  further  advance  of  age
does  not  seem  to  dim  the  faculty,  but  rather  the  reverse,  judging  from
numerous  statements  to  that  effect ;  but  advancing  years  are  some-
times accompanied  by  a  growing  habit  of  hard  abstract  thinking,  and
in  these  cases — not  uncommon  among  those  whom  I  have  questioned —
the  faculty  undoubtedly  becomes  impaired.  There  is  reason  to  believe
that  it  is  very  high  in  some  young  children,  who  seem  to  spend  years
of  difficulty  in  distinguishing  between  the  subjective  and  objective
world.  Language  and  book-learning  certainly  tend  to  dull  it."  The
results  were  similar  in  the  cases  of  two  special  kinds  of  visualisation
investigated  by  him,  namely,  the  visualised  forms  associated  with
numbers  and  dates,  and  the  colours  associated  with  letters — especially
the  vowel  sounds — by  certain  persons.

Heredity  in  Relation  to  Hallucinations.

Our  statistics  are  not  calculated  to  give  more  than  fragmentary
information  on  the  subject  of  the  comparative  frequency  of  hallucina-
tions in  different  families,  because  in  most  cases  we  have  no  means  of
knowing  whether  our  informants  are  related  to  one  another  or  not.
We  have,  however,  analysed  such  facts  bearing  on  this  subject  as
we  have  been  able  to  trace,  with  the  following  results  : —

(1)  Taking  three  generations  of  linear  descendants  into  considera-
tion we  find  that  in  34  families  hallucinations  have  occurred  in  at
least  two  generations.  In  two  of  these  families,  a  great  grandparent
has  had  hallucinations  as  well.  In  three  other  families,  both  parents
and  two  or  more  sons  or  daughters  have  had  hallucinations.

(2)  In  41  families,  hallucinations  have  been  experienced  by  two
brothers,  or  two  sisters,  or  one  brother  and  one  sister,  or  sometimes  by
more  than  two  members  of  the  family  of  the  same  generation.  In  one
family,  two  sisters,  a  father,  grandfather,  two  uncles  and  two  aunts
were  all  subject  to  visual  hallucinations.

(3)  In  7  cases,  hallucinations  have  been  experienced  by  at  least  two
persons  related  to  one  another  as  uncles  or  aunts  to  nephews  or  nieces,
or  as  cousins.

(4)  In  3  cases,  we  are  told  that  hallucinations  have  been  experi-
enced by  "  other  members  of  the  family,"  whose  exact  relationship  to
the  percipient  is  not  stated.

Though  these  numbers  are  not  large  in  proportion  to  the  whole
number  of  persons  included  in  the  Census,  still — considering  that  the
information  about  relationships  has  only  come  to  us  accidentally —


VIII.] Heredity  in  Relation  to  Hallucinations.


155


they  seem  to  afford  some  evidence  that  hallucinations  tend  to  run  in
families.

The  numbers  given  above  do  not  include  hallucinations  stated  to
have  been  experienced  simultaneously  by  members  of  the  same  family.
The  following  table  shows  the  relationship  to  one  another  of  the
percipients  in  our  first-hand  cases  of  "  collective  "  or  joint  hallucinatory
perception.


Visual

cases.

Auditory  cases.

Parents  and  Children

Brothers  and  Sisters

26

6  Vl4

Cousins  or  aunt  and  niece

V

Husbands  and  Wives

12

1

No  relationship

35

19

95

34

From  this  it  appears  that,  in  half  the  visual  and  in  nearly  half  the
auditory  cases  of  collective  hallucinations,  the  percipients  were  related
to  one  another.  From  this  large  proportion  of  cases  where  the  halluci-
natory experience  is  shared  with  a  member  of  the  same  family  we
may  perhaps  infer  that  the  similarity  of  temperament  existing  more
or  less  in  most  families  facilitates  the  sharing  of  the  impression.  It  is
true  that  most  persons  are  probably  more  often  in  the  company  of
members  of  their  own  family  than  of  others ;  but  this  hardly  seems  a
sufficient  explanation  of  the  result  in  question,  since  it  will  be  observed
that  the  hallucination  is  only  shared  by  husbands  and  wives — who  are
specially  likely  to  be  in  each  other's  company — in  10  per  cent,  of  the
cases.

We  think  that  the  Census  also  affords  some  evidence  that  halluci-
nations running  in  families  tend  to  take  similar  forms.  It  is  possible
that  this  may  in  some  measure  be  attributable  to  the  influence  of
heredity,  but,  as  was  before  suggested  (see  p.  126)  it  may  be  due  to
family  tradition,  moulding  the  ideas  of  the  percipients.  A  lady
(No.  671.  20)  who  has  constant  hallucinations,  which  generally
take  the  form  of  a  yellow  cat  or  black  dog,  tells  us  that  the  phenomenon
is  common  in  her  mother's  family.  We  are  also  told,  by  a  collector,
of  a  family,  of  which  the  members  are  said  to  see  apparitions  of  a  white
dog,  before  a  death  in  the  family  :  several  instances  are  mentioned,  but
the  percipients  refuse  to  give'any  first-hand  accounts.


156  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


In  the  following  case,  a  mother  and  daughter,  at  different  times,
see  an  apparition  of  a  cat.

(561.  24.)  From  Mrs.  E.  L.  Kearney.

January  17th,  1892.

"My  step-grandfather  was  lying  ill  in  my  father's  house.  I  was  coming
down  stairs  when  I  saw  a  strange  cat  coming  towards  me  along  the  hall.
When  it  saw  me,  it  ran  behind  a  green  baize  door  which  separated  one  part
of  the  hall  from  the  other.  This  door  was  fastened  open,  and  I  went  forward
quickly  to  hunt  the  strange  cat  (as  I  thought)  away,  but  to  my  utter
astonishment  there  was  no  cat  there,  or  anywhere  else  in  the  hall.  I  at
once  told  my  mother  (and  she  told  me  the  other  day  that  she  remembers
the  occurrence).  My  grandfather  died  next  day.  Taken  in  connection
with  the  above,  the  following  is  interesting.  My  mother  told  me  that  the  day
before  her  father  died  she  saw  a  cat  walk  round  her  father's  bed ;  she  also
went  to  hunt  it  out,  but  it  was  not  there."

As  bearing  on  the  general  subject  of  heredity,  we  may  add  that  Mrs.
Kearney  informed  us  that  her  maternal  great-grandmother  had  seen
an  apparition  of  her  husband  at  the  time  of  his  death  by  drowning.  This
she  had  heard  from  her  mother.  The  latter  was  at  one  time  interested
in  Spiritualism,  and  exhibited  an  automatic  capacity  for  drawing  flowers,
etc.,  in  which  she  had  normally  no  ability  at  all.  Later,  circumstances
determined  her  to  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  the  subject.

The  following  are  accounts  of  similar  "  grotesque  "  apparitions  seen
at  different  times  by  two  sisters  when  young  children  : —

(164.20.)  FromMrs.  M.  H.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

"About  the  year  1869, whilst  lying  in  bed  one  morning  (about  6.30  a.m.),
when  about  7  years  old,  I  had  a  distinct  impression  of  seeing  a  man  dressed  in
Eastern  costume,  with  turban,  flowing  robes,  and  yellow  slippers,  standing
at  the  side  of  the  foot  of  my  bed.  I  covered  my  face  with  the  bed-clothes,
and  then  looked  again,  and  the  figure  was  slowly  sinking  down  into  the
floor.  As  far  as  I  know,  I  was  in  a  healthy  state  of  body  and  mind.  I
never  saw  the  apparition  before.  My  little  sister  and  a  nurse  were  in  the
room,  but  asleep  at  the  time.  This  was  the  only  time  I  ever  had  such  an
experience.  My  younger  sister,  at  4  years  old,  saw  the  same  apparition,  but
did  not  tell  me  of  it  till  after  I  had  seen  it.  Her  account  exactly  corre-
sponded with  mine.  I  have  been  since  told  that  there  was  at  the  time,  in  a
loft  close  to  my  room,  a  Turkish  sword,  brought  from  Sebastopol  by  an
uncle  of  mine. Might  this  have  something  to  do  with  the  apparition  ? "

(164.  24.)  From  Miss  E.  S.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

"  When  about  5  years  old,  I  was  lying  awake  in  the  dark- one  night,  when
the  door  by  the  head  of  my  bed  opened,  and  a  man  in  Eastern  dress
(turban  and  long  flowing  robe)  came  in  ; he  passed  by  me,  and  stood  at  the


VIII.] Heredity  in  Relation  to  Hallucinations.  157


side  of  my  sister's  bed.  I  have  an  idea  that  he  held  something  in  his  hand,
but  whether  it  was  a  light,  I  do  not  know.  I  was  perfectly  well.  The
nurse  and  my  elder  sister  [were,  present].  My  sister  saw  a  man  answering
to  this  description  about  a  year  and  a-half  afterwards  in  the  daylight.  I
never  told  anyone  of  the  apparition  till  my  sister  spoke  of  it."

In  this  case  the  existence  of  the  Turkish  sword,  brought  by  an
uncle  from  Sebastopol,  makes  it  possible  that  Eastern  dress  and
manners  may  have  been  specially  interesting  to  the  household,  and
that  conversation  may  have  suggested  the  form  of  the  hallucination  to
each  percipient.

In  the  following  case  there  is  evidence  of  a  similar  figure  being
seen  independently  by  percipients  of  three  generations,  which  seems
to  indicate  a  hereditary  tendency  to  see  apparitions — though  this,  no
doubt,  is  not  a  complete  explanation  of  the  phenomena  as  reported.  ^

(483.  10.)  From  Mr.  T.  A.  Quin.

October  24:th,  1891.
' '  I  saw  a  nice  gentlemanly-looking  young  man  in  evening  clothes,  in  the
bouse  I  live  in,  for  many  years,  at  diflferent  hours  of  the  night  and  day,
and  in  various  parts  of  the  house.  I  was  sometimes  in  bed  and  sometimes
about  the  house,  in  my  usual  state  of  health,  and  with  no  grief  or  anxiety  to
agitate  the  mind  ;  from  under  thirty  [upwards].  The  man  had  been  dead
many  years  before  I  was  born  ;  my  father  knew  him  when  alive.  On  some
occasions  others  were  present,  but  did  not  see  him. I  saw  him  often.

"T.  A.  Quin."

Mrs.  Quin  writes  : —

"  With  regard  to  the  apparition  seen  by  Mr.  Quin,  my  husband,  I  will
write  down  all  I  have  heard  about  it.  To  begin  with,  the  house  is  situated  on  the
town  lands  of  ;  the  estate  belonged  to  a  family  named  F.,  the  male  mem-
bers of  which  have  all  died  out,  and  it  has  gone  in  the  female  line.  The

last  survivor  of  the  brothers,  Tom,  lived  at  House,  and  I  have  been  told

by  two  ladies  who  were  acquainted  with  him  during  his  lifetime  and  while  he
lived  in  the  place,  that  he  himself  often  saw  a  gentleman  about  the  house,
but  he  never  saw  his  face.  He  died  in  London  of  consumption  ;  my
husband's  father  afterwards  took  the  house,  and  one  night  he  woke  up  and
saw  Tom  F.  standing  by  his  bedside  ;  he  tried  to  wake  his  wife  (from
whom  I  heard  the  story)  but  could  not  succeed,  and  told  her  the  next
morning  what  he  had  seen.  I  am  not  sure  if  the  ghost  ever  appeared  to  him
again,  but  his  wife's  brother,  who  lived  with  him,  one  evening  before  dinner
turned  into  a  bedroom  which  had  been  prepared  for  a  guest  to  see  if  it  was
aU  right,  and  saw  a  gentleman  either  sitting  or  standing  before  the  fire  ;
thinking  it  was  the  guest  expected,  apologised  for  his  intrusion  and  left  the
room. When  he  went  downstairs,  he  found  my  father-  and  mother-in-law

1  The  evidence  for  what  is  commonly  called  "haunting"  will  be  discussed  in
Chapter  XVI.


158


Reiyort  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


[chap.


waiting  for  dinner  and  wondering  why  so-and-so  was  so  late.  '  Why,'  said
Mr.  B.,  'I  saw  him  in  his  room  just  now,'  and  they  said  he  must  have
been  mistaken  as  he  had  not  arrived  at  all.  He  persisted  that  he
had  seen  and  spoken  to  him,  so  they  went  upstairs  and  found  there
was  no  one  in  the  room.  After  my  father-in-law's  death,  other
tenants  took  the  house,  and  the  daughter  of  the  people  who  had  it
before  my  husband  took  it  told  me  some  time  afterwards  that  none  of
their  people  had  ever  seen  or  heard  anything  there.  My  mother-in-law
never  saw  anj'thing  in  the  house.  When  my  husband  decided  upon  taking
it,  he  was  very  anxious  to  know  what  his  father  had  seen,  but  his  mother
would  not  tell  him.  At  the  same  time  she  said,  if  he  ever  did  see  anything
after  living  there,  and  would  write  and  tell  her  what  it  was,  she  would  then
let  him  know  what  his  father  had  seen.  After  being  in  the  house  a
short  time,  he  was  in  bed  one  night,  having  locked  the  door,  a  bright  fire  in
the  room.  He  suddenly  saw  a  gentleman  standing  by  his  bedside,  dressed
in  evening  clothes.  It  was  the  time  of  the  Fenian  rising,  and,  being  almost
alone  in  the  house,  he  had  a  loaded  pistol  under  his  pillow,  which  he  at  once
tried  to  feel  foi-,  thinking  someone  had  got  into  the  house,  but  he  saw  the
figure  gradually  moving  towards  the  door,  when  it  disappeared  suddenly.
He  wrote  the  next  day  to  his  mother,  describing  exactly  what  he  had  seen,
and  she  answered  back  it  was  exactly  what  his  father  had  seen.  He  was
only  two  years  old  when  his  father  died,  so  he  could  have  had  no  recollec-
tion. He  often  saw  the  same  figure  afterwards,  at  diflferent  times  of  the  day,
and  in  different  parts  of  the  house.  I  lived  there  after  I  was  married  for
sixteen  years,  and  never  saw  anything,  nor  had  I  any  trouble  about
servants,  though  the  house  had  always  the  reputation  of  being  haunted,
and  I  have  been  about  the  house  all  hours  of  the  night.  My  eldest
son,  when  he  was  little,  slept  in  his  crib  beside  my  bed.  [Being]  subject  to
asthma,  he  was  suffering  one  night,  and  could  not  sleep.  At  last  I  thought
he  had  gone  off,  and  was  trying  to  sleep  myself,  but,  after  some  time,  I  heard
him  awake,  and  spoke  to  him.  '  I  thought  you  were  asleep,  my  pet  1 '
'No,  mamma  ;  a  man's  face  has  been  looking  at  me.'  'You  are  dreaming,
my  darling.'  'No,'  he  said  'and  there  it  is  again,'  and  he  got  rather
frightened  and  clung  to  me.  His  father  next  day  was  asking  him  about
his  dream  and  what  he  saw  ;  he  said  it  was  a  man's  face,  with  hair  on  it.
'  Was  it  a  beard  ?  '  '  No,  only  side  whiskers, '  and  that  was  the  same  kind  of
face  he  himself  saw.  The  child  was  very  young,  and  has  no  recollection  of
it  at  all,  as  I  never  reminded  him  about  it  ;  nor  while  we  were  in  the
house  did  I  allow  the  children  to  hear  of  the  ghost,  or  be  told  about  it.
Since  we  left  it  a  gentleman  took  it,  and  he  said  he  never  saw  anything,
and  I  hear  the  family  who  are  living  there  now  say  they  never  have  seen
anything."

In  another  case  (No.  563.  24.)  a  girl  of  about  18  saw  an  apparition
of  herself,  apparently  standing  before  a  mirror.  She  was  living  at  the
time  with  an  aunt,  who  had,  as  a  girl,  twice  had  an  experience  of  the
same  kind,  the  apparition  representing  herself.  In  another  case
(No.  545.  18.)  the  percipient  was  awakened  by  a  crash  and  saw  a  large
ball  of  fire,  which  seemed  to  light  up  the  room,  at  her  bedroom


VIII.]


Nationality  and  Hallucinations.


159


window,  on  the  night  of  her  mother's  death.  The  latter  is  said  to
have  had  a  similar  hallucination  at  the  time  of  her  husband's  death  by
drowning.

Nationality  in  Relation  to  Hallucinations.

Table  IX.  gives  what  information  we  have  been  able  to  gather  from
the  Census  as  to  the  influence  of  nationality  on  hallucinations.  As
will  be  seen,  the  great  majority  of  the  persons — nearly  16,000  out  of
17,000 — included  in  the  Census  are  English,  or,  at  least,  English-
speaking,  a  few  Americans,  as  well  as  Australian  colonists,  being
included  in  the  English  group.  The  next  largest  group  is  Russian,
collected  chiefly  by  Mr.  Aksakoff,  either  personally  or  through  friends ;
the  Brazilian  collection  is  due  entirely  to  the  efforts  of  Professor  A.
Alexandei'.  The  remaining  section  consists  of  collections  made  in
various  countries, — Austria,  Germany,  France,  Italy  and  Sweden —
the  total  numbers  being  so  small  that  it  seemed  best  to  group  them
together.  It  is  probable  that  a  few  foreigners  are  also  included  in  the
English  group,  but  the  great  bulk  of  this  is  certainly  English.

The  relative  proportions  maintained  within  the  groups  are  similar
throughout.  In  each,  a  larger  proportion  of  women  than  of  men
answer  the  Census  question  in  the  aflirmative,  and  in  each  the  visual
hallucinations  are  the  most  numerous^  and  the  tactile  least  so.  Still,
very  striking  difierences  are  seen  in  comparing  the  groups  with  one
another.  Taking  the  first  three  sections, ^  the  Brazilian  percentages  of
affirmative  answers  and  of  hallucinations  are  highest  throughout,  being,
I'oughly  speaking,  between  two  and  three  times  as  high  as  the  English,
which  are  the  lowest  in  every  respect.  The  Russian  percentages  ai'e
also  considerably  higher  than  the  English.

Another  noteworthy  feature  is  the  large  proportion  among  the
foreigners,  as  compared  with  the  English,  of  hallucinations  affecting-
more  than  one  sense.  These  amount  to  39  out  of  160  described
experiences,  or  24-4  percent.,  among  the  Russians;  21  out  of  9.3,  or
22"6  per  cent.,  among  the  Brazilians;  and  176  out  of  1,675,  or  10"5
per  cent.,  among  the  English.

Health  in  Relation  to  Hallucinations.

It  was  important  to  enquire  to  what  extent  the  hallucinations
included  in  the  Census  could  be  regarded  as  due  to  ill-health,  and
therefore  one  of  the  questions  put  to  all  percipients  was,  "  Were  you
out  of  health  ?  "  But  as  our  desire  was,  not  to  investigate  experiences
of  delirium  or  insanity,  but  to  confine  ourselves  to  hallucinations

1  The  last  section  is  anomalous  in  several  respects,  but  the  number  of  persons
in  it  is  so  small  that  we  should  not  be  justified  in  drawing  conclusions  from  it.


160  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


occurring  to  persons  in  a  normal  condition,  we  stated,  in  the  instruc-
tions to  collectors  on  the  back  of  Schedule  A,  that  "  the  question  should
not  be  asked  of  persons  who  are  known  to  have  been  at  any  time
insane,  and  it  is  not  intended  to  include  experiences  of  delirium."

Of  all  the  hallucinations  coming  within  the  scope  of  the  Census
question,  of  which  we  have  first-hand  accounts,  a  certain  degree  of  ill-
health  is  reported  in  146  cases.  All  these  cases  wei'e  carefully  con-
sidered. Dr.  Myers  giving  special  attention  to  their  medical  aspect,  so
far  as  this  could  be  judged  of  from  the  information  given.

In  23  of  them,  the  hallucination  took  place  in  a  state  of  illness
when  delirium  is  known  to  occur  frequently,  e.g.,  in  scarlet  or  typhoid
fever,  or  in  a  state  of  temporary  injury  to  the  brain,  e.g.,  from  a  fall
on  the  head.  In  these  cases  it  may  well  be  supposed  to  be  due  exclu-
sively to  a  morbid  physical  condition  ;  these  23  hallucinations  are
accordingly  not  included  in  the  Tables,  ^  and  the  persons  who
experienced  them  are  counted  as  having  answered  "  no  "  to  the  Census
question,  unless  they  have  had  other  hallucinations  when  in  good
health.

In  the  remaining  123  cases,^  though  morbid  conditions  may  have
had  something  to  do  with  producing  the  hallucinations,  it  is  so
much  more  doubtful  than  in  the  23  already  mentioned  that  we  have
thought  it  better  to  retain  them.  Of  the  first-hand  cases  included
in  the  Tables,  therefore,  there  was  a  certain  degree  of  ill-health  in
rather  over  7  per  cent.  In  21  of  them  the  percipient  was  in  a  state
of  convalescence  after  some  illness,— the  nature  of  which  is  not  always
specified,  but  which  was  apparently  acute, — or  recovering  from  a
recent  operation,  or  on  the  verge  of  a  severe  illness.  In  55  cases  the
percipient  was  in  a  state  of  depressed  health  or  minor  illness — e.g.,  "in
a  nervous  dyspeptic  condition,"  "  in  a  very  low  state  of  health,"
"  bronchitis  with  weakness  of  heart  "—the  condition  being  one  with
which  hallucinations  are  not  supposed  to  be  generally  associated,
though  it  may  have  rendered  the  patient  more  liable  to  them  than  a
person  in  normal  health  would  be.  There  remain  47  cases  of  still
slighter  indisposition  than  the  above,  such  as  being  "  a  little  below
par,  and  somewhat  nervous  and  excited,"  where  it  seems  very  doubt-

1  Three  second-hand  cases  are  also  excluded  from  the  Tables  on  the  same  ground.
Of  the  23  first-hand  cases,  7  are  apparitions  of  living  persons,  including  2  representing
the  percipient  himself  ;  1  is  an  apparition  of  a  dead  person,  and  2  of  unrecognised
persons;  3  belong  to  the  class  of  "grotesque,  horrible,  or  monstrous  apparitions";
and,  of  the  remainder,  6  are  ^'isual  hallucinations  of  other  kinds  and  4  are  auditory
hallucinations.

"  In  29  of  these  cases  there  was  a  certain  degree  of  anxiety  or  mental  distress  as
well  as  of  ill-health.  The  possible  effect  of  such  emotional  conditions  in  producing
hallucinations  is  discussed  in  the  next  Chapter.


VIII.]  Health  in  relation  to  Hallucinations.


161


ful  whether  the  physical  condition  had  any  share  in  producing  the
hallucination.

In  780  first-hand  cases  (that  is,  48  per  cent.),  no  statement  at  all  is
made  as  to  health.  The  assumption  in  these  cases  is  that  the  per-
cipient was  in  good  health.  Often  it  is  clearly  to  be  inferred  from  all
the  circumstances  stated.  And  as  the  question,  "  "Were  you  out  of
health  ? "  was  put  to  all  the  percipients,  they  would  probably  have
a,nswered  it  if  they  had  been  so.  Considering  the  extremely  slight
natui'e  of  many  of  the  ailments  that  were  mentioned,  it  seems  that  the
tendency  was  rather  to  exaggerate  than  to  ovei-look  any  possible  con-
nection that  there  may  have  been  between  the  hallucination  and  the
state  of  health  at  the  time.  Some  persons  appeared  anxious  to  show
that  their  hallucinations  were  due  to  their  state  of  health,  even  if  they
could  not  point  to  any  other  symptom  of  ill-health  than  the  hallu-
cination itself.

In  719  first-hand  cases,  that  is,  about  44  per  cent.,  a  positive  state-
ment is  made  that  the  percipient  was  in  good  health  at  the  time.

On  the  whole,  therefore,  it  appears  that,  in  the  great  majority  of
hallucinations  included  in  the  Census,  there  is  no  reason  to  think
that  the  physical  condition  of  the  pei-cipients  was  in  any  way  morbid.
No  symptom  of  disease  appears,  unless  the  hallucination  itself  is  to  be
regarded  as  such,  which  is  not  the  view  now  generally  taken  by  the
majority  of  competent  observers  familiar  with  the  phenomena  of
hypnotism.

In  considering  the  kind  of  hallucinations  that  occur  during  ill-
health,  it  is  convenient  to  take  the  whole  number,  whether  excluded
from  the  Tables  or  not,  into  account.  Dividing,  according  to  the  sense
affected,  the  146  first-hand  cases  in  which  any  degree  of  ill-health  is
mentioned,  we  find  that  106  are  visual  hallucinations,  28  auditory
and  12  tactile.  In  this  I'espect,  therefore,  the  proportions  are  not
markedly  different  from  those  in  the  whole  collection.  The  proportion
of  realistic  human  apparitions  (69  out  of  the  1 06  visual  cases)  is,
however,  distinctly  small.  And  the  non-realistic  apparitions  include
a  disproportionately  large  number  (namely,  9),  of  grotesque,  horrible,
or  monstrous  apparitions.

The  following  are  two  cases  of  hallucinations  occurring  during  ill-
health  : —

(112.  22.)  From  Mrs.  Girdlestone.'

January,  1891.

"  I  felt,  more  than  I  saw,  many  animals  (principally  cats)  passing  by  me
and  pushing  me  almost  aside,  as  I  went  downstairs  in  Ijroad  daylight  in  our

iThe  kind  and  degree  of  illness  in  this  case  was  judged  t,o  be  sufficient  to  e.vcludo
it  from  the  Tables.

H


162  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


house  at  Clifton  during  several  ]iionths  in  1886  and  1887.  Also  often  during
same  period,  and  even  now  occasionally,  I  saw  and  see  frightful  faces  ;  only
faces,  no  other  part  of  the  body  ;  faces  of  no  one  I  ever  met  in  life,  and  faces
made  hideous  through  terrible  disease.  I  might  be  walking,  or  reading,  or
talking.  Occupation  had  no  effect,  neither  time  of  day.  In  1886  and  1887
I  suffered  from  overwork  (mental)  ;  [  was  always  conscious  that  the  sights
were  illusions,  except  for  the  animals  pushing  me,  or  perhaps  a  shadowy
shapeless  form,  from  which  I  suffer  still,  though  quite  well.  [This  happened]
many  times  ;  and,  as  remarked  above,  I  still  feel  in  bi'oad  daylight  as  if
someone  or  something  pushed  past  me  ;  so  much  so  that  I  invariably  go
aside  to  let  pass  whatever  seems  in  the  way,  though  realising  almost
immediately  that  there  is  nothing.  Opiates  act  most  quickly  and  peculiarly
upon  me.  1-16  of  a  grain  of  morphia  given  by  the  mouth  makes  me  lose  for
some  hours  my  sense  of  identity.  Bellad<jnna  plaster  on  the  back  invariably
causes  many  cats  to  swarm  around  me."

(13.  5.)  From  Mr.  J.  S.  R.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889).

"In  the  summer  of  1870,  after  very  prolonged  intellectual  exertion,  and
want  of  sleep,  when  the  strain  was  over,  and  I  was  in  a  state  of  exhaustion,
I  was  conscious  of  elaborate  music  being  played,  and  forms  moving  in  and
out  of  the  room,  of  the  unreality  of  which  I  was  well  aware.  The  impres-
sions persisted  for  some  hours,  and  were  only  removed  by  a  deep  sleep.  [I
have]  only  once  [had  such  an  experience]."

It  will  be  observed  that  these  hallucinations  are  of  quite  a  different
character  from  the  majority  of  those  reported  to  us,  being  more
complicated  and  dream-like.  In  this  respect,  they  have  some
resemblance  to  the  visions  produced  by  opium,  hasheesh,  and  other
such  drugs,  which  are  frequently  very  complicated,  as  well  as  pro-
longed {e.g.,  a  case  quoted  by  Professor  James,  Frinci'ples  of  Psychology,
Vol.  II.,  p.  121).  Several  hallucinations  of  this  kind  occur  among
those  accompanying  some  degree  of  ill-health,  but  none  in  the  rest  of
our  collection.

Some  other  cases  of  hallucinations  occurring  to  percipients  in  more
or  less  abnormal  physical  conditions  are  given  as  illustrations  of  other
points,  e.g.,  Nos.  546.  19.,  49.  b.,  and  460.  14.  (see  pp.  119,  142,  and
103).  For  another  case,  see  A2>j)endix  E.

Number  of  Persons  ivho  have  had  more  than  one  Hallucination.

In  Table  III.  the  noteworthy  fact  appears  that,  of  the  persons
included  in  the  Census  who  have  experienced  hallucinations,  only  .34
per  cent., — 427  out  of  1 249, — of  those  who  give  first-hand  accounts  have
had  more  than  one  such  experience. Table  III.  also  shows  that  there


yiil]


Recurrent  Hallucinations.


163


is  a  good  deal  of  variety  in  the  experiences  of  these  persons,  both  as  to
the  kind  and  as  to  the  number  of  their  hallucinations  :  nearly  half  of
them  have  only  had  visual  hallucinations ;  about  a  quarter  have  only
had  auditory  hallucinations  ;  and  a  few  only  tactile.  Nearly  a  quarter
have  had  hallucinations,  some  of  which  affected  one  sense  and  some
another.  As  to  the  number  experienced,  about  half  the  percipients
report  themselves  to  have  had  several  or  many  hallucinations,  but  do
state  the  exact  number  ;  rather  more  than  a  third  of  them  have  had
only  two  hallucinations;  the  remainder  have  had  numbers  varying  from
tliree  to  six.

When  several  hallucinations  are  experienced  by  the  same  percipient
they  are  in  some  cases  scattered  throughout  his  whole  life,  or  a  long
period  of  it,  and  in  others,  even  when  numerous,  they  are  confined  to  a
comparatively  short  period.  As  a  specimen  of  the  former  kind
described  by  an  exceptionally  intelligent  witness,  see  the  case  of
Mrs.  D.  {Appendix  D),  also  No.  422.  22  (Mr.  Mamtchitch's  case  in
Chapter  XVII).  Instances  of  the  latter  kind  are  Nos.  327.  25
(p.  196)  and  488.  14  (p.  353).  Again,  while  in  most  cases  the
successive  hallucinations  are  apparently  quite  miscellaneous,  in
others  they  show  a  more  or  less  marked  tendency  to  repeat  them-
selves, the  same  hallucination  recurring  again  and  again.  We  find
71  cases  of  this  kind  of  recurrence  in  visual  hallucinations.  By
"  recurrence  "  we  do  not  mean  necessarily  an  exact  reproduction,  but
that  the  general  resemblance  is  enough  to  make  the  percipient  regard
the  successive  hallucinations  as  representing  the  same  person  or  thing,
or,  in  the  case  of  animals,  the  same  species  of  animal.  Thus,  in  No.
37.  13,  the  percipient  was  wakened  by  clothes  falling  off  her  bed,  and
saw  a  figure  in  profile,  with  a  lilac  print  dress  and  white  apron,
standing  at  the  other  end  of  the  room.  On  another  occasion  she
was  wakened  by  feeling  her  hand  clutched,  and  saw  a  figure  of  a
woman  in  a  similar  costume  facing  her.  Here  the  general  resemblance
was  eiiough  to  make  the  percipient  regard  the  figures  as  representing
the  same  pei'son.  Again,  in  No.  280.  20,  the  percipient  saw  the  face
of  his  brother  in  a  wide-awake  hat  look  in  at  the  door  of  his  room  in
the  evening.  The  same  night  he  woke  and  saw  the  upper  half  of  his
brother  standing  by  his  bed,  looking  at  him.  We  count  both  these
cases  as  recurrent,  in  spite  of  the  slight  differences  between  the  impi-es-
sions  on  the  different  occasions.  In  most  of  the  recurrent  cases,  the
various  appearances  seem  to  have  resembled  one  another  more  closely
than  in  these.


M  2


164  Report  on  the  Census  of  Halliocinations.  [chap.

The  following  Table  shows  the  number  and  kind  of  these  recurrent
visual  hallucinations.


Recurrent  Visual  Hallucinations.


Number  of  times  tlie  hallucina-
tion occurred.

Total .

2

3

4

In-
definite.

Realistic  apparitions  of  living  persons

5

o
O

8

,, ,, dead  persons

2

2

9

13

, , , , unrecognised  persons

10

4

3

9

26

Incompletely  developed  apparitions  . . .

4

1

1

5

11

Other  visual  hallucinations

3

2

8

13

Total

24

9

4

34

71

Of  the  percipients  included  in  the  above  Table,  28  have  had  other
hallucinations  of  a  different  kind  from  the  one  which  was  i-epeated.

Auditory  and  tactile  hallucinations  appear  to  be  repeated  much
more  frequently  in  proportion  than  visual  hallucinations, — 146  cases
of  recurring  auditory  and  35  of  recurring  tactile  hallucinations  being
reported  in  the  Census, — but  this  seems  to  follow  naturally  from  the
smaller  variety  of  form  to  be  found  in  auditory  and  tactile  cases.

The  repetition  of  hallucinations  is  —  as  might  be  expected —
especially  marked  in  cases  occurring  during  ill-health.  Of  the  106
visual  cases  reported  to  us  in  which  the  pei'cipient  was  in  ill  health,  16,
or  15  percent,  were  recurrent.  Tt  should  l^e  said  that  7  of  these  are
among  the  19  cases  which  seemed  so  clearly  due  to  ill-health  that  we
have  excluded  them  from  the  Tables  ;  but  recurrence  is  also  found  in
over  10  per  cent,  of  the  remainder,  whereas,  of  all  the  visual  cases  in-
cluded in  the  Census,  only  71,  or  5-5  per  cent.,  were  recurrent.

The  connexion  between  recurrence  and  ill-health  is  less  marked  in
the  auditory  and  tactile  cases.  Of  the  40  auditory  and  tactile  cases
reported  to  us  as  occurring  during  ill-health,  18,  or  45  per  cent.,
were  recurrent,  while  of  all  the  auditory  and  tactile  cases  included  in
the  Census,  181,  or  36  per  cent.,  were  recurrent.

We  have  not  included  among  recurrent  visual  hallucinations  about
20  cases  in  which  a  visual  hallucination  is  repeated  once  or  more
within  a  very  short  period — one  or  two  days,  at  most — because  the
phenomenon  appears  to  be  of  a  somewhat  different  kind  from  repeti-


VIII.]


Recurrent  Hallucinations.


165


tions  at  longer  intervals.  ^  It  may  be  regarded  as  a  single  hallucina-
tion of  more  than  average  force  and  persistency,  analogous  to  those
very  rare  cases  where  the  hallucination  continues  for  a  long  time— say,
as  much  as  half  an  hour —  and  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  draw  the
line  between  such  cases  and  those  where  an  apparition  is  seen  again
after  looking  away  from  it,  or  after  closing  the  eyes  and  then  looking
at  it  again.  We  have  in  No.  450.  18.  (p.  234)  a  rather  striking-
instance  of  an  intermediate  kind.

Analogous  auditory  cases,  which  must  obviously  be  regarded  as
single  hallucinations,  are  those  where  the  percipient  hears  himself
called  two  or  three  times  in  succession.


1  We  have  therefore,  as  stated  on  p.  52,  counted  these  cases  each  as  one  halluci-
nation, unless  there  are  some  special  features  of  difference  between  the  different
appearances,  as  in  No.  280.  20,  referred  to  on  p.  163


1G6  Report  on  the  Censm  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Chapter  IX.

MENTAL AND NERVOUS CONDITIONS IN CONNEXION  WITH
HALLUCINATIONS.

Tn  the  last  Chapter  we  have  been  dealing  with  general  physical
conditions,  whose  influeiice  on  the  phenomenon  investigated  is,  for  the
most  part,  only  statistically  traceable.  We  now  pass  to  consider,  in
the  light  furnished  by  our  statistics,  certain  conditions  of  the  mind  and
nervous  system,  whose  connexion  with  hallucinations  is  commonly  held
to  be  of  a  more  direct  and  important  kind.  The  chief  of  these  are
anxiety,  grief,  and  the  state  of  overstrained  nerves  which — though  it
may,  of  course,  be  an  effect  of  prolonged  or  intense  anxiety  or  grief —
may  also  result  from  mere  overwork  and  mental  fatigue,  when  neither
of  the  before-mentioned  emotions  is  present.  We  shall  treat  the
three  conditions  separately,  as  far  as  possible:  and  shall  begin  with  the
state  of  nervous  overstrain,  since  in  some  cases — where  the  overstrain
has  gone  so  far  as  to  cause  illness — its  effects  have  already  come  under
our  notice^  in  the  preceding  chapter.  Omitting  cases  where  definite
or  permanent  ill-health  has  been  produced,  the  percipient  states  himself
to  have  been — at  the  time  he  experienced  a  hallucination — overworked,
overstrained,  extremely  tired,  in  a  state  of  overwrought  nerves,  or  in
some  similarly  described  condition,  in  some  25  cases  in  the  present
collection.  And,  though  not  mentioned,  it  is  probable  that  such  over-
strain existed  in  a  certain  proportion  of  17  other  cases  where  the
percipient  was  in  constant  attendance  on  a  friend  or  relative  who  was
dying  or  very  ill.  In  8  of  the  25  cases,  a  definite  cause  of  anxiety
is  mentioned,  and  in  3  others,  the  percipient  speaks  of  himself  as
worried.

The  following  is  a  case  where  the  hallucination  and  overwork  were
clearly  connected.

(287.  1. )  From  Mr.  W.  H.  F.

January  17  th,  1890.
"  I  saw  what  seemed  to  be  the  end  of  a  ladder  placed  against  the
lower  part  of  my  bedroom  window.  Slowly  the  head  and  shoulders  of  a  man
(ordinary  workman's  dress)  appear  until  he  is  higli  enougk  to  unfasten  the
window  catch,  an  operation  he  immediately  proceeds  to  try  to  perform.
Place:  my  rooms  at  Oxford.  Time:  always  between  12  and  2  a.m.  Dates:
I  do  not  remember,  but  at  least  twice  respectively  in  the  winters  1884-5,
1885-6,  1886-7,  1887-8,  never  since. [I  was]  lying  sleepless  and  worried  in

1  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  cases  in  which  the  resulting  illness  is  of  a  kind
known  to  iiroduce  hallucinations  have  been  excluded  from  our  Tables.


IX.]


Emotional  Conditions.


167


bed,  but  in  perfect  health  in  other  ways,  the  '  worry  '  due  entirely  to
overwork.  Age  24-29.  [The  man  was  a]  perfect  stranger  ;  actions  suggestive
simply  of  burglary.  (N.B.  I  have  never  been  in  any  house  which  has  been
burglariously  entered.)  The  experiences  [were]  always  exactly  the  same.
[1]  always  regarded  it  simply  as  my  sign  that  I  was  overworking.  As  soon
as  I  could  rest,  the  hallucination  disappeared ;  if  I  couldn't  rest  immediately,
it  appeared  nightly."

The  following  is  a  case  in  which  overwork  seems  mainly  responsible
for  the  hallucination,  but  where  its  form  was  apparently  determined
by  anxiety.

(426.  13.)  From  Dr.  A.  H.

November  22nd,  1891.
"Spring  of  1880.  I  was  seated  in  the  train  at  Cannon  Street  Station,
when  a  train  drew  up  beside  mine.  In  the  carriage  wliicli  stopped  beside
mine  and  in  the  seat  nearest  to  me  was  seated  (as  I  thought)  my  brother
Leslie.  He  was  the  sole  occupant  of  the  carriage.  I  let  down  the  window
■of  my  carriage,  knocked  at  his  carriage  window,  and  otherwise  tried,  without
result,  to  attract  the  man's  attention.  [I  was]  extremely  ovei'Worked  ;
[age]  24.  My  brother  was  in  tlie  West  Indies.  The  last  despatches  sjaoke
of  yellow  fever  on  board  the  ship,  and  other  things  wliich  had  made  me
anxious. He  was  not  ill."

Other  cases  where  overstrain  seems  to  be  the  probable  cause  of  the
hallucination,  are  No.  460.  14  (see  p.  103)  and  No.  643.  22  (see  p.  103).
To  these  may  be  added  one  or  two  cases — not  included  in  the  numbers
above  given — where  the  percipient,  being  subject  to  hallucinations,
finds  them  more  frequent  in  periods  of  overstrain :  and  we  have  also,
of  course,  to  take  account  of  the  cases  where  tlie  overstrain  has  been
allowed  to  reach  the  point  of  a  breakdown  of  health.

Effect  of  Emotion  in  producing  Hallucinations.

We  endeavoured  to  obtain  information  as  to  the  influence  of
emotion  on  hallucinations  by  asking  all  percipients  whether  they  were
in  grief  or  anxiety  at  the  time  of  the  experience  that  they  described.
The  positive  information  given  in  answer  to  this  question  is  no  doubt  a
good  deal  coloured  by  subjective  bias  ;  for  percipients  will  vary  in
their  readiness  or  reluctance  to  give  such  information,  and  some  will
exaggerate,  and  others  underestimate,  the  degree  in  which  emotional
agitation  was  really  present.  It  is  therefore  best  not  to  attempt  to
decide  what  degree  emotional  disturbance  ought  to  reach  before  it  is
reasonable  to  take  it  into  consideration  at  all  as  a  possible  cause  of
hallucinations,  but  merely  to  draw  such  general  conclusions  as  we
can from the  cases  where emotion is  mentioned,  or  where  the


168  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap,


circumstances  seem  to  warrant  the  assumption  that  unusual  emotion
was  present.

Taking  all  hallucinations,  whether  of  sight,  hearing,  or  touch,  of
which  we  have  first-hand  accounts,  we  find  that  anxiety,  more  or  less
grave,  about  the  illness  of  a  relative  or  friend,  is  stated  to  have  been
present,  or  aj^pears  from  the  evidence  to  have  been  probably  present,
in  about  89  cases. ^  In  54  other  cases,  we  find  mention  of  anxiety,  or
worry,  or  serious  trouble  about  other  subjects  than  illness, — or  at
least  not  stated  to  have  been  about  illness.  Then  there  are  about  49
cases,  in  which  the  percipient  appears  to  have  been  in  grief,  or  un-
happy (besides  some,  already  counted,  in  which  he  states  himself  to
have  been  in  anxiety,  as  well  as  in  grief) ;  and  if  we  add  cases  of
depression  (5)  and  of  agitation  in  various  forms  (23), ^  we  get  altogether,,
out  of  1,622  hallucinations,  about  220  cases  in  which  emotional  dis-
turbance accompanied  the  hallucination.  In  437  cases,  a  positive
statement  is  made  that  no  grief  or  anxiety  existed,  and  there  seems
to  be  no  reason  to  susjiect  the  presence  of  either  in  the  great  majority
of  the  cases  where  no  answer  is  made  to  the  question  about  emotion,
nor  any  information  given  bearing  on  the  subject.

In  42  of  the  49  cases  of  grief,  it  is  due  to  the  recent  death  of
friends ;  so  that  altogether  anxiety  about  illness,  or  grief  abov^t  death,
was  present  in  131  cases  of  hallucinations,  that  is,  about  8  per  cent.,  or
nearly  ~  of  the  whole  number  of  hallucinations.  It  seems  practically
certain  that  our  informants  have  not,  on  the  avei'a'ge,  been  in  a  state
of  anxiety  about  the  health  of  their  friends,  or  in  grief  for  their
recent  loss,  during  -jV  of  their  lives — the  period  required  to  account
by  chance  alone  for  the  number  of  hallucinations  occurring  under
these  circumstances  :  at  first  sight,  therefore,  it  would  seem  clear  that
anxiety  and  grief  did  cause  hallucinations.  But  further  examination
makes  it  doubtful  whether  this  inference  from  the  facts  is  legitimate.
In  42  of  the  131  cases  the  hallucination  is  stated  to  have  occurred  at
the  moment  of  death,  or  within  1 2  hours  (generally  very  much  less)  of
it,  the  death  being  unknown  to  the  percipient,  and  the  hallucination
connected  in  some  way  with  the  decedent :  and,  in  several  other  cases,

'  We  say  "  about,"  because  the  extreme  difficulty  of  deciding  what  the  emotion
amounted  ti">  makes  it  desirable  to  regard  the  numbers  we  give  as  approximate  only.
We  include,  among  these  89  cases,  some  where  no  anxiety  is  mentioned,  but  where  we
have  reason  to  think  that  the  critical  nature  of  the  illness  of  a  friend  or  relative  was.
known,  or  may  have  been  known.  In  the  case  of  an  illness  of  long  standing  and  not
known  to  be  approaching  a  crisis,  it  is,  of  course,  probable — unless  the  contrary  is
stated — that  no  special  anxiety  was  felt.

2  Some  cases,  in  which  seemingly  small  degrees  of  annoyance  or  agitation  are
mentioned  by  our  informants,  have  been  included  in  this  number.  The  fact  of  their
being  mentioned  has  some  tendency  to  show  that  more  important  degrees  of  emotion
are  not  likely  to  have  been  passed  over  in  silence.


IX.]  Emotional  Conditions.  169

there  is  an  element  of  coincidence  suggesting  a  possible  telepathic
explanation.  In  these  coincidental  cases,  it  would  be  begging  the
question  to  assume  that  anxiety  about  illness,  ov  grief  about  death,  is
the  sole  cause  of  the  hallucination  ;  and,  if  we  omit  these  cases,  those
that  remain  ai'e  hardly  sufficiently  numerous  to  afford  a  clear  statistical
proof  of  the  tendency  of  these  emotions  to  produce  hallucinations.

At  the  same  time,  the  general  view  that  emotional  excitement  some-
times causes  hallucination  is  supported  by  an  examination  of  ^^articular
instances  which  strongly  suggest  a  connexion  between  the  two  ;  but  in
the  best  cases  of  this  in  our  collection  the  emotion  was  different  from
those  just  considered.  The  most  undeniable  instance  is  No.  733.  18
(see  p.  141),  where  a  boy,  who  had  received  a  shock  from  seeing  a
corpse  lying  in  an  open  coffin,  afterwards  saw  an  apparition  of  the
same  figure  :  but  the  connexion  between  emotion  and  hallucination  is,
at  any  rate,  highly  probable  in  the  following  cases  of  hallucinations
occurring  during  obvious  and  imminent  peril  of  death.

(34.  7.)  From  Mr.  A.  L.

(Tlie  account  was  written  in  1889.)

"  Wlien  driving  in  the  wilds  of  North  Devonshire,  the  post-boy,  in  giving  a
gruel  to  tlie  horse,  took  off  the  head  collar  in  the  road.  The  horse,  startled,  set
off  at  full  gallop  with  me  in  the  gig,  with  only  the  reins  holding  to  the  rings
of  the  collar.  I  said,  '  Your  life  is  sacrificed  by  the  folly  of  a  fool.'  I  heard
a  voice  distinctly  say,  'No,  it  is  in  the  hands  of  God.'  [I  was]  in  strong
health  [at  the  time]. No  [other  persons  were  present.]"

(453.  3)  From  Mr.  J.  L.  C.

September  2m,  1891.
''When  going  from  Glasgow  to  New  York  per  Anchor  steamer  ^'■jtrcipa,
on  March  4th,  1871,  we  were  overtaken  by  a  severe  storm,  which  somewhat
alarmed  all  the  passengers.  At  10  o'clock  p.m.  we  were  startled  by  the
news  that  the  bridge  had  been  swept  away,  carrying  with  it  the  captain  and
two  prmcipal  officers,  who  were  lost.  In  the  excitement,  the  vessel  fell  off
into  the  trough  of  the  sea,wlnch  increased  our  fears.  We  were  all  gathered
together  in  the  cabin,  the  Doctor  reading  from  the  Prayer  Book,  as  we
thought  our  last  hours  were  come .  While  sitting  lonely  and  sad,  thinking  of
my  loved  ones  at  home,  I  lifted  my  head  to  look  across  the  cabin,  and  saw,
as  I  thought,  my  motlier  standing  with  niy  little  boy  waiting  for  me  at  the
sea  shore. 1 I  saw  them  very  distinctly,  just  as  I  had  seen  them  moving

^  The  collector  writes  : — "As  I  had  previously  heard  the  incident,  there  was  no
mention  of  '  sea-shore,' and  'waiting  for  me  '  is  plainly  an  inference,  the  clause  being-
doubtless  innocently  prompted  by  the  hymn —

'  We  are  watching  by  the  river,

'  We  are  waiting  by  the  shore. ' "  .  ,  .•


170  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


about  before  they  died.  My  mother  had  died  about  a  year  befoi'e  this,  and
my  boy  about  six  montlis.  Coming  to  me  in  tliis  hour  of  deep  grief,  it
gave  me  a  thrill  of  real  joy.  The  vision  only  lasted  for  a  few  moments.
I  was  then  44  years  old.  About  20  were  in  the  cabin,  but  no  one  shared
the  experience  ;  [it]  was  personal  to  myself."

Crises  of  this  kind  are  brief  and  comparatively  rare,  so  that  we
think  it  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  hallucination  did  not  occur
then  by  accident;  and  the  intense  emotional  agitation  connected  with
the  crisis  seems  the  most  proljable  cause.

We  may  add  two  other  cases  of  less  violent  emotion.^

(287.  15.)  From  Mrs.  H.  R.

(The  account  was  written  in  1890.  For  another  experience  of  the  same
percipient,  see  p.  201.)

"  I  was  in  bed,  unable  to  get  any  sleep.  T  recollected  a  bad  dream  I  had
had  in  the  same  house,  and  a  sudden  feeling  of  fear  of  the  invisible  made  me
pull  the  clothes  closely  round  me.  As  I  did  so,  I  distinctly  thought  I  heard
a  voice  behind  me  say,  '  It  is  of  no  use  doing  that. '  At  the  time  I  was  so
frightened  that  I  jumped  out  of  bed  and  lighted  a  candle.  This  occurred  in
July,  1883. I  was  not  in  very  good  health  at  the  time."

(424.  7.)  From  Mr.  C.  H.  G.

(Late  Senior  Assistant  Medical  Officer  at  ).

February  17th,  1891.

"Quite  recently,  viz.,  two  months  ago,  half  an  hour  after  retiring  to
bed,  9.30  p.m.,  when  quite  awake,  I  heard  the  captain  of  my  ship,  the  Elbe,
come  into  the  cabin  and  ask  for  the  key  of  the  medicine  chest.  Ujjon
enquiry  next  morning,  I  was  informed  tliat  no  such  occurrence  had  taken
place.  At  the  time  I  was  to  some  extent  suffering  from  mental  worry,
owing  to  an  epidemic  amongst  my  people,  viz.,  600  coolies.  At  the
time,  the  captain  was  in  his  cabin  on  the  upper  deck  (mine  being  below)
reading.  No  one  [was]  present  at  the  time.  [I  have]  only  once  [had
such  an  experience.]  Two  nights  later,  the  captain  had  a  similar  ex-
perience at  about  the  same  hour,  and  came  out  of  his  cabin  imagining
that  I  had  called  him."

These  cases,  taken  together,  seem  to  show  that  emotion  does  to
some  extent  tend  to  produce  hallucinations.  There  is  no  reason,
however, to  think  it  a  very  fruitful  source  of  hallucinations,  and

'  In  none  of  these  cases,  it  will  be  observed,  is  there  any  expectation  of  seeing  or
hearing  what  is  seen  or  heard.  Ca.ses  whj^re  there  is  such  expectation,  even  if  acute
emotion  is  also  present,  cannot  be  regarded  as  necessarily  due  to  the  emotion,  since
the  expectation  may  itself  produce  the  hallucination  (see  Chapter  X).


IX.]


Repone  and  Abstraction.


171


certainly  only  a  ^'ery  small  pi'oportion  of  those  in  our  collection  can
be  thus  accounted  for.

RejMse  and  Abstraction.

There  is  stronger  statistical  ev  idence  tending  to  show  that  a  state
of  repose  is  favourable  to  hallucinations.  We  find  from  Tables  V.
VII.,  and  VIII.,  that  in  38  per  cent,  of  visual,  34  per  cent,  of  auditory
and  44  per  cent,  of  tactile  cases,  the  percipient  was  in  bed,  or  (in  a
very  few  cases)  had  been  sleeping  in  his  chair  or  elsewhere.
Considering  what  a  small  part  of  our  lives  we  generally  spend  awake
in  bed,  the  fact  that  over  ^  of  the  hallucinations  occur  under  these
circumstances  is  certainly  remarkable  :  and  the  proportion  that  occurs
immediately  after  waking — about  12  per  cent,  of  visual  hallucinations
— is  still  more  striking.  We  are  inclined  to  attribute  this  result  to  a
combination  of  causes.  In  the  first  place,  it  seems  probable  that  the
transition  from  sleep  to  complete  wakefulness  —  and  the  transient
states  intermediate  between  sleep  and  waking,  which  probably  often
occur  during  the  times  of  general  wakefulness  in  bed — are  not  vei-y
dissimilar  in  their  characteristics  to  the  hypnotic  condition,  except  for
their  extreme  instability.  Now  the  hypnotic  condition  is  well-known
to  be  one  in  which  it  is  very  easy  to  induce  hallucinations  of  all
kinds,  and  in  which  they  sometimes  occur  spontaneously  :  we  liave
observed  this  several  times  with  our  own  subjects,  and  it  is  probably
familiar  to  all  investigators  of  hypnotism.^  It  must  be  remembered
that  no  experience  occurring  when  the  percipient  does  not  believe  that
he  was  fully  awake  is  counted  in  our  Tables  :  but  this  is  not  incom-
patible with  the  supposition  that  the  hallucination  may  sometimes
have  begun  when  his  state  was  verging  on  half-sleep  and  have  roused
him  completely  before  it  vanished.

In  some  cases  of  hallucinations  immediately  after  waking  a  some-
what diflFerent  cause  has  operated, — the  influence  of  impressions  from
the  dream- world  of  complete  sleep.  We  have  already  (Chap.  IV.,  pp.
71-2)  given  two  instances  of  this — besides  a  specimen  of  the  seven  cases
excluded  fi-om  our  Tables,  in  which  dream-images  or  nightmares
persisted  into  the  waking  state — and  the  following  is  another  example.

(724.  3.)  From  Mr.  B.  L.  L.

April  2Sth,  1892.

[We  give  an  abstract  oi  the  original  account,  which  was  WTitten  m
French.]

Mr.  B.  L.  L.  was  French  professor  at  the  Ecole  reale  of  — ,  present  age
45. Towards  the  end  of  July,  1870,  bemg  at  Paris,  he  dreamt  vividly  that

1  For  examples,  see  Mull's  Htipnotlsm,  English  translation,  pp.  177  and  178, where
he  refers  to  the  observations  of  other  expeiimenters  besides  his  own.


172


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


he  went  into  his  sister's  house,  and  ff)und  her  lying  dead  in  a  coffin  in  the-
drawiijg-room.  He  woke  and  told  a  friend  with  him  that  his  sister  was  dead.
At  the  same  moment  he  heard  ' '  une  voix  melodieuse  et  qui  n'avait  rien  de
commun  avec  nos  voix  terrestres  :  '  Ladislas  cheri,  Ladislas  cheri,  Ladislas
cheri  !  '  "  (Ladislas  being  his  Christian  name).  His  sister  died  at  the  same
time.  He  knew  that  she  was  ill,  but  the  last  two  letters  he  had  had  about-
her  had  said  that  she  was  convalescent.  His  only  anxiety  at  the  time  was-
about  the  approaching  war  with  l^russia.

We  add  a  peculiar  and  interesting  case  of  a  dream  impression:
lasting  into  the  waking  state  :  though,  as  it  failed  to  produce  a  sensory
hallucination,  it  is  not  included  in  our  Tables.

(214.  19.)  From  Mrs.  E.  T.

November  3rd,  1889.
"[I  was]  awaked  at  night  by  my  own  voice,  saying,  'Do  not  let  him
sleejj  1 '  and  feeling  agonised  by  seeing  my  son  (who  had  gone  out  to  British
Columbia  some  weeks  previously)  lying  exhausted  on  deep  snow,  a  horse
also  lying  near  him.  [I]  found  myself  walking  the  room,  quite  awake,
imploring  some  one  I  could  not  see,  not  to  let  him  sleep.  [I]  ascertained
some  months  later  there  had  been  this  risk  in  travelling  to  a  distant  raiiche.
[I  had]  had  much  anxiety  and  grief  ;  [age]  about  49.  My  son  (only  child)
aged  about  28,  was  doing  what  is  described,  i.e.,  lying  down  exhausted  in
the  snow,  but  I  could  not  j^rove  that  the  exact  time  [corresponded].  My
husband  was  in  the  same  room,  but  knew  nothing  of  my  experience,  nor  did
I  say  why  I  called  out  '  don't  let  him  sleep.'  "

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  : —

December  IQth,  1891.

"I  have  this  afternoon  seen  Mrs.  T.  She  seeuis  quite  clear  that  her
experience  was  not  externalised.  There  was  no  ajjpaiition  in  the  room  with
her — nor  vision  that  she  saw  with  her  eyes .

' '  It  happened  perhaps  5  years  ago.  She  was  very  anxious  about  her  son,
who  was  at  the  time  going  through  dangers  in  crossing  the  Rocky  Mountains
and  dangers  in  snow.  But  her  vision  gave  her  a  quite  definite  idea  of
danger  from  sleepimi  in  the  snow  ;  and  this  was  not  one  that  had  occurred  to
her  apart  from  the  vision,  because,  as  she  .said,  '  it  was  such  an  absurd  thing
to  do.'  The  son  had  had  a  very  arduous  day's  joui'ney  and  was  utterly
exhausted  :  but  the  smell  of  the  interior  of  the  Indian  hut  to  which  they
came  was  more  than  he  could  stand,  and  he  lay  down  outside  in  the  snow  by
his  horse,  and  fell  asleep  almost  instantly.  Tliey  dragged  him  into  the  hut
at  once,  or  it  might  have  been  fatal.  Mrs.  T.  did  not  note  the  date,  nor  did
her  son,  so  the  coincidence  cannot  be  made  out.  She  believes,  however,
that  there  was  one."

Another  case  where  the  connection  between  the  dream  and  the
hallucination  that  followed  on  waking  seems  to  be  clearly  made  out,  is
No.  34.  20  (see  p.  289).

The  exjjlanations  above  given,  however,  apply  only  to  a  portion  of
the  class  which  we  are  now  considei'ing, — the  hallucinations  that  occur


IX.]


Solitude  and  Abstraction.


173


-when  the  percipient  is  in  bed.  We  are  inclined,  therefore,  to  think
i}hat  the  mere  absence  of  external  distractions  which  is  incident  to  rest
in  bed — even  when  the  person  resting  is  in  a  condition  of  complete  and
prolonged  wakefulness — is  in  itself  favourable  to  hallucinations.  This
supposition  seems  to  be  supported  by  the  fact  that  hallucinations  occur
more  in  solitude  than  in  company,  as  the  following  Table  shows.


Visual  Hallucinations.
Analysed  according  to  the  condition  of  the  percipient  in  respect  of  solitude.


Percipient
alone.'

Otlier  peisons
present.

Unstated.

Totals.

Percipient

in  bed ...

318

62

43

423

uj)  and  indoors

261

147

30

438

out  of  doors  ...

103

98

201

Unstated

10

1

39

50

Totals  ...

692

308

112

1112

From  this  it  appears  that  62  per  cent,  of  the  visual  hallucinations
occurred  when  the  percipient  was  alone  or  practically  alone.

It  seems  to  us  possible  that  the  practice  of  crystal  gazing  may
partly  facilitate  hallucinations  by  producing  a  state  of  quiescence
and  abstraction  :  and  that  the  gazer  may  even  sometimes  j^ass  into  a
semi-hypnotic  condition  through  keeping  the  eyes  fixed  on  the  same
spot.  Mr.  Keulemans  describes  a  condition  of  this  kind  as  resulting
from  the  concentration  of  his  attention  on  one  spot,  during  the  process
of  drawing  the  eye  of  a  bird  (.see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,
pp.  517-519)  ;  and  the  experience  of  one  of  our  jaercipients.  No.  323.  22,
— who,  when  being  photographed  (and  therefore  with  her  eyes  fixed)
"saw  the  bust  and  head  of  some  one  appeal',  who  looked  like  a
musician  " — is  perhaps  of  the  same  kind.  But,  as  was  said  in  Chapter
V.  (p.  109),  the  17  cases  in  our  collection  of  apparitions  seen  in
reflecting  surfaces  rather  suggest  that  the  crystal  assists  in  the
formation  of  hallucinations  by  providing  convenient  points  de  rei)ere.


In  the  first  column  we  }iave  included  cases  where  it  seems  pi-obable  from  tlie
circumstances  mentioned  that  the  percipient  was  alone,  though  he  does  not  explicitly
state  it,  and  also  oases  where  any  other  persons  present  in  the  room  were  asleep.


174  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Chapter  X.

EXPECTANCE  AND  SUGGESTION.  •  ■

In  a  variety  of  cases  included  in  our  returns,  the  expectation  of  a
certain  sense-perception  seems  to  have  caused  or  facilitated  the  pro-
duction of  a  hallucinatory  percept  of  the  kind  expected.

Thus  there  are  in  the  Census  14  cases  (13  of  which  were  -visual
and  one  auditory),  of  phantasms  of  persons  for  whose  arrival  the-
percipient  was  at  the  moment  looking  out.  The  correspondence
in  these  cases  of  what  was  seen  or  heard  with  the  subject  occupy-
ing the  percipient's  thoughts  seems  so  clear  that  we  can  hardly
avoid  the  conclusion  that  there  was  a  causal  connection  between  the
state  of  expectancy  and  the  hallucination.

The  following  is  an  instance  : —

(690.  1.)  From  Mrs.  T.  E.

(The  account  of  Mrs.  E.'s  experiences,  some  others  of  wliicli  are  quoted
below,  pp.  186  and  333,  was  written  by  the  collector,  Mr.  D.  Eraser  Harris,
in  April,  1890,  and  signed  by  Mrs.  E.)

"  This  happened  in  1870,  when  Mrs.  E.  was  aged  40.  She  was  sitting  in
the  drawing-room  of  a  hotel  overlooking  a  park,  and  was  waiting  for  her
husband  to  take  her  down  to  dinner.  The  drawing-room  door  was  open,
and  from  her  seat  Mrs.  E.  had  a  view  of  part  of  the  staircase  and  the  inter-
vening hall  or  passage.  He  delayed  coming,  so  Mrs.  E.  ever  and  anon  kept
glancing  towards  the  door  and  out  into  the  hall  beyond.  At  last  one  time
she  imagined  she  saw  him  turn  a  bend  in  the  staircase  and  come  slowly  along
the  corridor.  Keeping  her  eyes  fixed  all  the  time  on  what  she  thought  was
her  husband  approaching  her  with  a  well-known  smile,  Mrs.  E.  rose  and
crossed  the  room  till  she  stood,  as  she  thought,  opposite  her  husband,  when
the  spectre  vanished  from  before  her  eyes.  She  was  in  good  health  at  this
time.  In  about  half-an-hour  afterwards,  her  husband,  detained  unavoidably,
did  veritably  come  into  the  room."

Another  kind  of  expectation,  of  which  we  have  two  instances  in  the
Census,  occurs  when  a  prediction  is  made  through  some  automatic
means  at  a  spiritualistic  seance  that  the  alleged  "  controlling  "  spirit
will  appear  to  one  of  the  sitters  as  a  test  of  identity.  One  of  these
cases,  in  which  information  unknown  to  the  percipient  and  afterwards
verified  was  given  at  the  seances,  was  published  in  Proceedings  S.'P.Fv.,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  351,  and  we  give  here  an  abstract  of  the  percipient's
account  in  the  other  case.


X.]


Expectancy  and  Suggestion.


175


(536.  25.)  From  Miss  E.  K.  B.

(Miss  B.'s  account  was  written  on  August  21st,  1889.)

On  November  27th,  1887,  while  staying  near  Melbourne,  Australia,  Miss
B.  made  the  acquaintance  of  a  lady.  Miss  L.  T.,  who  had  the  capacity  of
planchette  writing.  A  communication  written  through  her,  and  signed  by
the  name  of  a  well-known  authoress,  "  M.  N.,"  stated  that  "  before  another
year  had  rolled  away,  some  gift  of  spiritual  power  would  come  to  "  Miss  B.
Miss  B.  afterwards  went  to  Otago,  and  on  the  evening  of  December  31st,
1887,  was  persuaded  by  the  friends  with  whom  she  was  staying  to  try
experiments  in  table-tilting.  Miss  B.,  remembering  the  prediction  made
through  Miss  T.'s  planchette,  wished  to  enquire  further  about  it,  and  the
tilts  indicating  that  "  M.  N."  was  present,  she  asked  when  the  "  gift  "  would
come  to  her  and  what  form  it  would  take.  The  tilts  replied  that  "  M.  N."
would  be  able  to  make  herself  visible  to  Miss  B.  the  same  night.  This
occurred  at  10  p.m.  Miss  B.  states  tliat  she  was  not  at  all  imj^ressed  by  the
incident  and  went  to  bed  and  to  sleep  without  thinking  about  it.  In  the
middle  of  the  night,  she  woke  suddenly  and  completely,  with  a  curious
feeling  of  what  she  desci-ibes  as  "  inward  shivering"  ;  the  room  was  quite
dark,  and  she  saw  a  tall  white  female  figure  .slowly  rising  between  the  wall
and  her  bed  with  its  arms  stretching  out  towards  her.  She  turned  away
from  it  and  saw  it  again  after  turning  back  ;  it  then  seemed  to  disappear
slowly  into  the  floor.  After  a  few  minutes,  she  looked  at  her  watch  and
found  it  was  2.25  a.m.  In  the  morning  she  told  her  host,  who  confirms
her  account.

Six  weeks  later.  Miss  B.  heard  from  Miss  L.  T.  that  she  had  been
planchette-writing  with  a  friend  at  Melbourne  on  the  evening  of  December
31st,  1887.  "M.  N."  had  communicated,  but  at  12.30  had  said  that  she
"must  go  to"  Miss  B.  This  time  at  Melbourne  corresponds  to  about
2.15  a.m.  at  Otago,  the  time  when  Miss  B.  saw  the  apparition.

Miss  L.  T.  writes  on  July  7th,  1889,  giving  an  account  of  her  planchette-
m-iting  on  the  evening  in  question,  and  confirming  Miss  B.'s  statements.

Expectancy,  of  course,  cannot  account  for  Miss  B.'s  seeing  the
apparition  just  at  the  time  when  the  statement  that  "  M.  N."  would
go  to  her  was  written  by  the  planchette  ;  but,  in  any  case,  it  may  be
regarded  as  having  facilitated  the  hallucination.

In  the  following  case  (received  from  Brazil)  there  was  a  general
expectation  of  seeing  something,  though  there  had  been  no  suggestion
that  it  would  be  seen  at  any  particular  time.

(73U.  18.)  From  Mr.  J.  K.

March  IStli,  1892.

"I  saw  the  form  of  a  man  dressed  in  a  cap  and  blouse  like  those  worn  by
French  workmen.  He  entered  my  bedroom  with  a  peculiar  gait,  more  like
dancing  than  walking.  I  heard  him  say,  '  You  wanted  to  know  me.  Here
I  am.'  He  came  right  up  to  the  bed,  and  I  could  not  help  uttering  a  nervous
cry.  'If  you  are  afraid,'  said  the  man,  'I  will  go,'  and  he  immediately  dis-
appeared. I  am  not  quite  sure  of  the  date,  but  it  must  have  been  in  '82  or


176  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


thereabouts.  It  was  past  midnight.  I  was  lying  in  bed  smoking  a  cigai'ette.
I  am  in  the  habit  of  smf)king  when  I  wake  up  at  night.  Health  good.  I  was
feeling  a  little  anxiety  about  the  nervous  state  [into]  which  my  wife  had  then
fallen,  and  which  I  attributed  to  adverse  spirit  influence.  My  age  in  '82  was
33.  I  had  challenged  the  supposed  influence  some  hours  before  to  come  to
me,  and  I  believe  that  it  was  in  answer  to  this  challenge  that  the  form
appeared.

"  I  was  once  reading  aloud  at  a  sitting  when  I  saw  a  man  leaning  on  the
table  by  my  side,  who  interrupted  my  reading  with  the  remark,  'I  don't
understand.'  On  looking  round,  I  found  he  had  disappeared,  nor  did  any  of
the  others  observe  a  person  sitting  in  the  place  where  I  saw  him.  At  another
sitting,  I  was  rising  from  my  chair,  when  a  heavy  hand  was  laid  upon  my
shoulder  and  forced  me  down  again. Yet  there  was  "nobody  behind  me."

It  is  possible  that  habitual  attendance  at  spiritualistic  seances  may
lead  in  sone  persons  to  the  seeing  of  apparitions  and  hearing  of  voices.
In  one  case,  (No.  383.  1)  the  percipient,  a  working-man,  reports  several
hallucinations,  bnth  visual  and  auditory,  occurring  in  the  course  of  a  few
months,  and  the  collector — himself  a  spiritualist — suggests  that  this
may  be  the  effect  of  the  seances  which  he  was  accustomed  to  attend
at  that  time.

Suggestions  by  ivord  or  gesture  from  the  other  persons  present.

An  obvious  cause  of  the  expectation  of  a  percept  is  suggestion,
in  some  form,  from  another  person  :  and  the  question  whether  halluci-
nations can  be  induced  in  persons  in  a  normal  waking  condition  by
such  suggestion  is  especially  important  in  connection  with  the  evidence
for  sliared  or  collective  hallucinations  ;  since  there  are  not  many  cases
of  collective  hallucinations  recorded  in  which  it  is  quite  certain
that  suggestion  by  word  or  gesture  from  one  percipient  to  the  other
was  excluded.  But  if  this  suggestion  was  the  sole  cause  of  the
sharing  of  the  hallucination  in  these  cases,  we  should  expect  to  find
other  cases  where  one  person  who  is  not  experiencing  a  hallucination
produces  one  by  verbal  suggestion  in  some  one  else.

Now  it  is  well  known  that  hallucinations  may  be  produced  in  this
way  in  hypnotised  persons  by  suggestions  given  in  the  hypnotic  state :
and  according  to  Bernheim  (Be  la  Suggestion,  Chap.  V.)  they  can
sometimes  be  produced  in  persons  "  hypnotisable,  but  in  no  way
hysterical,"  even  when  they  are  in  the  normal  condition,  provided  that
they  have  previously  been  hypnotised.  We  have  heard,  moreover,  on
good  authority,  of  an  experimental  case  in  which  the  effect  was
brought  about  in  a  person  not  previously  hypnotised  and  in  a  com-
pletely normal  state,  by  verbal  suggestion  of  an  insistent  and  emphatic
kind  :  but  we  are  not  aware  that  any  such  case  has  been  cai'efully


X.]


Expectancy  and  Suggestion.


177


observed  and  recorded. And  certainly  no  case  clearly  of  this  kind

is  included  in  our  Census  ;  but  in  the  two  following,  the  collective

nature  of  the  experience  is  somewhat  doubtful,  and  it  seems,  for

different  reasons,  specially  likely  that  the  hallucination  was  caused  in

the  percipient  who  .describes  it  through  verbal  suggestion  from  her

companion.
♦

(237.  13.)  From  Mrs.  S.

January  3rrl,  1890.
"I  once  fancied,  or  really  saw,  the  shape  of  a  woman  by  my  bed.
When  about  16  years  old,  and  sleeping  with  a  lady  some  years  older  than
myself,  she  awakened  me  suddenly,  asking  if  I  saw  anything,  and  I
believed  at  the  time  that  I  saw  a  tall,  grey  figure,  near  the  foot  of  the  bed,
on  the  side  farthest  from  me,  but  it  did  not  make  any  serious  impression
on  me."

Here  the  transition  from  sleep  to  waking  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a
condition  favourable  to  hallucinations  :  and  though  the  elder  lady
must  be  taken  to  have  seen  something,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose
that  it  was  a  tall  grey  figure.

(536.  2.)  From  Miss  .J.  S.

Augtist  9th,  1891.

"In  the  year  1883,  I  was  studying  music,  and  used  to  practise  alone  fre-
quently in  the  evening.  Towards  the  autumn  of  that  year,  on  one  occasion,
I  felt  some  one  touch  me,  and  on  looking  round  I  saw  the  figure  of  a  gentle-
man whom  I  knew.  He  was  dressed  in  black  clothes,  with  the  collar  of  his
coat  buttoned  closely  round  his  neck,  showing  no  white  cullar.  As  I  looked
he  faded  away.  This  occurred  on  three  different  occasions.  I  was  in  perfect
health  at  the  time,  and  in  no  trouble  or  anxiety  ;  of  full  age.  I  had  not
seen  the  gentleman  himself  for  about  two  years  before  that  occurrence,  and
have  no  idea  what  he  was  doing  at  the  time.  The  two  first  occasions
were  exactly  alike.  On  the  last  occasion,  a  young  girl  was  playing  a  duet
with  me.  She  suddenly  shuddered  and  said,  '  I  felt  some  one  touch  me.'  I
also  felt  as  if  a  hand  touched  my  shoulder,  and  on  looking  round  saw  the
same  gentleman."

In  this  case  the  other  witness,  on  being  applied  to  for  confirma-
tion of  her  share  in  the  experience,  said  that  she  did  not  remember
anything  about  it.  But  even  if  Miss  S.'s  recollection  is  accurate,  the
sudden  verbal  suggestion,  assisted  by  the  traces  of  the  two  previous
experiences,  is  probably  sufl&cient  to  account  for  the  phenomenon  on
the  third  occasion.

The  possible  efficacy  of  verbal  suggestion  in  cases  of  collective
hallucinations  will  be  considered  further  when  we  come  to  deal  with
these  cases. (See  Chapter  XV.)

N


178  Report  jon  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Effect  of  Noises  in  Producing  Hallucinations.

It  appears  in  some  cases  that  it  is  possible  for  a  noise  to  induce  visual
hallucinations  by  creating  in  the  hearer  a  strong  expectation  of  seeing
something  corresponding  to  it  or  that  may  account  for  it.  Dr.  Moll
gives  a  curious  instance  of  a  hypnotic  subject  of  his,  who  when  hypno-
tised was  once  much  alarmed  by  a  hallucination  of  a  mad  dog  attacliing
him ;  Dr.  Moll  observed  that  this  recurred  whenever  one  of  the  persons
present  creaked  his  boots.  {Hyjjnotism  :  English  translation,  p.  178.)
He  gives  some  further  instances  of  visual  hallucinations  in  hypnotised
persons  following  on  some  slight  stimulus  of  the  other  senses ;  e.g.,
blowing  with  a  bellows  caused  a  hallucination  of  a  train  and  I'ailway
station  {Op.  cit.,  p.  196).  But  in  the  hypnotic  condition,  suggestibility
to  hallucinations  is  of  course  very  much  greater  than  in  ordinary
waking  life;  and  the  cases  just  quoted  are  perhaps  comparable  to  the
instances  described  by  more  than  one  psychologist, ^  of  dreams  pro-
duced experimentally,  e.g.,  by  slight  tactile  stimuli,  rather  than  to
sensory  hallucinations  of  persons  in  a  normal  waking  condition.  The
following,  however,  is  a  transitional  case — between  dreaming  and
waking — in  which  the  visual  percept  seems  to  be  clearly  dependent  on
a  real  sound  heard  at  the  time  or  just  before.  It  is  quoted  from
Pltantctsms  of  the  Living,  (Vol.  I.,  p.  474,  foot-note).  The  percipient
writes : —

"  Between  sleeping  and  waking  this  morning,  I  perceived  a  dog  running
about  in  a  field  (an  ideal  white  and  tan  sporting  dog),  and  the  next  moment
I  heard  a  dog  barking  outside  the  window.  Keeping  my  closed  eyes  on  the
vision,  I  found  that  it  came  and  went  with  the  barking  of  the  dog  outside;
getting  fainter,  however,  each  time."

With  this  may  be  compared  the  following  case  from  Dr.  G.  J.
Stoney's  paper,  On  tlt,e  Limits  of  Visioyi,  another extract  from  which
is  quoted  in  Chapter  VII.,  p.  141.

"  Some  years  ago,  a  friend  and  I  rode — he  on  a  bicycle,  I  on  a  tricycle — on
an  unusually  dark  night  in  summer  from  Glendalough  to  Rathdrum.  It  was
drizzling  rain,  we  had  no  lamps,  and  the  road  was  overshadowed  by  trees  on
both  sides,  between  which  we  could  just  see  the  sky-line.  I  was  riding
slowly  and  carefully  some  ten  or  twenty  yards  in  advance,  guiding  myself  by
the  sky-line,  when  my  machine  chanced  to  pass  over  a  piece  of  tin  or  .some-
thing else  in  the  road  that  made  a  great  crasli.  Presently  my  companion
came  up,  calling  to  me  in  great  concern.  He  had  seen  through  the  gloom  my
machine  upset  and  me  flung  from  it.  The  crash  had  excited  the  thought  of
the  most  likely  cause  for  it,  and  this  involved  a  visual  percex^tion  in  the  mind,

1  See  especially  Maury,  Le  Sommeil  ct  les  Bercs,  p.  132,  etc.
-  See  The  Philosophical  Magazine,  March  1894.


X.]


Expectancy  and  Suggestion.


179


faint,  but  sufficient  on  this  occasion  to  be  seen  with  distinctness  when  not
overpowered  by  objects  seen  in  the  ordinary  way  through  the  eyes."

In  the  following  case  the  form,  at  least,  of  the  hallucination  seems
to  have  been  suggested  by  the  barking  of  the  dog,  though  the  coinci-
dence with  the  death  points  to  the  operation  at  tlie  same  time  of  a
supernormal  cause.

(562.  3.)  From  Miss  Wharton.

"  12,  Addison- terrace,  Notting  Hill,  VV.,  December  Uh,  1891.

"I  heard  the  voice  of  a  friend  saying  to  my  brother-in-law,  'Please
silence  your  dog. '  Nero,  our  dog,  was,  in  fact,  barking  immediately  before
I  heard  the  words.  Place  :  15,  Royal- crescent.  Netting  Hill.  Date  and
time  :  April,  1882,  5  a.m.  I  was  in  bed,  awakened  by  the  dog  barking.
Not  in  any  grief  or  anxiety. Age  40.

"I  recognised  the  voice  distinctly  as  that  of  a  friend  who  was  lying
ill  of  pneumonia  in  Cambridge-gardens.  My  brother-in-law  called  next
morning,  according  to  his  daily  practice,  to  inquire  after  the  patient,  and
ascertained  that  he  had  died  in  the  early  morning —about  3  a.m.^

"  No  one  else  was  awake  or  heard  the  voice.

"Emma  Whartox."

In  answer  to  a  question  put  to  her  by  the  collector,  Mr.  E.  L.  Kearney,
Miss  Wharton  writes  : —

"  I  mentioned  my  experience  to  [my  sister],  Mrs.  A.,  at  breakfast,  and
she  has  some  recollection  of  my  telling  her  what  I  have  recently  written
down  for  you  on  Form  B,  but  her  memory  of  it  is  not  sufficiently  vivid  to
warrant  her  in  formally  attesting  it.  The  news  of  the  death  did  not  reach
me  until  Mr.  A.  returned  home  in  the  evening."

Mrs.  A.  adds  : — "  The  above  correctly  explains  what  was  told  me  of  the
afifair."— E.  S.  A.

The  friend's  name  was  given  to  us  in  confidence.  Miss  Wharton  says,
■"  He  was  a  very  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  A.  and  myself."

Fro7n  the  Register  we  find  that  the  death  took  place  on  April  6th,  1881,
not  1882,  as  stated  above.

In  an  interview  with  Miss  Wharton  on  January  29th,  1891,  Mr.  Myers
learnt  that  the  experience  narrated  was  the  only  hallucination  she  had  ever
had.

The  explanation  that  the  hallucination  was  produced  by  a  sound
seems  also  to  be  rightly  applied  by  the  percipient  in  the  following  case.

(653.  5)  - From  Miss.  E.  J.

Fehrnary  17th,  1891.
"  The  most  distinct  hallucination  that  I  remember  was  one  which  occurred
to  me  one  day  in  January  1891. I  heard a  friend  (whose  footstep  I


1  The  importance  of  the  coincidence  is  of  course  reduced  by  the  percipient's
knowledge  that  her  friend  was  seriously  ill.

N  2


180  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


recognised)  coming  into  this  house,  cross  the  hall  just  outside  the  room  in
which  I  was  standing,  and  go  ujistairs.  At  the  same  time  that  I  distinctly
heard  her  going  upstaii's  after  having  crossed  the  hall,  I  saw  her  in  the  room
where  I  was.  The  room  opens  into  the  hall.  I  only  saw  her  fi)r  a  second  or
two  ;  and  she  had  n(jt  on  her  hat  and  jacket  as  she  would  naturally  have  had
coming  in  from  a  walk,  but  was  dressed  as  .she  usually  is  in  the  house.  The
appearance  vanished  almost  at  once.  I  was  startled  by  it,  and  when  my
friend  came  down  I  told  lier  what  I  had  seen,  explaining  that  it  must  have
been  the  s(;und  of  her  step  outside  which  caused  the  appearance.  I  had
also  just  come  in  from  a  walk,  and  was  talking  to  other  people  in  the
sitting-room.  I  was  not  out  of  health  nor  in  anxiety  of  any  kind.  Age  27.
I  was  living  in  the  house  with  the  lady  I  mentioned.  She  certainly  came  into
the  house  at  the  time  at  wliicli  I  heard  her,  but  went  straight  upstairs  and  did
not  come  into  the  sitting-room."

Besides  the  case  just  (juoted,  there  are  a  lai-ge  number  of  cases  in
which  a  visual  hallucination  seems  to  have  been  preceded  by  a  noise.
In  most  of  these  cases,  however,  the  noise  is  regarded  as  hallucinatory
by  the  percipient,  so  that  they  are  classed  in  Table  II.  as  bisensory
hallucinations,  "  visual  and  auditory  (non-vocal)."  But  in  the
majority  of  them,  the  hallucinatory  chai'acter  of  the  sounds  seems  to
have  been  merely  inferred  from  the  fact  that  they  were  unexplained,
or  from  their  association  with  visual  hallucinations.  Now,  it  is
obviously  difficult — or  in  many  cases  impossible — to  ascertain  of  what
nature  these  sounds  were  ;  and  we  think  it  probable  that  in  many  cases
they  may  have  been  real  sounds,  due  to  unexplained  physical  causes.
For  we  hnd  that  when  sounds  of  this  kind  are  heard, — e.g.,  in  houses
reputed  to  be  "haunted," — they  are  most  frequently  heard  by  every
one  in  the  house,  or  in  the  part  of  the  house  that  is  associated
with  theni.  Further,  the  assumption  of  their  physical  reality  is  not
necessarily  inconsistent  with  our  systematised  experiences  of  matter.
An  apparition  which  disappears  in  a  clear  space  while  being  looked
at,  or  passes  through  a  closed  door,  is  inexplicable  as  a  part  of  the
ordinary  external  world  ;  but  it  is  otherwise  with  these  sounds.
They  may  be  unexplained,  but  they  cannot  be  regarded  as  strictly
inexplicable.  Another  characteristic  of  them  is  that  they  recur  very
frequently,  to  a  degree  that  is  extremely  rare  among  hallucinations
that  can  be  proved  to  be  such.

These  considerations  apply  with  special  force  to  cases  where  non-
vocal  sounds  alone  are  heard,  no  sights,  or  other  more  definite
impressions,  being  associated  with  them.  The  uiicertainty  with  regai  d
to  the  nature  of  the  sounds  is  then  so  great  that  we  did  not  include  in
our  statistical  enquiry  alleged  hallucinations  of  this  kind  ;  l)ut  the
uncertainty  remains  in  some  cases  when  the  sounds  accompany — and
especially  when  they  precede — visual  impressions  that  are  undoubtedly
hallucinatory. There  are  71  cases  (see  Table  I)  in  our  collection  where


X.]


Expectancy  and  Stifjgestion.


181


a  non-vocal  sound  is  heard  accompanied  by  a  visual  hallucination,  and
in  56  of  these  the  sound  pi'ecedes  the  apparition.  It  seems  to  us  not
improbable  that  in  many  of  these  latter  cases  the  sound  was  real  and
produced  in  the  hearer  a  state  of  expectant  attention  which  led  to
the  visual  hallucination.  Instances  of  such  cases  are  No.  68.  25
(see  p.  120)  and  the  following.

(623.  9.)  From  Mr.  H.  F.

April,  1892.

"  I  was,  so  far  as  I  remember,  nine  years  of  age  [i.e.  in  1874].  I  had  just
gone  to  bed,  and  was — at  least  this  was  my  impression  at  the  time — quite
awake.  The  door  of  my  room  was  ajar,  and  there  was  a  light  in  the  passage,
which  half  illumined  my  room.  Suddenly,  I  became  aware  of  a  series  of
slight  taps  on  the  passage  outside.  These  taps  were  not  sufficiently  loud  for
a  human  footstep  :  on  the  other  hand,  the  volume  of  their  sound  was  greater
than  that  made  by  a  walking  stick.  I  fully  remember  sitting  up  in  bed  and
beholding  two  tojj  boots  trot  rapidly  across  the  room  and  vanish  into  tlie
opposite  wall.  The  illusion  was  astonishingly  vivid  and  I  can  recall  the
details  to  this  day.  I  have  never  had  a  waking  dream  since,  nor  have  I  ever
experienced  ambulant  top  boots  except  on  this  occasion."

Another  case  where  it  seems  especially  probable  both  that  the
sound  heard  was  a  real  sound,  and  that  the  hearing  of  it  was  the
occasion  of  the  visual  hallucination  that  followed,  is  No.  733.  18
(see  p.  141),  where  a  previous  agitation  had  clearly  predisposed  the
percipient  to  that  particular  hallucination.  See  also  No.  284.  23
(p.  73),  where  the  sound  of  the  "bang"  was  followed  by  the  sight  which
the  percipient  was  accustomed  to  associate  with  it.

In  other  cases,  a  non-vocal  noise,  such  as  that  of  footsteps,  leads  up
to  a  tactile  hallucination  (3  cases)  or  to  the  hearing  of  a  voice  (5  cases).

In  consideiing  how  far  the  reality  of  the  sounds  may  be  inferred
from  their  being  genei-ally  audiljle  to  every  one  within  ear-shot  of
them,  we  have  examined  the  56  cases  where  a  non-vocal  sound  pre-
ceded an  apparition.  We  find  that  other  persons  were  present  in  19
cases  :  that  in  5  cases,  all  those  who  were  present  both  heard  and
saw  the  same ;  that  in  6  cases,  the  other  persons  had  no  share  in  the
impression ;  but  that  in  the  other  8  cases,  the  sounds  were  heard  by
one  or  more  persons  who  did  not  share  in  the  visual  percept.  In-
stances of  this  last  kind  are  Mrs.  Hall's  case.  No.  656.  26  (see
chap.  XVII.),  and  the  following.

(319.  1.)  From  Miss  C.  E.

Jvly  ith,  1890.

"On  January  11th,  1883,  between  6  and  7  p.m.,  I  was  in  the  breakfast-
room  of  my  home,  when  I  heard  my  father  insert  his  latch-key  in  the  front
door,  open  the  door  and  knock  his  stick  on  the  tiles  in  the  hall,  but  did  not


182  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


hear  him  come  up  the  hall.  At  the  same  time  I  saw  liis  dog,  a  small  Scotch
terrier,  pass  the  breakfast-room  door,  as  though  he  had  returned  with  my
father.  He  did  not  go  into  the  dining-room,  but  toward  the  mat  at  the  foot
of  the  stairs.  I  was  standing  by  the  table  with  my  face  toward  the  open
door,  glancing  into  a  book  ;  when  I  heard  my  father's  key,  I  put  down  the
book  and  tlius  saw  tiie  dog.  Living  with  my  father,  I  saw  both  him  and  the
dog  cojistantly.  It  was  his  habit  to  go  for  a  walk  about  that  hour,  but  on
that  day  both  he  and  the  dog  were  dozing  before  the  dining-room  fire.  The
dining-room  door  was  opposite  that  of  the  breakfast-room,  but  was  fast  shut.
I  was  alone,  but  an  elder  sister  and  a  woman  who  sewed  for  her  were  in  the
liall  and  heard  my  father  open  the  front  door.  They  made  no  mention  of
the  dog,  but  were  emphatic  as  to  my  father  having  entered  the  liouse.  I  have
another  sister  who  remembers  my  elder  sister,  the  woman,  and  myself  all  re-
lating the  incident  to  her  the  moment  it  occurred.

"  I  ought  to  mention  that  directly  my  elder  sister  was  told  that  my  father
had  not  entered  the  front  door  as  she  supposed,  she  hurried  into  the  dining-
room  to  convince  herself  that  he  was  tliere  ;  and  told  him  what  had  occurred.
He  declared  he  had  not  left  the  room  all  [the]  afternoon,  and  the  dog  had
been  with  him."

Miss.  E.'s  sister  writes  :

December  Ibth,  1890.
In  corroboration  of  my  sister  Miss  C.  E.'s  statement,  I  remember  the
sewing  woman  and  both  my  sisters  telling  me  at  the  time,  that  ray  father
had  entered  at  the  front  door,  when  at  that  moment  he  was  asleep  in  the
dining-room.

"  H.  G.  E."

Later  she  adds  : —

"  I  remember  my  sister  C.  telling  me  at  the  time  she  saw  the  dog  cross
the  hall."

Mr.  Podmore  writes  : —

March  ^Isi,  1892.

"I  called  on  Miss  C.  E.  and  Miss  H.  G.  E.  to  day.

"  Miss.  C.  E.  explained  that  she  distinctly  heard  the  'fuss'  of  opening
the  front  door,  {i.e.  key  in  latchlock,  etc.),  and  then  tap  of  stick,  and  tiny
patter  of  dog's  nails  on  tiled  floor.  Then  she  saw  the  dog  pass  her
in  the  hall — a  yellow  Scotch  tenier — quite  unmistakal:)le  in  the  full  light  of
the  gas.  Miss  C.  E.  then  went  into  the  hall,  and  presently  joined  her
two  sisters  Miss  H.  G.  E.  and  Miss  E.  in  the  pantry  with  the  work-
woman referred  to.  She  there  learnt  that  Miss  E.  had  just  had  a
glass  of  beer  brought  to  the  workwoman  in  the  hall.  Mr.  E.  much
disliked  anything  being  drunk  in  the  hall,  and  probably  the  infringement  of
the  rule  of  the  house  made  Miss  E.  a  little  apprehensive  of  her
father's  return.  Anyway,  both  she  and  the  workwoman  said  that  they
heard  his  key  in  the  latch  and  had  run  straightway  into  the  pantiy,  meeting
Miss  H.  G.  E.  on  the  way.  Miss  H.  G.  E.  gave  tlie  fullest  corroboration.
She  remembered  to  have  heard  of  the  incident  from  both  her  sisters  and
from  the  woman  (now  dead  I  gathered).  Miss  H.  G.  E.  was  of  opinion  tliat
Miss  E.  saw  nothing,  and  Miss  C.  E.  was  inclined  to  agree  with  her.


X.]


Expectancy  and  Suggestion.


183


"  It  should  be  added  that  both  sisters  were  of  opinion  that  there  was  no
real  sound  to  start  the  hallucination,  but  the  house  fronted  on  a  public
square,  and  it  is  clear  that  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  exclude  the  possibility
of  real  sounds.

"Miss  C.  E.  was  about  23  at  the  time.  She  has  had  no  other
hallucinations  "

Before  leaving  this  subject,  it  may  be  worth  wliile  to  remark  that
the  spontaneous  association  of  visual  images  with  real  sounds  which
occurs  with  some  persons — such  as  the  "  number-forms  "  described  Ijy
Mr.  Galton  and  the  phenomena  of  "  coloured  audition  " — sometimes
seems  to  assume  a  hallucinatory  form.  The  following  is  an  instance
which  appeared  originally  in  Nature  of  March  6  th,  1890.  The  account
there  given,  which  was  written  in  May,  1889,  has  since  been  revised,
with  a  few  additions,  by  the  percipient,  Miss  G.,  whose  later  account
we  quote. She  writes  : —

April  12th,  1891.

"The  sound  of  an  oboe  brings  before  me  a  white  pyramid  or  obelisk,
running  into  a  sliarp  point ;  the  point  becoming  more  acute  if  the  note  is
acute,  blunt  if  it  is  grave.  The  obelisk  apjjears  to  be  sharply  defined  and
solid  if  the  note  is  loud,  and  vague  and  vaporous  if  it  is  faint.  All  the  notes
of  the  'cello,  the  high  notes  of  the  bassoon,  trumijet,  and  trombcjne,  and  the
low  notes  of  clarionet  and  viola,  make  me  see  a  tiat  undulating  ribbon  of
strong  white  fibres.  The  tone  of  the  horn  brings  before  me  a  succession  of
white  circles  of  regularly  gradated  sizes,  overlapping  one  another.  The
greater  the  intensity  of  the  sound,  the  larger  and  more  distinct  the  circles.
These  circles  and  the  ribbon  float  past  me  horizontally,  but  the  point  of  the
obelisk  seems  to  come  at  me.

' '  In  an  orchestra,  when  tlie  violins  strike  up,  after  the  wind  band  has
been  prominent  for  a  time,  I  see  often  but  not  always,  a  shower  of  bright
white  dust  or  sand,  very  crisp  and  glittering.  I  am  taking  note  of  the  recur-
rence of  this  impression,  and  think  it  is  becoming  more  frequent,  but  it  is
not  invariable  like  the  others. [It  is  mucli  more  frequent  now,  1891.]

"I  have  heard  a  great  deal  of  orchestral  music  all  my  life,  but  I  have
only  noticed  these  effects  for  six  or  seven  years.  They  gained  gradually  in
frequency  and  clearness,  and  now  the  first  three  are  invariable.

"If  I  know  the  scoring  of  a  piece  well,  the  various  effects  slighlly  prucede
the  sound  of  the  instrument  tliey  belong  to  ;  only  the  objects  are  vague  and
faint  till  the  sound  begins.  Sometimes,  if  an  oboe  passage  has  an  intense
and  yearning  character,  the  white  point  comes  so  near  me,  and  moves  so
rapidly,  that  I  think  it  mud  wound  me.

"I  am  very  anxious  to  make  it  clear  that  I  am  not  trying  to  describe  a
mental  state  by  symbols,  but  that  I  actnully  see  the  point,  the  fibres,  and  the
circles.  Generally  they  float  half-way  between  me  and  the  orchestra.  They
give  me  great  pleasure.  If  only  one  class  of  instruments  is  used,  the  effect
does  not  extend  beyond  the  opening  bars  :  for  instance,  in  a  string  quartette
I  only  see  tlie  white  sand  for  a  moment  at  the  beginning  ;  if,  however,  wind
and  stringed  instruments  are  combined,  I  see  tlie  vaiious  effects  again  and
again  in  one  piece. Lately  (1891),  the  horn  notes  affect  me  so  strongly  that


184  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


instead  of  seeing  a  string  or  necklace  of  circles  the  air  is  full  of  them,  like
flakes  in  a  snow-storm,  and  I  have  a  swimming,  giddy  sensation.
"  I  am  quite  healthy  and  have  always  been  so. I  am  SGj."

Other  Slight  Impressions  leadiny  to  Hallucinations.

The  seeing  of  an  apparition  is  sometimes  preceded  by  slight  or
inde6nite  impressions,  other  than  sounds,  which  often  produce  in  the
percipient  an  expectation  of  seeing  something  and  by  this  means,
perhaps,  produce  the  hallucination.  There  is  the  same  difficulty  of
determining  whether  these  impressions  are  real  or  hallucinatory  that
we  have  found  in  the  case  of  sounds. ^  The  following  is  an  instance
where  it  seems  very  probable  that  the  sensation  described  was  produced
by  real  movements.

(726.  18.)  From  Mr.  F.  B.

October  Zlst,  1891.

"  When  a  boy  I  sometimes  saw  forms  in  the  dark.  In  the  province  of  C,
of  which  I  am  a  native,  we  sleep  in  hammocks.  I  felt  the  hammock  quiver,
and  on  looking  would  see  a  form  standing  by  (jr  passing  under  it.  I  attached
no  importance  to  this  at  the  time.  This  [occurred]  in  C.,<ine  of  the  Northern
Provinces  of  Brazil.  I  ceased  to  see  them  some  24  or  25  years  ago  I  was
in  good  health  and  spirits.  I  was  subject  to  these  visions,  to  the  best
of  my  recollection,  between  my  eighth  and  fourteenth  or  fifteenth  year."

In  about  14  cases,  the  seeing  of  an  apparition  is  preceded  by  the
apparent  opening  of  a  door,  through  which  the  figure  seems  to  walk
into  the  room.  Here  again,  it  is  possible  that  the  apparent  movement
may  occasionally  be  a  real  one,  due  to  some  ordinary  cause,  and  that
the  sudden  expectancy  which  it  produces  may  lead  to  the  seeing  of  the
apparition.  (See  Miss  E.  L,  T.'s  case,  No.  264.  23,  Chap.  XVI.).  An
indication  of  the  efficacy  of  such  a  cause  is  to  be  found  in  an  expression
used  in  an  account  quoted  in  Chapter  IV.  (pp.  76,  77).  The  percipient,
who  frequently  experienced  the  hallucinations  described,  says,  "  Often
when  a  door  is  opened,  they  rush  in,  like  messengers  in  haste."  It
would  of  course  he  a  proof  of  the  reality  of  such  a  movement  if  the
oljject  moved  were  found  finally  in  a  different  place  from  where  it  was
at  first — if  the  opened  door  i-emained  open.  In  most  cases,  however,
the  door  appears  to  open  and  shut  again,  and  then  the  most  probable
interpretation  would  generally  seem  to  be  that  the  whole  movement
is  part  of  the  hallucination :  though  in  Miss  E.  L.  T.'s  case,  just

1  In  the  discussion  of  the  "sense  of  presence"  in  Chapter  IV.  (p.  85),  it  was
suggested  that  some  impressions  of  this  kind  may  be  initiated  by  slight  sounds  or
movements  of  the  air,  etc.  half  consciously  or  unconsciously  perceived  ;  but  we  have
no  positive  ground  for  attributing  the  phenomenon  to  such  a  cause  in  any  of  the
20  cases  in  the  Census  where  the  "  sense  of  presence  "  precedes  a  fully  externalised
hallucination.


X.]  Expectancy  and  Suggestion.  185

referred  to,  the  fact  that  the  opening  and  slmtting  appear  to  have  been
seen  by  two  persons  I'enders  it  probable  that  the  movement  was  real.

Other  comparatively  slight  impressions  leading  up  to  more  definite
ones  are  when  a  tovichis  felt,  preceding  a  visual  hallucination  (17  cases),
or  the  hearing  of  a  voice  (7  cases). The  following  is  an  instance.

(437.  19.)  From  Miss  L.  W.

Juhj  7th,  1891.

"  I  felt  a  touch  as  uf  a  hand  laid  on  my  shoulder,  and,  on  looking  up,
saw  a  girl  whom  I  had  not  seen,  and  of  whom  I  had  not  heard,  for  about
two  years.  Place  :  at  my  own  home.  Hour  :  about  4.30  p.m.  [I  was]
occupied  in  shading  a  drawing  ;  was  m  perfect  health,  with  nu  grief  or
anxiety  ;  age  20.  [I]  was  not  in  the  habit  of  seeing  the  girl  [and]  do  not
know  what  she  was  doing  at  the  time.  Two  other  persons  were  in  the  room,
but  they  did  not  share  the  experience."

In  answer  to  questions,  Miss  W.  adds  : —

"The  incident  occurred  about  a  year  ago  last  March  or  April.  As  far  as
I  know,  the  girl  was  at  that  time  in  Nottingham,  but  as  I  do  not  know  her
address,  I  am  not  able  to  find  out  anything  about  her.  The  figuie  only
remained  about  a  second  after  I  first  saw  it,  and  I  do  not  remeud)er  in  what
way  it  disappeared. I  saw  it  very  clearly."

It  is  possible  that  the  feeling  of  touch  in  this  case  was  a  muscular
sensation  misinterpreted. See  Chap.  V. ,  p.  111.

An  additional  reason  for  regarding  the  hallucinatory  nature  of  the
initial  part  of  the  impression,  in  the  cases  discussed  above,  as  doul)tful,
is  that  in  a  large  proportion  of  them  (at  least  35  out  of  124)  the
percipient  is  awakened — e.g.,  by  the  sound  or  the  touch — and  then  sees
the  apparition.  This  makes  it  doubtful,  on  the  one  hand,  whether
the  sound  or  touch  was  not  a  dream-impression,  and,  on  the  other
hand,  whether  it  was  not  real ;  since  there  is  a  special  difficulty  in  dis-
tinguishing between  true  and  false  impressions  at  the  moment  of
waking.  Several  other  cases  of  the  visual  hallucinations  that  occur
on  waking  are  preceded  by  moi'e  indefinite  sensations,  described  in
such  terms  as  the  following: — "woke  with  a  disagreeable  sensation";
"  woke  with  weight  on  chest";  "wakened  by  warm  wind";  "woke
with  feeling  that  scalding  water  had  been  thrown  over  her";  "woke
with  uncanny  feeling";  "  wakened  by  some  one"  or  "  by  something."
Here  again  it  is  proljable  that  some  of  these  sensations  were  produced
by  a  physical  stimulus  of  a  normal  kind.

The  Ojjeration  of  Suggestion  in  the  ivorking  out  of  Hallucinations.

The  operation  of  suggestion  may  further  be  traced  in  the  develop-
ment of  a  hallucination  after  it  has  once  started — one  percept  leading
on  to  the  next  by  the  working  out  of  the  idea  involved. For  instance,


186  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


this  explanation  appears  to  be  applicable  to  the  reflection  of  apparitions
in  mirrors, — an  effect  which  MM.  Binet  and  Fere  were  able  to  reproduce
experimentally  in  visual  hallucinations  suggested  to  their  hypnotic
subjects.  In  view  of  these  experimental  results,  we  cannot  regard  this
phenomenon  as  affording  evidence  that  the  hallucination  is  more  than
purely  subjective  in  such  cases  as  the  following  : —

(690.  1)  ■ From  Mrs.  T.  E.

(The  account  was  written  in  April  1890.)

"It  was  on  an  evening  in  June,  1847,  when  Mrs.  E.  Avas  20  years  of  age,
that  she  had  this  vision.  The  liouse  she  was  living  in  was  one  reported  to
be  '  haunted, '  and  Mrs.  E.  and  her  husband  were  only  tenants  in  it  for  a
year.  No  tenant  would  remain  in  it  for  a  longer  time.  Mrs.  E.  was  in
perfectly  good  health,  and  on  the  evening  in  question  was  sitting  alone  upon
the  piazza  of  the  house  of:'  which  opened  the  drawing-room,  into  which  [she]
had  an  uninterrupted  view.  The  house  was  empty,  the  servants  were  away
frnm  tlie  back  premises,  and  the  nurse  had  taken  the  only  child  out  to  play  ;
all  the  back  doors  were  locked.  Mrs.  E.  was  watching  a  number  of  children
playing  some  distance  off,  and  was  certainly  not  thinking  of  anything  relating
to  apparitions,  or  anything  extraordinary,  when,  quite  suddenly,  and  some-
what towards  the  left  of  the  seat,  a  female  figure  aj^peared,  and  strode  across
the  drawing  room  in  an  oblique  direction,  but  always  keeping  its  face  turned
away  from  Mrs.  E..  The  outline  was  very  clearly  delineated,  the  dress
Mrs.  E.  remembers  yet,  it  was  so  distinct ;  and  so  vivid  was  the  appearance,
that,  on  casting  her  eyes  on  the  mirror  on  the  drawing-room  wall  a  little
towards  [her]  right  hand,  she  saw  the  side  or  profile  of  the  figure  reflected
there.  So  exceedingly  real  did  this  latter  circumstance  make  it,  that
Mrs.  E.,  being  certain  there  was  a  woman  in  her  drawing-room,  rose  and
rushed  into  the  room,  saying — '  I  wonder  how  yoti,  got  in,  indeed  !  '  only  to
find  nothing  out  of  the  common  there.  Mrs.  E.  said  she  had  heard  no
details  or  descriptions  of  the  alleged  '  haunting,' and  so  her  mind  could  not
have  been  pre-adjusted  to  see  any  one  kind  of  apparition  more  than
another.  She  liad  never  let  the  fact  of  the  house  being  '  haunted  '  rest
with  or  distress  her,  and  on  this  evening  was  not  thinking  of  anything
except  those  children  playing  in  the  front  of  the  house."  ^

This  is  the  only  case  in  the  Census  in  which  the  apparition  is  seen
hrst  and  its  reflection  afterwards  ;  but  there  are  three  cases  in  which
the  tigure  is  first  seen  in  a  mirror,  and  afterwards  appears  to  be
standing  in  the  room,  and  the  double  impression  in  these  cases  seems
equally  explicable  as  the  effect  of  suggestion, — as  whichever  appearance
is  seen  first,  might  naturally  lead  to  the  second  corresponding  percept.
The  following  is  one  of  the  three  cases  referred  to.

1  For  another  experience  of  the  same  percipient,  see  p.  174.


*


X.]


Expectancy  and  Suggestion,


187


(208.  7.)


From  Mrs.  T.


[The  account  was  written  down  from  the  lips  of  the  percipient  by  the
collector,  in  August,  1889.]

"  My  grandmother  was  ill  in  her  bed,  txom  which  slie  never  afterwards  got
up,  and  we  were  reading  the  Bible — she  explaining  it  to  me,  as  I  was  about  [ten]
at  the  time — it  was  about  an  angel  appearing  that  we  were  reading.  I  said  to
her,  '  Oh,  grandmother,  I  shan't  stay  here  when  you're  gone  ;  I  should  be
afraid.'  My  grandmother  said,  '  Nonsense,  child  ;  I'm  sure  I  shouldn't  do
thee  any  harm. '  When  my  grandmother  died  [in  February,  1865]  I  was  so
frightened  of  being  in  the  house  that  I  went  to  a  cousin's.  After  some  time
I  returned  home,  and  being  one  day  dusting  in  a  room  (the  room  was  next
to  that  in  which  mj'  grandmother  died,  and  I  was  not  thinking  about  her  at
the  time),  as  I  was  dusting  the  looking  glass,  I  saw  my  grandmother  reflected
in  it,  standing  at  the  door.  I  turned  round  and  saw  her  standing  in  her
night-dress,  with  one  foot  in  the  room,  and  her  head  turned  round  to  look
at  me.  I  made  a  run  past  her  to  go  down  stairs — but  I  passed  nothing,  for
she  disappeared  I  never  knew  where.  My  naother  reproached  me  for  coming
down  in  that  way,  saying  she  had  never  seen  such  a  way  of  coming  dowar
stairs  ;  and  I  said,  '  I  have  seen  grandmother,'  and  my  mother  said  she  '  could
not  think  it.'  I  always  thought  my  grandmother  had  come  so,  to  show  me
she  would  do  me  no  harm."

The  collector  adds  : —

"  Mrs.  T.,  who  is  the  wife  of  a  blacksmith,  says  she  never  had  any  other
experience,  and  that  this  one  is  as  clear  to  her  now  as  the  day  she  saw  it."

The  casting  of  a  shadow  by  an  apparition  may  similarly  be  ex-
plained by  suggestion.  This  is  only  recorded  in  two  cases  in  the  Census,
which  we  proceed  to  give.  It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  first  case
the  hallucination  begins  with  the  perception  of  the  shadow.


"  At  my  grandmother's  house,  Albemarle  Co.,  Virginia,  U.S.A.,  at  about
11  p.m.,  my  cousin.  Miss  S.,  somewhat  older  than  I,  and  myself,  had  been
conversing  in  the  parlour.  She  left  me.  The  house  door  opening  into  the
jjarlour  stood  open,  the  night  being  warm,  and  the  moonlight  streamed  in
over  the  floor  beside  me  as  I  sat,  leaning  on  the  sofa-arm,  my  back  to
the  entrance.  The  .shadow  of  a  human  form  fell  on  the  moonlit  floor.  Half
turnmg  my  head  I  saw  a  tall  woman  dressed  in  white,  her  back  to  me.  By  the
contour  and  the  gleam  of  the  j^laits  round  her  head  I  recognised  my  cousin,
and  deemed  she  had  doffed  her  black  dress  to  try  a  white  one.  I  addressed
an  ordinary  remark  to  her.  She  did  not  reply  and  I  turned  right  round  upon
her.  Then  she  went  out  of  the  door  down  the  entrance  steps,  and  as  she  dis-
appeared I  wondered  I  had  heard  nothing  of  a  step  or  the  rustle  of  her  dress.
I  sat  and  puzzled  over  this,  though  without  taking  fright,  for  a  few  minutes.
I  was  unoccupied,  ruminating  quietly  ;  in  robust  health  ;  completely  awake  ;
untroubled  ;  [age]  16  years  about.  It  was,  I  felt  convinced,  though  I  did  not  see
her  face,  my  cousin. I  am  short-sighted,  but  fully  believed  I  saw  my  cousin.


(361.  9.)


From  Miss  A.  S.


December  30th,  1889.


188


Report  on  the  Census  of  B  allucinations.  [chap.


She  had  shortly  before  left  the  room  by  the  inner  door.  She  lived  there.  I
was  fanniliar  with  the  sight  of  her.  I  was  alone  for  about  half-an-hour.  I
then  sought  niy  cousin  and  found  her  in  the  other  sitting-room  with  my
grandmother.  I  said,  'I  thought  you  had  changed  your  dress.'  She  said,
'  No,  I  have  not.'  I  asked,  '  Didn't  you  come  to  the  house  door  just  now  ? '
She  said,  '  I've  been  with  grandmother  the  last  half-hour, — since  I  left  you.'
I  then  grew  frightened  and  went  up  to  the  only  other  two  inmates,  at  that
hour,  of  the  house.  These  two  (females)  denied  that  they  had  been
downstairs  during  the  interval.  The  negro  slaves  had  all  gone  to  their
(outside) quarters  for  the  night."

In  the  next  case,  on  the  other  hand,  the  perception  of  the  shadow
follows  that  of  the  figure.

(240.  13.)  From  Mrs.  W.

January  8th,  1890.
"  I  apparently  saw  my  brother  walk  down  stairs  in  his  house  in  Newport,
Mon.,  between  2  and  3  o'clock,  p.m.,  one  summer  day,  25  years  ago.  My
br(.)ther  had  left  us  with  the  object  of  changing  dress  to  take  us  (lut  for  a
walk  or  drive  that  afternoon.  The  vision  was  so  distinct  that  I  called  my
brother  by  name,  but  it  (the  vision)  bowed  its  head  as  if  to  avoid  obsei-vation.
I  then  looked  over  the  bannisters  and  saw  the  shadow  of  the  figure  disappear
from  the  stairs,  letired  to  my  room  and  mentioned  tlie  matter  to  my  sister
who  was  with  me,  when  we  went  to  his  room  and  called  him,  finding  him
still  there  and  in  deshabille,  and  he  had  not  been  on  the  stairs  or  out  of  his
r<_M)m.

"  The  house  in  which  the  matter  mentioned  occurred  had  the  reputation
of  being  haunted,  though  I  was  unaware  of  this  at  the  time  and  was  not
told  until  next  day  by  some  one  who  knew  nothing  of  this  particular
occurrence.  My  brother  has  told  me  he  once  saw,  as  he  thought,  our
mother  jjass  through  one  of  the  bedrooms.  Our  mother  was  at  the  time
living  in  [another  town]."

We  may  compare  with  this  another  case,  No.  180.  15.,  where  the
percipient  says,  "  I  watched  the  figure  walk  right  round  the  room,
passing  l)etween  myself  and  the  candle  on  the  dressing-table,  (for  a
moment  [it]  hid  the  light  from  me),  until  it  reached  the  hearth-rug,
when  it  disappeared."  The  feature  of  appearing  to  hide  the  light  of  a
candle  is  also  mentioned  in  No.  37.  13  (see  p.  313).

It  is,  of  course,  the  usual  property  of  a  fully  externalised  visual
hallucination  to  appear  to  shut  out  the  view  of  objects  behind  it ;
the  efiect  merely  becomes  more  conspicuous  when  the  object  in
question  is  a  light.  For,  in  order  that  a  hallucinatory  figure
may  take  a  definite  place  among  the  objects  seen  by  the  per-
cipient, and  completely  simulate  the  body  that  it  represents — as  it
•ordinarily  does  when  fully  externalised — the  vision  of  real  things
through  the  retina  must  obviously  be  inhibited  to  a  corresponding
■extent. Sometimes,  indeed,  as  we  have  before  observed  (Chap.  VI.,


X.]


Expectancy  and  Suggestion.


189


p.  119),  the  inhibition  partially  fails:  the  visible  phantasm  does  not
completely  obliterate  the  view  of  objects  behind  it.  The  apparition
then  gives  the  impression  of  transparency  ;  and,  lacking  the  quality
of  opacity,  it  fails  to  attain  a  completely  realistic  appearance.

A  similar  inhibition  of  the  vision  of  real  objects  occurs  in  tlie
"  negative  hallucinations "  imposed  on  hypnotic  subjects,  when  a
person  or  object  is  made  invisible  to  them  by  suggestion.  But  to
be  able  thus  not  to  see  a  real  object  to  which  the  attention  is
directed,  in  the  absence  of  any  imaginary  obstacle,  requires  a  very  high
degree  of  suggestibility  ;  accordingly,  we  find  that,  even  in  hypnosis,
some  subjects  appear  to  cai'ry  out  the  suggestion  by  creating  for
themselves  spontaneously  a  hallucinatory  obstacle.^  Another  striking
effect  of  suggestion  in  the  "  negative  hallucinations "  of  hypnosis
is  that  the  subject  sometimes  imagines  that  he  can  see  real
objects  in  front  of  which  a  person  who  has  been  made  invisible  to
him  by  suggestion  is  standing.  (See  MM.  Binet  and  Fere,  Animal
Magnetism,  p.  309).  Actual  vision  of  these  objects  is,  of  course,  pre-
vented, but  the  subject  seems  spontaneously  to  create  a  hallucination
of  them,  in  order  to  fill  up  the  gap  whicli  the  invisible  object  has
produced  in  his  field  of  vision."-

As  the  vision  of  real  objects  is  affected  by  that  of  hallucinatory
objects,  so  the  vision  of  hallucinatory  objects  is,  in  tlie  great  majority
of  cases,  aflfected  by  the  various  physical  conditions  which  would
affect  real  vision.  Thus  a  i-eal  obstacle  placed  in  front  of  the  eyes
generally  prevents  the  sight  of  an  apparition  (see  case  of  Prof.
Vignoli,  p.  141)  ;  similarly,  on  closing  the  eyes,  the  apparition  usually
vanishes,  and  occasionally  is  seen  again  on  reopening  them,  as  in  Pi'of.
Vignoli's  case.  See  also  an  experience  of  Mrs.  D.'s  [Appendix  D)  and
the  following.

(364.  5.)  From  Miss  T.  D.

August  20th,  1890.
' '  I  was  reading  by  candle-light  in  summer  [in  1868  or  1869],  alone  in  a
large  room  in  the  upper  storey  of  a  house  in  a  small  town,  about  11  p.m.  ;
the  blinds  were  not  drawn. I  looked  up  and  saw  close  to  the  panes  outside
the  figure  of  a  man,  who  was  staring  at  me  ;  the  figure  was  dressed  in  a

1  We  observed  this  in  the  case  of  one  of  the  Brighton  subjects  with  whom  the
experiments  in  thought-transference  described  in  Proceedings  S.P.E..,  Vol.  VIII.,
pp.  536  et  seq.,  were  carried  out.  When  the  operator,  who  had  been  made  invisible  to
him  by  suggestion,  was  standing  immediately  in  front  of  him,  we  gathered  from  his
remarks  that  he  saw  a  vague  dark  mass  or  shadow  between  him  and  the  operator.

-  This,  however,  does  not  always  happen  ;  in  our  Brighton  experiments,  the
subject  was  sometimes  conscious  that  he  could  not  see  what  was  actually  hidden  from
him  by  the  invisible  person,  and  was  occasionally  much  puzzled  to  know  what  was
hiding  it.


190  Report  on  the  Gensm  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Avhite  linen  jacket  of  the  kind  German  soldiers  wear  in  summer,  and
appeared  down  to  the  waist  over  the  window  ledge.  I  forced  myself  to  shut
my  eyes,  wishing  to  try  whether  I  should  see  the  figure  with  eyes  shut,  but
I  did  not.  When  I  reopened  them  the  figure  was  still  there,  but  disappeared
very  soon.  T  was  working  ratlier  hard  for  an  examination,  and  used  to  sit
up  till  midnight  or  later. I  was  nearly  18  years  old."

With  these  cases  we  may  compare  further  results  found  by  MM.  Binet
and  Fere  in  experimenting  on  the  hallucinations  of  hypnotised  persons,
namely,  that  the  hallucinatory  objects  were  sometimes  hidden  by  real
screens  placed  in  front  of  them  and  sometimes  not.  {Animal  Magnetism,
p.  234.)  In  the  cases  where  the  hallucinatory  objects  continued  to  be
seen  in  spite  of  the  screen,  some  subjects  appeared  to  see  them  in  the
same  place  as  at  first,  namely,  behind  the  screen,  while  others  would
see  them  transferred  to  the  front  of  the  screen.  Similarly,  in
experimenting  witli  hallucinatory  pictures  on  blank  sheets  of  paper,  it
has  been  observed  that  some  sul)jects,  if  another  blank  sheet  is  placed
over  the  one  on  which  they  first  saw  the  picture,  will  see  it — either  at
once  or  after  an  interval — on  the  new  sheet.  Also,  in  some  of  M.
Binet's  experiments  (quoted  in  Phantasms  of  the  Livinc/,Yo\.  I.,  p.  472,
foot-note)  "  after  a  screen  had  been  interposed  between  the  patient's
eyes  and  the  imaginary  object,  she  continued  to  see,  not  only  that
object  (say,  a  mouse)  but  a  7-eal  object  (say,  a  hat)  on  which  it  had
been  placed."

The  difference  between  hypnotic  cases  and  the  apparitions  seen  by
persons  in  a  normal  waking  state, — ■  which,  as  we  have  said,  are
almost  always  hidden  by  anything  of  the  nature  of  a  screen, — seems  to
be  that  the  mind  of  the  waking  percipient  is  not  exclusively  concen-
trated on  the  apparition,  but  is  aware  of  his  general  surroundings,  and
therefore  open  to  suggestions  from  them.  Whereas,  in  the  hypnotic
state,  an  idea  impressed  by  ver))al  suggestion  takes  hold  of  the
mind  with  greater  insistency  and  exclusiveness  than  in  the  normal
state  ;  the  subject  ignores  everything  else  for  the  moment,  and  there-
fore other  actions  or  objects  do  not  suggest  to  him  any  modification
of  his  original  percept.^

Another  illustration  of  the  similarity  of  the  vision  of  hallucinatory
objects  to  that  of  real  objects  is  shown  in  the  fact  that  an  apparition

1  The  cases  where  a  I'eal  object  that  has  been  made  invisible  by  suggestion  appears
not  to  obstruct  the  view  of  real  objects  behind  it  cannot  be  explained  in  exactly  the
same  way.  Here  a  certain  amount  of  unconscious  reasoning  seems  to  come  into
play  ;  the  subject,  being  convinced  that  there  is  no  obstacle  between  him  and  the
real  objects  in  question,  infers  from  this  that  he  must  be  able  to  see  them,  and
unconsciously  conjures  up  a  hallucination  of  them  in  order  to  harjnonise  his  con-
ception of  the  situation.


x]


Expectancy  and  Suggestion.


191


does  not  generally  follow  the  movements  of  the  eyes,i  but  can  be  looked
away  from,  and  back  to,  like  a  real  object.

Sometimes  the  seeing  of  an  apparition  seems  to  depend  on  the
presence  of  light,  and  this  is  probably  due  to  suggestion  also.
(Apparitions  seen  in  the  dark,  which  are  rare,  are  discussed  in  Chapter
IV.,  see  p.  78).  Thus,  in  one  case  (No.  443.  15)  the  figure,  seen  by
the  light  of  a  lamp,  disappeared  when  the  lamp  was  turned  out.  In
No.  402.  19  (Baron  von  Driesen's  case,  see  Chapter  XVII, )  the  per-
cipient first  heard  foot-steps,  and  did  not  see  the  apparition  till  he  had
struck  a  light.  Again,  in  No.  422.  25  (see  p.  192)  the  apparition
vanished  when  the  light  was  put  out  and  was  seen  again  on  re-
lighting it.

Another  instance  of  the  operation  of  suggestion  may  be  found  in
the  apparent  elFects  on  real  objects  produced  by  apparitions.  The
most  commonly  reported  cases  are  the  apparent  opening  of  doors  in
■connection  with  the  entrance  or  exit  of  a  ghost.  We  have  already
spoken  of  the  possibility  that  the  movement  in  such  cases  may  have
been  real.  Where  there  is  any  clear  evidence  that  this  was  so,  we
have  to  consider  whether  the  door  was  not  moved  by  ordinary  means,
such  as  draughts,  and  whether,  in  that  case,  the  movement  may
not  have  led  by  expectation  to  the  seeing  of  the  apparition,  as  sug-
gested above  (see  p.  184).  But  in  most  cases  of  this  kind  included
in  the  Census,  we  have  no  evidence  worth  considering  in  sujDport  of
the  hypothesis  that  any  actual  effect  was  produced  on  the  door ;
nor  does  this  generally  appear  to  be  the  view  of  the  percipients  :
so  that  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  us  from  regarding  the  apparent
movement  as  merely  part  of  the  whole  hallucinatory  conception,-'  just
as  the  movement  of  the  apparition  itself  is.

The  following  are  two  cases  of  a  somewhat  peculiar  character,  in
which  apparitions  seemed  to  produce  material  effects  other  than  the
opening  of  doors.

(684.  1.)  From  Mrs.  P.

Febniary  23rd,  1892.
"  I  saw  luy  eldest  child  Daisy  run  down  the  two  lowest  steps  of  the  stair-
case into  the  drawing-room.  I  followed,  calling  her,  but  obtaining  no  answer.
The  figure  ran  under  the  table,  and  the  cloth  wliere  she  passed  under  shook.
I  paused  for  resolution,  raised  the  cloth  and  saw  nothing. Date  ,  1865.

'  Only  one  case,  arid  that  a  somewhat  dubious  one,  of  an  apparition  moving  with
the  eyes  is  reported  in  the  Census. This  is  quoted  in  Chapter  VII.,  p.  1.34.

-There  are  only  three  cases  of  reported  movements  of  real  objects  seen  not  in
connection  with  an  apparition — two  when  a  door  seemed  to  open  and  shut  (Nos.
114.  6  and  264.  23,  see  pp.  343-4),  and  one  when  the  handle  of  a  locked  door  seemed
to  be  twisted  round  (No.  285.  14— see P;-oeeerfm£/6-  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  328).  There
seems  to  be  no  reason  for  regarding  these  appearances  as  other  than  hallucinatory.


192


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Time,  3  p.m.  At  the  time  .she  was  at  the  top  of  the  house.  I  had  just  come
in  and  was  standing  in  the  hall  by  tlie  pantry.  I  liad  recently  lost  my  father.
Age  28.

"  My  late  husband  saw  a  vision  of  another  daughter  in  almost  identical
circumstances  a  month  later."

(422.  25.)  From  Mr.  D.  Amosof.

Man  24«(,  1891.

"  L'annee  1883,  a  St.  Petersbourg,  [j'ai]  ete  temoin  de  I'apparitioii
dont  voici  le  recit.

"  J'etais  alors  age  de  19  ans  et  sur  le  point  d'achever  le  cours  de  mes
Etudes  au  premier  corps  des  cadets  a  St.  Petersbourg.  Au  mois  de  D^cembre
de  la  meme  annee  (la  date  m'est  echappee),  je  me  trouvais  dans  le  logement
de  ma  mere  a  Petersbourg.  Etant  alors  en  voie  de  gudrison,  apres  une
maladie  de  gorge,  et  Ic  medecin  ayant  trouv^  I'etat  de  ma  sante  satisfaisant,
je  me  proposal  de  quitter  le  lit  le  lendemain.  II  etait  jjres  de  minuit,  et
un  silence  coniplet  regnait  dans  la  maison.  J'avais  eteint  la  bougie,  placee
sur  une  petite  table  a  cote  du  lit,  au  jjied  duquel  se  trouvait  un  tabouret.

' '  Las  de  me  tourner  sans  pouvoir  m'endormir,  j  'eu.s  I'idee  de  fumer,  et
j'etendis  le  bras  a  la  faible  lueur  d'une  allumette  pour  jirendre  les  papiros.
En  ce  moment  j'aperqus  distinctement  sur  le  tabouret  ma  defunte  grand'-
mere,  Marie  Al^xeevna  VolohofF(la  mere  de  ma  mere),  morte  depuis  cinq  ans,
c'est-a-dire,  en  1878.  Assise  sur  le  tabouret,  elle  s'accoudait  a  la  table
et  me  regardait  fixement.  Terrific,  je  jetai  I'allumette,  en  retombant  sur
les  coussins.  M'etant  un  peu  tranquillise,  j'allumai  une  bougie,  et  je  revis
I'apparition,  qui  etait  toujours  la,  comme  aupai-avant,  accoudee  a  la  table.
Recourant  a  tout  le  sang-froid  dont  j'etais  capable,  je  pris  un  pajjiros
et  en  dirigeai  la  fumee  vers  I'apparition  meme.  Quel  ne  fut  pas  mon
etonnement,  en  voyant  la  fumee  -se  parta(ier  des  deii,x  cotes  de  Vwpparition,
comme  heurtant  un  ob.stacle.  Ensuite  I'apparition  se  leva;  j'entendis  par-
faitement  le  bruit  du  tabouret  recule,  et  vis  ma  grand'mere,  se  tenant  sur  les
bequilles  (ses  pieds  furent  paralyses  quelques  annees  avant  sa  mort).  Elle
avait  sa  robe  noire  habituelle  et  une  cafetiere  a  la  main,  dont  elle  ne  s'^tait
presque  jamais  separee  de  son  vivant.  L'apparition  tit  quelques  pas  en  arriere ;
puis,  toujours  en  reculant,  sortit  dans  le  corridor  par  la  porte  de  ma  chambre,
qui  etait  ouverte.  S'etant  arretee  pour  me  dire  les  paroles  suivantes  :  '  Ne
m'oublie  pas,  Daniel,  et  viens  sur  ma  tombe,'  la  figure  disparut.

"  Je  sautai  du  lit  et  m'dlangai  par  le  corridor  dans  la  chambre  a  coucher
de  ma  mere,  que  je  r^veillai,  ainsi  que  mon  beau-pere,  pour  leur  raconter  le
fait.  Apres  cet  incident  je  craignais  longtemps  de  dormir  dans  une  chambre
sombre.  "  D.  Amosof."

The  following  notes  are  from  Mr.  Amosof's  mother  and  stepfather.

' '  Je  me  souviens  parfaitement,  que  mon  fils  Daniel  est  accouru  par  une
nuit  du  mois  de  Decembre,  188.3,  pour  me  reveiller  et  me  raconter,  qu'il
avait  vu  I'apparition  de  sa  grand'mere  (ma  mere),  ainsi  qu'il  I'a  expose  dans
son  recit.  "  Marie  Tbl^chof."

"  Daniel  m'a  reveille  la  meme  nuit  et  m'a  fait  part  de  sa  vision.

"  Athanase  Tel^chof."

For  another  experience  of  Mr.  Amosof's,  see  p.  227.


X.]


Expectancy  and  Suggestion.


193


Hallucinations  affecting  more  than  one  sense.

The  operation  of  suggestion  is  also  to  be  traced  in  the  hallucina-
tions that  affect  more  than  one  sense.  In  almost  all  cases,  the
alfection  of  the  first  sense  seems  to  lead  on  to  that  of  the  other,  which
follows  to  complete  a  familiar  conception.^

We  have  disci;ssed  above  the  possibility  that  non-vocal  sounds,
such  as  footsteps,  which  sometimes  precede  the  seeing  of  an  apparition,
may  occasionally  be  real  noises,  which  lead  by  expectation  to  the
sight.  But  in  some  cases  the  apparition  is  fii'st  seen,  and  then  foot-
steps or  some  other  sounds  apparently  caused  by  it  are  heard,  as  in
the  case  last  quoted  :  the  sound  is  then  to  be  regarded  as  part  of  the
hallucination ;  and  this  is  still  more  obvious  when  the  apparition  is  seen
and  then  heard  to  speak  definite  words,  as  in  the  same  case  and  in
many  others, — e.g.  Nos.  620.  4  (see  p.  195)  and  422.  22  (Mr.  Mamt-
chitch's  experiences,  Chap.  XVII.),  where  the  apparition  speaks  in
answer  to  a  question  from  the  percipient.  This  latter  feature  is
also  recorded  in  a  few  other  cases.  Sometimes  the  hearing  of  a  voice
seems  to  lead  on  to  the  seeing  of  an  apparition,  as  in  No.  464.  15
(Miss  Dodson's  case,  in  Chap.  XVII. ).  Sometimes,  again,  an  appari-
tion is  first  seen  and  then  felt  to  touch  the  percipient,  as  in  Nos.  61.  6
(see  p.  252),  215.  9  (see  p.  224),  and  73.  20  (see  p.  132).^  Some-
times the  development  is  of  a  more  complicated  kind,  as  in  the
following  case,  where,  as  will  be  seen,  three  senses  appear  to  have  been
more  or  less  involved,  and  the  hallucinatory  vision  included  an  impres-
sion of  life-like  movement.

(470 1.)  From  Miss  M.  C.

April  1891.

"  In  1866  I  had  a  situation  as  governess  in  Herefordshire.  [My  age  was
then]  39.  One  Sunday  I  was  sufl'ering  greatly  from  headache,  to  which  I  was

then  very  subject. Mrs.  M  placed  me  on  the  sofa  and  said  she  would

take  charge  of  the  children,  in  the  hope  that  perfect  quiet  would  do  me  good.
Shortly  after,  she  came  to  me  and  touched  me  on  the  shoulder,  saying,  as  I
thouo-ht,  '  Take  care  of  the  children.'  Knowing  she  was  in  delicate  health,
I  immediately  followed  her  out  of  the  room,  seeing  her  until  I  reached  the
hall,  when  I  supposed  she  passed  through  one  of  the  doors  leading  out  of
the  hall.  I  then  went  to  look  for  the  children,  and  to  my  surprise  found  the
mother  reading  to  them  ;  she  asked  why  I  had  disturbed  myself  ;  my  reply
was,  '  You  called  me.'  She  laughed,  and  said  :  '  You  have  been  dreaming.'
Though  I  knew  I  had  not  slept,  still  T  should  have  fancied  I  had  done  so,  if
I  had°not  followed  her  across  the  room  into  the  hall.  Mrs.  M.  died  in  less
than  a  fortnight  from  that  time."

'  This  operation  is,  we  think,  traceable  in  the  veridical  no  less  than  in  the
merely  subjective  cases  :  only  in  the  former  cases  the  suggestion  of  which  we  are
speaking,  of  course,  merely  supplies  a  part  of  the  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  ;
it  merely  detennines  the  form  in  which  the  supernormal  influence  takes  effect.

O


194  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


In  these  "  bisensory "  or  "trisensory"  cases,  the  constructive
imagination  seems  to  have  reached  a  higher  point  than  in  simple
visual  or  auditory  hallucinations,  further  details  being  added  which
make  the  percept  more  consistent  with  ordinary  experience,  and  there-
fore more  like  reality.  This  may  be  regarded  as  an  example  of  sugges-
tion and  unconscious  expectancy.  The  resemblance  of  hallucinatory
objects  to  the  real  objects  that  we  are  accustomed  to  see,  e.g.,  human
beings,  would  generally  lead  to  the  expectation  that  they  would,  like
real  objects,  be  perceptil)le  to  other  senses  besides  that  of  sight.  From
Table  II.  it  appears  that  in  nearly  14  per  cent.  (225  out  of  1622)  of
the  cases,^  more  than  one  sense  is  affected.  The  expectation  that  this
will  occur  is  not  always  excited,  and,  even  when  it  is,  the  constructive
power  does  not  always  succeed  in  creating  a  hallucination  of  more  than
one  sense.  Thus,  in  certain  cases,  the  appeal  to  other  senses  is  definitely
i)bserved  to  fail,  e.g.,  when  the  percii^ient  seeing  an  apparition  puts  out
his  hand  to  touch  it  and  can  feel  nothing,  (see  account  of  Dr.  H.  C,
p.  117);  or  when  it  is  reported  that  no  audible  effect  is  produced
when  an  apparition  goes  through  the  motions  of  speaking  ^  (^e.g.  No.
425.  12.  p.  211)  or  of  making  sounds  {e.g.  No.  390.  1,  p.  150) ;  or  again,
when,  as  in  the  following  case,  it  is  observed  that  the  apparition  not
only  walks  with  noiseless  footsteps,  but  also  fails  to  cast  a  shadow.

(544.  10)  From  Miss  C.  B.

October  1th,  1891.

"  At  the  top  of  Heigham  Road,  Norwich,  on  New  Year's  Eve,  about  the
year  1879  or  later,  at  10  p.m.,  my  elder  sister  and  myself  were  walking
home  from  a  quiet  evening  spent  with  an  aunt  and  uncle.  To  our  right  a
row  of  houses  wei-e  divided  from  a  house  enclosed  in  a  high  wall  by  a
passage.  Quietly  out  of  the  passage  came  an  old  woman  about  5  feet  in
height,  wearing  dark  brown  dress,  and  large  black  sliawl  fastened  across  the
chest,  the  point  of  it  reaching  nearly  to  the  bottom  of  the  dress,  and
a  small  poke  bonnet.  She  walked  before  us  some  yards,  exciting  my
wonder  by  her  noiselessness  upon  the  gravel  path,  and  finally  by  the  fact
that  she  cast  no  shadow.  Putting  my  hand  upon  my  sister's  arm  I  said,
'What  a  funny  old  woman,'  but  with  the  movement  of  my  hand  she
disappeared,  we  being  by  the  blank  wall  in  which  there  was  neither  gate
nor  opening,  with  plenty  of  gas  lights,  so  that  she  must  have  been  seen
crossing  the  road.  I  was  in  perfect  healtli  and  peace  of  mind,  and  I  think  17
at  the  time.  The  old  woman  was  entirely  strange  to  me,  I  had  not  for  years
seen  anyone  like  her  :  she  simply  reminded  me  in  dress  of  the  old-fashioned
type  of  respectable  old  age. My  sister  [who]  was  with  me  saw  nothing."

'  Excluding  the  cases  where  only  an  auditory  halhicination  of  a  non-vucal  kind
is  added  to  the  hallucination  of  another  sense,  the  proportion  is  reduced  to  a  little
over  9  per  cent. — 152  out  of  1622.

'  An  interesting  intermediate  case  is  that  in  which  an  inaudible  impression  of
words  is  conveyed  without  any  movement  of  the  lips  of  t4ie  apparition  (see,  for
instance,  case  of  Miss  G.,  pp.  88-9).


X.]


Expectancy  and  Suggestion.


195


The  frequent  extension  of  a  hallucinatory  conception  to  other
senses  besides  the  one  primarily  affected,  seems  to  render  it  probable
that  a  person  experiencing  a  hallucination  has  his  susceptibility  to
hallucinatory  influences  momentarily  heightened — as  it  is  heightened
in  the  hypnotic  state.  This  view  is  supported  by  a  small  class  of
bisensory  cases,  somewhat  different  from  those  just  considered,  in
which  the  correspondence  between  the  two  elements  of  the  double
phenomenon  is  less  close  and  complete.  An  example  of  this  class  is
No.  579.  24  (see  p.  223)  where  the  percipient  sees  an  apparition  of  his
father  and  hears  an  unrecognised  voice  telling  him  of  his  father's
death.  Here  there  seems  to  be  no  necessary  connection  between  the
two  hallucinations  ;  but  it  is  as  if  the  telepathic  impulse  were  externa-
lised almost  simultaneously  in  two  different  ways,  in  a  manner  that
suggests  an  exceptional  degree  of  insistent  force.  We  cannot,  however,
always  draw  the  line  between  these  and  the  ordinary  bisensory  cases,
where  the  affection  of  the  two  senses  seems  to  give  merely  two  different
aspects  of  what  is  obviously  the  same  conception,  as  when  an  apparition
seems  itself  to  sjDeak,  in  a  voice  which  is  recognised  as  belonging  to  the
person  represented  by  it.  Thus  we  have  an  intermediate  case  in  No.
728.  16  (see  p.  309),  where  the  tactile  hallucination  was  obviously
suggested  Ijy  the  sight  of  the  apparition  that  preceded  it,  though  not
definitely  connected  with  this.  Another  intermediate  case  is  No.
205.  1  (see  \y.  199)  which  might  be  taken  as  an  example  of  arrested
development,  so  far  as  the  visual  part  of  the  percept  was  concerned,
while  the  auditory  part  was  fully  developed  and  recognised.

Sequent  Hallucinations  of  the  same  Sense.

Analogous  to  the  bisensory  phenomena  last  considered  are  cases  in
which  a  hallucination  is  followed  by  another  of  the  same  sense,  repre-
senting a  different  object,  but  so  that  the  connexion  of  thought  is
manifest.  Thus,  in  No.  460.  1  (see  p.  288)  the  percipient  first  sees  the
figure  of  her  brother  dying  at  the  foot  of  her  bed,  and  then  sees  a
cofiin  in  the  same  place.  This  may  be  compared  with  the  crystal-
visions  which  follow  or  respond  to  the  course  of  conscious  thought
in  the  mind  of  the  percipient,  for  instance.  No.  406.  25  (p.  106).
The  following  is  a  peculiar  case  of  this  kind,  which  is  also  bisensory
— verbal  suggestion  from  an  apparition  producing  a  second  visual
hallucination.

(620.  4)  From  Mrs.  W.  E.

[The  account  is  wi-itten  by  the  collector,  the  Rev.  H.  Kendall,  and
signed  by  the  percipient.]

J%dy  13th,  1892.

"Mrs.  E.  was  staying  in  the  year  1890  by  the  seaside  for  a  few  days,
having  left  all  her  children  at  home. She  was  feeling  rather  exhausted  and

o  2


196  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


requiring  a  change.  One  night,  when  quite  awake  and  in  full  possession  of
her  powers,  when  she  was  somewhat  anxious  about  the  children  she  had  left
behind,  her  mother  came  and  lay  close  beside  her,  and  she  saw  her  afterwards
as  she  retired.  Her  mother  spoke  to  her  very  sympathetically,  as  if
entering  into  all  her  anxiety  and  depression.  She  assured  her  that  all  was
right  at  home,  and  in  order  to  satisfy  herself  that  this  was  so,  she  should
see  her  youngest  child.  Accordingly  she  saw  the  child  up  in  a  corner  of  the
room  near  the  ceiling.  Her  mother  encouraged  her  to  look  up  where  the
child  was,  and  assured  her  it  would  do  her  no  harm.  When  this  occurred
her  mother  had  been  dead  four  years.  She  was  very  much  beloved  by  her
children.  Mrs.  E.  ascertained  that  all  was  right  at  home  just  as  she  had  been
told.  She  has  never  at  any  other  time  seen  or  heard  anything  that  she
would  deem  supernatural.  What  she  saw  and  heard  [then]  was  too  real  for
her  to  be  able  to  explain  it  by  mere  tension  of  the  nerves."
"  The  above  account  is  correct.

(Signed) "  E.  E.  "

We  may  compare  with  this  another  remarkable  case — also  slightly
bisensory — where  the  ceasing  of  a  hallucination  of  unique  persistence
seems  to  be  due  to  self-suggestion,  taking  the  form  of  suggestion  from
the  appai'ition.  The  further  information  which  the  collector  gives
about  the  percipient  shows  that  she  must  have  had — at  least  during
some  part  of  her  life — an  unusual  tendency  to  carry  out  self-suggestions
of  various  kinds.

(327.25.)  From  Madame  R.

April  22nd,  1890.

"  En  1882,  au  mois  de  Janvier,  vers  2  a  3  h.  du  jour,  en  passant  par
un  long  corridor  de  notre  maison,  j'ai  senti  quelqu'uii  a  cote  de  moi.  En  nie
retournant  je  vis  une  personne,  dont  je  ne  saurais  pas  dire  le  sexe,  habillee  en
une  tres  large  robe  grise.  Elle  etait  tres  pale,  avec  de  grands  yeux  noirs,  et
de  longs  cheveux  noirs  retombant  sur  les  epaules,  avec  une  raie  au  milieu.
Je  ne  fus  nullement  effrayee  et  meme  pas  etonnee.  J'allais  dans  la  chambre
d'^tude  pour  prendre  une  leqon.  J'^tais  bien  portante,  gaie.  J'avais  I'age  de
14  ans.  Cette  ombre  ou  vision  ne  m'a  jamais  quittee  2  mois  ou  6  semaines  de
suite.  Si  je  ne  la  voyais  pas,  je  lasentais  a  cote  de  moi,  je  sentais  son  souffle
sur  mon  epaule.  Si  je  causais  avec  quelqu'un,  e'est  a  elle  que  je  m'adressais,
car  je  la  voyais  derriere  la  j^ei'sonne  a  qui  je  parlais.  '  L'ombre '  avait
une  tres  belle  figure,  tantot  gaie,  tantot  triste.  Elle  semblait  etre  contente
quand  je  faisais  bien,  chagrinee  quand  je  faisais  mal.  J'etais  tellement  habituee
a  cette  vision  que  je  ne  m'en  inqui(^tais  pas.  C'etait  la  premifere  figure  que  je
voyais  en  me  reveillant,  la  derniere  en  m'endormant.  Elle  ne  me  disait
jamais  rien,  mais  elle  me  faisait  quelquefois  des  signes  de  la  tete.  Elle  disparut
tout  a  coup  dans  le  meme  corridor  oil  je  I'ai  vue  pour  la  premiere  fois.  Elle
me  regarda,  me  fit  un  signe  de  tete,  et  je  sentis  que  je  ne  la  reverrai  jamais,
puis  elle  disparut,  je  ne  sais  comment.  Depuis  je  n'ai  jamais  ni  vu  ni  ren-
contrd  une  figure  semblable,  ni  en  reve,  ni  en  rdalitf?.  Dans  le  premier
moment  personne  [n'etait  avec  moi]  ;  depuis  je  la  voyais  etant  en  societe.


X.]


Expectancy  and  Suggestion.


197


mais  les  persoimes  presentes  n'ont  jamais  rien  vu,  et  lorsque  j'enpaiiais,  on
se  moquait  de  moi,  croyant  que  j'inventais."

The  collector,  Mine,  de  Holstein,  writes  : —

"  Le  cas  de  Mine.  R.  est  interessant,  parcequ'  il  parait  que  c'etait  le  debut
d'une  serie  de  phenomenes  tres  etranges,  qui  se  sont  developp^s  plus
tard.  Deux  ans  apres  le  cas  decrit,  Mme.  R.  avait  des  acces  de  sommeil
spontane.  EUe  s'endorniait  sans  aucune  raison,  a  n'importe  quelle  heure  de
la  journee.  Pendant  ce  somineil  eUe  avait  du  delire,  elle  parlait  a  differentes
personnes,  qui  paraissaient  lui  repondre.  Tres  souvent  on  entendait  qu'elle
fixait  I'heure  et  le  jour  d'un  rendezvous  a  ces  personnes  invisibles,  et  alors
on  etait  sur  qu'elle  s'endorniira  le  jour  et  I'heure  fixes.  Au  reveil  elle  n'avait
aucune  conscience  de  ce  qu'elle  avait  dormi,  ni  encore  moins  de  ce  qu'elle
avait  vu.  Deux  ans  plus  tard  ces  acces  de  sommeil  disparurent  sans  laisser
de  traces,  et  pour  toujours.  Mme.  R.  est  actuellement  une  femme  absolument
saine  au  point  de  vue  nerveux."

In  the  follomng  case  of  sequent  hallucinations,  there  is  an  interval
of  one  or  two  hours  between  the  successive  phenomena  ;  but  it  can
hardly  be  doubted  that  the  first  led  to  the  second.

(485.  13)  From  Mr.  H.  M.

Auijud  9th,  1891.

"In  May  1890,  about  8  p.  ni.,  I  looked  up  from  my  seat  by  the  fire
and  saw  my  wife  standing  near  the  door.  '  My  dear,  have  you  come  home  ?  I
didn't  see  you  come  in,'  I  said,  rising,  but  ere  I  reached  her  she  had  dis-
appeared. I  did  look  about  for  her,  but  contented  myself  with  tlie  con-
viction that  I  had  made  a  very  strange  mistake.  Bedtime  came  a  Uttle
later,  and,  as  is  my  habit,  I  opened  the  front  door  to  look  round,  and  there,
facing  me  a  few  feet  off  in  the  road,  stood  my  wife's  mother,  who  had  been
dead  ten  years.  I  ims  shocked  then.  'In  the  name  of  God,  what  do  you
come  for  1 '  I  said.  She  moved  to  her  left,  and  I  followed  till,  opposite  the
window  of  my  next  door  neighbour,  where  was  a  light,  she  vanished.  I
was  smoking  comfortably,  in  no  trouble  of  mind  or  body. My  age  64.  My

wife  had  been  for  some  little  time — a  few  weeks — with  an  invalid  at  H  ,

and  when  told  what  I  have  stated  of  her  visit  to  me,  she  said  she  was  not
surprised,  for  she  had  thought  of  me  very  anxiously,  because  she  was
staying  longer  than  she  had  intended.  When  I  went  on  to  tell  of  her
mother's  appearance,  she  was  greatly  disturbed  in  mind,  as  I  was  myself.
We  told  it  to  no  one  but  our  children  and  near  relatives.  Our  children  are
all  grown  up.  My  wife  is  now  getting  very  much  like  her  uiother,  but  at
that  tune  there  was  no  mistaking  the  one  for  the  other.  I  was  alone  in  the
house  ;  could  not  sleep  that  night,  but  kept  my  eyes  closed  lest  I  should
see  more  than  I  wished,  and  in  the  morning  went  to  see  my  wife,  about
whom  I  was  very  anxious,  and  finding  her  all  right,  I  forbore  to  trouble  her
mind  with  what  I  had  seen  till  she  came  home.  I've  never  seen  or  heard
anything  I  couldn't  account  for  before  or  since,  and  I  have  been  used  to  be
out,  often  in  the  church  and  churchyard,  at  all  hours  of  the  night.  There
was  no  need  to  write  it  down,  I  couldn't  forget,  but  I  think  I  should  only
have  thought  it  a  mistake  if  I  hadn't  seen  the  second  figure."


198


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Chapter  XI.

ORGANIC  EFFECTS  ACCOMPANYING  HALLUCINATIONS.

In  the  present  chapter  we  propose  to  consider  certain  organic
effects  reported  to  us  as  accompanying  hallucinations.  It  may
perhaps  be  thought  that  this  discussion  would  have  been  more  fitly-
placed  in  Chapter  VII.,  in  connexion  with  the  "Physiology  of  Hallu-
cinations " :  our  reason  for  placing  it  here  is  that,  in  considering  the
explanation  of  these  phenomena,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  the
operation  of  suggestion,  illustrated  in  the  preceding  chapter.

The  first  effect  to  be  noticed  is  the  "  feeling  of  cold  " — generally
described  as  a  "chill"  or  "cold  shudder" — which  is  sometimes
reported  as  accompanying  or  immediately  j^receding  hallucinations.
This  is  so  common  in  magazine  stories  of  apparitions  that  our  readers
may  expect  to  find  it  a  normal  feature  in  the  narratives  collected  by
us  :  it  is,  however,  on  the  contrary,  quite  an  exceptional  feature,  being-
only  reported  in  seven  cases,^ — exclusive  of  about  half-a-dozen  cases  in
which  a  "feeling  of  cold  breezes"  is  mentioned.  Now  it  has  been
maintained  (see  Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  296-7)  that  one  distinc-
tion between  phantasms  of  the  living  and  those  of  the  dead  is  that  the
latter  are  specially  liable  to  produce  this  sensation,  whereas  it  hardly
ever  occurs  with  the  former.  This  conclusion  is  not  supported  by  the
evidence  on  the  subject  furnished  by  our  Census.-  Out  of  the  seven
cases  reported,  only  one  is  a  phantasm  of  the  dead,  namely,  No.  422.  22
(Mr.  Mamtchitch's  case  in  Chapter  XVII).  Another  is  No.  458.  9,  (see
p.  332),  and  here  the  person  apparently  represented  by  the  hallucina-
tion was  living  at  the  time. The  following  are  three  other  cases.

(182.  9.)  From  Miss  K.  M.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

' '  [About  20  years  ago]  I  was  about  10  years  old,  and  was  staying  with
friends  in  Kensington.  Between  the  hour  of  8  and  9  p.m.,  we  were  all  sitting
in  tlie  drawing-room  with  the  door  open,  [it]  being  a  very  warm  evening.
Suddenly  I  experienced  a  cold  shudder,  and  on  looking  through  the  door,
opposite  which  I  was  sitting,  I  saw  a  figure  of  a  little  old  lady  dressed  in  a
long  brown  cloak  with  a  large  brown  hat,  carrying  a  basket,  glide  down  the
stairs  and  disappear  in  the  room  next  the  drawing  room.  The  impression
was  that  of  some  one  I  had  never  seen.  I  was  talking  on  ordinary  subjects,
neither  ill,  in  grief,  or  anxiety.  There  were  several  otlier  people  in  the
room,  but  no  one  noticed  anything  but  myself.  I  liave  never  had  any
experience  of  the  kind  before  or  since."

1  It  is,  of  course,  not  improbable  that  the  sensation  may  have  been  felt  in  other
cases  in  which  it  has  not  been  recorded.

"  See  also  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  37,  foot-note.  Of  the  cases  there
referred  to,  three  were  coincident  with  a  death,  and  three  others  with  an  event
occurring  to  the  iMrson  represented.


XL]


Organic  Effects.


199


(205.  1.)  From  Mrs.  F.  R.

November  dth,  1889.
"  When  my  father  was  lying  on  what  proved  to  be  his  death-bed,  I  was
obliged  to  go  to  the  dentist.  I  was  of  course  anxious  about  him  and  in  pain.
But  the  physician  had  told  us  we  need  not  fear  the  death  of  the  patient.
While  waiting  in  the  ante-room,  I  seemed  to  feel  a  shudder  and  to  see  a
white  cloud  before  me,  and  heard  my  father  call  me  by  name.  I  immediately
left  and  found  my  father  insensible  and  he  died  a  few  hours  after.  This
occurred  May  5th,  1879,  when  I  was  20."

(277.  7.)  From  Miss  T.  B.

January,  1890.

"  With  my  bodily  eyes  I  have  never  yet  seen  the  scene  I  see  so  often  in
mental  vision,  which,  never  varying,  is  always  an  expanse  of  bright  green
lawn  of  great  extent,  or  large  field,  with  a  shady  glade  or  path  on  the  left
hand  side  ending  indefinitely.  Suddenly  the  scene  falls  into  shadow,  and  a
horrible  chill  sensation  comes  across  me.  I  sh\idder,  and  the  whole  thing  is
gone.  Sometimes  this  feeling  occurs  several  times  in  a  day,  and  sometimes
not  for  months.  I  know  for  a  fact  it  only  lasts  a  moment,  but  is  so  vivid  while
it  lasts  that  evei-ything  else  is  as  nothing,  though  I  see  this  through  the  book
I  am  reading  or  the  people  I  am  talking  to.  It  has  occurred  during  every
condition  of  mind  and  body;  and  the  first  occasion  is,  I  think,  the  first  thing
I  distinctly  remember.  I  was  just  four  years  old,  and  sitting  alone  in  the
nursery  [in]  broad  daylight,  when  I  saw  this  green  brightness,  and  then  when  it
darkened  I  remember  screaming  out,  and  the  nurse  coming  in  and  telling  me
I  had  a  new  little  brother  just  born,  so  by  this  I  can  fix  the  date.  The  curious
part  is  that  up  to  middle  age  the  appearance  has  never  varied  one  iota. "

In  another  case  (No.  579.  21)  the  percipient,  who  was  then  a  girl  at
school,  saw  an  apparition  of  herself  sitting  by  her  side.  This  recurred
several  times,  the  apparition  being  always  seen  on  one  side  of  her,  and
imitating  all  her  movements.  It  was  always  accompanied  by  a  sensa-
tion of  cold  and  then  of  exti*eme  weakness.  It  recurred  for  two  or
three  months,  during  a  period  of  serious  ill-health,  for  which  reason  the
hallucination  has  been  excluded  from  our  Tables.

In  the  last  case  (No.  736.  18)  the  percipient  felt  her  dress  pulled
and  a  cold  shiver  run  through  her  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  a  fi'iend
about  whose  illness  she  was  in  anxiety.

Thus  of  these  seven  cases,  two  (Nos  205.  1  and  579.  21)  are  cer-
tainly phantasms  of  the  living,  and  two  more  (Nos.  458.  9  and  736.  18)
are  possibly  so.  We  may  add  the  following  somewhat  grotesque  case
of  what  was  perhaps  an  illusion,  which  reached  us  independently
of  the  Census.

From  Mrs.  S.  W.

January  SOi/i,  1892.
"About  two  years  ago  I  was  walking  alone  along  a  carriage  drive,  over-
looking an  old  shrubbery,  about  4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon. The  day  was


200  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


bright  and  clear,  and  below  nie  among  the  slirubs  80  yards  off  I  saw  a  tall
thing  like  a  long  pole  overtopping  the  shrubs,  moving  through  them  in  a
stately  manner  ;  some  articles  seemed  to  hang  from  the  top  of  the  pole.
After  moving  for  a  few  yards  in  a  straight  line  it  vanished.  I  felt  cold  as  ice.
I  did  not  rush  away,  but  looked  at  it  as  long  as  it  was  to  be  seen,  then  I  ran
home  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  As  soon  as  I  reached  home  I  sent  [the  coach-
man] to  the  shrubbery  garden,  and  he  returned  and  assured  me  he  could  not
see  anything  ;  he  hunted  everywhere  and  the  two  gates  were  quite  safe."

It  will  be  observed  that  in  some  of  these  cases  the  chill  is  reported
as  preceding,  in  others  as  accompanying  oi-  following  the  hallucination.
In  the  latter  cases  it  would  seem  to  be  a  natural  result,  on  certain
physical  temperaments,  of  the  emotional  excitement — terror,  awe,  etc.,
— caused  by  the  unusual  experience ;  while  in  such  recurrent  cases  as
No.  277.  7  (p.  199)  the  regular  recurrence  of  the  chill  may  perhaps  be
due  to  association.  One  of  our  collectors  (Mr.  E.  L.  Kearney)  has
communicated  to  us  a  rather  curious  case  of  the  association  of  this
sensation  with  the  sight  of  a  real  object  of  a  kind  which  does  not
excite  any  strong  emotion  in  ordinary  minds.  The  account  is  as
follows  : —

' '  The  sight  of  a  meteor  gives  me  (usually)  a  chilling  sensation  from  head
to  foot.  On  one  occasion  (about  1877)  I  was  walking  with  a  friend,  now
dead,  and  felt  the  sensation  without  seeing  a  meteor.  I  instantly  demanded
of  my  companion  if  he  saw  one,  and  he  replied  that  he  did.  T  have  never
come  across  any  one  who  shared  this  peculiarity  with  me."

But  where  the  chill  precedes  the  hallucination,  it  seems  clear  that
the  sensation  must  be  regarded  as  an  incident  of  the  whole  nervous
disturbance  of  which  the  hallucination  is  one  effect.  In  this  connexion,
we  tnay  refer  to  a  case  quoted  by  Professor  James  [Princijyles  of
Psychology,  Vol.  II.,  p.  323),  of  the  apparition  of  a  corjase,  seen  by
a  blind  man.  The  experience  recurred  repeatedly,  and  was  always
preceded  in  the  percipient  by  a  feeling  of  "  a  cold  draught  of  air
suddenly  upon  his  face,  with  a  prickling  sensation  at  the  roots  of  his
hair."  He  afterwaixls  traced  the  experiences  to  the  strong  tea  which
he  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  for  lunch  ;  on  giving  it  up,  he  never  saw
the  corpse  or  any  other  apparition  again.  Hei'e  again  it  seems  possible
that  a  link  of  association  may  have  been  established  between  the
feelings  of  cold  and  prickling — probably  resulting  in  the  first  instance
from  over-stimulation  of  the  nerves — and  the  apparition  :  so  that  the
apparitions  after  the  first  may  have  been  partly  suggested  by  the
recurrence  of  the  sensations.

It  will  have  been  observed  that  in  the  last  case  the  sensation  was
described  as  of  "  a  cold  draught  of  air."  As  has  been  already  said,  we
have  in  our  collection  about  half-a-dozen  cases  where  it  is  said  that  the


XL]


Organic  Effects.


201


feeling  of  cold  breezes  accompanied  the  seeing  of  an  apparition.  This,
is  mentioned,  for  instance,  in  the  case  that  appeared,  under  the  title  of
a  "  Record  of  a  Haunted  House,"  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.
VIII.  (see  pp.  320  and  325)  ;  on  one  occasion  several  members  of  the
household  heard  footsteps  at  night  walking  up  and  down  the  landing-
past  them ;  as  the  steps  passed,  they  felt  a  cold  wind,  though  the
lighted  candles  they  were  holding  were  not  blown  about.  This  would
seem  to  be  merely  another  form  of  the  feeling  of  chill  just  discussed.

We  pass  to  a  more  unusual  kind  of  case,  where  a  sensation  is  felt
resembling  that  produced  by  electric  shocks ;  this,  too,  may  perhaps  be
regarded  as  merely  a  variety  of  the  "chill."

(287.  15.)  From  Mrs.  H.  R.

(The  account  was  written  in  1890. )

[After  describing  an  experience  quoted  on  p.  170,  Mrs.  R.  continues  : — }

"Once  I  distinctly  had  the  impression  of  some  one  bending  over  me  at
night,  and  the  contact  of  this  person  produced  thrills  something  similar  to
those  produced  by  a  galvanic  battery.  I  felt  that  it  was  the  late  Mrs.
Laurence  Oliphant,  and  yet  I  was  fully  aware  that,  as  she  had  been  dead
three  years,  it  was  impossible  that  I  should  receive  any  impression  from  her..
I  absolutely  disbelieve  in  any  reappearance  of  the  dead,  I  think  it  most
improbable  that  there  is  any  individual  existence  after  death,  and  yet  all  my
senses  were  impressed  with  the  personality  of  Mrs.  Oliphant.  Mr.  Lau-
rence Oliphant  had  called  upon  me  about  a  month  before  I  had  this
experience,  and  no  doubt  this  recalled  to  my  mind  a  photograph  I  had  once
seen  of  his  late  wife.  I  don't  think  I  ever  see  or  hear  or  feel  anything  of
the  sort  when  I  am  in  normal  health."

The  collector,  Mr.  C .  Schiller,  writes  :  —

"Mrs.  R.  tells  me  that  her  impression  of  Mrs.  Oliphant  was  not  an
impression  through  any  of  the  ordinary  senses,  but  an  impression  of  her
presence,  including,  however,  a  consciousness  of  her  form  and  features  :
quite  indescribable  in  language.  But  she  was  made  aware  by  it  of  details,
like  the  colour  of  Mrs.  Oliphant's  hair,  eyes,  &c.  She  did  not  know  Mrs.
Oliphant  personallj^  but  could  form  a  general  idea  of  her  from  her  photo-
graph. The  experience  occurred  in  May,  '88,  and  was  not  suggested  in  any
way  by  Mr,  L.  Oliphant."

In  a  few  cases  the  organic  accompaniment  of  a  hallucination  is  some-
what more  serious  than  those  which  we  have  been  illustrating.  Thus  in
No.  422.  22  (Chapter  XVII),  Mr.  Mamtchitch  states  that  he  turns,
pale  and  his  breathing  is  affected.  Occasionally  fainting  is  produced
this  is  recorded  in  six  cases  in  the  Census.  One  is  No.  33.  25  (see  Pro-
ceedings.  Vol.  V.,  p.  462),  where  the  apparition  was  unrecognised  by
the  percipient,  but  was  supposed  from  subsequent  enquiries  to  resemble
a  man,  unknown  to  her,  who  had  died  in  the  room  where  it  was  seen.
The  other  five  cases  were  apparitions  of  dead  persons  known  to  the  per-


202  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


cipients.  In  three  of  these  cases,  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  the
hallucination  was  not  an  effect  of  the  same  physical  condition  that
led  to  the  fainting,  rather  than  strictly  the  cause  of  the  latter.  Thus,
in  No.  152.  1,  the  percipient,  camping  out  in  Australia,  had  been
nearly  suffocated  by  the  fumes  of  some  charcoal  which  he  was  burn-
ing to  warm  his  tent ;  on  going  outside  to  escape  them,  he  saw  the
figure  of  his  mother  standing  inside  the  tent,  and  then  lost  conscious-
ness for  some  time.  In  No.  681.  9,  again,  after  mentioning  that  he
had  fainted  on  seeing  an  apparition  of  his  father,  the  percipient
writes  : — "  a  severe  nervous  illness  dates  from  that  evening  ''  [in
January,  1884]  "which  has  lasted  on  and  off  till  within  the  last  year"
[1891]  During  the  six  weeks  following  his  first  experience,  he  saw
the  same  apparition  twice  more,  and  fainted  each  time.  Another
case  (No.  733.  18),  quoted  on  p.  141,  is  an  example  of  a  hallucination
probably  induced  by  a  state  of  nervous  agitation.  In  the  two  reflnain-
ing  cases,  however,  (one  of  which  is  No.  728.  16,  see  p.  309)  there  is
no  indication  of  the  hallucination  being  associated  with  any  morbid
condition  of  the  percipient.

Pain.

Only  in  four  cases  is  pain  described  as  resulting  from  a  hallucina-
tory touch.  In  three  of  these  the  touch  was  connected  with  an  appari-
tion ;  in  the  fourth  c;ise,  the  impression  was  merely  tactile.  In  one  of
the  three  cases,  the  apparition  represented  a  dead  person ;  in  the  other
two,  which  we  quote,  it  was  unrecognised.  In  the  first  of  these  latter
cases,  it  is  noteworthy  that  several  other  hallucinations  experienced  by
the  same  jaercipient  were  followed  by  more  or  less  marked  physical  in-
disposition. It  may  perhaps  be  conjectured  that  this  exceptional
result  indicates  a  tendency  in  this  percipient  to  some  peculiar  i-ecurrent
organic  disturbance,  which  in  its  first  stage  manifested  itself  in  a
hallucination,  and  which  in  one  case  was  attended  by  painful  sensations
in  the  left  hand,  the  commencement  of  which  mingled  with  the  hallu-
cination.

(417.  17.)  From  Dr.  Vladimir  Soloviofr.

St.  Petersburg,  Febrnanj,  1891.

"Vers  5  heures  du  matin  le  17-29  Aout,  1890,  etant  arriv^  la  veille  de
Moscou  chez  des  amis  a  la  cainjiagne,  j'ai  eu  I'apparition  suivante.  M'etant
^veill4  apres  un  somineil  sans  reves,  et  voyant  clairement  rentourage,
j'entendis  tout-a-coup,  que  la  jjorte  exterieure  de  ma  chambre,  qui  donnait
sur  un  balcon  et  qui  etait  fermee  a  I'interieur  avec  un  crochet,  s'ouvrait
doucement,  et  je  vis  entrer  une  forme  humaine  en  costume  oriental — une
espece  de  robe  de  chambre  blanche  avec  bordure  bleue.  J'eprouvais  une
terreur  panique  et  une  stupeur  complete  sans  pouvoir  bouger  ni  proferer
une  parole. L'honnue  blanc  approcha  de  mou  lit,  et  alors  je  vis  que  dans


XI.]


Organic  Effects.


203


sa  main  gauche  il  tenait  un  rouleau  couvert  de  caracteres  inconnus,  qui  ne
ressemblaient  ni  au  Sanscrit,  ni  a  I'arabe,  ni  a  I'h^breu,  mais  plutot  au
thib6tain.  II  se  pencha  sur  moi,  et  alors  je  vis  distinctenierit  les  traits  de  sa
figure.  Elle  etait  tres  pale  et  d'un  type  tnongol  mitige,  avec  une  petite
barbe  d'un  roux  clair.  En  tenant  toujours  son  rouleau  devant  mes  yeux,il  prib
de  sa  main  droite,  qui  etait  libre,  ma  main  gauche,  et  y  enfongant  ses  ongles,
ce  qui  me  causa  une  douleur  aigue,  dit  a  voix  basse  quelques  paroles  (en
langue  russe)  qui  n'avaieut  pas  le  sens  commun.  Apres  un  certain  temps
(dont  la  duree  exacte  serait  difficile  k  determiner — une  minute  a  peu
pres)  il  abandonna  ma  main  et  disparut  au  milieu  de  la  chambre.  II  ne
ressemblait  a  personne  que  je  connais.  Je  ne  me  suis  plus  rendormi,  et
pendant  plusieurs  jours  apres  cette  apparition  j'eprouvais  des  douleurs
neuralgiques  et  des  contractions  dans  ma  main  gauche.  J'etais  seul  dans
ma  chambre.  Des  apparitions  semblables,  mais  moins  distinctes,  me  sont
deja  arrivees  plusieurs  fois  durant  I'ete  de  la  meme  annee,  1890,  ainsi  que
dans  les  annees  1884,  1886,  et  1889.  Dans  tous  ces  cas,  les  apparitions
n'etaient  precedees  d'aucune  maladie  ni  d'aucun  trouble  moral  jsarticulier,
mais  elles  amenaient  a  leur  suite  des  indispositions  physiques  jjIus  au  moins
marquees.  Je  suis  absolument  sur  que  ces  apparitions  n'etaient  pas  de
simples  reves  ;  mais  je  ne  puis  pas  dire  que  I'etat  de  la  conscience  dans
lequel  je  les  ai  eprouvees  fut  tout-a-fait  normal — c'etait  un  etat  a  jjart,  ne
ressemblant  ni  au  sommeil  ni  a  I'etat  de  veille.  J'ai  actuellement  I'age  de
38  ans,  celibataire,  occupe  de  travaux  intellectuels  dans  le  domaine  de  la
philosophic,  de  I'histoire  religieuse,  et  de  la  morale  sociale.

"  De.  Vladimir  Solovioff"
"  (Membre  honoraire  de  la  Soci^te  de  Psychologie  a  Moscou)."

The  next  case  comes  from  Brazil.

(725.  17.)  From  Mr.  A.  S.

Novemhvr  5lh,  1891.
"  On  [one]  occasion,  when  asleep  in  bed,  my  wife  awoke  me,  saying  she
heard  a  noise  as  of  a  cane  striking  on  the  ceiling.  When  the  candle  was  out
and  my  wife  sleexjing,I  heard  the  blows  repeated  on  the  framework  of  the  bed
itself.  I  rose,  lit  the  candle,  and  examined  everything  in  the  room,  and
then  visited  the  other  rooms  in  the  house.  I  could  find  no  explana-
tion for  the  noise.  As  soon  as  I  returned  to  bed  and  blew  out  the
candle,  the  raps  were  repeated.  I  looked  towards  the  door  of  the  corridor.
There  stood  a  child  [who]  seemed  about  four  years  old,  of  darkish  skin,
habited  in  the  shirt  which  is  usually  worn  by  children  of  tliat  age  in  Brazil.
The  apparition  lasted  but  a  short  time.  It  occurred  to  me  that  it  might  harm
my  own  child,  and  my  first  impulse  was  to  throw  some  object  at  it  to  drive  it
away.  On  seizing  a  board  that  lay  near,  I  felt  a  smart  rap  on  the  back  of  the
hand,  that  pained  me  for  three  days  after,  though,  indeed,  tliere  was  no  sign
of  contusion  on  the  skin.  My  efforts  to  rise  when  I  saw  the  vision  were
useless. I  could  at  first  only  turn  my  head. Tliis  happened  in  1888."

The  I'arity  of  pain  as  an  accompaniment  of  hallucinations — con-
sidering the  ease  with  which  sensations  of  pain  are  produced  by


204  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


self-suggestion  in  the  hysterical  condition,  as  well  as  by  suggestion  in
the  hypnotic  state — tends,  we  think,  to  conlirm  our  conclusion  that
hallucination  is  not  ordinarily  a  symptom  of  a  morbid  condition.

Further  Physical  Effects.

In  one  case,  the  alarm  caused  by  an  ajaparition  appears  to  have
produced  an  organic  effect  somewhat  more  permanent  than  a  fainting-
fit. This  case  (No.  285.  14)  was  published  in  the  "Record  of  a
Haunted  House,"  already  referred  to  on  p.  201  (see  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  319,  328).  The  percipient,  then  a  parlour-
maid in  the  house,  had  twice  seen  an  apparition,  which  took  the
form  of  a  dark  shadowy  figure,  and  she  knew  that  others  in  the  house
had  had  similar  experiences.  After  this,  she  was  sitting  up  in  her
bedroom  late  one  night  when  she  heard  a  loud  noise,  and,  looking  up,
saw  the  handle  of  her  door  twisted  round,  as  though  some  one  were
trying  to  come  in,  the  door  being  locked.  She  was  very  much
frightened,  and  next  morning  on  looking  in  the  glass  saw  that  one
side  of  her  face  was  slightly  twisted.  The  effect  lasted  for  some  days.
The  doctor  who  attended  her  for  it  thought  that  it  might  have  been
caused  by  a  draught  as  well  as  by  a  fright,  but  she  was  convinced
that  she  had  not  caught  cold,  and  that  it  was  merely  the  effect  of  her
terror.

Finally,  we  have  two  remarkable  cases  in  which  a  hallucination  is
stated  to  have  been  accompanied  by  physical  effects  on  the  percipient's
organism,  resembling  those  that  would  have  been  produced  by  the
jjressure  of  human  fingers.  The  first  of  these  cases  is  also  noteworthy
as  being  one  of  the  very  few  in  our  collection  in  which  a  collective
hallucination  of  touch  is  recorded.

(106.  2.)  From  Miss  M.  P.

February  16th,  1890.
"My  sister  and  I  slept  in  the  same  bedroom  at  the  top  of  the  house —
in  small  beds  placed  about  3  feet  apart.  One  night  about  3  years  ago,  [our
ages  at  the  time  being  respectively]  20  and  18,  I  awoke  suddenly  with  the
horrible  feeling  that  some  one  was  in  the  room.  For  a  few  minutes  I  lay  still,
too  much  frightened  to  speak  to  E.  At  last  I  called  to  her,  and  she  answered
in  a  voice  of  extreme  terror,  '  Who  is  in  the  room  ?  I  have  been  awake  for
ages,  and  dare  not  speak.'  At  that  moment  a  cokl  hand  touched  my  face;  in
an  agony  of  fright  1  called  to  E.  once  again,  but  7iot  saying  what  liad
happened.  The  next  second  she  shrieked  to  me  '  Some  one  touched  my
face.'  Overcome  with  terror,  we  pulled  the  bed-clothes  over  our  heads  and
shouted  for  help.  A  few  minutes  later  my  brother  came,  and  we  told  him  that
some  one  was  in  the  room.  He  searched  everywhere,  but  of  course  found
nothhig.  E.  complained  that  her  face  was  burning,  and  on  lighting  tlie  gas
we  saw  that  her  face  on  the  one  side  was  crimson,  with  the  distinct  impress
of  a  liand  with  outspread  fingers.


XI.]  Organic  Effects.  205

"Twice  afterwards,  at  intervals  of  about  a  month,  we  were  awakened  with
the  same  horrible  feeling  of  a  strange  presence  in  the  room,  which  for  a  few
minutes  paralysed  all  powers  of  speech,  and  once  we  saw  the  same  thing

stand  between  our  beds.  ,r  -r^

(Signed)  "  M.  P.

"  E.  P."

(The  second  signature  is  that  of  the  sister  who  shared  tlie  experience.)
The  collector,  Miss  Porter,  writes  :  —

February  28i/i,  1891.
"MissM.  P.  has  just  been  here  talking  about  her  experience,  but  was  not
able  to  add  much  to  what  she  originally  wrote.  On  the  first  occasion  she
lierself  did  not  actually  see  the  figure,  but  Miss  E.  P.  thinks  she  did.  The
room  was  so  dark  that  it  would  Iiave  been  impossible  to  have  noticed  any
difference  in  the  figures,  if  they  had  varied  on  the  different  occasions;  con-
sequently they  decided  that  it  was  the  same.  The  impression  is  that  it
always  took  the  same  course,— was  between  the  two  beds  and  passed  from
one  to  the  other.

' '  The  experience  has  had  such  an  effect  upon  them  that,  though  nothing
has  been  seen  or  felt  since  they  left  the  house,  they  occasionally  wake  in  a
great  fright  -which  soon  passes  off.  Miss  P.  spoke  of  it  as  though  the  being
awakened  by  the  figure  had  got  them  into  tlie  habit  of  waking  very  much
frightened."

Mr.  Podmore  writes  : —

February  22nd,  1892.

"I  met  the  Misses  P.  on  the  16th,  and  they  gave  me  an  account  of  their
experiences,  which  occurred  at  their  former  house,  about  1886  or  1887.
They  have  no  means  of  fixing  the  date  precisely.  The  disturbances— four
in  number— occurred  within  the  space  of  2  or  3  weeks.  On  the  first  occasion
Miss  P.  smo  nothing  ;  on  the  second  occasion  both  sisters  felt  a  presence
in  the  room,  having  been  awoke  from  sleep  by  fright,  but  saw  nothing  ;
on  the  third  occasion  Miss  P.  saw  a  very  vague  muffled  form  or  shadow  ;
and,  lastly,  on  another  occasion.  Miss  E.  P.  again  saw  a  vague  form.

"The  visual  sensations  appear  to  have  been  extremely  vague  on  all  three
occasions — certainly  nothing  approaching  a  distinct  human  figure.  But  the
impression  of  terror  produced  was  very  strong.  The  percipients  appear  to  have
been  quite  unnerved  by  the  fright  on  the  first  occasion — which  may  account
for  the  repetition  of  the  experience.  They  could  not  account  for  the  first  ex-
perience, and  had  had  nothing  else  of  the  kind.  Tlieir  health  was  good  at
the  time.

"  The  marks,  as  of  fingers,  on  Miss  E.  P.'s  face  were  very  distinct.  She
had  not  been  lying  on  that  side— so  there  could  have  been  no  normal
pressure  there.

"  Their  recollection  does  not  seem  to  be  now  very  clear  of  the  several
occasions  on  which  they  had  the  experience.  But  it  seems  certain  that  they
had  a  collective  experience  of  touching  on  the  first  occasion,  at  any  rate,  and
solitary  visual  hallucinations  on  two  subsequent  occasions."


The  other  case  of  this  kind  (No.  134.  5)  is  given  by  a  lady,  Mrs.
A.  C.  S.,  who  has  all  her  life  had  a  very  large  number  of  experiences


206


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


(from  the  age  of  6  to  her  present  age,  56)  of  seeing  visions — more  or
less  externahsed — hearing  voices  and  feehng  touches,  all  of  which
she  regards  as  due  to  the  agency  of  spirits.  "  Among  many  other
experiences  of  the  kind,"  she  writes,  "  I  have  frequently  been
touched  by  the  finger  of  my  eldest  son  [after  his  death],  and
the  indentation  of  it  would  be  plainly  seen  on  my  hand  when
the  touch  was  felt,  and  sometimes  it  has  been  several  times
repeated  by  request  for  others  to  see  it."  The  account  is  endorsed
by  Mrs.  S.'s  husband,  but  we  have  been  unable  to  obtain  further
details.

Some  cases  have  been  recorded  of  similar  effects  on  the  organism
produced  by  self-suggestion  in  the  normal  state,  e.g.,  a  red  mark  on  the
ankle  from  seeing  a  gate  likely  to  fall  against  a  child,i  while,  by
hypnotic  suggestion,  such  effects  may  be  carried  much  further.  Thus
Dr.  J.  Rybalkin^  suggested  to  a  hypnotic  subject  that  after  waking  he
would  warm  himself  at  the  stove  (which  had  not  been  lighted)  and
liurn  a  certain  place  on  his  arm  against  it,  and  that  blisters  would  be
produced.  The  suggestion  was  duly  carried  out.  Dr.  Biggs,  of  Lima,^
irives  an  account  of  three  cases  in  which  he  had  caused  a  red  mai'k  in
the  shape  of  a  cross  to  appear  on  the  skin  of  his  hypnotic  subjects,  the
mark  pei'sisting  in  one  case  for  many  months.  Dr.  von  Krafft-Ebing*
suggested  to  a  hypnotic  subject,  on  whom  the  experiment  of  producing
blisters  by  liypnotic  suggestion  had  several  times  been  performed
successfully,  that  a  red  mark  in  the  shape  of  a  letter  K  would  develop
without  inflammation  or  pain,  on  a  selected  and  protected  area
between  the  shoulder-blades.  This  occurred  gradually,  the  process
being  completed  in  rather  more  than  two  months.  Several  similar
cases  are  given  in  Mr.  Myers'  paper  on  "  The  Subliminal  Con-
sciousness"  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIL,  pp.  334-347),  from  which
those  just  mentioned  are  taken.

These  instances  of  the  influence  of  ideas  on  the  organism  show  that
it  is  not  iiecessary  to  suppose  that  the  effects  of  the  hallucinations  on
the  percipients,  in  the  three  cases  given  above,  were  due  to  other  than
mental  causes.


1  Dr.  Hack  Tuke,  The  Intlnence  of  the  Mind  upon  the  Bodtj,  Vol.  II.,  p.  35.
-  Bevuc  de  I' Ht/pnotismc,  June  1800,  p.  361.
3  See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  330.
An  Experimental  Study  in  Hypnotism,  by  Dr.  R.  von  Krafft-Ebing,  translated
by  C.  G.  Chattock,  M.D.,  New  York,  1889.


XII.]


Death-  Coincidences.


207


Chapter  XII.

" "  DEATH-COINCIDENCES.

In  the  preceding  chapters  we  have  had  occasion  to  consider,  in  con-
nection with  the  facts  reported  to  us,  various  causes  of  hallucinations
recognised  in  the  ordinary  scientific  treatment  of  the  subject.  We
now  pass  to  examine  the  evidence  for  the  opei'ation  of  a  cause  not  so
recognised,  namely,  Telepathy.  To  put  it  otherwise,  we  pass  from  the
study  of  merely  subjective  hallucinations,  in  order  to  concentrate  our
attention  on  those  which  appear  to  have  a  veridical  character.

By  veridical  hallucinations  we  mean  those  which,  either  from  the
ideas  involved  in  them,  or  from  the  time  at  which  they  occur,  or  both,
can  only  be  accounted  for  on  the  hypothesis  that  impressions  or  impulses
have  reached  the  percipient's  mind  otherwise  than  through  the
recognised  channels  of  sense.

As  we  have  pointed  out  in  Chapter  I.,  a  certain  number  of  cases
which  would  prima  facie  appear  to  have  this  character  would  occur
by  chance,  and  merely  be  "  extraordinary  coincidences "  without
significance  ;  accordingly,  from  the  point  of  view  of  psychical  research,
the  most  important  object  of  a  statistical  enquiry  like  the  present  is
to  decide  whether  the  number  of  prima  facie  veridical  cases  is  more
than  chance  will  account  for  or  not.  In  the  present  and  following  chap-
ters, we  shall  be  chiefly  engaged  in  examining  this  question,  in  the
light  of  the  evidence  furnished  by  our  Census.

The  hallucinations  which  have  a  prima  facie  claim  to  be  regarded
as  veridical  may  be  divided  into  three  classes.  The  first  is  the  class
in  which  the  hallucination  coincides  in  time  with  an  external  event

in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest  a  causal  connection  between  them,

as  when  an  apparition  is  seen  by  B  at  the  time  when  A,  at  a  dis-
tance, is  trying  telepathically  to  make  him  see  one,  or  when  the
apparition  of  a  dying  person  is  seen  at  the  time  of  his  death.  The
second  is  the  class  in  which  some  information  pre^dously  unknown
to  the  percipient  is  conveyed  to  him  through  the  hallucination.  These
two  classes  often  overlap,  as  when  a  hallucination  coinciding  in  time
with  a  death  distinctly  conveys  the  information  that  the  death  has
occurred  (see,  for  instance,  No.  425.  12,  p.  211;  No.  381.4,  p.  214;  No.
579.24,  p.  223),  or  when  an  apparition  represents  some  actual  charac-
teristics of  the  dress  or  appearance  of  the  dying  person  which  was
unknown  to  the  percipient  (as  in  Xo.  571.14,  p.  237  ;  Xo.  147.23,  p.
218).  The  third  class  consists  of  "collective"  hallucinations;  that
is,  hallucinations  occurring  simultaneouslj-  to  two  or  more  persons,
which  cannot  be  traced  to  sensory  suggestion from  the  same  ex-


208  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


ternal  cause,  and  cannot  Ije  explained  as  transferred  from  one
percipient  to  the  other  through  suggestion  by  word  or  gesture.

In  this  and  the  next  chapter  we  shall  confine  our  attention  to  a
selected  portion  of  the  first  of  these  classes.  This  restriction  is
necessary,  since,  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  thei'e  are  veridical
hallucinations  which  chance  will  not  account  for,  we  have  to  select  a
coincidence  between  two  quite  definite  events,  and  see  how  often  it
would  occur  by  chance,  and  how  often  it  actually  does  occur.  The
coincidence  most  suited  to  our  requirements  occurs  among  veridical
hallucinations  of  the  first  class,  and  is  that  of  a  i-ecognised  apparition
occurring  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  the  pei'son  represented  by  it — a
kind  of  coincidence  which  has  the  further  advantage  of  being  far
the  most  numerous  in  our  collection.

We  have  further  to  define  exactly  what  we  mean  by  "coinciding."
"We  propose  to  take  the  same  limits  of  time  as  are  adopted  in  Phantasms
of  the  Livhig  and  to  call  an  apparition  "  coincidental  "  when  it  occurs  on
the  same  day  as  the  death — that  is,  within  twelve  hours  either  before  or
after  it.^  The  reason  for  selecting  these  particular  limits  is  the  con-
venience of  calculation.  We  shall  accordingly  speak  of  a  coincidence
of  this  kind  as  a  "death-coincidence."  We  propose  in  this  chapter  to
discuss  the  death-coincidences  reported  to  us,  and  in  the  next  to  consider
whether  they  can  be  accounted  for  by  chance.

The  number  of  alleged  death-coincidences  (in  the  sense  just  defined)
among  the  first-hand  cases  included  in  our  Tables  is  80,  of  which  70
were  realistic  apparitions,  6  incompletely  developed  apparitions,  and  4
visions.^  This  does  not  include  cases  in  which  the  death  was  known  to
the  percipient  when  he  saw  the  apparition  (of  which  there  are  7
within  the  prescribed  time  limit) — nor  does  it  include  a  case  in
which  the  percipient  was  in  the  next  room  to  the  dying  niece  whose
apparition  she  saw  at  the  moment  of  death,  since  some  sound  may
possibly  have  suggested  that  the  death  was  taking  place.  Strictly
.speaking,  these  eight  cases  no  doubt  come  within  the  definition  of
death-coincidences  adopted,  but  it  is  obviously  Ijetter  to  limit
ourselves  to  cases  in  which  the  death  was  not  known,  because  the
knowledge — or  rather  the  emotions  attending  it  —  might  in  some
cases  be  the  cause  of  the  hallucination,  and  in  any  case  would  be
likely  to  influence  its  form.^

1  The  explanation  of  the  inclusion  of  apparitions  seen  after  death,  as  a  part  of
the  evidence  for  telepathy,  will  be  given  in  Chapter  XVII.
For  an  explanation  of  these  terms,  see  pp.  50-1.

3  We  have  also  omitted  7  cases  which  may  have  been  death-coincidences,  but  in
which  the  percipients  seem  uncertain  as  to  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence  ;  and  it
should  be  mentioned  that  we  have  counted  as  one  only,  a  death-coincidence
in  which  two  percipients  included  in  the  Census  shared  the  experience.  Such  cases
are,  as  explained  at  p.  51,  foot-note,  counted  once  for  each  percipient  in  the  general


XII.]


Death-Coincidences.


209


Further,  to  avoid  complication,  we  do  not  intend  to  use  for  pur-
poses of  calculation  cases  occurring  to  percipients  who  have  experienced
other  hallucinations,  some  of  which  were,  or  may  have  been,  appari-
tions of  living  persons,  of  which  they  have  not  reported  to  us  the  exact
number  ;  nor  experiences  of  children  under  ten.  Of  the  first  of  these
classes  there  are  7,  and  of  the  second,  8  death  coincidences.  We  do
not  exclude  these  cases  because  we  think  them  unlikely  to  be  telepathi-
cally  caused.  On  the  contrary,  the  experiences  of  percipients  who
have  had  frequent  hallucinations  which  they  believe  to  be  veridical,
like  Mrs.  McAlpine  (Iso.  458.  9,  see  pp.  278-282,  where  one  of  the
excluded  experiences  will  be  found),  require  special  consideration  in
estimating  the  whole  evidence  for  telepathy.  But  in  this  chapter,  we
are  considering  a  limited  class  of  cases  with  a  view  to  numerical
calculation.

After  making  these  reductions,  we  have  65  alleged  death-coinci-
dences to  deal  with.  Before,  however,  we  examine  these  coincidences
in  detail,  there  is  another  question  to  consider  : — the  question,  namely,
whether  a  disproportionate  number  of  alleged  death-coincidences  has
been  introduced  into  our  collection  by  collectoi's  seeking  after  particular
kinds  of  answers.  The  precautions  taken  to  guard  against  this  source
of  error,  and  its  possible  effect  on  the  whole  collection,  have  already
been  discussed  (see  pp.  57-60).  We  saw  there  that  either  the  effect  is
insignificant,  or  the  cases  illegitimately  introduced  ai'e  balanced  by  those
which  from  reserve  or  other  causes  are  left  out.  But  though  Selection
— as  we  there  called  it — has  thus  had  little  effect  on  the  whole,  it  does
not  follow  that  it  has  not  disproportionately  affected  death-  coincidences.
As  before  observed,  it  would  affect  hallucinations  regarded  as  interest-
ing more  than  others,  and  death-coincidences  are  so  regarded.  This
is  indicated  by  their  being,  as  we  shall  presently  show,  better  recol-
lected than  the  average  of  hallucinations  ;  and  further  evidence  is
afforded  by  the  compai-atively  large  proportion  of  such  cases  stated
by  our  collectors  to  have  been  previously  known  to  them, — for,  generally
speaking,  cases  thought  interesting  are  those  that  will  be  talked  of
and  therefore  known.  About  Hi  per  cent,  of  the  recognised  appari-
tions of  living  persons  ^  (including  visions  and  incompletely  developed
hallucinations)  in  our  collection  are  stated  by  the  collectors  to  have
been  previously  known  to  them,  and  it  is  a  striking  fact  that  not  much
less  than  half  of  these  known  cases — 22  out  of  50 — are  death-coinci-

Tables,  but  for  the  present  purpose  the  case  in  question  should,  we  think,  be
counted  once  only,  because,  however  genuinely  collective  the  hallucination  may  have
been,  it  could  not  be  assumed  that  it  was  caused  in  more  than  one  percipient  by  the
death  (see  discussion  on  collective  cases,  Chapter  XV).

1  The  percentage  given  on  p.  68  is  here  slightly  increased  by  including  appari-
tions other  than  realistic.

P


210  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


dences.  In  other  words,  about  25  ^  per  cent,  of  the  death-coincidences
are  stated  to  have  been  previously  known  to  the  collectors,  and  only
about  8  per  cent,  of  all  the  other  recognised  apparitions  of  living
persons.

This  disproportion  renders  it  practically  certain  that  errors  due  ta
any  desire  of  collectors  to  obtain  affirmative  answers  will  have  dispro-
portionately affected  death-coincidences.  We  cannot  estimate  exactly
the  amount  of  error  thus  introduced  :  for,  on  the  one  hand,  our
returns  as  to  answers  known  beforehand  are  incomplete,  and  on  the
other,  answers  known  beforehand  are  by  no  means  necessarily  selected ;
they  would  often  have  been  collected  whether  previously  known  or
not.  But  we  have  obtained  definite  information  with  regard  to  a
considerable  number  of  cases,  and,  on  the  basis  of  this,  we  are  able
to  form  an  approximate  estimate  of  the  influence  of  selection  on
the  remainder.

Of  the  65  first-hand  death-coincidences  with  which  we  are  now
dealing,  19  were  known  beforehand  to  the  collector,  26  were  not  known,
and  of  the  remaining  20,  we  have  no  adequate  means  of  judging
whether  they  were  known  or  not.  Of  the  19  which  were  known
beforehand,  we  have  good  ground  in  5  (including  1  experience  of
the  collector  himself)  for  confidence  that  the  percipients  would  have
been  asked  the  question  in  any  case.  In  3,  on  the  other  hand,  we
have  evidence  that  they  were  specially  selected.  In  the  remaining
11,  we  have  no  reason  to  suspect  them  of  having  been  selected,  but  we
cannot  feel  sure  that  they  were  not.-  The  possible  influence  of
selection  is  therefore  limited  to  34  cases  out  of  the  65  :  the  exact
allowance  to  be  made  for  it  we  propose  to  estimate  at  a  later  stage.^
Meanwhile  the  3  cases  known  to  be  selected  should,  we  think,  be  ex-
cluded at  once.  They  are  Nos.  61.  6,  301.  6,  and  350.  1,  and  will  be
found  in  Chapter  XIV.  pp.  252-4.

Deducting  these,  we  are  left  with  62  alleged  death- coincidences,
which  must  be  considered  in  detail  in  order  to  judge  how  far  their
character  as  death-coincidences  is  established,  and  what  proportion  of
them  we  ought  to  count.  There  are  two  questions  to  ask  about  each
case.  (1)  Have  we  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  apparition  really
occurred  within  12  hours  of  the  death  ?  (2)  Have  we  good  reason  to
believe  that  it  was  recognised  before  the  death  was  known,  and  not

1  This  number  is  calculated  on  all  tlie  alleged  death-coincidences,  inchiding  expe-
riences under  the  age  of  10,  and  those  which  were  experienced  by  persons  who  have
had  unenuraerated  liallucinations,  and  also  eight  second-hand  cases  ;  in  all  88  cases.

-  The  information  that  we  possess  as  to  whether  any  case  which  we  have  printed
was  kno^v^l  to  the  collector  beforehand  or  not,  is  given  at  the  end  of  the  case.

3  See  p.  243.


XII.]


Death- Coincidences.


211


merely,  having  been  unrecognised  at  the  time,  assumed  afterwards  to
have  represented  the  decedent  because  of  the  coincidence?

Exaggeration  of  the  closeness  of  coincidence  may  occur  in  two  ways  :
(a)  from  a  tendency  of  the  memory  to  simplify  the  phenomenon  by
placing  both  the  striking  events  on  one  day  [cf.  Phantasms  of  the
Livuig,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  140—1-12)  ;  and  (6)  from  a  mistake  having  from
the  iirst  been  made  as  to  the  date  of  one  or  other  event.  We  have
met  with  an  example  of  the  error  occurring  in  each  of  these  ways  in
the  course  of  the  present  collection.^

Of  the  second  kind  of  error,  by  which  an  unrecognised  figure
is  afterwards  remembered  as  a  recognised  one,  we  have  no  proved
instances  ;  nor  had  Mr.  Gurney  when  Phmitasms  of  the  Living  was
written  (see  that  work.  Vol.  I.,  p.  137).  Still  it  is  an  error  respect-
ing which  we  ought  to  be  on  our  guard.

The  best  guarantee  against  both  kinds  of  exaggeration  is  a  written
note  of  the  hallucination  made  before  the  death  was  known.  Such  a
note  is  stated  to  have  been  made  in  only  six  cases,  which  we  now  pro-
ceed to  quote.  In  only  one  of  them  has  the  note  been  preserved,
and  then  only  in  an  ambiguous  form,  but  in  three  others  (Nos.  425.  12,
381.4,  and  147.23),  there  is  evidence,  independently  of  the  percipient's
memory,  that  the  note  was  made  at  the  time.

The  cases  are  arranged  in  chronological  order — ^the  most  recent  one
first — the  dates  being  reckoned  according  to  the  intei'val  between  the
experience  and  the  time  when  the  percipient  answered  the  Census  ques-
tion. None  of  these  six  cases  were  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.

(425.  12.)  From  Mr.  S.  Walker- Anderson. ^

Tickhill,  near  Bawtry,  Yorks.,  June  12th,  1891.

"An  auiit  of  mine,  who  died  in  England  last  November,  1890  .  .  .
appeared  before  me  in  Australia,  and  I  knew  before  I  received  the  letter  of

1  In  the  first  of  the  examples  here  referred  to,  the  case  was  not  an  alleged  death-
coincidence  in  the  sense  we  are  now  using  the  word,  since  the  figure  was  not  recog-
nised. In  the  later  version  of  the  story,  written  in  answer  to  the  Census  question
and  three  or  four  years  after  the  experience,  the  apparition  is  said  to  have  occurred
within  twelve  hours  of  the  death  (which  was  that  of  a  stranger  lodging  in  the  same
ho>ise  as  the  percipient),  and  before  the  percipient  had  heard  of  it.  We  found,  how-
ever, that  we  had  in  the  archives  of  the  Society  an  account  at  second-hand,  but  which
we  had  good  reason  to  regard  as  correct,  of  the  same  incident,  written  about  a  month
after  its  occurrence.  This  account  stated  that  the  apparition  was  seen  a  week  after
the  death.  The  other  example  referred  to  is  No.  656.2(5,  quoted  on  p.  370.  Here  the
apparition  occurred  before  the  news  of  the  death  was  received,  but  when  the  witness
was  examined,  it  became  clear  that  the  news  must  have  taken  considerably  longer  to
travel  than  the  interval  between  the  hallucination  and  the  receipt  of  the  letter,  and
that  the  belief  in  the  simultaneity  of  the  two  events  probably  arose  from  ignerance
of  this  fact.

^  For  another  experience  of  the  same  percipient,  see  p.  382.

p  2


212  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


her  death  that  she  was  dead.  I  took  a  note  of  [it]  at  the  time,  and  found
on  comparing  notes  that  she  appeared  to  me  the  day  she  died — date,
November  21st,  1890."

Mrs.  Anderson  writes  : —

February,  1892.

' '  I  remember  perfectly  well  my  husband  telling  me  of  the  apparition  of
his  aunt  ;  he  also  made  a  note  of  the  date,  and  when  we  had  news  of  her
death,  I  remember  comparing  the  two  dates."

Professor  Sidgwick,  who  had  two  interviews  with  Mr.  Anderson,  gives
the  following  accounts,  written  from  notes  taken  at  the  time  : —

December  mh,  1891.

"Yesterday  afternoon  I  met  Mr.  S.  Walker- Anderson  and  had  some  con-
versation with  him  about  the  apf)arition  seen  by  him  in  Australia.

"  He  told  me  that  it  occurred  on  the  night  of  November  17th  (not  21st,  as
given  in  the  pajDer  communicated),  1890.  He  had  gone  to  bed  early,  8.30  or
a  little  later  ;  and  between  9  and  12  he  woke  up  and  saw  the  figure  of  his

aunt,  Mrs.  P  ,  standing  with  her  arms  down  near  the  foot  of  the  bed

at  one  side,  dressed  in  an  ordinary  black  dress  such  as  he  had  seen  her  in
many  times.  She  looked  older  and  stouter  than  when  he  last  saw  her  three
years  before.  She  seemed  to  speak,  i.e.,  he  saw  the  lips  move,  though
he  heard  no  sound  ;  and  he  seemed  to  catch  that  she  meant  '  good-bye. '
Then  the  figure  gradually  vanished.  They  had  a  lamp  in  the  room.  He  is
convinced  that  he  was  fully  awake.  He  was  not  anxious  about  her,  having
had  no  letters  to  say  that  she  was  seriously  ill,  though  he  knew  she  was  not
very  well.  She  used  to  write  to  him  about  once  in  two  months,  and  he  to
her  somewhat  oftener.

"  In  the  early  morning  he  told  his  wife,  '  I  have  seen  AuntP  -who  said

"  good-bye  "  ;  I  am  sure  she  is  dead  ;  we  will  take  a  note.'  So  he  put  down

on  a  piece  of  paper,  '  I  believe  Aunt  P  died  on  the  17th, '  and  put  the

paper  in  a  drawer. ^  He  knows  it  was  before  12  o'clock  that  he  had  the
vision,  because  he  used  to  get  up  at  midnight  to  give  the  child  something.
Then  in  due  time  an  English  paper  gave  the  news  of  his  aunt's  death  with
date,  November  17th.  Afterwards  a  letter  came  from  his  mother  with  the
same  information  ;  and  when  he  came  home  lie  ascertained  that  his  aunt
had  died  about  11  a.m.  on  that  day.

"  He  remembers  distinctly  that  it  was  on  a  Moiidcuj ;  but  he  and  his  wife
had  disagreed  about  the  day  of  the  month.  It  was,  I  understood,  ascertained
to  be  the  17th,  by  ascertaining  that  to  be  the  Monday.  [November  17th,
1890,  was  a  Monday.]

' '  This  was  the  only  time  that  he  had  had  an  apparition  of  this  aunt.  The
figure  seemed  quite  solid  and  lifelike.  It  lasted,  say,  20  seconds.  He  sat
up  in  bed  and  thought  for  a  moment  or  two  tliat  it  liad  been  his  aunt  in  the
flesh. He  did  not  wake  his  wife  at  once,  but  told  her  in  the  early  morning."

March  20th,  1892.
"Yesterday  I  called  on  Mr.  Anderson,  and  questioned  him  about  the
•discrepancy  of  dates. He  said  that  his  mentioning  the  21st  was  due  to  an

1  "  The  paper,  he  told  me,  was  destroyed  when  they  left  Australia. — H.  S."


XII.]


Death-Coincidences.


213


accidental  lapse  of  memory.  Mrs.  Anderson,  whom  I  saw  and  questioned,
said  that  she  had  always  remembered  the  day  as  the  17th.  She  clearly
remembered  his  speaking  to  her  of  his  vision  at  breakfast  next  morning,  and

saying,  'I  am  perfectly  sure  Aunt  P  is  dead,'  and  adding,  '  I  will  make

a  note  of  it.'  She  remembers  that  she  made  a  note  of  it  herself  in  a  diary
that  she  kept,  and  that  after  the  letter  arrived  in  December  announcing
his  aunt's  death,  she  referred  to  the  diary  and  found  it  confirmed  tlieir
recollection  as  to  the  coincidence  of  the  dates.

"  H.  SiDGWICK."

We  have  verified  the  date  of  Mrs.  P  's  death.

Mr.  Anderson  does  not  mention  in  what  part  of  Australia  he  was  then
living,  buc  Melbourne  time  is  about  9  hours  40  minutes  earlier  than  Green-
wich, so  that,  if  he  was  in  about  the  same  longitude  as  Melbourne,  the
death  would  have  preceded  the  apparition  by  two  or  three  hours.
This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand-
It  will  be  noticed  in  the  above  case  that  the  apparent  saying  of
"good-bye"  by  the  figure  amounted  to  an  intimation  of  the  death;
so  that  the  evidential  character  of  the  case  depends  on  more  than
the  mere  coincidence.

(442.  17.)  From  Miss  L.  B.

September,  1893.

"At  the  end  of  August  of  the  year  1882,  my  father,  mother,  and  sisters
left  home  for  our  usual  summer  holiday.  [At]  the  same  time  a  young  man
whom  we  knew  quite  slightly  (although  he  was  our  neighbour)  started  to
Texas  to  learn  farming,  for  which  I  felt  sorry,  because  I  was  looking  forward
to  paint  well  enough  by  my  return  to  ask  him  to  sit  for  the  principal  figure
in  a  picture  I  was  longing  to  do.

"  We  went  to  a  cottage  in  Gloucestershire,  where  my  sister  and  I  shared
the  same  room.  About  the  14tli  of  September,  1882,  my  sister  and  I  felt
worried  and  distressed  by  hearing  the  '  Death  Watch  '  ;  it  lasted  a  whole  day
and  night.  We  got  up  earlier  than  usual  the  next  morning,  about  six  o'clock,
to  niiish  .some  birthday  presents  for  our  mother.  As  my  sister  and  I  were
working  and  talking  together,  I  looked  up,  and  saw  our  young  acquaintance
standing  in  front  of  me  and  looking  at  us.  I  turned  to  my  sister,  she  saw
nothing  ;  I  looked  again  to  where  he  stood,  he  had  vanished.  We  agreed
not  to  tell  anyone — and,  although  I  wished  to  put  it  down  in  my  diary
(which  I  had  not  kept  for  some  time),  I  was  afraid  to  do  so  ;  I  therefore
made  marks  to  remind  myself.

"  Some  time  afterwards  we  heard  that  our  young  acquaintance  had  either
committed  suicide  or  had  been  killed  ;  he  was  found  dead  in  the  woods
twenty-four  hours  after  landing.

"  On  looking  back  to  my  diary,  1  found  that  my  marks  corresponded  to
the  date  of  his  death."

(This  account  was  enclosed  in  a  letter  dated  September  7th,  1893.  Miss

B  ,  however,  answered  the  Census  question  in  the  middle  of  1891,  so

that  the  experience  is  reckoned  as  having  occurred  nine  years  ago. )


214


Report  on  the  Census  of  HalUicinations.  [chap.


Mr.  Podinore  called  on  Miss  B.  and  her  sister  on  April  8th,  1893,  and
gives  the  following  account  of  his  interview.

AprU  lOtK  1893.

"In  September,  1882,  Miss  L.  B.  and  Miss  B.  occupied  the  same  room.
They  had  got  up  early  to  work;  at  a  present  for  their  mother's  birthday,
October  4th  (I  saw  the  cushion  actually  worked  on  that  occasion  in  crewels).
Miss  L.  B.  saw  a  momentary  vision,  near  the  washstand,  of  A.  L.,  a  young

man  who  had  left  B  a  few  weeks  before  for  Texas. She  made  a  note  of

it  and  found  later  that  A.  L.  had  been  murdered  in  Texas  the  same  day.

"A.L.  (age  about  19)  was  barely  an  acquaintance  of  Miss  L.B. 's  (she  was
only  about  14).  But  she,  an  artist  student,  had  wanted  to  get  him  some
time  to  '  sit '  for  her.  They  had  probably  not  spoken  to  each  other  more
than  once  or  twice.

"  Miss  L.  B.  mentioned  the  vision  at  the  time  to  her  sister.  In  Miss
B.'s  diary  for  that  year  apjoears  an  entry  on  September  15th,  1882  :
'  Up  at  6.30  a.m.  working  at  present.'  Miss  L.  B.'s  diary  for  1882  was
found  ;  the  latter  part  of  the  year  consists  almost  entirely  of  blank  pages,
with  a  few  cryptogram  marks.  Under  September  14th,  15th,  and  16th
respectively,  appear  the  marks  /'\,  +  ,  x  .  The  succeeding  days  are  blank
in  the  diary  for  some  time.

"  Miss  L.  B.  did  not  mention  the  incident  to  her  parents  for  some
years.  In  conversation  with  me.  Miss  B.  fully  corroborated  what  Miss
L.  B.  had  said."

Neither  Miss  L.  B.  nor  her  sister  could  remember  the  exact  date  of  the
death,  but  they  informed  us  that  it  had  been  announced  in  the  Strmdard.
From  the  Standard  of  October  9th,  1882,  we  afterwards  found  that  the
death  occurred  on  September  14th,  1882.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  marks  in  the  diary  do  not  clearly  indicate
whether  the  apparition  was  seen  on  September  14t]i,  15th,  or  ICth.
The  probability  that  September  14th  was  the  day,  is,  however,
strongly  supported  :  first,  by  the  recollection  of  both  sisters  that  they  ascer-
tained the  coincidence  when  they  first  heard  the  news  of  tlie  death,  and
when,  no  doubt,  Miss  L.  B.  would  have  remembered  the  exact  meaning  of
all  the  marks  in  her  diary,  which  she  now  forgets  ;  and,  secondly,  by  the
expressions  used  in  her  account,  which  seem  to  imply  that  the  entry  relating
to  the  apparition  was  the  f  rst  one  made  after  some  interval.

This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.

Miss  B.  has  had  two  other  experiences  which  may  have  been
liallucinatory,  one  auditory  and  one  visual.  It  is  worth  noting  that
her  father,  mother,  and  sister  have  all  had  hallucinations.  An
apparently  veridical  experience  of  her  mother's  is  quoted  in  Chapter
XVII.,  p.  371.

(381.  4.)  From  Mrs.  J.  P.  Smith.

Amble,  Northumberland,  Janvxij-y  17 tli,  1891.

"  In  June,  1879,  I  was  a  teacher  in  Macclesfield. A  friend,  Mrs.  ,  was

near  lier  confinement.  She  told  me  she  was  afraid  she  would  die.  I  went  into
the  county  of  Durham  for  a  holiday. While  there  I  was  roused  from  sleep  by


XII.]


Death-Coincidences.


215


Mrs. as  I  supposed. She  was  shaking  nie,  and  saying,  '  I  have  parsed

away,  but  the  baby  will  live.'  Then  the  figure  left  the  room  by  the  door.  I
got  out  of  bed  and  went  to  my  sister  and  related  the  incident.  We  agreed  to
make  a  note  of  it.  Next  day  I  received  a  letter  from  a  friend  in  Macclesfield
saymg  that  Mrs. was  dead  but  the  baby  was  alive.

"  [I  was]  in  the  best  of  health  and  about  29  years  of  age.

"No  other  persons  were  present."

Mrs.  Smith,  who  is  the  mistress  of  the  Infants'  School  at  Amble,  informs
us  that  this  is  the  only  experience  of  the  kind  she  has  ever  had,  and  that
to  the  best  of  her  recollection  the  apparition  was  seen  about  an  hour  or  two
after  the  death.

Unfortunately,  neither  the  note  made  at  the  time  nor  the  letter  announc-
ing the  death  has  been  preserved,  but  we  have  received  the  following  letter
of  corroboration  from  Mrs.  Smith's  sister  : —

"203,  Elswick-street,  Leichhardt,  Sydney,  Australia,  November  2nd,  1891.

"  I  distinctly  remember  my  sister  coming  into  my  room  and  waking  me  up
to  tell  me  of  her  dream,  which  was  as  follows  : —

' '  That  she  had  dreamt  that  a  lady  friend  of  hers  some  miles  away  had
appeared  to  her  and  said  she  was  dead  ;  but  that  her  baby  would  live.  The
dream  had  evidently  impressed  my  sister  very  much,  as  she  seemed  quite
.■agitated,  and  we  said  we  would  note  it  down,  and  to  our  utter  astonishment
the  next  morning  my  sister  received  a  letter  to  say  that  her  friend  had  passed
away  that  same  night.  "Annie  Beown."

It  will  be  observed  that  Mrs.  Smith's  experience  is  here  referred  to  as  a
dream.  That  this  is  not  her  own  view  of  it  appears  from  the  following
account  given  by  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  of  an  interview  which  they
Lad  with  her  on  September  16th,  1891.  The  account  was  written  within
two  hours  of  their  seeing  Mrs.  Smith,  from  notes  made  at  the  time.

"The  figure  appeared  twice  on  the  same  night.  The  first  time  was  in
the  breaking  dawn  of  a  June  morning,  before  there  was  any  sun.  It  woke
her,  and  she  heard  tlie  words  she  mentions,  but  she  did  not  get  out
of  bed,  and  was  probably  only  half  awake.  The  second  time  the  same
thing  happened,  but  she  is  quite  sure  she  was  awake.  It  appeared  at  the
left  hand  side  of  her  bed,  and,  after  speaking,  it  moved  very  quickly  round
the  bed  and  apparently  through  the  door,  which  was  at  the  right  hand  side
of  the  bed  parallel  to  the  head  and  liidden  by  the  curtains,  so  that  she  did
not  see  it  go  out.  The  figure  went  as  if  in  a  great  hurry.  It  seemed  to  be
dressed  in  drab  ;  the  face  was  seen — it  seemed  exactly  as  in  life.  She  felt
no  fear,  nor  sense  of  the  supernatural — only  anxiety  to  question  further —
and  regarded  it  as  real  until,  running  after  the  figure  downstairs,  she  became
•convinced  that  it  was  a  vision.  She  felt  as  she  ran  as  though  she  would
have  caught  it  up,  had  she  not  had  to  open  the  door.  It  was  about  5  o'clock
when  she  went  to  her  sister,  which  she  did  at  once  after  the  second  vision.

Mrs.  had  told  her  she  thought  she  should  not  live,  but  Mrs.  Smith  had

thought  little  of  this,  and  it  had  quite  passed  out  of  her  mind. She  was

in  no  anxiety. Mrs.  was  no  special  friend  of  hers. Her  children  came

to  Mrs.  Smith's  school,  and  she  was  interested  in  them. She  did  not  know

why  Mrs.  should  have  told  her  of  her  expectation  of  dying  ;  but  she

said  at  the  same  time,  '  If  I  go,  you  will  be  very  kind  to  my  children. '


216  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


The  friend  who  wrote  telling  her  of  the  death  mentioned  it  casually —
especially  as  sad  because  of  the  young  children.  She  mentioned  the  time  as
in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning,  and  it  struck  Mrs.  Smith  when  she  got
the  letter  that  the  vision  had  been  coincident  with  the  death,  but  she  did
not  verify  this  by  ascertaining  the  exact  time  of  the  death.

"Mrs.  Smith  told  us  that  when  she  communicated  what  she  had  seen  to
her  sister,  the  latter  said  it  must  have  been  just  a  very  vivid  dream,  to
which  she  replied,  'Well,  it  was  a  very  vivid  one,  then,'  or  words  to  that
effect."

This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.

This  is  another  case  where  there  is  more  than  a  mere  coincidence,
since  information  as  to  the  death  was  given  and  also  as  to  the
survival  of  the  baby.  It  perhaps  adds  to  the  force  of  the  evidence  for
telepathy  here,  that  the  dying  mother  is  likely,  from  the  circumstances,
of  the  case,  to  have  had  Mrs.  Smith  specially  in  her  mind  at  the  time
of  the  death.

In  the  following  case  also  there  seems  to  have  been  a  definite  in-
timation of  the  death.

(383. 24.)  From  Mr.  James  Lloyd.

3,  The  Grove,  Adderley-road,  Saltley,  Birmingham,  February  10th,  1891.

"[I]  was  in  India.  [I]  awoke  in  the  night  [and]  saw  my  father  iiii
England,  standing  beside  the  bed.  He  was  as  real  as  in  life,  and  dressed
in  a  gi'ey  suit  such  as  he  used  to  wear  when  I  last  saw  him  about
nine  years  before.  The  figui'e  said,  '  Good-bye,  Jim  ;  I  won't  see  you
any  more,'  or  words  to  that  effect.  A  month  after  that  (the  first  mail  I
could  have  heard  by)  a  letter  came,  saying  he  had  died  that  same  night,  and
about  that  hour — September  Idth,  1876.  I  was  a  soldier  at  Mhow,  in  Bom-
bay Presidency.  What  hour  the  vision  appeared,  [I]  did  not  know.  In  the
morning  [I]  told  a  comrade  who  slept  in  the  next  room.

"I  wrote  it  on  the  wall  at  the  back  of  my  bed  at  the  same  time,  so  as  to-
fix  the  date."

Mr.  Lloyd  was  27  at  the  time,  and  was  in  good  health,  and  in  no  anxiety
about  his  father.

Mr.  Myers  called  on  him  on  December  18th,  1891,  and  writes  : —

December  19th,  1891.

"  I  saw  Mr.  Lloyd  yesterday. He  seems  a  straightforward  man.

"  I  saw  Mrs.  Lloyd  separately.  The  apparition  occurred  before  their-
marriage,  but  she  said  that  she  had  heard  her  husband  tell  the  story
frequently  since  her  first  knowledge  of  him.

' '  Mr.  Lloyd  said  that  he  wished  to  correct  the  date  from  September
14th  to  November  9th,  1876. He  was  in  the  3rd  King's  Own  Hussars."

"  P.S. — Mr.  Lloyd  has  sent  me  a  funeral  card,  which  shows  that  James.
Lloyd  died  November  9th,  1876  ;  interred  at  Saltley."

This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.


XII.]


Death-Coincidences.


217


The  following  case  is  classed  as  a  vision.
(362. 21.)  From  Mrs.  Baldwin.

November  IWi,  1890.
"I  was  my  Uncle  E.  de  C.'.s  favourite  niece,  and  we  had  made  a
compact  that  whichever  of  us  died  first  should  appear  to  the  other.  I  was
about  2.5  at  the  time,  and  lie  said  to  me,  '  You  won't  be  afraid,  but,  if  God
permits  such  a  thing,  I  will  come  to  you.'  This  took  place  at  Camareah,  in
1860.  I  was  then  a  widow,  living  at  my  uncle's  house.  It  was  in  December
1863  (I  had  married  again,  and  was  living  at  Umritsur),  when  one  morning
at  about  4  o'clock,  as  I  was  sitting  up  in  bed  with  my  baby  in  my  arms,  I  saw
my  uncle.  He  was  lying  on  the  sofa  in  the  drawing-room  and  appeared  to
be  dying.  I  also  saw  his  bearer  and  my  Aunt's  ayah.  They  passed  each
other  in  going  across  the  room,  and  looked  at  me  and  sighed.  I  said  to  my
husband,  'Look,  there  is  my  uncle  dying,'  and  I  described  the  above
scene.  He  thought  it  so  remarkable  that  he  got  out  of  bed  and  made  a  note
of  it.  He  wrote  at  once  to  my  cousin  C,  to  inquire  after  uncle  and  we
heard  from  him  that  my  uncle  had  died  very  suddenly,  on  the  day  and  at
the  time  I  saw  him,  of  lieart  disease,  after  an  illness  of  a  few  days,  at  his
house  at  Mirzapore.  "  G.  Adeline  Baldwin."

Mrs.  Baldwin  writes  further  : —

' '  Camareah  is  between  AUahabad  and  Benares,  about  30  miles  from  the
latter.

"  Mr.  E.  de  C.  was  not  failing  in  liealth  prior  to  his  sudden  death,  and  did
not  even  know  he  had  heart  disease.

"I  saw  the  drawing-room  distinctly,  with  my  uncle  lying  on  the  sofa.
The  room  was  at  his  own  house.

"The  note  that  was  made  at  the  time,  and  the  letter  from  my  cousin,
which  my  husband  received  in  answer  to  inquiries,  were  unfortunately
destroyed  by  white  ants.  [Mrs.  Baldwin  informed  us  in  conversation
that  the  white  ants  had  also  destroyed  documents  of  greater  importance
to  her.]

"  I  have  quite  lost  sight  of  my  cousin,  and  do  not  even  know  where  he  is
likely  to  be  found."

"  With  regard  to  the  mode  of  my  micle's  death  it  happened  just  as  I
saw  it,  inasmuch  as  he  died  in  the  drawing-room  on  the  sofa  ;  tlie  ayah  and
bearer  were  present  ;  all  this  my  husband  wrote  and  ascertained.  The  sofa
was  placed  in  a  different  piosition  to  what  it  had  been  when  I  was  last  in  the
house."

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  : —

January  3rd,  1891.
"  I  have  just  had  a  long  interview  with  Mrs.  and  Miss  Baldwin.  Miss
Baldwin  tells  me  that  she  first  heard  the  account  from  her  father  when  she
was  about  16  or  17.  He  died  in  1880.  (She  was  the  baby  who  was  in  Mrs.
Baldwin's  arms  at  the  time  of  the  vision.)  Her  father  was  much  impressed
with  it.  According  to  her  recollection,  the  actual  position  of  the  sofa  where
the  uncle  died  was  not  ascertained,  but  Mrs.  Baldwin  is  clear  on  this  point.
He  did  die  on  the  sofa,  and  facing  the  door,  which  was  not  the  usual  position


218


Report  on  the  C'ensios  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


of  tlie  sofa.  The  ayah  and  bearer  were  tlie  only  j^eople  with  him,  as  his
wife  had  gone  to  rest.  Mrs.  Baldwin  says  that  her  uncle  seemed  to  look  at
her  and  sigh,  and  so  did  the  ayah  and  Ijearer.  They  would  both  have  known
of  her  uncle's  attachment  to  her.  She  saw  some  details  but  not  others,
does  not  know  how  her  uncle  was  dressed,  but  noticed  a  jDlate  of  fruit  on  a  shelf
(not,  I  think,  verified).  The  house  was  well  known  to  her.  She  was  not  at
all  aware  of  her  uncle's  illness.

"  She  made  some  notes  of  the  visioti  of  her  uncle  some  years  ago,  from
which  she  wrote  her  account,  but  she  is  not  sure  when  tlie  notes  were
made — certainly  since  her  husband's  death  in  1880.

' '  The  duration  of  Mrs.  Baldwin's  vision  of  her  uncle  can  only  be  guessed
at.  Slie  had  time  to  rouse  her  husband  and  to  say,  '  Loo'k,  there's  uncle —
he's  dying,'  for  liim  tn  say  he  saw  nothing,  and  for  lier  to  describe  what
she  saw."

In  this  case  also  definite  information  is  conveyed,  but  pictorially,
and  with  more  detail  than  in  the  cases  before  quoted.  It  is  also
interesting  as  being  one  of  the  three  apparitions  at  the  time  of  death,
in  connexion  with  which,  as  we  are  told,  a  compact  had  been  made  to
appear,  if  possible.

(147. 23.)  From  Madame  Obalechefl.

(The  account  is  translated  from  the  original  Russian  by  Mr.  A.  Aksakoff.)

"  V.  de  Tver,  le  27  Mars,  1891.

"Apparition  de  mon  beau-frere  (le  mari  de  ma  soeur),  Nicolas  Nilovitch
^ikoff,  que  je  vis  dans  I'etat  de  veille  a  Odessa  en  1861,  le  17  Janvier,  a  H
heures  du  soir — le  jour  et  a  I'lievn-e  meme  de  sa  mort,  qui  eut  lieu  a  Tver.

"Je  ne  dormais  pas  et  me  sentais  tout-a-fait  bien  portante.  Dans  la
chambre  oil  je  me  trouvais  briilait  une  lanipe  d'image  et,  en  outre,  una
bougie  sur  la  table  pres  de  mon  lit.  A  cote,  par  terre,  dormait  ma  domestique
• — une  tille  ci-devant  serve,  que  j 'avals  emmenee  de  Tver,  et  qui  connaissait
parfaitement  mon  beau-frere.  II  y  avait  deux  portes  dans  la  chambre  :  I'une
d'elles,  conduisant  au  salon,  se  trouvait  non  loin  du  chevet  de  mon  lit  ;
quant  a  I'autre,  qui  conduisait  dans  la  chambre  contigue,  je  la  voyais  juste
devant  moi,  etant  couchee  ou  assise  dans  mon  lit.  Entendant  les  pleurs  de
mon  tils,  alors  age  d'un  mois,  je  reveillai  la  domestique  et  lui  ordonnai  de
me  donner  I'enfant.  Tout  a  cote  de  mon  lit,  pres  des  coussins,  etait  place  un
fauteuil,  sur  le  bras  duquel  je  m'accoudai  de  la  main  droite,  et,  prenant
I'enfant,  je  me  mis  a  le  nourrir.  Mon  mari  dormait  dans  la  meme  chambre,
et  la  domestique,  apres  m'avoir  passe  I'enfant,  s'assit  par  terre,  a  cote  de
mon  lit,  la  figure  tournee  vers  le  fauteuil,  sous  lequel  elle  etendit  les  pieds.
Je  ne  pensais  alors  qu'a  mon  tils,  couche  dans  mes  bras.  Levant  par  hasard
les  yeux  sur  la  porte,  que  j'avais  devant  moi,  je  vis  entrer  lentement  mon
beau-frere  en  pantouffles  et  en  robe  de  chambre  de  bayette  a  carreaux,  que
je  ne  lui  avals  jamais  vue  (plus  tard,  ayant  pris  des  informations  la-dessus,
j'appris  qu'elle  n'avait  ete  faite  qu'une  semaine  avant  sa  mort,  et  qu'il
i'avait  sur  lui  en  mourant). S'approchant  du  fauteuil,  sur  les  bras  duquel  il


XIL]


Beath-Coinci  den  ces.


219


s'appuya,  il  enjambea  les  pieds  de  la  domestique,  qui  se  trouvaic  la,  et  s'assit
dans  le  fauteuil  lentement.  En  ce  moment  la  pendule  de  la  chambre  sonna
11  heui'es.  Bien  sure  de  voir  distinctement  mon  beau-frere,  je  m'adressai
a  la  domestique  avec  la  question  suivante  : — '  Tu  vois,  Claudine  ? '  mais  je
ne  nommai  pas  mon  beau-frere.  La-dessus,  la  domestique,  tremblant  de
frayeur,  me  repondit  immediatement  : — '  Je  vois  Nicolas  Nilovitcli '  (le  nom
de  mon  beau-frere).  A  ces  paroles,  mon  beau-frere  se  leva  lentement,
enjambea  de  nouveau  les  pieds  etendus  de  Claudine  et,  se  tournant,  disparut
derriere  la  porte,  qui  conduisait  au  salon.  Cette  ajjparition  ne  m'efFraya
nullement,  mais  je  reveillai  immediatement  mon  mari,  en  le  priant  de
prendre  une  bougie  et  d'aller  voir  le  salon.  Mon  mari  se  rendit  a  ma  jDriere,
et  apres  avoir  visite  la  chambre  attentivement,  il  retourna,  disant  qu'il  n'y
avait  trouve  personne.  Alors  meme,  je  lui  dis,  que  sflrement  mon  beau-
frere  venait  de  mourir  a  Tver,  et,  comme  nous  nous  aimions  sincerement,  il
sera  certainement  venu  pour  prendre  conge.  En  eflet,  tout  cela  se  contirma
par  une  nouvelle,  arrivee  de  Tver,  et  annon^ant  que  mon  beau-frere  y  mourut
justement  le  17  Janvier,  1861,  a  11  heures  du  .soir.

"De  retour  d'Odessa  a  Tver,  il  m'arriva  un  jour  de  causer  de  cette  appa-
rition avec  le  prieur  de  I'eglise  de  Notre  Dame  St.  Vladimir,  I'archipretre
Vladislavlew,  qui,  de  mon  consentement,  publia  ce  recit  dans  la  gazette  du
diocese  de  Tver.

"  AiM^E  TICHONO^VNA  Obalecheff  (Veuve  de  conseiUer  de  college)."

Attestation  de  la  veiice  de  Mr.  Nicolas  Zikoff.

"  Je  certifie  ci-dessous,  que  quoique  la  lettre  de  ma  soeur,  Aimee  Ticho-
nowna  Obalecheff,  par  laquelle  elle  me  communiquait  I'apparition  de  mon
mari,  qu'elle  avait  vu  dans  I'etat  de  veille,  soit  deja  egaree,  je  sais  pour  sur
qu'elle  avait  exjaedie  cette  lettre,  avant  que  je  lui  eus  envoye  la  mienne  avec
la  nouvelle  de  la  mort  de  mon  mari,  qui  coincida  avec  le  jour  et  I'heure
meme  de  I'apparition.  Nous  tardions  de  lui  faire  part  de  notre  chagrin,  en
vue  de  ses  couches,  craignant  de  Tefirayer  par  cette  nouvelle.  Ce  n'est
qu'apres  avoir  reiju  sa  lettre  au  sujet  de  I'apparition,  que  nous  nous  decidames
de  confirmer  sa  supposition  sur  la  mort  de  mon  mari.  La  robe  de  chambre
decrite  par  ma  sceur,  et  dans  laquelle  lui  etait  apparu  mon  mari,  etait
identique  a  celle  qu'il  avait  en  mourant,  et  qui  a  eie  faite  peu  avant  sa  mort;
de  sorte  que  ma  soeur,  Obalecheff,  ne  I'avait  jamais  vue  avant.  A  son
retour  a  Tver  je  lui  montrai  cette  robe  de  chambre,  et  elle  confirma  que
c'etait  la  meme  qu'elle  avait  vue  sur  le  defunt  apparu.

"Elisabeth  Tichonowna  Zikoff  (Veuve  de  lieutenant)."
This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.

In  this  case,  as  in  the  last,  the  appearance  includes  a  veridical
feature  unknown  to  the  percipient,  but  not  one  of  any  interest
either  to  her  or  to  the  dying  man  : — viz  :  the  dressing  gown.  The  un-
importance of  this  detail  in  itself  does  not,  of  course,  affect  its  import-


220


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallitcinations.  [chap.


ance  as  evidence  of  the  operation  of  some  supernormal  faculty.  Another
point  of  interest  in  the  case  is  that  the  hallucination  appears  to  have
been  shared  by  a  second  person.  The  special  questions  raised  by  this
sharediiess  or  "  collectivity "  of  hallucinations  will  be  discussed  in
Chapter  XV.

This  completes  the  death-coincidences  about  which  it  is  stated
that  a  note  was  made  at  the  time.

The  importance  and  value  of  contemporary  documentary  evidence
for  telepathy  was  first  pointed  out  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (Vol.  I.
pp.  134-147),  and  has  been  constantly  and  emphatically  reiterated
by  those  who  are  working  at  psychical  research,  with  the  result  that,
in  addition  to  what  existed  at  tlie  time  Pliantasms  of  the  Living  was
written,  the  amount  of  it  has  since  been  steadily,  though  slowly
accumulating.  1  Some  of  the  critics  of  the  Society's  work  have  assumed
that  in  a  large  proportion,  probably  about  one  in  seven,  of  the  cases-
where  a  sensory  hallucination  is  expei'ienced,  the  percipient  would  at
once  write  a  letter  on  the  subject  to  some  friend,  and  that  letters  con-
taining such  accounts  would,  in  general,  be  carefully  preserved.  They
have  accordingly  maintained  that  the  absence  of  documentary  evidence
in  the  gt"eat  majority  of  cases  constitutes  a  positive  argument
against  the  telepathic  explanation.  The  force  of  this  argument
depends,  of  course,  primarily  on  the  frequency  with  which  contem-
porary notes  of  possibly  telepathic  incidents  are  made.  We  have
therefore  endeavoured  to  obtain  information  as  to  the  cases  in  which
any  notes  were  taken  at  the  time  of  the  hallucinatory  experience.
From  the  information  received,  it  appears  that  in  49  out  of  the
1942  cases  recorded,  that  is,  in  2 '5  per  cent,  some  note  was  made,  or
some  letter  mentioning  the  hallucination  written,  within  24  hours
of  the  occurrence,  and  before  knowing  whether  it  was  coincidental
or  not,  either  by  the  percipient  himself,  or  by  some  person  who  was
told  of  it  at  the  time.  We  have  included  in  the  49  some  cases  in
which  it  is  not  quite  certain  from  the  expressions  used  whether  our
informant  meant  that  he  had  made  a  W7'itten  or  a  mental  note  of
his  experience,  in  order  to  obtain  an  outside  estimate  of  the  number
of  cases  in  which  contemporary  documentary  evidence  of  any  kind
ever  existed.

1  A  discussion  of  the  state  ot  the  evidence  on  this  subject  two  years  ago,  with  a
selection  of  cases  received  since  the  publication  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living^  is  to  be
found  in  an  article  by  Mr.  Podmore,  "  In  Defence  of  Phantasms,"  in  the  National
Revieio  for  April,  1892.

-  There  is  also  an  auditory  case  not  coming  within  the  scope  of  the  Census  ques-
tion, but  printed  below,  No.  105.  1  (see  p.  291),  in  which  we  have  documentary  evi-
dence and  a  few  other  non- veridical  "non-Census  "  cases  were,  we  are  told,  noted  at
the  tiine. These  are  not  included  in  the  following  Table.


Death-Coincidences.  221


The  following  is  an  analysis  of  the  49  cases  : —


Number  of  Hallucinations
about  which  Notes  were  made.

Kind  of  Hallucinations.

Coinciding
with
deaths.

Coinciding
with  other
events.

Non-coin-
cidentcil.

Totals.

Apparitions  of  recognised  living  \
persons ... ■■. ■■■  1

6

6

12

24

Apparitions  of  recognised  dead  )
persons ... •  •  ■ ■  •  •  J

1

3

4

Other  visual  hallucinations

1

8

9

Auditory  hallucinations

1

1

8

10

Tactile  hallucinations

1

1

2

Totals

8

9

32

49

"Where  no  information  is  given  on  the  subject,  it  is  generally
probable  that  no  written  record  was  made  at  the  time ;  and  a  positive
statement  to  this  effect  is  made  in  214  cases.

It  will  be  observed  that  a  large  proportion  of the  noted  cases,
namely,  about  one  third,  are  prima  facie  veridical,  which  seems  to
show  that  veridical  cases  are,  on  the  whole,  more  impressive  at  the  time
than  subjective  ones. It  is,  of  course,  only  the  veridical  cases  in  which
the  documents  are  of value  as  evidence  for  telepathy,  but  the  im-
portant point  to  ascertain,  in  considering  how  much  documentary
evidence  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  forthcoming,  is,  in  how
many  cases  such  documents  were  written  before  it  was  known  whether
there  was  reason  to  regard  the  hallucination  as  veridical or  not.
"When  we  consider  the  very  small  proportion  of  adults  who  keep
diaries,  and  the  probably  still  smaller  proportion  of  people  who  are  in
the  habit  of making  any  other  written  notes,  otherwise  than  in
letters,  about  any  events  in  their  lives,  the  small  number  of  notes
reported  is  not  surprising. With regard  to  mention  in  letters,  it
happens  often  that  the  percipient  is  living  with  the  persons  to  whom,
if  he  were  living  elsewhere,  he  would  most  naturally  write  on  the
subject,  and  he  therefore  speaks  of  his  experience  and  does  not  write
of  it. It  has  also  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  great  majority  of
educated  persons  are  reasonably  afraid  of  being  ridiculed  as  super-
stitious if  they  appear  to  attach  importance  to  such  experiences  ;  and
are  therefore  much  more  inclined  to  communicate  them  orally  to  sym-
pathetic auditors,  than  to  narrate  them  in  letters. It  follows  that
corroborative  evidence  depending  on  some  person's  recollections  of


222  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


a  verljal  communication,  exists  much  more  often  than  contemporaiy
written  evidence.  We  should  further  expect  that,  even  if  the  percipient
did  mention  his  experience  in  a  letter,  he  would  be  inclined  to  put
off  doing  so  till  he  had  ascertained  that  there  was  "  something  in
it."  Also  in  a  large  propoi'tion  of  the  death -coincidences,  the  news
of  the  death  is  said  to  have  followed  the  experience  after  so  short
an  interval  that  any  letter  telling  of  the  hallucination  before  the
percipient  received  the  news  would  have  had  to  be  written  very
promptly.

As  to  the  preservation  of  any  notes  that  are  made,  it  must  be
remembered  that,  as  a  rule,  only  a  very  small  proportion  of  letters
written  on  any  subject  are  producible  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  yeai's.
Diaries  also  are  often  destroyed  after  some  time,  and  all  kinds  of
papers  are  liable  to  be  disposed  of  indiscriminately  in  the  course  of
household  removals,  and  at  the  death  of  their  owner.

When  the  percipient  makes  a  note  for  himself,  he  is  generally
simply  interested  in  proving  to  himself  that  the  hallucination  has  been
coincidental.  This  is  done  once  for  all  by  his  comparing  it  with  the
time  of  death,  when  he  hears  what  this  is,  and — for  him — the  note  is
aftei'wards  almost  or  quite  valueless.  In  eight  cases  out  of  the  seven-
teen, in  fact,  the  percipient  tells  us  that  the  note  was  destroyed  after  the
coincidence  had  been  verified.  It  would  probably  occur  to  very  few
people — unless  they  had  been  convinced  of  the  scientific  importance  of
the  matter — to  keep  such  a  paper  for  the  sake  of  proving  to  others
afterwards  that  the  event  had  happened  to  them  just  at  that  time.
Either  they  would  not  expect  that  other  people  would  be  sufficiently
interested  to  enquire  into  the  matter  so  minutely,  or  they  would  ex-
pect these  others  to  be  their  intimate  friends  or  near  relatives,  who
were  not  in  the  habit  of  demanding  from  them  written  evidence  of
their  statements.

We  should,  however,  expect — and  this  is  what  we  find  has  actually
happened — that  in  a  few  cases  the  percipient  who  had  made  a  note,
would  keep  it  for  himself  as  a  memento  of  an  important  or  striking
event  in  his  life ;  and  that  a  certain  proportion  of  the  letters
describing  the  hallucinations  would  be  considered  by  their  recipients
sufficiently  interesting  to  be  carefully  preserved  ;  or  that  we  might  be
able  to  trace  the  answers  received  by  the  percipient  to  these  letters,
which  answers,  if  dated  and  sufficiently  detailed,  have  practically
the  same  evidential  value  as  the  original  letters.

Whether  the  proportion  of  documentary  evidence  that  has  been
preserved  in  the  coincidental  cases  is,  or  is  not,  smaller  than  would  be
reasonably  expected,  we  must  leave  to  the  judgment  of  our  readers.
Since  the  numbers  are  so  small,  it  will  be  convenient  to  summarise
here  the  amount  of  the  evidence  in  the  two  classes  of  "  death-coinci-


XII.]


Death- Coincidences.


223


dences "  and  "  coincidences  with  other  events  "  put  together,  but  it
of  course,  be  obvious,  on  referring  to  each  case,  to  which  class  it
belongs.  Of  the  17  coincidental  cases  which  were  noted  at  the  time,
the  note  has  been  seen  by  us  in  two  cases  (No.  442.  17,  see  p.  213,  and
No.  660.  6,  seep.  282)  ;  in  a  third  case  (No.  290.  3,  see  p.  293)  a  letter
which  was  written  in  answer  to  one  from  the  percipient  describing  her
expei'ience,  and  which  establishes  the  coincidence,  has  been  seen  by
us  ;  in  a  fourth  case  (No.  34.  20,  see  p.  289)  we  have  received  a  copy  of
a  similar  letter  ;  and  in  five  other  cases  (No.  147.  23,  see  p.  218  ;
No.  381.  4,  see  p.  214  :  No.  425.  12,  see  p.  211  ;  No.  78.  16,  see  p.  299  ;
No.  458.  9,  see  p.  279)  we  have  evidence — either  from  the  persons  who
received  the  letters,  or  from  those  who  witnessed  the  making  of  the
notes— confirmatory  of  the  percipient's  statement  that  the  letters  or
notes  were  written  at  the  time.

The  next  best  kind  of  confirmatory  evidence  is  that  alForded  by
the  testimony  of  a  second  person  who  has  known  of  the  percipient's
impression  at  the  time,  before  the  arrival  of  the  news  of  death,  and  with
him  has  been  aware  of  the  coincidence  as  soon  as  it  was  ascertained.  The
case  then  rests  on  the  agreement  between  the  memory  of  two  persons
instead  of  on  the  memory  of  one,  and  granting  that  each  memoiy  by
itself  may  be  liable  to  err,  it  is  unlikely  that  both  would  happen  to
have  corresponding  illusions ; — though  it  is  not  impossible  that  by
verbal  suggestion,  some  illusion  of  memory  on  the  part  of  the  second
witness  might  be  induced,  eg.,  to  the  effect  that  he  had  heard  of  the
event  at  the  time,  when  he  had  not  really  heard  of  it  till  some  time
afterwards.^

The  death-coincidences  among  the  62  with  this  kind  of  confirma-
tion are  10  in  number,  besides  4  of  those  we  have  already  quoted.
We  give  9  of  them  here,  in  chronological  order  as  before.

(579. 24.)  From  Mr.  E.  A.

(His  original  account,  written  in  Russian,  was  translated  into  French  by  the

collector,  Mr.  AksakofF.)

81  Janvier,  1892. St.  Petersbourg.

' '  C'etait  a  Milan,  le  10  (22)  Octobre,  1888.  Je  demeurais  a  I'hotel  Ancora.
Apres  le  diner,  vers  7  heures,  j'etais  assis  sur  le  sofa  et  je  lisais  une  gazette.
Ma  femme  se  reposait  dans  la  meme  chambre  sur  une  couchette,  derriere  un
rideau.  La  chambre  etait  ^clairee  par  une  lampe  placee  sur  la  table,  auprJjs
de  laquelle  j'etais  assis  et  lisais. Tout-k.-coup  je  vis  sur  le  fond  de  la  porte,  qui

'  A  conspicuous  instance  of  a  joint  illusion  of  memory  was  met  wth  in  a  story
which,  in  the  early  days  of  the  S.P.R.,  was  published  on  the  authority  of  two  unim-
peachable witnesses,  and  had  afterwards  to  be  withdrawn  on  the  discovery  of
chronolosrical  inconsistencies  which  made  it  impossible  that  the  events  should  have
occurred  as  described. But  we  believe  cases  of  the  kind  to  be  rare.


224


Report  on  the  Census  of  Halliocinations.  [chap.


se  trouvait  en  face  de  nioi,  la  figure  de  inon  pere  ;  il  etait,  coninie  tou jours,
en  surtout  noir,  tres  pale,  comnie  niourant.  En  ce  moment  j'entendis  tout
pres  de  mon  oreille  une  voix  qui  me  disait  :  '  On  apportera  une  depeche
que  tonpk'e  est  mort.'  Tout  cela  ne  prit  que  quelques  secondes.  Je  sautai
sur  pied  et  me  precipitai  vers  ma  fcmme,  mais  pour  ne  pas  I'efFrayer  je  ne
lui  en  dit  rien  ;  pour  motiver  mon  irruption  je  lui  criai :  '  Voila,  tu  ne  vois
pas  que  la  bouilloire  a  the  deborde.'  ....  Le  soir  du  meme  jour,  vers  les  11
lieures,  nous  etions  a  prendre  le  thd,  en  compagnie  de  plusieurs  personnes,
parmi  lesquelles  se  trouvaient  Mme.  Y.,  sa  fille,  E.Y.,  ci-devant  artiste  des
theatres  imperiaux,  et  Mile.  M.,  demeurant  a  present  a  Florence.  Tout-a-coup
on  frappe  k  la  porte  et  le  concierge  annonce  une  depeche.  Bleme  d'emoi,  je
m'ecrie  immediatement  :  '  Je  sais,  mon  pere  est  mort,  j'ai  vu.'  ...  La
depeche  contenait  ces  mots  :  'Papa  mort  subitement. — Olga.'  C'etait  une
depeche  de  ma  sceur  vivant  a  Petersbourg.  J'appris  plus  tard  que  mon  pere
s'etait  suicid(^  le  matin  du  meme  jour."

Temoignage  de  Mme.  A.
"  J'ai  ete  jjresente  a  cela,  et  je  temoigne  de  I'exactitude  du  recit.

"W.  A."

Mr.  Aksakoff  writes  : —

"Mme.  et  Mile.  Y.  ne  se  trouvent  pas  a.  Petersbourg,  et  oil  sont  elles
M.  A.  ne  le  salt  pas. J'ai  vu  I'original  de  la  depeche,  dont  voila  la  copie  :

"  'Ricevuto  il  22, i  1888.  Milano,  Petersbourg,  data  22, i  ore  e  minute,
■8.40. Papa  mort  subitement. — Olga.'  "

Milan,  i.e.,  Roman,  time  is  about  70  minutes  later  than  St.  Petersburg
time,  so  that  the  apparition  occurx-ed  about  half-an-hour  after  the  despatch  of
the  telegram.

This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  this  is  again  a  case  in  which  the  fact  of
the  death  is  communicated  by  the  hallucination.  The  same  may  prac-
tically be  said  with  regard  to  the  following  case,  in  view  of  the  parting
words  of  the  friend  whose  apparition  is  seen.

(215.  9.)  From  Miss  J.  E.  L.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889. )

"On  June  14th,  1885,  while  awake,  I  suddenly  saw  the  figure  of  a  friend
at  the  door.  She  looked  very  ill,  came  to  me,  and  bent  down  and  kissed  me.
I  got  out  of  bed,  looked  at  the  hour  ;  it  was  between  6  and  7  o'clock.  The
next  day  I  received  news  my  friend  had  died  at  that  hour.  I  was  in  London
at  the  time.  I  had  left  home  in  May,  and  on  saying  good-bye  to  my  friend,
she  asked  me,  should  she  die  while  I  was  away,  might  she  come  to  me  in
spirit  and  tell  me  so  ?  I  said,  '  Yes, '  hardly  realising  what  was  meant.  I
was  in  bed,  in  my  usual  healtli,  and  not  in  grief  or  anxiety.

"  No  [other  persons  were  present  at  the  time]."

Miss  L.  informs  us  that  she  has  had  no  other  experiences  of  tlie  kind.
J  "  Le  nom  du  mois  (Octobre)  est  omis  par  negligence  du  bureau  telegraphique."


XII.]


Death  -  Co  incides  ices.


225


The  collector,  Miss  Finlay,  writes,  in  answer  to  questions  : — "  [Miss  L.]
did  know  that  her  friend  was  dying.  I  may  add  that  I  was  aware  of  the
incident  soon  after  it  occurred,  and  knew  about  the  lady  and  the  circum-
stances of  her  death."

Miss  L.'s  sister  writes  : —

"  I  remember  my  sister  telling  me  that  her  friend  had  appeared  to  her  in
the  early  morning,  and  when  she  was  told  there  was  a  letter  from  home  she
said,  '  Yes,  I  know  that  my  friend  is  dead.'  "  E.  M."

Miss  L  ,  who  is  now  in  a  sisterhood,  was  unwilling  to  see  a  member  of
the  Committee  on  the  subject.

The  following,  as  will  be  seen,  is  also  a  case  in  which  the  person
whose  apparition  is  seen  had  promised  to  appear,  if  possible,  to  the
percipient.

(379. 24.)  From  the  Rev.  Matthew  Frost.

■  •  Bowers  Gilford,  Essex,  January  30th,  1891.

"The  first  Thursday  in  April,  1881,  while  sitting  at  tea  with  my  back  to
the  window  and  talking  with  my  wife  in  the  usual  way,  I  plainly  heard  a  rap
at  the  window,  and  looking  round  I  said  to  my  wife,  '  Why,  there's  my
grandmother,'  and  went  to  the  door,  but  could  not  see  anyone  ;  and  still
feeling  sure  it  was  my  grandmother,  and  knowing,  though  83  years  of  age,
she  was  very  active  and  fond  of  a  joke,  I  went  round  the  house,  but  could
not  see  anyone.  My  wife  did  not  hear  it.  On  the  following  Saturday  I  had
news  my  grandmother  died  in  Yorkshire  about  half  an  hour  before  the  time
I  heard  the  rapping.  The  last  time  I  saw  her  alive  I  promised,  if  well,  I
would  attend  her  funeral  ;  that  [was]  some  two  years  before.  I  was  in  good
health  [and]  had  no  trouble,  [age]  26  years.  I  did  not  know  that  my  grand-
mother was  ill."

Mrs.  Frost  writes  :—  January  30th,  1891.

"  I  beg  to  certify  that  I  perfectly  remember  all  the  circumstances  my
husband  has  named,  but  I  heard  and  saw  nothing  myself."

The  house  (seen  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick)  in  which  Mr.  Frost  was  living  when
the  event  occurred,  stands  some  way  back  from  the  road  in  a  garden,  and  the
door  into  the  garden  opens  out  of  the  sitting-room,  so  that  he  must  have  got
to  the  door  much  too  quickly,  if  he  went  at  once,  for  anyone  to  liave  got
away  unseen  by  him.

Professor  Sidgwick,  who  called  on  Mr.  Frost  on  June  18th,  1892,  gives
the  following  account  of  his  interview,  written  from  full  notes  taken  at  the
time  ; —

June  22nd,  1892.

"  Mr.  Frost  had  last  seen  his  grandmother  in  December,  1878.  When  he
said  good-bye  to  her  she  said  that  she  might  never  see  him  again  on  earth
and  asked  him  to  come  to  her  if  she  became  ill,  or  if  not,  to  her  funeral.
He  promised  he  would  come,  and  said  :  '  They  tell  me  that  when  people  die
they  can  make  it  known  to  those  they  love. If  you  die  and  are  happy  will

Q


226


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


you  let  me  know  it '? '  She  promised  that  .she  would  if  she  could.  She
had  gone  through  trouble  some  years  before  and  he  had  always  been  very
fond  of  her.

"  Mr.  Fro.st  was  sitting  at  tea  with  his  back  to  the  window  when  he  heard
a  distinct  knocking.  He  said,  '  What's  tliat  ? '  turned  round  and  saw  his
grandmother.  He  saw  her  face  (\mie  clearly — in  tlie  bonnet  and  cape  that
she  used  to  wear,  and  saw  her  hand  in  the  attitude  of  having  just  tapped  at
the  window.  Tliis  was  at  Bowers  Gifford,  between  Southend  and  Pitsea,
200  to  300  miles  from  Knottingley,  where  she  lived.  His  idea  was  that  she
had  taken  a  journey  to  surprise  him.  Slie  was  an  active  old  lady,
and  an  excursion  of  the  kind  did  not  at  the  time  seem  surprising  to  him.
He  thought  she  had  come  in  this  way  for  a  joke,  and  went  at  once  to  the
door  and  all  round  the  house,  but  could  find  no  one.  He  is  quite  certain
that  no  one  could  have  got  away  without  being  seen.  It  was  about  5  o'clock
in  April — full  daylight.  He  remembers  the  time  of  year  by  his  having  just
come  back  from  his  Easter  liolidays,  and  the  time  of  the  day  by  the  fact  that
he  was  at  tea.

If  it  had  been  a  real  knock  and  a  real  person,  Mrs.  Frost  must  have
heard  and  seen  it.  He  was  surprised  at  her  not  hearing  and  seeing,  and  she
says  tliat  she  must  have  done  so  if  a  real  person  had  been  there,  and  that  she
would  have  seen  a  person  coming  up  the  path.  As  it  was,  she  could  not
understand  what  was  tlie  matter.

"  Mr.  Frost  did  not  at  first  regard  it  as  supernatural,  but  when  he  came
back,  having  found  nobody,  the  explanation  that  his  grandmother  was  dead
occurred  to  liim.  Mrs.  Frost  remembers  his  saying,  '  I  should  not  be
surprised  if  my  grandmother  is  dead.'  He  had  heard  of  things  of  the  kind,
Init — in  spite  of  the  talk  with  his  grandmother — did  not  really  believe  in
them.  He  has  never  had  any  experience  of  the  kind  before  or  since  (only
coincidences  of  thinking  about  people  just  before  they  appeared,  and  to  this
he  attached  no  importance),  and  would  have  ridiculed  the  subject  five  minutes
before.  They  had  not  been  talking  or  thinking  about  her,  and  did  not  know
she  was  ill.  He  certainly  would  not  have  gone  away  for  a  holiday  if  he  had
had  any  idea  of  being  summoned  to  her  bedside.

"  They  had  news  of  her  death  by  letter,  naming  the  day  and  hour.  Mrs.
Frost  remembers  the  letter  coming,  and  that  they  noticed  the  coincidence  of
time.  Mr.  Frost  went  to  tlie  funeral,  but  arrived  on  the  Monday  after,  his
grandmother  having  been  buried  on  Sunday.  He  saw  the  coffin,  which  was
left  in  the  open  grave  till  he  came.

"I  got  the  information  mainly  from  Mr.  Frost  when  Mrs.  Frost  was  out
of  the  room,  and  then  obtained  her  confirmation  by  questions  afterwards."

Mr.  Frost  could  not  remember  the  exact  date  of  the  death,  but  enquired
of  his  brother,  who  stated  that  it  was  April  21st,  1880.  We  find,  however,
from  the  Register,  that  the  true  date  was  Api-il  21st,  1881,  and  this  was,  in
accordance  with  Mr.  Frost's  statement  in  conversation,  the  first  Thursday
after  Easter,  1881,  though  not,  of  course,  the  first  Thursday  in  the  month.

This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.

The  next  case  is  a  very  peculiar  one  ;  since  a  hallucination  shared
"by  seven  persons  and  (apparently)  by  a  dog  also  is  something  unique


XII.]


Death-Coincidences.


227


in  our  collection.  There  seems,  however,  no  reason  to  doubt  that  an
apparition  was  seen,  by  the  three  persons  who  sign  the  account,  at  a
time  approximately  coinciding  with  the  death  of  the  child.

(422.  25.)  From  Mr.  D.  Amosof.

(The  account  is  translated  from  the  original  Russian  by  the  collector,  Mr.
Aksakoff. )

St.  Petersburg,  May  ith,  1891.
"  Voila  le  phenomene  dont  toute  notre  famille  fut  tenioin.  C'dtait
a  P^tersbourg,  en  1880,  lorsque  nous  deiueurions  rue  Pouchkarska.  Par
une  soiree  du  mois  de  Mai,  vers  les  6  heures,  ma  mere  (aujourd'hui  Madame
Teldchof)  se  trouvait  au  salon  avec  ses  cinq  enfants,  dont  j'etais  I'ame
(j'avais  alors  16  ans).  En  ce  moment  vni  anoien  serviteur  de  la  maison,
qu'on  traitait  en  ami  (mais  qui  alors  ne  servait  plus  cliez  nous),  ^tait  venu
nous  voir  et  etait  engage  dans  une  conversation  avec  ma  mere.  Tout  a  coup
les  ^bats  joyeux  des  enfants  s'arreterent,  et  I'attention  generale  se  porta
vers  notre  chien  'Moustache,'  qui  s'dtait  precipite,  en  abeyant  fortement,
vers  le  poele.  Involontaii'ement  nous  regardames  tous  dans  la  meme  direc-
tion, et  nous  vimes  sur  la  corniche  du  grand  poele  en  carreaux  de  faience
un  petit  garQon,  de  5  ans  a  peu  pr^s,  en  chemise.  Dans  ce  gargon  nous
reconnumes  le  fils  de  notre  laitiere — Andre,  qui  venait  chez  nous  sou  vent
avec  sa  mere  pour  jouer  avec  les  enfants ;  ils  vivaient  tout  jn'es  de  nous.
L'apparition  se  ddtacha  du  poele,  passa  au-dessus  de  laous  tous,  et  disparut
dans  la  crois^e  ouverte.  Pendant  tout  ce  temps, — une  quinzaine  de  secondes
a  peu  pres — le  chien  ne  cessait  d'aboyer  de  toutes  ses  forces,  et  courrait  et
aboyait  en  suivant  le  mouvement  de  l'apparition.  Le  meme  jour,  un  peu
plus  tard,  notre  laitiere  vint  chez  nous,  et  nous  fit  part  que  son  fils  Andre,
apres  une  maladie  de  quelques  jours  (nous  savionsqu'il  dtait  malade)  venait
de  mourir  ;  c'etait  probablement  au  moment  oil  nous  le  vimes  apparaitre.

' '  Daniel  Amosof.

"  Marie  TeliSchof
' '  (la  mere  de  M.  Amosof  en  second  mariage).

' '  KOUZEMA  PeTROF

"  (vivant  a  present  a  L^biajey^,  pr^s  Oranienbaum). "

This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.
For  another  experience  of  Mr.  Amosof,  see  p.  192.

The  next  case  presents  a  marked  contrast  to  the  last ;  since  the
figure  was  invisible  to  all  present  except  the  one  percipient,  although
the  attention  of  others  was  called  to  it.

(630.  5.)  From  Mr.  J.  H.

March  29th,  1892.

"  It  occurred  at  Bury  (Lancashire),  about  fourteen  years  ago;  I  was
awakened  by  a  rattling  noise  at  the  window,  and  wakened  my  step-brother,
with  whom  I  was  sleeping,  and  asked  him  if  lie  could  hear  it.  He  told
me  to  go  to  sleep,  there  was  nothing.  The  rattle  came  again  in  a  few
minutes,  and  I  sat  up  in  bed,  and  distinctly  saw  the  image  of  one  of  my

Q  2


228  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


step-brothers  (who  at  the  time  was  in  Blackpool)  pass  from  the  window
towards  the  door. Time,  2.30  a.m.

"  I  was  in  good  health  and  spirits. Age  eighteen.

"  I  had  not  seen  him  for  some  time.  He  had  not  been  home  for  2  or  3
months.  We  heard  next  morning  that  he  had  been  taken  ill  and  died  about
2.30  a.m.

"Three  step-brothers  and  myself  slejjt  in  the  same  room.  I  awakened
them,  but  they  could  not  see  anything.  My  father,  hearing  the  talking,
got  out  of  bed,  and  came  into  the  room.  I  told  him  what  I  had  seen,
and  he  got  his  watch,  and  said,  '  We  will  see  if  we  hear  anything  of  him.'  "

Mr.  H.  adds  that  this  is  the  only  hallucinatory  experience  he  has
ever  had.

The  following  corroboration  from  one  of  the  step-brothers  was  sent
by  the  collector,  Mr.  Butterworth,  of  16,  Essex  Street,  Rochdale,  who  says  :
"  I  regret  that  I  am  unable  to  get  more  than  one  signature,  as  the  father  is
dead,  and  the  other  two  brothers  are  abroad."

"I  remember  very  distinctly  my  step-brother,  J.  H.,  getting  up  in  bed
one  night  in  August,  1878,  and  saying  he  could  see  an  apparition  of  my
brother  in  a  kneeling  position,  and  my  father  coming  into  the  bedroom
to  ask  what  was  the  matter.  He  referred  to  his  watch,  and  found  it
was  about  2.30  a.m.  The  following  morning  we  received  news  of  my
brother's  death  at  the  time  stated.

(Signed) "  W.  R."

"Witness  :  S.  R."

The  next  case  is  counted  as  belonging  to  a  period  more  than  10
years  ago,  since  it  occurred  15  years  before  the  percipient  was  asked
the  Census  question  ;  but  it  will  be  observed  that  the  account  was
written  in  1884,  within  10  years  of  the  incident.

(83.  21.)  From  Miss  Ellen  M.  Greany  (now  Mrs.  Edwards.)

Formerly  a  servant  in  the  family  of  Miss  Porter,  at  16,  Russell  Square,
W.C.

[This  case  is  reprinted  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  JI.,  p.  54.]

May  20th,  1884.

"  I  sat  one  evening  reading,  when,  on  looking  up  from  my  book,  I  dis-
tinctly saw  a  school  friend  of  mine  to  whom  I  was  very  much  attached,
standing  near  the  door.  I  was  about  to  exclaim  at  the  strangeness  of  her
visit,  when,  to  my  horror,  there  were  no  signs  of  anyone  in  the  room  but
my  mother.  I  related  what  I  had  seen  to  her,  knowing  she  could  not  have
seen,  as  she  was  sitting  with  her  back  towards  the  door,  nor  did  she  hear
anything  unusual,  and  was  greatly  amused  at  my  scare,  suggesting  I  had  read
too  much  or  been  dreaming.

' '  A  day  or  so  after  this  strange  event,  I  had  news  to  say  my  friend  was
no  more.  The  .strange  part  was  I  did  not  even  know  she  was  ill,  much  less
in  danger,  so  could  not  have  felt  anxious  at  the  time  on  her  account,  but  may
have  been  thinking  of  her:  that  I  cannot  testify. Her  illness  was  .short.


XII.]


Death- Coinciden  ces.


229


and  death  very  unexpected.  Her  mother  told  me  she  spoke  of  me  not  very
long  before  she  died,  and  wondered  I  had  not  been  to  see  her,  thuiking,  of
course,  I  had  some  knowledge  of  her  illness,  which  was  not  the  case.  It
may  be  as  well  to  mention  she  left  a  small  box  she  prized  rather,  to  be  given
to  me  in  remembrance  of  her.  She  died  the  same  evening  and  about  the  same
time  that  I  saw  her  vision,  which  was  the  end  of  October,  1874.

"Ellen  M.  Greany."

In  answer  to  an  enquiry.  Miss  Greany  adds  that  this  hallucination  is  the
only  one  she  has  ever  experienced.  She  was  then  about  15  years  old.  She
tells  Miss  Porter  that  she  went  to  see  her  dead  friend  before  the  funeral,
which  accords  with  her  statement  that  she  heard  the  news  of  the  death  very
soon  after  it  occurred  ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that,  at  the  time
when  she  heard  the  news,  she  was  able  correctly  to  identify  the  day  of  her
vision.

Her  mother  corroborates  as  follows  : —

Acton,  July,  1884.
"  I  can  well  remember  the  instance  my  daughter  speaks  of.  I  know  she
was  not  anxious  at  the  time,  not  knowing  her  friend  was  ill.  I  took  no  notice
of  it  at  the  time,  as  I  do  not  believe  in  ghosts,  but  thought  it  strange  the
next  day,  when  we  heard  she  was  dead,  and  died  about  the  same  time  that
my  daughter  saw  her.

"  Margaret  Greasy."

Mr.  Gurney  writes  :  —

"  I  have  seen  Ellen  Greany,  who  is  a  superior  and  intelligent  person.
She  went  over  her  story  without  prompting,  giving  an  entirely  clear  and  con-
sistent account,  and  standing  cross-examination  perfectly."

This  case  was  known  to  the  collector,  Miss  Porter,  beforehand,  but
the  percipient  was  not  included  in  the  Census  because  of  her  experience,  and
the  case  is  one  of  those  referred  to  on  p.  210  as  known  beforehand,  but  not
selected.

In  the  next  case  the  interval  in  time  between  the  apparition  and
the  news  of  the  death  is  unusually  long,  and  there  is  a  discrepancy  as
to  the  day  of  the  week  remembered  by  the  percipient ;  but  her  recollec-
tion that  the  coincidence  of  the  two  events  was  ascertained  when  the
news  came  is  clearly  corroborated  by  her  husband.

(307.  20.)  From  Mrs.  Murray.

Langholm,  Upper  Norwood,  June  IStli,  1890.

' '  Some  time  in  the  summer  of  1869,  awaking  suddenly  at  night,  I  dis-
tinctly saw  a  man  in  naval  uniform,  whose  features  I  recognised,  standing  in
the  room,  who  seemed  to  walk  bel^ind  a  curtain.  I  had  not  seen  the  person
for  some  years,  or  thought  or  spoken  of  him.

"  I  was  in  good  health  ;  21  years  old.

"I  distinctly  saw  and  recognised  the  face.  Some  months  after,  I  heard
that  the  person  I  had  seen  had  died  the  same  night  I  thought  I  had  seen
him,  somewhere  at  sea.


230  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


"I  awoke  my  husband,  told  him  whom  I  liad  seen,  and  he  searched  the
room  and  house.

"  I  have  never  had  any  other  experience,  and  am  not  nervous  or  fanciful.

"Florence  Murray."

Mr.  Podmore  called  on  Mrs.  Murray  on  March  29th,  1892,  and  wrote  an
account  of  his  interview  the  same  day  as  follows  : —

"The  vision  happened  in  1869. The  figure  seen  was  that  of  a  young-

man,  Mr. ,  who had known Mrs. Murray before her  marriage.

The  naval  uniform  with  bi'ass  buttons,  in  which  the  apparition  was  dressed,

she  had  never  seen. Mr.  ,  however,  as  she  knew,  had  left  England  a

few  months  before  the  vision,  having  obtained  some  appointment  on  a  ship
— probably  purser  on  a  P.  and  0.  steamer.  She  showed  me  a  photograph  of
him — given  to  her  later — in  naval  uniform,  but  witli  gold  band  and  large
brass  buttons.  She  told  her  husband  what  slae  had  seen,  and  he  got  up  and
searched  the  room.

"Next  day  (probably  a  Saturday)  she  met  the  young  man's  mother  at
the  Crystal  Palace,  and  asked  if  he  were  quite  well.  The  news  of  his  death
— by  an  accident  at  sea — she  saw  some  three  weeks  or  a  month  later  (she
thinks),  in  an  evening  paper.  The  vision  occurred  in  the  summer  of  18G9,
early  in  the  morning,  for  the  room  was  partly  light.

' '  No  notes  were  taken  of  the  vision,  but  she  and  Mr.  Murray  talked  the
matter  over  when  they  heard  of  the  death,  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that
it  occurred  on  the  same  day,  the  date  of  vision  being  fixed  by  the  fact  of  her
going  to  the  Palace  on  the  following  day."

Mr.  Murray's  corroboration  was  given  in  answer  to  Mr.  Podmore's
request.

April  3rd,  1892.

"  Mrs.  Murray  has  advised  me  of  your  visit  and  the  purport  thereof.
"I  recollect  the  circumstance  very  distinctly,  but  saw  nothing  myself.

"I however  ascertained  that  ■  's  death  did  occur  at  that  time,  as

nearly  as  difference  of  [longitude]  will  allow.

"M.  Murray."

Mr.  Podmore  wrote  to  Mr. 's  brother  asking  for  the  date  of  his

death,  and  was  informed  that  he  died  on  A.ugust  24th,  1869,  on  one  of  the
Royal  Mail  Company's  steamers,  and  was  buried  at  sea.  August  24th,  1869,
was  a  Tuesday  ;  so  that  Mrs.  Mui'ray's  present  impression  as  to  the  day  of
her  visit  to  the  Crystal  Palace  is  probably  at  fault.

The  following  is  again  a  case  of  shared  or  collective  hallucination  : —

(418. 4.)  From  Mr.  H.  Sims.

64,  Geach-street,  Birmingham,  May  20th,  1891.

"  Sixteen  years  ago,  I  had  just  got  into  bed,  but  had  not  lowered  the  gas,
which  was  brightly  burning.  My  wife  and  I  both  saw  her  aunt  walk  acrosa
the  room  and  disappear.  The  figure  was  as  plain  as  in  life.  She  lived
one  and  a-half  miles  away,  and  was  ill  at  the  time.  Next  day  we  heard  she
had  died  about  that  hour.

"My  age  was  26.  "Henry  SiMS."


XII.]  : ■■  Death-Coincidences.


231


Mrs.  Sims  adds  a  note  to  the  narrative  : —
' '  I  certify  the  above  to  be  correct.

"Eliza  Sims."

Mr.  Sims,  who  is  an  engineer  in  a  factory  at  Birmingham,  says  that  he
has  had  no  other  hallucination,  except  a  non- vocal  auditory  one,  and  that
he  was  not  out  of  health  or  in  anxiety  on  eitlier  occasion.

Mr.  Myers  writes  : —

December  Idth.,  1891.

"  I  saw  Mr.  and  Mi-s.  Sims  yesterday  evening.  They  seem  both  of  them
sensible  persons.  They  are  quite  sure  that  they  saw  the  figure  independenily .
They  both  saw  it  move  in  the  same  direction.  The  date  was  more  remote
than  Mr.  Sims  had  at  first  supposed,  viz.,  January,  1869."

This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.

In  the  next  case  the  experience  is  veiy  remote  ;  but  tlie  recollection
both  of  the  percipient  and  of  his  wife  appears  to  be  quite  firm  and  clear.

(523.  12.)'  From  Mr.  John  Cass.

Castleford,  Yorkshire,  December  IS^Ti,  1891.

"[In]  May,  1845,  in  Castleford,  Yorks,  about  10  p.m.,  I  saw  the  figure
of  my  sister  Isabella  pass  through  the  bedroom.  [I  had]  just  retired  to
rest — light  still  burning  in  bedroom  ;  [I  was]  in  good  health  ;  age  29  years.
My  sister  and  I  were  in  great  sympathy  of  spirit.  I  learned  next  day  that
she  had  died  at  the  same  hour  of  above  experience,  at  Barnsley,  17  miles  off.

"  My  wife  was  present  at  above  time,  to  whom  I  remarked,  'My  sister
Isabella  is  dead,  I  have  just  seen  her  pass  through  the  room.'  My  wife  did
not  share  the  experience.  [I  have  had]  no  other  experience  so  distinct  as
[the]  above.  "John  Cass."

Professor  Sidgwick  writes  : —

March  IStli,  1892.

"I  called  on  Mr.  Jolm  Cass  this  morning,  and  also  saw  his  wife.  Slie
said  that  she  remembered  the  incident  as  clearly  as  possible.  She  remem-
bered that  her  husband  said,  'My  sister  Isabella  is  dead,'  that  she
answered,  'How  do  you  know  T  and  that  he  replied,  '  She  has  just  passed
through  the  room.'  I  asked  about  the  coincidence  of  time.  She  said,  they
generally  went  to  bed  about  10,  and  as  she  was  not  yet  in  bed  when  the
apparition  was  seen  by  her  husband,  the  time  of  it  was  thus  approximately
fixed.  It  happened  on  Sunday.  They  learnt  that  it  coincided  with  the
time  of  the  death  by  a  letter  that  arrived  on  Tuesday  from  another  sister.
Mrs.  Cass  said  that  she  remembered  her  husband  remarking,  wlien  the  letter
had  been  read,  '  that  it  would  be  about  the  same  time. '  The  letter  was  long-
since  burnt.  The  sister  died  of  consumption,  aged  24,  near  Barnsley,  17
miles  off.  They  knew  tliat  she  was  very  ill,  but  had  no  expectation  of  hev
death  as  imminent  at  the  time  when  Mr.  Cass  saw  the  apparition.  Mr.
Cass  was  irot  inclined  to  give  details  about  the  figure,  beyond  saying  that  it
passed  through  the  room,  that  he  knew  it  was  spiritual,  Init  felt  no  alarm.
Mrs.  Cass  thought  that  she  must  have  seen  it  if  it  liad  been  a  real  human
being. He  was  also  reluctant  to  give  details  of  his  other  experiences,  but


232


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


he  said  unhesitatingly  that  this  was  the  oiily  time  he  saw  the  apparition  of
a  relative  or  friend.  He  thinks  that  he  can  make  others  think  uf  him,
and  know  clairvoyantly  what  they  are  doing.  He  mentioned,  and  Mrs.  Cass
confirmed,  that  a  daughter  living  13  miles  off  had  come  to  see  him,  with
her  liusband,  meaning  to  take  him  by  surprise,  and  found  dinner  specially
prepared  for  her  and  lier  husband."

The  1 0th  case  in  which  we  have  testimony  from  more  than  one  per-
son who  knew  of  the  experience  before  the  news  of  the  death  was
received — viz.,  No.  118.20 — will  1)e  found  in  F/iantasins  of  the  Living,
Vol.  II.  p.  462,  where  it  is  numbered  500.  We  do  not  reprint  it  here,
as  there  is  some  doubt  whether  the  hallucination  preceded  the  death  by
four  to  six  hours,  or  followed  it  by  some  18  or  20  hours.  In  the  latter
case,  it  would  not  of  course  have  been  a  "death-coincidence"  according
to  our  definition.  In  this  instance  the  death  happened  at  a  distance,
and  was  not  heard  of  till  some  weeks  later,  as  in  Mrs.  Murray's  expe-
rience above.  Under  these  circumstances,  there  is  na,turally  more
doubt  about  the  coincidence  when  no  note  is  made,  since  the  evidence
depends  on  the  percipient's  remembering  the  date  of  the  hallucination
accurately  when  the  news  comes.  If  the  death  is  heai'd  of  by  telegram
or  otherwise  on  the  day  it  occurs,  a  mistake  at  the  time  as  to  whether
there  was  a  coincidence  or  not  is  almost  impossible.  The  following  9
cases  are  instances  of  this.

(61. 22.)  From  Miss  C.  L.  P.

(The  account  was  written  in  May  or  June,  1889.)

"I  saw  my  father.  Date,  Wednesday,  April  Gth,  1887.  Hour,  between
8  and  8.30  a.m. Place,  B  .

"[I  was]  walking  [alone]  to  scho(jl.  He  was  then  dying  (or  dead)  at  P  ,

and  I  was  the  last  person  mentioned  by  him.  We  were  in  absolute  ignorance
of  his  illness.  Two  telegrams  were  brought  to  me  at  school  from  my  lodgings
— one  saying  that  he  was  ill,  tlie  second  that  he  was  dead.

' '  On  Sunday,  April  3rd,  a  presentiment  of  coming  trouble  took  such  hold
of  me  that  I  went  down  to  a  friend,  telling  her  I  really  could  not  stay  alone,
as  I  expected  to  hear  every  second  that  somebody  belonging  to  me  was  dead
or  dying.  Sleep  was  advised  as  a  cure  for  nervousness,  and  the  presentiment
wore  away  completely."

Miss  P.,  who  was  at  the  time  a  mistress  in  a  High  School,  writes
further  that  she  has  never  had  any  otlier  experience  of  the  kind.  Her  going
abroad  has  prevented  our  obtaining  further  evidence  in  the  case,  but  we  have
ascertained  from  a  local  paper  of  A^jril  14th,  1887,  that  her  father's  death
occurred,  as  she  states,  on  April  6th,  1887.

This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.  ,  .

In  the  following  case  there  is  more  than  a  mere  coincidence  ;  since
the  fact  of  the  death  and  the  position  of  the  dead  person  were  com-
municated to  the  percipient.


XII.]


Death- Co  incidences.


233


(730.  24.)  From  Mrs.  B.  de  A.

Rio  de  Janeiro,  March  14f/i,  1892.

"  I  saw  the  form  of  a  lady  friend  lying  on  a  sofa  as  if  dead.  I  exclaimed,
'  Retiuha  is  lying  there  dead,  mother. '  We  were  living  at  the  time  at  Rio
de  J aneiro. It  was  past  midnight  on  the  21st  of  J une ,  1886.

"  I  was  doing  needlework. Health  and  spirits  good. Age  at  time,  56.

"  [It  was]  Donna  R.  N.,  my  cousin.  She  had  promised  to  dine  with
me  that  very  day,  but  afterwards  sent  word  that  she  would  dine  at
T.  She  died  of  congestion  of  the  brain  at  the  house  of  the  people
she  had  gone  to  visit,  shortly  after  midnight,  and  was  laid  out  on  the  sofa.
I  saw  her  next  day  exactly  in  the  same  position  in  which  I  had  seen  her  at
home.

"  My  mother  and  a  servant  [were  present].  They  did  not  share  the
experience."

This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.

In  the  next  case — as  in  the  first  of  this  group  (Miss  P.'s) — the
probability  of  thought-transference  appears  to  be  increased  by  the
statement  that  the  dying  person's  thoughts  were  directed  to  the
percipient.

(645.  11.)  From  Mr.  C.  H.  Beer.

Cheltenham,  May  2dth,  1893.

"  My  first  impression  was  at  a  concert  at  Richmond,  Surrey,  un  Decem-
ber 12th,  1881,  when  my  father  appeared  to  me  on  the  platform  at  frequent
intervals  the  whole  time  the  concert  was  going  on.  My  father  was  lying  ill
in  Devonshire  at  the  time.  He  was  dressed  in  his  ordinary  clothes.  I  was
told  afterwards  that  my  father  had  been  asking  for  me  at  this  time.

"I  was  in  much  anxiety  about  my  father,  who  was  very  ill  at  the  time,
but  I  did  not  know  he  was  any  worse  in  December  than  he  had  been  for
some  weeks  previously. My  age  was  27.

"  I  again  saw  my  father  in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning  of  the  13th
December,  and  was  so  disturbed  that  I  got  up  and  told  a  footman  of  it  in  an
adjoining  room.  On  returning  to  my  own  room  I  again  saw  the  figure  of
my  father,  leaning  over  me  as  I  lay  in  bed,  and  he  remained  on  and  off
through  the  night.  I  had  seen  my  father  the  previous  July.  He  died  at
7.30  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  December,  within  a  short  time  of  his
appearing  to  me.  I  did  not  know  of  his  death  till  mid-day  on  December
13th.

"I  have  had  one  hallucination  subsequently,  of  a  man  whom  T  did  not
recognise.

"Charles  H.  Beeh."

Mr.  Beer  is  a  butler,  in  the  service  of  the  Rev.  Hugh  Peai'son,  at  whose
house  Dr.  Myers  saw  him  on  May  30th,  1893.
Dr.  Myers  writes,  on  the  same  day  : —

"  [Mr.  Beer]  seemed  to  me  a  very  good  witness — clear  and  intelligent,
and  not  inclined  to  exaggerate.  His  master  told  me  he  had  always  lieard
the  same  story  from  him. He  knew  his  father  was  seriously  ill  (consump-


234  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


tion)  at  the  time  of  his  hallucination,  December  12th  and  13th,  but  was
expecting  him  to  live  over  Christmas,  when  he  hoped  to  go  and  see  him.

' '  He  says  he  told  a  footman  at  the  time  about  his  hallucination  before  he
knew  of  his  father's  death  (and  this  footman  is  now  at  an  unknown  address
in  Australia),  and  also  a  nurse,  who  is  now  dead.  I  see  no  hope  of  getting
contemporary  evidence. He  says  he  .wrote  down  nothing."  ,  ;

We  have  verified  the  date  of  death  independently.

This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand .  •

The  frequent  recurrence  of  the  appaiition,  which  we  find  in  Mr.
Beer's  case,  is  a  very  unusual  feature.  (See  Chapter  VIII.,  pp.  164-5.)
The  duration  of  the  experience  in  the  next  case  is  no  less  unusual.

(450.  18.)  From  Miss  S.  R.  R.

August  2211(1,  1891.

"  When  my  sister  died  in  1877,  she  died  in  Dublin.  I  was  at  home  ;  we
knew  she  was  very  ill,  and  my  father,  who  was  in  Dublin,  said  he  would
telegi'aph  if  she  grew  worse.  But  that  night  I  .saw  my  sister  lying  dead
beside  me,  and  I  knew,  before  we  sent  for  the  telegram,  the  contents  of  it.
It  came  by  post  next  morning."

In  answer  to  our  enquiries.  Miss  R.  sent  the  following  more  detailed
account  of  her  exjoerience: —

September  bth,  1891.

' '  At  the  time  of  my  sister's  death,  I  was  sleeping  in  my  mother's  room,
and  my  thoughts  were  very  much  with  my  sister,  who  was  dangerously  ill  in
Dublin,  and  just  as  I  lay  down,  I  plainly  saw  her  lying  dead  beside  me,
with  her  arm  outside  the  clothes,  just  as  she  had  died  a  few  hours  ago.
I  scarcely  slej)t  at  all  that  night,  and  there  my  sister  lay  beside  me,  and  I
was  glad  to  have  her,  knowing  too  well  what  the  contents  of  the  telegram
would  be  next  morning.  1  said  nothing  of  it  to  anyone,  till  I  was  sending
the  gi'oom  to  the  post  office  for  it,  and  then  I  said  to  him,  '  I  know  the
contents  of  it,  Mrs.  R.  is  dead.'  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  any  use  asking
him  any  questions — he  left  my  father's  service  shortly  after,  and  I  am  sure
could  not  recall  events  so  long  past."

Some  years  after  this  incident.  Miss  R.  saw  repeatedly  aj)paritions  of  her
mother,  which  she  describes  as  follows; —

A  mjnst  22nd,  189] .
"My  mother  died  in  February,  1882,  and  for  three  months  after  her
death  she  used  to  come  to  me  almost  nightly,  after  I  had  retired  to  my
bed-room. Sometimes  she  would  come  up  to  the  bed  and  bend  over  me;
at  other  times  she  would  stand  at  the  door  and  beckon  to  me."

Professor  Sidgwick  writes: —

March  2^rd,  1892.

"  I  saw  Miss  R.  to-day,  and  she  described  to  me  her  experiences.  The
apparition  of  her  sister  was  the  first  hallucination  she  ever  had.  It  oc-
curred about  six  hours  after  her  death;  she  died  at  four  o'clock  in  the  after-
noon, and  Miss  R.  went  to  bed  about  10,  and  had  the  vision  soon  after.  She
knew  her  sister  was  very  ill,  but  did  not  think  there  was  immediate  danger;


XII.]


Death-Coincidences.


235


her  father  had  gone  to  Dublin  to  the  sister,  and  liad  promised  to  write
or  telegraph  if  there  was  such  danger  ;  but  in  fact  the  alarming  symptoms
only  manifested  themselves  half-an-hour  before  she  died.

"  What  she  saw  was  first  '  something  white '  on  a  long  cedar  chest  beside
her  bed;  then  looking  closer  it  seemed  to  be  her  sister  in  bed;  the  chest  was
plain  bare  wood,  but  it  seemed  just  like  a  bed.  She  saw  the  face  distinctly;
she  had  put  out  the  candle,  but  there  was  a  fire  in  her  room;  she  is  quite
sure  that  she  was  awake.  She  saw  it  all  night  whenever  she  turned  to  it,
just  as  if  it  was  a  real  form.  She  was  clearly  anxious  to  give  her  recollection
exactly.

' '  The  apparitions  of  her  mother  were  always  completely  externalised ;  she
appeared  just  as  in  life.  The  first  time  she  ajjpeared  standing  in  the
doorway,  with  a  gesture  as  if  beckoning  to  follow,  and  this  was  the  more
usual  appearance  ;  but  sometimes  she  came  when  Miss  R.  was  in  bed,  and.
seemed  to  stoop  over  the  bed."

The  next  case  is  one  to  which  we  have  referred  in  Chapter  VI.
p.  117,  as  an  instance  of  gradual  development  of  the  apparition.

(328.  5.)  From  Dr.  A.  T.

His  original  Russian  account  has  been  translated  into  French  by  the
collector,  Madame  de  Holstein.  It  is  undated,  but  was  written  not  later
than  the  early  part  of  1890.

"C'^tait  en  1874,  au  commencement  du  mois  de  Mars,  a  Kielf.  Entre  7
et  8  h.  du  soir  j'etais  assis  seul  dans  ma  chambre  et  je  pensais  a  mon  pere.
J 'etais  sous  I'influence  de  tres  tristes  pensdes  ;  voici  pourquoi :  deux  jours
avant,  j 'avals  lu  dans  un  livre  que  la  maladie  qui  avait  entre  autres  et^
reconnue  chez  mon  pere  avait  assez  souvent  pour  issue  une  mort  subite.
Comme  j'aimai  beaucoup  mon  pere,  ce  que  j'ai  lu  ne  laissait  pas  de  me
rendre  inquiet.  J'etais  surtout  oppress^  le  soir  dont  je  parle.  Tout  a  coup  je
commensal  a  distinguer  a  I'autre  bout  de  la  chambre  une  figure  qui,  au  com-
mencement, semblait  etre  recouverte  d'un  brouillard  ;  en  suite  la  figure  de
mon  pere  s'est  nettenient  dessinee.  Je  la  voyais  nettement,  elle  me  fixait  et
Texpression  du  visage  ^tait  tres  triste.  Au  bout  de  trois  minutes  environ  le
fantasme  (vision)  disparut.  Le  meme  jour  a  11  h.  du  soir  j'ai  rcQu  de  Kr4-
mentchouk,  oii  habitait  mon  pere,  un  t^legramme  m'annon9ant  qu'il  etait
serieusement  malade.  Je  vins  3  jours  apres  a  Krementchouk  juste  pour
son  enterrement.  II  mourut  le  jour  ou  j'ai  veqn  le  tdl^gramme,  pres  de
6  h.  du  soir. J'avais  alors  21  ans.

".Je  n'ai  jamais  rien  eprouve  de  semblable  apres."

The  following  letter  from  Dr.  T.  to  Madame  de  HoLstein  gives  fuller
details  of  the  incident  : —

"  En  reponse  a  vos  questions  je  m'empresse  de  vous  dire  que  la  tristesse
que  j'^prouvai  le  soir  dont  il  s'agit  avait  certainement  pour  cause  la  lecture
de  laquelle  j'ai  parle.

"  Au  moment  oil  j'ai  vu  I'apparition  je  n'ai  rien  fixe,  je  n'avais  pas  de
point  de  repere. J'ai  regarde  par  hasard  du  cote  de  la  porte.


236  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


"  Je  n'ai  rien  ressenti  d'extraordinaire  avant  I'apparitiou,  aiicim  choc  ;
je  ii'avais  pas  un  sentiment  d'attente  ;  I'id^e  de  voir  men  pere  n'a  pas
traverse  mon  esprit  un  seul  instant.  J'ai  commence  par  voir  une
grande  tache  qui  n'^tait  pas  lumineuse,  c'etait  comme  un  nuage,
comnie  des  vapeurs.  En  regardant  bien,  j'ai  tout  d'abord  distingue
le  visage,  qui  etait  pale,  extenue,  avait  une  expression  de  douleur,  et
^tait  tel  que  je  I'ai  vu  apres  les  acces  d'angine  de  poitrine,  dont  mon  pere
etait  atteint.  Apres  le  visage  j'ai  distingu^  toute  la  iigure  de  mon  pere,  de
graiideur  naturelle.  II  etait  habille  en  noir,  conime  je  I'ai  vu  pour  la
derniere  fois,  etant  all^  passer  a  la  maison  paternelle  les  vacances  de  Noel.

"Je  n'ai  pas  remarqu^  sur  le  visage  de  mon  pere  des  changements  dont
je  n'avais  pas  connaissance  auparavant.

"  La  chambre  ou  je  I'ai  vu  n'etait  pas  bien  eclairde,  la  lampe  n'etait  pas
encore  allumee,  c'etait  dans  le  penombre  d'une  soirde  de  printemps.

"  Je  n'ai  pas  ressenti  de  peur,  j'^tais  ^tonnd,  stupdfait,  et  plutot  enclin  a
croire  a  la  presence  reelle  de  mon  pere  qu'a  une  'apparition.'  Quand
I'apparition  disparut,  j'ai  ^prouv4  une  angoisse  excessive,  un  pressentiment,
la  conviction  qu'il  devait  arriver  quelque  chose  K  mon  pere.

"  Jusqu'au  moment  de  I'arrivee  du  telegramme  j'^tais  sous  le  coup  de
cette  apparition,  j'ai  meme  conQu  I'idee  de  partir  tout  de  suite  a  Krement-
chouk.  Lorsque  j'ai  re§u  le  teldgramme  je  ne  I'ai  pas  ouvert  de  suite ;  je  ne
jsavais  pas  d'oii  il  venait,  mais  j'^tais  convaincu  qu'il  s'agissait  d'un  malheur
arriv^  a  mon  pere.

"Mon  pere  n'a  jamais  habite  ni  frequente  la  maison  ou  je  I'ai  vu.
J'liabitai  alors  une  chambre  garnie.  Je  ne  suis  ni  hysterique,  ni  neurast^-
nique,  et  je  I'dtais  encore  moins  en  1874.

(Signed) A.  T.,  Docteur  en  Medecine."

Madame  de  Holstein's  comments  on  this  case,  contained  in  a  letter,  part
of  which  is  printed  below,  express  what  seems  to  us  a  just  view  as  to  how
far  it  is  reasonable  to  regard  anxiety  as  the  cause  of  this  hallucination.

29,  Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paris,  August  26th,  1890.

".J'ai  demande  M.  T.  s'il  a  parle  a  quelqu'un  de  sa  vision  ;  il  n'avait
repondu  que  non.

"Quant  aux  causes  reelles  de  I'apparition,  elles  resteront  douteuses  dans
le  cas  en  question,  comme  du  reste  dans  beaucoup  d'autres  cas.  Pour  moi,
le  cas  du  Dr.  T.  est  sui'tout  int^ressant  parcequ'il  vient  d'une  personne  par-
faitement  saine  d'esprit  et  de  nerfs,  instruite,sce23tique,  sans  idees  pr^con^ues.
II  me  semble  aussi  qu'il  est  tres  difficile  de  chercher  I'explication  de  cette
vision  dans  I'inquietude  que  M.  T.  eprouvait.  II  n'est  pas  arrive  a  I'age  de
40  ans  sans  etre  plusieurs  fois  inquiet  pour  ceux  qui  lui  etaient  chers ;  pour-
quoi  n'avait  il  pas  d'autres  visions  ?

"Mais  tout  ceci  constitue  une  serie  de  preuves  morales,  subjectives  si
■vous  voulez,  et  vous  avez  mille  fois  raison  de  faire  une  reserve."

The  evidential  value  of  the  next  case  depends  on  the  great  exact-
ness of  the  coincidence — it  will  be  seen  that  the  evidence  of  its
exactness  is  strong.


XII.]


Death- Coincidences.


237


(725.  6.)


From  Dr.  B.  G.

Rio  de  .Janeiro,  September  1st,  1891.


"  I  saw  very  distinctly  the  apparition  of  a  friend  passing  in  front  of
a  looking  glass.  I  was  then  in  bed.  I  lived  at  the  time  in  Rio  de  Janeiro.
It  was,  I  believe,  about  3  a.m.  I  told  my  wife  at  the  time  to  look  at  the
watch. This  occurred  November  21st,  1873.

"  I  was  lying  awake  in  bed.  My  health  was  good  at  the  time.  We  had
taken  it  in  turns  to  sit  up  with  the  sick  man  whose  phantasm  appeared,  but
I  had  rested  from  my  watching. I  was  57  years  old.

"  The  appearance  coincided,  as  nearly  as  we  could  make  out,  with  the
moment  of  death.  It  was  that  of  a  friend,  Sn.  A.,  whom  I  had  visited
the  night  before.  I  had  sat  up  with  him  on  previous  nights,  and  therefore
knew  that  he  was  seriously  ill.

"My  wife  was  present,  but  sleeping.  I  woke  her,  told  her  what  I  had
seen  and  asked  her  to  look  at  the  watch.  My  son,  who  had  been  watching
by  the  decedent,  and  who  had  witnessed  the  death,  returned  at  6  a.m.  I
told  him,  much  to  his  surprise,  that  I  knew  Sn.  A.  had  expired  at  3  a.m.  He
confirmed  it."

This  case  was  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.

The  next  is  again  a  case  in  which  there  was  a  veridical  element
besides  the  coincidence, — ^viz.,  the  dress  of  the  apparition,  which,
unknown  to  the  percipient,  resembled  that  of  the  decedent.


' '  When  I  was  about  19  years  old,  an  old  friend  of  my  mother's,  Mr.
Wilson,  1  came  to  live  near  us.  He  had  just  lost  his  wife  and  was  himself  in
consumption,  with  no  chance  of  permanent  recovery.  He  was  in  the  habit
of  coming  to  our  house  in  a  bath-chair  every  morning,  when  he  was  well
enough,  and  having  a  rest  and  a  little  luncheon.  One  day  he  came  as  usual,
but  looking  much  better  and  in  particularly  good  spirits.  On  the  evening  of
that  day,  about  9  o'clock  (it  was  quite  dusk),  I  was  sitting  at  supper  with  my
mother  and  aunt  in  the  dining-room,  with  my  back  to  the  window,  and  facing
an  old-fashioned  sideboard.  I  distinctly  saw  Mr.  Wilson  standing,  resting
his  elbow  on  the  sideboard  and  his  face  on  his  hand  ;  he  had  Jio  coat  on,  and
I  was  particularly  struck  by  noticing  that  the  back  of  his  waistcoat  was  made
of  a  very  shiny  material.  I  felt  as  though  I  could  not  take  my  eyes  off  him,
and  my  aunt,  noticing  that  I  looked  terrified,  asked  me  what  was  the  matter
He  then  disappeared.  Withm  an  hour  a  messenger  came  to  fetch  my  mother,
telling  her  that  Mr.  W.  had  broken  a  blood  vessel  and  was  dying.  We  went
round  just  in  time  to  see  him  alive,  and  he  was  lying  on  the  bed,  on  his
side,  ivithout  a-  coat,  and  wearing  a  waistcoat  with  a  particularly  shiny  back.

"  This  vision  so  unnerved  me  that  for  months  I  was  unable  to  go  about
the  house  alone,  even  in  the  daytime.  This  is  perfectly  correct,  not  in  any
way  exaggerated.  "Ada  Belcher."


(571.  14.)


From  Mrs.  Belcher.
Apsley  House,  Gloucester,  September  26f/(,  1891.


1  This  is  an  assumed  name.  The  real  name  of  the  gentleman  was  given  us  in
confidence.


238  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.

Mr.  Myers  writes  : —

December  22n(l,  1891.

"I  have  to-day  seen  Mrs.  Belcher,  an  excellent  witness.  Her  mother
had  been  very  kind  to  the  invalid,  and  he  left  souvenirs  to  mother  and
daughter — some  cabinets,  which  I  saw,  to  the  daughter.  The  date  must
have  been  20  or  25  years  ago.

' '  The  figure  looked  quite  solid  ;  it  gazed  into  the  room,  but  not  at  Mrs.
Belcher.  The  back  of  the  waistcoat  was  clearly  seen,  a  black  shining
material. Mrs.  Belcher  had  never  seen  the  decedent  without  his  coat.

"  She  has  had  one  other  slight  experience — perhaps  a  mere  illusion.  Her
nerves  were  much  shaken  by  the  apparition  of  Mr.  Wilson,  and  one  day,  soon
afterwards,  while  looking  in  the  glass,  she  thought  she  saw  in  the  glass  her
mother  looking  over  her  shoulder — in  the  dress  which  she  was  wearing  at
the  time. Mrs.  Belcher  does  not  regard  this  as  a  full-blown  hallucination."

In  the  next  case  the  percii^ient  knew  of  the  illness  of  the  brother
whose  figure  appeared  to  him ;  but  we  see  no  reason  to  doubt  his
assertion  that  the  knowledge  was  not  attended  by  serious  anxiety.

(452.  10.)  From  Mr.  Alexander  Sherar.

5,  Wellwood-street,  Amble,  Northumberland,  September  Idth,  1891.

"  About  27  years  ago,  when  about  11  years  of  age,  one  morning  at  about
11  o'clock,  going  downstairs  on  my  way  to  work  I  met  a  figure  which  I  instantly
recognised  as  that  of  my  brother,  who  had  fallen  into  the  water  a  few  days
previously,  and  was  lying  ill  at  liis  house  about  200  yards  off.  I  was
accustomed  to  see  [him]  daily.  He  seemed  to  have  just  come  out  of  the
water,  as  the  water  was  running  from  him.  I  was  startled  and  ran  into  the
house  and  told  my  mother,  who,  knowing  my  brother  was  confined  to  bed,
ran  to  his  house,  and  found  that  he  had  died  about  the  time  I  saw  him.

"  I  was  in  good  health,  and  in  no  grief  or  anxiety.  No  one  [was]  with  me
at  the  time. My  present  age  is  38.

"Alexander  Sherar."

Mr.  Sherar  has  had  one  other  veridical  hallucination,  which  we  have
classed  as  a  "  vision."  It  is  included  in  the  62  death-coincidences,  and  is
interesting  as  being  of  the  nature  of  a  crystal-vision,  and  also  in  connexion
with  his  former  experience.  It  is  therefore  printed  here,  to  keep  the  two
together,  but  the  coincidence  is  not  so  certain  as  in  the  first  case,  since  the
news  of  death  may  not  have  been  received  till  some  time  later.  He  describes
it  thus  : —

"When  about  20  years  of  age,  on  board  ship  in  the  North  Sea  (about
July,  1873  about  6  to  8  p.m.,  while  I  was  at  the  wheel  I  was  startled  by
seeing  reflected  in  the  face  of  tlie  compass  the  face  of  a  young  lady  to  whom
I  was  to  be  married  on  my  return  home.  On  arrival  at  Berwick  next  day  I
learnt  that  the  lady  had  died  about  the  time  I  saw  her.  I  was  not  at  [the]
time  of  seeing  [the]  face  aware  she  was  ill."

The  following  account  of  an  interview  with  Mr.  Sherar,  on  September
16th,  1891,  is  given  by  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  from  notes  taken  at
the  time  : —


XII.]


Death-  Coincidences.


239


' '  Mr.  Sherar  is  a  sailor.  He  struck  us  as  having  a  very  vivid  recollection
of  his  experiences.  He  was  starting  to  go  down  the  stairs  when  he  saw  the
figure  of  his  brother  coming  up.  They  met  on  the  landing,  where  the  stairs
turned.  The  figure  stopped,  and  Mr.  Sherar,  knowing  it  could  not  really
be  his  brother,  turned  at  once  and  ran  back  to  tell  his  mother.  He  did  not
look  round  again,  and  did  not  see  the  figure  after  he  turned.  He  did  not
see  his  brother  drawn  out  of  the  water  :  indeed,  he  liad  not  seen  him  at
all  since  he  fell  in  and  became  ill.  He  did  not  think  him  so  seriously  ill
that  there  was  any  need  to  go.  His  mother  and  all  his  family  are  dead,  so
that  no  corroboration  can  be  .obtained.

"  At  the  time  of  his  second  experience  he  lived  at  Shields,  and  so  did  the
young  lady.  He  heard  of  her  death  by  letter  from  a  friend,  who  wrote  to
him  at  once.  The  letter  came  after  he  landed  at  Berwick.  He  believes  the
writer  of  the  letter  to  be  dead,  and  the  crew,  to  whom  he  probably
mentioned  the  vision,  are  scattered.  No  corroboration  can  be  obtained.
When  the  letter  came  he  believes  he  made  out  the  coincidence  of  time.  He
was  not  anxious  and  was  not  specially  thinking  of  her  when  he  saw  the  face.
The  illness  was  short  and  he  knew  nothing  of  it.  After  seeing  the  face  he
foreboded  evil.  It  was  getting  dusk  when  he  saw  it.  He  has  had  no  other
experiences  of  the  kind  except  these  two."

These  cases  were  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.

The  next  case  is  very  like  Dr.  B.  G.'s,  given  on  p.  237;  and  in  the
same  way  depends  for  its  evidential  value  on  the  exactness  of  the
coincidence.

I

(385.  20.)  From  Mrs.  C.  S.

January  1st,  1891.

''At  5  a.m.,  September  23rd,  1855,  I  saw  my  grandfather  stand  by  me.
Three  hours  and-a-half  afterwards  I  learnt  that  he  died  at  that  exact  time.

"  I  was  sitting  up  through  the  night. I  was  nearly  twenty-one.

"  I  had  a  friend  sharing  my  watch  and  pressed  her  arm  and  whispered
the  fact  and  hour  to  her  as  a  witness  to  the  truth  of  it.

"  [I  have]  never  [had  any  other  hallucinations]."

In  answer  to  further  enquiries,  Mrs.  S.  writes  : —

"I  knew  my  grandfather  was  ill.  He  had  been  sat  up  with  for  a  week.
I  did  not  specially  expect  his  death  that  night.  My  youngest  sister  was  also
ill,  in  another  house,  and  a  friend  and  I  were  sitting  up  with  her.

' '  The  house  we  lived  in  was  across  a  small  park  from  my  grandfather's  ;
it  would  take  from  five  to  ten  minutes  to  go  from  one  to  the  other.

' '  [I  am]  certain  [of  the  coincidence]  because  a  clock  struck  five  within  a
minute  or  so  of  my  grandfather's  being  with  me,  and  I  whispered  the  hour
to  my  friend,  bidding  her  remember  it.

' '  The  death  caused  a  great  change  in  our  family,  and  is,  therefore,  well
remembered ,  though  so  long  ago.

"  I  mentioned  the  matter  to  my  parents,  as  my  father  spoke  on  entering
the  room  to  acquaint  my  mother  with  my  grandfather's  death,  but  till  then
my  friend  and  I  had  sat  silent  and  alone  of  waking  inmates  of  that  room."


240  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Since  giving  this  account,  Mi-s.  S.  has  been  abroad,  so  that  we  have  been
unable  to  make  her  personal  acquaintance.

The  case  was  not  known  beforehand  to  the  collector.

The  last  case  we  shall  include  in  this  group  is  I'emote,  and  the  per-
cipient was  young  at  the  time  ;  but  Mr.  McKechnie  is  a  careful
witness,  and  if  his  recollection  is  substantially  accurate,  the  evidence
both  of  the  hallucinatory  and  of  the  coincidental  nature  of  the
experience  appears  quite  unmistakable.

(191.  3.)  From  the  Rev.  C.  C.  McKechnie.

43,  Stanhope-road,  Darlington,  Saptemher  24:t]i.,  1889.

' '  I  was  about  10  years  of  age  at  the  time,  and  had  for  several  years  beert
living  with  my  grandfather,  who  was  an  elder  in  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  and
in  good  circumstances.  He  was  very  much  attached  to  me,  and  often
expressed  his  intention  of  having  me  educated  for  the  ministry  in  the  Kirk.
Suddenly,  however,  he  was  seized  with  an  illness,  which  in  a  couple  of  days,
proved  mortal.  At  the  time  of  his  death,  and  without  my  having  any  appre-
hension of  it,  I  happened  to  be  at  my  father's  house,  about  a  mile  oflf.  I
was  leaning  in  a  listless  sort  of  way  against  the  kitchen  table,  looking
upwards  at  the  ceiling,  and  thinking  of  nothing  in  particular,  when  my
grandfather's  face  appeared  to  grow  out  of  the  ceiling,  at  first  dim  and
indistinct,  but  becoming  more  and  more  complete  until  it  seemed  in  every
re.spect  as  full  and  perfect  as  I  had  ever  seen  it.  It  looked  down  upon  me,
as  I  thought,  with  a  wonderful  expression  of  tenderness  and  affection.
Then  it  disappeared,  not  suddenly,  but  gradually  ;  its  features  fading  and
becoming  dim  and  indistinct,  until  I  saw  nothing  but  the  bare  ceiling.
I  spoke  at  the  time  of  what  I  saw  to  my  mother,  but  she  made  no  account
of  it,  thinking  probably  it  was  nothing  more  than  a  boyish  vagary.  In
about  15  or  20  minutes  after  seeing  the  vision,  a  boy  came  running  breath-
less to  my  father's  with  the  news  that  my  grandfather  had  just  died.

"I  have  never  been  able  to  persuade  myself  that  the  vision  was  purely
subjective.  I  have  rather  been  inclined  to  think  that  the  explanation  is
to  be  sought  in  my  grandfather's  exceptionally  strong  love  for  me,  impelling
and  enabling  him  to  bring  liimself  inti3  connection  with  me,  at  the  moment
of  his  death,  in  the  way  I  have  stated.  It  was  at  Paisley  where  the  above
occurred.

"  To  the  best  of  my  i-ecollection  this  is  a  correct  statement.

"  Colin  Campbell  McKechnie."

On  being  asked  for  an  approximate  date,  Mr.  McKechnie  writes: —
"To  the  best  of  my  recollection  the  boyish  vision — if  I  may  so  call  it — •
occurred  in  1830  or  1831. The  Register  of  Deaths  kept  in  the  Gaelic
Chapel  of  Paisley,  if  consulted,  would  enable  one  to  fix  the  date.  Grand-
father lived  in  Sneddon-street,  and  his  name  was  John  McKechnie.

"Colin  C.  McKechnie."

Professor  Sidgwick  called  on  Mr.  McKechnie  on  September  23rd,  1891,
and  writes  on  the  same  day  :—


XII.]


Death-Coincidences.


241


"Mr.  McKechnie  has  had  no  other  experience  of  the  kind,  except  that
of  hearing  a  voice,  which  was  'between  sleeping  and  waking.'  In  the  case
of  his  vision  of  his  grandfather's  face  he  was  certainly  awake.

"  He  believes  that  he  was  in  no  anxiety  about  his  grandfather's  illness,
though  he  was  aware  of  it.

' '  He  has  often  told  the  story,  but  no  corroboration  is  now  possible,  all
those  who  could  have  corroborated  being  no  longer  living.

' '  I  saw  an  account  written  by  Mr.  Kendall  (the  collector),  on  November
2nd,  1870,  from  memory,  a  day  or  two  after  hearing  it  from  Mr.  McKechnie.
This  is  briefer,  but  corresponds  in  all  essential  respects  with  the  narrative
given  above,  except  that  the  news  of  the  death  is  said  to  have  come  ten
minutes  after."

We  add  one  more  case  in  which  the  action  taken  in  consequence
of  the  apparition  shows  it  to  have  been  at  the  time  of  an  impressive
character,  and  makes  it  improbable  that  any  mistake  could  have  been
made  as  to  the  coincidence  when  the  death  was  heard  of.  No
corroboration  is  now  obtainable.

(579.  25.)  From  Mrs.  A.

Mrs.  A.  is  the  wife  of  the  percipient  in  the  case  numbered  (579.  24.).
(The  account  was  written  in  1892.)

"En  1867  je  vivais  a  Toula  (ville  de  gouvernement).  Le  24  du  mois
d'Octobre,  je  me  rendis  au  vUlage  Lanky,  a  100  verstes  de  Toula  ;  vers
10  heures  du  soir  je  me  mis  au  lit,  tout  en  continuant  la  conversation  avec
la  mere  de  I'intendant  de  ce  bien,  qui  se  faisait  un  lit  dans  la  meme  chambre.
Vendant  que  cette  femme  me  tournait  le  dos,  en  arrangeant  les  coussins  de
son  lit,  et  continuait  de  me  parler  (je  me  rappelle  tres  bien  de  ce  moment),  je
vis  tout  k  coup  au  dessus  de  moi,  tout  au  devant  de  mes  yeux,  une  main,  la
paume  tournee  vers  moi,  passer  lentement  devant  mes  yeux  et  disparaitre.
La  chambre  etait  encore  eclairee,  de  faqon  que  je  pus  tres  bien  reconnaitre
dans  cette  main  la  main  de  mon  pere,  vivant  alors  a  Moscou,  dans  sa  propre
maison.  Depuis  plusieurs  annees  il  t;tait  malade  do  phthisie,  mais  son  etat
n'inspirait  rien  d'alarmant,  et  je  I'avais  vu  deux  mois  avant  cet  accident.
Je  fis  part  immediatement  a  la  mere  de  I'intendant  de  ce  que  je  venais  de
voir,  et  I'impression  qu'un  malheur  m'attendait  etait  si  forte  que,  quoiqu'a
peine  arrivee  a  la  campagne,  le  lendemain,  de  grand  matin,  je  me  mis  en
route  pour  revenir  en  ville.  Ai-rivee  a  Toula,  oii  j'occupai  un  appartement,
je  trouvai  une  depeche  de  ma  mere,  par  laquelle  elle  m'informait  que  mon
pere  venait  de  mourir  le  24  Octobre,  a  11  heures  du  matin."

This  case  was  not  known  to  the  collector  beforehand.

If  the  reader  has  perused  all  the  cases  we  have  pi'esented  to  him
in  this  chapter,  he  has  had  before  him  26  of  the  62  death-coincidences
(not  including  the  second  case  of  No.  4.52.10).  For  another  (No.  118.
20)  we  have  referred  him  to  Phantasms  of  the  Living  :  and  three
more,  vi^.,  Nos.  407.  3,  460.  1,  and  692.  2,  are  printed  in  other  chapters
to  illustrate  different  points  (see  pp.  129,  288  and  115). We  have  nob

R


242  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


thought  it  worth  while  to  print  more  specimens  of  this  class,  though
we  keep  the  rest  for  refei'ence.

The  26  given  in  this  chapter  seem  to  us,  on  the  whole,  the  best
evidentially.  It  is,  of  course,  difficult  to  draw  the  line,  and  probably
some  of  those  omitted  might  be  thought  by  others  more  impressive-
than  some  which  we  have  included ;  but  the  evidential  value  of  many
of  the  unprinted  cases  is  not  very  great.  When,  however,  it  is
remembered  that  the  62  cases  are  simply  all  the  cases  which,  in  the
answers  to  our  circular  of  enquiry,  have  been  reported  to  us  as  death-
coincidences  among  the  recognised  visual  j^hantasms,  leaving  out  those-
only  which  belong  to  the  classes  specified  on  pp.  209-10,  it  will  be-
obvious  that  their  value  as  evidence  must  vary  considerably.  Some  of
the  cases  are  very  remote  ;  others  are  vaguely  and  inadequately  des-
cribed ;  many  are  without  corroboration  or  confirmation  of  any  kind,  the
persons  who  could  have  given  corroboration  in  many  cases  being  dead,,
or  having  been  lost  sight  of.  That  in  some  among  so  many  the  close-
ness of  coincidence  is  exaggerated,  we  might  safely  assume  a  priori.
But  we  have  now  to  show  that  indirect  evidence  of  such  exaggeratiort
is  afforded  by  the  distribution  of  the  cases  in  time,  since  there  is
good  reason  for  believing  the  remoter  cases  to  be  too  numerous  iix
proportion  to  the  recent  ones.

If  the  62  death-coincidences  are  divided  into  those  that  occurred
within  10  years  of  the  answering  of  the  Census  question  and  those  that
occurred  earlier,  it  will  be  found  that  the  number  in  the  recent  period
is  11,  and  in  the  remoter  period  51.  Now  the  average  age  of  the  per-
cijDientsat  the  time  of  answering  the  question  was  46  years, ^  and  as  we
have  not  included  experiences  occurring  at  ages  under  10,  this  gives  an
average  period  of  36  years  over  which  the  62  death-coincidences  are
distributed.  If  we  assume  that  death-coincidences  are  equally  likely
to  occur  at  all  ages  from  10  years  old  upwards,  and — unlike  the
average  hallucination — equally  likely  to  be  remembered,  however
remote,  then  62  divided  by  3-6,  or  about  17,  is  the  number  which,
should  have  occurred,  out  of  the  62,  in  the  most  recent  ten  years  (a  period
which,  as  our  percipients  are  all  over  20  years  of  age,  is  common  to
them  all),  leaving  45  for  the  remote  period.  This  is  a  very  different
proportion  from  the  actual  one.  We  cannot,  of  course,  expect  the
proportion  to  conf<3rm  so  exactly  to  the  average  as  we  should  were
we  dealing  with  a  larger  number  of  percipients,  but  51  remote  experi-
ences should  on  an  average  imply  19  or  20  recent  ones  instead  of  11,
and  that  the  recent  experiences  should  by  chance  alone  be  not  much
over  half  the  most  probable  number  in  proportion  to  the  remote  ones

1  It  is  thus  higher  than  the  average  age  of  our  informants  generally,  which  is  only
40  years. (See  p.  -53;)


XII.]


Death-Coincidences.


243


seems  unlikely.  If  we  look  at  it  the  other  way,  we  should  infer  from
the  11  recent  cases  that  there  were  really  about  29  remote  ones  ;  and
that  some  22  of  those  reported  were  not  death-coincidences  at  all.
Our  numbers  are,  however,  too  small  to  justify  us  in  drawing  this
inference  with  any  confidence;  especially  as,  if  we  included  second-hand
cases,  we  should  add  3  to  the  period  within  ten  years,  and  only  2  to
the  remoter  period.  Moreover,  we  ought  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  fact
that  there  are  probably  special  causes  tending  to  reduce  the  number  of
recent  cases  that  come  to  our  knowledge.  It  is  not  impi'obable  that
some  may  have  been  withheld  from  us,  owing  to  a  natural  reluctance
to  make  public  experiences  which  have  strongly  affected  the  emotions,
especially  I'ecently.^  Still  we  have  also  to  take  into  account  the
possibility  that  one  or  two  of  the  recent  cases  given  were  not  really
death-coincidences.  2

On  the  whole,  in  view  of  the  evidential  defects  of  many  of  the
cases,  we  are  disposed,  in  order  to  be  on  the  safe  side,  to  accept  a
reduction  to  the  extent  above  suggested,  and  to  estimate  the  whole
number  of  death-coincidences  at  40,  instead  of  62.  From  this  number
we  propose,  for  the  purpose  of  calculating  the  probability  of  chance
coincidence,  to  make  a  further  reduction  of  8,  as  a  very  ample  allowance
for  the  selection  which,  we  must  assume,  may  have  occurred  in  some
cases. 3

Before  concluding  this  chapter,  we  must  explain  to  what  extent  we
have  made  the  personal  acquaintance  of  the  percipients,  and  talked
over  their  experiences  with  them,  which  it  has  been  our  wish  to  do  as
far  as  possible  in  veridical  cases.  Out  of  the  62  percipients  in  the
death-coincidences  we  are  now  considering,  we  have  interviewed  21,

1  From  one  of  our  informants  who  answered  "Yes,  "no  further  particulars  could  be
obtained,  because  the  experience  was  connected  with  the  recent  death  of  her  brother.
This  may  have  been  a  death-coincidence  not  reported.  One  alleged  death-coincidence
was  withheld,  though  related  verbally  to  the  collector,  because,  not  having  mentioned
it  to  her  friends  at  the  time,  the  percipient  was  unwilling  to  make  it  iKiblic  now.

-  One  of  those  cut  out  as  a  suspicious  case,  see  next  Chapter,  pp.  2-16-7,  is  a  recent
case  in  which  the  coincidence  is  not  clearly  made  out.

3  We  arrive  at  this  number  thus :  out  of  65  cases,  as  stated  on  p.  210,  19  were
known  beforehand  to  the  collector,  2G  unknown,  and  of  20  we  cannot  say  whether
they  were  known  or  not.  Assumine;  these  20  to  be  divided  between  known  and
unknown  cases  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  45  of  which  we  have  information,  we
may  take  9  as  known  beforehand.  We  have  therefore  28  known  beforehand.  Of  these,
as  we  saw,  5  were  certainly  not  selected  and  3  certainly  selected,  leaving  20  which
must  be  regarded  as  doubtful.  As  express  instructions  were  given  not  to  select,  it  will
be  an  outside  estimate  to  assume  that  half  of  these  were  selected,  i.e.,  less  than  10  out
of  62  (besides  the  3  known  to  have  been  selected,  which  we  excluded  at  the  outset).
As  the  62  are  now  reduced — by  an  allowance  for  exaggeration — to  40,  and  as  there  is
no  reason  to  suppose  selection  to  have  operated  more  in  unexaggerated  than  in
exaggerated  cases,  we  think  that  the  diminution  of  these  by  8  will  be  a  more  than
adequate  allowance  for  selection.


24<4  Rei^ort  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.

and  3  others  had  been  similarly  questioned  by  Mr.  Gurney.^  Of  the
others,  22  were  practically  inaccessible  to  us  on  account  of  residence
abroad,  5  on  various  grounds  refused  to  see  us,  2  have  apparently
changed  their  address  and  cannot  be  got  at ;  in  6  cases  out  of  the
remaining  9,  it  has  not  on  the  whole  appeared  to  us  worth  making  a
troublesome  journey  to  see  the  percipients,  either  because  of  the  length
of  time  since  the  incident,  or  because  it  was  vaguely  remembered,  or
for  vinavoidable  reasons  badly  evidenced ;  finally,  (in  3  cases)  we  have
thought  the  collectors'  investigations  sufiicient.

The  general  result  of  the  interviews  we  have  had  in  these  and  other
cases  has  been  decidedly  satisfactory,  leading,  in  almost  all  cases,  to  a
favourable  view  of  the  carefulness  and  desire  for  accuracy  of  the
witnesses.  In  2  cases,  a  flaw  in  the  evidence,  which  had  not  been
observed  by  the  witness,  was  detected,  one  being  No.  656.  26  (see  p.  370),
already  referred  to,  reported  as  a  death-coincidence,  but  proving  to  be
an  apparition  after  death,  but  before  the  death  was  known  ;  and  the
other,  No.  460.  1  (see  p.  288),  which  we  have  still  counted  as  a  death-
coincidence,  but  where  there  is  a  discrepancy  as  to  the  day  of  the  week.
But,  in  most  cases,  the  interview  decidedly  adds  to  the  evidential  value
of  the  story,  at  least  in  the  interviewer's  own  mind.


1  In  15  out  of  the  26  cases  iu  this  Chapter,  the  percipients  have  been  thus
questioned.


XIII.]


Chance  Coincidence.


245


Chapter  XIII.

CHANCE  COINCIDENCE.

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  estimate  the  improbability  that  the
death-coincidences  are  due  to  chance.

The  fact  that  each  of  us  only  dies  once,  enables  us  to  calculate
definitely  the  probability  that  that  death  will  coincide  with  any  other
given  event,  such  as  the  recognised  apparition  of  the  dying  person.
Taking  as  a  basis  for  calculation  the  average  annual  death-rate  for
England  and  Wales  for  the  ten  years  1881  to  1890,  as  given  in  the
Registrar  General's  Report  for  1890,  namely,  19'15  per  thousand,  we
get  as  the  probability  that  any  one  person  taken  at  random  would  die
on  a  given  day,  19-15  in  365,000,  or  about  1  in  19,000.  This,
then,  may  be  taken  as  the  general  probability  that  he  will  die  on  the
day  on  which  his  apparition  is  seen  and  recognised,  supposing  that
there  is  no  causal  connection  between  the  apparition  and  the  death.
We  ought  therefore  to  find  that  out  of  19,000  apparitions  of  living
persons,  or  persons  not  more  than  12  hours  dead,  one  is  a  death-
coincidence, — occurs,  that  is,  on  the  day  of  the  death  of  the  person
seen,  and  within  12  hours  of  the  death  on  either  side.

The  number  of  apparitions  of  living  persons  (including  persons  not
more  than  12  hours  dead,  if  they  are  not  known  to  the  percipient  to  be
dead)  in  the  present  collection  is  381  ;  viz.,  352  realistic  apparitions,
(see  Table  IV.),  20  cases,  classed  as  incompletely  developed,  where  the
figure  or  portion  of  a  human  figure  seen  is  recognised  as  representing
a  living  acquaintance,  and  9  visions^  in  which  a  living  acquaintance
appears.  But  among  the  percipients  in  these  cases  there  are  some  who
have  experienced  more  than  one  hallucination.  When  these  are  all
specified  and  enumerated,  no  confusion  in  our  numbers  can,  of  course,
arise,  because  each  apparition  of  a  recognised  human  being  is  counted
among  the  381.  But  the  cases  where  our  informants  have  experienced
several  or  many  unenumerated  hallucinations,  some  or  all  of  which
were- -or  at  least  may  have  been — apparitions  of  living  persons,
introduce  an  element  of  uncertainty  into  the  numbers  which  would
complicate  the  calculation  of  the  propoi'tion  of  coincidental  to  non-
coincidental  cases.  For  the  purpose  of  the  present  discussion,  there-
fore, it  seemed  best  to  omit  them  altogether.

There  are  28  percipients  who  have  had  such  unenumerated  experi-
ences among  those  whose  experiences  are  included  in  the  381,  and  the

1  For  the  use  of  this  term  see  the  explanation  of  the  Tables  at  the  end  of  Chapter
II.  ;  also  Chapter  IV.,  p.  83.


246


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


[chap.


number  of  cases  to  be  cut  out  on  their  account  is  31,i  of  which  7  are
death-coincidences,  and  were,  as  it  will  be  remembered,  omitted  in
estimating  the  death-coincidences  in  the  last  chapter.  Omitting  these
31  cases,  our  number  becomes  350.

We  now  come  to  the  most  important  correction  we  have  to  make —
that  for  lapse  of  memory.  It  was  shown  in  Chapter  III.  that  the
proportion  of  hallucinations  (including  perhaps  doubtful  hallucinations)
which  is  forgotten  or  ignored  is  probably  very  large.  If  oblivion
affected  death-coincidences  to  the  same  extent  that  it  affects  the
average  of  visual  hallucinations,  it  would  be  unnecessary  for  us  to
take  it  into  account — since  the  ratio  of  the  two  would  not  be  altered
by  it.  But  this  is  not  the  case, — as  is  proved  by  the  distribution  in
time  of  the  alleged  death-coincidences  reported  (see  last  chapter,
p.  242),  and  as  might  be  assumed  from  the  fact  that  the  coincidence
would  itself  impress  the  hallucination  on  the  memory.  Indeed,  it  is
clear  that  the  evidence  before  us  does  not  entitle  us  to  assume  that  any
death-coincidences  at  all  aie  foi'gotten.  They  may  be,  and  the  absence
of  any  indicatioii  of  it  may  be  due  to  the  withholding  of  recent  cases,
but  we  have  no  sufficient  grounds  for  assuming  this.  The  whole
correction  required  for  oblivion  ought,  therefore,  to  be  applied  to  the
350  recognised  apparitions  of  living  persons  with  which  the  death-
coincidences  are  to  be  compared.  What  this  correction  should  be,  is
not  quite  a  simple  question,  as  the  discussion  in  Chapter  III.  (pp.  63-6)
showed.  The  conclusion  there  arrived  at  was  that  in  order  to  form
a  fair  estimate  of  the  whole  number  of  visual  hallucinations  occurring
to  persons  over  1 0  years  of  age,  we  should  multiply  the  number  reported
by  6"^y,  if  we  included  what  we  there  called  "  suspicious  cases,"  that  is,
experiences  which  must  be  regarded  as  doubtfully  hallucinatory  on  cer-
tain specified  grounds,  but  that  the  multiplier  would  be  4  if  we  excluded
these  suspicious  cases  from  consideration.  Now  it  is  to  be  observed
that  such  suspicious  cases  are  particularly  prevalent  among  the
reported  apparitions  of  living  persons,  so  that,  if  we  estimate  the
whole  number  of  these  by  multiplying  the  reported  number  by  61-,  the
proportion  of  trivial  and  doubtfully  hallucinatory  experiences  will  be
even  larger  than  with  the  visual  hallucinations  in  general  ;  whereas
among  the  62  death-coincidences  discussed  in  the  last  chapter,  there  are
only  two  cases  of  which  the  hallucinatory  character  is  doubtful ^  on  the

1  Of  these,  5  occurred  within  one  year  from  the  time  of  answering  the  Census
question,  13  others  within  ten  years,  8  are  more  remote,  and  5  are  undated.  Of  the
death-coincidences  thus  cut  out,  2  occurred  within  the  last  ten  years,  4  were  more  re-
mote and  1  is  undated.

-  Taking  the  three  specified  grounds  of  suspicion  named  at  p.  64,  viz. ,  (a)  the
figure  seen  at  some  distance  either  out  of  doors  or  in  a  public  room ;  (h)  the  figure  seen
passing  outside  the  door  of  the  room  in  which  the  percipient  was,  or  .seen  inside  the
room  when  the  percipient  passed  outside  it ;  and  (c)  seen  in  a  bad  light  and  under


XIII.]


Chance  Coincidence.


247


grounds  specified.  This  being  so,  it  is  more  correct  to  compare  the  death-
coincidences  with  the  estimated  number  of  recognised  hallucinations,
■omitting  the  suspicious  cases  on  both  sides ;  and  this  latter  number  we
obtain,  for  the  reasons  given  i\\  Chapter  IIT.,  pp.  63-5,  by  subtracting
from  the  reported  number  8  per  cent,  for  experiences  occurring  under
the  age  of  ten,^  and  multiplying  the  remainder  by  4.  The  number  of
recognised  apparitions  thus  obtained  is  1,288,  or,  let  us  say,  1,300.

We  concluded  in  the  last  chapter  that,  after  making  ample  allow-
.ance  for  possible  exaggeration  and  selection,  it  would  be  safe  to  reckon
-32  death-coincidences.  To  be  on  the  safe  side,  let  us  assume — what  is
very  impi'obable — that  the  two  suspicious  cases  are  both  among  these
-32  and  exclude  them.  We  have  then  30  death-coincidences  in  1,300
cases,  or  about  1  in  43.  But  chance  would,  as  we  have  seen,  produce
death-coincidences  at  the  rate  of  1  in  19,000  apparitions  of  recognised
living  persons,  and  1  in  43  is  equivalent  to  about  440  in  19,000,  or  440
times  the  most  probable  number.  Or,  looking  at  the  matter  in  a
different  way,  we  should  expect  that  if  death-coincidences  only  occur
by  chance,  it  will  require  30  times  19,000,  or  570,000  apparitions  of
living  pei'sons,  to  produce  30  such  coincidences,  and  of  these  we  may
assume  that  about  a  quartei',  or  142,500  would  be  remembered.  AVe
should  therefore  expect  to  have  to  collect  142,500  cases  instead  of  350,
in  order  to  obtain  by  chance  30  death-coincidences.

If  we  include  the  suspicious  cases,  and  accordingly  multiply  the
a-eported  number  of  cases  by  Q'^,  we  get  about  1  death-coincidence  in
65,  i.e.,  about  292  times  the  most  probable  numbei'.

This  is  the  case  if  we  take,  as  we  have  done,  death-coincidences  to
mean  an  apparition  occurring  on  the  same  day  as  the  death  of  the
person  seen  that  is  within  12  hours  of  the  death.  But  as  a  matter
of  fact,  the  great  majority  of  the  coincidences  are  beheved  by  the
percipients  to  be  closer  than  this,  as  may  be  seen  by  examining  the  62
cases  (or  the  31  printed  ones)  discussed  in  the  last  chapter.  The
improbability  of  the  apparition  occurring  by  chance  within  an  hour
of  the  death,  is,  of  course,  twelve  times  as  great  as  that  of  its  occurring
within  12  hours  of  it.

We  conclude  then  that  the  number  of  death-coincidences  in  our

■circumstances  not  otherwise  such  as  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  mistake,  we  find  in
the  first  place  that  out  of  the  62,  only  4  occurred  out  of-doors  at  all  (or  5  if  we  include
No.  379.24,  p.  225,  when  the  figure  appeared  out-of-doors,  being  seen  through  a
window),  and  of  these  only  one  comes  under  the  category  of  "seen  at  some
■distance."  Under  head  (6)  there  are  none  among  the  62,  and  under  head  (c)  we  ought
possibly  to  put  one  case,  but  not  more.

^  The  reasons  for  excluding  these  before  estimating  the  correction  required  for
•oblivion  are  given  in  Chapter  III.,  p.  65.  They  are  also,  it  will  be  remembered,  (see
p.  209),  excluded  from  the  number  of  death-coincidences  with  which  we  are  about
to  compare  the  whole  number  of  recognised  apparitions.


248


Report  on  tie  Census  of  Hcdlucinations.  [chap:


collection,  if  our  estimate  of  them  is  accepted  as  fair,  is  not  due  tO'
chance.  This  will  not  be  maintained  by  anyone  with  the  most
elementary  acquaintance  with  the  doctrine  of  chances.  The  opponent
of  a  telepathic  or  other  supernormal  explanation  must  take  one  of
three  other  lines  of  argument.  He  must  either  (1)  maintain  that  the-
alleged  coincidences  are  misrepi'esented  as  such  to  a  much  larger
extent  than  we  have  allowed  for,  or  (2)  that  they  have  been  sought
after  by  the  collectoi's,  and  illegitimately  introduced  into  the  collection
to  a  much  larger  extent  in  proportion  to  non-coincidental  cases  than
we  have  allowed  for  ;  or  (3)  admitting  that  the  coincidences  really
exist  in  a  proportion  sufficient  to  prove  a  causal  connection  between,
the  apparition  and  the  death  of  the  person  seen,  he  may  maintain  that
this  connection  is  not  telepathic,  but  consists  in  a  condition  favourable-
to  hallucination  being  produced  in  the  percipient  in  some  normal  way
by  the  circumstances  of  the  case.

The  first  of  these  lines  of  argument  can  only  be  met  by  reference-
to  the  evidence  on  which  each  case  rests.  This  in  "26 — or  in  fact  31
— cases  is  before  the  i-eader,  and  he  must  form  his  own  estimate.  We
need  only  point  out  here  that  the  evidence  must  break  down  in  a,
wholesale  way  in  order  to  destroy  our  argument.  For  the  margin  on
the  side  against  chance  is  very  large,  even  one  death-coincidence  being
more  than  we  should  be  justified  in  expecting  chance  to  produce  in  a
collection  ten  times  the  size  of  ours.

As  to  the  second  line  of  argument,  we  have  only  to  remind  the-
reader  that  in  26  of  the  death-coincidences,  of  which  16  are  printed
in  the  last  chapter,  our  collectors  report  that  they  had  no  previous-
knowledge  of  the  percipient's  experience.  We  may  add  that  in  11  of
these  cases— of  which  8,  viz.,  Nos.  425.  12,  442.17,  381.4,  383.24,,
379.24,  61.22,  4-52.  10  (two  cases),  are  among  the  27  printed  in  the-
last  chapter  —  we  have  —  besides  the  marking  of  the  returns  in.
accordance  with  our  instructions  —  the  positive  statement  of  the-
coUector,  confirmed  in  most  cases  by  circumstances  mentioned  by  him-
when  questioned,  that  he  did  not  know  of  the  experience  when  the-
question  was  put  to  the  percipient.  The  number  of  these  cases  is-
alone  sufficient  to  destroy  the  argument  for  chance  coincidence,  and
as  stated  on  p.  210,  we  have  strong  ground  for  believing  that  in  some
of  the  cases  in  which  it  is  known  that  the  collector  was  aware  of  the
experience,  this  knowledge  had  no  influence  on  his  selection  of  the
informant.

The  third  line  of  argument — that  death-coincidences  really  exist
and  are  not  due  to  chance,  but  that  the  causal  connection  between
hallucination  and  death  is  not  telepathic, — requires  careful  examination.

We  saw  in  Chapter  IX.,  that  certain  mental  and  physical  states  of
the  percipient  are  to  some  extent  favourable  to  hallucinations,  and


XIII.]


Chance  Coincidence.


249


there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  form  of  any  hallucination  that  may
occur  is  likely  to  be  determined  by  the  subject  with  which  the  mind  of
the  percipient  is  occupied. If,  therefore,  any  mental  tension — whether
it  be  anxiety,  grief,  awe,  anxious  alertness  to  act  rightly  in  an  emer-
gency, or  any  other  such  psychological  condition — ,  or  any  overwrought
state  of  nerves  be  produced  in  the  percipient  by  the  dying  person's
state,  it  is  proper  to  regard  it  as  a  possible  cause  of  the  hallucination
and  examine  it  accordingly. But  the  case  can  obviously  only  arise  if
the  percipient  is  aware  of  the  dying  person's  condition,  and,  whatever
be  the  effect  of  emotion,  telepathy  will  still  have  to  be  called  in  to
explain  the  existence  of  at  least  19  cases  among  the  62  death-coinci-
dences of  which  10  are  included  in  the  last  chapter,^  in  which  it
is  positively  stated,  or  clearly  implied,  that  the  illness  had  not  been
heard  of  at  all  by  the  percipient  at  the  time  of  the  apparition.  To
these  we  may  reasonably  add  those  cases  where  though  there  was  (or,
at  least,  so  far  as  we  know,  may  have  been)  knowledge  of  illness,  there
was  none  of  danger,  and  where  it  is  expressly  stated,  or  clearly  implied,
that  there  was  no  anxiety. Such  are  cases  where  the  percipient  either
believes  the  illness  to  be  trifling,  or  where  it  is  a  long  chronic  illness
not  known  to  be  approaching  a  crisis,  and  where  he  cannot  therefore
be  supposed  to  be  emotionally  affected. These  are  18  in  number,  of
which  6  are  included  in  the  last  chapter.-^ With  them  we  may  reckon
No.  579.  24  (see  p.  223),  where  the  death  was  due  to  suicide,  but  where
we  cannot  be  sure  that  it  was  not  preceded  by  illness,  and  No.  307.20
(see  p.  229),  where  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  there  was  more
anxiety  than  is  usual  when  our  friends  are  on  a  voyage.

There  i-emain  20  cases,  of  which  8  are  included  in  the  last  chapter,^
in  which  the  illness  was  known  to  be  dangerous,  or  in  which  we  cannot
assume  that  this  was  not  known,  and  3^  in  which  the  percipient  was
otherwise  more  or  less  anxious  or  troubled  about  the  decedent.  The
extent  to  which  the  anxiety  or  trouble  really  occupied  the  percipient's
mind  in  these  23  cases  varies  considerably  and  is  sometimes  difficult
to  estimate.  In  some  cases  {e.g.,  Nos.  450.18  and  328.5),  the  anxiety
was  clearly  great.  In  others  (e.g.,  No.  422.25),  the  knowledge  of  the
serious  illness  does  not  seem  to  have  produced  emotional  anxiety  in

1  Nos.  442. 17  (p  213),  383.  24  (p.  216),  362.  21  (p.  217),  147.  23  (p.  218),  379.  24
(p.  225),  630.  5  (p.  227),  83.  21  (p.  228),  61.  22  (p.  232),  730.  24  (p.  233),  452. 10  (second
case,  p.  238).  These  cases  are  none  of  them  under  suspicion  of  having  been  selected
by  the  collector. In  7  of  them  we  have  positive  evidence  to  the  contrary.

2  Nos.  425.  12  (p.  211),  215.  9  (p.  224),  418.  4  (p.  230),  571.  14  (p.  237),  452.  10
(first  case,  p.  238),  579.  25  (p.  241).

3  Nos.  422.  25  (p.  227),  523.  12  (p.  231),  645. 11  (p.  233),  4.50. 18  (p.  234),  328.  5
(p.  235),  725.  6  (p.  237),  385.  20  (p.  239),  191.  3  (p.  240).

-i  Nos.  381.  4  (p.  214),  and  460. 1  (p.  288),  are  two  of  them.


250


Report  on  the  Census  of  JHallticinations.  [chap.


the  percipient  at  all,  on  account  of  the  absence  of  emotional  relation
between  the  percipient  and  the  decedent ;  but  though  this  makes
the  anxiety — if  it  can  be  called  so — less  important,  it  also  makes  a
telepathic  explanation  less  plausible,  so  that  we  had  better  consider
together  all  the  cases  where  there  was  knowledge  of  serious  illness,
whether  this  knowledge  produced  emotional  anxiety  or  not,  or  where
there  is  reason  to  think  that  the  percipient's  mind  was  specially
occupied  with  the  decedent.

The  question  before  us  is  :  granting  that  anxiety  and  other
■emotions,  or  concentration  of  the  mind  on  particular  persons,  are
causes  of  hallucinations  representing  the  person  exciting  the  state  of
mind,  ought  we  to  assume  that  where  such  a  state, — let  us  say
anxiety, — is  present,  it  sufficiently  accounts  for  a  death-coincidence?
It  is  clear  that  the  answer  must  largely  depend  on  the  duration  of  the
anxiety  as  compared  with  the  interval  between  the  hallucination  and
the  death.  If  the  anxiety  remains  much  the  same  for  several  days,
the  hallucination  will  not  occur  on  the  day  of  the  death,  and  at  no
other  time  during  that  period,  without  some  reason  other  than  the
anxiety,  and,  similarly,  if  the  anxiety  is  unchanged  for  several  hours
and  the  hallucination  occurs  within  a  few  minutes  of  the  death,  the
coincidence,  if  frequent,  needs  accounting  for.  There  may,  no  doubt,
be  cases  where  a  period  of  culmination  of  emotion  or  fatigue  occurs  at
the  time  of  death  comparable  in  duration  to  the  interval  between
death  and  hallucination,  and  when  this  is  so,  the  subjective  causation
of  the  hallucination  may  be  regarded  as  equally  probable  with  the  tele-
pathic. But  this  does  not  happen  to  be  the  case  in  any  of  the  death-
coincidences  with  which  we  are  now  concerned,  and  in  our  opinion,
therefore,  anxiety  will  not  account  for  even  those  in  our  collection  in
which  it  was  acute.  ^

It  must  be  regarded  as  confirmatory  of  this  view  that,  out  of  the
50  apparitions  in  the  whole  collection  that  occurred  to  our  informants
during  anxiety  (or  presumable  anxiety)  of  the  percipient  about  the
person  whose  figure  was  seen,  3 1  -  are  reported  to  have  coincided  with
the  latter's  death — a  proportion  which  must  be  greatly  in  excess  of

1  The  strongest  instance  of  anxiety,  is  perhaps  No.  407.  2.  The  death  had  been
hourly  expected  since  the  morning.  From  noon  till  evening,  the  percipient  had
watched  by  her  dying  cousin,  and  then  had  to  return  to  her  own  house  next  door  to
rest,  in  preparation  for  her  work  next  day  as  a  teacher.  Some  time  after  she  was  in
bed,  she  saw  the  figure  of  her  cousin,  at  once  got  up  and  dressed,  and,  as  she  left  the
room,  met  the  news  that  all  was  over.

^  This  includes  8  cases  not  reckoned  in  the  62  death-coincidences,  because  in  2  of
them  the  percipient  was,  or  may  have  been,  aware  that  the  death  was  actually  at  that
moment  taking  place  ;  in  3  the  percipient  either  was  under  10  years  of  age  or  had  had
unenumerated  experiences  :  and  the  other  3  are  the  ones  in  which  we  have  evidence
^pointing  to  special  selection  by  the  collectors.


XIII.]


Chance  Coincidence.


251


the  frequency  with  which  anxiety  is  terminated  by  the  death,  and  not
by  the  recovery,  of  the  person  inspiring  it.  It  is  further  signilicant
that,  of  the  remaining  19  cases,  11  occurred  when  the  person  seen
proved  to  be  on  his  death-bed,  though  he  did  not  die  within  the  12
hours  which  we  have  taken  as  the  limit  for  death-coincidences.  ^

The  reader  should  bear  in  mind  that  when  we  affirm  telepathy  to
have  operated  in  any  particular  case,  we  do  not  intend  thereby  to
exclude  the  action  of  other  causes  and  conditions, — such  as  those
examined  in  Chapters  IX.  and  X.  Indeed,  the  operation  of  other
causes  besides  telepathy  is  sometimes  obviously  required  to  explain  the
bizarre  form  occasionally  taken  by  seemingly  telepathic  communications.
It  is  therefore  quite  likely  that  anxiety, — with  other  things  which
direct  the  thoughts  of  the  percipient  to  the  agent, — may  facilitate
telepathic  communication  ;  but  except  in  very  special  cases,  of  which
we  have  none  in  the  present  collection,  it  will  not  by  itself  account
for  the  coincidence  of  the  hallucination  with  the  death.


1  It  is  worth  analysing  the  remaining  8  cases.  Three  of  them  occurred  during
illness  of  the  person  seen,  but  we  have  no  information  as  to  whether  the  illness
ended  fatally  or  not.  One  (No.  69. 14,  see  p.  105)  coincided  with  a  serious  danger
to  the  person  seen,  suggesting  a  possible  telepathic  explanation.  Two  are  cases
where  the  percipient  was  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  person  seen.  (One  of  these
is  No.  317.  14,  see  p.  308. )  The  anxiety  was  by  no  means  acute  in  either  case,  and
there  was  in  both  a  slight  element  of  coincidence,  which  makes  the  interpretation
doubtful.  In  another,  the  percipient  saw  a  friend,  and  states  that  he  was  anxious,
but  does  not  say  on  what  subject.  In  the  remaining  case,  (No.  426.  13,  see  p.  1H7)
the  person  whose  phantasm  was  seen  appears  to  have  been  in  no  exceptional
condition  at  the  time.


252  Rei^ort  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Chapteb  XIV.

VERIDICAL HALLUCINATIONS CONTINUED  :  FURTHER
COINCIDENTAL  CASES.

In  the  last  two  chapters  we  limited  ourselves  to  a  special  class  o£
coincidences,  namely,  recognised  apparitions  of  a  dying  person  seen
within  12  hours  of  the  death,  in  order  to  base  a  calculation  upon
them.  The  evidence  for  telepathy — or  some  other  supernormal  cause
— afforded  by  the  Census  does  not,  however,  rest  on  these  cases  alone  ;
and  in  the  present  chapter  we  shall  give  selected  instances  of  halluci-
nations which  do  not  fall  within  the  class  above  defined,  but  which
yet  either  coincide  with  some  external  event  in  such  a  manner  as  to
suggest  a  causal  connection  between  them,  or  else  convey  some  in-
foi'mation  previously  unknown  to  the  percipient.

But  before  leaving  the  subject  of  recognised  visual  death-
coincidences,  we  may  conveniently  lay  before  the  reader  the  three
cases  which  we  excluded  from  the  last  two  chapters  (see  p.  210)
because  there  was  some  reason  to  believe  that  the  percipients  were
asked  the  Census  question  owing  to  their  having  had  an  experience.
In  all  of  them  the  coincidence  was  well  made  out,  and  appears  to.
have  been  very  close. They  are  the  following : —

(61.  6.)  From  Mrs.  G.

''  I  saw  my  mother,  exactly  as  she  was  some  few  months  before  (when  she
lived  with  me),  standing  at  my  bedside.  She  touched  me,  but  when^I  spoke
to  her  and  tried  to  touch  her,  slie  immediately  vanished.  This  took  place
in  January,  1883. Place,  my  own  bedroom,  in

"I  was  in  bed  at  the  time,  but  wide  awake ;  was  suffering  from  rheumatism.

"  I  had  not  seen  my  mother  for  some  months  ;  previous  to  that  time  she
had  lived  with  me.  I  was  not  aware  of  what  she  was  doing  at  the  time.  My
mother  died  at  the  exact  time  I  saw  her  at  my  bedside,  as  I  found  next
morning.

"  No  other  person  was  in  the  room  at  the  moment  I  felt  the  touch  of  her
hand  ;  but  one  of  my  daughters,  coming  in  just  afterwards,  saw  nothing
took  note  of  exact  time,  which  was  9.10  y.m..

"I  have  never  since  had  a  similar  experience."

The  lady  through  whom  this  case  was  obtained  informed  us  that  she
had  first  heard  the  accovmt  from  the  daughter  referred  to,  who  told  her
that  on  going  into  her  mother's  room  she  had  found  her  talking,
apparently  to  someone  at  the  foot  of  her  bed.  Her  mother  asked  her  if  she
could  see  anyone,  but  she  saw  nothing.  They  had  a  telegram  next  morning
saying  that  Mrs.  G.'s  mother  had  died  at  the  time  the  apparition  was  seen.
Miss  G.  was  then  about  16.  Mrs.  G.  had  some  ground  for  serious  anxiety
with  regard  to  her  mother's  health,  but  tlie  death  was  quite  unexpected.


XIV.]


Death-  Coincidences.


253


The  account  was  written  in  May  or  June,  1889.  It  is  in  the  handwriting
of  the  daughter,  and  is  signed  by  Mrs.  G.  herself.

Mrs.  G.,  who  is  now  an  invalid,  was  unwilling  to  see  any  member  of  the
Committee  on  the  subject.

(301.  6.)  From  Mrs.  Wilde.

10,  Golborne-street,  Warrington,  Mwy  Id,  1890.

' '  On  November  7th ,  1883,  I  was  sitting  in  the  evening  nursing  my  baby,
■when  my  brother-in-law,  who  I  knew  was  at  tlie  time  very  ill,  suddenly
appeared,  raised  his  arm,  and  then  vanished.  He  was  without  his  coat,  as  I
had  often  seen  him  at  his  own  home.  I  went  at  once  to  his  house,  and  was
told  that  he  had  just  died.  He  was  very  fond  of  me,  and  during  his  illness
had  often  said  that  he  wished  he  coftkl  come  and  see  me.

"  I  was  quite  well,  very  anxious  about  my  brother,  but  not  thinking  about
him  at  the  time.  I  was  30  years  old.  I  had  only  my  baby  with  me  at  the
time.

"  That  was  the  only  time  I  had  such  an  exjjerience.

"Catherine  Mary  Wilde."

Mr.  Wilde  corroborates  as  follows  : —

' '  I  beg  to  certify  that  I  remember  my  wife  relating  to  me  shortly  after
TQy  brother-in-law's  death  the  circumstance  already  given  relating  to  the
same.

"Thomas  Wilde."

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  : —

December  im,  1891.

"  I  have  to-day  seen  Mrs.  Wilde  and  questioned  her  as  to  her  experience.
rShe  seems  a  good  witness.  Her  brother-in-law,  whose  name  was  Thomas
Hatch,  died  of  bronchitis  (added  to  some  degree  of  consumption),  and  was
delirious  during  the  last  few  days  of  his  life.  He  was  attended  by  a
professional  nurse,  but  Mrs.  Wilde  saw  him  frequently,  and  he  seemed  to
recognise  her  when  she  came  into  the  room.  On  one  occasion  he  got  up  in
bed  and  said  he  was  coming  round  to  have  a  cup  of  tea  with  her.  She
believes  she  had  seen  him  on  the  day  he  died  more  than  once.  She  knew
lie  was  expected  to  die,  but  did  not  realise  it  as  likely  to  be  immediate
nor  had  she  any  idea  that  she  had  seen  him  for  the  last  time.  The  kitchen
in  which  she  sat  had  a  doorway  into  the  lobby  with  no  door.  She  looked
up  and  saw  him  in  the  doorway  quite  distinctly  ('not  like  a  .shadow')  just
as  she  was  accustomed  to  see  him  before  he  was  ill,  in  his  shirt  sleeves.
She  saw  him  raise  his  arm  (as  though  to  beckon,  I  think  she  said).  At  the
first  moment  she  really  thought  it  was  he  ;  then  she  was  frightened  and
looked  away  and  saw  him  no  more.  She  was  so  startled  by  the  incident  that
she  went  round  instantly  to  her  sister's  house,  not  three  minutes  off,  for  the
sake  of  company,  not  with  any  idea  of  finding  her  brother-in-law  dead.  She
asked  how  he  was  and  was  told  he  had  just  died.  No  one  was  with  her  when
she  had  the  experience,  but  she  told  her  husband  soon  after."

We  have  verified  the  date  of  death  through  the  Warrington  Advertiser
of  November  10th,  1883,  which  gives,  under  Deaths,  "November  7th,  aged
29  years,  Mr.  T.  L.  Hatch,  Golborne-.street,  Warrington."


254


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


After  the  above  account  was  given,  Mrs.  Wilde  had  another  possibly
veridical  experience — of  an  auditory  hallucination — which  she  thus
describes  : —

April  7th,  1892.

' '  .Just  before  I  got  up,  on  the  morning  of  the  28th  January,  1892,  I
heard  my  name  called  distinctly  (Kate).  I  thought  it  was  my  husband's
voice,  and  throwing  something  on  went  quickly  down.  I  noticed  the  time
by  the  large  clock  in  Sankey-street,  which  is  plainly  visible  from  our  door  j
it  was  then  a  quarter  to  eight.  Mr.  Wilde  was  not  in  the  house,  and  did
not  come  in  for  nearly  an  hour.  About  eleven  o'clock  that  morning  news
was  brought  of  the  death  of  Mrs.  L.,  the  lady  whose  business  I  was
managing.  She  died  at  a  quarter  to  eight,  the  time  I  heard  the  voice
calling  me.

"C.  M.  Wilde."

A  mourning  card,  giving  the  date  of  death,  was  sent  witli  this  account.

(350.  1.)  From  Mr.  T.  J.  Hay.

Tower  House,  Millbrook,  Southampton,  June  24^/i,,  1890.

"  It  is  long  ago — I  think  in  1845.  One  evening  I  took  a  candle  and
went  downstairs,  when  I  thought  I  met  my  great-aunt,  who  I  was  aware
was  seriously  ill.  I  talked  of  this  at  the  time  with  my  mother  and  brother,
and  probably  also  my  sister.  Early  the  next  morning  the  footman  brought
word  that  the  poor  old  lady  died  the  previous  evening,  about  the  hour  when
I  fancied  I  saw  her. [I  was]  in  good  health,  [age]  19  years.

"  Thomas  J.  Hay."

Mr.  Hay  informed  us  further  that  this  is  the  only  hallucinatory
experience  he  has  ever  had,  and  that  his  brother  was  present,  but  did  not
share  in  the  experience.  His  brother,  through  whom  the  collector  first
heard  of  the  case,  writes  : —

' '  I  was  present  with  my  brother  when  the  so-called  vision  took  place,
but  I  did  not  see  it.

"H.  W.  Hay."

Professor  Sidgwick  gives  the  following  account,  written  from  notes  taken,
at  the  time,  of  an  interview  which  he  had  with  the  percipient : —

March  23rd,  1892.

' '  I  called  yesterday  morning  on  Mr.  T.  J.  Hay  at  the  Tower  House.  He
told  me  he  only  regarded  the  matter  as  a  strange  coincidence.

"It  happened  thus.  He  had  been  sitting  in  the  evening  with  his  mother
and  sister,  but  had  left  them  for  a  brief  interval,  and  it  was  during  this
interval  that  he  saw  the  figure  of  his  aunt.  He  was  well  aware  that  she  was
dangerously  ill,  but  was  not  in  emotional  anxiety.  The  appearance  was  quite
clear  and  definite,  just  as  though  she  were  there  in  the  body  :  but  knowing
this  to  be  impossible,  he  had  a  '  creepy  '  feeling,  though  not  a  nervous  man.
It  lasted  about  lialf  a  minute,  and  then  vanished.  He  went  back  into  the
sitting-room,  and  told  his  mother  and  sister,  saying,  '  I  fear  something  has
happened  to  Aunt  Fanny. '  At  the  same  time  he  regarded  the  experience  as
a  mere  hallucination. He  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination,  nor,  so  far


XIV.]


Voices  coinciding  tvith  Death.


255


as  he  knows,  has  any  member  of  his  family.  When  the  butler  came  the  next
morning  with  the  news  of  his  aunt's  death,  he  asked  the  time  of  it,  and  found
it  about  the  same  as  the  time  of  the  appearance."

Recognised  Auditory  and  Tactile  Death-Coincidences.

The  next  group  of  cases  are  auditory  hallucinations,  in  which  a
voice  is  heard  at  the  time  of  a  death,  and  either  recognised  as  that  of
the  dying  person,  or  distinctly  associated  with  him.  There  are  15  of
these  in  our  collection,  not  counting  those  in  which  a  recognised
apparition  is  accompanied  by  a  voice.  In  10  of  them,  what  is  heard
is  the  percipient's  name  only,  and  in  the  remainder,  other  words.
One  of  the  15  cases  (No.  83.  3)  was  published  in  Phantasjns  of  the
Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  564,  where  it  is  numbered  616  ;  another  has  been
already  printed  in  Chapter  X.,  p.  179  ;  the  following  are,  we  think,
the  three  best  cases  among  the  others.


(131.11.)  From  Mrs.  Smith.

38,  Gillingham-street,  Pimlico,  S.W., September  9th,  1890.

' '  [I  heard]  a  voice  calling  my  name  three  times  on  board  the  Runnymede,
homeward  bound  from  Australia.  10  p.m.,  1874,  Mai-ch  9th.  [I  was]
lying  in  the  bunk,  but  wide  awake,  only  just  laid  down  ;  in  good  health  and
spirits.

"  It  was  my  mother's  [voice.  She  was]  in  England.  My  husband  [was
present]  but  he  heard  nothing.

"  When  I  returned  to  England  I  found  my  mother  had  died  that  same
night.  She  pined  and  lost  her  health  after  I  left.  She  was  particularly
anxious  to  see  me  before  she  was  taken,  and  thought  I  had  returned.

"E.  S.  Smith."

Mrs.  Smith  writes  further  to  the  collector,  Miss  H.  Wilson  : —

''February  2Sth,  1891.

' '  I  can  only  tell  you  that  my  motlier  was  not  attended  by  any  of  those
belonging  to  the  family,  as  slae  died  in  Bethnal  Green  Asylum,  March  9th,
1874  ;  and  her  name  was  Ann  Youens,  and  I  cannot  ask  anyone,  as  I  am  the
only  one  living  of  all  the  family,  but  my  husband  has  signed  his  name,  as  he
knows  quite  well  I  told  hiin  on  the  9th  of  March,  the  same  night  the  fire
broke  out  on  board  the  Runnymede,  the  ship  we  came  home  in,  and  got  in
the  West  India  Docks  the  8th  of  .June,  1874,  on  Sunday  morning.  The
captain's  name  was  Hay. I  am  sorry  that  I  have  no  one  left  to  tell  you  more. "

Mrs.  Smith  enclosed  the  following  statement  from  her  husband  : —

38,  Gillingham-street.
"  When  on  board  ship  my  wife  told  me  that  she  distinctly  heard  her
mother's  voice  calling  her  name.  . .  j^^^^^  g_  g^^^^^ _„


Mrs.  Smith  is  a  lodging-house  keeper. She  states  that  she  has  had  no


256  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


other  hallucinatory  experiences.  Mr.  Poclmore  called  on  her,  and  gives  the
following  account  of  his  interview  : —

February  Uh,  1891.

"I  heard  the  story  from  Mrs.  Smith  and  her  husband  yesterday.  Both
are  good  witnesses,  and  intelligent.  I  enclose  newspaper  extract  about  the
fire.  The  Runnymede  was  a  barque  sailing  from  Brisbane,  and  belonged
(Mrs.  Smith  thinks,  but  is  not  sure)  to  the  Shaw  and  Savile  line.  It  was  a
wool-ship,  and  the  fire  broke  out  in  the  wool.  The  fire  broke  out,  they
agreed,  about  half  an  hour  after  the  voice.  The  voice  was  distinctly  re-
cognised as  that  of  Mrs.  Smith's  mother.  The  name  called  was  '  Lizzie.'
The  agent's  name  was  Ann  Youens.  I  saw  a  printed  memorial  card
giving  the  date  of  her  death,  March  9th,  1874."

The  newspaper  cutting  referred  to  gives  under  the  head  of  ' '  Shipping
Intelligence  "  : —

"(from  Lloyd's,  april  15.) wrecks  and  casualties.

"  Pern AMBUCO  (per  telegraph,  Lisbon,  April  14).  A  fire  broke  out  on
board  the  Runnymede,  fr6m  Brisbane  to  London,  loading  wool,  and  tin  ore,
but  was  extinguished  with  little  damage  to  vessel  ;  extent  of  damage  to  cargo
not  yet  ascertahied.  She  has  been  surveyed,  and  has  discharged  part  of  her
cargo  ;  cause  of  fire  unknown. "

The  fact  that  the  voice  and  the  fire  occurred  on  the  same  night  is
likely  to  have  fixed  the  date  in  the  mind  of  the  percipient ;  and  this
diminishes  in  the  present  case  the  evidential  weakness  which — if  no
note  is  taken  at  the  time — usually  attaches  to  cases  where  a  consider-
able interval  elapses  between  the  hallucination  and  the  receipt  of  the
news  of  the  death.  In  the  next  case  there  can  have  been  no  mistake
as  to  coincidence,  since  the  news  was  received  by  telegram  at  once.

(23.  11.)  From  Mr.  Eggie.

^  Walbottle,  May,  1889.

"On  October  5th,  1863,  I  awoke  at  5  a.m.  I  was  in  Minto  House
Normal  Scliool,  Edinburgh.  I  heard  distinctly  the  well-known  and  charac-
teristic voice  of  a  dear  friend,  repeating  the  words  of  a  well-known  hymn.
Nothing  [was]  visible.  [I  was]  lying  quite  awake  in  bed— in  good  health,
and  free  from  any  special  anxiety.  Tliere  would  be  two  others  in  the  room,
but  sound  asleep.

"  I  have  always  thought  it  remarkable  that  at  the  very  same  time,  almost

to  a  minute,  my  friend  was  seized  suddenly  with  mortal  illness. He  died

same  day,  and  a  telegram  reached  me  that  evening  announcing  that  fact.

He  had  previously  been  in  his  usual  good  health.

^  ".Jno.  Eggie."

Mr.  Eggie  is  a  certificated  schoolmaster  at  Walbottle.  In  answer  to  our
further  inquiries  he  writes  :  —

Walbottle,  May  2Uh,  1889.
"  I  cannot  produce  any  independent  testimony  of  any  kind  regarding  the
incident. It  rests  entirely  on  my  own  word,  which,  of  course,  in  a  scientific
investigation,  is  worth  nothing. My  replies  would  be  as  follows  :—


XIV.]


Voices  coinciding  with  Death.


257


' '  I  mentioned  it  to  no  one  before  the  death.

"  The  friend  was  my  father.  He  died  on  October  5th,  1863.  The  cause
of  death  was,  I  believe,  certified  as  the  bursting  of  a  blood-vessel.

' '  The  sudden  death  was  mentioned  at  the  time  in  the  Dundee  news-
papers, but  I  have  no  copy  of  one  of  them.

"The  words  had  something  peculiarly  appropriate  about  them,  but,
so  far  as  I  know,  there  was  no  special  association.

"You  will  see  that  most  probably  my  father  would  at  least  be  thinking
a  good  deal  about  me  that  day.  He  did  not  speak,  I  believe,  after  the
seizure."

Professor  Sidgwick  writes  : —

September  23rd,  1891.

"  Yesterday,  at  5.45  p.m.,  I  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  Eggie.  He  read
over  his  paper,  and  suggested  modifications  of  one  or  two  phrases,  which  he
thought  perhaps  needed  slightly  qualifying.

"Thus,  with  regard  to  'no  anxiety,'  Mr.  Eggie  thought  he  ought  to
mention  that  his  father  had  been  ill  at  the  previous  Christmas-time— had
burst  a  blood-vessel ;  but  he  had  recovered  from  this,  and  was  believed  to
be  in  normal  health.  Mr.  Eggie  had  had  a  letter  from  him  a  day  or  two
before,  which  gave  not  the  slightest  ground  for  anxiety.  Still,  though  he
had  no  ground  for  special  anxiety,  there  might  have  been  a  faint  general
anxiety  on  account  of  the  previous  illness.

"Again,  in  his  statement  of  the  exactness  of  the  coincidence,  he  thought
' almost '  should  be  inserted  before  'to  a  minute.'  But  he  felt  sure  of  the
closeness  of  the  coincidence,  for  the  following  reasons  : —

"  (1.)  He  knew  the  time  of  the  voice  from  hearing  the  chimes  of  St.  Giles's
Church  very  shortly  after.  (2.)  The  time  of  the  seizure  he  learnt  when  he
went  home  for  the  funeral ;  and  it  was  fixed  in  his  mind  by  the  following
circumstances.  The  father  was  engaged  in  farming,  and  the  day  of  tlie
fatal  illness  was  market  day ;  he  consequently  rose  earlier  than  usual,  and
was  making  himself  some  breakfast  when  the  seizure  occurred ;  he  never
became  conscious  again,  and  he  died  at  2  p.m.  on  the  same  day.

"  The  voice  repeated  two  complete  stanzas  of  the  hymn.

' '  An  entry  by  which  Mr.  Eggie  knows  the  date  was  in  the  fly-leaf  of  a
Bible;  it  must  have  been  made  very  shortly  after  the  death.  He  heard  of
the  death  by  telegraph  on  the  same  day  ;  a  letter  followed  ;  but  neither
mentioned  the  exact  time  of  the  death.  He  has  had  no  similar  experience,
either  before  or  after."

This  case  is  a  death-coincidence,  as  the  hallucination  occurred
within  seven  hours  of  the  death ;  but  the  almost  exact  agreement  in
time  between  the  hallucination  and  the  seizure  suggests  that  it  was  the
crisis  of  the  seizure  rather  than  of  the  death  which  caused  the  tele-
pathic impulse.

In  the  following  case,  again,  the  receipt  of  the  news  followed  the
hallucination  so  closely  that  there  can  have  been  no  mistake  as  to  the
coincidence.

s


258  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


(55.18.)  From  the  Rev.  J.  Maskell.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889).
■ ■  Emanuel  Hospital,  Westminster.

"On  30th  October,  1857,  while  Curate  of  Gain's  Colne,  Essex,  I  was
sitting  in  my  room,  in  lodgings,  in  a  lonely  half-occupied  farmhouse,  about
7  p.m.,  when  I  heard  tlie  voice  of  a  parishioner,  whom  I  well  knew,  calling
me  from  the  outside,  under  my  window,  'Mr.  Maskell,  I  want  you  ;  come.'
I  went  out,  but  saw  no  one,  and  thought  no  more  of  it,  till  about  9  p.m.
I  was  sent  for  by  the  man's  wife,  distant  nearly  a  mile,  and  then  learned
that  the  man  J.  B.  had  been  found  dead  in  the  roadway  from  Chappie
Station  to  the  village — a  long  distance  from  my  abode,  perhaps  a  mile
or  more.

"  [I  was]  reading,  and  in  good  health.

"J.  B.  was  a  cattle  dealer,  and  I  saw  him  frequently,  both  in  his  place
in  church,  and  out  of  it.  I  had  no  knowledge  of  his  occupation  at  7  p.m.
on  Saturday,  October  30th,  1857.

' '  A  lad  who  was  my  pupil  [was  present] ;  he  had  no  share  in  the  experience .

"I  took  no  notes.  The  man  J.  B.  was  supposed  to  have  been  murdered,
and  at  the  inquest  the  verdict  was  '  Wilful  murder  against  some  person
or  persons  unknown.'  The  motive  for  the  murder  was  robbery,  as  he  had
sold  much  cattle,  and  was  returning  with  money  from  Colchester  Market.

"J.  Maskell."

We  have  verified  the  fact  that  October  30th,  1857,  was  a  Saturday.

Mr.  Maskell  is  now  no  longer  living,  but  through  the  kindness  of  Miss
Maskell  we  have  been  able  to  obtain  a  copy  of  the  inscription  on  the
murdered  man's  tomb  in  the  churchyard  of  Colne  Engaine,  Halstead,  Essex,
which  gives  the  date  of  his  death  as  October  31st,  1857.  The  circumstances
of  the  death  seem  to  make  it  certain  that  it  was  on  Saturday  night,  and  not
on  Sunday,  that  the  man  was  killed,  so  that  we  must  suppose  the  day  of
the  month  on  the  tombstone  to  be  wrong.

Miss  Maskell  says  : —

"[My  father]  was,  I  know,  much  impressed  with  the  occurrence,  and
seldom  spoke  of  it;  but,  if  necessary,  I  could  have  given  you  data,  &c."

The  following  case  is  the  nearest  approach  among  our  cases  to  a
recognised  tactile  hallucination  coinciding  with  a  death,  but,  as  will  be
seen,  it  was  not  the  touch  that  was  connected  with  the  dying  person,
but  an  accompanying  mental  impulse,  much  more  impressive  than  the
touch  and  of  which  the  touch  seemed  to  be  a  subsidiary  part.

(338.  26. )  From  Miss  L.  D.

September  4th,  1890.
"On  September  3rd,  1858,  I  was  in  a  wild  part  of  the  West  Highlands,
where  our  home  was,  close  to  the  sea.  A  party  of  cousins  were  with  us,  on
a  visit.  I  and  a  sister  and  one  of  our  guests,  a  girl  of  16,  went  out  on  the
hills,  to  a  point  where  we  could  look  over  the  Sound  of  Mull.  We  sat  on
the  turf  looking  at  the  view.  I  and  my  cousin  made  an  outline  sketch.
[Then]  she  rose  and  walked  a  little  further  to  join  my  sister. I  was  left


XIV.]


Touches  coinciding  with  Death.


259


alone,  and  an  impulse  came  over  me  to  pray  for  a  brother,  a  sailor — he  was
in  the  West  Indies  at  the  time.  I  heard  no  sou7id,  but  I  felt  a  sensation  as
if  something  touched  me.  I  obeyed  and  prayed  for  his  safe  keeping  (his
ship  was  on  its  way  home).  I  said  nothing  to  the  others,  but  I  did  look  at
my  watch  :  it  was  3.30  p.m.

' '  On  September  7th  a  letter  from  this  brother  came.  He  hoj^ed  to
be  with  us  in  a  few  weeks,  but  they  had  been  coaling  at  St.  Thomas,  and
yellow  fever  was  raging  there  ;  several  cases  on  board  his  own  ship,  though
none  were  very  severe.  His  letter  was  dated  on  a  late  day  in  August
(25th,  I  think).  On  September  21st,  our  guests  having  all  left  us,  a  letter
came  from  the  authorities  at  Portsmouth,  stating  that  on  September  3rd
he  had  died  of  yellow  fever  on  his  voyage  home,  and  his  body  had  been
committed  to  the  deep  on  the  same  day.  He  had  been  taken  ill  just  after
writing  his  last  letter,  and  as  he  was  a  young  fellow  of  19,  the  surgeon
thought  his  best  chance  was  to  be  sent  off  at  once,  so  he  was  carried  on
board  and  died  on  the  second  day  at  sea,  September  3rd.  The  exact  hour
was  not  known,  for  the  boy  was  left  asleep  in  his  berth,  and  found  dead  by
one  of  his  fellow-officers.

"  The  shock  was  great  to  my  mother — we  could  not  talk  much  to  her.
Just  after  Christmas  my  mother  and  I  went  to  stay  with  old  friends  and  con-
nections at  a  beautiful  place  close  to  Dunbar.  Of  course  the  sad  event  was
talked  over  by  my  mother  and  our  hostess.  I  was  sitting  by  the  first  time
they  spoke,  and  heard  my  mother  say,  that  about  3  o'clock  on  September  3rd
she  was  sitting  talking  to  her  friend  (the  mother  of  the  girl  who  walked  out
with  me).  Each  had  a  sailor-boy,  and  they  were  talking  of  those  two  absent
ones.  Then  they  agreed  to  go  out  and  walk,  and  my  motlier  had  got  on  her
things,  and  was  leaving  her  room  to  join  her  friend,  when  (I  quote  her
words)  '  a  hand  seemed  to  force  me  to  turn  back,  and  I  went  and  knelt
down  and  prayed  for  my  boy.  I  did  not  know  why,  but  I  just  prayed
he  might  be  safe.'  When  I  got  her  alone,  I  told  her  about  our  walk  and
my  own  experience.  I  had  never  done  so  till  then,  she  had  been  so  ill
and  upset.  Neither  of  us  had  a  doubt  but  that  this  '  message  '  was  sent  to
us  just  as  the  young  spirit  passed  alone  into  the  Unseen  World.  We  heard
no  voice  and  saw  nothing,  but  we  were  aware  of  an  unusual  sensation,  which
could  not  be  resisted. I  can,  only  call  it  '  an  uncontrollable  impulse.'

"My  mother  died  last  year,  and  all  the  persons  except  one,  who  were
with  us  on  that  day,  are  dead  too.  The  exception  is  that  young  cousin,  but
I  do  not  think  I  ever  told  her. I  was  24  years  old."

It  is  an  interesting  feature  in  this  case  that  the  experience
apparently  occurred  to  two  percipients  in  different  places  simul-
taneously, but  the  second  percipient  being  dead,  it  has,  of  course,  been
impossible  to  obtain  her  evidence  at  first-hand.

Apparitions,  not  of  the  Dying  Person,  Coinciding  with  Death.

In  the  next  group  of  cases,  an  apparition  coinciding  with  the  death
represents,  not  the  dying  person  herself,  but  a  near  relative  of  hers.
There  are  four  cases  of  this  type  in  the  Census ;  of  these,  one  was

s  2


260  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


published  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  357  (No.  124),  and
two  others  are  given  below.

Such  cases  need  present  no  difficulty  on  the  telepathic  theory.
Indeed  it  may  be  rather  said  that  the  absence  of  any  cases  of  the  kind
would  render  the  theory  improbable.  They  raise  the  question,  however,
who  the  "agent" — the  person,  that  is,  from  whom  the  telepathic
communication  comes — is,  in  hallucinations  coinciding  with  a  death.
Usually  it  seems  natural  to  assume  that  it  is  the  dying  person,  and  in
some  cases — as  we  have  seen  in  Chapter  XII — this  view  is  supported
by  evidence  that  the  dying  person's  thoughts  were  specially  directed  to
the  percipient.  The  mere  fact,  however,  that  the  apparition  represents
a  particular  person  does  not  prove  that  that  person  was  the  agent.  It
is  possible  for  an  agent  to  transfer  to  a  percipient  an  image  of  some
third  person,  and  it  is  possible  for  a  percipient  to  embody  an  impression
telepathically  received  in  a  form  suggested  by  his  own  mind  and  not
by  the  agent's.  As  an  instance  where  it  seems  improbable  that  the
pex'son  whose  figure  was  seen  was  the  agent,  see  Mrs.  McAlpine's
vision  of  her  baby  nephew  at  the  time  of  its  death  (printed  at  p.  281)
after  another  experience  of  the  same  percipient.)  It  seems  more  likely
in  this  case  that  the  agent  was  some  one  with  the  child,  than  the  child
itself,  aged  six  months.  In  one  of  the  death  coincidences  quoted  in
Chapter  XII.,  (No.  579.  24,  p.  223),  there  is  some  reason  for  thinking
that  the  agent  was  the  sister  who  telegraphed  the  news  rather  than  the
decedent;  because  (1)  the  hallucination  nearly  coincided  in  time  with
the  despatch  of  the  telegram,  while  it  occurred  some  hours  after  the
death,  and  (2)  it  foretold  the  arrival  of  the  telegram.  These  cases,
of  course,  differ  from  those  we  are  about  to  quote,  in  that  the  appa-
rition is  of  the  dying  person,  but  they  should  be  kept  in  view  in
interpreting  them.

(341.  21.)  From  Miss  W.

October  nth,  1891.
"It  was  one  Sunday  morning  at  church,  during  morning  service.  I
looked  up  from  my  Prayer-book  and  saw  the  figure  of  a  man  standing  in  what
had  been  an  empty  seat  ojiposite  me.  He  turned  half  round  and  looked  at
me  with  a  fixed,  agonised  gaze.  I  felt  pei-turbed  and  very  annoyed  at  his
behaviour,  when  he  bowed  his  head  as  though  something  were  passing  over
him,  and,  to  my  utter  astonishment,  vanished. This  was  on  Sunday,

 ,  1885. I  was  singing  the  Psalms,  with  my  brother  sharing

the  same  book. I  was  in  good  health,  and  quite  free  from  grief  or  anxiety.

My  age  was  22.

"The  appearance  was  that  of  an  acquaintance  of  mine,  who  from  his
seat  m  church  was  much  given  to  staring  at  me  during  service.  I  lieard
afterwards  that  at  tliat  exact  time  he  was  at  the  deathbed  of  his  mother.

' '  This  was  the  only  occasion  [on  which  I  have  had  such  an  experience].


XIV.] Apparitions  coinciding  with  other  Deaths.  261

Miss  W. ,  in  answer  to  further  questions,  informed  us  that  she  did  not

know  that  Mr. 's  mother  was  ill. She  had  been  delicate  for  years,  but

she  had  not  heard  that  she  was  at  all  less  strong  then  than  usual.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  called  on  Miss  W.  on  December  5th,  1891,  and  gives  the
following  account,  written  at  once,  of  what  she  heard  from  her  : —

"  Miss  W.  was  at  the  west  end  of  the  church.  The  figure  appeared  in
the  choir  at  the  opposite  side,  so  that  she  had  a  three-quarters  view  of  it,  as
it  were. It  was  the  gentleman's  usual  seat. She  had  the  impulse  to  say  to

her  brother  :  '  How  could  Mr.  have  got  there  without  our  seeing  him

going  across  ? '  but  restrained  herself  because  of  the  way  he  was  looking  at
her,  which  made  her  angry.  She  thinks  the  appearance  may  have  lasted
through  half  a  Psalm,  but  is  not  sure.  I  think  she  most  likely  did  not  keep
her  eyes  on  it,  and  when  she  looked  again  it  was  gone.  Anyhow,  she
cannot  give  any  account  of  its  vanishing  ;  it  was  just  not  there.  Only  then
did  she  realise  that  what  she  had  seen  was  not  real,  and  it  gave  her  a  shock.
She  had  a  difficulty  in  standing  through  the  remainder  of  the  Psalms,  her
knees  shook  so  much  ;  but  looking  over  the  same  book  with  her  brother,  she
would  not  give  way.  She  had  no  unusual  feelings  before  the  figure  vanished.
Her  sight  is  good  and  she  would  see  a  real  person  quite  clearly  at  that
distance.

"  She  heard,  when  she  got  home,  that  Mrs.  had  died  that  morning,

at  the  time  she  saw  her  son,  as  she  believes.

"  She  has  never  told  anyone  of  this  experience,  so  that  no  further
evidence  can  be  obtained."

We  have  verified  the  date  of  Mrs. 's  death  independently  through

a  local  paper.

In  this  case  the  coincidence  appear  to  have  been  very  close.  In  the

absence  of  evidence  either  from  Mr. or  liis  mother,  it  is  not

possible  for  us  to  feel  sure  which  was  the  agent. The  fact  that  Mrs.

 was  more  clearly  passing  through  a  crisis  is  an  argument  for

supposing  that  the  telepathic  impression  came  from  her,  but  on  the

other  hand  there  is  reason  to  think  that  Mr. and  the  percipient

were  more  interested  in  each  other  than  the  dying  lady  and  the
percipient  were,  and  his  thoughts  may  well  have  turned  to  her  at  the
moment  of  his  mother's  death.

In  the  next  case  the  fact  that  the  person  whose  figure  was  seen  can
hardly  by  any  noi'mal  means  have  known  of  his  mother's  death  at  the
time  of  the  hallucination  makes  it  difficult  to  suppose  that  he  was
the  agent,  without  a  telepathic  hypothesis  so  complicated  as  to  be
extremely  improbable.

(338.  20.) From  Miss  C.  L.  Hawkins-Dempster.

(The  account  was  written  in  1890).

24,  Portman-square,  W.
"I  ran  downstairs  and  entered  the  drawing-room  at  7.30  p.m.,  believuig
I  had  kept  my  two  sisters  waiting  for  dimier. They  had  gone  to  dmner,  the


262  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


room  was  empty.  Behind  a  long  sofa  I  saw  Mr.  H.  standing.  He  moved  3
steps  nearer.  I  heard  nothing.  I  was  not  at  all  afraid  or  surprised,  only
felt  concern  as  [to]  what  he  wanted,  as  he  was  in  South  America.  I  learnt
next  morning  that  at  that  moment  his  mother  was  breathing  lier  last.  I
went  and  arranged  her  for  bui'ial,  my  picture  still  hanging  above  the  bed,
between  the  portraits  of  her  two  absent  sons.

"  I  was  in  the  habit  of  hearing  often  from  [Mr.  H.],  and  was  not  at  that
moment  anxious  about  Mrs.  H.'s  health,  though  she  was  aged.

' '  I  had  had  25  days  before  the  grief  of  losing  an  only  brother.  No  [other
persons  were  present  at  the  time].

"C.  L.  H.  Dempster."

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  we  learnt  from  Miss  Hawkins-Dempster
that  the  above  incident  occurred  on  New  Year's  Eve,  1876-77  ;  the  room  was
lighted  by  "  one  bright  lamp  and  a  fire,"  and  the  figure  did  not  seem  to  go
away,  she  merely  "ceased  to  see  it."  She  used  to  see  Mrs.  H.  often,  and
was  in  no  anxiety  as  to  her  health  at  the  time.  Mrs.  H.  was  very  old,  but
not  definitely  ill.  Miss  Hawkins-Dempster  corrected  her  first  statement  as
to  the  exactness  of  the  coincidence  by  informing  us  that  Mrs.  H.  died  in  the
morning  of  the  same  day  on  which  the  apparition  was  seen.

Miss  Hawkins-Dempster  mentioned  what  she  had  seen  to  her  sister,  who
thus  corroborates  : —

Juhi  loth,  1892.

"  I  heard  of  my  sister  Miss  C.  L.  Hawkins-Dempster's  vision  of  Mr.  H.
in  the  drawing-room  at  7.30  p.m.  on  New  Year's  Eve,  1876-7,  immediately
after  it  happened,  and  before  liearing  that  Mi's.  H.  died  the  same  day,  the
news  of  which  reached  us  later  that  evening.  -g  -g  j)gjy|-pgj,j,j^  "

We  have  verified  the  date  of  death  at  Somerset  House.

Miss  Hawkins-Dempster  has  had  one  other  experience.  While  sitting
at  luncheon  with  her  sister  and  their  governess,  they  all  saw  their  hostess,
who  was,  in  fact,  writing  in  her  own  room,  and  probably  conscious  that  she
was  late  for  luncheon,  enter  the  room.  She  actually  came  in  about  ten
minutes  later. This  occurred  in  1848  or  1849.

Mr.  Myers  had  an  interview  with  the  Misses  Hawkins-Dempster  on
July  16th,  1892,  and  writes  as  follows  the  next  day  : —

"  Miss  C.  Hawkins-Dempster's  veridical  experience  is  well  remembered
by  both  sisters.  The  decedent  was  a  very  old  lady,  who  was  on  very  intimate
terms  with  them,  and  had  sjDecial  reasons  for  thinking  of  Miss  C.  Hawkins-
Dempster  in  connection  with  the  son  whose  figure  aijjjeared.  He  was  at  the
other  side  of  the  world,  and  almost  certainly  had  not  heard  of  his  mothei''s
death  at  the  time.

"  The  figure  was  absolutely  life-like.  Miss  Hawkins-Dempster  noticed
the  slight  cast  of  the  eye  and  the  delicate  hands.  The  figure  rested  one
hand  on  the  back  of  a  chair  and  held  the  other  out.  Miss  Hawkins-
Dempster  called  out,  '  What  can  I  do  for  you  ? '  forgetting  for  the  moment
the  impossibility  that  it  could  be  the  real  man.  Then  she  simply  ceased  to
see  the  figure.


XIV.]  Unrecognised  coincident  Apparitions.  263


' '  She  was  in  good  healtli  at  the  time,  and  her  thoughts  were  occupied
with  business  matters."

Here  the  apparition  followed  the  death  by  some  hours  ;  so  that,  if
Mrs.  H.  was  the  agent,  the  telepathic  impression  must  either  have
remained  latent  for  some  time,  or  have  been  produced  by  the  agent
after  death.  In  this  the  case  resembles  other  death-coincidences  in
which  the  apparition  followed  the  death.  This  class  of  experiences  will
be  further  discussed  in  Chapter  XVII.

Unrecognised  Hallucinations  coinciding  with  Death.

We  come  next  to  cases  in  which  the  hallucinatory  figure  or  voice
which  coincides  with  a  death  is  unrecognised,  or  in  which  the
coinciding  (visual)  hallucination  does  not  amount  to  a  human  figure
at  all.

We  have  in  our  present  collection  two  cases  where  a  human  figure
seen  at  the  time  of  death  is  not  recognised  as  representing  any  known
person.  In  the  first  of  these,  the  dying  person  was  one  whom  the
percipient  had  never  even  heard  of,  and  therefore  could  not  be
expected  to  recognise.

(317.  6.)  From  Miss  S.  Money.

(The  account  was  written  in  1890).

47,  Upper  Baker-street,  Regent's  Park,  N.W.

"At  Redhill,  on  Thanksgiving  Day,  between  8  and  9  in  the  evening,
when  I  was  taking  charge  of  the  little  daughter  of  a  friend,  during  [my]  friend's
absence  for  that  evening,  I  left  the  child  sleeping  in  the  bedroom,  and  went
to  drop  the  blinds  in  two  neighbouring  rooms,  being  absent  about  three
minutes.  On  returning  to  the  child's  room,  in  the  full  light  of  the  gas-
burner  from  above  I  distinctly  saw,  coming  from  the  child's  cot,  a  white
figure,  which  figure  turned,  looked  me  full  in  the  face,  and  passed  down  the
staircase.  I  instantly  followed,  leaned  over  the  banisters  in  astonishment,
and  saw  the  glistening  of  the  white  drapery  as  the  figure  passed  down  the
staircase,  through  the  lighted  hall,  and  silently  through  the  hall  door  itself,
which  was  barred,  chained,  and  locked.  I  felt  for  the  moment  perfectly
staggered,  went  back  to  the  bedroom,  and  found  the  child  peacefully  sleep-
ing. I  related  the  circumstance  to  the  mother  immediately  on  her  return
late  that  night.  She  was  incredulous,  but  said  that  my  description  of  the
figure  answered  to  that  of  an  invalid  aunt  of  the  child's.  The  next  morning
came  a  telegram  to  say  that  this  relative,  who  had  greatly  wished  to  see  her
niece,  had  died  between  8  and  9  the  previous  evening.

"  I  had  just  put  down  the  Pickwick  Papers  with  which  I  had  been
whiling  the  time,  was  free  from  trouble,  and  in  good  health.

"  No  one  was  in  the  house  but  myself,  the  child,  and  one  servant,  who,
at  the  time,  was  in  the  kitchen,  dressed  in  black.


264  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


"This  is  the  only  experience  of  this  nature  I  have  ever  had.

"P.S. — The  writer  cannot  give  the  date  in  figures  without  reference  to
an  almanack  of  that  year,  but  is  certain  that  this  occurred  on  the  evening  of
Thanksgiving  Day  for  the  recovery  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  [i.e.,  February

In  answer  to  our  inquiries,  the  collector,  Miss  B.  Garnett  writes  : —
Highlands,  Clarendon-road,  Lewisham,  S.E.,  December  20th,  1890.

"I  obtained  lately  an  interview  with  Miss  Money,  and  wrote  down  her
replies  to  the  four  questions  enclosed.  This  was  all  the  information  she  was
able  to  give.  I  should  state  that  Miss  Money's  rather  interesting  experience
was  told  me  lojig  before  I  was  asked  to  collect  answers  for  the  Society,  and
then  merely  was  told  by  her  in  the  course  of  conversation,  when  I  had  been
expressing  my  scepticism  about  all  so-called  t;2yirit'nal  manifestations.  She
then  said  she  had  been  utterly  sceptical  until  she  herself  met  with  this
experience."

The  replies  enclosed  were  : —

"1.  The  child's  mother  died  about  10  or  11  years  ago.

"  2.  Miss  Money  did  not  even  know  of  the  existence  of  the  aunt  at  the
time  of  [her]  experience.

"3.  Miss  Money  has  scruples  about  giving  the  name  without  permission.
She  states  that  the  aunt  was  a  single  woman,  and  a  step-sister  of  the  father
of  the  child,  and  that  the  aunt  was  not  living  near.

"4.  As  the  lady  (the  aunt)  was  no  acquaintance  of  Miss  Money's,  and  as
she  heard  no  further  details,  she  knows  of  no  further  way  of  proving  the
fact.  Miss  Money  lost  sight  of  the  parents,  having  been  abroad  herself  for
many  years  afterwards."

Miss  Garnett  says  further,  in  speaking  of  the  original  account,  which  was
first  given  to  her  verbally  by  Miss  Money,  ' '  It  was  clearly  and  repeatedly
given,  amid  many  critical  suggestions  on  my  part.  I  may  add  that  Miss
Money's  testimony  on  any  subject  is  one  that  I  have  always  found  reliable.
I  merely  add  this  because  there  are  so  many  people  who  seem  scarcely  able
to  help  exaggerating  in  the  direction  of  the  particular  bias  of  their  minds."

Mr.  Podmore  called  on  Miss  Money  on  February  2nd,  1892,  and  heard
full  particulars  of  the  incident  from  her.  He  further  ascertained  that  no
corroboration  is  now  obtainable,  and  that  Miss  Money  has  failed  to  obtain
permission  to  give  the  name  of  the  lady  who  died.  We  have  therefore  been
unable  to  verify  the  date  of  the  death.

In  this  case,  it  is  said  that  the  percipient's  "description  of  the
figure  answered  to  that  of  "  the  decedent.  We  cannot  lay  much  stress
on  such  a  supposed  correspondence,  but  if  there  really  was  any
material  resemblance,  it  may  be  compared  to  cases  where  some  veridical
detail  not  previously  known  to  the  percipient  is  introduced  into  a
coincidental  apparition,  as  the  "  waistcoat  with  the  shiny  back  "  in
No.  571.  14  (see  p.  237),  the  dressing-gown  in  No.  147.  23  (see  p.  218),


XIV.]  Unrecognised  coincident  Apparitions.  265


and  the  details  of  the  scene  in  No.  362.  21  (see  p.  217).  "Where
the  appearance  of  the  phantasm  presents  no  details  that  could  not
have  been  evolved  from  the  percipient's  own  mind,  all  that  we  have
to  suppose  transferred  from  the  one  mind  to  the  other  is — to  use  Mr.
Gurney's  phrase  {Phantasms  of  the  Living^  Vol.  I.,  p.  -537) — a  dim  and
shadowy  idea ;  the  particular  f oi'm  of  the  hallucination  depending  on
the  mental  processes  of  the  percipient,  who  alone  may  supply  the
embodiment  of  the  idea.  But  in  certain  cases,  such  as  those  above
referred  to,  the  hallucination  includes  features  which  could  not  be
supplied  by  the  percipient's  mind,  and  seem  in  some  way  to  be  derived
from  the  agent's  ;  it  seems  (see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,Yol.  I.,  p.  555)
"  that  a  ready-made  concrete  image,  and  not  a  mere  idea,  has  been
transferred  from  one  to  the  other."  There  is  another  peculiar  feature
in  the  case  now  before  us  ;  viz.,  that  there  seems  to  be  no  reason
why  the  apparition  should  have  been  seen  at  all  by  this  particular
person.  A  few  instances  of  the  same  kind  are  recorded  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living  (see  Vol.  I.,  p.  524,  and  Vol.  II.,  p.  61)  and  another  will
be  found  later  in  this  chapter  (No.  402.  8.,  p.  284).  It  is  difficult  to
decide,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  as  to  the  right  explana-
tion of  such  cases ;  but  it  may  be  suggested  that  they  are  quasi-
collective  in  character,!  the  telepathic  impulse  reaching  the  percipient
through  the  other  person  present — the  child  in  this  case, — who  may
have  acted  as  a  link  between  agent  and  percipient,  because  the  minds
of  both  were  much  occupied  with  her.

In  the  second  case  of  an  unrecognised  coincidental  phantasm,  the
non-recognition  is  of  a  different  type,  the  figure  seen  appearing
indistinct.

(459.  2.)  From  Dr.  VV.  A.  Jamieson.

35,  Charlotte-square,  Edinburgh,  June  19th,  1891.

"  I  am  an  early  riser  ;  the  awakening  bell  rings  usually  at  seven  o'clock
a.m.  On  the  morning  of  December  24th,  1887,  it  rang  a  little  later,  about
twenty  minutes  past  seven.  I  was  aroused  by  it,  but  did  not  immediately
rise,  though  fully  awake.  The  dawning  light  came  in  somewhat  obscurely,
as  the  shutters  were  partially  closed.  When  just  on  the  point  of  rising,  I
became  conscious  that  a  dark  form,  distinctly  that  of  a  female  of  medium
height,  was  passing  round  the  foot  of  my  bed,  and  glided  up  to  my  side.
Wlien  it  reached  me  I  raised  myself  in  bed  and  felt  with  my  hand,  but  it
passed  through  the  shadow.  I  felt  nothing,  and  on  looking  closely  found
the  apparition  was  gone.  I  at  once  pulled  my  watch  from  under  the  pillow  ;
it  was  exactly  half-past  seven.

"  This  occurred  at  26,  Rutland-street,  Edinburgh. I  was  just  on  the

1  A  discussion  of  collective  percipience  will  be  found  in  the  next  Chapter.  Com-
pare with  this  case  one  given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  256.


266  Me'port  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


point  of  rising,  was  in  good  health,  had  had  no  worry  or  anxiety,  and  was
then  forty-eight  years  of  age.

"The  form  closely  resembled  that  of  a  patient  of  mine  whom  I  had  seen
the  evening  before.  She  was  very  ill,  though  quite  conscious,  and  I  had
fcold  her  husband  that  I  did  not  think  she  would  live  over  the  night.
She  was  aged  sixty-six,  was  not  an  interesting  person  ;  had  caused  her
friends  much  distress  from  her  habits.  She  died  as  nearly  as  could  be  ascer-
tained at  7.30  a.m.,  December  24th,  1887.

"My  wife  was  in  bed,  but  asleep.  I  wakened  her  and  told  her  my
experience,  impressing  on  her  the  fact  that  I  had  mentioned  the  circum-
stance, though  I  could  not  explain  its  import,  as  I  was  not  thinking  of  the
lady  who  died  at  tlie  time. She  had  seen  nothing.

"[I  have]  never  before  or  since  [had  such  an  experience.]

"W.  Allan  Jamieson,  M.D."

Professor  Sidgwick,  who  called  on  Dr.  Jamieson  on  September  21st,
1891,  writes  on  the  sanie  day  from  pencil-notes  taken  during  the  inter-
view : —

' '  At  the  time  Dr.  J amieson  saw  the  female  figure  described  in  his
statement  he  was  in  the  act  of  getting  uf),  and  undoubtedly  quite  awake.
Though  the  time  was  7.30  on  December  24th,  still,  as  the  house  looked
south  and  east,  and  the  central  part  of  both  shutters  was  open,  enough  light
came  in  to  enable  him  to  see  the  form  distinctly.  He  felt  no  '  chill '  or
shudder,  nor  nervous  feeling  of  any  kind.  He  put  out  his  hands  to  feel  it,
in  order  to  find  out  what  it  was,  having  no  definite  idea  what  it  would  turn
out  to  be.  When  he  put  out  his  hands  the  form  had  passed  out  of  the  light
of  the  window,  moving  by  his  bedside,  so  that  he  did  not  see  it  disappear,
but  only  felt  that  there  was  nothing  there.

"  He  first  looked  at  his  watch,  ascertained  the  time  to  be  7.30,  then  woke
his  wife  and  told  her  what  he  had  seen  ;  but  the  resemblance  of  the  form  to
his  patient  did  not  occur  to  him  at  the  time,  so  that  lie  did  not  mention  it
to  his  wife  :  it  only  occurred  to  him  after  tlie  news  of  her  death  had  reached
him.  He  immediately  went  to  see  the  husband,  who  told  liim  that  she
had  died  '  as  near  as  I  can  say  '  at  7.30.

"Though  he  knew  the  woman  to  be  dying,  his  mind  was  not  occupied
about  her.  When  he  went  away  after  seeing  her  he  dismissed  her  from
his  mind.

"  It  could  not  possibly  be  a  real  human  being,  nor  a  reflection  from
anything."

Dr.  Jamieson  writes  later  : —

35,  Charlotte-square,  Edinburgh,  October  2nd,  1891.

"  Dear  Sir, — I  now  have  much  pleasure  in  sending  the  statements  you
wished  me  to  obtain  in  connection  with  the  experience  I  had  on  December
24th,  1887.  I  send  the  letter  I  received  to-day  from  the  lady's  daughter.  I
have  inquired  at  the  Registrar's  oifice  and  find  that  the  husband  of  the
lady  registered  the  death  as  having  occurred  at  7.55  a.m.  on  December  24th,
1887.  This  is  certainly  twenty-five  minutes  later  than  the  time  at  which  I
saw  the  dark  appearance  enter  my  room.  T  can  only  say  that  when  I  called
At  the  house  that  morning  the  lady's  husband  told  me  that  his  wife  died  at


XIV.]  Unrecognised  coincident  Aiypctritions.


267


half-past  seven  before  I  mentioned  anything  to  him,  but  he  must  have  found
that  it  really  was  later  ;  at  least  he  has  registered  it  as  mentioned  above.

"  W.  Allan  Jamieson."

The  statements  enclosed  are  as  follows  : —

(1)  From  Mrs.  Jamieson.
35,  Charlotte-square,  Edinburgh,  September  28th,  1891.

"  My  husband  has  asked  me  to  relate  what  I  remember  of  an
occurrence  on  the  morning  of  December  24th,  1887.  I  was  asleep  and  had
not  risen  from  my  bed  when  he  woke  me  to  tell  me  the  following  : —

"That  he  had  seen  a  dark  figure  come  from  the  door  on  the  side  of
the  room  furthest  from  him.  It  walked  round  the  foot  of  the  bed  and
came  and  stood  at  his  side  ;  he  put  out  his  hand  to  feel,  but  encountered
no  one.  He  then  woke  me  and  asked  if  I  had  come  to  the  side  of  his  bed,
but  I  told  him  I  had  not  been  up.  On  looking  at  his  watch  my  husband
found  the  hour  to  be  half-past  seven.

"  C.  A.  Jamieson."
(2)  From  Mrs. 's  daughter.

October  2nd,  1891.

"Dear  Dk.  Jamieson, — I  just  got  your  note  last  night  on  my  return  to
town.  As  far  as  I  can  remember  it  was  just  about  eight  o'clock  or  a  few
minutes  after  that  my  mother  died,  December,  1887-"

The  non-recognition  in  this  case  appeared  at  the  time  to  be  due  to
the  bad  light,  which  prevented  the  apparition  from  being  seen  dis-
tinctly :  but  an  effect  of  this  kind  may  be  put  down  to  the  influence  of
self-suggestion.  The  case  is  analogous  to  those  where  an  apparition
becomes  invisible  as  soon  as  a  light  is  put  out  and  reappears  on  the
relighting  of  it  (see,  for  instance,  No.  422.  25,  p.  192).  It  would
seem  that  the  telepathic  impulse  was  prevented  from  reaching  the
consciousness  of  the  percipient  in  the  form  of  a  completely  developed
hallucination  by  his  subconscious  idea  of  the  difficulty  of  seeing  it.  It
is,  however,  quite  possible  to  suppose  that  the  telepathic  impression
was  altogether  vague,  so  that  there  was  no  definite  idea  to  be  translated
into  a  hallucination.  As  Mr.  Grurney  expresses  it  {Phantasms  of  the
Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  538,  footnote),  such  an  undistinctive  idea  may  be
"  hurried  on  into  hallucination,  without  having  first  declared  itself
as  an  idea  ;  it  assumes  the  defiiiiteness  of  visible  shape,  while  yet
its  content  or  message  remains  indefinite."  The  case  would  thus  be
analogous  to  the  cloud-like  stages  of  some  hallucinations,  telepathic
and  other  (see  Chapter  VI.,  p.  116),  and  to  the  shrouded  forms
classed  with  undeveloped  hallucinations  (see  Chapter  VI.,  p.  119).

In  the  next  case,  we  have  an  unrecognised  apparition  which  has  a
certain  interest  on  account  of  its  exceptionally  rudimentaiy  character.
It  is  just  one  step  beyond  the  "  sense  of  presence,"  before  mentioned,
which  we  have  regarded  as  not  amounting  to  a  sensory  hallucination.


268  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


(554.  13.)  From  Miss  Egerton.

Whitwell  Hall,  York, April  10th,  1891.

' '  [At]  Seville,  April,  1882,  I  was  leaving  iny  bedroom  hurriedly  (pro-
bably to  join  my  companions)  when,  as  I  opened  my  door,  somebody
appeared  to  enter,  and  I  started  hastily  back;  the  impression  disappeared
instantaneously  ;  there  was  no  one.  [I  was]  in  good  health,  and  in  no
gTief ;  [age]  36.

"The  impression  was  absolutely  vague,  as  to  the  individuality  of  the
appearance.  No  one  [else  was  present].  A  week  after  the  occurrence  I
heard  of  the  death  of  a  favourite  cousin,  which  happened  in  Java,  on  the
same  day.

"Mary  L.  Egerton."

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Miss  Egerton  writes  further : —

' '  I  did  not  mention  it  to  anyone  at  the  time.  I  saw  the  figure  vaguely,
more  as  an  obstructive  object  or  body,  as  I  opened  the  door  of  my  bedroom
to  go  into  a  somewhat  dark  passage.  The  impression  was  sufficiently  strong
to  make  me  start  hurriedly  back  for  fear  of  running  '  amuck  '  into  the
stranger,  as  I  thought  it  was.  The  impression  was  gone  instantaneously,
and  I  saw  there  was  no  one.  The  moment  I  heard  of  my  cousin's  death,
I  remembered  the  impression,  and  made  out  then  that  it  must  have  been
within  a  few  hours  of  his  death."

Professor  Sidgwick  called  on  Miss  Egerton  in  March,  1892,  and  writes
from  notes  taken  at  the  time: —

March  22nd,  1892.

' '  Miss  Egerton  said  that  when  she  opened  her  door  to  go  out  into  the
passage  she  had  momentarily  no  doubt  that  she  met,  face  to  face,  another
human  being  coming  in.  Her  impression  was  that  it  was  a  man,  but  the
whole  thing  was  so  startling  and  transient  that  she  could  not  be  sure
of  this.  She  started  back  just  as  she  would  do  to  avoid  a  sudden  collision
with  a  real  person. It  seemed  to  be  within  a  few  inches  of  her.

"  The  passage  was  perfectly  bare;  with  nothing  in  it  to  produce  illusion.
It  was  lighted  from  a  courtyard.  (The  event  occurred  in  the  Hotel  de
Paris,  at  Seville.)  When  it  was  over,  and  she  found  there  was  no  person
there,  she  regarded  it  as  a  momentary  hallucination.

"  When  the  news  of  the  cousin's  death  in  Java  came,  she  convinced
herself  that  the  coincidence  in  time  between  her  experience  and  the  death
was  tvithin  an  hour,  allowing  for  difference  of  longitude.  (The  exact  hour
of  the  cousin's  death  was  communicated.)  The  relation  between  the  two
was  more  intimate  than  ordinary  cousinship,  as  they  had  been  much  with
each  other  from  childhood ;  he  was  more  like  a  younger  Vjrother.

' '  The  hallucination  was  only  of  the  sense  of  sight.  It  was  a  quite
unique  exjjerience. "

In  cases  such  as  this  and  Dr.  Jamieson's,  the  closeness  of  the
coincidence  and  the  uniqueness  of  the  experience  are  specially  impor-
tant considerations  in  estimating  the  probability  that  the  hallucination
and  the  death  were  causally  connected.


XIV.]


Unrecognised  coincident  Voices.


269


Out  of  17  cases  of  hallucinatory  lights  in  our  Census,  7,  as  already-
said  (p.  125),  were  seen  at  or  about  the  time  of  a  death ;  two  of  these,
ISTo.  191.  2  (see  p.  124),  and  No.  305.  4  (see  p.  126),  have  been  given
already,  but  as  evidence  of  a  telepathic  connection  between  death  and
hallucination  we  cannot  lay  much  stress  on  them,  since  they  are  open
to  another  interpretation.  This,  for  various  reasons,  is  true  also,  we
think,  of  the  remaining  cases,  which  we  do  not  therefore  quote  here.

Of  unrecognised  auditory  hallucinations  coinciding  with  a  death,
"we  have  8  cases. The  following  is  one  of  them  : —

(561.  24.)  From  Mrs.  E.  L.  Kearney.

2,  Wharton-road,  West  Kensington,  W.,  November  30th,  1891.

"I  felt  my  bed  shaken  under  me,  and  heard  a  gurgling  noise,  and  a
distinct  cry  for  help.  Time  and  date,  about  1  p.m..  New  Year's  Day,  1875.
Place,  Westboume,  Hermitage-road,  Geelong,  Victoria,  Australia.

"  I  was  fully  awake,  lying  in  bed  convalescent  from  an  attack  of  scarlet
rash.  Durmg  this  illness  the  rash  only  remained  a  few  hours,  and  I  had  no
symptoms  of  fever,  neither  thirst,  nor  high  temperature,  nor  derangement
of  consciousness.  I  was  not  in  any  grief  or  anxiety.  Age  18.  The  sun
was  very  bright,  and  it  was  very  hot  at  the  time.

"  I  was  very  much  aflfected  by  the  sound  and  cry,  but  did  not  at  the  time
associate  it  with  any  particular  person.

"No  one  was  with  me,  and  none  shared  the  experience.  I  rang  my
bell,  and  on  my  mother  coming  to  me,  told  her  what  had  occurred.  At
about  3  o'clock  the  same  day,  a  telegram  was  brought  announcing  that  my
cousin,  Charles  Griffith  (aged  13),  had  been  drowned  in  a  lagoon  at  1  o'clock.
He  was  out  shooting,  and  went  in  after  a  wild  duck.  He  was  an  expert
swimmer.

' '  My  mother  noted  the  day  and  hour  at  the  time  I  called  her,  but  I  do
not  think  any  permanent  record  was  made.

"  Gertkude  E.  Kearney."

In  answer  to  our  request  for  further  information  and  corroboration,
Mrs.  Kearney  wrote : —

January  17th,  1892.

"What  occurred  is  perfectly  fresh  in  my  memory,  although  it  is  some
years  smce  it  happened.  I  should  like  to  add  that  two  days  previous  to  my
cousin  Charlie  Griffith's  going  up  the  country  he  came  to  say  good-bye  to
myself  and  my  family,  but  as  his  people  were  afraid  I  might  have  something
infectious,  he  remained  at  the  garden  gate,  and  called  out  to  my  mother,
who  was  standing  on  the  balcony,  to  say  good-bye  to  me,  as  he  could  not
come  in. Two  days  later  he  was  drowned."

Mrs.  Kearney  enclosed  the  following  note  from  her  father.  Her  mother,
being  ill,  could  not  be  pressed  to  write  any  statement  of  her  recollections.

' '  With  regard  to  the  Charley  Griffith  episode,  neither  your  mother  nor  I
can  call  to  mind  any  exact  particulars.  I  do  remember  your  returning  about
Christmas  time  from  a  visit  to  the  Timms',  and  having  what  was  supposed
might  be  an  attack  of  scarlet  fever. I  remember  the  news  coming  in  the


270  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


afternoon  of  1st  J anuary  (year  I  know  not) — the  news  of  the  poor  boy's  being
drowned  in  a  pool  at  Edmondson's  station.  Your  mother  remembers  your
calling  her  into  your  bedroom  to  tell  her  you  had  heard  'a  cry,'  or  some-
thing of  that  sort ;  no  more."

Mrs.  Kearney  has  had  another  experience  mentioned  in  Chapter  VIII.  >
p.  156.

Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kearney  are  known  to  Mr.  Myers.

Thous;h  the  hallucination  in  this  case  was  unrecognised  and  did  not
indicate  the  person  who  was  dying,  it  gave  some  indication  of  the
nature  of  the  death,  and  the  evidence,  therefore,  for  a  telepathic  origin
is  something  more  than  the  mere  coincidence  of  the  two  events  in  time.

An  unrecognised  auditory  death-coincidence,  in  which  the  hallu-
cination consisted  merely  in  the  hearing  of  the  name  of  one  of  the
percipients,  will  be  found  in  Chapter  XV.,  p.  316  (No.  138.  18).

The  hallucinations  in  the  present  collection  affecting  the  sense  of
touch  only,  which  are  believed  to  have  coincided  with  the  death  of  a
friend  or  relative,  need  not  detain  us.  There  are  seven  of  these,  besides
the  one  quoted  at  p.  258.

Hallucinations  Experimentally  Produced.

We  turn  now  to  cases  where  some  event  other  than  the  death  of
the  supposed  agent  coincides  with  the  hallucination  in  such  a  way  as
to  suggest  a  causal  connection  between  them.

The  special  importance  of  one  class  among  these,  viz.,  hallucinations
experimentally  caused,  (B  experiencing  a  hallucination  when  A  is,
unknown  to  B,  endeavouring  by  mental  suggestion  to  induce  one  ia
him),  was  dwelt  on  in  Chapter  I.  This  class  is  not  very  strongly
represented  in  the  present  collection,  probably  because  the  experiment
is  only  rarely  attempted.  We  have  four  cases  which  belong  to  it  more
or  less,  two  of  them  visual,  one  auditory,  and  one  tactile.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  agent  in  the  first  of  these  cases —
Mr.  Kirk — seems  to  possess  an  unusual  capacty  for  impressing  other
minds  telepathically,  as  shown  by  his  experiments  in  thought-trans-
ference, a  few  of  which  have  been  already  printed  in  the  Journal,  and
some  more  of  which  we  hope  to  publish  in  a  future  Part  of  the
Proceedings.

(The  following  case  is  not  included  in  our  Tables,  because  it  occurred
after  the  percipient — Miss  G. — had  filled  up  the  Census  form).

(284.  19.)  From  Mr.  Kirk.

2,  Ripon-villas,  Upper  Ripon-road,  Plumstead,  Jnhj  7th,  1890.

"  I  have  to  inform  you  that  from  the  10th  to  20th  June  I  tried  a  telepathic
experiment  each  night  upon  Miss  G.  I  did  so,  as  suggested  by  you  in  your
letter  of  June  3rd,  without  her  knowledge,  as  a  preliminary  to  entering  upon


XIV.]


Experimental  Hallucinations.


271


experiments  with  her  under  conditions  of  expectancy  and  the  recording  of
dates  and  hours.  Each  trial  had  for  its  object  the  rendering  myself  visible
to  her — simply  visible.  With  the  exception  of  one — which  was  made  one
afternoon  from  my  office  in  the  Arsenal — each  trial  took  place  at  my  house
between  the  hours  of  11  p.m.  and  1  a.m.

"  Up  to  June  23rd  I  heard  nothing  direct  from  my  '  subject.'  Indirectly,
however,  I  learnt  that  my  influence  was  acting  rather  strongly.  Each  time
Miss  G.  came  to  my  house,  while  the  experiments  were  in  progress,  she
complained  of  being  kept  sleepless  and  restless  from  an  uneasy  feeling  which
she  was  unable  to  describe  or  account  for.  On  one  night,  so  strong  was  this
uneasy  feeling,  she  was  compelled  to  get  up,  dress  herself,  and  take  to  some
needlework,  and  was  unable  to  throw  off  the  sensation  and  return  to  bed
until  2  o'clock.  I  made  no  comments  on  these  complaints — never  dropped  a
hint,  even,  as  to  what  I  was  doing.  Under  these  circumstances  it  seemed
probable  to  me  that,  although  my  influence  was  telling  upon  her,  to  her  dis-
comfort, I  had  not  succeeded  in  the  object  of  my  experiments.  Supposing
this  to  be  the  case,  and  that  I  was  only  depriving  her  of  rest,  I  thought  it
best  to  discontinue  the  trials  for  a  time.

"  I  felt  disappointed  at  this  apparently  barren  result.  But,  on  June  2.3rd,
an  agreeable  surprise  was  sprung  upon  me,  in  that  I  learnt  I  had  most
effectually  succeeded  on  one  occasion — the  very  occasion  on  which  I  had
considered  success  as  being  highly  improbable — in  presenting  myself  to  Miss
G.  As  you  will  find  in  her  statement,  herewith  enclosed,  the  vision  was
most  complete  and  realistic.  The  trial  which  had  this  fortunate  result  was
that  I  had  made  from  my  office  and  on  the  spur  of  the  moment.  I  had  been
rather  closely  engaged  on  some  auditing  work,  which  had  tired  me,  and  as
near  as  I  can  remember  the  time  was  between  3.30  and  4  p.m.,  that  I  laid
down  my  pencil,  stretched  myself,  and  in  the  act  of  doing  the  latter  I  was
seized  with  the  impulse  to  make  a  trial  on  Miss  G.  I  did  not,  of  course,
know  where  she  was  at  the  moment,  but,  with  a  flash,  as  it  were,  I  transferred
myself  to  her  bedroom.  I  cannot  say  why  I  thought  of  that  spot,  unless  it
was  that  I  did  so  because  my  first  experiment  had  been  made  there.  ^  As  it
happened,  it  was  what  I  must  call  a  '  lucky  shot, '  for  I  caught  her  at  the
moment  she  was  lightly  sleeping  in  her  chair — a  condition  which  seems  to
be  peculiarly  favourable  to  receiving  and  externalising  telepathic  messages.

"The  figure  seen  by  Miss  G.  was  clothed  in  a  suit  I  was  at  the  moment
wearing,  and  was  bareheaded,  the  latter  as  would  be  the  case,  of  course,  in  an
office.  This  suit  is  of  a  dark  reddish-brown  check  stuff,  and  it  was  an  unusual
circumstance  for  me  to  have  had  on  the  coat  at  the  time,  as  I  wear,  as  a  rule,
an  office  coat  of  light  material.  But  this  office  coat  I  had,  a  day  or  so  before,
sent  to  a  tailor  to  be  repaired,  and  I  had,  therefore,  to  keep  on  that  belong-
ing to  the  dark  suit.

1  The  first  experiment  of  this  series  was  on  the  night  of  the  10th,  the  successful
experiment  on  the  afternoon  of  June  11th  (Wednesday).  Mr.  Kirk  tells  us  that  he
made  a  note  at  the  time  on  his  blotting  paper,  of  day  and  hour.  Mr.  Kirk  had  on
four  occasions  during  the  previou.s  four  years  tried  from  a  distance  to  produce  an
impression  of  presence  on  Miss  G.  with  considerable  success,  but  had  not  tried  to
appear  to  her.  These  experiments  and  others  are  described  in  the  Journal  S.P.  R.,
Vol.  v.,  pp.  21—30.


272


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations .  [chap.


"I  tested  the  reality  of  the  vision  by  this  dark  suit.  I  asked,  '  How  was
I  dressed  ? '  (not  at  all  a  leading  question).  The  reply  of  Miss  G.  was,
touching  the  sleeve  of  the  coat  I  was  then  wearing  (of  a  light  suit),  '  Not
this  coat,  but  tliat  dark  suit  you  wear  sometimes.  I  even  saw  clearly  the
small  check  pattern  of  it  ;  and  I  saw  your  features  as  plainly  as  though  you
liad  been  bodily  present. I  couW.  not  have  seen  you  more  distinctly.'  "

Miss  G.'s  account  is  : —

June  2Sth,  1890.

' '  A  peculiar  occurrence  haj^pened  to  me  on  the  Wednesday  of  the  week
before  last.  In  the  afternoon  (being  tired  by  a  morning  walk),  while  sitting
in  an  easy-chair  near  the  window  of  my  own  room,  I  fell  asleep.  At  any
time  I  happen  to  sleep  during  the  day  (which  is  but  seldom)  I  invariably
awake  witli  tired  uncomfortable  sensations,  which  take  some  little  time  to
pass  off ;  but  that  afternoon,  on  the  contrary,  I  was  suddenly  quite  wide
awake,  seeing  Mr.  Kirk  standing  near  my  chair,  dressed  in  a  dark  brown
coat,  which  I  had  frequently  seen  him  wear.  His  back  was  towards  the
window,  his  right  hand  towards  me  ;  he  passed  across  the  room  towards  the
door,  which  is  opposite  the  window,  the  space  between  being  15ft.,  the  fur-
niture so  arranged  as  to  leave  just  that  centre  clear  ;  but  when  he  got  about
4ft.  from  the  door,  which  was  closed,  he  disappeared.

' '  My  first  thought  was,  '  had  this  happened  a  few  hours  later  I  should
have  believed  it  telepathic,'  for  I  knew  Mr.  Kirk  had  tried  experimenting
at  different  times,  but  had  no  idea  he  was  doing  so  recently.  Although  I
have  been  much  interested  by  his  conversation  about  psychical  phenomena
at  various  times  during  the  past  year,  I  must  confess  the  element  of  doubt
would  very  forcibly  present  itself  as  to  whether  telepathic  communication
could  be  really  a  fact  ;  and  I  then  thought,  knowing  he  must  be  at  the  office
at  the  time  I  saw  him  (which  was  quite  as  distinctly  as  if  he  had  been  really
in  the  room),  that  in  this  instance,  at  least,  it  must  be  purely  imaginary,  and
feeling  so  sure  it  was  only  fancy,  resolved  not  to  mention  it,  and  did  not  do
so  until  this  week,  when,  almost  involuntarily,  I  told  him  all  about  it.  Much
to  my  astonishment,  Mr.  K  irk  was  very  pleased  with  the  account,  and  asked
me  to  write  it,  telling  me  that  on  that  afternoon,  feeling  rather  tired,  he  put
down  his  pen  for  a  few  moments,  and,  to  use  his  own  words,  '  threw  himself
into  this  room.'  He  also  told  me  he  had  purjoosely  avoided  this  subject  in
niy  presence  lately,  that  he  might  not  influence  me,  but  was  anxiously  hoping
I  would  introduce  it.

"I  feel  sure  I  had  not  been  dreaming  of  him,  and  cannot  remember  that
anything  had  happened  to  cause  me  even  to  think  of  him  that  afternoon
before  falling  asleep."

Mr.  Kirk  writes  later  : —

' '  I  have  only  succeeded  once  in  making  myself  visible  to  Miss  G.  since  the
occasion  I  have  already  reported,  and  that  had  the  singularity  of  being  only
my  features — my  face  in  miniature,  that  is,  about  three  inches  in  diameter."

In  a  letter  dated  January  19th,  1891,  Mr.  Kirk  says  as  to  this  last
appearance  : —

"  Miss  G.  did  not  record  this  at  the  time,  as  she  attached  no  impoi-tance  to
it,  but  I  noted  the  date  (July  23rd)  on  my  office  blotting-pad,  as  it  was  at
the  office  I  was  thinking  of  her. I  say  'thinking,'  because  I  was  doing  so


XIV.]  Experimental  Hallucinations.  273


in  connection  with  another  subject,  and  with  no  pui'iDose  of  making  an  ex-
periment. I  had  a  headache,  and  was  resting  my  head  on  my  left  hand.
Suddenly  it  occurred  to  me  that  my  thinking  about  her  might  probably
influence  her  in  some  way,  and  I  made  the  note  I  have  mentioned.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  a  talk  with  Mr.  Kirk  and  with  Miss  G.  o\\  April
8th,  1892,  about  the  above  incidents  and  other  experiments  in  thought-
transference  between  them,  and  writes  : —

"Mr.  Kjrk's  appearance  to  Miss  6.  evidently  impressed  her  very  much.  It
was  extremely  realistic.  She  is  quite  sure  she  was  awake.  It  was  as  if  she
had  waked  up  to  see  it,  but  she  had  not  been  dreaming  of  Mr.  Kirk.  The
figure  did  not  look  towards  her  or  appear  to  take  any  interest  in  her.  The
other  time  she  saw  his  face  it  was  Hke  a  miniature.  She  did  not  think  so
much  of  that  exjaerience."

The  experiment  in  the  following  case  succeeded  on  the  first  trial.

(98.  13.) From  Miss  Edith  Maughan  (now  Mrs.  G.  Rayleigh  A^icars).

September,  1890.

"  One  night  in  September,  1888,  I  was  lying  awake  in  bed  reading.  I  for-
get what  the  book  was,  but  I  had  recently  been  studying  with  interest
various  cases  of  astral  projection  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  and  I  distinctly
remember  making  up  my  mind  that  night  to  try  whether  I  could  manage  to
accomplish  a  projection  of  myself  by  force  of  will-concentration.

"The  room  next  to  mine  was  occupied  by  a  friend  of  mine  [Miss  Ethel
Thompson],  who  was  an  old  acquamtance,  and  not  at  all  of  an  excitable  turn
of  mind.  This  room  had  formerly  been  used  as  a  dressing-room,  and  there
was  a  door  connecting  it  with  mine.  For  some  years,  however,  it  had  been
absolutely  separated  by  the  locked  door,  on  my  side  of  which  stood  a  very
heavy  wardrobe,  which  would  require  two  strong  men  to  move  it  away.  The
only  available  exit  from  my  room  was  the  other  door  which  opened  on  to
the  landing,  as  was  also  the  case  with  the  dressing-room.  That  night  I  per-
fectly recall  lying  back  on  my  pillow  with  a  resolute  but  half  doubtful  and
amused  determination  to  make  Miss  Thompson  see  me.  The  candle  was
burning  on  a  chair  at  the  side  of  my  bed,  and  I  heard  only  the  ticking  of  tlie
clock  in  my  room  as  I  '  willed '  with  all  my  might  to  appear  to  her.  After
a  few  minutes  I  felt  dizzy  and  only  half  conscious.

"  I  don't  know  huw  long  this  state  may  have  lasted,  but  I  do  rememlier
emerging  into  a  conscious  state  and  thinking  I  liad  better  leave  off,  as  the
strain  had  exhausted  me.

"  I  gave  up,  and  changing  into  an  easy  position  I  thought  I  had  failed
and  needlessly  fatigued  myself  for  an  impossible  fancy.  I  blew  out  my
candle  ;  at  the  instant  I  was  startled  by  hearing  an  indistinct  sound  from
the  next  room.  It  was  Miss  Thompson's  voice  raised  slightly,  but  I  could
not  distinguish  more  than  the  actual  sound,  which  was  repeated,  and  then
there  was  silence.  I  wondered  whether  she  had  had  a  bad  dream,  and
listened  a  short  time,  but  did  not  seriously  imagine  that  it  was  more  than  an
accidental  coincidence. Soon  after  my  clock  struck  2  (a.m.)  and  I  fell  asleep.

1  Mr.  Kirk  enclosed  the  piece  of  blotting-paper  mth  the  note.

T


274  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


"  Next  morning  I  noticed  that  Miss  Thompson  looked  rather  tired  at
breakfast,  but  I  asked  no  questions.  Presently  she  said,  '  Had  I  gone  into
her  room  to  frighten  her  during  the  night  1 '  I  said  I  liad  not  left  my  room.
She  declared  that  I  seemed  to  her  to  come  in  and  bend  over  her.  From
what  she  said  I  concluded  it  must  have  been  between  1  and  2  a.m.  Her
own  account  is  in  the  possession  of  the  Psychical  Society.  All  I  have  to
add  is,  that  I  was  in  my  ordinary  state  of  health,  and  not  at  all  excited,  but
merely  bent  on  trying  an  experiment. "

In  a  letter  accompanying  this.  Miss  Maughan  says  : —

"  I  can't  find  the  fact  noticed  in  my  diary  for  1888.  I  only  keep  a  very
tiny  one,  just  f')r  the  sake  of  entering  letters,  &c.,  and  have  no  allusions  to
what  happens  as  a  rule.  I  fancy,  though,  that  it  was  on  the  night  of
September  lOtli.  Does  Miss  Thompson  give  any  exact  date  ?  for  if  it
approximates  to  tliat,  it  would  be  the  correct  one.  I  know  it  was  just  at
that  time,  because  it  was  during  her  last  visit  at  this  house.  "  .  ,  .

Miss  Thom]3Son  writes  : —

The  Chimes,  Grove  Park,  Cliiswick, December  30th,  1889.

"  During  the  summer  of  1888  (end  of  August)  I  was  staying  with  the  Miss
Maughans  in  Lincolnshire.  We  were  interested  in  Tlieosophy,  and  had
been  discussing  the  phenomena  of  peoj^le  leaving  their  bodies  and  appearing
in  their  astral  forms.  I  am  not  a  good  sleejaer,  but  hot  at  all  of  a  nervous
temperament.  I  stayed  awake  one  night  until  two  or  three.  I  was  per-
fectly wide  awake,  when  suddenly  I  saw  Miss  Edith  Maughan  standing  by
my  bedside  in  her  ordinary  dark  dressing-gown.  The  moonlight  came  in  at
the  window  sufficiently  for  me  to  distinguish  her  face  clearly,  and  her  figure
partially.  I  sat  up  in  bed,  and  said,  rather  crossly,  '  What  do  you  want
here,  Edith  1 '  I  thought  she  had  come  for  some  joke.  As  she  didn't
answer,  I  immediate}]!  struck  a  light,,  but  she  was  gone.  It  is  a  mistake  that  I
screamed  out.  I  may  have  sjooken  sufticiently  loudly  to  be  heard  in  the  next
room.  I  thought  slie  had  got  out  of  the  room  with  astonishing  rapidity,
but  I  didn't  trouble  much  about  it.  The  next  morning  I  asked  why  she
came  into  my  room.  She  denied  having  done  so,  but  said  she  had  thought
of  coming,  but  that  as  it  might  disturb  me  she  decided  not.  She  said  she  sat
up  in  bed,  and  for  the  sake  of  something  to  do  was  willing  lierself  to  go  out
of  her  body  and  come  to  me,  and  mentioned  about  the  time  I  saw  her.
Although  it  is  more  than  a  year  ago,  I  remembei'  the  incident  clearly,  as  it
made  a  distinct  imjjression  upon  me.

"Ethel  Thompson."

Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  talked  over  this  experience  with  Miss  Maughan  and
Miss  Thompson  separately,  and  questioned  them  specially  as  to  the  possi-
bility that  Miss  Maughan  had  really  gone  into  Miss  Thompson's  room
unconsciously.  They  were  both  quite  certain  that  she  had  not  done  so,
Miss  Thomj^son  dwelling  on  the  impossible  rapidity  of  the  disappeai-ance,
and  Miss  Maughan  on  the  fact  that,  when  she  roused  herself,  she  was  lying
in  the  same  position  as  before — hands  clasped  and  feet  crossed  in  a  special
manner,  which,  she  had  been  told,  is  adopted  by  Eastern  people  wishing  to
concentrate  themselves  on  anything,  and  which  she  adopted  deliberately  on
this  account.


XIV.]


Experimental  Hallucinations .


275


It  is  interesting  that  Miss  Maughan  has  appeared,  but  unintention-
ally, on  other  occasions  to  other  percipients,  while  one  of  her  sisters
was  the  agent  in  No.  105.  1  (see  p.  291).  The  following  is  an  account
of  another  of  Miss  Maughan's  appearances.

[Extract  from  letter  received  by  Miss  Maughan  on  March  12th  from  Miss
Gatty. The  original  letter  is  in  our  possession.]

Holbein  House,  Sloane-square,  S.W.,  Wednesday,  March  11th,  1891.

' '  I  wonder  whether  you  have  been  experimenting  psychically,  or  if  it  be
a  mere  curious  coincidence  that  I  should  have  had  a  distinct  vision  of  you
last  night.

"The  facts  are  these.  Being  very  seedy  yesterday — writing  to  you
probably  tired  me  a  good  deal,  and  feeling  very  helpless  where  you  were
concerned  distressed  me  more  than  a  little — I  went  off  to  [bed]  at  about
8  o'clock.  I  read  for  an  hour  or  thereabouts,  and  then  fell  asleep.  I  woke
again  when  mother  passed  througli  to  go  to  her  own  room,  and  several  times
in  the  night  after  dreaming  in  an  unexciting  fashion.  Then  I  lay  awake  for
some  time,  and  thought  about  a  Roman  Catholic  I  know,  etc.

"  A  little  while  after,  I  don't  know  what  it  was  that  made  me  turn  my
head  towards  one  special  corner  of  the  room,  where  I  saw  you  standing  (in  a
nightdress  trimmed  with  Swiss  embroidery),  in  a  most  ill-balanced  posture.
So  much  did  this  strike  me  that  I  got  out  of  bed  (the  cold  of  the  floor  was
excessive),  and  went  to  catch  you,  so  that  you  might  not  fall  over  on  your
face.  You  remained  there  until  I  had  made  the  motion  of  touching,  when  I
found  nothing  there  any  longer.  This  is  all,  except  that  you  looked  as  if
you  had  candlelight  or  some  faintly  perceptible  yellowishness  behind  you.
I  went  back  to  bed,  and,  not  liking  to  disturb  mother  by  asking  her  the
time,  I  listened  for  the  chimes,  and  shortly  after  heard  four  strike.  Of
course  I  didn't  go  to  sleep  again,  but  lighted  ray  candle  and  read  until  day
dawned.  At  breakfast  I  told  mother,  who  accounts  for  everything  by  the
word  'somnambulism,'  but  says  she  heard  me  moving  about.  I  am  perfectly
convinced  of  my  wakefulness,  but  in  any  case,  as  I  am  unused  to  sleep-
walking, that  would  be  strange  enough  in  itself  to  make  me  wonder  if  there
should  be  any  cause  for  it  beyond  my  subjective  reason  of  anxiety  about
you. The  time  is  the  most  curious  part,  is  it  not  ?  "  E.  K.  G."

Miss  Maughan  writes  : —

East  Kirkby  Vicarage,  Si^ilsby,  Lincolnshire,  May  21st,  1891.

"  I  left  W  ,  in  Derbyshire,  on  March  10th,  and  arrived  at  Collingham,

in  Nottinghamshire,  about  3  p.m.  I  was  not  alone,  or  able  in  any  way  to
give  my  attention  to  any  one  subject  until  nearly  midnight,  when  I  went  to
bed.  During  the  whole  evening,  though  T  had  been  busy  hearing  and  giving
news  of  mutual  interest,  I  had  experienced  a  sort  of  '  undertone '  of  thought
about  my  friend  E.  G.  [Miss  Gatty].  I  had  only  once  spoken  of  her  inci-
dentally during  the  evening,  but  I  felt  my  mind  revert  to  her  in  a  general
way  for  a  few  moments  several  times.  When  I  got  to  bed  I  lay  awake  and
thought  of  her  again.  Why,  I  did  not  really  know.  I  had  heard  from  her
the  day  before,  saying  she  was  not  well,  but  that  was  not  specially  in  my


276  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


mind,  as  I  did  not  suppose  she  was  more  than  temporarily  indisposed.  I
remember  wondering  at  the  time  why  she  was  so  present  to  my  mind,  as  I
had  a  great  many  things  to  think  of  that  day  totally  apart  from  any  connec-
tion with  her.

"I  fell  asleep  at  last,  to  wake  suddenly.  It  must  have  been  after
3  a.m.,  as  the  fire  had  burnt  very  low — almost  out.

' '  During  the  short  time  I  lay  awake  I  remember  cleaidy  that  the  thought
of  E.  G.  returned  strongly  to  my  mind.  I  felt  an  instinctive  turning
towards  her  for  the  mental  sympatliy  certain  circumstances  might  render  me
in  need  of,  and  I  felt  with  a  sort  of  flash  that  she  would  be  better  able  to
understand  what  I  wanted  than  any  friend  I  had.  I  know  I  dwelt  on  this
with  strengthening  confidence  until  I  fell  asleep.

' '  I  had  not  been  dreaming  consciously  of  anything  :  I  merely  woke  up,
thought  of  E.  G.,  and  mentally  claimed  her  sympathy,  but  with  no  intention
tohatemr  of  trying  to  influence  her  in  any  possible  way.  The  whole  attitude
of  my  mind  was  unconscious  and  involuntary,  and,  but  for  the  letter  1
received  from  her  on  the  12th,  I  should  have  attached  no  importance  to  the
matter.  "  Edith  Maughan.  "

On  another  occasion,  in  1886  or  1887,  Miss  Maughan  was  staying  in  the
house  of  Mr.  T.  [assumed  initial],  and  Mrs.  T.  one  evening  thought  she  saw
her  for  a  moment  standing  in  the  doorway  when  she  was  really  in  another
room.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  together  also  saw  her  later  on  the  same  day  going
downstairs  into  a  room.  They  followed,  and  found  the  room  empty.  Miss
Maughan  having  gone  to  bed.

Miss  Maughan  herself  says  of  this  case  : —

"The  being  seen  by  Mr.  T.  is  not  so  positive  to  my  mind.  I  was  very
ill  at  the  time,  and  any  mistaken  impression  must  rest  upon  his  shoulders.
I  have  argued  the  possibility  of  my  being  seen  in  reality,  but  he  and  his
wife  appear  convinced. I  can't  be  sure  about  it  myself."

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  :  —

June  2&th,  1891.

' '  I  saw  Miss  Edith  Maughan,  and  also  Mrs.  T. ,  with  whom  she  is  staying,
this  afternoon.  In  the  case  where  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  were  the  percijiients.  Miss
Maughan  was  simply  sitting  in  the  drawing-room,  wishing  that  Mr.  T.  would
consent  to  her  going  home,  because  .she  felt  so  ill.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  were  in
the  passage  talking.  Mr.  T.  said  he  had  forgotten  to  say  good-night  to
Miss  Maughan.  Mrs.  T.  said,  '  I  think  she  has  gone  upstairs.'  He  replied,
'  No,  I  saw  her  go  into  the  study.'  Mrs.  T.  said,  '  Oh,  I  think  I  did  too  '  ;
and  they  went  to  look,  and  she  was  not  there.  I  did  not  gather  that  the
figure  was  very  clearly  seen  in  this  case.  It  was  more  distinct  on  the  other
occasion,  which  occurred  on  the  same  afternoon,  when  Mrs.  T.  saw  Miss
Maughan  looking  over  the  shoulder  of  a  man  to  whom  she  (Mrs.  T.)  was
talking  in  the  dining-room.

"  As  to  the  appearance  to  Miss  Gatty,  Miss  Maughan  is  quite  sure  that
she  did  think  of  her  in  a  special  way,  as  the  person  who  would  be  able  to
help  her  in  an  anticipated  difficvdty.  This  suddenly  occurred  to  her  in  the
middle  of  the  night.  It  appears  that  Miss  Gatty  was  troubled  about  Miss
Maughan,  wishing  she  could  help  her  in  her  difliculty. Miss  Maughan  told


XIV.]


Experimental  Hallucinations.


277


me  that  she  had  written  to  Miss  Gatty  about  this  difficulty,  and  begged  her
to  write  to  her  often  while  it  lasted.  Miss  Maughan  is  not  sure  whether
the  embroidery  seen  on  the  apparition  by  Miss  Gatty  was  of  the  kind  that
she  was  wearing  then."

The  tactile  experience  referred  to  on  p.  270  occurred  in  an  experi-
ment which — as  the  percipient,  Miss  C.  M.  Campbell,  says — cannot  be
called  a  success.  Her  friend,  Miss  Despard,  had  agreed  to  try  to  appear
to  her,  without  fixing  the  days  beforehand ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that
a  sense  of  presence,  and  in  one  case  a  soft  touch  as  if  some  one  were
stroking  her  hair,  were  felt  by  Miss  Campbell  on  the  only  two  nights
on  which  Miss  Despard  made  the  attempt ;  but  that  was  all  that
occurred.  The  letters  and  notes  relating  to  the  experiments  have  been
submitted  to  us.

A  seemingly  telepathic  visual  experience  of  Miss  Campbell's  has  been
printed  in  Chapter  IV.,  p.  85.  (See  also  Procecdfiig.s  S.  P.  R. ,  Vol.  VIII,  pp.
314  and  324).  She  has  also  carried  out  some  other  successful  experiments
in  thought-transference  with  Miss  Despard,  an  account  of  which  was  printed
in  the  Journal  S.  P.  R.,  January,  1893.

The  experiment  in  which  the  auditory  hallucination  occurred  was
of  an  entirely  different  kind. It  is  as  follows : —

(78.  14.)  From  Mrs.  Raines.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

46,  Sussex-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  W.

"  At  20  minutes  to  11  on  the  night  when  Mr.  Irving  Bishop  took  up
Mr.  Labouchere's  challenge  to  read  the  number  of  a  note  enclosed  in  an
envelope,  I  heard  my  husband's  voice  say,  quite  loud  and  distinctly,  '  He
has  read  the  number  of  the  note.'  It  was  so  distinct  that  for  a  moment
I  could  not  believe  he  was  not  in  the  room.  My  next  thought  was  to
ascertain  the  exact  time. I  was  in  our  own  dining-room.

"I  was  working,  and  expecting  my  husband's  return,  he  having  gone  to
the  seance.  I  had  asked  him  to  try  and  will  me  to  know  if  the  note  was
read,  and  he  said  the  trial  would  take  place  from  about  9.30  to  10  o'clock.
So  at  that  hour  I  fixed  my  mind  intently  on  the  subject,  but  as  there  was  no
result  I  gave  up  trying,  and  was  not  thinking  of  the  note  when  I  heard
the  voice.  When  he  did  return  his  first  words  were,  '  Well,  he  read  the
number  of  the  note,  and  it  was  exactly  20  minutes  to  11  when  he  read  it.'
He  afterwards  told  me  he  was  one  of  the  committee  chosen  to  sit  on  the
platform,  and  see  fair  play.

"  It  was  my  husband's  voice,  and  I  believed  him  to  be  on  his  way  home
at  the  time  I  heard  it.

' '  I  was  quite  alone.

"  I  did  not  make  any  notes,  as  the  experiment  was  only  attempted  out  of
curiosity,  and  the  intimation  reaching  me  so  much  later  than  I  expected,
made  me  believe  at  the  time  that  it  had  failed.

"  Kate  Raines."


278  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


General  Raines  writes: —

46,  Sussex-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  November  'ktli,  1889.

"Dear  Sir, — Mrs.  Raines  has  handed  to  me  your  letter  of  the  15th
October,  in  which  you  ask  if  I  can  at  all  contribute  to  the  account  she
wrote  you  of  the  night  of  the  thought-reading  by  Mr.  Bishop  of  the
bank-note.

"Yes,  I  quite  remember  being  one  of  the  chosen  from  the  audience
to  form  the  committee  on  the  stage  at  St.  James's  Hall,  to  see  fair  play
Mrs.  Raines  had  asked  me  to  try  and  will  that  she  at  home  should  know
the  result  before  I  returned,  and  1  said  the  note  will  probably  be  read  about
10  o'clock,  but  owing  to  many  things  that  took  place  on  tlie  stage  the  actual
time  was  20  minutes  to  11  o'clock.  I  quite  remember  coming  home  at
about  a  quarter  to  12,  and  on  my  entering  the  dining-room  she  at  once  said,
'  Mr.  Bishop  has  read  the  note, '  and  narrated  how  she  had  heard  my  voice
telling  her  that  Mr.  B.  had  done  so.

"Julius  Raines."

Mr.  Podmore  writes:—

November  25^/^,  1891.
"I  called  on  General  and  Mrs.  Raines  to-day.  They  could  add  nothing
further  to  the  story;  except  that  Mrs.  Raines  told  me  tliat,  in  the  Irving-
Bishop  case,  she  went  out  into  the  liall,  after  hearing  the  voice,  in  order  to
note  the  time  by  the  clock  there.  The  voice  sounded  quite  real  and  lifelike.
The  incident  occurred  about  6  or  7  years  ago,  they  think.  Mrs.  Raines
added  accounts  of  two  prophetic  dreams,  fulfilled ;  both  of  wliich  accounts
General  Raines,  to  whom  the  dreams  wei-e  told  before  fulfilment,  cor-
roborated. "

The  arrangement  made  beforehand  in  this  case  may  have  had  some
influence  in  inducing  the  hallucination,  which,  it  will  be  observed,
however,  conveyed  the  correct  one  of  the  two  possible  alternatives,
and  gave  this  information  at  the  right  time,  and  after  the  percipient
had  given  up  expecting  it.

Hallucinations  Coinciding  tvith  Illness  and  Accidents.

In  the  next  set  of  cases  to  be  considered,  the  hallucination  occurs
during  a  sudden  or  serious  illness  of  the  supposed  agent,  which  was
unknown  to  tlie  percipient.  There  are  eleven  cases  of  recognised
apparitions  under  these  circumstances,  and  three  of  recognised  voices,
also  three  cases  in  which  the  voice  was  not  recognised. ^  The  following
four  ca.ses, — together  with  one  already  published  in  Fhantasms  of  the
Living  (Vol.  II.,  p.  526,  No.  572), — are,  we  think,  those  in  which
the  evidence  for  a  telepathic  origin  is  the  best.  Mrs.  McAlpine,  the
percipient  in  the  first  case,  belongs  to  a  small  but  interesting  class
of  percipients  who  have  had  several  experiences,  all  of  which  they
believe  to  have  been  veridical. Only  three  of  hers  have,  however,  been

1  In  0  out  of  these  17  cases,  the  illness  ended  fatally;  in  4  cases  the  j:)atient
recovered,  and  in  the  remaining  4  cases  it  is  not  stated  whether  he  did  so  or  not.


XIV.]  Apparitions  Coinciding  with  Illness.  279


communicated  to  us ; the  remainder  being,  we  understand,  of  too
intimate  a  nature  to  be  communicated  to  strangers.

(458.9.)  From  Mrs.  McAlpine.

(The  following  account  was  enclosed  in  a  letter,  dated  April  12th,  1892.
We  had  previously  received  a  somewhat  briefer  account,  dated  May  7th,  1891,
which  agrees  in  all  essential  particulars  with  the  one  printed  below.)

Garscadden,  Bearsden,  Glasgow.

"  On  the  25th  March,  1891,  my  husband  and  I  were  staying  at  Furneso
Abbey  Hotel,  Barrow-in-Furness,  with  a  friend  of  ours,  the  late  Mr.  A.  D.
Bryce  Douglas,  of  Seafield  Tower,  Ardrossan.  He  was  managing  director  of
the  'Naval  Construction  and  Ai-manients  Company, '  and  had  resided  at  Furness
Abbey  Hotel  for  some  eighteen  months  or  more.  He  had  in\-ited  us,  along
with  a  number  of  other  friends,  to  the  launch  of  the  Empress  of  China.  ^^  e
breakfasted  with  Mr.  Bryce  Douglas  on  the  day  of  the  launch,  the  25th,  and
afterwards  saw  the  launch,  had  luncheon  at  the  shipyard,  and  returned  to  tlie
hotel.  He  appeared  to  be  in  his  usual  health  and  spirits  (he  was  a  power-
fully-budt  man,  and  justly  proud  of  his  tine  constitution).  The  following
day  (Thursday)  he  left  with  a  party  of  gentlemen,  to  sail  from  Liverpool  to
AjL-di'OSsan,  on  the  trial  trip  of  tlie  Empress  of  Japan,  (another  large  steamer
which  had  been  built  at  his  yard).

"  We  remained  on  at  the  hotel  for  some  days  with  our  son  Bob,  aged  23,
who  was  staying  there,  superintending  work  which  Mr.  McAlpme  was  carry-
ing on  at  Barrow.

"On  the  Monday  night,  the  30th,  I  went  upstairs  after  dinner.  On  my
way  down  again  I  saw  Mr.  Bryce  Douglas,  standuig  in  the  doorway  of  his  sit-
ting-room, I  saw  hmi  quite  distinctly.  He  looked  at  me  with  a  sad  expres-
sion. He  was  wearing  a  cap  which  I  had  never  seen  him  wear.  I  walked  on  and
left  him  standing  there.  It  was  then  about  ten  minutes  to  eight.  I  told  my
husband  and  Bob.  We  all  felt  alarmed,  and  we  immediately  sent  the  follow-
ing telegram,  '  How  is  Mr.  Bryce  Douglas  i '  to  Miss  Caldwell,  his  sister-in-
law,  who  kept  house  for  him  at  Seafield.  It  was  too  late  for  a  reply  that
night.  On  Tuesday  morning  we  received  a  wire  from  lier  ;  it  ran  thus  :
'  JVIr.  Bryce  Douglas  dangerously  ill. '  That  telegram  was  the  first  intimation
of  his  illness  which  reached  Barrow.  As  will  be  seen  in  the  account  of  his
illness  and  death  in  the  Barrow  News,  he  died  on  the  following  Sunday,
and  we  afterwards  ascertained  from  Miss  Caldwell  that  he  was  unconscious
on  Monday  evening,  at  the  time  I  saw  him.

"  My  husband  and  [step]  son  can  corroborate  this,  and  I  have  also  letters
which  bear  out  my  statements."

In  her  earlier  account  IMrs.  McAlpine  states  that  she  ' '  was  in  good
health,  and  in  no  grief  or  anxiety  whatever." Her  age  was  26.

Mrs.  McAlpine  enclosed  a  copy  of  the  Bar  row  News  for  April  11th,  1891,
containuig  a  memoir  of  Mi-.  Bryce  Douglas,  and  a  full  account  of  his  last
illness  and  death.  It  appears  from  this  account  that  he  left  Barrow  on
Thursday,  March  26th,  to  join  the  steamer  Empress  of  Japjari,.  He  was
noticed  by  his  friends  to  be  far  from  well  on  Wednesday,  the  previous  day,
on  the  occasion  of  the  launch  of  the  Empress  of  China,  and  was  advised  to
go  home. He  did  not  do  so,  however,  until  the  Sunday,  when  he  was  put


280  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.

ashore  at  Ardrossan,  and  walked  liome  to  Seafield— a  distance  of  nearly  two
miles.  His  medical  man  was  sent  for  the  same  day,  and  the  case  was  con-
sidered serious  from  the  first,  and  on  tlie  following  Thursday  the  doctors
pronounced  it  hoi^eless. He  died  on  April  5th,  at  about  5  a.m.

From  the  evidence  which  follows  it  seems  clear  that  if  any  anxiety  as  to
his  health  was  felt  before  he  left  Barrow,  as  suggested  in  the  newspaper
report,  Mrs.  McAlpine  knew  nothing  of  it.

Mr.  Myers  writes  :—

"  I  discussed  the  incident  connected  with  the  death  of  Mr.  Bryce
Douglas  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  McAlpine  and  Mr.  McAlpine,  jun.,  on  February
24th,  1892.  I  believe  that  their  evidence  has  been  very  carefully  given.
Mr.  McAlpine  knew  Mr.  Bryce  Douglas  intimately.  Mr.  Bryce  Douglas
was  a  rolnist  and  vigorous  man,  and  disliked  ever  to  be  supposed  to  be°ilL
Mr.  McAlpine  tlierefore  felt  great  unwillingness  to  telegraph  to  him  abo«t
his  liealth,  but  from  his  previous  knowledge  of  phenomena  occurring  to  Mrs.
McAlpine,  he  felt  sure  that  her  vision  must  be  in  some  sense  veridical."

Mrs.  McAlpine's  husband  and  his  son  corroborate  as  follows

A2)ril,  1892.

"I  was  at  Barrow  on  the  25th  of  March  of  last  year  (1891),  and
distinctly  remember  the  incident  of  the  following  Monday  night.  I  can
bear  testimony  to  the  statements  made  by  my  wife  and  son.

"  Robert  McAlpine."

Garscadden  House,  A2ml  4f/(,  1892.
"  I  was  living  for  several  months  in  the  Furness  Abbey  Hotel,  at  Barrow-
m-Furness,  and  I  remember  father  and  mother  coming  for  a  few  days  in
order  to  see  the  launch  of  the  Empress  of  China  on  tlie  25th  of  March,  1891,
and  on  the  following  day  (Thursday)  Mr.  Bryce  Douglas  (who  was  then  m  his
usual  health)  left  with  a  party  of  friends  on  the  trial  trip  of  the  Empress  of
Jcvpan.  I  also  distinctly  remember  that  the  following  Monday  night  (30th)
my  father  and  I  were  sitting  at  the  drawing-room  fire  after  dinner,  and
mother  came  in  looking  very  pale  and  startled,  and  said  she  had  been  upstairs
and  had  seen  Mr.  Bryce  Douglas  standing  at  the  door  of  his  sitting-room  (he
had  used  this  sitting-room  for  nearly  two  years).  Both  my  father  and  I  felt
anxious,  and  after  some  discussion  we  sent  a  telegram  to  Mr.  Bryce  Douglas's
residence  at  Ardrossan  asking  liow  lie  ^v^\.s,  and  the  following  morning"  had
the  reply,  '  Keeping  Ijetter,  but  not  out  of  danger,'  or  words  to  that  eflect.
I  can  assert  positively  that  no  one  in  Barrow  knew  of  his  illness  until  after
the  receipt  of  that  telegram.

"Robert  McAlpine,  Jun."
Mrs.  McAlpine  w^rote  to  some  of  the  persons  who  knew  of  the  circum-
stances at  the  time,  asking  for  their  recollections  of  them,  and  the  letters
that  follow  were  sent  Ijy  her  to  us  in  their  original  envelopes.

1.  From  Miss  Caldwell,  sister-in-law  of  Mr.  Bryce-Douglas  :—

[Post-mark,  February  8th,  1892.]
" • • • I  can  remember  perfectly  well  the  [telegram]  you  sent  on
Monday,  the  ;jOth  of  March,  tlie  day  after  [Mr.  Bryce  Douglas]  arrived


XIV.]


Apparitions  Coinciding  luith  Illness.


281


home,  and  I  was  very  much  surprised  at  receiving  it,  as  I  did  not  think  any-
one knew  he  was  so  ill ;  but  I  remembered  afterwards  that  you  and  Mr.
McAlpine  were  at  the  launch  of  the  Empress  of  China,  and  Mr.  Bryce  Douglas
was  rather  complaining  at  that  time,  so  I  thought  you  would  want  to  know
if  he  was  better.  The  contents  of  the  telegram  were — as  far  as  I  can  re-
member— '  Kindly  let  us  know  if  Mr.  Bryce  is  better.'  "

2.  From  Miss  Charlton,  daughter  of  Mr.  Charlton,  of  Barrow-in-Furness.
(Mr.  and  Mrs.  McAlpine  and  their  son  had  spent  the  Sunday,  March  29th,
at  the  house  of  Mr.  Charlton,  who  was  also  a  personal  friend  of  Mr.  Bryce
Douglas).

February  loth,  1892.

"  .  .  .  [My  father]  says  I  am  to  tell  you  that  he  can  quite  bear  out
all  you  have  said — indeed,  we  all  can,  for  on  the  Sunday  you  were  here,  we
were  all  quite  unconscious  of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Douglas  was  ill.  Indeed,  it
was  not  until  the  Tuesday  after  (Easter  Tuesday)  that  father  heard  by  tele-
gram— his  first  intimation — which  ran  as  follows: — 'I  have  been  very  ill,
&c.  We  also  did  hear  of  what  you  saw  at  the  hotel  .  .  .  and  we
thought  it  a  very  singular  coincidence  at  the  time."

Mrs.  Scarlett,  the  wife  of  the  proprietor  of  the  Furness  Abbey  Hotel,
also  confirms  the  sending  of  the  telegram.

Of  the  other  two  experiences  communicated  to  us  by  Mrs.  McAlpine,  one
is  the  following  death-coincidence,  which,  however,  we  have  not  counted  in
Chapter  XII.,  because  of  her  unenumerated  experiences,  all  of  which,  as
has  been  said,  she  believes  to  have  been  telepathic.

April  mh,  1892.

"I  remember  my  brother,  who  lived  some  six  miles  from  us,  writing  a
postcard  to  mamma,  saying,  '  Come  up  to  see  us  to-day,  the  children  have
colds, '  or  some  such  words,  not  indicating  anything  serious,  or  any  particular
child.  We  were  not  alarmed,  but  mamma  drove  to  see  them  about  1  o'clocic
in  the  day.  At  6  o'clock  I  was  crossing  the  hall  and  saw,  as  in  a  cloud,  the
baby  (aged  about  6  months)  lying  dead.  I  looked  at  the  clock  and  told  a
servant,  who  was  the  only  other  person  in  the  house,  that  the  child  was.
dead.  She  was  shocked,  and  asked  if  I  had  had  a  telegram.  I  told  her  what
I  had  seen.  Next  morning  I  had  a  letter  from  mamma  telling  me  that  the
baby  had  died  at  6  o'clock  the  previous  evening.  She  remembers  the  occurr-
ence, and  can  give  the  exact  date,  which  I  have  forgotten."

The  letter  printed  below,  to  Mrs.  McAlpine  from  her  mother,  corrobo-
rates both  the  incidents  already  described  : —

Fehntary  8th,  1892.
"  I  remember  perfectly  that  you  wrote  me  from  Barrow — from  the
Furness  Abbey  Hotel — saying  you  had  had  a  bad  shock,  that  you  were
passing  along  a  corridor  and  you  saw  Mr.  Bryce  Douglas  in  his  room,  stand-
ing and  looking  at  you — knowing  that  he  had  left  early  in  the  day  (it  was
then  evening)  you  were  alarmed  and  got  your  husband  to  wire  an  inquiry
about  his  friend — that  the  rej^ly  was  '  He  is  very  ill. '  You  wrote  that  letter-
the  morning  after  the  appearance.

"I  also  remember  very  clearly  abotxt  your  brother  Ben's  little  child.
Tou  and  I  only  were  at  home  here. I  got  a  note  asking  me  to  go  to  his.


282


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


house,  as  the  little  ones  had  colds  and  their  mother  was  anxious,  but  there
was  nothing  to  cause  you  to  expect  bad  news.  I  went,  and  the  poor  baby
was  dying  when  I  arrived,  and  at  6  o'clock  was  dead.  At  that  exact  time
you  told  the  maid  that  the  doctor's  baby  was  dead.  She  knew  the  hour,
she  told  me  long  afterwards,  because  you  told  her  to  look  at  the  clock.  When
I  got  liome,  in  a  few  clays,  I  asked  you,  '  Were  you  shocked  when  the
messenger  came  saying  the  poor  little  baby  was  dead  ? '  You  replied,  '  0\\,
no  ;  I  knew  at  the  time  it  died.'  And  either  then  or  soon  after  you  said,
' I  saw  it.'  "

Witli  regard  to  the  exact  date  of  the  baby's  death,  Mrs.  McAlpine  wrote
again  later  to  lier  mother,  and  received  the  following  reply  : —

Oetoher,  1893.

"  [The  baby]  died  on  Saturday,  April  6th,  1888.  .  .  I  have  never
forgotten  the  very  strange  circumstance  of  how  you  told  me  when  I  got
horne  that  you  saw  the  poor  little  child,  the  time  being  exactly  when  she
died. You  did  not  know  previously  that  slie  was  sei'iously  ill.''

For  another  of  Mrs.  McAlpine's  experiences,  see  p.  332.

The  following  has  already  been  referred  to  as  one  of  the  rare  cases
in  which  a  note  of  the  phenomenon  was  not  only  taken  at  the  time  but
preserved.  Here,  as  will  be  seen,  the  apparition  occurs  within  the  last
32  hours  of  a  brief  fatal  illness  of  which  the  percipient  had  no  know-
ledge.

(660. 6.)  From  Miss  Hervey,

9,  Tavistock  Crescent,  W.,  April  2Sth,  1892.

"I  saw  the  figure  of  my  cousin  (a  nurse  in  Dublin)  coming  upstairs,
■dressed  in  grey.  I  was  in  Tasmania,  and  the  time  that  I  saw  her  was
between  6  and  7  p.m.  on  April  21st,  1888.

"I  had  just  come  in  from  a  ride  and  was  in  the  best  of  health  and
spirits. I  was  between  31  and  32  years  of  age.

"I  had  lived  with  my  cousin,  and  we  were  the  greatest  of  friends,  but  my
going  to  Tasmania  in  1887  had,  of  course,  sejjarated  us.  She  was  a  nurse,
and  at  the  time  I  saw  her  in  A^jril,  1888,  she  was  dying  of  typhus  fever,  a
fact  unknown  to  me  till  6  weeks  after  her  death.  Her  illness  lasted  only  5
days,  and  I  lieard  of  her  death  at  the  same  time  as  of  her  illness.

"  Tliere  was  no  one  present  with  me  at  the  time,  but  I  narrated  what  I
had  seen  to  the  friend  with  whom  I  was  living,  and  asked  why  my  cousin,
Ethel  B. ,  sliould  have  been  dressed  in  grey.  My  friend  said  that  was  the
dress  <if  the  nurses  in  that  particular  hospital  ;  a  fact  unknown  to  me.

' '  The  imj^ression  of  seeing  my  cousin  was  so  vivid  that  I  wrote  a  long
letter  to  her  that  night,  saying  I  had  had  this  vision.  The  letter,  arriving
after  she  was  dead,  was  returned  to  me  and  I  destroyed  it."

"Rose  B.  E.  I.  Hervey."

Mr.  Podmore  writes  : —

Jahj  21st,  1892.

"I  called  on  Miss  Hervey  to-day.  She  was  staying  at  the  time  of  her
experience  witli  Lady  H. Miss  Hervey  and  Lady  H.  had  just  returned


XIV.J


Apparitions  Coinciding  luith  Illness.


283


from  a  drive,  and  Miss  Hervey  was  leaving  lier  room  to  cross  the  upper
landing  to  Lady  H.'s  room  to  have  tea.  On  passing  the  stairs  she  saw  the
figure  coming  up.  She  recognised  it  at  once  and  ran  away  to  Lady  H.,
without  waiting  to  see  the  figure  disajapear,  and  told  her  what  she  had  seen.
Lady  H.  laughed  at  her,  but  told  her  to  note  it  in  her  diary.  This  Miss
Hervey  did.  I  saw  the  entry  : — '  Saturday,  April  21st,  1888,  6  p.m.  Vision
of  [nickname  given]  on  landing  in  grey  dress. '  The  news  of  death  did  not
arrive  till  June. Date  of  death,  April  22nd,  1888,  at  4.30  p.m."

We  have  seen  a  copy,  retained  by  Miss  Hervey,  of  a  letter  giving  an
account  of  Miss  Ethel  B.'s  death.  It  was  written  on  the  evening  of  Sunday,
April  22nd,  1888.  The  letter  speaks  of  Miss  B.  liaving  been  "so  heavy  with
fever  all  through. "  The  crisis  of  the  illness  began  at  4  a.m.  on  the  22nd.
About  10  she  got  a  change  decidedly  for  the  worse,  and  lingered  on  till  half
past  four,  when  she  died. Miss  B.'s  relations  were  unable  to  be  with  her.

The  difference  of  time  between  Tasmania  and  Dublin  is  about  10  hours,
so  that  the  apparition  preceded  the  deatli  by  about  thirty-two  hours.

We  have  examined  a  pattern  of  the  material  used  for  the  nurses'  dress
at  the  hospital  where  Miss  B.  was.  It  is  of  cotton,  with  a  sort  of  check
pattern  of  white  and  dark  navy  blue  and  a  little  red  :  it  has  a  greyish  tone
at  a  little  distance,  but  the  coincidence  in  resjject  of  colour  is  not  marked
enough  to  be  of  any  value.

We  wrote  to  Lady  H.  asking  for  her  recollections  of  the  matter,  and
received  the  following  reply.

July  30th,  1893.

"Dear  Sir, — Your  letter  dated  April  6th  has  followed  me  back  to  Eng-
land, and  I  should  have  answered  it  a  week  or  two  sooner,  but  I  thought  my
son  from  Tasmania  might  be  able  to  throw  some  light  on  your  search  for  a
definite  corroboration  of  Miss  Hervey's  account  of  an  apparition  which  she
tells  you  she  saw  when  in  Tasmania  with  us  in  1888.  He,  however,  can  do
little  more  than  I  can  for  its  confirmation.  He  recollects  that  Miss  Hervey
made  such  a  statement  at  the  time,  and  I  seem  to  remember  something
about  it,  but  nothing  really  definite."

Miss  Hervey  has  had  one  other  apparently  veridical  vision.  As  a  girl  of
14  at  school,  she  saw  an  angel  (like  the  angel  in  the  picture  called  "  The
Reaper  and  the  Flowers,"  with  which  she  was  familiar)  carrying  one  of  her
schoolfellows  in  his  arms.  The  vision  is  believed  to  have  coincided  with
the  death,  but  the  child  was  known  to  be  dying,  and  no  corroboration  is
now  obtainable.  Miss  Hervey  has  had  no  other  visual  hallucinations,  but
several  auditory  ones,  two  of  which  were  prima  facie  veridical.  She  does
not,  however,  attach  much  im]jortance  to  tliese.

In  the  next  case  the  appaiition  preceded  the  death  by  two  days  ;
but  it  will  be  observed  that  the  final  stage  of  the  decedent's  illness  had
lasted  more  than  three  months.  The  case  is  curious  in  more  ways
than  one.  It  has  already  been  referred  to  in  Chapter  VI.,  p.  128,  as
an  instance  of  deferred  recognition,  and  in  the  present  Chapter,
p.  265,  as  a  case  of  a  telepathic  impulse  seeming,  so  to  speak,  to  have
missed  its  mark  and  affected  the  wrong  person ;  and  we  shall  have  to


284


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


[chap.


refer  to  it  again  (see  Chapter  XVII.)  as  an  instance  of  a  compact  to
appear  after  death  if  possible.


(402.  8.)


From  Countess  Eugenie  Kapnist.


June  24^7^,  1891.


"  A  Talta,  en  Fevrier,  1889,  nuus  finies  la  connaissance  de  M.  P.  et  de
sa  f  emme,  passant  la  soiree  chez  des  amis  communs  qui  avaient  tenu  a  nous
r(5unir.  A  cette  epoque,  M.  P.  souffrait  deja  d'une  phthisic  assez  avancee  ;
il  venait  de  perdre,  a  Petersbourg,  son  frere,  atteint  de  la  meme  maladie.
On  pria  ma  soiur  de  faire  un  peu  de  musique,  et  elle  choisit  au  hasard  le
Prelude  de  Mendelssohn.  A  mon  etonnement  je  vis  M.  P.,  que  nous  ne
connaissions  que  de  ce  soir,  aller,  tres  emotionne,  jarendre  place  aupres  du
piano,  et  suivre  avec  une  espece  d'anxiete  le  jeu  de  ma  soeur.  Lorsqu'elle
eut  fini,  il  dit  que  pour  quelques  instants  elle  venait  de  faire  ressusciter  son
frere,  executant  absolument  de  la  meme  maniere  ce  niorceau,  qu'il  jouait
frequemment.  Depuis,  en  voyant  nia  soevir,  il  aimait  particulierement  a
causer  avec  elle.  Je  'puis  certifier  ainsi  qu'elle  une  conversation  que  nous
eumes  a  une  soiree,  au  mois  de  Mars.  Nous  parlions  de  la  mort,  chose
frequente  a  Talta,  toujom-s  peuplee  de  malades  : — '  Savez-vous,'  disait-il  a  ma
soeur,  '  il  me  semble  toujours  que  mon  esprit  est  tres  proche  du  votre  ;  j'ai
la  certitude  de  vuus  avoir  deja  connue  ;  nous  avons  dans  la  realite  une  preuve
que  ce  n'est  pas  en  ce  monde — ce  sera  que  je  vous  aurais  vue  durant
quelqu'autre  vie  prec^dente '  (il  ^tait  un  peu  spirite).  '  Ainsi  done,  si  je
nieurs  avant  vous,  ce  qui  est  bien  probable,  vu  ma  maladie,  je  reviendrai
vers  vous,  si  cela  m'est  possible,  et  je  vous  apjjaraitrai  de  fa^on  a  ne  pas  vous
effrayer  desagreablement. '  Ma  sceur  lui  repondit,  jjrenant  la  chose  tres  au
serieux,  qu'elle  lui  rendrait  la  pareille  si  elle  mourait  la  premiere,  etj'etais
temoin  de  cette  promesse  mutuelle.

"  Neanmoins  nous  fimes  a  peine  connaissance  de  maison  ;  nous  nous
rencontrions  parfois  chez  des  amis  commims,  et  nous  le  voyions  souvent  se
promener  sur  le  quai  dans  un  paletot  couleur  noisette  qui  excitait  notre
hilarite  et  qui  nous  resta  dans  la  memoire  je  ne  sais  plus  pourqu<ji.  Au  mois
de  Mai,  nous  partions  de  Talta,  et  depuis  nous  eumes  tant  d'impressions
diverses,  nous  vimes  tant  de  monde,  que  jusqu'a  I'hiver  suivant  nous
oubliames  completement  M.  P.  et  sa  femme,  qui  rej)resentaient  pour  nous
des  connaissances  comme  on  en  a  par  centaines  dans  la  vie.

"  Nous  etions  a  Petersbourg.  Le  11  Mars,  c'etait  un  lundi  de  Careme  en
1890,  nous  allames  au  theatre  voir  une  representation  de  la  troupe  des
Meiningner.  Je  crois  qu'on  donnait  Le  Marchand  de  Venise.  Mile.  B.
6tait  avec  nous,  venue  de  Tsarskoe  a  cette  occasion.  La  piece  terminee,
nous  n'eumes  que  le  temj^s  de  rentrer  a  la  maison  changer  de  toilette,  apres
quoi  nous  accompagnames  Mile.  B.  a  la  gave.  Elle  partait  avec  le  dernier
train,  qui  quitte  pour  Tsarskoe  Selo  a  1  heure  de  la  nuit.  Nous  rinstalhlmes
en  wagon,  et  ne  I'y  laissames  qu'apres  la  seconde  cloche  de  depart.

"  Notre  domestique  allait  bien  en  avant  de  nous,  afin  de  retrouver  notre
voiture,  de  maniere  que,  gagnant  le  jjerron,  nous  la  trouviimes  avancee  qui
nous  attendait.  Ma  soeur  s'assit  la  jjremiere  ;  moi  je  la  fis  attendre,  descen-
dant plus  doucement  les  marches  de  I'escalier ;  le  domestique  tenait  la
portiere  du  landau  (Uiverte. Je  montai  a  demi,  sur  le  marchejjied,  et


XIV.]  Apparitions  Coinciding  with  Illness.  285


soudain  je  m'arretai  clans  cette  pose,  tellement  surprise  que  je  ne  compris
plus  ce  qui  m'arrivait.  II  faisait  sombre  dans  la  voiture,  et  pourtant  en
face  de  ma  soeur,  la  regardant,  je  vis  dans  un  petit  jour  gris  qu'on  eut  dit
factice,  s'(5claircissant  vers  le  poiiit  qui  attachait  le  plus  mes  yeux,  une
figure  a  la  silhouette  emoussee,  diapliane,  plutot  qu'indecise.  Cette  vision
dura  un  instant,  pendant  lequel,  pourtant,  mes  yeux  prirent  connaissance
des  moindres  details  de  ce  visage,  qui  me  sembla  connu  :  des  traits  assez
pointus,  une  raie  un  peu  de  cote,  un  nez  prononce,  un  menton  tres  maigre  a
barbe  rare  et  d'un  blond  fonce.  Ce  qui  me  frappe,  lorsque  j'y  pense  a  present,
c'est  d'avoir  vu  les  difFerentes  couleurs,  maigre  que  la  lueur  grisiltre,  qui
eclairait  a  peine  I'inconnu,  eut  ete  insuffisante  pour  les  distinguer  dans  un  cas
normal.  II  etait  sans  chapeau,  et  en  meme  temps  dans  un  paletot  comme  on
en  porte  au  sud — de  couleur  plutot  claire — noisette.  Toute  sa  personne  avait
un  cachet  de  grande  fatigue  et  de  maigreur.

' '  Le  domestique,  tres  etonne  de  ne  pas  me  voir  monter,  arretee  ainsi  sur  le
marchepied,  crut  que  j'avais  marchi5  dans  ma  robe  et  m'aida  a  ni'asseoir,
pendant  que  je  demandais  a  ma  soeur,  en  prenant  place  a  cote  d'elle,  si  c'etait
bien  notre  voiture  ?  A  tel  point  j  'avals  perdu  la  tete,  ayant  senti  un  vrai
engourdissement  de  cerveau  en  voyant  cet  etranger  installe  en  face  d'elle,
je  ne  m'^tais  pas  rendu  comjate  que,  dans  le  cas  d'une  presence  reelle  d'un
semblable  vis-a-vis,  ni  ma  sceur,  ni  le  valet  de  pied  ne  resteraient  si  calme-
ment  a  I'envi.sager.  Lorsque  je  fus  assise,  je  ne  vis  plus  rien,  et  je  deman-
dais a  ma  soeur  : — '  N'as-tu  rien  vu  en  face  de  toi  ? '  '  Rien  du  tout,  et  quelle
idee  as-tu  eue  de  demander,  en  entrant  dans  la  voiture,  si  c'etait  bien  la
notre?'  repondit-elle  en  riant.  Alors,  je  lui  racontais  tout  ce  qui  pri^cede,
d(5crivant  minutieusement  ma  vision.  '  Quelle  figure  connue,'  di.sait-elle,  '  et
a  paletot  noisette,  cette  raie  de  cote,  oii  done  I'avons  nous  vue  ?  Pourtant
nul  ne  ressemble  ici  a  ta  description  ; '  et  nous  nous  creusions  la  tete  sans
rien  trouver.  Rentrees  a  la  maison,  nous  racontames  ce  fait  a  notre  mere  ;
ma  description  la  fit  aussi  souvenir  vaguement  d'un  visage  analogue.  Le
lendemain  soir  (12  Mars)  un  jeune  homme  de  notre  connaissance,  M.  M.  S.,
vint  nous  voir.  Je  lui  r^petais  aussi  I'incident  qui  nous  etait  arrive.  Nous
en  parlames  beaucoup,  mais  inutilement  ;  je  ne  pouvais  toujours  pus  appliquer
le  nom  voulu  a  la  personnalite  de  ma  vision,  tout  en  me  souvenant  fort  bien
avoir  vu  un  visage  tout  pareil  parmi  mes  nombreuses  connaissances  ;  mais
oil  et  a  quelle  6poque  ?  Je  ne  me  souvenais  de  rien,  avec  ma  mauvaise
m^moire  qui  me  fait  souvent  d^ifaut,  a  ce  sujet.  Quelques  jours  plus  tard,  nous
etions  chez  la  grandmere  de  M.  M.  S.  : — '  Savez  vous,'  nous  dit-elle,
'quelle  triste  nouvelle  je  viens  de  recevoir  de  Talta  1  M.  P.  vient  de  mourir,
mais  on  ne  me  donne  pas  de  details. '  Ma  soeur  et  moi,  nous  nous  regardames.
A  ce  nom,  la  figure  pointue  et  le  paletot  noisette  retrouverent  leur  possesseur.
Ma  soeur  reconnut  en  meme  temps  que  moi,  grace  a  ma  descrijation  23r(5cise.
Lorsque  M.  M.  S.  entra,  je  le  priai  de  chercher  dans  les  vieux  journaux
la  date  exacte  de  cette  mort.  Le  deces  etait  marque  au  14  du  mois  de  Mars,
done,  deux  jours  apres  la  vision  que  j'avais  eue.  J'ecrivis  a  Talta  pour  avoir
des  renseignements.  On  me  r^pondit  qu'il  gardait  le  lit  depuis  le  24
Novembre  et  qu'il  avait  ete  depuis  dans  un  etat  de  faiblesse  extreme,  mais  le
sommeil  ne  I'avait  point  quitte  ;  il  dormait  si  longtemps  et  si  profondement,
meme  durant  les  dernieres  nuits  de  son  existence,  que  cela  faisait  esp^rer  une


286  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hcdlucinations.  [chap.


amelioration.  Nous  nous  etonnions  de  ce  que  j'aie  vu  M.  P.,  malgre  sa
promesse  de  se  montrer  a  ma  sceur.  Mais  je  dois  aj  outer  ici  qu'avant  le  fait
d^crit  ci-dessus,  j'avais  ete  voyante  un  certain  nombre  de  fois,  mais  cette
vision  est  bien  celle  que  j'ai  distinguee  le  plus  nettement,  avec  des  details
minutieux,  et  avec  les  teintes  diverses  du  visage  humain,  et  meme  du
vetement.

' '  COMTESSE  EUG]^NIE  KaPNIST.
"  CoMTESSE  InA  KaPNIST."

The  second  signature  is  that  of  the  sister  who  was  present  at  the  time.

Mr.  Michael  Petrovo-Solovovo,  the  collector,  writes  : —

"  I  have  much  pleasure  in  certifying  that  the  fact  of  Countess  Kapnist's-
vision  was  mentioned,  among  others,  to' myself  befoi'e  the  news  of  Mr.  P.'s-
death  came  to  Petersburg.  I  well  remember  seeing  an  announcenrent  of  his
demise  in  the  pajjers."

In  the  following  case  the  hallucination  occurred  within  36  hours  of
the  death.  The  percipient  withholds  her  name  from  publication  for
reasons  which  seem  to  us  adequate.

(5.55.  5.)  From  Miss  A.  O,

Janncmj  21st,  1892.

"  In  the  autumn  of  1880  I  was  living  in  a  farm  house  among  tlie  Cheviot
hills,  having  gone  there  with  some  yiiunger  members  of  the  family,  quietness-
being  desirable  at  home,  owing  to  the  illness  of  a  near  relative.  The  house
l>eing  a  small  one,  I  occupied  a  bedroom  which  coinmunicated  with  a  sitting
room  on  the  upper  storey,  and,  being  some  way  from  the  other  sleeping
rooms,  it  was  my  habit  to  keep  a  lamp  burning  during  the  entire  night.
On  the  29th  of  September  I  retired  as  usual  in  the  best  possible  health  and
spirits,  quite  unaware  of  the  then  critical  state  of  my  relative,  and  liad  just
got  into  bed,  witli  face  turned  towards  the  wall,  when  I  became  aware  of
another  presence  in  the  room.

"  Turning  towards  the  door  of  communication,  I  there  saw,  as  I  imagined,
my  relative  who  was  ill,  standing  looking  at  me  and  smiling.  He  was
dressed  as  t  had  been  accustomed  to  see  him  ;  the  light  was  bright,  and  I
observed  every  detail.  I  lay  for  a  few  seconds  and  then  spoke,  but  getting
no  answer,  jumped  out  of  bed  with  hands  outstretched  towards  the  figure,
which,  on  my  approach,  retreated  to  the  outer  room  still  smiling  with  peculiar
sweetness.  1  followed  it,  and  watched  it  vanish  through  the  outer  door,
which  was  closed.  After  a  moment's  pause  I  opened  the  door  and  looked
out  but  saw  nothing  but  a  bare  passage  and  narrow  staircase,  dimly  lit  from
the  room  in  which  I  stood.  I  was  not  afraid,  only  wondering,  for  though  we
had  been  in  the  habit  of  telling  '  ghost '  stories,  it  did  not  strike  me  at  the
time  to  associate  tliis  with  anythhig  of  the  kind.

"On  the  following  morning  I  told  the  other  members  of  the  family  of  my
experience,  and  somebody  suggested  that  it  was  just  possible  that  the  bright
light  at  that  hour  might  have  alarmed  the  man  who  had  care  of  the  house,
an  old  servant,  and  that  he  might  have  come  up.stairs  to  see  that  all  was  safe.


XIV.]


Apparitions  Coivciding  tvith  Illness.


287


Though  personally  quite  sure  of  the  identity  of  the  apparition,  I  made
inquiries,  and  found  that  there  was  no  foundation  for  the  suggestion.
"  My  relative  died  the  following  night.

"  On  relating  this  experience  some  years  later  to  a  cousin,  she  owned  to
having  seen  the  same  apparition  on  the  same  night  as  it  appeared  to  me.  She
herself  was  then  recovering  from  a  long  indisposition,  but  her  intellect  was
clear  and  her  nerves  steady.  Her  husband  distinctly  recollects  being  told
by  her  at  the  time  of  what  she  had  seen.  She  was  not  afraid,  her  feeling
was  one  of  gratitude.  I  may  add  that  the  above  is  her  only  experience  of
the  kind."

In  answer  to  our  enquiries,  Miss  0.  wrote  : —

January  28th  [1892].
"My  cousin  was  not  in  the  same  house  as  myself  at  the  time.  I  am  not
sure  of  her  address,  but  know  for  certain  that  she  was  not  within  50  miles  of
it.  The  apparition  appeared  to  her,  I  imagine,  at  a  later  hour  than  it  did  to
me.  We  were  young  [Miss  O.  was  15  at  the  time],  and  went  early  to  bed  ;
I  should  think,  a  good  deal  earlier  than  was  her  habit  ;  also,  if  I  recollect
rightly,  she  had  been  asleep  previously.  1  do  not  corre.spond  with  her.
.  .  .  [I]  will  try  to  obtain  her  written  testimony,  but  have  little  hope  of
succeeding.  I  made  no  note  of  the  occurrence,  but  know  for  certain  that
my  relative's  illness  terminated  fatally  on  the  30th  of  September,  1880.  It
is,  however,  possible  that  his  death  may  have  occurred  in  the  early  morning
hours  of  the  30th,  which  would  cause  my  experience  to  have  been  on  the
28th—not  29th,  as  previously  .stated.  I  am  quite  sure  of  the  date  of  the
death,  and  have  consulted  the  county  papers  which  contained  obituary
notices. The  relative  was  my  father."

The  following  corroborative  note  was  received  from  Miss  O's  sister :

Janvary  28th,  1892.

' '  I  distinctly  recollect  on  the  morning  of  September  30th  (or  29th),  1880,
being  told  by  my  sister  of  her  experience  of  the  previous  night, — before  the
termination  of  our  relative's  illness.

"K.O."

It  will  be  noticed  that  in  the  three  cases  of  apparitions  coinciding
with  illness  first  quoted,  and  very  possibly  in  the  last,  the  agent  was  in
a  comatose  state. In  this  respect,  these  cases  contrast  strongly  with

some  other  cases  of  coincidence  with  illness  in  our  collection,  notably

with  No.  34.  20,  quoted  below,  in  which  the  agent  is  at  the  moment  in
a  state  of  very  active  consciousness,  in  acute  pain  and  feeling  a  vivid
desire  for  the  help  of  the  percipient.

Parenthetically  we  may  remark  here  that,  if  we  are  right  in
believing  that  a  certain  number  of  the  hallucinations  described  as
occurring  within  12  hours  of  death  were  not  really  so  closely  coinciden-
tal, some  of  them  may  still  have  been  coincident  with  fatal  ilhiess— like
those  we  have  just  been  describing — or  may  have  occurred  after  death,
the  death  being  unknown  (see  Chapter  XVII.).  For  instance,  the
following  case  is  counted  as  a  death-coincidence,  because  the  percipient


\

288  Report  on  the  Gensm  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


believed — perhaps  rightl}' — that  it  was  so;  but  she  also  beUeves  that
it  occurred  on  a  Sunday,  because  she  remembers  going  to  church  on
the  same  day,  and  that  the  death  took  place  on  the  8th  of  the  month,
which  we  find  was  a  Wednesday.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  her
memory  is  at  fault  somewhere.  Possibly  she  went  to  church  on  a
Wednesday,  or  possibly  the  apparition  occurred  either  during  the  fatal
illness  or  after  the  death.  But  in  any  case  a  coincidence  remains,
since  it  occurred  when  the  family  were  still  unaware  that  thei'e  was
anything  wrong.

(460.  1.)  From  Miss  H.  L.  H.

Jidii  Uh,  1890.

"  I  was  in  Staffordshire,  and  on  the  night  of  August  7th,  1877,  retired  to
rest  between  eleven  and  twelve,  but  I  could  not  sleep.  About  two,  as  near
as  I  can  remember,  while  still  awake,  a  strange  feeling  came  over  me,  as  if
I  was  not  alone,  and  sitting  up  to  look,  two  scenes  came  vividly  before  me  ;
in  the  first,  I  saw  my  dear  brother  (who,  as  I  believed,  was  far  away  in
Bangkok)  lying  at  the  foot  of  my  bed,  dying.  I  remember  I  cried  out,  '  No
one  there  who  loves  him,  and  no  last  message.'  Then  I  saw  a  coffin  in  the
same  place,  and  felt  he  was  dead. [I  was]  in  good  health. [Age]  over  20.

"In  December  we  lieard  that  my  brother  had  died  in  hospital  at  Singapore
on  his  way  home,  unconscious,  and  with  no  one  there  who  knew  him.  At
the  time  I  had  this  vision  we  were  not  aware  of  my  brother's  illness."

The  collector,  Mr.  G.  R.  Farncombe,  says  : —

' '  Miss  H.  assured  me  that  her  experience  took  place  on  the  day  of  her
brother's  death,  but  the  exact  hour  of  this  she  did  not  know.  Whether  she
had  an  independent  recollection  of  the  date  I  cannot  say."

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  had  ever  experienced  any  other
hallucinations,  Miss  H.  writes  : —

"  On  two  occasions  I  have  heard  the  voice  of  my  father  calling  me  by
name,  once  before  and  once  after  his  death.  In  the  last  [case]  I  ajipeared
to  see  him  as  he  stood  by  me  at  night."

Professor  Sidgwick  called  on  Miss  H.  on  September  21st,  1891,  and
writes  on  the  same  day,  from  notes  taken  at  the  time  of  his  interview  : —

"The  two  scenes  seen  on  the  morning  of  August  8th  were  completely  ex-
ternalised, and  appeared  to  be  in  Miss  H.'s  room  ;  the  coffin  in  the  second
vision  appeared  to  be  across  the  bed.  She  is  quite  convinced  that  it  was  not
a  dream  in  either  case  ;  in  the  second  case  she  remembers  sitting  up  and
looking  at  the  coffin.  She  was  under  no  anxiety  about  her  brother  on  tlie
score  of  illness— he  had  been  ill  earlier  in  the  year,  but  they  had  heard  that
he  was  better.  They  were,  however,  dightly  anxious  on  account  of  not
having  heard  from  him  for  some  time.

"  Within  a  week  after  the  visions,  Miss  H.  wrote  to  her  father,  describing
what  she  had  seen,  in  consequence  of  which  he  wrote  to  the  Consul  at
Bangkok  to  inquire  about  his  son.  Before  he  received  an  answer  to  this
letter,  the  news  came  of  the  son's  death  at  Singapore  ;  later,  he  received  a
certificate  of  death,  giving  as  its  date  August  8th.


XIV.]


Voices  coinciding  with  Illness.


289


"Miss  H.  remembers  distinctly  that  this  was  the  date  of  her  visions;  it
was  a  Sunday  morning  ;  ^  she  was  asked  by  the  vicar's  wife  after  church  why
she  looked  strange  and  whether  she  was  unwell.  She  is  not  a  good  sleeper,
but  was  not  specially  suffering  from  sleeplessness  at  the  time — was,  in  fact,
in  normal  health.

"  The  night  of  August  7th  there  had  been  strange  noises  in  the  house,
heard  by  Miss  H.  and  the  two  other  persons  who  were  the  inmates  of  the
house  besides  the  servants — the  latter  having  gone  upstairs  did  not  hear
them.  Tlie  noises  heard  were  as  of  heavy  doors  banging  ;  a  window  was
seen  to  shake,  and,  thinking  some  one  must  be  there,  they  went  and  searched
in  the  yard,  but  found  no  one.  The  night  was  quiet,  and  the  phenomena
could  not  be  explained  by  wind.  In  the  morning  it  was  found  that  a  lamp
placed  on  the  window-sill  had  fallen  and  was  broken,  also  the  looking  glass
of  a  servant  b<jy — a  '  tiger. '  Miss  H.  did  not  regard  the  noises  as  supernormal
before  the  visions  had  occurred  ;  though  afterwards  she  was  disposed  to
connect  the  two.  No  corroboration  of  the  coincidence  of  visions  and  death
is  now  obtainable  ;  her  father  died  in  1879."

In  the  next  case  the  hallucination  appears  to  have  coincided  exactly
with  a  severe — though  not  fatal — -attack  of  angina  2)''-cto7'is.

(34.  20.)  From  Miss  M.  A.  King.

(The  account  was  written  during  the  first  half  of  the  year  1889.)

Belle  Vue,  Exeter.

"I  heard  a  voice  .say,  'Come  to  me,  I'm  so  ill,  come  to  me.'  This
happened  at  five  in  the  morning,  one  day  in  October  of  1888.  I  was
lying  awake,  having  been  dreaming  vividly.  My  health  was  perfect,  and
I  was  in  no  grief  or  anxiety  at  the  time.

"[The  impression  was  that  of]  some  one  with  whom  I  was  most  intimate,
but  whom  I  had  not  seen  for  two  months.  She  was  at  the  time  200  miles
away,  and  at  that  exact  time  was  undergoing  a  severe  attack  and  spoke  the
same  words  that  I  heard.

' '  No  other  person  was  present.

"I  have  not  had  any  other  experiences  of  this  sort  definite  enough  to
describe.

"M.  A.  King."

In  answer  to  our  inquiries,  the  collector,  Mr.  Lauder  Smith,  wrote  : —
Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  Augnd  22nd,  1889.

"  Dear  Sir, — I  have  obtained  some  of  the  further  information  which  you
desired  in  Miss  King's  case  of  thought-transference.  I  sent  your  letter  to
Miss  King,  and  she  replied  as  follows  : —

"  '  (1)  I  did  not  mention  the  experience  to  anyone  at  the  time  except  to
the  friend  in  question,  to  whom  I  wrote  the  .same  day.  She  answered  at
once,  telling  of  the  strange  coincidence.

"  '  (2)  My  friend  was  subject  to  occasional  heart  attacks  attended  with
much  pain  and  the  result  of  ague,  but  she  was  in  good  general  health  at  the

1  We  find,  however,  that  August  8th,  1877,  was  a  Wednesday.

U


290


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


time  and  I  had  no  thought  of  her  being  ill.  The  occurrence  was  impressed
on  my  mind  by  the  unusualness  of  my  waking  at  four  in  the  morning,  and  of
my  staying  awake.'

' '  Miss  King  also  enclosed  part  of  the  letter  from  Miss  Ilidd,  the  friend
in  question,  which  she  mentions  as  having  received  in  reply  to  her  own  ;
it  ran  as  follows  : —

"  '  I  didn't  mean  to  tell  you  about  it,  but  the  coincidence  is  so  strange
I  must.  Sunday  morning  about  four  o'clock  I  had  awfully  bad  pain,
thought  I  was  going  to  die  for  a  few  minutes,  and  when  I  could  speak  I
stretched  out  my  arms  to  your  photo  and  said,  "  My  Trix,  come  to  me,  I'm
so  ill,  come  to  me  !  " Wasn't  it  strange  ? '

"  I  wrote  to  Miss  Ridd,  and  she  replied  :  '  Now  to  answer  your  queries.
Yes,  I  did  say  those  words  aloud  that  Miss  King  quotes  :  I  was  sitting  up
in  bed  and  addressed  my  remark  to  a  photo  of  [her]  that  stands  on  my
mantelpiece.  She  wrote  to  me  telling  me  of  her  strange  dream  {sic)  before
I  mentioned  the  fact  to  her  and  before  she  knew  that  I  had  been  ill.'  "

'  Miss  Ridd  unfortunately  could  not  find  Miss  King's  original  letter  to  her
describing  her  experience.

Miss  Johnson  writes  : —

Angnd  15th,  1891.
' '  I  called  on  Miss  King  this  morning  and  saw  her  and  Miss  Ridd  to-
gether. Miss  King  gave  me  a  verbal  account  of  her  expei'ience,  which
seemed  to  differ  slightly  from  her  written  account,  but  only,  I  think,  because
she  had  been  very  careful  in  the  latter  to  put  down  only  what  actually
came  within  the  scope  of  the  questions.  She  said  that  she  had  had  a  vivid
dream  of  going  out  of  the  front  door  of  her  house  at  Exeter  and  meeting
the  postman,  who  brought  her  a  letter  froni  Miss  Ridd.  On  or  in  the
letter  was  written,  'Come  to  me,  Trix,  I'm  so  ill.'  Then  she  woke  and
heai'd  the  same  words  resounding  in  her  ears.  She  thought  it  possible  that
she  had  been  awakened  by  them.  I  asked  if  it  was  just  like  a  real
person  speaking,  and  she  said.  Yes  ;  also  if  she  definitely  recognised  the
voice.  She  could  not  remember  exactly,  but  said  that  she  thought  it  could
not  have  been  anyone  else  but  Miss  Ridd,  as  no  one  else  called  her  Trix.
It  never  occurred  to  her  that  it  could  be  anyone  else.  She  was  much'  im-
pressed by  it  and  stayed  awake  a  long  time  afterwards.  It  was  very  unusual
for  her  to  wake  at  all  in  that  way  in  the  morning.

"  I  asked  how  they  had  established  the  coincidence,  the  date  being  no-
where exactly  stated.  Miss  King  .said  she  had  written  the  same  day  to
Miss  Ridd  in  London,  who  had  answered  by  return.  As  to  the  exact  hour,
Miss  Ridd  remarked,  '  Don't  you  remember  you  heard  the  Cathedral  clock
strike  just  after  ? '  Miss  Ridd  herself  had  noticed  the  time  because  of
having  to  take  some  medicine  at  four,  and  told  how  she  had  spoken  the
words  to  the  photograph  of  '  Trix '  in  her  room.  I  pointed  out  that  Miss
King  had  given  the  time  as  five  on  the  schedule.  Tliey  both  agreed  that  this
must  have  been  a  slip,  both  appearing  to  remember  four  as  the  hour  of  Miss
King's  experience,  as  she  says  in  her  letter,  quoted  by  Mr.  Lauder  Smith.

' '  Miss  Ridd's  illness  was  angina  pectoris,  which  used  to  come  on
occasionally  quite  suddenly  at  night.  There  was  no  expectation  of  it  just
then  in  either  of  their  minds,  and  she  had  not  had  it  for  some  time.


XIV.]


Voices  coinciding  with  Illness.


291


"Miss  King  said  that  this  was  the  only  time  she  had  ever  heard  a
hallucinatory  voice  ;  she  had  not  even  ever  imagined  that  she  heard  herself
called."

Miss  King  writes  later  : —

"I  do  not  remember  ever  dreaming  of  Miss  Ridd's  being  ill,  except
once  when  I  dreamed  of  her  in  a  rather  skeleton-like  condition,  but  as  she
changed  into  several  other  people  before  I  woke,  the  dream  only  impressed
itself  on  my  mind  by  its  grotesqueness.

"  I  had  been  from  time  to  time  a  little  anxious  about  Miss  Ridd's  con-
dition, but  was  not  so  at  that  time,  as  she  had  not  spoken  of  any  attacks,
and  I  believed  her  to  have  been  very  well  for  some  time."

It  may  be  added  that  Miss  Ridd  has  had  one  hallucinatory  experience —
which,  however,  contains  no  evidence  of  veridicality — relating  to  Miss
King.  She  felt  her  hand  clasped,  a  face  pressed  against  hers,  and  her
name  spoken  distinctly.

The  next  case  is  one  of  those  not  taken  account  of  in  our  statistics,
because  the  sounds  heard,  though  vocal,  were  not  articulate  (see
Chapter  II.,  p.  36).  But  the  impression  was  a  perfectly  definite  one,
and  unique  in  the  experience  of  the  percipient,  and  the  evidence  for  a
telepathic  origin  seems  strong.  It  seems,  therefore,  sufficiently  in-
teresting to  be  worth  printing  here,  though  excluded  from  the  Tables.

(105.  1.)  From  Miss  C.  Clark.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

"I  heard  someone  sobbing,  one  evening  last  August  (1888),  about
10  p.m.  It  was  in  the  house,  in  Dunbar,  Scotland,  as  I  was  preparing
to  go  to  bed.  Feeling  convinced  that  it  was  my  youngest  sister,  I  advised
another  sister  not  to  go  into  the  next  room,  whence  the  sounds  seemed
to  proceed.  After  waiting  with  me  for  a  few  minutes,  this  sister  went  into
the  dining-room,  and  returned  to  me  saying  that  our  youngest  sister  was
in  the  dining-room,  and  not  crying  at  all.  Then  I  at  once  thought  there
must  be  something  the  matter  with  my  greatest  friend,  a  girl  of  24,  then  in
Lincolnshire.  I  wrote  next  day,  asking  her  if  at  that  hour  on  the  previous
night  she  had  been  crying.  In  her  next  letter  she  said  yes  ;  she  was  suffer-
ing gi'eat  pain  with  toothache  just  at  that  time,  and  was  unable  to  restrain  a
few  sobs.

"I  felt  convinced  tliat  it  was  my  sister  whom  I  had  just  left  in  the
dining-room;  from  the  sound  of  the  sobs  I  knew  that  she  could  no  longer  be
there,  and  thought  she  must  have  left  that  room  and  gone  into  the  bedroom
adjoining  mine.  Just  after  I  heard  the  sobs,another  sister  came  into  my  room,
on  her  way  into  the  inner  bedroom.  I  told  her  not  to  go  there,  as  she  would
disturb  the  sister  who,  as  I  told  her,  was  crying. I  alone  had  heard  the  sobs.

"  This  has  been  the  only  similar  experience  I  have  had.

"Cecily  C.  Clark."

In  a  letter  to  Miss  Porter  (for  whom  the  case  was  collected).  Miss  Clark
enclosed  copies  of  portions  of  the  correspondence  which  had  passed  between


292  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


her  and  Miss  Mabel  Maughan,  the  friend  referred  to,  on  the  subject.  Miss
Maughan  is  the  sister  of  the  agent  in  the  experimental  case  No.  98.  13,
(see  p.  273;.  This  correspondence  is  printed  below.  Miss  Clark  says  also  : —
"  I  had  never  before  seen  or  Iieard  anything  of  the  kind,  and  have  not  done
so  since."

Miss  Maughan  writes  : —

Jxly  21st,  1889.

"  Dear  Miss  Porter, — You  asked  f(jr  some  account  of  my  sensations  on
the  night  on  which  my  friend  heard  me  crying  with  toothache.  My  sister
and  I  slept  together.  She  fell  asleep  very  soon  after  going  to  bed,  but  I  was
kept  awake  with  pain  in  my  teeth.  After  sitting  up  in  bed  applying  various
remedies,  none  of  wliich  did  me  any  good,  the  pain  became  so  intense  that
I  could  not  refrain  from  sobbing  for  a  short  time.  I  remember  perfectly
well  that,  with  the  exception  of  two  or  three  audible  sobs,  I  made  no  sound,
as  my  sister  had  gone  to  bed  very  tired,  and  I  was  anxious  not  to  disturb
her.  Not  till  I  fairly  broke  down  did  I  think  of  my  friend,  but  then  I
wished  intensely  that  she  were  with  me.

"  Mabel  Maughan."

Extracts  from  letters.
I. [From  Miss  Clark  to  Miss  Maughan.]

Dunbar,  Wednesday,  August  22nd,  1888,  9p.m.

"  Were  you  crying  on  Sunday  night  near  11  o'clock  ?  because  T  distinctly

heard  someone  crying,  and  sujjposed  it  was  H  in  the  next  room,  but

she  wasn't  there  at  all.  Then  I  thought  .  .  .  that  it  might  be
you . . .  "

Thnrsdaii,  August  23rd,  1888,  4.45  p.m.
[Continuation  of  letter  of  August  22nd,  not  posted  until  23rd. — F.P.]
"Thank  you  very  much  for  your  letter  just  come. I  am  so  sorry  your
face  is  sore  ; did  it  make  you  ci-y  on  Sunday  night  1 . , .  "

II.  [From  Miss  Maughan  to  Miss  Clark,  received  by  the  latter  on  August

23rd,  1888.]

E.  Kirkby  Vicarage,  Spilsby,  Tuesday  evening,  August  21st,  1888.
[Post-mark  Spilsby,  August  22nd,  1888.— F.  P.]
" . . . On  Sunday  we  went  to  see  Wroxham  Broad . . .  We
had  an  immense  amount  of  walking  to  do  altogether,  and  I  think  I  got  a
little  cold  in  my  face  in  the  morning,  and  all  night  I  suffered  with  it,  and
niy  face  is  swelled  still . . .  "

III.  [From  Miss  Maughan  to  Miss  Clark,  received  by  the  latter  August

26th,  1888.]

Thursday,  August  23rd,  11  p.m.
"  I  am  putting  bread  poultices  on  my  gums. I  have  never  had  such  a  huge
swelling  before,  and  it  won't  go  down. It  is  so  horribly  uncomfortable  .

Saturday  afternoon. — Thanks  for  letter.  Yes,  I  was  crying  on  Sunday
night — only  on  account  of  the  pain.  It  was  awful,  but  I  only  cried  quietly,
as  Edith  was  asleejj. . .  "


XIV.]


Other  Coincidences.


293


Mr.  Podmore  wi'ites:-  Fehrnanj  lOth,  1892.

"I  called  on  IVIiss  Clark  and  Miss  Ethel  Maughan  yesterday.  The
mention  of  '  next  day  '  in  the  original  narrative  as  the  date  of  Miss  Clark's
first  letter  is  a  mistake.  I  saw  all  the  letters  referred  to,  and  verified  the
extracts. The  experience  was  e'S'idently  vei'y  impressive  to  Miss  Clark."

Here,  as  in  the  last  case,  the  documentary  evidence  shows  that  the
experience  was  held  to  be  remarkable  before  the  coinciding  event  was
heai'd  of.

A  coincidence  between  a  hallucination  and  an  accident  to  the
supposed  agent  resembles  a  death- coincidence  in  the  definiteness  and
brief  duration  of  the  coinciding  event.  We  have  five  of  these  in  the
Census.  The  best  evidenced  of  the  five,  from  a  telepathic  point  of
view,  is  perhaps  No.  343.5,  which  will  be  found  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  141  ;  a  young  sailor  m  Australia  appeared  to  his
sister  in  England  within  twelve  hours  of  a  narrow  escape  from  drown-
ing, the  wet  appearance  of  the  phantasm  and  the  words  spoken
adding  to  the  force  of  the  coincidence.

Hallucinations  Coiiiciding  tvith  Emotional  States  oj  the  Agent.

It  would  of  course  be  ditiicult  to  classify  all  the  possible  kinds  of
coincidences,  and  we  may  say  generally  that,  besides  those  we  have
already  enumerated,  there  are  some  twenty  cases  in  the  Census  with
some  prima  facie  claim  to  be  regarded  as  telepathic  on  account  of
the  circumstances  of  the  supposed  agent  at  the  time  of  the  halluci-
nation. Four  of  these  seem  w^orth  quoting  here.  The  first  is  one  of
the  cases  about  which  there  is  contemporary  documentary  evidence ;  it
occurred  when  the  agent  was  in  mental  trouble  and  her  thoughts  were
strongly  directed  to  the  percipient.

(290.  3.)  From  Miss  L.  Caldecott.

February  Uth,  1890.

"  A  sensation  of  faint  glowing  light  in  the  darkest  corner  of  the  room
made  me  first  look  in  that  direction  (which  happened  to  be  next  the  door),
■and  I  then  became  aware  of  some  one  standing  there,  holding  her  hands
outstretched  as  if  in  appeal.  My  first  impression  was  that  it  was  my  sister,
and  I  said,  '  ^^^lat's  the  matter  ? '  but  instantly  saw  who  it  was — a  friend,
who  was  at  that  time  ui  Scotland.  I  felt  completely  rivetted,  but  though  !ny
heart  and  pulses  were  beating  unnaturally  fast,  neither  much  frightened  nor
surprised,  only  with  a  sort  of  impulse  to  get  up  and  go  after  the  figure,
which  I  could  not  move  to  do.  The  form  seemed  to  melt  away  mto  the  soft
glow,  which  then  also  died  out. It  was  about  half -past  ten  at  night. I  was

at  my  home  in  . The  date  I  am  unable  to  fix  nearer  than  that  it  was

either  August  or  September,  1887.

"I  was  perfectly  well.  I  was  reading  Carlyle's  Sartor  Eesartv.s  at  the
time. I  was  in  no  trouble  or  aiLxiety  of  any  kind. Age  about  26.


294  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


"  I  had  not  seen  my  friend  for  about  a  year.  I  wrote  to  her  the  day  after
this  happened,  but,  before  my  letter  reached  her,  received  one  in  which
she  told  me  of  a  great  family  trouble  that  was  causing  her  much  suffering,
and  saying  that  she  had  been  longing  for  me  to  help  her.  Another  letter  in
answer  to  mine  tlien  told  me  that  her  previous  letter  was  written  about  10. 30
on  the  night  I  saw  her,  and  that  she  had  lieen  wishing  for  my  presence  then
most  intensely. My  friend  died  very  shortly  afterwards.

"  No  other  persons  were  present  at  the  time.  n  «

'■  ^  L.  Caldecott.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  : —

December  2}kd,  1891.

"  I  called  on  Miss  L.  Caldecott  this  afternoon.  She  has  found  one  of  her
friend's  letters — the  one  in  answer  to  her  own  describing  the  apparition.
The  letter  is  dated  Augu.st  16th,  1885,  S(.i  that  Miss  Caldecott's  date  in
hei-  account  is  wrong.  Miss  Caldecott  read  me  out  the  part  bearing  on
the  subject,  and  I  wrote  it  down  from  her  dictation,  afterwards  reading  it
ovej'  to  her,  while  she  compared  it  with  the  t>riginal. It  ran  as  follows  : —

' '  '  Your  account  is  very  strange,  and  I  cannot  quite  make  up  my  mind
what  to  think  of  it.  If  it  had  not  been  tliat  on  that  very  Tuesday  night  I
really  was  thinking  of  you  very  much,  and  wishing  from  the  bottom  of  my
heart  that  I  could  get  at  you,  I  should  be  inclined  to  say  that  your
ajjparition  was  entirely  subjective,  and  that  you  imagined  you  saw  me.  But
if  there  is  any  connection  between  mind  and  mind,  why  should  it  not  be  so,
and  that  it  really  was  because  I  was  wishing  so  hard  I  could  be  with  you.
You  know  that  was  the  night  I  got  back.  I  unpacked  some  of  my  things,
and  then  began  to  write  to  you.  It  was  then  somewhere  between  11  and  12.
At  all  events,  I  remember  it  struck  12  some  time  after  I  got  into  bed.
.  .  .  .  Tell  me  anything  you  can  of  my  general  appearance,  and  so
forth.  If  you  saw  me  as  I  was  at  the  time  it  seems  fairly  conclusive  it  was.
my  thinking  of  you  caused  you  to  see  me,  and  not  indigestion  on  your  part,,
and  entirely  independent  of  me.'

"  It  will  be  seen  that  the  hour  named  is  different  from  that  mentioned  by
Miss  Caldecott  in  her  account — between  11  and  12  instead  of  between  10  and
11.  But  Miss  Caldecott  says  her  memory  is  bad,  and  I  think  she  has  no
inde]jendent  recollection  of  the  hour  any  more  than  of  the  day.  She  re-
members being  struck  with  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence  at  the  time.
And  the  sentence  in  the  above  letter  referring  to  the  hour  seems  to  indicate
that  her  friend  also  thought  the  hours  coincided.  It  reads  as  if  Miss  Caldecott
had  in  her  letter  named  a  time  between  11  and  12.

"I  asked  particularly  about  the  apj^earance.  The  corner  of  the  room
where  it  appeared  was  shaded  by  a  wardrobe.  Her  attention  was  caught
by  the  light,  which  made  her  look  up.  It  was  not  a  bright  light  like  a  fire,
but  it  seemed  to  radiate  out — glow  out.  Later,  she  said  it  was  the  sort  of
light  you  see  when  some  one  aiDproaches  along  a  dark  passage  with  a  candle.
She  saw  the  cornice  (I  am  not  sure  whether  of  wall  or  cupboard)  at  the
same  time.  The  face  and  hands  were  the  clearest  parts.  The  hands  were
held  out,  palms  upwards.  She  looked  as  Miss  Caldecott  was  accustomed
to  see  her,  but  she  did  not  notice  the  dress  particularly.  She  did  not  see
the  figure  clearly  at  all  below  the  knees. She  showed  me  the  sort  of


XIV.]


Other  Coincidences.


295


distance,  which  I  should  judge  to  be  about  10  feet.  The  feeling  of  her  heart
beating  fast  was  only  what  one  feels  after  anything  sudden  and  startling.
She  only  felt  it  after  the  figure  disappeared.  She  cannot  at  all  judge  of
the  duration  of  the  experience.

' '  She  has  on  two  other  occasions  seen  figures,  both  times  when  very  weak
after  an  illness  and  not  sufliciently  recovered  to  be  up.  When  she  saw  the
figure  described  in  her  answer  to  our  questions  she  was  remarkably  well,
and  had  just  been  taking  a  holiday,  which  she  had  enjoyed  very  much."

In  the  next  case,  the  coincidence  is  somewhat  similar,  except  that
the  emotion  is  due  to  imagined,  and  not  to  real  circumstances.

(41.  3.)  From  Mrs.  Malleson.

Highfield,  Haling  Park-road,  Croydon,  April  12th,  1889.

' '  What  I  am  about  to  relate  happened  in  the  autumn  of  187 4  or  1875,  I
cannot  remember  which,  as  we  spent  some  months  of  both  those  years  in
the  same  place  and  under  very  similar  circumstances.  We  were  living  in  a
small  house  close  upon  the  sea-shore,  in  a  somewhat  lonely  situation,
between  Littiehampton  and  the  village  of  Rustington.  My  husband  and
one  of  our  sons,  about  sixteen,  were  to  take  the  night  boat  from  Littie-
hampton and  cross  to  the  French  coast,  returning  in  a  few  days.  I  was  not
in  strong  health,  but  certainly  not  ill :  I  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  long
rides  on  horseback,  and  spending  hours  of  the  day  upon  the  shore.  .  .
With  no  cause  for  special  anxiety,  I  felt  a  little  lonely  and  depressed
at  the  thought  of  [my  husband's]  leaving  me,  and  of  our  being  parted
by  the  sea.  I  determined  to  go  to  bed  before  they  started.  .  .  .  Before
I  proceed  further,  I  wish  to  say  that  although  I  had  all  my  life  been  a
dreamer  of  very  vivid,  consecutive,  and  striking  dreams,  yet  I  was  not
subject  to  any  form  of  nightmare,  that  I  knew  nothing  of  a  half-waking
state,  but,  on  the  contrary,  was  always  conscious  of  a  thoroughly  defined
line  between  the  two  conditions  ;  and  that  I  had  never,  upon  any  occasion,
dreamed  of  being  where  I  actually  was.  I  mention  this  because  it  made
the  incident  I  am  about  to  relate  far  more  striking  to  me  at  the  time.  I
had  no  doubt  then,  and  I  have  never  had  any  since,  that  I  did  actually
awake  when  I  thought  I  awoke,  nor  was  I  conscious  of  any  farther  awakening.

"  I  had  slept  for  some  hours  when  I  was  suddenly  awakened  by  feeling
some  one  bending  ever  me.  I  was  conscious  of  lying  in  the  same  position  in
which  I  had  fallen  asleep.  My  room  was  dark,  yet  I  felt  no  doubt  that  it
was  my  husband.  I  felt  a  strange  thrill  and  a  vague  anxiety,  but  no  fear.  I
did  not  doubt  that  it  was  himself  in  bodily  presence,  and  yet  I  remember  a
strange  momentary  feeling  that  he  could  read  my  thoughts.  I  said,  '  Oh,
Willie,  you  have  come  back  ! '  I  put  out  my  arms  and  felt  his  coat.  He
answered,  'Yes  1  I  am  come  back.'  I  remember  that  the  tone  was  very
solenm  and  my  fears  were  aroused.  I  asked,  '  Has  anything  happened  ? '
he  replied  in  the  same  peculiar  low,  solemn  tone,  '  Yes  !  something  has
happened.'  Then  I  thought  of  the  boy  and  asked  eagerly,  '  Where  is
Eddy  ? '  There  was  no  answer,  and  after  a  moment's  pause  I  felt  that  I  was
alone. I  raised  myself  on  my  arm  and  endeavoured  to  penetrate  the  dark-


296  Report  on  the  Cens^is  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


ness.  I  looked  towards  the  door  ;  I  was  sure  there  was  no  one  in  the  room,
and  equally  sure  that  there  had  been  no  sound  or  stir  of  one  leaving  it.
Then  in  an  instant  came  the  conviction  that  it  was  not  in  his  ordinary  bodily
presence  that  he  had  been  there,  and  at  the  same  time  the  agonising  realisa-
tion that  it  was  himself  to  whom  something  had  happened,  although  I
reflected  that  he  could  not  have  been  drowned,  because  his  clothes  had  not
been  wet  to  my  touch.  I  struck  a  light  and  went  to  look  at  my  watch,  for
which  pui'pose  I  had  to  get  out  of  bed  ;  it  was  five  o'clock.  ...  I  re-
mained restless,  anxious,  and  miserable  until  Sunday  morning,  when  I
received  a  letter  from  my  husband,  my  vision  having  taken  place  on  the
morning  of  Friday.  When  my  husband  returned  I  told  him  of  my  vision.
He  was  vexed  that  I  had  been  so  much  troubled,  and  merely  said,  '  Well,
you  see  I  was  in  no  danger,  nothing  was  the  matter,  so  I  hope  you  will  never
believe  in  visions  or  presentiments  any  more  1 '  I  may  say  that  although
this  was  and  has  remained  my  only  vision,  I  was  and  am  apt  to  have  '  pre-
sentiments'  during  his  absences.

"K.  E.  Malleson."

Mr.  Malleson  writes  : —

Airril  22nd,  1889.

"My  wife  has  related  that  my  son  and  I  left  Littlehanipton  by  a  steam-
boat that  was  to  cross  in  the  night  to  Honfleur.  We  no  doubt  stayed  some
time  together  on  deck,  and  then  I  went  below  to  try  to  get  some  sleejj,  while
he  preferred  to  remain  in  the  fresh  air.  I  got  into  a  l)erth,  partly  undressed
myself,  and,  I  believe,  fell  asleep,  until  I  was  awakened  by  two  men  who
were  sitting  at  the  table  in  the  cabin,  talking.  Presently  they  rose  to  go  up
the  cabin  stairs,  and  I  said,  '  I  have  left  a  boy  of  mine  on  deck.  If  you  are
going  up,  would  you  mind  seeing  how  he  is  getting  on  ? '  They  said  they
would,  and  I  remained  quietly  in  my  berth  until  they  returned.  To  my
question  whether  they  had  seen  him,  they  replied,  '  No,  they  had  not  noticed
him  anywhere.'

"Not  long  after  this  my  imagination  began  to  work  upon  their  answer,
at  first  merely  as  a  sort  of  occupation  for  my  mind,  and  I  j^ictured  myself
searching  for  my  son  all  over  the  deck  in  vain,  and  questioning  the  sailors,
and  getting  to  hear  nothing  about  liim.  Then  my  mind  began  to  dwell  upon
the  supposition  that  I  should  never  see  or  hear  oi  my  dear  lad  again — but
this  only  as  a  supposition,  a  story,  as  it  were,  told  to  myself.  I  was
not  in  any  real  fear,  but  after  a  little  time  my  imagination  gained  greater
hold  of  me,  and  I  found  myself  pacing  woefully  along  the  lonely  sea  road  to
our  cottage  with  the  terrible  news  to  tell  my  wife  that  our  boy  was  gone —
was  lost — had  fallen  overboard,  no  doubt,  and  no  one  had  even  seen  or
heard  him.  The  story  had  now  taken  possession  of  me,  and  I  could  not
by  any  means  shake  myself  free  of  it.  That  solitary  walk — the  agony  of
the  interview  that  would  follow — the  thought  of  what  I  should  say — how
tell  the  awful  misfortune — what  she  would  say — how  look — what  answer
I  was  to  make  to  the  inevitable  question,  '  Where  is  Eddy ! '  all
this  was  acting  itself  l)efore  me,  and  my  pulses  violently  beating.
The  last  question  was  more  than  I  could  endure,  and  I  rose  and  went
on  deck,  tlius  putting  an  end  to  a  state  of  mind  perfectly  new  and  strange  to
me,  which  I  have  never  experienced  before  or  since. True,  for  a  time  I


XIV.]  Other  Coincidences.  297

■could  not  find  Eddy  anywhere,  Ijut  liefore  I  had  become  seriously  uneasy  I
discovered  him  snugly  hidden  away  under  a  great  sheet  of  tarpaulin.  I
don't  remember  looking  at  my  watch,  but  it  was  daylight,  and  we  remained
on  deck  a  couple  of  hours  or  more  before  getting  in  to  Honfleur  to  breakfast.

"When  my  wife  told  me  on  our  return  to  Littlehampton  how  I  had
appeared  to  her,  I  refrained  at  the  time  from  telling  her  my  half  of  the
experience.  She  was  not  strong,  and  I  feared  f<jr  her  the  excitement  of  so
strange  a  corroboration  of  her  vision.  ^  y^^^^ Mallkson  "

Mrs.  Malleson  says  that  she  has  on  many  occasions  seen  "quite  clearly
and  for  a  considerable  time  "  apparitions  of  persons  who  were  elsewhere,  but
only  when  she  was  "either  suffering  in  health  or  from  anxiety  of  mind,"
except  on  one  occasion,  when,  being  "  perfectly  well,"  she  saw  an  apparition
of  a  young  lady  who  was  staying  in  the  house  walking  into  a  room  in  front
of  her. She  followed,  and  found  the  room  empty.

In  cases  such  as  both  of  those  last  quoted,  it  is,  of  course,  difficult  to
judge  to  what  extent  the  agent's  condition  was  exceptional;  and,  in  the
second,  there  is  the  additional  doubt  as  to  whether  the  experience
might  not  have  been  due  simply  to  the  percipient's  state  of  mind.  But
those  who  think  that  the  fact  of  telepathy  is  proved,  will  feel  little
doubt  that  these  two  cases  are  examples  of  it.


Hallucination  correspond i7ig  to  the  Agent's  Tlioughts.

In  the  next  case,  the  coincidence  is  as  definite  and  unmistakable  as
could  be  desired,  and  any  doubt  as  to  the  telepathic  causation  is  of  a
different  nature.

■  (31.  2.)  From  Miss  S.  Mallet.

25,  Highbury  New  Park,  N.,  May,  1889.
The  collector,  Miss  A.  V.  Mallet,  writes: —

"My  sister  Sophia  Mallet  had  written  No  when  I  reminded  her  of  the
following  incident,  and  she  changed  her  No  into  Yes.  It  occurred  on
December  12th,  188G  ;  she  had  gone  through  a  surgical  operation  under
chloroform  and  was  just  recovering  from  the  effects  ;  our  own  physician,  an
old  and  intimate  friend,  was  standing  by  her  bed  feeling  her  pulse,  when  she
thought  she  heard  him  say,  '  How  A.  is  altered  ;  he  used  to  be  so  handsome
and  now  he  is  quite  a  fat  fellow. '  It  struck  her  as  a  very  strange  thing  for
him  to  say.  When  he  had  left  the  room  she  said  to  the  imrse,  '  What  made
Dr.  H.  speak  of  Mr.  A.?'  'He  did  not,  ma'am.'  'Oh,  yes,  he  did,  and
said  he  was  become  quite  a  fat  fellow.'  The  nurse  looked  at  our  own  maid,
who  was  also  standing  by  the  bed,  and  who  said,  '  He  said  you  were  going
on  all  right,  nothing  else.'

"  Now,  they  did  not  know  it,  but  Mr.  and  Mrs.  A.  had  called  just  as  the
surgeons  were  leaving  the  house  ;  they  came  to  me  in  the  di-awing-room.
Dr.  H.  left  them  with  me  to  go  up  and  see  my  sister  ;  when  he  came  down


298


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


after  they  were  gone  lie  used  the  identical  words  to  me  about  Mr.  A.  which
my  sister  thought  he  had  said  to  her  ;  I  c<in  only  sujjpose  that  the  thought
was  passing  through  his  mind  while  he  had  his  fingers  on  her  pulse,  and
that,  her  nerves  being  in  an  abnormal  state,  the  impression  was  conveyed  to
her  mind,  and  it  seemed  to  her  that  she  heard  him  say  the  words.

"A.  V.  Mallet.

"  Sophia  Mallet."

Miss  A.  V.  Mallet  explains  that  she  and  her  sister  drew  up  the  account
together,  the  latter  adding  her  signature  to  certify  that  it  was  correct.  No
notes  were  made  at  the  time. She  writes  later  : —

May  2,1st,  1889.

"I  was  in  the  drawing-room  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  A.  and  Dr.  H.  when,
my  sister  asked  the  nurse  and  maid.  I  did  not  hear  of  the  occurrence  till
the  next  day,  as  I  was  only  allowed  to  see  my  sister  for  a  minute  or  two  the
first  evening.  The  nurse  and  maid  were  both  repeatedly  questioned,  and
never  varied  in  their  account.  The  whole  thing  was  the  subject  of  dis-
cussion amongst  us  all  and  several  of  our  intimate  friends  for  some  weeks.
The  nurse  we  have  never  seen  or  heard  of  since  she  left,  three  weeks  after
the  operation.  I  do  not  even  remember  her  name.  Our  maid  left  vis  a  year
ago  to  join  some  relatives  in  America.  We  have  no  means  of  tracing  either
of  them.  My  sister  and  I  were  both  struck  by  the  expression  '  fat  fellow.'
If  Dr.  H.  had  said  'Mr.  A.  has  grown  so  stout'  it  would  not  have  im-
pressed us  nearly  so  much."

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  : —

December  3rd,  1891.
' '  I  have  j  ust  returned  from  calling  on  the  Misses  Mallet.  Miss  Sophia
Maliet  was  still  more  or  less  under  the  influence  of  the  chloroform  when  her
experience  occurred,  and  in  a  somewhat  dazed  condition.  The  only  hypothesis
she  can  suggest  other  than  the  telepathic  is  hypertesthesia,  viz.,  that  she  really
only  heard  the  words  when  he  said  them  to  her  sister  a  few  minutes  later  down-
stairs. That  this  doubt  should  be  possible  shows  that  her  ideas  about  it  are  not
quite  clear  ;  but  she  distinctly  thinks  she  heard  the  words  while  Dr.  H.'s  hand
was  on  her  pulse.  They  sounded  far  off.  The  room  where  she  was  is  not
over  the  drawing-room,  where  the  words  were  actually  spoken,  and  I  was
informed  that  it  was  difhcult  to  hear  the  piano  from  one  to  the  other.  Miss
S  .  Mallet  does  not  seem  to  remember  hearing  the  real  words  spoken  by  the
doctor  in  her  room  about  her  being  all  right.  She  had  been  under  chloroform
for  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  Tlie  matter  was  a  good  deal  discussed
and  inquired  into  at  the  time,  so  that  I  should  think  Miss  A.  V.  Mallet's
impression  about  it  is  correct,  and  that  she  is  a  more  '  first-hand  '  witness
than  her  sister,  owing  to  the  dazed  condition  of  the  latter."

This  case  is  interesting  as  a  possible  example  of  the  eflFect  of  drugs
in  heightening  the  telepathic  faculty.  Tliat  there  was  either  hyperses-
thesia  or  thought-reading  seems  clear,  and  that  the  phenomenon  was
partly  due  to  the  effect  of  the  chloroform  seems  also  certain.  It  is
worth  noting  that  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  hypnotic  state
(which  the  effect  of  chloroform  and  other  drugs  occasionally  resembles


XIV.]


Reciprocal  Telepathic  Impressions.


299


in  the  suggestibility  induced  i)  is  favourable  to  thought-transference
and  in  some  cases  to  hypertesthesia.'-

Reciprocal  Telej)athic  Impressions.

The  next  case  is  a  possible  example  of  a  "recipi'ocal"  case,  in  which,
as  defined  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  153,  each  of  the  twa
persons  concerned  appears  to  be  receiving  a  telepathic  impulse  from
the  other,  so  that  each  is  at  once  agent  and  percipient.  The  indi-
cations of  reciprocality  are,  however,  only  slight,  since  there  is  no

certainty  that  Miss  's  dream  gave  her  any  information  as  to  Mr.

Evans'  condition  at  the  time,  nor  is  it  clear  that  it  was  exactly
contemporaneous.  The  evidence  that  his  experience  was  not  purely
subjective  depends  on  the  apparition  presenting  a  true  feature  unknown
to  him  (the  silver  cross),  and  is  stieugthened  by  the  fact  that
Miss  's  thoughts  wei'e  occupied  with  him  that  afternoon.

(78.  16.)  From  the  Rev.  C.  L.  Evans.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889).

Shiresliead  Vicarage,  Forton,  Garstang,  Lanes.

"  Two  years  ago  I  liad  occasion  to  undergo  a  course  of  magnetism,  under

the  treatment  of  Miss  . I  was  under  her  treatment  for  six  weeks,  and

derived  considerable  benefit  from  her  treatment.  A  warm  friendship  sprang
up  between  us,  as  she  had  wonderfully  improved  my  sight.  I  went  up  to
St.  Edmund  Hall,  Oxford,  at  the  commencement  of  the  October  term,  as-
my  eyes  were  so  much  stronger.  One  afternoon,  as  I  had  just  come  in  fronr
the  river,  being  rather  tired,  I  sat  down  for  a  minute  before  I  changed,  when,
to  my  gTeat  surprise,  the  door  opened,  and  Miss  appeared  to  walk  in.

"  She  was  looking  rather  pale  at  the  time,  and  looked  mtently  at  me  for-
about  a  minute,  then  left  the  room  as  slowly  as  she  had  walked  in.  I  was
much  alarmed,  as  I  fancied  that  something  must  have  hapjjened  to  her,  and

I  immediately  sat  down  and  wrote  off  two  letters,  one  to  Miss  ,  askmg-

if  she  was  well,  and  another  to  my  mother,  telling  her  of  the  strange  occur-
rence. The  next  day  I  had  back  the  two  repUes. My  mother  said  that  on

that  very  afternoon  she  had  called  on  Miss  ,  and  naturally  they  had  been,

discussmg  my  case. She  said  that  my  description  of  Miss  's  dress,  &c.,'

was  perfectly  accurate. I  then  read  Miss  's  note. She  stated  that  my

1  See  Dr.  von  Schreuk-Notzing,  Die  Bedcutv.mi  narcotischer  Mittel  fur  den
Hi.'jmotismns,  in  the  Schriften  der  tresellschaft  fiirpsi/chologische  Forschung,  Heft.  I.,
Leipzig-,  1891.

-  It  is  possible  that  in  hypnotism  there  may  be  a  correlated  heightening  of  the
psychical  with  the  physical  sensory  faculties,  though  the  former  maj'  not  in  any  way
directly  depend  on  the  latter.  Supposing  that  a  certain  mind  is  constantly  receiving-
telepathic  impulses,  most  or  all  of  which,  as  a  general  rule,  remain  latent  or  .subli-
minal, the  same  conditions  which  produce  hyperaesthesia  of  the  senses  maj'  tend  to-
translate  the  subliminal  into  supraliminal  percepts.


300  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.

mother  had  called,  and  had  left  at  about  half-past  four,  she  then  had  lain
down  for  a  few  minutes,  and  was  thinking  and  wishing  to  see  me.  She  had
a  distinct  impression  that  she  saw  me  during  this  sleep,  or  trance,  but  when
she  awoke  the  impression  was  not  very  vivid.  The  time  exactly  coincided,
and  she  said  that  my  desciiption  of  her  was  very  accurate.  At  the  time  that
she  appeared  to  me  I  was  not  thinking  in  the  least  of  her.

"Charles  Lloyd  Evans."

Mr.  Podmore  writes  : —

April  2btK  1892.

"  I  called  on  Mr.  Evans  on  the  20th  instant,  and  had  a  long  conversation
with  him.

"The  occurrence  took  place  in  November,  1887.  It  would  be  about
4.15  p.m.  He  was  resting  in  his  chair — in  boating  clothes — with  the  door
ajar. He  heard  a  knock  or  sound  as  of  someone  entering  ;  turned  round  and

saw  Miss  come  into  the  room  and  walk  towards  him. She  was  dressed

in  red  bodice  and  dark  silk  skiit  (a  not  unfamiliar  dress),  but  with  a  silver
filigree  cross  hanging  from  a  chain  round  hei'  neck,  which  he  had  never  seen

before.  He  learnt  afterwards  that  the  cross  had  been  given  by  General-

only  a  few  days  before  the  incident.  The  figure  looked  him  straight  in  tlie
face — then  seemed  to  fade  away  bit  by  bit.  He  was  himself  perfectly  well,
and  not  a  bit  sleepy.

"  He  has  had  no  other  hallucinati(jns. His  age  at  the  time  was  20."

Mr.  Podmore  wrote  to  Mr.  Evans'  mother  asking  for  her  coiToboration
of  the  incidents  described  by  her  son,  and  she  rejjlied  : —

April  27th,  1892.

"In  reply  to  the  questions  you  asked  me  about  the  apparition  of  Miss

 to  my  son,  when  at  Oxford,  I  can  fully  verify  his  statement. He  wrote

to  me  the  same  afternoon,  begging  me  to  call  upon  Miss  and  see  if  she

was  ill,  detailing  me  the  account  of  what  he  had  seen,  and  also  describing

her  dress  minutely  and  the  cross  she  was  wearing. I  called  upon  Miss

the  following  day,  and  read  her  my  son's  letter,  giving  the  hour  at  which  she
had  appeared  to  liim.  She  told  me  that  she  had  not  been  feeling  well,  and
was  lying  down  on  the  couch  thinking,  too,  of  my  son,  and  that  she  went  off
into  a  sort  of  trance,  and  she  saw  him  distinctly  looking  at  her  and  he  was
very  pale.  .  .  .  [She]  told  me  that  my  son  had  at  once  written  to  her,
fearing  that  she  nmst  be  ill,  and  told  her  the  circumstances  under  which  she
appeared  to  him.  When  I  saw  Miss  — —  she  was  then  wearing  the  same
dress  and  filigree  cross  which  Charlie  had  described  to  me  in  his  letter,  and
which  he  had  never  seen  her  wearing  before.

"  Mary  E.  Evans."

Mr.  Podmore  afterwards  saw  Miss  ,  and  gives  the  following  account

■of  his  interview  : —

July  17t.h,  1892.

"I  called  on  Miss  this  afternoon.

' '  Her  account  of  tlie  matter  is  that  Mrs.  Evans  (the  percipient's  mother)
called  on  her  on  the  afternoon  of  the  vision,  and  talked  much  about  her  son.

After  Mrs.  Evans  left — probably  about  5.30  p.m. — Miss  ,  as  usual,  lay

down  to  sleep  for  a  few  minutes,  and  woke  about  6  p.m.  with  the  recollection


XIV.]


Characteristics  of  Veridical  Cases.


301


of  having  seen  Mr.  C.  L.  Evans.  She  can  recall  no  details  of  appearance — •
merely  the  recollection  of  having  been  in  the  same  room  with  him.  The  next
day  she  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  C.  L.  Evans  telling  of  his  vision,  and  on

the  same  day  another  visit  from  his  mother. Miss  was  wearing  the  dress

and  filigree  cross  described.  The  ci-oss,  as  stated,  had  been  given  to  her
only  a  few  days  before.

"  She  is  not  sure  of  the  time  at  which  her  vision  or  dream  occurred.
It  may  have  been  earlier  than  6  p.m.,  her  hours  being  very  irregular.
She  had  compared  notes  with  Mr.  Evans,  and  was  under  the  impression
that  their  experiences  coincided.  But  I  think  that  her  first  statement —
6  p.m. — is  probably  correct.  If  so,  her  dream  would  have  come  one  and
a-half  to  two  hours  after  Mr.  Evans'  vision."

"We  have  in  the  Census  one  other  seemingly  reciprocal  case,  but  we
have  not  been  able  to  obtain  enough  information  about  it  to  make  it
worth  considering  evidentially.  Cases  which  are  clearly  reciprocal
seem  to  be  very  rare,  but  if  established,  they  would  be  of  great
theoretic  importance  as  throwing  light  on  the  nature  of  telepathy.
For,  especially  when  they  contain  any  element  of  what  Mr.  Gurney
calls  "  telepathic  clairvoyance,"  they  seem  to  show — using  his  words —
"  either  that  A's  power  to  act  abnormally  in  a  certain  direction  has
involved  an  abnormal  extension  of  his  own  susce2'>tibility  in  the  same
direction  ;  or  else  that  some  independently-caused  extension  of  his  own
susceptibility  has  involved  the  power  to  act  abnormally."  {Phantasms
of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  162).

It  will  be  convenient,  before  proceeding  to  the  next  class  of
veridical  hallucinations,  to  consider  what  characteristics,  if  any,  dis-
tinguish those  we  have  been  discussing  from  hallucinations  in  general.
The  telepathic  hypothesis  does  not  require  that  there  should  be  any
difference.  On  the  contrary,  if  all  hallucinations  are  sensory  manifes-
tations of  conscious  or  subconscious  ideas,  all  that  telepathy  has  to  do
is  to  introduce  the  idea  ;  and  there  is  no  reason  d  priori  why  the
telepathically  received  ideas  should  externalise  themselves  as  sensory
hallucinations  either  more  often  in  proportion  than  ideas  which  arise
spontaneously,  or  in  a  different  manner.  Experience,  however,  gives
some  ground  for  thinking  that  telepathic  ideas  do  project  themselves
as  hallucinations  more  readily  than  others  ;  at  least,  this  seems  to  be
the  most  natural  explanation  of  the  number  of  telepathic  hallucina-
tions as  compared  to  the  number  of  telepathic  ideas  rising  above  the
threshold  of  consciousness  without  producing  sensory  hallucinations.
K^o  doubt,  the  non-hallucinatory  impressions, — e.g.  of  a  dying  person,
— would  not,  unless  unusually  vivid,  excite  special  attention,  but
would  be  lost  in  the  general  mass  of  ideas  that  pass  through  the  mind.
Still,  there  are  instances  of  feelings,  impressions,  and  impulses  to
action,  which  there  is  strong  ground  for  attributing  to  a  telepathic


802  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


oi'igin  (see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  232 — -294),  and  the
student  of  telepathy  can  hardly  fail  to  be  sui'prised  that  in  spontaneous
cases  these  are  not  more  numerous  in  proportion  to  the  hallucinations,
unless  the  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  a  special  tendency  of  tele-
pathic ideas  to  produce  hallucinations.

Such  a  tendency  would  naturally  be  accompanied  by  a  greater  force
and  insistency  on  the  average  in  the  hallucinations  produced,  and  we
believe  that  there  is  some  indication  of  such  a  greater  insistency  in  the
coincidental  cases.  One  indication  is  the  larger  proportion  of  coinci-
dental cases  in  which  some  kind  of  note  has  been  made  of  the  occur-
rence before  the  coincidental  nature  of  it  was  known  (see  p.  221).

The  larger  proportion  of  bisensory  hallucinations  among  coinci-
dental cases  is  probably  another  indication.  In  estimating  the  number
of  bisensory  cases,  it  will  be  best  to  omit  those  which  are  only  classed
as  bisensory  because  some  non-vocal  sound  accompanied  the  visual  or
tactile  hallucinations ;  since  it  is  often  doubtful  whether  these  sounds
were  not  real,  so  that  to  count  them  as  hallucinatory  is  apt  to  be  mis-
leading. From  Table  II.  we  see  that  the  hallucinations  described  at
first-hand,  in  which  more  than  one  sense  was  affected,  amount  to  about
9 '5  per  cent,  of  all  the  hallucinations.  But  among  the  180  coinci-
dental cases  which  we  have  discussed  in  this  and  the  two  preceding
Chapters,  more  than  one  sense  was  affected  in  14'5  per  cent.  If  we
limit  ourselves  to  the  80  visual  death-coincidences,  17 '5  per  cent,  is
the  number  which  are  bisensory  or  trisensory,  while  in  the  381
apparitions  of  living  persons  with  which  these  are  to  be  compared,  only
12  per  cent,  are  bisensory  or  trisensory.^  These  differences  are  very
marked,  and  the  conclusion  that  a  relative  preponderance  of  bisensory
cases  is  to  be  found  among  the  telepathic  ones  is  in  accordance  with
that  arrived  at  by  Mr.  Gurney  on  the  basis  of  his  collections  of  tele-
pathic and  purely  subjective  hallucinations  (see  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  Vol II.,  pp.  23,  24).


Since  bisensory  cases  are  more  impressive,  and  therefore  presumably  better  re-
membered than  other  subjective  cases,  we  may  assume  that  the  real  proportion  of  the
bisensory  cases  that  are  not  coincidental  to  the  whole  number  of  non-coincidental
cases  will  be  consider.ably  exaggerated  in  our  returns  :  whereas  we  have  agreed  that
we  cannot  assume  any  material  effect  of  forgetf  iilness  in  estimating  the  real  number  of
telepathic  hallucinations,  whether  bisensory  or  not.  Henee  the  real  ratio  of  the
bisensory  telepathic  eases  to  those  which  are  not  bisensory,  must  be  assumed  to  exceed
the  general  ratio  of  bisensory  to  non-bisensory  cases,  by  a  difference  much  greater  than
that  shown  in  our  statistics.


XV.]


Collective  Hallucinations.


303


Chapter  XV.

COLLECTIVE  HALLUCINATIONS.

Hallucinations  simultaneously  experienced  by  two  or  more  per-
cipients— which  we  distinguish  as  "collective  " — are  obviously  of  great
interest  in  the  general  consideration  of  the  cause  and  nature  of
hallucinations,  even  if  the  collectivity  is  due  to  transference  from  one
percipient  to  another  by  suggestion  through  the  senses.  But  the
interest  becomes  still  greater  if,  this  explanation  being  excluded,  we
are  driven  to  suppose,  either  that  the  transference  between  the  per-
cipients has  been  effected  by  purely  mental  suggestion,  or  that  the
hallucinations  have  been  simultaneously  produced  in  both  percipients
by  some  supernormal  cause.  We  have  therefore  examined  this  part  of
our  evidence  with  special  attention.

At  fii'st  sight,  the  quantity  of  this  kind  of  evidence  appeared  to  be
ample — at  any  I'ate  so  far  as  visual  hallucinations  are  concerned.  The
Census  contains  95  instances,  reported  to  us  at  first-hand  by  at  least
one  percipient,  of  figures  or  objects  believed  to  have  been  hallucinatory
and  to  have  been  simultaneously  seen  by  two  or  more  persons.  To
compare  with  these  we  have  992  instances  of  unshared  visual  hallu-
cinations reported  at  first-hand,  in  188  of  which  the  percipient  states
that  he  had  a  waking  companion.  ^

The  auditory  collective  cases  reported  are  less  numerous  than  the
visual,  and  bear  a  smaller  ratio  to  the  whole  number  of  auditory  cases.
There  are,  however,  34  cases  in  which  two  or  more  percipients  are  said
to  have  heard  approximately  the  same  hallucinatory  voice  simul-
taneously, in  5  of  which  the  percipients  were  in  diiferent  rooms.  The
number  of  unshared  auditory  hallucinations  reported  at  first-hand  is
459,  in  60  of  which  the  percipient  states  that  he  had  a  waking  com-
panion.

Collective  cases  where  the  sense  of  touch  is  affected  ai'e — as  might
be  expected — rare.  Indeed  we  have  only  two  first-hand  cases  that
could  possibly  be  placed  in  this  class,  and  in  one  of  them  the  experience
is  too  trivial  and  vague  to  be  worth  considering.  The  other  is  an  in-
teresting case,  which  we  have  given  in  the  discussion  on  physical
effects  connected  with  hallucinations  (see  p.  204).  But  the  visual  and
auditory  cases,  taken  together,  appeared  at  first  sight  to  constitute  a
strong  body  of  evidence  for  collectivity.

1  The  numbers  given  in  this  and  the  following  paragraph  apparently  disagree  with
the  Tables,  since  in  some  of  the  collective  cases  more  than  one  percipient  is  included
in  the  Census,  and  in  the  Tables  each  percipient  in  the  Census  is  reckoned  separately.
There  is  no  case  in  which  two  percipients  both  see  an  apparition  and  at  the  same  time
hear  a  voice,  so  that  the  numbers  given  of  visual  and  of  auditory  collective  cases  are
mutually  exclusive.


304  Report  on  the  Census  of  Halkocinations.  [chap.


A  closer  inspection,  however,  showed  us  that  important  deductions
had  to  be  made  from  this  evidence  :  since  there  are  special  reasons  for
doubting  either  the  collective  or  the  hallucinatory  character  of  a  con-
siderable number  of  the  experiences.

First  as  I'egards  the  collective  character.  We  are  so  accustomed  in
ordinary  life  to  find  our  visual  and  auditory  exjieriences  shared  by^
others,  that  the  assumption  of  their  having  been  so  shared  on  any  par-
ticular occasion  is  probably  liable  to  be  made — at  the  time  or  after-
wards— on  insufficient  grounds.  At  any  rate  we  have  found  in  a  few
cases  that  a  supposed  second  percipient,  when  applied  to,  has  no  recol-
lection of  the  incident ;  which  renders  it  doubtful  what  his  impression
was  at  the  time.  Second-hand  evidence  for  collectivity  cannot  there-
fore be  ranked  above  second-hand  evidence  for  other  questions  con-
nected with  hallucinations  :  and  it  is  only  in  43  out  of  the  95  visual
cases  reported  as  collective  that  we  have  been  able  to  obtain  evidence
of  the  sharing  of  the  experience,  beyond  the  recollection  of  one  per-
cipient— partly  because  the  second  percipient  is  often  dead  or  has  been
lost  sight  of.

But,  granting  that  the  perception  was  collective,  there  may  still  be
room  for  doubt  as  to  whether  it  was  really  hallucinatory.  "We  have
already  ^  given  reasons  for  thinking  generally  that  some  of  the  ex-
periences counted  in  our  Tables  were  mistakenly  reported  as  hallucina-
toiy,  and  further  that  this  mistake  is  especially  likely  to  be  made  out
of  doors.  The  fact,  therefore,  that  over  44  per  cent,  of  the  collective
experiences  occurred  out  of  doors,  and  only  about  15  per  cent,  of  those
that  were  unshared,  renders  it  probable  that  proportionally  more  of  the
former  have  been  erroneously  regarded  by  the  percipient  as  hallucina-
tory :  and  this  probability  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  a  larger
proportion  of  out-door  cases  are  collective,  than  of  indoor  cases  in
which  the  percipient  had  a  waking  companion.-  The  presumption  thus
afforded  is  confirmed  by  an  examination  of  the  evidence  in  particular
cases.  If  we  go  through  the  realistic  human  apparitions  that  occurred
when  the  percipient  was  up,  asking  ourselves  this  question — "  If  the
facts  are  correctly  stated,  is  it  certain  that  the  figure  seen  was  not  a
real  human  being?" — we  find  that  we  answer  "No"  in  a  considerably
larger  proportion  (nearly  double)  of  collective  cases  than  of  others,  and
this  though  we  leave  entirely  out  of  consideration  the  collective
cliai-acter  itself.  Of  course,  an  estimate  of  this  kind  h  MS)  cLS  8b  statistical
statement,  only  a  relative  value. A  judgment  so  formed  is  sure  to

1  See  Chapter  II.,  p.  37  ;  Chapter  V.,  p.  98.

-Taking  only  those  ca.ses  where  the  percipient  had  a  waking  companion,  we  find
tliat,  out  of  1!)4  where  he  wa.s  indoors,  5.3  or  27  per  cent,  are  said  to  have  been
collective ;  and  out  of  88  where  he  was  out  of  doors.  42  or  nearly  48  per  cent,  are  said
to  liave  been  collective. In  one  case,  it  is  not  stated  whether  he  was  indoors  or  not.


XV.]


Collective  Hallucinations.


305


depend  largely  on  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  person  judging,  and  moi'e-
over  fuller  or  better  given  evidence  might  alter  the  aspect  of  the  case.
There  seems,  however,  no  reason  why,  if  the  same  person  judges  of  both
the  collective  and  non-collective  cases,  the  same  errors  of  judgment
should  not  affect  both  classes  equally ;  so  that  this  relative  estimate
may  be  taken  as  fairly  trustworthy.  In  view  of  these  considerations,
we  think  that  any  conclusions  about  collective  hallucinations  must  rest
upon  individual  cases  carefully  scrutinised,  and  not  on  the  alleged
numbers,  respecting  which  we  cannot  regard  ourselves  as  having
sufficiently  accurate  information.  "We  shall,  therefore,  only  quote
here  some  of  those  which  seem  to  be  evidentially  the  best  cases.

Collective  Visual  Hallucinations.

Before  we  proceed  to  give  fresh  narratives,  we  may  remind  the
reader  that  we  have  already  come  across  three  cases  believed  to
have  been  collective  among  the  death-coincidences.  In  the  first  of
these,  No.  147.  23,  p.  218,  the  evidence  of  the  second  percipient  is
unobtainable,  but  if  there  is  no  exaggeration,  the  description  makes  it
difficult  to  suppose  that  there  was  any  mistake  as  to  the  complete  and
independent  recognition  of  the  figure  by  both  percipients.  In  the
other  two  cases  (Nos.  422.  25,  p.  227,  and  418.  4,  p.  230)  the  account  is
signed  by  three  and  two  percipients  respectively,  and  in  the  second  we
have  ascertained  that  the  percipients  l)elieve  themselves  to  have  seen
the  figure  independently — that  is,  without  verbal  suggestion  by  one  to
the  other.

In  the  case  we  have  next  to  quote,  there  is — apart  from  the
collectivity — no  element  of  coincidence.  It  seems  a  clear  case  of
collective  hallucination,  the  disappearance  of  the  cat  proving  it  to
have  been  hallucinatory.

(535.  2  and  3.) From  Mrs.  Greiffenberg  and  Mrs.  Erni-Greiffenberg.

The  collector,  Mr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  tells  us  that  he  heard  the  story  in
October,  1890,  from  the  two  percipients.  The  following  account  was  put
together  by  him  from  an  account  (which  he  also  sent  us)  written  by  Mrs.
Erni-GreifFenberg,  and  various  conversations  which  he  had  with  both  ladies
on  the  subject.  He  afterwards  obtained  their  signatures  to  it.  Neither  of
them  has  had  any  other  hallucinatory  experience.

December  Uth,  1890.
' '  In  the  beginning  of  the  summer  of  1884  we  were  sitting  at  dinner  at
home  as  usual,  in  the  middle  of  the  day.  In  the  midst  of  the  conversation
I  noticed  my  mother  suddenly  looking  down  at  something  beneath  the  table.
I  inquired  whether  she  had  dropped  anything,  and  received  the  answer,
'  No,  but  I  wonder  how  that  cat  can  have  got  into  the  room  ? '  Looking
underneath  the  table,  I  was  surprised  to  see  a  large  white  Angora  cat  beside

X


306  Report  on  the  Census  of  Halhicioiations.  [chap.


my  mother's  chair.  We  botli  got  up,  and  I  opened  the  door  to  let  the  cat
out.  She  marched  round  the  table,  went  noiselessly  out  of  the  door,  and
when  about  half  way  down  the  passage  turned  round  and  faced  us.  For  a
short  time  she  regularly  stared  at  us  with  her  green  eyes,  and  then  she  dis-
solved away,  like  a  mist,  under  our  eyes.

"  Even  apart  from  the  mode  of  her  disappearance,  we  felt  convinced  that
the  cat  could  not  have  been  a  real  one,  as  we  neither  had  one  of  our  own,
nor  knew  of  any  that  would  answer  to  the  description  in  the  place,  and  so
this  appearance  made  an  unjDleasant  imj^ression  upon  us.

' '  This  impression  was,  however,  greatly  enhanced  by  what  happened  in
the  following  year,  1885,  when  we  were  staying  in  Leipzig  with  my  married
sister  (the  daughter  of  Mrs.  Greifienbei'g).  We  had  come  home  one  after-
noon from  a  walk,  when,  on  oijening  the  door  of  the  flat,  we  were  met  in
the  hall  by  the  same  white  cat.  It  jjroceeded  down  the  passage  in  front  of
us,  and  looked  at  us  with  the  same  melancholy  gaze.  When  it  got  to  the
door  of  the  cellar  (which  was  locked),  it  again  dissolved  into  nothing.

' '  On  this  occasion  also  it  was  first  seen  by  my  mother,  and  we  were  both
impressed  by  the  uncanny  and  gruesome  character  of  the  appearance.  In
this  case,  also,  the  cat  could  not  have  been  a  real  one,  as  there  was  no  such
cat  in  the  neighbourhood.

(Signed) "Mrs.  Erni-Gkeiffenberg.
"Mrs.  Greiffenberg. ' '

In  the  following  case  there  was  no  vanishing,  and  the  figure  left  the
field  of  view  as  a  real  figure  would  have  done,  but  it  was  clearly
recognised  by  both  percipients,  and  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  the
real  person  came  into  the  church  and  forgot  all  about  it.  It  is  on  this
that  the  evidence  for  the  hallucinatory  character  of  the  experience
depends.

(647.  7.)  From  Miss  C.  J.  E.

March,  1892.

"I  was  playing  the  harmonium  in  the  church  of at  about  4  p.m.,

August,  1889,  when  I  saw  my  eldest  sister  walk  up  the  church  towards  the
chancel  with  a  roll  of  papers  under  her  arm.  When  I  looked  up  again  she
had  disappeared,  and  I  thought  she  had  just  come  in  for  a  few  minutes  and
gone  out  again  ;  but  wlien  I  asked  her  afterwards  what  she  wanted  in  the
church,  she  was  much  sui'prised,  and  told  me  she  had  been  in  the  rectory
liljrary  all  the  afternoon,  studying  genealogical  tables.  I  am  not  sure  of  the
exact  date,  but  it  was  about  the  time  I  mention.

' '  I  was  practising  on  the  harmonium  ;  as  far  as  I  remember  I  was  quite
well  and  not  worried  about  anything.  I  was  eighteen  years  old.  A  younger
sister  was  the  only  other  person  in  the  church  with  me  at  the  time.  She
was  standing  beside  me  on  an  old  stone  coffin,  and  also  noticed  my  eldest
sister  walk  up  the  church  with  papers  under  her  arm,  but  thought  it  nothing
unusual  and  looked  away,  and  when  she  looked  back  again  my  sister  had
disapjDeared.

"My  eldest  sister  looked  just  as  usual  and  wore  her  hat  and  jacket,  as  I
and  my  younger  sister  both  noticed. She  walked  rather  briskly,  looking


XV.]


Collective  Hallucinations.


307


straight  before  her.  She  assures  us  that  she  was  sitting  alone  in  the
rectory  library  (the  rectory  is  within  a  stone's  throw  of  the  church)  all
the  afternoon."

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  has  had  any  other  hallucinations
Miss  E.  says:  "  I  have  seen  dark  forms  in  my  room  at  night  when  there  was
no  one  in  the  room  but  myself,  but  as  I  am  nervously  inclined  I  am  not  very
positive  about  it,  as  it  may  have  been  partly  imagination.  But  the  ajjpari-
tion  [of  my  sister]  I  positively  saw."

Miss  E.  writes  further  : —

April  Uth,  1892.

"  I  am  quite  sure  that  the  figure  could  not  have  been  any  one  else  looking
like  K.,  for  I  saw  distinctly  every  detail  of  her  face  and  figure  and  dress,
and  noticed  tliat  she  was  looking  straight  before  her.  My  sight  is  excellent,
and  I  know  I  could  not  have  been  mistaken.  Wheia  I  looked  up,  the  figure
was  about  three  yards  from  me,  I  should  say.  The  figure  may  have  gone
back  past  me  without  my  noticing  it,  but  T  think  it  very  improbable,  as
I  was  sitting  with  my  face  towards  the  aisle  through  which  it  must  have
passed."

The  other  percipient,  Miss  H.  E.,  writes  : —

"My  sisters  and  I  were  spending  the  day  with  our  uncle  at  ;  as

he  is  the  rector  his  garden  leads  into  the  churchyard.  In  the  course  of  the
afternoon  C.  and  I  went  into  the  church  ;  she  began  to  play  the  harmonium
and  T  stood  on  a  stone  coffin  beside  her  with  my  hand  on  her  shoulder  ;  my
sister  was  playing  a  hymn  and  I  was  looking  down  at  the  book  to  read  the
words.  C.  casually  looked  up  ;  I  did  the  same,  and  following  the  direction
of  her  eyes  saw  K.  walking  to  us  up  the  church  with — and  this  rather
surprised  me — a  long  bundle  of  papers  in  her  hand. We  made  no  remark

and  took  no  further  notice  of  her  movements,  for  when  we  go  to

we  often  just  wander  in  to  see  the  church.  It  was  certainly  K.  herself  ;  I
could  see  her  face  quite  well.  C.  and  I  finished  our  hymn  and  found  that  she
had  gone.  C.  and  I  soon  after  went  in  to  tea.  At  tea  we  were  surprised  to
hear  K.  say,  '  I  am  so  sorry  I  did  not  see  the  church,  but  part  of  the
afternoon  I  was  looking  at  pedigrees  in  the  study;  before  that  I  passed  the
church  gate  ;  I  was  going  in,  but  turned  back  to  the  study  instead,'  or
words  to  that  efi'ect.  C.  and  I  exchanged  glances,  but  said  nothing.
However,  next  morning  we  attacked  K.  on  the  subject  ;  she  was  much  sur-
prised, had  certainly  not  been  in  church  at  all,  but  had  first  been  in  the
library  studying  the  family  pedigree,  and  then  gone  to  the  church  gate  and
returned.  My  sister  and  I  both  have  perfectly  good  eyesight.  It  seems  im-
possible that  K.  can  have  visited  the  church,  but  my  sister  and  I  are  both
positively  certain  that  we  saw  K.  or  her  likeness.  The  day  after  we  both
described  the  details  of  her  dress,  so  far  as  we  could  recollect  them,  and
K.  said  that  it  was  a  correct  account  of  her  dress  the  day  before.  I  saw  the
pedigree  papers  before  I  went  out,  and  both  C .  and  I  thought  them  very  like
the  papers  the  figure  had  in  her  hand.  These  are,  as  far  as  I  remember,  the
details  of  the  case  without  exaggeration  or  diminution.

"It  was  possible,  but  rather  improbable,  that  K.  should  have  left  the
church  without  our  notice,  because  she  must  have  passed  back  the  same  way
close  to  us."

X  2


308  Re2:)ort  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Miss  K.  E.  writes  : —

"Upon  the  afternoon  during  \yhich  this  curious  incident  happened,  I
wandered  about  my  uncle's  garden  for  a  while,  and  half  thought  of  going
into  the  church,  but  changed  my  mind  and  did  not.  I  went  into  the  library,
and,  being  interested  in  genealogy,  studied  my  uncle's  family  pedigree  until
tea  time,  when  I  remarked  to  my  sisters  that  I  had  not  been  to  the  church
all  the  afternoon,  and  they  told  me  that  they  had  seen  me  there.  I  felt  no
unusual  sensations  during  the  afternoon,  and  am  much  mystified  by  the
incident."'

A  case  of  a  recognised  figure  seen  out  of  doors  is  the  following  : —

(317.  14.)  From  Miss  A.  E.  R.

(The  account  was  written  in  1890.)

"  When  out  in  camp  in  an  Indian  jungle,  my  sister  and  I  were  anxiously
awaiting  the  return  of  her  husband,  who  had  left  in  the  morning  on  a
surveying  expedition,  promising  to  return  early  in  the  afternoon.  Between
six  and  seven  p.m.  we  were  very  uneasy,  and  were  watching  the  line  of
road,  I  should  say,  200  yards  distant  from  where  we  stood.  Simultaneously
we  exclaimed,  'There  he  is,'  and  I  distinctly  saw  him,  sitting  in  his  dog-
cart driving  his  grey  horse,  the  syce  occupying  the  seat  behind.  We  at  once
returned  to  the  tents — my  sister  ordering  the  bearer  to  get  the  Sahib's  bath-
water ready,  and  the  butler  to  prepare  dinner — I  running  to  set  my  brother-
in-law's  mother's  mind  at  rest  as  to  the  safety  of  her  son.  However,  as
time  passed  on,  and  he  did  not  appear,  our  alarm  returned,  and  was  not
allayed  until  he  arrived  in  safety  at  eight  o'clock.  On  interrogating  him,
we  found  he  was  just  starting  from  the  surveying  ground,  about  eight  miles
distant,  at  the  very  time  we  had  the  above  related  experience.  I  should
add,  we  were  both  in  good  health  and  certainly  wide  awake  at  the  time,
and  I  have  never  before  or  since  had  any  experience  of  the  kind."

Miss  R.  was  about  ten  years  old  at  the  time  of  this  incident.  Her  sister,
Mrs.  H.,  writes  to  the  collector,  Miss  B.  Garnett: —

December  17  th,  1890.
"  In  answer  to  your  request,  I  write  to  say  that  I  fully  endorse  the  state-
ment made  by  my  sister  with  reference  to  our  experience  in  India. I  was
present  at  the  time. Also  I  may  state  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  our

1 A  somewhat  similar  but  very  remote  case  is  mentioned  on  p.  262,  in  connexion
with  another  experience  of  the  percipient.  Miss  Hawkins  Dempster :  another
from  the  Census  has  been  printed  in  the  Jorirnal  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  140.
A  case  which  belongs  to  the  Census  (No.  91.  16)  is  published  in  Phantasms  of  the.
Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  210  (No.  327) : — the  figure  seen  was  out  of  doors  but  at  no  great
distance.  Two  otlier  cases  from  the  Census,  of  recognised  figures  collectively  seen  out  of
doors,  were  printed  in  the  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  129 — 133:  but  in  both  the  distance
renders  the  recognition — on  which  the  hallucinatory  character  mainly  depends —
somewhat  doubtful.  On  the  othei-  hand,  the  figure  was  in  both  oases  very  marked  ;
and  in  one  of  them  one  of  the  percipients  afterwards  had  a  hallucinatory  vision  of
the  same  person.


XV.]


Collective  Hallucinations.


309


mistaking  any  other  person  for  my  husband,  as  the  road  ended  at  our  tents,
and  the  figure  we  saw  must  necessarily  have  driven  straight  to  us.  I  should
also  say  we  were  in  an  isolated  part  of  the  country.'

Mr.  Myers  called  on  Mrs.  H.,  and  she  informed  him  that  the  incident
took  place  "about  18  years  ago,"  when  her  son,  who  was  then  twenty,  was
about  two  years  old.

Mr.  Myers  writes : —

December  5th,  1891.

' '  Mrs.  H.  explained  to  me  in  conversation  that  a  mistake  of  identity
was  impossible,  both  from  the  lonely  nature  of  the  country  and  from  the
great  height  of  her  husband,  who  is  about  6ft.  4in.  tall."

Mrs.  H.  added  a  further  note  to  her  sister's  account,  to  the  following
effect : —

December  5th,  1891.
"I  fully  endorse  all  the  details  of  this  account. I  may  add  that  the
time  I  saw  my  husband  was  about  the  hour  I  expected  him  home. He  had
been  detained  later  than  he  expected,  and  I  know  would  be  concerned  as  to
my  anxiety  about  him. I  have  never  had  any  other  similar  experience."

In  this  case  the  proof  that  the  figure  was  not  real  depends  not  so
much  on  the  recognition — for  the  distance  was  probably  too  great  for
certain  recognition — as  on  the  combination  of  .that  with  the  very
great  improbability  that  any  human  being  whatever  was  driving  a
dog  cart  in  the  place  at  that  moment.

In  the  following  case  the  apparition  was  that  of  a  dead  person,  and
there  seems  to  be  little  room  for  mistake  as  to  its  hallucinatory
character.

(728.  16.)  From  Dr.  S.  da  G.

March  17th,  1892.

"  I  saw  what  seemed  to  be  my  fiancee' s  sister  at  a  window  in  the  garden.
Her  head  was  tied  up  in  a  handkerchief  ;  I  approached  her,  but  on  arriving
opposite  the  window  I  found  it  closed.  Nobody  was  there  ;  yet  one  moment
before  I  had  seen  the  form,  and  I  did  not  hear  the  window  close,  for  which,
indeed,  there  was  no  time.  I  stood  before  the  window,  gazing  at  it  in
perplexity,  when  suddenly  the  panes  seemed  to  disappear  and  the  same
form  was  leaning  on  the  sill  looking  out  upon  me.  It  was  not  the  sister  of
my  fiancee ;  1  recognised  the  appearance  as  that  of  my  fiancee's  mother,  for
I  had  seen  her  portrait  in  the  house.  I  retired  towards  the  place  where
ray  fia  ncee  was  sitting.  I  was  horrified,  but  not  to  alarm  her  I  did  not  run.
When  I  came  back  to  her  she  saw  the  form  accompany  me.  It  was  visible
only  down  to  the  waist.  She  had  also  seen  what  she  supposed  to  be  her
sister  at  the  window,  and  told  me  not  to  pay  her  any  attention.  There  was
at  the  time  some  misunderstanding  between  them.  As  I  was  going  up  the
steps  of  the  verandah  I  felt  as  it  were  a  finger  pulling  me  back  by  the
collar.  I  did  not  look  back,  but  G.  screamed  out,  '  Look — my  mother  !  '
and  fainted  away.  Place:  Rio  de  Janeiro.  Date,  1876;  hour,  nine
o'clock  p.m.


310  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


"  I  [had  been]  talking  with  my  future  wife  on  subjects  of  everyday  life.
Health  and  spirits  of  both  good.  Age  at  time  between  21  and  22.  (My  wife
was  21.)

"  Our  first  impression  was  that  my  future  sister-in-law  was  listening  to
our  c(jnversation.  This  annoyed  me,  and  was  the  reason  of  my  going  to  the
window.  I  afterwards  recognised  my  fiancee's  mother  by  the  portrait  in
the  family  album,  which  I  had  already  seen. She  had  been  dead  seven  years.

"  The  light  by  which  the  above  apparition  was  seen  was  that  of  the  gas-
lamp  which  stood  just  ojDposite  the  garden  gate."

A  plan  was  enclosed,  showing  the  position  of  the  verandah  in  which  Dr.
and  Mrs.  da  G.  were  sitting,  the  lamp  in  the  street  beyond,  and  the
window  of  the  house  looking  out  on  the  garden,  at  which  the  apparition  was
first  seen.

The  collector,  Professor  Alexander,  writes  : —

Rio,  May  im,  1892.
"In  answer  to  questions,  the  wife  of  Dr.  da  G.  declares  that  she
recollects  seeing  the  figure  at  the  window  and  behind  Dr.  da  G.  as
he  came  towards  the  steps.  It  was  visible  from  the  waist  up.  She
does  not  remember  if  it  had  a  handkerchief  tied  round  its  head  or  not.
She  thought  that  the  form  at  the  window  was  that  of  her  married  sister,  but
she  afterwards  recognised  her  mother.  She  thinks  that  she  told  him  at  the
time  that  it  was  her  mother.  She  cried  out  at  the  moment  that  Dr.  da  G-.
felt  himself  pulled  from  behind.  When  she  did  so  the  form  disappeared.
This  happened  when  they  were  on  the  verandah  engaged  in  conversation.
(Donna da  G.  does  not  seem  to  recollect  the  occurrence  so  well  as  her

h"^^*"'^-)  "A.  Alexander."

In  the  next  case  the  figure  is  unrecognised,  and  the  reasons  for
regarding  it  as  hallucinatoiy  are,  first,  its  disappearing  roore  rapidly
than,  as  it  seemed,  a  real  person  could  have  done  ;  and,  secondly,  its
oddness,  suggesting  that  if  it  was  a  real  person  he  must  have  been
masquerading  in  a  strange  dress.

(256.  17.)  From  Mrs.  Goodhall.

27,  Nevern-square,  S.W.,  February  6th,  1890.

"Time,  summer's  evening,  towards  the  day's  wane,  but  still  quite  light.
Place,  the  broad  plateau  of  a  high  hill,  between  Willesden  and  Ravensden,
on  the  road  to  the  town  of  Bedford.  Year,  either  1873  or  1874.  The  road
unusually  wide,  with  deep  margins  of  grass  on  both  sides.  I  was  being
driven  by  my  daughter  in  a  low  pony  carriage,  when  I  suddenly  saw  a
figure,  dressed  in  black  from  head  to  foot,  advancing;  it  appeared  to  glide
along.  I  said  to  my  daughter,  '  Oh,  do  look  at  that  strange  figure  !  '  It
passed  on  the  left  side  of  the  carriage,  on  the  grass,  within  two  yards  of  us  ;
as  it  did  so,  it  turned  its  face  directly  our  way,  and  of  all  the  fiendish  faces
it  was  the  most  horrible  you  can  imagine ;  its  garments  seemed  to  train
behind  it.  My  daughter  looked  back  after  it  as  it  passed  us  ;  she  says  it
turned  its  face  over  its  shoulder,  and  looked  towards  us.  I  myself  turned
round  immediately — it  was  gone. I  told  people  in  the  county  what  we  had


XV.]


Collective  Hallucinations.


311


seen,  but  could  never  learn  any  history  beyond  the  saymg  of  the  people,
that  part  of  the  road  was  supposed  to  be  haunted.  The  figure  passed  about
three-quarters  of  a  yard  beyond  the  roadway.

' '  I  was  in  good  health  and  quite  happy ;  age  about  50.

' '  [The  figure  had]  no  likeness  to  any  one  I  ever  had  seen  or  have
seen  since.

"My  daughter,  who  was  driving  me  at  the  time,  confirms  my  statement."
[Miss  Goodhall  adds  here  a  note :  —  "  I  do. (Signed)  May  C.  Goodhall."]

' '  I  took  no  notes  of  the  experience,  but  often  spoke  of  it  to  others  at
the  time,  and  also  since.

"Charlotte  E.  Goodhall."

Mr.  Podmore  writes : —

June  1th,  1892.

"I  called  to-day  on  Mrs.  Goodhall.  The  figure  was  seen,  according  to
the  testimony  of  both  ladies,  in  all  but  full  daylight — a  quite  unmistakable
figure.  They  could  not  determine  which  saw  it  first.  But  their  interest
was  aroused  at  once,  because,  as  both  assured  me,  the  figure  seemed  to
glide,  not  walk.  Mrs.  Goodhall  described  the  face  as  fiendish.  Miss
Goodhall  said  that  it  had  a  nasty  expression,  and  a  large  mouth ;  like  a
man's  coarse  features  in  a  woman's  dress.  Miss  Goodhall  looked  round
at  once,  and  the  figure  had  disappeared.  It  could  not  have  disappeared  if
a  real  figure,  as  the  distance  from  the  hedge  was  too  great.  The  vision
can  have  lasted  only  a  few  seconds  in  all.

' '  Miss  Goodhall  has  had  no  other  hallucinations ;  but  Mrs.  Goodhall  has
had  two  or  three  auditory  hallucinations.

' '  Mrs.  Goodhall  wrote  a  full  account  of  the  vision  seen  by  herself  and
Miss  Goodhall  to  her  married  daughter,  in  India  at  the  time. The  letter  has

unfortunately  been  destroyed ;  but  Mrs. told  me  that  she  remembered

reading  of  the  incident.

"I  also  saw  an  accoinit  written  in  a  diary  by  Mrs.  Goodhall  three
years  (or  more)  after  the  event ;  which  corresponds,  almost  word  for  word,
with  the  account  given  to  us. ' '

In  the  case  of  unrecognised  figures  collectively  seen  out  of  doors,  it
is  usually  on  their  unexplained  disappearance  that  the  evidence  for
their  hallucinatory  character  depends  ;  and  the  value  of  this  evidence
is  often  hard  to  estimate.  We  referred  in  Chapter  V.  (p.  98)  to  a  case  in
which  the  two  percipients  took  different  views  of  a  figure  seen  by  them
— one  regarding  its  mysteriotis  disappearance  as  explicable  on  the
hypothesis  that  it  was  a  real  man,  and  the  other  holding  the  opposite
opinion.  When  the  two  percipients  agree  that  a  real  person  could  not
have  got  out  of  sight  in  the  manner  in  which  the  figure  was  seen
to  disappear,  we  must,  at  least,  regard  the  disappearance  as  diflicult  of
explanation  ;  and  this  was,  doubtless,  the  case  in  the  experience  just
quoted.^ Still,  while  there  is  the  smallest  possibility  of  bodily  disap-

1  This  statement  applies  also  to  No.  513.3,  which  was  printed  in  the  Journcd  of
the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  137.


312  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


pearance  behind  an  obstacle  to  vision,  some  doubt  as  to  the  hallucina-
tory character  of  the  experience  must  remain ;  and  we  require  clearer
cases  to  prove  the  fact  of  collective  hallucinations.

Indoors,  even  when  bodily  disappearance  is  not  absolutely
excluded,  there  is  often  an  additional  difficulty  in  supposing  an
unrecognised  figure  to  have  been  a  real  person — -namely,  the  impro-
bability of  a  stranger  being  there  at  all.  This  is  the  case  with
the  following  experience^ — where,  however,  the  figure  seen  was  very
indefinite.

(49.  2  and  3.)  From  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C.

(The  accounts  were  written  in  1889.)
Mr.  C.  writes  :—

"The  place,  my  father's  house,  a  village  rectory  in  the  Eastern  Counties;
the  room,  that  in  which  my  mother  died  ;  the  time,  night,  between  12  and
3  a.m.  ;  date,  July,  1879.  My  wife  and  I  were  both  asleep,  when  I  woke
suddenly,  found  her  sitting  up,  also  just  awake  ;  she  said  :  '  What  is  that?'
At  once  I  pointed  to  where,  at  the  bottom  of  the  bed,  I  saw  indistinctly  a
white  figure,  unrecognisable,  which  at  once  vanished.  I  got  out  of  bed
and  explored  the  room.  There  was  no  mooidight  effect  to  account  for  the
experience,  the  shutters  being  shut ;  no  white  garment,  no  apparent  cause .
We  were  both  startled  by  the  mutual  experience,  which  was  too  short  to
accurately  investigate  ;  but  we  undoubtedly  were  both  awakened  at  the
same  time  by  the  consciousness  of  the  presence  of  something  in  the  room  ;
both  saw  the  same  white  unrecognisable  figure,  in  the  same  place.  I  was
asleep,  but  awakened  into  possession  of  every  faculty  at  once  by  the
consciousness  of  the  above  experience.  We  were  both  in  excellent  health.
My  mother  had  died  some  ten  years  before,  and  we  had  not  been  speaking
of  her  ;  in  fact,  I  had  not  told  my  wife  that  the  bedroom  we  occupied  was
that  in  which  my  mother  had  died.  The  figure  was  too  evanescent  and
unrecognisable,  and  insufficiently  defined  in  outline,  to  identify.  My  wife
was  with  me  at  the  time,  and  gives  her  account  so  far  as  she  remembers  it.
I  shovild  not  have  thought  any  more  at  all  of  the  experience,  but  for  the
identity  of  our  mutual  experience.  The  date  was  no  particular  anniversary,
nor  impressed,  by  any  event  afterwards  heard  of,  on  the  mind.

"C.  V.  C."

Mrs.  C.  writes  : —

' '  I  saw  a  white  form,  without  features  visible,  move  at  the  end  of  the
bed  where  I  was  lying,  from  near  the  middle  to  one  side,  where  it  vanished.
This  took  place  in  the  year  1879.  I  was  asleep  in  bed  and  awoke  in  terrible
fright  with  the  feeling  that  some  one  was  in  the  room,  and  I  then  saw  the
moving  figure  I  have  described. I  was  in  perfect  health  at  the  time  and  in

1  The  statement  applies  also  to  two  collective  cases  belonging  to  the  Census —
viz..  No.  731.19,  20,  and  21,  and  No.  717.  16,  which  were  printed  in  the  Journal,
Vol.  VI.,  pp.  133-37  ;  and  still  more  to  one  (No.  451.  4)  iDublished  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  619  (where  it  is  numbered  666).


XV.]


Collective  Hallucinations.


313


no  trouble  or  anxiety.  I  had  no  impression  of  any  particular  person,  it
seemed  simply  a  figure.  My  husband  was  with  me,  and  experienced  exactly
the  same  sensations.  u  -g -g, q  ,,

Neither  Mr.  nor  Mrs.  C.  has  ever  had  any  similar  experience.
Mr.  Myers  writes  : —

Octohev  13th,  1891.

"I  saw  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C.  to-day.  They  are  quite  sure  that  each
independently  saw  the  figure.  The  incident  occurred  when  they  were
paying  their  first  visit  to  Mr.  C.'s  father's  house  after  their  marriage.  It
was  the  first  time  that  Mr.  C.  had  been  in  that  room  since  his  mother's,
death.  There  was  no  light  in  the  room,  and  they  cannot  tell  how  the
moving  object,  'like  a  white  petticoat,'  was  seen."

Here  the  vagueness  of  the  figure  and  the  dimness  of  the  light  seem
to  leave  room  for  the  supposition  that  the  expei'ience  was  an  illusion,
rather  than  a  hallucination,  although  the  percipients  failed  to  discover
any  basis  for  illusion.  In  this  respect  the  case  resembles  a  collective
experience  (No.  196.  2)  quoted  in  Chapter  V.,  p.  100.

In  the  next  case  the  visual  hallucination  is  of  a  slight  kind,  but  its
collective  character  appears  unmistakable.


(37.  13.)  From  Miss  H.  Wilson.

The  Cottage,  Ditchingham,  Bungay,  Augiid,  1888.

"  It  was  Sunday  night. F.  T.,  my  cousin,  Mrs.  H.  (an  old  servant  and.
friend  of  the  family),  and  I  were  sitting  in  the  drawing-room.  All  the  rest  of
the  family  were  gone  to  church,  the  house  was  shut  up,  the  shutters  closed,
and  door  shut.

"  F.  and  I  sat  opposite  each  other  on  the  same  side  of  the  table;  two^
candles  were  on  the  table.

"  I  sat  reading  with  my  back  turned  to  the  candle  near  me,  so  that  the
light  fell  on  my  book.  Suddenly  the  light  disappeared,  so  that  I  could  not
go  on  reading.  I  looked  round  quickly,  and  saw  a  dark  shadow  pass
between  me  and  the  candles.  The  shadow  was  so  thick  as  to  seem  almost
like  a  substance,  but  I  did  not  see  any  shape.  We  both  exclaimed,  '  I
thought  both  the  candles  were  going  out,'  and  F.  said,  'It seemed  to  me  to
come  from  the  door.'  When  the  shadow  had  passed,  the  candles  were  perfectly
clear  and  steady ;  the  old  nurse  was  stooping  low  over  the  fire,  on  the  same
side  of  the  room  as  we  were.  She  was  in  great  trouble  about  a  sick  brother,
and  when  we  spoke  to  her  did  not  seem  to  have  noticed  anything  or  heard,
us  talk.

"Early  next  morning  she  was  called  away — her  brother  had  died  that
night  at  3  a.m."

Miss  Wilson  writes  later : —

September  m,  1888.
' '  I  enclose  [my  cousin's]  account  of  our  experience,  which  you  may  find
useful,  though,  probably  through  her  natural  timidity  and  nervousness,  her-
recollection  of  what  happened  is  not  quite  so  clear  as  mine. I  can  quite


314  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


clearly  remember  that  she  said  in  answer  to  my  remark,  that  '  it  seemed
like  a  thick  shadow  between  me  and  the  candle,'  '  It  seemed  to  me  to  come
from  the  door. '  The  door  was  on  her  side  of  the  room.

"  ,  a  sergeant  of  H.M.  — tli,  was  the  man's  name,  and  he  died

in  his  own  house  at  3  a.m.  on  the  night  of  March  4th  last,  or  rather  the
morning  of  March  5th. ^  The  doctor  called  his  disease  blood-poisoning.
A  few  hours  before  his  death  he  got  out  of  bed  in  his  restlessness,  and
neither  doctor  nor  friends  could  persuade  him  to  return  to  it.  You  will
observe  that  the  soldier  died  a  few  hours  after  we  saw  the  shadow."

The  note  enclosed  from  Miss  F.  T.  was  as  follows  : —

"My  cousin  and  I  sat  in  the  drawing-room  on  the  evening  of  Sunday,
March  4th,  between  7  p.ni.  and  8  p.m.,  with  a  pair  of  composite  candles  on
the  table  between  us,  or  rather  nearer  my  cousin,  who  was  reading  aloud.
The  elderly  woman,  sister  of  the  man  who  was  dying,  sat  on  my  left  near
the  fire,  looking  down,  too  much  absorbed  in  sad  thoughts  to  notice  anything.
Suddenly  the  candles  appeared  to  be  momentarily  obliterated,  whether  by  a
shadow  passing  by  them  or  what  I  can  scarcely  say,  and  I  exclaimed  '  What's
that? '  or  some  such  thing."

Miss  Wilson  has  had  another  visual  hallucination,  given  on  p.  79,
besides  two  referred  to  on  p.  1G3.

Ml'.  Podmore  writes  : —

April  29th,  1892.

"  I  called  on  Miss  Wilson  to-day,  and  heard  from  her  a  full  account  of
her  several  experiences.

"The  time  at  which  she  saw  the  shad(jw  was,  she  believes,  about  8.30.
A  note  was  made  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  in  an  old  pocket-book.
Mrs.  H.  is  still  living,  but  even  at  the  time  knew  nothing  about  the
occurrence,  which  took  place  at  Miss  T.'s  house.

"  The  shadow  was  extremely  distinct,  about  the  thickness  of  a  man's  body,
height  not  noticed.  It  passed  from  the  direction  of  the  door,  past  Miss
T.,  and  Miss  Wilson  saw  it  just  as  it  jjassed  between  herself  and  the
candle,  and  then  disappeared  behind  her.  She  is  very  ^Jositive  that  it  could
not  have  been  due  to  any  wind  or  mere  flickering  of  the  candle.  It  was  a
solid-seeming  mass  of  almost  black  shadow.  The  occurrence  made  a  strong
impression  upon  Miss  T.,  who  is  very  nervous."

Mr.  Podmore  wrote  to  Miss  T.  for  a  fuller  account,  especially  as  to
whether  she  saw  the  shadow  before  Miss  Wilson,  which  the  latter  believed  to
have  been  the  case. The  following  is  her  reply  : —

May  5th,  1892.

' '  In  answer  to  your  letter  of  the  29th  last,  I  can  only  say  that  my
impression  of  the  occurrence  was  something  of  a  mist  or  shadow  obliterating
the  candles.  I  said,  '  What's  that  ? '  and  my  cousin  looked  up  and  left
■oS  reading,  I  believe  quite  simultaneously. I  was  not  conscious  of  any


1  March  4th,  1888,  was  a  Sunday.


Collective  Hallucinations.


315


draught;  but  the  shadow  or  whatever  it  should  be  called  seemed  to  come
from  the  direction  of  the  door. I  do  not  think  I  can  say  anything  more."

This  will  be  seen,  is  at  once  collective  and  coincidental :

but,  in  the  absence  of  any  recognition,  the  coincidence,  we  think,  is
not  sufficiently  close  to  establish  clearly  the  telepathic  origin  of  the
experiences.  If  we  regard  the  origin  as  telepathic,  it  will  be  another
example  of  the  phenomenon  of  deflected  telepathic  communication,
discussed  on  p.  265;  since  it  was  the  old  nurse  who  was  concerned
with  the  dying  man.

Collective  Auditory  Hallucinations.

We  now  pass  to  collective  auditory  hallucinations.  The  following
is  a  good  specimen  of  this  class.

(735.  3  and  12.) From  Messrs.  de  B.  and  V.
Mr.  de  B.  writes  : —

Rio  de  Janeiro,  April  3rd.,  1892.

"  I  heard  a  voice  call  a  friend,  who  was  with  me  in  the  same  room,  by
his  name — '  Senhor  V.'  Place,  Rua  de  S.  Christina,  Rio  de  Janeiro.  We
were  both  in  bed  in  the  same  room. This  happened  in  1872.

' '  I  was  lying  still  in  bed,  but  awake .  Health  good.  I  naturally
sympathised  with  my  friend,  who  had  lost  his  wife  on  the  previous  day.
My  age  at  time  was  42.

"  I  did  not  myself  recognise  the  voice  ;  but  it  was  the  name  used  by  my
friend's  wife  in  addressing  her  husband.  The  friend  above  referred  to.
Sr.  F.  v.,  also  heard  the  voice.  Each  of  us  asked  at  the  same  time  if  the
other  had  heard  it.  I  was  staying  at  his  house  to  keep  him  company  in  his
bereavement.

"  [With  regard  to  other  experiences],  I  may  have  felt  hallucinatory
impressions  of  touch,  but  I  am  not  sure  about  it."

Mr.  V.  writes  : —

Rio  de  Janeiro,  April  ith,  1892.

"  I  awoke,  hearing  the  voice  of  my  wife  calling  me  by  name — '  Senhor
V.'  The  call  was  repeated  after  I  had  awaked,  and  it  was  then  that  each
of  us  (Sr.  G.  de  B.  and  I)  asked  the  other  if  he  had  heard  the  voice.  We
spoke  simultaneously.  I  slept  in  a  bed  made  up  on  the  floor.  My  friend
slept  in  another  bed,  so  placed  that  our  heads  were  near  together.  The
lamps  were  still  alight  in  the  street,  but  there  were  faint  indications  that
the  day  was  just  breaking.  Date,  night  of  May  7th,  1871  (and  not  1872)  ;
place,  Rua  de  S.  Christina,  Rio  de  Janeiro.

"  I  had  been  sleeping  a  troubled  sleep,  but  was  awake  the  second  time
that  the  voice  called.  On  the  6th  of  May  my  wife  died.  She  was  buried  on
the  7th. I  was,  therefore,  under  the  influence  of  grief. Age  at  time,  38."


316  -Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Mr.  V.  has  had  one  other  hallucinatory  experience,  thus  described  : —
"  At  the  request  of  my  dying  son,  Arthur,  I  had  been  to  light  the
candles  in  the  chapel.  I  had  lighted  them  before,  and  was  surprised  to  fiiid
them  put  out.  On  withdrawing  I  closed  the  door  of  the  chapel.  The
sacristy,  where  I  then  was  with  my  friend.  Sr.  J.  B.,  was  completely  in  the
dark.  I  saw  before  me  the  form  of  Arthur  dressed  in  the  habit  of  St.
Francis,  to  whose  Order  he  belonged.  The  form  shone  with  a  light  of  its
own. This  was  in  1886. Age  53.

' '  Arthur  had  received  the  last  Sacrament  and  was  dying.  He  was  still
living  at  the  time  of  the  vision.  He  died  shortly  after,  and  was  buried  in  the
habit  of  the  Order  to  which  he  belonged. The  vision  was  very  distinct."

Professor  Alexander  adds  : —

"Sr.  J.  B.  declares  that  he  himself  saw  nothing."

A  casein  Phantasms  of  the  Livi7ig,Yo\.  II.,  p.  221  (No.  336),  which
also  comes  into  the  Census,  may  be  compared  with  this, — both  being
recognised  voices  of  persons  recently  dead.

In  the  following  case  the  voice  was  unrecognised  ;  but,  like  the  one
quoted  at  p.  318,  it  is  a  coincidental  case  which  may  have  been
telepathic  in  its  origin.

(138.  18.)  From  Mr.  C.  H.  Gary.

Secretary's  Office,  March  2Uh,  1892.

"  I  heard  a  voice  say  '  Joseph  !  Joseph  ! '  [at]  Bow,  London,  E.  The  date
was  March  8th,  1875,  the  time  about  8.30  p.m.

' '  [I  was]  talking  with  my  father  and  cousin  (Joseph)  about  the  battle  of
Balaklava. In  good  health,  &c. My  age  was  nearly  13.

"  I  never  remember  seeing  the  pei'son  whose  voice  it  was  afterwards
believed  to  be. The  individual  was  dying  at  the  time.

"  My  father,  R.  H.  Gary,  and  my  cousin,  Joseph  Gary  [were  present].  All
three  of  us  heard  the  voice,  which  we  suppose  to  be  Joseph's  grandmother.

"G.  H.  Cart."

Mr.  Gary  writes  to  the  collector,  Mr.  Podmore : —

March  25th,  1892.

' '  I  herewith  enclose  the  form  you  gave.  I  have  filled  it  up  to  the  best  of
my  remembrance,  and  am  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  truth  of  what  actually
occurred.  The  name  of  the  individual  whose  voice  it  was  supposed  we
heard  was  that  of  my  cousin's  grandmother  (no  relation  of  mine),  Mary
Victor;  she  died  at  Lynwood,  Paul,  near  Penzance."

Mr.  Gary  further  informs  us  that  he  has  had  no  other  hallucinations,
except  the  hearing  of  footsteps.  He  heard  them  first  in  1879,  and  his
brother  died  shortly  after.  He  did  not  then  know  that  such  sounds  were
regarded  as  premonitory  of  a  death.  He  has  heard  them  twice  since,
and  on  each  occasion  a  cousin  of  his  died.  His  father  also  had  heard  them
more  than  once,  and  each  time  lost  a  brother.  Mr.  Gary  says  of  these
sounds  :  "I  express  no  opinion  of  belief  or  disbelief  as  to  their  super-
naturality."


XV.]


Collective  Hallucinations.


317


Mr.  Podmore  writes  : —

' '  Mr.  Gary  explained  to  me  that  the  voice  was  heard  on  the  day,  and,  as
he  believes,  near  the  actual  hour,  of  death.  Mrs.  Victor  was  kno\vn  to  be
very  ill,  but  her  death  was  not  supposed  to  be  imminent.

"So  far  as  he  knows  the  voice  was  heard  independently  by  all  three
persons.  It  was,  indeed,  mistaken  for  the  voice  of  Mrs.  Gary  (narrator's
mother),  who  was  in  an  adjoining  room.

' '  When  the  telegram  came  announcing  the  death,  Mr.  Joseph  Gary  said
that  it  must  have  been  his  grandmother's  voice  which  he  heard.

"Mr.  G.  H.  Gary  did  not  recognise  the  voice  at  all,  and  he  believes  his
father  did  not  either. It  merely  seemed  to  them  to  be  a  woman's  voice.

"  There  were  no  ties  of  affection  between  the  deceased  and  the  narrator
or  his  father."

Mr.  Podmore  has  written  three  times  to  Mr.  Joseph  Gary,  asking  for  his
recollections  of  the  incident,  but  has  received  no  reply.

Mr.  R.  H.  Gary,  in  answer  to  a  request  for  his  corroboration,  wrote  to
Mr.  Podmore: —

49,  Gladsmuir-road,  Highgate,  N.,  March  ^Ist,  1892.
"  Dear  Sir, — With  reference  to  your  enquiry  concerning  the  voice
■which  was  heard  at  the  time  of  the  late  Mrs.  Victor's  death,  I  am  able
to  state  that  my  son,  my  nephew,  and  myself  were  sitting  together,  and  we
all  heard  it  distinctly.  This  occurred  about  fourteen  years  ago.  The
account  given  by  my  son  exactly  coincides  with  my  own  recollection.

"R.  H.  Gary."
"We  have  verified  the  date  of  death  at  Somerset  House.

We  have  one  other  collective  auditory  case  —  besides  the  one
just  quoted — which  is  stated  to  have  been  coincidental,  but  with
illness,  not  death :  in  this,  also,  the  percipient's  name  was  called
in  an  unrecognised  voice.

Collectivity  with  Partial  Dissimilarity.

There  is  a  somewhat  dilFerent,  but  important,  kind  of  collective
hallucination  in  which  the  percipients  ha^-e  simultaneous  hallucinatory
experiences  involving  something  of  the  same  idea,  though  differing
markedly  f I'om  one  another.  The  following  ^  is  a  g-ood  illustration  (for
another  instance,  see  No.  740.  9,  p.  373).

(703.  24.)  From  Lady  C.

October  IWi,  1884.
"In  October,  1879,  I  was  staying  at  Bishopthorpe,  near  York,  with  the
Archbishop  of  York. I  was  sleeping  with  Miss  Z.  T.,  when  I  suddenly  saw
a  white  figure  fiy  through  the  room  from  the  door  to  the  window. It  was
only  a  shadowy  form  and  passed  in  a  moment. I  felt  utterly  terrified,  and

^This  case  has  already  appeared  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  20,S.
We  have  accordingly  given  the  percipients'  accounts  as  there  published .


318  Re'port  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [char.


called  out  at  once,  '  Did  you  see  that  ? '  and  at  the  same  time  Miss  Z.  T„
exclaimed,  '  Did  you  hear  that  1 '  Then,  I  said,  instantly,  '  I  saw  an  angel
fly  through  the  room,'  and  she  said,  '  I  heard  an  angel  singing.'

"  We  were  both  very  much  frightened  for  a  little  while,  but  said  nothing
about  it  to  any  one."

Miss  Z.  T.'s  account  is  dated  December  19th,  1884.

"Late  one  night,  about  October  I7th,  1879,  Lady  C.  (then  Lady  K.  L.)
and  I  were  preparing  to  go  to  sleep  after  talking  some  time,  when  I  heard
something  like  very  faint  music,  and  seemed  to  feel  what  people  call  '  a
presence.'  I  put  out  my  hand  and  touched  Lady  C,  saying,  'Did  you
hear  that  ? '  She  said,  '  Oh,  don't  !  Just  now  I  saw  something  going  across
the  room  ! '  We  were  both  a  good  deal  frightened,  and  tried  to  go  to  sleep
as  soon  as  we  could.  But  I  remember  asking  Lady  C.  exactly  what  she  had
seen,  and  she  said,  'A  sort  of  white  shadow,  like  a  spirit.'  The  above
occurred  at  Bishopthope,  York."  j  t  "

There  are  about  8  cases  more  or  less  of  this  type  in  our  collection,
but  the  evidence  in  most  of  them  is  deficient  in  various  ways.  The
following  is  an  auditory  case  of  the  kind,  which,  though  one  of  the
percipients  was  young  at  the  time  and  the  evidence  of  the  other  can
no  longer  be  obtained,  seems  to  us  worthy  of  consideration.  The
surviving  witness  is  well  known  in  the  educational  world,  in  which
he  occupies  an  important  position.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  experi-
ence is  coincidental  as  well  as  collective.


(289.  13.)  From  Mr.  P.  B.

June  15th,  1890.

' '  I  heard  my  grandfather  call  me  by  name  in  our  own  house.  I  was
al)out  nine,  and  not  of  nervous  temperament,  nor  apprehensive  of  any-
thing. I  cannot  fix  the  date,  and  quite  forget  the  exact  hour  ;  but  my
mother  thought  at  the  same  moment  that  she  heard  herself  called,  and
we  both  came,  from  different  rooms,  to  answer.  I  did  not  know  what  my
o-randfather  was  doing  or  where  he  was  at  the  time.  As  a  matter  of  fact
he  was,  at  the  same  time,  dying  at  Fenchurch  Street  Station."

Mr.  B.  states  that  he  has  never  had  any  other  experience  of  the  kind.

Mr.  Podmore  writes  : —

November  2Uh,  1891.
"  I  called  to-day  on  Mr.  B.  His  grandfather's  (mother's  father)  name  was
S.  L. ;  he  lived  at  Prestwich,  near  Manchester  :  but  he  died  quite  suddenly
(Mr.  B.  could  not  state  the  cause  of  death)  at  Fenchurch  Street  Station,
in  or  about  1868.  He  was  about  84  years  old  at  the  time,  and  apparently
well  and  hearty.  He  had  come  up  from  Manchester  a  few  days  before  on
purpose  to  see  his  grandson  before  he  went  to  school.  He  was  much
attached  to  the  boy.  Mr.  B.  was  living  with  his  parents  at  Bow  at  the  time,
and  was  about  9  or  10  years  old  (he  is  now  33).  Mr.  L.  had  gone  out  for
the  afternoon  ;  was  expected  back  for  dinner  at  about  6  p.m. There  was


XV.]


Collective  Hallucinations.


319


no  cause  for  anxiety  at  all.  Sometime  between  early  dinner  and  6  p.m.
(probably  about  3  p.m.)  Mr.  B.  thought  he  heard  his  grandfather  call  him,
'Percy':  he  ran  into  the  hall  and  met  his  mother,  who  thought  she  had
heard  her  father  call,  'Sarah.'  Mr.  B.  recogni.sed  the  voice,  and  states
that  his  mother  (now  dead)  recognised  it  also.  He  is  pretty  sure  that  it
was  not  a  real  sound  mistaken  for  the  grandfather's  voice.  As  Mr.  L.  did
not  come  in  at  6  p.m,.  Mrs.  B.  grew  anxious,  and  went  out  to  search  for
news  of  him  ;  and  whilst  she  was  absent — about  7  p.m. — a  messenger  came
to  announce  the  death.  Mrs.  B.  was  much  impressed  by  the  coincidence  of
the  voice  with  the  death.  She  was  by  no  means  a  nervous  or  fanciful
woman  ;  and,  her  son  believes,  had  had  no  other  experience  of  the  kind.
Mr.  B.'s  father—  the  only  other  witness — is  dead.

"Mr.  B.  trusts  the  accuracy  of  his  own  memory  for  the  facts  here  set
down.  He  has  had  no  other  experience,  and  has  no  special  interest  in  the
subject."

Another  case  which  is,  in  its  essential  features,  of  the  same  nature
as  a  collective  hallucination  with  different  percepts,  will  be  found  in
Chapter  XVII.,  p.  383,  (No.  726.  14).  Here,  however,  the  experience
of  one  of  the  percipients  seems  to  have  been  a  pseudo-hallucination
rather  than  a  completely  externalised  sensory  hallucination.

The  class  of  cases  in  which  one  percipient  sees  an  apparition,  while
he  and  others  collectively  hear  a  non-vocal  sound,  such  as  footsteps,
or  see  a  door  opening  and  closing,  has  already  been  discussed  in
Chapter  X.  In  such  cases  it  is  generally  possible  that  the  noise  or
movement  was  real,  and  it  may  in  some  cases  even  have  been  the
immediately  suggesting  cause  of  the  hallucination.

Explanations  of  Collective  Hallucinations.

The  reader  has  now  before  him  the  cases  in  the  Census  which  seem
to  us  on  the  whole  to  afford  the  best  evidence  for  collective  hallucina-
tion. Here,  as  with  the  death-coincidences,  there  is  of  course  no
sharp  line  marking  off  the  more  convincing  cases  from  the  others.
Different  judges  would  probably  form  different  estimates,  and  some,  for
instance,  of  the  narratives  from  the  Census  already  printed  in  the
Journal  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  and  referred  to  in  foot-notes  on
previous  pages,  might  in  the  judgment  of  some  persons  seem  more
impressive  than  some  of  those  in  the  present  chapter.

The  cogency  of  the  evidence  in  the  aggregate  will  also  be  differently
estimated  by  different  persons.  Few,  however,  are  likely  to  regard  it
as  strong  compared  with  that  for  apparitions  coinciding  with  deaths,
and  if  the  case  for  collective  hallucinations  rested  on  the  Census  alone,
it  would  perhaps  be  rash  to  regard  it  as  conclusively  pi'oved  that  hallu-
cinations may  be  shared.  It  does  not  so  rest,  however.  Readers  of  Fhan-


320  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


tasms  of  the  Living  will  remember  that  a  considerable  mass  of  evidence
for  collective  halhicinations  was  there  presented  and  discussed  (see  Vol.
II.,  Chapter  XVIII.),  and  since  then  further  cases  have  been  received
and  laid  before  the  Society  from  time  to  time  in  the  Journal.  Among  the
latter,  we  may  especially  refer  to  the  case  of  the  brothers  Ellwood
{Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  286)  who  state — in  an  account  written  within
two  months  of  the  experience — that  they  simultaneously  saw  a  halluci-
natory figure  standing  at  their  bedside  ;  the  case  of  three  sisters — the
Misses  Du  Cane — who  collectively  saw  the  figure  "  of  a  young  man  of
middle  height,  dressed  in  dark  clothes  and  wearing  a  peaked  cap,"  which
vanished  "  within  a  few  inches  of  "  two  of  them  {.Journal,  Vol.  V.,  p.
224)  ;  the  case  of  Lady  B.  and  Miss  B.  {Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  145) ;
and,  finally,  the  very  remarkable  case  narrated  by  Miss  Atkinson — a  few
months  after  the  experience — in  an  account  {Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  230)
from  which  we  extract  the  following  : —

"My  friend  had  been  telling  me  of  a  very  dear  old  friend  of  the

family  [Dr. ]  who  was  buried  in  the  church. ... I  remember

that  the  neglect  of  his  wish  [to  have  a  window  put  in  to  his  memory]
quite  made  me  angry.  .  .  .  Just  then  I  saw  an  old  gentleman  behind
us,  but,  thinking  he  was  looking  over  the  church,  took  no  notice.  But

my  friend  got  very  white  and  said  'Come  away,  there  is  Dr.  !'  Not

being  a  believer  in  apparitions,  I  simply  for  the  moment  thought  she
was  crazy,  though  I  knew  they  were  a  ghost-seeing  family.  But  when
I  moved,  still  looking  at  him,  and  the  figure  before  my  very  eyes
vanished,  I  had  to  give  in.  .  .  .  When  we  got  outside  my  friend  told  me
that  his  was  the  figure  which  came  to  difi"erent  members  of  their  family  so
often,  and,  indeed,  had  been  the  cause  of  their  leaving  one  house."

To  all  this  previous  evidence,  that  included  in  the  Census  adds
material  confirmation,  and  we  do  not  think  it  can  reasonably  be
doubted  that  collective  hallucinations  occur,  though  unmistakable
ones  are  somewhat  rare.

If  this  be  so,  we  may  probably  regard  our  collection  as  a
typical  one ;  and  may  conclude  from  it  that  collectivity  is  fairly
distributed  over  the  different  classes  of  hallucinations ;  since  an
analysis  of  the  cases  stated  to  be  collective  shows  that  all  the  classes
into  which  we  have  divided  visual  and  auditory  hallucinations  are
adequately  i-epresented  among  them,  except  visions  and  religious
apparitions. 1

Another  point  on  which  our  statistics  are  calculated  to  throw  light
is  the  question  how  far  hallucinations  tend  to  be  shared,  when  there
is  more  than  one  person  present.  As  already  stated,  the  cases  in
the  Census  in  which  a  visual  hallucination  is  shared  are  about
a  third of  those  in  which  we  know  that two  or  more  persons


1  See  Table  in  Appendix  F.


XV.]


Collective  Hallucinations.


321


were  together  and  awake — namely,  95  out  of  283.  Among  the  95
cases  there  are  38  in  which  there  were  more  than  two  persons  present,
and  in  23,  or  about  three-fifths,  of  these  all  present  shared  in  the
experience.  At  first  sight,  therefore,  it  appears  legitimate  to  infer
that  shared  visual  hallucinations  are  more  rarely  unseen  by  some
present  than  hallucinations  confined  to  a  single  percipient.  But  in
view  of  the  probability  that  in  collective  cases  many  of  the  supposed
hallucinatory  objects  were  real,  it  would  be  unsafe  to  draw  any
inferences  from  this  ;  especially  as,  among  the  38  cases,  examination
shows  that  in  a  considerably  larger  proportion  of  those  where  all
present  saw  the  object  than  of  the  others,  there  are  grounds  for  sus-
pecting that  the  objects  were  real  and  not  hallucinatory.

We  may  further  use  our  collection  as  a  basis  for  the  discussion  of
the  important  question,  how  any  hallucinations  at  all  come  to  be
collective.  There  are  four  possible  hypotheses  apart  from  the  supposi-
tion that  the  object  collectively  perceived,  while  not  belonging  to  the
ordinary  external  world,  was  yet  a  real  object  subject  to  physical  laws.
The  difiiculties  of  this  supposition  have  been  discussed  by  Mr.
Gurney  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  Chapter  XVIII.,  and
need  not  detain  us  now.

Of  the  remaining  four  hypotheses,  the  first  is  that  some  real
external  object  suggests  to  each  percipient  thi'ough  the  senses  a
hallucination  which  assumes  a  similar  form  for  each  owing  to  similar
associations  and  trains  of  thought.  This  explanation  seems  to  us
admissible  in  special  cases,  e.g.,  in  No.  317.  p.  308,  where,  as  both
sisters  were  actually  expecting  to  see  the  same  sight  in  the  same  place,
some  movement  in  the  distance  may  have  acted  for  both  as  a  starting
point  for  the  hallucination.  But,  as  the  narratives  above  given  suffi-
ciently show,  this  explanation  cannot  cover  more  than  a  small  part  of  the
cases  of  alleged  collective  hallucinations,  and  we  must  therefore  for
the  remainder  have  recourse  to  one  or  more  of  the  other  three  hypo-
theses. These  are  : —

(1)  That  a  hallucination  experienced  by  one  percipient  is  trans-
ferred to  the  other  by  verbal  or  other  suggestion  through  the  ordinary
senses.

(2)  That  the  hallucination  of  one  percipient  is  similarly  transferi-ed
to  the  other,  but  telepathically — by  mental  suggestion.

(3)  That  there  is  an  external  agent  directly  aflfecting  the  minds  of
both  percipients  and  producing  a  hallucination  independently  in  each,
in  some  supernormal  manner.

The  last  hypothesis  has  been  amplified  by  Mr.  Myers  in  a  "  Note
on  a  suggested  mode  of  psychical  interaction,"  appended  to  Phantasms
of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  277,  et  seq. The  view  there  set  forth  was

Y


322  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


that  in  all  cases  there  is  an  agent,  who  is  himself  telepathically  or
clairvoyantly  affected,  and  that  the  appearance  of  this  agent,  A,  to
the  percipients,  B  and  C,  depends  on  A's  own  perception  of  his  own
presence  (psychically)  in  the  scene  where  his  phantasm  is  observed.
Now  there  is,  no  doubt,  a  small  amount  of  evidence  supporting  the
view  that  persons  clairvoyantly  or  telepathically  perceiving  a  locality
to  which  they  feel  themselves  temporarily  transported,  as  it  were,  may
sometimes  manifest  themselves  more  or  less  clearly  to  a  person  in  that
locality.  The  experience  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newnham,  in  which  Mr.
Newnham  dreamt  very  vividly  that  he  saw  Mrs.  Newnham,  to  whom
he  was  then  engaged,  going  upstairs  in  her  own  house,  and  that  running
up  after  her,  he  clasped  her  round  the  waist ;  while  Mrs.  Newnham,  who
was  actually  going  upstairs  at  the  time,  thought  she  heard  his  step
and  felt  his  arms,  ^  is  a  case  in  point.  And  another  possible  case  is  one
of  Dr.  Backman's  experiments,  in  which  a  clairvoyant  girl  describes  a
room  in  which  a  gentleman  was  sitting — he  at  the  same  time  imagining
that  he  saw  a  worn  an.  ^

But  the  evidence  of  this  kind  in  our  possession  in  not,  in  the  view
of  the  majority  of  the  Committee,  sufficient  to  justify  us  in  regarding
recriprocal  telepathic  influence  as  a  completely  established  fact ;  and
even  if  it  were  otherwise,  the  rarity  of  the  proved  cases  of  reciprocity
would  still  be  a  serious  objection  against  admitting  the  hypothesis
that  we  are  now  considering  as  a  universally  applicable  explanation
of  collectivity.

Further,  if  this  reciprocal  action  between  agent  and  percipient  were
a  general  explanation  of  collective  hallucinations,  we  should  expect  to
find  that  the  agent,  when  a  living  person,  was  sometimes  aware  of  it
e.g.,  in  the  case  of  Miss  K.  E.,  seen  by  her  sisters  in  the  church,
p.  306.  But  in  the  present  collection  we  have  no  instance  among
the  collective  cases  of  consciousness  of  any  reciprocal  action :  and
there  is  only  one  such  case — an  auditory  one — in  Phantasms  of  the
Living.^

Finally,  if  Councillor  Wesermann's  record  of  an  experiment,  given
in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  287,  be  accepted  as  trustworthy
— and  we  know  no  reason  for  distrusting  it — it  seems  to  us  to  afford  a
crucial  instance  against  the  theory  that  reciprocal  action  between  the
distant  agent  and  the  percipients  is  a  necessary  condition  of  collective
percipience.  In  this  case  we  have  an  apparition  experimentally  pro-
duced— an  apparition  not  of  the  agent  himself,  but  of  a  dead  person  ;
it  appears  to  the  person  whom  the  agent  intended  to  impress,  but  not

1  Phantctsvis  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  225.

2  Procee<Mnfjs  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  206-207.

3  Vol.  II.,  p.  164  (No.  308).


XV.]


Collective  Hallucincdions.


323


in  the  place  where  the  agent  believed  the  percipient  to  be ;  and  it
appears  not  only  to  the  intended  percipient,  but  to  a  person  unknown
to  the  agent,  and  of  whose  local  proximity  to  the  intended  percipient
the  agent  was  entirely  unaware,  until  informed  of  it  tlu'ough  the
ordinary  channels  of  intelligence.  Hence  it  seems  clear  (1)  that  the
agent's  success  in  impressing  the  percipient  whom  he  intended  to
impress  was  entirely  independent  of  the  locality  of  the  latter,  and  (2)
that  the  channel  of  communication  with  the  secondary  percipient  was
through  the  first  percipient  and  not  through  the  agent's  thought  of
the  locality.

The  question,  however,  still  remains  whether  the  mere  fact  of  col-
lective perception  of  an  apparition  is  a  ground  for  supposing  some
supernormal  action  of  an  external  agent  on  the  joint  percipients.  This
supposition  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  numerous^  cases  in  which
the  person  represented  in  a  collective  hallucination  is  known  not  to
have  been  passing  through  any  crisis  at  the  time  of  the  halluci-
nation :  but  a  stronger  argument  against  it  lies  in  the  cases  where  the
apparition  is  not  human.  The  cat,  for  instance,  in  No.  535.2  (see  p.
305)  can  hai'dly  have  caused  its  apparition  by  projecting  itself
psychically  first  into  one  house  and  then  into  another,  in  which  the
percipients  happened  to  be.

It  is  true  that  collective  non-human  apparitions  are  rare,  but  so  are
non-human  apparitions  which  are  not  collective  ;  indeed,  collective  ex-
periences are  more  than  proportionately  represented  in  the  non-human
classes. 2

On  the  whole  then,  we  can  only  allow,  at  most,  a  restricted  applica-
tion to  the  hypothesis  that  in  collective  hallucinations  an  external
agent  affects  both  percipients  directly.  In  a  considerable  jDrogortion
of  cases  we  have  to  fall  back  on  the  other  two  hypotheses,  and  suppose
that  the  phenomenon  is  due  to  the  influence  of  one  percipient  on  the
other,  either  through  ordinary  or  through  telepathic  suggestion.  Of
course,  in  cases  in  which  there  is  a  distant  agent, — as  in  Councillor

1  In  14  of  the  27  cases  reported  to  us  of  recognised  apparitions  of  living  persons
collectively  perceived,  the  person  represented  appears,  from  the  statements  made,  to
have  been  at  the  time  in  a  perfectly  ordinary  condition.

In  one  case  in  our  Census  (No.  296.  1)  a  hallucinatory  chair  is  said  to  have  been
seen  by  two  persnos ;  one  of  whom  (Mrs.  Savile  Lumley)  describes  the  experience —
which  occurred  many  years  ago— as  follows  : —

"While  taking  a  lesson  in  drilling  and  callisthenics,  with  a  class  of  girls,  at  20,
Camden  Place,  Bath,  in  the  forenoon  ...  I  and  another  girl  distinctly  saw  a
chair  over  which  we  felt  we  must  fall,  and  called  out  to  each  other  to  avoid  it,
but  no  chair  ims  there.  All  chairs  were  removed  to  make  room.  [I  was]  14  or  15,  in
good  health.  Several  [persons  were  present],  but  only  one  other  saw  the  same — the
girl  who  was  immediately  behind  me."

y  2


324  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hcdlueinations.  [chap.


Wesermann's  case,  and  presumably  in  the  coincidental  cases,^ — the
experiences  of  the  simultaneous  percipients  may  be  both  directly  pro-
duced by  him  ;  but,  even  when  this  is  to  some  extent  the  case,  we  are
disposed  to  think  that  they  are  still  seldom  wholly  independent  of  each
other.  If  they  were,  it  appears  to  us  in  the  first  place  that,  considering
the  variety  of  forms  that  telepathic  impressions  take,  the  hallucina-
tions of  different  percipients  in  collective  cases  would  be  more  often
decidedly  divergent  than  they  are — would  appeal  to  different  senses,
for  instance,  or  one  percipient  would  see  an  apparition  standing  and
another  would  see  it  sitting,  one  would  see  it  in  one  dress  and  one  in
another,  etc.  Or,  if  this  does  not  happen  because  the  form  of  the
phantasm  is  due  to  the  agent's  thought,  we  should  at  least  expect  that
it  would  generally  be  seen  by  the  different  percipients  to  occupy
different  positions  in  the  room.

It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that,  if  there  is  action  by  one
percipient  on  the  other,  or  mutual  action  between  their  minds,  their
percepts  will  in  all  respects  agree.  For  instance,  in  No.  703.  24
(see  p.  317),  where  the  hallucinations  affected  different  senses,  they
may  still  have  been  the  result  of  thought-transference  between  the
percipients.  All  that  we  are  maintaining  is  that  it  is  difficult  or
impossible  to  explain  the  degree  of  agreement  which  we  usually
find  on  the  assumption  that  the  joercepts  are  independent  of  each
other.

We  pass,  then,  to  consider  what,  in  collective  cases,  is  the  nature  of
the  action  between  the  minds  of  the  jaercipients.  Does  it  take  place
through  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense,  or  is  it  telepathic  1  As  regards
the  first  hypothesis,  we  explained  in  Chapter  X.,  pp.  176-7,  that  we
have  at  pi'esent  no  conclusive  evidence  for  the  possibility  of  the  sudden
production  of  a  sensory  hallucination  in  a  person  in  an  entirely  normaP
state,  by  word  or  gesture.  But  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  vividness
of  impression,  pi'oduced  in  A  by  the  hallucination,  may  be  required  in
order  to  enable  his  word  or  movement  to  convey  the  impression  to  B
with  hallucination-producing  force.  A  mere  idea  or  effort  of  the
imagination  is  a  very  different  thing  from  the  feeling  of  reality  which
a  hallucination  momentarily  gives.  At  any  rate,  it  would  not  be  safe
to  assume  that  the  action  between  the  minds  has  been  telepathic,  unless

^  The  proportion  of  collective  cases  among  coincidental  hallucinations  in  the
Census  i.s  slightly  smaller  than  among  hallucinations  generally,  but  there  is  not  a
great  difference.  Seven  visual  death-coincidences  are  said  to  have  been  collective
out  of  2fi  in  which  the  percipient  had  a  waking  companion.

-  The  instances  known  to  us  in  which  hallucinations  have  been  produced  by
verbal  suggestion,  outside  the  hypnotic  state,  are  either  (a)  cases  of  persons  wt  o
have  previously  been  hypnotized,  or  (b)  cases  where  the  effect  has  been  produced  b\
prolonged  and  insistent  effort.


XV.]


Collective  Hallucinations.


325


we  have  excluded  the  possibility  of  ordinary  suggestion,  and  it  is
very  difficult  to  exclude  this  completely.  There  is  hardly  a  case  among
those  which  we  have  given  in  the  course  of  the  present  report,  where
we  can  feel  sure  that  it  did  not  operate  in  some  degree.  It  is
obvious,  however,  that  suggestion  of  this  kind  would  more  easily
account  for  the  phenomenon  in  some  cases  than  in  others.  If  the
figure  seen  is  that  of  a  person  who  is  well  known  to  both  percipients,
who  is  more  likely  to  be  in  that  place  than  any  one  else,  or  still
more  if  he  is  actually  expected  by  both  (as  in  No.  317.  14,  p.  308),  a
very  small  amount  of  sensory  suggestion  from  A  might  convey  the
idea  to  B,  and  if  they  were  both  to  have  hallucinations  they  would
be  likely  to  have  similar  ones.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  figure  seen
is  an  unfamiliar  one  (as  in  No.  535.  2,  p.  305,  and  256.  17,  p. 310),  we  can
hardly  conceive  that  the  idea  of  it  could  be  conveyed  from  one  per-
cipient to  the  other  through  the  senses  in  the  brief  time  available.  No
doubt  there  is  a  possibility  that  in  comparing  notes  immediately  after
the  experience,  the  percipients  may  have  unconsciously  brought  their
recollections  into  a  unison  of  detail  not  warranted  by  the  original
impressions.  But  our  enquiries  have  not  produced  any  positive
evidence  that  this  has  occurred  :  and  to  suppose  it  to  have  occurred  to
the  extent  required  in  order  to  explain  collective  hallucinations
entirely  by  sensory  suggestion,  seems  to  us  unwarrantable  and  ex-
travagant.

We  think,  therefore,  that  in  the  explanation  of  these  cases,  the
hypothesis  of  ordinary  suggestion  must  be  at  least  supplemented  by
that  of  telepathic  suggestion.  For  those  who  believe  in  telepathy,  mental
suggestion  is  really  an  easier  explanation  of  collective  hallucinations  than
verbal  suggestion  ;  for  not  only  can  we  imagine  the  idea  thus  conveyed
pictorially,  as  it  were,  and  with  full  details,  in  an  instant,  but  we  have
actual  experimental  instances  of  hallucinations  telepathically  produced
in  persons  in  a  normal  state,  by  the  intention  of  another  person.  In
these  experimental  cases,  moi'eover,  the  effect  was  produced  under
apparently  less  favourable  circumstances — namely,  greater  distance  and
absence  of  any  indication  that  there  was  anything  special  to  be  looked
for.i  On  the  whole  we  are  inclined  to  think  that  in  collective  cases
there  is  generally  a  combination  of  telepathy  with  suggestion  by  woixl
or  gesture,  each  helping  the  other ;  and  that  this  is  the  reason  why
the  proportion  of  collective  cases  out  of  those  in  which  a  second
possible  percipient  was  present  is  large  compared  with  the  proportion

^  In  visual  collective  oases  there  must  generally  be  at  least  the  indication  given
by  the  direction  of  the  eyes— an  indication  to  which  most  of  us  are  habitually  sensi-
tive. For  evidence  of  this  among  cases  printed  in  this  chapter,  see  especially  Nos .
535.  2  (p.  305),  647.  7  (p.  306),  256.  17  (p.  310).


326


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


of  successful  cases  of  telepathy  among  those  in  which  we  must  suppose
that  persons  dying,  or  in  some  other  crisis,  have  desired  to  communicate
with  their  friends.

The  Sharing  of  Hallucinations  by  Animals.

Before  concluding  this  chapter,  we  have  to  discuss  a  special  class
of  alleged  collective  hallucinations  of  which  nothing  has  as  yet  been
said — those,  namely,  in  which  it  is  believed  by  our  informants  that
animals  who  were  present  with  them  when  they  saw  apparitions
shared  in  the  experience.  There  appears  to  be  some  evidence  (occa-
sionally very  slight)  of  this  in  15  out  of  the  27  cases  in  the  Census
where  the  presence  of  animals  ^  is  recorded.

There  is,  so  far  as  we  know,  no  reason  to  assume  that  animals
cannot  experience  hallucinations  ;  but  it  is  necessarily  very  difficult  to
prove  that  they  do  experience  them  ;  because,  as  they  cannot  describe
what  they  see  and  hear,  we  can  only  infer  it  from  their  behaviour,  for
which  tliere  may  be  other  causes  besides  the  apparition.  In  some
cases  it  is  at  least  as  plausible  to  suppose  that  the  emotion  of  the  horse
or  dog  is  caused  by  the  behaviour  or  appearance  of  his  master  when
seeing  the  apparition,  as  to  suppose  it  caused  by  any  sharing  of  his
master's  hallucination.  For  instance,  consider  the  case  of  Mr.  Mamt-
chitch,  quoted  in  Chapter  XVII.  Mr.  Mamtchitch  tells  us,  at  p,  389,
that  cei'tain  effects  observable  by  those  with  him  are  produced  on  himself
each  time  he  sees  the  apparition  which  has  so  frequently  recurred  in
his  experience.  Is  it  not  probable  that  the  behaviour  of  the  dog  de-
scribed at  p.  390  was  due  to  the  distress  caused  by  his  master's  unusual
state  rather  than  by  seeing  the  apparition,  especially  as  he  does  not
seem  to  have  behaved  as  he  habitually  did  when  a  stranger  intruded
into  the  room?^  When  the  action  of  the  animal  which  leads  to  the
inference  that  he  is  a  co-percipient  precedes  the  seeing  of  the  appari-
tion by  the  human  percipient — which  is  said  to  have  occurred  in  5  of
the  15  cases  in  which  animals  play  a  part — there  is,  no  doubt,  generally
suggestion  from  the  animal  ;  but  that  may  be  the  whole  of  his  share  in
the  phenomenon.  In  the  following  case,  for  instance,  the  dog's  growl  and
the  direction  of  his  gaze  suggested  to  Mr.  S.  that  some  one  was  coming
in  ;  but  the  dog's  action  may  have  had  quite  a  different  cause.

1  In  all  but  one  of  these  cases,  the  animal  was  either  a  horse  or  a  dog.  In  the
other  case  it  was  a  parrot,  but  the  details  of  the  account  are  too  meagre  for  it  to  be
possible  to  lay  any  stress  on  it.

-  The  evidence  for  Mr.  Mamtchitch 's  little  son  sharing  his  hallucination  on  one
occasion  (see  p.  390)  is  much  stronger  than  that  for  the  dog's  doing  so  ;  because,
though  the  child  could  scarcely  speak,  he  could  say  enough  to  show  that  he  thought
he  saw  a  woman.


XV.]


Collective  Ha  llucinations.


327


(157.11.)  From  Mr.  H.  E.  S.

August  Sth,  1892.

"[When  aged  about  18]  about  the  year  1874,  in  my  father's  house,  I  got
up  one  summer  morning  about  five  o'clock,  and  lighted  a  fire  to  get  myself
some  tea.  A  large  bull-terrier  dog  used  to  follow  me  about  everywhere,  so
of  course  he  had  to  be  near  me  when  I  was  getting  the  fire  to  light.  He
gave  a  short  growl  and  looked  towards  the  door  ;  this  caused  me  to  look
round,  and  to  my  great  terror  I  saw  a  tall,  dark  figure  with  flashing  bright
eyes  coming  into  the  kitchen  towards  me.  I  screamed  for  help  and  fell  to
the  floor.  My  father  and  brothers  ran  down  from  their  bedrooms  thinking
that  thieves  were  in  the  house.  I  told  them  what  I  had  seen,  but  they
said  it  was  an  imagination  caused  by  a  recent  illness.  But  why  should  the
dog  have  seen  something  as  well  as  myself  1  This  dog  often  used  to  see
things  invisible  to  me.  He  would  start  and  snap  at  them,  and  then  turn  to
me  a  look  with  his  big  eyes,  as  much  as  to  say  :  '  Did  you  see  that  ? '  "

In  this  case  the  percipient  had  had  two  other  hallucinations,
one  before,  (at  the  age  of  five  years),  and  one  after  that  here  quoted,
so  that  he  probably  had  a  more  than  average  susceptibility  to  them  ;
though  it  appears  that  the  dog's  behaviour  often  suggested  the  presence
of  things  invisible  to  him,  without  producing  a  hallucination.

In  the  two  following  cases  thei'e  is  even  less  indication  that  the  dog
saw  the  apparition,  though  there  is  a  good  deal  of  indication  that  he
was  the  cause  of  his  master's  seeing  it.

(116.  11.)  From  the  Rev.  J.  W.

(The  account  was  written  in  1891.)

"[I  saw]  lady  looking  into  room  about  12.30  [a.]m.  ;  saw  lier  in  clear
moonlight  ;  about  the  year  1862.  [I  was]  reading  and  writing,  till  called
out  by  howling  of  dog.  [I]  believed  she  was  on  [the]  sea  at  the  time.  No
person  present,  but  the  dog  shared  the  experience,  as  he  was  in  the  utmost
terror.  [I  have]  never  again  [had  such  an  experience.  I]  took  no  notes
but  never  forgot  it."

(283.  25.)  From  Mr.  L.  D.

J cmuary,  1890.

' '  I  was  awakened  by  a  little  dog  (which  used  to  lie  at  the  bottom  of  my
'bed),  and  looking  towards  the  window,  I  distinctly  saw  the  figure  of  a
woman.  She  was  dressed  in  a  low  necked  dress  and  short  sleeves  bunched
up  on  the  shoulder. I  asked  about  it  and  could  gain  no  information."

In  the  following  case  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  dog's  excitement
"began  before  or  after  the  experience  of  the  human  percipient.  It  will
be  noticed  that  to  those  persons  who  did  not  see  the  apparition,  the
dog's  behaviour  does  not  appear  to  have  at  the  time  suggested  the  need
of  a  supernormal  explanation.


328  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


(583.  14.)  From  Mrs,  T.

(Translated  from  the  original  Russian  by  Mr.  Aksakolf.)

October,  1891.

Notes  prises  sit,r  le  recit  de  Madame  T.

"  En  187 —  Madame  T.  se  trouvait  un  jour  chez  ses  voisins  de  campagne,
M.  et  Mme.  B.,  a  P.,  leur  bien  (au  gouvernement  deTwer).  La  conversation
s'engagea  sur  un  evenement  tragique,  qui  eu  lieu  dans  la  famille  des  T.,  qui
finit  par  le  suicide  d'un  des  parents  de  Mme.  T.  ;  tout  a  coup  elle  le  vit
apparaitre  dans  la  chambre  contigue  au  salon  oil  ils  se  trouvaient,  et  dont  la
porte  etait  ouverte .  Au  meme  moment,  le  cliien  de  la  maitresse  de  la  maison,
qui  etait  C(juche  a  ses  pieds,  se  redressa,  et  coramenga  a  aboyer  f  urieusement
dans  la  direction  de  la  porte.  M.  et  Mme.  B.  ne  virent  rien,  car  ils  tour-
naient  le  dos  a  cette  porte,  et  Mme.  T.  ne  leur  dit  rien  de  ce  qu'elle  avait
vu."

Cor\JirmatioH  de  ce  recit  par  mie  lettre  du  temoin,  Madame  B.

October  Will,  1891.
"  C'etait  en  187 —  a  notrebien,  P.  (gouv.  de  Twer).  Nous  etions  trois  :
Mme.  T. ,  notre  voisine,  qui  etait  venue  nous  voir,  mon  niari  et  moi  ;  nous
nous  trouvions  dans  le  petit  s  ilon  de  notre  maison  de  campagne,  non  loin
d'une  porte  ouverte  donnant  sur  ma  chambre  k  coucher,  eclairee  par  una
grande  fenetre.  Madame  T.  ^tait  assise  sur  une  couchette,  en  face  de  cette
porte  ;  moi  j'etais  assise  aujDres  d'elle  sur  un  tabouret,  aussi  en  face  de  cette
porte  ;  mais  mon  mari  se  trouvait  dans  un  coin,  de  fagon  qu'il  ne  voyait  pas
cette  porte.  A  mes  pieds  etait  couche  mon  chien  Beppo,  la  tete  tourn^e  vers
cette  porte.  Nous  parlions  de  I'^v^nement  qui  venait  d'avoir  lieu  dans  la
famille  des  T.,  ou  la  femme,  entrainee  par  la  passion,  abaiidonna  ses  enfants
et  son  mari,  et  celui-ci,  dans  son  d^sespoir,  se  brula  la  cervelle.  Mon  mari
accusait  la  femme,  Mme.  T.  accusait  le  mari,  qu'elle  avait  toujours  beaucoup
aime,  mais  dans  ce  cas  elle  ne  I'excusait  pas.  Tout  k  coup  elle  se  tut,  et  le
chien,  relevant  la  tete,  se  mit  h  hurler  et  voulut  se  pr^cipiter  vers  la  porte
<;)uverte  de  la  chambre  k  c<jucher  ;  tout  son  jjoil  se  herissa,  et  il  s'arrachait
de  mes  mains  pour  se  jeter  sur  quelqu'un.  J 'avals  grande  peine  k  le
retenir  ;  mon  mari  voulait  le  battre,  et  moi  je  le  defendait.  Ni  moi,  ni  lui,
nous  ne  vimes  rien  hors  la  colere  de  notre  chien.  Mme.  T.  se  taisait,  et
quand  notre  chien  se  calma,  elle  proposa  de  passer  dans  la  salle,  oii  se  trouvait
son  mari.  Bientot  M.  et  Muie.  T.  partirent  et  ce  n'est  que  plus  tard,
quand  j'allai  leur  faire  une  visite  k  leur  campagne,  que  Mme.  T.  me  dit
qu'elle  avait  vu,  au-devant  de  la  porte  de  ma  ch;imbre  a  coucher,  le  fantome
de  celui  qu'elle  accusait — vetu  de  blanc,  et  avec  une  expression  de  desespoir
dans  ses  mouvements,  comme  lui  reprochant  qu'elle  aussi  ^tait  contre  lui.
'  Votre  Beppo  a  vu  la  meme  chose,  me  dit  elle,  il  etait  furieux  et  voulait  se
jeter  sur  cette  apparition.'  J'ai  bien  vu  la  furie  de  Beppo,  mais  je  n'ai  pas
vu  I'apparition.  "N.B."

The  following  is  an  instance  of  a  horse  supposed  to  see  an  appari-
tion. It  is,  again,  rather  doubtful  whether  the  unwonted  experience
began  with  the  animal  or  with  the  man.  In  the  latter  case  we  must
allow  for  the  disturbing  effect  ou  the  pony,  which  would  certainly  be


XV.]


Collective  Hallucinations.


329


considerable,  if — as  must  have  happened — his  rider  pulled  him  up  as
though  there  was  an  obstacle  in  front  of  him,  when  there  was  none.

(532.  6.)  From  Captain  C.

December  5th,  1891.
"Between  10  and  11  one  moonlight  night,  in  December,  1865,  or
January,  1866,  in  Darjeeling,  whilst  riding  my  hill-pony  at  a  sharp  trot
along  the  mountain  road  from  that  station  to  the  convalescent  depot,  J ulla-
pahur,  where  I  happened  to  be  stationed  at  the  time  on  sick  leave,
I  suddenly  saw  before  me  what  appeared  to  be  a  dead  native,  wrapped  m  a
white  sheet,  and  lying  stretched  across  the  road.  My  pony  evidently  saw  the
apparition,  or  whatever  it  was,  at  the  same  time,  for  he  instantly  reared  up
and  fell  over  backwards  with  me  on  the  road,  and  dragged  me  close  to  the
edge  of  a  '  khud  '  or  precipice.  I  regained  my  feet  just  in  time,  and  raised  the
prostrate  animal  by  the  bridle.  Found  it  trembling  in  every  limb,  and  much
frightened.  Looked  round  angrily  to  '  wig  '  the  native — thinking  him  to  be,
perhaps,  a  drunken  Bhootea,  or  Hill-man,  lying  there,  when,  lo  and  behold  !
he  had  disappeared  !  On  one  side  was  the  precipice,  on  the  other  the  precipi-
tous mountain  side,  clothed  with  a  few  trees  higher  up,  and  not  an  object  else
to  be  seen  but  the  white  road!  Mounting,  and  making  my  way  half  or  three-
quarters  of  a  mile  further  on  to  my  bungalow,  I  handed  the  pony  over  to  one
of  my  servants.  He  presently  came  to  me  and  said,  '  Sir,  what  is  the  matter
with  the  pony  ;  he  is  trembling  all  over  ? '  After  a  while,  my  syce,  or  groom,
came  running  up  aird  entered  the  stable.  (It  is  usual  for  native  grooms,  or
syces,  in  India  to  run  on  foot  after  their  masters'  horses. )  He  likewise  soon
presented  himself  before  me,  saying,  '  Sir,  what  is  wrong  with  your  pony ;  he
seems  to  be  much  frightened  1 '  I  then  told  him  what  had  happened,  and
asked  if  he  had  met  or  seen  anyone  on  the  road  1  '  No,  sir  ;  not  a  soul  all  the
way, '  replied  he.  '  Did  you  notice  anything  strange  at  all  ? '  '  No  ;  nothing
whatever,  sir.'

"  I  remained  some  months  after  that  at  Jullapahur,  and  never  could  I
ride  my  pony  up  and  down  that  road  leading  to  Darjeeling  without  his
showing  the  utmost  trepidation  whenever  he  approached  that  particular
spot.  I  may  mention  that  I  was  a  good  deal  cut  and  bruised  by  the  sudden
and  unlooked-for  fall,  and  so  also  was  the  unfortunate  pony.  And  to  this
day  I  cannot  account  for  my  adventure.

"  [I  was  at  the  time]  on  nine  months'  sick-leave  from  Bhootan,  where  I
had  contracted  fever  during  the  campaign,  but  was  convalescent  at  the  time,
and  able  to  go  about  in  the  better  climate  of  the  hills  at  Darjeeling  ;  was
then  about  24  years  old."

In  answer  to  enquiries,  Captain  C.  adds  : —

' '  The  apparition,  when  I  first  saw  it,  seemed  to  be  quite  close — a  yard  or
two  only  in  front  of  my  pony's  head.  I  came  across  it  very  suddenly  in  trot-
ting quickly  round  a  sharp  curve  of  the  road,  which  curve  was  made  by  the
road  running  round  a  somewhat  pointed  spur  of  the  mountain  there  jutting
out.  The  road  was  white—  a  good  and  smooth  one — and  the  night  bright
moonlight,  with  occasional  intervals  of  less  light,  i.e.,  when  the  moon  became
obscured  by  passing  clouds,  but  even  then  it  was  by  no  means  too  dark  to  see
objects  around. Bhooteas  and  other  Hill-men  were  in  the  habit  of  visiting


330  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


the  bazaar  (Darjeeling)  with  loads  of  firewood,  fowls,  and  vegetables  for  sale,
and  some  of  these  occasionally  indulged  too  freely  in  arrack  and  toddy,  and
have  been  known  to  lie  about  the  I'oads  in  a  state  of  intoxication.  I  conse-
quently took  my  apparition  at  first  to  be  a  drunken  Bhootea,  lying  wrapjjed
up  in  his  sheet  on  the  road  ;  but  the  remarkable  thing  is,  if  so,  where  coidd
the  fellow  have  disap^xared  to  so  very  rapidly  and  completely,  for  on  my  right
hand  was  the  tremendous  'khud,'  or  precipice,  and  on  my  left  nothing  Imt
the  steep  mountain  side,  up  which  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  my  seeing  a
good  way  till  the  trees  were  reached.  I  had  in  those  days,  and  have  still,
capital  sight,  and  having  had  rather  a  stirring  life,  having  gone  through  many
a  trying  and  dangerous  experience,  both  in  time  of  war  and  of  peace — the
Indian  Mutiny  campaign,  and  Bhootan  War,  etc. — I  am  not  easily  upset  or
frightened.  But  what  the  thing  could  have  been  beats  my  comjarehension,
nor  could  any  of  my  brother  officers  or  friends  in  Darjeeling  at  the  time,  or
afterwards,  solve  the  mystery."

Readers  of  the  Journal  will  remember  that  it  has  been  maintained
(see  Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  296-7)  that  "one  of  the  most
commonly  I'eported  incidents  connected  with  a  post-mortem  phantasm
is  the  evident  terror  shown  by  animals  present  at  the  time,  a  feature
which,"  the  writer  says,  "is  absent,  so  far  as  I  know,  in  phantasms  of
the  living."  He  calculated  that  of  the  cases  publi.shed  by  the  S.P.R.,
animal  terror  was  not  recorded  in  connection  with  any  recognised
phantasm  of  a  living  person,  but  was  reported  in  about  12  per  cent,  of
other  cases,  "  nearly  all  unrecognised,  but  generally  assumed  by  the
percipient  to  be  post-mortem,  for  reasons  more  or  less  cogent."  This
result  is  not  confirmed  by  the  present  collection.  Fear  or  alarm
seemed  to  have  been  exhibited  by  the  animals  in  about  8  of  the  15
cases  in  which  they  are  supposed  to  have  seen  the  apparitions  seen  by
human  percipients.  In  one  of  these,  viz..  No.  116.  11  (see  p.  327),  the
apparition  was  of  a  living  person  ;  in  one,  viz.,  No.  422.  22,  (see  p.  390),
of  a  dead  person  ;  and  in  the  other  six  unrecognised.  In  none  of  the
unrecognised  cases  is  there  any  good  reason  for  associating  the
apparition  with  a  dead  person,  and,  except  in  one  case  (No.  80.  21,
see  Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  139),  no  reason  is  even  suggested.

On  the  whole  the  reported  cases  of  animals  seeing  apparitions  do
not  appear  to  us  to  afford  material  support  to  the  evidence  for
collectivity,  nor  need  they,  we  think,  influence  our  views  as  to  its
•causes.


XVI.]


Premonitions.


331


Chapter  XVI.

PREMONITIONS  AND  LOCAL  APPARITIONS.

In  Chapter  XIV.  we  gave  some  instances  of  hallucinations
occurring  during  the  illness  of  the  persons  whom  they  represented  or
suggested  to  the  percipient.  We  there  regarded  such  an  experience  as
due  to  telepathy,—  supposing  it  to  be  probably  contemporaneous  with  a
crisis  of  illness  and  caused  by  the  condition  of  the  mind  or  nervous
system  of  the  person  passing  through  the  crisis.  At  the  same  time,  we
are  aware  that,  where  the  illness  had  a  fatal  termination,  the  popular
view  of  such  a  hallucination — so  far  as  it  was  regarded  as  more  than
merely  subjective — would  be  that  it  was  "  premonitory"  of  the  death
that  followed.

We  do  not  think  that  there  is  any  adequate  justification  in  the
cases  which  we  have  given,  or  in  other  cases  of  the  same  kind,
for  introducing  the  vast  difficulties  involved  in  this  view.  There  is
no  sufficient  reason  for  regarding  them  as  caused  differently  from
other  hallucinations  occurring  during  the  illness  of  the  persons
represented  or  suggested,  where  the  illness  does  not  end  fatally, — of
which  we  have  given  two  examples.  But  in  view  of  the  traditional
belief  that  apparitions  of  living  persons  are  generally  premonitory  of
the  death  of  the  person  represented,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  men-
tion that  out  of  the  301  such  apparitions — other  than  death-coincidences
— reported  to  us  in  the  Census,  it  is  stated  in  only  22  cases  that  the
person  represented  died  some  time  after ;  the  interval  between  the
apparition  and  death  varying  from  15  hours  to  a  year.  Of  these  22,
7  coincided  with  a  sudden  and  fatal  illness  of  the  agent,  unknown  to
the  percipient  (being  included  in  the  11  cases  of  coincidence  with
illness  mentioned  on  p.  278).  In  6  other  cases,  the  apparition  occurred
during  the  course  of  an  illness,  about  which  the  percipient  was  in
more  or  less  anxiety.  There  remain  therefore  only  9  cases^ — in  two
of  which  the  interval  between  hallucination  and  death  was  as  much
as  a  year — which  we  have  no  ground  for  attributing  either  to  tele-
pathy or  to  anxiety  ;  and  these  are  clearly  insufficient  to  show  that
there  was  any  real  connexion  between  the  apparition  and  the  death
that  followed  it.  Indeed,  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  the  circumstances
strongly  suggest  such  a  connexion,  except  in  one  case  (Xo.  1.  5),  where
the  percipient,  lying  awake  in  bed  in  the  early  morning,  saw  an  appari-
tion of  her  brother  sitting  in  the  room,  About  15  hours  later,  he  was
killed  in  a  railway  accident.  The  incident  occurred  about  25  years
before  it  was  reported  to  us,  and  no  corroboration  is  obtainable.


1  One  of  these  is  No.  470.  1,  see  p.  193.


332


Re'port  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


There  are,  however,  seven  or  eight  cases  of  hallucinations  of  a
dilFerent  kind  (that  is,  other  than  recognised  apparitioiis  of  living  per-
sons) which  have  perhaps  a.primd  facie  claim  to  be  regarded  as  prescient
or  premonitory.  Of  these  we  proceed  to  give  the  most  interesting ;  but
we  cannot  regard  them  as  constituting  an  important  addition  to  the
evidence  already  collected  on  this  subject. i

(458.  9.)  From  Mrs.  McAlpine.^

Garscadden,  Bearsden,  Glasgow,  Aii>ril  20th,  1892.

"  I  remember  in  the  June  of  1889,  I  drove  to  Castleblaney,  a  little  town
in  the  County  Monaghan,  to  meet  my  sister,  who  was  coming  by  train  from
Longford.  I  expected  her  at  3  o'clock,  but  as  she  did  not  come  with  that
train,  I  got  the  horse  put  up,  and  went  for  a  walk  in  the  demesne.  The  day
was  very  warm  and  bright,  and  I  wandered  on  under  the  shade  of  the  trees
to  the  side  of  a  lake,  which  is  in  the  demesne.  Being  at  length  tired,  I  sat
down  to  rest  upon  a  rock,  at  the  edge  of  the  water.  My  attention  was  quite
taken  up  with  the  extreme  beauty  of  the  scene  before  me.  There  was  not  a
sound  or  movement,  except  the  soft  ripple  of  the  water  on  the  sand  at  my
feet.  Presently  I  felt  a  cold  chill  creep  through  me,  and  a  curious  stiflPness
of  my  limbs,  as  if  I  could  not  move,  though  wishing  to  do  so.  I  felt
frightened,  yet  chained  to  the  spot,  and  as  if  impelled  to  stare  at  the  water
straight  in  front  of  me.  Gradually  a  black  cloud  seemed  to  rise,  and  in  the
midst  of  it  I  saw  a  tall  man,  in  a  suit  of  tweed,  jump  into  the  water
and  sink.

"In  a  moment  the  darkness  was  gone,  and  I  again  became  sensiljle  of  the
heat  and  sunshine,  but  I  was  awed  and  felt  'eerie,' — it  was  then  about
4  o'clock  or  so — I  cannot  remember  either  the  exact  time  or  date.  On  my
sister's  arrival  I  told  her  of  the  occurrence  ;  she  was  surprised,  but  inclined
to  laugh  at  it.  When  we  got  home  I  told  my  brother  ;  he  treated  the  subject
much  in  the  same  manner.  However,  about  a  week  afterwards,  a  Mr.  Espie,
a  bank  clerk  (unknown  to  me),  committed  suicide  by  drowning  in  that  very
sjjot.  He  left  a  letter  for  his  wife,  indicating  that  he  had  for  some  time  con-
templated his  death.  My  sister's  memory  of  the  event  is  the  only  evidence
I  can  give.  I  did  not  see  the  account  of  the  inquest  at  the  time,  and  did  not
mention  my  strange  experience  to  any  one,  saving  my  sister  and  brother.

"F.  C.  McAlpine."

Mrs.  McAlpine's  sister  writes  : —

Roxboro',  February  15th,  1892.
"  I  remember  perfectly  you  meeting  me  in  Castleblaney,  on  ray  way  home
from  Longford,  and  telling  me  of  the  strange  thing  which  happened  in  the
demesne.  You  know  you  were  always  hearing  or  seeing  something,  and  I
paid  little  attention,  but  I  remember  it  distinctly — your  troubled  expression
more  than  the  story.  You  said  a  tall  gentleman,  dressed  in  tweed,  walked
past  you,  and  went  into  a  little  inlet  or  creek.  I  think,  but  am  not  sure,
that  you  said  he  had  a  beard.  You  were  troubled  about  it,  or  looked  so  ;
and  I  talked  of  other  things. You  told  me  while  we  were  driving  home.  I

1  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  pp.  288-354.

-  For  otlier  exj^erieuces  of  the  same  percipient,  see  i^p.  279-282,


xvl]


Premonitions.


333


think,  but  I  am  not  sure,  that  it  was  about  the  25th  or  27th  of  J une,  1889,
that  I  left  Longford.  I  am  sure  of  that  being  the  day,  but  cannot  remember
the  date.  It  ims  in  June,  and  on  the  3rd  of  July,  1889,  a  Mr.  Espie,  a
bank  clerk,  drowned  himself  in  the  lake  in  the  demesne  in  'Blaney.  I  have
no  doubt  that  the  day  I  came  home  you  saw  Mr.  Espie's  '  fetch.'  "

The  following  account  is  taken  from  a  local  paper,  the  Nortliern  Standard,
Saturday,  Jidy  Gth,  1889  :—

Sad  Case  of  Suicide. — The  town  of  Castleblaney  was  put  into  a  fearful
state  of  excitement  when  it  became  known  on  Wednesday  last  that  Mr.
Espy  had  committed  suicide  by  drowning  himself  in  the  lake  in  the  demesne.
Latterly  he  was  noticed  to  be  rather  dull  and  low  in  spirits,  but  no  serious
notice  was  taken  of  his  conduct,  nor  had  anyone  the  most  remote  idea  that  he
contemplated  suicide.  On  Wednesday  morning  he  seemed  in  his  usual  health,
and,  as  was  customary  with  him,  walked  down  to  get  his  newspaper  on  the
arrival  of  the  9.45  train  from  Dublin.  He  met  Mr.  Fox  (in  whose  office  he
has  been  for  years)  at  the  station,  and  having  procured  his  paper  walked  up
to  the  office,  wrote  a  note  in  which  he  stated  what  he  was  going  to  do  and
indicating  where  his  body  would  be  found.  This  seemed  to  concern  him  a
good  deal,  for  he  seemed  very  anxious  that  his  body  should  be  recovered
without  any  delay.  He  had  fishing  tackle  in  his  pocket,  and  having  tied
one  end  of  a  pike  line  to  a  tree,  and  the  other  end  round  one  of  his  legs,  he
threw  himself  into  about  three  feet  deep  of  water,  where  he  was  found
shortly  afterwards  quite  dead,  and  before  the  note  that  he  had  left  in  the
office  had  been  opened."

It  is  possible  that,  if  we  knew  more  abovit  the  intending  suicide,
we  should  perceive  that  the  simplest  explanation  of  this  case  is
a  telepathic  one.  If  the  clerk's  mind  was  brooding  on  his  pui'pose
of  putting  an  end  to  himself,  and  on  the  spot  which,  as  the  letter
he  left  shows,  he  may  have  already  selected  for  the  purpose,  the
fact  that  the  percipient  was  at  that  place,  and  that  her  mind  was
therefore  occupied  with  it  also,  may  have  afforded  the  connecting  link
required  to  enable  her  to  receive  the  telepathic  impulse.

In  the  following  case,  we  cannot  be  sure,  in  the  first  place,  that  sub-
conscious physical  sensations  did  not  suggest  the  prophecy  and,  in  the
second,  that  the  expectation  created  by  the  prophecy  did  not  bring
about  the  punctual  but  unsuccessful  attempt  to  fulfil  it.

(690.  1.  )  From  Mrs.  T.  E.

[The  following  account  was  written  by  the  collector,  from  information  given
him  verbally  by  the  percipient,  Mrs.  E.,  who  afterwards  signed  it.  It  was
enclosed  in  a  letter  dated  Berlin,  April  14th,  1890.  For  otlier  exjieriences
of  Mrs.  E.'s,  see  pp.  174  and  186.]

"  Mrs.  E.  told  me,  herself,  each  and  all  of  the  occurrences  related  in  this
paper  while  I  was  in  Berlin  in  April,  1890.

"  Mrs.  E.  is  a  widow  lady  and  an  American,  but  of  English  extraction  ;
.she  describes  herself  as  being  not  imaginative,  not  credulous,  not  eccentric,


334  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


not  hysterical,  and  not  of  a  neurotic  constitution.  She  has  had  one  or  two
'  low,  nervous  fevers, '  but  iieither  in  the  f everisli  condition,  nor  in  that  of
convalescence,  has  she  had  any  hallucinations.

"  Throughout  her  entire  life  she  has  been  'haunted'  with  presentiments
(being  able  to  foretell  future  events  both  in  her  own  life  and  in  other  persons'
lives),  as  well  as  being  tormented  by  'voices  and  'visions,'  the  most
typical  of  which  are  concisely  given  below.  She  describes  both  the  voices  and
visions  as  being  invariably  of  the  nature  of  intruders  bursting  in  upon  and
disturbing  tlie  current  of  th(3ughts  at  the  moment.  All  the  hallucinations
were  most  vivid  and  apjjarently  '  real.'  This  suscejatibility  is  ajjparently
transmissible,  for  Mrs.  E. 's  only  daughter  is  the  subject  of  similar  hallucina-
tions. Mrs.  E.  yet  hears  voices,  often  daily  for  some  time.

"  All  the  recorded  cases  happened  in  America.

"  [The  following]  occurred  in  the  year  1845.  Mrs.  E.  was  in  good  health,
and  had  at  that  time,  had  none  of  tlie  Ijefore  mentioned  fevers,  wliich  came
on  between  the  ages  of  30  and  50.  Mrs.  E.  had  slept  well,  and  was  in  the
act  of  getting  up,  when  ajjparently  tlie  quiet  was  broken  in  upon  by  an
announcement  being  made  as  though  someone  had  come  in  at  the  bedroom
door,  and  said  in  a  loud  voice  these  words  : — '  To-day  at  6  o'clock  you  will
die.'  There  was  nothing  more,  but  these  words  seemed  to  resound  through-
out the  room.  Mrs.  E.  resolved  to  tell  no  one  of  the  announcement,  and
also  not  to  brood  over  it,  if  possible,  at  all.  To  accomplish  this,  she  went
in  the  coui'se  of  the  afternoon  to  the  house  of  a  married  sister  of  hers,
where  there  would  be  sure  to  be  sometliing  more  or  less  stirring  going  on.

' '  This  had  the  effect  of  distracting  the  attention  from  the  certainly  very
distressing  prophecy,  and  Mrs.  E.  had  the  benefit  of  her  sister's  society  till  6
o'clock  began  to  be  struck  by  the  clock.  As  it  commenced  sounding  Mrs.  E.
said  to  herself,  '  There  now,  it's  6  o'clock  already  and  nothing  has  happened,'
but  the  statement  was  premature,  for  before  the  chime  ceased,  blood  was
gushing  out  of  both  nostrils  in  a  copious  stream.  The  alarm  was  raised,
and  the  whole  household  flocked  round  and  applied  the  usual  remedies  of
cold  keys,  &c.,  but  quite  without  success.  This  profuse  and  alarming
hasmorrhage  did  not  cease  till  bucket-fulls  of  cold  water  were  p,oured  on  the
head  and  down  the  spine.  When  the  doctor  arrived  he  said  a  very  large
quantity  of  blood  had  been  lost,  and  life  only  just  saved  and  no  more.

''As  might  be  well  expected,  Mrs.  E.  was  very  weak  for  days  after  this
occurrence.  Though  this  was  the  first  in  point  of  time  of  tli£  more  im-
portant hallucinations  of  Mrs.  E.  's  life,  it  is  in  certain  respects  quite  the
most  extraordinary  by  reason  of  the  striking  sequel  to,  and  almost  complete
fulfilment  of,  the  prophecy.  ,ip jj  >,

Mrs.  E.  adds  :—

"  I  certify  that  this  report  is  correct.  ^  j  g

Mrs.  E.  at  our  request  obtained  the  following  corroborative  note  from
from  her  sister  : —

May  18th,  1890.

"At  Mrs.  E.'s  request,  I  write  to  inform  you  that  I  am  her  sister,
and  it  was  at  my  house  [that]  the  hremorrhage  of  her  nose  took  place  on  the
day  when  it  was  announced  to  her,  that  at  six  o'clock  on  that  day  she  would


XVI.]


Premonitions.


335


die,  and  according  to  the  prediction,  this  hfemorrhage  came  on  before  the
clock  had  done  striking  six,  and  continued  until  she  was  greatly  exhausted,
and  after  everything  had  been  done  to  stop  it.

"  I  willingly  certify  to  the  truth  of  all  my  sister  has  told  you  about  this,
and  in  her  experience  in  seeing  and  hearing  unnaturally,  as  it  has  always
been  known  in  our  family.  4i q  ,,

In  an  earlier  premonitory  experience  of  this  percipient,  which  we  give
from  the  same  narrative,  the  narrator's  words  themselves  suggest  that  the
prophecy  tended  to  cause  its  own  fulfilment.

"The  very  earliest  occurred  when  she  was  quite  a  girl.  On  this
occasion,  when  she  was  in  a  crowd,  a  voice  by  her  side  (apparently)  said
quite  distinctly,  '  That  man  will  be  your  husband. '  The  person  whom  she  was
looking  at  at  the  moment  did,  years  after,  become  her  husband.  At  the
time  of  the  announcement  she  did  not  know  him  ;  the  '  spell '  of  this  shaped
her  course  when  she  ultimately  did  make  his  acquaintance."

In  the  next  case  again,  the  indication  given  by  the  apparition  is
too  vague  and  doubtful  to  add  strength  to  the  case  for  premonitions.

(587.  5.)  From  Mrs.  Cockman.

26,  Dartmouth  Park  Avenue,  London,  N.W.,  November  2nd,  1891.

"At  29,  Grove  Road,  N.W.,  on  November  12th,  1882,  at  5.30
a.m.,  I  saw,  being  wide  awake  at  the  time,  a  slight  ethereal  looking  figure
standing  at  the  side  of  my  bed,  its  face  turned  towards  me,  and  gazing  wist-
fully at  me.  We  always  slept  with  the  bedroom  door  wide  open  to  admit  of
the  light  coming  in  from  a  gas  jet  which  was  immediately  over  the  door  on
the  landing.  By  this  light,  I  saw  the  figure  pass  slowly  into  the  next  room
(the  door  of  which  was  also  wide  open),  where  our  eldest  son,  a  boy  of  10,
was  sleeping.  I  woke  my  husband  and  told  him  what  I  had  seen.  He  went
at  once  into  our  son's  room  to  make  sure  he  was  not  walking  in  his  sleep  (a
thing  he  had  never  done),  but  from  the  position  of  the  bed-clothes  and  from
the  boy's  sound  calm  sleep,  this  theory  was  upset.  My  son  went  to  school
as  usual  in  the  morning,  apparently  in  good  health,  but  on  coming  home  in
the  aftei'noon  complained  of  feeling  unwell,  and  the  following  day  scarlet
fever  declared  itself.  I  at  once  connected  the  vision  with  my  son's  illness.
I  was  myself  in  good  health  at  the  time,  and  free  from  anxiety.  My  age
was  34."

Mrs.  Cockman  adds  the  following  account  of  an  apparently  telepathic
incident.

"  In  1878,  I  had  a  presentiment,  while  spending  the  evening  with  some
friends,  that  all  was  not  right  at  home.  I  combated  this  feeling,  but  could
not  conquer  it,  and  begged  my  husband  to  take  me  home  at  once.  On  our
arrival,  directly  the  door  was  opened,  I  heard  a  harsh  grating  sound  coming
from  the  nursery,  and  on  rushing  upstairs,  found  my  little  gii-1  of  two  con-
vulsed with  croup.  The  child  was  quite  alone  in  the  room,  the  nurse
having  left  her,  thinking  she  was  asleep.

"Matilda  Cockmaij."


336  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Mr.  Podmore  writes  : —

March  30th,  1892.

' '  I  called  on  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cockman  to-day.  As  regards  the  first  incident,
Mrs.  Cockman  explained  that  she  had  probably  been  lying  awake  some  little
time — it  was  about  5.30  a.m.  She  is  sure  that  she  was  completely  awake.
She  saw  the  figure  clearly,  but  did  not  recognise  it.  The  figure  was  clearly
visible  as  it  went  round  the  corner  into  the  next  room,  from  which  there
was  no  other  exit.  Mr.  Cockman  corroborated,  and  expressed  himself
convinced  that  the  figure  could  not  have  been  a  real  figure.

' '  Both  are  quite  certain  that  the  figure  appeared  on  the  night  of
Sunday-Monday  (12th-13th  November,  1882),  and  that  the  boy  came  home
ill  from  school  on  Monday,  the  13th.  That  this  date  (November  13th,  1882)
was  actually  the  beginning  of  his  illness  is  proved  by  an  entry  in  a  small
book  (shewn  to  me)  given  on  the  following  Christmas  day,  by  Mr.
Cockman  to  Mrs.  Cockman,  in  commemoration  of  the  boy's  recovery.

"  There  was  no  anxiety.  It  was  not  known  that  scarlet  fever  was  in  the
school  until  later.

"  In  the  second  case  they  were  dining  out  near  Addison  Road,  intending
to  spend  the  evening  there.  No  special  cause  for  anxiety.  In  accordance
with  lier  usual  custom,  Mrs.  Cockman  had  asked  a  lady  friend  (in  this  case
a  trained  nurse)  to  stay  in  the  house,  together  with  the  ordinary  nurse,
during  her  absence.  All  through  dinner  she  felt  very  uneasy  and  uncomfort-
able, and  immediately  that  Mr.  Cockman  and  the  other  men  returned  to  the
drawing-room,  she  insisted  on  going  home,  and  actually  reached  home  about
9  p.m. — two  hours  earlier  than  she  had  intended.  Her  uneasiness  was  not
connected  at  the  time  with  the  child  ;  it  was  merely  a  vague  sense  of  some-
thing wrong  at  home.  Mr.  Cockman  remembers  the  incident  well.  He
believes  it  to  be  unprecedented  in  their  lives.  Mrs.  Cockman,  though  rather
nervous  about  her  children,  had  no  special  cause  for  anxiety  (there  had
been  no  previous  warning  of  croup)  and  had  never  on  any  other  occasion
allowed  any  feeling  of  nervousness  to  interfere  with  plans."

Mr.  Cockman  corroborates  as  follows  : —

26,  Dartmouth  Park  Avenue,  N.W., March  30th,  1892.

"  Dear  Sir, — I  have  pleasure  in  stating  in  writing  that  I  distinctly
remember  the  two  occasions  to  which  my  wife  refers,  and  remember  speaking
of  the  first  the  next  day  to  two  of  my  colleagues.  When  my  wife  saw  the
apparition,  she  waked  me  and  I  instardhj  went  into  the  room  towards  which
it  had  moved,  but  both  the  boys  were  fast  asleep,  and  from  the  position  of
the  bed-clothes  one  could  easily  see  they  had  neither  of  them  been  out  of
bed. The  clothes  were  closely  tucked  up.

"  On  the  other  occasion,  when  my  little  daughter  had  croup,  I  do  not
remember  quite  so  vividly  all  the  circumstances,  but  do  remember  my  wife's
general  feeling  of  uneasiness,  and  that  she  begged  me  after  dinner  to  let  her
go  home,  that  she  felt  something  was  wrong  at  home — and  we  left  much
earlier  than  we  should  have  done  in  tlie  ordinary  way.  Arrived  there,  we
heard,  the  instant  the  door  opened,  the  ominous  barking  croupy  sound,  and
on  my  wife's  going  upstairs  she  found  the  child  almost  in  convulsions.  She
had  gone  to  bed  quite  well,  and  was  at  the  top  of  the  house,  where  the  nurse
had  not  heard  her. I  did  not  make  a  note  of  the  date  of  this  occurrence —


XVI.]


Premonitions.


337


I  do  not  think  we  then  thought  so  mucli  of  such  things  as  we  sliould  now.
Of  the  first  apparition  we  have  means  of  fixing  the  dates  very  exactly.

"  C.  ROABNIGHT  COCKMAN."

In  the  cases  just  given — whether  premonitory  or  not — the  halluci-
nation has  no  effect  in  preventing  the  danger.  But  we  have  three
cases  in  which  such  an  effect  is  reported.  In  one  case  (No.  262.  6)  a
miner  reports  that  he  ''felt  some  power  push  "  him  "  under  a  hollow
place,"  while,  "at  the  same  moment,  a  mass  of  earth  fell  on  the
place  whei'e "  he  "  had  originally  sat,  which  would  have  inevitably
killed"  him.  In  another  (No.  579.  21)  the  percipient  states  that  she
heard  a  voice  saying,  "  cross  the  road,"  just  before  a  runaway  horse
came  round  the  corner. The  third  case  is  the  following  :  —

(293.  13.)  From  General  M.

April  20th,  1890.

' '  I  was  a  captain  in  the  staff  of  tlie  army  at  the  siege  of  Delhi,  in  1857  ;
and,  among  other  duties,  often  carried  orders  and  messages  for  the  general
in  command.

"On  one  occasion  I  was  sent  by  the  general  with  some  message  or
orders  for  Sir  Charle.'i  Reid,  who  commanded  all  our  advanced  posts  along
the  well-known  '  ridge.'

"  He  was  not  at  his  headquarters,  but  had  gone  towards  the  ex-
treme right  and  most  exposed  part  of  the  ridge,  so,  leaving  ray  horse
under  cover,  I  proceeded  on  foot  along  the  road  towards  the  '  right
battery.'  Just  as  I  reached  a  turn  of  the  road,  which  was  specially
dangerous  owing  to  its  being  enfiladed  by  the  enemy's  guns  in  position,
I  heard  my  name  called  out,  on  the  left  hand,  and,  seeing  a  group  of
officers  standing  by  the  breastwork  which  lined  the  front  of  our  position,
I  went  towards  them  ;  and,  just  as  I  left  the  road,  the  spot  was  torn
up  by  a  shower  of  grape-shot,  which,  had  I  been  there,  must  have  killed
me  1  As  I  approached  the  officers,  among  whom  I  expected  to  find  Sir
C.  Reid,  one  of  them  remarked  on  the  narrow  escape  I  had  just  had  :
but  on  my  asking  why  they  had  called  out  to  me,  I  was  told,  to  my  utter
surprise,  that  no  one  had  done  so!  I  heard  the  summons,  however,  which
saved  my  life  ;  and  whether  I  fancied  that  some  other  of  the  many  sounds
in  the  air  at  the  time  was  my  somewhat  peculiar  name,  or  whether  the  call
to  me  at  that  fortunate  moment  was  a  '  spirit  voice, '  as  one  of  my  friends  at
once  pronounced  it,  or  was  altogether  the  product  of  my  own  imagination  ; —
the  facts  remain  that  I  heard,  or  thought  I  heard,  an  unrecognised  voice
summon  me  from  the  road  ;  that  by  obeying  the  summons  I  escaped  death,
or  at  any  rate  very  serious  wounding  ;  and  that  no  human  being  had  so
called  out  to  me  !

"  I  had  to  hunt  for  Sir  C.  Reid,  at  a  still  more  remote  part  of  the  ridge  ;
all  along  which  a  hot  fire  was  being  kept  up  ;  but  I  delivered  my  message,
unharmed,  and  without  any  other  incident  occurring,  or  any  other  '  hair-
breadth  'scape  '  that  I  know  of  !

z


338  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


"  My  journal  of  the  Delhi  Siege  has  been  lost  or  stolen,  so  I  cannot  give
the  exact  date — and  may ,  perhajas,  have  omitted  some  detail  of  the  '  ex-
I^erience.'  It  was,  however,  some  day  in  July  or  August,  1857,  when  the
'  ridge  '  was,  as  we  used  to  say,  extra  '  lively.'  "

Unrecognised  Local  Apparitions.

We  now  come  to  the  consideration  of  a  class  of  cases  in  which  the
arguments  for  assuming  a  supernormal  cause  rest  on  entirely
different  grounds  from  those  hitherto  discussed :  we  refer  to  the
apparitions  seen  in  so-called  "  haunted "  houses.  Speaking  gene-
rally, there  are  two  main  lines  of  argument  available  in  favour  of  a
supernormal  origin  in  these  cases.  The  first  relies  on  the  fact  that
apparitions  are  seen  in  the  same  place  by  two  or  more  persons  quite
independently — each  percipient  being,  at  the  time  of  his  experience,
unaware  that  any  similar  phenomenon  had  occurred  in  that  locality.
Now,  considei'ing  that  hallucinations  sometimes  occur  during  morbid
physical  conditions,  and  that  they  can  easily  be  induced  in  the
hypnotic  state,  we  clearly  ought  to  assume  that  a  hallucination  is
subjective,  unless  there  is  some  special  ground  for  thinking  otherwise.
The  present  collection  shows  further  that  hallucinations  which  there
is  no  ground  for  regarding  as  other  than  subjective  are  not  very
uncommon  phenomena.  Hence  the  mere  fact  of  apparitions  being
seen  in  the  same  place  by  two  persons  independently  is  far  from  being
a  conclusive  proof  of  the  supernormal  origin  of  the  apparitions. ^  But
the  force  of  the  evidence  of  course  increases  as  the  number  of  inde-
pendent percipients  increases,  especially  if  they  have  had  no  hallu-
cinations in  other  places,  or  only  veridical  hallucinations  ;  while  any
resemblances  between  the  figures  seen  also  add  to  the  evidence.

The  second  line  of  argument  connects  the  apparitions  with  some
former  inhabitant  of  the  place,  proceeding  on  the  basis  of  facts  {e.g.,
details  of  resemblance)  unknown  to  the  percipient  at  the  time  of  the
hallucination.

In  attempting  to  estimate  the  force  of  these  arguments,  we  have  to
take  into  account,  with  regard  to  alleged  resemblances  between  the
apparitions  seen  by  independent  percipients,  the  uncertainty  of  compari-
sons founded  on  mere  descriptions  ;  the  frequent  pre-conception  that
the  apparitions  represent  the  same  person,  and  the  consequent  tendency
to  emphasise  unduly  any  resemblances  that  there  may  be  ;  and  the
possibility  of  chance  I'esemblances,  unless  the  details  relied  on  are  of  a
very  unusual  kind. The  same  difficulties  arise  in  attempting  to  judge

1  Especially  if,  as  often  happens,  the  two  percipients  belong  to  the  same  family,
since,  as  we  have  said  above  (see  pp.  154-9),  there  is  some  reason  to  think  that
hallucinations  run  in  families.


XVI.]


Local  Apparitions.


339


of  alleged  resemblances  between  the  apparition  and  any  given
deceased  person  ;  and  in  such  cases,  we  also  have  to  estimate  the  chance
that  an  apparition  seen  in  any  house  will  resemble  in  some  degree  some
previous  inliabitant  of  the  house.  And,  since  the  most  primitive,  and
still  the  most  widely  spread  and  deeply  rooted,  conception  of  appari-
tions is  that  they  represent  dead  pei'sous,  any  accidental  resemblance
is  likely  to  be  unconsciously  exaggerated ;  and  resemblances  which  did
not  really  exist  are  likely  to  be  read  back  into  the  experiences  after-
wards. Further,  on  account  of  the  peculiar  kind  of  interest  attaching
to  this  class  of  apparitions  in  the  minds  of  many  persons,  there  is
a  special  probability  of  accretions  to  the  original  narrative,  and
second-hand  evidence  on  any  point  is  therefore  liable  to  be  specially
untrustworthy .  1

In  view  of  these  considerations,  the  reader  will  not  be  surprised
to  learn  that  in  many  of  the  cases  of  unrecognised  apparitions  reported
to  us  in  the  Census  which  were  said  to  be  connected  with  "  haunts,"
the  reasons  alleged  for  regarding  the  experience  as  other  than  sub-
jective seem  to  us  entirely  inadequate.  When  out  of  the  cases
reported  we  select  for  special  consideration  those  which  in  our
opinion  afford  any  primdfacie  evidence  of  a  supernormal  origin,  we  find
that  they  amount  to  some  thirty  in  number  :  of  these  we  give  below  the
best  authenticated.  In  15  out  of  the  30  cases,  the  apparitions — which
were  in  all  cases  unrecognised — were  not  associated  by  the  percipient
with  any  particular  deceased  person.  In  the  other  15  cases,  the  appari-
tion was  supposed  to  represent  some  dead  person,  whom  the  percipient
had  not  known.  The  two  cases  in  which  the  evidence  for  the  connec-
tion is  perhaps  the  strongest  happen  to  have  been  already  published
in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R., — one  as  the  "  Record  of  a  Haunted  House"
(Vol.  VIII.,  p.  311) ;  the  other  as  G.  188  (Vol.  VI.,  p.  270).  In  both
these  cases,  not  only  was  there  first-hand  evidence  of  a  certain  degree
of  resemblance  between  the  figures  seen  and  the  persons  in  question,
but  also  similar  figures  were  seen  by  several  dilFerent  percipients  in-
dependently. In  a  third  case,  No.  33.  25  (see  Proceedings  S  P.R.,
Vol.  v.,  p.  462),  the  evidence  for  identification  is  weaker,  and,  as  far
as  we  know,  the  apparition  was  only  seen  once  ;  but  it  was  seen  in  a
room  in  which  the  percipient  afterwards  heard  that  a  man  had  died
about  a  year  before.

Two  out  of  the  thirty  cases  have  been  quoted  in  previous  chaptei's,
namely,  No.  483.  10  (see  p.  157),  and  No.  588.  22  (see  p.  101).  In  the
first  of  these,  the  apparition  was  supposed  to  represent  a  former
inhabitant  of  the  house  ;  but  the  evidence  for  this  rests  on  remote

1  Compare,  for  instance,  the  remote  with  the  first-hand  versions  of  the  case  No.
267. 1,  given  below  (see  p.  368-362).

z  2


340  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


testimony,  and  the  same  testimony  states  that  tliis  former  inhabitant
himself  used  to  see  an  apparition  which  he  did  not  recognise,  in  the
same  house.  Tn  the  second  case,  the  narrative  sent  us  shows  that  the
apparition  was  not  seen  by  the  two  servants  independently.

Before  proceeding  to  discuss  the  other  cases  individually,  we  may
refer  to  some  general  characteristics  of  the  class  which  it  will  be
necessary  to  bear  in  mind.

Noises  in  "  Haunted  "  Houses.  ■■

One  of  the  most  commonly  reported  features  in  cases  of  "haunted"
houses, — as  has  been  remarked  in  articles  on  the  subject  previously
published  in  our  Proceedings,  and  is  borne  out  by  the  cases  in  the
present  Census, — is  the  frequent  occurrence  of  alarming  and  un-
accountable noises  in  the  house.  In  many  cases,  the  reputation  of  the
house  as  "  haunted  "  rests  on  these  noises  alone,  and  in  many  others,  it  is
the  noises  that  attract  most  attention,  while  the  seeing  of  an  apparition
by  one  or  more  persons  in  the  house  seems  a  merely  subsidiary
phenomenon  ;  for  instance,  in  the  well-known  story  of  the  Willington
Mill  (see  Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.,  pp.  331-352).

We  gave  reasons  in  Chapter  X.  (p.  180)  for  doubting  whether  noises
of  this  kind  are  hallucinatory.  But  in  addition  to  what  was  there
said,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  auditory  illusions —
especially  with  regard  to  the  localisation  of  sounds — are  much
more  possible  and  frequent  than  analogous  visual  illusions.  Fur-
ther, the  noises  in  question  are  generally,  though  not  invariably,
reported  to  be  heard  at  night,  when  mistakes  are  especially
liable  to  occur,  because  the  real  sounds  which  are  audible  at  night  are
often  comjjaratively  unfamiliar,  while  the  impressions  derived  from
them  cannot  be  corrected  by  the  sense  of  sight.  And  in  many  cases
the  hearers  ai-e  in  a  state  of  alarm  and  expectancy,  which  would  tend
to  make  them  misinterpret  their  impressions  of  ordinary  sounds.

At  the  same  time,  the  sounds  described  are  sometimes  such  that
it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  any  ordinary  explanation  of  them  which
would  not  have  been  discovered  by  the  persons  living  in  the  house  and
constantly  looking  out  for  some  such  explanation. ^

1  There  are  also  a  few  cases  where  it  is  reported  that  the  sounds  indicate  some
intelligence,  e.c/.,  when  raps  on  the  wall  reply  tc  spoken  or  mental  questions.  We
have,  however,  only  one  case  approaching  this  kind  among  those  reported  in  the
Census  ;  here  it  is  merely  stated  that  the  noises  became  more  violent  when  the
hearer  addressed  remarks  to  the  supposed  unseen  intelligence  ;  but  we  have  been
unaljle  to  obtain  confirmation  of  this  statement,  and  such  an  effect  is  one  which
it  would  imdeniably  be  very  easy  for  a  person  who  was  strongly  impressed  with  the
25henomena  to  imagine.


XVI.]


Local  ApiMritions.


341


Supposing,  however,  that  these  noises  are  in  some  cases  real
external  sounds  misinterpreted,  it  seems  probable  that  they  may  lead  to
the  apparitions  being  seen,  through  raising  expectancy  in  the  hearers.  In
Chapter  X.  (pp.  178-180)  we  have  given  some  evidence  that  real  noises  do
occasionally  have  such  an  effect ;  and  in  many  of  the  cases  of  "  haunted  "
houses,  it  is  stated  that  the  noises  had  been  constantly  heard  and  talked
over  before  any  apparition  was  seen. The  following  is  an  instance  : —

(284.  15.)  From  Miss  K.  B.

May  30th,  1890.

"  Tlie  circumstances  I  am  about  to  relate  occurred  during  two  visits  that
I  paid  to  Ireland  in  the  months  of  August  and  September,  1880  and  1881.
The  house  in  which  I  stayed  was  really  an  old  barracks,  long  disused,  very
•old-fasliioned,  and  surrounded  by  a  high  wall ;  in  fact,  I  am  told  it  was  built
during  the  time  of  Cromwell  as  a  .stronghold  for  his  men.

"  The  only  inhabitants  of  this  barracks  were  Captain  C.  (a  retired  officer
who  was  in  charge  of  the  place),  Mrs.  C,  three  daughters  and  two  servants.
They  occupied  the  central  part  of  the  building,  the  mess  room  being  their
drawing-room.  The  bedrooms  are  very  lofty,  and  some  are  connected  one
with  the  other  by  doors  leading  mto  each  otlier.  The  room  I  occupied  was
■une  adjoining  two  others,  and  those  were  occupied  by  the  three  daughters
of  Captain  C,  named  E.,  G.,  and  L.  The  first  recollection  I  have  of  aiay-
thing  strange  about  the  house  is  that  each  night  I  was  awakened  at  about
3  o'clock  a.m.  (judging  the  time  from  the  dawn  which  followed)  by  a
tremendous  noise  apparently  in  the  next  suite  of  rooms,  which  were  empty,
and  it  sounded  as  if  some  huge  iron  boxes  and  other  heavy  things  were
being  thrown  about  with  great  force.  This  continued  for  about  half-an-hour,
when  in  the  room  underneatli  (the  kitchen)  I  heard  the  fire  being  violently
poked  about  and  raked  for  some  minutes,  immediately  followed  by  a  most
terrible  and  distressing  coughing  of  a  man,  very  loud  and  ^dolent.  It
seemed  as  if  the  exertion  had  brouglit  on  a  paroxysm  which  he  could  not
stop.  I  should  here  say  that  in  large  houses  in  Kilkenny  the  tires  are  not
lighted  every  day,  as  the  Kilkenny  coal  has  the  property  of  burning  very
slowly  without  flame,  and  it  is  only  necessary  to  make  it  up  every  night
about  11  o'clock,  and  in  the  morning  it  is  still  clear  and  bright.  I  had  heard
about  this  coal,  aird  I  remember  wondering  why  it  was  necessary  for  Captain
C.  to  get  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night  to  stir  it  so  violently,  and  the  horrid
noises  perplexed  me  ;  but  as  I  am  not  a  nervous  .subject  I  forgot  all  about  it
till  the  next  night,  when  the  very  same  thing  occurred,  and  this  time  1  felt
a  great  desire  to  awaken  the  girls  in  the  next  rooms,  but  did  not  like  to.

"  The  next  day  I  said  to  E.  '  E.,  I  hear  sucli  .strange  noises  every  night,
.are  any  people  in  the  adjoining  part  of  the  building  ? '  She  turned  very
pale,  and  looking  earnestly  at  me,  said,  '  Oh,  K. ,  I  am  so  sorry  you  heard,  I
hoped  no  one  but  myself  heard  it.  I  would  have  given  worlds  to  have  spoken
to  you  last  night,  but  dared  not  move  or  speak  !  I  was  bathed  in  perspira-
tion with  terror. '

"  I  laughed  at  her  and  said,  '  Why,  E.,  one  would  think  to  see  you,  you
thought  it  was  ghosts.' She  said,  "  Oh,  I  don't  think,  but  know,  and  it  is  so


342  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


dreadful,  this  goes  on  night  after  night,'  and  when  she  went  on  to  tell  me
tliat  the  place  was  said  to  be  haunted,  and  told  me  a  lot  of  weird  things  that
had  been  seen  and  heard.  My  answer  to  this  was  a  disdainful  laugh,  and  I
said,  'Oh,  you  Irish  people  are  full  of  sujaerstition  ;  you  think  every-
thing that  happens  is  supernatural.'  After  this  the  subject  was  not  men-
tioned again,  and  I  did  not  feel  a  bit  scared  when  the  same  things  went  on
at  night  during  the  rest  of  my  week's  visit.  I  went  home,  forgetting  all
about  it  till  the  following  year,  when  I  again  visited  my  fiiends  and  spent
six  weeks  there.

"This  time  there  were  two  other  visitors  besides  myself,  a  Colonel  and
Mrs.  C.  They  occujjied  the  tri-une  room,  where  I  had  been  before,  and  to
me  was  allotted  a  huge  room  on  the  top  of  the  house  with  a  long  corridor
leading  to  it. The  girls  were  in  a  large  room  opposite  mine.

"I  don't  remember  once  thinking  of  the  strange  occurrences  of  the
former  visit  till  one  morning  when  1  was  awakened  about  4  o'clock  (I  should
think)  by  a  very  noisy  martial  footstep  ascending  the  stairs,  and  then  march-
ing (juickly  up  and  down  the  corridor  outside  my  room.  Then  suddenly  the
most  violent  coughing  took  place  that  I  ever  heard,  which  continued  for
some  time  (it  seemed  ages  to  me)  while  the  quick  heavy  stej)  continued  its
vigorous  march.  At  last  the  footsteps  faded  away  in  the  distance,  and  I
then  recalled  to  mind  the  very  same  coughing  after  exertion  last  year.

"  At  breakfast  that  morning  I  said,  'Oh,  Captain  C,  what  a  horrible
cough  you  have.'  He  looked  surprised  and  answered,  '  J  a  cough  ?  why  I
haven't  a  bit  of  one  ? '  I  then  turned  to  Colonel  C.  and  said,  '  Was  it  you.
Colonel,  who  were  making  such  a  noise  at  4  o'clock  this  morning  1 '  He  said,.
'  Faith,  you  won't  catch  me  prowling  about  at  such  uneartlily  hours  !  and  \
haven't  the  shadow  of  a  cough.'  I  noticed  that  all  the  C.  family  looked
uncomfortable,  and  nothing  moie  was  said  till  E.  came  to  me  in  a  most
mysterious  manner  with  tears  in  her  eyes  and  said,  '  Oh,  K. ,  please  don't  say
another  word  about  that  dreadful  coughing  ;  we  all  hear  it  often,  and
especially  when  anything  dreadful  is  going  to  happen.  Motlier  can't  bear  to
hear  it  mentioned,  and  we  don't  want  L.  to  hear  it  mentioned,  she  is  so
delicate  and  easily  upset !  '  After  this  I  thought,  come  what  will,  I'll  say
nothing  more,  but  1  would  give  a  good  deal  to  fathom  it  all  !

' '  Some  nights  after  we  had  been  having  a  dance  (indeed  we  did  this-
most  nights),  but  on  this  particular  evening  when  I  went  up  to  bed,  the  moon
was  shining  so  brilliantly  that  I  was  able  to  read  my  Bible  by  its  light,  and  I
left  the  Bible  ojien  on  the  window-sill,  which  was  a  very  high  one  and  on
which  I  sat  to  read,  having  had  to  climb  the  washstand  to  reach  it.  The
blinds  were  not  drawn,  as  I  liked  the  light,  and  I  soon  got  to  bed  and  fell
fast  asleep.  I  could  not  have  been  long  asleep  when  I  was  suddenly-
awakened  by  a  strange  feeling  that  some  one  was  in  the  room.  I  opened
my  eyes  and  turned  round,  and  opposite  me  on  the  window-sill  where  I  had
been  sitting  before  going  to  bed,  I  saw  in  the  moonlight  (which  was  still  very-
bright,  though  not  shuiing  direct  into  the  room)  a  long,  very  thin,  very  dark
black  figure  bending  over  the  Bible  and  apparently  earnestly  scanning  the
page.  It  took  only  a  second  to  see  this,  but,  as  if  my  movement  disturbed  the
figure,  it  suddenly  darted  up,  jumped  off  the  window-ledge,  on  to  the  wash-
stand,  and  thence  to  the  ground,  and  tlitted  quickly  across  the  room,  which  was.


XVI.]


Local  Apparitions.


343


very  large,  and  contained  a  large  round  table  at  the  other  end  on  which  were
a  lot  of  bangles  and  other  silver  ornaments.  I  tried  to  see  where  the  tigure
was,  but  I  could  only  hear  a  slight  jingle  as  if  some  one  were  feeling  quietly
my  bangles  and  rings.  I  thought  it  might  be  a  servant  walking  in  lier  sleep,
or  perhaps  some  one  to  steal  my  jewelry.  I  sat  up  and  looked  hard  over  in
the  corner  of  the  room,  but  could  see  nothing.  I  then  determined  to  wait
till  the  figure  should  go  out  of  the  room,  which  could  not  be  done  without
my  seeing  it  pass  in  the  light  of  the  window,  but,  although  I  did  not  take
my  eyes  off  the  spot  till  daylight  fairly  set  in,  I  saw  nothing  further,  and  am
convinced  that  nothing  and  no  one  left  the  room.

In  the  morning  G.  C.  brought  my  breakfast  to  me  in  bed,  as  she  said  I
must  be  tired  after  our  dancing,  and  indeed  I  was  tired,  but  not  from
dancing  !  When  she  came  I  said  '  G. ,  I  have  seen  your  ghost  at  last  I  '  She
said  not  a  word  but  rushed  out  of  the  room.

"When  I  next  saw  her  I  said  '  G.,  you  don't  believe  what  I  told  you
about  the  ghost,  but  it's  true  I  '  and  then  I  related  to  her  the  events  of  the
night.  She  said,  '  Oh,  yes,  indeed  I  only  believe  it  too  well  !  that  is  just
what  dear  H.  saw  before  he  died  I  '  (H.  was  her  brother  who  died  of
consumption,  aged  24.)  I  said,  'I  hope  you  don't  mean  I  am  going  to  die,'
and  she  said  '  something  always  happens  after  that  appears.'  I  may  as  well
add  here  that  nothing  dreadful  did  happen.  I  heard  afterwards  that  a
Colonel  had  cut  his  throat  in  that  very  room  many  years  before,  and  that
the  place  has  ever  since  been  haunted."

Miss  B.  had  had  one  other  hallucination  about  three  years  previously.
She  was  awakened  by  feeling  the  bed  clothes  pulled  off  her.  She  sat  up  to
replace  them,  and  then  saw  an  apparition  of  her  uncle  walk  into  the  room.
He  was  at  the  time  seriously  ill  in  the  same  house,  his  wife  watching  by
Mm,  and  he  died  shortly  after.

The  next  case  is  an  interesting  example  of  the  gradual  development
of  the  phenomena, — the  sounds  heard  increasing  in  violence,  while  the
vague  figux'e  first  seen  took  by  degrees  a  more  and  more  definite  form,
approximating  to  the  legendary  one,  but  only  apparently  after  the
percipient  had  become  familiar  with  the  legend.  A  figure  with  a  some-
what similar  costume  was,  however,  also  seen  by  a  visitor  who  had  not
heard  of  it  beforehand.

(114.  6.)  From  Miss  L.  H.

[We  give  an  abstract  of  Miss  H.'s  account,  which  was  written  in  1891.]

In  January,  1873,  Miss  H.  and  her  aunt,  sleeping  together,  saw  their  bed-
room door  opened  and  a  curious  pale  light  streaming  in.  The  door  shut  as
MissH.got  up, and  she  found  it  dark  outside  and  no  one  there.  Soon  they  began
to  hear  noises,  doors  opening,  footsteps, etc.,  at  night,  and  heard  that  the  house
was  reputed  to  be  "haunted."  Miss  H.  then  began  to  feel  touches  when
she  was  in  bed,  and  the  bed  shaken, etc. , and  the  noises  continued.  One  night
she  saw  in  the  moonlight  a  figure  burst  through  a  closed  door  and  rush  past
her  bed  to  the  window  ;  she  heard  the  sweep  of  garments  as  it  went  by.
The  noises  constantly  increased,  and  ' '  by  degrees, "  she  writes, ' '  I  used  to  see


344  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


a  figure,  always  the  same,  of  a  man  in  a  military  cloak  of  the  old  style,
seeming  to  keep  a  hand  over  its  eyes."  By  this  time  she  had  heard  that  the
house  was  supposed  to  be  "  haunted"  by  its  late  owner,  a  Waterloo  officer,
who  had  built  it  and  died  there.  Miss  H.'s  aunt  had  seen  a  hand  round  her
bed-curtains,  and  felt  her  own  hands  touched,  and  a  lady.  Miss  D.,  staying
in  the  house,  saw  a  figure  twice  at  night ;  though,  Miss  H.  states,  "we  never
prepared  our  visitors  at  all  for  it,  and  some  were  not  visited."  Miss  H.  went
on  living  at  the  house  after  her  aunt's  death  in  1882  until  1886,  the  noises,  etc.
continuing  to  trouble  all  the  inmates  at  intervals  during  the  whole  time.

In  an  interview  with  Mr.  Myers,  Miss  H.  informed  him  that  she  had
had  two  other  experiences  ;  she  saw  an  apjjarition  of  her  mother  at  the  time
of  the  latter's  death, and  an  apparition  of  lier  aunt  soon  after  her  death.

Miss  D.  writes  ^^^^..^  ^.^^^^^  ^g92.

"  During  the  month  of  August,  1881,  1  was  visiting  Miss  H.,  at  .  After

a  few  nights,  I  retired  to  my  room  as  usual,  and  when  I  had  been  in  bed  an
hour  or  so,  a  cloaked  figure  came  into  the  room,  having  previously  opened
(very  ([uietly)  the  door.  I  wish  to  state  emphatically  that  this  is  no  imagina-
tion, nor  a  dream.  I  was  wide  awake  and  in  good  health.  The  figure  came
close  to  the  bed,  and  glided  away  towards  the  window,  passing  the  foot  of  the
bed,  and  disappeared.  A  few  nights  after,  the  same  thing  occurred,  except
that  tlie  figure  on  entering  the  room  came  quite  up  to  the  bed,  and  gently
stroked  my  forehead,  smoothing  the  hair  from  it.

"  I  have  never  before  or  since  seen  anytliing  of  a  similar  nature."

In  the  next  case,  several  percipients  were  concerned  ;  the  one  who
gives  the  principal  first-hand  account  (Miss  H.  M.)  saw  two  distinctly
different  figures,  each  several  times,  and  it  does  not  seem  clear  that
either  of  them  had  any  particular  resemblance  to  the  figures  seen  by
the  other  witnesses,  who  were  probably  familiar-  with  the  reputation  of
the  house.  It  is  an  interesting  feature  in  the  case  that,  on  two  occa-
sions, the  two  percipients  concerned  had  different  but  corresponding-
percepts  at  the  same  time.  On  the  first  occasion,  both  saw  the
door  open  and  shut,  while  one  saw  the  ghost  walk  in  ;  and  on  the
second  occasion,  one  felt  a  touch  on  his  arm,  while  the  other  saw  the
ghost  touching  him.  The  evidence,  however,  for  tliis  last  incident  is
only  at  second-hand,  and  of  the  first  it  must  be  observed  that  the  pos-
sibility of  the  door  having  been  opened  by  ordinary  means  does  not
seem  to  be  excluded.

(264.  23.)  From  Miss  E.  L.  T.

June  7th,  ],890.

' '  In  March,  1889,  I  was staying  in  a  house  in  ,  and  several

times  had a strong impression  that  some one invisible  was  in  the

This  occurred  in  childhood,  and  no  corroboration  is  now  obtainable.  We  did  not,
therefore,  think  it  worth  while  to  press  for  a  first-hand  account,  and  the  case,  conse-
quently, is  not  included  in  the  first-hand  death-coincidences  discussed  in  Chapters
XI and  XIII.


xvl]


Local  Apparitions.


345


room.  At  the  same  time  it  was  usually  seen  by  one  person,  sometimes  by
two.  On  one  occasion  I  saw  the  dooi'  open,  when  a  lady  "who  was  with  me
saw  a  ficjure  (grey)  come  in  and  vanish.  The  door  was  a  very  heavy  one,
and  we  remarked  that  there  was  no  wind  at  the  time.  I  was  singing,
between  12  and  1  o'clock  (midday).  I  was  in  my  usual  health  ;  no  grief  or
anxiety;  age  26.  [The]  lady  with  me  was  playing  my  accompaniment  on  the
piano,  which  was  a  grand.  We  were  facing  down  a  long  ro(3m,  at  the  other
end  of  which  was  the  door.  We  finished  the  song,  though  much  startled.
Then  I  asked  my  friend  if  she  had  seen  anything.  She  said  she  liad  seen
the  grey  figure  come  in,  walk  up  to  a  writing  table,  and  vanish.

' '  Several  times  in  that  ro(.im,  generally  in  the  morning,  I  had  the  impression
of  some  one  having  come  into  the  room,  nearly  always  while  music  was  going
on  ;  sometimes  in  other  rooms  at  night.  Several timesi  haveheardmysterious
music  by  day  and  niglit  from  the  garden.  Once  I  was  sitting  at  the  writing
table  (where  the  ghost  has  been  seen  to  vanish),  when  I  suddenly  felt  a
fearful  coldness  come  over  me,  which  lasted  a  few  seconds  ;  then  I  suddenly
felt  quite  warm  again."

The  experiences  of  the  other  percipients  in  this  case  are  described  as
follows  by  Miss  T.'s  sister,  who  was  with  her  on  the  same  visit.  Her
account  was  written  not  later  than  1892.

"  When  first  we  visited  ,  no  one  had  ever  seen  a  ghost  there,  or

suspected  the  place  of  being  haunted  in  any  way.  It  was  in  January,  1889,
that  curious  things  first  began  to  happen.  There  was  a  large  party  in  the
house,  the  M. 's  themselves  [the  owners  of  the  house],  etc.  One  night  E.  [the
•writer  of  the  above  account]  could  not  sleep,  and  about  3  o'clock  she  heard
three  loud  knocks  on  the  wall  at  the  side  of  her  bed.  The  knocks  had  a
peculiarly  metallic  sound,  and  she  tried  several  experiments  the  next  day
to  get  the  same  sound,  but  could  wot  produce  it.

"  The  next  morning,  G.  iVI.  came  down  to  breakfast  and  said  H.  M.  [her
sister]  was  not  coming  down.  She  was  very  tired,  having  seen  a  ghost !  Her
story  was  :  she  was  awakened  by  seeing  a  light,  then  she  .saw  the  figure  of  a
man,  with  his  head  bent,  as  if  reading  a  book.  The  light  was  strong  enough  for
her  to  see  G.  's  bed  distinctly.  The  light  and  the  man  faded  away,  andH.  never
saw  the  same  tigu.re  again,  but  she  afterwards  very  frequently  saw  the  figure
of  a  grey  lady  in  the  drawing-room.  It  usually  came  in  by  the  door,  and
vanished  in  front  of  the  looking-glass,  though  it  occasionally  came  into  the
middle  of  the  room.  It  appeared  both  by  daylight  and  candlelight,  most
frequently  about  12  mid-day,  and  generally  came  when  music  was  going  on.
Mr.  H.  T.  [one  of  the  visitors]  saw  the  same  figure  on  one  occasion  in  the
drawing-room.  And  another  day  when  tea  was  going  on  in  the  hall,  he
felt  a  touch  on  his  arm.  He  saw  nothing,  but  was  much  frightened.  He
afterwards  asked  H.  if  she  had  seen  the  ghost  that  day.  She  said,  '  Yes,  I
saw  it  touch  you  on  the  arm.'  The  ghost  was  seen  several  times  that  year,
and  very  mysterious  noises  were  heard  at  night.

"In  the  March  of  that  year— 1889— E.  T.  was  again  at  ,  and

she  was  very  often  aware  of  the  presence  of  the  ghost,  and,  on  asking  H.
afterwards,  found  that  she  had  invariably  seen  it  at  the  time.  They  agreed
that  they  would  never  say  anything  at  the  time,  but  would  find  out  after  if
what  they  had  seen  and  felt  had  occurred  at  the  same  time.  One  day,  E.  was


346  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


singing,  H.  playing  her  accompaniment.  It  was  between  12  and  1 .  The
door  of  the  room  (a  large  and  heavy  one)  opened,  and  H.  saw  the  ghost  walk
in.  E.  did  not  see  it,  she  only  saw  the  door  open  and  shut,  but  she  felt  it
was  there,  and  it  required  some  courage  to  finish  the  song.

"  Miss  G.  H.  was  at  that  same  March. She,  like  tlie  rest  of  the

party,  was  greatly  disturbed  by  the  noises  in  the  night.  One  night  she  was
brushing  her  hair  before  the  looking-glass,  when  she  saw  a  ghost  standing
behind  lier.  The  door  was  open.  It  went  out  of  the  room  when  she  turned
round,  and  she  followed  it  down  the  passage  till  it  disappeared.

"  Miss  D.  is  said  to  have  seen  the  ghost  once,  and  the  butler  saw  it  cross-
ing the  grass  towards  the  chapel  one  evening  when  hymns  were  being  sung
in  there.  Mysterious  music  has  been  heard  there.  E.  T.  heard  it  twice,
Miss  G.  H.  heard  it,  and  three  maids  heard  it  once  at  night.

"  The  ghost  was  seen  and  noises  were  heard  in  1890  and  1891,  but  at  less
and  less  frequent  intervals.  I  was  in  the  drawing-room  once  when  the  ghost
was  seen,  but  I  did  not  feel  it  then."

Among  the  other  witnesses  referred  to,  Miss  H.  M.  is  the  only  one  from
whom  we  have  been  able  to  obtain  a  first-hand  account.  She  writes  as
follijws  : —

February  2Uh,  1890.
' '  [I]  saw  a  white  figure  standing  at  the  foot  of  my  sister's  bed  on  January
13th,  1889,  at  4.40  a.m.  I  have  also  seen  the  same  figure  twice  during  the
summer.  I  have  been  looking  out  of  the  window  and  [have]  seen  it  standing
in  the  garden.  I  often  used  to  see  a  grey  figure  come  in  at  the  drawing-room
door  and  vanish,  generally  between  12  and  1  in  the  daytime,  and  always
when  music  has  been  going  on.  No  one  else  has  seen  it,  but  several  people
have  felt  it.

"  When  the  white  figare  first  appeared,  I  was  in  bed — the  other  times
looking  out  of  the  window.  I  am  generally  playing  when  I  see  the  grey
figure,  or  sitting  in  the  room  while  others  are  playing  or  singing.  My  age
was  21  when  I  first  saw  them. I  am  now  22.

' '  The  grey  figure  appears  to  have  no  features.  The  white  one  has  a  very
good  profile,  but  I  cannot  recognise  it.  When  the  white  figure  appeared  in
the  garden,  amongst  five  of  us  who  were  looking,  only  one,  a  boy  of  19,  saw  it
besides  myself.  People  have/cW  the  grey  figure,  but  never  seen  it.  I  have
not  seen  either  since  last  September."

The  next  case,  though  remote,  is  interesting,  because  the  ap-
pai-ition  was  seen  in  the  first  instance  collectively,  and  when  none
of  the  percipients  were  in  any  condition  of  expectancy  or  alarm  about
it.  Tliough  noises  formed  part  of  the  phenomena,  they  were  not  heard
until  after  the  apparition  had  been  seen.  The  only  living  witnesses
were  children  at  the  time,  but  their  recollection  of  the  incidents  seems
to  be  clear.

(679.  2.)  From  Mrs.  Yearsley.

Chalk  Hill  House,  Kingsbury,  N.W.,  Vecemher  2nd,  1891.
"  I  saw  a  ghost  of  a  woman  standing  in  a  recess  by  the  stairs. I  was
coming  downstairs,  having  been  sent  by  my  mother  to  take  some  work  to  her


XVI.]


Local  A'pparitions.


347


bedroom.  It  was,  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember,  when  I  was  six  years  of  age.
It  was  about  4 — 4.30  in  the  afternoon,  at  No.  2,  Kent- villas.  Asylum-road,
Peckham.  The  apparition,  as  far  as  I  could  see,  looked  simply  like  the
figure  of  a  woman  with  a  shawl  over  her  head,  and  at  first  I  took  her  for  one
of  the  maid-servants,  but  she  was  in  the  kitchen  at  the  time.  No  [other
persons  were  present],  but  others  of  the  family  saw  a  similar  apparition  at
different  times.  I  myself  saw  it  on  two  occasions  ;  [the  second]  time  I  saw
it  pass  across  a  room  as  I  passed  by  the  open  door  of  that  room.

"  The  above  occurred  in  either  1853  or  1854.  t  t?  Vi.  .t>c.tt!.^  "

The  following  account  was  contained  in  a  letter  to  the  collector,  Mrs,
Yearsley's  son,  fi'om  her  sister,  Mrs.  Compton  : —

93,  East  Dulwich  Grove,  S.E.,  Jvly  6th  [1892].

"The  haunted  house  we  lived  in  for  over  three  years  still  stands,  and
was  let  the  last  time  I  passed  it,  some  months  ago.  The  address  used  to  be
No.  2,  Kent  Villas,  Asylum  Road,  Peckham.  No  doubt  that  is  altered  now.

"  The  first  I  ever  saw  of  the  ghost,  —  or  old  woman,  as  we  children  always
called  it, — was  the  very  day  we  moved  into  the  house.  The  men  were  putting
down  carpets,  etc.,  and  your  mother  and  I  and  George  and  Maggie  were
sent  to  play  upstairs  to  be  out  of  the  way.  We  chose  the  top  staircase
leading  to  the  upper  bedrooms.  This  staircase  had  a  small  dark  lumber
room  underneath  it,  the  door  of  which  was  almost  exactly  opposite  my
mother's  bedroom.  We  had  been  playing  f(jr  nearly  an  hour  when  we  saw
what  looked  like  a  tall,  thin  woman,  with  a  plaid  shawl  of  a  red  and  wliite
pattern  put  over  her  head  and  a  little  over  one  side  of  her  face,  come  slowly
down  the  stairs  from  the  upper  front  bedroom  ;  her  dress  rustled  behind
her.  We  all  drew  back  against  the  wall,  while  she  .passed  us  and  went  down
the  stairs,  turned  a  little  to  the  right,  and  disappeared  into  the  lumber
room.  We  were  all  dreadfully  frightened,  and  flew,  and  some  fell,  down  the
stairs  to  tell  what  we  had  seen.  My  mother  was  very  angry,  and  said  we  had
been  playing  at  ghosts  till  we  imagined  we  had  seen  one,  and  we  were  all
sent  back  again.  We  sat  huddled  together  till  called  to  bed.  All  this  took
place  on  a  bright  summer  afternoon.  The  very  next  Sunday  we  were  dining
in  the  breakfast-room,  and  in  the  middle  of  dinner  we  heard  the  latcli
lifted  of  the  half-glass  door  leading  to  the  garden.  Several  of  us  looked  up
and  saw  the  door  open,  and  the  shado^v  of  some  one  go  quickly  up  the  stairs.
My  father  called  two  of  the  boys,  saying,  '  some  one  has  got  into  the
house.'  They  took  heavy  sticks,  and  one  stood  in  the  hall,  so  that  no  one
could  pass  without  being  seen,  and  the  others  searched  every  corner  of  the
house  and  saw  nothmg.

"  My  eldest  brother  often  came  home  late  from  the  Stock  Exchange
on  account  nights,  and  mother  always  let  him  in,  to  see  that  he  was
all  right.  The  first  time  he  was  late  in  that  house,  he  came  down-
stairs again  in  half -an  hour  to  know  if  any  of  the  children  were  ill,  as  he
declared  my  mother,  as  he  supposed  it  to  be,  had  gone  up  and  entered  his.
room,  sighing  deeply,  and  then  had  gone  into  the  children's  room,  and  had
left  his  door  and  the  children's  wide  open.

"The  noises  in  the  house  were  at  times  almost  unbearable — exactly  as
though  half-a-ton  of  coals  had  been  shot  down  the  stairs. Mother  never-


348  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinattons.  [chap.


actually  saiv  the  old  woman,  thougli  she  constantly  followed  the  sound  of  the
footsteps  up  the  stairs  to  try  and  discover  what  it  could  be;  and  once,  while
sitting  up  late,  reading  in  front  of  a  long  glass  on  her  dressing  table,  she
heard  it  come  downstairs,  and  made  up  her  mind  she  would  look  ;  but
directly  the  door  began  to  open  she  covered  her  face,  and  distinctly  heard
it  cijme  all  round  the  room  and  go  out,  leaving  the  door  open.

"  One  afternoon,  I  was  sent  upstairs  to  the  children's  bedroom.  After
finding  what  I  wanted  I  came  down  the  top  flight  of  stairs,  and  right  in  front  of
me  stood  the  old  woman  in  the  doorway  of  mother's  bedroom.  I  stood,  too
frightened  to  move,  especially  as  I  had  to  pass  her  to  reach  the  lower  staircase.
If  I  saw  her  face  now,  after  all  these  years,  I  should  know  it.  The  hair  was
very  dark  and  smooth  ;  the  one  eye  not  covered  by  the  shawl  was  turned  up,
and  the  face  like  death.  It  had  the  look  I  have  since  seen  on  the  faces  of  the
dead.  How  long  I  stood  I  don't  know — it  seemed  hours.  At  last  I  made  a
desperate  effort  and  passed  it,  and  with  one  bound  was  downstairs,  and
I  fell  at  the  parlour  door.  I  was  unal)le  to  move,  and  they  dragged  me  in
and  well  scolded  me,  and  I  was  forbidden  to  speak  of  it  to  the  others.  An
hour  afterwards  your  mother  was  sent  up  for  something,  and  as  she  was  a
long  time  gone,  mother  called  to  her  to  come  at  once,  and  when  she  did,  she
said  cook  was  standing  at  the  lumber  room  door  with  a  shawl  over  her  head,
and  she  had  been  trying  to  make  her  speak,  but  she  was  too  cross.  At  last
we  got  quite  used  to  seeing  the  thing  about  the  house,  although,  for  my  part,
I  lived  in  dread  of  it.  I  saw  it  constantly  ;  it  used  to  come  into  my  room
and  stand  by  my  bed,  but  I  don't  remember  seeing  it  once  when  it  was
quite  dark.  The  noises  got  too  dreadful,  and  we  hvnited  for  another  house,
although  my  father  hesitated  about  taking  the  one  we  all  fixed  upon  ;  but
the  old  woman  settled  the  question,  for  father  having  gone  to  bed  early  with
one  of  his  favourite  bilious  attacks,  he  lieard  some  one  coming,  and  in  walked
the  old  woman,  which  so  frightened  him  that  he  was  up  by  7  o'clock  next
morning,  and  ofi'  to  take  the  new  house.

"  After  all  the  furniture  had  gone,  and  your  mother  and  I  and  Maggie
were  sleeping  in  beds  on  the  fioor,  we  were  all  talking  and  telling  fairy
tales,  when  Mag  suddenly  dived  under  the  clothes.  We  soon  knew  tlie
reason;  at  the  very  foot  of  our  bed  stood  the  old  woman,  and  your  aunt  had
•seen  it  first.  The  people  who  took  the  liouse  from  us  left  very  shortly,  as
they  said  they  could  get  no  rest  for  awful  noises.  How  it  has  fared  since,
I  don't  know.  I  fear  I  have  a  sort  of  faculty  for  uncanny  things  ('?),  as  the
old  woman  is  not  the  only  odd  thing  I  have  seen  ;  and  I  always  know  when
trouble  or  death  is  coming  to  any  member  of  the  family— I  wish  I  did  not."

Mrs.  Yearsley  adds  : —

Jnly  Zlst,  1892.

"I  have  read  my  sister's  (Mrs.  Compton)  description  of  the  events
which  took  place  at  2,  Kent-villas,  Asylum-road,  Peckham,  in  1853-4.  It
perfectly  describes  my  experiences  as  well  as  hers,  and  I  do  not  think  there
is  anything  I  can  add.

"  I  perfectly  remember  the  occasion  of  our  sitting  at  a  meal,  and  seeing
the  shadow  as  of  a  person  going  up  the  stairs  from  the  half  glass  door  from
the  garden.  I  also  can  distinctly  remember  meeting  the  apparition  at
the  top  of  the  stairs  and  speaking  to  it,  and  then  feeling  very  frightened,


XVI.]


Local  Ai->'parit%ons.


349


and  going  downstairs  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  my  mother  calling  to  the
servants  directly,  thinking  one  of  them  might  have  been  ujjstairs,  and  that
I  might  have  imagined  I  had  seen  this  phantom,  though  really  guessing  what
I  had  seen.  At  that  time  I  was  about  6  to  7  years  of  age,  and  my  sister,
Mrs.  Compton,  8  or  9*  years.  u  j  -  ^  Yearsley."

Mrs.  Yearsley's  other  brother  and  sister  mentioned  in  tlie  account  are
no  longer  living.  Another  surviving  brother  does  not  recollect  the  incidents
clearly  enough  to  give  an  account.

Recognised  Local  ApjMritions.

As  said  above,  the  great  majority  of  apparitions  that  seem  to  be
associated  with  special  places  are  unrecognised.  We  have,  however,
three  cases  in  the  Census  where  an  apparition  of  a  dead  person  known
to  the  percipients  is  believed  to  have  been  seen  by  more  than  one  person
independently  in  the  same  place.

In  the  first  case,  the  figure  was  seen  in  the  room  in  which  the
person  it  was  thought  to  represent  had  died  ;  but  it  was  only  recognised
by  one  of  the  percipients  after  the  other  had  seen  an  unrecognised
figure  in  the  same  room.

(570.  4.)  From  Mrs.  L.  F.

JanvMvy^Uh,  1892.

"In  the  bedroom  where  I  was  sleeping  I  saw  my  grandmother.  She
was  in  her  night-dress  and  cap,  and  walked  from  one  side  of  the  fire  place
to  the  other,  and  then  vanished.  The  room  was  the  one  she  died  in.  I  was
alone  in  bed.  I  was  not  grown  up  at  the  time,  and  don't  remember  what  age
I  was,  or  any  other  particulai's  as  regai'ding  my  health.  My  grandmother
[had  lived]  in  the  house  with  me,  but  I  don't  remember  how  long  after  her
death  it  was  that  I  saw  her.  [I  have]  never  [had  any  other  such  experience.]"

The  following  account  of  a  somewhat  similar  experience  in  the  same  room
is  from  Mrs.  F.'s  step-sister  : —

(570.  5.)  From  Miss  A.  C.

January  24:th,  1892.

'•  In  the  autumn  of  1874  I  saw  one  night  in  the  room  I  was  sleeping  [in]
an  old  woman  come  in  and  walk  to  the  cliair  beside  my  bed  ;  it  was  in  my
own  home,  and  the  room  the  one  she  died  in  some  years  before.

"  I  was  in  bed  ;  I  do  not  remember  what  was  my  state  of  health.  I  was
about  17  years  old.  I  did  not  recognise  ever  having  seen  the  old  woman
before.  I  was  sleeping  with  some  one  at  the  time  [who  was],  I  think,  asleep.
I  have  never  seen  any  one  since."

In  reply  to  our  request  for  further  particulars,  Miss  C.  writes  : —

March  1st  [1892]

"  As  well  as  I  can  remember,  the  person  had  on  a  white  cap  like  an  old
woman's  night-cap.  I  did  not  recognise  ever  having  seen  her  before.  Some
time  before,  Mrs.  F.'s  grandmother  died  in  that  same  room,  and  she  was  the


350  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


person  Mrs.  F,  saw,  after  I  had  seen  the  other  apparition.  I  had  never
heard  the  room  was  haunted  or  of  any  one  having  been  seen  in  it  since."

In  the  next  case,  we  are  not  expressly  told  whether  the  person
represented  by  the  apparition  had  any  connection  with  the  place  in
which  it  was  seen  ;  but  the  contrary  seems  to  be  implied.  On  the
other  hand,  in  the  case  of  the  second  apparition  seen  by  Miss  L.  H.,
the  association  seems  to  have  been  a  local  rather  than  a  personal  one.
The  frequent  recurrence  of  both  hallucinations  in  Miss  H.'s  experience
is  to  be  noted  ;  and  also  the  indication  of  a  hereditary  tendency  to
hallucinations  of  the  kind,  since  they  were  experienced  by  Mrs.  H.  and
two  of  her  children.  But  heredity  does  not  appear  to  be  a  sufficieiit
explanation  of  the  phenomena,  as  there  is  some  evidence  that  both
apparitions  were  also  seen  independently  by  other  persons.

(698.  24.)  From  Mrs.  H.  H.

March  8th,  1892.

"  I  saw  in  1872,  in  the  month  of  December,  an  old  gentleman,  apparently

■an  invalid,  crossing  a  room  in  a  house  in  ,  where  I  was  then  lodging.  As

near  as  I  can  remember,  the  hours  were  12  p.m.,  1  p.m.,  and  8  p.m.  The
only  tiling  I  observed  at  the  time  was  that  he  looked  very  ill,  and  wore  a
long  brown  Turkish  dressing-gown  with  big  tassels.  On  three  occasions  I
had  this  experience.  Twice  on  entering  the  room  I  saw  it,  and  on  one
occasion  it  appeared  while  I  was  at  lunch.  I  was  in  very  good  health,  and
not  suffering  from  grief  or  anxiety.  I  was  51  years  of  age.  Many  years
before  I  was  in  the  habit  of  seeing  the  gentleman  almost  daily.  My  little
son  and  his  nurse  [were  pi-esent,  and]  all  saw  him  distinctly,  as  did  my
daughter,  on  the  second  time  of  his  appearing."

From  the  following  statement,  received  from  Miss  L.  H.,  the  daughter
referred  to  in  Mrs.  H.'s  account,  it  does  not  seem  clear  that  the  apparition
was  ever  seen  collectively,  as  Mrs.  H.  appears  to  imply,  but  the  evidence
goes  to  show  that  a  similar  apparition  was  seen  independently  by  several
different  persons,  without  any  communication  with  one  another  on  the
subject.

June  17th,  1892.

"  L.  H.  was  the  daughter  who  saw  the  old  gentleman  in  the  dressing-
gown,  spoken  of  by  her  mother,  Mrs.  H.,  but  the  son  spoken  of  was  only  a
little  child  at  the  time  and  was  laughed  out  of  the  idea  that  he  had  seen  any
one,  at  the  time  ;  and  when  the  lodgings  were  given  up,  no  reference  to
the  apparition  was  ever  made  before  him,  as  he  was  both  delicate  and
nervous.  The  old  nurse  spoken  of  died  in  November,  1873,  but  she  never
doubted  having  seen  it.  Till  Mrs.  H.'s  little  son  spoke  of  having  seen  'an  old
man,'  neither  Mrs.  H.,  L.  H.,  nor  the  nurse  spoke  to  each  other  about  it,
as  naturally  each  one  thought  it  could  only  be  imagination.  The  person  seen
was  known  in  life  to  all  but  H.  H.  (the  little  boy);  he  was  indistinctly
remembered  by  L.  H.  as  an  old  man  who  was  always  ill  ;  but  both  the
nurse  and  Mrs.  H.  knew  him  well."


XVI.]


Local  Apparitions.


351


In  reply  to  further  enquiries,  Miss  H.  writes  : —

Aug}ist  31si,  1893.

"  I  will  endeavour  to  give  you  all  tlie  details  I  remember  of  the  apparition
seen  by  me  in  1872.  I  was  not  sleeping  in  the  house  in  which  my  mother
was  lodging,  but  I  used  to  go  in  and  out  several  times  during  the  day.  The
sitting-room  was  an  upstairs  room  ;  one  window  looked  into  the  street,  and
the  other  exactly  opposite  it  into  the  garden.  The  figure  used  to  glide  quite
suddenly  between  the  fireplace  towards  the  garden  window.  Whilst  I  was
watching  it,  it  apparently  melted.  I  never  really  saw  the  disappearing  ;
one  moment  it  was  there,  tlie  next,  I  used  to  think  it  was  all  rubbish,  and
I  must  have  let  my  eyes  deceive  me.

"  1  am  not  quite  sure  how  long  my  mother  was  in  the  house,  for  I  was
at  a  boarding-school  in  the  town  ;  but  I  know  the  first  time  I  saw  the
apparition  was  December  13th.  I  can  fix  the  date,  as  I  was  home  for  two
■days  for  my  sister's  wedding,  which  took  place  the  day  before.  It  must  liave
been  some  time  between  10  a.m.  and  1  p.m.,  as  I  was  lunching  with  friends
that  day  and  sht)uld  not  have  been  in  the  house  after  1  o'clock.  After  that
one  occasion  I  did  not  see  any  more  of  it  till  my  holidays  began,  say  about
December  20th,  and  I  left  on  January  14th  ;  but  between  these  two  dates  I
constantly  saw  it,  nearly  always  by  daylight ;  though  once  I  remember
seeing  it  exceedingly  distinctly  by  firelight.  I  remember  I  was  alone  on  that
occasion,  and  it  stayed  long  enough  for  me  to  notice  [that]  the  girdle  of  the
dressing-gown  it  appeared  to  be  wearing  had  a  big  upright  loop  to  it.

"  I  had  no  idea  that  anyone  else  saw  it  till  some  time  afterwards,  except
my  brother,  who  was  very  little  then,  and  he  had  declared  several  times  he
saw  an  old  man  in  the  corner  ;  but  he  was  very  delicate  and  nervous,  and
they  used  to  tell  him  it  was  the  shadow  of  a  tree  waving  about — he  was  so  easily
frightened.  I  used  not  to  say  anything,  for  we  are  a  very  matter-of-fact
family,  and  I  knew  I  should  be  unmercifully  chaffed,  if  I  had  said  anything
to  my  brothers  and  sisters  (of  whom  I  had  several).  Our  old  nurse  did  not
tell  my  mother  or  me  anything  about  it  till  she  was  out  of  the  house,  and
my  mother  was  equally  silent  I  think  they  were  both  afraid  of  alarming
us  ;  though  there  was  nothing  to  alarm  any  one  in  the  apparition.  It  was  a
very  gentle,  mild-faced  old  man,  and  not  one  bit  like  a  stoiy-book  ghost.

"  I  should  think  it  was  about  September,  1873,  that  I  first  heard  it  had
been  seen  by  my  motlier,  and  a  little  later  than  that  my  nurse  told  me  she
too  had  seen  it.

"  They  have  been  with  me  in  the  room  when  I  have  seen  it,  but  whether
they  saw  it  at  the  same  time,  of  course  I  cannot  tell.  You  see,  we  never
thought  any  one  else  would  be  interested  in  it.

"  There  was  a  distinct  feeling  of  some  strange  personality,  so  to  speak,
in  the  room,  that  involuntarily  used  to  turn  my  head  to  that  part  of  the
room  each  time  I  saw  the  apparition.  I  never  used  to  lo<il;  for  it,  but  when
it  was  there,  I  knew  it  ;  and  sometimes  I  used  not  then  to  turn  round,  if  I  was
very  much  interested  in  what  I  was  doing.  I  got  accustomed  to  it  ;  and
I  don't  think  I  was  ever  too  well  pleased  at  having  to  force  myself
into  a  belief  in  such  things.  I  hardly  ever  speak  of  my  own  experiences,  for
it  is,  I  find,  only  about  one  person  in  a  hundred  who  gives  one  credit  for
telling  nothing  but  the  honest  truth."


352  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap


Miss  H.  has  had  another  somewhat  similar  series  of  experiences,  which
she  thus  describes  :■ —

March  8th,  1892.

"  I  have  seen  on  several  occasions  the  figure  of  an  old  man,  always  in  the
house,  though  not  in  the  same  place  in  the  house.  The  hours  of  appearance
have  varied,  but  it  has  oftenest  been  broad  daylight.  The  dates  have  been
from  1874  to  the  present  year.  I  was  occupied  in  no  particular  way.  I  was
in  perfect  health  on  most  of  the  occasions,  and  had  neither  grief  nor  anxiety.
When  I  first  saw  it  I  was  eighteen.  I  never  .saw  the  person  in  life.  Some-
times the  figure  has  been  resting  in  an  armchair,  sometimes  it  appears  to
have  come  in  from  a  ride.  No  one  has  been  with  me  at  the  time,  though  I
have  heard  others  speak  of  the  same  figure  appearing  to  them.  I  have  never
tried  to  count  how  often  I  have  seen  it,  but  it  may  be  about  three  or  our
times  in  a  year.  The  old  man  has  very  bright  blue  eyes  and  a  good  deal  of
colour  ;  he  is  always  dressed  in  white  riding  breeches  and  black  coat."

In  answer  to  questions,  Miss  H.  writes  :  —

"To  the  best  of  L.  H.'s  knowledge  the  figure  was  seen  quite  inde-
pendently, no  one  person  having  told  another  it  was  to  be  seen,  or  that  he  or
she  had  seen  it.  There  was  no  special  reason  for  connecting  it  with  any
deceased  person  at  the  time  it  was  first  seen  by  L.  H.,  although  from  photo-
graphs and  a  picture  aftenoanh  seen,  she  had  no  doubt  as  to  its  identity.
L.  H.  is  sorry  not  to  be  able  to  give  any  particulars  as  to  any  fixed  dates
or  occasions  of  its  appearances,  for  they  are  most  erratic,— coming  sometimes
frequently  and  close  together,  and  then  not  again  for  months  ;  but  they
are  much  more  usual  in  daylight  than  at  any  other  time."

Miss  H.  adds  later  t ^  o^  ,  iqqo

Avgvst  6\st,  189o

"  I  have  seen  [the  apparition]  once  or  twice  within  the  last  four  months,
but  I  have  not  heard  of  anyone  else  having  seen  it  within  that  time."

Mrs  H.,  being  an  invalid,  was  unable  to  receive  visitors,  so  that  we  have
not  had  an  opportunity  of  a  personal  interview  with  her  or  Miss  H.

In  the  third  and  last  case  of  this  kind,  it  is  doubtful  whether
the  recognition  of  the  figure  was  at  all  clearly  made  out  until  the
percipients  had  formed  a  theory— the  one  that  would  most  naturally
occur  to  them— on  the  subject.  It  is  also  noteworthy  that  in  this
case,  as  in  so  many  of  the  unrecognised  ones,  the  phenomena  began
with  unaccountable  noises,  which  had  alarmed  the  children  a  good
deal  before  they  saw  the  apparition;  and  it  seems  probable  that,
when  the  experiences  had  once  begun,  the  alarm  and  discussion  they
occasioned  may  have  encouraged  both  a  tendency  to  experience
hallucinations,  and  a  tendency  to  exaggerate  them  in  memory.  But
we  have  first-hand  evidence  from  seven  different  percipients— six  of
whom  were  children  at  the  time,  though  old  enough  to  give  fairly
trustworthy  accounts— and  it  is  important  that  the  first  appearance
was  a  collective  one,  of  which  we  have  three  first-hand  concordant
accounts.


XVI.]


Local  Apparitions.


353


(488.  14.)  From  Miss  R.  N.

(The  initials  of  all  the  persons  in  this  case  are  assumed.  Miss  R.  N.'s
account  was  written  towards  the  end  of  1891.)

"  In  July  of  1885,  I  was  staying  in  the  country,  and  was  reading  in  the
garden  (JTeJeii's  Babies)  one  day,  when,  suddenly  looking  up,  I  saw  my  aunt
standing  in  front  of  me,  she  having  died  in  the  October  previous.  In  a
moment  or  two  she  passed  on  out  of  my  sight.  This  was  my  first  experience,
though  she  had  been  seen  by  several  members  of  the  family  at  home.

"  On  my  return  home  I  saw  her  many  times  in  the  following  nine  months,
and  was  often  conscious  of  feeling  some  one  in  the  room,  which  was  euipty
except  for  myself.  Also  during  that  time  I  continually  heard  the  most  real
and  awful  groans  and  various  sorts  of  noises,  which  could  not  be  accounted
for  in  any  way.  Doors  opened  and  shut  in  the  most  mysterious  way,  and
once,  when  we  were  all  working  in  the  room  my  uncle  occupied  when  with
us,  we  distinctly  heard  knocking  at  the  door,  and  on  calling  out  '  come  in, '
there  was  no  response,  and  a  cat  in  the  room  with  us  was  full  of  terror,
though  we  saw  notliing."

The  other  principal  witnesses  in  this  case  were  interviewed  by  Professor
Lodge  in  October,  1891.  He  informs  us  that  the  family  consists  of  Dr.  and
Mrs.  S.  ;  their  son,  who  had  come  to  live  in  the  house  after  the  death  of  his
wife  (whom  the  apparition  was  supposed  to  represent)  in  October,  1884;  and
their  daughter,  Mrs.  N.,with  her  son  and  four  daughters, R., aged  (in  1891)  23,
E.,  aged  20,  C.  aged  19,  and  A.,  a  year  or  two  younger.  The  apparition
was  first  seen  in  1884, — soon  after  the  aunt's  death, — collectively  by  C,  A.
and  a  friend,  Mi.ss  G.,  as  stated  in  their  accounts,  and  soon  afterwards  on  the
stairs  by  Miss  G.  and  A.  N.  together.  It  was  seen  later  by  a  cousin.  Miss
S.  ;  by  a  servant  who  had  formerly  been  the  deceased  lady's  housemaid,  and
afterwards  by  Miss  R.N.,  as  she  relates.  The  apparition  was  generally  seen
in  or  near  Mr.  S.'s  bedroom  and  dressing-room,  where  also  mysterious
noises — whirrings,  voices  and  taps — were  often  heard  by  several  members  of
the  household,  and  doors  were  said  to  open  and  shut  unaccountably,  much
to  the  alarm  of  tlie  children  ;  the  cat  also  showed  signs  of  terror.  The
manifestations  went  on  for  about  a  year  and  a  half,  and  ceased  about
February,  1886,  when  Mr.  S.  married  again  and  left  the  house.  In  July,
1886,  he  was  visiting  in  the  house,  when  the  children  again  fancied  they  saw
their  aunt.  The  incidents  were  not  mentioned  to  him,  but  Dr.  and  Mrs.
S.  and  Mrs.N.  confirmed  the  percipients'  accounts.  Professor  Lodge  gathered
that  the  figure  seen  was  at  first  unrecognised  and  the  subsequent
appearances  often  vague  and  shadowy,  the  recognition  being  perhaps  subse-
quently inferred,  and  the  children's  alarm  tending  to  make  them  at  the  time
emphasise  everything  that  occurred;  though  they  were  inclined  afterwards,  he
thought,  in  giving  him  their  testimony,  to  minimise  the  incidents.
The  following  accounts  are  given  by  the  percipients  : —

From  Miss  E.  N.

November,  1891.

' '  In  the  winter  following  my  aunt's  death,  1884  to  1885,  my  uncle,
who  was  living  with  us,  was  away  for  a  short  time,  and  wrote  begging  my
mother  to  get  something  for  him  out  of  his  wardrobe. I  went  with  my


354


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap„


mother  into  his  room  at  about  3  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  as  we  opened
the  wardrobe  door,  we  heard  the  most  appalling  noise.  The  only  thing  I  can
at  all  compare  it  to,  is  the  letting  loose  of  a  quantity  of  clock  machinery,
and  yet  that  doesn't  really  describe  it,  and  it  was  more  violent.  While  it
lasted,  which  was  about  half  a  minute,  we  clung  together  in  terror,  and
then  we  looked  everywhere  for  an  explanation,  but  could  hnd  none,  and
never  have.  No  one  else  in  the  house  heard  it,  though  it  was  so  loud,  and
we  never  heard  it  again.

"  During  that  winter  my  sisters  and  others  continually  saw  my  aunt,  but
it  was  not  till  the  following  winter  that  I  saw  anything,  when,  one  evening,
as  I  was  going  upstairs  alone,  I  half  saw  a  figure  turn  the  corner  of  the
staircase  in  front  of  me.  I  should  scarcely  say  that  1  saw  a  figure,  for  what
I  did  see  was  so  shadowy  and  vague,  and  was  more  like  the  sweep  of  a  dress-
round  the  corner,  but  it  was  gone  almost  before  I  had  seen  it.  I  distinctly
remember  stopijing  and  feeling  afraid  to  go  on,  but  hearing  my  mother  and
sisters  talking  in  one  of  the  bedrooms,  ran  up  and  joined  theiti.  Oftert
during  the  two  years  my  aunt  was  seen,  I  have  noticed  doors  unaccountably
opened  and  shut;  also  the  cat  used  sometimes  to  show  signs  of  great  terror,
and  would  race  about  in  a  frantic  way.  When  alone  in  a  room  I  have  often
felt  as  if  some  one  else  were  present.

"  I  was  thirteen  when  my  aunt  died,  and  we  were  very  fearless,  and.
until  my  aunt  was  seen  had  no  belief  in  anything  supernatural.  I  have
often  wondered  why  I,  who  was  more  frightened  than  my  sisters,  never
properly  saw  my  aunt,  while  they  often  did."

From  Miss  C.  N.

{November,  1891].

"When  I  first  thought  that  I  saw  my  aunt,  I  was  12  years  old;  it  was  in
1884,  about  two  months  after  her  death.  I  was  playing  in  the  drawing-room
when  suddenly  I  noticed  a  tall  iigure  in  black  leave  the  room.  The  others  had
also  seen  it ;  we  were  not  frightened,  only  very  much  surprised,  because  we
had  not  seen  any  one  enter,  and  it  was  certainly  no  member  of  the  family.
When  we  ran  out  of  the  room  to  see  where  the  person  had  disappeared  to,
there  was  no  sign  of  her  anywhere.  Later  on  the  same  day,  I  was  going
upstairs,  when  I  was  again  surprised  by  seeing  the  same  person  walking
acroiss  the  landing  from  one  bedroom  to  another.  Just  at  the  same  moment
my  sister  and  friend  came  up  ;  they  had  also  seen  the  figure.

"  One  evening  at  about  7  o'clock,  when  every  one  of  the  family  were  at
dinner,  I  passed  my  mother's  open  door  ;  there  I  saw  the  same  figure
standing  in  the  doorway  ;  lier  face  was  turned  from  me  towards  the  room  ;
I  looked  hard  at  her  for  one  minute,  tlien  ran  on.  When  I  reached  the  top  of
the  stairs  I  looked  again,  but  she  had  quite  vanislied.

"Another  evening  I  went  up  to  my  grandmother's  room  to  speak  to-
iler ;  there  was  a  long  screen  in  front  of  the  door,  so  that  I  could  not  see
into  the  room  when  I  first  entered.  I  stopped  at  the  door  for  a  second,
for  I  heard  what  I  thought  was  my  grandmother  walking  about  the
room  Just  as  I  was  going  to  run  past  the  screen,  the  same  figure  dressed  in
black  with  a  white  shawl,  passed  me  very  quickly  and  went  into  the  dressing-
room,  which  was  out  of  the  bedroom. My  first  impulse  was  to  follow  her^


XVI.]


Local  Apparitions.


355


but  I  heard  such  a  strange  noise  in  the  dressing-room  that  I  feared  to  enter.
I  do  not  remember  being  really  frightened  at  the  time,  for  I  never  saw  the
face  distinctly.

"The  last  time  that  I  ever  felt  anything  was  nearly  two  years  later,
in  July,  1886.  When  my  sister  and  I,  who  then  occupied  the  room  that
our  uncle  had  used  when  he  was  with  us,  were  just  settling  to  sleep, we  were
suddenly  I'oused  by  the  most  awful  feeling  of  terror;  it  was  quite  dark,  but
we  felt  that  something  or  some  one  supernatural  was  standing  by  the  bed-
side looking  at  us.  I  cannot  describe  it,  for  we  did  not  see  or  hear  anything
distinctly  ;  for  a  few  minutes  we  were  almost  beside  ourselves  with
fear — in  too  great  a  terror  to  move  or  look  up.  At  last  we  summoned  up
courage  to  rush  out  of  the  room.  Our  mother  came  back  into  the  room  with
us,  and,  after  lighting  the  gas  and  assuring  us  that  it  must  have  been
imagination,  we  got  back  into  bed,  and  heard  nothing  more  all  night.
I  never  saw  anything  again,  though  I  often  thought  I  heard  sighs  and  voices
in  my  uncle's  room  previously."

From  Miss  A.  N.

{Nooemher,  1891.]

"...  We  were  then  very  young  children,  and  fond  of  playing  hide-
and-seek.  Our  uncle  had  come  to  live  with  us  after  our  aunt's  death,  and
constantly,  when  hiding  in  his  room,  we  thought  we  heard  sighs  and  groans,
that  were  quite  unaccountable.  We  were  naturally  frightened  at  this,  and
soon  learned  to  avoid  playing  in  his  room.

"  Before  very  long  we  also  began  to  see  strange  things.  One  afternoon,
when  hiding  in  the  drawing-room  behind  the  sofa,  some  one  walked  out
of  the  room  quite  suddenly.  No  grown-up  person  had  been  in  the  room,
and  this  appeared  to  be  a  tall  lady  in  a  black  dress  and  a  white  shawl,  who
might  very  well  have  been  our  aunt.  At  any  rate,  it  was  nobody  in  the
house,  because  we  ascertained  that  by  inquiring  of  every  one  if  they  had
been  in  the  drawing-room  at  all,  and  were  answered  in  the  negative.
Besides,  I  certainly  remember  being  impressed  with  the  fact  that  I  had  seen
no  one  enter  the  room. . .  ."

[Miss  A.  N.  describes  further  two  subsequent  appearances  of  the  figure
to  her,  and  confirms  the  incident  related  at  the  end  of  MissC.  N.'s  account.]

From  Miss  G.
(Sent  to  Professor  Lodge.)
"  In  the  winter  of  1884  I  was  spending  the  day  at  a  friend's  house.  I
was  then  11  years  old.  The  little  girls  of  the  house  and  myself  were  play-
ing at  hide-and-seek,  and  two  or  three  of  us  ran  into  the  drawing-room  and
hid  behind  the  sofa.  Suddenly  I  saw  a  figure  pass  across  the  end  of  the  room,
and  disappear  through  the  door.  I  could  see  no  face,  and  the  figure  glided,
rather  than  walked ;  it  was  dark  and  shadowy,  but  I  could  see  plainly  it
was  no  shadow  ;  neither  was  it  any  one  of  the  household.  We  were  all
rather  startled,  but  I  did  not  feel  really  afraid  until  I  saw  the  same  figure
again.

"  I  was  chasing  one  of  tlie  little  girls  upstairs,  and  when  I  came  in  sight  of
the  landing  the  fiigure  I  had  seen  before  passed  from  one  of  the  rooms  to  the


356  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


other.  At  first  I  thought  it  might  be  my  friend,  but  she  too  had  stopped
on  tlie  stairs,  and  we  both  exclaimed.  We  searched  all  the  rooms  on  that
landing,  but  did  not  find  any  one  at  all.  I  only  saw  the  figure  twice,  as  I
went  away  from  England  very  soon  after."

From  Mrs.  N.'s  niece.  Miss  S.
(Apparently  written  in  December,  1891.)

"The  only  time  I  ever  heard  or  saw  anything  at  House  was  one  day

when,  standing  by  myself  on  the  landing  of  the  first  floor,  some  noise  attracted
my  attention,  and,  looking  round,  I  saw  a  tall  figure  in  a  grey  gown  come  out
of  one  of  the  bedrooms,  and  go  into  the  adjoining  dressing-room,  but  without
turning  its  face  in  my  direction.  Being  quite  ignorant  of  what  had  been
occurring  there,  I  only  concluded  that  it  was  some  visitor,  and  did  not  hear
until  later  in  the  day  that  there  was  no  one  answering  to  that  description  in
the  house.  I  saw  the  figure  quite  distinctly  ;  it  made  no  sound  in  walking,
which  did  not  strike  me  as  at  all  strange,  as  it  had  only  a  wrapper  on,  and
probably,  as  I  thought,  bedroom  slippers."

-  The  housemaid  referred  to  in  Professor  Lodge's  account  writes  to
Mrs.  N.

November  6th,  1891.

"  I  was  rather  surprised  to  hear  that  you  should  think  it  was  because  I

was  afraid  to  stay  that  I  left  House;  that  was  not  the  reason. I  left

because  I  did  not  feel  well  enough  to  do  my  work.

"  I  certainly  did  hear  sounds,  and  thought  I  saw  a  figure  in  my  bedroom
several  times.  As  I  was  not  strong,  it  upset  me  a  little,  and  made  me  feel
nervous  ;  so  once  or  twice  I  asked  F.  to  sleep  with  me,  as  I  felt  afraid.  The
sounds  were  as  if  some  one  was  walking  back  and  to  across  the  floor,  and
made  the  boards  creak  ;  tlie  figure  was  of  a  lady  in  a  night-gown.  Once  it
came  to  my  bedside  and  leaned  over  me,  but,  as  I  had  been  dreaming  of  my
dear  Mrs.  S.,  and  was  still  thinking  of  lier  when  I  awoke,  that  may  have
been  imagination."

Local  Apparitions  of  Living  Persons.

We  have  also  a  small  number  of  cases  in  which  apparitions,  seen
in  certain  places  by  more  than  one  person  independently,  are  reported
by  at  least  one  of  the  percipients  as  representing  persons  who  were
living  at  the  time.

In  the  following  case,  which  resembles  that  of  Mrs.  L.  F.  and  Miss
A.  C,  quoted  above,  there  is  nothing  in  the  experience  of  either
percipient,  taken  by  itself,  to  suggest  a  supernormal  origin  ;  but  it  is  a
curious  coincidence  that  they  both  saw  an  apparition  of  the  same
person  in  the  same  place.

(189.  14.)  From  Mr.  C.  C.

October  Sth,  1889.

"Some  time  in  the  early  summer  of  1850,  '51,  '52,  or  '53,  I  was  standing
on  the  grass  close  to  the  verandah  of  a  country  house  which  we  occupied


XVI.]


Local  Apparitions.


357


during  those  years.  The  verandah  went  round  two  sides  of  the  house  but
only  round  one  side  of  the  drawing-room.  I  distinctly  saw  the  appearance
of  my  father,  the  late  Mr.  Justice  C,  standing  close  to  and  looking  out  of
the  drawing-room  window,  which  opened  on  to  the  verandah.  I  made  a
mental  note  at  the  time,  and  felt  a  little  anxious  till  he  came  down  from
town,  either  on  that  evening  or  the  next.  My  father  was  apj^ointed  a  judge
in  1852,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think  the  above  incident  took  place  when  he
was  a  judge,  but  of  this  I  am  not  at  all  sure. The  house  was  four  miles

from  H  ,  where  we  lived  from  1848  to  1853. I  was,  I  think,  about  19

years  old. I  was  in  good  health,  and  in  no  particular  grief  or  anxiety.

"My  father  was  in  London,  attending  to  his  usual  business  as  barrister
or  as  judge,  and  we  were  in  no  anxiety  about  his  health  or  otherwise.

' '  My  sister  (Mrs.  R. )  had  an  almost  identical  experience,  seeing  the
appearance  of  my  father  looking  out  of  another  window  in  the  drawing-room,
on  the  side  where  there  was  no  verandah.  Whether  it  was  at  the  same
time,  we  have  no  means  of  deciding.  Neither  of  us  knew  of  the  experience
of  the  other  till  the  other  day,  September  29th,  1889,  at  my  brother-in-law's
house.  I  do  not  remember  [having  such  an  experience  on]  any  other
occasion."

(189.  15.)  From  Mrs.  R.

October  IQth,  1889.

"When  I  was  a  young  girl,  I  was  one  day  in  the  garden  of  the  country
house  we  occupied,  and,  looking  towards  the  house,  saw  my  father,  Mr.
Justice  C,  standing  at  and  looking  through  the  drawing-room  window  on
the  ground  floor.  The  window  was  not  open.  It  was  not  the  window
opening  on  to  the  verandah,  mentioned  in  the  previous  answer  by  my
brother,  Mr.  C.  C.  The  impression  was  momentary,  and  I  was  satisfied  at
the  time  that  it  could  not  be  my  father  himself.  It  was  summer,  and  in
broad  daylight.  I  was  walking  or  playing  in  the  garden.  I  was  not  out  of
health,  or  in  grief  or  anxiety.  I  cannot  recollect  in  what  year  it  took  place,
or  my  exact  age,  but  I  was  certainly  over  ten  when  we  first  went  to  the
house  and  fifteen  when  we  left  it  (about  1850).  I  believe  my  father  was
away  from  home  at  the  time,  but  I  do  not  know  what  he  was  dohig.  No
[one  was  with  me  at  the  time].  I  was  greatly  surprised  at  the  end  of  last
month  to  hear  of  my  brother's  similar  experience.  I  believe  I  never  heard
of  it  before.  I  do  not  think  I  ever  mentioned  mine  to  any  one  at  the  time
or  since  till  we  received  these  papers  ;  but  I  told  it  to  the  collector  before
hearing  my  brother's  experience,  and  he  told  his  before  hearing  of  mine.

"  [I  have  had]  no  [other  such  experiences]."

In  this  case,  it  may  be  a  mere  accident  that  the  apparition  was
seen  both  times  in  the  same  place — the  place  being  in  the  house  in
which  the  percipients  lived  ;  but  there  is  a  certain  interest  in  repeated
apparitions  of  the  same  person.  See  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (Vol.  II.,
pp.  77-90)  and  Miss  Maughan's  case,i  (pp.  273-7).

1  Another  case  of  this  kind  taken  from  the  Census  is  Mr.  Hasted's  (see  Journal
S.P.R.,  Vol.  VL,  p.  1.31.)


358


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


AVe  have  quoted  above  a  case  of  an  apparition  of  a  living  person
seen  in  a  house  which  the  percipient  afterwards  heard  was  reputed  to
be  "haunted"  (No.  240.13,  p.  188),  but  in  which  the  only  other
definite  incident  recorded  was  the  apparition  of  another  living  person
to  another  percipient.  See  also  No.  684.  1  (p.  191),  where  the  appari-
tions of  two  children  were  seen  at  different  times  by  their  parents.
These  cases  may,  of  course,  be  explained  as  merely  subjective  halluci-
nations, and  the  occurrence  of  two  of  them  in  the  same  place  may  be
purely  accidental.

The  following  is  a  case  of  similar  apparitions  seen  in  the  same
house  by  three  persons — two  of  whom  saw  them  independently, —
which  there  is  some  reason  to  regard  as  representing  some  one  who
afterwards  came  to  the  house.  The  parallel  with  "  haunts  "  whei'e  the
apparition  is  supposed  to  represent  some  deceased  person  unknown  to
the  percipients,  is  very  close.  There  was  undoubtedly  some  resemblance
between  the  apparition  and  the  person  in  question,  and  it  seems  likely
that,  if  the  percipients  had  had  no  more  opportunity  of  making  the
comparison  than  would  be  possible  in  the  case  of  a  supposed  apparition
of  the  dead,  they  might  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  could
be  no  doubt  of  the  identification.

The  case  is  instructive,  because  we  have  unusually  full  and  well-
authenticated  information  about  it,  including  an  account  written
before  there  was  any  question  of  identification.  We  also  happen
to  possess  a  less  authentic  account — probably  at  third-hand — which
we  print  as  illustrating  the  additional  impressiveness  that  narratives
of  this  kind  are  likely  to  gain  in  passing  fi'om  hand  to  hand.  It
will  be  observed  that  the  tempting  hypothesis  of  reciprocity  in  super-
normal perception  is  suggested  by  this  account,  but  the  evidence  which
suggests  it  is  denied  by  the  lady  who  is  in  the  best  position  for  making
statements  on  the  subject.

(267.  1.)  From  Mr.  G.  S.

December  30th,  1889.
"  On  the  Saturday  whicli  was  on  or  nearest  to  October  22nd,  1886,  at  the

house  of  Dr.  E  , ,  on  entering  the  drawing-room  on  the  first  floor

shortly  after  4  o'clock,  afternoon,  I  saw,  seated  on  a  settee,  with  her  back  to
nie,  a  young  lady  in  a  brown  dress,  with  a  broad  lace  collar.  She  was  present
in  the  room  for  some  minutes  after,  and  I  saw  her  as  I  sat  talking  to  Mrs.  E.
and  a  gentleman  caller  whose  name  I  forget.  Her  hair  was  reddish  gold  in
the  gleam  of  the  fire.  I  only  saw  the  round  of  her  right  cheek,  which
appeared  fresh  and  plump.  She  appeared  to  be  reading,  but  I  could  not  see
the  book.  When  the  gentleman  rose  to  go,  I  looked  round  for  her  expecting,
and  wishing,  to  be  introduced,  but  she  was  gone.  The  light  in  the  room  at
tlie  time  consisted  of  a  fine  open  fire,  and  a  gas  lamp  on  each  side  at  the
usual  level  of  a  bell  pull. The  girl's  back  was  to  the  fire,  and  she  sat  in  the


XVI.]


Local  Apparitions.


359


middle  of  the  settee.  Mrs.  E.  sat  on  the  side  of  the  settee  nearest  the  lire,
facing  it,  and  to  the  right  of  the  settee.  The  caller  sat  on  a  chair  near  the
end  of  the  settee  furthest  from  Mrs.  E.  I  was  28  years  of  age,  in  my  normal
health  {i.e.,  slightly  below  par),  and  in  good  spirits.  I  had  just  been  com-
pleting the  exchange  of  a  lease  for  Mrs.  E.'s  sou  L.,  who  had  lately  married.
I  never  saw  the  girl  before.  The  gentleman  seemed  to  be  looking  straight
towards  the  gii-1,  but  he  took  no  notice  of  her,  and  T  did  not  speak  of  her  to
Mrs.  E.  till  he  was  gone,  and  Mrs.  E.  disclaimed  any  knowledge  of  her —
and  was  rather  frightened — so  I  laughed  the  matter  off.  [I  have]  never  [had
any  other  such  experience.]"

Mr.  S.  wrote  an  account  of  his  experience  shortly  after  it  happened,  but
this  account  was  unfortunately  lost  by  the  friend  to  whom  it  was  given.  The
following  letter  from  Mr.  S.  to  the  collector,  Mr.  C.  W.  C.  Oman,  of  All
Souls'  College,  Oxford,  gives  further  particulars.

October  29th,  1887.

"  You  may  remember  my  telling  you  last  year  that  on  Saturday,

October  23rd  (I  think  that  was  the  date),  I  saw  an  apparition,  in

■Street.  Now,  on  the  20th  of  this  month,  it  has  again  been  seen  by  a
guest  in  the  same  house,  and  on  the  27th  by  a  servant — each  time  in  a
different  room  from  the  room  where  I  saw  it.  The  guest  v^as  a  Mrs.  R. ,
who  called  at  the  house,  after  I  had  seen  the  figure  last  year,  on  the  same
afternoon.  This  year  she  was  staying  in  the  house  ;  she  was  not  quite  well,
and  was  having  dinner  in  bed  about  7.30,  when  in  walked  a  fair-haired
young  lady,  of  two  or  three  and  twenty,  in  a  brown  dress,  with  a  broad  lace
•collar — the  dress  being  of  the  style  that  used  [to]  be  known  as  '  Princess '
cut.  She  advanced  without  a  word  to  the  cheval-glass,  and  began  to  take
down  her  hair.  Mrs.  R.  was  not  in  the  least  frightened,  taking  her  for  a
real  flesh  and  blood  woman.  She  got  out  of  bed,  and,  walking  up  to  the
glass,  laid  her  hand  on  the  girl's  shoulder  ;  but  it  passed  through  empty  air,
and  she  found  herself  looking  at  her  own  self  in  the  glass.  Even  then,
she  said,  she  was  puzzled,  not  frightened.  I  questioned  her  this  evening
about  the  'ghost's'  height,  shape,  dress,  contour  of  face,  etc.,  and  she  con-
firmed my  recollection  in  every  way,  except  the  manner  of  dressing  the
hair,  on  which  she  was  hazy.

' '  The  servant,  on  the  other  hand,  is  very  clear,  both  about  the  lace
•collar,  the  colour  of  the  dress,  and  the  dressing  of  the  hair,  and  its  peculiar
colour.  She  saw  the  figure  walk  into  the  dining-room,  which  has  only  one
door,  and,  following  it,  found  no  one  in  the  room.  The  chimney  and  window
were  the  only  exits,  and  the  latter  is  over  an  area  lined  with  spikes,  and
15ft.  deep.  I  asked  Mrs.  R.  some  questions  designed  to  lead  her  astray,  but
she  kept  straight  to  details  which  I  could  corroborate.  For  instance,  when
I  suggested  jjufied  sleeves,  she  stuck  to  the  simple  '  Princess  '  cut."

Mr.  S.  writes  further  : —

December  30th,  1889.
"  In  August,  1888,  Mrs.  E.'s  son  P. 's  wife  (whom  he married  in
■Australia,  and  whom  Mrs.  E.  had  never  seen)  arrived  from  Sydney. I  saw
her. She  was  out  of  health,  and  her  hair  had  been  cut  off'  shortly  before
she  started  for  England. It  was  of  a  reddish  hue. I  did  not  recognise


360  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


her.  She  went  into  the  country,  and  came  back  in  October  restored  in
health.  Shortly  after  her  return  Mrs.  R.  was  dining  with  Mrs.  E.,  and
Mrs.  P.  E.  came  down  in  a  brown  tea-gown  and  broad  lace  collar.  Mrs.
R.  and  Martha  at  once  recognised  her  as  the  brown  lady.  By  Mrs.  E.'s
desire,  nothing  was  said  to  Mrs.  P.  E.,  who  is  of  a  highly  nervous  tempera-
ment, and  I  believe  nothing  has  been  said  to  her  yet.  She  returned  to
Australia  in  the  year  1888,  only  to  return  this  year  (1889),  and  arrive  at
Mrs.  E.'s  house  at  the  end  of  October."

April  23rd,  1890.

"  So  far  as  I  am  aware  there  is  no  further  reason  for  thinking  that  the
apparition  was  Mrs.  P.  E.  beyond  the  recognition  by  Mrs.  R.  and  the  servant.
I  have  not  made  personal  inquiries  to  see  whether  the  recognitions  were
independent  in  each  case.  Since  T  filled  up  the  return  I  have  met  Mrs.
P.  E.  She  was  then  in  a  brown  dress  of  the  colour  I  remember,  and  some-
thing of  the  shape  about  the  shoulders,  but  she  did  not  strike  me  as  being
the  same  type  of  head  as  that  of  the  apparition  I  saw.  However,  1  only
saw  the  round  of  the  cheek  of  the  apparition  at  such  an  angle  that  the  nose
and  shape  of  the  eye  were  quite  hidden.  The  first  time  I  .saw  her  (Mrs.
P.  E.)  she  was  not  in  a  brown  dress.  She  was  then  recovering  from  a  rather
exhausting  illness."

April  29th,  1890.

' '  [Having  seen]  Mrs.  P.  E.  [again],  I  took  an  opportunity  of  looking  at
her  from,  as  nearly  as  I  could,  the  same  angle  as  I  saw  the  apparition  from,,
and  I  find  I  was  mistaken  in  thinking  the  shape  of  her  head  would  give  a
different  effect  from  that  of  the  apparition.  From  that  point  of  view  the
outline  of  her  cheek  corresponds  very  fairly  with  that  of  the  apjjarition.

"G.  S."

Mrs.  E.  writes  : —

May  5th,  1891.

"  My  son's  young  wife  came  to  England  from  Australia  in  exceedingly
delicate  health,  and  Mrs.  R.,  seeing  her  one  day  in  a  long  brown  tea-gown,

exclaimed  to  me,  '  Why,  I  believe  the  figure  I  saw  was ; '  and  the

servant  also  seemed  to  think  there  was  some  resemblance  ;  but  Mr.  S.  was
never  struck  by  any  such  likeness  to  the  figure  he  saw  in  the  drawing-room.

.  I  doubt  very  much  if  there  is  any  association  betweeji  her  and  the
figure  seen  by  the  others."

Mrs.  E.  sent  us  the  following  letter,  from  Mrs.  R.  to  herself,  describing
her  experience.

May  9th  [1891].

"  I  remember  every  detail.  As  you  know  I  am  not  a  nervous  or  excitable
person,  and  doji't  get  '  mixed  up  '  in  my  impressions.  The  facts  were  these  : — •
I  was  staying  with  you  in  the  October  of,  I  think,  1888,  but  I  know  it  was
the  October  before  P.'s  wife  came  home  on  that  visit.  I  had  a  cold,  and
remained  in  bed  all  day.  When  [my]  dinner  [came]  I  sat  up  in  bed,  and  ate
[it]  with  the  tray  on  a  pillow  before  me  for  an  improvised  table.  The  gas  was
full  on.  I  had  just  finished,  had  put  the  tray  on  the  table  beside  my  bed,  and
was  going  to  lie  down,  ljut  was  still  sitting  up — when  the  door  ojjened  gently
(the  red  door  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  as  the  i-oom  was  then  arranged),  and  a


XVI.]


Local  A-pparitions.


361


woman  came  quietly  in.  At  the  first  moment  I  thought  it  was  you,  and  I  had
said  '  Oh,  L.,  how  quick  you  have  been ! '  before  I  realised  that  it  was  not  you.
It  was  somebody  I  had  never  seen,  but  I  had  no  time  to  see  her  face  properly;
she  took  no  notice  of  me,  but  walked  up  to  the  toilet  table  and  put  up  her
hands  as  if  she  was  going  to  take  her  hair  down.  The  gas  shone  full  on  her
hair,  and  I  saw  that  it  was  fair  hair,  and  she  had  on  a  long  plain  brown  dress.
I  did  not  feel  at  all  alarmed,  but  very  curious  and  surprised,  and  I  jumped  out
of  bed,  came  up  behind  her,  and  was  going  to  touch  her  on  the  shoulder,  when
she  vanished.  You  know  how  small  the  room  was,  and  that  she  could  not  have
passed  me  without  touching  me.  I  got  back  into  bed,  and  then  I  remembered
what  Iliad  been  told  about  Mr.  S.  and  Martha  having  seen  a  brown  woman.
It  had  not  made  much  impression  on  me  ;  and  I  certainly  was  not  thinking-
about  it  when  the  door  opened  and  my  brown  woman  walked  in.  When  you
came  up,  I  told  you  about  it,  and  we  discussed  the  matter,  and  wondered
what  it  could  mean.  I  had  never  seen  any  one  at  all  resembling  the  a2:)pari-
tion  before,  but  I  afterwards  distinctly  recognised  her  in  P.'s  wife,  who  came
home  ill,  and  occupied  the  same  room  as  the  one  I  had  seen  her  [in]."

Mrs.  E.  adds,  in  sending  this  letter,  that  she  finds,  from  a  diary,  that
Mrs.  R.  was  staj'ing  with  her  in  October,  1887,  and  was  ill  in  bed  about  the
19th.  Her  son's  wife  came  to  England  in  1888,  and  she  thought  it  was  in
October,  1886,  that  Mr.  S.  saw  the  figure,  as  she  knew  that  he  had  called  on
her  one  afternoon  about  that  time.

The  following  account  was  written  by  Mrs.E.'s  parlourmaid,  Martha  .

"  In  the  early  part  of  October,  in  1887,  while  sitting  at  tea  in  the  kitchen
of  a  large  house  in  the  West-End  of  London,  with  three  other  servants  (all
that  were  kept  besides  myself),  the  visitors'  bell  rang,  and  on  reaching  the
hall,  before  opening  the  door,  I  distinctly  saw  the  back  of  a  tall,  fair  lady
walking  into  the  dining-room,  as  if  from  the  study.  It  was  light  enough  for-
me to  see  that  the  lady  had  golden  hair,  coiled  near  the  top  of  her  head,
and  a  brown  dress,  made  '  Princess'  robe  fashion,  a  little  long  behind.

"I  thought  it  was  my  own  lady,  by  only  glancing  at  her  and  seeing  my
lady's  little  dog  running  from  her  towards  the  door.  I  wondered  what  brown
dress  it  could  be,  as  a  few  minutes  before  I  had  left  my  lady  at  the  top  of
the  house  in  a  green  tea  gown.  Whilst  opening  the  front  door  nobody  could
possibly  have  come  out  of  the  dining-room  without  my  seeing  them  ;  but  on
going  into  the  room,  to  my  astonishment,  I  found  nobody  tliere,  nor  in  the
study,  or  anywhere  about ;  and  on  going  upstairs  was  surprised  to  see  my
lady  with  the  green  gown  on  still,  and  neither  herself  nor  the  lady  [Mrs.  R.]
that  was  with  her  had  left  the  room  since  I  left  them  before  tlie  kitchen  tea.
We  have  never  been  able  to  account  for  the  strange  lady's  appearance,
although  I  have  since  heard  that  the  same  lady  had  been  seen  by  a  gentleman
sitting  in  the  drawing-room  some  time  previous."

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  : —

May  9th,  1890.

"  I  called  to-day  on  Mrs.  E.,  and  saw  the  parlourmaid  Martha,  who  saw
the  figure  resembling  that  seen  by  Mr.  S.  She  struck  me  as  a  very  sensible
witness. She  does  not  think  she  had  heard  of  Mr.  S.'s  seeing  the  figure


362


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


{Mrs.  R.  saw  it  later  than  she  did),  and  is  at  any  rate  quite  sure  that  she
was  not  thinking  of  it  or  expecting  it.  [The  account  she  gave  to  Mrs.  Sidg-
wick  agreed  closely  with  the  account  which  she  wrote  shortly  after.]  Besides
Mrs.  E.  and  Mrs.  R.,  no  one  else  was  in  the  house  except  the  servants,  and
they  were  downstairs  all  the  tnne.  The  light  was  good  enough  to  distinguish
colour,  etc.,  witliout  any  doubt.  The  likeness  to  Mrs.  P.  E.  did  not  strike
her  till  after  Mrs.  R.  had  called  attention  to  it.

' '  N  oises  as  of  rustling  paper  have  beeji  heard  in  the  back  drawing-room,
■continued  for  some  time  and  heard  by  all."

The  following  is  the  more  impressive,  but  less  authentic,  account,  before
mentioned.

"  Some  two  years  ago  a  distant  connection,  a  Mrs.  R.,  was  at  the  house  of

a  friend  in  street. She  had  not  risen  for  breakfast ;  suddenly  she  saw  a

young  lady  standing  by  her  dressing-table,  the  chief  thing  about  her  being
her  golden  hair  ;  on  looking  again  nothing  was  to  be  seen.  On  going  down
to  lunch  she  mentioned  the  matter  to  her  hostess,  Mrs.  E. ,  and  then  learned
that  nearly  all  in  the  house  had  seen  the  same  thing.  Some  days  after,  in
the  afternoon,  a  gentleman  who  was  calling  desired  to  be  introduced  to  a
lady  present,  and  when  asked  which  one,  described  the  figure  before  seen.
News  soon  came  that  the  wife  of  a  son  who  had  married  an  Australian  lady
was  on  her  way  to  England  on  account  of  her  health,  and  when  Mrs.  E.
met  her  she  at  once  recognised  the  figure;  the  servants  also  did  this,  and  the
young  wife  when  she  reached  the  house  knew  wliich  was  her  room,  etc.  It
was  found  that  the  yjatient  was  subject  to  trances,  during  which  she  could  not
be  roused.  I  met  in  Surrey  a  few  months  back  a  lady  of  the  same  name,
and  on  enquiry  found  that  she  was  the  sister-in-law  of  the  Astral  (?)  shape.
She  informed  me  that  the  reason  the  golden  hair  was  so  prominent  was  that,
having  been  cut  oflf  during  typhoid  fever,  it  had  grown  into  a  kind  of  mass.

. . Several  London  physicians  saw  the  case."

In  rejjly  to  our  enquiries  as  to  the  accuracy  of  the  further  details  given
in  this  account,  Mrs.  E.  wrote  : —

"  The  unknown  narrator  of  our  story  has  not  been  accurate  in  the  facts.
Mrs.  P.  E.  has  never  been  in  a  trance,  but  when  she  first  came  to
England  she  was  in  such  a  debilitated  condition  of  health  that  any  over-
exertion would  cause  her  to  become  unconscious  for  some  minutes.  She
has  often  told  me  that  while  she  was  ill  in  Australia  she  used  to  try  and
picture  to  herself  the  home  her  husband  used  to  describe  to  her,  but  I  do
not  rememlier  that  when  she  arrived  here  she  recognised  any  particular
room."

The  cases  we  have  given  in  this  chapter,  in  addition  to  others  of
the  same  kind  to  be  found  in  previous  numbers  of  the  Proceedinys,
constitute,  we  think,  a  strong  body  of  evidence  showing  that  appari-
tions ai'e  seen  in  certain  places  independently  by  several  percipients,
under  circumstances  which  make  it  difficult  to  suppose  that  the
phenomena  are  merely  sulyective,  or  that  they  can  be  explained  by


XVI.]


Local  Apparitions.


363


telepathy,^  without  considerable  straining  of  our  general  conception  of
it.  It  appears,  however,  that  there  is  in  most  cases  very  little  ground
for  attributing  the  phenomena  to  the  agency  of  dead  persons.  The
apparitions  represent  occasionally  living  and  occasionally  dead  persons,
but,  as  we  have  said,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases,  they  are  un-
recognised ;  and,  in  these  cases,  if  they  I'eally  represent  any  actual
person,  there  is  often  no  more  reason  to  suppose  the  person  dead  than
living.  •


1  Tor  a  discussion  of  the  possibility  of  this  explanation,  see  Mr.  Podmore's  paper
on  "Phantasms  of  the  Dead  from  Another  Point  of  View,"  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,
pp.  229-313.


364  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


Chapter  XVII.

PHANTASMS  OF  THE  DEAD.

In  the  present  Chapter  we  propose  first  to  compare  recognised
phantasms  of  dead  persons  with  other  phantasms,  and  secondly  to  con-
sider what  evidence,  if  any,  the  Census  affords  of  the  possibility  of
communication  between  the  dead  and  the  living.  Phantasms  of  the
dead  must  be  understood  to  include,  in  addition  to  those  enumerated
as  such  in  the  Tables  under  the  head  of  "  realistic  human  phantasms,"
16  of  the  "  incompletely  developed  appai'itions  "  and  2  of  the  "visions."

As  regards  the  first  question,  we  may  infer  from  the  Tables — as
was  explained  in  Chajater  III ,  p.  67 — that  phantasms  of  the  dead  are
rarer  than  phantasms  of  the  living  ;  and  this  would  be  true  even  if  we
transferred  the  95  death-coincidences  (80  visual  and  15  only  auditory)
to  the  class  of  phantasms  of  the  dead.  We  have  also  in  Chapter  III.
(pp.  67 — 68)  shown  that  they  are  on  the  whole  more  impressive  than
other  phantasms.  Another  characteristic  of  them  as  a  class,  which
may  be  deduced  from  Table  II.,  is  that  bisensory  and  trisensory
hallucinations  are  relatively  frequent  among  them.  From  Table  VII.,
again,  we  see  that  a  relatively  large  proportion  of  the  auditory
apparitions  of  the  dead  consist  of  something  more  than  the  mere
calling  of  the  percipient's  name  :  and  from  Table  V.  it  appears  that
apparitions  of  the  dead  are  rarely  seen  out  of  doors.  The  qualities
thus  reported  to  us  as  possessed  more  frequently  by  phantasms  of  the
dead  indicate  a  smaller  admixture  among  them  of  illusion  and  mis-
taken identity,  and  a  more  than  average  degree  of  fulness  and  com-
pleteness in  the  hallucinations.  They  are  most  of  them,  it  will  be
rememl^ered,  qualities  which  we  have  already  noticed  as  belonging  to
the  class  of  death-coincidences. ^

Apparitions  of  the  dead,  like  other  apparitions,  usually  appear
dressed  like  ordinary  human  beings,  and  without  symbolic  accompani-
ments such  as  white  roljes  or  wings.  We  have,  indeed,  only  one  case
of  wings  (418.  5)  in  this  class  of  phantasms,  which  is  also  a  case  of  an
incompletely  developed  figure.  Our  informant  describes  an  apparition  of
his  mother  on  the  night  after  her  death. He  had  prayed  to  see  her  and

"  about  midnight  she  ai^peared  as  [a]  head  and  shoulders  with  wings.  She
kissed  me  three  times  on  the  right  cheek.  I  tried  to  speak  to  her,  but  could
not.  She  tlien  went  straight  up  through  the  roof.  I  wakened  my  brother,
who  was  asleep  beside  me,  but  he  had  seen  nothing. [My  age  was]  19.""

1  See  p.  246,  note,  and  pp.  301—2.

"  The  date  of  the  experience  is  February,  1884  :  the  narrative  was  written  in  April,
1891.


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


365


In  four  cases  it  is  specially  mentioned  that  the  phantasm  appeared
in  the  clothes  in  which  the  dead  person  was  buried  (see  for  an  instance
No.  733.  18,  p.  141).  Usually  the  appearance  in  dress  or  other-
wise is  what  the  percipient  was  accustomed  to  associate  with  the  per-
son in  life  (an  exception  is  No.  579.  23,  see  p.  378),  though  in  3  cases
it  is  stated  that  the  apparition  looked  younger  than  its  counterpart
when  last  seen  :  No.  196.  4,  p.  368,  is  an  instance.

"We  turn  now  to  the  question  what  evidence,  if  any,  the  Census
affords  of  the  possibility  of  communication  from  the  dead  to  the  living.
To  establish  this  possibility  would  be  a  result  of  far  greater  importance
than  any  which  our  investigation  has  yet  achieved  ;  since  it  would
carry  with  it  proof  of  continued  existence  after  death,  and  continued
interest  taken  by  the  dead  in  those  still  in  the  body.  Incidentally  it
would  suggest  that  telepathy  is  probably  a  phenomenon  caused  inde-
pendently of  any  physical  process  outside  of,  and  intervening  between,
the  bodies  of  the  human  beings  concerned  ;  since  there  is  no  reason  to
regard  the  apparent  communications  fi'om  the  dead  as  of  a  different
nature  from  those  which  we  are  able  to  trace  to  living  agents  ;  while
it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  the  communication  from  the  dead  depends
on  localisation  in  space  and  the  setting  in  motion  of  a  physical
medium.

Conversely,  if  we  ari'ived  at  the  conclusion  that  telepathic  com-
munication between  living  men  occurs  independently  of  any  physical
process  through  the  intervening  space,  we  should  certainly  have  taken
an  important  step  towards  proving  that  the  mind  is  not  essentially
dependent  on  the  body  ;  and  we  should  thereby  have  got  rid  of  an
important  argument  for  supposing  that  the  death  of  the  body  carries
with  it  the  extinction  of  the  mind,  or  at  least  the  termination  of  its
power  of  communicating  with  another  mind. On  the  other  hand,
while  the  recognition  of  telepathic  communication  between  the  living
may  make  the  reality  of  communication  with  the  dead  more  probable
than  it  otherwise  would  be,  it  at  the  same  time  makes  it  more  difficult
to  prove. The  evidence  that  an  apparent  communication  from  a  dead
person  is  not  purely  subjective  must,  as  in  the  case  of  apparent  com-
munication from  the  living,  depend,  in  the  main,  either  on  its  coinci-
dence with some state  of the supposed  agent unknown to  the
percipient,  suggesting  a  causal  connexion  between  that  state  and  the
hallucination  ;  or  on  information  unknown  to  the  percipient  being
conveyed  by  the  phantasm. Coincidence — as  will  have  been  perceived
— is  the  commonest  ground  of  evidence  in  the  cases  of  spontaneous
telepathy  which  we  have  laid  before  the  reader  in  pre^dous  chapters  ;
the  conveyance  of  definite  information  laeing  comparatively  rare.  But
in  the  case  of  phantasms  of  the  dead,  our  ignorance  of  the  actual
condition  of  the  dead  makes  it  possible  to  establish  coincidence  only


366  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


in  a  very  limited  class  of  cases — viz.,  those  in  which  the  death  has.
taken  place,  but  is  not  known  to  the  percipient  to  have  taken  place.
We  should  therefore  expect  to  find  the  cases  which,  ^jHmd  facie,  are
not  explicable  as  purely  subjective  hallucinations  to  be  rare  among'
the  phantasms  of  the  dead.  But  even  among  these  rare  cases  we
meet  with  another  difiiculty  in  proving  them  to  be  due  to  the
influence  of  the  dead.  The  difficulty  is  that  verifiable  information  is
seldom  unknown  to  living  persons,  and,  therefore,  granting  telepathy,
the  percipient  may  have  received  it  telepathically  from  the  living  and
not  from  the  dead.  Even  if  it  be  really  unknown  to  any  living
person,  but  yet  verifiable, — e.g.,  by  means  of  documents  put  away  by  the
deceased  person  during  his  life, — there  is  still  an  alternative  hypothesis
to  be  taken  into  account,  viz.,  that  an  extension  of  supernormal
perception,  such  as  is  involved  in  some  (alleged)  cases  of  clairvoyance,
enabled  the  percipient  to  acquire  the  knowledge  without  the  aid  of
any  other  individual  mind.  The  difficulties  that  lie  in  the  way  of
proving  communication  from  the  dead  are  therefore  necessarily  great,
and  even  if  it  is  to  be  ultimately  established,  we  must  expect  the
accumulation  of  the  requisite  evidence  to  be  slow  and  laborious.

In  the  present  chapter  we  intend  to  lay  before  the  reader  the
chief  cases  furnished  by  the  Census  of  phantasms  of  the  dead  which
have  a  prima  facie  veridical  character,  irrespective  of  the  question
whether  the  truth  imparted  can  be  supposed  to  come  from  the  dead, —
a  question,  however,  on  which  we  shall  endeavour  to  throw  such  light
as  our  statistics  afford.

We  shall  begin  by  considering  the  cases  in  which  the  ground  for
attributing  veridicality  is  a  coincidence.  In  dealing  with  this  part  of
the  subject  we  cannot  leave  out  of  account  the  death-concidences  which
we  have  already  considered  from  another  point  of  view.  Indeed,  those
of  them  which  occur  after  the  death,  however  near  it,  are  strictly
speaking  phantasms  of  the  dead  ;  and  those  which  occur  at  the  moment
of  death  ai'e  ambiguous,  — we  cannot  say  that  they  are  clearly  phantasms
of  either  the  living  or  the  dead.  Our  reasons  for  counting  them  so  far
with  phantasms  of  the  living  were  twofold.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  with
phantasms  of  the  living  that  we  must  group  them  in  order  to  calculate
the  probability  of  the  coincidence  being  due  to  chance  alone ;
the  probability  that  any  recognised  phantasm  of  the  dead  will  coincide
with  the  death  being  one  which  our  data  do  not  enable  us  satisfactorily
to  estimate.! Secondly,  it  is  desirable  in  establishing  new  facts  to  pro-

1  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  calculation  as  to  the  probability  of  the  aiDparition
of  a  living  person  being  seen  on  the  day  of  his  death  was  founded  on  the  registered
death  rate  (see  p.  245).  The  death-rate  is  calculated  in  proportion  to  the  population,
but  it  would  be  obviously  difficult  to  estimate  the  factor  corresponding  to  the  popula-
tion in  the  case  of  dead  persons.


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


367


ceed  from  the  kuown  to  the  unknown.  The  possibility  of  telepathy
between  living  persons  has  been  shown  experimentally,  and,  if  we
accept  the  result  of  those  experiments,  there  is  little  difficulty  in  extend-
ing our  conception  so  as  to  include  spontaneous  cases  ;  further, — since
we  have  some  evidence  suggesting  that  ideas  may  sometimes  I'emain
latent  and  only  emerge  into  consciousness  by  means  of  a  hallucination
after  an  interval  of  time, — there  is  no  great  difficulty  in  supposing  that
the  telepathic  impulse  from  the  dying  person  may  have  occurred  at  or
before  death,  and  not  have  produced  a  manifest  eflfect  on  the  percipient
until  a  few  hours  later.  A  belief  in  the  possibility  of  communications
from  the  dead  is  therefore  not  necessarily  involved  in  the  acceptance
of  the  veridical  character  of  death -coincidences.  But  in  studying
phantasms  of  the  dead  as  such,  we  take  a  dilferent  point  of  view  ;  from
which  it  becomes  important  to  distinguish  and  compare  three  different
kinds  of  death-coincidences, — those  in  which  the  hallucination  occurs
before  death,  those  in  which  it  occurs  after  death,  and  those  in  which
it  is  strictly  simultaneous  with  the  death.

The  80^  cases  reported  to  us  as  visual  death-coincidences  divide
themselves  as  follows  : —

The  apparition  is  known  to  have  occurred  before  the  death  — the
interval  being  fi'om  a  few  minutes  to  12  hours — in  7  cases,  of  which
ISTos.  645.  11  (p.  2.33)  and  571.  14  (p.  237)  are  instances. It  is  known
to  have  occurred  at  similar  intervals  after  the  death  in  10  cases,  of
which  Nos.  425.  12 (p.  211), 381.  4  (p.  214), 579.  24  (p.  223),
379.  24  (p.  225), 450.  18  (p.  234), 328.  5  (p.  235), and  579.  25
(p.  241)  are  instances. In  50  cases  the  coincidence  between  the
apparition  and  the  death  is  described  in  some  such  way  as  "on  the
day and  at  the  time"  (No.  362.  21,  jd.  217),  "at  that  hour"  (No.
215.  9,  p.  224),  "at  that  exact  time"  (No.  385.  20,  p.  239),  "coincided
as  nearly  as we  could  make  out  with  the  moment  "  (No.  725.  6,
p.  237),  "about  the  time  "  (No.  452.  10,  p.  238). Or  the  hour  at
which  both  events  occurred  is  named,  as  in  No.  147.  23, p.  218;
or  approximately  named,  as  in  an  unprinted  case  when  the  appari-
tion is  said  to  have  been  seen  about  3  a.m.,  and  the  death  to  have
occurred  "in  the  night  at  some  time  after  12." In  some  of  these
cases  we  have  adequate  reason  to  regard  the  coincidence  as  really
exact  to  a  minute  or  two  ; in  others  we  interpret  our  informants'
phrases  as  leaving it  undecided whether  the  apparition  preceded
or  followed  the  death  by  an  interval of  an  hour  or  two  or  less.
In  a  few  cases  again,  the  expression  used  probably  means  no  more
than  on  the  same  day  or  same  night, — or  even  possibly  an  interval
exceeding  1 2  hours,  since  we  have  seen  reason  ^  to  believe  that  too

'  See  Chapter  XII.,  p.  208,  for  the  exact  definition  of  this  group.
-  See  Chapter  XII.,  p.  242.


368  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


many  remote  cases  are  reported  as  death-coincidences.  In  the  13
remaining  cases  out  of  the  80,  the  coincidence  is  not  asserted  to  have
had  the  closeness  which  ought  strictly  to  be  implied  in  the  phrases
above  quoted,  though  the  apparition  is  reported  to  have  occurred  on
the  same  day  or  night  as  the  death.  For  our  present  purpose  neither
of  these  two  latter  classes  can  be  counted  as  in  strictness  phantasms
either  of  the  living  or  of  the  dead.

Of  the  15  auditory  death-coincidences — in  which  voices  are  recog-
nised, but  there  is  no  recognised  apparition — two-thirds  are  similarly
uncertain^  ;  but  for  the  present  it  will  be  convenient  to  confine  our
attention  to  phantasms  of  which  one  element  is  a  I'ecognised  apparition.

We  have  then,  among  cases  previously  counted  with  apparitions  of
of  the  living,  10  in  which  the  person  seen  was  actually  dead,  although
the  fact  was  unknown  to  the  percipient.  There  are  7  other  cases  which
occurred  within  12  houi'S  of  the  death,  but  in  which  the  death  was
known,  so  that  they  have  been  already  counted  as  apparitions  of  the
dead.2  One  of  these  has  been  already  described  in  this  chapter.
It  is  of  course  obvious  that  the  very  fact  which  often  makes  ap-
paritions of  this  kind  specially  impressive  to  the  percipient — the
fact  that  they  come  at  the  crisis  of  acutest  grief — also  renders  it  easy
to  explain  them  as  purely  subjective  phenomena,  caused  by  the  grief
which  they  console.

The  class  to  which  we  now  pass  does  not  admit  of  being  similarly
explained.  Extending  our  examination  beyond  the  12  hours  after
death,  we  find  Q-*  apparitions  which  occurred  more  than  12  hours  after
the  death,  but  while  it  was  still  unknown  to  the  percipient.  The
following  are  the  best-evidenced  cases  of  this  class.  In  the  first,  the
hallueination  occurred  less  than  two  days  after  the  death,  but  the
force  of  the  coincidence  is  weakened  by  the  anxiety  of  the  percipient
about  her  friend's  illness.  It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  the
hallucination  did  not  occur  during  the  period  of  greatest  anxiety,  but
after  the  percipient  had  heard  that  her  friend  was  better.

(196.  4.)  From  Mrs.  Frank  Malleson.

Dixton  Manor,  Winchcombe,  Gloucestershire

[Mrs.  Malleson  tells  us  that  the  account  she  gives  is  a  copy  of  notes  taken
in  March,  1885,  about  a  month  after  tlie  occurrence.]

"  My  friend,  whom  I  had  known  intimately  for  [the]  greater  part  of  my
life,  had  become  weak  and  failing  from  age,  and,  for  a  week  or  so,  I  had  been

1  Four  of  the  fifteen  (including  23.  11,  see  p.  256)  are  strictly  phantasms  of  the
living  :  one  (562.  3,  see  p.  17!*)  is  a  phantasm  of  the  dead.

"  They  were  accordingly  excluded  from  the  discussion  in  Chapters  XII.  and
XIII.,  see  p.  208.

3  We  have  excluded  three  cases  in  which  it  is  possible — and,  we  think,  most
probable — that  there  was  a  mistake  of  identity.


xvil]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


369


receiving  very  serious  accoimts  of  her  condition.  On  the  Saturday  morning
(January  31st),  following  days  of  illness,  I  received  letters  to  say  she  was
better  and  feai's  of  her  immediate  death  seemed  past.

"  On  the  Sunday  evening,  however,  I  had  a  strong  impression  that  my
friend  had  gone  from  us  ;  but  through  cross-country  posts  I  got  no  news  on
Monday  morning.  On  the  Monday  night  when  I  lay  down  in  bed  there
came  to  me  a  conviction  that  she  was  trying  to  make  her  presence  felt,  and
I  became  aware  of  her  standing  in  an  angle  between  my  bed  and  the  fire  ;
not  oppressed  with  extreme  age  as  I  had  often  seen  her  in  the  last  year  or  so,
but  in  the  vigour  of  middle  age  when  I  had  had  most  intercourse  with  her,

"  The  colour  of  her  dress  and  cap — the  fashion  of  both — were  absolutely
familiar  to  me  as  belonging  to  that  time.  She  stood  poised  in  a  natural
attitude — her  figure  with  absolute  solidity— looking  straight  at  my  face  lying
on  the  pillow.  I  felt  no  fear,  but  the  strain  of  emotion  was  so  great  that  I
remember  thinking,  '  If  this  strain  continues,  there  is  some  one  in  the  next
room,  and  if  I  call  out  I  shall  be  heard.'

"I  shut  my  eyes,  but  the  impression  of  the  presence  remained  with  me.
Then  I  believe  I  opened  them  again,  because  I  am  conscious  of  having  re-
ceived another,  and  second,  impression  of  the  figure  standing  there.  Then
it  disappeared,  and,  with  all  my  expectation  and  wish  of  having  the  experi-
ence over  again,  it  has  never  recurred.  In  the  morning  following  the
appearance  I  received  the  news  of  her  death,  which  had  taken  place  between
3  and  4  a.m.  on  the  Sunday  morning  (Februai-y  1st).  So  vivid  was  the
impression  produced  that  often  now  even,  I  avoid  stepping  on  the  place  in
my  room  where  the  figure  stood.  Elizabeth  Malleson."

Mrs.  Malleson  states  further  that  when  she  saw  the  apparition  she  was
reading  in  bed  by  the  light  of  a  candle  placed  beside  her,  and  that  this  is
the  only  experience  of  the  kind  that  she  has  ever  had.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  :  —

February  25th,  1892.
"I  have  just  seen  Mrs.  Malleson  and  talked  over  her  experience  with
her,  and  seen  the  exact  spot  where  the  apparition  stood.  It  was  just  at  the
foot  and  to  one  side  of  the  bed  in  which  she  lay.  There  is  no  doubt  that
it  was  thoroughly  externalised  and  vivid.  The  account  written  within  a  few
weeks  is  of  course  better  evidence  as  to  the  facts  than  anything  she  could
tell  me  now.  The  apparition  was  of  an  aunt  of  Mr.  Malleson's,  with  whom
she  had  lived  a  great  deal,  who  had  taught  her  much  and  with  whom
the  tie  of  friendshiji  was  very  close.  This  aunt  had,  Mrs.  Malleson  says,
agreed  with  a  friend  in  her  youth  that  whichever  died  first  should  appear
to  the  other,  and  had  been  greatly  disappointed  at  the  friend's  non-appear-
ance. Miss  Malleson  and  her  father  both  knew  of  the  apparition  before  the
news  came,  I  understood,  and  I  talked  to  both  of  them  about  it.  The
apparition  wore  her  favourite  colours."

Mrs.  Malleson  writes  later  : —

April  m,  1892.

"  I  am  sure  that  my  hvisband  was  the  first  person  I  told  of  the  appear-
ance, but  neither  he  nor  my  daughter  remember  my  story  with  sufficient
vividness  and  accuracy  to  write  their  testimony,  I  am  sorry  to  say."


370


Report  on  the  Census  of  Halhtcinations.


[chap.


The  following  case  was  originally  reported  to  us  as  a  "death-coin-
cidence," but  on  investigation  it  appeared  most  probable  that  the
apparition  was  seen  several  days  after  the  death  had  taken  place,^
though  before  the  percipient  had  heard  of  it,  the  mistake  having
apparently  arisen  from  her  ignorance  of  the  time  the  news  must  have
taken  to  travel.

(656.  26.) From  Mrs.  Hall,  a  college  bedmaker  at  Cambridge.


"  At  7.30  I  heard  a  knocking  and  turned  to  the  door.  I  saw  an  individual,
a  man  which  was  once  ray  master,  and  he  said  :  '  Well,  Agnes,  how  are  you  ? '
'  Oh,  it's  Mr.  Middleton.'  He  then  vanished.  [I  was]  sitting  talking  to  my
husband,  in  good  health,  28  years  of  age.  ...  At  the  same  hour  he
appeared  to  me,  he  died — at  7.30. My  husband  saw  nothing,  but  heard  the


The  collector,  Mr.  F.  W.  Grantham,  added  to  Mrs.  Hall's  account  the
f(illowing  notes,  written,  he  believes,  in  May  or  June,  1891,  from  information
which  she  gave  him  : —

' '  [The  apparition]  was  wearing  clothes  and  a  hat.  It  was  February
4th,  at  Cambridge.  I  had  not  seen  him  for  some  years  and  did  not
know  he  was  ill.  He  was  at  Sheffield  at  the  time  of  his  death.  I  got  a  letter
next  morning  to  say  he  had  died  7.30  the  previous  evening."

Miss  Johnson  called  on  Mrs.  Hall  at  her  own  house,  and  gives  the  fol-
lowing account  of  her  interview,  written  immediately  after  it.


"Mrs.  Hall  told  me  that  she  was  sitting  with  her  husband  at  tea  on
February  4th,  1891,  in  the  room  where  I  saw  her — he  was  facing  the  door
and  she  back  to  and  on  one  side  of  it.  They  both  heard  a  knock  at  the
door,  and  she  turned  round  and  saw  a  man  standing  on  the  mat  a  little  way
inside.  She  recognised  him  as  Mr.  Middleton.  He  said,  '  Agnes,  how  are
you  ? '  She  answered,  and  then  he  said  no  more  and  she  could  see  him  no
longer.  He  did  not  go  out  of  the  door,  but  simply  vanished.  Slie  had  not
seen  him  come  in  either,  and  the  door  had  not  seemed  to  open — she  merely
turned  round  and  saw  him.  She  was  much  startled,  and  told  her  husband.
He  had  seen  nothing  and  had  not  heard  the  apparition  speak,  and  he  said  it
was  all  nonsense.  Next  day  at  dinner-time  she  got  a  letter,  telling  of  Mr.
Middleton's  death.  He  was  a  retired  butcher,  and  she  had  lived  in  his  house
for  ten  years,  so  she  knew  him  very  well.  His  family  have  since  migrated
to  America.  She  did  not  keep  tlie  letter,  but  thought  (she  was  not  sure  of
this)  that  her  husband  had  referred  to  it  in  writing  the  account  on  the  B
form,  which  he  did  on  February  11th.  (I  showed  her  the  B  form,  and  she
told  me  that  her  husband  had  written  it ;  some  notes  are  added  in  Mr.
Grantham's  handwriting.)  She  was  not  able  to  write  then,  as  she  was
confined  on  February  10th,  so  her  husband  wrote  it  the day  after,  and


(The  account  was  written  on  February  11th,  1891.)


knocking.


A.  Hall."


May  mh,  1892.


1  The  case  is  therefore  counted  in  the  Tables  as  an  apparition  of  a  dead  person.


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


371


she  signed  it  later.  She  was  perfectly  well  all  the  time  beforehand,  up  to
the  day  of  her  baby's  birth,  and  remembered  the  date  of  the  apparition  in
relation  to  this,  and  also  as  having  happened  a  month  before  lier  husband's
death,  which  occurred  quite  suddenly  on  March  4th,  1891.

"  She  was  not  sure  by  what  light  the  apparition  was  seen,  but  it  was  jjer-
fectly  clear,  just  like  a  real  man. She  thought  it  was  a  real  man  at  first.

"She  has  never  had  any  other  hallucinations  of  sight,  but  a  week  or  two
after  this,  she  and  her  husband  used  to  hear  constant  knoekings  or  hammer-
ings at  night.  They  enquired  of  their  neighbours  about  it,  but  could  find  no
cause  for  it."

As  we  failed  to  find  in  the  register  any  record  of  the  death  of  Mr.
Middleton,  Miss  Johnson  called  again  on  Mrs.  Hall  to  make  further  en-
quiries, and  learnt  from  her  that  he  had  really  died  in  America,  not  at
Shefiield,  having  migrated  to  America  with  his  family  some  time  before
his  death.  Mrs.  Hall  repeated  that  it  was  on  February  4th,  1891, that  she
saw  the  apparition,  six  days  before  her  confinement.  The  letter  telling
of  Mr.  Middleton's  death  arrived  some  time  between  February  4th  and
February  9th  ;  she  was  not  sure  of  the  exact  day.  She  made  another
search  for  this  letter,  but  failed  to  find  it.  It  may  be  observed  that  the  state-
ment as  to  the  letter  arriving  the  "  next  morning  "  was  not  in  her  original
account,  but  in  the  notes  added  by  the  collector  two  or  three  months  later.

Putting  together  the  date  of  the  apparition  and  the  limits  of  the  time
during  which  the  letter  can  have  been  received,  it  seems  almost  certain  that
the  death  preceded  the  appai'ition,  though  the  latter  occurred  before  the
death  was  known  to  the  percipient.

In  the  three  following  cases,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  evidence  for  an
external  origin  is  stronger  than  in  those  just  given  ;  since  in  all  of  them,
the  apparition  is  not  only  seen  before  the  death  is  known  to  the
percipient, — who  had  not  even  heard  of  the  illness,— but  either
definitely  indicates  that  the  death  has  taken  place,  or  presents  some
other  primd  facie  veridical  feature.  The  first  is  a  vision  occurrijig
at  the  time  of  the  funeral,  and  giving  definite  indications  of  the  death.
It  may  be  also  remarked  that  the  case  is  one  in  which  a  written  note
was  made  at  the  time,  by  which  the  coincidence  was  verified  when  the
news  arrived.

(442.  15.)  From  Mrs.  B.i

April,  1892.

"At  Fiesole,  on  March  11th,  1869,  I  was  giving  my  little  children  their
dinner  at  half-past  one  o'clock.  It  was  a  fine  hot  day.  As  I  was  in  the  act
of  servmg  maccaroni  and  milk  from  a  high  tureen,  so  that  I  had  to  stand  to
reach  it,  and  give  my  attention  to  what  I  was  doing, — on  raising  my  head
(as  much  from  fatigue  as  for  any  purpose),  the  wall  opposite  me  seemed
to  open,  and  I  saw  my  mother  lying  dead  on  her  bed  in  her  little  house

1  Mrs.  B.  is  the  mother  of  the  percipient  in  No.  -142.  17,  see  p.  213.

2  B  2


372  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


at  .  Some  flowers  were  at  her  side  and  on  her  breast ;  she  looked  cahii,.

but  unmistakably  dead,  and  the  coffin  was  there.

"  It  was  so  real  that  I  could  scarcely  believe  that  tlie  wall  was  really
brick  and  mortar,  and  not  a  transparent  window — in  fact,  it  was  a  wall
dividing  the  hotel  in  which  we  were  living  from  the  Carabinieri.

"  I  was  in  very  weak  health — suffering  intensely  with  neuralgia — having
gone  tlirough  a  bad  confinement,  brought  on  by  travelling — the  baby  was
almost  still-born,  on  January  31st.

"Owing  to  a  family  quarrel,  I  had  left  England  without  telling  my
people  where  I  was  going ;  but  I  was  so  fond  of  my  mother  that,  when  in
Paris,  I  made  an  excuse  to  write  to  an  old  servant,  who  lived  with  my
mother,  to  ask  her  for  a  toy  which  we  had  left  with  her — the  object  being  to
get  news  of  my  mother.  Reply  came  that  foi"  years  she  had  not  been  so
well  and  strong  ;  thus  T  had  no  reason  for  imagining  her  to  be  dead.

"I  was  so  distressed  at  the  vision,  that  I  wrote  to  her  (my  mother),  to
give  her  my  address,  and  entreat  her  to  let  me  know  how  she  was.  By
return  of  post  came  the  statement  that  she  had  died  on  March  5th,
and  was  buried  on  the  11th.  At  the  hour  I  saw  her,  she  was  removed  from
her  home  to  Keasal  Green  Cemetery.  She  had  wished  to  see  me  so  much
that  letters  had  been  sent  to  a  great  many  continental  cities,  hoping  I  might
be  found  ;  but  I  never  got  a  letter  from  my  sister  till  long  after  I  had  re-
ceived the  news  of  my  mother's  death.

"When  I  was  married,  my  mother  made  ine  promise,  as  I  was  leaving
home,  to  be  sure  to  let  her  know  in  any  way  God  permitted  if  I  died,  and
she  would  try  to  find  some  way  of  communicating  to  me  the  fact  of  her
death — supposing  that  circumstances  prevented  the  usual  methods  of  writing
or  telegraphing.  I  considered  the  vision  a  fulfilment  of  this  jjromise,  for
my  mind  was  engrossed  with  my  own  grief  and  pain — the  loss  of  baby,  and
my  neuralgia,  and  the  anxieties  of  starting  a  new  life.

"  My  youngest  sister,  since  dead,  was  called  to  my  mother,  and  left
Devonshire,  where  she  was  staying  with  friends,  to  come  home.  When  she
arrived  at  home,  .she  entered  the  drawing-room,  but  rushed  out  terrified,
exclaiming  that  she  had  seen  godmamma,  who  was  seated  by  the  fire  in  my
mother's  chair.  Godmamma  had  been  dead  since  1852.  She  had  been  my
mother's  governess — almost  foster-mother  ;  had  lived  with  her  during  her
married  life,  been  godmother  to  her  eldest  girl,  and  when  my  father  died,  had
accepted  the  duty  of  taking  his  place  as  far  as  possible  in  the  family,  to
shield  her  from  trouble  and  protect  her — a  duty  which  she  fulfilled  nobly.

"  My  other  sister  went  into  the  drawing  room  to  see  what  had  scai-ed

K  ,  and  saw  the  figure  of  godmamma  just  as  K  had. Later  in  the

day,  the  same  figure  stood  by,  then  sat  on  the  edge  of  my  mother's  bed,  and
was  seen  by  both  my  sisters  and  the  old  servant,  looking  just  as  she  had
when  alive,  except  that  she  wore  a  grey  dress,  and,  as  far  as  we  could  re-
member, she  had  always  worn  black.  My  mother  saw  her,  for  she  turned
towards  her  and  said,  'Mary' — her  name."

We  have  verified  the  date  of  death  through  the  Register  at  Somerset
House.

Mrs.  B.  has  had  several  t)ther  hallucinatory  experiences, — e.g.,  in  1876,
in  an  Italian  church,  she  saw  an  apparition  of  a  child,  which  had  been  pointed


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


373


out  to  her  by  her  little  daughter,  then  aged  three,  but  was  invisible  to  a
friend  who  accompanied  her.  It  disappeared,  and  immediately  afterwards
the  body  of  a  dead  child,  resembling  the  figure  they  had  seen,  was  brought
into  the  church.  The  friend  who  was  with  Mrs.  B.  is  now  dead,  so  that  no
corroboration  can  be  obtained,  her  daughter  not  being  able  to  remember  the
incident.  Most  of  Mrs.  B.'s  other  experiences  were,  so  far  as  can  be
ascertained,  purely  subjective.

Mr.  Podmore,  who  visited  Mr.  and  Mi's.  B.  on  April  8th,  1893,  writes: —

April  mil,  1893.

"  Mrs.  B.  gave  me  a  full  account  of  her  vision  of  her  mother.  She
had  absolutely  no  cause  for  anxiety,  the  last  news  being  that  her
mother  was  better  than  she  had  been  for  years.  There  was  a  chronic  ail-
ment, but  no  reason  to  anticipate  death  soon.  The  children  were  too  young
to  remember  it,  but  Mr.  B.  told  me  that  he  came  in  a  few  minutes  later  and
comforted  his  wife,  whilst  she  was  crying  on  the  sofa.  A  written  note  of  the
date  was  taken  and  compared  with  the  date  given  in  the  letter  afterwards
received,  but  all  memoranda  and  letters  of  that  time  were  lost.  Both  Mr.
and  Mrs.  B.  are  satisfied  of  the  coincidence  of  the  vision  with  the  day  of  the
funeral."

In  the  following  case  the  hallucination  occurred  shortly  after  the
death, — perhaps  within  24  hours  of  it, — and  the  apparition  indi-
cated leave-taking.  It  is  an  interesting  example  (the  only  one  in
the  Census)  of  a  prima  facie  veridical  hallucination  coinciding
with  the  arrival  of  a  letter  bearing  on  the  subject.  Another  re-
markable feature  in  the  case  is  the  persistent  repetition  of  the
percept.

(740.  9.)  From  Miss  E.  L.  M.

(The  account  was  written  in  1889.)

"  On  the  morning  of  January  14th,  1876,  I  was  in  the  B.  schoolroom,  a
small  village  near  to  A.  in  Hants,  when  I  saw  what  appeared  to  me  to  be  a
favourite  cousin.  She  was  close  beside  me,  and  apjjeared  in  good  health,  as
I  had  every  reason  to  suppose  her  to  be.  1  should  here  explain  that  I  held
in  my  hand  a  letter  which  had  just  been  brought  to  me,  and  which  I  had  not
yet  opened,  telling  me  that  my  cousin  was  seriously  ill  with  scarlet  fever.
The  fact  was  that  at  the  time  she  was  actually  dead,  her  death  having
occurred  after  the  posting  of  the  letter.  I  was  waiting  for  children  to
assemble  in  school,  and  was  in  good  health  and  in  no  grief  or  anxiety.
I  knew  immediately  that  it  was  my  cousin  whom  I  saw,  and  believed  her
to  be  at  the  time  at  her  own  home.  I  could  not  understand  what  she  meant
by  saying  '  Good-bye,'  which  I  cannot  say  I  heard,  but  saio  by  the  move-
jnent  of  her  lips.

' '  The  village  children  and  my  sister  [were  present].  The  former  I  have
no  reason  to  think  saw  anything,  and  my  sister  only  laughed  at  me.  I  con-
tinued to  see  her  all  day,  and  when  indoors  my  sister  would  persist  in
strumming  on  the  piano,  although  I  remonstrated  with  her, — 'How  can  you


374  Reioort  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


keep  on  with  that  noise  when  Jessie  is  dead?'  I  received  a  letter  the  next
morning  informing  me  that  she  was  dead,  after  which  I  saw  her  only  at
intervals  that  day  and  part  of  the  next,  when  the  appearances  ceased."

Miss  M.  had  had  previously  another  veridical  experience,  which  she
describes  thus  : —

"  On  the  night  of  September  7th,  1864,  when  sleeping  with  my  mother
at  Southampton  I  was  suddenly  wakened  and  saw  my  aunt  in  the  right
hand  corner  of  the  room  looking  as  I  had  seen  her  in  bed  but  a  few  hours
befoi'e.  Though  very  ill  at  the  time  (consumption),  her  cheeks  were  brightly
flushed,  her  hair  about  her  shoulders,  and  she  had  a  very  pleasant  expr-ession.
Tlie  room  was  quite  dark,  but  she  was  distinctly  visible  to  me.  I  was  a  child
of  nine  years  old  and  in  good  healtli.  I  knew  that  my  aunt  was  ill,  having  left
her  but  a  short  time  before.  My  mother  was  beside  me  in  bed,  and  before
I  called  to  her,  she  had  beeir  wakened  by  what  she  described  as  something,
very  cold  touching  her  shoulder,  but  she  saw  nothing."

Miss  M.  writes  later  :  —

November  8th,  1889.
"  My  aunt  did  die  the  very  same  night  that  I  saw  the  vision  of  her.  We
were  living  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  her. I  cannot  remember  whether
I  was  told  of  her  death  before,  during,  or  directly  after  breakfast."

MissM.'s  sister  writes  :  —

November  9th,  1889.

"  I  distinctly  remember  the  circumstances  respecting  my  cousin  .Jessie.
All  one  day  my  sister  was  telling  me  she  saw  her,  and  that  she  knew  she
was  dead,  and  we  had  a  letter  next  morning,  with  the  news,  so  that  we
knew  before  the  letter  arrived.

"  I  have  asked  my  mother  about  it,  and  slie  remembers  my  sister  telling
her  at  the  time.

"  She  has  also  asked  me  to  say,  that  a  hand  was  placed  on  her  sliioulder,
just  about  the  same  time  that  my  aunt  died  ;  she  did  not  see  nor  feel  any-
thing else  but  the  cold  hand."

In  the  remaining  case  of  this  group,  a  detail  of  the  personal  appear-
ance of  the  deceased  person,  unknown  to  the  percipient,  was  represented!
in  the  apparition.  It  is  possible  that  it  may  have  been  seen  on  the  day
of  the  death,  as  stated  in  the  first  account,  but  since  the  percipient  finally
came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  a  day  or  two  later,  we  have  counted
it  as  a  phantasm  of  a  dead  person.

(461.  25.)  From  Mr.  H.  F.  Dean.

126,  LozelLs-road,  Birmingham,  A2)rtl  8th,  1891.

"  In  the  year  1877,  my  wife's  father  was  in  Canada,  and  had  been  for
many  years  ;  l)ut  one  evening,  passing  from  one  room  to  another  in  my  own
house,  I  saw  him.  Fourteen  days  afterwards  I  received  a  letter  stating  that
he  died  the  same  day  that  I  saw  him.

"H.  F.  Dean."


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


375


Tlie  collector,  Mr.  G.  R.  Farncombe,  writes  from  notes  taken  at  a  per-
sonal interview  with  Mr.  Dean  :  —

"  The  date  of  Mr. 's  death  and  of  his  appearance  to  his  son-in-law

was  June  9th,  1877.  He  died  in  Toronto,  having  been  resident  in  Canada
some  ten  years.  He  had  formerly  lived  in  Birmingham,  but  had  never  met  his
son-in-law,  and  had  never  been  in  the  house — in  Warstone-lane,  Birmingham
— where  the  appearance  was  seen.  Figure  appeared  in  hall  in  the  evening —
hall  dark  except  for  light  from  open  door  of  sitting-room.  Mr.  Dean  was
crossing  (alone)  from  one  room  to  the  other  when  figure  ajDpeared  and  ad-
vanced, smiling,  api^arently  as  if  going  to  speak  to  him,  then  vanished
gradually.  Mr.  Dean  says  on  seeing  the  figure  he  had  an  intuitive  impres-
sion that  it  was  his  wife's  father,  with  whose  appearance  he  was  familiar
through  having  often  talked  it  over  with  his  wife.  He  noticed,  however,  a
scar  on  his  face  which  he  had  not  heard  of.  Mr.  Dean  at  once  told  his  wife
that  he  had  seen  a  figure  which  he  thought  was  her  father,  but  remarked
that  he  had  a  scar  on  his  face  (pointing  to  place)  which  she  had  never  told  him
of.  His  wife  said  it  was  quite  true— was  precisely  in  that  position  and  had
been  caused  by  a  lathe  with  which  her  father  was  experimenting.  The
figure  was  seen  by  Mr.  Dean  only — in  good  health  and  entirely  free  from
anxiety.  Mr.  Dean  does  not  knovs^  the  precise  hour  of  his  father-in-law's
death — only  that  it  was  on  the  same  day  on  which  he  saw  the  appearance.
He  was  not  aware  of  his  father-in-law's  illness."

[Mr.  Dean's  signature  is  here  added,  certifying  that  he  had  read  the
account and  that  it  was  correct.]

Mr.  Farncombe  continues : —

"  Mr.  Dean  impresses  me  as  being  thoroughly  straightforward,  and  of  an
intelligence  distinctly  above  his  class — that  of  a  somewhat  suijerior  working-
man.  Unfortunately,  he  told  no  one  of  his  experience  at  the  time  excejjt
his  wife,  whom  he  will  not  on  any  account  allow  to  be  spoken  to  on  the
subject,  as  she  is  of  an  exceedingly  nervous  temperament,  and  he  expresses
himself  as  unwilling  that  such  painful  memories  should  be  revived."

Mr.  Dean  has  had  one  other  hallucinatory  experience,  an  apparition  of  his
sister,  twenty-two  hours  after  her  death,  in  1874.

Mr.  Myers  writes  : —

December  mil,  1891.

"  I  saw  Mr.  Dean  last  night.  He  is  a  very  good  witness ;  a  shrewd,  ciuiet,
elderly  man,  by  nature  sceptical,  and  even  now  by  no  nieans  certain  that  the
apparition  which  he  has  seen  can  be  taken  to  indicate  continued  existence.
Mrs.  Dean  was  out.  He  will  not  allow  her  to  be  questioned  on  the  subject  ;
saying  that  she  is  of  timid  disposition,  and  would  be  agitated  by  allusion  to
the  apparition  of  her  father.  I  feel  no  doubt  that  this  is  m  fact  Mr.  Dean's
reason  for  keeping  the  subject  from  her.

"  He  described  his  experience  at  length.  He  was  crossing  a  passage  in  his
house  in  the  dark,  when  suddenly  it  became  light.  Mr.  Dean's  account  given
to  me  corresponded  with  that  given  to  Mr.  Farncombe,  except  that  he  now
thinks  that  his  father-in-law  had  died  a  day  or  two  before  the  apparition.
This  cannot  be  made  certain  now.  I  fully  agree  in  Mr.  Farncombe's  high
estimate  of  Mr.  Dean's  good  sense  and  sobriety  of  judgment."


376  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


These  apparitions  of  the  dead  when  the  death  is  unknown  may  be
compared — from  an  evidential  point  of  view — -with  cases  where  an
apparition  occurs  during  the  fatal  illness  of  the  person  seen,  the  illness
being  unknown  to  the  percipient.  For  in  both  these  kinds  of  cases
alike  there  is  a  coincidence  of  a  hallucination  with  an  unknown  and
important  new  phase  in  the  condition  of  the  person  represented  ;  while
in  both  alike  the  probability  of  the  coincidence  occurring  by  chance  is
greater  than  in  death-coincidences,  in  proportion  to  the  greater  length
of  the  period  over  which  the  new  phase  extends.

Besides  these  cases  where  the  percipient  did  not  know  of  the
death,  there  are  a  number  of  cases  occurring  very  soon — but  more  than
12  hours — after  a  known  death.  These  may  be  ranked  with  the  cases,
about  equally  numerous,  of  apparitions  occurring  during  known  illness
which  proved  fatal.  About  one-fifth  out  of  the  whole  number  of  phan-
tasms of  the  dead,  whose  distance  in  time  from  the  death  has  been
reported  to  us,  occurred  within  the  week  after  death  ;  another  third
occurred  within  the  year  after  death.

If  now  we  survey  together  the  various  groups  of  phantasms  of  the
living  and  of  the  dead  which  we  have  been  compai'ing  in  detail,  we  see
that  there  is  a  marked  accumulation  of  cases  about  the  time  of  the
death.  They  occur  during  fatal  illness,  whether  this  is  known  or  un-
known to  the  jjercipient,  in  increasing  frequency  as  the  death  ap-
proaches,— the  largest  number  being  reported  as  happening  at  or  about
the  time  of  the  death  itself.  Then  they  continue  to  occur  after  the
death,  whether  the  fact  of  the  death  is  known  or  unknown  to  the
percipient,  becoming  rarer  as  the  death  recedes  into  the  distance.  The
death  thus  forms  a  central  point  about  which  the  hallucinations  cluster,
diminishing  in  number  on  each  side  of  it :  and  this  certainly  suggests
that  there  is  no  discontinuity  at  the  moment  of  death, — no  sudden
transition  from  a  state  in  which  communication  with  the  living  is
possible  to  a  state  to  which  it  is  not.

And  this  suggestion  is  strengthened  when  we  observe  how  little
support  is  given  by  our  statistics  for  the  assumption  that  either
anxiety  about  illness  or  grief  for  death  has  an  important  effect  on  the
wliole  number  of  apparitions  that  occur  when  the  person  represented
is  ill  or  recently  dead.  If,  for  instance,  we  take  the  cases  of  appari-
tions occurring  during  the  fatal  illness  of  the  person  represented,  l^ut
not  within  12  houi's  of  the  death,  we  find  that  the  illness  was  in
7  cases  out  of  18  unknown  to  the  percipient.  It  is  a  still  more
striking  fact  that  in  10  out  of  the  17  cases  of  apparitions  within  12
hours  after  the  death  of  the  pei-son  represented,  the  fact  of  the
death  was  unknown  to  the  percipient  ;  in  4  of  these  10  cases  it  was
not  even  known  that  the  person  was  ill,  and  only  in  2  of  the  6  cases
in  which  the  person  was  known  to  be  ill,  but  not  known  to  be  dead,


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


377


was  there  any  serious  anxiety  about  the  ilhiess.  In  view  of  these
facts,  the  regular  rise  and  fall  in  the  number  on  each  side  of  the
death  becomes  a  still  more  impressive  phenomenon.

Promises  to  Appear  after  Death.

Another  argument — to  which  perhaps  some  weight  should  be  allowed
— for  the  continuity  of  the  states  before,  at,  and  after  death  may  be
derived  from  the  apparent  fulfilment  of  promises  to  try  to  appear  or
commuiricate  after  death.  We  made  no  special  enquiry  about  such
promises,  and  have  therefore  no  reason  to.  think  that  we  have  complete
information  either  as  to  the  number  made  or  the  proportion  fulfilled.
We  have,  however,  some  facts  of  interest.  Promises  are  mentioned  in
three  of  the  80  cases  of  death-coincidences —namely,  JSTos.  362.  21
(p.  217),  215.  9  (p.  224), —in  both  of  which  the  apparition  is  stated  to
have  been  seen  at  the  time  of  death, — and  No  379.  24  (p.  225),  where
it  was  seen  half-an-hour  after  the  death.  A  promise  is  also  mentioned
in  one  of  the  9  cases  of  apparitions  after  death,  the  death  being  un-
known to  the  percipient :  viz..  No.  442.  15  (p.  371),  where  the  person
seen  had  been  dead  a  week;  and  also  in  one  of  the  11  cases  of  appari-
tions during  fatal  illness — the  approach  of  death  being  unknown  to  the
percipient — namely.  No.  402.  8  (p.  284),  where  the  apparition  occurred
two  days  before  the  death,  during  extreme  weakness,  and  probably
during  sleep,  of  the  slowly  dying  person.

Now  we  may  probably  assume  that  neith(ir  5  persons  in  100  nor  3
persons  in  80  of  all  classes,  sexes,  and  ages  make  promises  to  appear
if  possible  to  their  friends  after  death  :  and  if  so,  we  may  infer  that
the  occurrence  of  this  number  of  compacts  among  7; facie  veridical
cases  is  not  due  to  chance  alone.  If  it  is  not  accidental,  the  promise
and  the  apparition  must  be  in  some  way  causally  connected.  But  in
the  cases  referred  to,  it  seem  improbable  that  the  connection  depends
on  the  state  of  the  percipient  ;  since, — as  the  death  or  near  approach  of
death  was  in  all  the  5  cases  unknown  to  the  percipients, — they  could
hardly  be  at  the  time  expectant  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  We
seem  then  almost  driven  to  suppose  that  the  efficacy  of  the  promise
depended  on  the  state  of  the  dead  or  dying  person.  If  this  be  so,  we
seem  to  have  in  the  cases  of  fulfilment  of  a  promise  to  communicate — •
grouped  as  they  are  about  the  time  of  death  and  on  either  side  of  it  —
a  further  indication  that  there  is  for  the  dying  person  no  abrupt  transi-
tion at  death.

There  are  5  other  cases  in  the  Census  of  such  promises  fulfilled — 3
of  them  visual,  1  auditory,  and  1  auditory  and  tactile — the  interval
after  death  varying  from  a  few  months  to  5  years.  The  following  is
one  of  them.


378  Repoti  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


(573.  20.)  From  Miss  E.  M.  T.

September  lUh,  1891.
' '  I  awoke  from  sleep  and  saw  a  brother  who  had  been  dead  more  than
five  years  standing  at  the  foot  of  my  bed.  He  stood  still,  gazing  at  me
earnestly.  I  cannot  remember  a  voice,  but  he  distinctly  conveyed  to  my
mind  the  impression  that  I  was  to  have  no  more  anxiety  and  that  all  would
be  for  the  best.  I  said  'Oh,  Arthur!'  and  jumped  ujj  to  go  to  him,  when  he
vanished.  This  took  place  [on]  a  bright,  sunny  morning  about  4.30  a.m.
in  June,  1872.  No  one  was  present.  I  was  in  perfect  health  ;  but  we  had
family  trouble  at  the  time.  I  was  28.  My  lirother  in  life  had  said  he  would
appear  after  death  if  possible."

Miss  T.  adds  :—

' '  I  have  not  seen  him  again  ;  but,  previously,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  in
1867,  I  had  a  dream  in  which  I  thought  I  was  wandering  over  a  sort  of  wild
country  and  could  find  him  nowhere.  I  awoke,  crying,  feeling  he  was  lost.
The  dream  made  such  an  impression  on  me  that  I  made  a  note  of  it  at  the
time.  My  brother  was  in  Ceylon.  I  was  in  England.  About  five  weeks
afterwards  we  heard  oi  his  death  in  the  early  morning  of  the  day  I  had  the
dream. Just  before  he  died  he  called  my  name  loudly.

"  f  have  had  other  sensations  of  a  spiritual  presence  at  times,  but  have
actually  seen  nothing  definite  at  any  other  time."

Of  course,  in  cases  such  as  this  where  the  death  is  known,  we  have
no  argument  from  coincidence  tending  to  exclude  the  purely  subjective
action  of  the  percipient's  mind  ;  and  the  fact  of  the  promise  may,  by
producing  some  degree  of  expectancy,  have  helped  both  to  cause  and
to  shape  the  phantasm.  On  the  other  hand,  it  will  be  observed  that
the  number  of  apparitions  fulfilling  promises  after  the  death  is  other-
wise known  to  the  percipient  is  only  equal  to  the  number  of  similar
fulfilments  where  there  was  no  such  knowledge.

Information  Conveyed  by  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.

Leaving  the  evidence  supplied  by  the  distribution  of  phantasms  of
the  dead  and  by  their  occurrence  when  the  death  was  unknown,
we  may  consider  next  those  which  convey  true  information  to  the
percipient  about  facts  unknown  to  him.  Three  of  the  cases  already
discussed  belong  to  this  class  ;  in  two  of  which  (No.  442.  15  and  No.
740.  9,  pp.  371  and  373)  the  information  was  as  to  the  fact  of  the
death,  while  in  the  third  it  related  to  a  scar  on  the  face  (No.  461.  25,
p.  374).  In  the  following  case  there  is  a  veridical  feature  of  this  kind,
but  it  is  perhaps  one  that  might  more  easily  have  been  guessed.

(579.  23)  From  Mr.  Heintze.

2,  Rue  Pouchkine,  St.  Petersburg.
"  C'etait  a  Moscou,  vers  le  15  Avril,  1884.  Je  demeurais  rue  Mokowaya,
dans  les  appartements  de  Skworzof. Rentre  de  mon  service  au  tribunal  de


XVII.]  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  37  9"

I'arronclissement,  vers  4  h.,  je  pris  mon  diner,  et  m'efcant  place  sur  un  divan
je  me  mis  a  lire.  C'^tait  vers  5  h.,  il  y  avait  du  soleil  et  la  chambre  etait
parfaitement  eclairee.  Assis  sur  le  divan,  je  pouvais  voir  la  porte  d'entree.
Continuant  de  lire,  je  jetai  par  hasard  un  coup  d'ceil  vers  cette  porte  et  j'y
remarquai  un  petit  rond  lumineux,  pareil  a  celui  que  produirait  le  reflet  d'un
miroir.  Mais  ma  chambre  se  trouvait  au  troisieme  etage,  et  dans  las  fenetres.
de  la  maison  en  face  on  ne  voyait  personne.  Je  me  levai  et  j'examinai
attentivement  ces  fenetres.  Ayant  repris  ma  place  sur  le  divan,  je  regardaL
de  nouveau  vers  la  porte.  Le  rond  lumineux  devenait  de  plus  en  plus  grand,
et  lorsque  enfin  il  embrassa  toute  la  porte,  quelque  chose  de  sombre  com-
menga  a  a2:)paraitre  au  milieu.  Une  figure  humaine  se  forma  de  plus  en  plus,
distinctement,  se  detacha  du  )nur  et  s'avanQa  lentement  vers  moi.  Je  restai
sans  bouger,  comme  petrifie.  Dans  cette  figure  je  reconnus  mon  jjere,  mort  en
Janvier,  1880.  II  etait  en  frac,  il  avait  des  moustaches  fortement  grises,
conune  de  son  vivant,  mais  outre  cela  une  courte  barbe  completement
blanche,  que  je  ne  lui  connaissais  pas.  L'apparition  s'approcha  de  la  table^
qui  etait  devant  le  divan,  en  fit  le  tour,  et  prit  place  aupres  de  moi  sur  le
divan.  Je  n'etais  pas  en  etat  de  jiarler,  la  frayeur  m'avait  paralyse  la  langue.
L'apparition  me  tendit  la  main,  machinalement  je  lui  tendis  la  mienne  ;  sa
main  n'avait  pas  le  froid  glacial  d'un  cadavre,  elle  etait  seulement  fraiche.
II  commenqa  a  parler  :  sa  voix  etait  sourde,  mais  elle  ressemblait  a  la  voix  de
mon  pere.

"  Je  ne  puis  citer  ici  les  paroles,  qui  se  rapportaient  uniquement  a  moi
et  etaient  d'un  caractere  intime.  Ayant  fini  de  parler,  il  disparut  subiteinent..

"  J'etais  alors  en  jiarfaite  sante,  je  n'ai  jamais  souffert  de  hallucinations,
et  je  suis  sur  qu'en  ce  moment  j'etais  complfetement  dveille,  frais  et  dispos.
Outre  cela,  je  puis  avancer  des  preuves  en  faveur  de  la  realite  de  cette
apparition.

"  Mon  pere  etait  par  profession  maitre  de  musique  a  Moscou  ;  apres  trois.
mois  de  maladie,  il  mourut  quaiid  j'etais  loin  de  Moscou,  et  fut  enterre  en
mon  absence.  De  retour  a  Moscou  je  trouvai  ma  mere  tuee  de  chagrin  ;
j'e vital  de  parler  avec  elle  sur  ce  triste  sujet,  de  sorte  que  les  details  de  la
maladie  et  des  funerailles  de  mon  pere  me  resterent  inconnus.  Mais  le  soir
apres  cette  apparition,  je  me  rendis  chez  ma  mere  avec  la  ferme  resolution
de  la  questionner  a  ce  sujet :  j'appris  alors  qu'il  avait  ete  enterre  en  habit
noir  (frac),  que  jusqu'au  dernier  temps  il  n'avait  pas  porte  de  barbe,  mais
que  pendant  sa  maladie  une  petite  barbe  parfaitement  blanche  lui  avait  ponsse^
et  c'est  ainsi  qu'il  fut  enterre."  n  j^-  g£j-j^r],2E  "

The  collector,  Mr.  Aksakoff,  adds  a  note  : —

Janvier,  1892.

"  Traduit  et  abrege  de  I'original  russe  publie  dans  le  Rebus,  1891,  No.  27,
et  confirme  a  moi  par  Mr.  Heintze  verbalement.  La  mere  de  Mr.  Heintze
vit  encore,  mais  impossible  d'avoir  son  temoignage,  car  elle  a  toutes  ces
choses  en  horreur,  et  considere  comme  un  peche  de  s'en  occuper.

"A.  Aksakoff."


A  phantasm  of  this  degree  of  persistency  and  development  is  very
unusual. Mr.  Heintze  reports  a  similarly  complicated  phantasm  coin-


380


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


aiding  with  the  death  of  a  friend,  which  has  been  counted  among  the
death-coincidences.

A  few  cases  of  apparitions  of  the  dead  predicting  futm^e  events
fall  ■prima  facie  under  the  present  heading ;  but  in  most  of  them
the  event  is  such  as  might  have  been  guessed,  as  for  instance  when  a
parent  in  great  anxiety  for  one  child  sees  an  apparition  of  another
dead  one  who  makes  predictions  as  to  the  course  of  the  illness
(No.  91.  12) ;  or  when  a  second  marriage  is  predicted  by  the
apparition  of  the  deceased  wife.  In  one  case  (ISTo.  5-35.  1)  where  the
deceased  wife  appears  to  a  friend  at  about  the  same  time  that  the
widowei'  had,  unknown  to  the  percipient,  become  engaged  to  marry
again,  there  is  an  element  of  coincidence  which  gives  it  some
evidential  character  ;  but  the  expei'ience  occurred  rather  more  than
20  years  ago,  and  is  uncorroborated,  and,  moreover,  the  coincidence
is  not  stated  to  have  been  exact.

The  most  remarkable  case  in  our  collection  of  a  phantasm  of  the
dead  conveying  true  information  is  perhaps  the  following.  The
phantasm  not  only  gives  information,  but  coincides  in  time  with  the
death  to  which  its  apparent  words  and  actions  refer.

(464.  15.)  From  Miss  L.  Dodson.

September  lith,  1891.

"On  .June  5th,  1887,  a  Sunday  evening, ^  between  11  and  12  at
night,  being  awake,  my  name  was  called  three  times.  I  answered  twice,
thinking  it  was  my  uncle,  'Come  in,  Uncle  George,  I  am  awake,'  but  the
third  time  I  recognised  the  voice  as  that  of  my  mother,  who  had  been  dead
If)  years.  I  said,  '  Mamma  !  '  She  then  came  round  a  screen  near  my
bedside  with  two  children  in  her  arms,  and  placed  them  in  my  arms  and  put
the  bed-clothes  over  them  and  said,  'Lucy,  promise  me  to  take  care  of  them,
for  their  mother  is  j  ust  dead. '  I  said,  '  Yes,  mamma. '  She  repeated,
'  Promise  me  to  take  care  of  them. '  I  replied,  '  Yes,  I  promise  you  ; '  and  I
added  '  Oh,  mamma,  stay  and  speak  to  me,  I  am  so  wretched.'  She  repHed,
'  Not  yet,  my  child,'  then  she  seemed  to  go  round  the  screen  again,  and  I
remained,  feeling  the  children  to  be  still  in  my  arms,  and  fell  asleep.  When
I  awoke  there  was  nothing.  Tuesday  morning,  June  7th,  I  received  the
news  of  my  sister-in-law's  death.  She  had  given  birth  to  a  child  three  weeks
before,  which  I  did  not  know  till  after  her  death.

"  I  was  in  bed  but  not  asleep,  and  the  room  was  lighted  by  a  gas-light
in  the  street  outside.  1  was  out  of  health  and  in  anxiety  about  family
troubles.  My  age  was  42.  I  was  quite  alone^  I  mentioned  the  circum-
stance to  my  uncle  the  next  morning.  He  thought  I  was  sickening  for
brain  fever.  [I  have  had  other  experiences,  but]  only  to  the  extent  of
having  felt  a  liand  laid  on  my  head,  and  sometimes  on  my  hands,  at
times  of  great  trouble.  ..^ucy  Doi.son."


1  We  have  ascertained  that  this  date  was  a  Sunday,


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


381


The  collector,  Mr.  C.  H.  Cope,  writes  in  answer  to  our  questions  : —

Brussels,  October  Vjth,  1891.
"  I  have  received  replies  from  Miss  Dodson  to  your  enquiries.
"(1)  '  Yes  [I  was]  perfectly  awake  [at  the  time].'

"  (2)  '  Was  she  in  anxiety  about  her  sister-in-law  ?'  '  None  whatever  ;
I  did  not  know  a  second  baby  had  been  born;  in  fact,  had  not  the  remotest
idea  of  my  sister-in-law's  illness.'

"(3)  'Did  she  think  at  the  time  that  the  words  about  the  children's
mother  having  just  died  referred  to  her  sister-in-law?  Had  she  two  children  V
'  No,  I  was  at  a  total  loss  to  imagine  whose  children  they  were. '

"  (4)  'I  was  living  in  Albany  Street,  Regent's  Park,  ■  at  the  time.  My
sister-in-law,  as  I  heard  afterwards,  was  confined  at  St.  Andre  (near  Bruges),
and  removed  to  Bruges  three  days  prior  to  her  death.  (N.  B. — She  had  two
children  including  the  new-born  baby.)'

"(5)  '  My  late  uncle  only  saw  business  connexions,  and  having  no  rela-
tions or  personal  friends  in  London,  save  myself,  would  not  have  been  likely
to  mention  the  occurrence  to  any  one.'  "

Mr.  Cope  also  sent  us  a  copy  of  the  j^rinted  announcement  of  the
death,  which  Miss  Dodson  had  received.  It  was  dated,  "Bruges,  June  7th,
1887,"  and  gave  the  date  of  death  as  June  5th.  He  quotes  from  Miss
Dodson's  letter  to  him  enclosing  it,  as  follows: — "[My  friend],  Mrs.
Grange,  tells  me  she  saw  [my  sister-in-law]  a  couple  of  hours  prior  to  her
death,  which  took  place  about  9  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  June  5th,  and  it
was  between  11  and  12  o'clock  the  same  night  my  mother  brought  me  the
two  little  children."

Professor  Sidgwick  writes  : — ■

November  23rc?,  1892.

"  I  have  just  had  an  interesting  conversation  with  Miss  Dodson  and  her
friend,  Mrs.  Grange.

' '  Miss  Dodson  told  me  that  she  was  not  thinking  of  her  brother  or  his
wife  at  this  time,  as  her  mind  was  absorbed  by  certain  other  matters.  But
the  brother  was  an  object  of  special  concern  to  her,  as  her  mother  on  her
death  bed,  in  1871,  had  specially  charged  her — and  she  had  jjromised — to  take
care  of  the  other  children,  especially  this  brother,  who  was  then  5  years  old.
He  had  married  in  April  1885,  and  she  had  not  seen  him  since,  though  she
had  heard  of  the  birth  of  his  first  child,  a  little  girl,  in  January  1886  ;  and
she  had  never  seen  his  wife,  nor  heard  of  the  birth  of  the  second  child.

"  She  is  as  sure  as  she  can  be  that  she  was  awake  at  the  time  of  the
experience.  She  knew  the  time  by  a  clock  in  the  room  and  also  a  clock  out-
side. She  heard  this  latter  strike  12  afterwards,  and  the  apparition  must  have
occurred  after  11,  because  lights  were  out  in  front  of  the  public-house.  The
children  seemed  to  be  with  her  a  long  time  ;  indeed  they  seemed  to  be  still
with  her  when  the  clock  struck  12.  The  room  was  usually  light  enough  to
see  things  in — e.g.,  to  get  a  glass  of  water,  &c. — owing  to  the  lamj)  in  the
street,  but  the  distinctness  with  which  the  vi.sion  was  seen  is  not  explicable
by  the  real  light.  The  children  were  of  ages  corresponding  to  those  of  her
sister-in-law's  children  :  i.e.,  they  seemed  to  be  a  little  girl  and  a  baby  newly
born  :  the  sex  was  not  distinguished. She  was  not  at  all  alarmed.


382  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


"  She  heard  from  Mrs.  Grange  by  letter,  and  afterwards  orally  from  her
brother,  that  her  sister-in-law  died  between  8  and  9  the  same  night.

"  She  never  had  any  experience  of  the  kind,  or  any  hallucination
at  all  before  :  but  since  she  has  occasionally  felt  a  hand  on  her  head  in
trouble.

"  Mrs.  Grange  told  me  that  she  was  with  the  sister-in-law  about  an  hour
and  a  half  before  her  death.  She  left  her  about  7  o'clock,  without  any
particular  alarm  about  her  ;  though  she  was  suffering  from  inflammation  after
childbirth,  and  Mrs.  Grange  did  not  quite  like  her  look  ;  still  her  state  was
not  considered  alarming  by  those  who  were  attending  on  her.  Then  about
8.30  news  came  to  Mrs.  Grange  in  her  own  house  that  something  had  happened
at  the  sister-in-law's.  As  it  was  only  in  the  next  street,  Mrs.  Grange  put  on
her  bonnet  and  went  round  to  the  house,  and  found  she  was  dead.  She  then
wrote  and  told  Miss  Dodson."

There  are  some  phantasms  of  the  dead  which  by  their  appropriafie-
ness  suggest  that  the  deceased  are  taking  a  continued  interest  in
mundane  affairs.  The  case  just  given  is  one  of  these,  and  is  perhaps
the  sti'ongest  in  the  present  collection.  It  is,  however,  seldom  possible
in  such  cases  to  eliminate  other  possible  causes  and  thus  prove  the
agency  of  the  dead.  In  the  case  just  given,  for  instance,  a  telepathic
impulse  from  the  living  brother  might  conceivably  embody  itself  for
the  percipient  in  the  form  of  their  mother.  Where  no  information  is
given  by  means  of  the  phantasm,  and  its  appropriateness  depends
solely  on  the  circumstances  of  the  percipient  at  the  time,  it  is,  of
course,  easy  to  suppose  that  the  whole  experience  was  purely  sub-
jective. For  instance,  in  the  following  experience  of  the  percipient  of
a  well-evidenced  death-coincidence  (see  p.  211)  his  aunt  plays  the  part
of  a  guardian  angel  pointing  out  to  him  the  way  to  escape  frojn  danger.
But  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  suggestion  came  solely  from  his  own
mind,  assuming  a  hallucinatory  form  owing  to  his  emotional  condition,
as  in  the  cases  quoted  in  Chapter  IX.,  pp.  169 — 170.

(425.  12.)  From  Mr.  S.  Walker  Anderson.

[The  account  was  given  verbally  to  Professor  Sidgwick,  who  writes  from
notes  taken  at  the  time  of  his  interview  : — ]

December  IWi,  1891.

' '  Mr.  Anderson  has  seen  an  apparition  of  one  of  his  aunts,  who  had  died
many  years  before,  several  times  in  a  dream-like  and  half  shadowy  way,
immediately  after  waking  ujj  from  a  dream.  Once  only  he  saw  her  more
completely  externalised.  This  was  seven  years  ago  next  January,  when  he
was  in  danger  of  his  life  crossing  a  river  in  Queensland.  His  horse  was
carried  down  the  stream,  unable  to  swim  across  :  lie  gave  himself  up  for  lost,
when  he  saw  his  aunt  standing  on  a  floating  tree  ;  he  felt  it  to  be  an  indica-
tion tliat  he  was  to  leave  the  horse  and  seize  hold  of  the  tree,  which  he  did,
and  was  carried  safe  to  the  bank."


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


383


In  the  case  we  have  next  to  quote — unless  we  accept  the  hypothesis
of  chance-coincidence — the  evidence  for  the  agency  of  the  dead  is
certainly  strong,  because  any  other  explanation  compatible  with  the
veracity  of  the  narrators  requii'es  a  very  complicated  and  improbable
Tiypothesis  as  regards  the  sub-conscious  action  of  Senhor  Cabral's  mind.
The  case  came  into  our  collection  merely  as  a  tactile  hallucination  :
but  the  main  interest  of  it  depends  on  the  coincident  experience  of
Donna  Feliciana  Fortes.  It  seems  doubtful  from  the  account  given
whether  she  had  a  hallucinatory  vision,  or  merely  a  mental  vision,
Ibut  for  our  present  purpose  this  is  unimportant.

(726.  14.)  From  Senhor  Ulysses  J.  C.  Cabral.

Rua  Escobar  48,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  March  12th,  1892.

[After  relating  his  first  meeting  in  June,  1886,  with  "  Deolinda,"  a  child
whom  he  had  found  in  great  poverty  and  had  taken  charge  of,  and  her
■death  from  consumption  shortly  afterwards,  Senhor  Cabral  continues : — ]

"  Some  months  passed,  and  ray  family  (which  now  included  my  wife's
other  sister  Amelia)  went  to  stay  at  a  plantation  belonging  to  friends.  I
•escorted  them  thither,  and  returned  to  attend  to  my  obhgations  in  the  city.
In  order  not  to  be  alone,  I  accepted  the  invitation  of  my  friend,  Barboza  de
Andrade,  and  went  to  live  with  him  in  S.  Christovam.  One  month  after-
w^ards,  a  sister  of  Barboza's,  who  was  ill,  came  into  his  house.  She  grew
•daily  worse,  and  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  months  had  sunk  so  low  that  we
biad  to  sit  up  with  her  at  night.

"One  night,  when  I  had  taken  my  turn  at  nursing,  I  felt  sleepy,  and
went  to  lie  down.  Two  sisters.  Donnas  Anna  Ignez  Dias  Fortes  and
Feliciana  Dias  (now  deceased),  took  my  jilace.  I  had  made  their  ac-
quaintance but  a  few  days  before.  After  stretching  myself  on  the  bed,
I  was  filled  with  a  feeling  of  unbounded  joy.  I  was  happy,  and  could  not
imagine  what  was  the  cause  of  my  happiness.  I  had  a  sensation  as  if  some
one  were  holding  my  head  and  placing  something  round  it.

' '  Astonished  at  my  experience,  I  called  to  the  ladies  who  were  watching
in  the  next  room,  and  Donna  Feliciana,  though  from  the  place  where  she
was  seated  she  could  not  see  me,  answered  me  back,  '  I  see  at  your  bedside
a  spirit  child  clothed  in  white.  She  places  on  your  head  a  crown  of  roses.
She  says  her  name  is  Deolinda,  and  she  comes  to  thank  you  for  the  kindness
and  charity  with  which  you  behaved  to  her.'  I  was  amazed  at  such  a
declaration,  for  that  very  day  was  the  anniversary  of  Deolinda's  death,  and
neither  I  nor  any  other  person  in  the  house  had  recollected  this.^  Besides,
I  had  never  spoken  on  the  subject.

"  The  two  ladies  were  worthy  of  the  liighest  respect.  As  for  Donna  Anna
Fortes,  who  is  still  alive,  our  friendship  is  now  of  long  standing,  and  I
render  her  all  the  homage  which  her  virtue  and  goodness  merit.

"  Ulysses  Cabkal
"  (Director  of  the  '  Atheneu  Brazileiro '). "

1  Note  by  the  collectoi-.  Professor  Alexander  : — "  According  to  the  other  state-
ments, no  other  person  in  the  house  knew  anything  about  Deolinda. — A.  A."


384  Reijort  on  the  Census  of  Halhccinations.  [chap..


The  following  corroborative  sbatements  were  obtained  by  Professor
Alexander  :  —

Rio  de  Janeiro,  March  16th,  1892.
"  The  part  of  the  above  narrative  which  respects  me  is  exact. I  am  sure
that  neither  my  sister  nor  I  knew  of  the  story  of  Deolinda  before  she  was
seen  by  the  side  of  Senhor  Ulysses  Cabral  on  the  night  mentioned.

"Anxa  Ignez  Dias  Fortes."

Rio  de  Janeiro,  March  17th,  1892

"The  above  narrative  coincides  with  our  recollection  of  what  haj^pened.
in  our  house. ^  We  are  certain  that  our  friend,  Senhor  Ulysses  Cabral,  told
us  the  story  of  Deolinda  only  after  the  latter  had  been  seen  by  Donna.
Feliciana  Fortes.

"Manuel  Jm.  Bakboza  de  Andrade.
"Emilia  Baeeoza  de  Andrade."

Professor  Alexander  writes :  —

Rio  de  Janeiro,  3farch  17th,  1892.

"In  reply  to  further  questions,  Senhor  Ulysses  Cabral  said  the  sensa-
tion on  the  head  was  that  of  a  slight  but  distinct  compression.  He  supposed,
at  first  that  a  towel  had  in  .some  way  wound  itself  round  his  head.  He  did
not  speak  of  this  sensation  to  the  ladies  in  the  next  room.  The  ecstatic
feeling  would  not  allow  him  to  sleep  when  he  lay  down.  It  was  on  the
night  of  the  anniversary  of  the  child's  death,  about  12  o'clock,  that  this
occurred.  Senhor  Cabral  believed  that  he  had  not  spoken  of  Deolinda
to  the  people  of  the  house,  and  this  is  confirmed,  if  there  are  no  lapses
of  memory,  by  the  statements  of  the  other  persons  concerned.  He  thought
that  the  lustre  of  his  deed  of  charity  would  be  somewhat  tarnished  if  told
even  to  friends.  Though  at  my  request  he  has  made  the  whole  incident
public,  he  does  so,  I  am  well  assured,  with  the  intention  of  helping  us  in
a  quest  which  he  holds  to  be  all-important.  Both  he  and  Donna  Anna
Fortes  affirm  that  they  came  together  in  that  house  for  the  first  time  on
that  night,  although  they  had  met  once  or  twice  before  at  Spiritist  sittings.
The  lady  says  they  were  conversing  about  Spiritism  at  the  time  of  Senhor
Cabral's  experience.

"Donna  Feliciana  Fortes,  now  dead,  was  a  remarkable  sensitive,
according  to  the  accounts  I  have  received  of  her  by  surviving  friends.

"The  witnesses  to  the  above  case  are  all  Spiritists;  but  they  are  people
in  whose  veracity  I  can  trust  implicitly.

"  Alfred  Alexander."

I£  we  are  to  exclude  Deolinda's  agency  here,  we  must  suppose  that
Senhor  Cabral  was  sub-consciously  aware  that  it  was  the  anniversary
of  her  death,  and  that  tliis  subconscious  recollection  produced  by
association  the  feeling  of  happiness  and  the  tactile  hallucination,  with-
out even  then  influencing  his  conscious  memory  ;  and,  fui-ther,  that  the
other  witnesses  were  affected  by  telepathic  influence  from  his  uncon-


1  "Tliey  were  sleeping  at  the  time,  and  only  heard  of  it  the  next  day.— A.  A."


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


385


scious  memory.  This  is  cei'tainly  a  highly  strained  hypothesis  ;  and  a
few  more  well-evidenced  cases  of  this  sort  would  go  far  to  establish
the  agency  of  the  dead.

In  the  following  case,  the  interest  lies  in  the  simultaneous  appear-
ance to  two  percipients  who  were  not  together, — -a  coincidence  which
it  is  difficult  to  regard  as  fortuitous,  however  it  may  be  explained.

(402.  19.)  From  Baron  B.  von  Driesen.

The  account  was  written  in  November,  1899,  and  has  been  translated
from  the  Russian  by  the  collector,  Mr.  M.  Petrovo  Solovovo.

' '  [Baron  von  Driesen  begins  by  saying  that  he  has  never  believed  and  does
not  believe  in  the  supernatural,  and  that  he  is  more  inclined  to  attribute  the
apparition  he  saw  to  his  '  excited  fancy  '  than  to  anything  else.  After  these
preliminary  remarks  he  proceeds  as  follows  ; — ]

"I  must  tell  you  that  my  father-in-law,  M.  N.  J.  Ponomareif,
died  in  the  country.  This  did  not  happen  at  once,  but  after  a  long  and
painful  illness,  whose  sharp  phases  had  obliged  my  wife  and  myself  to  join
him  long  befoi-e  his  death.  I  had  not  been  on  good  terms  with  M.
PonomarefF  Different  circumstances  which  are  out  of  place  in  this  narrative
had  estranged  us  from  each  other,  and  these  relations  did  nut  change  until
his  death.  He  died  very  quietly,  after  having  given  his  blessing  to  all  liis
family,  including  myself.  A  liturgy  for  the  rest  of  his  soul  was  to  be  cele-
brated on  the  ninth  day.  I  remember  very  well  how  I  went  to  bed  between
one  and  two  o'clock  on  the  eve  of  that  day  and  how  I  read  the  Gospel  before
falling  asleep.  My  v/ife  was  sleeping  in  the  same  room.  It  was  perfectly
quiet.  I  had  just  put  out  the  candle  when  footsteps  were  lieard  in  the
adjacent  room — a  sound  of  slipjjers  shuffling,  I  might  say — which  ceased
before  the  door  of  our  bedroom.  I  called  out,  '  Who  is  there  1 '  No  answer.
I  struck  one  match,  then  another,  and  when  after  the  stifling  smell  of  the
sulphur  the  fire  had  lighted  up  the  room,  I  saw  M.  PonomareflF  standing
before  the  closed  door.  Yes,  it  was  he,  in  his  blue  dressing-gown,  lined  with
squirrel  furs  and  only  half -buttoned,  so  that  I  could  see  his  white  waistcoat
and  his  black  trousers.  It  was  he  undoubtedly.  I  was  not  frightened.  They
say  that,  as  a  rule,  one  is  not  frightened  when  seeing  a  ghost,  as  ghosts
possess  the  quality  of  paralysing  fear.

"'What  do  you  want?'  I  asked  my  father-in-law.  M.  Ponomareff
made  two  steps  forward,  stopped  before  my  bed,  and  said,  '  Basil  Feodorovitch,
I  have  acted  wrongly  towards  you.  Forgive  me  !  Without  this  I  do  not  feel
at  rest  there.'  He  was  jjointing  to  the  ceiling  with  his  left  liand  whilst
holding  out  his  right  to  me.  I  seized  this  hand,  which  was  long  and  cold,
shook  it  and  answered,  '  Nicholas  Ivanovitch,  God  is  my  witness  that  I
have  never  had  anything  against  you.'

' '  [The  ghost  of]  my  father-in-law  bowed  [or  bent  down],  moved  awaj?  and
went  through  the  opposite  door  into  the  billiard-room,  where  he  disappeared.
I  looked  after  him  for  a  moment,  crossed  myself,  put  out  the  candle,  and
fell  asleep  with  the  sense  of  joy  which  a  man  who  has  done  his  duty  must
feel.  The  morning  came.  My  wife's  brothers,  as  well  as  our  neighbours
and  the  peasants,  assembled,  and  the  liturgy  was  celebrated  by  our  con-


386


Rejjort  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


fessor,  the  Rev.  Father  Basil.  But  when  all  was  over,  the  same  Father
Basil  led  me  aside  and  said  to  me  mysteriously,  '  Basil  Feodorovitch,  I  have
got  something  to  say  to  you  in  private.'  My  wife  having  come  near  us  at
this  moment,  the  clergyman  repeated  his  wish.  T  answered,  '  Father  Basil,
I  have  no  secrets  from  my  wife  ;  please  tell  us  what  you  wished  to  tell  me
alone. '

"Then  Father  Basil,  who  is  living  till  now  in  the  Koi  parish  of  the
district  of  Kashin  [Gov.  of  Tver],  said  to  me  in  a  rather  solemn  voice,  '  This
night  at  three  o'clock  Nicholas  Ivanovitch  [Ponomarefif]  appeared  to  me  and
begged  of  me  to  reconcile  him  to  you.'

"(Signed) Baron  Basil  Driesen."

Mr.  Solovovo  adds  : —

"  The  Baroness  von  Driesen  is  now  dead,  so  that  her  evidence  cannot  be
obtained.

' '  I  also  saw  Baron  Basil  von  Driesen  himself,  and  si^oke  with  him
about  M.  Ponomareff's  ghost.  He  stated  to  me  that  if  he  were  going  to
die  to-morrow  he  should  still  be  ready  to  swear  to  the  fact  of  his  having
seen  the  apparition,  or  something  to  this  effect.  I  asked  him  to  obtain  for
me  the  clergyman's  account,  to  whom  I  had  already  written  before  seeing
Baron  von  Driesen  (though  not  knowing  him),  but  without  receiving  an
answer — which  is  but  natural,  after  all.  Baron  von  Driesen  kindly  promised
to  procure  for  me  the  account  in  question,  as  it  was  then  his  intention  to
visit  different  estates  in  Central  Russia,  including  the  one  that  had  belonged
to  M.  Ponomarefif.

' '  Baron  Nicholas  von  Driesen — Baron  Basil's  son — called  on  me  a  few
days  ago.  He  stated,  with  regard  to  the  case  in  question,  that  it  was
necessary  to  see  the  clergyman  in  order  to  induce  him  to  write  an  account
of  what  had  happened  to  him."

Baron  N.  von  Driesen  afterwards  sent  a  note  to  Mr.  Solovovo,  stating
that  his  grandfather  [M.  Ponomarefif]  died  on  November  21st,  1860  ;  and
the  testimony  of  the  priest  was  obtained  later.  Mr.  Solovovo,  who  had
already  ascertained  independently  that  the  Rev.  Basil  Bajenoflf  had  been
a  priest  at  Koi  in  the  year  1861,  and  was  thei-e  still,  writes  : —

"  The  following  is  the  translation  of  the  Rev.  Basil  Bajenofif's  statement : —

'  Koi,  July  23rd  [Augud  4:th],  1891.
"  '  To  the  account  I  heard  from  Baron  B.  F.  Driesen  in  the  presence  of
his  wife's  brothers,  MM.  N.  N.,  A.  N.,  and  I.  N.  Ponomarefif,  as  to  how
M.  Nicholas  I.  Ponomareff  appeared  to  him  in  the  night  of  November
29-30th,  1860,  having  died  nine  days  before,  and  begged  of  the  Baron  to
be  reconciled  to  him,  I  may  add  that  to  me  also  did  he  aj^pear  at  the  same
time  and  with  tlie  same  request,  which  fact,  before  hearing  the  Baron's
narrative,  I  communicated  to  all  those  present  at  the  Liturgy  for  the  rest
of  the  soul  of  the  late  M.  N.  I.  Ponomarefif.

"'(Signed) Basil  Bajenoff,
"  'Priest  of  Trinity  Church,  at  Koi,  District  of  Kashin,
Government  of  Tver.'  "

Baron  von  Driesen  had  previously,  in  1855,  had  another  apparently
veridical  experience. At  the  hour  of  the  death  of  a  brother-in-law,  who


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


387


■was  living  in  another  place,  and  whom  he  believed  to  be  in  good  health,  he
lieard  a  voice  saying  ;  "  Pray  ;  your  brother-in-law  is  dead."

We  may  conclude  our  examination  of  phantasms  of  the  dead  with
another  Russian  case,  apparently  carefully  observed,  and  presenting
several  points  of  interest,  among  which  is  a  incident  somewhat  resemb-
ling the  one  just  discussed.

(422.  22.)  From  Mr.  E.  Mamtchitch.

St.  Petersburg,  April  29th,  1891.

"  Comme  il  s'agira  des  apparitioirs  de  Palladia,  je  dois  dire  auparavant
quelques  mots  sur  sa  personne.  Elle  etait  la  fille  d'un  riche  proprietaire  russe,
mort  un  mois  avant  sa  naissance.  Sa  mere,  dans  son  desespoir,  voua  son
•enfant  futur  au  couvent.  De  la  son  nom,  usite  parmi  les  religieuses.  Deux
ans  apres,  sa  mere  mourut,  et  I'orpheline,  jusqu'  a  Tage  de  14  ans,  fut  dlevee
dans  un  couvent  de  Moscou  par  sa  tante,  qui  en  etait  la  superieure.

"En  1870,  etant  encore  ^tudiant  a  I'universite  de  Moscou,  je  fis  la
connaissance  du  frere  de  Palladia,  etudiant  comme  moi,  et  il  fut  souvent
question  entre  nous  de  rendre  a  la  societe  la  nonne  malgre  soi;  inais  ce
plan  ne  fut  realise  qu'en  1872.  J'etais  venu  en  ete  a  Moscou,  pour  voir
I'exposition,  et  j'y  rencontrai  par  hasard  le  frere  de  Palladia.  J'appris  qu'il
etait  entrain  de  I'envoyer  en  Crimee  pour  cause  de  sante,  et  je  le  secondai
de  mon  mieux.  C'est  alors  que  je  vis  Palladia  pour  la  premiere  fois ;
elle  avait  14  ans  ;  quoique  haute  de  taille,  elle  etait  fort  chetive  et  deja
poitrinaire.  A  la  priere  de  son  frere,  j'accompagnai  Palladia  et  sa  soiur,
Mme.  P.  S.,  en  Crimee,  ou  elles  resterent  pour  passer  I'hiver,  et  moi,  deux
semaines  apres,  je  revins  a  Kieff.

"En  ete  1873  je  rencontrai  par  hasard  Palladia  et  sa  soeur  a  Odessa,  oh
elles  etaient  venues  pour  consulter  les  medecins,  quoique  Palladia  avait
Pair  de  se  porter  assez  bien.  Le  27  Aout,  pendant  que  je  faisais  la  lec-
ture aux  deux  dames,  Palladia  mourut  subitement  d'un  anevrisme,  a  I'age
de  15  ans.

' '  Deux  ans  apres  la  mort  de  Palladia,  en  1875,  me  trouvant  a  Kieflf,  il
m'arriva,  par  une  soirde  du  mois  de  Decembre,  d'assister  pour  la  premiere
fois  a  une  seance  spiritique ;  j  'entendis  des  coups  dans  la  table ;  cela  ne
m'etonna  nullement,  car  j'^tait  sur  que  c'etait  une  plaisanterie.  De  retour
chez  moi,  je  voulus  voir  si  les  memes  coups  se  produiraient  chez  moi ;  je
me  mis  dans  la  meme  pose,  les  mains  sur  la  table.  Bientot  des  coups
se  firent  entendre.  Imitant  le  procede  dont  j 'avals  ete  le  temoin,  je  com-
niengai  h.  reciter  I'alphabet;  le  nom  de  Palladia  me  fut  indique.  Je  fus
•etonne,  presque  effraye;  ne  pouvant  me  tranquilliser,  je  me  mis  de  nouveau
a  la  table,  et  je  demandai  a  Palladia,  cpx'avait-elle  a  me  dire  ?  La  reponse  fut :
*  Replacer  I'ange,  il  tombe.'  Je  ne  compris  pas  de  suite  de  quoi  il  s'agissait.
Le  fait  est  qu'elle  est  enterr^e  a  Kieif,  et  j 'avals  entendu  dire  qu'on  voulait
mettre  un  monument  sur  sa  tombe,  mais  je  n'y  avals  jamais  ete,  et  je  ne
savais  pas  de  quel  genre  etait  le  monument.  Apres  cette  reponse,  je  ne  me
couchai  plus,  et  des  que  le  jour  parut  je  me  rendis  au  cimetiere.  Non  sans
peine,  avec  I'aide  du  gardien,  je  decouvris  enfin  la  tombe  enfouie  sous  la

2  c  2


888


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


neige.  Je  m'arretai  stupefie  :  la  statue  en  marbre  de  I'ange  avec  une  croix
etait  tout  k  fait  de  cot^.

"DejDuis  ce  moment,  il  me  fut  jirouve  a  I'^vidence  qu'il  y  a  un  autre
raonde  avec  lequel,  je  ne  sais  comment,  nous  j)ouvons  entrer  en  rapport,  et
dont  les  habitants  peuvent  nous  donner  de  telles  preuves  de  leur  existence
qu'elles  d^sarment  le  scepticisme  le  plus  tenace.

"En  Octobre,  1876,  je  me  trouvais  a  Kieff,  et  j'etais  en  train  de  m'installer
dans  un  nouveau  logement  (rue  Pror^snaya)  avec  mon  camarade  de  service
au  Ministere  de  la  Justice,  M.  Potolof.  On  venait  de  m'apporter  un
pianino.  II  fut  place  dans  la  salle,  et  je  me  mis  a  jouer;  il  dtait  a  peu
pres  8  h.  du  soir;  la  salle  oil  je  jouais  ^tait  4clair^e  par  une  lampe  pendue
au  mur.  A  cote  se  ti'ouvait  mon  cabinet  de  travail,  eclair^  aussi  par  une
lampe.  Je  me  rappelle  tres  bien  que  j'etais  de  fort  bonne  humeur.  Mon
camarade,  M.  Potolof,-  etait  occupe  a  sa  table,  a  I'autre  bout  du  logis.  Toutes
les  portes  etaient  ouvertes,  et  de  sa  place  il  pouvait  voir  tres  bien  le  cabinet
et  la  salle  oil  je  jouais. ^  Jetant  un  regai'd  vers  la  porte  de  mon  cabinet  de
travail,  je  vis  tout  k  coup  Palladia.  Elle  se  tenait  au  milieu  de  la  porte,  un
peu  de  cote,  avec  le  visage  tourn^  vers  moi.  Elle  me  regardait  tran-
quillement.  Elle  avait  la  meme  robe  fonc^e  qu'elle  portait  lorsqu'elle
niourut  en  ma  presence.  Sa  main  droite  pendait  librement.  Je  voyais
distinctement  ses  ^paules  et  sa  taille,  mais  ne  me  rappelle  jaas  du  bas  de-
son  habit,  et  avais-je  vu  les  pieds  ?  — peut-ltre,  parce  que  tout  le  temps
je  lui  regardais  dans  les  yeux.  En  la  voyant,  j 'avals  tout  a  fait  oubli^  que
je  voyais  devant  moi  non  une  personne  vivante,  mais  rnorte,  tellement
je  la  voyais  distinctement ;  elle  ^tait  eclairee  de  deux  cot^s ;  et  d'autant
plus  j'ai  la  vue  tres  bonne.  Ma  premiere  sensation  fut  un  frisson  dans
le  dos.  Je  f us  comme  petrifi^  et  ma  respiration  fut  suspendue ;  mais  ce
n'^tait  jjas  un  efFetcausd  par  la  frayeur  ou  I'excitation, — c'etait  quelque  chose
d'autre.  Je  puis  comparer  cela  a  la  sensation  que  j'(3i3rouve  quand  je
regarde  en  bas  d'une  grande  hauteur;  je  sens  alors  une  terrible  anxit^t^
et  en  meme  temps  je  ne  puis  me  retenir  de  regarder,  quelque  chose  m'attire
invinciblement.  Combien  de  temps  Palladia  resta  devant  moi,  je  ne  saurais
le  dire,  mais  je  me  rappelle  qu'elle  fit  un  mouvement  a  droite  et  disparut
derriere  la  porte  du  cabinet  du  travail.  Je  me  pr^cipitai  vers  elle,  mais
dans  la  porte  je  m'arretai,  car  alors  seulement  je  me  rappelai  qu'elle  ^tait
d4ja  morte,  et  je  craignai  d'entrer,  ^tant  sur  de  la  revoir.  Dans  ce  moment
mon  camarade  vint  moi  et  me  demanda  qu'est-ce  que  j'avaisl  Je  lui
dis  ce  qui  venait  de  se  passer;  alors  nous  entrames  au  cabinet,  oil  nous  ne
trouvames  personne.  Mon  camarade,  ayant  entendu  la  brusque  interruption
de  mon  jeu,  avait  lev^  la  tete  et,  tant  que  je  me  rappelle,  disait  avoir
vu  aussi  quelqu'un  passer  devant  la  porte  de  mon  cabinet;  mais,  voyant
mon  excitation,  il  me  dit,  pour  me  tranquilliser,  que  probablement  c'etait
Nikita,  mon  domestique,  qui  etait  venu  arranger  la  lampe.  Nous  allames
immediatement  dans  sa  chambre,  il  n'y  ^tait  pas;  il  ^tait  en  bas,  dans  la
cuisine,  oil  il  preparait  le  samovar.  Voila  comment  je  vis  Palladia  pour
la  premiere  fois,  trois  ans  apres  sa  mort.

1 A  plan  enclosed  show.s  a  suite  of  four  rooms,  M.  Potolof 's  study,  the  ante-
room, the  drawing-room,  and  M.  Mamtchitch's  study,  all  opening  into  one  another,
the  three  doors  between  them  being  in  one  straight  line.


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


389


"Apres  la  premiere  apparition  de  Palladia,  en  Octobre,  1876,  et  jusqu'a
present,  je  la  vois  souvent.  II  arrive  que  je  la  vols  trois  fois  par  seniaine,
ou  deux  fois  le  meme  jour,  ou  bien  un  mois  se  passe  sans  la  voir.  En
resumd,  voila  les  traits  principaux  de  ces  apx^aritions.

"(1.)  Palladia  apparait  toujours  d'une  fagon  inattendue,  me  jjrenant
comme  par  surprise,  juste  au  moment  quand  j'y  pense  le  moins.

"(2.)  Quand  je  veux  la  voir  moi-meme,  j'ai  beau  y  penser  ou  le  vouloir--
elle  n'apparait  pas.

"  (3. )  A  de  rares  exceptions,  son  apparition  n'a  aucun  rapport  avec  le
•courant  de  ma  vie,  comme  presage  ou  avertissement  de  quelqu'  evenenient
insolite.

"(4.)  Jamais  je  ne  la  vois  ensonge.

"  (5.)  Je  la  vois  egalement  quand  je  suis  seul,  ou  en  grande  eompagnie.

"  (6.)  Elle  m'apparait  toujours  avec  la  meme  expression  sereine  des  yeux;
■quelques  fois  avec  un  faible  sourire.  Elle  ne  m'a  jamais  parle,  a  I'exception
de  deux  fois,  que  je  vais  raconter  plus  loin.

"  (7.)  Je  la  vois  toujours  dans  la  robe  foncee  qu'elle  portait  lorsqu'elle
mourut  sous  mes  yeux.  Je  vois  distinctement  son  visage,  sa  tete,  les
epaules  et  les  bras,  mais  je  ne  vois  pas  ses  pieds,  ou  plutot  je  n'ai  pas  le
-temps  de  les  examiner.

"(8.)  Chaque  fois,  en  voyant  Palladia  inopinement,  je  perds  la  parole,  je
■sens  du  froid  dans  le  dos,  je  palis,  je  m'^crie  fail)lement,  et  ma  respiration
s'arrete  (c'est  ce  que  me  disent  ceux  qui  par  hasard  ui'ont  observe  pendant
ce  moment).

"(9.)  L'apparition  de  Palladia  se  prolonge  une,  deux,  trois  minutes,  puis
graduellement  elle  s'efface  et  se  dissout  dans  I'espace.

"A  present  je  vais  d^crire  trois  cas  d'apparitions  de  Palladia  dont  je
me  souviens  bien.

"(1.)  En  1879,  a  la  fin  de  Novembre,  a  Kieif,  j'etais  assis  amon  bureau  a
^crire  un  acte  d'accusation  ;  il  etait  8j  du  soir,  la  montre  etait  devant  moi
sur  la  table.  Je  me  liatais  de  (inir  mon  travail,  car  a  9h.  je  devais  me
rendre  a  une  soiree.  Tout  a  coup,  en  face  de  moi,  assise  sur  un  fauteuil,  je
vis  Palladia  ;  elle  avait  le  coude  du  bras  droit  sur  la  table  et  la  tete  appuyee
sur  la  main.  M'etant  rerais  de  mon  saisissement,  je  regardai  la  montre  et  je
■Buivisle  mouvement  de  I'aiguille  a  seconde,  jDuis  je  relevai  les  yeux  sur  Pal-
ladia ;  je  vis  qu'elle  n'avait  pas  change  de  pose  et  son  coude  se  dessinait
■clairement  sur  la  table.  Ses  yeux  me  regardaient  avec  joie  et  serenite  ;
alors  pour  la  premiere  fois  je  me  decidai  de  lui  parler  :  'Que  sentez-vous  a
present  ? '  lui  demandai-je.  Son  visage  resta  impassible,  ses  levres,  tant
que  je  me  rappelle,  resterent  immobiles,  mais  j'entendis  distinctement  sa
voix  prononcer  le  mot,  'Quietude.'  'Je  comprends,'  lui  rei3ondis-je,  et
efFectivement,  en  ce  moment,  je  comprenais  toute  la  signification  qu'elle
avait  mise  dans  ce  mot.  Encore  une  fois,  pour  etre  sur  que  je  ne  revai  pas,
je  regardai  de  nouveau  la  montre  et  je  suivis  les  mouvements  de  I'aiguille  a
seconde  ;  je  voyais  clairement  comme  elle  se  mouvait.  Ayant  rapporte  mon
regard  sur  Palladia,  je  remarquai  qu'elle  commengait  deja  a  s'ellacer  et  dis-
paraitre.  Si  je  m'etais  avisd  de  noter  immediatement  la  signification  du
mot  '  Quietude, '  ma  memoire  aurait  retenu  tout  ce  qu'il  y  avait  de  nouveau


390  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap:


et  (I'etrange.  Mais  a  peine  avais-je  quitte  la  table  pour  monter  en  haut,
chez  mon  camarade  Apouktine,  avec  lequel  nous  devions  aller  ensemble,  que
je  ne  pus  lui  dire  autre  chose  que  ce  que  je  viens  d'ecrire.

"(2.)  En  1885,  je  demeurais  chez  mes  parents,  a  une  campagne  du  gou-
Ternement  de  Poltava.  Une  dame  de  notre  connaissance  etait  venue  passer
chez  nous  quelques  jours  avec  ses  deux  demoiselles.  Quelque  temps  apres  leur
arriv^e,  m'etant  reveille  a  I'aube  du  jour,  je  vis  Palladia  (je  dormais  dans
une  aile  s^paree  oil  j'etais  tout  seul).  Elle  se  tenait  devant  moi,  a  cinq  pas
a  peu  pres,  et  me  regardait  avec  un  sourire  joyeux.  S'etant  approchee  de
moi,  elle  me  dit  deux  mots  :  '  J'ai  ete,  j'ai  vu,'  et  tout  en  souriant  disparut..
Que  voulaient  dire  ces  mots,  je  ne  pus  le  comprendre.  Dans  ma  chambre
dormait  avec  moi  mon  setter.  Des  que  j'aper^us  Palladia,  le  chien  lierissa
le  poll  et  avec  glajjissement  sauta  sur  mon  lit ;  se  pressant  vers  moi,  il
regardait  dans  la  direction  ou  je  voyais  Palladia.  Le  chien  n'aboyait  pas,
tandis  ijue,  ordinairement,  il  ne  laissait  personne  entrer  dans  la  chambre
sans  aboyer  et  grogner.  Et  toutes  les  fois,  quand  mon  chien  voyait  Pal-
ladia, il  se  pressait  aupres  de  moi,  comme  cherchant  un  refuge.  Quand
Palladia  disparut  et  je  vins  dans  la  maison,  je  ne  dis  rien  a  pers<mne  de
cette  incident.  Le  soir  du  meme  jour,  la  fille  ainee  de  la  dame  qui  se  trouvait
chez  nous  me  raconta  qu'une  chose  etrange  lui  etait  arrivi^e  ce  matin  :;
'M'etant  rdveill^e  de  grand  matin,'  me  dit-elle,  'j'ai  senti  comme  si
quelqu'un  se  tenait  au  chevet  de  mon  lit,  et  j'entendis  distinctement  une
voix  me  disant :  "  Ne  me  crains  pas,  je  suis  bonne  et  aimante."  Je  tournai
la  tete,  mais  je  ne  vis  rien  ;  ma  mere  et  ma  sceur  dorniaient  tranquillement;,
cela  m'a  fort  etonnee,  car  jamais  rien  de  pareil  ne  m'est  arriv(j.'  Sur  quoi  je
rdpondis  que  bien  des  choses  inexplicables  nous  arrivent ;  mais  je  ne  lui  dit
rien  de  ce  que  j 'avals  vu  le  matin.  Seulement  un  an  plus  tard,  quand
j'etais  deja  son  fiancd,  je  lui  fis  part  de  I'apparition  et  des  paroles  de  Pal-
ladia le  meme  jour.  N'4tait-ce  pas  elle  qui  etait  venue  la  voir  aussi  1  Je
dois  aj  outer  que  j 'avals  vu  alors  cette  demoiselle  pour  la  premiere  fois  et
que  je  ne  pensais  pas  du  tout  que  j'allais  I'djjouser.

"  (3.)  En  Octobre,  1890,  je  me  trouvais  avec  mafemnie  et  mon  fils,  ag^  de
deux  ans,  chez  mes  anciens  amis,  les  Strijewsky,  a  leur  campagne  du
gouvernement  de  Woroneje.  Un  jour,  vers  les  7h.  du  soir,  rentrant  de  la.
chasse,  je  passai  dans  I'aile  que  nous  habitions  jjour  changer  de  toilette  ;,
j'etais  assis  dans  une  chambre  4clair^e  jjar  une  grande  lampe.  La  porte-
s'ouvrit  et  mon  lils  01  eg  accourut ;  il  se  tenait  auj^res  de  mon  fauteuil,
quand  Palladia  apparut  tout  a  coup  devant  moi.  Jetant  sur  lui  un  coup
d'oeil,  je  remarquai  qu'il  ne  d^tachait  pas  les  yeux  de  Palladia  ;  se  tournant
vers  moi  et  montrant  Palladia  du  doigt,  il  pronon^a  :  'La  tante.'  Je  le
pris  sur  les  genoux  et  jetai  un  regard  sur  Palladia,  mais  elle  n'etait  plus.
Le  visage  d'Oleg  etait  tout  a  fait  tranquil  et  joyeux  ;  il  commen§ait  seule-
ment a  parler,  ce  qui  explique  la  denomination  qu  il  donna  a  Palladia.

"Eugene  Mamtchitch."

Mi's.  Mamtchitch  writes  : —

5  Mai,  1891.

' '  Je  me  rappelle  tres  bien  que  le  10  .Juillet,  1885,  lor.sque  nous  i^tion.?^
en  visite  chez  les  parents  de  M.  E.  Mamtchitch,  je  m'etais  reveillee  a  I'aube
du  jour,  car  il  avait  ete  convenu  entre  moi  et  ma  soeur  que  nous  iriorus  fair&


XVII.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


391


uiie  promenade  matinale.  M'etant  soulevee  sur  le  lit,  je  vis  que  maman  et
ma  soeur  dormaient,  et  en  ce  moment  je  sentis  comma  si  quelqu'un  se  tenait  a
mon  chevet.  M'etant  tournee  a  demi — car  je  craignais  de  bienregarder — je  ne
vis  personne  ;  m'etant  recouchee,  j'entendis  immediatement,  derriere  et  au
dessus  de  ma  tete,  une  voix  de  femme  me  disant  doucement,  mais  distincte-
ment :  '  Ne  me  Grains  pas,  je  suis  bonne  et  aimante,'  et  encore  toute  une
phrase  que  j'oubliai  a  I'instant  meme.  Immediatement  apres  je  m'  habillai
et  j'allai  ine  promener.  C'est  etrange  que  ces  paroles  ne  m'efFrayerent  pas
du  tout.  De  retour,  je  n'en  dis  rien  ni  a  ma  mere,  ni  a  ma  soeur,  car  elles
n'aimaient  pas  de  telles  choses  et  n'y  croyaient  pas  ;  mais  le  soir  du  meme
jour,  comme  la  conversation  tourna  sur  le  spiritisme,  je  racontai  a  M.  M.  ce
qui  venait  de  m'arriver  le  matin  ;  il  ne  me  repondit  rien  de  particulier.

"  Je  n'ai  jamais  eu  aucune  hallucination,  ni  avant,  ni  apres  cet  incident,  a
I'exception  d'un  cas  tout  recent,  quand  je  me  suis  vue  moi-meme,  de  quoi  je
parlerai  une  autre  fois.

"Sophie  Mamtchitch."
Mr.  Potolof  writes  to  the  collector,  Mr.  Aksakoff : —

Rue  Schpalernaya,  26. S.  Petersbourg,  le  10  Mai,  1891.

"Monsieur, — En  reponse  a  votre  lettre  du  8  Mai  et  les  questions  que
vous  me  posez  relativement  a  I'incident  avec  M.  E.  Mamtchitch,  lorsque
dans  les  ann^es  1876-1877  nous  habitions  ensemble  KieflF,  rue  Proresnaya,
maison  Barsky,  je  puis  vous  communicjuer  ce  qui  suit.  Effectivement,  je
fus  alors  temoin  comme  M.  M.,  pendant  qu'il  jouait  un  soir  du  piano
quelque  air  m^lancolique,  s'interrompit  brusquement  (comme  si  apres  avoir
fortement  attaque  le  clavier,  ses  mains  s'etaient  subitement  affaissees),  et
lor.sque  je  vins  lui  demander  ce  qui  lui  etait  arrive,  il  me  repondit  qu'il
venait  de  voir  apparaitre  le  fantome  de  Palladia,  se  tenant  derriere  la
draperie  de  la  porte  de  la  chambre  contigue  a  celle  ou  se  trouvait  le  piano.
Je  dois  ajouter  que  notre  appartement  commun  formait  une  enfilade  de  trois
chambres,  sans  compter  celle  de  I'entree,  qui  occupait  le  milieu;  je  travaillais
dans  ma  chambre,  qui  etait  a  droite  de  celle  de  I'entx'ee,  et  je  pouvais  voir
toute  I'enfilade  bien  eclairee.  Ce  qui  me  regarde  personnellement,  je  ne  vis
en  ce  moment  aucune  figure  humaine  passer  par  les  chambres  de  M.  M.,
mais  je  ne  nie  pas  que  pour  le  tranquilliser  j'essayai  d'expliquer  cet  in-
cident par  I'entree  de  notre  domestique  Nikita ;  il  se  peut  aussi  que,  ne
I'ayant  pas  trouve  dans  nos  aj^partements,  nous  allames  le  chercher  en
bas,  dans  la  cuisine.  Voila  tout  ce  que  je  puis  vous  dire  relativement  a
cet  incident.

"  W.  Potolof."

Note  by  the  collector  : —

S.  P(^tersbourg,  Le  16/28  Mai,  1891.

"  Traduit  des  manuscrits  russes  de  M.  et  Madame  Mamtchitch,  et  de
M.  Potolof.  La  premiere  partie  du  manuscrit  de  M.  Mamtchitch,  jusqu'a  la
premiere  apparition  de  Palladia,  est  abi-egee.

"  J'avais  rencontre  M.  Mamtchitch  plusieurs  fois,  mais  je  n'avais  aucune
idee  de  ces  apparitions  constantes  de  Palladia.  M.  Mamtchitch  a  vu  aussi
d'autres  figures  que  celle  de  Palladia,  mais  je  n'ai  pas  eu  le  temps  d'en
faire  un  memorandum  circonstantiel.

"A.  Aksakoff."


392  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [chap.


The  evidence  for  2^ost  mortem  agency  in  this  case  depends  mainly
on  the  communication  received  through  raps  at  the  seance,  before  any
apparition  was  seen  at  all,  and  the  explanation  of  this  belongs  to  a
branch  of  psychical  research  with  which  we  are  not  concerned  in  the
present  report.  The  simultaneous  hallucinations,  however,  of  Mr.
Mamtchitch  and  his  future  wife  in  diiferent  parts  of  the  house  also
suggest  an  agency  external  to  both  of  them,  just  as  the  joint  ex-
periences of  Baron  von  Driesen  and  the  priest  do,  and  for  the  same
reason,  though  it  is  possible  to  explain  the  circumstance  telepathically.
The  occasionally  collective  character  of  Mr.  Mamtchitch's  hallucina-
tions we  have  already  noticed  in  Chapter  XV.  One  somewhat  peculiar
feature  of  his  experiences  will  have  been  observed,  namely,  that  the
apparitions  seem  always  to  have  been  accompanied  by  a  slightly
abnormal  physical  condition,  noticeable  by  the  percipient  and  his
friends.  This  is  unusual  among  the  hallucinations  reported  to  us,
and  must,  in  so  far  as  there  is  any  reason  to  think  that  the  physical
state  may  be  a  cause  of  the  hallucination  and  not  its  consequence,
be  held  to  support  the  view  that  the  apparition  is  purely  subjective.

Summing  up  the  results  of  this  chapter,  we  have  found  that  the
distribution  of  recognised  apparitions  before,  at,  and  after  the  death
of  the  person  seen  affords  some  argument  for  the  continuity  of  psychical
life  and  the  possibility  of  communication  from  the  dead.  We  have
found  further  that  the  Census  affords  some  remarkable  cases  which
2)rimd  facie  are  not  purely  subjective,  and  which  suggest  the  action
of  the  dead.  The  amount  of  evidence,  however,  does  not  appear  to  us
in  itself  sufficient  to  constitute  anything  like  a  conclusive  case  for  2^ost
mortem  agency.


Conclusion.

"With  the  discussion  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead  we  may  regard  our
task  as  terminated.  For  the  extent  to  which  we  have  taxed  the
patience  of  our  readers  we  must  plead  as  an  excuse  our  wish  not  only
to  inform  them  of  the  views  to  which  we  have  been  led  by  the
examination  of  our  voluminous  returns,  but  also  to  lay  before  them,
adequately  if  not  completely,  the  evidence  on  which  those  views  have
been  founded.  Before  concluding,  it  may  be  convenient  that  we
should  retrace  briefly  the  plan  and  course  of  our  pi'otracted  discussion.
We  began  by  explaining  the  point  of  view  and  method  of  our  enquiry,
and  estimating  as  impartially  as  we  could  the  effects  of  possible


XVII.]


Conclusion.


393


■sources  of  error  in  its  tabulated  results.  Then,  in  what  we  may  call
the  second  part  of  the  Report — Chapters  IV.  to  XI.  inclusive — we
have  examined  the  light  thrown  hy  our  returns  on  the  main
characteristics  of  spontaneous  sensory  hallucinations,  and  on  the
mental  and  physical  conditions  favourable  to  their  occurrence.

The  remainder  of  our  Report  has  been  occupied  with  those  among
the  hallucinations  reported  to  us  whose  characteristics  may  be  thought
to  suggest  an  origin  not  purely  subjective  ;  and  especially  those  which
afford  evidence  for  telepathy.  Among  these  the  most  important  class
is  dealt  with  in  Chapters  XII.  and  XIII., — namely,  apparitions  which
'Coincide  in  time  with  the  death  of  the  person  seen.  These  are  the
most  important,  because  they  are  the  most  numerous,  and  because  they
•alford  the  means  of  estimating  precisely  the  improbability  of  explana-
tion by  chance.  We  have  shown  that — after  making  the  most  ample
-allowance  for  all  ascertainable  sources  of  error — the  number  of  these
experiences  remains  far  greater  than  the  hypothesis  of  chance-
coincidence  will  account  for ;  thus  confirming  the  conclusions  already
arrived  at  by  Mr.  Gurney  \i\  PJiantasms  of  the  Living  (Chapter  XIII.).

In  Chaj)ter  XII.  we  have  given  a  selection  of  the  cases  on  which
our  calculation  is  based,  in  order  to  enable  the  reader  to  judge  of
their  evidential  quality.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  been  careful  to
■explain  that  this  quality  is  very  various,  as  inevitably  follows  from  the
method  of  collection  ;  since  the  answers  to  a  comprehensive  statistical
enquiry  into  these  experiences  naturally  includes,  along  with  coinci-
dences carefully  observed,  a  number  of  cases  of  real  or  alleged
coincidence  in  which  the  observation  has  been  less  careful  and  the
report  accordingly  less  conclusive.

In  Chapter  XIV.  we  have  presented  the  further  evidence  for
telepathy  afforded  by  cases  in  which  the  improbability  of  chance
coincidence  does  not  admit  of  the  same  exact  calculation  as  that
discussed  in  Chapter  XII.  ;  although  their  cumulative  force,  in  any
fair  estimate  of  the  whole  evidence,  must  be  regarded  as  considerable.

In  Chapter  XV.  we  have  discussed  a  class  of  experiences  difficult
to  explain  but  of  great  theoretical  intei'est — collective  hallucinations.
"We  do  not  present  these  as  adding  material  support  to  the  evidence
for  telepathy  ;  but  we  think  that,  if  telejoathy  be  admitted  as  a  vera
causa,  it  affords  in  many  cases  the  most  probable  explanation  of  them.

Then,  in  Chapter  XVI.,  we  have  entered  on  still  more  dtibious
ground.  After  briefly  dealing  with  the  comparatively  slight  amount
of  evidence  for  premonitory  hallucinations  which  our  Census  affords,  we
passed  to  consider  the  more  numerous  cases  of  so-called  "  hauntings."
We  have  endeavoured  to  estimate  impartially,  and  illustrate  by  the
most  noteworthy  cases  in  the  Census,  the  evidence  tending  to  connect
the  seeing  of  apparitions  with  certain  localities  ;  but  we  have  not


394  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.

found  any  strong  reasons  for  attributing  phenomena  of  this  kind  to>
the  agency  of  the  dead.

Stronger  arguments,  however,  for  accepting  the  possibility  of
communication  from  the  dead  to  the  living  may  be  drawn  from  other
cases  included  in  our  returns ;  accordingly,  in  the  final  Chapter
(XVII.)  we  have  given  careful  consideration  to  these  arguments,
although  we  do  not  regard  them  as  in  themselves  conclusive.  We  have-
endeavoured  to  estimate  the  kind  and  degree  of  support  that  the
hypothesis  of  such  communication  appears  to  us  to  obtain  from  our
statistics  as  to  the  grouping  of  hallucinations  about  the  crisis  of  death  :
and  we  have  further  laid  before  the  reader  the  isolated  cases  which
suggest  the  conveyance  of  information  from  the  dead.

In  conclusion,  we  hope  that  our  repoit  will  afford  information  of
some  value  on  several  questions  relating  to  the  casual  hallucinations
of  sane  and  healthy  persons.  But  undoubtedly  the  most  important
part  of  our  work  lies  in  the  corroboration  (in  Chapters  XII.  and  XIII.),,
on  a  much  wider  basis,  of  the  conclusion  already  drawn  by  Mr.  Gurney
from  his  Census  in  1885.  Betiveen  deaths  and  apparitions  of  the  dying
jjerson  a  connexion  exists  tahich  is  not  due  to  chalice  alone.  This  we
hold  as  a  proved  fact.  The  discussion  of  its  full  implications  cannot
be  attempted  in  this  paper  ; — ^nor  perhaps,  exhausted  in  this  age.

Heney  Sidgwick.

Alice  Johnson.

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.  ^

Frank  Podmore.

Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick.

The  lamented  death  of  the  remaining  member  of  the  Committee —
Dr.  A.  T.  Myers —  deprived  us  of  his  help  in  the  composition  of  the
report ;  but  he  had  been  present  at  all  the  early  meetings  of  the
Committee,  and  had  been  able  to  consider  in  particular  the  evidence
furnished  by  the  Census  as  to  the  possible  influence  of  ill-health  in
causing  hallucinations,  and  to  give  advice  with  regard  to  the  treatment
of  this  subject  in  the  Report.


1  See  A  proj)osed  scheme  of  Apparitions,  by  Mr.  Myers,  Appendix  6 .,  p.  415.


Contents.


395


CONTENTS.


Chapter  I. — Introductory.  The  enquiiy,  begun  in  1889,  was  approved
by  the  Paris  International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology,  which
entrusted  it  to  Professor  Sidgwick's  direction.  Explanation  of  plan  of
Report.  Previous  evidence  for  telepathy  collected  by  the  S.P.R.  of  two
kinds, — experimental  and  spontaneous  cases  :  a  link  between  these  types  is^
furnished  by  experimental  apparitions.  Since  "non-coincidental"  as  well
as  "  coincidental  "  or  "  veridical  "  apparitions  occur,  it  is  necessary  to  find
the  proportion  of  one  kind  of  case  to  the  other,  in  order  to  test  whether
the  number  of  coincidences  is  more  than  chance  would  produce.  The
attempt  was  first  made  by  Mr.  Gurney  :  tlie  present  enquiry  is  a  develop-
ment of  his.  Distribution  of  the  work  among  diflerent  members  t>f  the
Committee. ........... 25 — 32

Chapter  II. — Method  of  Conducting  the  Enquiry,  and  General  Results.
Enquiry  limited  to  sensory  hallucinations  of  certain  kinds  ;  carried  on  by
collecting  answers  to  the  "  Census  question."  Collectors  410  in  number  ;
most  of  the  informants  are  educated  persons, — 17,000  in  number.
Affirmative  answers  in  some  cases  have  to  be  counted  as  negative.  Tables.
Explanation  of  headings  of  Tables  and  of  method  of  counting  the  hallucina-
tions. Explanation  of  estimates  in  Table  XI. .... 33 — 53

Chapter  III. — Discussion  of  the  Trustworthiness  of  our  Results.  Possibility
of  deception.  Whether  refusals  to  answer  the  Census  ciuestion  will  have
affected  the  proportion  of  affirmative  answers  recorded.  Danger  of  selection
of  informants  by  collectors.  Collectors  instructed  to  mark  the  names  of
persons  whose  answers  they  knew  beforehand.  Collections  of  answers  from
complete  unselected  groups  and  comparison  of  these  with  the  whole
collection.  Proportion  of  collectors  wlio  have  had  hallucinations.  Whether-
the  proportion  of  affirmative  answers  is  diminished  by  experiences  having
been  forgotten.  Superficial  forgetfulness  :  this  has  affijcted  auditory  and
tactile  hallucinations  more  than  visual.  Permanent  f(jrgetfulness  shown
by  the  numbers  of  visual  hallucinations  reported  for  recent  periods  being
greater  than  for  remote  periods,  the  numbers  decreasing  systematically  as
the  periods  become  more  remote.  The  numbers  of  doubtfully  hallucinatory
experiences  are  comjDaratively  much  larger  in  the  recent  periods.  Inference^
that  to  obtain  the  true  number  of  visual  hallucinations  experienced  since
the  age  of  10,  the  number  reported  must  be  multiplied  by  some  number
between  4  and  6^.  Auditory  and  tactile  hallucinations  are  forgotten  more
rapidly  than  visual  ones.  What  kinds  of  hallucinations  are  best  remem-
bered, and  most  often  known  beforehand  to  others. . . . 54 — 69

Chapter  IV. — Hallucinations  and  Pseudo-Hallucinations.  Definition  of
sensory  hallucinations  ;  the  distinction  between  them  and  dreams.  Examples,
of  dream-images  jjersisting  into  the  waking  state.  Distinction  between
hallucinations  and  mental  images. Examples  of  fully  externalised  hallucina-


396  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


tions.  Psoudo-liallucinations,  and  incompletely  externalised  hallucinations  ;
examples.  Examples  of  apparitions  seen  in  the  dark  ;  difference  between
them  and  pseudo-hallucinations,  and  further  examples  of  the  latter.
Apparent  illumination  of  real  objects.  Examples  of  "visions,"  incom-
pletely and  completely  externalised.  The  "sense  of  presence,"  sometimes
accompanied  by  non-externalised  visual  images.  Auditory  and  tactile
pseudo-hallucinations;  examples.  Further  examples  of  "visions."  The
power  of  visualising  in  relation  to  hallucinations  and  pseudo-hallucina-
tions 70-93

Chapter  V. — Tlie  Belation  of  Ilhiswns  to  Hallucinations.  Instances  of
illusions.  Possibility  of  mistaking  illusions  for  hallucinations.  Illusions
relatively  frequent  out  of  doors — where  also  mistakes  of  identity  may  occur —
and  in  a  Ijad  liglit.  Examples  of  apparitions  seen  repeatedly  in  the  same
place,  which  may  liave  been  illusions.  Apparitions  recurring  in  the  same
place  which  were  probably  hallucinatory.  Cases  transitional  between
illusions  and  hallucinations.  A  case  of  visions  seen  in  a  carafe  of  water.
Point  de  rephre.  Mr.  Dixey's  experiments  on  the  effects  of  lenses  on  crystal-
visions.  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  experiments  with  a  hypnotised  subject  on  points
de  repere  in  moving  hallucinations.  Many  hallucinations  are  entirely
independent  of  points  de.  repere.  Example  of  a  moving  apparition.  Auditory
illusions  frequent  ;  more  difficult  to  decide  whether  an  experience  is  an
illusion  or  a  hallucination  in  auditory  than  in  visual  cases.  Tactile  illusions  ;
possible  instances.  In  some  bisensory  cases,  illusions  may  be  combined
with  hallucinations  94 — 112

Chapter  VI. — Form  and  Development  of  Hallucinations.  Hallucinations
tend  to  take  familiar  forms  ;  the  great  majority  of  visual  hallucinations
represent  human  beings,  and  more  than  two-fifths  of  these  ai'e  living
persons  known  to  the  percipient.  The  dress  and  movements  of  apparitions
are  also  generally  such  as  the  percipient  is  accustomed  to  see.  Modes
of  appearance  and  disappearance  of  phantoms,  with  examples  ;  examples
of  metamorphoses  ;  of  development  from  a  cloud-like  form  to  a  clearly-
defined  figure  ;  of  a  figure  becoming  transparent  as  it  gradually  disappears.
Description,  with  instances,  of  "  incomjsletely  developed  apparitions": —
•a  transparent  figure ;  shrouded  and  veiled  figures ;  a  figure  with  an  in-
distinct face.  A  case  of  piecemeal  development.  Examples  of  fi'agmentary
fiwures  ;  hallucinations  projected  on  flat  surfaces,  like  pictures  ;  indefinite
forms  ;  lights.  Symbolic  forms  of  hallucinations.  Apijaritions  of  animals,
and  of  inanimate  objects.  Religious  phantasms.  Deferred  recognition.
A  case  of  double  recognition.  Auditory  and  tactile  hallucinations  more
rarely  reported  than  visual,  but  partly,  at  least,  because  they  are  more
forgotten.  They  are  much  less  impressive;  e.g.,  many  cases  of  hearing
name  called  ;  but  sometimes  an  apparition  is  combined  with  a  voice.
Instances  of  tactile  hallucinations  113 — 133

Chapter  VII. — Physiology  of  Hullucithations.  No  attempt  made  to
discuss  the  physiological  processes  involved  in  veridical  hallucinations  as
.such. Hallucinations may sometimes  be  initiated  by  the  condition  of


Contents,


397


the  sense-organs  ;  e.g.,  the  very  rare  ones  that  move  with  the  eyes;  and
those  that  occur  during  diseases  of  the  sense-organs  ;  no  evidence  of
such  an  origin  in  the  great  majority  of  our  cases,  which  are  probably
cerebral  in  origin.  It  has  been  suggested  that,  in  the  case  of  hallucmations
centrally  initiated,  there  may  be  a  downward  sensory  impulse,  through  which
the  sense-organs  are  involved.  The  view  rests  chiefly  on  cases  where  halluci-
nations resenible  retinal  after-images, — positive  or  negative.  Examjjles  of
hallucinations  resembling  i^ositive  after-images.  When  the  hallucination
occurs  some  time  after  the  object  which  it  reproduces  was  seen,  it  is  especi-
ally improbable  that  the  retina  is  concerned.  Examples  of  hallucinations
reproducing  objects  seen  many  yeai-s  before  and  almost  or  quite  forgotten.
Hallucinations  resembling  negative  after-images.  Binet  and  Fere's  experi-
ments in  induced  hallucinations  of  colour,  followed  spontaneously  by
hallucinations  of  the  complementary  colour.  Dream-images  persisting  with
complementary  colours.  Gorham's  experiments  show  that  effects  which
appear  to  be  produced  on  the  retina  may  be  purely  cerebral.  This  is  con-
firmed by  "  Miss  X. 's"  crystal-visions,  where  one  picture  was  followed  by
another,  of  a  complementary  colour  but  diflerent  form  ;  or  a  mere  desire  for
change  was  followed  by  the  appearance  of  the  complementary  colour.
The  physiological  action  involved  in  most  hallucinations  is  probably
exclusively  cerebral.  ........ 13-4 — 148

Chapter  VIII. — Aye,  Sex,  Heredity,  Nationality,  and  Health.  Recurrent
Hallucinations.  Hallucinations  may  occur  at  any  age  ;  seem  to  be  relatively
most  frequent  between  20  and  30.  Hallucinations  of  grotesque  or  fanciful
objects  rare  with  adults,  not  unfrequent  with  children.  Examples  of  cases
experienced  by  children.  Women  experience  more  hallucinations  than  men,
or  at  all  events  remember  them  better.  The  disproijortion  is  less  in  the
veridical  cases.  Galton's  results  as  to  variations  of  visualising  power  in
different  sexes  and  ages.  Evidence  that  hallucinations  tend  to  run  in  families,
and  then  sometimes  tend  to  take  similar  forms ;  examples.  Foreign  informants
report  larger  proportion  of  hallucinations  than  English,  also  larger  projjor-
tion  of  bisensory  cases.  Reports  as  to  health  of  percipients  at  time  of  their
experiences.  A  certain  degree  of  ill-health  reported  in  rather  over  7  per
cent,  of  the  cases  included  in  the  Tables.  Examples  of  hallucinations
occurring  during  ill-health.  Number  of  persons  who  have  had  more  tlian
one  hallucination.  Recurring  hallucinations,  in  which  tlie  same  form  is
repeated  several  times. ........ 149 — 165

Chapter  IX. — Mentcd  and  Nervous  Conditions  in  connection  u-ith  Hallu-
cinations. Hallucinations  sometimes  occur  during  a  state  of  nervous
overstrain ;  examples.  Efi'ect  of  emotion.  Anxiety,  grief,  or  trouble
reported  in  nearly  14  per  cent,  of  the  cases  ;  but  not  easy  to  separate  from
other  possible  causes.  Some  instances  given  of  hallucinations  occurring
during  emotional  conditions  with  which  they  are  obviously  connected.
Repose  and  abstraction  favour  hallucinations  ;  a  large  proportion  occur  in
bed,  and  many  soon  after  waking, — sometimes  apparently  caused  by  pre-
ceding dream-impressions  :  examples.  Hallucinations  occur  more  m  solitude
than  in  company.  166 — 173


398  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


Chapter  X. — Expectancy  and  Suggedion.  Example  of  apparition  of
person  whose  arrival  was  expected.  Cases  where  the  expectation  has  been
aroused  through  seances.  Suggestions  by  word  or  gesture  from  the  other
persons  present  ;  examples.  Effect  of  noises  in  producing  hallucinations  ;
examples  of  probable  and  possible  cases.  In  some  cases  where  apparitions
are  preceded  by  sounds  supposed  to  be  hallucinatory,  the  sounds,  which
may  cause  the  sights  by  creating  expectancy,  may  be  real — especially  when
they  are  heard  by  more  than  one  person  ;  example.  Reference  to  experiences
of  "  coloured  audition  "  which  sometimes  assume  a  hallucinatory  form.
Examples  of  other  slight  impressions  leading  to  hallucinations.  The  opera-
tion of  suggestion  in  the  working  out  of  hallucinations  ;  examples  of  reflection
in  mirrors  ;  of  a^Dparitions  casting  shadows.  Hallucinatory  vision  generally
affected  by  physical  conditions  which  affect  real  vision ;  example.  Comparison
with  cases  of  hypnotic  hallucinations.  Apparent  effects  on  real  objects  pro-
duced by  apparitions  ;  instances.  Hallucinations  affecting  more  than  one
sense,  one  percept  leading  on  to  another ;  example.  Sometimes  the  appeal  to
other  senses  is  observed  to  fail  ;  example.  In  some  bisensory  cases,  the
connection  between  the  two  elements  of  the  perception  is  not  very
close.  Example  of  verbal  suggestion  from  an  apparition  producing  a
second  visual  hallucination.  Example  of  suggestion  from  an  apparition
as  to  the  ceasing  of  a  persistent  hallucination.  Example  of  sequent
hallucinations. .  174—197

Chapter  XI. — Organic  Effects  cwcuinpanying  Halluchudions.  Operation
of  suggestion  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  in  considering  these.  Examples
and  discussion  of  cases  where  a  "cold  shudder"  is  reported  to  precede  or
accompany  hallucinations.  Example  of  hallucination  accompanied  by
sensations  as  of  electric  shocks.  Cases  where  fainting  occurs.  Pain
resulting  from  hallucinatory  touches  ;  examjales.  Other  physical  effects.
Marks  produced  on  percipient  resembling  those  that  would  have  been
produced  by  pressure  of  fingers  ;  example  :  compared  with  effects  of
hypnotic  suggestion. ........  198—206

Chapter  XII.  —  Dcath-Ooincidences.  In  this  chapter  we  enter  on  the
consideration  of  the  evidence  for  telepathy  afforded  by  the  Census.  The
main  object  of  the  enquiry  was  to  decide  whether  the  number  of  hallucinations
prima  facie  telepathic  is  more  than  chance  will  account  for  or  not.  Evidence
for  veridicality  may  be  of  three  kinds  :  coincidence,  conveyance  of  unknown
information,  and  collectivity.  The  discussion  in  this  chapter  is  confined  to
"death-coincidences,"  i.e.,  cases  of  recognised  ajiparitions  occurring  within
12  hours  of  the  death  of  the  person  represented,  the  death  being  unknown
to  the  percipient  at  the  time.  There  are  80  first-hand  cases  rejaorted  as
death-coincidences  in  the  Census  ;  by  excluding  certain  types,  these  are
reduced  to  65.  Of  these,  19  were  known  beforehand  to  the  collectors,  and
there  is  reason  to  suspect  that  3  of  the  19  were  specially  selected.  Deducting
these  3,  62  alleged  death-coincidences  remain.  Twenty-six  examples  of  these
are  given.  The  number  of  cases,  veridical  and  other,  in  which  it  is  reported
that  notes  were  made  and  the  proportion  of  notes  preserved  are  discussed.
Evidence  that  in  some  of  the  62  cases  the  closeness  of  coincidence  has  been


Contents.


399


'exaggerated  is  shown  to  be  afforded  by  the  cases  reported  for  remoter
periods  being  too  numerous  in  proportion  to  the  recent  ones.  From  this
we  infer  that  the  whole  number  may  more  safely  be  estimated  at  40  (instead
•of  62),  and  an  allowance  for  possibly  undetected  selection  further  reduces  to
32  the  number  which  we  decide  to  count  in  the  calculation  of  the  next
Chapter.  The  extent  to  which  members  of  the  Committee  have  had  j)ersonal
interviews  with  the  percipients  is  explained. .... 207 — 244

Chapter  XIII. — GJiance  Coincidence.  The  probability  that  any  one
will  die  on  a  given  day, — e.g.,  that  on  which  his  apparition  is  seen, — is  1  in
19,000.  The  number  of  apparitions  of  living  persons  reported  in  the  Census
is  381 ;  by  excluding  cases  of  a  type  already  excluded  from  death-coincidences,
these  are  reduced  to  350.  Since  there  is  no  evidence  that  death-coincidences
are  forgotten,  we  do  not  apply  the  correction  for  oblivion,  as  calculated  in
Chapter  III.,  to  them.  Applying  it  to  the  whole  number  of  apparitions  of
living  persons,  and  deducting  from  hoth  sides  cases  whose  hallucinatory
■character  is  doubtful,  we  have  30  death -coincidences  in  about  1,300  cases,
•or  1  in  43, — that  is,  440  times  the  number  that  chance  would  ]3roduce.
Or,  if  reported  cases  whose  hallucinatory  character  is  doubtful  are  included,
1  in  65.  But  the  interval  between  death  and  apparition  is,  in  most  cases,
much  less  than  12  hours,  which  greatly  increases  the  improbability  of  chance
■coincidence.  The  evidence  for  the  death-coincidences  must  break  down  in
a  wholesale  way  in  order  to  destroy  this  argument ;  and  it  is  shown  that
neither  selection  nor  a  state  of  the  percipient  produced  by  his  knowledge
of  the  dying  person's  condition  can  account  for  their  number.  Anxiety
may  facilitate  telepathic  communication,  but  cannot  by  itself  account  for
the  death-coincidences. ........ 245 — 251

Chapter  XIV. — Veridical  Hallucinations  Continned :  Further  Coinci-
dental Cases.  The  three  death-coincidences  excluded  from  Chapters  XII.
and  XIII.  because  they  were  selected.  Other  cases  coinciding  with  deaths  :
examples  of  recognised  voices  ;  example  of  touch  and  mental  impulse  ;
•cases  of  apparitions  of  relatives  of  the  dying  person  ;  cases  of  unrecog-
nised apparitions  ;  example  of  an  indefinite  figure  ;  and  of  an  unrecognised
Toice.  Hallucinations  coinciding  with  other  events  than  death.  Examples
■of  apparitions,  and  of  an  auditory  hallucination,  experimentally  produced.
Examples  of  apparitions  coinciding  with  sudden  or  serious  illness  of  person
represented.  Example  of  case  wliich  may  have  been  a  death-coincidence.
Examples  of  voices  coinciding  with  sudden  attacks  of  illness.  Examples
of  hallucinations  coinciding  with  emotional  states  or  thoughts  of  the  agents.
Example  of  a  possibly  reciprocal  telepathic  impression.  Greater  force
and  insistency  of  telepathic  hallucinations. .... 252 — 302

Chapter  XV. — Collective  Hallucinations.  Ninety-five  out  of  1,087  visual
■cases,  and  34  out  of  493  auditory  cases  are  reported  to  have  been  collective  ;
also  two  tactile  cases.  But  assumption  of  collectivity  is  easily  made  on  in.
sufficient  grounds;  also  the  hallucinatory  character  of  many  cases  is  doubtful.
Examples  of  apparitions  seen  collectively  :  of  a  cat ;  of  recognised  living
and  of  a  recognised  dead  person  ;  of  an  unrecognised  figure  seen  out  of


400


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


doors  ;  of  an  indefinite  figure  ;  of  a  shadowy  form  seen  a  few  hours-,
before  a  death.  Examples  of  collective  auditory  hallucinations  :  of  the  voice-
of  a  dead  person  ;  of  a  voice  coinciding  with  a  death.  Two  examples —
one  coincidental — where  the  two  percipients  have  simultaneous  but  dis-
similar impressions.  Reference  to  other  cases  of  collective  hallucinations
given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  or  since  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.
The  different  kinds  of  hallucinations  are  fairly  represented  among  collective
cases  in  the  Census.  Discussion  of  explanations.  Hypothesis  of  a  basis  of
common  illusion  can  only  cover  a  small  proportion  of  cases.  The  hypothesis
that  both  percipients  are  directly  and  independently  affected  by  an  external
agent, — the  latter  either  being  or  not  being  reciprocally  afiected  himself, — •
is  discussed,  and  reasons  given  why  it  can  at  most  be  of  restricted  application,,
and  why,  even  when  applicable,  the  experiences  of  the  two  percipients  can
seldom  be  independent  of  each  other.  The  phenomenon  is  in  many  respects,
most  easily  explained  by  attributing  it  to  the  influence  of  one  percipient  on
the  other.  This  may  be  by  word  or  gesture,  or  telepathically.  Tliere  is-
more  evidence  that  hallucinations  may  be  induced  by  telepathic  than  by
verbal  suggestion  in  the  normal  condition  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  exclude'
the  agency  of  ordinary  suggestion  in  collective  cases,  and  probably  both
kinds  of  suggestion  are  then  operative,  assisting  each  other.  The  supposed,
sharing  of  hallucinations  by  animals  is  occasionally  reported  ;  from  the  nature-
of  the  case  this  must  be  doubtful.  Examples  where  hallucinations  may  have
been  produced  in  human  percipients  by  suggestion  through  the  action  of
dogs. Other  examples  of  animals  supjjosed  to  see  apparitions. . 303 — 330-

Chapter  XVI. — Premonitions  and  Local  Apimritions.  Cases  of  appari-
tions seen  a  short  time  before  the  death  of  the  person  represented  are  rare,
and  of  doubtful  interpretation.  Example  of  an  apjaarently  premonitory
vision.  Example  of  a  partially  fulfilled  prophecy.  Example  of  an  un-
recognised apparition  seeii  shortly  before  unexpected  illness  of  percipient's
son.  Example  of  a  hallucination  saving  the  percipient  from  danger.  Un-
recognised local  apparitions.  Arguments  for  their  not  being  j^urely  sub-
jective rest  on  apparitions  being  seen  independently  by  more  than  one
person,  and  on  reasons  for  associating  the  apparitions  with  some  deceased
former  inhabitant.  Special  scui'ces  of  error  and  weakness  in  evidence.
About  30  cases  in  Census  afford  prima  facie  some  such  evidence  of  being^
more  than  subjective  ;  in  half,  the  apparition  was  supposed  to  repre-
sent some  dead  person.  Constantly  recurring  noises  form  a  frequent
part  of  the  phenomena  ;  they  may  sometimes  be  ordinary  noises,
misinterpreted,  which  lead  to  the  seeing  of  the  apparitions.  Example
where  noises  were  often  heard  before  apparition  was  seen.  Two  .similar
examples  where  apparitions  were  seen  by  more  than  one  person.
Case  where  the  apparition  was  first  seen  collectively.  Recognised  local
apparitions.  Example  of  phantom  of  a  dead  person  seen  after  unrecognised
figure  had  l)een  seen  by  another  percipient  in  the  same  room.  Example  of
apparition  of  a  dead  person  seen  independently  several  times  by  several
percipients,  one  of  whom  had  another  similar  series  of  experiences.
Example  of  apparition  associated  witli  a  dead  person  seen  by  several  persons.
Example  of  apparitions  of  the  same  living  jjerson  seen  independently  by


Contents.


401


two  percipients.  Example  of  similar  apparitions,  afterwards  associated  with
a  living  person,  seen  in  the  same  house  by  three  percipients. . . 331 — 363

Chapter  XVII. — PJuuitasms  of  tlie  Dead.  This  class  is  less  numerous
than  that  of  phantasms  of  the  living,  and  on  the  whole  more  impressive
to  the  percipient  than  other  phantasms.  They  usually  appear  in  familiar
dress,  etc.  To  prove  the  possibility  of  communication  from  the  dead  to  the
living  would  have  important  influence  on  our  view  of  telepathy  between  the
living.  But  the  recognition  of  telepathy  between  the  living  makes  it  more
difficult  to  prove  the  possibility  of  communication  fi'om  the  dead.  Evidence
from  coincidence  is  only  possible  in  cases  such  as  those  where  the  death  has
taken  place,  but  has  not  been  heard  of  by  the  percipient  ;  while  information
given  by  the  phantasm  may  be  due  to  telepathy  from  a  living  person,  or
to  clairvoyance.  In  considering  the  cases  in  which  the  evidence  for  veridi-
cality  is  coincidence,  the  "  death-coincidences  "  previously  considered  must
he  taken  into  account.  Of  the  80  death-coincidences,  10  are  known  to  have
oceui'red  after  the  death  ;  and  are,  therefore,  strictly  speaking,  coincidental
phantasms  of  the  dead.  Five  examples  of  apparitions  of  dead  persons,
seen  moi'e  than  12  hours  after  the  death,  but  before  the  percipient
knew  of  it ;  in  three  there  are  veridical  features  besides  the  coincidence.
Taking  phantasms  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead  together,  there  is  a  marked
■accumulation  of  cases  about  the  time  of  the  death,  gradually  diminishing
on  each  side  of  it  ;  this  suggests  that  there  is  no  discontinuity  at  death.
The  cases  where  the  percipient  was  unaware  of  the  state  of  the  person
represented  show  that  these  numbers  cannot  be  accounted  for  either  by
anxiety  about  illness  or  by  grief  for  death.  Promises  to  try  to  appear  after
death  are  reported  in  ten  cases  ;  3  of  these  were  death-coincidences,  and
2  occurred  during  fatal  illness  or  after  the  death, — the  state  of  the  person
seen  being  unknown  to  the  percipient  ;  example  of  such  a  case,  in
which  there  was  no  coincidence.  Two  cases  in  which  information  unknown
to  the  pei'cipient  was  conveyed  to  him  by  the  appai'ition.  Example  of  an
apparition  appropriate  to  the  circumstances  of  the  perci2:)ient.  Example  of
corresponding  impressions,  suggesting  agency  of  a  dead  person,  simulta-
neously experienced  by  two  percipients.  Example  of  an  ajjparition  seen
on  the  same  night  by  two  persons  in  different  places.  A  case  in  which
the  percipient  saw  repeatedly  apparitions  of  a  certain  dead  person,  with
some  evidence  of  veridicality. ....... 364 — 392

Conclusion 392—394

Appendix 402 — 422

The  careful  and  comprehensive  work  of  Herr  Edmund  Parish,
Ueher  die  Triigwahrnehimmg  (Hallucination  und  Illusion)  tnit
besonderer  Beriicksichtigung  der  Internationalen  Enquete  iiher
Wachhallucination  hei  Gesunden,^  reached  us  while  this  Report  was
passing  through  the  Press,  and  therefore  too  late  for  us  to  be  able  to
make  any  use  of  it  here.  We  hope  to  notice  it  in  the  next  Part  of  the
J'roceedings.

1  Schriftcn  dcr  Gcscllschaft  fiir  psychologische  Forschung.  Heft  7—8.  Leipzig,  1894.

2  D


402


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


APPENDIX  A.


tSF"  For  explanations  and  instructions  sec  back.-

A. International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology.

QUESTION  TO  BE  ADDRESSED  BY  THE  COLLECTOR  TO
TWENTY-FIVE  PERSONS  OVER  21  YEARS  OF  AGE-THEIR
ANSWERS  BEING  ENTERED  BELOW.


Have  you  ever,  when  believing  yourself  to  be  completely  awake,  had
vivid  impression  of  seeing,  or  being  touched  by  a  living  being  or  inanimat&
object,  or  of  hearing  a  voice  ;  which  impression,  so  far  as  you  could  discover,
was  not  due  to  any  external  physical  cause  ?


Answer
(yes  or
no)


Name  and  Address  of  person
answerina:.


Sex.


Occupation.


10


11


12

13'


14


15


16


17


18

19"


^0
21


22


23


24


25


Date  of  first  answer  entered
Date  of  last  answer  entered


Signature  of  Collector
Address  , ,


:  No  names  or  addresses  will  be  published  without  special  permission.


Aiypendix  A.


403


INTERNATIONAL  CONGRESS  OF  EXPERIMENTAL  PSYCHOLOGY.

SESSION OF  1889.


Sir  or  Madam,

The  International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology,  which  met  in
Paris  for  the  first  time  August  6 — 10,  1889,  resolved,  on  the  Report  of  a
Committee  specially  appointed  to  consider  the  question,  that  a  Census  such
as  that  below  described  should  be  carried  out  in  as  many  countries  of
Europe  as  possible,  and  in  the  United  States  of  America.  Having  been
requested  by  the  Congress  to  take  charge  of  this  enquiry  in  the  United
Kingdom,  I  beg  to  ask  for  your  aid  in  this  important  task.

The  experiences  to  which  the  question  on  tlie  other  side  relates  are  what
Psychologists  generally  would  describe  as  casual  hallucinatious  of  sane
persons  :  but  it  is  desired  to  include  in  this  collection  phantasmal  appear-
ances which  some  percipients  would  deny  to  be  hallucinations  because  they
regard  them  as  presentations  of  spiritual  reality.

The  object  of  our  enquiry  is  (1)  to  ascertain  approximately  the  propor-
tion of  persons  who  have  such  experiences,  and  (2)  to  obtain  details  as  to  the
experiences  with  a  view  to  examining  into  their  cause  and  meaning.

For  the  first  object  it  is  important  th\t  the  question  should  be  very

WIDELY  ASKED  AND  OF  ALL  SORTS  OF  PEOPLE — NOT  ONLY  OF  THOSE  WHO
ARE  THOUGHT  LIKELY  TO  HAVE  HAD  SUCH  AN  EXPERIENCE  OR  OF  THOSE
WHO  ARE  THOUGHT  LIKELY  NOT  TO  HAVE  HAD  IT.  ThE  ANSWER  "  No  "
ABD  THE  ANSWER "  YeS  "  ARE  EQUALLY  IMPORTANT. The  question  should

not,  however,  be  asked  of  persons  who  are  known  to  have  been  at  any  time
insane,  and  it  is  not  intended  to  include  experiences  of  delirium.

It  is  important  not  to  put  down  second  hand  answers — not  to  state  on
the  authority  of  B  that  A  has  or  has  not  had  an  experience  of  the  kind
enquired  into,  but  to  ask  A  himself.  The  name,  address,  sex  and  occupation
of  those  answering  can  be  filled  in  by  yourself  (the  collector)  and  we  shall
be  glad  if  you  will  also  put  a  cross  against  any  answer  known  to  you  before
asking  the  question.  The  question  should  not  be  put  to  persons  under  21
years  of  age,  though  remembered  experiences  which  have  occurred  at  any
age  should  be  included.  In  the  case  of  affirmative  answers  the  age  at  the
time  of  the  exjjerience  should  be  given.

The  experiences  in  question  are  believed  to  be  rather  rare,  so  that  you
will  probably  get  few  and  perhaps  no  answers  "  Yes  "  among  the  25.  It  will,
however,  greatly  assist  us  in  the  second  part  of  our  work — namely,
examining  into  the  nature  of  the  experiences — if,  should  you  receive  the
answer  "Yes,"  you  will  induce  the  person  answering  to  fill  in  schedule  B,  of
which  three  copies  are  sent  with  this,  and  of  which  more  can  be  obtained
from  me.  A  separate  copy  of  schedule  B  sliould  be  used  for  each  person
answering  "  Yes."


404  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


Should  you  find  it  impossible  to  collect  25  answers,  please  return  the
paper  filled  up  as  far  as  you  can.  But  it  is  much  desired  to  obtain  the
answers  in  batches  of  25  if  possible.

I  shall  be  happy  to  give  any  further  information  that  may  seem  to  you
necessary  ;  and  if  you  can  undertake  to  collect  any  further  batches  of  25
answers,  or  know  of  any  one  who  would  do  so,  I  shall  be  glad  to  forward
the  necessary  forms.

I  am,  yours  faithfully,

HENRY  SIDGWICK.

Please  return  this  paper  when  filled  up  to

Professor  Sidgwick,

Cambridge.


B International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology.

FURTHER  QUESTIONS  TO  BE  ADDRESSED  TO  ANY  PERSON
ANSWERING  YES  TO  THE  QUESTION  OF  SCHEDULE  A.
Namely  : — Have  you  ever,  when  believing  yourself  to  be  completely
awake,  had  a  vivid  impression  of  seeing,  or  being  touched  by  a  living
being,  or  inanimate  object,  or  of  hearing  a  voice  ;  wliich  impression,  so
far  as  you  could  discover,  was  not  due  to  any  external  physical  cause  1


1.  Please  state  what  you  saw  or  heard  or  felt,  and  give  the  place,  date

and  hour  of  the  experience  as  nearly  as  you  can.

2.  How  were  you  occupied  at  the  time,  and  were  you  out  of  health  or

in  grief  or  anxiety  ? What  was  your  age  ?

3.  Was  the  impression  that  of  some  one  whom  you  were  in  the  habit  of

seeing,  and  do  you  know  what  he  or  she  was  doing  at  the  timel

4.  Were  there  other  persons  present  with  you  at  the  time,  and  if  so

did  they  in  any  way  share  the  experience  ?

5.  Please  state  whether  you  have  had  such  an  experience  more  than

once,  and  if  so  give  particulars  of  the  different  occasions.

6.  Any  notes  taken  at  the  time,  or  other  information  about  the  ex-

periences will  be  gratefully  received.

Signature  —

Address  _ _

Date^ •


No  names  op  addresses  will  be  published  without  special  permission.


Appendix  B.  405
APPENDIX  B.i


Table  showing  through  what  means  the  Collectors  loere  obtained.


Number  of
Collectors.

Number  of

answers
obtained  by
them.

Belonging  to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research
Obtained  through  Members  of  the  Society
Obtained  through  articles  in  periodicals  and  )

lectures  given  on  the  Census  ... ...  J

Miss  Porter  and  her  sub-collectors

Mrs.  Dent  and  her  sub-collectors

Obtained  through  schedules  distributed  by  the  \

Revieiv  of  Reviews ... ... ...  )

Obtained  in  various  other  ways

1302
70

3G

35
12

40

87

1480

1285
1185

930

410

Among  collectors  to  whom  we  are  specially  indebted,  we  must  mention
Mrs.  Dent,  of  Sudeley  Castle,  Winchcombe,  (iloucestershire,  who  obtained
personally  very  nearly  900  answers  (a  larger  number  than  was  obtained  by
any  other  individual  collector),  besides  those  added  by  her  sub-collectors ;  and
Miss  Bertha  Porter,  whose  previous  exjierience  in  working  for  Mr.  Gurney's
Census,  together  with  her  familiarity  with  the  work  of  the  S.  P.  R.  in  general,
has  made  her  assistance  of  special  value,  both  as  regards  her  own  contribu-
tions and  the  sub- collectors  who  were  carefully  instructed  by  her.

The  answers  obtained  from  Russians  (see  Table  IX.,  p.  48)  were  chiefly
collected  by  Mr.  A.  AksakofF  and  friends  working  under  him,  whose  collec-
tions he  superintended.  He  also  translated  the  original  accounts — mostly
given  in  Russian — into  French.  All  the  Brazilian  answers  were  obtained
personally  by  Professor  Alexander,  and  in  this  case  also  a  good  deal  of  extra
labour  was  involved  in  the  translation  of  the  original  accounts  into  English.
In  these  foreign  cases,  we  were,  of  course,  unable  to  make  the  personal
enquiries  that  were  often  possible  with  English  informants  ;  but  our  two
chief  collectors,  having  a  special  acquaintance  with  the  questions  at  issue,
obtained  additional  information  and  corroboration  as  far  as  possible.

Statvs  and  Professions  of  the  Collectors.
As  already  stated,  about  nine-tenths  of  the  410  collectors  are  persons
educated  up  to  the  standard  of  the  professional  classes.  Fourteen  of  them
have  had  systematic  training  in  psychology.  Those  whose  occupations  are
known  to  us  include  :  medical  (22)  ;  clerical  (20)  ;  engaged  in  University  or
educational  work  (82)  ;  elementary  school  teachers  (3)  ;  Army  and  Navy  (10) ;
Civil  Service, — Upper  Divisions  (10)  ;  Civil  Service, — Lower  Divisions  (9)  ;
other  clerks  (12)  ;  Law  (6)  ;  artistic  (7)  ;  social  work  (7) ;  engaged  in  litera-
ture and  journalism  (11)  ;  merchants  and  manufacturers,  etc.  (13)  ;  retail
traders  (8)  ;  coastguards  (5).

1  See  pp.  34-35.

-  Besides  these,  8  members  of  the  S.P.R.  are  included  under  some  of  the  other
headings.


406  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.

APPENDIX  C.i

Classification  of  cases  where  persons  ansivering  '■''yes"  to  the  Census  question
have  heen  connted  as  answering  ''''no."


(i)  Experiences  which  clearly  do  not  come  within  the  scope  of  the
question.


Kind  of  Experiences.

Number  of  percipients.

Men.

Women

Total.

Noises  not  suggestive  of  human  voices

Hallucinations  of  smell

Dreams...

Experiences  in  a  half  waking  state...
Sense  of  an  invisible  presence
Non-sensory  mental  impressions  or  motor)

impulses  ... ... ... ...  /

Information  received  from  a  medium
Physical  phenomena  at  spiritistic  seances  ...
Real  events,  regarded  as  omens ;  or  move- )

ments  of  real  objects,  unaccounted  for /
Experiences of friends of the  person  \

answering ... ... ...  /

66
1

X

8

10

6

21

1

6

10
1

148
2

9
5
18

20

1

3

12
5

214

3

17
15
24

41

2
9

22
6

130

223

353

(ii)  Experiences  of  doubtful  kinds,  which  we  have  excluded  from  the
Tables.


Kind  of  E.xperiences.


Hallucinations  occurring  during  illness  ...
Persistent  dream-images  and  night-mares
Voices  awakening  the  percipient  from  sleeji
Touches ,,  ,,  ,,

Visions  seen  with  closed  eyes
Illusions  Jiypnagogiques
Apparent  illumination  of  real  objects
Sounds  as  of  human  voices,  but  inarticulate
Indefinite tactile impressions, not  in-"\

volving  a  sense  of  contact ...  /

Lights  seen  out  of  doors  ...

Visions  of  objects  outside  the  field  of)

distinct  vision ... ... ...  j

Visual  impressions  not  fully  externalised

Auditory

Illusions

Cases  probably  of  mistaken  identity
Experiences  described  as  too  vague  to  be)
defined ... ... ... ...  /


Number  of  percipients.


Men.

Women.

Total.

8

10

18

2

5

7

4

10

14

2

5

7

2

1

3

1

3

4

6

5

11

9

15

24

5

5

10

2

7

9

3

2

5

5

6

11

1

3

4

8

6

14

7

11

18

3

7

10

68

101

169

1  See  pp.  3fi— 37.


Ap2:)endix  D.


407


APPENDIX  D.


Account  given,  by  Mrs.  D.  of  her  hallucinatory  experiences,
Mrs.  D.  writes  : —

January  7th,  1891.

"  From  a  very  early  age  I  have  been  subject  to  hallucinations  of  both
sight  and  sound.  I  first  became  aware  that  my  eyes  and  ears  could  deceive
me  when  about  18  ;  up  to  that  time,  and  in  childhood,  I  no  doubt  suffered  a
great  deal  from  ignorance  of  this  fact.  Since  the  age  of  18  I  have  carefully
watched  myself  and  these  illusions,  so  that  I  can  give  an  exact  account  of
several.  I  have  been  able  to  make  clear  to  myself  that,  in  my  case,  there  is
a  distinct  connection  between  them  and  trouble  of  some  sort  at  the  nervous
centres  ;  that  they  are  most  vivid  when  physical  exhaustion  is  accompanied
by  nervous  excitement ;  and  that  the  will  can — when  once  attention  is
aroused — have  a  great  deal  to  say  in  controlling  or  increasing  these  halluci-
nations. The  visual  illusions  have  been  of  animals,  human  beings— servants
and  friends, — and  in  one  instance  a  hideous  apparition  of  monstrous  size  ;
{the  auditory]  of  hearing  voices  and  musical  sounds."

The  following  complete  account,  sent  in  answer  to  our  request  for
further  details,  was  enclosed  in  a  letter  dated  February  19th,  1891.

"  (1)  The  first  hallucination  of  which  I  can  give  an  exact  account  occurred
to  me  at  the  age  of  five  or  six.  I  woke,  shortly  after  going  to  sleep,  in  a
dark  room,  and  saw  a  great  patch  of  brilliant  light,  and  in  the  light  the  figures
-of  two  or  more  angels  bending  towards  me.  The  vision  was  a  great  delight  to
me,  I  being  a  very  devout  child.  The  incredulity  with  which  my  account
of  it  was  received  by  my  elders  I  tried  to  meet  by  giving  details, — such  as
that  '  the  angels  wore  blue  boots, ' — which,  of  course,  provoked  a  ridicule
which  taught  me  to  keep  silence  ;  but  such  details  serve  to  show  that  the
vision  was  perfectly  distinct  in  all  its  fiarts.

"  As  I  grew  up,  every  now  and  then  I  made  statements  as  to  servants
or  friends  having  done  things,  or  having  been  in  places,  the  truth  of  which
they  denied.  I  was  punished  for  'lying'  or  'inventing,'  as  I  believed,
unjustly.  In  the  light  of  later  experiences,  I  have  now  no  doubt  that  I  was
frequently  the  subject  of  hallucinations.

' '  (2)  The  first  which  I  was  in  a  position  clearly  to  recognise  as  such
occurred  during  the  Indian  Mutiny.  Several  members  of  our  family  were  in
danger.  One  night,  on  which  we  had  all  been  talking  late  of  them,  after  we
had  parted  and  gone  upstairs  to  bed,  I  stood  before  my  dressing-table  plaiting
my  hair,  when  my  attention  was  arrested  by  a  faint  spot  in  the  centre  of  the
mirror  ;  this  to  my  amazement  gradually  enlarged  (as  a  grease  spot  spreads
with  heat)  till  the  whole  surface  was  covered,  and  then, — in  the  centre  of
this  veil, — came  through  the  face  of  one  of  the  near  relatives  above  men-
tioned, as  plain  as  might  have  been  his  living  reflexion.  To  a  moment  of
spell-bound  fascination  succeeded  frantic  terror,  and  I  rushed  out  of  ray
room.  There  was,  however,  no  one  I  dared  tell.  My  father  would  have
admonished  me  not  to  be  a  fool ;  as  for  my  mother,  then  in  delicate  health,
I  could  not  venture  to  name  such  a  matter  to  her — the  ajjpearance  having  been


408


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


that  of  her  only  son.  I  noted,  however,  the  day  and  hour,  and  ascertained,,
six  weeks  later,  that  the  relative  seen  had  incurred  no  sort  of  danger  at  that
date,  but  was  in  comfortable  quarters,  in  conditions  of  ordinary  safety,  far
from  the  scenes  of  disturbance.

"  (3)  From  the  next  instance  to  which  I  will  refer  dates  the  period  since'
which  I  have  observed  myself  and  these  hallucinations.  I  was  about  nine-
teen or  twenty.  I  had  been  overworking,  it  was  late,  and  I  was  dressing  for
dinner  both  tired  and  hungry.  I  stooped  to  take  my  slippers  from  the  floor,,
and  as  I  did  so,  a  large  gray  rat  jumped  from  tlie  folds  of  my  petticoats  and
ran  across  the  room.  I  had  no  doubt  at  the  moment  of  its  reality,  and  main-
tained its  actual  existence  in  spite  of  all  the  household  ;  but  a  little  while
afterwards  I  saw  my  gray  rat  again,  and  after  pursuing  him  into  a  corner  put
a  stick  through  him,  for  which  he  was  none  the  worse.  This  circumstance  caused
me  to  watch  carefully  for  any  repetition  of  a  similar  illusion.  At  various
intervals,  for  the  next  three  or  four  years,  the  same  apparition, — varied  by  the
apparition  of  a  cat,  sometimes  gray  and  more  rarely  black, — continued  to
trouble  me.  At  this  period,  1864,  I  began  to  be  more  or  less  subject  tO'
neuralgia  in  the  right  side  of  the  head.

"  (4)  In  the  winter  of  1866  I  was  still  suffering  in  this  way. One  Sunday
evening,  I  had  given  special  permission  to  a  man-servant  to  absent  himself
out  of  his  turn  ;  going  into  the  dining-room  to  fetch  a  biscuit,  I  stood  at  the
sideboard  with  my  back  to  the  fiie,  which  was  blazing  brilliantly,  when  I  was
startled  to  hear  some  one  poking  it  violently,  as  I  had  seen  no  one  when  I
entered  the  room  ;  turning  round  I  found  that  the  servant  to  whom  I  had
given  leave  of  absence  was  standing  on  the  hearthrug,  having  the  poker
still  in  his  hand. At  my  movement  he  turned,  and  I  thought  looked  rather
surprised. It  occurred  to  me  that  some  small  tyranny  had  deprived  him  of
his  outing,  so  T  made  en(|uiry,  from  which  it  was  established  that  at  th&
time  at  which  I  saw  him  in  the  dining-room,  he  was  in  his  seat  in  church,
his  presence  there  being  fully  attested  by  other  members  of  the  family.
No  one  was  in  the  house  at  the  time  of  his  apparition  excejjt  myself  and  a.
woman  servant. Tlie  appearance  on  this  occasion  being  perfectly  natural,,
there  was  nothing  which  at  the  time  led  me  to  examine  it  closely.

"(5)  Abovit  a  month  later,  the  neuralgia,  from  which  I  continued  to-
sufFer  frequently,  ))ecame  occasionally  severe.  I  was  writing  alone  in  the
library  late  in  the  afternoon,  the  lamps  were  lighted,  and  every  coi'ner  of
the  room  and  of  a  further  room,  the  door  into  which  stood  open,  was  per-
fectly clear.  The  pain  becoming  acute,  I  got  up  and  began  to  pace  up  and
down  from  door  to  door.  I  had  done  this  several  times,  when,  as  I  turned
and  faced  the  open  door  of  the  further  room,  I  .saw  standing  against  it  a
figure  of  supernatural  height,  entirely  draped  in  vvhite  ;  the  face  only  was
fully  exposed,  and  was  covered  with  blood  which  dripped  on  the  garments.
The  shock  for  the  instant  was  horrible.  Then  I  determined  to  be  clear  about
tliis  thing.  First  I  shut  my  eyes  and  observed — what  I  had  promised  a
doctor  to  observe — namely,  whether  or  no  I  saw  the  apjjarition  when  my
eyes  were  shut  ;  he  had  believed  that  I  should,  but  I  am  quite  certain  I  did
not.  Next,  I  opened  them  and  looked  ;  it  was  fully  over  six  feet,  and
leaned,  rather  than  stood,  against  the  door,  the  colour  of  which  (though
white)  was  dark  against  the  whiteness  of  its  draperies. The  draperies  were


Ap'pendix  D.


409'


cotton,  or  linen,  and  one  hand,  the  left,  nuiffled  in  them,  rested  on  the  top-
of  the  door.  The  face,  smeared  with  blood,  had  an  expression  of  great
agony.  I  shut  my  eyes  again,  opened  them,  saw  it  much  less  distinctly  as
a  man  of  white  streaked  with  scarlet,  resolved  to  walk  to  it,  but  in  two
steps  it  was  gone  as  instantaneously  as  it  had  come.  In  this  instance,  again,
I  failed  to  trace  any  sort  of  connection  between  the  form  I  saw  and  anything
which  I  had  read,  or  heard,  or  seen  at  any  time  previous.

"  Here  I  should  mention  that  a  careful  examination,  later  in  the  year,
showed  that  the  neuralgia,  from  which  I  had  been  suffering  for  so  many
years,  had  been  provoked  in  the  part  of  the  head  in  which  it  showed
itself  by  the  enlargement  of  a  tooth  which  pressed  on  a  nerve.  This  matter
was  duly  attended  to  and  I  ceased  to  suffer  from  acute  pain  in  the  temple,
but  when  overworked  was  frequently  liable  to  attacks  of  a  less  acute  kind
in  the  knee  and  hip,  which  invariably  indicated  over-fatigue  of  mind  or-
body.

"  (6)  At  a  later  period  I  was  nursing  a  member  of  my  family  suffermg
from  an  infectious  disease,  the  course  of  which  had  already  taken  a  favour-
able turn,  when,  on  going  to  the  bedroom,  early  one  morning,  I  saw  a  large
half-bred  black  retriever  sitting  in  an  angle  of  the  stairs.  I  sent  a  servant
down  and  ascertained  there  was  no  dog  there,  but  continued  to  see  it,  and
at  last  it  became  a  fear  to  me  to  pass  the  landing  fiom  which  I  saw  it,  and  I
avoided  going  down  the  stairs.  During  the  visitations  of  the  black  dog,  it
was  always  visible  in  the  corner  of  the  stairs  whenever  I  looked  at  the
place.  It  never  changed  its  position;  and  in  the  end,  one  night,  feeling
very  ill,  I  fainted  on  the  stairs,  having  sickened  with  the  same  disease.

"  I  had  noted  the  day  on  which  the  apparition  of  the  dog  began;  it  was-
between  four  and  five  days  after,  according  to  the  usual  calculation,  I  had
begun  to  sicken  with  the  malady.  The  duration  of  this  hallucination  dis-
tinguishes it  from  others  which  I  have  had  when  seriously  ill,  and  which  may
have  been  of  the  nature  of  delirium,  and  which  I  will  not,  therefore,
recapitulate  here.

"  (7)  I  will  go  on  to  mention  the  only  apparition  which  I  have  seen  out
of  doors  and  in  full  day.  I  was  in  the  Highlands  for  my  health;  the  whole
party  (of  which  I  was  one)  had  decided  at  breakfast  on  making  an  expedition
which  was  to  occupy  the  day.  I  remained  at  home  resting,  till,  after  lunch,
I  started  on  a  long  solitary  ride,  in  the  opposite  direction  to  that  by  which
the  others  would  return.  About  five  o'clock,  in  an  August  afternoon,  I
turned  back  along  the  Pitlochry  road.  I  was  walking  my  horse  slowly,  I  had
lifted  my  veil  in  order  to  look  at  the  moors,  and  I  was  not  thinking  of  any
human  being  :  I  wanted  to  enjoy  being  alone.  To  my  annoyance,  therefore,
at  a  sudden  turn  in  the  road,  I  saw  one  of  my  friends,  a  man,  sitting  on  a
heap  of  sttjnes  under  a  little  tir  on  the  left  of  the  road  about  50  yards  from
me.  Believing  that  he  had  gone  to  Rannoch  with  the  rest,  I  stared  hard  at
him,  and  recognised  his  suit,  his  wideawake,  fishing  tackle  and  basket,  and
noticed  that  he  looke  d  greatly  absorbed  by  something  he  was  doing  with  his
fly-book,  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  so  much  so  that  he  paid  no  attention  to
my  approach.  When  at  last  I  was  come  so  close  that  I  could  distinguish
the  smallest  details  of  his  clothes,  and  even  the  expression  of  his  face,  I
called  out,  and,  getting  no  answer,  whipped  up  my  horse  intending  to  pull


410  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


up  in  front  of  where  he  was  sitting.  As  I  did  so,  he  moved  slightly  and  a
ourious  change  occurred  ;  the  whole  figure — I  then  being  within  a  couple  of
yards  or  so — shivered,  as  it  were,  and  vanished.  I  jumped  off  my  horse,  I
walked  round  the  tree,  I  looked  over  the  bank  :  there  was  nobody.  In
■spite  of  ray  firm  desire  not  to  let  myself  be  impressed  by  these  hallucina-
tions I  rode  back  uneasy.  Half  an  hour  after  my  return,  my  friend  drove
up  with  the  rest  of  the  party  in  a  break  from  Rannoch.  According  to  all
the  rules  of  second  sight  he  should  have  died  within  the  year  ;  he  did  not,
nor  did  any  trouble  or  misfortune  befall  him .

"I  have  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  above  hallucinations  the
neuralgia  in  the  head,  which  was  connected  with  trouble  of  [a]  nerve.
I  should  therefore  note  that  there  was  no  such  trouble  prior  to  1864  nor
after  1867.  At  the  time  when  I  saw  the  apparition  in  Scotland,  I  was  told
that  the  neuralgia  in  the  hip  and  knee  was  caused  by  some  pressure  on  a
nerve  centre  near  the  spine  low  down  in  the  back.  Before  I  close  what  I
have  to  say  on  the  subject  of  these  visual  hallucinations,  I  have,  however,
two  other  points  to  mention  in  this  connexion  :  (1)  That  I  have  strong
visual  memory,  which  for  years  I  cultivated  to  the  point  of  being  able, —
Tiaving  looked  with  that  intention  at  pictures,  or  other  works  of  art, — to  recall
them,  by  an  effort  of  will,  many  weeks  after,  with  such  distinctness  that  I
■could  set  down  from  the  visualised  image  full  and  accurate  details  of  com-
position and  colour.  (2)  That  I  have  eyes  of  different  focus,  the  right  eye-
sight shorter  than  the  left.  Also  [there  is  a  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  right
eye  to  diverge  outwards,  so  that  I  have  to  make  an  effort  in  order  to  keep
both  eyes  fixed  on  an  oljject.]  If  I  am  not  wearing  glasses,  there  is  a
moment  of  consciousness  when  I  look  to  the  left  as  the  effort  is  made  to
bring  tlie  two  sights  together.  I  am  now  ahnost  sure  that  tJu-  leap  given  by
the  apparitions  of  cats,  rats,  etc.,  which  lias  been  invariably  from  right  to
left,  is  connected  with  this  trouble  of  the  sight.  ■

"(8)  Auditory  hallucinations  have  been  less  frequent  in  my  case  than
the  visual  ones.  Occasionally  voices  calling — always  voices  I  could  recog- 1
nise,  but  more  often  musical  sounds.  One  example  will  suffice.  I  woke
in  the  night,  during  a  period  of  convalescence  after  a  serious  illness.  It  is
unusual  for  me  to  wake,  as  children  say,  '  broad  awake  '  ;  on  this  occasion
I  did  so,  and  with  a  curious  sense  of  alert  attention.  Within  half  a  minute
or  so  I  heard  a  perfectly  pure  note  in  mid-air  ;  the  sound  was  exti'emely  low
•  at  first,  but  went  on  swelling  by  impercejitible  degrees  until  it  i-eached  a
climax  at  which  the  volume  was  such  that  I  wondered  the  house  was  not
roused  ;  at  its  full,  when  it  had  become  almost  painful  to  listen,  it  snapped
off  short  in  linging  stillness.

"  You  ask  me  to  explain  what  I  mean  when  I  say  that  the  will  can  affect
these  hallucinations.  I  do  not  mean  that  at  the  instant  of  their  occurrence
the  will  can  do  anything  beyond  keep  the  brain  steady,  and  that  in  spite  of
fear,  which  sometimes  (I  confess)  accompanies  their  presence.  I  have,
however  (you  must  take  it  for  what  it  is  worth),  an  intimate  conviction  and
consciousness  that  there  was  a  period  when  physical  weakness,  coupled  with
the  moral  dispositions  which  accompany  a  strongly  mystic  and  speculative
bias  of  mind,  might  have  caused  me  (let  me  confess  further,  were  near  causing
me)  to  take  passive  satisfaction  in  my  own  hallucinations  instead  of  treating


Appendix  D.


411


them  as  a  matter  for  investigation.  I  am  conscious  that  in  that  state  they
were  tending  to  become  more  frequent.

"  Remember  they  have  had  always  a  powerful,  unconscious  ally  in  the
strong  visual  memory  which  I  cultivated  for  purposes  of  my  own  con-
venience.

"  In  conclusion,  I  have  to  say  that  for  five  years  past  I  have  almost
entirely  ceased  to  be  disturbed  by  any  such  apparitions  or  auditory  halluci-
nations, and  that  during  these  five  years  I  have  been  steadily  gaining  in
health,  and  in  what  is  called  '  tone.'  "


412


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


APPENDIX  E.


The  following  account  is  given  l)y  a  medical  man  of  the  hallucinatory
experiences,  occurring  during  ill-health,  of  a  patient^  of  his  own,  who  writes
to  confirm  the  accuracy  of  the  account.

March,  1892.

"Mrs.  S.,  aged  40,  has  been  married  6^  years.  Has  no  children.  Since
girlhood  has  been  subject  to  intense  neuralgic  headaches,  for  the  time
completely  incapacitating  her.  Up  to  marriage  lived  a  busy,  indeed,
arduous  life  as  an  artist.

' '  In  1875  had  first  optical  hallucination.  Three  months  after  her  father's-
death,  she  was  thinking  deeply  of  him,  when  she  suddenly  saw  his  face,
without  body,  hi  front  of  her. She  was  startled,  but  the  face  lacked
solidity,  and  .she  knew  it  was  a  hallucination. In  1890, in  India,  she
had  in  May  an  attack  of  bronchitis,  followed  by  a  long  neurotic  attack,
characterised  by  insomnia,  treniblings,  complete  prostration,  &c. ,  &c.  This
lasted  till  September,  when  she  was  completely  convalescent.  Between
May  and  September  she  had  frequent  and  varied  optical  hallucinations.  Of
these  she  gives  instances  :  (1)  an  Afghan  who  persistently  stood  mute  at  the
foot  of  her  bed  ;  (2)  a  man  on  a  velocipede  travelling  rapidly  from  left  ta
right ; a  peculiarity  of  this  man  was  that  he  always  appeared  with  a
'rainbow  edge,'  as  if  a  little  out  of  focus  ;  (3)  an  ayah  and  child,  with  the
peculiarity  that  they  were  always  as  if  made  of  plaster  of  Paris  : in  this
case  there  was  also  auditory  hallucination,  as  the  child  appeared  to  cry  and
was  heard  to  cry  ;  (4)  innumerable  hallucinations  of  animals  and  insects.

"  The  human  appearances  never  deceived  the  intelligence,  but  Mrs.  S.
was  constantly  taken  in  by  the  small  animals,  and  especially  the  insects,,
which  she  would  try  to  brush  ofl'  the  walls  or  the  bedclothes.

"By  the  end  of  September  all  these  appearances  had  disappeared  with
the  establishment  of  complete  convalescence.  In  November,  1890,  she  first
saw  an  appearance,  which  has  since  many  times  recurred.  She  was  in  her
house  in  India  when  a  black  cat  flashed  past  her  from  behind,  on  the  right
side,  as  if  chivied  by  something.  She  jumped  up  to  stop  or  protect  it,  when
it  disappeared.  It  did  not  fade  away,  or  disappear  behind  furniture.  It  was
simply  gone.  Between  November,  1890,  and  July,  1891,  she  saw  it  at
irregular  intervals,  and  quite  causelessly  and  suddenly  ;  it  always  came  from
behind,  and  on  the  right  side.

"  Between  July,  1891,  and  March,  1892,  she  has  seen  it,  she  thinks,
about  five  times.  Sometimes  she  is  still  momentarily  taken  in,  and  jumps
up,  but  not  always.  She  notices  that  the  outline  is  a  little  blurred,  but
otherwise  the  appearance  is  absolutely  natural.  On  two  occasions  she  has  seen
the  cat  in  a  different  way.  She  suddenly  saw  it  standing  with  its  back  and
tail  raised,  as  if  about  to  rub  itself  against  her  skirts.  She  was  about  to
stoop  to  caress  it  when  it  disappeared  with  absolute  suddenness.  On  the
first  of  these  two  occasions  she  was  deceived  by  the  appearance  ;  not  on  the
second,  as  she  recognised  the  animal  which  had  previously  deceived  her.

"H.  R.  F."

1  See  p.  1G2.


413


Mrs.  S.  adds  : —

"During  May,  June,  and  July,  1890,  when  my  illness  was  at  its  worst,
I  was  surrounded  by  a  circular  ring-like  line,  and  any  one  passing  through
this  imao-inary  boundary  gave  me  intense  pain  at  the  top  of  my  head.  I
mention"  this  because  the  line  was  a  visible  one,  wliitish  m  colour,  and
sli<^htly  quivering,  very  like  the  phosphorescent  mark  left  on  a  match-box
when  a  match  has  been  drawn  across  it.  This  line  was  not  always  there,
but  was,  I  think,  present  during  part  of  every  day  and  night.  I  could  not
be  called  licrht-headed  when  I  saw  it,  as  I  had  sense  enough  never  to  mention
it  knowing  that  my  husband's  distress  would  be  increased  if  he  knew  that
•each  time  he  came  to  my  side  I  went  through  some  moments  of  severe  pam.
When  people  left  my  bedside  and  repassed  the  circle  I  suffered  no  incon-
venience. I  have  never  seen  this  since  July,  1890.

"  It  is  not  literally  true  that  seeing  my  father's  face  was  my  first  optical
illusion,  though  it  was  the  first  after  I  grew  up. When  I  was  a  child
between  nine  and  ten  years  old  I  had  some  odd  experiences,  which  perhaps
I  had  better  explain. About  that  time  I  showed  an  unnatural  quickness
about  learning,  and  it  was  thought  well  to  separate  me  for  a  time  from  my
brothers  and  sisters, -who  were  all  much  older  than  I  was,  and  whose  society
Tvas  thought  by  my  father  too  stimulating  for  me, -and  to  send  me  to  live  m
.a  farmhouse  where  my  chief  companions  were  two  little  girls  about  my  own
:ac.e,  who  were  not  interested  in  algebraical  or  any  other  problems.  Among
other  subjects  which  occupied  my  mind  to  an  unusual  extent  was  that  of
religion,  and  when  waiting  for  my  companions  while  they  did  their  lessons
1  usually  spent  my  time  in  a  big  meadow,  praying  and  doing  mental
arithmetic  in  about  equal  parts. During  my  prayers  I  saw  (I  think  with
eves  shut)  the  most  beautiful  faces,  which  I  believed  to  be  those  of  angels
But  one  day  to  my  great  joy  and  awe  I  saw  with  my  eyes  open  a  great  and
misty  figure  which  I  thought  to  be  that  of  God  himself. I  do  not  remember
much  about  the  figure  except  that  it  blotted  out  the  trees  at  the  end  of  he
field,  and  that  the  face  vaguely  resembled  that  of  God  m  the  picture  of  the
Creation  of  Man  on  the  ceiling  of  the  Sistine  Chapel,  with  which  I  may
possibly  have  been  already  familiar  from  engravings. The  aiige  s  of  my
prayers  certainly  bore  a  very  strong  family  likeness  to  those  I  had  seen  in
pictures  in  the  National  Gallery  and  elsewhere. There  were  at  other  times
durinc'  my  childhood  visions  of  a  like  kind,  but  I  attempt  no  account  of
them,\s  I  cannot  be  sure  of  the  truth  of  my  memory  regardmg  them.

"Durin-thatportionof  my  life  which  was  most  exclusively  devoted  to
paintincr  Inconstantly  noticed  a  visual  phenomenon  which  may  be  extremely
common,  but  which  may  be  possibly  connected  with  this  tendency  of  mine
to  see  optical  illusions.  If  by  any  chance  after  a  day's  painting  I  entei-ed  a
darkened  room,  I  frequently  saw  at  a  distance  of  about  eighteen  mches  from
my  face  an  exact  representation,  brightly  illuminated,  of  whatever  part  of  my
picture  I  had  been  engaged  upon  during  the  day.  These  appearances  were
always  unconnected  with  my  thoughts  at  the  moment,  and  were  quite
different  from  those  visualizations  which  one  can  get  at  any  time  by  closing
one's  eyes  and  thinking  of  the  objects  one  wishes  to  visualise.'


414


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


APPENDIX  F.


Collective  Visual  hallucinations,  divided  according  to  conditions  of  perception.


Percip-
ients
in  bed.

Percip

and  in-
doors.

Seen
out  of
doors.

Totals.

Realistic  human  api^aritions  of  living  persons

3

10

14

27

,, ,, of  dead  persons

6

2

8

,, ,,  unrecognised

2

13

17

32

Incompletely  developed  apparitions

4

4

4

12

Visions

Angels  and  religious  apparitions  or  visions

Apparitions,  grotesque,  horrible,  or  monstrous

I

2

3

,, of  animals

3

1

4

,, of  definite  inanimate  objects

1

1

, , of  lights

1

1

2

,, of  indefinite  objects

5

1

6

Totals

11

42

42

95

Note. — This  Table  contains  only  cases  reported  to  us  at  first-hand  by  at
least  one  percipient.  The  numbers  given  in  the  Table  refer  to  cases  of  halluci-
nation, not  to  percipients  ;  whereas  in  the  general  Tables  each  perciijient  in  the
Census  is  reckoned  separately.  The  number  of  percipients  included  in  the
Census,  whose  collective  experiences  are  here  tabulated,  is  120.


Appendix  G.


415


APPENDIX  G.  .


A  PROPOSED  SCHEME  OF  APPARITIONS.

My  personal  share  in  the  work  of  the  Committee  on  the  Census  of
Hallucinations  has  been  quite  too  small  to  entitle  me  to  interpose  opinions
of  my  own  among  the  concordant  opinions  of  colleagues  far  more  familiar
with  the  actual  evidence  here  under  discussion.  It  has,  however,  been
thought  desirable  that  a  view,  somewhat  divergent  from  that  taken  in  the
Report  itself,  should  be  offered  to  the  reader  ;  and  I  proceed  briefly  to  state
certain  suggestions  as  to  the  nature  and  classification  of  hallucinations,  the
meaning  of  collective  percipience,  etc.,  without  expending  space  either  on
controversial  argument,  or  on  the  repetition  of  my  own  deep  sense — here
expressed  once  for  all — of  the  disputable  and  provisional  character  of  all
that  I  can  say.

I  must  premise  that  with  the  evidential  criticisms  and  conclusions  <'?
this  Report  I  am  in  full  accord.  I  admit  also  the  force  of  the  theoretical
arguments,  as  deduced  from  the  range  of  facts  here  lying  under  immediate
survey.  But  I  feel  impelled,  in  forming  a  judgment  on  some  of  the
problems  involved,  to  take  account  of  certain  groups  of  cognate  phenomena
which  it  has  hardly  been  possible  to  compare  or  to  consider  at  length  in  a
Report,  like  the  present,  of  definite  and  limited  scope.

The  spontaneous  sensory  hallucinations  of  sane  persons,  with  wliich  this
Report  is  concerned,  have  been  compared  in  Chapter  I.  with  tlie  experiments
in  telepathy,  which  at  certain  points  closely  resemble  them.  I  desire  here  to-
set  forth  these  hallucinations  as  members  of  a  still  wider  class  of  phenomena —
a  class  comprising  all  "  messages,"  to  give  them  the  most  generalised  title,
whether  sensory  or  motor,  whether  spontaneous  or  experimental,  which  rise
from  beneath  the  level  of  ordinary  consciousness  to  externalise  themselves
in  some  form  cognisable  by  the  every-day  supraliminal  self.  Some  of  these
messages  apparently  spring  from  the  percipient's  own  mind  alone,  and  are
in  that  sense  subjective  ;  others  seem  to  be  the  result  of  some  external
influence  exercised  subliminally  upon  the  percipient's  mind  ;  but  both  the
self-generated  and  the  telepathic  phantasms  or  messages  may  be  in  some
sort  veridical,  as  conveying  to  the  jjercipient's  supraliminal  self  some  know-
ledge of  which  only  his  subliminal  self  was  previously  possessed.  I  believe
indeed  that  in  certain  rare  cases  these  messages  involve,  or  are  accompanied
by,  efiects  produced  upon  the  material  world  ;  and  such  efiects  are  of  course
observable  by  onlookers  in  an  ordinary  or  supraliminal  manner.  But  the
essentially  subliminal  character  of  the  message  itself,  as  received  by  its
primary  percipient,  is  not  altered.  Even  those  physical  phenomena, —
whatever  their  ultimate  source, — are  in  the  percipient  subliminally  initiated,
and  depend  ujjon  intimate  processes  which  never  rise  above  the  conscious
threshold.

The  recollection  of  this  close  parallelism  between  sensory  hallucinations
and  other  forms  of  subliminal  message  will  influence,  I  think,  in  various
ways  our  estimate  of  the  sources,  and  of  the  true  nature,  of  tlie  phantasms
with  whicli  we  have  in  this  Report  to  deal.

In  the  first  place,  and  as  a  matter  of  evidential  statistics,  this  wider  com-


416


Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


parison  suggests  that  one  assumption  made  throughout  this  Report, — and
rightly  made,  as  telling  against  the  argument  for  telepathy, — is  probably  to
some  unknown  extent  in  excess  of  the  truth.  The  calculations  above  given
do  not  assume  that  non-coincidental  hallucinations  are  ever  due  to  telepathy.
When  A.,  the  agent,  is  seen  by  P.,  the  percipient,  at  a  moment  when  nothing
particular  is  happening  to  A,  this  is  counted  as  a  purely  subjective  or
falsidical  appai'ition.  Rightly  so,  I  repeat,  for  we  cannot  prove  that  there
was  any  telepathy  in  the  matter.  But  now  consider  the  cognate  phenomena
of  automatic  script  and  crystal  vision.  Through  either  of  these  methods  suit-
ably gifted  percipients  can  externalise  subliminal  messages  coming  either
from  incarnate  or  from  discarnate  agents.  Such  messages  compare  with
^apparitions  much  as  casual  talks  with  a  friend  compare  with  telegrams  from
him.  The  spontaneous  apparition,  or  subliminal  telegram,  represents,  we
Tnay  sujDpose,  the  greater  energy  of  communication,  and  is  likely  to  find  its
special  function  in  conveying  the  news  of  some  immediate  and  important
fact.  But  we  can  no  more  say  beforehand  to  what  occasions  this  flashing
message  will  be  restricted  than  we  can  be  sure  how  many  telegrams  a  friend
may  think  it  worth  while  to  send  out  about  a  play  or  a  dinner  jaarty.  The
vague  or  unverifiable  messages  which  make  the  bulk  of  automatic  script
and  crystal  vision  may  rise  sometimes  into  the  intenser,  but  briefer  and  less
intelligible,  form  of  a  phantasmal  picture  of  the  living  or  departed  friend
Avho  happens,  though  under  the  stress  of  no  crisis,  to  have  his  thoughts
turned  to  us  at  the  time.

How  many  of  these  non-coincidental  phantasms  may  be  thus  in  reality
telepathic,  we  cannot  tell.  We  positively  know  that  they  are  not  all  so  ;  for
we  know  that  in  various  conditions  of  body  phantasms  appear  which  are
removed  by  mere  bodily  treatment,  and  which  as  yet  we  have  no  sufficient
power  of  discriminating,  by  anything  in  their  own  aspect,  from  telepathic
apparitions.  But  the  caution,  nevertheless,  is  of  importance  throughout  all
this  enquiry  ;  and  its  importance  is  greater  for  that  class  of  aj)paritions
whose  evidential  value  it  is  the  most  difficult  to  appraise.  The  dead,  for  the
most  part,  are  beyond  coincidences.  If  a  departed  spirit  appears,  he  must,
I  suppose,  appear  when  best  he  can  ;  he  cannot  show  us  his  diary  and  mark
Tiis  hour  ;  and  if  we  have  accustomed  ourselves  too  strictly  to  attending  only
to  phantasms  which  bear  witness  to  an  immediate  fact  we  may  sweep  into  the
limbo  of  subjective  hallucinations  certain  phenomena  wliich  really  indicate
an  extra-terrene  source.

This  pohit  premised,  as  one  to  be  kept  in  mind  throughout,  let  us  now
■endeavour,  in  a  very  brief  review  of  the  main  classes  of  hallucinations, —
or  subliminally  generated  visual  and  auditory  quasi-percepts,  to  give  them  a
more  closely-fitting  although  a  more  cumbrous  name, — to  learn  by  analogies
something  of  their  more  intimate  nature,  something  of  what  is  really
taking  place  when  a  figure  is  seen,  or  voice  heard,  by  one  or  more  per-
cipients, which  figure  or  sound  has,  so  far  as  we  can  discover,  no  material
•counterpart.

Class  I. — The  simplest  form  of  hallucination  seems  to  be  that  which
follows  upon  a  conscious,  supraliminal  suggestion  given  by  A.  to  P.,  which
suggestion  P.  at  once  or  after  an  interval  works  up,  so  to  say,  into  a  hallucina-
tion, with  details  of  his  own. This  is  indeed  a  mere  exaggeration  of  the  pro-


Appendix  G.


417


cessesof  ordinary  life.  In  common  life,  if  A.  says  to  P.  "  I  saw  an  elephant,"
P.,  if  a  good  visualiser,  will  at  once  see  an  elephant  "  in  his  mind's  eye."
Xiet  P.  be  specially  suggestible,  and,  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  or  even  wide
awake,  he  will  visualise  the  elephant  with  such  intensity  that  it  actually
seems  to  stand  before  him.  A  little  practice,  and  he  will  be  able  to  carry
out  a  deferred  suggestion,  and  if  told  on  Monday  in  the  liyjanotic  trance  to
see  the  elephant  on  Tuesday,  he  will  so  see  it.

In  this  familiar  case  A.  has  done  nothing  in  any  way  transcendental.  He
lias  but  spoken  ordinary  words  ;  he  can  have  no  other  than  ordinary  means
of  foretelling  or  of  observing  their  effect.  The  hallucination  which  he  starts
may  of  course  be  shared  by  several  persons,  if  he  makes  the  suggestion  to
several  persons  together  ;  but  each  of  these  will  have  his  own  independent
hallucination  ;  there  will  be  no  true  "  collectivity."

Class  II. — Our  next — and  widest— step  is  to  the  case  where  A.,
at  a  distance  from  P.,  endeavours  to  transfer  to  him  a  hallucinatory
image.  In  experiments  such  as  these,  we  can  rarely  say  whether  the
subliminal  operation,  so  to  call  it,  is  mainly  A.'s  or  P.'s.  It  may  resemble
an  impression  of  the  picture  by  A.  upon  P.'s  mind,  or  an  extraction
of  the  picture  by  P.  out  of  A.'s  mind.  Assuming  for  the  present  that  A.
really  is  stibliminally  active  in  the  matter,  it  is  plain  that  his  action  is  now
very  different  from  the  mere  task  of  forming  syllables  and  expelling  air
which  was  all  that  he  needed  to  perform  in  Class  I.  Then  his  action  was
motor  and  molar  ;  now  it  is  telepathic,  and  possibly  molecular.  Possibly
molecular,  I  say;  for  if  his  "telepathic  impact"  consists  in  a  direct  im-
pingement upon  P.'s  brain-cells,  than  we  cannot  feel  confident  that  any
merely  molar  operation  can  effect  a  result  so  complex.  There  may  be  need
of  a  selective  action  upon  specific  molecules  in  P.  's  brain  ; — such  an  action  as
the  living  energy,  whatever  it  be,  in  each  of  us  is  wont  itself  to  exercise  upon
the  brain  througli  which  it  finds  manifestation.

This  question  presents  itself  in  a  striking  form  when  the  transferred  im-
pression is  an  idea  of  sleep,  or  command  to  sleep  ;  for  thus  the  impact,  so
to  say,  of  the  agent's  telergic  impulse  becomes  at  once  and  conspicuously
visible  in  the  percipient's  sudden  trance.

Be  this  as  it  may,  A.  is  now  getting,  by  whatever  means,  directly  at  the
subliminal  part  of  P. ;  and  such  action  we  must  at  any  rate  call  transcen-
dental, for  it  lies  entirely  outside  the  synthesis  of  the  forces  that  we  know.  We
can  now  no  longer  guess  whether  A.  may  himself  experience  any  effect  from
the  effort  ;  whether  he  may  have  any  subliminal  knowledge  or  memory
of  the  success  of  such  an  experiment.  There  are  some  faint  indications
that  this  is  sometimes  the  case.  Here,  too,  it  is  that  the  possibility  of
genuine  collectivity  of  percipience  begins.  The  first  trace  of  it  is  an  occa-
sional experiment  where  the  transfei-red  picture  or  impression  is  caught  up
by  more  than  one  person  present — persons  probably  all  of  them  on  the
alert  to  catch  the  image.  In  such  a  case  it  does  not  seem  as  though  there
were  any  real  contagion  of  the  hallucination  from  one  to  another  percipient;
for  sometimes  an  unintended  percipient  will  catch  the  image  when  the
person  intended  to  catch  it  fails.  The  influence  of  proximity — however  that
is  to  be  explained — seems  potent  here.  Only  in  one  case  that  I  remember —
the  experiment  of  Wesermann's  mentioned  in  Chapter  I.  as  "unique" — do  we

2  E


418  Repo7't  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


find  any  image  conveyed  by  telepathic  experiment  to  an  unintended,  as  well  as
to  the  intended,  percipient  at  a  distance  :  with  the  exception  of  one  special
form  of  image  alone.

Clas.s  III. — The  one  exception  of  which  I  speak, — the  one  experimental
telepathic  image  which  seems  to  have  a  fair  chance  of  being  perceived  by
unintended  percipients  at  a  distance, — is  that  of  the  agent's  self.  The
references  given  in  Chapter  I.  of  the  Report  to  experiments  of  this  type
will  enable  the  reader  to  judge  to  what  extent  these  self -projections  differ
in  this  and  in  other  characteristics  from  the  commoner  projections  of  a
mere  image  or  idea.  As  this  volume  passes  through  the  press  an  account
reaches  me  of  a  fresh  experiment  of  this  kind,  made  between  two  ladies  well
known  to  me,  wliom  I  will  call  Miss  Danvers  and  Mrs.  Fleetwood,  which  I
here  quote  as  well  illustrating  some  of  the  points  to  which  I  wish  to  call
attention.  I  asked  Miss  Danvers  to  endeavour  to  appear  to  Mrs.  Fleet-
wood, without  forewarning  that  lady,  and  to  send  me  a  letter-card  (the  best
vehicle  for  such  communications,  as  it  carries  the  postal  date  impressed
on  what  remains,  nevertheless,  a  private  letter), — to  tell  me  of  the  attempt
before  she  knew  whether  it  had  succeeded  or  no.

On  June  20th,  1894,  I  received  the  following  letter,  dated  June  19th,
from  Miss  Danvers,  witli  two  enclosures  : —

"  On  Sunday  night  at  12  p.m.  I  tried  to  apjjear  to  Mrs.  Fleetwood  [at  a
distance  of  about  nine  miles]  and  succeeded  in  feeling  as  if  T  were  really  in
her  room.  I  had  previoudy  written  my  statement,  which  I  enclose,  together
with  Mrs.  Fleetwood's,  which  she  has  just  sent  me.  She  wrote  it  also  at  the
time,  not  knowing  T  was  trying  to  appear.  I  was  lying  down,  not  kneeling,
but  the  other  details  are  correct."

A  memorandum,  signed  by  Miss  Danvers,  was  enclosed,  as  follows  : —
"June  17th,  1894,  12  p.m.  I  write  this  just  before  trying  to  appear  to  Mrs.
Fleetwood.  My  hair  is  down,  and  I  am  going  to  lie  down  and  try  to  appear
with  my  eyes  closed."

Also  a  memorandum,  .signed  by  Mrs.  Fleetwood,  as  follows  :  — "  Sunday
night,  June  17th,  1894. — I  woke  from  my  first  sleep  to  see  Edith  Danvers
apparently  kneeling  on  an  easy  chair  by  my  bedside,  her  profile  turned
towards  me,  her  hair  flowing,  and  eyes  closed,  or  looking  quite  down.  I  felt
startled  at  first,  as  I  always  do,  on  seeing  visions  in  waking  moments,  but
determined  to  keep  quiet ;  and  after  I  was  fully  awake,  and  able  to  reason
with  myself  the  figure  still  remained,  and  then  gradually  faded  like  a  dis-
solving view.  I  got  up  and  looked  at  the  clock.  It  was  jvist  twelve.  I  was
alone  in  the  room. As  I  now  write,  it  is  about  two  minutes  after  twelve."

In  conversation  on  June  23rd  Miss  Danvers  told  me  that  she  had  seen,
in  a  sort  of  flash,  Mrs.  Fleetwood  start  up  in  bed,  rest  on  her  elbow,  and
look  towards  her.  She  had  not  been  clearly  aware  of  her  own  attitude  in
Mrs.  Fleetwood's  room,  although  .she  seemed  aware  of  her  position,  which
corresponded  to  the  place  towards  which  Mrs.  Fleetwood  gazed.  Miss
Danvers  had  never  previously  made  notes  of  an  experiment,  and  had  not
seen  the  importance  of  writing  down  this  point  at  once,  nor  had  she  felt
confident  that  Mrs.  Fleetwood  really  .saw  her.  Mrs.  Fleetwood  also  sent  me
a  letter  of  Miss  Danvers  to  herself,  dated  June  18th,  in  which,  among
various  other  matters.  Miss  Danvers  a.sks,  ' '  Have  I  ai:)peared  to  you  at  all  ?


Appendix  G.


419


I  tried  last  night,  but  you  may  not  have  been  alone."  There  is,  of  course,
therefore,  no  proof  that  Miss  Danvers'  sense  of  invasion  of  the  room  was
more  than  subjective;  but  the  point  is  worth  mention  in  connexion  with  the  ex-
periment presently  to  follow.  As  regards  Mrs.  Fleetwood's  "  visions  in  wak-
ing moments,"  that  lady  herself  believes  them  to  have  been  all  in  some  sense
veridical,  but  they  have  not  been  recorded.  They  included  two  visions  of
Miss  Danvers.  at  moments  when  Miss  Danvers  on  her  part  was  strongly
directing  her  attention  to  Mrs.  Fleetwood.  So,  at  least,  both  ladies  believe  ;
but  the  visions  were  not  recorded  at  the  time.

Miss  Danvers  then  made  a  second  experiment,  in  which,  through  some
misunderstanding  of  the  due  conditions,  she  informed  Mrs.  Fleetwood
beforehand  of  her  intended  invasion.  It  turned  out,  however,  that  Mrs.
Fleetwood  .saw  nothing  whatever; — so  that  we  have  at  least  the  negative
assurance  that  mere  expectation  on  her  part  does  not  necessarily  produce  a
vision.  Miss  Danvers  then  made  a  third  (unannounced)  experiment  of  a
rather  different  kind,  which  she  describes  to  me  as  follows  in  a  letter  dated
June  27t]i,  1894.

"On  Monday,  June  25th,  at  12.15  a.m.,  I  thought  I  would  try  to  go
to  Mrs.  Fleetwood's  room,  but  did  not  think  she  could  see  me.  I  succeeded
in  seeing  her  room,  and  saw  the  third  volume  of  Marcella,  lying  on  a  chair
by  the  bedside.  I  did  not  know  she  was  reading  it,  as  I  thought  she' had
finished  it  long  ago,  so  I  was  surprised.  Mrs.  Fleetwood  did  not  appear  to
see  me,  or  make  any  sign.  The  room  was  otherwise  much  as  usual.  On  the
same  day  I  saw  Mrs.  Fleetwood,  and  asked  her  if  what  I  saw  was  correct,
and  she  said  it  was  perfectly  so.  She  also  said  she  was  suffering  from  tooth-
ache and  could  not  see  me,  but  felt  a  presence  in  the  room."

Mrs.  Fleetwood  writes,  June  27th  : — "  When  Miss  Danvers  came  to  lunch
with  me,  on  Monday  last,  she  asked  me  if  I  had  taken  the  third  volume  of
Marcella  up  to  my  room  the  night  before  (the  24th) ;  as  she  had  been  there
in  the  spirit,  and  had  seen  it  lying  on  a  chair  by  my  bed.  This  was  pre-
cisely what  had  happened.  I  had  taken  up  the  book  to  read  in  the  early
morning,  but  I  am  sure  Miss  Danvers  did  not  know  of  my  often  doing  so
[i.e.,  taking  a  book  to  her  bedroom],  as  it  is  not  my  usual  habit."  On
June  30th,  Mrs.  Fleetwood  adds:  "Miss  Danvers  did  know  we  had
had  Marcella  in  the  house,  for  she  read  it  when  here  ;  but  she  quite
thought  it  had  been  sent  away  long  before  she  saw  it  in  my  room.  She
did  not  know  that  I  had  laid  it  aside,  being  busy,  and  had  kept  back  the
third  volume."

This  case,  I  think,  strengthens  the  view  which  other  experimental  cases
have  suggested,  namely,  that  in  these  deliberate  projections  of  personality
there  is  something  more  than  a  thought  which  travels  ;  that  there  is  an
invading  presence  which  in  some  sense  changes  its  own  relation  to  space,
while  not  permanently  quitting  the  agent's  organism.

Class  IV. — We  pass  next,  by  a  gradual  transition,  from  the  exjjeri-
mental  to  the  spontaneous  projection  of  the  agent's  aiDparition.  There  is,  I
say,  no  marked  line  ;  for  it  seems  always  to  be  from  the  subliminal  region
that  the  telepathic  impulse  proceeds  ;  and  it  perhaps  makes  little  difference
to  the  operation  whether  the  supraliminal  self  was  aware  that  it  was  to  be
attempted  or  no. In  most  of  these  cases,  unfortunately,  we  can  ask  no


2  E  2


420  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


question  of  the  subliminal  self.  His  apparition  indicated  his  removal
from  our  world  ;  and  we  can  never  say  how  far  he  was  himself  conscious  of
the  impression  which  at  that  moment  he  produced,  or  of  the  desire  to
I^roduce  it.  The  rarity  of  the  testimony  to  such  reciprocal  action  need  not
therefore,  I  think,  prevent  us  from  regarding  the  reciprocal  type  as
theoretically  the  most  complete  ;  or  from  hoping  that  experimenters — through
the  kind  assistance  of  their  sublimijial  selves  ! — may  be  more  and  more  often
able  to  realise  this  ideal.

Class  V. — Thus  far  we  have  been  tracing  the  action  of  the  so-called
agent  alone.  But  this  view  as  to  the  probability  of  some  kind  of  latent
reciprocity  in  these  appearances  is  strengthened  by  the  growing  number  of
the  cases  where  the  so-called  percipient  appears  to  have  really  played  the
active  role.  He  seems  to  have  invaded  the  so-called  agent's  presence,  and
carried  back  with  him  a  knowledge  of  the  distant  scene.  Dwelling  upon
these  cases  in  the  "Note  on  a  Suggested  Mode  of  Psychical  Interaction"
in  which,  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  I  discussed  these  present  problems  at
somewhat  greater  length,  I  remarked  (Vol.  II.,  p.  287)  that  I  hoped  soon
to  set  forth  further  evidence  for  this  type  of  telepathic  communication.
The  projected  task  has  since  been  performed  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  whose  two
papers  on  "The  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance"  (S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Yo\.  VII.)
include  a  collection  of  cases  strong  enough,  I  think,  to  have  borne  a  heavier
stress,  in  the  way  of  corroborative  and  illustrative  analogy,  than  she  has
thought  fit  to  lay  upon  them  in  the  present  Report.

I  will  add  that  the  two  experiences  of  Miss  Danvers,  given  above, — the
first  being  one  of  apparent  reciprocity,  the  second  of  telepathic  clairvoyance,
—  exemplify  the  kind  of  relation  between  these  phenomena  which  I  am  sug-
gesting here.

Class  VI. — We  have  briefly  followed  the  main  types  of  telepathic
experience  for  agent  and  percijiient,  assumed  as  persons  incarnate  like  our-
selves. But  we  must  needs  consider  now  another  class  of  apparitions — a
class  of  whicli  both  Mr.  Gurneyandl  felt  bound,  in  Phantasms  of  tlie  Living,
to  speak  with  extreme  reserve,  and  which  is  still  in  the  present  Report  treated
with  caution  ;  but  the  evidence  for  which,  nevertheless,  has  so  increased  since
the  publication  of  Mr.  Gui-ney's  book  that  no  discussion  can  now  afford  to
neglect  its  difficult  lessons.  I  speak,  of  course,  of  phantasmal  appearances
in  which  the  agent  appears  to  be  a  disembodied  intelligence.  I  have  no  wish
to  press  or  hurry  any  man's  belief  ;  but  I  think  that  if  the  testimony  which
points  in  this  direction  continues  to  flow  in  as  our  Proceedings  and  Journal
show  it  to  have  flowed  in  during  the  eight  years  since  Phantasms  of  the
Living  appeared,  it  will  soon  become  a  rare  exception  for  a  student  who
attaches  importance  to  any  part  of  our  evidence  to  refuse  to  admit  the
occasional  occurrence  of  various  forms  of  posthumous  communication.  But
if  this  be  once  thoroughly  admitted — if  the  significance  of  this  prodigious
hypothesis  sink  deep  into  the  mind — it  is  plain  that  all  theories  as  to  the
nature  of  telepathy  between  living  men, — nay,  as  to  the  nature  of  earthly
life  itself — must  pause  in  suspense  while  the  character  of  this  telepathy
Ml  excelsis,  of  this  transcendent  life,  is  studied  as  far  as  human  powers
allow.  Such  a  task,  of  course,  lies  outside  the  scope  of  this  Report ;
but  the  mere  knowledge  that  it  has  yet  to  be  performed  may  well  check  our


Appendix  G.


421


confidence  in  any  explanation  of  telepathic  phenomena  on  earth  which  claims
credit  on  the  score  of  simplicity.  Simple,  as  we  esteem  simplicity,  no
explanation  can  be  which  has  to  make  allowance  for  this  inexplicable
bridging,  this  inconceivable  fusion  between  the  material  and  the  transcendent
worlds.

Class  VII.  — And  indeed  if  this  new  evidence  be  looked  into,  it  is
found  to  suggest  at  every  turn  aspects  of  those  more  familiar  phenomena
never  suggested  before.  Take  first  the  question  of  the  symbolism  of
phantasmal  pictures.  In  earlier  discussions  we  had  assumed,  as  almost  self-
evident,  that  the  symbolism  of  a  telepathic  message, — the  details  of  the
vision,  the  phrases  of  the  utterance— must  needs  emanate  either  from  the
agent's  or  from  the  percipient's  mind.  If  they  came  from  the  percipient's
mind,  we  assumed  that,  like  the  incidents  of  ordinary  dream,  they  were  due
to  a  working-up  and  re-mixing  of  earthly,  though  perhaps  latent,  memories.

But  these  suppositions  are  now  becoming  in  many  cases  altogether  un-
certain. As  automatic  script  is  analysed,  as  crystal  visions  are  observed,
especially  as  the  evidence  of  retrocognition  and  precognition — the  presenta-
tion of  scenes  past  and  future — multiplies  and  is  studied  anew,  it  is  found
that  there  are  phantasmal  presentations  of  many  kinds  in  which  no  real  clue
points  us  to  any  individual  source.  We  seem  in  contact  with  a  knowledge
of  whose  origin  or  whose  limits  we  have  no  indication.  More  than  this  it
would  be  premature  to  say  ;  but  the  possibilities  thus  shadowed  must  not
be  forgotten  in  the  discussion  of  subliminal  messages  even  of  an  apparently
much  simpler  type.

Class  VIII. — Once  more.  Intermingled  with  all  these  phenomena  at
which  we  can  manage  to  look  from  the  mental  side  alone,  we  find  another
group,  itself  widely  ramifying,  in  which,  besides  many  phenomena  on  whose
subjectivity  or  objectivity  it  is  hard  to  pronounce,  thei'e  seem  to  be  included
certain  definite  and  permanent  changes  in  the  material,  ponderable  world.
Collective  percipience,  on  such  a  view  as  this,  might  often  be  the  mere
result  of  an  actual  change  in  that  part  of  the  universe  where  the  percipients
were  assembled.  Such  a  change  might  be  perceived  either  subliminally  and
electively,  by  some  among  the  group  who  were  specially  gifted ;  or,  if  the  change
were  sufficiently  gross  and  palpable,  it  might  be  perceived  supraliminally
in  the  ordinary  sensory  fashion  by  all  persons  present.  The  step  here  taken
seems  a  great  one  ;  but  it  is  perhaps  less  sudden  than  it  seems.  For  every
case  of  telepathy  involves,  on  any  hypothesis,  a  modification  of  one  small
part  of  the  material  world — namely,  the  cells  of  the  percipient's  brain.
How  that  modification  is  effected — whether  directly  by  the  agent,  or  by  the
percipient  himself, — in  obedience  to  a  stimulus  how  received? — we  cannot
tell.  It  is  the  very  secret  of  life  which  confronts  us  here  ;  the  fundamental
antinomy  between  Mind  and  Matter.  But  such  confrontations  with  meta-
physical problems  reduced  to  concrete  form  are  a  speciality  of  our  research  ;
and  I  here  say  only  that  since  this  problem  does  already  exist, — since  the
cells  are  in  fact  altered  either  by  the  thought  or  along  with  it, — we  have  no
right  to  take  for  granted  that  the  problem,  when  more  closely  approached,
will  keep  within  its  ancient  limits,  or  that  Mind,  whose  far-darting
energy  we  are  now  realising,  must  needs  be  always  powerless  upon  aught  but
the  grey  matter  of  the  brain.


422  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations.


This  brief  review  of  the  various  classes  of  telepathic  phantasm,  or  sub-
liminal message,  which  I  think  that  the  enquirer  will  ere  long  have  to
attempt  to  colligate  and  explain,  may  indicate  the  expansions  which  the
theory  adopted  in  this  Report  seems  to  me  likely  ultimately  to  receive.

The  Census  itself,  I  admit,  has  added  but  little  to  our  evidence  of  those
rarer  phenomena  on  which  I  may  be  thought  to  dwell  with  undue  insistance.
But  my  general  argument  is  little  affected  by  any  question  as  to  the
■weight  of  the  cases  garnered  in  the  immediate  past,  or  in  the  immediate
piresent.  A  little  sooner  or  a  little  later  the  main  questions  here  raised
must  inevitably  confront  us  all.  Like  all  influences  which  touch  and  modify
man's  living,  material  brain,  telepathy  must  needs  have  a  physical  side  to  it
as  well  as  a  psychical.  It  is,  indeed,  inconceivable  that  any  one  new  physical
law, — a  fresh  etherial  radiation  or  the  like, — can  cover  manifestations  so  far-
reaching  and  so  diversified,  and  of  which  the  very  alphabet  is  as  yet  scarcely
known.  But,  in  however  complex  and  latent  a  form,  there  must  somewhere
be  a  physical  structure,  a  physical  concomitance  for  all  these  things  ;  and  our
successors  will  have  to  bring  out  those  potentialities,  and  to  translate  these
cosmic  mysteries  iirto  the  two  languages  of  spirit  and  of  matter.  Let  the
speculations  of  this  note,  then,  be  accepted  as  a  mere  warning  of  difficulties
yet  to  be  encountered  ; — questions  ready  to  spring  upon  us  when  a  few  more
steps  of  our  progress  shall  have  been  achieved.  Cenicmri  infoi  ibvs  stahulant;
and  he  wlio  would  follow  the  Sibyl's  guiding  must  prepare  his  mind  for
many  a  wrestle  with  seemingly  incompatible  natures,  incommensurable
worlds.


Supplement.]


JRevieiu.


423


SUPPLEMENT.


REVIEW.


Cock  Lane  and  Common  Sense. By  Andrew  Laxg. Lono'nians,  1894.

Though  Mr.  Lang  does  not  wear  the  unif(.)rm  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  he  is  an  effective  ally  whom  we  are  glad  to  welcome  in  his
capacity  of  franc-tireur  ;  and  if  he  has  on  former  occasions  had  a  playful
habit  of  firing  a  chance  shot  or  two  into  the  ranks  of  his  friends,  we
have  ^Jardoned  this  light-heartedness  in  consideration  of  his  services  as  a
skirmisher.  And  we  notice  with  satisfaction  that  in  his  last  volume  he  has
cured  himself  even  of  this  awkward  tendency,  and  no  longer  rebukes  us  for
ignorance  of  the  history  of  our  own  subject.  It  is  only  fair  therefore  that
we  should  frankly  acknowledge  the  material  addition  which  a  study  of
CocJi  Lane  and  Common  Se-nse  is  likely  to  make  to  the  knowledge  of  our
members  concerning  so  much  of  Psychical  Research  as  lies  outside  civilisa-
tion and  the  last  twenty  years.

That  psychical  phenomena  are  semper  and  uhupte,  that  they  are  not  con-
fined either  to  modern  times  or  civilised  races  :  these  are  Mr.  Lang's  main
themes  ;  and  they  lead  him  to  enquire  how  far  this  wide  disiDersion  in  time
and  place  may  be  taken  to  confirm  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  themselves.
His  general  position  is  already  familiar  to  the  readers  of  the  Proceedings  from
the  essay  entitled  Comparative  Psychical  Research,  reprinted  in  this  volume,
with  large  additions,  from  the  Contemporary  Review,  and  noticed  at  some
length  in  the  Proceedings,  Part  XXV.  We  will  therefore  only  take  for
consideration  a  few  points  while  passing  the  volume  rapidly  in  review.

After  an  introductory  chapter,  we  start  on  "  Savage  Spiritualism  "  and
"Ajicient  Spiritualism."  On  p.  81  Mr.  Lang  gives  a  curious  table,  on  the
model  of  that  published  by  Mr.  Myers  in  Proceedings  XXV.,  p.  336,  which  con-
veniently summarises  this  part  of  his  argunient.  He  here  compares  the  classes
of  phenomena  experienced  by  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  with  those  which  are  to  be
found  in  ancient  authors  and  in  the  performances  of  savage  magicians.  Out  of
the  twelve  principal  classes  of  Mr.  Moses'  phenomena  as  given  by  Mr.  Myers,
he  matches  eight.  The  most  universal  of  them  is  levitation,  whicli  is  known  to
lamblichus,  and  is  exhibited  by  the  Eskimo  and  the  Australians.  St.
Joseph  of  Cupertino  was  actually  canonized,  it  appears,  for  his  remarkable
proficiency  in  the  same  experience  which,  in  the  case  of  Simon  Magus,  was
held  to  be  mideniable  proof  of  demoniac  assistance.  The  evidence  for  St.
Joseph,  whose  date  is  1603-1663,  is  from  the  Acta  Sanctorum .  It  should  be
added  that  he,  like  Mr.  Moses,  was  distinguished  also  by  the  supernormal
production  of  fragrant  scent.  Mr.  Lang  adds  that  lamblichus  was  also
acquainted  with  the  phenomenon  of  alteration  in  tlie  bulk  of  the  medium  ;


424


Review.


[Supplement,


this,  tliough  not  exhibited  by  Mr,  Moses,  is  attested  in  the  case  of
D.  D.  Home.

Tlie  chapters  on  "  Comparative  Psychical  Research  "  and  on  "  Haunted
'  Houses  "  we  must  pass  over  :  the  fornier  because  it  has  already  been  noticed,
and  the  latter  as  based  almost  entirely  on  the  published  work  of  the  Society,
with  little  fresh  matter  of  Mr.  Lang's  own.  The  next  chapter,  with  the  same
title  as  the  whole  book,  lias  been  communicated  to  the  Society  as  a  paper
read  at  one  of  the  meetings,  but  has  not  before  been  published.  In  it  Mr.
Lang  examines  some  of  the  attempts  to  give  rationalistic  "  Common-sense  "
explanations  of  certain  tales,  including  that  of  the  famous  Cock  Lane  ghost,
and  shews  how  miserably  inadequate  tliey  are  to  account  for  the  phenomena
as  recorded  even  by  the  sceptics  themselves.  He  then  passes  on  to  "Appari-
tions, Ghosts,  and  Hallucinations,"  and  discusses  the  theory  of  ghosts,
strongly  inclining  to  the  conclusion  that  a  ghost  is  not  a  mere  hallucination,
but  an  entity  actually  present  in  space  and  capable  of  moving  material
objects.  But  here  he  does  not  seem  clearly  to  distinguish  the  cases  where
the  supposed  action  on  the  material  object  may  itself  be  part  of  the  hallucina-
tion. For  instance,  on  p.  205  he  quotes  a  ghost  which  lifted  a  mosquito
curtain.  On  this  he  triumphantly  asks,  "Could  a  hallucination  lift  a
mosquito  curtain,  or  even  produce  the  impression  that  it  did  so,  while  the
curtain  was  really  unmoved  1  "  One  would  have  thought  that  the  obvious
answer  was  "  Yes.  When  once  the  hallucination  was  generated,  it  might  be
expected  to  be  consistent,  by  doing  whatever  the  living  body  which  it  simu-
lated was  likely  to  do."  What  is  needed  is  some  evidence  other  than  that  of
the  hallucinated  subject  that  the  curtain  really  was  moved  :  and  this,
oddly  enough,  does  not  seem  to  occur  to  Mr.  Lang.  Even  in  cases  where  a
ghost  has  been  seen  to  ojjen  the  door  of  a  room  and  has  been  followed
through  the  door,  it  is  not  a  very  violent  supposition  that  the  person  who,
ex  hypothesi,  is  hallucinated  may  unconsciously  have  opened  the  door  and
passed  through  it.  At  all  events  such  evidence  is  not  enough  to  establish
a  theory  of  material  ghosts  without  more  decisive  evidence  ;  and  Mr.  Lang,
though  he  mentions  it,  does  not  dispose  of  the  old  difficulty  of  the  ghosts  of
clothes.

The  next  chapters,  on  "Scrying  or  Crystal  Gazing,"  "Second  Sight,"
"  Ghosts  before  the  Law,"  "  A  Modern  Trial  for  Witchcraft  "  (a  French  case
tried  in  February,  1851,  which,  by  the  way,  was  not  quite  in  the  time  of  the
Third  Empire,  as  Mr.  Lang  says)  and  "  Presbyterian  Ghost  Hunters,"  we
must  again  pass  over,  though  they  all  contain  good  reading.  We  may  com-
plain perhaps  that  Mr.  Lang  lays  himself  open  to  the  accusation  which  he
brings  against  Dr.  Hibbert  and  his  Ph  ilosophy  of  Appa  ritions  (1825),  of  going
back  two  centuries  and  neglecting  the  evidence  whicli  lies  near  at  hand  ;  for
in  the  chapter  on  "  Ghosts  before  the  Law  "  he  merely  mentions  in  a  note  at
second  hand  a  case  both  more  recent  and  nearer  home  than  any  which  he
gives  :  a  trial  which  took  place  in  Dublin  in  1885,  and  which  ended,  if  my
memory  serves  me,  in  a  verdict  for  Cock  Lane,  or  at  least  against  any  possible
common-sense  explanation  of  the  strange  noises  and  more  tangible
phenomena  which  troubled  the  tenant  of  the  Dublin  house.

In  the  chapter  on  "The  Logic  of  Table-turning"  Mr.  Lang  effectively
exposes  the  methods  of  M.  de  Gasparin  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  Dr.  Car-


Supplement.]


Review.


425


peuter  on  the  other.  M.  de  Gasparin,  who  wrote  on  table-turning  about
1853,  was  a  believer,  not  in  spirits,  but  in  a  "  magnetic  fluid,"  or  will-force,
whatever  one  chooses  to  call  it ;  Dr.  Carjjenter,  as  we  know,  would  explain
all  the  phenomena  by  unconscious  cerebration  and  muscular  action.  Mr.
Lang  shews  how  each  antagonist  calmly  ignores  everything  which  does  not
fit  in  with  his  own  theory.  M.  de  Gasparin  will  have  it  that  there  are  no
genuine  phenomena,  in  spite  of  statements  to  the  contrary,  but  those  which
occur  in  the  presence  of  a  chain  of  people  formed  to  collect  the  animal
magiietism.  Dr.  Carpenter,  while  professing  to  refute  M.  de  Gasparin,
coolly  ignores  his  statements,  which  were  of  the  essence  of  the  argument,
that  he  had  seen  the  table  move  without  the  contact  of  tlie  hands  of  the
chain.  The  moral  is  that  we  are  only  slowly  beginning  to  learn  what  evidence
means,  and  that  till  we  have  got  a  clearer  idea  on  this  head,  we  shall  all  be,
probably  for  a  long  time,  fighting  to  a  great  extent  in  the  air.

The  last  chapter,  on  "The  Ghost  Theory  of  the  Origin  of  Religion,"  is
perhaps  the  most  interesting  in  the  book.  But  liere  on  one  or  two  points
we  must  join  issue  with  Mr.  Lang.  He  seems  anxious  to  make  out,  while
seeing  the  difficulties  in  the  way,  that  the  savage  and  ancient  evidence  for
abnormal  phenomena  tends  to  establish  their  reality.  In  this  we  must
entirely  difi'er  from  him.  In  the  first  place,  the  evidence  here  is  in  no  way
cumulative.  So  large  a  proportion  of  striking  stories  breaks  down  on  the
application  of  strict  criticisua  that  no  accumulation  of  untested  material  can
strengthen  the  evidence.  The  presumption  in  each  individual  case  of  an
apparently  supernormal  occurrence  is  that  it  is  untrue,  until  it  has  been
examined  in  a  way  in  which  we  cannot  examine  any  occurrence  far  removed
in  time,  and  in  which  I  venture  to  think  that  no  occurrence  among  savages
has  yet  been  examined.  The  whole  question  must  stand  or  fall  solely  on
such  testimony  as  is  well  within  our  reach  :  when  we  have  once  settled  the
reality  of  supernormal  occurrences  for  ourselves  we  can  approach  the  ques-
tion of  supernormal  occurrences  among  the  ancients  and  uncivilised  ;
meantime,  we  must  be  very  careful  that  we  do  not  attempt  to  reverse  the
process.

But,  says  Mr.  Lang,  "the  anthropological  test  of  evidence  for  the
abnormal  and  rejected  phenomena  is  thus  amj^ly  satisfied.  Unless  we  say
that  these  phenomena  are  '  impossible, '  whereas  totemism,  the  couvade,
cannibalism,  are  possible,  the  testimony  to  clairvoyance,  and  the  other
peculiar  occurrences  is  as  good  in  its  way  as  the  evidence  for  odd  and
scarcely  credible  customs  and  institutions."  Surely  the  words  "belief
in  "  ought  to  be  inserted  before  "  clairvoyance."  The  evidence  is  ample  to
shew  that  the  belief  exists  ;  but  it  can  no  more  shew  that  the  facts  are  real
than  the  evidence  for  the  couvade  can  prove  that  it  is  the  husband  and  not
the  wife  who  is  in  fact  the  chief  sufferer  in  childbirth,  or  than  that  for
totemism  can  convince  us  that  certain  kins  are  descended  from  certain
beasts  or  vegetables.  If  the  anthropological  evidence  is  to  liave  any
effect,  the  classification  of  clairvoyance  with  the  couvade  and  totemism  does
not  seem  to  tend  in  the  direction  at  which  Mr.  Lang  is  aiming.  Anthropo-
logy, as  represented  by  Mr.  Tylor,  very  properly  confines  itself  to
establishing  only  the  psychological  facts  on  which  the  history  of  institutions
is  based  ;  the  physical  facts  on  which  tlie  psychological  may  themselves


426


Reviexv.


[Supplement.


rest  must  be  studied  in  a  diii'erent  way  altogether.  The  physical  study  may,
and  doubtless  will,  throw  light  on  the  psychological ;  telepathy  and  clair-
voyance, when  finally  proved,  would  make  clear  a  great  deal  of  what  we  are
told  of  biraarks,  peaimen  and  angekuts.  We  may  even — who  knows  'i — find
in  sympathetic  transference  of  pain  a  physical  basis  for  the  couvade,  and
Darwinism  may  have  done  something  for  totemism  by  proving  the  existence
of  a  great  monkey  kinship.  But  totemism  can  hardly  be  quoted  as  evidence
for  Darwinism,  or  lamblichus  and  biraarks  for  Mr.  Stainton  Moses.

Walter  Leaf.


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


427


EDMUND  GURNEY  LIBRARY.


SUPPLEMENTARY  CATALOGUE,  1894.
Additions  since  the  list  in  "  Proceedings,"  Vol.  IX.
ENGLISH.

"Bell  (Dr.),  Aiiimal  Electricity  and  Magnetism London,  1792

'CouRJiELLES  (Dr.  Foveau  de),  Hypnotism. From  the  French,

by  Lavu-a  Ensor London,  1891

J'elkln (R.W., M.D..), Hypnotism or  Psycho-Therapeutics

(2  copies) London,  1890

FEPaiiER  (David,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.),  The  Functions  of  the

Brain  (2nd  Edition) London,  1886

HoESLEY  (Victor,  B.S.,  M.B.Lond.,  and  F.R.C.S.),  On  Substitu-
tion as  a  means  of  restoring  Nerve  Function  considered  with
reference  to  Cerebral  Localisation.  Reprinted  from  the
Lancet,  July  oth,  1884 London,  1884

  The  Motor  Centres  of  the  Brain  and  the  Mechanism  of  the

Will London,  1885

Hudson  (Thomson  Jay),  The  Lawof  Psychic  Phenomena.  A  Work-
ing Hypothesis  for  the  Systematic  Study  of  Hypnotism,
Spiritism,  Mental  Therapeutics,  &c  London,  1893

Jackson  (J.  Hughlings,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  F.R.C.P.),  The  Croonian
Lectures  on  the  Evolution  and  Dissolution  of  the  Nervous
System.  Reprinted  from  the  British  Medical  Jonrnal,
March  29th  and  April  5th  and  12th,  1884  London,  1884

Kerr  (Norman,  M.D.,  F.L.S.),  Should  Hypnotism  have  a  recog-
nised place  in  ordinary  Therapeutics  ? London,  1890

Kingsbury  (Geo.,  M.D.),  The  Practice  of  Hypnotic  Suggestion

London,  1891

Ladd  (Prof.  G.  T.),  Elements  of  Physiological  Psychology  London,  1887

La2JGLEy(J.N.,  F.R.S.),  The  Physiological  Aspect  of  Mesmerism.

A  Lecture  at  the  Royal  Institution 1884

Lodge  (Prof .  Oliver,  F.R.S.),  Thought  Transference  :  An  Appli-
cation of  Modern  Thought  to  Ancient  Superstitions 1892

Moll  (Albert,  M.D.),  Hypnotism.  From  the  German. London,  1890

Myers  (A.  T.,  M.D.),  Hypnotism  at  Home  and  Abroad.  Re-
printed from  the  Practitioner,  March,  1890  London,  1890

 .James  Esdaile. Reprinted  from  the  National  Dictionary

of  Biography. (2  copies) N.D.

Newnham  (W.),  Essay  on  Superstition  :  being  an  Enquiry  into
the  effects  of  Physical  Influence  on  the  Mind  in  the  produc-
tion of  Dreams,  Visions,  Ghosts,  and  other  Supernatural
appearances  London,  1830

NicoLL  (Augustus,  M.B.  and  CM.  Edin.),  Hypnotism,  London,  1890

OcHOROwicz  (Dr.  J.),  Mental  Suggestion.  With  a  jji'eface  by
Professor  Ch.  Richet.  From  the  French  by  J.  Fitzgerald,
M.A  NeicYurl,  [1891]


428


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


PuRDON  (John  Edward,  A.B.,  M.D.),  The  Psychical  Import  of

Variable  Achromatopsia. Reprinted  from  the  Transactions

of  the  Medical  Association  of  Alabama,  U.S.  A  N.D..

RiBOT  (Th.),  Diseases  of  Memory  „ London,  1882^

Sextus  (Carl), Hypnotism. Its  Facts,  Theories,  and  related

Phenomena Chicago,  1893

TucKEY  (C.  Lloyd,  M.D.),  The  Value  of  Hypnotism  in  Chronic

Alcoholism London,  1892'

TuKE  (D.  Hack,  M.D.,  LL.D.),  A  Dictionary  of  Psychological

Medicine. 2  Vols London,  1892.

Van  Nokden  (Charles,  D.D.,  LL.D.),  The  Psychic  Factor.  An

Outline  of  P.sychology  iVeiy  Yorh,  1894

Yeo  (Professor  Gerald  Francis,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.),  The  Nervous

Mechanism  of  Hypnotism  London,  1884

FRENCH.

AzAM  (Dr.),  Hypnotisme.  Double  Conscience  et  Alterations  de  la

Personnalite Paris,  1887

Bar^ty  (Dr.  A.),  Le  Magn^tisme  Animal Paris,  1887

Beaunis  (Prof.  H.),  Recherches  Experimentales  sur  les  Condi-
tions de  L'Activite  Cerebrale  et  sur  la  Physiologie  des  Nerfs

Paris,  1886

 Le  Somnambulisme  provoqu^  : Etudes  Physiologiques  et

Psychologiques Paris,  1886'

B:6killon  (Dr.  Edgar),  Hypnotisme  Experimental.  La  Duality
Cerebrale  et  I'independance  fonctionnelle  des  deux  Hemis-
pheres Cerebraux Paris,  1884

Bernheim  (Dr.),  De  la  Suggestion  et  de  ses  applications  a  la

Therapeutique. (2  copies) Paris,  1884

BouRRU  (Prof.  H.  et  Prof.  P.  Burot),  Action  a  Distance  des  Sub-
stances Toxiques  et  Medicamenteuses  ;  suivie  d'une  Commu-
nication par  M.  Ch.  Richet Paris,  188&

  La  Suggestion  Mentale,  et  I'Action  a  Distance  des  Sub-
stances Toxiques  et  Medicamenteuses  Paris,  1887

 Variations  de  la  Personnalite Paris,  1888

Brullard  (Dr. Joseph),  Considerations  G^n^rales  sur  I'Etat

Hypnotique Nancy,  1886

Charcot  (J.  M. ),  Heniorragie  et  RamoUissement  du  Cerveau  ;

Metalloth^rapie  et  Hypnotisme  ;  Electrotherapie Paris,  1890

Crocq  (Dr.,  Fils),  L'Hypnotisme  et  le  Crime  Brussels,  1894

Delbceuf  (Prof. J.), De I'Origine des  Effets curatifs  de

I'Hypnotisme Paris,  1887

DiCHAS  (Dr.  A.),  Etude  de  la  Memoire  dans  ses  Rapports  avec

le  Sommeil  Hypnotique  (2  copies) Paris,  1887

DuRAND  (J.  P.),  Le  Merveilleux  Scieutifique Paris,  1894

EspiNAs  (Prof.  A.),  Du  Sommeil  provoque  chez  les  Hystt^riques

Bordeaux,  1884

F^Rf  (Dr.  Ch.)  La  Pathologic  des  Emotions:  Etudes  Physiolo-
giques et  Cliniques Paris,  1892

Janet (Prof. Pierre), Etat mental des Hysteriques  ;  les

Stigmates  mentaux. Preface  de  M.  le  Prof.  Charcot...  Par  is,  1892

 Etat  Mental  des  Hysteriques;  les  Accidents  Mentaux  Paris,  1894

Lafontaine  (Ch.),  L'Ai-t  de  Magnetiser  ou  le  Magnetisme  Vital

(5th  Edition) Paris,  1886


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


429


Xi^BEAULT  (Dr.  A.  A.),  Etude  sur  le  Zoomagnetisme Paris,  1883

Li^GEOis  (Prof.  J.), De  la  Suggestion  Hypnotique  dans  ses

Rapports  avec  le  Droit  Civil  et  le  Droit  Criminel Paris,  1884

XuYS  (Dr.  J.),  Les  Emotions  chez  les  Sujets  en  Etat  d'Hypno-

tisme  .Paris,  1887

Mesnet  (Dr.  E. ),  Le  Somnanibulisme  Provoqu^  et  la  Fascination

Paris,  1894

PiTEES (Prof.  A.),  Des  Suggestions  Hypnotiques  ...Bordeaux,  1884

Higher (Dr. Paul)  Etudes  Cliniques  sur  la  grande  Hysterie

2nd  Edition  ,  1^85

TouRETTE  (Dr.  Gilles  de  la)  L'Hypnotisme  et  Les  Etats  Ana-
logues au  point  de  vue  Medico-Legal Paris,  1887

Van  Renterghem  (Dr.  A.  W.  et  Dr.  F.  Van  Eeden),  Psycho-
Th^rapie  Suggestive.  Compte  Rendu  des  r^sultats  obtenus
pendant  la  premiere  periode  bisannuelle,  1887— 9... Brussels,  1889

Tung  (Dr.  Emile)  Le  Sommeil  Normal  et  le  Sommeil  Patho-

logique Paris,  1883

GERMAN.

Baierlachek  (Dr. E.), Die  Suggestions-Therapie und  ilire

Technik  Stuttgart,  1889

Da  Prel  (Dr.  Carl),  Studien  aus  dem  Gebiete  der  Geheimwissen-

schaften. ErsterTheil:  Thatsache  und  Probleme  ...iei^^iV/,  1890

  ExperimentalDsychologie und  Experimentalmetaphysik

Leipzig,  1891

■Grossmann  (Dr.  J.),  Die  Bedeutung  der  hypnotischen  Suggestion

als  Heilmittel Berlin,  1894

Li^BEAULT  (Dr.  A.  A.),  Hypnotismus  und  Suggestionstherapie.

Aus  der  Zeitschrift  fiir  Hypnotismus.  Heft  1 1892

Moll  (Dr.  Albert),  Der  Hypnotismus  Berlin,  1889

 2nd  Edition  (2  copies)  Berlin,  1890

Obebsteinek  (Prof.  Dr.  H  ),  Der  Hypnotismus  aus  der  klinische

Zeit-und  Streitfragen.  Heft  II  Vienna,  1887

Parish  (Edmund),  LTeber  die  Trugwahrnehmung  (Hallucination
und  Illusion)  mit  besonderer  P.eriicksichtigung  iiber  Wach-
hallucination  bei  Gesunden.  (Schriften  der  Gesellschaft  fiir
Psychologische  Forschung. Heft  7  u.  8.)  Leipzig,  1894

Schrenck-Notzing  (Dr.  Freiherr  von)  Die  gerichtliche  Bedeu-
tuno-  und  missbrauchliche Anwendung  des  Hypnotismus

^  Munich,  1889

 Ein  Beitra"  zur  therapeutischen  Verwerthung  des  Hypno-
tismus  Leipzig,  1888


A  full  Catalogue  of  the  hooks  in  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library  ivas  printed
at  the  end  of  Vol.  V.  of  the  Proceedings.  Supplementary  Catcdogues  tvere
printed  at  the  end  of  Vols.  VL,  VII.,  VIII.,  and  IX.  Separate  copies  of
these  Catalogues  are  still  on  hand,  and  can  be  obtained  from  the  Secretary.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


431


LIST  OF  MEMBERS  AND  flSSOCIATES.

(Auc/ust,  1894.)


PRESIDENT.
Professor  "William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.
The  Right  Hon.  Arthur  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.
John  R.  Hollond,  Esq.,  1,  Upper  Berkeley-street,  Portman-square,  W,
Richard  H.  Hutton,  Esq.,  Crossdeep  Lodge,  Twickenham.
Professors.  P.  Langley,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon.
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  Cambridge.

COUNCIL  FOR  1894.


G.  W.  Balfour,  M.P.

Thomas  Barkworth.

A.  W.  Barrett,  M.B.

Professor  AY.  F.  Barrett.

G.  P.  Bidder,  Q.C.

J.  MiLKE  Bramwell,  M.B.

The  Earl  of  Crawford  and

Balcarres,  K.T.,  F.R.S.
William  Ckookes,  F.R.S.
Lieut. -Col.  J.  Hartley.
Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.
Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S.
Professor  Macalister,M.  D.  ,F.  R.  S.


Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.
Frank  Podmore.

Professor  W.  RAMSAY.Ph.D., F.R.S.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

C.  Lockhart  Robertson,  M.D.

Sydney  C.  Scott.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.

H.  Arthur  Smith.

H.  Babington  Smith.

R.  Pearsall  Smith.

Professor  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.

J.  Venn,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.


HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

HON.  SECRETARIES.
Frederic  W,  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Frank  Podmore,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

SECRETARY  FOR  THE  UNITED  STATES.
Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.

ASSISTANT-SECRETARY.
Edward  T.  Bennett,  19,  Buckingham-street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C.


432


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


HONORARY  MEMBERS.

William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
The  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  M.P.,  Hawarden  Castle,  Chester.
Sir  Frederick  Leighton,  Bart.,  P.R.A.,  2,  Holland  Park-road,  W.
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantwood,  Coniston,  Lancashire.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.S.,  Corfe  View,  Pai'kstone,  Dorset.
G.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W.

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.

Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  Rio  Janeiro.

Professor  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Josephine,  Boute  d'Antibes,  Cannes,

Alpes  Maritimes,  France.
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Cambridge,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  6,  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  27,  Kothener  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.

Dr.  F^re,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany.

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  22,  Rue  de  Bellechasse,  Paris.

Professor  Kovalevsky,  The  University,  Kharkof,  Russia.

Dr.  a.  a.  Li^beault,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  J.  Liegeois,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43,  Corso  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy.

Hans  Natge,  Berlin-Tempelliof,  Berlin.

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass., U.S.A.
Dr.  F.  Freiherr  Goeler  von Ravensburg, 4,  Nettelbeckstrasse,
Berlin,  W.

Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  Philosophique,  Paris.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  15,  Rue  de  I'Universite,  Paris.
Professor  Sabatier,  Montpellier,  France.

Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing, 29,  Herzog-Wilhelmstrasse,
Munich.

Professor  N.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


433*


MEMBERS,  HONORARY  ASSOCIATES,  AND  ASSOCIATES.

Names  of  Members  are  printed  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Honorary  Associates  are  prefixed  by  an  Asterisk.
Names  of  Associates  are  printed  in  Small  Capitals.

Adair,  Mrs.,  Glenavon,  Cookstown,  co.  Tyrone.
Adams,  Mrs.,  4,  Brookside,  Cambridge.

Ainslie,  Ainslie  Douglas,  15,  Lower  Grosvenor-place,  S.W.

Alcock,  Richard,  M.B.,  Burlington-crescent,  Goole.

Alexander,  S.,  M.A.,  The  Owens  College,  Manchester.

Allen,  Frederic,  Sidmouth-road,  Newcastle,  Staffordshire.

Allen,  Henry  J.,  14,  Ailesbury-road,  Donnybrook,  co.  Dublin.

Allen,  Miss  Mary  Gray,  14,  Queen's-square,  W.C.

Allen,  Rev.  W.  O.  B.,  M.A.,  8-3,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.

Amery,  W.  C,  34a,  Corporation-street,  Birmingham.

Anderson,  James  Arbuthnot,  46,  Warwick-gardens,  Kensington,  W.

Anderson,  Miss  M.  25,  Lansdowne-crescent,  Kensington  Park,  W.

Apsley-Smith,  Mrs.,  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.

Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  The  Deanery,  Peterborough.

Arkwright,  Walter  George,  Adbury  House,  Newbury.

Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.I.

Ashbourne,  The  Lady,  23,  Fitzwilliam-street,  Dublin.

Ashburton,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.

Atkinson,  Miss  E.  A.,  44,  Percy-gardens,  Tynemouth.

Bacchus,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Lillington,  near  Leamington.

Bacon,  Rev.  John  Mackenzie,  M.A.,  Coldash,  Newbury.

Badelier,  Emile,  Rangoon,  British  Burmah.

Bailey,  Mrs.,  H.  H.,  50,  Clarendon-road,  Holland  Park,  W.

Baillie,  Edmund  J.,  F.L.S.,  Woodbine,  Eaton-road,  Chester.

Baines,  Miss  W.,  40,  Sussex-square,  Brighton.

Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  47,  Russell-road,  West  Kensington,  W.

Balfour, The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,M.P.,F.R.S.,  4,Carlton-gdns.,S.W.

Balfour,  G:  W.,  M.P.,  67,  Addison-road,  London,  W.

Balfour,  Miss,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Ball,  Thomas  Stanley,  Spring  Bank,  Fulwood,  near  Preston.

Banister,  Major  Fitzgerald  M.,  R.A.,  Jun.  Armyand  NavyClub,W.

Bannerman,  Colonel  P.  W.,  8,  Somers-place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Barber,  Mrs.  J.  W.,  Ferndene,  Abbeydale,  near  Sheffield.

Barclay,  Rev.  Chas.W.,  M.  A.,TheYicarage,  Hertford  Heath,  Hertford.

Barkworth,  Thomas,  J.  P.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex.

Barkworth,  Lieut.  John  R.,  R.E.,  R.A.  and  R.E.  Mess,  Malta.

Barmby,  Rev.  James,  B.D.,  Pittington  Vicarage,  Durham.


"434


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Barrett,  Ashley  William,  M.B.  (Lond.),  42,  Finsbury-square,  E.G.
Barrett,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  St.  Margaret's  Vicarage,  Lincoln.
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  F.R.S.E.,  Kingstown,  co.  Dublin.
Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  62,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.W.
Bartholomew,  Colonel,  Bantry  Lodge,  G-lengariff,  co.  Cork.
Bates,  Colonel  C.  E.,  60,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-square,  W.
Bates,  Miss,  c/o  London  and  County  Bank,  Maidstone.
Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.
Bayfield,  Rev.  Matthew  A.,  M.A.,  Christ's  College,  Brecon.
Bazley,  Sir  Thomas  S.,  Bart.,  J.P.,  M.A.,  Hatherop  Castle,  Fairford,
Gloucestershire.

Beatty,  Octavius,  Killevey,  Darleston-road,  Wimbledon,  Surrey.
Beazley,  Likutenant-Colonel  George  G.,  74,  Redcliffe-sq.,  S.W.
Bective,  The  Countess  of,  42,  Cadogan-square,  W.
Beer,  Mrs.,  7,  Chesterfield-gardens,  London,  W.
Bell,  Bainbridge  R.,  The  Rectory,  Cheltenham.
Bell,  Charles  W.,  J. P.,  D.L.,  Yewhurst,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.
Bell,  Major  Wm.  Morrison,  Thor,  Birchington,  Thanet,  Kent.
Brllasis,  Major  G.  M.,  c/o  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.
Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London.
Bennett,  Ernest  N.,  M.A.,  Hertford  College,  Oxford.
Benson,  Mrs.,  Lambeth  Palace,  London,  S.E.
Benson,  R.  Hugh,  1,  Landscape-place,  LlandalF.

Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  M.A.,  14,  Prince's-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Bergen,  Axel  von,  Harewood  Hill,  Darlington.
Bergen,  Dr.  Carl  von,  .32,  Karlavagen,  Stockholm.
Bernard,  John,  Captain,  R.M.L.I.,  H.M.S.  "  Nelson,"  Portsmouth.
Berry  Mrs.,  F.  M.  Dickinson,  M.D., 60, Welbeck-st.,Cavendish-sq.,W.
Best,  Mrs.  J.  Rycroft,  c/o  Messrs.  Coutts  &  Co.,  59,  Sti'and,  W.C.
Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W.
Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131,  Gloucester-road,  London,  S.W.
Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.
Bibby,  Charles  Hesketh,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Bickpord-Smith,  R.A.H.,  B.A.,  19,  Endymion-road,  Brixton  Rise,  S.W.
Bicknell,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.
BiCKNELL,  Norman  L.,  Foxgrove,  Beckenham,  Kent.
Bidder,  George  P.,  Q.C.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Bidder,  Mrs.  G.  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Bidder,  George  P.,  Junr.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Biddulph,  The  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19,  Ennismore-gardens,  S.W.
Bielby,  Horace  C.  V.,  67,  Lord-street,  Liverpool,  W.
Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  Lyndhurst,  Luton.
BiRKS,  Rev.  Edward  B.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Birrell,  Mrs.,  Placilla,  Down  View-road,  Worthing.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


435


Blackburn,  Ernest  M.,  38,  Egerton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Blackwell,  Elizabeth,  M.D.,  Rock  House,  Hastings.
Blackwood,  Mrs.,  Norton  Court,  Sittingbourne,  Kent.
Blakelock,  Rev.  R.,  M.A.,  Horbury  Bridge  Vicarage,  Wakefield.
Blaquiere,  Mrs.  Charles  de,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.
BoGER,  Mrs.  H.  M.,  Elvington,  Ryde,  Isle  of  Wight.
Bois,  Herbert  G.,  4,  Clarendon-place,  Hyde  Park-square,  W.
BoLDERO,  Lieut.-General  G.  N.,  20,  Westbourne-gardens,  Folkestone.
BoLLAND,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  Southampton.
Bonus,  Arthur  R.,  Dharwar,  India.

BoORNE,  Herbert  H.,  55  and  56,  Chancery- lane,  London,  W.O.

BoscQ  DE  Beaumont,  G.  du,  Bayeux,  (Calvados),  France.

Boucher,  Mrs.,  c/o  Miss  Lutley,  West-street,  Wiveliscombe,  Somerset.

BouLNOis,  H.  Percy,  M.Inst.C.E.,  7,  Devonshire-road,  Liverpool.

BouvERiE,  Edward  O.  P.,  M.  A.,  93,  Park-street,  Grosvenor-square,  W.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Highclere  Rectory,  Newbury.

BowELL,  Ernest  W.  W.,  Sissinghurst  Vicarage,  Staplehurst,  Kent.

Bowlby,  Arthur  S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

BowNESS,  William  Wilson,  26,Campden-grove,  Kensington,  London, W.

Boyd,  C.  W.,  7,  Abbotsford-crescent,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.

Boyd,  William  Henry,  Ballymacool,  Lettei-kenny.

Bra^mston,  Miss  A.  R.,  Witham-close,  Winchester.

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  Suntrap,  Radcliffe-road,  Croydon.

Bramwell,  John  M.,  M.B.,  2,  Henrietta-street,  Cavendish-square, W.

Brandreth,  Henry  S.,  Fairholme,  Weybridge.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brett,  George,  The  College,  Weston-super-Mare.

Brewster,  Mrs.  F.,  21,  Park-valley,  Nottingham.

Briggs,  Mrs.,  Rawdon  Hall,  near  Leeds.

Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  18,  West-square,  Southwark,  S.E.

Brooke,  Lady,  Ranee  of  Sarawak,  12,  Hans-place,  London,  S.W.

Brooke,  Rev.  Stopford  A  ,  M.A.,  1,  Manchestei'-square,  London,  W.

Brown,  Mrs.,  21,  South-street,  Park -lane,  W.

Brown,  Miss  Johnson,  26,  Carisbrooke-road,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea.
Browne,  Edward  G.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.
Browne,  Mrs.  Walter  P.,  Bidstoii,  Alleyn-road,  West  Dulwich,  S.E.
Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Bruhns,  Theodore,  Simferopol,  Russia.

Bryant,  Captain  G.  E.,  R.A.,  c/o  J.  M.  Edwards,  The  Elms,  Ramsgate.

Bryce,  J.  P.,  J. P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15,  Campden  Hill-square,  W.

Buchanan,  H.  B.  M.,  B.A.,  9,  Upper  Beulah  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

Buckler,  W.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.


436


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Bullock,  Mrs.,  Cedars  Lodge,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

BuLMER,  Mrs.,  Field  House,  Sleights,  R.S.O.,  York.

BuNNETT,  A.,  JuNR.,  10,  Station-road,  South  Norwood,  S.E.

BuNSHAW,  N.F.,  Med.  Off.,  B.G.J. P.  Rail  way,  Ghadechi,  Kathiawar,  India.

Burt,  Percival  J.,  16,  Leadeuhalkstreet,  London,  E.G.

Burton,  Mrs.,  Longner  Hall,  Shrewsbury.

Burton,  Mrs.,  1,  Iddesleigh  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harrow-ou-the-Hill.

Butcher,  Miss,  Nui'ses  Home,  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital,  E.G.

Bute,  The  Marquis  of,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.

Butler,  G.  W.,  B.A.,F.G.S.,  Sandham,  Chertsey,  Surrey.

Butt,  Lady,  8,  Petersham-terrace,  Gloucester-road,  S.W.

Buttemer,  Robert  William,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming.

Caillard,  Vincent,  Constantinople.

Caird,  Mrs.,  3,  Lyndhurst-gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London.
Caithness,  The  Countess of, Duchesse  de  Pomar,  124,

Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paiis.
Caldecott,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  45,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
CallaWxVY,  Charles,  D.Sc,  M.A.,  Sandon,  Wellington,  Salop.
Campbell,  James  A.,  Barbreck,  via  Lochgilphead,  Argyll,  N.B.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ballimore,  Tigh-na-bruaich,  Argyllshire.N.B.
Campbell,  Colin  E.,  B.A.,  22,  Market  Hill,  Cambridge.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Napier,  81,  Ashley-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Cannon,  Mrs.,  Hillcot,  Sharpies,  near  Bolton.
Carey,  Arthur,  B.Sc,  Browsich,  Gateacre,  near  Liverpool.
Carleton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Leir,  Greywell  Hall,  Winchfield.
*Carlile,  W.  a.,  101,  Whitehead-road,  Aston,  Birmingham.
Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13,  Berkeley -square,  London,  W.
Caudee,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  and  Co.,  London,  E.C.
Cave,  Charles,  J.  P.,  13,  Lowndes-square,  London,  S.W.
Cave-Browne-Cave,  Mrs.  T.,  Burnage,  Streatham  Common,  S.W.
Cazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Dorking.
Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham.
Champness,  Alfred,  Sedbergh,  Yorks.

Chandler,  Rev.  H.  0.  D.,  M.A.,  Waterbeach  Vicarage,  Cambridge.
Chase,  Capt.  W.  St.  L.,  V.C.,  care  of  Messrs.  William  Watson  and

Co.,  28,  ApoUo-street,  Bombay.
Chattock,  Arthur  P.,  University  College,  Bristol.
Childers,  Miss  F.  L,  46,  Gunter's-grove,  London,  S.W.
Clark,  W.  W.,  Denehurst,  Dorking.
Clark,  Miss,  Suffield  Park,  Cromer.

Clarke,  John  Henry,  M.D.,  30,  Clarges-street,  London,  W.
Clarke,  Robert  H.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C  S.,  Clarence  Lodge,  Redhill.
Clayequin,  Edward,  Munster  Lodge,  Monkstown,  Dublin.


List  of  Members  and  As>sociates.


437


Clayton,  Charles  E.,  Hillcote,  Highcroft  Villas,  Brighton.
Clemens,  S.  L.,  Hartford,  Uonn.,  U.S.A.

Clive,  The  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.
CoATES,  Andrew,  Pitcullen  House,  Perth,  N.B.

Coffin,  Walter  H.,  F.L.S.,  94,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
CoGHiLL,  Colonel  Kendal,  C.B.,  Cosheen,  Castle  Townshend,  co.  Cork.
Colchester,  Rev.  H.  B.,  M.A.,  7,  Bennett-street,  St.  James's,  S.W.
Cole,  Alfred  C,  M.A.,  64,  Portland-place,  W.
Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.
Coles,  D.  A.,  M.  D.,  Sydney  House,  Sutton  Court-road,  Chiswick,  W.
Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Claremont,  Esher.
CoUison,  Mrs.  Henry  C,  Newlands,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
Colt,  Frederick  E.,  9,  Old-square,  Lincoln's  Lm,  London,  W.C.
Colthurst,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
CoLviLE,  Colonel  Henry  E.,  C.B.,  24,  Chapel-st.,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.
Cooney,  Rev.  Stewart  E.,  M.A.,  73,  Botanic-avenue,  Belfast.
Cope,  Rev.  C.  H.,  M.A.,  15,  Racknitz-strasse,  Dresden,  A.
Cort  van  der  Linden,  Professor  P.  W.  A.,  Amsterdam,  Holland.
CouES,  Dr.  Elliott,  1,726,  N-street,  N.W.  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Cousens,  Charles  H.,  Star  Chambers,  30,  Moorgate-st.,  London,  E.C.
Cowan,  Mrs.,  Valleyfield,  Penicuik,  N.B.

Cowper,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Spencer,  38,  Rue  Jean  Goujon,  Paris.
Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S.,  2,  Caven-
dish-square, London,  W.
Crawford,  F.  Marion, Villa  Crawford,  Sant'Agnello  di  Sorrento,  Italy.
Crawford,  AV.  C,  1,  Lockharton-gardens,  Slateford,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Crawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
Crespo,  J.  Charters,  Rio  Maior,  Portugal.

Crewdson,  Miss  Gwendolen,  St.  Regulus,  St.  Andrews,  Fife,  N.B.

Crommelin,  Miss  Constance  de  la  C,  29,  Sussex-square,  Brighton.

Crossley,  Mrs.  C.  R.,  103,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-square,  London, W.

Crowe,  W.  Leadham,  15,  Great  St.  Helens,  London,  E.G.

Crowther,  W.  Fearne,  Mayfield,  Sussex.

Cruise,  F.  R.,  M.D.,  93,  Merrion-square,  W.,  Dublin.

Crump,  Harold  E.,  M.A.,  The  Chestnuts,  St.  Margaret's,  Twickenham.

Cunningham,  G.,D.M.D.  (Harvard,  U.S.A.),  2,  King's-parade,  Cambridge.

Cunningham,  Rev.  W.,  D.D.,  2,  St.  Paul's-road,  Cambridge.

*CuRTis,  Miss  Mary,  Laugharne,  St.  Clears,  South  Wales.

D'Abbadie,  Antoine,  120,  Rue  de  Bac,  Paris.

Dakin,  Rev.  Edward,  Selsley,  Stroud,  Gloucestershire.

Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  M. A., Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey.

Dallas,  Miss  H.  S.  A.,  Clilford  House,  Wellington,  Somerset.

Damania,  Surgeon-Major,  P.  J.,  National  Liberal  Club,  London.


438


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Danvees,  Mrs.,  4,  Cranley  Mansion,  Gloucester-road,  S.W.
Darell-Brown,  Mrs.,  1,  Douro-villas,  Cheltenham.
Darley,  Lady,  Quambi,  Woollohra,  New  South  Wales.
Darwin,  Mrs.  Francis,  Wychfield,  Huntingdon-road,  Cambridge.
Davies,  Benjamin,  50,  Marlborough-road^  Tue  Brook,  Liverpool.
Davis,A.E.,  L.R.C.S.  (Ed.),  L.R.C.P.I.,  20,  Great George-sq.,  LiverpooL
Davis,  Joseph  T.,  Holly  Bush,  Snaresbrook,  Essex.
Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  23,  Manor-park,  Lee,  Kent.
Davison,  Miss  Annie,  1,  Stanford-road,  Kensington,  W.
Dawkin,  William,  61,  Clifton-street,  Larkhall  lane,  S.W.
De  Brath,  Stanley,  c/o  H.  S.  King  &  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.
De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Despard,  Miss,  77,  Chesterton-road,  North  Kensington,  London,  W.
Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  M.A.,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  N.B.
Dickinson,  Goldsworthy  L.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dicksee,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  80,  Peel-street,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.
Dixon,  Edward  T.,  4,  Cranmer-road,  Cambridge.
Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  East  Park  Parade  Northampton.
Dobbie,  a.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Dodgson,  Rev.  Charles  Lutwidge,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.
Donnelly,  Mrs.,  Kendall-street,  Cowra,  New  South  Wales.
DoUBLEDAY,  Mrs. Frances  G.,  c/o Drexel, Harris and Co.,  37,,

Boulevard  Haussmann,  Paris.
Douglas,  George  William,  473,  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Doveton,  F.  B.,  Eastcliffe,  Babbacombe,  South  Devon.
DowsoN,  Mrs.,  L.K.Q.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.I.,  20,  Westgate-terrace,  Redcliffe-

square,  London,  S.W.
Doyle,  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  12,  Tennison-road,  South  Norwood,  S.E.
Duff,  Charles  E.,  M.B.,  122,  High-street,  Deptford.
DuLLEY,  Rev.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.
Duncan,  Mrs.  A.M.  A.,  Victoria  Club,  30a,  Sackville-st.,  London,  W.
DuTT,  R.  C,  CLE.,  Burdwan,  Bengal,  India.

Dyce,  Captain  Cecil,  (Retired)  Bengal  Staff  Corps,  3,  St.  Stephen's-

road,  Westbourne  Park,  W.
Eagle,  Frederick,  Barum  House,  Queen-street,  Henley  on-Thames.
Eardley,  Lady,  4,  Lancaster-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Earle,  Mrs.  0.  W.,  5,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Edelsten,  John  A.,  31,  Bold-street,  Warrington.
Egerton,  Miss  Mary  L.,  Whitwell  Hall,  York.
Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Elder,  Mrs.,  38,  Hyde  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
Elliot,  Gilbert,  10,  Hanover-square,  London,  W.
Elliot,  Mrs.  Minto,  7,  George-street,  Hanover-square,  W.  .


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


439


Elliott,  Sir  Charles  Alfred,  K.C.S.I.,  LL.B.,  Calcutta.

Elliott,  Rev.W.  A.,2,  Clarence-villas, Westboiune-gardens,  Trowbridge.

Ellis,  John  Edward,  M.P.,  40,  Pont-street,  London,  S.W.

Ellison,  Rev.  John  H.,  M.A.,  4,  Warwick-square,  London,  S.W.

Elton,  Oliver,  M.A.,  58,  Flanders-road,  Bedford  Park,  W.

Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Finborougli-road,West  Brompton,  London,  S.W.

Elworthy,  Arthur  K.,  Foxdown,  Wellington,  Somerset.

Elwyn,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  INIaster's  Lodge,  Charterhouse,  London.

Eno,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Ermacora,  Dr.,  G.B.,  Padua,  Italy.

Esterhasy,  Count  Michel,  Cseklesz,  Pressburg  County,  Hungary.

Eustace,  Miss  Grace,  Castlemore,  Tullow,  co.  Carlow,  Ireland.

Evans,  Kirkham,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Eves,  Mrs.  Charles  T.,  Brook's  Lodge,  The  Park,  Cheltenham.

Ewing-,  Lieut-Colonel,  A.,  The  Lawn,  Taunton.

Fagan,  Mrs.  L.  M.,  56,  Pvussell-square,  London,  W.C.

Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pump-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.

Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Technical  Institute,  Teramo,  Italy.

Farncombe,  George  Richard,  B.A.,  40,  Belgrave-street,  Birmingham.

Feilding,  The  Lady  Louisa,  23,  Princes-gate,  London,  S.W.

Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  Xewman  House,  Kenniugton-road,  S.E.

Felton,  Alfred,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Fielding,  Mrs.,  19,  Wilton- place,  London,  S.W.

Fielding,  Mrs.  T.  M.,  25,  Cardigan-road,  Richmond,  near  London.

Finch,  H.  Wynne,  Junr.,  B.A.,  5,  Alfred-place  West,  Thurloe-sq.,  S.W.

*FiNZi,  Dr.  George,  11,  Monte  di  Pieta,  Milan.
Fisher,  Rev.  J.  Hartman,  Nassau,  N.P.,  Bahamas.
FitzGerald,Desmond  G.,M.S.T.E.,46,  Loughborough-rd.,  Brixton,  S.W.

Florence,  Ernest  B.,  33,  Redcliffe-square,  South  Kensington,  S.W.
Flynt,  William  Garnett,  7,  Walmer-road,  Birkdale  Park,  Southport.

Ford,  Mrs.  Gerard,  7,  Mandeville-place,  London,  W.

Forrester,  Mrs.,  Gavell  House,  Kilsyth,  N.B.

Fort,  Charles  Leyland,  B.A.,  Alderbury  House,  Salisbury.

Foster,  Gerald  H.,  5,  Cleveland-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  W.

Fountain,  Alfred,  The  Elms,  Cornwall-road,  Uxbridge.

Fox,  St.  George  Lane,  4,  Grosvenor-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Eraser,  Col.  A.  T.,  R.E.,  Bellary,  Madras  Presidency.

Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C  ,Belgrave  Mansions,  Grosvenor-gdns.,  S.W.

Fry,  Lewis  George,  13,  Thurlow-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Fry,  Oliver  A.,  M.A.,  141,  Portsdown-road,  Maida-vale,  London,  W.

Fry,  R.  E.,  B.A.,  1,  Palace  Houses,  Bayswater  Hill,  London,  W.

*  Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  13,  Dumfries-place,  Cardiff.

Furnivall,  Percy,  Belgrave  Hospital  for  Children,  London,  S.W.

Galloway,  The  Countess  of,  17,  Upper  Grosvenor-street,  W.


440


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Gardiner,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  M.A.,  Fawley  Vicarage,  Wantage.

Gardner,  Right  Hon.  H.,  M.P.,  48,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-sq.,  "W.

Gardner,  The  Lady  Winifred,  48,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.

Gardner,  Mrs.  Ernest,  c/o  Miss  Wilson,  3.3,  Ladbroke-square,  W.

GarneRj  Edwin  T.,  Glendale,  Alexandra-road,  Selhurst,  Surrey.

Garth,  Henry,  M.B.,  CM.  (Edin.),  Morden,  near  Mitcham,  Surrey.

Gaussen,  Mrs.  L.D.,  Marten,  Basechurch,  Salop.

Geach,  Mrs.  Guichard,  2,  Edinburgh-ter.,Victoria-rd., Kensington, W.

Gessmann,  Gustav,  Junr.,  Zwolfers  Gasthof,  Altmansdorf,  Vienna.

Gibotteau,  Aime,  M.D.,  Villa  Bearnaise,  Biarritz.

Gibson,  Miss  M.  E.,  23,  Northumberland-street,  Edinburgh.

GiLCRiEST,  W.  R,  A.I.C.E.  (Ireland),  Sligo.

GiTTERMANN,  RuDOLPH  C,  Odessa,  Russia.

Glardon,  Rev.  Auguste,  Tour  de  Peilz,  Vaud,  Switzerland.

Glover,  John  J.  T.,  124,  Stephen's  Green,  W.,  Dublin.

Godfrey,  Thomas  H.,  M.B.,  Van  Mildert  House,  Stockton-on-Tees.

Godfrey,  Mrs.,  c/o  Col.  O.W.  Godfrey,  Bombay  Staff  Corps,  Poona,  India.

Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  Lambourne  Rectory,  Romford.

GooDiER,  Miss  B.  M.,  Edinscate,  Disley,  Cheshii-e.

Goodman,  Louis  H.,  Bertram  House,  170,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.
*Goodrich-Freer,  Miss,  2,  Westbourne  Park-road,  London,  W.
GoRDiGiANi,  Edward,  50,  Via  Degli  Alfani,  Florence.
Goring,  Lady,  Strettington,  Chichester.

GovER,  John  M.,  LL.D.,  5,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.O.

Govett,  The  Ven.  Archdeacon,  M.A.,  Gibraltar.

Graham,  Henry  R.,  8,  Marble  Arch,  London,  W.

Graham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  Meadowside,  Heald-place,  Rusholme,  Manchester.

Graham,  WiUiam  W.,  4,  Elm-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Gray,  Rev.  A.,  M.A.,  Malvern  House,  East  Liss,  Hants.

Gray,  Edward  W.,  Surgeon-Captain,  The  Citadel,  Cairo,  Egypt.

Green,  C.  T.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C  P.  (Lond.),  33,  Grange-mt.,  Birkenhead.

Green,  Miss  Marian,  The  High  School,  Spring  Mount,  Blackburn.

Greener,  W.  O.,  2,  Kent  Villas,  Ealing.

Greig,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Cottenham  Rectory,  Cambridge.

Grier,  Captain  George  R.,  Leonardstone  House,  Neyland,  Wales.

Griffith,  Miss  E.  C,  37,  York-street,  Portman-square,  London,  W.

Griffith,  Mrs.  Robert  W.,  The  Old  House,  LlandalF.

Grignon,  Rev.  William  S.,  M.A.,  Essenden,  Hattield,  Herts.

Grogan,  Miss,  18,  Ridgmount-gardens,  London,  W.C.

Groom,  Ernest,  Dothill  Park,  Wellington,  Salop.

^Grubb,  Edward,  M.A.,  5,  Royal-avenue,  Scarborough.

Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Shallow,  Ongar,  Essex.

Gudgeon,  James,  Stowraarket.

Guest,  A.  H.,  L.R.C. p. E., Westbourne,  Whalley-range,  Manchester.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


441


GuNTON,  Rev.  Charles  F.,  M.A.,  Fai-lam  Vicarage,  Milton,  Carlisle.

GuNTON.  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.

Gurney,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas'  Parsonage,  Pinilico,  S.W.

GuRNEY,REV.F.,M.A.,St.  John's  Cottage,  Bo  veyTracey,  Newton  Abbot.

Gurney,  Henry  G.,  3,  P^egent-street,  London,  W.

Gurney,  Mrs.  Russell,  3,  Orme-square,  London,  W.

Hackett,  James  F  ,  B.A  ,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Haggard,  John  G-,  H.B.M.  Consul,  Trieste,  Austria.

Haig,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Orchardwood,  Ascot  Heath,  Berks.

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.,  3,  Pitt-street,  Campden  Hill,  W.

Hall,  Charles  S.,  The  Borough  Chambers,  Bournemouth.

Hall,  George,  M.D.,  CM.  Edin.,  Wyndham  Lodge,  Milford,  Surrey.

Hamilton,  Colonel  G.  Rowan,  Killyleagh  Castle,  co.  Down,  Ireland.

Hannah,  Robert,  82,  Addison-road,  Kensington,  W.

Hansford,  Charles,  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester.

Hargrave,  Joseph  G.,  The  Grange,  Chorlton-cum-Hardy,  Manchester.

Hargreaves,  Miss,  69,  Alexandra-road,  Southport.

Harpur,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark.

Harris,  J.  C,  Bruce  Herald  Office,  Union-st.,  Milton,  Otago,  N.Z.

Hartley,  Lieut.-Colonel  J.,  LL.D.,  D.L.,  The  Old  Downs,  Hartley,

near  Fawkham,  via  Dartford.
Hartshorn,  MissC,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  and  Co.,  London,  E.C.
Haslam,  Prof.,  M.A.,  St.  Barbe,  Riccarton,  Christchuich,  New  Zealand.
Hastie,  Miss,  11,  Ashburn-place,  Cromwell-road,  S.W.
Hay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Alistair,  8,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W.
Hayes,  Frederick  W.,  12,  Westcroft-square,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.
*Hayes,  Joseph  W.,  1,  George's-street,  Enniscorthy.
Hayward,  M.  Cecil,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Heape,  Fred.  W.,  Toorak,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
Heard,  Richard,  90,  Wigmore- street,  London,  W.
Heaton,  Charles,  M.R.C.S.,  Watford,  Herts.
Henderson,  Miss  Lilian,  55,  Sutherland-avenue,  Maida-vale,  W.
Henley,  Hon.  Ernest,  Watford  Court,  Rugby.

Henniker-Major,  The  Hon.  Mary,  4,  Berkeley-street,  Piccadilly,  W.

Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1,  Argyll- villas,  Cheltenham.

Herbert,  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringwood,  Hants.

Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.

Hewetson,H.Bendelack,  F.L.S.,M.  R.C.S.,  11,  Hanover-sq.,  Leeds.

HiBBS,  Reginald  R.,  13,  St.  Lawrence-road,  North  Kensington,  W.

Hichens,  Rev.  Thomas  S.,  Guilsborough  Vicarage,  Northampton.

Higgin,  F.  C,  Killiney  Castle,  Killiney,  co.  Dublin.

HiLDYARD,  F.  W.,  St.  Nicholas  Club,  81a,  Queen  Victoria-st.,  London,  E.C.

Hill,  Clement  Hugh,  63,  Church-road,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea.

Hill,  Miss  E.  D.,  Instowe,  Malvern  road,  Cheltenham.  ;


442


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Hill,  Henry,  The  Park,  Nottingham.
Hill,  W.  Scott,  47,  Manor-place,  Edinburgh.
Hill-Tout,  Charles,  Trinity  College,  Vancouver,  B.C.
Hills,  Mrs.,  Corby  Castle,  Carlisle.

HoDDiNG,  Miss,  Selwood  House,  Barnard's  Cross,  Salisbury.
Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S. A
Hogg,  Miss  A.  M.  M.,  Berry  Head  House,  Brixham.
Hogg,  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  Melbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Hole,  Rev.  Donald,  A.K.C,  2,  Busby-place,  Camden-road,  N.W.
Holland,  Hon.  Lionel  R.,  B.A.,  58,  Conduit-street,  W.
Holland,  J.  F.  R.,  M.D.,  Kulm  Hotel,  St.  Moritz,  Switzerland.
Holland,  Miss,  Niddry  Lodge,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Hollond,  John  R.,  M.A.,  1,  Upper  Berkeley-street,  Portman-sq.,  W.
HoLSTEiN,  Madame  Alexandra  de,  29,  Avenue  de  Wagram,  Paris.
Holt,  H.  Sherwin,  Wave  Cottage,  Chelmsford.
Hood,  H,  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.
Hook,  Rev.  Cecil,  M.A.,  Hook  Memorial  Vicarage,  Leeds.
Hooper,  Gordon,  L.D.S.R.O.S.,  21,  New  Cavendish-st.,  Harley-st.,"W.
Hooper,  Mrs.  Pitman,  11,  Bulstrode-street,  Manchester-square,  W.
HoPKiNsoN, Professor  A.,  M.A.,B.C.L.,  The  Lodge,  32, Heme  Hill,  S.E.
Hopps,  J OHN  Page,  Oak  Tree  House,  South  Norwood  Hill,  London,  S.E.
HoRNE,  Alderson,  Ditton-place,  Balcoinbe,  Sussex.
HoRTON,  William  T.,  Millside,  Hatchlands-road,  Redhill,  Surrey.
Howard,  The  Lady  Mabel,  Greystoke  Castle,  Penrith.
Howard,  Robert  Henry,  Bishop  Hatfield's  Hall,  Durham.
Howe,  E.  R.  J.  Gambier,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
HowoRTH,  Henry  H.,  M.P.,  Derby  House,  Eccles,  near  Manchester.
HuBBE-SciiLEiDEN,  Dr.  J.  U.,  Steglitz,  near  Berlin.
Huddleston,  Mrs.,  Llwynderw,  Welshpool,  Montgomeryshire.
Hughes,  Ma.jor  H.  M.,  F.R.G.S.,  Rose  Bank,  Marden  Park,  Caterham
Valley,  Surrey.

Hughes,  Mrs.,  Gwynnondale,  Llanarthney,  R.S.O.,  Carmarthenshire.
Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  The  Pines, Worcester  Pk., Surrey.
Humfrey,  Miss  L.  R.,  8,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  W.
Humphreys,  Arthur  Lee,  Half-Timbered  Cottage,  Pangbourne.
Hunter,  Thomas,  Arnold  House,  Rugby.
HuTCHiNS,  D.  E.,  Conservator  of  Forests,  Cape  Town,
Hutchinson,  Frederick  W.  H.,  B.A.,  1,  Emmanuel-rd.,  Cambridge.
Hutchison,  Rev.  R.P.,  M.A.,  Martyr  Worthy  Rectory,  Winchester.
Infield,  H.  I.,  130,  North-street,  Brighton.
Inglis,  Rev.  D.,  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man.

Innes,  Lady,  Winslow,  Darling  Point,  Sydney,  New  South  Wales.
Irving,  Lewis  A.,  Surgeon-Major,  Govt.  House,  Ganesh  Khind,  Bombay.
Isaachsen,  Rev.  Thorveld  E.,  44,  Boompjes,  Rotterdam.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


44S


Jackson,  Rev. The  Vicarge,  Newton-upon-Rawcliffe,  Pickering.

Jackson,  William  H.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  PenWartha,  Weston-super-Mare.

Jackson,  Miss  E.  R.,S.  Hilda's  School,  Clifton-road,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Park-villas,  London,  W.

Jeapfreson,  Rev.H.  H.,M.A.,  115,  Clifton  Hill,  St.  John's  Wood,  N.W.

Jebb,  Rev.  H.  Gladwyn,  M.A.,  Firbeck  Hall,  Rotherham.

Jebb,  J.  Gladwyn,  11,  Ohester-place,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  Springfield,  Newnham,  Cambridge.

Jebb,  Miss  S.  G.,  Myn-yr-Afon,  Ruabon.

Jeffreys,  Mrs.,  Glandyli  Castle,  Glandovey,  R.S.O.,  North  Wales.
^Jenkins,  E.  Vaughan,  Energlyn,  38,  St.  Margaret's-road,  Oxford.
Jenkinson,  Mrs.  F.  R.  G.,  112,  Sloane-street,  London,  S.W.
Jennings,  Mrs.,  16,  Lower  Sloane-street,  S.W.
Jeune,  Lady,  37,  Wim pole-street,  London,  W.

Johnson,  Rev.  Wayland,LL.D.,709,  Ferry-street,Easton,Penn., U.S.A..
Johnson,  William  Ernest,  M.A.,  Llandaff  House,  Cambridge.
Johnston,  Miss  M.  F.,  16,  Gunterstone-road,  West  Kensington,  W.
Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.
Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.
Jones,  P.,  16,  Via  Massimiliana,  Trieste,  Austria.

Jones,T.  R. ,  M.  R.  C.S.  Lond. ,  L.  R.  C.  P.  I. ,  L.  M.  I. ,  2  6,  Lorne-rd. ,  Birkenhead.
Joyce,  Samuel,  113,  Richmond-road,  Dalston,  London,  N.E.
Kane,  J.  G.  Auriol,  Sloperton  Lodge,  Kingstown,  co.  Dublin.
Kay,  H.  A.,  71,  Maida-vale,  London,  W.
Keene,  Rev.  James  B.,  M.A.,  The  Rectory,  Navan,  co.  Meath.
Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  M.  A.,  2,  Lloyd-place,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E..
Kelso,  Commander,  R.N.,  Horkesby  Park,  Colchester.
Kenmare,  The  Countess  of,  Killarney  House,  Killarney.
Ker,  C.  B.,  M.D.,  Hadley  House,  Cheltenham.
Kerr,  George,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  St.  Colme-street,  Edinburgh.
*Keulemans,  J.  G.,  13,  York-terrace,  Brewery-road,  Southend.
Kingsbury,  George  C,  M.D.,  3,  Brighton-parade,  Blackpool.
Kingston,  H.  D.  R.,  M.B.,  Stormont  Lodge,  Willesden,  N.W.
♦Kirk,  Joseph,  2,  Ripon-rillas,  Upper  Ripon-road,  Plumstead,  Kent.
Knowles,  Ernest,  Inglehurst  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors.
Knox,  Nathaniel  A.,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.W.S.,  M.A.,  F.R.H.S.,Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford..
Lafone,  Alfred  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.
Laing,  R.M.,M.A.,B.Sc.,Boys'High  School,  Christchurch,New  Zealand..
Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Yalding  Vicarage,  Maidstone.
Lancaster,  Ernest  Le  C,  M.  B.,  Winchester  House,  Swansea.
Laurie,  Prof.  H.,  LL.D.,  President  of  the  Victorian  Society  for

Psychical  Pvesearch,  JMelbourne.
Lead  am,  Isaac  S.,  117,  St.  George's-square,  S.  W.


444


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  9,  St.  Paul's  Churchyard,  London,  E.G.
Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough.

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.  D.,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Leaf,  Mrs.  Walter,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Lees,  Lieut.  W.  E.,  Royal  Engineers,  R.A.  and  R.E.  Mess,  Malta.

Leete,  Miss,  2,  Earl's  Court-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Leete,  Miss  L.,  2,  Earl's  Court-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Legge,  The  Lady  Frances,  Woodsome,  Huddersfield.

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  M.A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Lewis,  C.  W.  Mansel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire.

Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Leymarie,  p.  G.,  5,  Rue  des  Petits  Champs,  Paris.

Leyson,  Miss  Kate,  Penscynnor,  Neath,  South  Wales.

Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Librarian,  School  of  Arts,  Brisbane,  Queensland.

Librarian  op  the  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Librarian,  General  Assembly  Library,  Wellington,  New  Zealand.

LiMOND,  Miss  Catherine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.

Lindsay,  Miss  Beatrice,  Bohemia,  Port  St.  Mary,  Isle  of  Man.

Lindsay,  Robert,  L.R.C.S.,  M.B  ,  59,  Caversham-road,  London,  N.W.

Lloyd,  Francis,  Grenadier  Guards,  43,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W.

Lloyd,  Otho  Holland,  16,  Tite-street,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Lodge,  Professor  O.  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  2,  Grove-park,  Liverpool.

Lodge,  Robert,  Loxford  Grove  Purk,  Wanstead.

LoEWE,  Hugo  L.,  3,  Southampton-street,  London,  W.C.

Lord,  Mrs.  Robert,  Newstead,  Albert-road,  Bolton,  Lancashire.

Lovell,  Reginald  H.,  449,  Collins-street,  Melbourne.

LoAV,  Lady,  23,  De  Vere-gai'dens,  Kensington,  W.

Lucas,  Mrs.  E  A.,  Clareville,  co.  Galway.

Lyttelton,  Sybella  Lady,  9,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.

Macalister,  Professor  A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Torrisdale,  Cambridge.

MacColl,  Rev.  Canon  Malcolm,  M.A.,  Devonshire  Club,  St.

James's,  S.W.
*Macdonald,  Rev.  J.  A.,  Heswall,  Cheshire.
Mackay,  George  D.,  Inveralmond,  Cramond,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Macky,  Dr.,  4,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair.  W.

Mackenzie,  J.  Kenneth  D.,  Broadway  Chambers, Westminster,  S.W.
MacNaughton,  Rev.  Samuel,  M.A.,  Rose  Bank,  Addison-road,  Preston.
Maitland,  Edward,  B.A.,  1,  Studio-buildings,  Thurloe-square,  S.W.
Major,  Albert,  77,  Clapham-road,  London,  S.W.
Malden,  William  E.  P.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Manders,  H.,  F.R.C.S.,  Agincourt  House,  Yorktown,  Farnborough.
Mangin,  Marcet,  130,  Boulevard  Haussmann,  Paris.
Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  M.A.,  Woodford  Bridge,  Essex.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.  445

Mantell,  Miss  Bertha,  5,  South  Bank-terrace,  Sui'biton.
Marjoribanks,  Lady,  Tillmoutli  Park,  Cornhill-on-Tweed,  Northumber-
land.

Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-a venue,  London,  N.W.

Marshall,  Henry  William,  Quorn,  South  Australia.

Marshall,  Thomas,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial-street,  Leeds.

Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  28,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.O.

Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Vanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.

Martin,  Miss  A.  E.,  34,  Elvaston-place,  Queen's  Gate,  S.W.

Martin,  Mrs.  E.  G.,  42,  Rue  Gambetta,  Honfleur  (Calvados),  France.

Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  17,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Chief  Court,  Lahore,  India.

Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts.

Massey,  Charles  C,  124,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Masterman,  Miss  Louisa,  Cawood  Lodge,  Haslemere.

Mathews, G.B. , B.  A. , 9,  Menai  View-terrace, Upper  Bangor,North  Wales.

Matthews,  Frank  H.,  22,  Wentworth-street,  Bolton,  Lancashire.

Mayor,  R.  G.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

McAlpine,  Mrs.,  Ardenconnel-row,  near  Helensburgh,  N.B.

McCaul,  Miss,  Creggandarroch,  Chislehurst.

McHugh,  p.  a.,'  M.P.,  Sligo.

McKerlie,  Miss  Helen  G.,  Monkstown,  co.  Dublin.
McLaren,  Mrs.  C,  4-5,  Harrington-gardens,  London,  S.W.
McLaughlin,  E.  N.,  Trinity  Villa,  Spanish  Town,  Jamaica.
McReily,  a.  J.  W.,  Q.C.,  Supreme  Court,  St.  John's,  Newfoundland.
Melville,  Andrew  P.,  .5,  West  Castle-road,  Merchiston,  Edinburgh.
Merrilees,  J.  F.,  M.D.,  Auburn,  Victoria.
Micklethwait,  Richard  K.,  Ardsley  House,  Bamsley.
Milford,  The  Lady,  16,  Hill-street,  Berkeley -square,  W.
Miller,  Mrs.  W.  Pitt,  Merlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
Milman,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  17,  Southwell-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Mitchell,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  195,  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Molesworth,  Sir  Guilford  L.,  K.C.I.E.,  Simla,  India.
Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,  F.R.G.S.
Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett,Walsingham  House,  Piccadilly, W.
Monteagle,  The  Lord,  K.P.,  Mount  Trenchard,  Foynes,  co.  Limerick.
Montgomery,  Mrs.,  9,  Hartley-road,  Exmouth.

MooRE,  Lieut.-General  Montgomery,  Bellevue,  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.

Mordan,  Miss  C.  E.^  15,  Queen-square,  W.C.

Morgan,  Rev.  Edward,  B.A.,  Penmark  Vicarage,  Cowbridge.

MoRisoN,  Mrs.  Miller,  3,  'Douglas-crescent,  Edinburgh.

Morison,  Theodore,  M.A.,  Aligarh,  N.W.P.,  India.

MouL,  Mrs.,  3,  Prince's  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

Moulton,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  c/o  Messrs.  Munro  &  Co.,  7,  Rue  Scribe,  Paris.


446  List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Mount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Shelley  House,  Chelsea,  S.W.
MoYNiHAN,  B.  G.  A.,  M.B.  (Lond.),  The  General  Infirmary,  Leeds.
MuNRO,  Henry  Acland,  B.A.,  Guy's  Hospital,  S.E.
MuNTHE,  Dr.,  Rome.

Murray,  Professor  Geo.  G.  AiME,B.A.,The  University,  Glasgow,  N.  B.

Murray,  Mrs.  G.  A.,  10,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.

Murray,  Colonel  Hugh  H.,  R.A.,  28,  Gower-street,  London,  W.O.

Murray,  K  M.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.O.P.(Edin.),  10,  Hope-st.,  Edinburgh.

Murray,  Sydney  J.,  70,  Oecile-park,  Crouch  Hill,  London,  N.

Murray,  T.  Douglas,  Clewer  Lodge,  Windsor.

Murray- Aynsley,  Mrs.,  Great  Brampton,  near  Hereford.

Muse,  Mrs.  Eva  S.,  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico,  U.S.A.

Musk,  Mis8  Agnes,  Market-place,  Mildenhall,  Suffolk.

Myers,  Mrs.,  Brandon  House,  Cheltenham.

Myers,  Frederic  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Mylne,  Mrs.,  122,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Nathan,  S.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Neate,  Percy  John,  F.G.S.,  M.M.E.,  Medway  Iron  Works,  Rochester.
Nelson,  Rev.  George,  LLD.,  St.  Michael's  Vicarage,  Bromley,  Poplar,  E.
Nelson,  Mrs.  R.  A,  The  Rookery,  Nungumbaukum,  Madras.
Neville,  Francis  Henry,  M.A.,  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge.
Newbold,  Miss  A.,  4,  Artillery-buildings,  Victoria-street,  S.W.
Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84,  Newman-street,  London,  W.
Newsom,  John,  The  American  Trading  Company,  Yokohama,  Japan.
Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.
NiCHOLL,  Iltyd  B.,  The  Ham,  Cowbridge,  South  Wales.
NiCHOLLS,  Rev.  T.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Oswald's  College,  Tynemouth.
Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  M.D.,  The  Grange,

Totteridge,  Herts.
Nicolson,  Sir  A.,  K.C.I.E.,  C.M.G.,  British  Embassy,  Constantinople.
*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  17,  Latimer-street,  Tynemouth.
Noakes,  D.  W.,  23,  Nelson-street,  Greenwich,  S.E.
Noel-Cox,  Herbert  L.  N.,  2,  Edinburgh  Mansions,  Victoria-st., S.W.
NoRRis,  William  Alfred,  Holmwood  Lodge,  Laton-road,  Hastings.
Nutter,  Mrs.,  Fairseat,  Wrotham,  Kent.
Oakeley,  Miss  H.  D.,  97,  Warwick-road,  Earl's  Court,  S.W.
Ogilvie,  G.  M.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.
Oman,  Mrs.,  St.  Philip's  Lodge,  Painswick-road,  Cheltenham.
Oman,  Charles  W.  C,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford.
O'Neill,  Gregory  L.,  M.B.,  140,  Elizabeth-st.,Sydney,New South  Wales.
Opie,  Edward  A.  D.,  J. P.,  Pirie-street,  Adelaide.
Osborne,  James,  Ph.C,  Hersham,  near  Walton-on-Thames.
OzANNE,  Major  Charles  H.,  8,  Victoria-road,  Old  Charlton,  S.E.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


447


Pack-Beresfoed,  Denis  R.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagnalstown,  Co.  Carlow.
Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.
Paget,  Lady,  Villa  Bellosguardo,  Florence.

Palmer,  Lieut.  H.R.,  P. A.,  The  Grand  Depot  Barracks,  Woolwich.

Panton,  D.  Morrieson,  Melrose,  Porus  P.O.,  Jamaica,  W.I.

Park,  Miss  Margaret  L.  M.,  23,  Mecklenburgh-square,  W.C.

Parker,  Edward  W.,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas,  U.S.A.

Parkes,  R.  J.,  2,  Church-street,  Southport,  Lancashire.

Parry,  Rev.  William  Edwards,  B.A.,  1,  Bell-terrace,  Clewer, Windsor.

Passingham,  Mrs.,  Fermoyle,  Castle  Gregory,  Co.  Kerry.

Peake,  C.  W.,  B.A  ,  c/o  Mr.  Wood,  High-street,  Newport,  Salop.

Pennington,  Mrs.,  c/o  William  Watson  &  Co.,  28,  ApoUo-st.,  Bombay.

Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  Teneriffe,  Canary  Islands.

Perry,  E.  C,  M.D.,  M.A.,  Superintendent's  House,  Guy's  Hospital,  S.E.

Pethybridge,  Walter,  29,  Methley -street,  Kennington  Cross,  S.E.

Petrovo-Solovovo,  Michael.  38,  Serghievskaia,  St.  Petersburg.

Phillimore,  R.  C,  86,  Eaton-place,  Loudon,  S.W.

Phillips,  Rev.  J.  T.,  147,  Beaufort-hill,  Beaufort,  Mon.

Phillipps,  Mrs.  March,  Edmonstone  House,  Cheltenham.

Phipps,  Miss,  Knebworth  House,  Stevenage,  Herts.

Pickering,  James  R.,  A.I.E.E.,  5,  Carew-road,  Thornton  Heath.

Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  29,  Dawson-place,  London,  W.

Plendkrleith,  William,  60,  Stroud  Green-road,  Finsbury  Park,  N.

Podmore,  Frank,  M.A.,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Pollexfen,  F.  H.,  3,  Chetwynd-road,  Oxton,  Cheshire.

Pollock,  Miss,  50,  Weymouth-street,  London,  W.

PoNSONBY,  Hon.  Mrs.,  2,  Wilton-terrace,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.

Ponsonby,  Miss,  Gleusouthwell,  Rathfarnham,  co.  Dublin.

PoNTiFEX,  Miss,  72,  Cornwall-gai'dens,  London,  S.W.

Pope,  George  H.,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  Merchants'  Hall,  Bristol.

Porter,  Mrs.,  Highbury  Grange,  Portarlington-road,  Bournemouth,  W.

Porter,  Miss,  16,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C.

Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  2,  Abbey-gai-dens,  Westminster,  S.W.

Postgate,  Professor  J.  P.,  Litt.D.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Powell,  Miss  Constance  M.,  5,  Campden  Hill-square,  London,  W.

Powell,  George  Thompson,  Rotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E.

PowLES,  Lewis  Charles,  M.A.,  9,  Queen's  Gate-place,  London,  S.W.

PowYS,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  29,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  Loudon,  W.

Praed,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Pai'k,  London,  W.

Preble,  W.  P.,  Junr.,  237,  Broadway,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Pribitkof,  Y.,  23,  Troitzky  Pereoulok,  St.  Petersburg.

Prickett,  Miss  L.  M.,  Ross  Cottage,  Fortune  Gate-road,  Harlesden.

Prothero,  Mrs.,  63,  Trumpington-street,  Cambridge.

Pullen,  Miss,  Milton  Yiew,  Elsecar,  Barnsley,  Yorkshire.


448


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


PuMPHREY,  Mrs.,  Shotley  Bridge,  co.  Durham.

PuRDiE,  Mrs.,  27,  Palace-court,  London,  W.

Pye,  William  A.,  25,  Mark-lane,  London,  E.G.

Pym,  Mrs.  AnCxEla.  Bankside,  Lunham-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

Raalte,  Charles  van,  Aldenham  Abbey,  Watford.

Radnor,  The  Countess  of,  52,  Grosvenor-street,  London,  W.

Raleigh,  Walter  A.,  M.A.,  27,  Ladbroke-road,  London,  W.

Ramsay,  Professor  William,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  12,  Arundel-gardens,  W,

Ramsay,  Lady,  The  Old  House  Wimbledon,  S.W.

Raper,  R.  W.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.

Raphael,  Mrs,  Walter,  7,  Bramham-gardens,  S.  Kensington,  S.W.
Raupert,  Rev.  H.  G.,  24,  Queen  Ann's-grove,  Bedford  Park,  London, W.
Rayleigh,  Clara  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Reade,  Herbert  V.,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
Reichel,  Principal  H.  R.,  M.A.,  University  College,  Bangor.
Reynolds,  Colonel  H.  C,  ThornclifFe,  Cheltenham.
Reynolds,  Mrs.,  Millington  House,  Thelwall,  near  Warrington.
Richardson,  Frederic  William,  F.C.S.,  2,  FarclilFe-place,  Bradford.
Richardson,  PtOBERT  E.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Riddiford,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Brookfield,  Hucclecote,  near  Gloucester.
Ridley,  Frank  C,  17,  Margaret-street,  London,  W.
Ridley,  Henry  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Botanic  Gardens,  Singapore.
PtiDLEY,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham-gardens,  London,  N.W.
RiGG,  Thomas  S.  J. ,B.  A., General  Post  Office,  Sydney,  New  South  Wales.
Roberts,  William  Johnson,  146,  Pembroke-road,  Dublin.
Roberts,  Rev.  W.  W.,  39,  Addison-gardens,  Kensington,  W.
Robertson,  C.  Lockhart,  M.D.,  Guns  Green, The  Drive,  Wimbledon.
Robertson,  George  M.,  M.B.,  Royal  Asylum,  Morningside,  Edinburgh.
Robertson,  Mrs.,  Nether  Scale  Hall,  Ashby-de-la-Zouch.
Robertson,  Miss  N.,  1,  Oakley-street,  Chelsea,  S.W.
PiOBiN,  Percy  A.,  B.A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Robinson,  Dr.  William  Newman,  Kadina,  South  Australia.
Roger,  W.  Wallace,  31,  Tavistock-square,  London,  W.C.
*RoGERS,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N.
Rogers,  Rev.  E.  H.,  M.A.,  Thames  Ditton,  Kingston-on-Thames.
Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  London  Hospital,  Whitechapel-road,  E.
Ross,  A.  Gait, 7,  Edinburgh-terrace,  Victoria-road,  London,  W.
Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5,  Hamilton-place,  London,  W.
Roxburgh,  R.,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  1,  Victoria-bdgs., Weston-super-Mare.
Riicker,  Professor  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  Errington,  Clapham  Park,  S.W.
Russell,  The  Earl,  Amberley  Cottage,  Maidenhead.
Russell,  Mrs.  Campbell,  Golden  Mead,  Chislehurst.
Russell,  John,  B.A.,  University  Hall,  Gordon-square,  London,  W.C.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


449


Rylands,  Thomas  G.,  F.L.S.,  F.G.S.,  Highfiekls,  Thelwall,  near
Warrington.

Sajous,  Charles  E.,  M.D.,  28,  Rue  de  Madrid,  Paris.

Salmond,  Percy  N.,  Captain  3rd  Royal  Scots,  Eldermere,  Ilkley.

Samaldas,  Lalubhai,  Chief  Revenue  Officer,  Bhavnager,  Bombay

Presidency,  India.
Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxsiialls,  Lindfield,  Hayward's  Heath.
Sams,  Rev.  George  F.,  M.A.,  Emberton  Rectory,  Newport  Pagnell.
Sands,  Mrs.  Mahlon,  40,  Portland-place,  London,  W.
Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone  House,  Padstow.
ScHRAM,  Miss  Lilian  M.E.,  178,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.
Schreiber,  Major,  27,  Fopstone-road,  Earl's  Court,  S.W.
Schuster,  Miss,  Cannizaro,  Wimbledon,  S.W.
ScHWABE,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  3,  Upper  Belgrave-road,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Scott,  Sydney  C,  Hatherleigh,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill,  London.
ScRiPPS,  T.  Cecil,  Adelphi  Chambei's,  London,  W.C.
■*Scudamorb,  Mrs.,  3,  Tollington-park,  Holloway,  London,  N.
Seilern,  Count  Charles,  23,  Wolmersley-road,  Stroud  Green,  N.
Sellin,  Professor  C.  W.,  5,  Wrangelsti^asse,  Holieluft,  Hamburg.
Selous,  Edmund,  Barton  Mills,  near  Mildenhall,  Suffolk.
Seymour,  Captain  Edward  H.,  R.N.,  9,  Ovington-squai-e,  S.W.
Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  Trewollack,  Bodmin.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1,  Edwardes-place,  Kensington,  W.
Sharpe,  J.  W.,  M.A.,  Woodroffe,  Portarlington-road,  Bournemouth.
Sheavyn,  Robert  F.,  Long-street,  Atherstone.
Sheppard,  W.  F.,  M.A.,  2,  Temple-gardens,  E.C.
Sheridan,  Mrs.  Dudley,  Russell  House,  4,  West  Kensington-gardens, W.
^Shield,  Mrs.,  Bowers  Gifford  Rectory,  Essex.

Shove,  Miss  E.,  K.Q.C.P.I. , M.B.,  25, St.  Mark's-cres., Regent'sPk., N. W.
Shroff,  M.  M.,  R.  H.  Bhaya's  House,  Bora  Bazar-st.,  Fort  Bombay,  India.
*Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W.  ,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.  C. ,  U.  S.  A.
Shuttle  worth,  John,  Kenmare  Bridge,  by  New  Galloway,  Kirkcud-
brightshire, N.B.
Sidgwick,  Arthur,  M.A.,  64,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.
SiDGWiCK,  Mrs.  Edward,  29,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.
Sidgwick,  Professor  Henry,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Simpson,  Reginald  Wynne,  B.A.,  14,  Cornwall-gardens,  S.W.
Sims,  F.  Manley,  F.R.C.S.,  12,  Hertford-street,  Mayfair,  W.
Sisley,  Richard,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Knightsbridge,  London,  W.
Skeffingtox,  Joseph  B.,  M.A.,  LL.B.,Downpatrick,  co.  Down,  Ireland.
Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  13,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Sloman,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  The  School  House,  Birkenhead.
Sloman,  Samuel  George,  Junr.,  39,  West-street,  Farnham.

2  G


450


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Smart,  J.  Naish,  Sydney  House,  Burnhara.

Smith,  G.  Albert,  St.  Ann's  Well,  Brighton.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Amble,  ISTorthumberland.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  H.  B.,  M.A.,  Grange  over  Sands,  Lancashire.

Smith,  Henry,  M.D.  (Jena)  Cravensea,  Cockington,  Torquay.

Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.O.

Smith,  H.  Babington,  B.A.,  Government  House,  Calcutta.

Smith,  John  George,  29,  Cadogan-terrace,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Miss  J.  M.,  Hyde  Park  Court,  Albert  Gate,  London,  W.

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson-place,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Smith,  R.  Morris,  3,715,  Chestnut-street,  W.  Philadelphia,  U.S.A.

Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  44,  Grosvenor-road,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  R.  Travers,  B.D.,  "Vicarage,  Clyde-road,  Dublin.

Smith,  Wallace  A.,  34,  Devonshire-street,  Portland-place,  London, W.

Smith,  Mrs.,  Barnes  Hall,  Sheffield.

Snape,  Mrs.  Markland  Hill,  Heaton,  Bolton.

Sxow,  Chester  A.,  712,  Eighth-street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Solovioff,  Wsevolod,

Soltykoff,  Prince  Alexis,

Somerset,  Lady  Henry,  The  Priory,  Reigate.

Somerset,  H.  Somers,  The  Priory,  Reigate.

Speer,  Mrs.  Stanhope,  Ashley  Villa,  Yentnor,  Isle  of  Wight.

Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  25,  York-street,  Portman-square,  W.

Sperling,  Arthur,  J. P.,  Lattenbury  Hill,  St.  Ives,  Hunts.

Spinks,  Judge,  Vernon,  British  Columbia.

St.  George,  Mrs.,  2,  Jervis-place,  Clonmel,  Ireland.

Stackhouse,  Mrs.  M.  F.,  Stackhouse,  Settle.

Stainforth,  Miss  Emily,  15,  Matheson-road,  West  Kensington,  W.
Stanley,  Henry  M.,  D.CL.,  LL.D.,  2,  Richmond-terrace,  S.W.
Stanavay,  Miss  Emily,  17,  Park-street,  Taunton.
Stapley,  Alfred  M.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.
Stapley,  Richard,  33,  Bloomsbury-square,  London,  W.C.
Stapley,  Mrs.,  33,  Bloomsbury-square,  London,  W.C.
Stead,  William  T.,  Cambridge  House,  Wimbledon  S.W.
Steam,  H.  T.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Stephenson,SirAugustusK.,K.C.B.,Q.C.,46,Ennismore-gdns,S.W.
Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.W.
Stevenson,  George,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  Hastings-st.,  Calcutta.
Stevenson,  R.  L.,  Vailinia  Plantation,  Upolu,  Samoan  Islands.
Stewart,  Mrs.  Charlotte  A.,  Largham,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.
Stewart,  Miss  Susan,  89,  Philbeach-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Stillman,  W.  J.,  3,  Clialloner-street,  West  Kensington,  W.
Stirling,  J.  M.  Morries,  Gogar  House,  Stirling,  N.B.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


451


Stone,  Miss  Edith  L.,  Shute  Hay,  Walditch,  Briclport.
Stout,  George  F.,  M.A,,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.
Sturges,  Mrs.  William,  32,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-sq.,  London,  W.
Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,  2,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-sq.,  London,  W.
*SuGDEN,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Bradford,  Yorkshire.
SuMMERSON,  Samuel  J.,  Haughton-le-Skerne,  Darlington.
Swan,  C.  A.,  10,  Delamere -street,  London,  S.W.
SwANWicK,  Miss  Anna,  23,  Cumberland-terrace,  London,  N.W.
Sweeting,  Richard,  D.H.,  B.A.,  D.P.H.,  6,  Hereford  Mansions,  Here-
ford-road, Bayswater,  W.
Swire,  Henry,  Captain,  2,  ISTightingale-place,  Woolwich.
Stmons,  Miss  Jessie  H.,  91,  Wigmore-street,  London,  W.
Stnge  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  1,  Daleham-gardens,  South  Hampstead,  N.W.
Tancred,  Mrs.  Clement,  2,  Princes'  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.
Talbot,  The  Lady  Edmund,  26,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Tanner,  Ernest,  Hazlehurst,  Penarth.

Tanner,  Slingsby,  104b,  Mount-street,  Bei'keley-square,  W.
Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.
Tattersall,  Robert  W.,  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  High-street,  Oxford.
Taunton,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.
Taxis,  The  Princess,  Grosse  Mohrengasse,  Vienna.
Taylor,  Rev.  Arnold  D.,  B.A.,  Churchstanton  Rectory, Honiton,  Devon.
Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  The  Larches,  Banstead,  Surrey.
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Milner-square,  London,  W.
Taylor,  Lieut.-Colonel  G.  L.  Le  M.,  Lismore,  Guildford.
Tebb,  Albert  E.,  M.D.,  173,  Finchley  Ptoad,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  near  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Thackeray,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  32,  Kidbrooke  Park-road,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Thatcher,  Miss,  36,  Devonshire-street,  Portland-place,  London,  W.
Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville-park,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Thomas,  A.  C,  Korumburra,  Gippsland,  Victoria,  Australia.
Thomas,  Joseph  William,  F.I.C.,F.C.S.,  Drumpellier,  Gloucester.
Thompson,  I.  C,  F.L.S.,  F.R.M.S.,  Woodstock,  Waverley-rd.,  Liverpool.
Thomson,  Prof.  J.  J.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Thorpe,  Mrs.  Mary,  Lenton  House,  Lenton,  Nottingham.
Thurstan,  Frederic,  W.,  M.A.,  c/o  The Nawab  Fakhr-ul-Mulk,

Bahadur,  Hyderabad,  Deccan,  India.
Todd,  Mrs.,  Maclean,  Clarence  River,  New  South  Wales.
Tooth,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  Woodside,  Croydon.
Townlet,  Miss  F.  M.,  47,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.
Traherne,  Mrs.,  Coedriglan  Park,  Cardiif.
Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J.P.,  Kenmare,  Ii-eland.

Trevor,  Rev.  Thomas  Warren,  M.A.,  Penmon  Vicarage,  Beaumaris.


452


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  33,  Green- street,  Grosvenor-square,  W.
TuKER,  Miss  Mildred  A.R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  N.W.
Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Milton  Hall,  Cambridgeshire.
TwEEDiE,  David  M.,  Adelaide.
Tyrer,  Mrs.  W.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot.

Underwood,  Rev.  Canon  0.  W.,  M.A.,  Hi.ston  Vicarage,  Cambridge.

Vacher,  William  H.,  54,  Addison  Mansions,  Kensington,  S.W.

Vailati,  Professor  Giovanni,  Crema,  Italy.

Van  Eeden,  Frederick,  M.D.,  Bussum,  Holland.

Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  2-51,  Keisersgracht,  Amsterdam.

Venman,  Hezekiah,  20,  Pimlico-road,  London,  S.W.

Venn,  J.,  D.Sc,  F.  R.S.,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.

Vebrall,  Mrs.,  Selwyn-gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26,  Gloucester-place,  Brighton.

ViAN-WiLLiAMS,  Rev.  H.,  3,  Waterloo-place.  North  Shields.

Vicars,  G.  R.,  M.D.,  Branston,  Lincoln.

ViLLAMABiNA,  The  Marchesa  di,  Palazza  Reale,  Quirinale,  Rome.
Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  Villa  Flora,  Cannes,  France.
Vincent,  R.  Harry,  Fernbank,  Leytonstone,  N.E.
Vivian,  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Vores,  Arthur,  M.R.C.S.,  8,  Mansfield-street,  Cavendish-square,  W.
Walford,  Col.  Neville  L.,  R.A.,  1,  Asliburn  place,  London,  S.W.
Walker,  Mrs.  Emma,  42,  Kingsnorth-gardens,  Folkestone.
Walker,  Mrs.  Stewart,  Shrewsbury  House,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  64,  Harley-street,  London,  W.
*Walwyn,  Mrs.,  9,  Sion  Hill,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Warburton,  Rev.  W.  T.,  M.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Rock  Ferry,  Birkenhead.

Ward,  Wilfrid,  Molescroft,  Eastbourne.

Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.

Wardrop,  Mrs.,  10,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  Eaton-square,  S.W.

Warrand,  Mrs.,  Bught,  Inverness,  N.B.

Warter,  M  rs.  Tatham,  Longden  Manor,  Pontesford,  Salop.

Wassell,  H.  a.,  F.R.A.S.,Addenbrook  Villa,01d  Swinford, Stourbridge.

Wateriiouse, C. H. , M.  D. ,  .5 6,  Karl  Ludwig  Strasse, Ober-Dobling,  Vienna.

Watson,  Rev.  John,  M.A.,  18,  Sefton  Drive,  Liverpool.

Watson,  Mrs.  W.  C,  39,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.

Webber-Smith,  Colonel  James,  27,  Shaftesbury-avenue,  London,  W.

Webb,  Godfrey,  13,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.

Wedd,  N.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Welldon,  Rev.  J.  E.  C,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.
Wells,  Edmund  P.,  C.E.,  26,  Cambridge-gardens,  N.  Kensington,  W.
Wells,  Miss  Grenville,  27,  Westbourne-square,  London,  W.
Wemyss,  Miss  A.,  Washwell  House,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.
Westcott,  William  Wynn,  M.B.,  D.P.H.,396,  Camden-road,  London,  N.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


453


Westlake,  Ernest,  F.G.S.,  2,  Ridge  way-road,  Redhill.

Whately,  Mrs.  Henry,  14,  Campden  House-road,  Kensington,  W.

Wherry,  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambridge.

Whishaw,  Mrs.  Bernhard,  173,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.

Whitear,  Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  107,  Florence-road,  Finsbury  Park,  IST.

Whitehead,  J ohn,  Esplanade,  Guernsey.

Whiting,  J.  Markby,  58,  Tedworth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Wig  AN,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone.

Wilde,  Mrs.  Oscar,  16,  Tite-street,  Chelsea,  S.W.

WiLLAN,  Miss  Florence  M.,  Hanley  Castle,  near  Worcester.

WiLLARD,  Miss  Frances  E.,  The  Cottage,  Reigate.

WiLLETT,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindfield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.

Williams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  9,  Upper  Beulah-hill,  Upper  Norwood, S.E.

Williams,  Rev.  Nelson  G.,M.A.,Ketteringham,Wymondham,  Norfolk.

Williams,  Miss  S.,  The  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham.

Willmott,  Miss  R.,  Warley  Place,  Great  Warley,  Essex.

Wilson,  David  H.,  M.A.,  Dunridge,  West  Hill,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea.

Wilson,  Herbert  W.,  The  Woodlands,  Athlone.

Windeyer,  The  Hon.  W.  C.  Justice,  Supreme  Court,  Sydney,  Australia.
WiNGFiELD,  Mrs.  Edward,  40,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  W.
WiNGFiELD,  H.  E.,  M.A.,  58,  Tedworth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
*WiNGFiELD,  Mrs.,  Belvidere  Place,  Church-road,  Wimbledon.
Wisden,  Lieut.  Thomas  F.  M.,  Broadwater,  near  Worthing.
WiTHERBY,  Arthur  George,  B.A.,  117a,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.
Withers,  J.  J.,B.A.,  2,  Museum  Chambers,  Bury-st.,  Bloomsbury,  W.C.
WiTTiG,  Gregor  C,  2,  Kornerstrasse,  Leipzig.
WoEiKOW,  Alexis,  Moika  28,  St.  Petersburg.
Wood,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Newent  Rectory,  Gloucestershire.
W^OOdhouse,  G.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton.

Wright,  Arthur  J.,  M.A.,  Kensington  Palace  Mansions,  London, W.

Wyld,  George,  M.D.,  Fieldhead,  Wimbledon  Park,  S.W.

Wyllie,  J.  Eilenroe,  Cap  d'Antibes,  S.  France.

Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.

Yearsley,  p.  Macleod,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Chalk-hill  House,  Kings-

bury-Neasden,  N.W.
Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  W.
Young,  Rev.  Charles  John,  F.R.A.S.,  Stalford-place,  Halifax.
Young,  Professor  W.  H.,  11,  Werder  Strasse,  Baden  Baden,  Germany.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any
change  of  address  to  the  Assistant-Secretary,  19,  Buckint^hani-street,  Adeliihi,
London,  W.C.


454  List  of  Members  and  Associates.


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES  OE  THE  AMERICAN  BRANCH.

(AoGUST  1st,  1894.)


Names  of  Members  are  ^:>rm<efZ  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Honorary  Associates  are  jirefixed  by  an  Asterisk.

Names  of  Associates  are  2)rinted  in  Small  Capitals.


All  Addresses  are  "  U.S.A."  except  ivhen  another  Gounlry  is  named.


Albery,  Mrs.  H.  M.  L.,  Colusa,  Colusa  Co.,  Cal.
Albree,  John,  June.,  56,  Bedford-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Albree,  Joseph,  20,  Market-street,  Allegheny,  Pa.
Alden,  F.  E.,  Vandergrift  Building,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Alexander,  Don,  454,  Oak-street,  Chattanooga,  Tenu.
Alexander,  W.  L.,  Canton,  Ohio.
*Alexander,  Mrs.  Kezia  E.,  Birmingham,  Mich.

Allen,  Prop.  J., Univ. of  City  of  N.  Y.,Washington-sq.,New  York,  N.Y.
Allen,  Rev.  M.  Theresa,  Liberal,  Mo.
Almy,  Francis,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Ames,  Mrs.  Joseph  B.,  5,  Richter-terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.
Andrew,  Miss  Elizabeth  L.,  Old  Colony  Hill,  Hingham,  Mass.
Annes,  a.  L.,  Wansan,  Wis.

Arnold,  J.  N.,  19,  College-street,  Providence,  R.T.

AuEL,  Mrs.  C,  65,  Letferts-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Austen,  Mrs.  George,  Morris  Plains,  New  J ersey.

Avery,  Miss  M.  H.,  137,  Academy -st.,  Poughkeepsie,  New  York,  N.Y.

Ayer,  J.  C,  68,  West  91st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Ayers,  George  D.,  Maiden,  Mass.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  2,729,  Prairie-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Baker,  Dr.  Smith,  Winston-building,  TJtica,  N.Y.

Baldwin,  Henry  C,  1729,  Common  wealth- avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Bancroft,  Mrs.  John  C,  61,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mas.s.

Barnes,  W.  A.,  New  Madrid,  Mo.

Barr,  James  M.,  c/o  Institute  of  the  City  and  Guilds  of  London,

Central  Institute,  Exhibition-road,  London,  S.W.
Barrows,  C.  M.,  Walnut-street,  Brookline,  Mass.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


455


Bartlett,  James  W.,  211,  Central-avenue,  Dover,  N.H.
Beale,  C.  W.,  Arden,  North  Carolina.

Beam,  Mrs.  John  V.,  Jr.,  10,  West  -SOth-street,  New  York,  N.Y,

Belden,  Mrs.  Amanda,  4,726,  Woodlawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Bigelow,  Dr.  W.  S.,  60,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Blackford,  A.,  322,  South  Main-street,  Findlay,  Ohio.

Blackmar,  Paul,  406,  Lumber  Exchange,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Blake,  Francis,  Keowaydin,  Weston,  Auburndale,  P.O.,  Mass.

Blodgett,  C,  M.D.,  2.38,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.

Blodgett.  Mrs.,  238,  Maple-street,  Holyoke,  Mass.

Boardman,  W.  F.,  Department  of  the  Interior,  Ottawa,  Canada.

Boon,  Mrs.  E.  G.,  Villa  de  la  Gi'azia,  Alassio,  Eiviera  di  Ponenta,  Italy.

Both-Hendriksen,  Miss  Louise,  166,  Macon-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Bowditch,  C.  P.,  28,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

BowDiTCH,  Professor  H.  P.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  Mass.

Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  179,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Briggs,  Dr.  E.  C,  12-5,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass,

Brimmer,  Martin,  47,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Brimmer,  Mrs.  Martin,  47,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama.

Brooks,  Henry,  15,  Milk-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Brown,  Alfred  S.,  195,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Brown,  Delass  S.,  309,  Main-street,  Peoria,  111.

Browne,  G.  H.,  16,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Browne,  Mrs.  L.  Andrews,  131,  Sargent-street,  Newton,  Mass.

Bryan,  W.,  c/o  Messrs.  Bottler  Bros.,  Main-street.  Houston,  Texas.

Buffett,  Dr.  E.  P.,  520,  Bergen-avenue,  Jersey  City  Heights,  N.  J.

Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bulley,  B.  H.,  Canton,  Ohio.

Bundy,  Mrs.  Mary  E.,  Box  1069,  So.  Evaston,  111.

Burge,  Miss  Marie  L.,  132,  Montague-street,  Bi-ooklyn,  N.Y.

Butler,  C  W.,  M.D.,  35,  Fullerton-av.,  South,  Montclair,  N.J.

Butler,  Miss  Virginia,  Stockbridge,  Mass.

Cabot,  Caroline  A.,  M.D.,  168,  W.-48th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Carey,  A.  A.,  29,  Fairfield-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Carey,  Mrs.  A.  A.,  29,  Fairtield-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Carnochan,  Gouverneur  M.,  46,  Exchange-place,  New  York,  N.Y.

Carpenter,  Frank  B.,  Tiffany  Building,  337,  4th-avenue,  New  York.

Carpenter  Franklin  R.,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.

Carpenter,  Mrs.  Franklin  R.,  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.

Carpenter,  W.  O.,  517,  Adams-street,  Chicago,  III.

Carr,  Lucien,  163,  Brattle-street,  Cambridge,  Mass,

Carr,  Robert  S.,  Hamilton,  Ohio.

Casey,  Theodore  B.,  Minneapolis,  Minn.


456  List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Oatlin,  Captain  R.,  1,428,  Euclid-place,  "Washington,  D.C.

Caulkins,  Silas,  Soldiers'  Home,  San  Bernardino,  California.

Chapin,  F.  W.,  M.D.,  Hot  Springs,  Virginia.

Chapman,  Mrs.  J.  J.,  327,  West  82nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Cheesman,  Dr.  W.  S.,  22,  William-street,  Auburn,  N.Y.

Cheney,  Dr.  Fred.  E.,  Hotel  Bristol,  Boston,  Mass.

Cheney,  W.  T.,  220,  Broad-street,  Rome,  Georgia.

Chenoweth,  Mrs.  C.  Van  D.,  Shrewsbury,  Worcester  Co.,  Mass.

Chick,  Frank  W.,  Madrid,  Franklin  Co.,  Maine.

Clarke,  J.  E.,  Ph.D.,  21-4,  South  43rd-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Claypole,  Professor  E.  W.,  603,  Buchtel-avenue,  Akron,  Ohio.

Cleaves,  N.  Porter,  29,  India-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Clough,  Albert  L.,  Box  114,  Manchester,  N.H.

Cobb,  Mrs.  Francis  D.,  Barnstaple,  Mass.

Coffin,  Charles  A.,  109,  Nahant-street,  Lynn,  Mass.

Coffin,  C.  P.,  39,  Court-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Coleman,  Miss  Anne  C,  Lebanon,  Pennsylvania.

*Coleman, William Emmette,  Chief Quartermaster's  Office,  San
Francisco,  Cal.

CoLSON,  W.  A.,  Cor.  Buckner-avenue  and  Bluff-street,  Peoi'ia,  111.
CoMPTON,  Prof.  Elias,  Wooster  University,  Woostei-,  Ohio.
Conner,  Mrs.  Eliza  A.,  American  Press  Association,  45  &  47,  Park-
place,  New  York,  N.Y.
Cook,  Mrs.  Ellen  K.,  220,  Main-street,  Davenport,  Iowa.
Coonley,  Mrs.  John  C,  620,  Division-street,  Chicago,  111.
Cope,  Professor  Edward  D.,  2,102,  Pine-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Corning,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  Oxford,  Maine.
Coryell,  V.  M.,  310,  Sixth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Cotton,  Mary  H.,  M.D.,  Portsmouth,  Ohio.
Cowles,  Dr.  E.,  McLean  Asylum,  Somerville,  Mass.
Crafts,  James  M.,  59,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Crafts,  Mrs.  J.  M.,  59,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Craig,  John  W.,  Box  291,  San  Bernardino,  Cal.
Crepin,  Ernest  E.,  4,726,  Woodlawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Critchlow,  E.  B.,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.

Crocker,  Mrs.  F.  E.,  P.  O.  Box  59,  Columbus  Junction,  Iowa.
Crosby,  Mrs.  Eleanor  F.,  Gardner-road,  Brookline,  Mass.
Crosby,  Professor  W.  O.,  Society  Natural  History,  Boston,  Mass.
Croswell,  James  G.,  17,  West  44th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Crothers,  Dr.  T.  D.,  Walnut  Lodge,  Hartford,  Conn.
Curran,  Richard  L.,  219,  Genesee-street,  Utica,  N.Y
Curtis,  W.  E.,  1740.  M-street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C,
Gushing,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  Highland  Park,  111.
Dailey,  Judge  Abeam  H.,  16,  Court-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.


List  of  Ilembers  and  Associates.


457


Darrow,  Clarence  S.,  3,559,  Yernon-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Davidson,  Thomas,  Prof.,  239,  West  105th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Dawbarn,  Robert  H.  M.,  M.D.,  105,  W.  74th-st.,  New  York,  N.Y.
Delabarre,  Prof.  G.  B.,  9,  Arlington-avenue,  Providence,  R.I.
Deland,  Mrs.  Lorin  F.,  112,  Mount  Yernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Dexter,  Mrs.  George,  Egmont-street,  Brookline,  Mass.
Dickey,  Calvin,  M.A.,  Boom  22,  94,  Washington-street,  Chicago,  111.
Dike,  Miss  Florence  B.,  207,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
DiMMocK,  George,  P.  O.  Box  15,  Canobie  Lake,  N.H.
DoANE,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.

Dodge,  J.  T.,  340,  West  Washington-avenue,  Madison,  Wis.
Dole,  Nathan  H.,  "Hedgecote,"  Glen-road,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Donald,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  Winchester,  Trinity  Church,  Boston,  Mass.
Dorr,  Mrs.  C.  H.^  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dorr,  George  B.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dow,  Alexander,  331,  West  85th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Drown,  T.  Pickering,  351,  Congress-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Duncan,  W.  A.,  Ph.D.,  Syracuse,  N.Y.

Dunham,  Miss  E,  L.,  37,  East  36th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
DwiGHT,  Mrs.  James,  Stockbridge,  Mass.
Dyer,  Walter  H.,  Knightsville,  Maine.

Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  c/o  R.  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Edwards,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  161,  Main-street,  Keene,  N.H.
Ellis,  Miss  Lucy,  330,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Errani,  Mrs.  Charlotte,  118,  East  26th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
EsTERLY,  Mrs.  G.  W.,  2,027,  Kenwood  Parkway,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
EsTY,  Professor  William  C,  Amherst  College,  Amherst,  Mass.
Etheridge,  Miss  Fanny  S.,  91,  Round-hill,  Northampton,  Mass.
Evans,  Miss  Ella  K.,  186,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Evans,  Mrs.  Glendower,  12,  Otis-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Everett,  Professor  C.  C,  23,  Berkeley-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Farmer,  Miss  Sarah  J  ,  Eliot,  Maine.

Fayes,  Prop.  Chas.,  LL.D.,  150,  East  45th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Felton,  Thomas  C,  Hotel  Ludlow,  Boston,  Mass,

Ferguson,  J.  H.,  Talmage,  Nebraska.

Fields,  Mrs.  James  T.,  148,  Charles-sti-eet,  Boston,  Mass.

Fillebrown,  Thos.,  M.D.,  D.M.D.,  157,  Newbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.

FiNNiGAN,  John,  90,  Gold-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

FisKE,  Rev.  Richmond,  D.D.,  251,  Lexington-st.,  East  Boston,  Mass.

Fluhrer,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  Grand  Rapids,  Michigan.

Forbes,  John  M.,  Milton,  Mass.

Forbes,  W.  H.,  181,  Devonshire-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Frothingham,  O.  B.,  118,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
FuUerton,  C.  W^.,  94,  Dearborn-street,  Chicago,  111.


458


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


FuLLERTON,  PROFESSOR  G.  S.,  4,116,  Spruce-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Gage,  Lyman  J.,  470,  North  State-street,  Chicago,  111.
Gale,  Harlow  S.,  43,  Biilow-strasse,  Berlin.

Gardiner,  Dr.  Edward  G.,  Iiistitute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.
Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N".,  23,  Craft's-aA-enue,  Northampton,  Mass.
Gardiner,  J.  Hays,  Hawes-street,  Longford,  Mass.
Gardner,  Mrs.  John  L.,  152,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Genung,  Prof.  J.  Franklin,  Ph.D.,  Amherst,  Mass.
Gerrish,  Dr.  F.  H.,  675,  Congress-street,  Portland,  Maine.
Gill,  Wm.  Fearing:,  3,  East  86th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Gilman,  Benjamin  I.,  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston,  Mass.
Gleason,  Adele  a.,  M.D.,  The  Sanitarium,  Elmira,  N.Y.
Goddard,  George  A.,  1,  Mount  Vernon-place,  Boston,  Mass.
GoDDARD,  Mrs.  Moses,  25,  Brown-street,  Providence,  R.I.
GoFP,  F.  C,  Morgan  Run  Coal  and  Mining  Company,  Cleveland,  Ohio.
GooDALE,  Henry  Sterling,  400,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
GooDNOW,  H,  R.,  95,  Riverside  Drive,  New  York.
Goodridge,  Mrs.  Frederick,  250,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Goodwin,  W.  H.,  Junr.,  Sioux  City,  Iowa.
Gray,  Miss  Agnes  W.,  1,  Berkeley-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Greeley,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Nashua,  Iowa.
^  Green,  Mrs.  Richmond,  Easthampton,  Mass.
Greene,  Miss,  Hotel  Brunswick,  New  York,  N.Y.  ^
Gridley,  J.  N.,  Virginia,  111.

Griffin,  Rev.  Pt.  A.,  Columbus-avenue,  Northampton,  Mass.

Oeipfing,  Mrs.  0.  R.,  729,  Amsterdam-avenue,  New  York,  N,Y.

Grover,  Rev.  G.  W.,  22,  Temple-street,  Nashua,  New  Hampshire.

Grower,  George  G.,  Ansonia  Brass  and  Copper  Co.,  Ansonia,  Conn.

Gulliver,  Professor  Julia  H.,  Rockford  College,  Rockford,  111.

Hale,  George  S.,  10,  Tremont-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hall,  Hon.  G.  E.,  Consulat  Imperial  de  Turquie,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Hall,  Professor  James,  New  York  State  Museum,  Albany,  N.Y.

Hall,  Dr.  T.  P.,  Tabor,  Fremont  Co.,  Iowa.

Hamblet,  Eugene,  P.  O.  Box  1 2,  Dracut,  Mass.

Hamilton,  C.  M.,  50,  Main-street,  Salamanca,  N.Y.

Hansen,  Otto  R.,  649,  Cass-street,  Milwaukee,  Wis.

Hardaway,  W.  a.,  M.D.,  2,710,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Harden,  Judge  William  D.,  Savannah,  Georgia.

Harris,  Rev.  J.A.,D.D.,  St.  Paul's  Rectory,  Chestnut  Hill,  Philadelphia.

Harris,  John  J.,  St.  Louis  Insane  Asylum,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Harris,  William  T.,  LL.D.,  914,  23rd-street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.

Hartzell,  T.  S.,  73,  Navarre-street,  Canton,  Ohio.

Harwood,  C.  H.,  M.D.,  208,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


459


Hawkins,  William  M.,  6,  Coit  Block,  West  Swan-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Haworth,  George  D.,  Decatur,  111.
Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239,  Beacon- street,  Boston,  Mass.
Hayward,  Alvinza,  224,  California-street,  San  Fi'ancisco,  Cal.
Heard,  John,  Junr.,  c/o  Messrs.  Baring  &  Co.,  London,  England.
Hedges,  Mrs.  Sidney  M.,  7G,  Highland-street,  Roxbury,  Mass.
Heilner,  Rev.  S.  A.,  813,  South  3rd-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Hemenway,  Augustus,  Readville,  Mass.
Heyer,  George  W.,  619,  Main-street,  Houston,  Texas.
Heywood,  Charles,  Gardner,  Mass.
Hicks,  Benj.  D.,  Old  Westbury,  Queen's  Co.,  N".Y.
HiLES,  Ogden,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.
Hill,  Mrs.  A.  S.,  19,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Hoffman,  Professor  F.  S.,  Union  College,  Schenectady,  N.Y.
HoLBROOK,  Levi,  P.  O.  Box  536,  New  York,  N.Y.
HoLBROOK,  Dr.  M.  L.,  46,  East  21st-street,  New  York,"  N.Y.
Holladay;  Prof.  Waller,  400,  West  57th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holmes,  Mrs.  Julia  Sadler,  112,  West  118th-st.,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holmes,  Rev.  S.  V.  V.,  Westminster  Church,  Deleware  Avenue,
Buffalo,  N.Y.

Holt,  Henry,  29,  West  23rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Holt,  L.  Emmett,  M.D.,  15,  East  54th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Hommel,  p.  a.,  794,  2nd-avenue,  Pittsburg,  Pa.

Hooper,  Miss  E.  R.,  141,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

HoTCHKiss,  Miss  Jeannie  E.,  M.A.,  Rathbun  House,  Elmira,  New  York.

HoYLE,  W.,  El  Toro,  Orange  County,  Cal.

Hubbard,  Robert  M.,  322,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Hudson,  Thomson  Jay,  10,  Ninth-street,  S.E.,  Washington,  D.C.

Hudson,  Woodward,  Concord,  Mass.

Hull,  Miss  P.  C,  22,  John-street,  Providence,  R.I.

Hunt,  Chas.  R.,  M.D.,  262,  Union-street,  New  Bedford,  Mass.

Hurley,  A.  M.,  corner  of  First  and  Monmouth-sts.,Independence,Oregon.

HusE,  Wm.,  Ponca,  Dixon  Co.,  Nebraska.

Hutchinson,  Dr.  Mahlon,  100,  State-street,  Chicago,  111.

Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  N.Y.

Jackson,  Mrs.  Flora  J.,  558,  Milwaukee-street,  Milwaukee,  Wis.

James,  Mrs.  C.  E.  L.,  c/o  Bleecher  Luce,  10th  and  Chestnut-streets,

Fort  Smith,  Ark.
James,  Dr.  F.  H.,  2,627,  Olive-sti-eet,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
James,  Professor  William,  95,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
January,  Mrs.  J.  Lindell,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.,  London.
Jayne,  H.  La  Barre,  505,  Chestnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Jefferson,  J.,  Buzzard's  Bay,  Mass.


460


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Jenks,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  290,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Jewett,  Miss  >S.  O.,  South  Berwick,  Maine.

Johnson,  Charles  R..,  Box  492,  405,  Main-street,  Worcester,  Mass.
Johnson,  Professor  Roger  B.,  Miami  University,  Oxford,  Ohio.
Johnson,  Thomas  M.,  Osceola,  St.  Clair  Co.,  Mo.
Joline,  Mrs.  Adrian  H.,  1,  West  72nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jones,  George  H.,  .561,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jones,  Miss  Theresa  E.,  South  Evanston,  111.
JosLYN,  John  R.,  208,  E.  Water-street,  Elmira,  N.Y.
Kehew,  Mrs.  William  B.,  317,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Kelly,  W.  C,  Shelbyville,  111.

Kelly,  W.  F.,  918,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Kempton,  Charles  W.,  61,  Oro  Blanco,  Pima  Co.,  Arizona.

Kibbe,  a.  B.,  M.D.,  326,  Bailey-building,  Seattle,  Washington.

KiDD,  G.  W.,  853,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Kilner,  Mrs.  S.  E.,  333,  West  78th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Kimball,  Miss  Hannah  P.,  325,  Commonweal th-ave.,  Boston,  Mass.

King,  J.  Stebbins,  M.D.,  Syndicate  Block,  Decatur,  111.

Knowles,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  30,  Institute-road,  Worcester,  Mass.

KoPTA,  Madame  Flora  P.,  Gut  Podmok  in  Podraok,  Post  Shiitten-

hofen,  Bohemia.
Krekel,  Mrs.  M.P.,  802,  East  llth-street,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Kuhn,  Hamilton,  36,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Kuhn,  Mrs.  Hartman,  36,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Lasiont,  Robert,  60,  St.  James's-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Lang,  B.  J.,  8,  Brimmer-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Langley,  Professor  S.  P.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.
Latham,  Miss  V.  A.,  B.Sc,  N.  W.  Univ.,  Woman's  Medical  College,

S.  Lincoln-street,  Chicago,  111.
Lathrop,  John,  10,  Gloucester-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Lawrence,  Mrs.  Amory  A.,  59,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Lawrence,  A.  E.,  Junr.,  Exeter  Chambers,  Back  Bay,  Boston,  Mass.
Lawton,  Miss  Elizabeth,  142,  East  18th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  New  York,  N.Y.
Lee,  Mrs.  M.  H.,  21,  Chauncey-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Leonard,  Thomas,  628,  22nd-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Leonhardt,  J.  S.,  M.Sc,  M.D.,  1,427,  0-street,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.
Lewis,  P.  M.,  M.D.,  Lecompton,  Kansas.
Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine.
Librarian,  Cassadaga  Lake  Library  Association,  Lily  Dale,  N.Y.
Librarian,  Cutting's  Free  Library,  Lunen  burgh,  Vermont.
Librarian,  Denver  Public  Library,  Denver,  Colo.
Librarian,  Enoch  Piatt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore.
Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


461


Librarian,  Haverhill  Public  Library,  Haverhill,  Mass.
Librarian,  Lowell  City  Library,  Lowell,  Mass.
Librarian,  Maiden.  Public  Library,  Maiden,  Mass.
Librarian,  Michigan  State  Library,  Lansing,  Mich.
Librarian,  University  Nebraska,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.
Librarian,  Ohio  University,  Athens,  Ohio.
Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.

Librarian,  Rochester  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  New  York,N.Y.
Librarian,  San  Francisco  Free  Public  Library,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Librarian,  (Springfield)  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.
LiPPiTT,  General  Francis  J.,  Onsett,  Mass.

LiTTLEFiELD,  J.,c/o  S.  S.White  &  Co.,  12th  &  Chestnut-sts.,  Philadelphia.

LocKwooD,  Colonel  J.  S.,  146,  Franklin-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Lodge,  Mrs.  John  E.,  31,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Logan,  W.  S.,  58,  William-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

LoMBARDi,  C,  1,314,  Rusk-avenue,  Houston,  Texas.

Long,  George  E.,  Jos.  Dixon  Crucible  Company,  Jersey  City,  N.J.

Lounsberry,  C.  a.,  Fargo,  N.D.

Lukens,  Dr.  Anna,  1,068,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Lyman,  Joseph  B.,  University-bldg.,  Washington-sq.,  E.,  New  York.

MacDonough,  Thomas  B.,  West  End,  Long  Branch,  N.J.

Macleod,  Miss  Gertrude  E.,  1,  Berkeley-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Mallery,  Mrs.  Garrick,  1,323,  N.-st.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.

Marshall,  Rev.  A.  A.,  D.D.,  Crystal  Springs,  Georgia.

Marshall,  Henry  R.,  Macintyre  Bg.,  874,  Broadway,  New  York,N.Y.

Martin,  Mrs.  Emma  H.,  Worcester,  Mass.

Marvin,  Walter  T.,  2,099,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.  .

Mason,  Miss  Ellen  F.,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Mason,  Miss  Ida,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Mason,  H.  L.,  39,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Mason,  R.  Osgood,  M.D.,  348,  West  .58th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Mather,  Enoch,  M.  D.,  Ph. ,  D.  LL.  D. ,  1 24,  Hamilton-av.Paterson,  N.J.

Maurs,  Philip,  620,  F.-street,  Washington,  D.C.

McClellan,  Mrs.  Clare  D.,  Galena,  111.

McClelland,  Major  G.  P.,  Davenport,  Iowa.

McCuNE,  Dr.  Olive  F.,  53,  Orange-street,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  N.Y.
McEwEN,  Mrs.  D.  C,  160,  Stirling-place,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  N.Y.
McGee,  W.  J.,  U.S.  Geological  Survey,  Washington,  D.C.
McHenry,  Miss  J.  Howard,  Pikesville,  Balto.  Co.,  Maryland.
McIntosh,  Herbert,  537,  Massachusetts-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
McVicker,  J.  H.,  McVicker's  Theatre,  Chicago,  111.
Mendenhall,  Mrs.  E.  R.,  Duluth,  Minn.

Mendenhall,  Nereus,  M.D.,  Guilford  College,  Guilford  Co.,  N.O.
Metcalf,  Mrs.  I.  H.,  133,  Angell-street,  Providence,  R.I.


462


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Miller,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  Peterborough,  Madison  Co.,  N.Y.

Millet,  Josiah  B.,  150,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.

MiLLiKEN,  George,  3,614,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

MiNOT,  Professor  Charles  S.,  22,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

MiNTURN,  Miss,  109,  East  21st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Mitchell,  James,  Stock  Exchange,  New  York,  N.Y.

Morgan,  W.  E.,  M.D.,  34,  East  29th-street,  Chicago,  111.

Moth,  M.  J.,  M.D.,  3438,  Indiana-avenue,  Chicago,  111,

Myers,  W.  H.,  M.D.,  15,  West  Wayne-street,  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.

Myrick,  Rev.  Henry  L.,  Sing  Sing,  New  York.

Nagles,  Miss  Maria  K.,  1,214,  Walnut-street,  Phila.,  Pa.

Newbold,  Wm.  Romaine,  Ph.D.,  Univ.,  of  Penna.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Newcomb,  Prof.  Simon,  Washington,  D.C.

Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Ney,  G.  S.,  M.D.,  27,  Adams-avenue  East,  Detroit,  Michigan.

Nichols,  Miss  A.  B.,  92,  La  Salle-street,  Chicago,  111.

Niles,  Harry  D.,  M.D  ,  217,  East  Brigham-street,  Salt  Lake  City, Utah.

Nims,  F.  A.,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Noble,  Louis  Spencer,  Leadville,  Colo.

Norbury,  Miss  Mary  A.,  c/o  L.  C.  Root,  Stamford,  Conn.

NoRRis,  Hon.  C.  H.,  Marion,  Marion  Co.,  Ohio.

Nunn,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  119^,  York-street,  Savannah,  Georgia.

Nye,  William  B.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  N.Y.

Oldham,  F.  F.,  Blymyer  Building,  opp.  Post  Oilice,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.

Oliver,  George,  S.  J.,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.

Openheimer,  L.  M.,  Austin,  Texas.

Ormsby,  George  F.,  113,  Devonshire-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Osborn,  General  F.  A.,  236,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Park,  Dr.  Roswell,  510,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Parke,  Miss  M.  P.,  117,  West  49th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Parker,  William  L.,  339,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Parsons,  A.  J.,  1,818,  N-street,  Washington,  D.C.

Parsons,  John  E.,  M.D.,  6,  Grove-street,  Ayer,  Mass.

Peckham,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111.

Pellew,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  1,637,  Massachusetts-ave.,  Washington,  D.C.

Pendleton,  Miss,  1,522,  Locust-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Penfield,  Sophia,  M.D.,  Danbury,  Conn.

Perkins,  Mrs.  A.  T.,  112,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Perkins,  Mrs.  Charles  E.,  223,  Commonwealth-ave.,  Boston,  Mass.

Perkins,  Mrs.  E.  H.,  5,  East  40th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Perkins,  Franklin  R.,  294,  Linwood-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Perrin,  Mrs.  E.  O.,  Stanton,  Florida.

Perry,  John  G.,  M.D.,  48,  East  34th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Perry,  Thos.  S.,  312,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


463


Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Peters,  E.  T.,  Box  265,  Washington,  D.C.

Peters,  Mrs.  P.  A.-,  Forest  Hill-street,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Peterson,  Dr.  Frederick,  201,  West  .54th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Pettit,  Miss  Edith,  2205,  Trinity-place,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Phillips,  Mrs.  J.  C,  Junr.,  299,  Berkeley-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Platt,  J.  0.,  333-335,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Plumb,  D.  S.,  24,  Boudinot-street,  Newark,  N.J.

Plummer,  J.  W.,  200,  Randolph-street,  Chicago,  111.

Preston,  Mrs.  William  G.,  Hotel  Berkeley,  Boston,  Mass.

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  71,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Miss  Annie  C,  63,  Marlborougli-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  George,  50,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  James  .J.,  106,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.

Quincy,  Josiah  P.,  82,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Quirk,  Charles  H.,  M.D.,  c/o  Messrs.  Payton  and  Co.,  765,  Calle

Moreno,  Buenos  Ayres,  South  America.
B,aine,  R.  J.,  Carleton-place,  Ontario,  Canada.
Rand,  Mrs.  J.  L.,  49,  Kirkland-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Randall,  Herbert,  Ann  Arbor,  Michigan.
Ranney,  E.  H.,  Kalamazoo,  Michigan.

Ransom,  Frank  H.,  Coal  and  Iron  Exchange,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Raymond,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  Carey-road,  Brookline,  Mass.

Rayson,  Miss  Amy,  B.A.,  34,  Gramercy-park,  New  York,  N.Y.

*Rees,  Mrs.  Janet  E.  Ruutz,  Wayside,  Scarsdale,  New  York,  N.Y.

Reid,  Miss  Estelle,  38,  East  30-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Remer,  William  A.,  Deadwood,  South  Dakota.

Reynolds,  Edward,  M.D.,  130,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Reynolds,  Roth,  Lock  Box  32,  Gainesville,  Florida.

Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall,  2,  Wellington-terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.

Richardson,  Mrs.  Abby  S.,  256,  West  lOOth-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Richardson,  Charles,  608,  Chestnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Richardson,  M.  T.,  Ridgewood,  New  Jersey.

Richardson,  Dr.  W.  L.,  225,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
RobbinS,  Miss  A.  M.,  7,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Robinson,  C.  W.,  108,  Travis-street,  Houston,  Texas.
RoLFE,  Alfred  G.,  The  Hill  School,  Pottstown,  Pa.
Ropes,  John  C,  99,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
RoTCH,  Miss  Joanna,  Milton,  Mass.

Royce,  Mrs.  Charles  H.,  258,  W.  75-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Royce,  Professor  Josiah,  103,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
RuMSEY,  Mrs.  B.  C,  cor.  Delaware-ave.  and  Tracey-st.,  Buffalo  N.Y.


464


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Russell,  David,  Houston,  Texas.
Salter,  W.  M.,  Silver  Lake,  N.H.

Sargent,  Mrs.  Winthrop,  207,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  Pembroke-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Savage,  Philip  H.,  28,  Holyoke  House,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Sawyer,  Hon.  Chas.  H.,  Dover,  New  Hampshire.

Sawyer,  G.  C,  Utica  Academy,  Utica,  N.Y.

ScHENCK,  Miss  Ida  Z.,  114,  East  19th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

ScHiEFPELiN,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  242,  East  15th -street.  New  York,  N.Y.

Schiller,  Prof.  C,  Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N.Y.

ScHOFiELD,  Edwin,  1,825,  Ontario-street,  Tioga,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Scull,  Mrs.  H.,  237,  Rialto  Building,  Chicago,  111.

Sears,  John  D.,  Upper  Sandusky,  Ohio.

Sercombe,  p.  H.,  58,  Sentinel-building,  Milwaukee,  Wis.

Shaw,  Mrs.  F.  G.,  120,  East  30th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Shaw,  Mrs.  G.  H.,  23,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Shaw,  Mrs.  Quincy  A.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Shed,  Z.,  Room  3,  Masonic  Temple,  Denver,  Colorado.

Sheets,  John  C,  Cincinnati  Sanatorium,  College  Hill,  Ohio.

Sherman,  Mrs.  B.  W.,  Riverside,  Cook  County,  111.

Shimmin,  Miss  Blanche,  229,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Shinn,  Miss  Hattie  A.,  Room  46,  115,  Monroe-street,  Chicago,  111.

■*Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.

Shultz,  Rev.  N.,  Box  583,  San  Antonio,  Texas.

Sintenis,  E.  H.,  p.  O.  Box  115,  Abilene,  Texas.

Smith,  Francis,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Smith,  George  R.,  M.D.,  Dover,  New  Hampshire.

Smith,  Horace  J.,  6,  East  Penn.,  Germantown,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Smith,  J  Heber,  M.D.,  279,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson-place,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Smith,  William  Hawley,  Peoria,  111.

Smith,  W.  Lincoln,  Inst,  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.

Smith,  Winfield,  Duxbury,  Mass.

Stansell,  Mrs.  E.  T.,  75,  La  Casa,  Denver,  Colo.

Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,803,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Steffens,  J.  L.,  Credit  Lyonnais,  Parity  France.

Sterling,  Mrs.  E.  C,  22,  Westmoi-eland-place,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Stillmann,  Mrs.  W.  0.,  287,  State-street,  Albany,  N.Y.

Stilwell,  Mary  H.,  D.D.S.,  1,300,  A;  h-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Stockton,  John  P.,  Junr.,  Highwood,,. Bergen  Co.,  N.J.

Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  229,  Madison-avei*  le.  New  York,  N.Y.

Stone,  Charles  W.,  68,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Stone,  Mrs.  Richard,  Junr.,  18,  Clie lut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Stone,  Col.,  W.  L.,  Mount  Vernon,  N -  York,  N.Y.


JAst  of  Members  and  Associates.


465


Strauss,  Albert,  124,  West  97th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Street,  Miss  Ida  M.,  112,  South  24th-street,  Omaha,  Neb.
Strong,  Charles  A.,  M.D.,  5,516,  Woodlawn-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Sturgis,  Chas.  Russell,  63,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Sumner,  Dr.  A.  M.,  3-36,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Sutherland,  J.  G.,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.
Swift,  William  H.,  Wilmington,  Delaware.

Symonds,  Brandreth,  M.D.,  128,  W.  59-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Tappan,  Miss  M.  A.,  247,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Taylor,  Edward  Wyllys,  M.D.,  Mont  Clair,  N..J.

Taylor,  Fredk.,  174,  School-street,  Lowell,  Mass.

Thaw,  A.  Blair,  M.D.,  Campbell,  Santa  Clara  Co.,  California.

Thaw,  Mrs.  A.  Blair,  Campbell,  Santa  Clara  Co.,  California.

Thomson,  Dr.  W.,  1,426,  Walnut-sti-eet,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Thorndike,  S.  Lothrop,  2,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Thorpe,  Joseph  G.,  Junr.,  115,  Brattle-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Tighe,  JuDGE.J.G.,Germanica  Bdg.,  375-379, Fulton-st.,  Brooklyn,  N  Y.

Totten,  Mrs.  Enoch,  1,708,  I-street, Washington,  D.C.

Touzalin,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  P.O.  Box  113,  Colorado  Springs,  Colorado.

Towner,  .Judge  J.  W.,  Santa  Ana,  California.

Toy,  Professor  C.  H.,  7,  Lowell-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

TuRNBULL,  Miss  K.  E.,  113,  East  39th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Turner,  Miss  Mary  J.,  11,  Faxon-avenue,  Quincy,  Mass.

TuTTON,  Mrs.  Sara,  2,318,  Jay-street,  Denver,  Colorado.

Tweedy,  Edmund,  Newport,  Rhode  Island.

Tyson,  Mrs.  George,  314,  Dartmouth-.street,  Boston,  Mass.

Underwood,  B.  F.,  92,  La  Salle-street,  Chicago,  111.

Van  Horn,  M.  L.,  104,  West  29th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Van  Norden,  Rev.  C,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Auburn,  California.

Van  Norden,  Warner  M.,  16,  West  48th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Van  Slyke,  J.  M.,  23,  North  Pinckney-street,  Madison,  Wis.

Wait,  Marshall,  5,144,  Madison-avenue,  Hyde  Park,  Chicago,  111.

Wake,  C.  Staniland,  4,403,  State-street,  Chicago,  111.

Ward,  W.  E.,  Port  Chester,  N.Y.

Warren,  Dr.  J.  W.,  Bryn  M^wr  College,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pa.

Washburn,  Oscar  F.,  West  jti.cton,  Mass.

Watson,  Mrs.  F.  S.,  263,  Clarendon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Watson,  Professor  William,  107,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass,

Watts,  H.  M.,  "The  Press," hiladelphia,  Pa.

Webb,  Mrs.,  34,  Chestnut-street,  Salem,  Mass.

Webster,  David  L.,  332,  Bea.  m-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Wheeler,  Mrs.  Stephen,  cor '6th  and  Ash-stpeets,  Fort  Smith,  Ark.

Wheeler,  William,  Concord,  -lass.

WiiERRELL,  John,  M.D.,  228,*' orth  Mill-street,  Kansas  City,  Kansas.

2  H


466


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Whipple,  L.  E.,  328,  Madisou-a venue.  New  York,  N.Y.

White,  Professor  C.  J.,  36,  Weld  Hall,  Cambridge,  Mass.

White,  Professor  Frances  E.,  1,717,  Master-st.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

White,  Henry  G.,  32,  Irving-place,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

White,  James  T.,  765,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

White,  J.  T.,  M.D.,  Room  206,  Pioneer-lxlg.,  Seattle,  Washington,  D.C.

Whiteside,  Miss  H.,  c/o  A.  A.  Carey,  29,  Fairfield-st.,  Boiston,  Mass.

Whitman,  Mrs.  Henry,  77,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Whiton,  Rev.  James  M.,  Ph.D.,  79,  Worth-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

WiLKiNS,  Miss  F.  A.,  c/o  G.  A.  Dewey,  146,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Williams,  Professor  H.  H.,  University  of  N.C.,  Chapel  Hill,  N.C.

Williams,  Mrs.  S.  C,  37,  East  50th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Wilmarth,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  The  Auditorium,  Chicago,  111.

Wilson,  Mrs.  John  L.,  P.O.  Box  19,  Framingham,  Mass.

Wilson,  Tom  L.,  Room  10,  Chopin  Block,  Buffixlo,  N.Y.

*Wiltse,  Dr.  a.  S.,  Carl-street,  W.  Roxbury,  Mass.

Wolcott,  Mrs.  Roger,  173,  Comnjonwealth-a venue,  Boston,  Mass.

Woodman,  Walter,  M.D.,  Hubbard-park,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Wright,  Dr.  J.  P.,  500,  North  Commercial-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Wyatt,  Melvyn  H.,  SparkiU,  Rockland  County,  N.Y.

Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Wynne,  Mrs.  M.  Y.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Yates,  W.,  2,937,  Indiana-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

ZuG,  C,  P.O.  Box  1,053,  Sable  Iron  Works,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of
any  change  of  address  to  Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston  Place,
Boston,  Mass.


PROCEEDINGS OF  THE


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


INDEX TO VOLUME  X.

1894.


A.

A.,  Mrs.,  Case  coiitiibutetl  by ...  1.39

A.,  Mr.s.,  Case  contributed  by ... ...  241

A.,  Mr.s.  B.  cle.  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... ... ...  233

A.,  Mr.  E.,  Case  contribnted  by  223

A.,  Miss  E.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ...  115

Afl»  Mr.  J.  W.,  Case  contributed  by 80

A.  ,  Mr.  T. ,  Case  contributed  by  117

Amosof,  Mr.  D. ,  Cases  contribnted  by ... ... ... ... ...  192,227

Animals,  Apparitions  of ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ...  127

Animals,  The  Sharing  of  Hallucinations  liy 326-3.30

Apparitions,  A  Proposed  Scheme  of,  bj^  F.  W.  H.  Myers 415

Apparitions  Coinciding  with  the  Death  of  the  Person  Seen...  115,  122,  129,

207-244,  252-2.34,  281,  288

Apparitions,  not  of  tlie  Dying  Person,  Coinciding  with  Deatli ...  259-263
Appendix  to  Report  on  Census  of  Hallucinations ... ... ...  402-422

Auditory  Death  Coincidences 179,  199,2.35-258,  316,  318

B.

B.  ,  Mrs.,  Case  C(mtributed  by , 122

B.,  Mrs.,  Case  contribnted  by 371

B.,  Mr.  A.  C,  Case  contributed  by ■■ •■.  82

B. ,  Miss  C. ,  Case  contributed  by 194

B.,  Mr.  de,  (and  Mr.  V.)  Case  contributed  by  ... ...  315

B.,  Miss  E.  K. ,  Case  contributed  by 175

B.,  Miss  E.  R.,  Case  contributed  by 98


ii


Index  to Volume  X.


B.,  Mr.  F.,  Case  contrilmteii  by 18-i

B. ,  Miss  I.,  Case  contributeil  by  ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  199

B. ,  ^Nliss  K,.  Case  contributed  by... 341

B.,  Miss  L.,  Case  contributed  by  ... ... 213

B.,  Mr.  P.,  Case  contributed  by 318

B.,  Mr.  W.,  Case  contributed  by ...  Ill

Bakewell,  Mr. ,  P^xperinients  of 140

Baldwin,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ...  217

Balfour,  The  Kiylit  Hon.  A.  J.,  M. P. ,  Addre.ss  as  President 2

Beer,  Mr.  C.  H. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... ... .  .  233

Belcher,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... ...  237

Binet,  and  Fere,  MM. ,  E.xperinients  in  IlaHuciuations  produced  Hypno-
tically  144-14(i,  1S6,  190

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  Case  contributed  by 81


C.

C,  Captain,  Case  contributed  by 329

C,  Lady,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... ...  317

C,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  312

C,  Mr.  C,  Experience  as  to  Visualising;-  ... ... ... ... ...  92

C,  Mr.  C,  Case  contributed  liy  3.36

C,  Miss  A.,  Case  contributed  by  ... ... ... 349

C. ,  Miss  C. ,  Case  contributed  by  .. . ... ...  74

C. ,  Miss  C.  P.  M. ,  Case  contributed  by 83

C,  Dr.  H.,  Case  contributed  by  ... ... ... 117

C,  Mr.  H.,  Case  contributed  by  ... ...  150

C,  Mr.  G.  M.,  Case  contributed  by 99

C,  Mr.  J.  L.,  Case  contributed  by 169

C,  Mi.ss  M.,  Case  contributed  by 193

C,  Mr.  W.  A.,  Case  contributed  by 106

Cabral,  Senhor  Ulysses  J.  C,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ...  383

Caldecott,  Miss  Ii.,  Case  contributed  by... ... ... ...  293

Campbell,  Miss  C.  M. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... .. ...  8.5

Gary,  Mr.  C  H.,  Case  contributed  by  316

Cass,  Mr.  John,  Case  contributed  by 231

Chance  Coincidence,  Discussion  of .. 245-2.51

Children,  Hallucinations  of 122,  119-152,.  156,  181,  240

Clark,  Miss  C,  (Ja.se  contributed  by  291

Clough,  Miss  A.  J.,  Case  collected  by  1.32

Cocknian,  INIrs,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ...  335

Collective  Auditory  Halluciuations ... ...  315-317

Collective  Hallucinations  with  different  Percepts ... 317,  318,  344,  374,  .383

Collective  Tactile  Hallucination 204

Collective  Visual  Hallucinations 218,  227,  230,  .305-315,  320,  347,  354-355

Collectors  of  answers  in  Census  ... ... ... 34,  57-60,  405

C'omplementary  Colours  in  Hallucinations ... ...  144-148

Congress,  Intern.ational,  of  Experimental  P.sychology ... ... ...  25

Contents  of  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations ,395-401


Index  to Volvme  X.


iii


D.


D. ,  Mr.  a.  ,  Ca.se  contriljuted  by  . .

  91

D.,  Miss  F.,  Case  conti  ibiited  hy

  80

D.,  Miss  F.  M. ,  Case  contributed  by

 123

D. ,  Mr.  L. ,  Case  contributed  by

  ...  327

D.,  Miss  L. ,  Case  contributed  by

  258

D.,  MLss  T.,  Case  contributed  by

  1S9

Dean,  iNIr.  H.  F. ,  Case  contributed  by

  374

De  v.,  Mr.  F. ,  Case  contributed  liy

 141

Dixey,  Mr.  W.  A.,  Experiments  in  Crystal-visions  «ilh  '

'  •  .Miss  X  and

Mr.s.  Verrall

 108

Dodson,  Miss  L. ,  Case  contributed  by

  380-

Driesen,  Baron  B.  von,  Case  contributed  by  ...

  385

Druniuiond,  Hon.  ^Irs.,  Case  contributed  by

  145

E.

E.,  Mr.  a..  Case  contributed  by 110

E.,  Miss  C,  Case  contributed  by 181

E.,  Miss  C.  J.,  Case  contributed  by 306

E.,  Mrs.  T.,  Cases  contributed  by 174,  186,  333

E.,  Mrs.  W.,  Case  contributed  by 195

Egerton,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by 268

Eggie,  Mr. ,  Case  contributed  by . . 256

Evans,  Rev.  C.  L.,  Case  contributed  by 299


F.

F.,  Mr.  H.,  Case  contributed  by - 181

F.,  Mrs.  L.,  Case  contributed  by 349

F.,  Mr.  W.  H.,  Case  contributed  by 166

Frost,  Rev.  Matthew,  Case  contributed  by


G.

G.,  Mrs.,  Experience  contributed  by 88

G.,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 25?-

G.,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by

G.,  Professor,  Case  contributed  by  ...

G.,  Dr.  B.,  Case  contributed  by 237

G.,  Mr.  C.  H.,  Case  contributed  by 1^0

G.,  Mr.  C.  T.,  Case  contributed  by '^•5

G. ,  Dr.  S.  da.  Case  contributed  by ^ 309

GaltoD,  F.,  Researches  as  to  Power  of  Visualising ' 153

Girdlestone,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 161

Good  hall,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 310

Gorham,  Mr.  John,  Experiments  in  Colour-vision 146

Greany,  Miss  Ellen  M.,  Case  contributed  by -'28


88
103


IV


Index  to Volume  X.


Green,  Dr.  C.  T. ,  Experiment  in  Hypnotic  Hallucinations  ... ... ...  14o

Greift'enberg,  Mrs.,  (and  Mrs.  Erni-Greiffenberg)  Case  contribuled  by ...  305


Gurney,  Edmund,  his  Census  of  Hallucinations

31,  394

Gurney,  Edmund,  Library,  Supplementary  Catalogue

 427

H.

H. ,  iNlu. ,  Case  contributed  by  ...

. . ... ...  86

H.,  Dr.  A.,  Case  contributed  by  ...

..V  167

H. ,  Mme.  A. ,  Case  contributed  by

:;.  106

H.,  I!ev.  A.,  Case  contributed  by...  ..,

...  150

H. ,  Dr.  C.  tr. ,  Case  contributed  by

  122

H.,  Mrs.  H.,  Case  contributed  by

..  129

H.,  Mrs.  H. ,  Case  contributed  by

. ..  350

H.,  Miss  H.  L.,  Case  contributed  by

..; ...  288

H. ,  Mr.  J. ,  Case  contributed  by  . . .

.... ...  227

H.,  Mrs.  J.,  Case  contributed  by...

 131

H.,  Mrs.  L.,  Case  contributed  by...

 116

H  ,  Miss  L.,  Case  contributed  by...

 343

H.,  Mrs.  M.,  Case  contributed  by  ...

 156

H.,  Miss  M.,  Case  contributed  by

 104

H.,  Mr.  li.  H. ,  Case  contributed  by

  74

H.,  MissS. ,  Case  contributed  by...

  96

Hall,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by

 370

Hallucinations,  Coinciding  with  other  e\  o;its  than  Deaths

.. 85,  175,  278-302

,,  Exjierimentally  produced ... ... ... ...  270-278

, ,  Keport  on  the  Census  of ... ■ .  ■ ...  25

,,  Unrecognised,  Coinciding  with  Deaths 124,  126,  171,  263-270

Hawkins-Dempster,  Miss  C.  L. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ...  261

Hay,  Mr.  T.  J.,  Case  contributed  by '  254

Heintze,  Mr. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... ... ...  379

Heredity  in  Relation  to  Hallucinations 154

Hervey,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by 282

Hyi)notic  E.vperiments  in  Hallucination.s  108,  144,  145,  178,  186,  189,  190
Hypnotic  Suggestion,  Organic  effects  produced  by ... ...  206


J.

J.,  MlS.S  E  ,  Case  contributed  by ...  179

J.,  Miss  E.  M.,  Case  contributed  by 79

Janiie5on,  Dr.  W.  A.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... 265

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Keport  on  the  Census  o.  llalhicinaLions  by... ...  25

Jones,  Mrs.  Gordon,  Cases  contributed  by 116.  127


K.

K.,  :\[iss  A.  F.,  Case  contributed  by '.. ...  119

K.,  Mr.  H.  B.,  Case  contributed  by 134

K.,  Mr.  J.,  Case  contributed  by 175


Index  to  Volume  X.


V


Kapnist,  Countess  Eugenie,  Case  contributeil  bj'' ... ... ... ...  284

Kearney,  Mri.  E.  L. ,  Cases  contributed  by ... ... 15(i,  269

Keulenians,  Mr.,  E.Kperience  in  visualising  (Jimiplenie ^Lary  Coluur.s ...  145

King,  Miss  M.  A.,  Case  contributed  by  289

Kirk,  Mr.  Joseph,  Cases  contributed  by.. ... ... 73,270


L.

L.,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  l>y 142

L.,  Mr.  A.,  Case  contributed  by ...  169

L.,  Mr.  B.  L.,  Case  contributed  by ... .. ... . ... ...  171

L. ,  Mr.  G.  B. ,  Case  contributed  by ...  119

L.,  Mi.ssJ.  E.,  Case  contributed  by 224

Lang,  Andrew.  Cock  Lane  and  Common  Sense,  lleview  of ...  423

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  Review  by —

Cock  Lane  and  Common  Sense,  By  Andrew  Lang 423

Lewitt,  Miss  F. ,  Case  contributed  by 101

Library,  Edmund  Gurney.  Supplementary  Catalogue ...  427

Lloyd,  Mr.  James,  Case  contributed  by  216

Local  Apparitions,  of  Recognised  Dead  Persons 349-356

,,  ,, of  Recognised  Living  Persons 356-363

Unrecognised 100,101,157,338-349,352

Lodge,  Professor  Oliver  J.,  F.R.S.  — On  tlie  DilHculty  of  making  Crucial
E-xperiments  as  to  the  Source  of  the  extra  or  unusual  Intelligence
manifested  in  Trance-Speech,  Automatic  Writing,  and  other  states  of
apparent  mental  inactivity 14


M.


M.,  General,  Case  contributed  by 337

M.,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... 114

M.,  Professor,  Case  contributed  by ... 80

M.,  Miss  C.  B.,  Case  contributed  by .. ...  76

M.,  Miss  E.  L.,  Case  contributed  by 373

M.,  Mr.  H.,  Case  contributed  by  ..." 197

M.,  Miss  H.,  Case  contributed  by 100

M.,  Miss  K.,  Case  contributed  by 198

M.,  Miss  M.  H.,  Ca.se  contributed  by 71

Malleson,  Mrs.  W.,  Case  contributed  by 295

Malleson,  Mr?.  Frank,  Case  contributed  by 368

Mallet,  Miss  S.,  Case  contributed  by 297

Mamtchitcli,  Mr.  E.,  Case  contributed  by 387

Maskell,  Rev.  J.,  Case  contributed  by 258

Maughan,  Mi.ss  Edith,  Case  contributed  by ..  273

McAlpine,  Mrs.,  Cases  contributed  by 279,  332

McKechnie,  Rev.  C.  C,  Case  contributed  by 240

Meetings  of  the  Society,  General 1

Members,  Associates  and  Honorary  Members,  List  of ...  431

,, American  Branch,  List  of 454

Money,  Miss  S.,  Case  contributed  liy 263


VI


Index  to Volume  X.


Murray,  Mrs. ,  Case  coil tribiiied  by ... ... ... ...  229

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  A  Proposed  Scheme  of  Ap])aiitioiis  (Appeiidi.K  (J) ...  415
,, Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  by ... ...  25


N.

N.,  Mis.s  11.,  Case  contributed  by ^  353

Noises  in  "  Haunted  Houses  " 340-349,  353

,, Possiltle  eflect  of  in  producing  Hallucinations 178-184


0-

0.,  Miss  A.,  Case  contributed  by '  ■ ..  286

O.,  Miss  A.  B.,  Case  contributed  by 74

O.,  Miss  G.,  Case  contributed  by 121

Obalecheff,  Madame,  Case  contributed  by ...  218


P.

P.,  Mr.,  Case  contril)uted  by '.  126

P.,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ...  ... ... ...  191

P.,  Miss  C.  L.,  Case  contributed  by .232

P.,  Dr.  J.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... ... ... .. ... .  72

P. ,  Miss  M. ,  Case  contriliuted  by  204

Phantasms  of  the  Dead,

Corresponding  impres.sions  occv.rring  to  two  perciiJients  simul-
taneously  383-391

Information  conveyed  by ... ... ... ...  371-375,378-382

Occurring  before  the  Death  i.s  known.. 366-377

Podmore,  Frank,  lleport  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  Ijy ... ...  25

I'roniises  to  appear  at  Death  or  after  ... 217,  224,  225,  284,  371,  378

Q.

Q.,  Me.  G.,  Case  contributed  by  115

(^uin,  Mr.  T.  A.,  Case  contributed  by 157

R.

K.,  Madame,  Case  contributed  by 196

R. ,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 357

R.,  Miss  A.  E.,  Case  contributed  by 308

R.,  Mrs.  F.,  Case  contributed  by 199

R.,  Mrs.  H.,  Cases  contributed  by 170,  201

R.,  Mr.  J.  .S.,  Case  contributed  by 162

R.,  Miss  S.  R.,  Case  contributed  by .. 2.34

Raines,  Mrs.,  Case  contriliuted  l)y ... ... ... ...  27?

Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  ... ... ...  25

Review. — (Cock  Lane  and  Common  Sense.  By  Andrew  Lang) 423


Index  to  Voluwe  X.

vii

Q

S.,  Mrs.,  Case  contrilnited  Ijy

...  72

S.,  Mis.,  Case  contributed  by  ..

...  177

S.,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by

...  90

S. ,  Mr.  A.,  Case  contributed  by  ...

...  203

S.,  Miss  A.,  Case  contributed  by

...  187

S.,  Mrs.  A.  C  ,  H\periences  of

...  20.J

S.,Mrs.  C  ,  Case  contributed  by

...  239

H. ,  ^liss  E  ,  Case  contributed  by

...  156

S.,  Mr.  H  E.,  Case  contributed  by

...  327

S. ,  Mr.  G. ,  Case  contributed  by

...  358

S.,  Mr.  J  ,  Case  contributed  by

...  152

S.,  Miss  J.,  Case  contributed  by

...  177

S. ,  Mr.  W  ,  Case  contributed  by

...  105

S. ,  Mi:  \i.  K. ,  Case  contributed  I  )y

...  150

Schedules  used  for  collecting  answers  in  Census

402-404

Siierar,  Mr.  Alexander,  Cases  contributed  by

...  238

Sidgwick,  Professor,  Keport  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  by  ...

...  25

Sidgwick,  Mrs.,  lieport  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  by

..  25

Sidgwick,  jNIrs  ,  Experience  as  to  Visualising

...  93

Sidgwick,  Mrs.,  Experiments  on  joo<«^s  dc  reprre

...  108

Sims,  Mr.  H.,  Case  contrilmted  by

...  230

Smith,  H.  Babington,  Experience  as  to  Visualising

93

Smith,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  l  )y

...  255

Smith,  Mrs.  J  P.,  Case  contributed  by...

...  214

SoloviofF,  Dr.  Vladimir,  Case  contributed  by

...  202

Sorley,  Professor  W.  R.,  Case  contributed  by

...  94

Stoney,  Dr.  G.  J. ,  Cases  recorded  by

141,  178

T.

T. ,  Mrs.  ,  Case  contributed  by 187

T.,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 328

T.,  Dr.  A.,  Case  contributed  by 235

T.,  Mis.  E.,  Case  contributed  by 172

T.,  Miss  H.,  Case  contributed  by 120

T. ,  Miss  E.  L.,  Case  contributed  by 344

T.  Miss  E.  M.,  Case  contributed  by 378

Tables  -

Atiirmative  answtrs  to  Census  oLuestion  counted  as  negative

(Appendix  C.) 406

Collective  Visual  Hallucinations  (Appendix  F.) .. 414

Collectors  for Census,  how  obtained  (Appendix  15. ) 405

General  Results  of  Census 39-.")0

Hallucinations  about  which  notes  were  made ... 221

Proportion  of  doubtful  cases  among  recent  apparitions  of  living

persons  ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ...  66

Recurrent  Visual  Hallucinations 104

Relationship  of  Percipients  in  Collective  Cases 155

Visual  Hallucinations  occurring  in  solitude  or  in  company  '. ...  173

Tacti'e  Death  Coincidences 131,258


viii


Index  to  Volume


V.

Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  Case  contributed  by  ...
Vignoli,  Prof.  T.,  Case  recorded  by


W.

W,,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  ...

W.,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by /  ..

W.,  Miss,  Case  con tiibuted  by

W.,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by

W.,  Rev.  J.,  Case  contributed  by

W. ,  Miss  L.,  Case  contributed  by

W.,  Mrs.  S  ,  Case  contributed  by..

Walker- Anderson,  Mr.  S.,  Cases  contributed  by

Wharton,  Mis.a,  Case  contributed  by

Wilde,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by .. .

Williams,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by  ...

Wilson,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by

Wilson,  Miss  H.,  Cases  contributed  by


X.

X.,  Miss,  Experiments  in  Crystal  Visions  of  ...

Y.
