Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXIX (1916-1918)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1916 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts LXXII-LXXIV and Appendix) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc29soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXIX

(CONTAINING  PARTS  LXXII,  LXXIII,  LXXIV,  AND  APPENDIX)

1918


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
publislied  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED

UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
1918

Agents  for  the  sale  of  publications  :

.  LONDON :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  81  High  Street,  Marylebone,  W.
GLASGOW :  JAMES  MACLEHOSE  &  SONS,  61  St.  Vincent  Street
AMERICA:  THE  W.  B.  CLARKE  CO.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.


All  rights  reserved


Digitized  by

the  Internet  Archive

in  2015

https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc29soci


CONTENTS

PART  LXXII.
November,  1916.
I. Gross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type. By  J.  G.  Piddington,
II. Presidential  Address. By  Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.,
Litt.D.,  .......

III.  Report  on  a  Series  of  Experiments  in  "Guessing." By  Mrs.

A.  W.  Verrall,

IV.  Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival. By  Sir  Oliver

Lodge,  E.R.S.,  .  •  ■

V. Obituary  Notice  :  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall,  ....

Supplement  :  Reviews:

Mr.  Henry  Holt's  "On  the  Cosmic  Relations."  By  Pro-
fessor W.  R.  Newbold,  .....

Professor  Boris  Sidis's  "The  Foundations  of  Normal  and
Abnormal  Psychology." By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.,

Professor  Jung's  "Collected  Papers  on  ^Analytical  Psycho-
logy" (translated  by  Dr.  Constance  Long).  By  T.  W.
Mitchell,  M.D.,  ......

PART  LXXIII.
March,  1917.

The  Ear  of  Dionysius  : Further Scripts affording  Evidence  of

Personal  Survival. By  The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour, .  197

PART  LXXIV.
December,  1917.

I.  On  the  Development  of  Different  Types  of  Evidence  for
Survival  in  the  Work  of  the  Society.  By  Mrs.  Henry
Sidgwick, ...  .  -  •  •  ■  245

II. The  Ear  of  Dionysius  :  A  Discussion  of  the  Evidence.  By

Miss  F.  Melian  Sta^vell,  .....  260

191059


iv  Contents.

III. The  Ear  of  Dioh>!?ifs"; \  5 U  p)  v.' By  J'l'EIRwshtJJon.  G.  W.  PAoa
Balfour, .  .  .  .  .  270

[V. Presidential  JLddtdss  :  I'll"  Thwory  of  Siii-ViAal' ;in. 'the  Light

of  its  Context. By  L.  P.  Jacks,.  IjL'J);,-  %  \  \\,  .  .  287

V. Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist. By  Mrs.  W.  H.

Salter,  .......  306

VI. Some  Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy. By  the

Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield, .....  350

Supplement.

VII. In  Memoriam— Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall, .  .  .  .376

VIII.  Reviews:

Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
"The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality."  By
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc, .  .  .  .  .386

Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  "Raymond." By  Mrs.  Henry  Siduwick,  404

APPENDIX  TO  PART  LXXIV.
March,  1918.

Officers  and  Council  for  1918, .  .  .  .  .  .410

List  of  Members  and  Associates,  ......  411

Index  to  Vol.  XXIX., .......  451


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXXII.

November,  191G.


CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES  OF  A  GALLIC  TYPE.1

BY  J. G.  PlDDINGTON.

"  They  order,  said  I,  this  matter  better  in  France."

Steme,  A  Sentimental  Journey.

INTRODUCTION.

At  the  end  of  1913,  Dr.  Gustave  Geley  read  a  paper
before  the  Societe  Universelle  d' 'Etudes  Psychiques,  in  the
course  of  which  he  discussed  the  cross-correspondences
published  in  our  Proceedings,  and  gave  an  account  of
5  cases  of  cross-correspondence  that  had  occurred  during
the  summer  of  1913,  between  two  French  automatists.2
These  cases  being  all  of  a  very  simple  and  clean-cut
character  require  little  explanation  and  commentary ,  and

1This  paper  was  read  at  a  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  on  January  29,  1915.

2  Contribution  a  Vitude  des  Correspondances  croise"es  ( Documents  Nouveaux )
Conference  faite  par  Le  Docteur  Gustave  Geley.  Paris,  Imprimerie  E.  Roussel,
20,  rue  Gerbert,  1914.

A


■2


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


are  all  described  in  a  few  pages  ; and  so, thinks  Dr.

Geley,  contrast  favourably  with  our  cross-correspondences,
which  have  to  have  big,  fat  volumes  written  about  them
before  their  intricacies  and  obscurities  are — I  must  not  say
unravelled  and  elucidated,  but — placed  before  the  reader.
In  fact,  remarks  Dr.  Geley,  there  lies  the  same  psycho-
logical abyss  between  his  cross-correspondences  and  ours
as  between  the  French  mind  and  the  Northerner's  mind.
I  suspect  that  Dr.  Geley  was  restrained  only  by  the
politeness  characteristic  of  his  nation  from  pronouncing
our  cross-correspondences  to  be  as  foggy  as  our  climate.
What  he  actually  does  say  is  that  while  the  Northerner
delights  in  complicated  researches  and  mysterious  symbols
and  subtle  arguments,  the  French  mind  craves  for  clear-
ness and  orderliness  ;  and  that  the  effect  of  these  two
different  diatheses  can  be  seen  in  the  cross-correspondences
produced  on  opposite  sides  of  the  Channel.

Now,  I  ought  to  be  one  of  the  last  people  to  deny
that  some  of  our  cross-correspondences  are  complex
and  difficult  to  follow  ;  yet  I  think  that  Dr.  Geley's
condemnation  of  our  poor  English  efforts  is  too  wholesale,
for  we  have  published  some  simple  and  straightforward
cases:  e.g.  "A  triangle  within  a  circle"  and  "Laurel
Wreath"  in  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  "Neptune  and  trident,"
"  Troy  and  Joy  "  and  "  Exile  and  Moore  "  in  Vol.  XXIV. ;
and  this  last  volume  also  contains  the  "  Sesame  and
Lilies  "  case,  which,  apart  from  some  unessential  ex-
crescences, is  not  really  involved.

But  as  Dr.  Geley  has  either  overlooked  these  instances
or  does  not  think  them  simple  or  numerous  enough,  I
propose  in  this  paper  to  produce  some  fresh  examples  of
fairly  simple  cross-correspondence,  in  the  hope  of  convincing
our  French  critic  that,  in  spite  of  our  national  predilection
for  the  obscure  and  complex,  our  automatists  are  not
quite  so  black  as  he  has  painted  them.

I  do  not  mean  that  their  phenomena  rival,  but  only  that
they  sometimes  approach  within  humble  distance  of  those  of
the  French  automatists.  These  Dr.  Geley  describes  as  being
"  d'une  grande  simplicity  "  ;  and  no  one  who  has  read  his
paper  would,  I  think,  quarrel  with  that  description  of  them.


Lxxn.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.  3


Four  out  of  the  five  cases  reported  by  Dr.  Geley  conform
to  one  of  two  patterns.1  Either  both  automatists  write
"  Polly,  put  the  kettle  on  "  ;  or  else  Automatist  A  writes
"  There  was  a  little  girl "  and  "  right  in  the.  middle  of
her  forehead,"  while  Automatist  B  writes  "  and  she  had
a  little  curl  "  : the  sum  of  these  parts  making

"  There  was  a  little  girl,
And  she  had  a  little  curl
Right  in  the  middle  of  her  forehead."

Our  own  automatists,  you  will  find,  only  once  quite
succeed  in  attaining  the  majestic  simplicity  of  the  first
type  ;  and  can  produce  but  clumsy  imitations  of  the
second.  Still,  if  allowance  be  made  for  the  racial  dis-
advantages under  which  they  labour,  they  will,  I  hope,
be  thought  to  have  done  better  than  might  have  been
expected.

But  the  aim  of  this  paper  is  not  only  to  vindicate
our  automatists  from  some  of  the  aspersions  cast  on
them  by  Dr.  Geley,  but  also  to  describe  some  concordant
automatisms  of  a  simple  type  as  simply  as  I  may,  for
the  benefit  of  any  weaker  vessels — if  such  there  be  in
our  Society — who,  like  Dr.  Geley,  Dr.  Maxwell  and  others,
have  found  much  of  the  previous  evidence  difficult  of
digestion.

I  also  aspire,  though  with  no  very  sanguine  hopes
of  success,  at  bringing  forward  evidence  which  will  alter
Dr.  Maxwell's  opinion  of  our  cross-correspondences.  Dr.
Maxwell,  as  Dr.  Geley  reminds  us  in  his  article,  at  present
considers  that  they  are  to  be  put  down  to  chance  or
else  to  forced  and  overfanciful  interpretation.

I  do  not,  however,  propose  to  argue  the  question  of
whether  chance  is  an  insufficient  explanation  of  the
coincidences  I  am  about  to  describe,  because  theoretically
chance  may  always  be  held  to  explain  a  coincidence,
or, rather, may  always be  urged  as an  alternative  to

1  As  I  am  dealing  here  only  with  the  pattern  in  which  the  French
cross-correspondences  are  cast,  I  leave  out  of  account  the  fact  that,
except  in  one  instance  apparently,  the  coincidental  phrases  are  original
and' not  drawn  from  a  literary  source.


4


■J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


some  other  explanation.  If  ten  automatists  on  the
same  day  each  wrote  :  "A  covey  of  elephants  danced
round  Buckingham  Palace,  and  sang  '  We  won't  go  home
till  morning  '  ",  no  one  could  prove  that  chance  would
not  cover  the  coincidences.  One  has  to  judge  in  these
matters  by  common  sense ;  and  common  sense  does  not
lead  everyone  to  the  same  conclusion.

I  do  not  intend,  either,  in  this  paper  to  raise  such
questions  as  whether  the  cross-correspondences  are  pur-
posive, or  whether  there  lies  behind  them  any  ulterior
meaning,  or  whether  their  content  affords  evidence  of
the  action  of  surviving  personalities.

Rather  my  design  is  to  throw  each  of  the  coincidences
at  the  reader,  so  to  speak,  and  then  to  limit  myself  to
asking  him,  explicitly  or  implicitly,  this  question  :  "  Do
you  believe  this  kind  of  thing  happens  by  chance  ?  Or,
if  you  think  this  or  that  coincidence  is  due  to  chance,
do  you  think  a  series  of  such  coincidences  is  ?  "

I  shall  have  occasion  in  the  course  of  this  paper  to
mention  a  new  automatist  under  the  pseudonym  of
Mrs.  King.  All  that  I  need  say  about  her  is  that  she
has  only  recently  developed  the  automatic  faculty,  that
she  has  been  a  member  of  this  Society  for  a  good  many
years,  and  that  she  is  known  to  me  and  much  better
known  to  some  of  my  colleagues.

I  shall  also  have  occasion  to  state  how  often  particular
words,  phrases  or  quotations  have  occurred  in  the  various
scripts.  These  statements,  I  may  explain,  are  not  made
upon  the  strength  of  perfunctory  examinations  of  the
scripts,  but  are  based  upon  elaborate  indexes  of  words,
phrases  and  quotations  occurring  in  the  scripts  of  all
the  automatists  whom  I  shall  mention  except  Mrs.  King.
Naturally,  I  do  not  claim  that  these  indexes  are  entirely
free  from  errors  of  commission  and  omission  ;  but  I  may
say  that  they  have  been  compiled  with  care  and  are
constantly  being  checked.

To  save  repetition  in  each  individual  case,  I  may  as
well  at  this  point  make  two  observations,  which  apply  to  all
the  cases  of  cross-correspondence  dealt  with  in  this  paper.


lxxil] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


5


In  the  first  place,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  no  one
of  the  automatists  contributing  to  any  given  cross-corre-
spondence saw  the  contributions  made  to  it  by  the  other
automatists  until  some  time — usually  a  long  time — after
the  cross-correspondence  was  complete.1

In  the  second  place,  I  have  asked  all  the  automatists
concerned  whether  the  topics  which  have  formed  the
themes  of  the  cross-correspondences  had,  to  the  best
of  their  recollection  and  belief,  been  brought  to  their
attention  in  some  ordinary,  everyday  manner  at  or  about
the  time  when  references  to  them  emerged  in  their  scripts.
To  this  question,  it  is  to  be  understood,  unless  otherwise
stated,  that  the  answer  in  each  case  was  "  No."


Festina  lente.

The  subject  of  my  first  case  is  the  words  "  Festina
lente,"  which  mean  "  Hasten  slowly."  This  motto  is
found  for  the  first  time  in  any  of  the  scripts  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script  of  Dec.  9,  1908.  I  do  not  regard  this
occurrence  of  it  as  forming  part  of  the  cross-correspon-
dence, and  confine  myself  to  stating  the  fact.

Nearly  five  years  pass  before  it  is  quoted  again  by
any  of  the  automatists.  Then,  on  Nov.  28  and  again
on  Dec.  19,  1913,  it  appears  in  the  script  of  Mrs.  King,
who  had  not  seen  Mrs.  Holland's  script.2

Less  than  three  weeks  later — on  Jan.  6,  1914 — it  re-
appears  in the script of Miss Verrall,3 who had  seen

1  In  making  this  statement  without  qualification,  I  am  not  losing
sight  of  the  cases  where  a  phrase  has  been  "  cribbed  "  by  one  auto-
matist  from  another's  script,  because  a  coincidence  of  this  kind,  unless
otherwise  reinforced,  does  not  constitute  a  cross-correspondence'.  See
pp.  10,  11,  20,  21.

2  Parts  of  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Dec.  9,  1908,  have  been  printed
in  the  Proceedings  (Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  320  ;  XXV.,  p.  250),  but  not  the
part  containing  the  words  "Festina  lente."

3  As  both  this  paper  and  the  scripts  discussed  in  it  were  written
before  Miss  Verrall's  marriage  to  Mr.  W.  H.  Salter,  I  refer  to  her
throughout  by  her  maiden  name.


6


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


neither  Mrs.  Holland's  nor  Mrs.  King's  script,  in  the
following  form  :

Festinasse  lente  dulcedine  captus  amoris
temporis  impatiens  .  .  -1  festina  lente.

A  literal  translation  of  this  would  be  :  "  To  have
hastened  slowly 2  captivated  by  the  charm  of  love
impatient  of  time  .  .  .  hasten  slowly."  Probably
"  dulcedine  captus  amoris  temporis  impatiens "  is  an
attempt  to  say  :  "  One  whom  love  has  made  captive
chafes  at  delays."  In  any  case  a  contrast  must  be
intended  between  "  temporis  impatiens "  and  "  festina
lente."

Eleven  days  later,  on  Jan.  17,  1914,  Mrs.  Verrall,
who  had  seen  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Dec.  9,  1908,
but  had  not  seen  either  Miss  Verrall's  or  Mrs.  King's
script,  wrote  as  follows  :

Where  Tweed  meets  Tyne

There  is  a  rhyme  about  the  meeting  of  those  rivers — or  the
rivers  speak

Says  Tweed  to  Tyne

For  Auld  Lang  Syne
Says  Tyne  to  Tweed

More  haste  less  Speed.

"  More  haste  less  Speed "  is  a  very  good  paraphrase
of  "  Festina  lente  "  ;  and  the  following  well-known  poem,

1  In  the  omitted  part  of  the  script  represented  by  dots  seven  distinct
topics  are  mentioned  between  "festinasse  lente"  and  "festina  lente."
This  shows  that  the  fact  of  two  phrases  being  separated  by  a  consider-
able interval  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  they  do  not  belong  to-
gether. Miss  Verrall's  script  of  April  6,  1914  (see  pp.  13-14)  furnishes
another  instance  of  the  separation  of  two  related  phrases.

2  The  probability  (hat  "festinasse,"  the  perfect  infinitive  of  festino.,
was  a  mere  slip  of  the  pen  for  "  festina,"  the  present  imperative,
is  increased  by  the  fact  that,  if  "  festina  "  be  substituted  for  "  festinasse,"
a  perfect  hexameter  line  results  :  "  temporis  impatiens  "  making  the
beginning  of  another  hexameter.  Original  Latin  hexameters  are  not
uncommon  in  Miss  Verrall's  script.


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


7


of  which  the  script  is  obviously  reminiscent,  might  well
bear  the  title  "  Festina  lente."

Says  Tweed  to  Till—

'  What  gars  ye  rin  sae  still  ?'

Says  Till  to  Tweed—

'  Though  ye  rin  speed
And  I  rin  slaw,

For  ae  man  that  ye  droon
I  droon  twa.'

The  very  next  day,  Jan.  18,  1914,  Miss  Verrall's  script
opens  thus  :  "  Festina  lente — note  when  that  phrase
recurs."  The  first  time  it  appeared  in  Miss  Verrall's  script
was  on  Jan.  6,  1914,  the  second  time  on  Jan.  18,  1914 ;
and,  as  between  these  two  dates  Miss  Verrall  produced
no  script,  her  only  citations  of  "  Festina  lente "  occur
in  successive  scripts  ;  and  in  between  these  two  successive
scripts  falls  Mrs.  Verrall's  "  More  haste  less  Speed."

Twice  more  the  motto  comes  in  script  :  on  March  8,
and  July  22,  1914  ; each  time  in  Mrs.  King's  script.

If  the  first  appearance  of  the  motto  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  is  left  out  of  account,  we  find  that  between  Nov.
28,  1913,  and  July  22,  1914,  it  occurs  no  less  than  six
times  :  four  times  in  Mrs.  King's  and  twice  in  Miss
Verrall's  script.  Why,  I  ask,  this  sudden  outburst  of
reiterated  "  Festina  lente's  "  ?

Moreover,  eleven  days  after  the  first,  and  one  day  before
the  second  occurrence  of  "  Festina  lente  "  in  Miss  Verrall's
script,  Mrs.  Verrall  writes  "  More  haste  less  speed " —
a  proverb  that  has  not  been  quoted  elsewhere  in  any
of  the  scripts.

Though  I  have  felt  bound  to  mention  Mrs.  Verrall's
contribution  to  this  cross-correspondence,  I  cannot  help
regarding  it  as  regrettable,  because  it  spoils  what  would
otherwise  have  been  an  ideally  simple  and  lucid  type
of  cross-correspondence.  The  French  blood  that  flows  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  veins  ought.!  to  have  saved  her  from '  thus
"  darkening  counsel  by  words  without  knowledge."  I
suppose  she  might  plead  in  mitigation  that  her  subliminal
purposely  substituted  "  More  haste  less  speed  "  for  "  Festina


s


J.  O.  Piddington .


[PART


lente  "  because  it  knew  that  her  supraliminal  had  seen
the  latter  phrase  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  To  a  conjecture
of  this  kind  I  might  have  listened  with  sympathy  in  my
unregenerate  days  before  I  read  Dr.  Geley's  paper ;  but
now  my  ears  are  deaf  to  such  sophistries.

Music  has  charms.

I  now  turn  to  two  coincidences  of  a  straightforward
land  between  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall.

On  April  11,  1913,  Miss  Verrall's  script  contained  the
following  :

the  Lesbian  lyre — to  strike  the  lyre  with  might music  hath
charms.

"  Music hath charms  " is from Congreve's play  The

Mourning  Bride  :

"  Music  has  charms  to  soothe  a  savage,, breast,
To  soften  rocks,  or  bend  a  knotted  oak.
I've  read  that  things  inanimate  have  moved,
And,  as  with  living  souls,  have  been  inform'd
By  magic  numbers  and  persuasive  sound."

Four  days  later — on  April  15,  1913 — Mrs.  Verrall's  script
opens  thus  :

And  the  mountain  tops  that  freeze
Follow  after  follow  after
Now  with  tear  and  now  with  laughter

Music  has  charms  and  you  know  the  rest

Then  write  again  Music.

"  And  the  mountain  tops  that  freeze  "  is  from  "  Orpheus
with  his  lute  "  hi  Henry  VIII.  ;  and  it  is  quite  appro-
priate to  associate  this  song  with  the  quotation  from
Congreve's  The  Mourning  Bride,  because  the  context
of  "  Music  has  charms  "  there  evidently  alludes  to  Orpheus.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  Mrs.  Verrall  did  not  know  the
full  context  of  "  Music  has  charms."  She  knew,  as
everyone  does,  the  whole  line  "  Music  has  charms  to
soothe a savage breast," but not the succeeding  four


lxxii.] Gross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.  9


lines  which  particularly  suggest  Orpheus.  Still,  as  Mrs.
Verrall  herself  says,  the  first  line  is  enough  to  suggest
"  that  Orpheus  is  likely  to  be  in  the  neighbourhood."
I  must  not,  then,  be  understood,  as  claiming  that  Mrs.
VerralFs  script  shows  a  knowledge  of  the  context  of
"  Music  has  charms  "  which  the  automatist  herself  did
not  consciously  possess.  What  I  do  think  is  that  the
reference  in  her  script  to  Orpheus  which  precedes,  and
the  remark,  "  and  you  know  the  rest,"  which  follows
the  quotation,  suggest  that  stress  is  being  laid  on  the
fact  of  these  words  having  a  literary  source  and  a  context,
and  of  their  not  being  a  mere  unattached  proverbial
saying  like  "  A  rolling  stone  gathers  no  moss."  Why
I  wish  to  make  this  point  will  appear  presently.

It  is  Mrs.  Verrall's  habit  to  copy  her  scripts,  soon
after  they  are  written,  into  a  book  which  she  keeps  for
the  purpose  ;  and  to  post  the  originals,  as  soon  as  the
copy  is  made,  to  Miss  Johnson  or  me.  To  the  copies
she  adds  from  time  to  time  various  notes  and  com-
ments, and  puts  against  them  the  dates  on  which  they
are  made.  Thus,  on  April  16,  1913 — that  is  the  day
after  "  Music  has  charms  "  appeared  for  the  first  and
only  time  in  her  script — she  noted  that  it  is  a  quotation
of  which  she  does  not  know  the  source.

She  teUs  me  that  to  the  best  of  her  belief  nothing
had  happened  to  bring  this  quotation  to  her  mind  at  or
about  the  time  when  it  occurred  in  her  script  :  I  mean
nothing  she  had  lately  been  thinking  of,  or  reading,  or
hearing  said.

With  Miss  Verrall  the  case  is,  or  appears  to  be,  otherwise.

Some  time  in  April  1913,  she  talked  with  her  cousin,
Mr.  Evelyn  Riviere,  about  a  Literary  Problems  Party
which  they  were  both  concerned  in  getting  up,  and
which  was  to,  and  did,  take  place  on  May  19,  1913.
During  this  conversation  Mr.  Riviere  told  Miss  Verrall
that  one  of  the  questions  to  be  asked  at  the  Party
was  the  source  of  "  Music  has  charms,"  and  he  then
informed  her  that  it  came  from  Congreve's  Mourning
Bride  :  a  fact  previously  unknown  to  her.  The  date
on  which  this  conversation  took  place  Miss  Verrall  cannot


LO


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


ascertain  for  certain.  On  my  first  asking  her  when  it
occurred,  she  said  she  thought  about  the  end  of  April,
1913  ;  but  she  subsequently  decided  that  it  must  have
been  before  April  11,  1913  :  the  date  on  which  the
quotation  appears  in  her  script.  I  gather  from  her
that  the  chief  reason  for  her  change  of  opinion  is  that
since  the  quotation  appeared  in  her  script  on  April  11,
1913,  it  was  therefore  before  this  date  that  Mr.  Riviere
mentioned  it  to  her.  I  am  not  entirely  convinced  by
this  argument  ;  for  if,  as  appears  to  be  the  case,  Mrs.
Verrall  got  the  quotation  telepathically  from  Miss  Verrall,
it  seems  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  Miss  Verrall
may  have  got  it  telepathically  from  Mr.  Riviere.  I
find  a  stronger  argument  in  favour  of  Miss  Verrall's  view
in  the  script  itself,  which  opens  with  references  to  "  Dido
with  a  willow  in  her  hand  "  and  to  Semele  "  the  bride  of
the  bladed  thunder  "  :  both  "  Mourning  Brides  "  ;  and
this  suggests  that  she  knew  when  this  script  was  written
that  "  Music  has  charms  "  comes  from  Congreve's  Mourning
Bride. In  any  case  it  is  safer  to  accept  the  earlier  date.

Mrs.  Verrall,  at  any  rate,  knew  nothing  about  the
problems  to  be  set  at  the  Party  until  after  "  Music  has
charms  "  had  appeared  in  her  script.  On  April  27,
1913,  Miss  Verrall  told  her  mother  about  the  proposed
Party,  and  mentioned  the  choice  of  "  Music  has  charms  "
as  one  of  the  problems,  and  told  her  where  it  came
from.  Mrs.  Verrall  was  careful  to  note  in  her  script-book
on  April  27,  1913,  that  she  then  told  her  daughter  that
the  quotation  had  recently  occurred  in  her  own  script.

I  hope  that  no  one  will  imagine  that  I  have  set  forth
the  above  facts  because  I  think  they  afford  a  normal
explanation  of  the  cross-correspondence  in  question.  They,
of  course,  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  They  explain,  or
may  explain,  in  a  perfectly  normal  way  the  appearance
of  the  quotation  from  Congreve  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  ;
but  not  its  repetition  four  days  later  in  Mrs.  Verrall's.
My  reason  for  mentioning  the  facts  is  to  show  the  kind
of  precautions  that  ought  to  be  taken,  and  that  we  do
as  a  matter  of  fact  take,  to  guard  so  far  as  is  possible
against the risk of coincidences explicable by  normal


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.  11


causes  being  mistaken  for  cross-correspondences.  It  is
clear  that  such  pseudo-cross-correspondences  are  more
likely  to  occur  in  the  scripts  of  a  mother  and  daughter,
who,  it  is  true,  do  not  live  in  the  same  house,  but  who
meet  at  fairly  frequent  intervals,  than  in  the  scripts
of  mere  acquaintances  or  strangers.  In  the  case  under
review  it  is  evident  that  had  Mrs.  Verrall  known  about
the  problems  to  be  set  at  the  Party  by  or  before  April  16,
the  coincidence  might  still  have  occurred,  but  it  would
have  been  absurd  to  claim  it  as  a  cross-correspondence.

Walking  in  Darkness.

The  second  example  of  a  cross-correspondence  of  a
simple  kind  between  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall  is  this.

On  September  11,  1913,  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  contained
the  following  :

non  visum  neque  tactum,  sed  non  invisibile  neque
intangibile.  Interpret  that  riddle- — they  see  not  neither
do  they  hear — no,  you  miss  the  point.

She  walks  in  darkness  like  the  night  that  gives  a
better  analogy.  Try  this — her  own  darkness  makes  the
night  visible,  and  the  same  darkness  makes  her  invisible
■ — then  say  that  inward  eye  I  can't  get  anything  more
here  and  now — But  I  think  there  is  something  said  that
wanted  saying — though  there  is  certainly  confusion.

"  She  walks  in  darkness  like  the  night  "  is  a  mis-
quotation of  Byron's

She  walks  in  beauty,  like  the  night
Of  cloudless  climes  and  starry  skies  ;

And  all  that's  best  of  dark  and  bright
Meet  in  her  aspect  and  her  eyes  :

Thus  mellow'd  to  that  tender  light
Which  heaven  to  gaudy  day  denies.

The  misquotation — recognised  by  the  automatist — whether
intentional  or  not,  certainly  serves  to  emphasise  the
words  "  walks  in  darkness."

The  Latin  means  :  "  not  seen  and  not  touched,  but
ot  invisible  and  not  intangible."


L2


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


The  first  script  written  by  Miss  Verrall  after  the  date
of  this  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's — namely,  eight  days  later,
on  Sept.  19,  1913 — contained  the  following  passage  :

the  starlit  path — the  lantern  beams — they  cast  their
light  before  them  but  they  themselves  walk  in  darkness
— handing  on  the  torch —

There  had  been  one  previous  reference  in  Miss  Verrall's
own  script  to  torch-bearing  and  one  to  the  XajuiraSijcpoplu,1
and  three  references  to  the  \a/u.7ruS>i<popla.  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  script 2  of  which  Miss  Verrall  knew ;  but  in
none  of  these  cases  is  there  the  slightest  suggestion  of
the  torch-bearers  being  themselves  in  darkness.

The  Days  of  Creation.

The  coincidences  in  this  case  consist  of  a  series  of
references  in  the  scripts  of  two,  and  perhaps  of  three,
automatists  to  the  Days  of  Creation.  This  topic,  which
some  seven  years  later  was  to  become  the  theme  of  a
spacious  cross-correspondence,  first  appeared  explicitly  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Dec.  24,  1906.  But  before  quoting
this  script,  I  will  first  quote  two  earlier  scripts  of  Mrs.
Verrall's,  because  it  seems  probable  that  in  them  are
to  be  found  the  first  approaches  to  the  topic  clearly
expressed  in  the  script  of  Dec.  24,  1906.

Extract  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Dec.  3,  1902.

Vesperavit  iam  ante  in  lumine  lux  fiat  [i.e.  Evening  has
already  come  before ha  the  light let  there  be  light.]  .  .  .

Extract  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March  1,  1903.

.  .  .  largas  ad  lummis  oras 3  .  .  . Ex  tenebris  fiet  lux 3

[i.e.  To  the  wide  shores  of  light  .  .  .  Out  of  darkness
will  light  come.]  .  .  .

1  On  Dec.  16,  1909,  and  June  11,  1912,  respectively.

2  On  May  26,  June  30,  1901,  and  Jan.  18,  1903.

3  "  Luminis  oras"  is  a  Lucre tian  phrase.  H.  A.  J.  Munro  says  that  it
"is  a  favourite  phrase,  by  which  Lucretius  seems  to  denote  the  line  or
border  which  divides  light  from  darkness,  being  from  non-being."  Hence
it  is  appropriately  connected  in  the  script  with  "  fiet  lux,"  which
is  clearly  reminiscent  of  the  Vulgate's  "Fiat  lux,"  "Let  there  be  light."


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


L3


Extract  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Dec.  24,  1906.

Let  there  be  light  he  said  and  there  was  light  And  the
evening  and  the  morning  were  the  first  day.  The  re-
ference has  been  given  before  1  but  I  think  not  understood
— largas  luminis  oras.

I  am  not  proposing  to  consider  the  references  in
the  various  scripts  to  "  Let  there  be  light,"  except  where
these  words  are  combined  with,  or  soon  followed  by,
one  of  the  "  evening  and  the  morning  "  verses  from
the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  ;  but  in  order  that  the  reader
may  be  in  a  position  to  judge  whether  or  not  I  have
dealt  fairly  with*  the  evidence,  I  shall  give  at  the  end
of  this  section  a  list  of  all  the  quotations  in  the  scripts
from  the  first  two  chapters  of  Genesis.  It  is,  then,  the
occurrences  of  one  or  other  of  the  "  evening  and  the
morning  "  verses  which  I  regard  as  constituting  the
cross-correspondence.

After  Dec.  24,  1906,  more  than  six  and  a  half  years
passed  before  any  of  these  "  evening  and  morning  "
refrains  appear  again  in  any  of  the  scripts.  Then,  on
August  24,  1913,  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  ends  with  "  And
the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  first  day."  Next,
after  an  interval  of  nearly  seven  and  a  half  months,
on  April  6,  1914,  Miss  Verrall's  script,  which  she  began
to  write  at  4.20  p.m.,  opened  with  the  words  "  Parvus
— per  amicitiam — luminis  oras  "  ;  and  then  in  the  next
dozen  lines  or  so  went  on  to  refer  to  seven  different
subjects,  between  none  of  which  and  "  luminis  oras  "
can  I  see  any  connexion.  At  this  point  the  automatist
was  interrupted.  When  she  resumed  at  5  p.m.,  she
quoted  first  from  The  Blessed  Damozel,  next  from  Tenny-
son's Mariana,  and  then  wrote  the  following  :  "  And
the  morning  and  the  evening  were  the  third  day.  We
have  got  to  get  things  through  as  we  can  and  sort  them
out  afterwards  bit  by  bit."

Now,  in  January  1914,  Mss  Verrall  had  seen  for  the
first  time  a  printed  collection  of  all  the  scripts  produced
by Mrs. Verrall between  January 1905 and  May  1907.

1  Namely  in  the  script  of  March  1,  1903.


14


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Among  these  is  the  script  of  Dec.  24,  1906,  which  com-
bines "  And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  first
day  "  with  "  luminis  oras."  It  is  fair  to  assume,  therefore,
that  the  appearance  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  April  6,
1914,  of  "luminis  oras"  and  of  "the  morning  and  the
evening  were  the  third  day  "■ — separated  though  these  two
phrases  are  by  a  considerable  interval  from  each  other-
is  due  to  her  acquaintance  with  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
of  Dec.  24,  1906.  Miss  Verrall,  in  fact — to  use  an  ex-
pression that  Mrs.  Willett  has  applied  to  similar  instances
of  borrowing — "  cribbed  "  from  Mrs.  Verrall.

Naturally,  then,  I  do  not  claim  the  coincidence  as
evidence  of  supernormal  faculty.  At  the  same  time
the  fact  should  not  escape  notice  that  the  "  crib  "  was
not  textual  :  Miss  Verrall's  script  mentioning  the  third
day  of  Creation,  and  not,  like  Mrs.  Verrall's,  the  first.
This  variation  from  the  known  original  is  emphasised  by
the  very  next  script  that  Miss  Verrall  wrote — on  April  17,
1914 — as  it  opens  with  the  words  :  "  And  the  evening
and  the  morning  were  the  fourth  day."

Nearly  eight  weeks  passed  before  another  "  Evening
and  morning  "  reference  occurred.  Then,  in  close  succes-
sion, came  six  such  references  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,
as  follows :

June  11,  1914:  "And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were
the  first  day and  so  of  all  days  "  ;

June  22,  1914:  "And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were
the  2nd  day  "  ;

June  26,  1914  :  "  And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were
the  third  day. And  there  was  light  "  ;

June  27,  1914  :  "  This  is  not  an  evening  and  a  morning —
quite  in  another  series  "  ;

June  28,  1914  :  "  Let  there  be  light  and  the  evening  and
the  morning  were  the  fifth  day  Yes
I  mean  what  I  say — the  fifth  day  "  ;

June  29,  1914  :  "  And  he  rested  on  the  7th  day — Don't
try  to  understand  these  little  tags
from  Genesis — But  each  has  its  pur-
pose, and  I  have  said — and  you  have
written — in  each  case  what  I  mean."


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


L5


Then,  after  g»  ^Ta^fcqr^al^of ,  jiQarJjr  eleven  weeks,  Miss
Verrall  takes  up  thei  ^galn:  n?/,fvfd;,  successive  scripts.
On  Oct.  13,  1914,  she  writes:

"  The  elements,:  riihigkidf^eaj'th;  &irij&r,e\  and\  water —
And  he  said  let  there  "be  light  "and  there  :was  light  "  ;

and  on  Oct.  16,  1914  :

"  And  the  morning  and  the  evening  were  the  first  day."

Now,  if  my  object  were  to  present  the  facts,  not  as
they  are,  but  as  they  ought  to  be,  I  should  leave  this
cross-correspondence  as  it  stands,  and  claim  it  as  a
Gallic  "  gem  of  purest  ray  serene  "  ;  for  recalling,  as
it  does,  the  rhythmic  simplicity  of  "  One  little,  two
little,  three  little,  four  little,  five  little  Blackamoor  boys,"
it  seems  fairly  entitled  to  rank  beside  either  of  Dr.  Geley's
two  ideal  types  of  cross-correspondence — nay,  even  to
comprise  the  perfections  of  both.

But  candour  compels  me  to  confess  that  probably  I
have  not  yet  told  all  the  relevant  facts  ;  and  I  am  afraid
that  the  truth  probably  is  that,  just  as  Mrs.  Verrall
marred  the  Gallic  clarity  of  the  "  Festina  lente  "  cross-
correspondence  by  her  "  more  haste  less  speed "  script,
so  here  Mrs.  King  marred  this  cross-correspondence  by
making  indirect  or  obscure  allusions  to  the  Creation
instead  of  quoting  one  or  more  of  the  "  evening  and  the
morning  "  tags.

Paragraphs  to  be  avoided  by  M.  M.  Celey  and  Maxwell.

The  passages  in  Mrs.  King's  script  which  seem  to
contain  these  indirect  or  obscure  allusions  to  the  Creation
are  as  follows  :

Extract  from  Mrs.  King's  script  of  Dec.  29,  1913.

.  .  .  The  luminous  globes  ... 1  Fulmine  gens  He  moved
across  the  face  of  the  waters  .  .  .

1  These  dots  represent  the  omission  of  a  few  words  of  encouragement
addressed  parenthetically  to  the  automatist.  This  is  quite  a  common
feature  in  Mrs.  King's  script.


16


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Extract  from  Mrs.  King's  script-  'of.  J.dmt  3.914.
.  .  .  Let  .there  be  'Iigiif;. .  '..  •  •

Extract  from  Mrs.  King' 's. sprint  of.  . Jan.  1;8,.  1914.
.  .  .  The  -g'cistenifeg'/gl.o^s  .'.  .  ."•  ■  •"•*•  :

Extract  from  Mrs.  King's  script  of  Jan.  20,  1914.

.  .  .  One  moment  more  1 — Deukalion  the  last  is  the  best  .  .  .

Few  will  question  that  "  He  moved  across  the  face  of
the  waters  "  is  a  reminiscence  of  the  second  verse  of  the
first  chapter  of  Genesis  :  "  And  the  earth  was  without
form  and  void  ;  and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the
deep.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of
the  waters."

What,  however,  of  "  the  luminous  globes  "  ?  These
words,  by  themselves  and  without  context,  would  not
suggest  any  connexion  with  the  Creation  ;  but  closely
followed,  as  they  are,  by  words  strongly  reminiscent
of  a  sentence  in  the  biblical  narrative  of  the  Creation,
I  think  it  not  unreasonable  to  see  in  them  an  allusion
to  a  famous  series  of  six  pictures  2  by  Burne-Jones  called
"  The  Angels  of  Creation."  In  this  series  each  day  of
the  Creation  is  represented  by  an  Angel  holding  in  his
hands  a  luminous  globe,  wherein  are  reflected  the  chief
features  of  each  day's  creative  work.  At  the  feet  of
the  Angel  of  the  Sixth  Day  is  seated  the  Angel  of  the
Seventh  Day  holding,  not  a  globe,  but  a  harp.

So  far  I  have  passed  over  without  comment  the  words
"  fulmine  gens,"  which  come  between  "  the  luminous
globes  "  and  "  He  moved  across  the  face  of  the  waters."
In  offering  an  interpretation  of  them,  I  hope  it  will  be
understood  that  I  do  not  claim  for  it  anything  more
than  a  certain  degree  of  probability.

The  words  mean  literally  "  by  lightning  a  people,"
and,  as  they  stand,  make  no  sense.  The  first  time,
however,  that  I  saw  them  in  Mrs.  King's  script,  and
long before I saw the reference to Deukalion in  her

1  "  One  moment  more  "  is  an  instruction  to  the  automatist  to  try
for  one  more  impression  before  ceasing  to  write.

'■■  To  one  of  these  pictures  there  is  an  allusion  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
of  Feb.  6, 1908  ; but  Mrs.  King  has  never  seen  this  script.


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


IT


script  of  Jan.  20,  1914,  they  immediately  suggested  to  me
the  opening  lines  of  Hor.  C.  I.  2  :

Jam  satis  terris  nivis  atque  dirae
Grandinis  misit  Pater,  et  rubente
Dextera  sacras  jaculatus  arces

Terruit  urbem,
Terruit  gentes,  grave  ne  rediret
Seculum  Pyrrhae.

(Enough  of  snow  and  dreadful  hail  the  Father  has  now  sent
upon  the  earth,  and,  smiting  with  red  right-hand  the  sacred
heights,  has  affrighted  the  city,  has  affrighted  the  nations,  lest
the  troublous  age  of  Pyrrha  should  return."

Lonsdale  and  Lee's  Translation.)

Here,  then,  we  get  "gentes"  (the  plural  of  "gens");
and  by  implication  "  fulmen "  too,  for,  though  the  word
"  f ulmen "  is  not  actually  used,  the  thing  that  Jupiter
hurled  {jaculatus)  is,  of  course,  his  "  fulmen."  Moreover,
the  day  after  the  allusion  to  "  the  glistening  globes  " —
which  has  every  appearance  of  being  meant  as  equivalent
to  "  the  luminous  globes  " — comes  the  name  "  Deukalion,"
which  will  suit  with  the  "Pyrrha"  of  Horace's  lines.

If  I  recall  in  rough  outline  the  story  of  Pyrrha  and
her  husband  Deucalion,  it  will  be  clear  to  the  reader
why  an  allusion  to  it  might  appropriately  be  sandwiched
between  allusions  to  the  Creation.

The  impiety  and  vice  of  mankind  in  the  Iron  Age
had  so  angered  Zeus  that  he  determined  to  destroy
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  and  to  create  a  new
race  of  men.  He  caused  a  great  flood  to  overwhelm
the  earth,  so  that  the  top  of  Mount  Parnassus  was  the
only  land  not  covered  by  the  waters.  The  whole  human
race  was  drowned  except  Deucalion  and  Pyrrha  :  a  pious
couple,  who  had  sought  refuge  on  the  heights  of  Par-
nassus. Zeus  took  pity  on  them,  and  for  the  sake  of
their  uprightness  and  devoutness  spared  them,  and  made
the  flood  to  abate.  Realising  that  they  were  the  only
beings  left  alive,  Deucalion  and  Pyrrha  sought  counsel
from  an  oracle  how  they  might  replenish  the  earth.  The
oracle  bade  them  throw  the  bones  of  their  mother  behind

B


18


G.  Piddington.


[part


their  backs.  Pyrrha  refused  to  do  anything  so  disrespect-
ful ;  but  Deucalion,  with  an  ingenuity  worthy  of  some
psychical  researchers,  suggested  that  the  oracle  meant
the  Earth  by  their  mother,  and  stones  of  the  earth
by  her  bones  ;  and  argued  that  there  could  anyhow  be
no  harm  in  acting  on  this  hypothesis.  Accordingly  they
did  ;  and  the  stones  thrown  by  Deucalion  became  men,
and  those  thrown  by  Pyrrha  became  women  ;  and  so
took  place  the  second  Creation  of  Man.

If,  then,  Mrs.  King's  "  fulmine  gens  "  and  "  Deucalion  "
are  allusions  to  the  opening  lines  of  Hor.  C.  I.  2,  they
are  not  inappropriately  combined  with  phrases  that  directly
or  indirectly  relate  to  the  Biblical  account  of  the  Creation
of  Man.

I  append,  as  promised,  a  list,  in  chronological  order,
of  all  quotations  from,  and  phrases  reminiscent  of  the
first  two  chapters  of  Genesis  occurring  in  the  scripts.
Against  those  which  form  the  cross-correspondence  asterisks
are  placed.  No  quotations  from  the  first  two  chapters
of  Genesis  occur  in  Mrs.  Holland's  or  in  the  Mac  scripts.
Mrs.  King's  script  has  not  been  thoroughly  indexed,  but
I  believe  that  it  contains  no  other  quotations  from  these
chapters  than  those  given  below  ;  and  this  is  all  the  more
significant  since  her  script  teems  with  Biblical  quotations.

M.  V.  =Mrs.  Verrall's  script  ;
H.  V.  =Miss  Verrall's  script  ;
King  =Mrs.  King's  script  ;
W. =Mrs.  Willett's  script.

M.  V.  Jan. 17,  1902. "  Fiet  lux."
„ Dec. 3,  1902. "  Lux  fiat."

March 1,  1903. "  Ex  tenebris  fiet  lux."
,, Dec. 24,  1906. "  Let  there  be  light  he  said  and

there  was  light
And  the  evening  and  the  morning
were  the  first  day."
H.  V.  Jan. 22,  1909. "  Something  about  the  spirit — on

the  face  of  the  waters."
„ Feb. 22,  1910. "  Let  there  be  light."
„ May 12,  1910. "  Fiat  lux."


Lxxn.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.  19


w.

Aug.

23,

1911.

"The  life  of  the  Whole  flowing

through  and  beholding  itself  that
it  is  good."

5  J

Dec.

3,

1911.

"  Let  us  make  Man  in  our  Image."

*M.  V.

Aug.

24,

1913.

"  And  the  evening  and  the  morn-

ing were  the  first  day."

*King.

Dec.

29,

1913.

"He  moved  across  the  face  of  the
waters."

*

Jan.

6,

1914.

"  Let  there  be  light."

*H.  V.  April

6,

1914.

"  And  the  morning  and  the  evening

were  the  third  day."

*

April

17,

1914.

"  And  the  evening  and  the  morning
were  the  fourth  day."

*M.  V.

•June

11,

1914.

"  And  the  evening  and  the  morning
were  the  first  day."

*

June

22

1914.

"  And  the  evening  and  the  morning
were  the  2nd  day."

*

55

June

26,

1914.

"  And  the  evening  and  the  morning
were  the  third  day. And  there
was  light."

*

5  5

June

27,

1914.

"  This  is  not  an  evening  and  a
morning."

*

55

June

28,

1914.

"  Let  there  be  light  and  the  evening
and  the  morning  were  the  fifth
day."

*

June

29,

1914.

"  And  he  rested  on  the  7th  day."

*H.'V.

Oct.

13,

1914.

"  And  he  said  let  there  be  light  and
there  was  light."

*

55

Oct.

14,

1914.

"  And  the  morning  and  the  evening

were  the  1st  day."

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  scripts  forming  the  cross-
correspondence  refer  to  the  first,  second,  third,  fourth,
fifth  and  seventh  days,  but  not  to  the  sixth  day,  on
which  Man  was  created.  To  the  work  of  the  sixth
day  the  only  direct  reference  is  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script
of  Dec.  3,  1911,  though  of  course  the  phrase  in  her
script  of  Aug.  23,  1911— "the  life  of  the" Whole  flowing
through  and  beholding  itself  that  it  is  good " — includes
the  work  of  all  six  days.


20


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Narthex.

In  the  last  case  I  had  occasion  to  draw  attention
to  the  fact  that  in  all  probability  Miss  Verrall  "  cribbed  "
the  words  "  luminis  oras  "  from  an  early  script  of  Mrs.
Verrall's.  By  way  of  introduction  to  the  present  case,
it  will  be  convenient  to  say  something  further  about
"  cribs "  in  Miss  Verrall's  script.  Miss  Verrall  is,  or
must  be  assumed  to  be,  familiar  with  all  scripts  published
in  our  Proceedings  or  Journal.  Moreover,  between  May
and  December,  1912,  she  went  through  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  from  its  beginning  in  1901  down  to  the  end  of
1904,  for  the  purpose  of  translating  the  Greek  and  Latin
words,  phrases  and  quotations  that  occur  in  it  ;  and  in
January  1914,  she  received  a  copy  of  a  printed  volume
of  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  produced  between  January  1905
and  May  1907.  If  she  has  not  read  all  these  scripts —
about  500  in  all — she  has  at  any  rate  browsed  among
them.  It  might,  accordingly,  be  thought  that  her  own
subsequent  scripts  would  exhibit  a  large  number  of  "cribs"
from  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact
this  is  not  so.

In  this  paper  I  shall  cite  no  script  of  Miss  Verrall's
earlier  than  April  11,  1913,  or  later  than  Oct.  16,  1914,
as  contributing  to  a  cross-correspondence.  I  have  gone
carefully  through  all  her  scripts  between  these  two  dates
with  a  view  to  ascertaining  how  many  words  or  phrases
borrowed  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  they  contain  ;  and
I  have  succeeded  in  tracing  only  three  certain  "  cribs "
and  one  possible  one.

The  possible  "  crib "  is  the  word  "  Nympholeptus,"
on  Aug.  7,  1913,  which  may  be  a  reminiscence  of  the
word  "  nympholept "  found  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
Jan.  23,  1903  ;  but  just  as  probably,  if  not  more  pro-
bably, a  classical  author  or  Browning's  poem  Numpkoleptos
was  the  source  on  which  Miss  Verrall  drew.

Two  of  the  certain  "cribs"  are  (a)  "narthex  cero-
matica  "  and  (6)  "luminis  oras"  combined  with  an  "evening
and  morning  "  quotation.  These  two  appear  in  successive
scripts on March 31 and April b, 1914,  respectively.


Lxxn.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


21


One,  as  we  have  seen,  and  the  other,  as  will  presently
appear,  have  formed  the  themes  of  cross-correspondences.
The  third  certain  "  crib  "  occurs  on  Aug.  29,  1914,  and,  so
far  as  I  know,  is  not  re-echoed  in  the  script  of  any  of
the  other  automatistss

Still,  when  I  find  that  two  out  of  the  three  certain
"  cribs "  are  thus  re-echoed,  it  makes  me  suspect  that
this  "  cribbing  "  is  not  a  random  process.

The  way  is  now  clear  to  deal  with  the  "  Narthex "
cross-correspondence.

The  word  Narthex  occurs  twice — and  twice  only — in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  :  for  the  first  time  on  Feb.  2,
1903,  in  the  form  "  cum  narthece  ceromatico,"  and  for
the  second  time  on  Sept.  23,  1908,  in  the  following
forms  :

yap vapOipci KaXujUL/uepov to irvp ih  TlpofJujOevs
tow  av6pct)7rovs  deoiaiv  eoiKOTag  eiroujcre.
In  a  narthex  stem  conveyed
By  the  god  who  disobeyed
Broke  the  fate,  mankind  to  save
So  gave  freedom  to  the  slave.

The  Greek  means  "  For  in  a  narthex  was  hidden  the  fire
by  which  Prometheus  made  men  like  unto  gods."

Narthex  is  the  name  of  some  plant  with  a  hollow
stalk.  It  is  also  used  of  a  small  case  or  tube  for  holding
unguents.  Its  best  known  association  is  with  the  hollow
stalk  in  which  Prometheus  brought  down  fire  from  heaven ;
and  it  is  in  this  sense  that  the  word  is  used  in  the
second  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  two  scripts.  The  words  "  cum
narthece  ceromatico  "  in  her  first  script  mean  literally
"  with  a  waxen  narthex,"  and  Mrs.  Verrall  takes  this
to  mean  "  a  phial  of  unguent."  The  first  of  these  two
scripts — that  of  Feb.  2,  1903 — has  been  printed  and
discussed  in  Proc.  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  121-123  ;  the  second
in  Proc.  Vol.  XXV.,  p.  259.

Mrs.  Willett  and  Miss  Verrall  have  read  these  volumes,
and  may  therefore  be  assumed  to  be  acquainted  with  both
scripts.

The  word  Narthex does  not  occur  in  the  scripts  of


22


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


any  of  the  other  automatists  until  March  31,  1914,  when
Miss  Verrall's  script  contains  the  following  :

narthex — what  is  that  1  ceromatica — this  is  important — ■
it  is  wanted  for  completion.

Then  on  May  2,  1914,  Mrs.  Willett's  script  has  :

The  divine  fire  in  a  narthex  this  was  conveyed  to  the  sons
of  men.

This,  as  Mrs.  Willett  herself  recognised,  is  a  "  crib  "
from  the  second  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  two  "  Narthex  "  scripts  ;
while  Miss  Verrall's  "  narthex  ceromatica  "  is  a  "  crib  "
from  the  first  of  the  two.

Why,  I  ask,  within  less  than  five  weeks  of  each  other,
did  Miss  Verrall  select  one  and  Mrs.  Willett  the  other
of  the  only  two  references  to  Narthex  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  for  reproduction  in  their  own  scripts,  rather  than
some  of  the  other  thousands  of  phrases  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  equally  known  to  both  of  them  ?

"  The  stabs  when  they  sang  together,"
and  Tennyson's  "  Mariana."

Miss  Verrall's  script  of  April  6,  1914,  has  already,  as
we  have  seen  in  the  Days  of  Creation  case,  furnished
one  cross-correspondence.  But  that  was  not  the  only
one,  for  it  contained  three  other  cross-correspondences  ;
and  of  these  I  will  now  proceed  to  render  an  account.

It  will  be  remembered  that  on  April  6,  1914,  Miss
Verrall  was  interrupted  in  the  middle  of  writing  her  script
(see  p.  13).  The  last  words  she  wrote  before  the  inter-
ruption were  these  :

Something about music too — the common chord — but
not  Abt  Vogler — this  is  another  association.

Then  after  the  interruption  she  wrote  :

the  stars — when  they  sang  together — he  cometh  not  she
said — And  the  morning  and  the  evening  were  the  third  day.

"  He  cometh  not  she  said  "  is  from  Tennyson's  Mariana.


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


23


The  original  source  of  "  the  stars — when  they  sang
together  "  is,  of  course,  Job,  xxxviii.  7  :  "  When  the
morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God
shouted  for  joy."  But  the  words  in  the  script  "  the
stars — when  they  sang  together "  are  more  probably
derived  from  Rossetti's  The  Blessed  Damozel  than  from
Job.  This  will  be  clear  if  the  three  are  placed  side
by  side.

Job.  "  When  the  morning  stars  sang  together  "  ;
Rossetti.  "  Her  voice  was  like  the  voice  the  stars

Had  when  they  sang  together  "  ;
Script.  "  the  stars — when  they  sang  together."

Rossetti  and  the  script  both  omit  "  morning  "  ;  and
both  have  "  the  stars  when  they  sang  together,"  whereas
Job  has  "When  the  stars  sang  together."

But  although  the  script  phrase  is  in  my  opinion  nearer
to  Rossetti  than  to  Job,  I  think  that  the  combination  of
"  And  the  morning  and  the  evening  were  the  third  day  "
with  "  the  stars — when  they  sang  together  "  makes  it
practically  certain  that  Job,  as  well  as  Rossetti,  was
in  the  automatist's  thoughts  ;  for  the  context  of  "  When
the  morning  stars  sang  together  "  in  Job  is  concerned
with  the  Creation  of  the  World  :

Where  wast  thou  when  I  laid  the  foundations  of  the
earth  ?  .  .  .  Whereupon  are  the  foundations  thereof
fastened  %  or  who  laid  the  corner  stone  thereof  ;  When
the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of
God  shouted  for  joy  % Job,  xxxvih.  4,  6,  7.

The  first  time  that  Mrs.  Willett  wrote  automatically
after  April  6,  1914 — the  date  of  Miss  Verrall's  script
just  quoted — was  on  April  12,  1914,  when  her  script
contained  the  following  passage  :

The  Blessed  Damozel  leans  down  ...  In  vain  for  hei
shall  seraphs  harp,  her  eyes  were  deep  as  water  stilled
at  even. He  will  come He  will  come.

All  these  phrases  are  taken  from  The  Blessed  Damozel,
except "  In  vain  for  her  shall  seraphs  harp," which,  I


24


J.  0.  Piddington.


[PART


susjoect,  is  an  intentional  variation  of  the  following  lines
in  P.  W.  H.  Myers's  Immortality  :

I  fear  that  howsoe'er  the  seraphs  play
My  life  shall  not  be  theirs  nor  I  as  they,
But  homeless  in  the  heart  of  Paradise.

Whatever  its  source,  it  was  entirely  appropriate  to
insert  "  In  vain  for  her  shall  seraphs  harp  "  in  the  midst
of  allusions  to  Rossetti's  poem,  for  Paradise  was  to  be
but  homeless  for  the  Blessed  Damozel,  and  her  joy  not
perfect, until  she  was  joined  to  her  lover  again.

Appropriately,  too,  does  the  "  He  will  come  He  will
come  "  of  Mrs.  Willett's  script  answer  to  the  "  He  cometh
not  "  of  Miss  Verrall's  ;  for  although  Mariana's  "  He
cometh  not "  and  "  He  will  not  come "  are  in  formal
contradiction  with  the  Blessed  Damozel's  "  He  will  come",
both  cries  are  the  expression,  the  one  in  the  language  of
despair,  the  other  in  the  language  of  tremulous  hope,
of  the  same  passionate  yearning.

She  only  said,  '  My  life  is  dreary,

He  cometh  not/  she  said  ;
She  said,  '  I  am  aweary,  aweary,

I  would  that  I  were  dead  !  '

and  again  :

Then,  said  she,  '  I  am  very  dreary,

He  will  not  come,'  she  said  ;
She  wept,  '  I  am  aweary,  aweary,

Oh  God,  that  I  were  dead  !  '

(Tennyson,  Mariana.)

"  I  wish  that  he  were  come  to  me,
For  he  will  come,"  she  said.
Have  I  not  prayed  in  Heaven  ? — on  earth,

Lord,  Lord,  has  he  not  pray'd  ?
Are  not  two  prayers  a  perfect  strength  ?
And  shall  I  feel  afraid  ?

(D.  G.  Rossetti,  The  Blessed  Damozel.)

The  coincidence  between  Miss  Verrall's  and  Mrs.  Willett's
scripts  is  striking  enough  as  it  stands  ;  but  it  is  enhanced
by  a  passage  in  a  later  script  of  Mrs.  Willett's.


lxxh.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


25


After  April  12,  1914,  there  was  no  further  quotation
from,  or  allusion  to,  The  Blessed  Damozel  in  Mrs.  Willett's
script  until  August  16,  1914,  when  this  came  :

Seven  Stars  .  .  -1  He  mousike  [i.e.  >j  iuovotiki]  =  Music]
a  harmony  of  other  days  Such  harmony  is  in  immortal
Souls  that  is  the  true  music  of  the  spheres  to  which  the
world  goes  round  The  young  eyed  cherubims  and  the  Sons
of  God  Job  and  Browning  no  Job  and  Rossetti  the  stars
singing  together.

If  I  now  give  those  passages  of  The  Blessed  Damozel
to  which  Miss  Verrall's  script  and  Mrs.  Willett's  two
scripts  make  allusion,  the  reader  will  be  able  to  realise
at  a  glance  how  remarkably  the  three  dovetail.

The  blessed  damozel  leaned  out

From  the  gold  bar  of  Heaven  ;
Her  eyes  were  deeper  than  the  depth

Of  waters  stilled  at  even  ;
She  had  three  lilies  in  her  hand,

And  the  stars  in  her  hair  were  seven.


(Omission  of  1\  stanzas.)

and  now  she  spoke  as  when
The  stars  sang  in  their  spheres.

The  sun  was  gone  now  ; the  curled  moon

Was  like  a  little  feather
Fluttering  far  down  the  gulf  ; and  now

She  spoke  through  the  still  weather.
Her  voice  was  like  the  voice  the  stars

Had  when  they  sang  together.

(Omission  of  one  stanza,  placed  within  parentheses
in  the  original.)

1  These  dots  represent  a  considerable  omission  ;  but  it  is  almost
impossible  when  an  unmistakeable  allusion  to  The  Blessed  Damozel  occurs
in  the  same  script  not  to  connect  "  Seven  stars  "  therewith,  however
great  the  interval.


26


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


"  I  wish  that  he  were  come  to  me,
For  he  will  come,"  she  said.1

The  quotation  from  Tennyson's  Mariana  in  Miss  VerraiTs
script  of  April  6,  1914,  is  her  only  quotation  from  this
poem.  The  only  other  quotations  from  it  in  the  scripts
of  the  other  automatists  are  as  follows  :

Mac.  script  of  July  20,  1908  :  "I  am  aweary."

Mrs.  VerraiTs  script  of  July  4, 1911  : "  Mariana  said

that  he  came  not  but  reverse  that  "  ;
Mrs.  VerraiTs  script  of  May  10,  1913  : "  Upon  the  sill

the  flower  pots  were  mossy  dank  and  dripping  what

is  it  Mariana With  blackest  age  the  flower  pots."
Mrs.  VerraiTs  script  of  Sept.  17,  1914  : "  With  dankest

moss  the  flower  pots."

The  only  one  of  these  scripts  that  Miss  Verrall  had
seen  when  she  wrote  her  script  on  April  6,  1914,  was
the  Mac.  script  of  July  20,  1908.  It  should  especially
be  noted  that  she  had  not  seen  Mrs.  VerraiTs  script  of
July  4,  1911.  Mrs.  Verrall  does  not  quote  at  all  from
The  Blessed  Damozel.

"  Blow,  blow  thott  winter  Wind  "  and
Tennyson's  "  Mariana."

I  pass  on  now  to  the  third  cross-correspondence  to
which  Miss  VerraiTs  script  of  April  6,  1914,  contributed.

On  May  10,  1913,  Mrs.  VerraiTs  script  contained  the
following  :

Blow  blow  thou  wintry  wind  .  .  .  Boil  thou  first  in
the  charmed  pot  and  upon  the  sill  the  flower  pots  were
mossy  dank  and  dripping  what  is  it  Mariana  With
blackest  age  the  flower  pots.

Here  we  get  combined  "  Blow,  blow  thou  winter  wind  "

1  As  there  are  several  versions  of  The  Blessed  Damozel,  and  some
omit  the  stanza  beginning  "  The  sun  was  gone  now,"  I  should  explain
that  I  have  quoted  from  The  Poetical  Works  of  Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti,
Edited  with  Preface  by  William  M.  Rossetti,  A  New  Edition  in  one
Volume,  London,  1910.


lxxh.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


27


from  As  You  Like  It  with  quite  unmistakeable  reminiscences
of  Tennyson's  Mariana.

Nearly  eleven  months  later,  on  April  6,  1914,  Miss
Verrall's  script  contained  the  following  :

Blow  blow  thou  winter  wind  .  .  .  Something  about
music  too — the  common  chord — but  not  Abt  Vogler — ■
this  is  another  association  [Interruption]  the  stars — ■
when  they  sang  together- — he  cometh  not  she  said.

The  last  words,  as  already  stated,  are  a  quotation  from
Tennyson's  Mariana.  Both  scripts,  then,  comprise  "  Blow,
blow  thou  winter  wind  "  and  Mariana*

I  say  "  comprise "  rather  than  "  combine,"  because  a
number  of  phrases  intervene  in  Miss  Verrall's  script
between  "  Blow,  blow  thou  winter  wind  "  and  the  Mariana
quotation,  and  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  they  belong
together.  Moreover,  the  interval  of  time  between  the
two  coinciding  scripts  is  a  long  one.  These  are  weak
points  in  the  case.  Against  them,  however,  may  be  set
four  considerations  :

(1)  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  April  6,  1914 — the  one  in
question — displays  no  less  than  three  other  instances  of
cross-correspondence  ;

(2)  In  this  very  same  script  "  luminis  oras  "  is  separated
from  "  the  morning  and  the  evening  were  the  third
day  "  by  an  even  wider  interval  than  "  blow,  blow,  thou
winter  wind "  is  from  the  Mariana  quotation ;  yet  the
former  pair,  for  reasons  already  given  (see  pp.  13-14),
certainly  belong  together.  And  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of
Jan.  6,  1914,  "  Festinasse  lente "  is  separated  from
"  Festina  lente "  by  a  number  of  irrelevant  topics  ;  yet
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  belong  together  ; 1

(3)  The  "  author "  of  the  script  of  April  6,  1914,  is
aware  that  the  topics  have  emerged  in  disjointed  fashion
and  need  re-sorting,  as  is  shown  by  the  words  :  "  We
have  to  get  things  through  as  we  can  and  sort  them
out  afterwards  bit  by  bit  "  ;

1  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  are  scores  of  instances  in  Miss  Verrall's
script  where  two  or  more  complementary  phrases  are  widely  separated
from  each  other.


28


-/.  G.  Piddington.


[part


(4)  The  combination  of  topics  does  not  seem  a  likely
one  to  occur  by  chance  to  two  persons  independently.
In  Tennyson's  Mariana,  it  is  true,  there  are  allusions
to  "  cold  winds  "  and  "  wild  winds  "  which  might  suggest
the  Shakespearian  "  Blow,  blow,  thou  winter  wind,"  and
might  the  more  readily  do  so,  perhaps,  because  Tennyson's
Mariana  is  explicitly  connected  by  the  poet  himself  with
Sfmkespeare's  Mariana.  And  moreover,  the  "winter  wind"
being  "not  so  unkind  as  man's  ingratitude"  might  suggest,
the  faithlessness  of  Mariana's  lover.  But  that  these  far
from  obvious  or  inevitable  associations  should  independently
suggest  themselves  to  two  automatists  is  not  easy  of  belief.

To  facilitate  the  reader's  task  in  following  the  four
cases  of  cross-correspondence  into  which  Miss  Verrall's
script  of  April  6,  1914,  enters,  I  append  a  copy  of  the
whole  of  it  except  the  last  two  or  three  lines.

Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  April  6,  1914.
(4.20  p.m.)

Parvus — per  amicitiam — luminis  oras — the  wind  in  the
trees — a  sighing  and  a  sobbing — Poor  cock  Robin — I
said  the  sparrow — Be  the  green  grass  above  me —
and  here  let  the  wind  blow —

The  flight  of  the  arrow — Swifter  far  than  swallow's
flight — the  snake  in  the  grass —

Blow  blow  thou  winter  wind — there  is  an  important
point  in  this  Script — it  should  be  clear  I  think —

Something  about  music  too — the  common  chord —
but  not  Abt  Vogler — this  is  another  association —
(Interruption.)

(5  p.m.)

the  stars — when  they  sang  together — he  cometh  not
she  said —

And  the  morning  and  the  evening  were  the  third
day — We  have  to  get  things  through  as  we  can  and
sort  them  out  afterwards  bit  by  bit.  Otherwise  we
should  never  get  on  at  all.  As  it  is  things  mostly
do  get  clear  in  the  end  .  .  .


Lxsn.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.  29


Swifter  fab,  than  summer's  flight.

The  fourth  cross-correspondence  in  which  Miss  Verrall's
script  of  April  6,  1914,  plays  a  part  remains  to  be  described.

Miss  Verrall's  script  of  August  2,  1907,  contained  the
following  original  rhymed  lines  :

Sing  on  sweet  harbinger  of  summer  days
thy  voice  with  its  monotonous  refrain
Hath  the  rich  cadence  of  the  ripening  grain
A  satisfying  melody  of  praise.

None  of  the  phrases  which  go  to  make  up  this  verse
occurs  again  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  except  on  February  15,
1912,  when  "  harbinger  of  summer  days  "  reappears  in
the  following  context  :

the  swallow  summer — harbinger  of  summer  days.

"  The  swallow  summer "  is  a  quotation  from  Shelley's
poem  Remembrance.

Anyone,  therefore,  who  saw  these  two  scripts  might
naturally,  owing  to  both  having  the  phrase  "  harbinger
of  summer  days,"  be  led  to  associate  together  in  his
mind  the  topics  expressed  or  implied  in  each.  Thus,  he
might  associate  the  original  verse  of  the  first  with  any
line  of  Shelley's  Remembrance.  Now,  some  time  before
Mrs.  Willett  wrote  a  script  which  I  am  going  presently
to  quote,  she  had  seen  these  two  scripts  of  Miss  Verrall's,
and  was  consequently  in  a  position  to  do  what  anyone
else  who  had  seen  them  could  have  done  :  namely,  to  put
the  contents  or  some  of  the  contents  of  the  two  together.

Before,  however,  I  quote  this  script  of  Mrs.  Willett's
I  must  first  quote  from  a  third  script  of  Miss  VerraU's,
namely,  the  one  she  wrote  on  April  6,  1914  :

The flight of the arrow — Swifter far than  swallow's
flight  .  .  .  the  stars — when  they  sang  together.

"  Swifter  far  than  swallow's  flight  "  is  an  obvious
"  portmanteau  "  of  two  lines  in  Shelley's  Remembrance  :

"  Swifter  far  than  summer's  flight,"

and

"  The  swallow  summer  comes  again."


30


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


"  The  stars — when  they  sang  together  "  is  to  be  referred,
as  we  have  already  seen  (see  p.  23),  to  Job  and  Rossetti's
Blessed  Damozel.

Now,  anyone — whether  possessed  of  supernormal  powers
or  not — who  had  seen  all  three  scripts  of  Miss  Verrall's,
might  of  course  associate  together  topics  found  in  them,
because,  as  the  foUowing  tabulated  summary  of  them
shows,  the  three  are  interconnected.


But  why  should  anyone  who  had  not  seen  the  3rd
Script,  associate  Job  and  The  Blessed  Damozel  with  "  Har-
binger of  summer  days  "  ?  Yet  that  is  what  Mrs.  Willett
did  on  August  16,  1914,  in  the  following  very  definite'
manner  :

Sing  on  thy  passionate  refrain  hath  the  true  some-
thing of  the  ripening  grain  harbinger  that  is  in  it  in
the  line  Cadence  too  Cadence  the  word  should  be  said
Melody  He  Mousike  a  harmony  of  other  days  Such
harmony  is  in  immortal  Souls  that  is  the  true  music
of  the  spheres  to  which  the  world  goes  round  The
young  eyed  cherubims  and  the  sons  of  God  Job  and
Browning  no  Job  and  Rossetti  the  stars  singing  together
Thy  passionate  refrain  Hath  the  deep  cadence  of  the
ripening  grain.


On  August  5,  1913,  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  contained  the
words  "  Dux  femina  facti,"  which  mean  "  a  woman  the
leader  of  the  enterprise."  They  are  a  quotation  from
the  first  book  of  Vergil's  Aeneid,  and  relate  to  the  found-
ing of  Carthage  by  Dido.

The  context  in  which  they  occur  is  as  follows  :

Aeneas,  flying  from  Troy,  has  been  driven  by  stress  of
weather  on  to  a  strange  coast.  As  he  is  wandering
along  the  shore  his  mother  Venus,  disguised  as  a  huntress,
accosts liim  ; and Aeneas asks her to tell him  what


1st  Script.  "Sweet  harbinger  of  summer  days"  etc.
2nd  Script. „  „ „ ,, „  +1

3rd  Script.


+Job  and  The  Blessed  Damozel.


SlCHAETTS  AND  DlDO.


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.  31


country  it  is  that  he  has  reached.  Venus  answers  him
thus  :

"  Punic  is  the  realm  thou  seest,  Tyrian  the  people  .  .  .  ;
but  their  borders  are  Libyan.  Dido  sways  the  sceptre,
who  flying  her  brother  set  sail  from  the  Tyrian  town.  .  .  .
Her  husband  was  Sichaeus,  wealthiest  in  lands  of  the
Phoenicians.  .  .  .  But  the  kingdom  of  Tyre  was  in  her
brother  Pygmalion's  hands,  a  monster  of  guilt  unparaUeled
Between  these  two  madness  came  ;  the  unnatural  brother
blind  with  lust  of  gold  .  .  .  lays  Sichaeus  low  before
the  altars  [ante  aras]  .  .  .  and  for  long  he  hid  the  deed,
and  by  many  a  crafty  pretence  cheated  her  love -sickness
with  hollow  hope.  But  in  slumber  came  the  very  ghost
of  her  unburied  husband,  lifting  up  a  face  [ora]  pale
in  wonderful  wise  ;  he  exposed  the  cruel  altars  [aras]
and  his  breast  stabbed  through  with  steel,  and  unwove
all  the  blind  web  of  household  guilt.  Then  he  counsels
hasty  flight  and  abandonment  of  her  country,  and  to
aid  her  passage  discloses  treasures  long  hidden  under-
ground, an  untold  mass  of  silver  and  gold.  Stirred
thereby,  Dido  gathered  a  company  for  flight  .  .  .  they
seize  on  ships  that  chance  to  lie  ready,  and  load  them
with  the  gold.  Pygmalion's  hoarded  wealth  is  borne
overseas  ;  a  woman  guides  the  enterprise  [Dux  femina
facti].  They  came  at  last  to  the  land  where  thou  wilt
descry  a  city  now  great,  New  Carthage."

(Mackail's  Translation . )

Two  of  the  outstanding  features  of  this  story  are  that
it  was  at  the  instigation  of  the  ghost  of  Sichaeus  that
Dido  left  her  home  and  fled  to  Libya,  where  she  founded
the  city  of  Carthage  ;  and  that  this  achievement  was  the
work,  not,  as  would  be  usual,  of  a  man,  but  of  a  woman.

Before  the  appearance  of  the  words  "  Dux  femina
facti "  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  August  5,  1913,  there
had  been  no  quotation  from,  or  allusion  to  this  passage
in  the  first  book  of  the  Aeneid  in  the  scripts  of  any  of
the  automatists  ;  nor  have  there  been  any  since  with
the  exception  of  three  allusions  thereto  which  I  am  now
going  to  cite.


32


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part


On  April  17,  1914,  Miss  Verrall's  script  contained  the
following  phrases  :

The plumed  East — yes plumed — a labyrinth of  flowers


of  Dis —

The  word  that  follows  "  a  labyrinth  of  flowers  "  was
badly  written,  and  I  could  not  decipher  it  with  certainty.
The  letters  appeared  to  be  "  S-i-c-h-a-s,"  but  as  there
is  no  such  word  or  name,  I  showed  the  original  script
to  Miss  Verrall  at  3  p.m.  on  April  23,  1914,  and  asked
her  what  she  thought  the  word  was.  She  said  she
thought  it  might  be  "  Sichaeus."  I  then  suggested  that
when  she  next  wrote  automatically  she  should  try  to
get  the  word  clearly  written.  The  result  of  this  suggestion
is  seen  in  a  script  written  at  6  p.m.  on  the  same  day,
viz.  April  23,  1914  :


/va*4v»/5  a  funeral  pyre  the  grave  gives  up  its
dead—  ante  ora — Sichaeus.

On  this  occasion  the  doubtful  word  is  first  written
badly  as  before — in  fact  the  imperfect  writing  of  it  in  the
previous  script  seems  to  be  intentionally  reproduced — ■
and  then  it  is  written  quite  clearly.  As  regards  the
phrases  which  fall  between  the  two  writings  of  the  name
"  Sichaeus,"  it  seems  likely  that  they  belong  thereto.
A  funeral  pyre  had  only  once  before  been  mentioned  in
Miss  Verrall's  script,  or:  January  24,  1908 ;  and  there
it  is  explicitly  associated  with  Dido's  death.1  "  The
grave  gives  up  its  dead  "  is  possibly  an  allusion  to  the
apparition  of  Sichaeus  when  he  warned  Dido  to  fly  from
Pygmalion  ;  but,  if  so,  it  can  hardly  be  called  a  happy
one,  because  Vergil  speaks  of  the  ghost  of  Dido's  unburied
husband.

With regard to "a labyrinth of flowers  " — a  phrase

1  See  Vergil,  Aen.  iv.  502  and  504,  for  references  in  close  sequence
to  the  death  of  Sichaeus  and  to  Dido's  funeral  pyre.


a  festival — to  hold  high  festival  in  the  Court


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


33


that  is  probably  taken  from  a  poem  of  W.  de  la  Mare's
— Mrs.  Verrall  has  suggested  to  me  that  it  is  an  attempt
to  allude  to  Aen.  rv.  504-507  :

"  But  the  Queen,  when  the  pyre  is  built  up  of
piled  faggots  and  cleft  ilex  in  the  inmost  of  her
dwelling,  hangs  the  room  with  chaplets  and  garlands
it  with  funeral  boughs. ."

"  To  hold  high  festival  in  the  court  of  Dis  "  may
reflect  the  scene  described  in  11.  509-511  :

"  Altars  are  reared  around,  and  the  priestess,  with
hair  undone,  thrice  peals  from  her  lips  the  hundred
gods  of  Erebus  and  Chaos,  and  the  triform  Hecate,
the  triple-faced  maidenhood  of  Diana."

(Mackail's  Translation.)

There  remain  the  words  "  ante  ora  "  to  explain.  They
mean  "  before  the  eyes  "  or  "  before  the  faces."  They
had  never  occurred  before  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  ;  and
they  have  occurred  only  once  since,  namely,  in  her  script
of  Dec.  17,  1914,  in  the  following  context  :

"  Sic  fatur  lacrimans — ante  ora  parentum."

For  a  reason  given  on  p.  37  below,  it  is  quite  certain
that  "  ante  ora  parentum  "  here  is  an  expansion,  and
so  an  explanation,  of  the  "  ante  ora  "  of  the  earlier
script.  The  connexion  of  "  ante  ora  "  with  Sichaeus
and  of  "  ante  ora  parentum  "  with  the  Vergilian  phrase
"  Sic  fatur  lacrimans  "  indicates  that  the  source  of  "  ante
ora  parentum  "  is  to  be  sought  in  Vergil's  Aeneid.

"Ante  ora  parentum"  occurs  twice  only  in  the  Aeneid  : 1
first  of  the  Trojan  boys  defiling  on  horseback  "  before
their  parents'  eyes  "  at  the  Funeral  Games  in  honour
of  Anchises  (Aen.  v.  553)  ;  secondly,  of  those  young  men
and  maidens  laid  on  funeral  piles  "  before  their  parents'
eyes  "  whose  ghosts  form  part  of  the  crowd  that  swarms
round  Charon's  boat  (Aen.  vi.  308).

1  "  Ante  oculos  evasit  et  ora  parentum  "  in  Aen.  n.  531,  and  "  Exclusi
ante  oculos  lacrimantumque  ora  parentum  "  in  Aen.  xi.  887,  need
not  be  considered  on  account  of  the  separation  of  "  ante  "  from  "  ora  "
in  each  case.


34


J.  0.  Piddington.


[part


That  it  is  the  latter  that  is  meant  is  practically  certain
for  two  reasons  :  namely,  that  it  is  one  of  the  best
known  passages  in  the  Aeneid,  and  that  "  Sic  fatur
lacrimans," 1  found  once  only  in  the  Aeneid,  are  the
opening  words  of  the  Sixth  Book.  The  passage  is  as
follows  :

"Hue  omnis  turba  ad  ripas  effusa  ruebat,
Matres  atque  viri,  defunctaque  corpora  vita
Magnanimum  heroum,  pueri  innuptaeque  puellae
Inpositique  rogis  iuvenes  ante  ora  parentum."  2

"  Hither  all  crowded,  and  rushed  streaming  to  the
bank,  matrons  and  men,  and  high-hearted  heroes  dead  and
done  with  life,  boys  and  unwedded  girls,  and  youths  and
maidens  laid  on  the  funeral  pile  before  their  parents'  eyes."

"  Ante  ora  "  in  the  script  of  April  23,  1914,  seems,
then,  to  emphasise  "  a  funeral  pyre  "  (i.e.  Dido's  funeral
pyre)  ;  and  the  intention  of  the  emphasis  thus  thrown
may  have  been  to  point  to  the  words  spoken  by  Dido,
when,  having  cast  herself  upon  the  funeral  pile,  she  is
about  to  stab  herself  with  the  sword  of  Aeneas  :

"  And  now  shall  I  go  a  queenly  phantom  under
the  earth.  /  have  built  a  renowned  city  ;  /  have
seen  my  ramparts  rise  ;  by  my  brother's  [Pygmalion's]
punishment  I  have  avenged  my  husband  [Sichaeus]
of  his  enemy." (Aen.  iv.  654-656.)

These  words  spoken  by  Dido  at  the  point  of  death
bring  us  back  to  the  subject  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
Aug.  5,  1913  :  the  founding  of  the  city  of  Carthage
by  Dido  after  she  had  fled  from  her  brother's  court
at  the  instigation  of  the  ghost  of  Sichaeus.3

1  "  Sic  fatur  lacrimans  "  ("  So  speaks  he  weeping  ")  refers  to  Aeneas'
apostrophe  to  his  drowned  pilot  Palinurus,  whom  he  afterwards  meets
among  the  crowd  of  unburied  dead  that  flocks  to  the  banks  of  Cocytus
and  pleads  with  Charon  to  be  ferried  across.  There  is,  therefore,  a
fairly  direct  association  of  ideas  between  "sic  fatur  lacrimans"  and
"ante  ora  parentum."

2  The  last  three  lines  are  repeated  from  Oeorg.  iv.  475-477.

3  Though  I  believe  this  explanation  is  correct  so  far  as  it  goes,  I
suspect  that  there  may  be  other  reasons  besides  for  the  conjunction  of


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


35


The  third  and  last  reference  to  the  story  of  Dido  and
Sichaeus  occurs  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script.  On  April  18,
1914 — one  day,  that  is,  after  the  first,  and  five  days
before  the  second,  occurrence  of  the  name  Sichaeus  in
Miss  Verrall's  script — her  script  contained  the  following  :

It  was  a  woman  who  founded  the  city
Not  Ilion's  golden  towers

The  "  woman  who  founded  the  city  "  is  Dido  ;  and
for  the  phrase  "  founded  the  city  "  there  is  actual  warrant
in  the  Aeneid  :

"  0  Regina,  novam  cui  condere  Iuppiter  urbem
.  .  .  dedit." {Aen.  I.  522-523.)

"  Not  Ilion's  golden  towers  "  indicates  the  city  that
the  woman  founded  ;  and  does  so  in  a  way  that  seems
to  show  close  acquaintance  with  the  story  of  the  founding
of  Carthage  as  told  in  the  Aeneid.  Tor  the  success  of
Dido's  enterprise  was  largely  due  to  her  possession  of
the  secret  hoard  of  gold  which  the  ghost  of  Sichaeus
told  her  of  :  "  Then  he  [Sichaeus]  counsels  hasty  flight
.  .  .  and  to  aid  her  passage  discloses  treasures  long
hidden  underground,  an  untold  mass  of  silver  and  gold.  .  .  .
They  seize  on  ships  that  chance  to  lie  ready,  and  load
them  with  the  gold.  Pygmalion's  hoarded  wealth  is
borne  overseas  ;  a  woman  guides  the  enterprise  [Dux
femina  facti]."

Not  only  did  gold  make  the  enterprise  practicable,
but  Vergil  calls  Carthage  "  dives  opum  "  and  makes
frequent  and  marked  references  to  the  gold  with  which
the  royal  palace  and  Dido's  person  were  adorned.  (See
Aen.  i.  14,  640,  698,  726,  728,  739,  741  ;  iv.  135,  138,
139,  148.)

The  interval  of  time  between  Mrs.  Verrall's  "  Dux
femina  facti  "  and  the  corresponding  allusions  in  Miss
Verrall's  and  Mrs.  Willett's  scripts  is  a  long  one  ;  but
this  weak  point  in  the  case  appears  to  me  to  be  more
than counterbalanced by the nearness in time of  Miss

"  ante  ora "  with  "  a  funeral  pyre  "  and  "  Sichaeus,"  which  I  have
failed  to  seize.


3G


./.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Verrall's  and  Mrs.  Willett's  contributions  to  the  cross-
correspondence. The  case  may  be  tabulated  thus  :

M.  V.  Aug. 5,  1913. "  Dux  femina  facti."

H.  V.  April 17,  1914. "  Sichaeus."

W. April 18,  1914. "It  was  a  woman  who  founded

the  city."

H.  V.  April  23,  1914. "  Sichaeus a funeral pyre  .  .  .

Sichaeus."

It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  moreover,  that  the  two
H.  V.  scripts  are  successive  ones  :  that  is  to  say,  the
first  script  written  after  April  17,  1914,  by  Miss  Verrall
was  that  of  April  23,  1914.

It  may  be  as  well  to  add  that  when,  on  the  afternoon
of  April  23,  1914,  I  asked  Miss  Verrall  how  she  read
the  word  I  had  deciphered  as  "  Sichas,"  I  had  not  seen
Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  April  18,  1914.  I  could  not,
therefore,  have  given,  by  direct  suggestion  or  otherwise,
any  clue  whereby  Miss  Verrall  could  have  been  led  to
convert  "  Sichas  "  into  a  name  which  would  tally  with
Mrs.  Willett's  "  it  was  a  woman  who  founded  the  city."
As  a  matter  of  fact  when  she  read  the  word  as  "Sichaeus,"
I  doubted  whether  this  could  be  right.

Sequel  to  the  "  Sichaeus  and  Dido  "
Cross-Correspondence.

There  is  an  offshoot  of  this  last  case  which,  though
it  is  rather  outside  the  scheme  of  my  paper,  I  may,
perhaps,  be  allowed  to  describe  at  this  point.

The  interpretation  I  have  given  above  of  the  words
"  ante  ora  "  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  April  23,  1914,
was  not  the  first  that  occurred  to  me.  In  the  first  draft
of  this  paper,  written  before  the  fuller  version  of  "  ante
ora  "  appeared  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Dec.  17,  1914,
I  had  suggested  that  "  ante  ora  "  was  an  error  for  "  ante
aras,"  "before  the  altars" — the  altars,  namely,  before
which  Sichaeus  was  slain  by  Pygmalion  :

"  Ille  Sichaeum

Impius  ante  aras

Clam  ferro  incaixtum  superat." (Aen.  I.  348-350.)


LXXil.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


37


I  had  suggested  further  that  the  substitution  of  "  ora  "
in  the  script  for  "  aras  "  was  traceable  to  the  vicinity
of  the  words  "  ora  "  and  "  aras  "  in  the  immediate
context  of  "  ante  aras."

"Ipsa  sed  in  somnis  inhumati  venit  imago
Conjugis,  ora  modis  attollens  pallida  miris  ;
Crudelis  aras  traiectaque  pectora  ferro
Nudavit."  {Am.  I.  353-356.)

On  Dec.  11,  1914,  when  I  told  Miss  Verrall  about  this
cross-correspondence,1  I  mentioned  my  conjectural  explana-
tion of  "  ante  ora  "  ; and  she  thought  it  not  improbable.

Her  script,  however,  thought  otherwise  ;  for  the  appear-
ance in  it  on  Dec.  17,  1914,  of  the  words

"  Sic  fatur  lacrimans — ante  ora  parentum,"

certainly  implies  the  rejection  of  my  conjectural  emenda-
tion ;  and  seems  to  give  the  right,  and  certainly  gives
a  simpler,  explanation  of  "  ante  ora."

This  script  of  Dec.  17,  1914,  was  written  at  5.40  p.m.,
and  I  received  it  by  the  first  post  on  Dec.  18.

By  the  first  post  on  the  next  day,  Dec.  19,  1914,  I
received  a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  written  on  Dec.  17,
at  10.20  p.m.  :  that  is  4  hours  and  40  minutes  later  than
Miss  VerralFs  script  containing  the  words

"  Sic  fatur  lacrimans — ante  ora  parentum."
This  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  ran  as  follows  :

I  dont  think  I  can  get  tonight  the  message  that  is
wanted — but  yon  might  try.

By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them  You  need  not
send  more  to  Piddington  than  that  and  just  this  word —
that  I  was  amused  to  see  him  in  the  light  of  the  electric
lamp  the  other  day  struggling  with  the  lexicon — its  not
there  he  will  get  the  clue  he  wants — Tell  him  it  is  quite
plain  in  Helen's  recent  script  and  I  think  that  he  will
make  it  out That  will  do.


1 1  had  mentioned  the  bare  fact  of  there  being  a  cross-correspondence
on  the  subject  of  Sichaeus  to  Miss  Verrall  first  on  Nov.  27,  1914,  but
gave  her  no  details  until  Dec.  11,  1914.


:;s


G.  Piddington.


[part


After  reading  this  script  I  noted  down  that  during
the  previous  two  or  three  weeks  I  had  "  struggled  with
the  lexicon "  over  three  points,  all  connected  with  Miss
Verrall's  script  :

(a)  I  had  looked  through  all  the  references  in  Lewis
and  Short's  Latin  Dictionary  under  the  words  "  o,"  "si,"
and  "  sic,"  in  a  vain  endeavour  to  find  whether  there
is  any  classical  authority  for  "  o  si  sic  omnes  "  :  a  varia-
tion of  the  well-known  phrase  "  o  si  sic  omnia  "  that
has  appeared  four  times  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  and  once
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  ;

(b)  I  had  looked  up  the  words,  inrepTUTos,  Opovos,
a-rpw/xa  and  <TTpw/uLi>}]  in  Liddell  and  Scott  in  the  hope
of  tracing  the  source  of  a  phrase  in  a  script  of  Miss
Verrall's  containing  these  Greek  words  ;  and

(c)  I  had  looked  through  all  the  references  in  Lewis
and  Short  under  "  ante  "  and  "  os  "  in  the  hope  of
finding  the  words  "  ante  ora  "  in  a  context  which  would
explain  their  conjunction  with  "  Sichaeus  "  in  Miss  Verrall's
script  of  April  23,  1914.

It  was  the  last  of  these  three  subjects  that  had  engaged
my  attention  the  most  :  the  first  two  had  interested  me
only  in  a  small  degree.

If  the  statements  made  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
Dec.  17,  1914,  are  referred  to  the  facts  given  under  (c),
they  fit  them  uncommonly  well.  I  cannot,  of  course,  say
whether  the  communicator  was  amused  ;  but  it  is  true
that  I  struggled  with  the  lexicon,  that  I  did  not  find
in  the  lexicon  the  clue  I  wanted,  that  a  clue  of  the
kind  I  wanted  had  been  plainly  given  in  Miss  Verrall's
recent  script,  and  that  I  did  "  make  it  out."  I  cannot
swear  that  when  I  looked  through  the  passages  quoted  under
"  ante  "  and  "  os  "  I  was  working  by  electric  light ;  but  I
believe  that  I  was.

Pine  Trees.

According  to  Dr.  Hyslop 1  we  have  been  criticised  of
late for displaying a predilection for material  which

1  Journal  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  September,
1914,  p.  414


lxxii.] Gross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


39


permits  us  to  "  air  our  classical  knowledge."  Dr.  Hyslop
does  not  say  whether  he  himself  endorses  this  kindly
estimate  of  our  motives  ;  but,  as  I  am  afraid  he  may
do  so,  I  shall  not  again  in  this  paper  venture  to  select  a
case  of  cross-correspondence,  like  the  last,  involving  an
expedition  into  that  mysterious  region  of  human  lore,
the  classics.  So  I  must  content  myself  with  taking  for
my  next  and  last  example  a  case  which  will  not  lead
us  beyond  the  borders  of  our  own  literature,  but  which
will  yet  have  the  advantage  of  permitting  me  to  air
a  knowledge  of  Ruskin  : — a  knowledge  that,  I  hope,  will
not  impress  my  readers  the  less  because  it  has  been  crammed
for  the  occasion.

Two  automatists  only,  Mrs.  Whlett  and  Miss  Verrall,
are  concerned  in  this  case.

On  June  15,  1914,  Mrs.  Willett's  script  contained  the
following  passage  :

a  great  pine  and  the  Pine  trees  that  march  in  gallant
companies  up  the  mountain  side  the  Morning  [sic]  Glory
Ruskin  wrote  of  it.

Mrs.  Willett's  own  contemporaneous  note  on  it  is :
"  I  take  this  to  refer  to  the  7th  paragraph  of  Ruskin's
chapter  on  '  Mountain  Glory  '  in  Modem  Painters  :
'  climbing  hand  in  hand  among  the  difficult  slopes,'
'  gliding  in  grave  procession  over  the  heavenward  ridges.'  "

But  I  had  better  quote  more  extensively  from  this  para-
graph of  the  chapter  on  The  Mountain  Glory  than  Mrs.  Willett
has  done.  Ruskin  is  arguing  that  trees  are  seen  to  greater
advantage  in  mountainous  country  than  in  plains  ;

"  For,"  says  he,  "  the  resources  of  trees  are  not  de-
veloped until  they  have  difficulty  to  contend  with  ;  neither
their  tenderness  of  brotherly  love  and  harmony,  till  they
are  forced  to  choose  their  ways  of  various  life  where
there  is  contracted  room  for  them.  .  .  .

.  .  .  The  various  action  of  trees  rooting  themselves
in  inhospitable  rocks,  stooping  to  look  into  ravines,  hiding
from  the  search  of  glacier  winds,  reaching  forth  to  the
rays  of  rare  sunshine,  crowding  down  together  to  drink
at  sweetest  streams,  climbing  hand  in  hand  among  the


40


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


difficult  slopes,  opening  in  sudden  dances  round  the  mossy
knolls,  gathering  into  companies  at  rest  among  the  fragrant
fields,  gliding  in  grave  procession  over  the  heavenward
ridges, — nothing  of  this  can  be  conceived  among  the
unvexed  and  unvaried  felicities  of  the  lowland  forest."

Observe  the  strongly  anthropomorphic  language  that  Ruskin
here  repeatedly  applies  to  trees.  He  in  a  way  reverses  the
metaphor  of  the  blind  man  at  Bethsaida  who  saw  "  men  as
trees,  walking  ",  and  speaks  of  "  trees  as  men,  walking  ".

Mrs.  Willett  connects  pine  trees  with  this  passage  from
The  Mountain  Glory.  Explicitly  Ruskin  does  not  ;  but,
considering  that  he  is  here  particularly  treating  of  Swiss
mountain  scenery,  and  that  Modern  Painters  is  rich  in
references  to  pines  (for  which  Ruskin  had  a  great  affection),
we  can  hardly  doubt  that  he  had  pines — even,  perhaps,
rather  specially — in  mind  when  writing  this  passage.1  Not
indeed,  that  it  matters,  so  far  as  the  cross-correspondence
is  concerned,  whether  he  had  or  not  ;  because  Mrs.  Willett's
script  at  any  rate  definitely  associates  pine  trees  with  the
Ruskinian  passage.

So  much,  then,  for  Mrs.  Willett's  script.  But  before
I  give  Miss  Verrall's  contribution  to  the  cross-correspon-
dence, I  first  want  to  quote,  for  a  purpose  which  will
soon  be  plain,  a  short  extract  from  another  of  the  chapters
on  Mountains  in  the  fourth  volume  of  Modem  Painters.
It  is  the  closing  passage  of  the  chapter  "  On  the  Sculpture
of  Mountains."  2

1  Yet,  in  another  passage  in  Modern  Painters  (Vol.  IV.  Ch.  XI.,  §  9)
devoted  to  pines,  Ruskin  lays  stress  on  their  immobility  :  "  all  along
its  ridges  stand  the  dark  masses  of  innumerable  pines  .  .  .  asserting
themselves  for  ever  as  fixed  shadows  .  .  .  fallen  flakes  and  fragments
of  the  night,  stayed  in  their  solemn  squares  in  the  midst  of  all  the
bendings  of  the  orchard  boughs."

With  particular  reference  to  this  passage  Ruskin  himself  wrote  :
"  Almost  the  only  pleasure  I  have,  myself,  in  re-reading  my  old  books,
is  my  sense  of  having  at  least  done  justice  to  the  pine."

2  The  last  thirteen  chapters  of  the  fourth  volume  of  Modern  Painters
are  all  on  the  subject  of  Mountains.  The  first  four  are  named  "  Of
the  Materials  of  Mountains,"  the  next  two  "  Of  the  Sculpture  of
Mountains,"  the  next  five  "  Resulting  Forms,"  and  then  next  and
last  come  "  The  Mountain  Gloom  "  and  "  The  Mountain  Glory."


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.


1  I


The  rock  stands  forth  in  its  white  and  rugged  mystery,
as  if  its  peak  had  been  born  out  of  the  blue  sky.  The
strength  that  raised  it,  and  the  sea  that  wrought  upon
it,  have  passed  away,  and  left  no  sign,  and  we  have
no  words  wherein  to  describe  their  departure,  no  thoughts
to  form  about  their  action,  than  those  of  the  perpetual
and  unsatisfied  interrogation, —

"What  ailed  thee,  0  thou  sea,  that  thou  fleddest  %
And  ye  mountains,  that  ye  skipped  like  lambs  ?  "

Miss  VerralTs  script  of  June  18,  1914 — the  first  she
wrote  after  Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  June  15,  1914 —
contained  the  following  passage  :

the  Delectable  Mountains — the  mountains  shall  skip
— the  pine  trees  Ours  is  a  great  wild  country — We
have  spoken  before  of  the  Flight  of  the  Dxichess.  I  do
not  think  it  has  been  clearly  understood.

There  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  what  passage  in  R.
Browning's  The  Flight  of  the  Duchess  is  meant,  for,  other
considerations  apart,  pines  are  only  once  mentioned  in
that  poem.

"  Ours  is  a  great  wild  country  :

If  you  climb  to  our  castle's  top,

I  don't  see  where  your  eye  can  stop  ;
For  when  you've  passed  the  cornfield  country,
Where  vineyards  leave  off,  flocks  are  packed,
And  sheep-range  leads  to  cattle-tract,
And  cattle-tract  to  open-chase,
And  open-chase  to  the  very  base
Of  the  mountain,  where,  at  a  funeral  pace,
Round  about,  solemn  and  slow,
One  by  one,  row  after  row,
Up  and  up  the  pine-trees  go,
So,  like  black  priests  up,  and  so
Down  to  the  other  side  again

To  another  greater,  wilder  country  .  .  ."

Browning,  like  Ruskin,  sees  trees  as  men  walking,
but,  unlike  Ruskin,  specifies  the  trees.


42  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

Now  can  anyone — even  Dr.  Maxwell — suppose  that  a
literary  parallel  so  exact  and  felicitous,  and  yet  so  far
from  commonplace,  occurs  by  chance  in  scripts  produced
by  independent  writers  within  an  interval  of  only  three
days  ?

Preceding  the  quotation  from  The  Flight  of  the  Duchess
in  Miss  Verrall's  script  is  "  The  mountains  shall  skip."
Though  personally  I  have  little  doubt  that  these  words
reflect  the  quotation  from  the  HUh  Psalm  with  which
Ruskin  ends  his  chapter  "  On  the  Sculpture  of  Mountains,"
I  will  not  lay  much  stress  on  this  subsidiary  coincidence,
for  fear  lest  I  quench  some  tiny  spark  of  faith  that
the  central  coincidence  may  kindle  in  Dr.  Maxwell's  breast.
But  I  do  claim  two  things  for  this  combination  in  Miss
Verrall's  script  of  "  the  mountains  shall  skip  "  with  the
quotation  from  The  Flight  of  the-  Duchess  :

First,  it  links  together  mountains  and  pines,  and  so
accentuates  the  coincidence  with  Mrs.  Willett's  connexion
of  pines  with  Ruskin's  passage  on  mountain  trees.
Secondly,  it  makes  the  first  of  two  examples  in  Miss
Verrall's  script  of  the  attribution  to  inanimate  things
(i.e.  mountains  and  pines)  of  locomotory  powers  (i.e.
skipping  and  climbing)  ;  and  so  supplements  the  coinci-
dence with  the  Ruskin  passage  referred  to  by  Mrs.  Willett,
where  exactly  the  same  kind  of  metaphor  is  employed.

After  quoting  "  Ours  is  a  great  wild  country  "  Miss
Verrall's  script  goes  on  to  say  :  "  We  have  spoken  before
of  the  Flight  of  the  Duchess.  I  do  not  think  it  has  been
clearly  understood."

These  words  probably  refer  in  part  to  the  following
passage  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  26,  1912  :

The  flight  of  the  Duchess  there  is  a  quotation  from  it
which  I  have  given  elsewhere.

The  only  quotation  from  The  Flight  of  the  Duchess
besides  "  Ours  is  a  great  wild  country  "  that  has  been
traced  in  any  of  the  scripts  is  one- — quite  unconnected,
by  the  way,  with  pines  or  the  "  great,  wild  country  "
— in  Mrs.  King's  script  of  November  25,  1913.  Obviously


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.  43

Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  26,  1912,  is  not  referring  to
a  script  written  21  months  later.  To  what  then  does
it  refer  ?

I  suspect  that  a  trace  of  the  quotation  from  The
Flight  of  the  Duchess  that  "  has  been  given  elsewhere  "
and  "  not  clearly  understood "  is  to  be  found  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script  of  Oct.  13, 1909,  which  opens  thus  :

"  The  pines  drawn  up  as  if  in  battle  array."

This  is  not  a  quotation  from  the  poem,  but  it  may  have
been  suggested  by  an  imperfect  recollection  of  the  lines  :

"  One  by  one,  row  after  row,
Up  and  up  the  pine-trees  go."

This  script  of  Mrs.  Holland's  had  not  been  seen  by
Miss  Verrall,  who  gives  the  quotation  about  the  pine-trees
from  the  poem.  It  had  been  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett,  who,
however,  connects  her  reference  to  pine-trees  not  with
The  Flight  of  the  Duchess  but  with  Ruskin's  Modern
Painters.  At  the  same  time  I  think  it  probable  that
the  peculiar  military  turn  given  by  Mrs.  Willett  to  her
reminiscence  of  the  passage  in  Modern  Painters  was  due
to  her  recollection  of  Mrs.  Holland's  "  The  pines  drawn
up  as  if  in  battle  array."  Thus,  while  Ruskin  speaks  of
"  companies  "  he  does  not  speak,  as  does  Mrs.  Willett,  of
"  gallant  companies  "  ;  and  though  he  speaks  of  the  trees
"  climbing  "  and  "  gathering  into  companies,"  he  does  not
make  them  "  march,"  as  does  Mrs.  Willett.  But  even  if
it  be  true  that  Mrs.  Willett's  script  was  influenced  by
Mrs.  Holland's,  this  does  not  in  the  slightest  degree  help
to  explain  the  coincidences  between  Mrs.  Willett's  and
Miss  Verrall's  scripts  of  June  15  and  18,  1914,  respectively.

A  critical  reader  may  like  to  know  how  many  references
to  pine-trees  there  are  in  the  scripts,  and  of  what  character
they  are.  Exclusive  of  the  references  already  cited,
pines  are  mentioned  nine  times  in  Miss  Verrall's  script
between  1903  and  1914  ;  eight  times  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  between  1901  and  1914  ; 1 twice  in  Mrs.  Holland's

1  This  includes  two  mentions  of  "  conifera  arbos  "  which  may,  or  may
not,  be  a  pine-tree.


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


script  between  1903  and  1910  ;  twice  in  Mrs.  Willett's
script,  both  times  in  June,  1910.  Mac  script  contains
no  reference  to  pine-trees.

In  most  of  these  instances  the  reference  is  of  a  vague
character  :  such  as  "  the  pines  smell  strong,"  or  "  Why
does  the  hurricane  rage  in  the  pine  trees  ?  "  There  are
three  probable  allusions  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  and
one  certain  allusion  in  Miss  Verrall's,  to  a  pine  tree  in
one  of  Turner's  pictures  ;  one  allusion  in  Miss  Verrall's
script  to  the  pines  on  Mount  Ida  loved  by  the  Oenone
of  Tennyson's  poem  ;  one  allusion  in  Miss  Verrall's  script
to  the  last  verse  of  Hood's  "  I  remember,  I  remember  "
in  this  form  :  "fir  branches  fir — pine  I  remember  I
remember  "  ;  one  problematical  allusion  in  Mrs.  Willett's
script  to  some  pine-groves  mentioned  in  Ovid's  Fasti,
and  one  still  more  problematical  allusion  in  the  same
automatist's  script  to  the  "  pine  tree  of  Makistos  "  in
Browning's  La  Saisiaz.  Mrs.  Holland's  first  mention  of  a
pine,  "  A  screw  pine  stood  like  a  sentinel,"  introduces
a  martial  metaphor,  as  does  "  The  pines  drawn  up  as
if  in  battle  array  "  in  her  script  of  Oct.  13,  1909 ;  but
it  should  be  noted  that  in  each  case  Mrs.  Holland's
pines  are  stationary  and  do  not  march  like  Mrs.  Willett's,
or  climb  like  Browning's  pines  and  Ruskin's  mountain
trees.

There  are  besides  a  few  references  to  Fir-trees  in  the
scripts.  These  I  have  examined  carefully  with  a  view
to  estimating  whether  they  could  be  supposed,  had  Miss
Verrall  or  Mrs.  Willett  seen  them,  to  have  suggested  to
them  the  passages  in  The  Flight  of  the  Duchess  and  in
The  Mountain  Glory.  I  have  failed  to  find  among  them
any  which  seem  in  the  slightest  degree  likely  to  have
prompted  a  recollection  of  either  the  Buskin  or  the
Browning  passage.

Conclusion.

Here  it  will  be  safer  for  me  to  stop  ;  for  the  last
two  cases  have,  perhaps,  gone  rather  near  the  border-line
that  divides  the  simple  from  the  complex — the  light
from the darkness  ; and, were I to continue, the  old


lxxii.] Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type.  45


Adam  might,  I  fear,  gain  the  upper  hand  and — against
my  newly- acquired  better  instincts — force  me  once  again
along  the  path  that  leads,  indeed,  through  a  Slough  of
Despond,  but,  alas  !  to  no  Wicket  Gate.  It  is  this  appre-
hension, and  not  lack  of  material,  that  makes  me  bring
this  paper  to  an  end.  Were  there  anything  to  be
gained  by  piling  up  the  evidence,  I  could  add  to  the
list  a  good  many  more  examples  of  cross-correspondences
that  conform  more  or  less  closely  to  the  Gallic  type.

At  the  same  time,  I  do  not  wish  to  convey  the  im-
pression that  the  reformation  of  our  automatists  is  com-
plete or  likely  to  be  permanent.  Bad  habits  of  long
growth  are  not  to  be  eradicated  in  a  moment  ;  and
there  are  still  to  be  found  enshrined  in  their  scripts
coincidences  of  a  very  complex  character.

Even  with  the  cases  dealt  with  in  this  paper  I  have
more  than  once,  as  the  reader  may  have  observed,  had
to  resort  to  a  certain  amount  of  manipulation  in  order
to  bring  them  within  the  desired  category.  Thus,  I  have
split  up  into  several  tidy  isolated  units  what  might  have
been  treated  as  one  straggling  complex  of  coincidences  ;
or,  to  use  a  culinary  metaphor,  I  have  chopped  neat
— or  comparatively  neat — little  cutlets  off  unshapely  joints
and,  with  the  temerity  of  a  heavy-handed  English  cook,
tried  to  serve  them  a  la  francaise.

Yet,  if  I  have  simplified  some  of  the  cases  in  something
the  same  way  that  history  has  been  simplified  in  Little
Arthur's  History  of  England — a  work,  by  the  way,  which
I  venture  to  recommend  to  M.  Geley  for  its  transparent
lucidity  and  entire  lack  of  subtlety — I  hope  I  am  not
guilty  of  having  given  a  wholly  misleading  impression
of  them.


Dec.  26,  1914.


46


Professor  Gilbert  Murray.


[part


II.

PRESIDENTIAL  ADDRESS.

Delivered  on  July  9th,  1915.

By  Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.

When  I  chose  as  the  subject  of  this  address  "  The  Fringe
of  Consciousness,"  I  had  not  read  the  discourse  given
to  the  Society  two  years  ago  by  a  President  whom  I
feel  myself  particularly  unworthy  to  follow.  But  I  find
now  that  M.  Bergson  has  not  only  used  almost  the  same
language  that  I  was  proposing  to  use,  but  has,  in  the
course  of  his  far  deeper  and  more  philosophic  paper,
thrown  out  certain  suggestions  which  lead  almost  directly
to  the  line  of  inquiry  which  I  wish  to  put  before  you.
I  will  start  by  two  quotations  from  M.  Bergson's  address  :

"  If  telepathy  is  a  real  fact,  it  is  very  possible  that
it  is  operating  at  every  moment  and  everywhere,  but
with  too  little  intensity  to  be  noticed,  or  else  it  is  oper-
ating in  the  presence  of  obstacles  which  neutralize  the
effect  at  the  same  moment  that  it  manifests  itself.  We
produce  electricity  at  every  moment,  the  atmosphere
is  continually  electrified,  we  move  among  magnetic  cur-
rents ;  yet  millions  of  human  beings  lived  for  thousands
of  years  without  having  suspected  the  existence  of  elec-
tricity. It  may  be  the  same  with  telepathy."

The  second  quotation  comes  after  a  discussion  of  the
work  performed  by  the  brain  in  limiting  and  defining
and,  as  M.  Bergson  puts  it,  "  canalizing "  the  life  of
the  mind  by  selecting  for  conscious  remembrance  certain


LXXII.]


Presidential  Address.


47


experiences  and  rejecting  others.  He  proceeds  to  say
the  same  of  sense-perception,  using,  as  he  often  does,
the  technical  language  of  Aristotle  :

"  I  think  that  we  perceive  virtually  (cWa/xet)  many
more  things  than  we  perceive  actually  (epycp),  and  that
here  once  more  the  part  that  our  body  plays  is  that
of  shutting  out  from  the  field  of  our  consciousness  all
that  is  of  no  practical  interest  to  us.  .  .  .  The  sense
organs,  the  sensory  nerves,  the  cerebral  centres,  canalize
the  influences  from  without,  and  thus  mark  the  various
directions  in  which  our  own  influence  can  be  exercised.
But  in  doing  so  they  narrow  the  field  of  our  vision  of
the  present,  just  as  the  cerebral  mechanisms  of  memory
limit  our  vision  of  the  past.  Now,  just  as  certain  useless
memories,  or  '  dream  '  memories,  may  slip  into  the
field  of  consciousness,  availing  themselves  of  a  moment
of  inattention  to  life,  may  there  not  be  around  our  normal
perception  a  fringe  of  -perceptions,  most  often  unconscious
but  all  ready  to  enter  into  consciousness,  and  in  fact  enter-
ing in  in  certain  exceptional  cases  or  in  certain  predis-
posed subjects  ?  If  there  are  perceptions  of  this  kind,"
the  philosopher  proceeds  to  recommend  to  this  society
the  study  of  them,  and  it  is  that  particular  study  about
which  I  ask  permission  to  speak  to  you  to-day.

And  here  let  me  explain  the  plot  of  my  address  and
at  the  same  time  make  some  very  necessary  apologies.

When  the  Society  did  me  the  high  honour  of  electing
me  to  be  its  President,  my  first  intention  was  to  make
a  thorough  study  of  the  publications  of  the  last  few
years  and  try  to  estimate  the  actual  advance  of  knowl-
edge which  your  patient  and  systematic  researches  have
achieved.  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  advance
is  there  ;  that  some  questions  really  have  been  answered,
and  that  now,  in  1915,  we  face  a  number  of  important
psychological  problems  from  a  standpoint  very  different
from  that  of  1895.  But  the  War  has  upset  everybody's
calculations  ;  and  I  soon  found  that  I  should  not  have
the  time  for  any  proper  research  into  the  literature  of
the  subject,  nor  the  leisure  of  mind  to  form  a  judgment
on a number of difficult questions which were  bound


1


48  Professor  Gilbert  Murray.  [part

to  present  themselves.  Consequently  I  have  fallen  back
on  a  subject  which  was  ready  in  my  mind.  It  is  not
an  ambitious  subject  ;  yet,  I  regret  to  say,  it  is  open
to  two  quite  particular  objections.  It  is  in  the  first
place  egotistic,  and  will  land  me  in  frequently  talking
about  myself.  Secondly,  it  is  largely  based  on  evidence
of  the  most  unimpressive  kind — to  wit,  that  of  first  hand
experience  without  documents.  I  remember  Sir  F.  Burnand
observes  in  Happy  Thoughts  that  if  a  man  told  you
he  had  seen  a  ghost  you  very  properly  disbelieved  him  ;
but  if  he  told  you  that  he  had  a  friend,  a  man  of  the
highest  character,  who  had  under  a  seal  of  secrecy  con-
fided to  him  a  document  in  which  he  described  how
he  had  seen  a  ghost,  you  could  not  help  being  impressed.
Now  I  have  never  seen  a  ghost,  nor  could  I  earn  even
the  meagrest  and  most  precarious  livelihood  as  a  medium  ;
but  I  have  long  been  interested  in  the  sort  of  phenomena
that  we  generally  class  under  the  head  of  telepathy,
and  have  had  a  good  deal  of  success  now  and  then
in  small  telepathic  experiments.  And  I  feel  that  if  I
could  refer  to  my  experiences  as  "  the  Case  of  Mr.  X  .  .  .
(a  gentleman  personally  known  to  me),  printed  in  volume
140  of  the  Proceedings  "  of  this  or  some  other  Society,
they  would  be  far  more  impressive  than  if  I  merely
tell  you  what  happened.

However  that  may  be,  the  line  of  argument  which  I
wish  to  lay  before  you,  and  which  is  based  on  a  fair
amount  of  thought  and  attention  throughout  a  number
of  years,  will  be  one  that  is  familiar  to  most  of  you  :
that,  as  M.  Bergson  suggests,  the  action  of  what  we
call  telepathy  is  habitual  in  ordinary  human  intercourse.
And  secondly,  that  in  essence  it  consists  in  nothing  more
mysterious  than  the  action  on  the  mind  of  sense-im-
pressions which  are  too  faint  to  establish  themselves,
as  sense-impressions,  above  the  threshold  of  consciousness.
The  action  or  the  knowledge  of  the  good  telepathic
"  medium  "  is  in  fact  simply  based  on  that  "  fringe  of
perceptions,  most  often  unconscious  but  ready  to  enter
into  consciousness  "  of  which  M.  Bergson  speaks.  I  may
however  wish  to  extend  that  fringe  rather  widely.


LXXH.]


Presidential  Address.


49


Now  I  suppose  it  is  beyond  dispute  that,  at  any  mo-
ment, the  conscious  experience  of  any  person,  the  "  stream
of  consciousness,"  as  William  James  calls  it,  has  a  vivid
centre  and  dim  edges,  gradually  passing  into  the  imper-
ceptible. If  you  cut  a  section  across  the  stream  of
consciousness  that  is  what  you  would  find  :  a  focus
of  attention,  vivid  and  strong,  and  shading  gradually
away  from  it  a  rather  wide  field  of  experience,  conscious,
sub-conscious  and  eventually  not  conscious  at  all.  This
is  seen  at  its  simplest  if  we  take  one  sense  at  a  time.
Medical  men  may  judge  of  a  patient's  health,  for  instance,
by  the  range  of  his  field  of  vision.  The  patient  looks
at  a  focus  straight  in  front,  but  has  some  dim  vision
of  objects  held  about  80  degrees  to  either  side.  The
size  of  the  field  is  said  to  vary  according  to  the  patient's
mental  vigour  ;  it  seems  also  to  vary  inversely  with  the
intensity  of  one's  attention.  At  least,  I  should  say  that,
when  not  particularly  interested  in  anything,  I  am  often
conscious  of  things  outside  the  rims  of  my  spectacles  ;
but  if  interested  in  the  object  I  am  looking  at,  I  am
not  conscious  of  anything  outside  the  direct  line  of  vision.
The  case  is  even  clearer  with  the  sense  of  hearing.  If
you  stand  still  in  Trafalgar  Square  at  mid-day  and  try
to  count  all  the  continuous  sounds  which  are  impinging
on  your  ear,  drowning  one  another  and  slipping  in  between
one  another,  and  diverting  your  attention  now  this  way
and  now  that,  you  cannot  but  realize  the  extraordinarily
wide  field  from  which  you  are  at  any  moment  selecting
the  sound  which  you  mean  to  attend  to.  For  of  course
it  need  not  be  the  loudest.  An  abnormal  crash  will
no  doubt  always  attract  attention  ;  but  normally,  if
amid  all  the  whistling  of  trains  and  roar  of  traffic  some-
body speaks  to  you  by  name,  you  will  probably  attend
at  once  to  the  slighter  sound  and  become  barely  conscious
of  the  noises.  In  normal  healthy  life  the  sound  which
you  attend  to  will  be  chosen,  as  M.  Bergson  says,  for
its  significance,  its  practical  relation  to  life.  A  Red
Indian  surrounded  by  the  noises  of  a  camp  full  of  horses
and  the  roar  of  a  waterfall  would,  so  the  stories  used
to  tell  us, start to attention  instantly at the  cracking

D


50


Professor  Gilbert  Murray.


[part


of  a  twig  which  might  betoken  the  approach  of  an  enemy.
A  nurse  in  a  sick  room  will  sleep  peacefully  through
any  amount  of  ordinary  noise,  but  will  wake  if  the  patient
moves.  This  is  a  power,  a  definite  increase  of  mental
capacity,  made  by  the  process  of  selection  or  "  canaliza-
tion." But  if  the  mental  life  is  a  little  out  of  gear  or
disjointed,  you  will  find  people  attending  to  the  wrong
things.  I  have  heard  of  a  lady  who,  while  receiving
a  proposal  of  marriage,  could  not  hear  her  suitor's  words
because  his  watch  ticked  so  loud  that  she  could  attend
to  nothing  else.  This  is  akin  to  what  M.  Bergson  calls
"  inattention  to  life."  The  process  of  selection  has  gone
wrong.

It  may  seem  odd  that  the  sense-impression  to  which
one  attends  should  be  not  the  strongest  but  merely
what  one  calls  "  the  most  significant."  But  of  course
the  whole  problem  of  attention  is  a  difficult  one  ;  and
I  think  it  quite  likely  that  if  you  take  into  account
not  the  isolated  sense-stimulus  but  the  whole  psychic
disturbance,  the  result  will  come  out  that  one  does  attend
to  the  sight,  or  sound,  or  whatever  it  is,  that  causes
the  most  psychic  disturbance.  That  is,  the  significant
sound  does  not  produce  more  auditory  disturbance  than
other  sounds,  yet  it  does  produce  greater  psychic
disturbance  on  the  whole.  The  nurse  who  hears  the
patient  move,  the  Indian  who  hears  the  twig  snap,  is
really  receiving  an  extremely  exciting  sense-impression,
as  a  whole,  though  only  hearing  a  slight  sound.  One
could  easily  extend  these  examples  to  the  other  senses,
touch  and  taste  and  very  decidedly  smell.  One  is  always
receiving  a  vast  number  of  sense-impressions  and  selecting
a  very  few  of  them  to  attend  to.

Hitherto  we  have  only  considered  impressions  which,
whether  attended  to  or  not,  were  at  least  of  the  normal
strength  necessary  for  reaching  the  human  consciousness.
Now  let  us  extend  our  range  a  little.  People  with
special  sensitiveness  or  in  special  conditions  of  attention
can  become  conscious  of  impressions  well  below  the
strength  that  is  normally  necessary.  We  can  find  simple
cases  of  hyperesthesia,  especially  in  the  sense  of  sound.


LXXII.]


Presidential  Address.


51


I  knew  a  lady  who,  during  an  illness,  could  hear  the
doctor's  carriage  pass  along  a  certain  road  at  a  distance
which  made  ordinary  hearing  impossible.  Another  who
could  often  tell  by  the  smell  of  a  ribbon  whether
it  had  ever  been  worn  and  which  of  several  people  had
worn  it.  In  such  cases,  we  observe  that  the  sense  is
abnormally  acute,  and  therefore  the  extremely  faint
sense-impression  is,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  consciously
received  as  a  sense-impression,  a  sound  or  a  smell.  Now
let  us  go  a  little  further  still  towards  the  outer  fringe.
There  are  cases  where  a  sense-impression  or  a  memory
of  some  experience  is  too  faint  to  come  up  into  con-
sciousness itself,  but  yet  able  to  produce  the  same,  or
practically  the  same,  result  which  it  would  have  pro-
duced if  fully  received  into  consciousness.  The  point
is  important  and  a  little  difficult.  In  a  previous  case
we  noticed  that,  amid  a  great  confusion  of  sounds,  a
particular  significant  sound,  though  comparatively  low,
was  able  to  seize  the  attention.  But  the  sound  we
thought  of  was  definitely  audible,  though  faint.  Similarly,
in  a  case  of  hyperesthesia  the  sound,  though  fainter  still,
is  yet  audible  to  that  particularly  sensitive  person.  But
now  I  am  supposing  a  sound — or  any  sense-impression —
which  is  too  faint  to  be  consciously  perceived  at  all,  yet  the
infinitesimal  disturbance  which  it  makes  sets  going  some
other  disturbance  which  may  be  quite  large  and  important.

I  omit  mere  cases  of  reflex  action,  where,  for  example,
jrou  draw  your  foot  back  from  the  fire  because  it  is
too  hot,  without  noticing  either  that  it  was  hot  or  that
you  have  moved  it.  I  will  consider  only  voluntary
actions.  But  we  can  take  a  gradation  of  cases.  First,
incidents  of  ordinary  life,  so  common  and  unimportant
as  to  be  generally  neglected.  Next,  instances  where
the  sense,  or  the  general  mental  responsiveness,  of  the
agent  has  been  specially  sharpened  by  professional  train-
ing or  practice  or  need  ;  and  lastly,  cases  which  most
people  would  be  inclined  to  regard  as  abnormal.

In  ordinary  life  an  incident  like  this  is  quite  common.
In  a  concourse  of  people,  while  you  are  talking,  some-
body in  another  part  of  the  room  calls  you  or  mentions


52


Professor  Gilbert  Murray.


[part


your  name.  You  do  not  consciously  hear  the  name
but  you  turn  and  give  attention.  I  have  several  times
noticed  a  variant  of  this — You  suddenly  find  yourself
listening  to  the  conversation  of  a  particular  group  and
then  discover  that  they  are  speaking  of  something  that
specially  interests  you.  This  almost  certainly  means
that  you  sub-consciously  overheard  some  fragments  of
the  conversation,  and,  without  the  words  heard  ever
fully  getting  into  your  consciousness,  acted  upon  the
stimulus  which  they  applied.

Examples  of  professional  hyperesthesia,  or  at  least
of  specially  acute  responsiveness,  are  as  common  as
blackberries.  Fishermen,  hunters,  scientific  investigators
are  all  apt  to  display  it,  as  well  as  trained  nurses.  The
only  question  is  whether  it  works  in  cases  where  the
sense-impression  is  not  consciously  received  at  all.  I
have  no  good  instance  to  give  ;  but  I  have  frequently
heard  both  from  nurses  and  doctors  that  a  good  nurse
will  often  act  on  a  sense-stimulus  which  she  has  not
consciously  perceived.  If  asleep  she  will  wake,  if  in
another  part  of  the  ward  she  will  come,  to  find  that
the  sound  of  the  patient's  breathing  has  changed,  or
that  he  has  moved  into  an  unsuitable  position  or  the
like.  The  account  she  will  give  of  it  may  be  simply  :
"  I  thought  I  had  better  have  a  look  at  you,"  or  "  I
just  wondered  if  you  were  comfortable."  But  the  pro-
bability is  that  her  trained  ear  was  attending  all  the
time  to  a  sharply  selected  complex  of  sounds,  all  of  them
significant.  Then  a  changed  sound  occurred  which  qua
sensible  sound  was  not  strong  enough  to  force  its  way
into  consciousness,  but  qua  significant  information,  if
I  may  so  speak,  was  enough  to  wake  her  and  make
her  move.

Let  us  now  turn  to  cases  which  would  generally  be
classed  as  abnormal  and  attributed  to  clairvoyance  or
second-sight.  And  first  we  will  take  the  simple  class
of  case  in  which  the  percipient  acts  without  any  hallu-
cinations or  fictitious  machinery.

I  met  recently  a  Scotch  lady  engaged  in  some  respon-
sible work which necessitates her taking stock  every


LXXII.]


Presidential  Address.


53


week  or  fortnight  and  making  sure  that  of  a  huge  number
of  small  objects  and  papers  none  have  been  lost.  She
says  that  she  can  generally  tell,  when  some  object  is
missed,  whether  it  is  really  lost  or  is  going  to  turn  up,
and  her  companions  seem  to  recognize  the  power.  This,
I  should  think,  was  a  case  of  unconscious  observation
and  memory.  Her  memory  of  what  has  happened  to
paper  5009  is  too  weak  to  enable  her  to  say  where  it
is,  but  strong  enough  to  make  her  feel  a  sort  of  assurance
about  it.  If  she  were  a  less  sensible  woman  a  Voice
from  Heaven  would  confirm  that  assurance.  I  will  venture
to  add  here  an  experience  of  my  own  which  is  possibly
of  the  same  character.  In  a  house  where  we  once  lived
there  was  a  high  hall  and  a  lamp  suspended  by  a  long
chain  from  the  ceiling.  One  day  I  came  in,  not  in  any
way  thinking  of  the  lamp,  walked  past  the  lamp  and
was  going  upstairs,  when  it  suddenly  struck  me  that
the  chain  was  going  to  break  and  the  lamp  to  fall.  The
feeling  was  strong  enough  to  make  me  go  downstairs
and  reach  up  to  feel  the  lamp.  I  lifted  it  slightly  in
my  hand  and  let  it  down  again,  and  as  I  did  so  the
chain  broke  and  the  lamp  came  into  my  hand.  It  seems
probable  that  I  had  sub-consciously  observed  something
about  the  chain — I  do  not  in  the  least  know  what —
which  led  me  to  conclude  that  it  was  likely  to  break.
The  original  stimulus  was  not  strong  enough  to  get  into
full  consciousness,  but  the  deduction  drawn  from  it,  being
rather  alarming,  was.  I  had  about  the  same  time  a
very  similar  experience  about  a  swing.  I  suddenly  began
to  think  it  was  going  to  break,  and  it  did.

Now,  in  making  these  confessions  or  boasts — and  I
am  intending  to  make  some  more  presently — I  am  filled
with  a  natural  sense  of  shame.  That  I  admit.  Yet
my  shame  is  mingled  with  some  lurking  spirit  of  defiance.
It  is  very  easy  to  condemn  me,  when  I  have  been  found
out  ;  but  I  do  not  believe  that  other  people  are  really
quite  so  innocent  as  they  pretend.  I  suspect  that  most
sensible  persons,  when  they  have  experiences  like  this,
promptly  forget  them.  Their  well-formed  brain  performs
its  duty  and  effectively  walls  off  the  recollection  of  such


54


Professor  Gilbert  Hurray.


[part


undesirable  incidents.  And  then  they  give  themselves
airs  and  despise  the  supposed  delusions  of  their  more
candid  neighbours  !

At  the  same  time  I  would  like  to  plead  in  mitigation
of  any  sentence  you  may  be  passing  on  me,  that,  what-
ever small  acts  of  petty  clairvoyance  may  be  laid  to  my
charge,  I  have  never  condescended  to  a  hallucination.
I  have  never  heard  Voices  or  seen  Visions.  Now  here
is  a  case  which  shows  what  I  might  have  done  and  did
not.  It  is  given  by  Mr.  Archer  in  his  paper  in  M'-Clure's
Magazine  of  January,  1915,  "  Can  We  Foretell  the  Future  ?  "

"  A  steam  yacht  was  lying  moored  by  two  ropes  to
a  wharf  in  the  Norfolk  Broads.  One  of  the  two  friends
who  had  chartered  her  had  a  very  detailed  and  vivid
dream  of  two  aerial  figures  burning  away  the  mooring
ropes,  so  that  the  steamer  drifted  and  was  lost  on  the
river  bar.  The  dreamer  was  incapable  of  moving  for
some  time,  but  at  last  dashed  out  of  his  berth,  smashed
open  the  bolted  cabin  door,  and  was  just  in  time  to
save  the  vessel,  both  ropes  having  actually  parted."

We  may  assume,  in  all  probability,  that  he  had  some
unconscious  sense-impression — he  heard  the  ropes  creak
or  felt  them  give — which  indicated  the  danger  ;  and  his
subconsciousness,  not  knowing  how  it  had  got  its  in-
formation, dreamed  a  sort  of  mythological  groundwork
for  it.  Such  a  proceeding  is  very  common  in  dreams.
For  my  own  part  I  would  never  have  condescended  to
it.  If  I  had  been  that  man  I  should  have  woken  up,
have  felt  a  suspicion  that  the  ropes  were  parting,  and
then  lain  quietly  in  my  bed  until  I  was  drowned  and
proved  right.

The  more  showy  and  intemperate  method  pursued  by
this  unnamed  gentleman  has  of  course  attracted  a  great
deal  of  attention  and  even  exercised  some  influence  on
public  history.

The  subject,  having  made  a  discovery  or  reached  a
conclusion  by  means  of  some  unconscious  mental  process
— whether  sense-perception  or  memory  or  something  far
more  complex — instead  of  leaving  well  alone  invents  some
fictitious machinery to fortify the belief or emotion  at


LXXII.]


Presidential  Address.


55


which  he  has  now  arrived.  The  internal  process,  what-
ever it  may  have  been,  is  projected  into  a  mythological
shape.  The  form  of  the  projection  is,  of  course,  deter-
mined by  the  habits  of  thought  to  which  the  subject
is  accustomed.  Ancient  armies  in  certain  crises  of  emotion,
when  they  reached  a  sudden  feeling  of  confidence  which
they  could  not  explain,  generally  saw  the  brethren  Castor
and  Pollux  championing  them  ;  modern  armies  see  Angels
or  a  Cross  in  the  sky  or  the  green  standard  of  Mohammed.
I  see  that  the  man  who  tried  this  week  to  assassinate
Mr.  J.  P.  Morgan  states  that  he  heard  a  voice  from
heaven  bidding  him  do  so.  And  I  remember  as  a  child
conceiving  an  unfavourable — and,  I  am  sure,  most  unjust
— opinion  of  St.  James  the  Less  because  a  certain  murderer
in  Australia  firmly  maintained  that  his  crime  had  been
recommended  to  him  by  that  saint  in  person.  I  fear
that  I  may  be  differing  from  the  judgment  of  your
last  year's  President  when  I  express  the  opinion  that,
though  the  murderer's  belief  was  a  matter  of  some  im-
portance, and  nerved  him  to  a  difficult  action,  it  was
nevertheless  quite  untrue,  and  would  have  remained  equally
untrue  if  it  had  involved  ten  thousand  murders,  or  caused,
or  prevented,  a  European  war.  But  Dr.  Schiller  uses
the  word  "  truth  "  in  his  own  pragmatic  way,  and  it
is  quite  likely  that  I  have  misunderstood  him.  I  do
not  want  to  quarrel  with  him  so  much  as  I  do  with
a  quite  different  class  of  writers,  who  positively  believe
in  the  truth  of  these  visions,  and  use  the  word  truth
in  its  ordinary  sense.  Some  of  our  troops  in  the  retreat
from  Mons  are  said  to  have  seen  angels  in  the  sky  ;
and  they  deserved  to  do  so  if  ever  troops  did.  But
it  does  sadden  and  disappoint  me  to  find  an  educated
clergyman  actually  maintaining  that  the  angels  were
there — angels  with  long  feathery  wings,  as  in  Christmas
cards — and  basing  arguments  upon  the  supposed  fact.
There  have  been  plenty  of  people  who  have  had  visions
of  Apollo  and  Anubis  and  the  divers  gods  of  the  cannibal
islands.  There  have  been  people  who  have  had  visions
of  Demogorgon,  though  Demogorgon  is  not  a  person  at
all but only a slip of the pen — the word  demiurgum


56


Professor  Gilbert  Murray.


[part


being  mixed  by  a  scribe's  mistake  with  the  word  gorgona
in  a  known  passage  of  Lactantius  Placidus.  In  last
year's  Proceedings  we  can  read  how  Mr.  Griinbaum  had
a  vision  of  the  spirit  Bien-Boa,  whom  he  had  read  about  ;
and  the  original  Bien-Boa  has  been  shown  by  Miss  Verrall
not  to  have  been  a  spirit  at  all  but  a  mere  fraudulent  hoax.

The  best  illustration  of  the  process  by  which  these
hallucinations  arise  is  to  be  found,  as  I  suggested  above,
in  the  myth-making  faculty  of  common  dreams.  There
is  a  well-known  case,  printed  in  an  old  number  of  the
Proceedings  of  this  Society,  of  a  girl  who  was  asleep
and  was  roused  by  her  sister,  who  caught  her  by  the  sleeve
and  said  "  Boo."  In  the  moment  before  she  woke  she
had  a  long  dream.  A  huge  dog  was  pursuing  her,  with
barks  and  growls.  She  held  a  door  against  it,  but  it
broke  through  ;  then  another  door  and  another  door  ;
at  last  she  was  holding  the  last  door  of  the  house,  the
brute  was  too  strong  for  her  ;  it  burst  through  and,
uttering  a  roar,  seized  her  sleeve  with  its  teeth.  You
will  observe  that  the  sequence  of  time  is  rather  curious.
The  sense-perception  which  caused  the  dream  occurs  in
the  dream  not  at  the  beginning  but  at  the  end.  The
rest  of  the  dream  consists  in  what  we  may  call  a  hurried
improvisation  of  imaginary  incidents  to  lead  up  to  the
sense-impression  which  started  it.  It  is  as  though  the
sleeper's  subconsciousness  said  :  "A  cry  of  Boo  and  a
pull  at  my  sleeve  !  How  the  dickens  can  I  account  for
this  ?  "  It  is  just  the  same  in  a  more  elaborate  case
given  in  vol.  xii.  of  the  Proceedings  by  a  distinguished
American  Assyriologist.  He  had  been  working' late  at  the
arrangement  of  an  Assyrian  collection  in  the  University
of  Pennsylvania.  In  the  course  of  the  night,  his  brain
still  working  in  its  sleep,  it  struck  him  that  two  pieces
of  cut  jade  which  had  been  classified  as  having  nothing
to  do  with  each  other  were  cut  out  of  the  same  piece,
and  that  piece  an  inscribed  cylinder.  The  shock  of
discovery  took  shape  in  a  dream,  after  which  he  got  up
and  verified  the  suggestion,  and  it  proved  true.  But
the  way  in  which  his  dream  presented  it  was  this.  He
found himself standing, if I remember rightly, in  an


LXXII.]


Presidential  Address.


57


ancient  Assyrian  temple,  when  there  came  to  him  a
long-robed  high  priest,  whose  dress  he  noted  carefully
and  compared  with  his  expectations.  The  priest  beck-
oned him  to  come  to  the  treasure-chamber  on  the  south-
east side  of  the  building,  and  there  told  him  a  story  ;
how  the  King,  Sargcn,  had  sent  a  message  to  the  priests
who  were  in  this  room,  bidding  them  send  him  a  pair
of  jade  ear-rings,  and,  having  no  other  jade  handy,  they
had  cut  an  inscribed  cylinder  in  two  and  made  ear-rings
of  it.  "  Which  two  ear-rings,"  the  priest  concluded,
"  are  now  Nos.  (say)  932  and  128  in  your  collection  at
Pennsylvania."

What  seems  to  occur  in  a  dream  of  this  sort,  or  in
an  ordinary  hallucination,  is  that  the  mind  reaches  some
conclusion  or  some  passionately  held  belief  by  a  process
of  which  it  is  not  properly  conscious.  It  desires  some
support  for  its  present  state  ;  it  insists  on  having  it  ;
it  projects  its  own  desire  for  support  into  the  form  of
an  external  assurance.

Now,  so  far  I  have  been  speaking,  for  simplicity's
sake,  as  if  the  only  means  by  which  we  can  receive
communications  from  the  external  world  were  the  orthodox
five  senses.  This  view  probably  needs  correction.  The
five  senses  are,  as  M.  Bergson  says,  the  canals  into  which
our  consciousness  of  the  external  world  is  specially  directed.
It  is  thus  made  clear,  definite,  limited.  But  there  seem
to  be  other  forms  of  sense-perception  which  cannot  ex-
actly be  referred  to  the  special  organs  of  sense.  There
is  the  sense  of  internal  strain,  for  example  ;  and  perhaps
the  curious  sense  of  propinquity — as,  for  instance,  when
in  the  dark  you  feel  that  you  are  coming  close  to  a  wall.
I  am  here  quite  out  of  my  depth,  but  I  rather  suspect
that  we  must  also  allow  for  some  direct  passage  of  vibra-
tions from  one  human  body  to  another,  or  of  currents
between  two  minds.  I  do  not  wish  to  be  dogmatic
here.  The  cases  in  which  a  man  seems  to  receive  in-
formation direct  from  another  mind,  and  not  by  any
definite  channel  of  sense,  will  seldom  bear  close  examina-
tion. For  example,  one  can  feel,  as  we  say,  "  instinc-
tively," that  some one  in  the  room is cross or  hostile,


58


Professor  Gilbert  Murray.


[part


but  it  would  be  very  rash  to  conclude,  in  such  a  case,
that  there  had  been  no  sense-perception  of  the  uncon-
scious kind.  What  makes  me  incline  to  a  belief  in  the
transmission  of  thoughts  or  impressions  by  some  method
different  from  our  normal  five  senses  is  chiefly  my  own
experience  in  telepathy.  When  I  am  getting  at  the
thing  which  I  wish  to  discover  the  only  effort  I  make
is  a  sort  of  effort  of  attention  of  a  quite  general  kind.
The  thing  may  come  through  practically  any  sense-
channel,  or  it  may  discover  a  road  of  its  own,  a  chain
of  reasoning  or  of  association,  which,  as  far  as  I  re-
member, never  coincides  with  any  similar  chain  in  the
mind  of  anyone  present,  but  is  invented,  much  as  a
hallucination  is  invented,  for  the  purpose  of  the  moment.
I  will  illustrate  this  by  a  few  instances.

The  method  followed  is  this  :  I  go  out  of  the  room
and  of  course  out  of  earshot.  Someone  in  the  room,
generally  my  eldest  daughter,  thinks  of  a  scene  or  an
incident  or  anything  she  likes,  and  says  it  aloud.  It
is  written  down,  and  I  am  called.  I  come  in,  usually
take  my  daughter's  hand,  and  then,  if  I  have  luck,
describe  in  detail  what  she  has  thought  of.  The  least
disturbance  of  our  customary  method,  change  of  time
or  place,  presence  of  strangers,  controversy,  and  especially
noise,  is  apt  to  make  things  go  wrong.  I  become  myself
somewhat  over-sensitive  and  irritable,  though  not,  I
believe,  to  a  noticeable  degree.  You  will  understand
that  I  am  not  attempting  to  prove  the  validity  of  these
experiments,  much  less  alleging  that  I  have  any  stronger
powers  of  telepathy  than  my  neighbours.  I  am  merely
using  certain  incidents  in  my  own  experience  for  what
they  are  worth — and  they  may  be  worth  very  little —
as  illustrations  of  the  theory  I  have  been  putting  forward
about  the  fringe  of  consciousness.

Let  me  first  take  a  perfectly  simple  and  uninteresting
instance,  not  an  experiment  at  all  but  an  accident.  A
few  days  ago  a  lady  whom  I  know  slightly  came  and
told  me  a  longish  story  affecting  a  matter  of  business.
In  it  there  occurred  a  person  whose  name  she  would
not mention,  but  whom  she  called "Mr. X." As  soon


LXXII.]


Presidential  Address.


59


as  she  said  "  Mr.  X.  "  I  knew  who  the  man  was,  though
I  had  never  heard  him  called  out  of  his  name  before,
and  did  not  know  that  he  knew  this  lady.  This  know-
ledge seemed  to  come  immediately.  But  I  should  not
like  to  be  sure  that  it  did.  It  may  have  been  rapid
unconscious  reasoning .

Now  for  some  experiments,  where  the  subconscious  impres-
sion chose  some  sense-channel  by  which  to  reach  me.  First,
the  sense  of  smell.  My  daughter  thought  of  Savonarola
at  Florence  and  the  people  burning  their  clothes  and
pictures  and  valuables  in  the  square. — I  first  felt  "  This
is  Italy,"  then  "  This  is  not  modern  "  ;  and  then  hesi-
tated, when  accidentally  a  small  tarry  bit  of  coal  tumbled
out  of  the  fire.  I  smelt  oil  or  paint  burning  and  so
got  the  whole  scene.  It  seems  as  though  here  some
subconscious  impression,  struggling  up  towards  conscious-
ness, caught  hold  of  the  burning  coal  as  a  means  of
getting  through.  (I  am  sorry  to  use  metaphorical  lan-
guage, but  exact  language  would  be  both  difficult  and
cumbrous.)  In  this  case,  then,  the  information  came
through  the  channel  of  the  sense  of  smell.

Often  it  comes  through  sight.  For  example  :  Subject
set  :  "  Mr.  B.  .  .  .  in  the  quad  at  New  College  with
a  big  dog  jumping  up  on  him.'' — My  guess:  "Mr.
B.  .  .  .in  the  courtyard  of  a  hotel  with  a  dancing  bear.*'
This  erroneous  guess  was  evidently  a  misinterpreted
picture.  There  are  many  cases  of  correct  pictures.  E.g.
Subject  set  :  "I  think  of  grandfather  at  the  Harrow
and  Winchester  cricket  match,  dropping  hot  cigar-ash
on  Miss  Thompson's  parasol." — My  guess  (verbatim)  :
"  Why,  this  is  grandfather.  He's  at  a  cricket  match —
why  it's  absurd  :  he  seems  to  be  dropping  ashes  on
a  lady's  parasol."

Sometimes  the  impression  comes  through  hearing.  Once
I  had  to  guess  something  about  a  man  called  David  ;  I  got
the  action  right,  but  thought  the  man  was  Davies.  This
case  is  not  quite  as  conclusive  as  it  looks,  since  it  so
happened  that  the  two  men,  David  and  Davies,  had  in
some  ways  just  the  same  geographical  atmosphere  about
them. This  incident  set  us  all  on  the  look-out  for  evidence


(10


Professor  Gilbert  Murray.


[part


of  auditory  hyperesthesia  ;  but  the  clue  was  not  particu-
larly successful,  though  once  or  twice  I  have  described
the  scene  or  incident  in  almost  exactly  the  same  words,
or  in  phrases  of  the  same  rhythm,  in  which  they  were
described  by  the  person  setting  the  problem.

Sometimes  I  get  at  the  result  by  a  fictitious  association
of  ideas.  A  good  case  is  the  following.  Subject  set  :
Mr.  Z  .  .  .  galloping  along  a  beach  in  Greece. — When  I
came  in  my  eyes  caught  a  book  by  Mr.  Z  .  .  .  on  my
bookshelves,  and  presently  I  heard  a  horse  in  the
road  outside.  I  then  said  :  "  This  is  a  mere  guess,
because  I  hear  a  horse  galloping  and  I  happen  to  have
seen  Z  .  .  .'s  book  ;  but  I  think  of  Z  .  .  .  galloping
on  a  horse."  Question  :  Where  ?  "  Oh,  I  suppose  in
Greece." (His  book  was  about  Greece.)

Much  more  often,  however,  the  information  comes  not
through  any  particular  sense  but  through  what  I  may
call  a  sort  of  indeterminate  sense  of  quality  or  atmosphere.
For  instance,  I  almost  always,  if  I  am  going  right,  get
first  a  feeling  of  the  country  in  which  the  scene  or  in-
cident is  set.  I  say,  "  This  is  Russian,"  "  This  is  Italian,"
"  This  seems  tropical,"  or  the  like.  Also  I  am  apt  to
know  whether  a  thing  comes  from  a  book  or  from  real
life,  and  the  taste  of  the  book  is  apt  to  be  very  strong.
One  could  never  confuse  Thackeray  and  Tolstoy,  for
instance.  A  rather  instructive  case,  and  one  in  which
I  do  think  I  was  rather  clever,  referred  to  a  scene  in
a  book  which  I  had  not  read. I  give  it  more  at  length.

Subject  set  :  A  scene  in  a  story  by  Strindberg.  A
man  and  woman  in  a  lighthouse,  the  man  lying  fallen
on  the  floor,  and  the  woman  bending  over  him,  looking
at  him  and  hoping  that  he  is  dead.

My  guess  :  "A  horrid  atmosphere,  full  of  hatred  and
discomfort.  A  book,  not  real  life.  A  book  I  have
not  read.  Not  Russian,  not  Italian,  but  foreign.  I
cannot  get  it.  .  .  .  There  is  a  round  tower,  a  man  and
woman  in  a  round  tower  ;  but  it  is  not  Maeterlinck.
Not  like  him.  I  should  guess  it  was  Strindberg.  The
woman  is  bending  over  the  man  and  hating  him,  hoping
he  is  dead."


lxxii.]  Presidential  Address.  61

Another  Strindberg  scene,  also  from  a  book  I  had  not
read,  raises  a  rather  interesting  point.  The  subject  set
was  an  old  cross,  poor,  disappointed  schoolmaster  eating
crabs  for  lunch  at  a  restaurant,  and  insisting  on  having
female  crabs.  I  got  the  atmosphere,  the  man,  the  lunch
in  the  restaurant  on  crabs,  and  thought  I  had  finished,
when  my  daughter  said,  "  What  kind  of  crabs  ?  "  I
felt  rather  impatient  and  said  :  "  Oh,  Lord,  I  don't
know  :  Female  crabs."  That  is,  the  response  to  the
question  came  automatically,  with  no  preparation,  while
I  thought  I  could  not  give  it.  I  may  add  that  I  had
never  before  heard  of  there  being  any  inequality  between
the  sexes  among  crabs,  regarded  as  food.

Before  sitting  down  let  me  recapitulate  the  kind  of
conclusion  to  which  I  think  these  results  possibly  point.
I  will  take  them  under  two  heads.

In  the  first  place,  my  whole  experience  leads  me  to
believe  strongly  in  the  truth  of  M.  Bergson's  suggestion
that  telepathy  is  as  a  matter  of  fact  operating  at  every
moment  and  everywhere.  I  greatly  doubt  whether  it
does  not  lie  at  the  root  of  language.  It  is  hard  to
see  how  language  can  originally  have  grown,  or  how
an  infant  can  learn  it,  or  how  we  can  ever,  by  means
of  language,  understand  a  new  idea,  without  telepathy.
Of  course  there  is  a  considerable  difference  in  degree
between  that  ordinary  everyday  amount  of  telepathy
and  the  somewhat  disgraceful  stage  of  proficiency  attained
by  your  temporary  President.  And  you  will  suspect
me  of  trying  to  shelter  myself  by  blackening  the  characters
of  my  neighbours  when  I  express  the  opinion  that  pro-
bably most  people  could  attain  the  same  results  if  they
practised  for  a  good  time  and  did  not  get  excited  or
flurried.  It  is  however  quite  possible  that,  if  my  results
are  above  the  average,  it  may  be  that  I  have  accidentally
hit  on  some  good  method — though  I  have  no  idea  what
it  is.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  likely  that  the  fact  of
my  not  eating  meat  or  the  like  has  anything  whatever
to  do  with  it.  Nor  do  I  suppose  that  there  is  any
importance  in  the  fact  that  I  find  the  whole  business
rather  unpleasant  : it  does  not  make  me  ill  or  exhaust


62


Professor  Gilbert,  Murray.


[part


me  in  any  noticeable  way,  but  I  rather  dislike  it  and.
would  sooner  do  something  else.  I  think  this  probably
means  that  I  get  into  a  state  of  slight  hyperaesthesia
and  am  particularly  sensitive  to  every  kind  of  impression.
Noises,  for  instance,  become  intolerable.  In  any  case,  I
have,  in  this  matter,  thrown  myself  on  your  mercy.  And
if  you  feel  disposed  to  think  harshly  of  these  proceedings
in  a  respectable  bourgeois  paterfamilias  of  sober  habits,
I  would  venture  to  warn  you  to  look  inside  and  make
very  sure  of  yourselves  before  you  condemn  others.

The  second  conclusion  to  which  I  incline  is  this.  The
basis  of  this  so-called  telepathy  is  unconscious  sense-
perception,  the  sensory  disturbance  itself  being  too  slight
for  consciousness,  but  the  state  of  mind  resulting  from
it  being  fully  perceptible.  (As,  e.g.  an  imperceptible  touch
may  make  a  man  unconsciously  put  his  hand  towards
his  waistcoat  pocket  without  knowing  why  he  does  so,  and
may  at  the  same  time  excite  him  violently  with  the
thought  that  his  pocket  has  been  picked.)  The  basis
is  unconscious  sense-perception  ;  but  we  must  be  prepared
for  the  possibility  that  this  sense-perception  is  not  con-
fined to  the  canonical  five  channels  of  Sight,  Sound,  Smell,
Taste,  Touch.  At  least,  in  my  own  experience,  when  the
information  professes  to  come  through  one  of  the  regular
senses,  the  profession  has  generally  the  air  of  being  false.
I  mean,  I  seize  on  the  smell  of  the  burning  coal  in  the
Savonarola  subject,  or  on  the  sound  of  the  horse  galloping
on  the  road  in  the  Mr.  Z  .  .  .  subject,  where  a  less  well-
regulated  mind  would  at  once  have  a  direct  hallucinatory
communication  from  St.  James  the  Less.  And  again,
some  of  the  information  which  seems  to  come  most  clearly
and  rapidly,  as  when  I  feel  a  certain  emotional  atmosphere,
or  the  country  to  which  an  incident  belongs,  or  the
fact  that  it  is  in  a  book  and  not  in  real  life,  does
not  seem  to  be  the  sort  that  could  well  be  conveyed
by  mere  sense-impressions  of  the  canonical  sort.  Thus
I  should  be  inclined  provisionally  to  admit  the  likelihood
that  we  may  become  directly  sensitive  to  another  person's
state  of  mind  ;  though  I  realise  that  it  is  hard  here
to say exactly what one means. We spoke above  of


LXXII.]


Presidential  Address.


63


a  familiar  experience.  For  example  :  that  if  one  person
in  a  small  party  is  angry,  others  will  often  feel  it  without
any  tangible  source  of  information.  It  feels  like  a  direct
sensitiveness  of  mind  to  mind.  Yet  it  seems  likely
enough  that  one  is  really  getting  the  information  from
extremely  slight  subconscious  sense-impressions ;  that  the
angry  person,  if  put  under  a  psychic  microscope,  would
be  seen  to  be  kicking,  pouting,  snorting,  and  making  un-
mistakable grimaces,  and  that  it  is  one's  unconscious
perception  of  these  that  causes  the  so-called  telepathy.
But  I  do  not  feel  able  to  rule  out  the  possibility  of
a  much  wider  and  more  direct  impression,  not  conveyed
through  any  of  the  specialized  channels.  I  leave  the
question  to  biologists.

[Note.  Some  of  the  cases  quoted  here  are  given  from
memory.  The  contemporary  written  record  will  be  found
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  or  in  the  Appendix.  The  con-
temporary record,  it  should  be  mentioned,  being  hurriedly
scribbled  in  long  hand  and  uncorrected,  is  apt  to  be  not
quite  complete. G.  M.]


64  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part


III.

REPORT  ON  A  SERIES  OF  EXPERIMENTS  IN

"  GUESSING."

By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.

Read  at  a  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  on  February  23,

1916.

My  object  in  this  paper  is  to  give  a  detailed  account  of
the  experiments  to  which  Professor  Murray  alluded,  and
some  of  which  he  described,  in  his  Presidential  Address  to
our  Society  1  delivered  in  July,  1915,  and  so  to  enable  the
reader  to  form  his  own  conclusions  as  to  their  results.
The  experiments  have  extended  over  a  period  of  some  six
years,  from  the  spring  of  1910  to  the  end  of  1915,  and  a
complete  and  careful  record  has  been  kept.  The  total
number  of  experiments  recorded  is  505 :  a  number,  it
seems  to  me — especially  in  view  of  the  complex  nature
of  the  subjects  selected  for  transmission — sufficient  to
call  for  thorough  examination  and  analysis,  although
perhaps  insufficient  to  establish  beyond  doubt  their  vera
causa.

Professor  Murray  has  briefly  described  the  method
observed  :  A  small  group  of  people  assemble  in  one  room,
and  in  the  absence  of  the  percipient,  a  scene  or  incident
is  selected  for  transmission,  briefly  described  by  the  person
selecting  it,  and  noted  in  writing  by  one  of  the  company,
usually  not  the  selecting  agent.  Professor  Murray,  on  being
called  into  the  room,  takes  the  hand  of  the  agent  and

1  See  above,  pp.  40-63.


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing.''''  65

proceeds  to  describe  his  impressions.  The  company  in
general  remains  silent,  but  a  few  questions  may  be  asked
by  the  agent  ;  and  these,  as  well  as  the  percipient's
remarks,  are  recorded  by  the  note-taker.  I  have  spoken
of  the  "agent,"  but  that  is  perhaps  to  beg  the  question,
for  when  there  are  four  or  five  persons  present,  all  of
whom  know  the  subject  selected,  it  is  possible  that
the  "agency"  is  distributed  among  them  and  not  con-
fined to  the  person  whom  Professor  Murray  specifically
addresses.

Some  variations  have  been  made  in  the  procedure  ;
contact  has  occasionally  been  omitted,  and  written  sub-
stituted for  spoken  description  of  the  incident  selected.
More  frequently  the  subject  has  been  chosen  by  a  member
of  the  company  who  does  not  act  as  the  ostensible  agent.
Mr.  Murray  has  pointed  out  that  the  least  disturbance  of
the  customary  method  is  apt  to  make  things  go  wrong,
and  this  is  an  experience  familiar  to  all  who  have  any
acquaintance  with  experiments  on  such  lines  as  these,  or
indeed  with  any  supernormal  phenomena.  Too  much
reliance  must  not,  therefore,  be  placed  on  the  effects
which  seem  to  follow  these  variations,  but  the  effects  are
worth  noting  and  may  be  suggestive.

Contact  does  not  appear  to  be  necessary  to  the  success
of  the  experiments,  though  it  probably  serves  the  purpose
of  fixing  the  attention  of  agent  and  percipient,  and  in
some  cases  may  afford  to  the  latter  indications  as  to  the
general  success  or  failure  of  the  impression  described.  But
the  complexity  of  the  selected  incidents  makes  it  difficult
to  suppose  that  much  help  could  be  derived  from  a
positive  or  negative  indication  unconsciously  given  by
contact,  and  herein  the  case  differs  markedly  from  "  muscle-
reading  performances,"  which  are  so  arranged  by  the
"thought-reader"  as  to  present  a  series  of  alternatives  to
which  the  response  must  be  "  Right  "  or  "  Wrong."  Pro-
fessor Murray's  successive  approaches,  when  he  is  not  at
once  successful,  introduce  two  or  three  elements,  of  which
one  may  be  right  and  others  wrong,  or  vice  versa.  Take,
for  instance,  an  experiment  at  which  I  was  present
(February  17,  1914). The  subject,  a  purely  fantastic  one,

E


66  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

selected  by  Professor  Murray's  elder  daughter,  Mrs.  Arnold
Toynbee,  was  as  follows  :

"  Celia  Newbolt 1  under  a  gourd  tree  at  Smyrna."

Professor  Murray's  successive  statements  were  as  follows  :

(a)  Modern  Greek  of  some  kind.

(b)  Sort  of  Asia  Minor  place.

(c)  A  tree  and  women  sitting  under  it.

(d)  A  particular  tree.

(e)  A  girl  sitting  under  it.

(/)  She  does  not  belong  to  the  place.

(g)  She  is  English.

(h)  Something  to  do  with  a  poet.

(i)  Can't  be  Mrs.  Kipling.
{k)  No,  it's  a  girl.

(I) Rather  like  one  of  the  0  s.

(m)  Don't  think  I  can  get  her.

It  is  difficult  to  imagine  what  kind  of  indication  from
contact  could  lead  from  step  to  step  in  the  above  series  ;
how,  for  instance,  after  (c)  had  been  said,  could  contact
indicate  that  not  "  women  "  but  "  a  girl  "  was  thought  of
as  sitting  under  the  tree,  and  how  can  contact  uncon-
sciously, or  for  that  matter  consciously,  indicate  that  the
girl  in  question  has  "  something  to  do  with  a  poet  "  ?

Moreover,  that  contact  is  not  indispensable  to  the
success  of  the  experiments  is  shown  by  an  examination  of
the  eleven  recorded  cases  where  there  was  either  no
contact  at  all  or  contact  only  half-way  through  the
experiment.  In  two  of  these  cases  there  was  failure,  but
in  the  other  nine  there  was  at  least  partial,  and  in  some
of  them  striking  success.  Thus  on  August  11,  1913,  the
subject  chosen  by  Mrs.  Toynbee  was  as  follows  :

"  The  scene  in  [Tolstoi's] 2  Resurrection  where  the  girl
[Maslova]  goes  to  the  station  to  see  Nekludov,  but  instead
of  the  real  girl  I'll  think  of  Christina  [Roberts] — she  goes
to  the  station,  but  he  won't  [stop]."

1  "  Celia  Newbolt  "  is  the  daughter  of  Sir  Henry  Newbolt, the  poet,
author  of  Admirals  All,  etc.,  etc. See  Appendix,  p.  107.

2  The  words  in  brackets  are  my  explanatory  additions  in  the  contem-
porary record.


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing."


67


Professor  Murray,  without  contact,  said  :

"  It's  a  faked  thing.  You  say  it's  a  Tolstoi,  in  Resur-
rection, but  it's  really  Christina  Roberts,"  then  after
taking  hands,  he  added  :

"  I  can  only  get  her  at  Waterloo  going  to  Brackland
[near  Hindhead,  the  house  of  her  parents].  I  know  it's
not  right,  but  it's  something  to  do  with  a  station.  I
can't  get  it."

Here  the  "  faking  "  and  the  combination  of  Resurrection
and  Christina  Roberts  were  described  before  contact,  after
which  was  added  the  idea  of  a  station,  but  the  exact
incident  was  not  divined.

On  a  date  not  named,  in  1914,  three  successive  experi-
ments without  contact  were  made,  with  excellent  results.
1  quote  one  of  these  :

Mrs Arnold  Toynbee  : "Mrs.  C hitting  the  Purser1

with  a  skipping  rope."

Professor  Murray,  without  contact :  "  I  think  it's  Mother
hitting  the  Purser  with  a  skipping  rope — No,  it's  your
woman  the  overdressed  woman — Mrs.  C  ."

On  the  other  hand,  on  ten  occasions  when  writing  was
substituted  for  speaking,  during  Professor  Murray's  absence,
there  was  no  success,  and  this  fact  of  course  suggests  that
the  success  in  other  cases  may  be  due  to  hearing,  that  is,
not  to  telepathy  in  which  the  senses  are  excluded,  but  to
hyperesthesia.  The  conditions  are  clearly  such  as  to
exclude  any  chance  of  Professor  Murray's  overhearing  what
is  said  in  the  room  after  his  departure,  if  one  is  to  reckon
with  ordinary  sense-impressions.  The  door  of  the  room  is
shut,  Professor  Murray  waits  either  in  the  hall  at  some
distance  from  the  closed  door,  or  in  another  room  beyond  the
hall,  with  the  door  shut,  the  party  inside  the  room  are  also
at  some  little  distance  from  the  door,  and  the  speaker
describes  the  selected  incident  in  a  low  voice.  But  we
know  so  little  about  the  conditions  of  hyperaesthesia  that
it  must  not  be  ruled  out  as  a  possible  explanation,  and
no  doubt  the  complete  failure  in  these  ten  cases  when  the
subject  was  not  audibly  expressed  suggests  that  audition

1  This  incident  actually  occurred,  but  was  not  known  to  Professor  Murray.


68


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


plays  a  part  in  the  result.1  But  it  should  be  noted  that
six  of  them  are  parts  of  unsuccessful  series  of  experiments.
Thus  on  June  10,  1910,  out  of  the  whole  number  of
experiments,  thirteen  (four  written),  there  was  only  one
success  and  three  partial  successes  :  a  proportion  far  below
the  average.2  On  December  15,  1910,  when  two  further
attempts  were  made  without  speaking,  there  had  been
distinct  success  in  the  first  three  cases  (spoken),  but  after
the  failure  in  the  fourth  case  (written)  there  was  little  further
success  on  that  day.  Another  of  the  failures  was  the  last
in  a  series  of  ten,  and  the  agent  was  a  stranger  making  his
first  trial,  so  that  failure  is  not  surprising.  Still,  when  all
allowance  is  made  for  disturbance  of  normal  conditions,
and  discouragement  arising  from  previous  failure,  the  want
of  success  when  writing  is  substituted  for  speaking  un-
doubtedly makes  it  necessary  to  watch  carefully  for  other
indications  suggestive  of  auditory  hyperesthesia.

Before  considering  this  question  further,  some  general
account  must  be  given  of  the  experiments,  and  of  the
proportion  of  successes,  partial  successes  and  failures.  It
is  not  possible  to  classify  complex  incidents  of  this  kind
as  "Right"  or  "Wrong";  many  cases  are  on  the
border-line  and  might  be  classified  differently  by  different
people.  About  failures  there  is  little  or  no  doubt,  and
where  there  is  any  doubt,  I  have  counted  the  experiments,
for statistical purposes, as failures. The non-failures  I

1  On  one  of  these  occasions,  however,  although  Mr.  Murray  was  not
successful  in  describing  the  subject  selected,  he  seems  to  have  become
aware  of  the  action  of  one  of  the  company.  A  subject  was  chosen  by
his  brother,  Mr.  Aubrey  Murray,  who  handed  a  written  note  of  it  to
the  agent,  Mrs.  Toynbee,  pointing  vigorously  to  it  to  draw  her  attention
to  this  new  suggestion  that  writing  should  be  substituted  for  speaking.
Professor  Murray  received  the  impression  that  the  subject  was  "  some-
thing you  can  point  out  here,"  and  on  being  told  that  was  not  so,  he
added,  making  a  vigorous  gesture,  like  that  of  his  brother  :  "  It's  very
odd,  I  get  an  impression  that  you  pointed  at  something."  No  hyper-
aesthesia  can  account  for  this.  The  contemporary  record,  though  it
makes  clear  the  "  vigorous  pointing  "  does  not  state  that  the  subject
was  written  and  not  spoken.  My  information  on  this  point  comes  from
the  witnesses  themselves,  but  I  have  not  included  the  case  in  the  main
report,  owing  to  the  want  of  clearness  in  the  contemporary  record.

2  For  statistics,  see  below,  p.  70,


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing.'''  69


have  placed  in  two  classes,  which  I  have  called  Successes
and  Partial  Successes.  I  have  counted  as  Successes  not
only  all  cases  where  the  complete  incident  is  described,
but  also  cases  where  what  may  be  called  the  essential
elements  are  given  by  the  percipient,  but,  of  course,
opinions  will  differ  as  to  what  is  essential.  That  difficulty
can  only  be  met  by  my  giving  in  detail  one  or  two
instances,  which  I  have  classified,  for  statistical  purposes,
as  Successes  (S)  and  Partial  Successes  (P),  so  that  the
reader  may  form  his  own  impression  as  to  my  judgement
in  this  matter.

Of  the  seven  cases  described  by  Professor  Murray,1  six
come under  the head  of Successes  in  my  classification,

although  in  one  case  (May  8,  1910),  that  of  B in  the

front  quad  at  New  College  with  a  dancing  bear,  the
animal  thought  of  was  in  fact  a  dog.2  The  seventh  case
I  have  counted  as  P  and  not  S,  because  whereas  the
subject  was  :  "  Mr.  Z.  riding  on  the  sea- shore  on  a  horse,"
the  description  gave  no  definite  locality.3  My  method
of  distinguishing  P  from  S  is  further  indicated  in  the
three  following  cases,  which  I  count  as  P.  The  first  two
were  on  the  same  day  :

J?me,4  1910.

Subject.  "  Miss  Barbara  Tchaikovsky  visiting  a  political
prisoner  in  the  Peter  and  Paul  [prison]."

Professor  Murray.  "  Tchaikovsky,  but  I  can't  see  what  he's
doing. — No,  I've  got  it  blurred.  I've  got  it  mixed  up
with  Miss  Tchaikovsky.  I've  got  her  knocking  at  a
front  door."

As  the  idea  of  prison,  prisoner,  is  absent  in  the  descrip-
tion, I  have  not  counted  this  as  a  complete  success.

1  See  above  p.  59  ff.

2  The  record  here  shows  that  though  the  locality  was  incorrectly
guessed  at  first,  it  was  subsequently  correctly  given.  (See  Appendix,
p.  90).

3  For  further  comment  on  this  case,  see  below,  p.  85  and  Appendix,  p.  92.

4  The  date  is  not  noted,  but  was  between  June  10  and  Juno  18.  (See
Appendix,  p.  94.)


70


Mrs.  A.  W.  V  err  all.


[part


June,  1910.

Subject.  "  Paul  Sabatier  walking  with  an  alpenstock  along  a
winding  road  in  Savoy."

Professor  Murray.  "  A  man  like  Mr.  Irving  going  up  a
mountain — it  isn't  Mr.  Irving — it's  a  clergyman  with  an
alpenstock — I  should  say  it  was  a  foreign  clergyman."  1

Here,  again,  since  the  name  "Paul  Sabatier"  and  the
locality  "  Savoy "  were  not  given,  the  success  is  counted
only  as  Partial,  though  I  think  it  will  be  admitted  that
the  greater  part  of  the  desired  impression  was  successfully
transmitted,  and,  incidentally,  the  failure  to  mention  the
distinctive  names  is  against  the  theory  of  auditory  hyper-
aesthesia.

September  14,  1913.

Subject.  "  Alister  and  [Malcolm]  MacDonald  running  along
the  platform  at  Liverpool  Street,  and  trying  to  catch  the  train
just  going  out."

Professor  Murray.  "  Something  to  do  with  a  railway
station.  I  should  say  it  was  rather  a  crowd  at  a  big
railway  station,  and  two  little  bo37s  running  along  in  the
crowd. I  should  guess  Basil."  2

Here,  again,  though  the  picture  of  two  little  boys
running  in  a  railway  station  is  correctly  described,  the
name  of  the  station  is  not  given,  and  the  boys  are  not
identified. This  therefore  appears  as  P,  and  not  S.

Having,  an  I  hope,  enabled  the  reader  to  attach  a
meaning  to  the  symbols  P  and  S,  I  joroceed  to  a  statistical
examination  of  the  experiments.

The  total  number  of  recorded  experiments  is  505.  On
six  occasions  where  the  subject  is  noted  there  is  no  entry
of  a  description,  and  these  I  count  as  Failures.  So  also
I  do  ten  cases  where  only  the  word  "  Failure  "  is  noted.
In  sixty-eight  cases  no  impression  was  obtained,  and  for
statistical  purposes  these  are,  of  course,  also  Failures,
though  there  is  a  great  distinction,  as  regards  our  estimate

1  See  Appendix,  p.  94.

2  For  further  comment,  see  below,  p.  74


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing."  71


of  the  phenomena,  between  a  wrong  guess  and  a  failure
to  have  any  impression.  These  may  be  called  Negative,
and  the  others  Positive  Failures.  The  whole  number  of
Failures  of  every  kind  is  197,  sixty-eight  of  these  being
due  to  absence  of  any  impression.1  The  number  of
Partial  Successes  is  141,  and  of  Complete  Successes  167.

Thus,  in  the  whole  505  experiments,  we  have  the  follow-
ing percentage  :

Success  -  -  -  -  33-1
Partial  Success  -  -  27-9
Failure -  39-0

or,  excluding  the  sixty-eight  cases  in  which  no  impression
was  received,  in  the  resulting  437  experiments  we  have  :

Success  -  38-2
Partial  Success  -  -  32-3
Failure -  29-5

so  that  where  some  sort  of  impression  was  obtained,  the
cases  in  which  there  was  complete  failure  amounted  to
less  than  a  third  of  the  whole.

These  figures  clearly  establish  the  fact,  already  suffi-
ciently shown  in  the  cases  quoted  above,  that  some
information  is  transmitted  to  the  percipient,  and  it  be-
comes therefore  of  great  interest  to  determine  if  possible
whether  the  ordinary  senses,  if  we  allow  for  special  sensitive-
ness, are  the  agency  for  the  transmission.  The  conditions  of
the  experiment  show  clearly  that  the  only  sense  we  need
consider  is  that  of  hearing,  and,  as  I  have  said,  our
attention  is  specially  directed  to  that  by  the  failure  of
the  few  cases  where  the  selected  subject  was  not  described
in  spoken  words.

Another  feature  of  these  records  also  disposes  one  to
look  for  a  solution  in  the  direction  of  auditory  perception.
In  several  instances,  about  forty,  the  subject  was  selected
by  one  member  of  the  company  and  described  to  another
person  who  was  to  act  as  agent,  that  is,  who  was  to  be  in

*I  have  counted  the  "Failures,"  so  noted,  and  the  blank  entries  as
Positive  Failures,  though  I  suspect  that  in  most  if  not  all  these  cases  no
impression  was  obtained. [Note  by  Professor  Murray. "  Yes,  that  is  so."]


72


Mrs.  A.  W.  V  err  all.


[part


contact  with  Professor  Murray,  and  to  whom  he  addressed
himself when describing his impression. Now, in  the
majority  of  these  cases,  Professor  Murray  begins  by  saying
to  the  agent  : "  This  is  not  yours  ;  this  seems  to  be  So-
and-So's." Of  course,  his  impression  may  be  telepathically
derived, but  we  cannot  exclude  the  possibility,  granting
auditory  hyperesthesia,  that  the  percipient  subconsciously
hears a voice which he recognises as not that of  the
ostensible  agent,  and,  in  fact,  on  more  than  one  occasion
Professor  Murray  has  announced  on  entering  that  he  "  heard
So-and-So's voice,"  1 and the experiment was  usually
stopped. Less  delicate  sense  of  hearing  would  be  needed
to  recognise  a  voice  than  to  catch  actual  words,  so  that
if  audition  plays  any  part  in  the  phenomena,  we  should
expect  it  to  enter  into  the  recognition  that  the  subject
has  been  selected  by  some  one  other  than  the  ostensible
agent. If  this  were  so,  if,  that  is,  the  guess  were  thus
helped  by  ordinary  sense-perception,  it  would  be  reasonable
to  look  for  at  least  as  high  a  ratio  of  success  in  these
forty  instances  as  in  the  general  totals. But  that  is  not
the case. The failures are relatively more  numerous,
amounting  to  twenty  out  of  forty,  that  is,  to  50  per  cent,
instead of 29 per cent. This fact, so far  as it  goes,
points  against  audition,  and  in  favour  of  telepathy  from
the agent. For  it may, I think, be assumed  that  the
agent  realises  less  vividly  a  subject  dictated  by  another
than one deliberately chosen by herself, and that  in
consequence the telepathic transmission is less clear.  I
make  this  suggestion  with  diffidence,  as  I  am  aware  that
the  number  of  these  cases,  forty,  is  not  large  enough  to
warrant  a  conclusion. But  I  note  it  because  the  more  I
consider  these records, the more plain it becomes  that
vivid  realisation  on  the  part  of  the  agent,  and  a  real  as
distinct  from a momentary  and  ad  hoc  interest in  the
subject, is conducive to success — a fact which, if  true,
would  seem  to  point  to  telepathy  rather  than  to  hyper-
aesthesia  as  a  vera  causa.

On  the  whole,  however,  the  recognition  that  the  subject

1  For  the  evidential  value  of  the  percipient's  own  impressions,  see
below,  p.  85.


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing."


73


has  been  chosen  by  some  one  not  the  ostensible  agent  is
at  least  suggestive  of  auditory  perception  ;  and  so  perhaps
is  the  fact  that  noise,  during  the  percipient's  absence
from  the  room,  is  recognised  as  a  very  potent  cause  of
failure  to  obtain  any  impression  at  all.  In  many  of  these
cases  Mr.  Murray,  on  returning  to  the  room,  says  :  "  Too
much  noise  ;  no  impression,"  or  11 1  was  disturbed  by  the
servants,"  or  "  by  the  dogs."  But  to  this  I  do  not
attach  much  value,  as  all  Avho  have  taken  part  in  experi-
ments of  this  kind,  under  conditions  excluding  sense-
perception,  know  how  important  concentration  and  freedom
from  disturbance  is  to  the  percipient,  and  how  "  sensitive  "
most  successful  percipients  are  to  noise  or  other  irregular
interruptions.

The  question  of  hyperesthesia  versus  telepathy  can,  it
seems  to  me,  be  best  answered  by  a  detailed  examination
of  the  records,  and  especially  of  the  partially  successful
cases  and  the  failures,  with  a  view  to  seeing  whether  (a)
the  errors  are  likely  to  be  produced  by  mishearing,  and
(b)  whether  any  elements  are  observable  which  cannot  be
accounted  for  by  hearing.  I  have  examined  the  records
carefully  with  this  object  in  view,  and  I  propose  to  place
before  the  reader,  such  evidence  as  I  have  been  able  to  obtain.

(a)  Evidence  suggestive  of  auditory  hyper aesthesia.

The  chief  source  of  this  evidence  must  be  sought  among
errors,  though,  of  course,  it  is  possible  that  when  a
description  reproduces  faithfully  the  words  used  by  the
selecting  agent,  the  success  is  due  to  overhearing.  But  it
may  equally  well  be  due  to  a  vivid  telepathic  impression,
and  therefore  does  not  help  to  determine  the  question
under  consideration.

A  careful  examination  of  errors  gives  seventeen  cases,
besides  the  one  described  by  Professor  Murray,1  where  mis-
hearing might  conceivably  account  for  the  mistake.  Thus
we  find  the  following  substitutions  :

J.  A.  Smith  for  Jane  Eyre

Masefield  for  Mansfield

1  David — Davies. See  above,  p.  59.


74


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Synge  and  Arran
Margoliouth


for  a  Scene  with  Anne  Boleyn
for  Margie,  subsequently


corrected


hall

Cannan
Harconrt
Mrs.  Garr
Bellot


for  horse

for  Cameron

for  Cartagena

for  Mrs.  Carlyle


for  Bell
for  Alister  1

for  Miss  N.  with  a  reading  lamp.


perhaps  Basil

and Miss  N.  reading


This  Jast  perhaps  suggests  that  the  word  rather  than  the
picture  was  transferred.  Sometimes  a  word  is  unmistakeably
recognised.  Thus,  on  February  4,  1911,  the  subject  being
"  The  merchant  picking  red  roses  in  Beauty  and  the
Beast,'"  Professor  Murray  says  :  "I  seem  to  get  the  one
word  '  Merchant.'  "  On  other  occasions  a  word  is  recog-
nised but  misinterpreted,  as  when  "  Poll  "  is  substituted,
though  afterwards  corrected,  for  "  Pole,"  "  Ball  "  is  taken
to  be  a  name  instead  of  a  dance,  and  "  Karen,"  an
acquaintance  of  the  experimenters,  is  described  in  the  place
of  Karen,  a  character  in  a  book.  The  two  remaining
cases  of  possible  audition  are  as  follows  :

November  13,  1910.2

Subject. "  Out  of  UEspion  ;  Evsei  finding  a  fly  in  his  ink."

Professor  Murray.  "  This  is  a  book  too,  a  Russian  book.
It's  L'Espion.  It's  a  scene  I  don't  remember  at  all.  I  get
[the]  impression  of  the  boy  squashing  a  fly,  but  I  can't
remember  it  at  all. I  confuse  it  with  Joseph  Vance."

The  name  of  the  boy  Evsei  is  not  given  by  Professor
Murray,  but  I  think  that  it  is  responsible  for  the  con-
fusion with  Joseph  Fance.3  In  this  case,  however,  as
Professor  Murray  had  read  UEspion,  it  is  quite  as  likely
that  a  half-recalled  normal  memory  of  his  reading
suggested  the  similar  sound,  as  that  he  had  subconsciously
heard  his  daughter  give  the  name.


3  A  correspondent  suggests  that  the  confusion  may  be  duo  to  the
"  crocking  "  of  the  "  hinseck "  in  the  bur,  described  at  the  beginning
of  de  Morgan's  book.


1  See  above,  p.  70.


2  See  Appendix,  p.  97.


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing. ."  75


September  7,  1913.

Subject.  "  Lewis  Carroll  drawing  pictures  of  black  cats  in  the
parapet  room  at  Naworth."

[To  this  is  appended  a  note  saying  that  the  agent,  Mrs.  A.
Toynbee,  "  at one moment thought of  Christ Church,"  the
Oxford  College  of  which  "  Lewis  Carroll  "  was  a  member.]
Professor  Murray. "  It's Naworth, and it's  somebody
drawing  in the parapet room. It's somebody  who
doesn't  belong  there. He's  drawing  the  picture  of  the
cat  in  Alice in  Wonderland with a grin. Can't  get
him  a  bit. He  makes  the  same  sort  of  impression  as
Verrall,  but  he  isn't  Verrall. I  think  it  is  not  a  real
cat. I  think  it  is  Alice  in Wonderland. At  one  time
I  got  a  feeling  of  Christ  Church."

I  have  quoted  this  case  at  length  at  this  point  because
without  the  context  it  might  be  thought  that  the  intro-
duction of  the  name  Verrall  was  due  to  a  mishearing  of
Carroll.  But  under  the  circumstances,  seeing  that  the  cat
in  Alice  in  Wonderland  had  already  been  mentioned,  it  is,
I  think,  pretty  certain  that  it  is  some  other  reason  and
not  similarity  of  sound  which  is  responsible  for  the  intro-
duction of  "  Verrall."  1

This  is  the  complete  list  which  careful  scrutiny  has
furnished  of  errors  suggestive  of  mishearing,  and  it  will
be  admitted  that  the  number  is  not  large  nor  the  evidence
striking.  It  remains  to  examine  the  other  class  of  cases,
those,  namely,  suggesting  that  the  impression  of  the
subject  is  such  as  it  is  unlikely  or  impossible  should  be
derived  from  auditory  hyperaesthesia.

(b)  Evidence  suggestive  of  telepathy.

Against  the  seventeen  cases  just  described  must  be  set
forty-five  instances  where  the  whole  arrangement,  if  I  may
use  that  word,  of  his  impression  by  Mr.  Murray  suggests
that  he  has  in  some  way  caught  a  picture  of  the  subject
chosen,  or  perceived  its  general  characteristics,  and  is  not
influenced  by  the  words  used  by  the  agent. It  is  exceed-

1  Note  by  Professor  Murray.  "I  think  it  was  the  feeling  of  wit."  Cf.
the  feeling  of  connexion  with  a  poet  in  the  Celia  Newbolt  case,  p.  66.


7G


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verratt.


[part


ingly  difficult  to  represent  to  the  reader  how  strongly  I
have  been  led  by  a  study  of  these  records,  and  even
more  by  witnessing  the  phenomena,  to  the  conclusion
that,  as  Mr.  Murray  has  said,  "  the  percipient  often
seems  to  receive  information  which  comes  direct  from
another  mind  and  not  by  any  definite  channel  of  sense."
But,  perhaps,  a  summary  of  certain  types,  and  a  detailed
account,  with  comments,  of  some  others,  will  enable  the
reader  to  realise,  if  not  to  share,  the  writer's  feeling  that
the  main,  perhaps  the  sole,  explanation  of  the  phenomena
is  to  be  found  in  telepathy.

In  thirteen  of  the  forty-five  cases  mentioned  above,  the
scene  is  described  but  no  names  are  given,  although  the
names  were  mentioned  by  the  agent.  The  three  following
are  types  of  this  sort  :

March  15,  1913.

Subject. "  Ta.gore  singing  his  own  hymn  and  preaching."
Mrs.  A.  Toynbee  was  the  agent,  but  the  subject  was  chosen
by  Lady  Mary  Murray.

Professor  Murray  (to  Mrs.  A.  T.). "  I  don't  think  this  is

yours. — I  don't  think  I  am  going  to  get  it."
Professor Murray (to Lady  Mary  Murray). "  Do  you

remember a story of your  father's about a  German

describing  a  picture  :  '  Paulus  in  the  middle  j)red,i]cant .'

No,  I  don't  think  I  am  going  to  get  it."

Here,  although  the  main  subject  is  not  caught,  and  no
single  one  of  the  words  is  reproduced,  the  idea  of  preach-
ing is  conveyed  by  an  allusion  to  a  story  familiar  to  Mr.
Murray  and  to  Lady  Mary  Murray,  in  which  the  German
word  for  "  a  preacher  "  occurs.

March  15,  1914.

Szibject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  I  think  of  a  scene
in  a  silly  play  that  [Norah  Shrewsbury] 1  did.  I  think  of  it
on  the  morning  of  the  election  when  the  man  comes  in,  and
he's  very  sorry  he  got  in."

Professor  Murray.  "  Something  to  do  with  an  election,  and
he's  returning  thanks,  and  he's  sorry  he  got  in.  [Is  it]
somebody  I  ought  to  know  ? No,  I  don't  know  him —

1  Pseudonym.


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing."  77

Ought  I  to  know  who  it  is  1 — Oh,  it's  in  a  play,  or  a
book,  a  play.  The  only  play  I've  seen  with  that  is  a
Barrie  play,  but  I  do  not  think  it's  that.  I  get  an
impression  of  its  being  feeble,  feeble,  or  silty,  or  some-
thing, but  I  can't  get  anything  more.  No.  I  feel  as
though  it  were  something  amateurish, — written  by  a
nobleman  who  wanted  to  write  plays, — or  something  like
that."

Here  the  two  main  ideas,  the  annoyance  of  the  success-
ful candidate  and  the  source  from  a  "  silly  play,"  are
both  reproduced,  but  the  lady's  name  though  mentioned
by  the  agent  is  not  given  ;  the  "  nobleman,"  however,
probably  represents  the  surname,  that  of  a  well-known
peerage.

June  19,  1915.

Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Miss  Negroponti
[a  Greek  lady]  looking  at  tulips  at  Kew."

Professor  Murray.  "  [I]  don't  feel  at  all  sure  about  this.
Is  it  Jamaica,  or  the  West  Indies  ?  I  get  an  impression
of  a  girl  looking  at  flowers,  in  a  garden.  Its  funny,  I
thought  she  was  an  Italian,  but  she  is  not  Italian  ;  she
seems  like  a  black.  I  thought  she  was  looking  at
tulips."

(At  this  point  the  company  began  to  laugh  and  make  fun.)
"  Not  one  of  Mrs.  W.'s  black  Belgians  ?  "

A  contemporary  note  here  adds  that  Mrs.  A.  Toynbee
first  thought  of  tulips,  then  thought  of  a  very  dark
person  looking  at  them,  a  negroid  person,  before  fixing  on
Miss  Negroponti.

This  case  is  interesting.  The  introduction  of  "  Jamaica,
West  Indies,  like  a  black "  is  clearly  not  fortuitous.  It
may  be  derived  from  Mrs.  Toynbee's  rejected  impression  of
a  "  negroid  person,"  1  or  it  may  be  due  to  a  vague
apprehension  of  the  name  Negroponti,  in  which  case
hyperaesthesia  is  not  excluded.  I  have  quoted  the  incident
as  interesting  in  itself,  and  as  affording  the  weakest
evidence  against  hyperaesthesia  among  these  thirteen  cases.

1  For  other  instances  where  rejected  impressions  are  caught  by  the
percipient,  see  below,  pp.  79  and  90.


78


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


In  another  group  of  cases,  eleven  in  all,  though  the
whole  impression  is  not  correct,  what  may  be  called  "  the
atmosphere  "  has  been  perceived.  Twice,  for  instance,  on
November  13,  1910,  and  September  7,  1913,  when  the
subject  selected  was  a  specified  literary  person  engaged  in
writing,  the  general  situation  was  apprehended,  though  in
both  cases  the  actual  writer  was  incorrectly  guessed,  in
one  case  "  May  Sinclair  "  being  substituted  for  "  Forster,"
in  the  other  "  a  literary  man  in  India  or  somewhere  "  for
"Mary  Wilkins  in  America."1  On  June  1,  1912,  a  scene,
described  in  Tchekov's  play  The  Cherry  Orchard,  was  said
by  Professor  Murray  to  be  "  Russian,  it's  in  a  book,  it's  a
play,  it's  a  very  inconsequent  play,  Tchekov,  one  of  the
two  Tchekov  plays,  I  should  say  The  Cherry  Orchard,  but
that's  just  guessing,"  and  he  failed  to  get  the  exact
scene.  Again  on  December  12,  1915,  a  scene  from  Conrad's
Under  Western  Eyes,  a  story  of  Russian  anarchists  in
Switzerland,  appears  as  "  it's  a  book,  it's  about  Russia,
I  do  not  think  it's  a  real  Russian  book  .  .  .  guessing,  I
should  say  it  was  Conrad.  It's  English  and  it's  about
Russia."  Here,  also,  the  exact  situation  is  not  described,
though  the  percipient,  quite  correctly,  notes  that  there  is
"  someone  in  a  great  state  of  terror  or  anxiety  coming
downstairs."  Once,  on  June  19,  1915,  the  selected  subject
being  an  extravagant  dream,  Professor  Murray,  though  failing
to  perceive  all  details,  remarks  that  it  is  "  something  in-
vented. It's  not  a  story,  not  a  book  ;  I  should  think  it
was  a  dream.  There  is  some  queer  element  of  unreality
about."

But  suggestive  as  the  above-quoted  cases  are  that  Pro-
fessor Murray's  impressions  are  not  derived  from  auditory
hyperesthesia,  they  are  not  conclusive  against  such  an
explanation,  for  experience  has  shown  that  impressions  sub-
consciously obtained  through  one  sense  may  take  a  form,  as
they  come  into  the  percipient's  consciousness,  appropriate
to  quite  another  derivation.  In  my  own  case,  for  instance,
in  the  course  of  some  experiences  in  guessing  the  values
of  cards  felt, with  closed  eyes, by  my  finger  tips,  the

1  See  Appendix,  p.  103.


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing."


79


impressions  derived  soon  began  to  appear  to  me  as  visual
images,  probably  because  to  a  good  visualiser,  as  I  am,  most
mental  impressions  take  that  form.1  It  is,  therefore,  possible
that  information  subconsciously  heard  by  Professor  Murray
rises  into  his  consciousness  as  a  perceived  scene  or  a
general  impression,  so  that  his  feeling  that  a  girl  in  Jamaica
"something  like  a  black"  is  looking  at  tulips  is  due
to  his  having  in  fact  heard  subconsciously  the  name
Negroponti.

For  conclusive  evidence  that  telepathy  is  at  work  in
these  experiments,  we  must  look  for  indications  in  the
percipient's  descriptions  that  thoughts,  as  distinct  from
spoken  words,  have  been  transferred  from  the  agent  or
agents.  Some  evidence  for  this  there  is,  and  I  give  it
in  detail  here  ;  if  telepathy  can  be  established  in
these  cases,  the  presumption  is  very  strong  that  it  is
also  acting  in  other  cases,  where  otherwise  we  are  bound
to  strain  the  evidence  for  hyperaesthesia  as  the  vera
causa.2

Twice  (June  7,  1910,  May  18,  1913)  when  the  agent
rejected  her  first  selection  in  favour  of  a  second,  the  first,
and  not  the  second,  was  apprehended  by  Professor  Murray ;
but  the  cases  are  not  perfectly  clear  for  both  selections  were
described  in  words,  and  might  therefore  have  been  heard.
One  of  these  presents  several  points  of  interest,  and  is
therefore  quoted  here  :

June  7,  1910.3

1st  Subject,  suggested  to  the  agent,  Mrs.  A.  Toynbee,  by  Lady
Mary  Murray.  "  A  picture  [in  another  room]  by  Grandfather
[Lord  Carlisle]  of  the  Villa  Glori  [where  the  Cairo li  brothers
were  killed  in  1867]."

'See  Proc,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  182  ff.

3  Here,  however,  I  should  like  to  enter  a  Caveat.  Personally,  I  believe
that  auditory  hyperaesthesia,  under  the  conditions  observed  in  these
experiments,  is  quite  as  "  abnormal  "  as  telepathy  would  be,  and  re-
quires for  its  establishment  much  more  corroborative  evidence  than  I
have  been  able  to  find.  In  fact,  the  records  of  the  S.P.R.  seem  to  me
to  show  that  telepathy  is  at  least  as  common  as  hyperaesthesia.

3  See  Appendix,  p.  92.


80


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


To  this  Mrs.  Toynbee  objected  that  it  would  be  very
difficult,  as  she  had  not  the  picture  in  her  mind.

2nd  Subject  also  suggested  by  Lady  Mary  Murray.  "  Gari-
baldi with  the  people  in  their  red  shirts  in  the  streets  of
Palermo."

Professor  Murray.  "  It's  an  Italian  picture.  I've  got  a
blurred  picture — like  a  picture  in  Trevelyan's  book  of  the
Cairoli  brothers.  I've  got  only  this,  but  I  know  it
doesn't  exist."

The  "  picture  in  Trevelyan's  book  "  is  no  doubt  that  of
the  three  Cairoli  brothers  with  their  mother  (see  Mr.
G.  M.  Trevelyan's  Garibaldi  and  the  Making  of  Italy,
p.  37,  where  the  death  of  two  of  the  brothers  at  the  Villa
Glori  is  recorded).  It  must  be  admitted  that  Professor
Murray's  subconscious  self,  whether  deriving  its  information
from  hyperesthesia  or  otherwise,  at  least  masquerades
here  as  "  telepathetic."  Omitting  all  names  mentioned  in
both  selections,  and  avoiding  all  direct  allusion  to  either
subject,  he  presents  us  with  an  unmistakeable  indirect
allusion  to  the  rejected  subject :  the  picture  is  "  blurred  "  (it
is  not  in  Mrs.  Toynbee's  mind)  ;  it  is  "  like  a  picture  .  .  .
of  the  Cairoli  brothers  "  (killed  at  Villa  Glori)  ;  it  "  does
not  exist  "  (the  subject  having  been  rejected).  But
believers  in  the  ingenuity  of  the  "  subliminal,"  and  its  desire
to  claim  supernormal  powers,  will  no  doubt  suppose  that  the
"  telepathic  game  "  was  deliberately  played,  though  the
information  was  derived  from  auditory  hyperesthesia.

But  such  an  explanation  cannot  be  given  where  one  of
the  percipient's  statements  corresponds  with  an  involuntary
and  unmentioned  thought  of  the  principal  agent,  or  of
some  other  member  of  the  company.  Thus,  on  September
25,  1910,  the  subject,  that  of  a  lady  brushing  her  hair  in  a
place  named,  being  correctly  given,  Professor  Murray,  before
naming  the  lady,  mentioned  the  name  of  another  lady
entirely  unconnected  with  the  subject,  but  whose  photo-
graph 1  was  in  the  mind  of  the  agent.  And,  again,  what
explanation  can  be  given,  other  than  telepathy,  where  the
percipient  adds  to  his  description  of  the  selected  subject

1  See  Appendix,  p.  97. The  photograph  was  not  in  the  room.


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing."


si


details  not  known  to  him  but  correct,  though  not  named
by  the  agent  ? Thus  :

May  18,  1913.1

Subject. Mrs.  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Belgian  Baron  getting  out
of  train  at  Savanarilla  with  us,  and  walking  across  the  sandy
track,  and  seeing  the  new  train  come  in."
Professor  Murray. "  Man  getting  out  of  a  train  and  looking
for  something. I  don't  know  if  he's  looking  for  another
train  to  come. I  think  it  is  a  sort  of  dry  hot  sort  of  place.
I  get  him  with  a  faint  impression  of  waxed  moustache —
a  sort  of  foreign  person — but  I  can't  get  more."

The  "  Belgian  Baron,"  never  seen  by  Mr.  Murray,  had  a
waxed  moustache,  "  not  mentioned "  by  Mrs.  Toynbee,  as
is  noted  in  the  contemporary  record.

August  24,  19 13. 2

Subject. Mrs.  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  I  think  of  Mrs.  F.  sitting
on  the  deck,  and  Grandfather  opening  the  door  for  her."
Professor  Murray. "  This  is  Grandfather. I  think  it  is  on
a  ship,  and  I  think  he  is  bowing  and  smiling  to  some-
body— opening  the  door."
Mrs.  T. "  Can't  you  get  the  person  ?  "

Professor  Murray. "  I  first  thought  of  the  Captain,  and
afterwards  a  lady. I  get  a  feeling  of  a  pink  head  dress."
Mrs.  T. "Yes,  that  is  right."

January  13,  1914. 3

Subject.  Mrs.  Toynbee  (agent):  "I  think  of  that  funny  old
Irishman  called  Dr.  Hunt  in  the  hotel  at  Jamaica.  I'll  think
of  the  race  where  they  wouldn't  let  him  ride  with  his  little
gray  mare."

Professor  Murray. "  Tropics. It's — It  must  [have]  some-
thing to  do  with  Jamaica. I  can't  get  it  a  bit  clear.

I  feel  as  if  it  were  a  drunken  Irish  doctor  talking
with  a  brogue. I  can't  get  it  clear."

To  this  the  contemporary  note  says  that  Mrs.  Toynbee
"did  not  mention  he  got  drunk,  but  he  did."  4

1  See  Appendix,  p.  100. 2  See  Appendix,  p.  101. 3  See  Appendix,  p.  105.

4  I  omit  one  other  case  where  Professor  Murray  got  an  impression  not
of  the  chosen  subject,  but  of  something  of  which  Mrs.  Toynbee  was,  in

F


82


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Once,  although  the  subject  selected  was  an  actual
incident  known  to  both  agent  and  percipient,  an  incorrect
impression  of  the  agent's,  subsecpiently  rectified  in  her
own  mind,  was  reproduced  by  the  percipient,  no  mention
having been  made  of  this  impression. Thus  :

August  11,  1912.

Subject. Lady  Mary  Murray  (agent)  : "  A  Glasgow  class-
room, and  the  students  presenting  us  with  a  wedding -present."
Professor  Murray. "  Oh, it's Glasgow. It's  something
going  on  in  the  Greek  class-room — it's  that  man,  I  think

[it]  is  G  ,  presenting  us  with  the  Waverley  Novels

[as  in  fact  was  the  case]."

The  record  notes  that  the  presentation  was  not  in  the
Greek  class-room,  but  that  Lady  Mary  Murray  first  thought
of  it  as  taking  place  there,  but  then  remembered  that  this
was  wrong.  So  that  here  the  agent's  first  impression
seems  to  have  outweighed  the  actual  knowledge  of  the
percipient.

Once  certainly,  and  perhaps  twice,  Mr.  Murray  caught
the  thought,  not  of  the  principal  agent,  but  of  some  other
member  of  the  company.  Thus,  on  December  15,  1910,
he  reported  his  impression  as  "  Kangaroos,"  a  subject
entirely  unconnected  with  that  selected  by  Mrs.  Toynbee,
but  one  that  had  been  in  the  mind  of  another  of  the
party,  who  thereupon  reported  that  she  had  been  thinking
that  if  she  were  to  select  she  would  choose  something  like
a  kangaroo,  or  a  bear  with  a  visiting- book,  like  a  recent
picture  in  Punch;1  and  on  June  19,  1915,  while  giving
an  almost  complete  rendering  of  the  scene  chosen,  Mr.
Murray  thought  of  the  principal  figure  as  a  soldier,
whereas  Mrs.  Toynbee,  the  agent,  had  thought  of  a
woman,  while  the  rest  of  the  company  thought  of  a  man,

having  so  interpreted  her  words  "  a  friend  of  the  R  s

who  was  kicked  by  a  horse  and  died."  In  this  case,  if
hyperesthesia is admitted, the percipient may  have

fact,  thinking,  because  as  the  subject  of  her  involuntary  thoughts  was
of  recent  occurrence — a  meeting  of  the  evening  before — it  may  havo
emerged  independently  from  among  Professor  Murray's  thoughts.

1  Soo  Appendix,  p.  98.


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing."  83

misinterpreted  the  words  also,  but  in  the  former  case  the
kangaroo  or  bear  had  not  been  mentioned,  so  that  over-
hearing cannot  account  for  its  introduction.

Here  I  conclude  my  presentation  to  the  reader  of
typical  cases  from  among  the  very  interesting  records  of
these  experiments.  My  own  conclusion  is  that,  after
making  all  possible  allowance  for  occasional  assistance
from  unconscious  overhearing  by  Mr.  Murray  of  voices  or
actual  words,  the  greater  part  of  the  remarkably  successful
"  guessing  "  is  to  be  ascribed  to  telepathy,  to  some
process,  that  is  to  say,  into  which  the  normal  senses  do
not  enter.  It  is  greatly  to  be  hoped  that  our  President
will  continue  his  experiments,  and  that  gradually  the
conditions  may  be  so  modified  as  to  exclude  all  possi-
bility of  auditory  perception,  conscious  or  unconscious,
and  of  aid  or  even  encouragement  from  contact  with  the
principal  agent.  Already  some  progress  has  been  made  in
varying  the  conditions  without  thereby  introducing  a
disturbing  element  ;  for  instance,  at  first,  Mr.  Murray  was
rarely  successful  with  a  new  agent,  but  in  the  later
experiments  he  has  not  been  "  put  off "  in  this  way.
Thus  in  the  last  two  sets  of  experiments,  December  5  and
December  12,  1915,  three  times  subjects  were  selected  by
"  strangers,"  i.e.  by  persons  never  before  taking  part  in
these  trials,  and  in  each  case  there  was  success,  complete
or  nearly  complete.

In  the  earlier  series,  the  success  was  greatest  when  Mrs.
A.  Toynbee  was  acting  as  ostensible  agent,  the  percentage
of  complete  success  when  this  was  the  case  being  35-7
and  of  failure  (including  lack  of  impression)  being  38,  as
against  33-1  and  39  respectively  in  the  general  totals  ;  and
in  the  successes  and  partial  successes  otherwise  obtained
the  agent  was  usually  Lady  Mary  Murray  or  Miss  Agnes
Murray,  thus  showing  that,  for  whatever  reason,  familiarity
between  agent  and  percipient  was  a  favourable  element.
Various  explanations  may  be  offered  for  this  fact,  and
among  them  must  certainly  be  reckoned  the  mental
attitude  of  the  agent.  The  topics  chosen  by  these
members  of  his  family  have a vividness and  actuality,


84


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


a  pictures  queness,  a  detail  and  often  an  element  of  the
fantastic  which  is  lacking  in  the  more  sober  selections
made  by  visitors,  less  acquainted  perhaps  with  the  con-
ditions of  previous  success.  For  there  is  no  doubt  that
the  fantastic  and  the  unusual  specially  lends  itself  to  the
successful  guessing  of  Professor  Murray,  so  that  future  ex-
perimenters should  think  of  schoolmasters  eating  female
crabs,1  of  actual  persons  replacing  fictitious  characters,  and
perhaps  especially  of  Russian  novels  rather  than  of  actual
incidents,  "  choses  vues,"  or  personal  experiences,  if  they
are  to  have  their  impressions  divined  by  this  percipient.
This  experience  is  entirely  consistent  with  observations  in
other  telepathic  experiments  ;  the  great  difficulty  is
always  to  keep  alive  the  interest  of  the  percipient,  and
prevent  the  deadly  boredom  which  comes  from  thinking
of  cards,  or  numbers,  or  diagrams,  even  in  the  case  of
persons  whose  scientific  curiosity  induces  them  to  multiply
experiments  capable  of  "  statistical  "  estimate  as  to  success
or  failure.  Such  estimates  are  not  to  be  undervalued,  but
we  must  deal  with  the  telepathic  faculty  as  we  find  it,
and  where  the  subjects  selected  for  transmission  are  as
varied,  as  complex  and  as  distinctive,  as  they  are  in  the
series  under  consideration,  there  is  little  or  no  practical
difficulty  in  estimating  results,  although  they  cannot  be
compared  with  what  would  be  produced  by  chance  as  they
can  when  selected  numbers  or  playing  cards  are  the  chosen
subjects  and  there  is  a  calculable  probability  of  success.

So  far  as  these  experiments  go,  they  seem  to  show  that
the  main  factor  of  success,  as  between  agent  and  per-
cipient, is  to  be  found  in  the  faculty  of  the  percipient.
Several  attempts  were  made  by  Mrs.  Toynbee  to  transfer
her  impressions  to  various  other  would-be  percipients,  but
these  in  all  cases  failed.  Professor  Murray,  on  the  con-
trary, was  successful  with  a  considerable  number  of  agents,
though  it  should  be  remembered  that,  even  when  a
stranger  was  acting  as  ostensible  agent,  Lady  Mary
Murray  or  one  of  Professor  Murray's  two  daughters  was
present  and  acquainted  with  the  selected  subject.  But
the presence of no  one  of  these  three  individuals  was

1  See  above,  p.  61,  and  Appendix,  p.  109.


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing."  85

necessary  to  success,  for  success  was  achieved  in  the
absence  of  each  one  of  them.

Interesting  suggestions  have  been  made  by  Professor
Murray  as  to  the  method  by  which  the  subconscious  impres-
sion enters  his  consciousness  ;  thus  he  has  noted  that  it  is
sometimes  by  way  of  a  sense-channel  (smell,  sight,  hearing),
sometimes  by  a  specially  invented  chain  of  reasoning  or
association,  more  often  through  an  undeterminate  sense  of
quality.  The  subjective  impressions  of  the  percipient  as  to
method  are  always  valuable,  and  Professor  Murray  has  given
us  concrete  examples  of  each  of  the  suggested  processes.
But  a  considerable  familiarity  with  this  type  of  phenomena,
both  as  critic  and  as  percipient,  leads  me  to  warn  the
reader  that,  though  the  subjective  impression  is  no  doubt
accurately  noted,  we  must  not  accept  it  unchallenged  as
an  explanation  of  the  process.  In  other  words,  while  we
may  grant,  for  instance,  that  the  smell  of  a  tarry  coal
which  fell  from  the  fire  was  the  means  of  translating  a
subconscious  impression  into  a  conscious  thought  of  the
burning  of  pictures,1  it  is  not  safe  to  infer  that  such  an
incident  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  process.  In  the  unusual
condition  induced  by  a  deliberate  desire  to  plunge  below
the  threshold  and  bring  back  spoil  from  the  depths,  the
mind  grasps  eagerly  after  something  familiar,  and — I
speak  at  least  of  my  own  sensations — is  relieved  at
seizing  a  solid  fact,  within  normal  experience,  to  which  it
may  attach  the  half -apprehended  object  of  its  search.
The  percipient's  mind  being  thus,  so  to  say,  on  the  look-
out for  such  a  link,  fastens  on  the  falling  coal,  but  had
the  coal  not  fallen,  it  is  capable  of  finding  some  other
link,  or  even  of  forging  one.  Thus  in  one  of  his  instances
of  a  fictitious  association  of  ideas,  Professor  Murray  speaks
of  hearing  a  horse  in  the  road  outside  :  "I  have  a  noise  of
hoofs.  I  expect  it's  the  noise  of  hoofs  in  the  street  that
makes  me  think  of  it."  But  in  the  contemporary  record  of
the  note-taker  we  read  :  "  No  noise  of  hoofs  in  the  street."  2

In  twelve  cases  the  record  shows  that  Mr.  Murray
connected  his  impression  with some  external  occurrence,

1  See  above,  p.  59,  and  Appendix,  p.  104.

2  See  above,  p.  60,  and  Appendix,  p.  92.


86


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


and  in  all  these  cases  his  impression  was  correct.  Some-
times he  attributes  the  emergence  of  a  name  to  the  fact
that  it  had  been  mentioned  in  conversation  shortly  before
the  experiments  were  made.  In  one  of  the  most  striking
cases,  that  of  the  dropping  of  cigar-ash  upon  a  lady's
umbrella,1  he  began  by  remarking  that  he  thought  of
Dr.  So-and-So,  "  whom  I  have  been  talking  about,"  then
passed  to  the  person  who  dropped  the  ash,  so  to  the
scene  described,  and  finally  to  the  owner  of  the  umbrella,
who  was  the  daughter  of  Dr.  So-and-So.  Sometimes  he
connects  his  impression  with  some  act  of  his  own  :  "  my
eyes  fell  on  the  dictionary  "  ;  and  he  proceeds,  correctly,  to
describe  the  scene  in  Vanity  Fair  where  Becky  Sharp
throws  Miss  Pinkerton's  dictionary  out  of  the  window  of
the  cab.  On  another  occasion,  the  chosen  subject  being
"  Gorki  working  as  a  ship's  boy  on  a  Volga  steamer,"  he
says  :  "It  seems  Russian.  It's  some  Russian  writer.-  I
should  think  it  was  Gorki,"  and  notes  :  "  I  had  a  feeling
of  some  one  being  dirty  ;  I  trod  on  a  dirty  sack  outside."  2
Or,  again  (March  5,  1914),  he  begins  :  "  Oh  this  is
perfectly  dreadful — I  don't  know  if  it's  the  cats  (cats
were,  in  fact,  screeching  outside  the  house),  there's  a  sort
of  feeling  of  driving  along  through  dead  men  and  wounded
men  ;  it's  the  horses  screaming — oh  it's  Lady  De  Lancey
driving  to  her  husband  when  he  was  wounded  at  Water-
loo," which  was,  in  fact,  the  subject  chosen.  Again,  the
subject  being  the  appearance  to  Charles  I.  of  the  ghost  of
Strafford  when  John  Inglesant  was  the  page  in  waiting,
Professor  Murray  approaches  the  matter  by  guessing  that
"it  is  a  ghost,"  there  being,  he  notes,  a  light  through  the
window  which  suggested  a  ghost,  and  so  proceeds  to
complete  the  picture  :  "I  should  say  a  sort  of  cavalier
ghost  appearing  in  the  evening.  I  should  think  it  is  in  a
book.  Charles  I.  appearing  to  anybody — ghost  appearing
to  Charles  I.- — I  guess  Strafford."  3

In  the  account  which  he  gave  of  these  experiments  in
his  Presidential  Address,  Mr.  Murray  expressed  the  opinion 4


1  See  above,  p.  59.
3  See  Appendix,  p.  94.


2  See  Appendix,  p.  104.
4  See  above,  p.  61.


lxxii.] A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing'''  87

that  "  probably  most  people  could  attain  the  same  results
if  they  practised  for  a  good  time  and  did  not  get  excited
or  flurried."  This  assumption  may  be  too  liberal,  but  it
is  not  at  all  improbable  that  the  faculty — whatever  it  be —
which  Professor  Murray  displays,  is  possessed  by  many  people
who  are  not  aware  of  possessing  it.  I  hope,  therefore,
that  others  will  be  encouraged  by  the  publication  of  these
records  to  experiment  on  similar  lines.  As  to  the  con-
ditions under  which  such  experiments  should  be  conducted,
it  is  not  possible  to  lay  down  hard  and  fast  rules.  In  a
general  way  it  may  be  said  that  the  stricter  the  con-
ditions can  be  made  the  better,  but  it  is  of  no  use  to
impose  ideal  conditions  at  the  cost  of  totally  inhibiting
the  desired  phenomena.  Every  experimenter  must  discover
for  himself  on  what  lines  he  can  obtain  the  best  results,
remembering  always  that  these  results  will  have  no
scientific  value  unless  some  probable,  if  not  certain,  con-
clusion can  be  drawn  from  them.  In  the  case  of  Professor
Murray's  experiments,  I  think,  as  I  have  tried  in  this  report
to  show,  that  we  have  good  evidence  of  some  supernormal
faculty,  probably  telepathic,  and  that  the  results  obtained
are  therefore  a  valuable  contribution  to  psychical  research.


APPENDIX.

The  original  records  of  about  a  hundred  experiments  are
printed  here,  so  that  readers  may  judge  for  themselves  the
kind  of  evidence  upon  which  Mrs.  Verrall  based  her  con-
clusions in  the  foregoing  paper.  To  some  extent  the  selection
was  made  at  random,  but  it  was  influenced  by  these  two
considerations :  (a)  that  it  was  desirable  to  'print  such  cases
as  were  most  accurately  recorded  ;  and  (b)  that  the  selection
should  illustrate  the  various  theories  and  suggestions  put
forward  in  Mrs.  VerralVs  report,  which  was  based  on  a
careful  study  of  the  whole  record.  Almost  all  the  experi-
ments to  which  reference  is  made  either  in  Professor  Murray's
Presidential  Address  or  in  Mrs.  VerralVs  paper  are  included.
The records have in every case been printed  verbatim,


«


88


Mrs.  A.  W.  V  err  all.


[part


except  that  names  Jiave  sometimes  been  omitted.  Statements
in  round  brackets  form  part  of  the  original  record  ;  state-
ments in  square  brackets  are  editorial  additions.  A  few
corrections  and  additions  have  also  been  made  in  footnotes.

The  Appendix  also  includes  the  notes  made  by  Mrs.
Verrall  of  the  experiments  which  she  herself  witnessed.

For  the  general  conditions  under  which  the  experiments
were  conducted,  see  above,  p.  64.  Unless  there  is  a  statement
to  the  contrary,  the  subject  was  described  audibly  by  the
agent  (Professor  Murray  being  out  of  the  room),  and  there
was  contact  between  the  agent  and  percipient  during  the
experiment.— Ed  .

April  17,  1910.

1.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Dad's  little
German  hair-dresser  cutting  Denis's  hair."1

Professor  Murray  :  "A  funny  little  man  walking  down  a
street  knocking  at  doors — he  looks  foreign — he's  just
like  my  little  German  hairdresser."

2.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  At  Amain,
the  Marchese  recognising  Grandfather  [Lord  Carlisle]  in  the
summer-house  on  the  terrace — us  there."

Professor  Murray  :  "  It's  you  at  Amain,  I  think  in  the
dining-room,  or  it  might  be  the  terrace,  and  your
Marchese  is  there."

April  31,  1910.

3.  Subject. Mrs. Arnold Toynbee (agent)  : "  Mr.  D

poking  the  fire,  with  the  kettle  boiling."  (In  lodgings  at
Aldeburgh.)

Professor  Murray  :  "A  red-hot  poker,  a  man  bending
down  poking  the  fire  ;  he  is  smiling — with  a  beard —
[correct]  it's  Mr.  D  ."

4.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent) :  "  Mr.  Newbury
in  his  Rembrandt  hat  at  a  country  station."

Professor  Murray  :  '  The  Newbury s  walking  down  the
road  at  W  . Mr.  Newbury  in  his  big  hat."

1  According  to  Professor  Murray's  recollection,  the  record  of  this
experiment  is  incorrect.  The  agent  was  Mr.  Denis  Murray,  and  the
statement  of  the  subject  should  run  thus  :  "  Dad's  little  German
hair-dresser  going  round  canvassing."


lxxii.]  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing  " — Appendix.  89


5.  'Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent).  Professor  Myers
reading  Tchekov  in  that  arm-chair  (study) — I  think  it's  Pro-
fessor Myers.

Professor  Murray  :  "  Russian — Rosalind  [Mrs.  Toynbee]
reading  The  Sea-gull  [by  Tchekov]  in  an  arm  chair — no,
it's  a  man — a  man  with  a  dark  beard  and  a,  long  face —
I  can't  see  exactly  who  it  is." [Description  correct.]

May  3,  1910.

6.  Subject.  Miss  Agnes  Murray  (agent)  :  "Us  [Professor
Murray,  Lady  Mary  Murray  and  Miss  Agnes  Murray]  going  in
the  tram  to  visit  Mr.  T  f  at  Christchurch."

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  get  two  separate  things — one  is
the  long  bridge  from  Bournemouth  to  Christchurch,  and
the  other  is  you,  Mother  [Lady  M.  Miirray]  and  me

walking with T  f, walking down the lane to  the

tram."

(Rosalind  [Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee]  had  in  her  mind  the  long
bridge.)

7.  Subject. Miss  Agnes  Murray  (agent)  : "  L on  his

bicycle  running  into  a  motor."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Somebody  on  a  bicycle  (on  a  hill) —
I  think  Cousin  B  ; then  the  bicycle  smashed  up."

May  6,  1910.

8.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Mr.  Hammond
type-writing."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Hammond  in  his  room  at  the  top
of  the  Daily  News  office,  sitting  at  his  table  writing."

9.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Mr.  Brown
and  myself  playing  fives  at  Castle  Howard."

Professor  Murray  :  "  You  and  Brown  and  me  walking
down  the  long  passage  at  Castle  Howard."

10.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Cecil  W

and  the  N children  playing  by  the  windmill  at  W  ."

Professor  Murray  :  (No  impression).

11.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Dr.  Bell
getting  into  a  dog-cart."

Professor  Murray  : "  Robert  Bell  driving  in  Dr.  L  's

gig  on  Hindhead."


90  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

12.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Mrs.  M

feeding  swans  in  Worcester."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Somebody  feeding  swans  on  the  pond,
in  the  park  at  Glasgow — a  woman  with  a  brisk  manner —
I  can't  be  sure  who  it  is — perhaps  Miss ."

May  8,  1910.

13.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Mr.  B

with  a  dog  in  the  front  Quad  at  New  College."

Professor Murray  : "  B  showing P some  old

building  in  Rome — no,  it's  not  in  Rome,  he's  in  the
front  Quad  at  New  College,  with  something  like  a
dancing-bear."

14.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Mr.  M

signing  cheques."

Professor  Murray. (No  impression.)

15.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Mrs.  A

watering  flowers."

Professor  Murray. (No  impression.)

May  — (?),  1910.

16.  Subject.  Miss  F.  M.  (agent)  :  "  Mrs.  H — —  brushing  her
hair."

Professor  Murray  : "  Somebody  brushing  her  hair."
May  13,  1910.

17.  Subject  i. (Suggested  by  Lady  Mary  Murray.) Mr.  B

at  his  trial. (This  was  rejected  as  being  too  obvious.)

ii. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Mr.  B skating."

Professor  Murray  :  "  This  is  something  that  nobody  here
has seen. It  seems to be  the  little  room  under  the

law-courts, where B waited  after  the  trial — he  is

there  with  Mrs.  B  and  McC and  me."

18.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Miss  Penrose
in  a  library  taking  out  a  book."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Miss  Penrose  giving  away  prizes —
standing — books . ' '

19.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Grandmother

and  Aunt  K as  girls  sitting  and  sewing  in  the  garden  at

A  ."

Professor  Murray  : "  Two  people  sitting  in  a  garden  and
sewing — (looking  up at a picture of Grandmother) — it


lxxil]  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing  " — Appendix.  91

seems  to  have  some  connection  with  that  picture —
nobody  definite — two  mid-Victorian  ladies."  (Afterwards
he  said  that  he  had  had  a  distinct  impression  of  Cousin
B [Aunt  K.'s  son],  but  had  rejected  it.

20.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Grandfather
Terence  [Professor  Murray's  father]  writing."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Somebody  writing  with  a  quill-pen
at  an  old-fashioned  desk — like  that  one  in  the  cupboard."
(The  desk  in  the  cupboard  belonged  to  Grandfather
Terence.)

(When  asked  who  the  person  could  be.) "  I  should
say  from  the  desk  it  is  my  father."

June  5,  1910.

21.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent):  "Lady  in
black  with  long  black  gloves,  looking  at  a  picture."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Somebody  in  long  black  robes — only
their  back."

22.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Mr.  0

of  K  looking  at  brasses  in  the  ante-chapel  at  Merton."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Get  no  definite  person,  but  somebody
getting  squeezes  of  brasses  in  a  church,  perhaps  Cumnor."

23.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Lake  at  Castle
Howard  with  water-lilies — with  reeds. Mrs.  M in  a  boat."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Somebody  in  a  boat  on  a  lake,  with
a  lot  of  ducks — lake  at  Castle  Howard — a  gentle  sort
of  person — (guessing)  Mrs.  M  ."

24.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Uncle  G

as  a  little  boy  looking  at  a  canary  in  a  cage."

Professor Murray  : "  Something about Cousin A  .

Cousin  A — —  pushing  a  bicycle  up  a  hill — an  old  one."

25.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  That  Knight
at  Siena — a  medieval  horseman  riding  towards  a  castle — in  a
picture  at  Siena. I  mean  the  person  to  be  a  real  one."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Something  Italian — something  like  an
old  Italian  town."

26.  Subject  (suggested  by  Lady  Mary  Murray).  Mrs.  Arnold
Toynbee  (agent)  : "  The  woman  in  Boston  Harbour  who  fell

overboard. Mr. M  n and Mother [Lady Mary  Murray]

watching  on  their  way  to  the  '  Ivernia.'  "


02  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

Professor  Murray  :  "  Something  of  Mother's  [Lady  Mary
Murray] — the  woman  who  tried  to  drown  herself  in
Boston  Harbour."

27.  Subject. Lady  Mary  Murray  (agent)  : "  Class-room  at

Glasgow — Professor Murray lecturing and G R  ■  is

there."

Professor  Murray  : "  Rosalind  [Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee]  in

the  dining-room."
(Mrs. Toynbee had said before  : "  Shall I go into  the
dining-room  ?  ")

June  7,  1910.

28.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  The  Bird
Droves  Chorus  in  Hijojwlytus ."

Professor  Murray  : "  Something  about  Egypt  or  the  Nile."

29.  Subject  (suggested  by  Lady  Mary  Murray).  Mrs.  Arnold
Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Garibaldi  with  the  people  in  their  red
shirts  in  the  streets  of  Palermo."

(Lady Mary first suggested picture by Grandfather  [Lord
Carlisle]  of  Villa  Glori  ; Rosalind  [Mrs.  A.  Toynbee]  said  [it
would  be]  very  difficult,  as  she  hadn't  the  picture  in  her  mind.)
Professor  Murray  : "It's  an  Italian  picture — I've  got  a
blurred  picture — like  a  picture  in  Trevelyan's  book  of
the  Cairoli  brothers. I've  got  only  this,  but  I  know  it
doesn't  exist."

30.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Bavarian
peasants  in  a  dancing-room  drinking  beer  by  a  wooden  table
in  a  room  full  of  smoke."

Professor  Murray  :  "  People  dancing — in  funny  costume,
I  think — not  court  dress— rather  ugly,  rather  lumpy
peasant  costume.  I  should  only  be  romancing  if  I  went
on,  but  I  should  say  they  had  a  lot  of  coins."  (Quite
correct.)

31.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee (agent): "Dr.  S

and  Cousin  B having  tea  in  a  restaurant."

Professor  Murray  :  "  No.  A  dim  impression  of  Cousin
B  ."

32.  Subject  (suggested  by  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee). Lady  Mary

Murray  (agent)  : "  Mr.  Z riding  on  the  sea-shore  on  a

horse."


lxxii.]  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing  " — Appendix.  93

Professor  Murray  :  "Is  this  a  thing  of  your  own  ?  Let  me
try  it  with  Rosalind  [Mrs.  A.  Toynbee].  Well,  absurd,
same  impression  from  both.  I  have  Z.'s  manuscripts
there — and  I  have  a  noise  of  hoofs.  I  expect  it's  the
noise  of  hoofs  in  the  street  that  makes  me  think  of
it."1 (No  noise  of  hoofs  in  the  street.)

33.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Miss  N

in  the  garden  at  B  s  with  a  guinea-pig."

Professor  Murray  : "  It's the H  's house at  Churt

(i.e. B  s) — it's  somebody  I  don't know — it's  U

■ — it's  somebody  walking  in  the  garden  with  Miss  N  .

Is  she  feeding  goats  ?  "

June,  10,  1910.

34.  Subject  (written,  not  spoken).  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee
(agent)  : "  Mrs.  S G painting  a  picture."

Professor  Murray  :  "  PI  riding  on  an  elephant."

35.  Subject  (written,  not  spoken).  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee
(agent)  : "  Miss  H at  Maskelyne  &  Devant's."

Professor  Murray  :  "  R B calling  on  J  ."

36.  Subject  {written,  not  spoken).  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee
(agent)  : "  Mr.  J-  gardening."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Mrs.  C painting  the  Acropolis."

37.  Subject  (suggested  by  Lady  Mary  Murray).  Mrs.  Arnold
Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Little  Mermaid  in  Andersen's  Fairy-Tales
at  the  bottom  of  the  sea."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Poem  or  picture  to  do  with  the  sea —
it  seems  like  a  mermaid  sitting  on  a  rock."

38.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Margaret
L bathing."

Professor  Murray  (without  contact)  :  "  Nothing."  (With
contact)  : "  Cousin  B  writing  his  book."

39.  Stibject.  Lady  Mary  Murray  (agent)  :  "  Jane  Eyre
finding  the  fire  in  Rochester's  bedroom."

Professor  Murray  :  "  J.  A.  Smith  moving  resolution  about
'  Greats.'  "

1  Note  by  Professor  Murray. The  record  here  is  not  quite  complete.

It  should  end  thus  : "  It  is Z riding  on  a  horse. ("  Where  ?  ")

I  suppose  in  Greece."


94


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


40.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Aunt  F  ■

and  J B with  a  wheelbarrow  in  the  kitchen-garden  at

Barford."

Professor  Murray  (without  contact)  :  "  The  kitchen-garden
at  Barford — people  who  don't  belong  there  [correct] —
Aunt  H — —  and  some  Cambridge  young  man."  [Correct
of  J B— .]

June—  (?),  1910.

41.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent):  "  Miss  Barbara
Tchaikowsky  visiting  a  political  prisoner  in  the  Peter  and  Paul
[prison]."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Tchaikowsky,  but  I  can't  see  what
he's  doing.  No,  I've  got  it  blurred.  I've  got  it  mixed
up  with  Miss  Tchaikowsky.  I've  got  her  knocking  at
a  front-door."

42.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Paid  Sabatier
walking  with  an  alpenstock  along  a  winding  road  in  Savoy."

Professor  Murray  :  "A  man  like  Mr.  Irving  going  up  a
mountain — it  isn't  Mr.  Irving,  it's  a  clergyman  with  an
alpenstock — I  should  say  it  was  a  foreign  clergyman."

43.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Ghost  of
Strafford  coming  in  to  see  Charles  I.,  when  John  Inglesant  was
pa  ge  -in  -waiting . ' '

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  think  this  is  wrong.  I'm  going  to
guess  it  is  a  ghost.  (A  light  through  the  window
suggested  a  ghost.)  I  should  say  a  sort  of  Cavalier
ghost  appearing  in  the  evening.  I  should  think  it  is
in  a  book.  Charles  I.  appearing  to  anybody — ghost
appearing  to  Charles  I. — (guessing)  Strafford."

44.  Subject.  Lady  Mary  Murray  (agent)  :  "  The  first  shot
being  fired  in  the  American  War  of  Independence  at  that  little
bridge  at  Concord."

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  can't  hear  anything  but  noises."
(Great  noises  going  on.)

45.  Subject.  Lady  Dorothy  Henley  (agent)  :  "  Mafeking
night  and  the  turmoil  in  London."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Nothing  but  Canadian  troops."

40.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  G at  a


lxxii.]  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing  " — Appendix.  95

show  of  the  Zanzigs,  at  which  they  sat  behind  a  screen  with
gold  storks  on  it."
Professor  Murray.  Nothing.

47.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Tolstoi  re-
ceiving friends  on  his  eightieth  birthday."

Professor  Murray  :  "I  had  an  impression  of  a  road  in
New  Guinea — like  a  water-course.  Grandfather  or  Mr.
Cornford."

48.  Subject.  Lady  Mary  Murray  (agent)  :  "  Sitting  on  the
steps  of  the  Museum  at  Sparta,  waiting  to  see  if  we  could  find
the  Ephor."

Professor  Murray  :  "  This  is  something  that  happened
when  you  and  I  were  in  Greece — when  we  toured  in
the  Peloponnese.  It's  waiting  for  the  Ephor  when  it
was  ploughing."

June  18,  1910.

49.  Subject  {suggested  by  Lady  Mary  Murray). Mrs.  Arnold

Toynbee (agent)  : "  T A  and Grandfather  standing

together  side  by  side  doing  the  picture  of  the  Palatine  in  the
dining-room  now."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Is  it  your  own  thing  ?  ("  No.")
Mother's  ?  ("Yes.")  Somebody  painting  a  picture — either
painting,  or  standing  looking  at  a  picture.  I'm  guessing
— Costa — it's  something  Italian. I  get  muddled."

50.  Subject  {suggested  by  Lady  Mary  Murray).  Mrs.  Arnold
Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Professor  Murray  taking  a  walk  with
Jowett,  when  an  undergraduate,  round  by  Mansfield,  when  the
scaffolding  was  up."

Professor  Murray  :  "  No,  I  can't  get  anything.  I  get  a
faint  impression  of  Masefield."

(With  Lady  Mary  Murray  as  agent.) "  No,  I  can't
get  anything."

51.  Subject  {suggested  by  Lady  Mary  Murray).  Mrs.  Arnold
Toynbee  (agent)  : "  The  death  of  Byron — railway  station  in

North  Italy — Trelawney — the  news  being  brought — Uncle  G

is  there."

Professor  Murray  :  "  That's  Mother's. [Right.] She  always
does  things  in  either  Italy  or  Greece. I  get  a  crowd  of


96


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


people  in  consternation  at  some  news  or  other.  I've  got
the  crowd  quite  clearly.  It's  a  crowd  at  a  railway
station  in  France  receiving  the  news  of  the  death  of
Napoleon,  but  that's  not  right.  I've  got  it  quite  clear.
I  get  now  the  death  of  Byron."

52.  Subject  i.  (suggested  by  Lady  Mary  Murray).  Mrs.  Arnold
Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Botha  making  his  inaugural  speech  as
Prime  Minister.  No.  (Mrs.  Toynbets  own  suggestion.)  Mr.
M  h  and  a  soldier  dressed  in  red  by  the  side  of  an  ice-
bound pond."

Professor Murray  : "  It's M  h giving an  inaugural

address."

53.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Miss  L

dragging  her  little  dog  up  the  hill  at  Alassio  in  the  heat."

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  get  the  impression  of  people  on  the
Riviera  going  up  a  hill.  Is  a  dog  in  it  ?  ("  Yes.")
Road  towards  the  gap  at  Alassio."

August  7,  1910.

54.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Miss
Neroutsos  reading  at  Cambridge  with  a  reading-lamp."

Professor  Murray  (coming  into  the  room)  [without  con-
tact] :  "  I  believe  this  is  Miss  Neroutsos  teaching  you
German  here,  reading  aloud  to  you."

55.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Mr.  Cornford
as  Comus  in  the  theatre  at  Cambridge,  when  he  first  comes  in."

Professor  Murray  (coming  into  the  room)  [without  con-
tact] :  "  I  know  tin's — Cornford  doing  Comus.  I  won-
dered at  first  if  it  was  Faustus."  (Mrs.  Toynbee  con-
fused it  with  Faustus.)

August  9,  1910.

[Six  failures  and  one  partial  success.]

August  20,  1910.

56.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Mr.  H

throwing  stones  into  a  pond  on  Hampstead  Heath."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Not  Denis  and  me  throwing  stones
at  a  notice-board  ?  Faint  impression  of  throwing
stones."


lxxii.]  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing  " — Appendix.  97


September  25,  1910.

57.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  F wash-
ing a  blouse  in  a  wash-hand  basin."

Professor  Murray  : "  This  is  F arranging  flowers  in  a

basin. ("Not  quite  right.") Then  she's  washing  clothes."

58.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  G K

drawing  an  anatomical  diagram  on  a  desk."

Professor Murray  : "  Not somebody drawing a map  ?

Uncle A  1 Somebody making a diagram — I  can't

get  who."

59.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  J —  R

in  his  castle  in  France  with  the  C  s  in  the  garden."

Professor  Murray  :  "I  get  vague  impressions  of  a  French
chateau  and  I  should  have  thought  the C — — s.  The

C  s  walking  in  a  garden — he's  the  Frenchman  who

was  at  Bedales."  (Right.)

80.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  K L

brushing  her  hair  in  the  Long  Gallery  and  a  looking-glass  on
the  table."

Professor  Murray  :  "  The  Long  Gallery  at  Castle  Howard.
I  can't  get  the  person- — it  seems  like  somebody  with  a
fiddle in a  dressing-gown brushing  her  hair — Georgina

the  beautiful  duchess,  Miss  J  ,  K L  ."  (Mrs.

Toynbee  was  thinking  of  the  photograph  of  Miss  J  .)

November  13,  1910.

61.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Forster
writing  Hoivard's  End  in  a  particular  room  with  a  French
window  looking  out  on  a  lawn."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Someone  I  don't  know.  I  get  a
room — rather  pretty  with  lawn  and  garden  in  front —
with  a  French  window. I  get  a  woman— May  Sinclair."

62.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Out  of
L'Espion. Evsei  finding  a  fly  in  his  ink."

Professor  Murray  :  "  This  is  a  book — a  Russian  book.
It's  L'Espion.  It's  a  scene  I  don't  remember  at  all.
I  get  an  impression  of  the  boy  squashing  a  fly,  but  I
can't  remember  it  at  all.  I  confuse  it  with  Joseph
Vance."

G


98


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


63.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  God  Save
the  King."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Noise  outside."

December  15,  1910.

64.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Cousin  B

having  his  eyes  examined  by  Mr.  C  ."

Professor  Murray  : "  An oculist, C  ,  examining  the

eyes of B  ." (Suggested by one of the  company

moving  her  spectacles.)

65.  Subject  (written,  not  spoken).  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee
(agent)  : "  Cousin  A feeding  cats."

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  think  you've  been  writing  it.  No,
I  can't  do  it."

[Three  failures  followed,  the  subject  being  spoken  aloud  in  each
case.]

66.  Subject. Mrs. Arnold  Toynbee (agent)  : "  Mr.  L

beating  an  egg  at  Siena."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Kangaroos."

(Miss  H  was  thinking  that  if  she  were  doing  it  she

would  give  something  like  a  kangaroo  or  a  bear  with  a  visiting-
book  like  the  picture  in  Punch.  Professor  Murray  had  sheep,
bears,  kangaroos  in  his  mind.)

December  13,  1910.

67.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Sir  Henry
Lunn  at  the  North  Pole."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Is  it  anything  to  do  with  the  poll  at
an  election  ?  A  vague  impression  of  a  crowd  waiting
at  the  North  Pole."

68.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Forster  talk-
ing at  the  Friday  Club."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Somebody  reading  a  paper  at  an
Essay  Society — not  in  Oxford.  A  man  that's  not
Masefield — he  reminds  me  of  hirn — it's  Forster. A  vague

impression  of  Miss  C and  G  . I  feel  as  if  the

subject  were  something  to  do  with  Woman's  Suffrage."

(Miss  C and  G  ■  are  members  of  the  Friday  Club.)

69.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Mr.  Barrie


lxxii.]  A  Series  of  Experiments  in"  Guessing  " — Appendix.  99


in  our  lodgings  at  Rottingdean  playing  draughts  with  Mrs.
H  ."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Lots  of  peojjle  in  a  sea-side  lodging.

It's  Rottingdean  when  we  were  there  with  F D  .

I  get  an  impression  of  Barrie  being  there,  but  I  don't
think  he  ever  was."

70.  Subject.  Mr.  Gayter  (agent)  :  "  Choir  singing  carols
in  New  College  Chapel  next  Sunday  night."

Professor  Murray  :  "  It's  something  like  the  Waits — it's
people  singing  in  the  street.  I'm  not  sure  that  they  are
in  the  street.  It's  people  singing  Christmas  things  in
the  choir  at  New  College  Chapel."

February  4,  1911.

71.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent):  "  Keir  Hardie
blacking  boots."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Hunter's  shoes.  Labour  Party  with
exceedingly  bright  boots."

72.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Y look-
ing at  Manet's  picture  of  a  barmaid  at  the  Post-Impres-
sionists."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Post -Impressionist  picture  I  haven't
seen — I  can't  get  it  exactly — an  ugly  sort  of  picture  of
a  woman.  A  barmaid  ?  ("  That's  not  the  whole  thing.")
Somebody  looking  at  it  ? Perhaps  G  ."

73.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  The  Mer-
chant picking  red  roses  in  Beauty  %nd  the  Beast.'"

Professor  Murray  :  "I  seem  to  get  the  one  word  mer-
chant."

74.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Mr.  B

pulling  a  tin  bath  at  the  top  of  a  stair-case."

Professor  Murray  :  "  This  is  Harold  B — ■ — .  I  thought  he
was  looking  in  at  a  shop-window,  but  now  I  can  only
get  tin  pans."

March  12,  1913.

75.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Mr.  Cameron
the  planter  riding  on  his  chestnut  mare  up  to  the  bathing-shed,
and  I — —  and  D in  their  bathing-dresses."

Professor  Murray  :  "  No,  I  have  not  the  faintest  notion.
I  should  think  it  was  Cannan  of  the  Press."


100  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

May  18,  1913.

76.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  I  shall  think

of  the  3rd  S brother  eating  spoil  ge -cake  and  talking  to  the

other  S  's  grey  dog."

Professor  Murray  : "  This  smells  to  me  like  Birmingham.

It's  the  S family — not  Ernest. I  rather  think  it's

Hugh,  but  there  are  other  S  s  about,  and  Hugh's

eating  something — a  sort  of  afternoon  tea.  It's  not
Hugh — it's  another  one  I  don't  know.  It's  either  Hugh
or  one  I  don't  know."

77.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  I  think  of
Mr.  Sauter  and  Albert  Rothenstein  painting  in  a  studio —
painting  a  picture  of  a  flower-girl  with  a  red  scarf."

Professor  Murray  (without  contact)  :  "  It's  people  painting
in  a  studio,  and  they're  foreign.  It's  in  England  all
right.  (With  contact)  Oh — Mr.  Sauter  and  somebody
else — I  can't  get  him."

78.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Belgian
Baron  getting  out  of  the  train  at  Savanilla  with  us  and
walking  across  the  sandy  track  and  seeing  the  new  train
come  in."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Man  getting  out  of  a  train  and
looking  for  something.  I  don't  know  if  he  is  looking
for  another  train  to  come.  I  think  it  is  a  dry  hot
sort  of  place.  I  get  him  with  a  faint  impression  of
waxed  moustache — a  sort  of  foreign  person — but  I  can't
get  more."

(He  had  a  waxed  moustache,  but  Mrs.  Toynbee  had  not
mentioned  it.)

79.  Subject.  Miss  Agnes  Murray  (agent)  :  "  I  think  of  the
man  in  Under  Western  Eyes  coming  out  of  the  house  when
his  ears  were  off 1  and  getting  under  the  tram-car. No.  [2nd

Subject.] Mr.  D walking  down  High  Street  outside  Barber's

that  night  late  and  we  thinking  he  was  a  wraith."

Professor  Murray  :  "  It's  the  last  scene  in  Under  Western
Eyes — when  the  man  goes  out- — out  deaf — and  getting
under  the  tram-car."

1  Note  by  Professor  Murray.  This  is  a  slip  on  the  part  of  the  note-
taker. The  record  should  run  :  "  When  his  ear-drums  were  broken."


lxxii.]  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing  " — Appendix.  101

August  14,  1913.

80.  Subject.  Miss  Agnes  Murray  (agent)  :  "  Mr.  Barker
sitting  outside  a  tent  over  a  charcoal  fire  in  the  clearing  of  a
forest."

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  think  this  is  an  imaginary  thing —
not  a  real  thing.  I  get  an  impression  of  somebody
crouching  over  a  fire.  I  get  Barker  dressed  as  an
Arab."

81.  Subject.  Lady  Mary  Murray  (agent):  "I  have  the
funeral  of  Herr  Bebel  and  all  the  German  Socialists  going  to
his  grave."

Professor  Murray  :  "  It  isn't  a  Socialist  procession  or
something  like  that  ?  "

August  24,  1913.

82.  Subject.  Mes.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  I  think  of  a
street  in  Jerusalem  and  Mrs.  Barker  with  a  Moorish  woman
walking  along  it."

Professor  Murray  :  "  This  is  not  airy  of  your  usual
countries — not  Italian  or  Russian.  It's  Eastern — yes —
a  street  in  some  sort  of  Oriental  town — Jerusalem.  I  am
now  getting  my  own  memories  of  Jerusalem  instead.
But  I  think  it  is  a  European  lady  shopping — Mrs.
Barker."

83.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee (agent)  : "  I  think  of

Mrs.  F  sitting  on  the  deck  and  Grandfather  opening  the

door  for  her."

Professor  Murray  :  "  This  is  Grandfather.  I  think  it  is
on  a  ship  and  I  think  he  is  bowing  and  smiling  to
somebody — opening  the  door.  ("  Can't  you  get  the
person  ?  ")  I  first  thought  of  the  Captain  and  afterwards
a  lady.  I  get  a  feeling  of  a  pink  head-dress."  ("  Yes,
that  is  right.")

84.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  I  think  of

Dr.  M in  a  white  coat  in  his  X-ray  room  examining  a

Russian  with  a  red  beard."

Professor  Murray  (entering  the  room)  [without  contact]  :
"  I  wonder  if  this  is  right,  as  I  have  got  a  vivid  picture
of  someone  with  a  cough  being  examined  by  a  doctor,
I  think  your  doctor  at  Genoa  or  somewhere — in  a  white


102


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[PAET


coat,  and  the  patient  who  is  consulting  him  is  rather
like  Tolstoi,  but  it  isn't.  Ought  I  to  know  the  person  ?
("  You  don't  know  him,  but  what  is  he  like  ?  ")  He
is  a  big  Russian  with  a  beard."  [When  Mrs.  Toynbee
first  pictured  the  scene,  she  had  Tolstoi  in  her  mind.]

August  25,  1913.

85.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  I  think  of
Mr.  Gladstone  making  a  speech  and  speaking  to  a  drunk  man
who  interrupted  him."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Oh  !  (Long  pause.)  It's  '  I  will  ask
my  friend,  notwithstanding  the  difference  of  our  opinions,
to  extend  to  me  the  same  large  measure  of  indulgence
which  were  I  in  his  position  and  he  in  mine  I  should
undoubtedly  extend  to  him  ' — I  got  the  Gladstonian
rhythm." [Right. It  was  an  anecdote.]

86.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  I'll  try  '  To
be  or  not  to  be.'  "

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  don't  think  this  is  a  scene  at  all —
it's  words.  It's — oh  !  I  think  it's  just  Hamlet's  solilo-
quy."

87.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  '  The  glories
of  our  blood  and  state  are  shadows,  not  substantial  things.'  "

Professor  Murray  :  "I  think  this  also  is  not  a  scene,  but
a  quotation.  Is  it  a  quotation  I  know,  do  you  think  ?
I  don't  feel  that  I  know  it.  Has  it  got  the  words  '  my
little  sister  '  in  it  ?  "

August  31,  1913.

88.  Subject.  Miss  Agnes  Murray  (agent)  :  "  I  think  of  Mr.
Rochester  driving  round  the  corner  on  a  white  road  in  the
rain  and  Jane  Eyre  waiting  very  anxious  at  the  other  end."

Professor  Murray  :  "  This  is  out  of  a  book.  I  think  it's
Villette  or  Jane  Eyre.  I  can't  get  the  scene,  although  I
have  the  impression  of  rain. I  know  it's  a  book."

89.  Subject.  Mr.  J.  Murray  (agent)  :  "  Bathing  this  morning
and  the  tremendous  swerve  there  was  towards  the  groin."

Professor  Murray  :  "I  feel  something  like  a  stormy  sea —
sea  whirling  round  a  light -house."

90.  Subject. Miss  Agnes  Murray  (agent)  : "  Anna  Karenina


lxxii.]  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing  " — Appendix.  103

and  her  little  black  bag  and  a  veil  over  her  face,  and  throwing

herself  under  the  train  at  the  station."

Professor  Murray  : "I  am  full  of  Miss  L  catching  her

train  to-morrow  morning.  Oh  !  it's  Tolstoi.  It's  Anna
sitting  in  a  train.  She's  coming  from  Moscow  and  she's
sitting  and  opening  a  little  black  bag."

September  7,  1913.

91.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent):  "I  think  of
Mary  Wilkins  writing  her  American  stories  in  an  American
house  with  French  windows."

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  get  a  faint  impression  of  a  sort
of  literary  man  writing — I  should  have  thought  a  man
in  India  or  somewhere."

92.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Mrs.  X
driving  in  a  taximeter  towards  Notre  Dame  and  shouting  to
the  cabman  to  stop  and  he's  deaf  and  doesn't  hear."

Professor  Murray  :  "  This  is  something  French — Paris.  I
get  an  impression  of  Notre  Dame  and  somebody  driving
towards  it  and  the  cab  stopping  or  something — it's  not
clear,  but  I  get  Notre  Dame.  A  rich  stoutish  elderly
woman  with  rather  a  manner."  [The  description  applies
to  Mrs.  X.]

93.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Colonel
Smyth  and  Mr.  William  Bell  sitting  in  a  coffee-house  at
Singapore,  smoking,  and  ivy  outside."

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  think  it  is  two  people  sitting  over
cigarettes  and  coffee — now  there's  a  funny  thing — I  was
going  to  say  one  was  Belloc  and  then  thought  of  him
as  Bellott,  and  one  is  a  clergyman."

94.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  I  think  of
'  Hark,  hark  the  lark  at  Heaven's  gate  sings.'  "

Professor  Murray  :  "  Can't  get  anything  at  all.  I  tried
for  a  soene  and  couldn't  get  it."

95.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Mrs.  Carlyle
reading  Kubla  Khan  aloud  to  John  Stuart  Mill."

Professor  Murray  :  "  It's  a  poem  again.  It's  Kubla  Khan.
It's  somebody  reading  it  aloud.  I  suppose  it's  Coleridge
—but  it  isn't  .  ("  Who  is  it  ?  ")  Not  the  Vicar's  wife  ?
(Her  name  is  Mrs.  Carr.)


104


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


September  9,  1913.

96.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Gorki  work-
ing as  a  ship's  boy  on  a  Volga  steamer."

Professor  Murray  :  "  It  seems  Russian.  It's  some  Russian
writer.  I  should  say  it  was  Gorki."  (I  had  a  feeling  of
someone  being  dirty. I  trod  on  a  dirty  sack  outside.)

97.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Castle  at
Nurnberg  and  Mr.  Hammond  seeing  over  it  and  seeing  the
Iron  Maiden."

Professor  Murray  :  "  It's  a  jumbling — it's  foreign.  It's  not
Russian,  and  it's  not  Italian.  It's  some  old  German
castle — and  somebody — it's  Hammond— going  over  it.  I
don't  think  I  know  the  castle.  Ought  I  to  know  where
it  is  ? ("  Yes.") I  should  say  Nurnberg."

December  8,  1913.

98.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Lord  Jim
being  tried  at  Aden  in  Conrad's  book.  The  scene  in  the  Law
Court."

Professor  Murray  :  "  No,  not  a  glimmer."

99.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Mr.  Fisher
and  Mr.  B drinking  beer  in  a  cafe  in  Berlin."

Professor  Murray  :  "  It's  got  something  to  do  with  a
public-house — no,  it's  beer.  It's  Fisher  and  somebody
else  drinking  beer — somebody  who  has  nothing  to  do
with  Fisher.  I  can't  be  at  all  sure — I  should  think
[it's]  little  B  ."

100.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Savonarola
having  the  pictures  burnt  in  Florence  and  standing  uj)  and  a
crowd  round."

Professor  Murray  :  "  It's  Italian — I  think  it's  something
in  a  book.  Well,  this  is  the  merest  guess  and  may  have
something  to  do  with  the  spark  that  came  out  of  the
fire — I  get  a  smell  of  burning,  the  smell  of  a  bonfire —
I  get  Savonarola  burning  the  pictures  in  Florence."

101.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent):  "I  think  of  a
scene  in  a  Strindberg  play — two  people  sitting  in  a  round  tower
and  the  man  has  a  fainting-fit  and  the  wife  hopes  he  is  dead."

Professor  Murray  : "  This  is  a  book  and  a  book  I  haven't
read. No — not Russian — not Italian. It's  somebody


lxxii.]  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing  " — Appendix.  105

lying  in  a  faint.  It's  very  horrible.  I  think  somebody
is  fainting  and  his  wife  or  some  woman  is  hoping  he  is
dead.  It  can't  be  Maeterlinck — I  think  I  have  read
them  all — oh  !  it's  Strindberg.  ("  Can  you  get  the
place  1  ")  I  thought  of  them  in  a  great  round  tower.
That  was  why  I  thought  of  Maeterlinck."

January  13,  1914.

102.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  I  think  of
that  funny  old  Irishman  called  Dr.  Hunt  in  the  hotel  at
Jamaica.  I'll  think  of  the  race  where  they  wouldn't  let  him
ride  with  his  little  grey  mare."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Tropics.  It  must  be  something  to  do
with  Jamaica.  I  can't  get  it  a  bit  clear.  I  feel  as  if  it
were  a  drunken  Irish  doctor  talking  with  a  brogue.  I
can't  get  it  clear."  (Mrs.  Toynbee  did  not  mention  that
he  got  drunk,  but  he  did.)
  ?,  1914.

103.  Subject. Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  : "  Mrs.  C

hitting  the  Purser  with  a  skipping  rope."

Professor  Murray  (without  contact)  :  "  I  think  it's  Mother
hitting  the  Purser  with  a  skipping-rope — no,  it's  your
woman,  the  over-dressed  woman,  Mrs.  C  ."

104.  Subject.  Mks.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  The  little
crocodile  on  the  Captain's  trunk  and  him  showing  it  to  Isabel
and  me."

Professor  Murray  (without  contact)  :  "  Where's  Denis's
lizard  gone  ? — because  I  thought  it  was  Denis's  lizard
pursuing  you  and  Isabel- — the  lizard  on  a  bed  in  a
cabin  and  you  and  Isabel  looking  at  it."

105.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  I'll  do
D S in  a  dug-out  canoe  on  the  Serpentine."

Professor  Murray (without contact)  : "  Is it  somebody

walking  in  Kensington  Gardens  ? D S walking

in  Kensington  Gardens.  No,  I  didn't  see  what  else  he
was  doing — perhaps  he  was  in  a  boat."

December  16,  1915.

106.  Subject.  Miss  Agnes  Murray  (agent)  :  "  Shelley  when
he's  rescued  from  nearly  being  drowned  in  the  Mediterranean.


106


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


He  says  :  '  What  a  j)ity  !  I  wanted  to  see  what  the  next
world  was  like.'  "

Pro  fessor  Murray  :  "  This  is  Shelley — '  In  a  little  more  I
should  have  known  the  great  secret.'  "

January  2,  1916.

107.  Subject.  Mrs.  Arnold  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  A  little
captive  fox  at  Leith  Hill  on  a  chain."

Professor  Murray  :  "  It  feels  like  cruelty  to  animals — is
it  ?  Little  wild  animals  being  eaten  or  something  like
that. I  don't  think  I  can  get  it."

January  12,  1916.

108.  Subject.  Miss  Agnes  Murray  (agent)-:  "I  think  of
Byron  and  Leigh  Hunt  driving  over  an  Italian  mountain  and
little  Italian  beggar-boys  begging  of  them."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Italian  thing — old-fashioned — an  Eng-
lishman driving  in  a  cart  and  boys  begging  of  him.
Like  a  sort  of  Shelley — I  should  think  it  was  somebody
like  that.  ("  Can't  you  get  the  people  ?  ")  No,  I  can't
get  them  clearly,  but  I  should  say  Shelley  or  Byron  or
Trelawney  or  somebody  like  that."

109.  Subject. Miss Agnes Murray (agent)  : "  The  two

G  s  sitting  in  a  little  dug-out  decorated  with  Persian  rugs

and  talking  to  a  German  officer  they  have  just  captured."

Professor  Murray  : "  These  are  people  killed  in  the  war.

I  should  think  it  was  G  and  his  brother. They  are

in  a  dug-out  which  is  absurdly  furnished  like  a  boudoir
and  talking  to  a  German  officer  they  have  just  cap-
tured."

Notes  taken  by  Mrs.  Verrall  of  the  experiments
at  which  she  was  present.

February  18,  1914.

Yesterday,  February  17,  between  tea  and  dinner,  I  was
present  at  a  series  of  experiments  in  thought-transference,
in  which  Professor  Murray  acted  as  percipient  and  his
daughter,  Mrs.  Toynbee,  as  agent.  There  were  present,
in  the  study,  Lady  Mary  Murray,  Miss  Blomfield  (who


lxxii.]  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing  " — Appendix.  107

took  notes),  Mr.  Arnold  Toynbee  (who  left  after  the  first
or  second  experiment),  and  myself,  besides  the  two  prin-
cipals.

Professor  Murray  went  out  of  the  room,  and  the  door
was  shut.  Mrs.  Toynbee  then  decided  on  a  subject  to
transfer,  and  described  it  in  a  low  voice  ;  Miss  Blomfield
recorded  it,  and  no  other  word  was  spoken.  (Once  Lady
Mary  Murray  asked  if  the  note  was  made.)  Then  Lady
Mary  Murray  opened  the  door,  in  silence,  and  Professor
Murray  came  in,  held  Mrs.  Toynbee's  hand,  sometimes
standing,  sometimes  sitting,  and  proceeded  to  describe  his
impressions.

Usually  nothing  was  said  till  he  had  finished  all  that  he
had  to  say,  but  occasionally  (as  recorded  in  the  notes)
Mrs.  Toynbee  asked  for  a  further  detail.

In  the  first  five  experiments  the  subject  was  chosen  by
Mrs.  Toynbee  ;  in  the  sixth  it  was  also  so  chosen,  but
after  Professor  Murray  had  suggested  that  I  should  choose
it  ;  in  the  seventh  it  was  chosen  by  me,  and  Professor
Murray  held  my  hand.

So  far  as  I  observed,  and  I  observed  with  care,  Pro-
fessor Murray  never  looked  at  Mrs.  Toynbee  after  he  had
taken  her  hand,  nor  did  she  look  at  him.  Any  indications
derived  from  contact  must  be  confined  to  suggestions — of
course  unintentional — of  encouragement  or  discouragement,
and  no  mere  encouragement  could,  as  far  as  yesterday's
experiments  were  concerned,  account  for  the  success.  Pro-
fessor Murray's  descriptions  were  conveyed  in  a  series  of
brief  sentences,  but  these  sentences  were  not  confined  to  a
single  idea  (to  which  assent  or  dissent  might  be  given  by
an  involuntary  response  on  the  part  of  the  agent),  nor
did  they  proceed  from  general  to  particular,  or,  so  far  as
I  could  analyse  them,  in  any  regular  or  calculable  sequence.

The  details  are  as  follows  :

I.  Subject.  Mrs.  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Celia  Newbolt  under  a
gourd-tree  at  Smyrna."

Professor  Murray  :  "  Modern  Greek  of  some  kind — sort  of
Asia  Minor  place — a  tree  and  women  sitting  under  it —
a particular  tree — girl sitting under it — she does  not


108


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


belong  to  the  place — she  is  English — something  to  do
with  a  poet — can't  be  Mrs.  Kipling — no,  it's  a  girl — ■
rather  like  one  of  the  Oliviers — (I)  don't  think  I  can
get  her."

In  this  case,  the  subject  was  imagined,  not  remembered.

II.  Subject. Mrs. Toynbee (agent)  : "  Mr. S playing

Badminton  at  the  Badminton  Club  at  Bogota  :  Lord  Murray
watching,  and  ladies  watching,  one  with  a  fan."

Professor  Murray  :  "  This  is  something  to  do  with  your
voyage  to  Panama — it's  South  American — it's  people  in

white playing a game — it's your villain S  — he's

playing  a  game- — the  word  Bogota  is  coming  to  my
mind — I  think  it  is  at  a  games-club."

Mrs.  Toynbee  : "  What  is  the  game  ?  "

Professor Murray  : "  I think I am only guessing.  I
think  the  game  is  Badminton,  and  the  Master  of  Elibank
[Lord  Murray]  is  there."
Here, too, the  scene  is purely  imaginary. Who '  Mr.

S  '  is I do not know  : Mrs.  Toynbee  has  made  a

voyage  to  Panama  ;  Lord  Murray  was,  as  of  course  we
all  knew,  to  speak  yesterday  in  the  House  of  Lords.

III.  Subject.  Mrs.  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  I  think  of  a  scene
in  Youth,  when  the  ship  was  smouldering  and  Marlowe  is
tipping  up  the  bench  because  there  is  an  explosion  of  gas  in
the  hold."

Professor  Murray  :  "  This  is  out  of  a  book — it's  Conrad,
so  I  suppose  it's  the  last  Conrad  I  haven't  read — it's  a
ship  on  fire — not  exactly  on  fire  but  smouldering — a
sort  of  stifling  feeling,  as  if  there  was  something  under-
neath— it's  all  straining  and  the  j)eople  don't  know  it —
I  have  read  it — I  think  it's  an  old  Conrad — it's  the
story  in  Youth  where  they  go  on  sailing  with  the  ship
that  is  burnt."

Mrs.  Toynbee  : "  Can  you  get  the  particular  incident  ?  "

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  think  it's  somebody  thinking  some-
body else  is  making  a  mistake,  or  doing  something  quite
wrong — I  think  the  man  who  tells  the  story  is  thinking
something  is  being  mismanaged."

Mrs.  Toynbee  :  "Yes."


lxxii.]  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing  " — Appendix.  109

I  do  not  know  the  book  in  question  :  Marlowe  is  also
the  teller  of  the  story  in  Chance,  the  last  Conrad,  which
neither  Professor  Murray  nor  Mrs.  Toynbee  have  read.

IV.  Subject.  Mrs.  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  This  he  hasn't  read —
a  book  (of)  Strindberg,  called  Marriage  about  a  horrid  old
schoolmaster,  I  think,  who  goes  into  a  restaurant  and  asks  for
female  crabs  to  eat."

Professor  Murray  :  "  This  is  a  book — I  haven't  read  it,
and  it's  all  nasty — it's  a  cross,  tired  sort  of  man — oh
it  must  be  Strindberg — a  cross  tired  sort  of  man  going
into  a  restaurant — he  seems  to  be  eating  crabs  and
tearing  them  up — I  mean  tearing  them  malignantly —
I  feel  inclined  to  say  that  they  are  female  crabs  but —

At  this  point  we  laughed  at  the  hesitation  which  accom-
panied the  final  success  with  '  female  '  crabs.  I  have  not
read  the  book,  but  I  understood  from  Mrs.  Toynbee  that
no  motive  is  assigned  for  the  eating  of  female  crabs,  nor
is  the  tearing  '  malignant.'

V.  Subject.  Mrs.  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  Dostoievsky  writing  in
a  very  bare  room,  I  think  in  France,  and  hearing  the  bailiff
people  banging  at  the  door,  and  pretending  he  is  not  in  the
house."

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  think  this  is  out  of  a  book — it's
Russian — it's  a  man  inside  a  house — and  the  people
beating  and  beating  on  the  door  outside — and  he's
keeping  quite  still  so  that  they  shan't  know  he  is
there — it's  a  big  sort  of  bare  room  and  he  is  a  writer —
seems  a  mad  sort  of  person — (I)  don't  somehow  feel  as
if  I  was  going  to  get  it — I  think  it  is  in  France— but
he  must  be  Russian — I  don't  feel  as  if  they  were  going
to  murder  him  at  all — I  should  think  it  is  a  story  of
Dostoievsky  that  I  can't  get — I  have  a  feeling  that  I
can't  be  right — Are  they  bailiffs  ?  "

Mrs.  Toynbee  said,  when  the  experiment  was  over,  that
this  was  not  anything  in  a  book,  but  a  made-up  incident.

VI.  Professor  Murray  then  suggested  that  I  should
choose  an  incident  and  tell  Mrs.  Toynbee. But  after  he


110


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


had  left  the  room,  at  an  unspoken  suggestion,  by  sign,  of
Lady  Mary  Murray's,  we  decided  to  pursue  the  usual  plan.

Subject.  Mrs.  Toynbee  (agent)  :  "  I'll  think  (of  the)  Master
of  Trinity — [to  me]  your  Master  walking  along  the  Backs  and
a  gardener  with  a  wheelbarrow  sweeping  up  dead  leaves  and
getting  out  of  his  way."

Professor  Murray  : "  I  don't  think  this  is  Mrs.  Verrall 's —
it's  the  Master  of  Trinity  walking  in  a  garden — and  a
gardener  sweeping  leaves."
Mrs.  Toynbee  :  "  Any  special  place  ?  "
Professor  Murray  :  "  The  Backs."

VII.  It  was  arranged  that  I  should  think  of  the  next
subject,  and  act  directly  as  agent.

Subject.  Mrs.  Verrall  (agent)  :  "  Jean  Valjcan  walking  in
the  dark  wood  and  taking  the  handle  of  the  pail  from  the
little  child  (Cosette)."

Professor  Murray  :  "  I  had  a  faint  impression  of  Silver-
locks  finding  the  bears'  house  in  the  wood."

Even  in  this  comparative  failure  there  are  two  points  of
contact — the  wood  and  the  girl-child.  My  subject  was
from  Hugo's  Les  Miserables.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  Ill


IV.

RECENT  EVIDENCE  ABOUT  PREVISION  AND

SURVIVAL.

By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.

Read  at  a  Private  Meeting  of  the  Society  on  June  23,  1916.

I.

The  Faunus  Incident.

My  son,  Raymond,  joined  the  Army,  September,  1914.
He  trained  near  Liverpool  and  Edinburgh  with  the  South
Lancashires,  and  in  March,  1915,  was  sent  to  the  trenches
in  Flanders.  In  the  middle  of  July  he  had  a  few  days'
leave  at  home,  and  on  the  20th  returned  to  the  Front.

The  first  intimation  that  I  had  that  anything  might
be  going  wrong  was  a  message  from  MyersP  through
Mrs.  Piper  in  America  ;  communicated  apparently  by
"  Richard  Hodgson "  at  a  time  when  Miss  Robbins  was
present,  on  August  8th,  1915,  and  sent  me  by  Miss  Alta
Piper  together  with  the  original.  A  copy  of  this  script
was  sent  by  me  to  my  friend  Mr.  J.  Arthur  Hill  in  the
ordinary  course,  and  returned  endorsed  by  him.  Here
follows  the  extract  :

{Extract  from  Mrs.  Piper's  Script,  August  8th,  1915.
Miss  Robbins  present.)

Notes  by  Miss  Alta  L.  Piper.

[Miss  Robbins  now  asked  about  a  trip  to  California
that  she is contemplating  taking  soon, and  when


112


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


they had finished advising her, Hodgson  began

abruptly,  as  follows  : A.  L.  P.]
Now  Lodge

while  we  are  not  here
['  while  we  are  not  here  '  repeated  because  not  read .

A.L.P.]
as  of  old,  i.e.

not

quite,  we  are  here

enough  to  take
and  give  messages.

Myers  says,  you
take  the  part  of
the  poet,
and  he  will
act  as

Paunus.  FAUNUS.
['  Paunus  '  re-written  in  large  letters  though  correctly

read  at  first. A.  L.  P.]
Yes [when  we  repeated  the  word  '  Faunus.'  A.  L.  P.]

Myers.
Protect.

he  will  U.D.
[Evidently  referring  to  Lodge. A.  L.  P.]
What  have  you  to  say
Lodge, good  work,
ask  Verrall,  she
will  also  U.D.
Arthur  says  so.
["  Arthur  "  clearly  means to us,  Arthur  W.  Verrall.
O.  J.  L.]

Miss  r. Do  you  mean  Arthur  Tennyson  ?

[Miss P. must have become confused with R.  H.'s

previous  reference  to  "  poet." She  was  much  amused

about  this  mistake  later. A.  L.  P.]
No. Myers  knows.
So  does —

you  got  mixed  [to  Miss  R. A.  L.  P.]
but  Myers  is


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  113

straight  about
Poet  and  Faunus.

In  order  to  interpret  this  message,  I  wrote  to  Mrs.  Verrall
as  instructed,  asking  her  :  "  Does  The  Poet  and  Faunus
mean  anything  to  you?  Did  one  'protect'  the  other?"
She  replied  at  once  (September  8th,  1915)  referring  me
to  Horace,  Ode  II.  xvii.  27-30,  and  saying  :

The  reference  is  to  Horace's  account  of  his  narrow  escape
from  death,  from  a  falling  tree,  which  he  ascribes  to  the
intervention  of  Faunus.  Cf.  Hor.  Odes  n.  xiii  ;  n.  xvii.  27  ;
m.  iv.  27  ;  nr.  viii.  8  for  references  to  the  subject.  The
allusion  to  Faunus  is  in  Ode  n.  xvii.  27-30.

Me  truncus  illapsus  cerebro
Sustulerat,  nisi  Faunus  ictum
Dextra  levasset,  Mercurialium
Custos  virorum.

'  Faunus,  the  guardian  of  poets  '  ('  poets  '  being  the  usual
interpretation  of  '  Mercury's  men  ').

The  passage  is  a  very  well-known  one  to  all  readers  of
Horace,  and  is  perhaps  specially  familiar  from  its  containing,
in  the  sentence  quoted,  an  unusual  grammatical  construction.
It  is  likely  to  occur  in  a  detailed  work  on  Latin  Grammar.

The  passage  has  no  special  associations  for  me  other  than
as  I  have  described,  though  it  has  some  interest  as  forming
part  of  a  chronological  sequence  among  the  Odes,  not  generally
admitted  by  commentators,  but  accepted  by  me.

The  Avords  quoted  are,  of  course,  strictly  applicable  to  the
Horatian  passage,  which  they  instantly  recalled  to  me.

I  perceived,  therefore,  from  this  manifestly  correct  inter-
pretation of  the  "Myers"  message  to  me,  that  the
meaning  was  that  some  blow  was  going  to  fall,  or  was
likely  to  fall,  though  I  didn't  know  of  what  kind,  and
that  Myers  would  intervene,  apparently  to  protect  me
from  it.  So  far  as  I  can  recollect  my  comparatively
trivial  thoughts  on  the  subject,  I  believe  that  I  had
some  vague  idea  that  the  catastrophe  intended  was
perhaps  of  a  financial  rather  than  of  a  personal  kind  ;
though,  as  Mr.  Piddington  has  now  reminded  me,  a  falling

H


114


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


or  fallen  tree  is  a  recognised  symbol  of  death — the  sym-
bolism being  perhaps  derived  from  a  misunderstanding  of
Eccl.  xi.  3.

The  above  message  reached  me  near  the  beginning  of
September,  1915,  in  Scotland.  Raymond  was  killed  near
Ypres  on  the  14th  September,  1915,  and  we  got  the
news  by  telegram  from  the  War  Office  on  September  17th.

Subsequent  Enquiries  and  Comments.

After  the  event  had  happened,  I  wrote  round  to  several
scholars,  putting  to  them  the  same  bare  question  as  I
had  sent  to  Mrs.  Verrall  ;  my  object  in  doing  so  being,
not  to  obtain  additional  information,  still  less  to  check
Mrs.  Verrail's  detection  of  the  intended  reference,  of  which
I  had  no  doubt  whatever,  but  to  ascertain  how  familiar
the  passage  was  ;  especially  in  view  of  her  statement
that  it  was  "  likely  to  occur  in  a  detailed  work  on  Latin
Grammar."

The  question  I  sent  in  the  following  form  :

Does '  The  Poet  and  Faunus  '  suggest  any  obvious  reference

to  you  ? Did  one  '  protect  '  the  other  ?
[Kindly  write  answer  on  this  page  and  return  to  0.  J.  L.,

Mariemont,  Edgbaston. 21  Sept.  1915.]

It  may  be  worth  recording  that  I  addressed  this  question
to  :  Mi-.  Piddington,  Sir  Alfred  Dale,  Professor  Sonnen-
schein,  Mr.  George  Brewerton,  Mr.  R.  C.  Gilson,  Dr.
G.  H.  Rendall,  Professor  H.  A.  Strong,  C.  S.  Lodge,  and
the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield,  all  of  whom  replied  that  the
reference  was  fairly  obvious,  and  quoted  Horace,  Ode  II.  17.

I  sent  also  to  :  Gilbert  Murray,  A.  C.  Bradley,  and
C.  C.  Cotterill,  none  of  whom  happened  to  think  of  the
exact  passage.  Though  Professor  Murray  says  it  is  odd
that  he  did  not,  as  it  was  perfectly  familiar  to  him,  only
he  did  not  happen  to  get  on  the  right  road  ;  while
Professor  Bradley's  reply  was  that  "  There  is  a  well-
known  Ode  (in.  xviii.)  in  which  Horace  addresses  Faunus,
but  he  is  not  asking  for  protection  or  (I  should  say)
addressing the god as his protector." He goes on  to


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  115

say  :  "As  a  matter  of  fact  the  name  Faunus  suggested
to  me  first  a  passage  in  Tennyson's  Lucretius 1  (part
beginning  '  But  who  was  he,')  ;  but  no  hint  of  protection
here.  I  suppose  the  passage  is  suggested  by  something
in  Lucretius's  poem,  but  I  don't  remember  what."

Soon  after  this,  I  informed  Mr.  Bayfield  fully  of  the
facts,  as  an  interesting  S.P.R.  incident,  and  he  was  good
enough  to  send  me  a  careful  note  in  reply,  concerning
the  grammatical  peculiarities  and  exact  significance  of
the  passage  :

1.  A  Grammatical  Explanation:

Normal  Latin  requires  two  subjunctives  in  such  a  conditional
sentence  (sustulisset).  There  are  a  fair  number  of  exceptions,
however,  in  passages  where  we  find  the  indicative  (sustulerat)
instead  of  the  subjunctive.  It  is  like  Numbers  xxii.  33,
"  Unless  she  had  turned  from  me,  surely  now  I  had  slain
thee."  This  exceptional  use  of  the  indicative  is  noted  in
all  school  grammars,  and  this  passage  of  Horace — and  one
from  Virgil's  Georgics,  n,  '  et,  si  non  alium  late  iactaret  odorem,
laurus  erat '  (not  esset) — are  the  two  stock  examples  most
commonly  given.  Both  are  given  in  the  only  two  school
Latin  Grammars  that  I  have.  But  in  these  grammars  the
examples  are  not  translated,  and  probably  would  not  be  in
any  grammar.

2.  A  Detailed  Interpretation  :

Horace  does  not,  in  any  reference  to  his  escape,  say  clearly
whether  the  tree  struck  him,  but  I  have  always  thought
it  did.  He  says  Faunus  lightened  the  blow  ;  he  does  not
say  "  turned  it  aside."  As  bearing  on  your  terrible  loss,
the  meaning  seems  to  be  that  the  blow  would  fall  but  would
not  crush  ;  it  would  be  "  lightened  "  by  the  assurance,  conveyed
afresh  to  you  by  a  special  message  from  the  still  living  Myers,
that  your  boy  still  lives.

I  shall  be  interested  to  know  what  you  think  of  this  inter-
pretation. The  "  protect  "  I  take  to  mean  protect  from  being

1  [It  is  perhaps  noteworthy  that  this  Tennysonian  poem  contains  1  the
words  "  Look  !  What  is  it  ?  There  ?  yon  arbutus  totters,"  immedi-
ately after  a  mention  of  Faunus  ;  but  it  does  not  seem  to  be  an
allusion  to  the  Horatian  episode. O.  J.  L.]


116


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[pabt


overwhelmed  by  the  blow,  from  losing  faith  and  hope,  as  we  are
all  in  danger  of  doing  when  smitten  by  some  crushing  personal
calamity. Many  a  man  when  so  smitten  has,  like  Merlin,  lain

"  as  dead,

And  lost  to  life  and  use  and  name  and  fame."

That  seems  to  me  to  give  a  sufficiently  precise  application
to  the  word  (on  which  Myers  apparently  insists)  and  to  the
whole  reference  to  Horace.

In  a  postscript  he  adds  the  following  :

In  Carm.  ill.  8,  Horace  describes  himself  as  prope  funeralus  [
arboris  ictu,  '  well  nigh  killed  by  a  blow  from  a  tree.'  An
artist  in  expression  such  as  he  was  wo  aid  not  have  mentioned
any  '  blow  '  if  there  had  been  none  ;  he  would  have  said
'  well  nigh  killed  by  a  falling  tree  ' — or  the  like.  It  is  to
be  noted  that  in  both  passages  he  uses  the  word  ictus.  And
in  ii.  13.  11  (the  whole  ode  is  addressed  to  the  tree),  he
says  the  man  must  have  been  a  fellow  steeped  in  every
wickedness  "  who  planted  thee,  accursed  lump  of  wood,  a
thing  (meant)  to  fall  (this  is  the  delicate  meaning  of  caducum —
not  merely  '  falling  ')  on  thine  undeserving  master's  head."
Here  again  the  language  implies  that  he  was  struck,  and
struck  on  the  head.

Indeed  the  escape  must  have  been  a  narrow  one,  and  it
is  to  me  impossible  to  believe  that  Horace  would  have  been
so  deeply  impressed  by  the  accident  if  he  had  not  actually
been  struck. He  refers  to  it  four  times  :

Carm.  n.  13. (Ode  addressed  to  the  tree — 40  lines  long.)
n.  17.  27.

in.  4.  27.  (Here  he  jDuts  the  risk  he  ran  on  a
parallel  with  that  of  the  rout  at  Philipjoi,  from
which  he  escaped.)

in.  8.  8.

I  insist  on  all  this  as  strengthening  my  interpretation,
and  also  as  strengthening  the  assignment  of  the  script  to
Myers,  who  would  of  course  be  fully  alive  to  all  the  points
to  be  found  in  his  reference  to  Faunus  and  Horace, — and,  as
I  have  no  doubt,  believed  that  Horace  did  not  escape  the
actual  blow,  and  that  it  was  a  severe  one.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  117

Since  some  of  the  translators,  especially  verse  trans-
lators, of  Horace  convey  the  idea  of  turning  aside  or
warding  off  the  blow,  it  may  be  well  to  emphasise  the
fact  that  most  of  the  scholars  consulted  gave  "  lightened  "
or  "  weakened,"  as  the  translation.  And  Professor  Strong
says,  "  no  doubt  at  all  that  '  levasset  '  means  '  weakened  '
the  blow  ;  the  bough  fell  and  struck  the  poet,  but  lightly,
through  the  action  of  Faunus.  '  Levo  '  in  this  sense
is  quite  common  and  classical."

Bryce's  prose  translation  (Bohn)  is  quite  clear  :  "  a
tree-stem  falling  on  my  head  had  surely  been  my  death,
had  not  good  Faunus  eased  the  blow  ".  .  .  .  And  although
Conington's  translation  has  "  check'd  the  blow  in  mid
descent,"  he  really  means  the  same  thing,  because  it  is
the  slaying,  not  the  wounding  or  striking  of  the  Poet
that  is  prevented  :

"Me  the  curst  trunk,  that  smote  my  skull
Had  slain  ; but  Faunus,  strong  to  shield
The  friends  of  Mercury  (poets),  check'd  the  blow
In  mid  descent."

Oilier  pieces  of  Piper  Script.

Mr.  Bayfield  also  makes  a  friendly  comment  on  another
portion  of  Piper  script  which  I  had  sent  him — a  part
purporting  to  come  from  Madame  Guyon.  This  comment
is  valuable,  and  I  therefore  quote  it  :

I  do  not  understand  the  last  paragraph  in  your  letter,
re  the  script  beginning  "  Mine.  G.",  though  I  can  see  that
it  might  be  a  general  reference  to  the  losses  of  those  dear
to  us  which  the  war  causes,  and  preparatory  to  the  subsequent
message  to  yourself.  I  should  rather  say,  meant  to  prepare
you  personally  for  some  possible  trouble.  .  .  .

In  the  sentence,  "  for  the  moment,  Lodge,  have  faith  and
wisdom  [something  verbally  wrong  here]  in  all  that  is  highest
and  best.  Have  you  all  not  been  profoundly  guided  and
cared  for  ?  "  I  find  again  a  sort  of  attempt  to  prepare  you
for  some  personal  trouble.

The portion of "  Piper  " script here referred to  by


IIS


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Mr.  Bayfield,  was  a  bit  I  had  copied  in  my  explanatory
letter  to  him — a  piece  of  script  obtained  in  America
three  days  earlier,  viz.  on  August  5th,  1915  ;  which
reached  me  early  in  September,  simultaneously  with  that
fragment  of  the  sitting  on  August  8th,  1915,  which  has
been  already  quoted  verbatim.  This  script  of  August  5th
was  automatic  script,  and  is  tidily  written  on  full  pages
and  on  both  sides  of  each  page  ;  whereas  that  of  August  8th
is  trance  script,  untidy,  and  a  few  words  on  each  page,
in  the  usual  old  "Rector"  manner.  The  portion  extracted
of  August  5th  is  headed,  "  Mme.  G,"  meaning  that  Madame
Guyon  is  the  communicator,  and  she  says  :

Clouds  arise  where  evil  reigns.  But  for  worldly  gain
and  greed  your  world  would  not  be  now  in  such  a  state
of  chaos.  Listen  to  this  friends  of  earth,  and  try  to
profit  by  these  terrible  losses,  look  more  to  spiritual
things,  and  peace  will  be  your  portion.  Lodge,  Myers
has  messages  good  and  clear  which  are  coming  through.
Through  Willet  the  message  came  "  This  is  such  a  big
thing  and  is  going  to  be  :  it  is  with  difficulty  we  can
act."

A.  L.  P. This  is  the  message  that  came  through  Willett  ?  1
Yes. For  the moment  Lodge have  faith  and  wisdom
in  all  that  is  highest  and  best,  have  you  all  not  been
profoundly  guided  and  cared  for, can  you  answer  No  ?
It  is  by  your  faith  that  all  is  well  and  has  been.

Then  follows  a  bad  drawing  of  the  rosary  symbolic  of
Madame  Guyon,  with  her  usual  signature.

I  remember  being  a  little  struck  by  the  wording  in
the  above  script,  urging  me  to  admit  that  we  all —
presumably  the  family — had  "  been  profoundly  guided
and  cared  for,"  and  "  that  all  is  well  and  has  been  "  ;
because  it  seemed  to  indicate  that  something  was  not
going  to  be  quite  so  well.  But  it  was  too  indefinite
to  lead  me  to  make  any  careful  record  of  it,  or  to  send
it  as  a  prediction  to  anybody  ;  and  it  would  no  doubt
have  evaporated  from  my  mind  except  for  the  "  Faunus  "
warning,  given  three  clays later though received at  the

1  No  such  message  is  known. O.  J.  L.


Lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  119

same  time,  which  seemed  to  me  clearly  intended  as  a
prediction,  whether  it  happened  to  come  off  or  not.

The  two  Piper  communications,  of  which  parts  have
now  been  quoted,  reached  me  at  Gullane,  where  my
wife  (M.  F.  A.  L.)  and  I  were  staying  for  six  weeks.
I  have  not  a  record  of  the  date  when  they  arrived,
but  it  must  have  been  at  the  beginning  of  September,
for  I  have  the  record  of  my  letter  of  acknowledgment
to  Miss  Alta  Piper,  which  was  written  after  I  had  had
time  to  write  to  and  receive  a  prompt  answer,  September
8th,  from  Mrs.  VerraU.  My  letter  to  Alta  Piper  ran
as  follows  :

The  Linga  Private  Hotel,

Gullane,  East  Lothian,

12  Sept.  1915.

My  Dear  Alta,

The  reference  to  the  Poet  and  Fannus  in  your
mother's  last  script  is  quite  intelligible,  and  a  good  classical
allusion.  You  might  tell  the  communicator  some  time  if
there  is  opportunity.

I  feel  sure  that  it  must  convey  nothing  to  you  and  yours.
That  is  quite  as  it  should  be,  as  you  know,  for  evidential
reasons.

This  was  written  two  days  before  Raymond's  death,  and
five  days  before  we  heard  of  it.

It  so  happens  that  this  letter  was  returned  to  me  for
some  reason  through  the  Dead  Letter  Office,  reaching
me  on  November  14th,  1915,  and  being  then  sent  forward
by  me  again.

I  also  wrote  to  Mrs.  Piper  to  know  if  the  message
about  Faunus  and  the  Poet  meant  anything  to  her  or
her  daughters,  though  1  felt  sure  it  didn't. She  replies  :

The  message  to  which  you  refer  is  quite  foreign  to  me.
I  have  no  recollection  of  ever  having  seen  it  or  reading  it
in  the  Proceedings.

She  admits,  however,  having  read  a  good  deal  of  the
Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  but  as  far  as  I  know  and
have  been  able  to  ascertain,  no  reference  to  this  Ode,
nor even to Faunus, has appeared in the  Proceedings.


120


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Hence  it  seems  to  me  that  on  the  evidential  side  the
evidence  is  perfect.

A  little  later,  September  22nd — before  I  or  any  member
of  the  family  had  had  any  sitting  or  attempted  com-
munication, and  before  I  knew  anything  of  Myers's  assistance
or  friendly  activity,  as  described  in  the  sequel — I  wrote  to
Alta  thus  :

Whew  you  next  have  an  opportunity,  you  might  take  this
message  from  me  to  Myers  :  namely  this — "  that  he  did  not
turn  aside  the  falling  trunk  with  his  right  hand."  You
might  further  ask  him  whether  he  tried  to  do  so,  or  whether
he  was  making  reference  to  something  still  in  the  future.

This  was  intended  to  show  "  Myers  "  that  the  allusion
had  been  understood,  and  at  the  same  time  to  convey
nothing  whatever  to  the  Piper  family  ;  for  I  did  not
either  explicitly  or  implicitly  associate  this  sentence
in  any  way  with  their  "  Faunus  "  message  :  and,  even
if  I  had,  they  would  not  have  understood.  I  sent  this
before  I  had  had  Mr.  Bayfield's  more  scholarly  and
detailed  interpretation  of  the  word  "  levasset,"  which
signifies  "  lightened  "  rather  than  "  warded  off."

On  February  11th,  1916,  I  noted  that  at  that  date  I
had  had  no  reply  from  America  to  this  message  ;  and  that
many  letters  had  been  sunk.  But  on  May  10th,  1916,
the  following  information  concerning  the  reception  in
America  of  my  reply  to  the  Faunus  message  reached  me
from  Miss  Alta  Piper  :

(Mrs.  Pipers  Script,  12th  January,  1916.  Received
by  0.  J.  L.  10th  May,  1916.)

+  HAIL.

Rector. I come to greet you friend of earth  with
peace  and  joy.

Alta. Hail  Rector  ! I  am  glad  you  have  come  ! I  have  a
qiiestion  to  ask  you  for  Sir  Oliver.
Good .

Alta. May  I  give  it  now  ? Can  you  hear  me  distinctly  ?
I  U.D.  absolutely  friend.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  121

(Here  I  read  from  Sir  Oliver's  letter,  the  passage  re-
ferring to  the  turning  aside  of  a  fallen  trunk.  Doubt-
less Sir  Oliver  has  a  copy  of  that  letter. A.  L.  P.)

["  When  you  next  have  an  opportunity,  you  might
take  this  message  from  me  to  Myers  :  namely  this—
'  that  he  did  not  turn  aside  the  falling  trunk  with
his  right  hand.'  You  might  further  ask  him  whether
he  tried  to  do  so,  or  whether  he  was  making  reference
to  something  still  in  the  future."]

(The  following  was  then  written.)

I  cannot  answer  all  today  but  will  take  influence
away  with  me  and  return  another  day  to  reply.

Dear  friend  worry  and  fear  not  all  is  well  and
we  are  sincerely  looking  after  your  interests  and
those  most  vital  to  you  on  this  side  U.D.  This
may  sound  blind  and  incoherent  but  you  will  I
am  sure  understand  it  all  fulty.  Grannie  sends  love
and  says  she  is  looking  after  and  taking  good  care
of  the  trunk,1  U.D.  I  wish  you  could  U.D.  what
Virus  means  also  Helvetian
Alta. You  mean  you  wish  Sir  Oliver  could  U.D.  ?

Yes.  would  get  full  meaning.  This  will  be  all  this
time  more  later.

Farewell,
Rector.

{Extract  from  Mrs.  Pipers  Script,  16th  January,  1916,  but  not
received  by  0.  J.  L.  till  10th  May,  1916.)

(Miss  Robbins  present,  most  of  the  messages  to  her.)
Alta. Thank  you  for  all  you  have  said. Is  there  any  other
message  from  or  to  anyone  I  can  take  ?
Myers has some. That had reference to the  future
as  much  as  to  the  past.
Alta. Thank  you. You  want  me  to  send  that  to  Lodge  ?

Yes  because  there  are  other  trunks  which  might  fall
were  they  not  stayed. Understand  ?

1  [This  word  is  either  '  work  '  with  the  word  '  good  '  above  it  (in
the  script)  underlined,  or  it  is  the  word  '  trunk  '  with  the  crossing  of
the  '  t  '  gone  astray,  as  it  often  does.  It  looks  more  like  '  trunk  '
to  O.  J.  L.]


122  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

Alta. Yes,  I  understand. This  is  in  reference  to  the  message  ?

Yes. Have  you  forgotten  it  ?
Alta. No, I read  it to you the other  day  and you  were
unable  at  that  moment  to  reply  to  it,  and  this  is
the  answer  now  1

Yes

Alta. All  right,  thank  you.

— —  partly. There will be more later, but for  the
moment  take  this.
Alta. I understand. Now  do you wish all this writing  to
be  sent  to  Sir  Oliver  this  time  ?
Why,  yes.

Alta. I  just  wanted  to  have  it  clearly  understood.

You  understand.
Alta. All  right,  thank  you.

And  when  you  get  ready  please  say  I  have  a  friend
here  who  wishes  to  speak  to  Lodge.  One  message
was  ask  L  if  he  remembers  about  screen  and  if  it
has  any  significance  to  him.  L  third.  L  third.  I
used  to  throw  pillows  at  him.
Alta. All  right.

Hodgson  says  so.
Alta. Yes,  you  used  to  throw  pillows  at  Sir  Oliver  ?

Some  one  is  here  who  sends  message

Alta. Yes,  I  understood  that.

  but  no  names  come  to  me,  but  L onel L  oni

(Miss  Rob  bins says to Miss Piper in an  undertone
"  Lionel  "  ?)

(Miss  Piper  replies  in  imdertone  to  the  effect  that  she  knew
name  but  did  not  wish  it  to  be  spoken.  The  communi-
cators paid  no  attention,  as  if  they  had  not  heard.)
L  o  n  1  Screen  Never  mind  I  do  not  care  whether
names  are  correctly  given  here  if  they  can  only
be  understood  in  the  very  least.
Alta. Can't  you  try  that  once  more  ?

I  will  listen  for  it.
Alta. That  is  better.

First  letter  sounds  like  L
Alta. Yes,  all  right. Now  what  is  the  second  letter  ?
o  n  d  e No L I  cannot  hear  it  distinctly.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  123


Alt  a. All  right.

L  on  e  1 Lone No  not  quite Oh Li  Lionel.
(During  writing  of  the  last  line  there  was  great  thump-
ing of  hand  on  pad  and  two  pencils were  broken
before  writing  continued  calmly.)
Alt  a. All  right.

Ask  him  about  screen

Alta. Yes,  ask  Lionel  about  screen.

  and  if  to  him  it  signifies  anything.

Alta. Yes,  I  will.

I  have  given  this  message  as  correctly  as  it  can  at

the  moment  be  given.
(Miss  Piper  left  table  a  moment  while  last  was  being
written,  therefore  Miss  Robbins  replies.)
Miss  R.  Thank  you. I  think  we  have  it  all  right.1

Then  why  don't  you  understand  ?
Alta. (Just returned). I understand that this message  is
to  be  sent  across  the  water  to  Sir  Oliver  ?
Yes,  and  ask  him  for  my  sake  to  be  calm,  quiet  and
worry not. Hodgson, Myers. All is well.  ALL
ALL.
Alta. Yes,  all,  all.

The  next  relevant  bit  came  on  18th  January,  1916,  thus  :

(Mrs.  Pipers  Script,  obtained  on  ISth  January,  1916.)

[The  two  pages  previous  to  this  one  were  taken  up
with  advice  for  Mama.  Rector  seemed  rather
troubled  about  her  health. A.  L.  P.]

that  previous  message  (answer)  was  not  com-
plete this  is  why  I  make  the  request  to  hold  message
until  I  return  to  give  it  in  full.
Alta. Do  you  mean  the  message  given  last  Sabbath  ?

Yes  I  mean  message  given  when  Miss  Robbins  was
present  as  we  could  not  speak  out  clearly  neither

1  That  my  sons  Lionel  and  Raymond  used  to  throw  sofa  cushions  at  each
other,  and  once  certainly  knocked  a  screen  over  behind  which  one  of
them  had  dodged,  is  well  remembered  ;  but  the  trivial  incident  can
hardly  be  considered  evidential,  because  the  Pipers  when  on  a  visit
to  us  may  perhaps  have  seen  some  of  this  play  going  on. O.  J.  L.


124  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

were we prepared to give full and definite  reply.
U.D.
Alta.  Yes.

1  will  return  at  some  future  date  and  complete  message.
Alta. You  wish  me  to  wait  before  sending  that  message  to
Sir  Oliver  till  you  return  again  ?
Yes.

+ Farewell,

Rector
Mine  G.

But  as  nothing  came,  Alta  sent  it  at  last,  and  it  reached
me  10th  May,  1910.


Sequel  to  the  Faunus  Message.

It  now  remains  to  indicate  how  far  Myers  carried
out  his  implied  promise,  and  what  steps  he  took,  or
has  been  represented  as  having  taken,  to  lighten  the
blow — which  it  is  permissible  to  say  was  a  terribly  severe
one.

For  such  evidence  I  must  quote  from  the  record  of
sittings  held  here  in  England  with  mediums  previously
unknown  to  me  and  my  family,  and  by  sitters  who  gave
no  sort  of  clue  as  to  identity.  I  ought  to  explain  here
that  the  junior  members  of  my  family  have  not  hitherto
been  interested  in  any  kind  of  psychical  subject,  and  had
never  either  been  to  a  medium  or  thought  of  going  to  one.
Their  attitude  was  in  fact  healthily  sceptical ;  they  never
read  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  and  they  for  the  most  part  probably
ignored  rather  than  criticised  my  work  in  that  direction.

It  may  be  objected  that  my  own  general  appearance
is  known  or  might  be  guessed.  But  that  does  not
apply  to  members  of  my  family,  who  went  quite  anony-
mously to  private  sittings  kindly  arranged  for  in  London
either  by  Mr.  J.  Arthur  Hill  or  by  friends  in  London,  Dr.
and  Mrs.  Kennedy,  whose  own  personal  experience  caused
them  to  be  sympathetic  and  helpful  ;  and  specially  careful
about  evidence.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survived.  125

The  very  first  sitting  of  this  kind  that  was  held  after
Raymond's  death  was  held  not  explicitly  for  the  purpose
of  getting  into  communication  with  him,  still  less  with
any  remotest  notion  of  finding  out  anything  concerning
Mr.  Myers,  but  mainly  because  a  French  widow  lady,
who  had  been  kind  to  our  daughters  during  winters  in
Paris,  was  staying  with  my  wife  and  was  in  terrible
distress  at  the  loss  of  both  her  beloved  sons  in  the
war,  within  a  week  of  each  other,  so  that  she  was  left
quite  desolate.  To  comfort  her  my  wife  took  her  up
to  London  to  a  sitting  kindly  arranged  for  September  24
by  Mrs.  Kennedy,  who  knew  and  recommended  a  certain
medium,  here  called  Mrs.  A.  Incidentally  I  may  say  that
the  two  sons  of  Madame  communicated  on  this  and  on
another  soon  following  occasion,  though  with  difficulty  ;
that  one  of  them  gave  his  name  completely,  the  other
approximately  ;  and  that  the  mother,  who  was  new  to
the  whole  subject,  was  partially  consoled.  Raymond,  how-
ever, was  represented  as  coming  with  them  and  helping
them,  and  as  sending  some  messages  on  his  own  account ;
but  I  shall  here  quote  only  those  messages  which  bear
upon  the  subject  of  Myers  or  have  any  possible  connexion
with  the  Faunus  message.

Evidential  Messages  obtained  in  England,  referring
to  Raymond  and  Myers.

As  a  kind  of  sequel  to  the  '  Faunus  '  episode,  it  will
be  convenient  now  to  quote  early  references  to  Myers
which  came  through  in  sittings  held  soon  after  Raymond's
death,  so  as  to  note  whether  there  is  any  indication,
obtained  through  entirely  distinct  channels,  that  Myers
took  an  interest  in  him,  and  was  doing  anything  to
help  him  and  me,  as  virtually  promised  in  the  '  Faunus  '
message  sent  to  me  through  Mrs.  Piper  in  America,  on
8th  August,  and  received  early  in  September,  1915.

I  shall  only  extract  here  the  relevant  portions,  detached
from  the  context  :  the  complete  record  in  each  case  is
kept  in  its  proper  place  in  the  series  of  sittings
arranged  according  to  date. Most  of  the  first  two  records


12G


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


consisted  of  messages  to  or  for  the  French  lady  from  her
sons.1

We  heard  first  of  Raymond's  death  on  17th  September,
1915;  and  on  the  25th  September  his  mother  (M.  F.  A.  L.)
who  was  having  her  second  anonymous  sitting  for  the
French  lady  mentioned  above,  had  the  following  spelt  out
by  tilts  of  a  table,  as  purporting  to  come  from  Raymond  :

Tell  father  I  have  met  some  friends  of  his.
m.  f.  a.  l. Can  you  give  any  name  ?

Yes Myers .

That  was  all  on  that  subject  on  that  occasion.

On  Monday,  27th  September,  1915,  I  myself  went
to  London  and  had  my  first  sitting,  between  noon  and
one  o'clock,  with  Mrs.  A.  I  went  to  her  house  or  flat
alone,  as  a  complete  stranger  for  whom  an  appointment
had  been  made  through  Mrs.  Kennedy.  Before  we  began,
Mrs.  A.  informed  me  that  her  '  guide  '  or  '  control  '  was
a  young  girl.  I  had  been  told  of  this  before,  so  I  said
that  I  had  heard  of  this  control.

In  a  short  time,  a  youth  was  described  in  terms  which
distinctly  suggested  Raymond,  and  the  control  brought
messages. I  extract  the  following  :

(From  First  Sitting  of  0.  J.  L.  with  Airs.  A.
21th  September,  1915.)

He  finds  it  difficult,  he  says,  but  he  has  got  so
many  kind  friends  helping  him.  He  didn't  think
when  he  waked  up  first  that  he  was  going  to  be
happy,  but  now  he  is,  and  he  says  lie  is  going  to
be  happier.  He  knows  that  as  soon  as  he  is  a
little  more  ready,  he  has  got  a  great  deal  of  work
to  do.  '  I  almost  wonder,'  he  says,  '  shall  I  be
fit  and  able  to  do  it. They  tell  me  I  shall.'

1  As  this  French  lady,  hardly  ever  in  England,  was  obviously  a
complete  stranger,  not  only  to  the  medium  but  to  Mrs.  Kennedy  also,
I  now  perceive  that  the  messages  to  her  had  rather  a  special  evidential
significance,  neutralising  the  forced  and  unnatural  hypothesis  of  collusion.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  127


o.  j.  l.  Good  !

'  I  have  instructors  and  teachers  with  me.'  Now  he
is  trying  to  build  up  a  letter  of  some  one  ;  M  he
shows  me,

A  short  time  later  he  said  :

'  People  think  I  say  I  am  happy  in  order  to  make
them  happier,  but  I  don't.1  I  have  met  hundreds
of  friends.  I  don't  know  them  all.  I  have  met
many  who  tell  me  that,  a  little  later,  they  will
explain  why  they  are  helping  me.  I  feel  I  have
got  two  Fathers  now.  I  don't  feel  I  have  lost
one  and  got  another  ;  I  have  got  both.  I  have
got  my  old  one  and  another  too — a  pro  tern  father.'

(Here  the  control  ejaculated  '  What's  that  ?  Is  that
right  ?  ' 0.  J.  L.,  chuckling,  replied  '  Yes.')

There  is  a  weight  gone  off  his  mind  the  last  day  or
two  ;  he  feels  brighter  and  lighter  and  happier
altogether,  the  last  few  days.  There  was  confusion
at  first.  He  could  not  get  his  bearings,  didn't
seem  to  know  where  he  was.  '  But  I  was  not  very
long,'  he  says,  '  and  I  think  I  was  very  fortunate  ;
it  was  not  very  long  before  it  was  explained  to
me  where  I  was.'

But  the  most  remarkable  indirect  allusion,  or  apparent
allusion,  to  the  '  Faunus  '  message,  came  at  the  end  of
the  sitting,  after  "  Raymond  "  had  gone,  and  just  before
Mrs.  A.  came  out  of  trance  :

He  is  gone,  but  [the  control]  sees  something  which  is
only  symbolic  ;  she  sees  a  cross  falling  back  on  to  you  ;  very
dark,  falling  on  to  you  ;  dark  and  heavy  looking  ;  and  as  it
falls  it  gets  twisted  round  and  the  other  side  seems  all  light,
and  the  light  is  shining  all  over  you.  It  is  a  sort  of  pale
blue,  but  it  is  white,  and  quite  light  when  it  touches  you.
Yes,  that  is  what  [the  control]  sees. The  cross  looked  dark,

1  This  is  reminiscent  of  a  sentence  in  one  of  his  letters  home  from
the  Front  :  "  As  cheerful  and  well  and  happy  as  ever.  Don't  think
I  am  having  a  rotten  time — I  am  not."  Date  11th  May,  1915  (really
12th). O.  J.  L.


128


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


and  then  it  suddenly  twisted  round  and  became  a  beautiful
light.  The  cross  is  a  means  of  shedding  real  light.  It  is
going  to  help  a  great  deal.

Did  you  know  you  had  a  coloured  Guide  ?  .  .  .  He  says
your  son  is  the  cross  of  light  ;  he  is  the  cross  of  light,  and
he  is  going  to  be  a  light  that  will  help  you  ;  he  is  going  to
help  too  to  prove  to  the  world  the  Truth.  That  is  why  they
built  up  the  dark  cross  that  turned  to  bright.  You  know  ;
but  others,  they  do  so  want  to  know.  [The  control]  is  losing
hold  ;  goodbye.

{From  First  Anonymous  Sitting  of  M.  F.  A.  L.  ivith
Mr.  Z. 21th  September,  1915.)

On  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  27th  September,
1915,  that  I  had  this  first  sitting  with  Mrs.  A.,  Lady
Lodge  had  her  first  sitting  as  a  complete  stranger  with
Mr.  Z.,  a  23rofessi°nal  medium,  who  had  been  invited
for  the  purpose — without  any  name  being  given — to
Mrs.  Kennedy's  house  at  3.30  p.m.

Here  again  Raymond  was  described  with  considerable
accuracy  fairly  early  in  the  sitting,  and  several  identifying
messages  were  given.  Presently  Z.'s  chief  control  asked,
"  Was  he  not  associated  with  Chemistry  ?  "  On  which  I
may  remark  that  my  laboratory  has  been  devoted  to
chemical  things  of  late  ;  though  probably  Z  would  hardly
discriminate  between  Chemistry  and  Physics.  And  the
record  continues,  copied  with  annotations  as  it  stands  :

Was  he  not  associated  with  chemistry  ?  If  not,  some  one
associated  with  him  was,  because  I  see  all  the  things  in  a
chemical  laboratory.

That  chemistry  thing  takes  me  away  from  him  to  a  man
in  the  flesh  [O.  J.  L.  presumably]  and  connected  with  him
a  man,  a  writer  of  poetry,  on  our  side,  closely  connected  with
spiritualism.  He  was  very  clever — he  too  passed  away  out
of  England. [This  is  clearly  meant  for  Myers.]

He  has  communicated  several  times.  This  gentleman  who
wrote  poetry — I  see  the  letter  M — he  is  helping  your  son  to
communicate.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  mid  Survival.  129


[Myers's  presence  and  help  were  also  independently  and
almost  simultaneously  mentioned  by  Mrs.  A.  to  me,  as  reported
above. 0.  J.  L.]

He  is  built  up  in  the  chemical  conditions.

If  your  son  didn't  know  this  man,  he  knew  of  him.  [Yes,
he  was  only  12  when  Myers  died. 0.  J.  L.]

At  the  back  of  the  gentleman  beginning  with  M  and  who
wrote  poetry  is  a  whole  group  of  people.  [The  S.P.R.  Group
doubtless.]  They  are  very  interested.  And  don't  be  surprised
if  you  get  messages  from  them,  even  if  you  don't  know
them.

(Then  [the  control]  stopped,  and  said)  :

This  is  so  important  that  is  going  to  be  said  now,  that
I  want  to  go  slowly,  for  you  to  write  clearly  every  word
(dictating  carefully)  :

"  Not  only  is  the  partition  so  thin  that  you  can  hear  the
operators  on  the  other  side,  but  a  big  hole  has  been  made."  1

This  message  is  for  the  gentleman  Avith  the  chemical  labora-
tory.

[The  control]  continued  :

The  boy — I  call  them  all  boys  because  I  was  over  a  hundred
when  I  lived  here  and  they  are  all  boys  to  me — he  says,
he  is  here,  but  he  says, —

"  Hitherto  it  has  been  a  thing  of  the  head,  now  I  am  come
over  it  is  a  thing  of  the  heart."

"  What  is  more  (here  the  medium  jumped  up  in  his
chair  vigorously,  snapped  his  fingers  excitedly,  and  spoke
loudly),—

"  Good  God,  how  Father  will  be  able  to  speak  out  ;  much
firmer  than  he  has  ever  done,  because  it  will  touch  our  hearts."

(Here  ends  extract  from  Mr.  Z.  Sitting  of  27th  September.
1915.)

No  further  reference  to  Myers  seems  to  have  come
until  a  table  sitting  with  Mrs.  A.  on  the  12th  October,
1915,  at  which  0.  J.  L.  and  M.  F.  A.  L.  were  both
present  as  well  as  Mrs.  Kennedy  ; when  "  Raymond  "  was

1  [Considering  that  my  wife  was  quite  unknown  to  the  medium,  this
is  a  remarkably  evidential  and  identifying  message.  Cf.  passage  in
my  book  Survival  of  Man  containing  this  Tunnel-boring  metaphor  :
page  337  of  large  edition,  page  234  of  shilling  edition. O.  J.  L.]


130


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


spelling  words  through  the  table,  and  I  suggested  his
taking  a  message  to  Myers.  My  message  to  Myers  was
to  the  effect  that  I  understood  about  Faunus  and  the
Poet,  and  that  Myers  might  say  something  more  about  it ;
and  the  only  point  of  interest  about  the  reply  or
comment  is  that  the  two  following  sentences  were  spelled
out,  as  purporting  to  come  either  indirectly  or  directly
from  '  Myers,' —

(1)  "He  says  it  meant  your  sons  transition )."

(2)  "  Your  son  shall  be  mine."

The  next  "  Myers  "  reference  seems  to  be  on  the  29th
October,  1915,  when  I  (0.  J.  L.)  had  a  sitting  unexpectedly
and  unknown  to  my  family  with  Mr.  Z.,  a  sitting  arranged
for  me  by  Mr.  J.  Arthur  Hill  as  for  an  anonymous  friend.

Mr.  Z.'s  chief  control  appeared,  and  after  some  com-
munications, gave  messages  from  a  youth  who  was
identified  as  my  son,  some  of  which  ran  as  follows  :

(Z.  Sitting  of  0.  J.  L.  on  29th  October,  1915.)

Your  commonsense  method  of  approaching  the
subject  in  the  family,  has  been  the  means  of
helping  him  to  come  back  as  he  as  been  able
to  do  ;  and  had  he  not  known  what  you  had
told  him,  then  it  would  have  been  far  more
difficult  for  him  to  come  back.  He  is  very
deliberate  in  what  he  says.  He  is  a  young  man
that  knows  what  he  is  saying.  Do  you  know
F  W  M  ?
o.  j.  l. Yes,  I  do.

Because  I  see  those  three  letters.

Now,  after  them,  do  you  know  S  T,  yes  I  get  S  T,
then  a  dot,  and  then  P  ?  These  are  shown  me  ;
I  see  them  in  light  ;  your  boy  shows  these  things
to  me.

o.  j.  L.  Yes,  I  understand.  (Meaning  that  I  recognised  the
allusion  to  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  poem  St.  Paul.
0.  J.  L.)

Well  he  says  to  me  :  "  He  has  helped  me  so  much,
more  than  you  think. That  is  F  W  M."


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  131

o.  j.  L. Bless  him  !

"  No,"  your  boy  laughs,  "  he  has  got  an  ulterior
motive  for  it  ;  don't  think  it  was  only  for  charity's
sake,  he  has  got  an  ulterior  motive,  and  thinks
that  you  will  be  able  by  the  strength  of  your
personality  to  do  what  you  want  to  do  now,  to
ride  over  the  quibbles  of  the  fools,  and  to  make
the  Society,  the  Society,  he  says,  of  some  use
to  the  world  ;  more  than  letting  a  lot  of  old
cats  come  together  and  cackle.  Can  you  under-
stand ?  "

o.  J.  L.  Yes.  (Meaning  that  I  supposed  it  represented  a
mood  in  which  he  thought  poorly  of  its  meetings.
But  how  much  of  all  this  represents  a  latent
opinion  of  the  medium,  need  not  be  discussed).
Now  the  boy  says,  "he  helped  me  because,  with
me  through  you,  he  can  break  away  the  dam
that  people  have  set  up.  Later  on,  you  are
going  to  speak  to  them.  It  is  already  on  the
programme,  and  you  will  break  down  the  opposi-
tion because  of  me."  Then  he  says,  "For  God's
sake,  Father,  do  it.  Because  if  you  only  knew,
and  could  only  see  what  I  see  ;  hundreds  of
men  and  women  heart-broken.  And  if  you  could
only  see  the  boys  on  our  side  shut  out,  you
would  throw  the  whole  strength  of  yourself  into
this  work.  But  you  can  do  it."  He  is  very
earnest.  Oh,  and  he  wants —  No,  I  must  stop
him,  I  must  prevent  him,  I  don't  want  him  to
control  the  medium. — Don't  think  me  unkind,  but
I  must  protect  my  medium,  he  would  not  be
able  to  do  the  work  he  has  to  do  ;  the  medium
would  be  ill  from  it,  I  must  protect  him,  the
emotion  would  be  too  great,  too  great  for  both
of  you,  so  I  must  prevent  him  from  controlling.
He  understands,  but  he  wants  me  to  tell  you  this  :
The  feeling  on  going  over  was  one  of  intense  dis-
appointment, he  had  no  idea  of  death.  The
second  too  was  grief.  (Pause.)


132


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


This  is  a  time  when  men  and  women  have  had
the  crust  broken  off  them  ; — a  crust  of  convention,
of — of  indifference  has  been  smashed,  and  every-
body thinks,  though  some  selfishly.

Now,  returning  to  him,  how  patient  he  is  !  He
was  not  always  so  patient.  After  the  grief,  there
was  a  glimmering  of  hope,  because  he  realised
that  he  could  get  back  to  you  ;  and  because
his  Grandmother  came  to  him.  Then  his  brother
was  introduced  to  him.  Then,  he  says,  other
people.  My-erse,  '  Myerse,'  it  sounds  like — do
you  know  what  he  means  ? — came  to  him,  and  then
he  knew  he  could  get  back.  He  knew.  [?  '  he,'
but  my  note  has  '  we.' O.  J.  L.]

Now  he  wants  me  to  tell  you  this  :  That  from
his  death,  which  is  only  one  of  thousands,  that
the  work  which  he  (I  have  to  translate  his  ideas
into  words,  I  don't  get  them  verbatum  [sic])
the  work  which  he  volunteered  to  be  able  to
succeed  in.  No,  that's  not  it.  The  work  which
he  enlisted  for,  that  is  what  he  says,  only  he
was  only  a  unit  and  seemingly  lost, — yet  the
very  fact  of  his  death  will  be  the  means  of  pushing
it  on.  Now  I  have  got  it.  By  his  passing
away,  many  hundreds  will  be  benefitted.

II.

The  Group  Photograph  Incident.

It  will  be  understood,  I  hope,  that  the  above  extracts
from  sittings  have  been  reproduced  here  in  order  to  show
that,  if  we  take  the  incidents  at  their  face  value,  Myers
had  redeemed  his  Faunus  promise  and  had  lightened  the
blow  by  looking  after  and  helping  my  son  on  '  the  other
side.'  I  now  propose  to  make  some  further  extracts —
of  a  more  evidential  character — tending  to  establish
the  survival  of  my  son's  own  personality  and  memory.
There have been several of these evidential  episodes,


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  133


making  strongly  in  this  direction  ;  but  I  select,  for
description  here,  one  relating  to  a  certain  group  photo-
graph which  we  were  told  of  through  two  mediums,  but  of
which  we  normally  knew  nothing  till  afterwards.

Raymond  was  killed  on  the  14th  of  September,  1915.

The  first  reference  to  a  photograph  taken  of  him  with
other  men  was  made  by  Mr.  Z.  at  M.  F.  A.  L.'s  first
sitting  with  Z.  in  Mrs.  Kennedy's  house,  on  27th  Septem-
ber, 1915,  thus  :

(Extract  from  M.  F.  A.  L.'s  Anonymous  Sitting  with
Mr.  Z.  on  September  21th,  1915.)

You  have  several  portraits  of  this  boy.  Before  he  went
away  you  had  got  a  good  portrait  of  him — two — no,  three.
Two  where  he  is  alone  and  one  where  he  is  in  a  group  of
other  men.  He  is  particular  that  I  should  tell  you  of  this.
In  one  you  see  his  walking-stick —  (The  control  here  put
an  imaginary  stick  under  his  arm.)

We  had  single  photographs  of  him  of  course,  and  in
uniform,  but  we  did  not  know  of  the  existence  of  a
photograph  in  which  he  was  one  of  a  group,  and  M.  F.  A.  L.
was  sceptical  about  it,  thinking  that  it  might  well  be
only  a  shot  or  guess  on  the  part  of  the  medium  at  some-
thing probable.  But  Mrs.  Kennedy  (as  Note-taker)  had
written  down  most  of  what  was  said,  and  this  record  was
kept,  copied,  and  sent  to  Mr.  Hill  in  the  ordinary  course
at  the  time.  M.  F.  A.  L.  describes  herself  as  feeling
somewhat  '  ashamed  '  of  what  seemed  palpably  a  mere
guess.

I  was  myself,  however,  rather  impressed  with  the
emphasis  laid  on  it — "  he  is  particular  that  I  should  tell
you  of  this  " — and  accordingly  made  a  half-hearted  enquiry
or  two  ;  but  nothing  more  was  heard  on  the  subject
for  two  months.  On  Monday,  November  29th,  however,
a  letter  came  from  Mrs.  Cheves,  a  stranger  to  us,  mother
of  Captain  Cheves  of  the  R.A.M.C.,  who  had  known
Raymond  and  had  reported  to  us  concerning  the  nature
of  his  wound,  and  who,  I  hope,  is  still  continuing  good


134


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


work  at  the  Front.  Mrs.  Cheves'  welcome  letter,  dated
November  28th,  1915,  ran  as  follows  :

My  son,  who  is  M.O.  to  the  2nd  South  Lanes,  has  sent
us  a  group  of  officers  taken  in  August,  and  I  wondered  whether
you  knew  of  this  photo  and  had  had  a  copy.  If  not  may
I  send  you  one,  as  we  have  half  a  dozen  and  also  a  key  ?
I  hope  you  will  forgive  my  writing  to  ask  this,  but  I  have
often  thought  of  you  and  felt  so  much  for  you  in  your  great
sorrow.

M.  F.  A.  L.  at  once  wrote,  enthusiastically  thanking
her,  and  asking  for  it  ;  but  fortunately  it  was  not  sent
then.

Before  it  came  I  (0.  J.  L.)  was  having  a  sitting  with
Mrs.  A.  alone  at  her  house  on  December  3rd,  and  on
this  occasion,  among  other  questions,  I  asked  carefully
concerning  the  photograph,  wishing  to  get  more  detailed
information  about  it  before  it  was  seen.  And  the  answers
were  thus  reported  and  recorded  at  the  time — the  typing
out  of  the  sitting  being  all  done  before  the  photograph
arrived.  By  this  time  my  identity  was  well  known  to
Mrs.  A.

(Extract  from  the  Record  of  0.  J.  L.'s  Sitting  with
Mrs.  A.,  December  '3rd,  1915.)

[The  Control.]  Now  ask  him  some  more.

o.  J.  l.  Well,  he  said  something  about  having  a  photo-

graph taken  with  some  other  men.  We
haven't  seen  that  photograph  yet.  Does  he
want  to  say  anything  more  about  it  ?  He
spoke  about  a  photograph.
Yes.  but  he  thinks  it  wasn't  here.  He  looks
at  [the  control],  and  he  says,  it  wasn't  to  you.
o.  J.  l.  No,  he's  cpiite  right. It  wasn't. Can  he  say

where  he  spoke  of  it  ?
He  says  it  wasn't  through  the  table,
o.  J.  l.  No,  it  wasn't.

It wasn't here at all. He didn't know  the
person that he said it through. The  con-


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  135

ditions  were  strange  there — a  strange  house.
[Quite  true,  it  was  said  through  Mr.  Z.  in
Mrs.  Kennedy's  house.]

o.  j.  l.  Do  you  recollect  the  photograph  at  all  ?

He  thinks  there  were  several  others  taken  with
him,  not  one  or  two,  but  several.

o.  J.  l.  Were  they  friends  of  yours  ?

Some  of  them,  he  says.  He  didn't  know  them
all,  not  very  well.  But  he  knew  some  ;  he
heard  of  some  ; they  were  not  all  friends.

o.  j.  l.  Does  he  remember  how  he  looked  in  the  photo-

graph 1

No,  he  doesn't  remember  how  he  looked,
o.  J.  l.  No,  no,  I  mean  was  he  standing  up  ?

No,  he  doesn't  seem  to  think  so. Some  were

raised up  round, he was sitting  down,  and

some were raised up at the back of  him.

Some  were  standing,  and  some  were  sitting,  he

thinks.

o.  J.  L.  Were  they  soldiers  ?

He  says  yes — a  mixed  lot.  Somebody  called
C  was  on  it  with  him  ;  and  somebody  called
R, — not  his  own  name,  but  another  R.

K,  K,  K, — he  says  something  about  K.

He  also mentions  a  man  beginning  with B —
(indistinct muttering something like  Berry,
Burney — then  clearly)  but  put  down  B.
o.  J.  l.  I  am  asking  about  the  photograph  because  we

haven't  seen  it  yet.  Somebody  is  going  to
send  it  to  us.  We  have  heard  that  it  exists,
and  that's  all.

[While  this  is  being  written  out,  the  above
remains  true.  The  photograph  has  not  yet
come.]

He  has  the  impression  of  about  a  dozen  on  it.
A  dozen,  he  says,  if  not  more.  [The  control]
thinks  it  must  be  a  big  photograph.

No,  he  doesn't  think  so,  he  says  they  were  grouped
close  together,
o.  J.  l.  Did  he  have  a  stick  ?


13G


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


He  doesn't  remember  that.  He  remembers  that
somebody  wanted  to  lean  on  him,  but  he  is
not  sure  if  he  was  taken  with  some  one
leaning  on  him.  But  somebody  wanted  to
lean  on  him  he  remembers.  The  last  what
he  gave  you,  what  were  a  B,  will  be  rather
prominent  in  that  photograph.  It  wasn't  taken
in  a  photographer's  place.
Was  it  out  of  doors  ?
Yes,  practically.

(The  control  sotto  voce): What  you  mean,  'yes
practically  '  ; must  have  been  out  of  doors  or
not  out  of  doors. You  mean  'yes,'  don't  you  ?
[The control] thinks he means 'yes,'  because

he  says  '  practically.'
It  may  have  been  a  shelter.

It  might  have  been. Try  to  show  [the  control].
At  the back  he shoAvs me lines  going  down.
It  looks  like  a  black  back-ground,  with  lines
at  the  back  of  them. (The  control  here  kept
drawing  vertical  lines  in  the  air.)

There  was,  for  some  reason,  considerable  delay  in  the
arrival  of  the  photograph  ;  it  did  not  arrive  till  the
afternoon  of  December  7th.  Meanwhile,  on  December
6th,  Lady  Lodge  had  been  looking  up  Raymond's  Diary,
which  had  been  returned  from  the  Front  with  his  kit,  and
found  an  entry  on  August  24th,  "  Photo  taken."  (A
statement  will  follow  to  this  effect.)

Now  Raymond  had  only  had  one  "leave"  home  since
going  to  the  Front,  and  this  leave  was  from  July  16th
to  the  20th  ;  hence  the  photograph  had  not  been  taken
then,  and  so  he  could  not  have  told  us  anything  about
it,  nor  did  he  make  any  mention  of  it  in  letters.  The
exposure  was  only  made  21  days  before  his  death,  and
some  days  may  have  elapsed  before  he  saw  a  print,
if  he  ever  saw  one.  He  certainly  never  mentioned  it
in  his  letters.  We  were  therefore  in  complete  ignorance
concerning  it  ;  and  only  recently  had  we  normally  become
aware  of  its  existence.


o.  J.  L.


o.  J.  L.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  137


On  the  morning  of  December  7th,  another  note  came
from  Mrs.  Cheves,  in  answer  to  a  question  about  the
delay  ;  and  this  letter  said  that  the  photograph  was
being  sent  off.  Accordingly  0.  J.  L.,  thinking  that  the
photograph  might  be  coming  at  once,  dictated  a  letter
to  Mr.  Hill,  recording  roughly  his  impression  of  what  the
photograph  would  be  like,  on  the  strength  of  the  com-
munication received  by  him  through  Mrs.  A.  ;  and  this
was  posted  by  A.  E.  Briscoe  about  lunch-time  on  the
same  day.  (See  statement  by  Mr.  Briscoe  at  the  end.)
The  statement  by  0.  J.  L.  to  Mr.  Hill  ran  thus  :

Concerning  that  photograph  which  Raymond  mentioned
through  Z.  [saying  this  :  "  One  where  he  is  in  a  group  of
other  men.  He  is  particular  that  I  should  tell  you  of  this.
In  one  you  see  his  walking  stick."  1],  he  has  said  some  more
about  it  through  Mrs.  A.  But  he  is  doubtful  about  the
stick.  What  he  says  is  that  there  is  a  considerable  number
of  men  in  the  photograph  ;  that  the  front  row  is  sitting,  and
that  there  is  a  back  row,  or  some  of  the  people,  grouped  and
set  up  at  the  back  ;  also  that  there  are  a  dozen  or  more
people  in  the  photograph,  and  that  some  of  them  he  hardly
knew  ;  that  a  B  is  prominent  in  the  photograph,  and  that
there  is  also  a  C  ;  that  he  himself  is  sitting  down,  and  that
there  are  people  behind  him,  one  of  whom  either  leant  on  his
shoulder,  or  tried  to.

The  photograph  has  not  come  yet,  but  it  may  come  any
day  now  ; so  I  send  this  off  before  I  get  it.

The  actual  record  of  what  was  said  in  the  sitting  is  being
typed,  but  the  above  represents  my  impression  of  it.

The  photograph  was  delivered  at  Mariemont  between
3  and  4  p.m.  on  the  afternoon  of  December  7th.  It  was
a  wet  afternoon,  and  the  package  was  received  by  my
daughter  Rosalynde,  who  took  the  wet  wrapper  off  it.
Her  mother,  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  was  resting,  and
did  not  see  it  till  after  tea,  after  Mrs.  Isaac  Thompson
had  arrived  on  a  visit.  About  7  o'clock,  M.  F.  A.  L.
brought it into the study to show me, together  with

1  This  bit  not  written  to  J.  A.  H.,  but  is  copied  from  Z.'s  sitting  for  con-
venience.


138


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


the  "  key  "  which  Mrs.  Cheves  had  sent  showing  who
the  different  people  were.  I  deferred  its  examination
till  later  in  the  evening,  after  I  had  done  my  letters.

Considered  as  a  photograph  of  Raymond  it  is  bad,
but  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  evidence  it  is
good.  For  on  examining  the  photograph,  we  found  that
every  peculiarity  mentioned  by  Raymond,  unaided  by  the
medium,  was  strikingly  correct.  The  walking-stick  is
there,  but  Z.  had  put  a  stick  under  his  arm  (which  is
not  correct),  and  in  connection  with  the  back-ground
Mrs.  A.'s  control  had,  by  gesture,  emphasised  vertical
lines.  There  are  six  prominent  nearly  vertical  lines  on
the  roof  of  the  shed,  but  the  horizontal  lines  in  the  back-
ground generally  are  equally  conspicuous.

By  "  a  mixed  lot,"  we  understood  members  of  different
Companies — not  all  belonging  to  Raymond's  Company,  but
a  collection  from  several.  This  must  be  correct,  as  they
are  too  numerous  for  one  Company.  It  is  probable  that  they
all  belong  to  one  Regiment,  except  perhaps  one,  whose  cap
seems  to  have  a  thistle  badge  instead  of  three  feathers.

As  to  "  prominence,"  I  have  asked  several  people
which  member  of  the  group  seemed  to  them  the  most
prominent,  and  except  as  regards  central  position,  a  well-
lighted  standing  figure  on  the  right  has  usually  been  pointed
to  as  most  prominent. This  one  is  a  "  B  "  as  stated.

Some  of  the  officers  must  have  been  barely  known  to
Raymond,  while  some  were  his  friends.  Officers  whose
names  begin  with  B,  with  C,  and  with  R,  were  among
them  ;  there  was  not  any  name  beginning  with  K,
but  there  is  a  name  beginning  with  a  hard  C.

Some  of  the  group  are  sitting  while  others  are  standing
behind.  Raymond  is  one  of  the  sitting,  and  his  walking-
stick  or  regulation  cane  is  lying  across  his  feet.

The  back-ground  is  dark,  and  is  conspicuously  lined.

It  is  out  of  doors,  close  in  front  of  a  shed  or  military
hut,  pretty  much  as  suggested  to  me  by  the  statements
made  in  the  Mrs.  A.  Sitting — what  I  called  a  "  shelter."

But  by  far  the  most  striking  piece  of  evidence,  is
the  fact  that  some  one  sitting  behind  Raymond  is  leaning
or resting a hand on his shoulder. The  photograph


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  130

fortunately  shows  the  actual  occurrence,  and  almost  indi-
cates that  Raymond  was  rather  annoyed  with  it  ;  for
his  face  is  a  little  screwed  up,  and  his  head  has  been
slightly  bent  to  one  side  out  of  the  way  of  the  man's
arm.  It  is  the  only  case  in  the  photograph  where  one
man  is  leaning  or  resting  his  hand  on  the  shoulder  of
another,  and  I  judge  that  it  is  a  thing  not  unlikely  to
be  remembered  by  the  one  to  whom  it  occurred.

[Added  later]  :  In  answer  to  an  enquiry,  Mrs.  Cheves
wrote  to  us  on  December  10th  saying  that  she  was
unable  to  tell  us  anything  about  that  photograph,  that
her  son  had  ordered  them  to  be  sent  to  her  just  as  they
were,  and  that  she  did  not  have  it  enlarged  ;  also  that
she  would  write  and  ask  him  to  tell  us  all  he  knew
about  it.  I  wrote  at  the  same  time  to  Gale  &  Polden,
of  Aldershot,  the  photographers  whose  name  is  printed
at  the  foot  of  the  photograph,  asking  them  to  send  me
further  particulars,  and,  if  possible,  extra  copies.

I  thus  obtained  prints  of  all  the  accessible  photographs
which  had  been  taken  at  the  same  time.  The  size  of
these  prints  was  5  by  7.

I  found  that  the  group  had  been  repeated,  with  slight
variations,  three  times — the  officers  all  in  the  same  relative
positions  but  not  in  identically  the  same  attitudes.
One  of  them  is  the  same  as  the  one  we  had  seen,  with
Captain  S.'s  hand  resting  on  Raymond's  shoulder,  and
Raymond's  head  leaning  a  little  on  one  side,  as  if  rather
annoyed.

In  another  the  hand  had  been  removed,  being  supported
by  Captain  S.'s  stick  ;  and  in  that  one  Raymond's  head
is  upright.  This  corresponds  to  his  uncertainty  as  to
whether  he  was  actually  taken  with  the  man  leaning  on
him  or  not.

In  a  third  variation,  however,  Captain  S.'s  leg  rests
on  or  touches  Raymond's  shoulder,  and  the  slant  of
the  head  and  slight  look  of  annoyance  have  returned.

As  to  the  evidential  value  of  the  whole  communication,
it  will  be  observed  that  there  is  something  of  the  nature


140


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


of  cross-correspondence,  of  a  simple  kind,  in  the  fact
that  a  reference  to  the  photograph  was  made  by  one
medium,  and  details  given  by  another  in  answer  to
a  question  which  I  asked  about  it  :  the  communicator
showing  that  he  was  aware  that  the  previous  reference
had  been  made  through  another  channel.  (See  report
above,  page  134.)

And  the  elimination  of  ordinary  telepathy  from  the
living,  except  under  the  far-fetched  hypothesis  of  the
unconscious  influence  of  complete  strangers,  was  excep-
tionally complete  ;  inasmuch  as  the  whole  of  the  infor-
mation was  recorded  before  any  of  us  had  seen  the
photograph.


Chronological  Summary.


July  20th,  1915.
August  24th,  1915.


September  14th,  1915.
September  21th,  1915.

October  15th,  1915.


November  29th,  1915.


December  3rd,  1915.


December  6th,  1915.


Raymond's  last  visit  home.

Photograph  taken  at  the  Front
(as  shown  by  Raymond's  pri-
vate diary)  but  not  men-
tioned by  him.

Raymond's  death.

Mr.  Z.'s  control's  mention  of
the  photograph.

Negatives  sent  from  France
to  Gale  &  Polden  for  re-
production.

Mrs.  Cheves  wrote  spon-
taneously, saying  that  she
had  a  group-photograph  of
some  2nd  South  Lancashire
Officers,  which  she  could  send
if  desired.

Mrs.  A.'s  control's  further  de-
scription of  a  photograph
which  had  been  mentioned
through  another  medium.

M.  F.  A.  L.  found  an  entry
in  Raymond's  Diary  showing
that  a  photogi-aph  had  been
taken  on  August  24th.


lxxti.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  141


Morning  of  Dec.  1th,  1915. To  make  sure,  0.  J.  L.  wrote

to  J.  A.  H.  his  impression  of
the  photograph  before  it  came.

Afternoon  of  Dec.  1th,  1915. Arrival  of  the  photograph.

Evenings  of  Dec.  1  and  8,  1915.  The  photograph  was  shown  to

the  home  members  of  the
family.


Appendix  to  the  Group  Photograph  Incident.

Statement  by  Raymond's  mother  (M.  F.  A.  L.)

Four  days  ago  (December  6th),  I  was  looking  through  my
son  Raymond's  Diary  which  had  been  returned  with  his  kit
from  the  Front.  (The  edges  are  soaked,  and  some  of  the
leaves  stuck  together,  with  his  blood.)  I  was  struck  by
finding  an  entry  "  Photo  taken  "  under  the  date  August  24th,
and  I  entered  the  fact  in  my  own  Diary  at  once,  thus  :
December  Gth.  "  Read  Raymond's  Diary  for  first  time,  saw
record  of  photo  taken  August  24th."

(Signed) Mary  F.  A.  Lodge.

10th  December,  1915.

Statement  by  A.  E.  Briscoe.

The  letter  dictated  to  Mr.  Hill,  recording  roughly  Sir  Oliver's
impression  of  what  the  photograph  would  be  like,  was  written
out  by  me  on  the  morning  of  Tuesday,  December  7th,  at
Mariemont  ;  it  was  signed  by  Sir  Oliver  at  about  noon,  and
shortly  afterwards  I  started  for  the  University,  taking  that  and
other  letters  with  me  for  posting  in  town.  I  went  straight
to  the  University,  and  at  lunch-time  (about  1.30)  posted  the
packet  to  Mr.  Hill  at  the  General  Post  Office.

(In  the  packet,  I  remember,  there  was  also  a  letter  on
another  subject,  and  a  printed  document  from  Mr.  Gow,  the
Editor  of  "  Light.")

(Signed) A.  E.  Briscoe.

8th  December,  1915.


142


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Statement  by  Eosalynde  Lodge.

I  was  sitting  in  the  library  at  Marie mont  about  3.45  on
Tuesday  afternoon  the  7th  December,  1915,  when  Harrison
came  in  with  a  flat  cardboard  parcel  addressed  to  Mother.
Mother  was  resting  ;  and  as  the  paper,  wrapping  up  what  I
took  to  be  the  photograph,  was  wet  from  the  rain,  I  undid
it  and  left  the  photograph  in  tissue  paper  on  a  table,  having
just  glanced  at  it  to  see  if  it  was  the  one  we'd  been  waiting
for.

No  one  saw  it  or  was  shown  it  till  after  tea  when  I  showed
it  to  Mother.  That  would  be  about  6.0.  Mrs.  Thompson,
Lorna,  and  Barbara,  now  also  saw  it.  Honor  was  not  at
home  and  did  not  see  it  till  later.

(Signed) R.  V.  Lodge.

8th  December,  1915.

Mr.  Alfred  Cress  well,  of  the  Edgbaston  Meteorological
Observatory,  has  now  kindly  supplied  me  with  the  record
of  his  automatic  rain  gauge  for  the  day  on  which  the
photograph  arrived — Tuesday,  7th  December,  1915.

The  curve  shows  that  at  1.30  p.m.  rainfall  began,  that
by  2  p.m.,  three-hundredths  of  an  inch  had  fallen,  and
that  rain  continued  without  ceasing  till  9  p.m.  ;  by
which  time  four-tenths  of  an  inch  had  fallen.

So  it  was  clearly  a  wet  afternoon,  in  accordance  with
the  above  testimony  on  pages  137  and  142.

Remarks  on  the  Photographs  by  J.  A.  H.

Thank  you  very  much  for  sight  of  the  3  photographs.
The  vertical  lines  at  the  back  struck  me  at  once,  and,  remem-
bering that  one  man  was  said  to  be  "  prominent,"  but  with
no  recollection  further,  I  looked  for  the  man  who  seemed
most  so,  and  at  once  fixed  on  the  man  standing  up  on  the
extreme  right,  probably  because  of  the  strong  light  on  his
shoulder.  Then  re-reading  the  account  I  find  that  this  is
Capt.  Boast,  fitting  in  with  the  prominent  man  whose  name
begins  with  B. The  whole  case  is  excellent.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  143


Normal  Information  about  the  Photograph.

Extract  from  a  letter  by Captain  Sydney T.  Boast  from  the
Trenches,  dated  7  May,  1916,  to  Mrs.  Case,  and  lent  me  to  see.

Some  months  ago  (last  summer)  the  Officers  of  our  Battalion
had  their  photo  taken.  .  .  .  You  see  the  photographer  who
took  us  was  a  man  who  had  been  shelled  out  of  house  and
home,  and  as  he  had  no  means  of  doing  the  photos  for  us,
we  bought  the  negatives,  and  sent  them  along  to  be  finished
in  England.

Letter  to  0.  J.  L.  from  the  Photographers  to  whom  the
Negatives  had  been  sent  by  Captain  Boast.

Aldershot,  1  July,  1916.
"  With  further  reference  to  your  letter,  we  have  looked
into  this  matter  and  we  find  that  we  received  the  negatives
from  Captain  Boast  on  the  15th  October,  1915.  We  did  not
send  any  set  of  prints  out  to  the  Front  to  Captain  Boast,
although  we  had  a  great  many  orders  sent  in  to  us  by  the
various  Officers  for  copies  to  be  sent  to  addresses  in  England.
We  think,  however,  that  they  must  have  seen  prints  of  these
before  the  negatives  were  sent  to  us."

(Signed) Gale  &  Polden.

Letter  from  Captain  Boast  to  0.  J.  L.

In  answer  to  a  special  enquiry  addressed  to  Captain
Boast  at  the  Front,  he  has  been  good  enough  to  favour
me  with  the  following  letter  :

10  July,  1916.

Dear  Sir,

Your  letter  of  the  4th  July  has  just  reached  me.
The  proofs  of  the  photographs  referred  to  were  received  by
me  from  the  photographer  at  Reninghelst,  two  or  three  days
after  being  taken.  To  the  best  of  my  belief  your  son  saw
the  proofs,  but  I  cannot  now  say  positively.  I  obtained
particulars of recpiirements from the officers forming  the


144


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


group,  but  the  photographer  then  found  he  was  unable  to
obtain  paper  for  printing.  I  therefore  bought  the  negatives
and  sent  them  home  to  Gale  and  Poklen.  In  view  of  the
fact  that  your  son  did  not  go  back  to  the  trenches  till  12  Sept.
1915,  it  is  highly  probable  that  he  saw  the  proofs,  but  he
certainly  did  not  see  the  negatives.

Yours  faithfully,

(Signed) Sydney  T.  Boast.

We  thus  learn  :

(a)  That  the  photographs  were  developed  in  France  and
a  proof  shown  to  some  officers  ;  though  whether  Raymond
was  one  who  saw  the  proofs  is  uncertain.  Captain  Boast
thinks  that  he  probably  saw  a  proof,  but  could  not
possibly  have  had  a  print  to  send  home.

(b)  That  the  date  on  which  the  negatives  were  bought
and  sent  home  for  reproduction  was  such  that  they  did
not  reach  the  firm  in  England  till  October  15th,  which
was  long  after  the  date  (September  27th)  when  a  group
photograph  was  mentioned  to  me  through  the  medium
Mr.  Z.

The  photographs  are  only  shown  here  because  of  their
evidential  interest.  Considered  as  likenesses  of  Raymond,
they  are  exceptionally  bad  ;  he  appears  shrunk  into  an
uncomfortable  position.

Concluding  Note.

Note  that  the  establishment  of  a  date  in  August  for
the  taking  of  the  photograph,  as  mentioned  first  in  Mrs.
Cheves'  letter  and  now  confirmed,  is  important,  because
the  last  time  we  ever  saw  Raymond  was  in  July.

To  my  mind  the  whole  incident  is  rather  exceptionally
good  as  a  piece  of  evidence  ;  and  that  "  Raymond  "
expected  it  to  be  good  evidence,  is  plain  from  Z.'s  con-
trol's statement,  at  that  first  reference  to  a  photograph
on  27th  September,  viz.  "He  is  particular  that  I  should
tell  you  of  this."  This  sentence  it  probably  was  which
made  me  look  out  for  such  a  photograph,  and  take  pains
to  get  records  soundly  made  beforehand.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  145


In  most  evidence  there  is  some  flaw.  There  may  be
one  in  this,  but  I  have  not  yet  discovered  it.  Our  com-
plete ignorance,  even  of  the  existence  of  the  photograph,
in  the  first  place,  and  secondly  the  gradual  manner  in
which  the  details  normally  came  to  our  knowledge,
so  that  we  were  able  to  make  provision  for  getting
the  supernormally  acquired  details  definitely  noted
beforehand,  seem  to  me  to  make  it  a  first  class  case.
While  as  to  the  amount  of  coincidence  between  the
description  and  the  actual  photograph,  that  surely  is  quite
beyond  chance  or  guess-work.  For  not  only  are  many
things  right,  but  practically  nothing  is  wrong.


Additional  Note  about  the  Photographs.

The  admittedly  unlikely  suggestion  has  been  made
that  one  or  other  of  the  mediums  may  possibly  have
seen  these  photographs  before  anything  was  said  about
them  to  us.  In  the  case  of  Mr.  Z.  the  information
given  definitely  negatives  this  suggestion  ;  for  the  negatives
did  not  arrive  in  this  country  till  October  15th,  while
Z.'s  first  mention  of  such  a  photograph  was  on  September
27th.

In  the  case  of  Mrs.  A.  I  have  seen  her  and  catechised
both  her  and  her  control.  The  answers,  very  honestly
given,  are  as  follows  :

First  from  Mrs.  A.  in  ordinary  state  and  quite  normal.
Second from Mrs. A.'s control, i.e. from Mrs.  A.
in the entranced condition, when the  control
appears  to  have  knowledge  and  memory  separate
from  her  own.

Catechising  of  Mrs.  A.  by  O.  J.  L.  Ylth  July,  1916.

Question.  Do  you  remember  in  any  of  your  sittings  having  seen

photographs  of  Officers  ?
Answer. Yes, a lady called W brought a  photograph

of her husband, — I think it was a head  and

shoulders. She comes from Birmingham.  Quite

a  young  lady.

K


146


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Question.  Did  anyone  bring  a  group  photograph  ?

Answee. No,  I  don't  think  they  have. No,  I  don't  remember

anyone  bringing  a  group  photograph. No,  I  can't

recollect  having  seen  one  at  all.
Question. I  don't  mean  from  Birmingham  ?

Answer. No, I don't remember  anybody  bringing a  group.

Sometimes  people  bring  little  parcels,  and  keep
them  on  their  knee,  but  they  don't  often  show
them  to  me.

Question.  Have  you  seen  a  group  of  officers  at  all  ?

Answer. No,  I  don't  think  so — I  don't  remember  any  group.

As  a  rule,  people  don't  show  me  their  photo-
graphs, they  have  one  wrapped  up  sometimes,
but  they  very  seldom  show  them  to  me.

Question.  Do  you  ever  hear  of  Papers  read  at  meetings  of
the  S.P.R.  ?

Answer. Oh,  you mean  the Psychical  Society  ? Yes,  a  Mrs.

[B.]  told  me  that  she  had  just  come  from  one
where  you  mentioned  me  and  [my  control].  She
only  told  me  the  fact,  and  not  any  particulars —
she  knew  I  should  be  pleased.

Catechising  of  Mrs.  A.'s  Control  by  O.  J.  L.
\<dth  July,  1916.

[Speaking  to  the  control]  When  people  sit  with  you,

do  they  ever  bring  photographs  to  show  you  ?
Yes, they  do,  sometimes. But  [I]  can't  see  them.
[I]  don't want  them  to bring  them, it  doesn't
help  a  bit.  It's  foolish  to  bring  them,  not  many
people  do.

Do they  ever  bring  a  photograph  of  a  group  of
people  ?

No,  they  bring  photograph  of  one  person,  the  one
they  want  to  talk  to. Sometimes  it's  a  big  one
of  the  people  they  want  to  get  at. But  [I]  can't
see  it,  and  it  doesn't  help.
But  do  they  ever  bring  a  group  photograph,  and

ask  you  to  pick  the  one  out  ?
No,  1 1  |  can't  remember  that  they  have  ever  done  that.


O.  J.  L.


O.  J.  L.


O.  J.  L.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  147


No, [I've]  never  seen  a  photograph  of a lot  of
people. It's  just  one  they  bring, and  it's  silly
to  bring  them,  'cos  [I]  can't  see  them,
o.  J.  l. Very  well,  Raymond  will  understand  why  I  ask  this.

Yes,  he  says  he  understands  perfectly,
o.  j.  l. Ask  him  did  he  ever  see  a  print  of  the  photograph  ?

He  says  he  didn't. He  can't  remember  that  he  did.
o.  J.  L. Were  they  developed  out  there  ?

No,  he  doesn't  even  think  they  were  developed.  He
doesn't  remember,
o.  J.  l. But  if  he  never  saw  the  prints,  how  did  he  know
what  they  looked  like  1
He  says,  only  because  he  knew  how  they  was  taken,
o.  j.  l. Yes,  but  he  said  something  about  a  dark  background
with  lines  ?

Yes,  he  means  he  knew  exactly  what  it  would  look

like,  because  he  see'd  it  himself,
o.  j.  l. And  then  he  said  that  one  would  come  out  prominent.
([The  control,  sotto  voce]  :  it  wasn't  you.)
No,  he  says,  it  wasn't  him. No,  he  says,  he  didn't

see it. He can't remember seeing any  print

at  all.

o.  j.  l. Well, Raymond, the photographer seems to  have
been shelled out of house and home,  perhaps
that's  why  he  couldn't  do  them.
Oh,  he  didn't  know  that  till  after.
He  knows  it's  all  very  important,  because  it  does
away with telepathy. But he can't  remember
seeing  even  a  proof,
o.  j.  l. Was  it  a  captain  that  had  the  photographs  taken  ?

Yes,  he  says. Somebody  else  was  keener  than  ho_
was,  but  he  had  the  most  say  about  it.  [Meaning
the  captain.]
o.  j.  l. Was  he  the  prominent  man  ?
Yes.

o.  j.  l. Did  he  arrange  things,  and  then  go  and  stick  himself
there  ?

He's  not  sure.  He  says,  I  don't  want  to  spoil  a
good  thing  by  trying  to  remember  something  when
I'm  hazy  about  it.


148  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

I  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Mrs.  A.  in  her  normal
consciousness  knows  anything  about  the  photograph.
I  have  not  told  her  of  it,  nor  have  I  shown  it  her.
Nor  have  I  mentioned  the  matter  any  further  to  her
control.  When  this  is  published,  if  she  ever  reads  the
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  it  will  be  the  first  time  that  she
becomes  aware  of  the  incident,  unless  some  member  or
associate  of  the  S.P.R.  tells  her  about  it.


III.

The  '  Horace  and  0.  L.'  Episode.

{A  side  issue  of  evidential  interest.)

Mr.  J.  Arthur  Hill,  of  Thornton,  near  Bradford,  on  the
3rd  of  March,  1916,  was  having  a  sitting  with  the
medium,  Mr.  Z.,  in  his  house  at  Thornton  (only  his  sister,
Miss  Hill  (M.  H.),  being  present  to  take  notes),  and  had
handed  to  the  medium  a  scrap  of  my  writing  from
which  everything  identifying  had  been  cut  off.  The
medium  didn't  look  at  it,  but  crushed  the  paper  in
his  hand.  But  it  seemed  to  put  him  into  touch
with  me,  and  with  Myers.  I  judge  this  because  "  Human
Personality  "  was  mentioned  ;  the  "  tunnel  "  simile  was
mentioned  ;  many  of  the  S.P.R.  Group  were  referred  to
like  a  kind  of  composite  portrait,  without  any  attempt
at  sejiaration  or  individual  identification.  And  presently
the  medium  said,  slowly  and  emphatically  :

"Tell  Hill,  tell  Hill— that's  you — I  want  this  transcribed
and  sent  to  0.  L.,  because  it  is  for  him  more  than  for  Hill."

Then  a  special  message  came  through  for  me — a  general
message  of  stimulus  and  encouragement.  Note  that  this
was  the  first  mention  of  0.  L.

Communications  about  the  S.P.R.  Group  continued,  and
presently  Mr.  Hill,  still  feeling  the  influence  of  "Myers"
present,  and  thinking  that  he  might  get  a  cross-corre-
spondence about  the  '  Faunus  '  message  which  had  come


Lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  140


last  year  to  me  through  Mrs.  Piper — as  reported  above —
said  in  a  definite  manner  :

"  Does  Horace  remind  you  of  anything  in  connexion  with
0.  L.  ?  "

The  answer  of  the  medium  is  recorded  as  follows  :

Medium. (After  pause.) Can't  get  his  answer.
(Pause.)

Very  curious. I  see  verses. Too  indefinite.  Verses
in  English  language. '  Oh  had  I  a  little  farm  !  '

What's  this  mean  ? I  get  a  picture  of  two  mice.
M.  h. Two  what  %
j.  a.  h.  Mice.

Medium.  One  mouse  is  very  smooth,  and  nice  :  hair  brushed
prettily  ;  fat.  The  other  is  rough  and  not  so
pretty.  A  little  laugh.  Somebody  is  laughing.
I  am  in  contact  with  some  one  who  hasn't  for-
gotten how  to  laugh.
What  has  that  to  do  with  a  book  ?  A  little  book,
covered  with  leather.  Curious  title  page,  much
worn.  Dear  to  you  through  age.  It  is  held  up
to  me. That's  all.

Mr.  Hill  adds  a  note  as  follows  :

March  7,  1916.

The  sentence  about  the  farm  recalls  nothing  to  me.  Nor
did  the  "  mice  "  at  the  time.  Since,  I  have  remembered
that  there  is  some  fable  about  a  town  mouse  and  a  country
mouse,  but  I  remember  no  more  about  it,  and  I  do  not  know
whether  it  is  in  Horace  or  not.  I  have  read  or  skipped
Horace  in  translations,  but  remember  practically  nothing.  I
have  purposely  not  yet  looked  it  up. J.  A.  H.

Later,  after  the  medium  had  gone,  Mr.  Hill  wrote  to
him  and  asked  if  he  knew  where  '  The  Town  and  Country
Mouse  '  occurred  in  literature.  He  replied — to  the  best
of  his  belief,  in  Prior.  Mr.  Hill  also  asked  him  whether
he  had  ever  read  Horace.  He  replied — hardly  at  all.
He  had  read  translations  of  Virgil  and  Homer,  but  had
found  the  translations  of  Horace  too  bad  to  be  readable.
[See  Appendix  for  his  full  statement  on  the  subject.]


150


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Mr.  Hill  soon  found  out  that  the  "  Town  and  Country
Mouse  "  fable  occurred  in  one  of  Horace's  Satires,  though
of  course  it  is  quoted  or  transcribed  in  many  places  in
literature.  And  when  I  read  the  above  sitting  to  the
family,  I  read  them  also  a  translation  of  Horace's  Satire
n.  G,  about  his  home  life  and  his  little  farm,  and  his
preference  for  country  to  town,  where  there  were  too
many  interruptions  and  distractions.  They  were  struck —
as  I  had  not  been — by  a  close  resemblance  between  the
description  of  Horace's  farm  and  a  more  prosaic  description
which  had  been  given  in  a  letter  by  my  eldest  son,
Oliver  W.  F.  Lodge,  of  his  very  recently  acquired  little
farm  ;  and  this  letter  of  Oliver's  was  hunted  up.  It  is
a  letter  to  his  mother,  dated  6th  January,  1916,  and
part  of  it  is  here  quoted  :

The  farm  is  glorious,  and  we  have  a  little  wood,  and  springs.
The  house  is  not  very  big,  but  it  will  be  good  when  I  have
got  the  new  drains  in. (Signed)  Oliver.

He  had  only  just  gone  out  from  a  town  (Cardiff)  to
live  in  the  country  ;  having  effected  the  move  and  entered
the  farm  at  Christmas.

And  the  following  is  Dr.  Hamilton  Bryce's  translation
of  the  beginning  of  the  6th  Satire,  Book  II.,  of  Horace —
the  one  which  ends  with  the  fable  of  the  Town  and
Country  Mouse  :

This  was  a  wish  of  mine  ; — a  piece  of  land  not  very  large
in  which  there  was  a  garden,  and  near  the  house  a  spring  of
never-failing  water,  and,  over  and  above,  a  little  wood.  The
gods  have  dealt  by  me  more  liberally,  and  better  than  I  hoped.
I  am  content.

It  would  be  quite  characteristic  of  Myers's  intelligence
and  vein  of  humour,  if  he  had  by  any  means  been
informed  of  Oliver's  unexpected  and  rather  surprising
farm  enterprise,  to  bethink  him  of  the  Horace  passage  ;
and  subsequently,  when  suddenly  asked  a  question  con-
necting Horace  with  0.  L.,  that  he  should  switch  from
the  O.  L.  intended,  and  give  an  answer  appropriate
to 0. L. Junior. Thinking  that  thereby  he could  give


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  151

something  which  would  ultimately  be  understood,  and
which,  when  understood,  would  prove  more  evidential — ■
more  completely  eliminating  telepathy  for  instance.  For
telepathy  would  not  have  been  eliminated  by  a  communica-
tion about  Faunus,  since  Mr.  Hill  had  been  privately  told
of  that  incident.  But  nothing  about  Oliver's  farm  could
possibly  be  in  his  knowledge,  nor  in  that  of  the  medium  ;
nor  did  it  happen  that  there  was  any  conscious  knowledge
of  this  particular  portion  of  Horace.  The  only  normal
explanation  seems  to  be,  coincidence.  And  the  question
how  far  coincidence  can  be  considered  sufficient  to  cover
details  of  agreement  in  this  CctSG,  IS  <3j  matter  of  judgment.

Added  June  27th,  1916.

[When  I  read  this  paper  at  the  meeting  of  the  S.P.R.,
Mr.  Piddington  urged  that  the  reference  to  Horace's  farm
was  really,  after  all,  another  allusion  to  Faunus  and  the
tree  trunk,  because  the  accident  had  happened  in  the
wood  on  Horace's  Sabine  Farm.  I  admit  the  fact,
though  I  had  not  recognised  it  before,1  but  I  think  the
reference  is  too  far-fetched  and  indistinct  to  be  considered
a  '  Faunus  '  allusion  ;  and  for  my  own  part  I  adhere  to
the  other  0.  L.  explanation,  though  I  admit  that  the
switch  from  one  0.  L.  to  another  is  curious,  for  in  the
earlier  part  of  Z.'s  utterance  I  was  certainly  the  0.  L.
intended.

I  pay  great  deference  to  Mr.  Piddington's  opinion  in
such  matters,  and  it  will  be  instructive  to  a  reader  to
have  the  matter  argued  before  him.  In  favour  of  Mr.
Piddington's  interpretation  is  the  fact  that  the  question
referred  to  me,  and  that  the  questioner  expected  a  Faunus-
tree-trunk  answer.  Against  that  interpretation  I  call
attention  to  the  medium's  mention  of  "  verses  in  the
English  language,"  and  to  the  migration  from  Town  to
Country  represented  by  the  fable  of  the  two  mice.  These
are  very  appropriate  to  my  son,  0.  L.  Junior,  who  has
published  a  volume  of  poetry,  and  quite  inappropriate  to

1  Since  the  episode  I  have  read  Sir  Archibald  Geikie's  article  in
the  Quarterly  for  April,  1916,  called  "  Horace  and  his  Sabine  Farm."


152


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[paet


myself  :  though  it  is  true  that  they  were  not  definitely
applied  to  either  of  us  by  the  utterance  of  the  Z  control.

Adhering  for  the  present  to  my  own  view,  I  argue  in  its
favour  thus  :  Mr.  Myers  knew  my  son  Oliver  as  a  boy,  and
was  kindly  interested  in  his  literary  ability  and  early
poetic  faculty.  On  hearing  that  he  had  just  gone  to  live
in  the  country  on  a  little  farm,  he  would  be  not  unlikely
to  think  of  Horace.  If  so,  it  is  quite  in  accordance
with  his  methods  that  he  should  give  the  reference  by
an  allusion  to  two  mice  ;  for  he  would  know  that  thus,
before  long,  it  would  be  identified.  If  this  is  the  true
interjiretation,  it  is  a  case  where  ordinary  telepathy
is  excluded  to  the  uttermost.  Mr.  Piddington's  inter-
pretation, however,  is  of  even  greater  interest,  and  he
has  expressed  his  views  in  a  careful  Note  (see  below,
p.  1G0).

Appendix.

Enquiries  concerning  Normal  Knowledge.

To  ascertain  how  far  it  was  familiar  to  a  literary
scholar  not  specially  classical  that  the  "  Town  and  Country
Mouse  "  fable  occurred  in  Horace  (I  seemed  to  have
an  indistinct  recollection  of  having  heard  the  fact  long
ago  but  had  quite  forgotten  it — I  thought  it  was  probabh'
in  Aesop),  I  wrote,  without  giving  any  reason,  to  my  son
Oliver,  asking  him  if,  without  looking  up,  he  would
tell  me  where  the  fable  occurred  in  literature.  He  replies
this  morning  (16th  March)  :

Before  looking  up  I  thought  the  fable  of  the  Town  and
Country  Mice  had  been  told  by  the  following  :

Aesop  (?).
Phaedrus  (?).

Henryson. The  Burger  Mouse  and  the  Upland  Mouse.
La  Fontaine. Le  Rat  Civile  et  le  Rat  de  Camyaqne.
Gay  (?).

If  you  want  the  order  in  which  the  names  came  to  me,  it
was  :  La  Fontaine,  Henryson,  Aesop,  Phaedrus,  Gay.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  153


On  looking  up  I  find  that  Horace  is  the  chief  Latin
source.

I  have  not  an  Aesop,  Phaedrus,  or  Gay  handy,  and  these  I
am  doubtful  of.

La  Fontaine,  who  otherwise  followed  Horace,  called  them  rats.
Hcnryson's  is  the  most  interesting  version  I  know  of  in  English,
and  1  should  say  that  Horace  is  the  locus  classicus.  If  this
is  not  what  you  want  I  am  delighted  to  send  more.

(Note  by  J.  A.  H.,  March  9th,  1916.)

I  have  found  the  "  two  mice,"  I  think.  It  is  in  the  fable
of  the  City  Mouse  and  the  Country  Mouse,  and  the  Horatian
account  is  in  Book  II.  of  the  Satires  :  No.  6.  And  the  sentence
"  0  had  I  a  little  farm  !  "  well  expresses  the  idea  of  this
Satire,  and  indeed  what  I  now  remember  to  have  been  Horace's
often  repeated  preference  for  country  life.

All  this,  however,  is  common  knowledge,  or  at  least  cannot
safely  be  assumed  to  be  unknown  to  a  reader  like  Z.  ;  though,
as  said  in  the  comments,  it  was  not  known  to  me  supra-
liminally.  I  have  almost  certainly  read  that  Satire,  years
ago,  but  had  evidently  almost  forgotten  its  contents.  If  anyone
had  asked  me,  unexpectedly, — as  I  practically  asked  the
control — to  produce  a  Horatian  reference,  I  could  have  pro-
duced nothing  but  the  Faunus  incident,  which  I  had  read  up
recently  in  Odes,  Book  2,  Nos.  13  and  17.  Further,  in  my
question  I  did  not  indicate  that  it  was  the  poet  Horace  I
was  meaning  ;  so  far  as  anything  I  said  was  concerned,  it
might  have  been  a  reference  to  some  deceased  (or  living)
relative  or  friend  of  "0.  L."  named  Horace.  If  I  were  asked
at  a  time  when  classical  matters  were  not  in  my  mind,  what
"  Horace  "  reminded  me  of,  I  should  probably  say  "  Horace
Duckett,  the  old  International  Rugby  football  player  " —
for  I  knew  him  well,  his  parents  and  himself  happening  to
live  in  a  house  belonging  to  me.

For  the  sake  of  interest,  and  not  because  it  is  evidence,
I  will  try  to  get  Z.'s  statement  of  what  he  knows  about
Horace.  I  will  take  a  copy  of  anything  I  may  write  to
him  about  it


154


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


{Letter  from  J.  A.  H.  to  Mr.  Z.)

March  9,  1916

I  want  to  ask  you,  in  consequence  of  some  things  which
came  through  in  the  trance,  one  or  two  questions.  I  shall
be  extremely  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  be  so  kind  as  to
answer  them,  briefly  but  as  comprehensively  as  you  have  time
for.  I  will  write  them  at  the  head  of  accompanying  sheets,
and  then  you  can  write  answers  underneath  and  can  send
me  the  sheets  back — with  this  letter  also,  unless  you  wish
to  keep  it — just  as  you  like.

(Signed) J.  Arthur  Hill.

{Questions  of  J.  A.  H. Answers  of  Mr.  Z.)

Q.  Are  you  acquainted  with  the  works  of  the  Roman

poet  Horace  ?  If  I  said,  "  What  do  you  remember
in,  or  of,  Horace,  what  would  you  say  ?,"  [Don't
look  anything  tip  before  answering  !  ]

Answer.  Alas  I  know  very  little  of  Horace  as  I  cannot  read
Latin  and  he  is  not  well  translated.  He  is  not
one  of  my  pet  books  I  know  only  a  scrap  about
him  being  the  son  of  a  free  man  and  that  he
wrote  odes  to  Augustus  and  one  of  his  patrons  was

a man whose name commenced with M  .  I

cannot  remember  any  thing  particular  to  quoth  as
I  never  remember  quotations.

q.  Do you know the fable of  the Town  Mouse  and

the  City  Mouse,  or  have  you  any  recollection  of  it,
or  of  where  it  occurs  in  literature  ?

Answer.  Yes  certainly  it  is  one  of  those  fables  that  is  uni-
versal I  believe  it  is  in  Prior  the  English  poet
of  the  time  of  Queen  Ann  and  as  I  have  not
Prior  at  hand  cannot  verify  the  fact.

{Letter  from  Mr.  Z  to  J.  A.  H.)
[Pveceived  March  11,  1916. J.  A.  H.]

[This  letter  is  quoted  to  show  that  Mr.  Z.  is  not  an  unread
man.  Long  residence  abroad  may  partly  account  for
spelling  peculiarities.]

Dear  Mr.  Hill  am  returning  the  sheets  as  you  desire  I
hope  I  have  answered  rightly  I  tried  to  read  Horace  years


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  155

ago  but  some  how  or  the  other  failed,  as  he  has  suffered
from  translators  more  than  any  of  the  classic  poets.  Homer
had  Pope  Virgil  had  Dryden  but  Horace  had  Frances  &  it
is  vile  stuff.  I  have  recently  in  fact  while  in  Scotland  bought
a  copy  of  Chapmans  Homer  which  I  am  reading  for  the
1st  time  for  when  I  read  Homer  I  was  17  &  that  in  Bones
translation  Drydens  Virgil  followed  and  I  have  not  re-read
them  since  I  tried  Frances  Horace  but  alas — even  I  could
not  stick  it.  I  give  you  the  details  of  course  I  see  scraps
of  him  quothed  everywhere  but  to  know  him  as  I  know
Browning  Shakespere  &  Rosseti  no  I  do  not.  How  cold  it
is  here  hi  London  to  day  Thurs  it  is  bitterly  cold  the  wmd
cuts  you  like  a  knife  &  one  longs  for  the  sunshine  I  feel
very  depressed  here  the  psychical  condition  of  London  is
awful  every  one  is  jumpy  &  depressed  I  went  to  a  Theatre
on  Monday  &  was  sorry  I  went  nothing  but  women  &  old
men  I  just  hate  the  war  conditions  but  I  suppose  I  must
wait  for  its  my  Karma all  kind  regards  from  [Z.].

Summary  by  0.  J.  L.

Concerning  the.  evidential  value  of  this  little  bye-episode,
I  will  add  some  comments.

Whatever  Z.  knew  or  did  not  know  of  Horace,  there
was  nothing  in  Mr.  Hill's  question  to  signify  necessarily  the
classical  poet.  Nor  was  there  anything  to  bring  me  into
the  business  normally  ;  because  the  mention  of  0.  L.
had  been  made  by  Z.  himself,  when  switched  clairvoyantly
on  to  me  and  Myers  by  having  a  bit  of  paper  in  my
writing — which,  however,  was  unknown  to  Z.  as  I  had
never  written  to  him — put  into  his  hand.  This  bit  of
paper  was  not  even  looked  at,  but  it  would  have  showed
no  connexion  with  me  even  if  it  had  been  read,  for  it
related  only  to  the  meaning  of  a  few  Greek  words  on
which  Mr.  Hill  had  asked  my  opinion.  However,  Z.,
by  its  aid,  got  on  to  0.  L.  somehow,  and  on  to  Mr.  Myers.

But  when  Mr.  Hill  asked  the  question  about  Horace
and  0.  L.,  no  further  reference  to  me  was  made  by  the
communicator — at  least  on  my  interpretation  of  the
episode  ;  but  instead  of  that  he  showed  intimate  know-
ledge by  switching  ingeniously  on  to  my  eldest  son,  who
had  never  been  thought  of  in  connexion  with  the  subject,
who had  never  been  near  Z.,  had  probably  never  heard


156


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


of  him, — who  is  not  known  personally  to  Mr.  Hill,  and  who
for  some  time  was  not  miderstood  by  any  one  to  be  the
0.  L.  intended,  until  later  when  I  read  the  supernormally
indicated  Horace  Satire  to  the  family.  A  letter  of  my
son  Oliver's  was  then  hunted  up,  and  found  to  correspond.

It  was  just  like  Myers  to  manage  this,  when  a  question
about  Horace  and  0.  L.  Avas  sprung  upon  him,  but  I  do
not  know  any  one  else  who  would  have  the  requisite
knowledge  and  quickness.  The  communicator  through  Z.
had  to  know  about  Oliver's  farm,  and  about  his  recent
transition  to  the  country  ;  "  Myers  "  could  presumably
know  this  through  Raymond.  He  would  also  know  the
initials  0.  L. — which  are  not  the  whole  of  my  son's
initials  indeed,  but  the  only  ones  likely  to  be  remembered
or  even  known  by  Mr.  Myers.  He  had  a  mind  steeped
in  classical  lore,  so  that  directly  a  question  was  asked
about  Horace  and  0.  L.,  a  little  farm  episode  in  relation
to  both  might  jump  to  utterance  ;  the  passage  being
identified  for  us  sufficiently  by  the  easily  found  quotation
about  Town  and  Country  Mice.  As  to  the  0.  L.,  Mr.
Hill,  of  course,  thought  it  meant  me,  for  he  knew  next
to  nothing  about  any  other  O.  L.

IV.

Some  Recent  Piper  Script  Forming  a  Concealed
Sequel  to  the  '  Faunus  '  Message.

Long  after  the  '  Horace  0.  L.'  episode,  but  before  I  read
about  it  to  the  S.P.R.,  I  received  from  America,  on  the
7th  June,  1916,  two  short  pieces  of  Piper  script,  which,
as  possibly  throwing  some  light  upon  the  question  whether
or  not  the  '  Horace  0.  L.'  message  was  in  any  way  con-
nected with  the  '  Faunus  '  message,  are  reproduced  here.
They  were  sent  with  the  following  accompanying  note  :

Letter  from  Alta  Pij>er  to  O.  J.  L.

20th  May,  1916.
The  enclosed  script  was  written  spontaneously  on  the  17th
aud 18th  of  this  month. Mama  was  alone  at  the  time  of


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  157

writing. She made no comments before, during, or  after

the writing, but allowed it to proceed as it would.  The

message  is  wholly  unintelligible  to  us,  but  I  hope  it  will  prove
to  have  some  meaning  for  you.

{Piper  Script  of  llth  May,  1916.)

+  HAIL

I  am  Rector

Mme  G  returns  with  me  and  F.  W.  H.  M.

To  greet  friend  Lodge  You  shall  bear  these  hardships
with  such  resolve  as  befitteth  stalwart  men  J  you  shall  not
altogether  die  but  a  mighty  part  of  xa&  you  will  escape  the
death  goddess  Gladly  will  I  take  the  gifs  of  the  present
and  abandon  [?]  other  things.  Had  I  the  power  of  Bacchus
I  would  preserve  a  home  in  the  island  of  the  blessed  for
the  [sic]  for  the  [sic]  oh  friend  of  other  days  I  do  not
wander  oer  the  earth  an  unlaid  Ghost  but  on  the  wing  or
fleet  of  foot  I  wander  to  find  an  earthly  friend  to  whom  I
can  give  cheer  &  try  truth  [?  "  by  "  instead  of  "  &  try  "].

Farewell  it  will  be  mentioned  elsewhere  wait  for  this

F.  W.  H.  M.
-J-  -f-  Farewell  R
Mme  G


[The  sketch  looks  as  if  it  might  be  a  mountain,  possibly
associated  with  the  F.  W.  H.  M.  signature.  The  rosary-
cross  on  its  left  is  the  characteristic  symbol  of  Mme  G.

Mr.  J.  Arthur  Hill  suggests  that  iEacus  may  be  meant
above  instead  of  Bacchus,  and  it  certainly  seems  to  make
more  obvious  sense,  but  in  the  original  script  the  writing


158  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

is  certainly  Bacchus,  whatever  was  intended  by  the  com-
municator.1

Mr.  Piddington,  by  scrutiny  of  the  original,  lias  detected
that  the  word  "  you  "  which  occurs  twice  was  originally
written  "  I  "  and  "  me  "  respectively,  and  then  written
over  and  converted  into  "  you."  This  will  be  perceived,
on  consideration,  to  be  really  an  excellent  point.  (See  a
footnote  to  Mr.  Piddington's  Note  below.) 0.  J.  L.]

{Supplementary  Piper  Script  of  May  18th,  1916.)

HAIL.

Friend  of  earth  I  greet  you  Rector

Tell  Mrs  Verrall  I  have  answered  her  question  of  long  ago,

Myers.
+  R

To  these  scripts  I  have  been  favoured  with  a  Note  by
Mr.  Bayfield,  here  reproduced  :

Note  by  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.

The  Rectory,  Hertingfordbttry,

Hertford,  6  July,  1916.

Piper  Script  of  May  17,  1916.

"  Gladly  will  I  take  the  gifts  of  the  present  "  is  a  clear
reference  to  Horace,  Carm.  in.  8.  27,  of  some  words  of  which
it  is  in  fact  a  translation. The  passage  is,

Dona  praesentis  cape  laetus  horae  et
Linque  severa,

'  Take  gladly  the  gifts  of  the  present  hour,  and  lay  cares  of
state  aside.'

The  poem  is  addressed  to  Horace's  patron  Maecenas,  who  on
the  day  on  which  it  is  ostensibly  composed,  the  1st  of  March,
is  apparently  dining  with  him  at  his  Sabine  villa.  It  may
be  summarised  as  follows  : You  wonder  to  find  me,  a  bachelor,

1  See  below,  moreover,  near  the  end  of  Mr.  Piddington's  important  Note  ;
where  it  is  made  quite  clear  that  Bacchus  (Liber)  was  intended.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  159


making  preparations  for  sacrifice  on  the  day  of  the  Matronalia
[a  festival  for  married  women].  It  is  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow
I  made  to  keep  holy  every  year  the  day  on  which  I  narrowly
escaped  death  from  the  blow  I  received  from  the  falling  tree.
I  swore  I  would  make  an  annual  sacrifice  to  Bacchus  on  this
day.  Forget  public  affairs  for  a  while,  Maecenas  ;  join  in
my  thanksgiving,  and  drink  my  health  as  often  as  you  will
before  the  night  is  over.  Take  gladly  the  gifts  of  the  present
hour,  and  banish  all  cares  of  state.

In  Carm.  n.  17.  27,  Horace  attributes  his  escape  to  the
lightening  of  the  blow  by  Faunus,  but  there  need  be  no
inconsistency  in  his  making  his  yearly  thanksgiving  to  Bacchus,
who,  as  one  of  the  gods  of  poetry,  might  be  assumed  to  have
been  the  prime  mover  in  the  matter,  possibly  employing
Faunus  as  his  agent.

It  is  impossible  not  to  connect  these  words  of  the  script  with
the  Faunus  message  ;  and  the  manner  of  it  seems  to  me  to
give  it  extraordinary  value,  to  make  it  indeed  one  of  our
best.

For  firstly,  it  is  most  improbable  that  Mrs.  Piper  should  be
capable,  consciously  or  subliminally,  of  making  a  quotation
from  Horace  at  all  ;  secondly,  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that
any  living  person  communicated  it  to  her  telepathically  ;  and
thirdly,  the  connexion  of  the  words  with  the  Faunus  message
could  hardly  have  been  more  effectively  concealed  without
becoming  irrecoverable.  As  I  read  the  script,  Horace's  words
dona  praesentis  cape  laetus  horae  happened  to  flash  across
my  mind,  but  they  might  well  not  have  done  so  ;  for  the
line  is  in  no  way  striking,  since  it  merely  expresses  a  common-
place of  the  poet's  philosophy  which  he  frequently  repeats
in  varying  language.  When  I  had  recalled  the  line  it  took
me  some  time  to  discover  in  what  ode  it  occurred,  and  so
little  did  I  dream  it  had  anything  to  do  with  the  falling  tree,
that  the  fact  came  as  a  pleasant  surprise.

The sentence in the script, "  wander o'er the earth  an

unlaid  ghost,"  suggests  poetry,  and  we  must  try  to  track  it

down  if  it  is  a  quotation.  „
H  M.  A.  B.


160


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[PART


NOTE  ON  THE  ALLUSION  TO  HORACE,  Sat.  n.  6,
IN  MR.  Z.'s  SITTING  WITH  MR.  J.  ARTHUR
HILL.

BY  J.  G.  PlDDINGTON.

On  August  8,  1915,  there  came  a  message  from  MyersP
to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  about  "  Faunus  and  the  Poet."
This  message  reached  Sir  Oliver  a  day  or  two  before
September  8,  1915.

On  October  12,  1915,  Sir  Oliver  sent  the  following
message  to  "Myers  "  through  Mrs.  A.  :

Tell  him  I  understand  about  '  Faunus  and  the  Poet  '
...  he  may  like  to  say  something.  ...  Of  course  he
may,  if  he  chooses,  say  something  more  through  Mrs.
Piper.

On  Jan.  12,  1916,  the  following  conversation  between  Miss
Alta  Piper  and  Rector  took  place  :

Alta. Hail  Rector  ! I  am  glad  you  have  come  ! I  have  a
question  to  ask  you  for  Sir  Oliver.
Good.

Alta. May  I  give  it  now  ? Can  you  hear  me  distinctly  ?
I  U.D.  absolutely  friend.

(Here  I  read  from  Sir  Oliver's  letter,  the  passage  re-
ferring to  the  turning  aside  of  a  fallen  trunk.  Doubt-
less Sir  Oliver  has  a  copy  of  that  letter. A.  L.  P.)

["  When  you  next  have  an  opportunity,  you  might
take  this  message  from  me  to  Myers  :  namely  this —
'  that  he  did  not  turn  aside  the  falling  trunk  with
his  right  hand.'  You  might  further  ask  him  whether
he  tried  to  do  so,  or  whether  he  was  making  reference
to  something  still  in  the  future."]

(The  following  was  then  written.)

I  cannot  answer  all  today  but  will  take  influence
away  with  me  and  rctmn  another  day  to  repty.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  161


On  Jan.  16,  1916,  the  following  occurred  during  Mrs.
Piper's  automatic  writing  :

Alta. Is  there any  other  message  from  or  to  anyone  I  can
take  ?

Myers  has  some. That  had  reference  to  the  future
as  much  as  to  the  past.
Alta. Thank  you. You  want  me  to  send  that  to  Lodge  ?

Yes  because  there  are  other  trunks  which  might  fall
were  they  not  stayed.  .  .  .  There  will  be  more
later,  but  for  the  moment  take  this.

On  March  3,  1916,  Mr.  J.  Arthur  Hill  had  a  sitting
with  a  medium,  Mr.  Z.,  hi  the  course  of  which  he  put
this  question  to  Mr.  Z.'s  control  :

Does  Horace  remind  you  of  anything  in  connexion
with  O.  L.  ?

The  answer  received  was  :

Very  curious.  I  see  verses.  Too  indefinite.  Verses
in  English  language.  '  Oh  had  I  a  little  farm  !  '  What's
this  mean  ?  I  get  a  picture  of  two  mice.  One  mouse
is  very  smooth  and  nice  :  hair  brushed  prettily  ;  fat.
The  other  is  rough  and  not  so  pretty.

On  May  17,  1916,  Mrs.  Piper  wrote  the  following
script  :

+HAIL

I  am  Rector

M™6  G[uyon]  returns  with  me  and  F.  W.  H.  M.

To  greet  friend  Lodge  You  shall  bear  these  hardships
with  such  resolve  as  befitteth  stalwart  men  you 1  shall
not  altogether  die  but  a  mighty  part  of  you  2  will  escape
the  death  goddess  Gladly  will  I  take  the  gif[t]s  of
the  present  and  (undeciphered  word)  3  other  things.  Had
I  the  power  of  Bacchus  I  would  preserve  a  home  in
the  island  [sic]  of  the  blessed  for  the  [sic]  for  the  [sic]

1  "  I  "  was  first  written,  and  then  was  turned  into  "you."

2  "  Me  "  was  first  written,  and  then  "  you  "  was  written  over  it.

3 1  am  almost  certain  that  the  undeciphered  word  is  "abandon,"'
written  "  aandon,"  the  "b"  being  afterwards  inserted.

L


162


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[PART


oh  friend  of  other  days.  I  do  not  wander  oer  the  earth
an  unlaid  Ghost  but  on  the  wing  or  fleet  of  foot  I  wander
to  find  an  earthly  friend  to  whom  I  can  give  cheer  by 1
truth.

Farewell  it  will  be  mentioned  elsewhere  wait  for  this

F.  W.  H.  M.
Farewell  R
Mme  G

(For  drawings accompanying  the  signatures  see  p.  157
above.)

On  May  18,  1916,  Mrs.  Piper  wrote  the  following  script:
HAIL.

Friend  of  earth I  greet  you  Rector

Tell  Mrs  Verrall  I  have  answered  her  question  of  long

&  Myers.

+R

With  Sir  Oliver's  interpretation  of  the  "  Faunus  and
the  Poet  "  message  in  Mrs.  Piper's  script  of  August  8,
1915,  I  entirely  agree.  Where  I  disagree  with  him  is
over  his  interpretation  of  Mr.  Z.'s  answer,  given  on
March  3,  1916,  to  Mr.  Hill's  question  :  "  Does  Horace
remind  you  of  anything  in  connexion  with  0.  L.  ?  "
We  both  agree,  and,  I  think,  every  one  will  agree,  that
Mr.  Z.'s  answer  refers  to  Horace's  little  farm  and  to  the
fable  of  the  Town  and  Country  Mouse,  as  described  and
told  in  Hor.  Sat.  n.  6.  But  here  we  part  company.  Sir
Oliver  considers  that  the  point  of  this  literary  reference
is  to  show  supernormally  acquired  knowledge  of  the  fact
that  his  eldest  son,  Mr.  0.  W.  F.  Lodge,  had  recently
moved  from  a  town  and  gone  to  live  at  a  little  farm,
which  he  had  described  in  a  letter  to  his  mother  in
terms  recalling  Horace's  description  of  his  little  farm.  I
consider  that  Mr.  Z.'s  reference  to  Hor.  Sat.  II.  6  is  a
continuation  of  the  previous  reference  through  Mrs.  Piper
to  Hor.  C.  II. 17  ("  Faunus  and  the  Poet  ").

1  Originally  deciphered  as  "  &  try  "  ;  but  I  think  the  true  reading
is  "  by,"  what  was  taken  to  be  an  ampersand  and  a  cross  to  a  t
being  merely  scrawls.


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  163


What  the  connexion  between  Hor.  Sat.  II.  6  and  Hor.
C.  ii.  17  is  I  will  show  later.

Meanwhile,  I  had  first  better  deal  with  the  only  reason
(except,  of  course,  the  admitted  coincidence  between  the  farm
of  Hor.  Sat.  n.  6  and  Mr.  Oliver  W.  Lodge's  farm)  which
Sir  Oliver  gives  for  referring  Mr.  Z.'s  answer  to  his  son
Oliver.  He  maintains  that  "  I  see  verses  .  .  .  Verses  in
English  language  "  is  a  way  of  alluding  to  the  fact
that  his  son  has  written  and  published  poems.  In  my
view  "  I  see  verses  .  .  .  Verses  in  English  language  "  is
simply  and  solely  the  medium's  description  of  how  the
ideas  which  he  is  attempting  to  convey  are  reaching
him.1  The  phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  of  Mrs.  Thompson —
to  name  only  two  automatists — exhibit  instances  in  pro-
fusion of  the  same  sort  of  process.  So  common,  indeed,
are  they,  that  anyone  who  wishes  to  verify  my  statement
will  have  to  read  but  few  records  of  Mrs.  Piper's  or  Mrs.
Thompson's  sittings  before  coming  across  plenty.

It  is,  of  course,  a  disadvantage  that  in  Mr.  Z.'s  case
no  series  of  detailed  records  of  his  trance-utterances
has  been  published — if,  indeed,  one  exists.  One  cannot,
therefore,  determine  with  certainty  whether  it  is  likely
that  Mr.  Z.  would  see,  and  would  describe  seeing,  a
picture  of  English  verses  just  before  he  was  going  to
utter  the  words  "  Oh  had  I  a  little  farm  !  "  2  But  even
in  the  very  exiguous  records  of  Mr.  Z.'s  trance-phenomena
accessible  to  me,  I  find  a  passage  that  supports  my
contention  to  some  extent.  It  is  in  Mr.  Z.'s  sitting  of
Oct.  29,  1915  (p.  130)  :

Do  you  know  F  W  M  ?
o.  j.  l. Yes,  I  do.

Because  I  see  those  three  letters.

Now, after them, do you know S.  T., yes I  get
1 1  am  disposed  to  agree. O.  J.  L.

2  I  understand  "  Oh  had  I  a  little  farm  !  "  to  be  one  of  the  "  Verses
in  English  language  "  seen  by  Mr.  Z.,  and  to  be  a  paraphrase  in  English
verse  of  the  opening  lines  of  Hor.  Sat.  n.  0  :

"  Hoc  erat  in  votis  : modus  agri  non  ita  magnus,"  etc.

There  are,  of  course,  several  versions  in  English  poetry  of  this  Satire  ;
the  best  known  being,  perhaps,  that  begun  by  Swift  and  finished  by  Pope.


164


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


S  T,  then  a  dot,  and  then  P  ?  These  are  shown  ;
I  see  them  in  light  ;  your  boy  shows  these  things
to  me. 1

Moreover,  when  Mr.  Z.'s  control  wants  to  refer  to  a
writer  of  poetry,  he  seems  to  have  no  difficulty  in  doing
so  quite  straightforwardly.  See  Mr.  Z.'s  sitting  of  Sep-
tember 27,  1915  :  "  a  man,  a  writer  of  poetry.  .  .  .  This
gentleman  who  wrote  poetry  .  .  .  the  gentleman  beginning
with  M  and  who  wrote  poetry  "  (p.  128).

I  will  now  give  my  own  interpretation  of  Mr.  Z.'s
answer  to  Mr.  Hill's  question.

Mr.  Hill,  knowing  of  the  Piper  "  Faunus  and  the
Poet  "  message,  and  with  that  in  his  mind,  asked
Mr.  Z.'s  control  :  "  Does  Horace  remind  you  of  anything
in  connexion  with  0.  L.  ?  "  In  reply,  allusion  was
made,  as  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  agrees,  to  the  little  farm  and
to  the  Fable  of  the  Two  Mice  of  Hor.  Sat.  n.  6.  In
this  Satire,  Horace  contrasts  the  happiness  of  his  placid
life  at  his  country  home  with  the  vexations  of  his  town
life  at  Rome.  He  enlarges  at  considerable  length  (11.
29-58)  on  the  desagrements  that  beset  him  at  Rome  in
consequence  of  his  intimacy  with  Maecenas  ;  and  describes
how  he  is  pestered  by  people  who  either  beg  him  to
use  his  influence  with  the  great  man  for  their  benefit,  or
who,  feeling  sure  that  so  close  a  friend  of  Maecenas'
must  be  "in  the  know,"  plague  him  with  such  questions
as  "Is  there  any  news  about  the  Dacians  ?  "  The  result,
says  Horace,  is  that  when  he's  in  town  he  is  longing  to
be  back  again  in  the  country  in  the  company  of  his
neighbours,  with  whom  he  can  discuss,  not  silly  topics
of  the  town,  but  such  questions  as  whether  it  is  wealth
or  virtue  that  makes  a  man  happy  ;  and  listen  to  his
friend  Cervius  telling  one  of  his  old- wives'  tales,  like
the  one  about  the  Town-mouse  and  the  Country-mouse.

But  why,  it  may  be  asked,  does  a  reference  to  this
Satire  furnish  an  appropriate  answer  to  Mr.  Hill's  question  ?

1  Cf.  "  Now  he  is  trying  to  build  up  a  letter  of  some  one  ;  M.  he
shows  me  "  ;  and  "  That  is  why  they  built  up  the  dark  cross  "  in
Mrs.  A.s  sitting  of  September  27,  1915  (p.  126).


LXxn.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  165


The  reason  is  that  the  tree  that  nearly  killed  Horace
stood  in  the  little  country  place,  Horace's  Sabine  Farm,
which  figures  so  largely  in  Sat.  II.  6.

This  interpretation  seems  to  me  to  be  very  strongly
confirmed  by  Mrs.  Piper's  script  of  May  17,  1916. 1
The  script  opens  by  exhorting  Sir  Oliver  to  "  bear
these  hardships  with  such  resolve  as  befitteth  stalwart
men "  ;  and  by  "  these  hardships  "  it  is  hardly  open  to
doubt  that  his  son's  death  is  meant.

Next  it  refers  to  Hor.  C.  in:  30,  6-7  :

"  Non  omnis  moriar,  multaque  pars  mei
Vitabit  Libitinam,"

which  means

"  I  shall  not  all  die,  and  a  great  part  of  me  will
escape  Libitina  (goddess  of  funerals)."  2

Then  follows  the  cardinal  allusion  :

"  Gladly  will  I  take  the  gifts  of  the  present."

This  is  a  rendering,  with  a  change  of  tense  and  person,
of  Hor.  C.  in.  8.  27  :

"  Dona  praesentis  cape  laetus  horae,"

which  means

"  Take  gladly  the  gifts  of  the  present  hour."

If  the  reading  "abandon"  is  right,  then  "and  abandon
other  things  "  represents  the  words  "  et  Linque  severa "
("  and  abandon  serious  things  "),  which  immediately
follow  "  laetus  horae."

1  This  interpretation  first  struck  me  when  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  was
reading  his  paper  at  a  Private  Meeting  of  the  Society  ;  and  was  suggested
solely  by  Mr.  Z.'s  trance-utterances.  I  had  at  the  time  seen  Mrs.
Piper's  script  of  May  17,  1916,  but  I  had  not  read  it  carefully,  and
I  had  not  recognised  the  allusion  in  it  to  one  of  the  Odes  in  which
Horace  speaks  of  his  narrow  escape  from  being  killed  by  the  tree.

2  As  the  "I"  turned  into  "you,"  and  the  "me"  written  over  "you,"
show,  the  intelligence  responsible  for  the  script  knew  the  quotation  in
its  original  form,  and  deliberately  substituted  the  second  person  for  the
first  in  order  to  make  it  apply  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


166


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


The  whole  Ode  is  so  essential  to  my  case  that  I  must
give  the  English  of  the  greater  part  of  it.  It  is  addressed
to  Maecenas,  and  Horace  is  the  speaker  throughout.

You  wonder  what  I,  a  bachelor,  am  doing  on  the
Kalends  of  March  [the  day  of  the  Matronalia,  a  festival
celebrated  by  married  women],  what  mean  the  flowers,
and  the  box  full  of  incense,  and  the  charcoal  placed  upon
the  living  turf,  you  that  are  learned  in  the  literature
of  either  tongue  [i.e.  Maecenas].

I  had  vowed  to  Liber  a  pleasant  feast  and  a  white
he -goat,  when  almost  done  to  death  by  the  blow  of
the  falling  tree.  This  day  of  festival,  as  the  year  comes
round,  shall  remove  the  pitch-bound  cork  from  a  wine-jar
which  was  trained  to  drink  the  smoke  in  Tullus'  con-
sulate .

Take,  Maecenas,  a  hundred  cups  in  honour  of  your
friend's  deliverance,  and  prolong  till  break  of  day  the
wakeful  lamps  ; let  all  clamour  and  passion  be  far  away.

Dismiss  your  politic  cares  for  the  City's  weal  ;  the
host  of  Dacian  Cotiso  has  fallen  ;  the  Mede  ...  is  dis-
tracted by  a  woeful  warfare  ;  our  ancient  enemy  of  the
Spanish  coast,  the  Cantabrian,  is  our  slave  .  .  .  ;  now
the  Scythians  .  .  .  are  resolving  to  withdraw  from  the
plains.

Carelessly,  as  a  man  not  in  place,  refrain  from  guarding
overmuch  that  the  people  in  no  way  suffer ;  snatch
joyfully  the  gifts  of  the  present  hour,  and  abandon  serious
thoughts  (et  Linque  severa).

(Lonsdale  and  Lee's  Translation.)

As  Mr.  Bayfield — to  whom  I  owe  the  identification  of
"  Gladly  will  I  take  the  gifts  of  the  present  " — observes,
the  whole  Ode  turns  on  the  tree  accident.  And,  moreover,
it  presents  analogies  to  Sat.  II.  6  so  marked  and  obvious
that  it  is  not  necessary  to  mention  them  in  detail,  except,
perhaps,  the  "  Numcpud  de  Dacis  audisti  ?  "  of  the  Satire
and  the  "  Occidit  Daci  Cotisonis  agmen  "  of  the  Ode.

Further  points  in  connexion  with  Mrs.  Piper's  scripts
of  May  17  and  18,  1916,  are  these.  "I  do  not  wander
o'er  the  earth  an  unlaid  Ghost  "  may  be  an  allusion  to


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  167

the  lines  in  the  '  Archytas  '  Ode  (Hor.  C.  I.  28.  23-25),
where  the  spirit  of  a  shipwrecked  man  appeals  to  a
passing  sailor  to  scatter  a  particle  of  sand  upon  his
unburied  bones  and  head.1  If  this  is  so,  it  will  serve  to
explain  the  reference  in  the  script  of  May  18,  1916,
to  Mrs.  Verrall's  "  question  of  long  ago."  Mrs.  Verrall
put  two  questions  to  MyersP  :  and  one  of  the  two
was  about  an  Ode  of  Horace,  viz.  the  '  Archytas  '  Ode.
In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  script  of  May  17,  1916,
contains  two  certain  allusions  to  Horace's  Odes,  and  a
possible  allusion  also  to  the  '  Archytas  '  Ode,  it  seems
reasonable  to  take  Mrs.  Verrall's  "  question  of  long  ago  "
to  mean  her  question  about  the  '  Archytas  '  Ode.  But
why  this  reference  to  the  "  question  of  long  ago  "  ?
I  suggest  that  it  was  the  best  approach  that  MyersP
could  make  towards  saying  something  of  this  kind  :
"  Long  ago  Mrs.  Verrall  put  me  a  question  about  an  Ode
of  Horace,  and  this  question  I  answered  partly  through
Mrs.  Piper  and  partly  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  own  script.  Quite
recently  another  question  about  Horace  has  been  put
by  Mr.  Hill  ;  and  I  have  answered  it  partly  through
Mr.  Z.  and  partly  through  Mrs.  Piper."

I  think  there  may  have  been  more  than  one  reason
for  introducing  the  allusion  to  Hor.  G.  rn.  30.  7  :  "  You
shall  not  altogether  die  but  a  mighty  part  of  you  will
escape  the  death  goddess."  It  gives,  in  the  first  place,
a  reason  why  the  hardship  of  a  son's  death  should  be
borne  with  courage  ;  in  the  second  place,  by  pointing
unmistakeably  to  Horace,  it  gives  a  hint  of  the  source
of  "  Gladly  will  I  take  the  gifts  of  the  present,"  which,
but  for  the  hint,  might  have  escaped  detection  ;  and
in  the  third  place  it  may  serve  as  a  link  with  Sat.  n.  6.

Libitina  ("  the  death  goddess  ")  is  mentioned  thrice
only  in  Horace  :  in  C.  in.  30.  7  (the  passage  referred
to  in  Mrs.  Piper's  script),  in  Ep.  n.  1.  49  (a  passage
dealing  with  the  immortality  of  poets,  and  so  analogous
to  C.  in.  30,  where  Horace  speaks  of  his  own  immortality

1  Unless  this  duty  to  the  dead  were  performed,  the  ghost  would  wander
about  unhappily  and  find  no  rest.


168


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[PAET


as  a  poet),  and  in  Hor.  Sat.  n.  6.  19,  where  Horace  says
that  when  he  has  retired  to  his  farm  in  the  hills,  he  is
safe  from  the  evil  effects  of  the  leaden  sirocco  and  of
the  unhealthy  autumn  that  enriches  Libitina.

Moreover,  it  will  be  noticed  that  on  each  occasion  it  is
a  question  of  poets  escaping  Libitina,  and,  on  two  out
of  the  three  occasions,  of  Horace  escaping  her.  Now  in
Mrs.  Piper's  script  of  August  8,  1915,  MyersP  had  said  :
"  Now  Lodge  .  .  .  you  take  the  part  of  the  poet,"  i.e.
of  Horace  ;  and  I  suspect  that  that  is  why  when  on
May  17,  1916,  Lodge  is  assured  that  a  "  mighty  part
of  him  will  escape  the  death  goddess,"  the  assurance
is  given  in  the  words  in  which  Horace  proclaims  how
he  will  balk  Libitina  of  her  prey.

The  sentence  beginning  "  Had  I  the  power  of  Bacchus  "
contains,  I  suggest,  an  allusion  to  Hor.  G.  IV.  8.  34  :

"  Liber  vota  bonos  ducit  ad  exitus."

The  context  is  as  follows  :

"  What  would  the  son  of  Mars  and  Ilia  be,  if  jealous
silence  suppressed  the  deserts  of  Romulus  ?  Aeacus,
rescued  from  the  Stygian  waves,  the  genius  and  goodwill
and  tongue  of  mighty  poets  commit  enshrined  to  the
Isles  of  Wealth  [divitibus  insulis,  i.e.  the  Islands  of  the
Blessed].  'Tis  the  Muse  who  forbids  to  die  the  man
that  is  worthy  of  renown  ;  'tis  the  Muse  that  blesses
him  with  a  place  in  heaven.  Thus  the  vigorous  Hercules
is  a  guest  at  the  coveted  bancpiets  of  Jove.  The  sons
of  Tyndarus  [i.e.  Castor  and  Pollux]  .  .  .  rescue  from
the  depth  of  the  waters  the  shattered  ships  ;  Liber,  with
fresh  vine-leaves  decked,  to  happy  issues  brings  the  vows
of  Men." (Lonsdale  and  Lee's  Translation.)

If  the  allusion  is  to  this  passage,  then  the  meaning  is  :
"  Had  I  the  power  that  Liber  (Bacchus)  has  of  bringing
vows  (or  prayers,  or  desires)  to  happy  issues,  I  should
preserve  a  home  in  the  Islands  of  the  Blessed  for  thee."  1

1  Two  different  associations  of  ideas  may  have  been  responsible  for
the  allusion  to  Hor.  C.  iv.  8.  34  :

(1)  The  "  Voveram  .  .  .  album  Libcro  caprum  prope  funeratus  Arboris


lxxii.] Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival.  169


The  closing  words  of  the  script  :  "  Farewell  it  will
be  mentioned  elsewhere  wait  for  this  "  may,  in  spite  of
the  tense,  refer  to  Mr.  Z.'s  "  Oh  had  I  a  little  farm  !  "
etc.  More  than  once  claims  made  by  communicators  to
have  achieved  a  cross-correspondence  have  proved  correct
except  for  mis-statements  as  to  the  time  of  its  occurrence.
"  If  you  wait,  you  will  find  that  this  has  been  mentioned
elsewhere  "  may  have  been  what  was  meant.

On  October  12,  1915  (see  p.  129),  Sir  Oliver,  like  his
famous  namesake,  had  "  asked  for  more."  When,  as  I
contend,  more  was  meted  out  to  him,  he  gave  it  such
a  twist  (if  the  pun  be  allowed)  that  he  failed  to  recognise
it  as  a  second  helping,  and  mistook  it  for  something  else.

ictu  "  of  Hor.  C.  m.  8.6-8,  may  have  recalled  the  "  Liber  vota  bonos
ducit  ad  exitus  "  of  C.  TV.  8.  34  ;

(2)  In  C.  ii.  13,  Horace  mentions,  for  the  first  time,  his  narrow  escape
from  being  killed  by  the  falling  tree.  After  abusing  the  man  who
planted  it  on  his  Sabine  farm,  he  goes  on  to  say  :

"  How  nearly  have  we  beheld  the  realms  of  dusky  Proserpine,
and  Aeacus on  his  judgement-seat  and  the  abodes  set  apart  for
the  good  {i.e.  the  Islands  of  the  Blessed)."
These  lines  may  have  recalled  the  reference  to  Aeacus  and  the  Islands
of  the  Blessed  in  C.  iv.  8,  which  forms  part  of  the  context  of  "  Liber
vota  bonos  ducit  ad  exitus."


170  Obituary  Notice:  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part


V.

MRS.  A.  W.  VERRALL.

The  short  announcement  in  the  July  Journal  of  the
death  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  on  July  2,  in  her  fifty-ninth  year,
could  not  do  justice  to  one  to  whom  the  Society  owes  so
much,  and  its  members  will  desire  that  at  least  an  attempt
should  be  made  to  commemorate  more  adequately  in
the  Proceedings  what  she  was  and  what  we  owe  her.

Mrs.  Margaret  de  Gaudrion  Verrall  was  the  daughter  of
Mr.  Frederic  Merrifield  of  Brighton,  till  recently  clerk  to  the
County  Councils  of  East  and  West  Sussex,  and  her  mother
was  a  daughter  of  Colonel  V.  P.  J.  de  Gaudrion,  a  member
of  an  old  French  family.  She  was  among  the  early
women  students  at  Newnham  College,  Cambridge,  and  was
placed  by  the  examiners  for  the  Classical  Tripos  in  the
honours  list  in  1880.  Immediately  afterwards  she  was
appointed  Lecturer  in  Classics  at  her  College,  and  she
continued  to  take  part  in  the  classical  teaching  there
till  very  recently  ;  for  her  marriage  with  Dr.  A.  W.
Verrall,  the  well-known  classical  scholar,  in  1882,  did
not  take  her  away  from  Cambridge.  Her  classical  studies
naturally  enabled  her  to  take  an  intelligent  interest  in
her  husband's  work,  and  she  herself  translated  and  colla-
borated in  the  commentary  on  the  text  of  Pausanias  for
The  Mythology  and  Monuments  of  Ancient  Athens,
which  she  published  jointly  with  Miss  Jane  Harrison
in  1890.  In  English  and  French  literature  she  was  also
widely  read.  After  her  husband's  death  in  June,  1912,
she  edited  his  lectures  on  Dryden,  a  fruit  of  his  short
tenure  of  the  new  King  Edward  VII.  chair  of  English
Literature. She, like her husband, was an  inspiring


LXxn.] Obituary  Notice :  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  171


teacher,  and  one  who  could  enter  readily  into  the  minds
and  feelings  of  younger  people.

Mrs.  Verrall's  practical  ability  was  as  marked  as  her
literary  taste.  She  was  for  many  years  a  valued  member
of  the  Council  of  Newnham  College,  and  since  May,  1901,  of
the  Council  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  the
meetings  of  which,  until  her  illness  began,  she  attended
with  great  regularity.  In  1914—15  she  took  an  active  part
in  work  in  connexion  with  the  Belgian  refugees,  serv-
ing as  secretary  to  the  Cambridge  University  Hospitality
Committee,  whose  function  was  to  make  arrangements
for  students  from  Belgian  Universities  to  continue  their
studies,  largely  with  their  own  professors,  at  Cambridge.
In  this  work,  which  practically  came  to  an  end  when
most  of  the  students  were  drafted  off  into  the  Belgian
army  or  into  other  work,  her  command  of  the  French
language  was  naturally  of  great  value  to  her,  but  it
would  have  served  little  had  it  not  been  accompanied
by  tact  and  sympathy  as  well  as  by  organising  power
and  businesslike  qualities,  which  won  the  cordial  apprecia-
tion of  all  with  whom  the  work  brought  her  in  contact.

I  have  purposely  dealt  so  far  with  aspects  of  Mrs.
Verrall's  life  outside  Psychical  Research,  but  must  now
turn  to  what  concerns  us  most  here — her  work  in  our
own  subject  ;  and  this  was  the  work  in  which  she  was
most  interested  of  late  years.

Mrs.  Verrall  joined  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research
in  January,  1889 — seven  years  after  its  foundation — and  at
once  became  an  active  member.-  Indeed  she  had  been
interested  in  its  work  earlier.  We  have  in  the  Journal
for  March,  1889,  an  account — anonymous,  but  written  by
Mrs.  Verrall — of  experiments  in  thought-transference  she
had  tried  a  year  previously  with  her  little  daughter
(now  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter),  and  which  she  had  recorded
carefully  at  the  time.  Incidentally  she  mentions  a  still
earlier  case,  similarly  recorded,  of  what  appeared  to  be
spontaneous  telepathy  between  them  when  her  little  girl
could  only  speak  very  imperfectly.  In  Proceedings,  Vol.
VIII.,  is  an  account  of  experiments  in  crystal-gazing,
carried  out  from  1889  to  1892  at  F.  W.  H.  Myers'  request.


172  Obituary  Notice  :  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

In  connexion  with  these  he  speaks  of  her  in  his  Human
Personality  as  "  among  our  best  observers,"  an  opinion
in  which  all  who  have  worked  with  her  in  Psychical
Research  will  agree.  Because  of  this  and  because  of
her  own  psychical  powers  Mrs.  Verrall  was  invited  by
Myers  to  sit  on  three  occasions  with  Mrs.  Piper  when
the  latter  first  visited  England  in  1889,  and  for  the  same
reasons  she  was  asked  to  take  part  as  a  sitter  when
Mrs. Piper  was again  in  this country  in  1907-8.

In  1895  Mrs  Verrall  read  her  first  paper  to  the  Society.1
It  was  on  "  Some  experiments  in  the  supernormal  acquisi-
tion of  knowledge,"  and  gave  an  account  of  experiments
conducted  by  herself  during  the  five  previous  years  in
the  guessing  of  unperceived  cards.  The  experiments
were  arranged  to  test  various  possible  causes  of  success — as
delicate  sense  of  touch,  telepathy,  hyperaesthesia,  telaes-
thesia.

It  is  curious  that  notwithstanding  Mrs.  Verrall's  various
psychical  experiences,  spontaneous  and  experimental,  all
attempts  at  automatic  writing,  or  at  table-tilting  by
herself,  failed  for  a  long  time.  This  must  have  been  a
disappointment  to  Myers,  who  was  always  in  search  of
successful  automatists.  After  his  death  in  January,  1901,
she  made  more  persistent  and  persevering  efforts  in  this
direction,  and  at  length  on  March  5th,  1901,  obtained
what  she  regarded  as  the  first  successful  result.2  Since
then  she  has  continued  to  have  numerous  scripts — amount-
ing to  many  hundreds ;  these  were  produced  from  time
to  time  till  within  a  week  or  two  of  her  death.  Her
scripts,  as  readers  of  the  Proceedings  know,  have  often
contained  matter  of  apparently  supernormal  interest,  as
in  cross-correspondence  with  other  automatists  and  other-
wise. Naturally,  much  that  is  or  may  be  of  psychical
interest  in  the  scripts  cannot  be  published  as  it  is  of
too  private  or  personal  a  nature.  Naturally,  also,  her
scripts  like  those  of  other  automatists  contain  a  large
admixture — at  least  she  always  thought  so — of  matter  of
probably  purely  subliminal  and  even  of  supraliminal  origin.

1  Published  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  176.

2  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  8.


lxxii.] Obituary  Notice  :  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  173

An  account  and  analysis  of  her  scripts  from  March,  1901,
to  the  end  of  1904  was  written  by  Mrs.  Verrall  herself,
and  published  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.,  in  1906.  This
able  and  careful  paper  excited  very  considerable  interest,
both  on  account  of  the  evidential  matter  it  contains,  and
on  account  of  the  light  it  throws  on  the  psychology  of
automatic  writing  and,  to  some  extent,  on  the  psychology
of  telepathy.  It  formed  the  starting-point  of  a  series
of  studies  on  cross-correspondence  which  have  appeared
in  our  Proceedings — cross-correspondences  observed  among
various  automatists :  Mrs.  "Forbes,"  Mrs.  "Holland,"  the
"Macs,"  Mrs.  "Willett,"  Mrs.  Salter  (Miss  Verrall),  Mrs.
"King,"  and  some  others,  and  also  Mrs.  Piper.  It  also  helped
in  the  building  up  of  evidence  for  communication  from  those
who  have  left  this  world.  Not  that  it  definitely  proved  that
such  communication  occurs.  Proof  is  from  the  nature  of
the  case,  as  those  engaged  in  Psychical  Research  well
know,  very  difficult  to  obtain.  But  careful  readers  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  will  agree  that  though  most  of  the
script  does  not  claim  to  come  from  identifiable  individuals,
incidents  are  there  recorded  which  can  be  more  simply
interpreted  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  dead,  and
especially  F.  W.  H.  Myers,1  communicated — granting  that
hypothesis  to  be  admissible — than  on  any  other.  And
it  is  on  accumulation  of  evidence  of  this  description  that
we  shall,  I  think,  in  the  main  have  to  rely,  in  obtaining
conviction  of  the  reality  of  communication  from  the
other  world.  It  is  not  always  remembered  to  what
extent  accepted  scientific  theories  rest  on  the  test  of
simplicity.  We  accept  an  hypothesis  largely  because  it
is  the  simplest  among  possible  ones.  I  am  not,  however,
claiming  that  sufficient  evidence  of  communication  from
the  dead  has  been  obtained  to  give  it  position  as  a
scientifically  established  theory.  What  I  do  think
is  that  little  by  little  the  necessary  evidence  is  being
built  up. Mrs. Verrall's  paper  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.,

1  Myers  as  communicator  is  usually  designated  by  the  letter  H.  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  paper.  In  the  case  of  one  incident — the  sphere-spear
cross-correspondence,  pp.  212-218,  the  name  of  Mrs.  Piper's  communi-
cator, who  professed  to  be  Myers,  is  omitted  altogether.


174


Obituary  Notice  :  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part


was  a  notable  contribution  to  this  building  up,  though
little  was  said  about  it  in  the  paper  itself.  And  sub-
sequent scripts  of  different  automatists  have  added  their
quota,  not  only  through  cross-correspondences,  but  in
more  direct  ways,  as  e.g.  in  the  Lethe  case  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XXV.,  p.  113  et  seq.),  and  in  the  Statius  case
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XXVII.,  p.  221  et  seq.).

One  very  important  effect  of  the  publication  of  Mrs.
Verrall's  paper  in  1906  was  the  encouragement  it  gave
to  other  automatists.  I  do  not  know  how  far  it  led
to  first  attempts  at  automatic  writing.  On  most  of  the
automatists  whose  work  has  been  dealt  with  in  our
Proceedings,  Myers'  book  on  Human  Personality  has  had
a  more  powerful  initial  influence.  But  Mrs.  Verrall
became  known  as  a  person  who  could  be  applied  to
for  sympathy  and  help  by  all  who  felt  indications  in
themselves  of  automatic  powers  worth  cultivating ;  and  to
her  wise  sympathy  we  undoubtedly  owe  much  of  the
evidence  accumulated.  Thus,  it  was  to  her  that  the
"  Macs  "  first  wrote  about  their  experiences  with  a  plan-
chette,  and  to  her  that  Mrs.  "  Willett  "  first  turned  in
her  early  efforts.  And  others  have  turned  to  her  who
though  they  have  contributed  but  little  to  available
evidence  for  supernormal  faculty  have  yet  added  to  Mrs.
Verrall's  own  knowledge  and  experience.

What  made  her  so  valuable  as  an  investigator  was  the
combination  in  a  high  degree  of  two  qualities — sympathy
and  the  critical  faculty.  This  does  not  need  illustration  to
those  who  have  read  her  papers  in  the  Proceedings,  whether
dealing  with  her  own  script  or  that  of  others  ;  or  dealing
with  phenomena  of  a  different  kind,  as  in  the  paper  on
our  President's  experiments  which  appears  in  the  present
number  of  Proceedings,  and  which  was  read  for  her  at  the
meeting  of  the  Society  on  the  23rd  of  last  February,  when
she  was  already  too  ill  to  read  it  herself.  Her  critical  faculty
was  indeed  sometimes  too  active,  and  tended  too  much
to  scepticism  in  the  case  of  her  own  scripts.  She  was
almost  too  ready  to  seek  and  find  a  normal  origin  for
any  particular  script  utterance.  This  is,  of  course,  a
fault  on  the  right  side,  but  in  the  case  of  an  automatist


lxxii.] Obituary  Notice  :  Mrs.  A.  W.  Y  err  all.  175

it  is  apt  to  interfere  with  the  spontaneous  flow  of  the  script,
and  conduce  to  the  intrusion  of  the  supraliminal  intelli-
gence in  the  writing.  This  supraliminal  interference  occurs
to  some  extent  with  all  automatists — at  least  when  not
in  trance — and  may  take  the  form  of  adding  guesswork
additions  to  what  the  subliminal  self  is  trying  to  say,
or  the  form  of  inhibiting  topics,  e.g.  the  names  of  known
individuals.  Or  it  may  act  in  an  intermediate  way  by
modifying  the  script  into  what  seems  to  the  supraliminal
self  to  make  sense  and  by  introducing  supraliminal  and
irrelevant  associations  of  ideas.  Criticism  applied  to
scripts  after  they  have  been  written  cannot  of  course
affect  them  in  any  of  these  ways,  but  it  may  create  an
atmosphere  unfavourable  to  the  spontaneity  of  future
scripts,  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  did
sometimes  do  this  with  Mrs.  Verrall.  She  used  to  say,
moreover,  that  prolonged  critical  study  of  scripts,  her  own
and  others,  tended  to  check  her  production  of  automatic
scripts,  and  leave  her  for  considerable  periods  without
any.  Criticise  she  did,  however,  and  no  one  need  fear  that
she  did  not  apply  to  her  own  scripts  in  full  measure
the  critical  examination  which  she  applied  to  those  of  other
automatists,  and  to  psychical  phenomena  generaUy.

Both  Mrs.  Verrall's  sympathy  and  her  critical  faculty
have  been  of  immense  value  to  most  of  those  engaged  in
active  work  for  the  Society.  All  the  papers  that  have
appeared  in  the  Proceedings  of  recent  years  have  passed
in  proof  through  her  hands  as  a  member  of  the  Com-
mittee of  Reference,  on  which  she  has  served  since
1894.  Her  function  on  this  Committee  was  never
treated  by  her  as  a  matter  of  form,  and  in  a  large  pro-
portion of  cases  the  authors  of  papers  have  received
from  her  valuable  criticisms  and  suggestions.  But  it
was  even  more  in  earlier  stages  of  their  work  that  her
friends  have  been  able  to  rely  on  her  help.  She  was
an  ideal  fellow-worker,  for  there  was  never  anything  of
self-seeking  or  desire  to  put  herself  forward  in  her  atti-
tude, and  her  sympathy  was  a  constant  stimulus.  Her
co-operation  in  psychical  research  will  long  be  greatly
missed.


176  Obituary  Notice  :  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

This  memorial,  brief  as  it  is,  should  not  go  out  to
the  world  without  a  few  words  about  Mrs.  Verrall  as  a
woman,  lest  any  should  imagine  that  this  private  side
of  her  life  was  submerged  in  the  activities  already  referred
to.  This  was  far  from  being  the  case.  As  a  wife,  a
mother,  and  the  mistress  of  a  house,  she  was  admir-
able, as  her  intimate  friends  well  know,  and  home
duties  were  not  postponed  to  other  undertakings.  Her
intellectual  attainments  were  her  servants  not  her  masters  ;
they  were  never  obtruded,  and  to  many  women  it  must
have  been  her  domestic  interests  that  were  most  apparent.
The  unselfishness,  sympathy,  and  understanding  of  others,
which  as  I  have  already  implied,  added  so  greatly  to
her  value  as  a  fellow-worker  in  psychical  research  and
affairs  outside  her  own  home,  also  made  her  a  woman
to  whom  others  readily  turned  for  help  in  their  own
lives  and  work,  a  true  and  staunch  friend.

E.  M.  S.


LXXII.J


Review.


177


SUPPLEMENT.


REVIEWS.

On  the  Cosmic  Relations.  By  Henry  Holt.  Two  volumes  (paged
continuously).  (Boston  and  New  York  :  Houghton  Mifflin
Co.,  1914.  London:  Williams  &  Norgate.  Pp.  xii,  989.
Price  21s.  net  )  1

An  American  audience  would  need  no  introduction  to  Mr.  Holt,
but  the  members  of  our  Society,  dispersed  over  the  entire
surface  of  the  earth,  will  be  glad  to  know  a  little  of  the
author  of  this  book.

He  has  been  for  nearly  fifty  years  one  of  the  foremost
citizens  of  New  York,  not  only  actively,  engaged  in  practical
affairs,  but  also  in  constant  touch  with  the  intellectual  interests
of  the  age,  as  indeed  the  founder  and  head  of  the  publishing
house  of  Henry  Holt  &  Company  could  not  fail  to  be.  But
the  influences  incidental  to  his  business  are  not  those  of  chief
importance  to  the  understanding  of  his  work  in  psychic  re-
search. After  graduating  from  Yale  University,  he  took  his
degree  in  law  from  Columbia  University,  Nsw  York1  He  never
practised,  but  the  discipline  of  that  study  has  proved  of  value
to  him  when  called  upon  to  appreciate  the  relative  weight  of
different  types  of  evidence  for  psychic  phenomena.  Rebelling
against  the  Calvinistic  form  of  Christianity  then  prevailing  at
Yale  (p.  3),  he  early  came  under  the  influence  of  Herbert
Spencer,  with  whom  he  had  considerable  personal  relations,
He  speaks  (p  77)  with  warm  appreciation  of  Spencer's  influence
upon  contemporary  thought,  and  many  traces  of  that  influence

1  Some  of  the  ideas  here  expressed  will  also  be  found  in  a  review  of
this  book  which  I  wrote  for  the  New  York  Nation  of  Jan.  14,  1915.

M


178  Professor  W.  B.  Newbold.  [past

are  discernible  in  Mr.  Holt's  thinking  ;  indeed,  he  might  still
be  accounted  a  Spencerian  were  it  not  that  he  goes  far  beyond
his  master  in  his  interpretation  of  the  significance  of  the
Unknowable.  Of  this  I  shall  have  more  to  say  later.  Before
the  appearance  of  this  book  Mr.  Holt  had  written  three  others
which  had  gone  through  numerous  editions  ;  he  had  also
founded  and  still  edits  The  Unpopular  Review,  a  quarterly
journal  designed  for  the  expression  of  such  unpopular  views
upon  popular  topics  as  the  editor  thinks  worth  expressing,  and
well  expressed.  In  this  journal,  no  doubt  because  so  unpopular
with  a  majority  of  its  readers,  psychic  research  has  an  honoured
place.

Mr.  Holt's  first  experience  with  supernormal  phenomena  dates
back  to  his  school-days.  One  of  his  schoolmates,  a  boy  of
sixteen  or  seventeen  years,  by  placing  the  tips  of  his  fingers
upon  a  stoutly  built  music-stand,  caused  it  first  to  tip  towards
him,  and,  after  removing  his  hands  altogether,  held  it  so
firmly  in  an  inclined  position  that  the  utmost  efforts  of  two
of  the  strongest  boys  present,  of  whom  Henry  Holt  was  one,
availed  only  to  break  the  heavy  wooden  base  from  the  upright
shaft  (pp.  94-6).  Later  in  life  he  encountered  a  supposed
medium,  Charles  H.  Foster,  who  convinced  him  that  he  (Foster)
possessed  at  least  telepathic  powers  (Chap.  XVI.).  In  1894
Mr.  Holt  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  a  fairly  good  one,  but
he  saw  in  it  nothing  more  than  telepathy  ;

But  my  attitude  regarding  spiritism — -that  it  was  nothing  but
telepathy  from  the  sitter,  having  been  fixed  in  my  interview
with  Foster,  and  considerable  reading  and  intimate  association
with  Hodgson  and  some  other  members  of  the  S.P.R.  not
having  changed  it  ;  and  finding,  at  the  time,  in  my  seance
with  Mrs.  Piper  nothing  but  telepathy,  I  felt  no  interest  in
farther  personal  investigation.

I  went  away  from  the  sitting  with  the  conviction :  "  She
gave  me  nothing  which  was  not  in  my  own  mind  :  it's  the
same  old  story  "  ;  and  I  have  not  been  near  a  medium  since,
and  do  not  care  to  go  (p.  395).

But  later  reflection  showed  him  seven  distinct  and  significant
items  of  information  which  he  got  from  her.  He  specifies  them
on  pp.  397-99,  and  with  regard  to  going  to  mediums  he  says  :

After  this  confession,  my  venturing  to  write  upon  the  subject
may  seem  to  others,  as  it  often  does  to  me,  presumptuous.


LXXII.]


Review.


179


That  view,  however,  would  have  silenced  most  of  the  his
torians  :  for  hardly  any  one  of  them,  or  even  any  editor,
witnesses  the  events  or  hears  the  debates  that  he  generalizes
upon  ;  nor  often  does  any  philosopher  discover  or  even  witness
most  of  the  facts  that  he  correlates,  nor  (T  hope  I  am  not
wearying  you)  any  scientist  most  of  the  facts  upon  Avhich  he
bases  his  discoveries  (p.  395).

Mr.  Holt's  convictions  seem,  nevertheless,  to  have  been
affected  more  by  personal  experience  than  by  observation  of
psychic  phenomena  in  others.  Throughout  his  life  he  has  had
from  time  to  time  the  mystic's  apprehension  of  the  reality
behind  phenomena,  which  he,  with  Dr.  Bucke,  calls  "  cosmic
consciousness  "  :

I  cannot  remember  when  I  did  not  have  the  rudiments  of
it  before  great  scenery  and  great  music,  and  it  culminated  in
me  ten  years  before  the  usual  period  (35-45)  he  (Dr.  Bucke)
assigns.  It  came  with  the  blaze  of  light,  but  the  light  was
from  the  natural  sunset  which,  however  ,  seemed  that  evening
not  confined  to  the  far-off  clouds,  bat  to  pervade  the  whole
atmosphere  and  all  other  things,  including  me,  and  to  be
pervaded  by  energy  and  mind  and  sympathy  (p.  87).

The  same  consciousness  inspires  not  a  few  striking  passages  :

But  the  powers  of  mystery  are  lovely  as  well  as  awful.  The
mists  and  mountains  and  dark  shadows  opposite  me  as  I
write,  are  both.  I  do  not  read  their  meaning,  as  I  read  the
meaning  of  a2  +  2ab+b2,  but  they  lift  and  expand  and  deepen
the  soul  as  do  no  meanings  that  I  can  read  ;  and  while  they
raise  the  most  terrible  questions,  they  answer  them  with  :
"  Peace  !  Wait  !  Work  !  Earn  the  rest  that  you  feel  is  in  Us  !
All  will  be  well  !  "  (pp.  65-6).

There  was  certainly  something  prophetic,  though  not  neces-
sarily prophetic  of  my  personal  experience,  in  the  exaltation
brought  me  before  sunrise  this  morning  in  the  pearl-gray  sky
holding  one  throbbing  planet  over  dark  Mount  Mansfield — there
was  something  beyond  my  eyes,  as  surely  as  there  was  beyond
those  of  the  tadpole  in  my  pond  (pp.  58-9).

In  his  dreams,  also,  of  which  Mr.  Holt  gives  a  tantalizingly
brief  account  in  Chapters  LIV.  and  LV.,  he  feels  that  he  sees
the  operations  of  a  something  not  himself.  From  childhood  he
has  seen  in  dreams  magnificent  buildings,  often  wandering
among  them  and  returning  repeatedly  to  the  same  spot  ;  long
suites  of  rooms  exquisitely  furnished  and  decorated  ;  tableaux,
pantomimes, costumes  ; and all these creations display  an

m2


180


Professor  W .  R.  Newbold.


[part


originality  of  conception  and  delicacy  of  taste  surpassing
anything  within  his  experience  :

.  .  .  never  in  my  dreams  have  I  seen  or  heard  anything
extraordinary  in  the  arts  where  I  have  some  trifling  capacity ;
while  in  some  arts  where  I  have  no  capacity  at  all,  I  have  from
childhood  seen  things  more  beautiful  than  any  human  being  has
ever  made  (p.  892  ;  italics  Mr.  Holt's).

Mr.  Holt  bases  his  belief  in  the  fact  of  survival  primarily
upon  three  dreams,  in  each  of  which  a  person  deceased  appeared
to  him  under  such  circumstances  that  no  other  explanation
seems  to  him  admissible  (pp.  920-23).  Unfortunately,  a  detailed
narrative  of  these  experiences  would  reveal  facts  of  too  intimate
a  nature  to  be  made  public,  and  Mr.  Holt's  outline  is  too
vague  to  enable  outsiders  to  appreciate  the  weight  of  the
evidence  for  survival  which  they  afford.

With  these  tentative  convictions  in  mind  he  began,  about
1908,  to  read  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.  consecutively
through,  and  found  his  convictions  strengthened  by  the  evidence
there  accumulated.  This  suggested  the  writing  of  On  the  Cosmic
Relations.

...  I  have  found  the  change  from  a  disbelief  in  the  sur-
vival of  bodily  death,  so  fruitful,  intellectually  as  well  as
emotionally,  that  I  am  prompted  to  do  what  I  can  to  share  it
with  others  (p.  39G).

His  estimate  of  his  own  contribution  is  modest  :

There  exist  better  books  on  this  department  of  my  subject
(possession)  than  I  dare  hope  this  is  going  to  be,  but  most  of
the  good  ones  appeal  principally  to  students  who  have  held
many  sittings  ;  and  were  begun  to  support  theses,  while  I
write  for  lay  readers,  and  at  least  began  with  the  intention  of
letting  the  theses  regarding  this  part  of  my  subject  form
themselves  as  I  should  go  along.  Moreover  my  long  experience
as  a  publisher  has  taught  me  that  intermediaries  are  needed
between  experts  and  lay  readers.  I  have  habitually  said  to
experts  to  whom  I  have  suggested  non-technical  books  :  "  The
right  point  of  view  must  cover  both  knowledge  and  ignorance  ;
I  can  trust  you  for  the  knowledge,  and  I  can  supply  the
ignorance." 1  am  doing  that  here  (p.  395).

The  deprecatory  tone  here  is  of  course  humorous,  although
it  not  unfairly  represents  Mr.  Holt's  uniformly  modest  attitude
towards  his  own  work.  His  detestation  of  pretence  prompts
him  frequently  to  call  the  reader's  attention  to  his  own  short-


LXXII.]


Review.


181


comings — his  bias  in  favour  of  survival,  his  occasional  incon-
sistency and  obscurity,  his  inability  to  remove  serious  diffi-
culties— in  brief  there  is  little  in  the  way  of  criticism  which
Mr.  Holt  has  not  himself  anticipated.  This  abhorrence  of
pretence,  indeed,  sometimes  carries  him  further  than  all  readers
will  follow  him  with  pleasure.  He  seems  to  include  in  it  the
customary  forms  of  our  literary  dialect  and  writes  "  colloquial
American  "  much  as  William  James  used  to  do,  not  scrupling
to  use  a  slang  word  or  to  coin  a  new  one  in  order  the  better
to  express  his  thought.  But  let  those  who  would  take  offence
beware  ;  possibly  Mr.  Holt  and  his  fellow-rebels  are  the
precursors  of  a  change  in  the  canons  of  style.

But  all  this  does  not  mean  that  Mr.  Holt  has  no  higher  aim
in  view  than  that  of  awakening  popular  interest  in  psychic
research.  The  points  upon  which  he  places  the  chief  emphasis
are  these  :

(1)  He  would  strengthen  the  inference  from  what  we  know  of
our  powers  of  apprehending  the  material  universe  to  a  pre-
sumably much  greater  universe  outside  it,  which  will,  we  may
hope,  prove  knowable,  to  some  extent  through  the  further
evolution  of  our  powers  of  apprehending  Reality,  but  more
fully  after  the  sloughing  off  of  the  body.

(2)  He  gives  a  more  careful  and  systematic  classification  of
the  phenomena  than  has  hitherto  been  proposed.

(3)  He  recognizes  that  ordinary  dreams  and  visions  are  feeble
examples  of  the  same  phenomena  that  have  been  classed  as
cases  of  possession,  and  that  both  afford  glimpses  of  the
spiritual  world.

The  "  cosmic  relations  "  are  the  "  interactions  between  soul
and  uni verse  "  (p.  6),  and  they  are  treated  under  three  captions.
Book  I.,  on  "  Correlated  Knowledge  "  (pp.  1-80),  expounds  the
outlines  of  the  author's  system  of  philosophy.  A  sketch  of  the
evolution  of  body,  soul  and  universe,  following  in  general  Mr.
Spencer's  fines,  results  in  the  inference  that  the  evolution  of  the
senses  warrants  anticipation  of  the  appearance  of  new  modes
of  perception,  which  anticipation  is  realized  in  psychical  pheno-
mena, correlated  to  the  aspect  of  reality  which  Spencer  called
Unknowable,  but  which  should  rather  be  called  Unknown.
This,  as  later  appears,  is  to  be  identified  with  the  spiritual
world or Cosmic Soul. Book II. (pp. 81-829) is  entitled


182  Professor  W.  R.  Newbold.  [part

"  Uncorrelated  Knowledge,"  and  is  devoted  to  a  review  of  the
leading  types  of  supernormal,  or  as  Mr.  Holt  prefers  to  call
them,  superusual  phenomena,  both  physical  and  psychical,
classified  under  a  new  and  rather  elaborate  technical  ter-
minology. Most  of  this  material  is  drawn  from  the  publications
of  the  S.P.R.,  and  it  is  accompanied  by  a  running  commentary
and  discussion  designed  to  correlate  it  with  the  author's
philosophical  system.  In  four  chapters,  XX.  to  XXIII.,  pp.
294-328,  he  digresses  from  the  main  topic  in  order  to  develop
that  system  more  fully.  He  first  introduces,  with  due  credit
to  Myers,  James  and  others,  the  conception  of  the  Cosmic  Soul
(Chap.  XX.),  of  which  (Chap.  XXI.)  the  individual  soul  is  but
a  portion,  and  which  is  identical  with  the  transcendental  ego
or  subliminal  self  :

The  discovery,  if  discovery  it  be,  that  the  subliminal  self  is
the  Cosmic  Soul,  may  impress  some  readers  as  belonging  in  the
same  class  with  the  immortal  discovery  in  Natural  History,
made  after  so  much  investigation  and  reflection,  that  a  snark
is  a  boojum.  Argument  against  such  an  impression  would  be
wasted.  The  subliminal  self  is  as  much  a  part  of  accepted
knowledge  as  is  the  law  of  association  of  ideas,  and  the
Cosmic  Soul  is  at  least  an  intiiition  of  most  of  the  minds
whose  intuitions  have  been  among  the  most  important  of
humanity's  guiding  lights.  The  conception  that  the  subliminal  self
and  the  Cosmic  Soul  are  the  same,  may  yet  be  demonstrated
to  a  clearness  that  will  place  it  among  those  beacons  (p.  311.)

In  Chap.  XXII.,  Mind,  seemingly  the  Cosmic  Soul,  is  con-
ceived, after  the  analogy  of  Spencer's  "  mind-stuff,"  as  :

...  a  redistribution,  into  combinations  ever  growing  higher,
of  a  primordial  element  like  force  and  matter — an  element
inherent  in  each  atom  of  our  structure,  and  also,  like  force
and  matter,  constantly  flowing  into  us  from  the  external
universe,  and  constantly  going  out  (p.  314).

As  such  it  is  termed  "  mind-jjotential  "  because  "  each
product  of  mind  becomes  mind  potential  for  further  products  "
(p.  315),  as  the  suggestions  of  experience  provide  the  material
for  the  artist's  creations.  And,  last  of  all,  in  Chap.  XXIII.,  the
Cosmic  Soul  is  the  seat  of  the  Ideas  described  by  Plato  ;  each
one  of  us  is  such  an  Idea,  and  of  it  the  material  bodies,  portraits,
dream-images,  etc.,  representing  us  are  but  copies  (pp.  320-7)  :

Do  not  our  latest  knowledge  and  best  thinking  result  in  the
idea — old  in  many  forms — that  we  are  but  expressions  of  a


LXXII.]


Review.


183


measureless  force  which  is  ourselves  and  also  behind  ourselves  ?
Would  any  person  given  to  the  old  phraseology  be  very
fantastic  in  calling  us  thoughts  of  the  divine  mind  ?  (pp.  163.)

Book  III.,  under  the  title  "  Attempts  at  Correlation,"  takes
up  the  subject  of  dreams  and  aims  to  prove  that  it  is  im-
possible to  explain  such  trances  as  those  of  Mrs.  Piper  by
subsuming  them  under  the  notion  of  "  dreams  "  ;  rather  must
we  invert  the  relation  and  explain  all  dreams  as  being,  what
these  trances  also  are,  more  or  less  imperfect  apprehensions  of
the  spiritual  world  :

Now  if  Mrs.  Piper's  dream  state  is  really  one  of  communi-
cation with  souls  who  have  passed  into  a  new  life,  dream
states  generally  may  not  extravagantly  be  supposed  to  be
foretastes  of  that  life.  .  .  .  The  dream  life  is  free  from  the
trammels  of  our  waking  environment  and  powers.  In  it  we
experience  unlimited  histories  in  an  instant  ;  roam  over  un-
limited spaces  ;  see,  hear,  feel,  touch,  taste,  smell,  enjoy
unlimited  things  ;  walk,  swim,  fly,  change  things  with  unlimited
speed  ;  do  things  with  unlimited  power  ;  make  what  we  will —
music,  poetry,  objects  of  art,  situations,  dramas,  with  un-
limited faculty,  and  enjoy  unlimited  society  (pp.  925-6).

The  suggestion  has  come  to  more  than  one  student,  and  to
me  very  strongly,  that  when  we  enter  into  life — as  spermatozoa,
or  star-dust,  if  you  please — we  enter  into  the  eternal  life,  but
that  the  physical  conditions  essential  to  our  development  into
appreciating  it  are  a  sort  of  veil  between  it  and  our  conscious-
ness. In  our  waking  life  we  know  it  only  through  the  veil  ;
but  when  in  sleep  or  trance,  the  material  environment  is
removed  from  consciousness,  the  veil  becomes  that  much
thinner,  and  we  get  better  glimpses  of  the  transcendent  reality.

Notwithstanding  its  Spencerian  colouring,  then,  Mr.  Holt's
philosophy  is  a  form  of  Idealism  or  Spiritualism  closely  akin  to
that  of  Mr.  Myers.  Indeed,  the  only  really  important  departure
from  Myers'  point  of  view  is  the  abandonment  of  the  sub-
liminal self  as  an  intermediary  between  the  individual  empirical
self  and  the  Cosmic  Soul,  from  which  results  a  much  freer  use
of  the  conception  of  the  Cosmic  Soul  as  an  explanatory  prin-
ciple and  the  substitution  of  the  telepathic  "  inflow  "  from  the
Cosmic  Soul  for  Myers'  "  subliminal  uprush  "  :

The  idea  of  a  transcendent  ego  seems  to  have  come  from
the  idea  of  a  transcendent  universe.  But  the  transcendent
universe  is  virtually  demonstrable,  while  the  transcendent  ego,
as  a  purely  individual  quality  independent  of  the  cosmic  soul,


184


Professor  W.  R.  Newbold.


[part


seems  far  from  demonstrable,  and  indeed  counter  to  the  indi-
cations of  evolution ;  for  evolution  apparently  produces  only
the  known  ego  resulting  from  interactions  between  the  known
self  and  the  known  environment.  Anything  more  must  appar-
ently be  an  inflow  from  outside  the  known  universe  (p.  309).

To  the  phenomena  of  the  Piper  trance  Mr.  Holt  devotes
nearly  one-half  of  his  book  (pp.  380-829),  and  those  of  us  to
whom  they  have  been  a  standing  puzzle  for  years — and  to
whom  have  they  not  ? — will  probably  be  especially  interested
in  the  solution  which  he  would  propose  for  them.

He  accepts  as  genuine  in  the  main,  although  not  without
repugnance,  the  communicators  of  the  period  when  Plhnuit  and
G.  P.1  were  in  control,  and  in  his  running  commentary  on  the
sittings  emphasizes  more  than  any  one  else  has  done  the
importance  of  the  "  dramatic  element  "  as  rendering  any  other
interpretation  unacceptable.

But  when  Mr.  Holt  comes  to  the  period  in  which  W.  S.
Moses,  George  Eliot,  Imperator  and  their  associates  are  supreme,
he  is  sorely  perplexed.  He  is  inclined  to  put  faith  in  the
genuineness  of  G.  P.  and  his  friends  ;  they  guarantee  the
existence  and  character  of  the  Imperator  Band,  yet  he  cannot
bring  himself  to  accept  the  guarantee.

On  p.  547  he  suggests,  although  seemingly  without  much
conviction,  that,  since the  evidence  of  the  Piper-Moses  con-

1  Since  Mr.  Holt  is  one  of  the  few  now  living  who  was  well  acquainted
with  G.  P.  in  the  flesh,  his  characterization  of  him  may  be  of  interest  to
the  many  who  know  the  G.  P.  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  :  "  I  have  often
wondered  why,  of  all  people  who  have  died  since  G.  P.  reached  maturity,
he  should  have  been  the  [most  prominent  ?]  one  to  show  up  through,  or
be  shown  up  by,  Mrs.  Piper.  In  habits  and  appearance  he  was  an
exceptionally  unobtrusive  personality.  In  a  roomful  of  people  he  was
perhaps  the  last  one  to  impress  a  stranger  or  be  engaged  with  a  friend,
except  as  his  presence  became  noticed  through  his  ingenious  and  tena-
cious support  of  some  theory  opposed  to  the  convictions  of  the  majority.
If  the  room  were  not  full,  but  shared  with  him  by  only  a  few  congenial
persons,  his  presence  would  at  once  be  felt  as  of  value.  Had  he  lived
longer,  his  literary  and  philosophical  tastes  might  have  made  him
widely  known.  He  had  a  few  close  and  warm  friends  in  intellectual
circles  in  both  New  York  and  Boston,  but  to  the  world  in  general  he
died  unknown,  and  to  the  average  members  of  the  more  intelligent
polite  world  who  were  friends  of  his  exceptionally  prominent  family —
historic  on  both  sides,  he  was  the  retiring,  somewhat  eccentric,  com-
paratively unknown  member "  (p.  540).


LXXII.]


Review.


185


tradicts  in  certain  points  the  evidence  of  Moses  in  the  flesh,
both  should  be  ignored  as  nullifying  each  other  and  the  case
decided  on  the  remaining  evidence.

Elsewhere  (pp.  579-81)  he  proposes  the  tentative  theory  that
the  Pi^er-Moses  originated  in  a  telepathic  impression,  or,
rather,  from  both  oral  and  telepathic  suggestions  received  from
sitters  (myself  and,  later,  Hodgson)  ;  this  dream-Moses  then
attracted  the  hypothetic  spirit-Moses,  who  at  first  blended  with
and  later  virtually  absorbed  and  obliterated  the  dream.  The
Imperator  Band  were,  possibly,  originated  in  the  same  way  by
Hodgson's  conveying  telepathically  to  Mrs.  Piper  his  impres-
sions from  W.  S.  Moses,  "  with  perhaps  some  involuntary
initiative  and  assistance  from  Professor  Newbold  "  (p.  579),  but,
of  course,  could  not  attract  the  spirits  in  question  because  the
latter  do  not  exist  at  all.  The  evidence  of  the  possibly  genuine
spirits  for  the  reality  of  the  spurious  spirits  is  dismissed  (pp.
586-7)  as  simply  unreliable.  They  met  them  "  in  the  medium's
mind  "  and  mistook  them  for  spirits  like  themselves.

But  G.  P.,  and  Hodgson  later  as  control,  profess  to  be
seeing  and  talking  with  these  people  constantly  !  So  did  Moses
when  he  was  here,  and  he  was  genuine  enough  here.  He  may
have  been  fooled,  but  if  he  was,  he  lost  none  of  his  own
actuality.  And  if  the  controls  G.  P.  and  Hodgson  are  fooled
in  the  same  way,  I  don't  see  how  it  affects  their  genuineness,
any  more  than  it  affected  the  genuineness  of  Moses  incarnate
(p.  587).

I  do  not  think,  nor  does  Mr.  Holt  think,  that  he  has  solved
the  Piper  problem,  although  I  believe  him  to  be  right  in  many
of  his  contentions,  but  he  has  nevertheless  given  us  a  valuable
book,  in  my  opinion  indeed  the  best  survey  of  the  evidence
that  has  appeared  since  Myers'  epoch-making  Human  Per-
sonality and  its  Survival  of  Bodily  Death.  Not,  of  course,  that
it  is  a  rival  of  the  latter  as  a  work  of  philosophical  synthesis —
Mr.  Holt  would  be  the  first  to  pooh-pooh  such  a  claim.  If  he
would  admit  any  rivalry  it  would  probably  be  in  analysis,  for
he  has  offered  a  classification  which  includes  both  the  kinetic
and  psychic  phenomena,  while  Myers  deals  with  the  latter  only.
But  the  book  is  especially  well  adapted  to  bring  home  to  the
reader  the  force  of  the  empirical  evidence  for  psychic  pheno-
mena, and  especially  for  those  which  indicate  survival  of  death,
and  to  point  out  to  him  one  way  in  which  the  neAv  knowledge


186


Professor  W.  R.  Newbold.  [part


may  be  incorporated  into  the  Avorld-view  now  current.  And
although  Mr.  Holt  frankly  pleads  a  cause,  he  does  not  ignore
the  difficulties  which  attend  it.  Indeed,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,
he  is  the  first  writer  who,  while  concerned  to  maintain  the
spiritistic  origin  of  the  Piper  communcations,  has  grappled  in
the  open  with  the  formidable  difficulties  raised  by  the  appear-
ance of  Sir  Walter  Scott,  George  Eliot  and  the  Imperator  Band
as  communicators.  The  very  traits  which  are  usually  accounted
faults  in  a  book — unconventional  diction,  diffuseness,  occasional
acknowledged  inconsistency  and  inconclusiveness — will  make  its
appeal  the  stronger  to  the  average  reader.  They  deepen  his
appreciation  of  the  frankness  with  which  Mr.  Holt,  a  man  of
trained  judgment,  ripe  experience  and  strong  convictions,  reveals
how  he  has  been  converted  from  lifelong  scepticism  to  a  belief
not  the  less  sincere  because  commingled  with  perplexity,  and,
as  the  reader  watches  the  struggle  in  Mr.  Holt's  mind  between
the  old  disbelief,  which  is  probably  his  own  state  of  mind  as
well,  and  the  new  evidence,  he  can  scarcely  fail  to  be  drawn
into  the  contest  himself.  He  may  not  be  led  to  accept  Mr.
Holt's  conclusions  but  he  will  be  impressed  with  the  reality  of
the  problems  and feel  more sympathy with those who  are

endeavouring  to  solve  them.  TTT  _  ,T

W.  Romaine  Newbold.


2

The  Foundations  of  Normal  and  Abnormal  Psychology.  By  Boris
Sidis.  (London  :  Duckworth  &  Co.  Pp.  vii,  416.  Price
7s.  6d.  net.)

All  who  realize  the  value  of  cross-fertilization  in  advancing  the
sciences  must  long  have  wondered  why  no  one  has  ever  set
himself  to  correlate  systematically  the  results  of  normal  with
those  of  abnormal  psychology.  For  though  it  seems  a  (pardon-
able) exaggeration  when  Dr.  Sidis  declares  (p.  48)  that  "  Know-
ledge of  the  normal  arises  out  of  knowledge  of  the  abnormal  "
and  that  "  we  may  even  say  that  the  normal  itself  originates
in  the  abnormal,"  it  must  be  admitted  that  abnormal  psycho-
logy has  at  its  command  a  distinct  method,  that  of  clinical
experiment,  which  is  quite  as  definite  as  those  of  normal
psychology,  introspection  and  laboratory  experimentation,  which


LXXII.]


Review.


187


has  certain  advantages  and  is  free  from  certain  defects  which
beset  the  latter.  The  results  of  the  psychologist's  self-inspection
are  apt  to  be  disappointing  and  to  reveal  little  that  is  enlightening,
so  long  as  he  looks  at  random  and  without  knowing  what  to
look  for,  while  if  he  looks  merely  to  find  confirmation  of  bis
theory  of  psychology,  his  results  may  easily  be  misleading.
Again  the  relatively  exact  control  which  is  possible  in  the
laboratory  experiment  is  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the
drawbacks  of  setting  the  mind  functioning  under  artificial  and
unnatural  conditions  and  for  trivial  objects.  On  the  other  hand,
the  fact  that  the  students  of  abnormal  psychology  are  mostly
professional  men  who  have  a  definite  therapeutic  aim  and  have
to  apply  their  theories,  is  a  valuable  guarantee  that  they  will
be  properly  and  severely  tested.  Medical  men  cannot  afford  to
entertain  theories  which  are  meaningless  or  devoid  of  appli-
cation and  are  merely  futile  exercises  in  academic  ingenuity.
Their  theories  have  got  to  work,  and  are  discarded  if  they  do
not.  Not,  of  course,  that  it  is  prudent  to  conclude  from  the
mere  fact  that  a  theory  works  that  it  is  absolutely  and  inde-
feasibly  true  ;  it  may  be  obscure,  inherently  improbable,
incoherent  and  even  self-contradictory,  and  yet  work  better
than  any  alternative  that  has  yet  occurred  to  any  one.  It
may,  however,  safely  be  inferred  that  a  theory  that  works  must
contain  some  truth  and  is  somehow  built  on  the  right  lines.

It  was  then  a  happy  thought  of  Dr.  Sidis's  to  develop  his
psychological  theories  in  connexion  with  his  psychiatric  prac-
tice :  moreover,  his  remarkable  work  on  Multiple  Personality,
which  he  wrote  a  dozen  years  ago  in  conjunction  with  Dr.
Goodhart  and  which  described  the  classic  case  of  the  Rev.  Mr.
Hanna,  justified  the  highest  expectations.  These  the  present
work  can  hardly  be  said  to  fulfil,  nor  does  it  supersede  Mul-
tiple Personality.  It  has  not  the  concrete  interest  given  to  the
former  volume  by  the  narration  of  illustrative  cases  ;  it
contains  practically  no  stories  and  not  even  references.  The
first  half  is  devoted  to  a  discussion  of  the  fundamental  prin-
ciples of  psychology  which  is  more  ambitious  than  successful.
For  it  is  probably  impossible  to  cover  so  much  difficult  and
disputed  ground  in  two  hundred  pages  without  giving  an
impression  of  dogmatism,  and  without  doing  apparent  injustice
to  many  theories  which  are  dealt  with  too  briefly.


188


Dr.  F.  C.  8.  Schiller.


[part


For  example,  in  spite  of  Dr.  Sidis's  admiration  for  William
James,  which  is  once  more  attested  in  his  dedication,  he
hardly  treats  the  '  transmission  '  theory  of  the  relation  between
body  and  mind  at  all  fairly,  nor  appreciates  its  logical  im-
portance. He  has  not  seen  that  its  mere  formulation  invali-
dates the  whole  of  the  evidence  to  which  the  materialist
theory  had  been  wont  to  appeal.  Materialism  had  always
interpreted  the  apparent  conditioning  of  mental  process  by
physical  as  meaning  that  the  latter  is  productive  of  the  former.
But  so  soon  as  the  transmission  theory  suggests  an  alternative
interpretation,  the  whole  of  this  argument  breaks  down.
Instead  of  assuming  that  the  correlation  of  the  physical  and
the  psychical  proves  that  the  physical  process  produces  the
phenomena  of  consciousness,  we  can  now  just  as  well  say  that
it  merely  transmits  consciousness  and  conditions  only  its  modes
of  manifestation.  No  facts,  therefore,  remain  to  which
materialism  can  lay  exclusive  claim  ;  no  coercive  proof  of
materialism  therefore  remains  possible,  while  there  is  no  similar
difficulty  in  conceiving  evidence  which  would  be  positively
incompatible  with  the  truth  of  materialism.  The  transmission
theory  therefore  involves  a  great  weakening  of  materialism
which  puts  it  permanently  on  the  defensive,  while  it  is  not
itself  exposed  to  attack.  For  the  charges  which  Dr.  Sidis
brings  against  it  seem  all  to  rest  on  misapprehensions.  He
accuses  it  of  postulating  an  additional  world  of  disembodied
consciousness  which  "  cannot  be  drawn  into  the  circle  of
exjierience  "  and  exists  "  from  all  eternity  in  a  region  outside
and  totally  independent  of  the  brain  "  (p.  62),  and  so  of
gratuitously  multiplying  entities.  All  this  is  erroneous.  The
question  is  quite  empirical  and  is  simply  whether  it  is  more
convenient  to  regard  the  correlation  of  body  and  mind  in  one
way  or  in  another.  Both  ways  are  thinkable,  and  no  facts
that  can  possibly  be  discovered  about  the  relations  between  the
two  sides  of  the  psycho -physical  individual  can  possibly  decide
between  them.  But  if  a  psychic  entity  should  show  itself
capable  of  manifesting  through  other  bodies  than  the  one  called
its  own,  this  would  yield  a  decision  in  favour  of  the  trans-
mission theory.  Not  that  it  would  prove  a  '  disembodied  '
consciousness  ;  it  would  establish  only  that  consciousness  was
capable  of  manifesting  through  more  than  one '  body.'  Nor


LXXII.]


Review.


189


would  it,  as  such,  convey  any  information  about  any  tran-
scendent world  ;  it  would  be  concerned  with  nothing  but  facts
of  experience  and  their  interpretation.

Of  course  the  failure  to  dispose  of  the  transmission  theory
very  seriously  affects  the  subsequent  discussion  of  '  volun-
taristic  '  psychology,  which  Dr.  Sidis  strangely  treats  as  an
attempt  "  to  make  of  psychology  a  science  independent  of  all
physiology  "  and  to  do  without  physiological  '  cement  '  to
fasten  up  the  psychological  material  (p.  86),  and  the  form  of
psycho -physical  parallelism  he  himself  adopts.  For  Dr.  Sidis
also,  like  all  who  conceive  parallelism  as  more  than  a  methodo-
logical convenience,  fails  to  keep  up  the  parallelism.  He
declares  (p.  81)  that  "every  psychic  change  must1  have  its
physiological  concomitant"  but  will  only  concede  that  "  every
physiological  process  may 1  have  its  psychic  accompaniment."
In  the  absence  of  any  transmission  theory  this  inconsistency
forces  him  back  into  the  materialism  he  had  tried  to  disavow.

The  analysis  of  the  abnormal  mind  which  fills  the  second
half  of  Dr.  Sidis's  book  is  built  up  on  what  he  calls  the  theory
of  the  moment-consciousness.  This  theory  had  already  made
its  appearance  in  Multiple  Personality  ;  its  present  restatement
has  been  complicated  and  rendered  more  technical  in  its
terminology,  but  not  otherwise  improved.  The  notion  of
'  moment-consciousness  '  or  '  moment  '  is  defined  (p.  231)  in
terms  of  '  the  synthetic  unity  of  consciousness,'  and  plainly
rests  on  the  assumption  that  the  problem  of  mental  life  is
essentially  one  of  synthesis,  i.e.  of  explaining  how  a  discrete
plurality  of  psychic  states  can  ever  be  fused  into  a  unity  or
whole.  Dr.  Sidis  is  clearly  aware  of  the  difficulty  J.  S.  Mill
got  himself  into  by  analysing  the  mind  into  a  series  of  events
and  then  conceiving  its  unity  as  a  superadded  event  (p.  231).
But  he  hardly  seems  to  be  aware,  how  antique  this  philosophic
difficulty  is,  or  that  Hume's  analysis  of  the  self  had  failed  at
exactly  the  same  point,  and  that  Kant's  elaborate  system  was
entirely  necessitated  by  the  need  of  devising  machinery  for  the
synthesis  of  the  discrete  sensations  he  had  accepted  from
Hume.  And  it  is  very  remarkable  that  Dr.  Sidis  has  not  seen
that  this  whole  putting  of  the  problem  has  been  completely
antiquated  by  William  James. By  declaring  that  mental  life

1  Italics  mine.


190


Dr.  F.  C.  8.  Schiller.


[part


forms  a  continuum  or  '  stream,'  he  rejected  on  principle  the
common  assumption  of  previous  psychology  that  it  had  to  be
compacted  out  of  separate  events,  '  states,'  '  sensations,'  or
'impressions,'  and  rendered  superfluous  all  the  traditional
devices  for  unifying  them  into  a  consciousness.  For  it  follows
that  the  problem  of  psychology  is  no  longer  '  synthesis  '  but
'  analysis.'  How  and  why,  that  is,  is  the  continuous  flow  of
experience  broken  up  into  a  plurality  of  perceptions,  things,
and  ideas  ?  The  answer  comes  easily.  We  analyse  our  ex-
perience in  the  ways  indicated  by  our  interests,  purposes  and
biological  needs  of  adaptation  to  the  conditions  of  life.  But
the  plural  things  we  distinguish  are  not  really  separated  from
the  continuum  in  which  they  occur,  and  relapse  into  it  when
we  have  done  with  them.  Nor  is  it  incompatible  with  this
description  of  psychic  process  to  observe  the  apparently  for-
tuitous character  of  much  that  comes  up  in  the  mind  (cf.
pp.  99-100).  For  purposiveness  is  shown  in  selection,  and
selection  implies  a  superabundance  of  material,  some  of  which
is  rejected.  Only  we  must  not  infer  with  Dr.  Sidis  that  "  not
purpose,  but  chance  is  at  the  heart  of  mental  life."  For  there
is  no  reason  to  regard  the  raw  materials  as  more  valuable  and
characteristic  than  the  finished  product.

The  notion  of  the  '  moment -consciousness  '  then  does  not
seem  to  be  consistent  with  Dr.  Sidis's  acceptance  of  James's
notion  of  the  '  stream  of  consciousness.'  And  I  fail  to  see  also
that  it  develops  any  descriptive  advantages  in  dealing  with  the
complex  phenomena  of  multiple  personality.  It  appears  to
require  vast  amounts  of  unverified  (and  largely  unverifiable)
hypothesis  in  rising  from  the  elementary  form  it  is  supposed  to
take  in  the  amoeba  to  the  '  synthetic  recognitive  moment  '  of  a
self-conscious  person  and  not  a  little  uncritical  metaphor.  Dr.
Sidis's  reader  is  continually  tempted  to  inquire  e.g.  what  is  really
meant  by  a  psychic  '  element  '  (p.  317),  by  the  '  identity  '  of
'  recurrence  '  of  psychic  '  states  '  (p.  370),  and  by  their  '  copy-
ing,' 1  reproducing  '  and  '  representing  '  each  other.  Dr.  Sidis
seems  blissfully  unaware  of  the  troubles  philosophers  have  had
with  all  these  popular  notions,  and  it  is  hard  to  believe  that
the  technique  and  success  of  his  method  of  '  l^pnoidization  '
can  really  depend  on  any  association  with  such  very  dubious
psychology. On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  pleasure  to  recognize


LXXII.]


Review.


191


that  Dr.  Sidis  is  very  clear  that  there  is  no  difference  in
psychological  nature  between  percepts  and  hallucinations  (pp.
149-50).  For  one  great  reason  why  psychologists  have  failed
so  often  to  devise  a  tenable  theory  of  perception  is  that
they  have  failed  to  connect  true  perception  with  false,  and  to
see  that  the  difference  between  a  perception  of  reality  and  a
hallucination  does  not  lie  in  the  psychological  experience,  but
is  essentially  one  in  the  value  of  the  product.

P.  C.  S.  Schiller.


3

Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology.  By  C.  G.  Jung,
M.D.,  LL.D.  Authorised  translation  edited  by  Dr.  Con-
stance E.  Long.  (Bailliere,  Tind?U  and  Cox.  London.
1916. Pp.  xvi  +  392. Price  12s.  6d.  net.)

This  volume  consists  of  a  collection  of  articles  and  pamphlets
written  by  Dr.  Jung  of  Zurich  during  the  past  fourteen  years.
The  majority  of  these  papers  deal  with  various  aspects  of
psycho  (analysis,  and  by  bringing  them  together  in  book  form
Dr.  Constance  Long  has  earned  the  gratitude  of  all  students
of  this  subject.  They  are  printed  in  chronological  order,
and  we  can  thus  trace  the  gradual  growth  of  some  of  the
doctrines  which  are  especially  characteristic  of  the  Zurich
school.

Hitherto  judgments  of  the  value  of  psycho-analysis  as  a
method  of  psychological  investigation  and  as  a  mode  of  therapy
have  been  based  mainly  on  the  writings  of  Freud  and  his
followers,  and,  as  is  well  known,  the  views  put  forward  by
them  have  met  with  much  opposition  and  protest  from  many
quarters.  In  some  respects  Jung's  teaching  will  appear  less
objectionable  than  that  of  the  Vienna  school,  and  Dr.  Long,
in  her  preface,  says,  lt  It  will  be  a  relief  to  many  students
of  the  Unconscious  to  see  in  it  another  aspect  than  that  of  '  a
wild  beast  couched,  waiting  its  hour  to  spring.'  "  But  Dr.
Long  would  be  the  first  to  admit  that  the  question  as  to
which  view  is  the  less  objectionable  is  a  small  matter  compared
with  the  question  as  to  which  view  is  the  more  true.


192


Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell.


[part


Dr.  Jung  tells  us  that  it  is  not  his  intention  to  give  a
presentation  of  the  fundamental  concepts  of  analytical  psycho-
logy in  this  book.  It  will  indeed  appeal  chiefly  to  those
who  already  have  some  knowledge  of  the  subject  and  have
followed  the  development  of  psycho-analytic  theory  and  practice
in  recent  years.  On  the  whole  it  is  supplementary  to  and
corroborative  of  the  work  of  the  Vienna  school,  and  the
criticisms  that  may  legitimately  be  levelled  against  Freud's
views  are  equally  applicable  to  much  of  what  Jung  has  written.
Nevertheless,  there  are  in  this  book  several  new  points  of
view  so  fundamentally  important  and  so  opposed  to  what
has  been  hitherto  taught  that  they  have  led  to  a  schism
in  the  psycho-analytic  world.  The  main  points  of  difference
between  the  two  schools  are  most  clearly  revealed  in  Jung's
conclusions  regarding  the  aetiology  of  the  neuroses  and  in
his  views  on  the  significance  and  interpretation  of  dream
symbolism.  It  is  perhaps  in  his  treatment  of  symbolism
that  he  breaks  away  most  fundamentally  from  Freud  and
his  disciples.

From  the  very  beginning  of  the  psycho-analytic  movement
the  importance  of  dreams  has  been  insisted  upon.  Freud
declared  the  interpretation  of  dreams  to  be  "  the  via  regia
to  the  interpretation  of  the  unconscious,  the  surest  ground
of  psycho-analysis,  and  a  field  in  which  every  worker  must
win  his  convictions  and  gain  his  education."  According  to
him  every  dream  is  the  disguised  fulfilment  of  an  unconscious
wish.  The  wish  is  unconscious  because  it  has  been  repressed.
It  has  been  repressed  because  it  is  the  outcome  of  some
primitive  craving  whose  realization  is  incompatible  with  the
ethical  and  cultural  standards  of  the  individual.  In  the
waking  state  it  is  prevented  from  entering  consciousness  by  a
sort  of  censorship  which  is  always  at  work  during  waking
hours.  But  in  sleep  this  censorship  is  relaxed  to  some  extent,
and  the  unconscious  wishes  get  a  chance  of  showing  themselves.
They  are  not  allowed,  however,  to  appear  in  undisguised
form.  Did  they  do  so,  the  sleeper  would  awake.  The  function
of  the  dream  is  to  protect  sleep  by  so  distorting  these  insistent
thoughts  of  the  unconscious  that  their  true  significance  is
unrecognizable,  and  the  dreamer  may  therefore  continue  to
sleep. In bringing about the necessary distortion of  the


LXXII.]


Review.


193


true  dream  thoughts,  the  unconscious  makes  use  of  a  sort
of  symbolism,  especially,  Freud  says,  in  the  presentation  of
sexual  complexes.

Now  one  of  the  most  important  features  of  Jung's  work
is  his  exposition  of  the  conception  of  the  dream  which  his
experience  has  forced  upon  him — a  conception  fundamentally
different  in  many  respects  from  that  put  forward  by  Freud.
And  this  difference  in  the  two  rival  conceptions  of  the  dream
seems  mainly  to  depend  on  a  difference  hi  the  interpretation
of  the  significance  and  value  of  psychological  symbols.  Jung
says  (p.  222),  "  According  to  Freud,  the  dream  is  in  its  essence
a  symbolic  veil  for  repressed  desires  which  are  in  conflict  with
the  ideals  of  personality.  I  am  obliged  to  regard  the  dream
structure  from  a  different  point  of  view.  The  dream  for  me
is,  in  the  first  instance,  the  subliminal  picture  of  the  psycho-
logical condition  of  the  individual  in  his  waking  state.  It
presents  a  resume  of  the  subliminal  associative  material  which
is  brought  together  by  the  momentary  psychological  situation."

Thus  for  Freud  the  dream  symbol  is  merely  a  sign  or
token  representing  primitive  psycho-sexual  tendencies,  and
is  dependent  wholly  on  historical  causes.  For  Jung  the
symbol  has  a  positive  value.  It  has  a  meaning  for  the
actual  present  and  for  the  future.  It  is  an  attempt  at  com-
prehension by  means  of  analogy,  and  an  '  endeavour  to  solve
the  actual  problems  of  the  dreamer's  life.  As  Jung  says,
in  his  preface,  "  To  the  Zurich  school  the  symbol  is  not  merely
a  sign  of  something  repressed  and  concealed,  but  is  at  the
same  time  an  attempt  to  comprehend  and  to  point  out
the  way  of  the  further  psychological  development  of  the
individual."

Although  Jung  thus  teaches  that  we  must  regard  the  funda-
mental thoughts  and  impulses  of  the  unconscious  as  symbols
indicative  of  a  definite  line  of  future  development,  he  feels
compelled  to  make  the  somewhat  startling  admission  that
there  is  "  no  scientific  justification  for  such  a  procedure,
because  our  present  day  science  is  based  as  a  whole  upon
causality."  He  defends  himself,  however,  by  maintaining
that  "  causality  is  only  one  principle,  and  psychology  essentially
cannot  be  exhausted  by  causal  methods  oidy,  because  the
mind  lives  by  aims  as  well  " (p.  ix). He  seems  to  realize


194


Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell.


[part


that  he  is  here  entering  upon  very  debatable  territory,  and
that  any  real  attempt  to  justify  the  position  he  takes  up
would  entail  a  disquisition  on  certain  philosophical  topics
which  would  carry  him  far  from  the  immediate  purpose  of
his  work.  It  is  only  in  isolated  sentences  or  paragraphs
that  he  even  hints  at  the  difficulties  inherent  in  the  views
he  holds.  It  may  be  that  the  real  ground  of  dispute  is
the  old  battle-ground  of  freedom  and  necessity.  Jung  disputes
the  completeness  of  Freud's  view  as  a  scientific  explanation
of  dream  psychology,  because  "  the  psyche  cannot  be  con-
ceived merely  from  the  causal  aspect  ;  but  necessitates  also
a  final  view-point."  But,  the  deter minist  says,  if  the  end  is
determined  it  can  be  dealt  with  from  the  causal  aspect ;
if  the  end  is  not  determined  no  science  of  man  is  possible.

There  would  seem  to  be  a  fundamental  difference  between
Jung  and  Freud  in  their  attitude  towards  human  personality.
According  to  Freud  the  unconscious  motive  of  every  human
activity  is  a  desire  for  pleasure,  and  the  ends  or  aims  of
the  unconscious  are  always  the  immediate  gratification  of
its  desires.  Thus  the  aim  of  the  dream  is  attained  in  the
symbolised  realization  of  the  unconscious  wish,  and  the  inter-
pretation of  the  dream  consists  in  finding  the  true  dream
thoughts  in  the  associative  material  which  groups  itself  round
the  different  parts  of  the  dream.  In  the  last  analysis  these
thoughts  are  always  the  expression  of  infantile,  primitive
cravings  and  are  unacceptable  to  the  conscious  personality.
They  are  of  a  universal  and  elementary  character,  but  they
may  be  disguised  in  the  dream  under  manifold  forms.

This,  Jung  says,  is  the  result  of  applying  only  the  principle
of  "  causality "  to  the  material  associated  with  the  dream  ;
"  we  reduce  the  manifest  dream  content  to  certain  fundamental
tendencies  or  ideas."  But  if  we  use  the  principle  of  "  finality,"
the  dream  may  be  shown  to  have  quite  another  significance.
We  may  ask  of  the  dream,  as  of  any  other  psychic  activity  :
What  is  its  purpose  ?  And  Jung  sees  in  the  dream  not
merely  the  fulfilment  of  an  unconscious  wish  but  an  attempt
at  the  solution  of  some  unsolved  problem,  the  settling  of
some  unconscious  conflict.  Jung  would  have  us  believe  that
there  is  in  man  a  "  psyche  "  whose  purposes  are  not  abrogated
even in sleep, though its activities may be obscured,  and


Lxxn.]


Review.


195


that  in  dream  the  primordial  tendencies  of  the  unconscious
are  utilized  as  a  means  of  siibconscious  expression  of  the
ways  by  which  these  purposes  may  be  achieved.  Thus  the
symbol  of  the  dream  may  play  a  part  in  the  moral  education
of  the  individual  similar  to  that  which  the  religious  symbol
has  played  in  the  history  of  civilization.

T.  W.  Mitchell.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXXIII.
March,  1917.


THE  EAR  OF  DIONYSIUS  :

Further  Scripts  affording  Evidence  of  Personal

Survival.1

By  The  Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.

On  the  26th  of  August,  1910,  the  automatist  who  is
already  well  known  to  members  of  the  Society  under
the  name  of  Mrs.  Willett  sat  for  script  with  Mrs.  VerralJ.

The  script  produced  on  this  occasion,  partly  written
and  partly  dictated — I  use  the  word  script  for  con-
venience' sake  to  include  the  spoken  as  well  as  the
written  word— contained  the  phrase  "  Dionysius'  Ear
the  lobe."  The  phrase  occurred  in  the  dictated  part
of  the  script,  and  the  name  Dionysius  was  pronounced
as  in  Italian.  It  has  no  obvious  relevance  to  the
context,  and  this  first  appearance  of  it  in  Willett  Script
remains  even  now  without  any  satisfactory  explanation.

1  This  Paper  was  read  at  a  meeting  of  the  Society  on  November  9th,
1916,  substantially  in  the  form  in  which  it  is  now  published,  except
that  considerable  additions  have  been  made  to  the  argumentative
portion.


19  S


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


To  Mrs.  Verrall  herself,  as  we  shall  see  presently,
the  words  conveyed  at  the  time  no  meaning  whatever.
As  a  good  many  of  my  audience  may  be  in  like  case
with  her,  I  had  best  explain  at  the  outset  that  the
Ear  of  Dionysius  is  a  kind  of  grotto  hewn  in  the  solid
rock  at  Syracuse  and  opening  on  one  of  the  stone
quarries  which  served  as  a  place  of  captivity  for  the
Athenian  prisoners  of  war  who  fell  into  the  hands
of  the  victorious  Syracusans  after  the  failure  of  the
famous  siege  so  graphically  described  by  Thucydides.
A  few  years  later  these  quarries  were  again  used  as
prisons  by  the  elder  Dionysius,  Tyrant  of  Syracuse.
The  grotto  of  which  I  have  spoken  has  the  peculiar
acoustic  properties  of  a  whispering  gallery,  and  is  tradi-
tionally believed  to  have  been  constructed  or  utilised
by  the  Tyrant  in  order  to  overhear,  himself  unseen,
the  conversations  of  his  prisoners.  Partly  for  this
reason,  and  partly  from  a  fancied  resemblance  to  the
interior  of  a  donkey's  ear,  it  came  to  be  called  TJOrecchio
di  Dionisio,  or  the  Ear  of  Dionysius  ;  but  the  name
only  dates  from  the  sixteenth  century.  The  grotto  is
still  one  of  the  objects  of  interest  which  every  visitor  to
Syracuse  is  taken  to  see.

No  further  reference  was  made  in  any  Willett  Script
to  the  Ear  of  Dionysius  until  more  than  three  years
later.  The  subject  was  first  revived  in  a  script  written
in  the  presence  of  Sir'  Oliver  Lodge  on  the  10th  of
January,  1914.  The  sitting  was  a  very  long  one;  and
in  the course of it occurred the  following  passage.

A.

(Extract  from  Script  of  Jan.  10,  1914.)

Do  you  remember  you  did  not  know  and  I  complained  of
your  classical  ignorance  ignorance

It  concerned  a  place  where  slaves  were  kept — and  Audition
belongs,  also  Acoustics

Think  of  the  Whispering  Gaily


LXXIH.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


199


To  toil,  a  slave,  the  Tyrant — and  it  was  called  Orecchio —
that's  near

One  Ear,  a  one  eared  place,  not  a  one  horsed  dawn  [here
the  automatist  laughed  slightly],  a  one  eared  place — You  did
not  know  (or  remember)  about  it  when  it  came  up  in  con-
versation, and  I  said  Well  what  is  the  use  of  a  classical
education —

Where  were  the  fields  of  Enna

[Drawing  of  an  ear.]

an  ear  ly  pipe  could  be  heard

To  sail  for  Syracuse

Who  beat  the  loud-sounding  wave,  who  smote  the  moving
furrows

The  heel  of  the  Boot

Dy Dy .  and  then  you  think  of  Diana  Dimorphism
To  fly  to  find  Euripides
not  the  Pauline  Philemon

This  sort  of  thing  is  more  difficult  to  do  than  it  looked.

There  are  several  interesting  points  to  be  noted  in
connection  with  this  passage.  Earlier  in  the  script  it
was  stated  that  a  message  was  to  be  sent  to  Mrs.  Verrall  ;
but  at  the  point  where  the  extract  commences,  Mrs.
Verrall  is  directly  addressed  in  the  second  person,  although
she  was  not  herself  present.  The  communication  must
be  taken  as  purporting  to  come  from  Dr.  A.  W.  Verrall,
the  incident  recalled  in  the  extract  having  actually
happened  very  much  as  described.  I  will  relate  it  in  the
words  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  own  note,  written  on  Jan.  19,  1914,
after  this  portion  of  the  script  had  been  shown  to  her.

My  typed  note  on  the  Willett  Script  of  Aug.  26,
1910,  is  as  follows  :  '" ;  Dionysius'  Ear  the  lobe '  is  un-
intelligible to  me.  A.  W.  V.  says  it  is  the  name  of  a
place  at  Syracuse  where  D.  could  overhear  conversations."
This  makes  clear  what  was  instantly  recalled  to  me  on
hearing  the  Willett  Script  of  Jan.  10,  that  I  did  not
know,  or  had  forgotten,  what  the  Ear  of  Dionysius  was,
and  that  I  asked  A.  W.  V.  to  explain  it.  I  cannot  say
whether  on  that  occasion  he  asked  "  What  is  the  use
of  a  classical  education  ?  " but  he  expressed  considerable


200


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


surprise  at  my  ignorance,  and  the  phrase  of  the  script
recalls — though  it  does  not,  I  think,  reproduce — similar
remarks  of  his  on  like  occasions.

The  incident  to  me  is  very  striking.  I  am  quite
sure  that  Mrs.  Willett  was  not  present  when  I  asked
A.  W.  V.  about  the  Ear  of  Dionysius  ;  no  one  was
present  except  A.  W.  V.  and  myself.  .  .  .  She  therefore
had  no  reason  to  suppose  that  on  this  particular  subject,
of  the  Ear  of  Dionysius,  my  information  had  been
obtained  from  A.  W.  V.  On  the  other  hand,  the  form
given  to  my  contemporary  note — "  A.  W.  V.  says  etc." —
confirms  my  own  vivid  recollection  of  the  incident  above
described.  It  is  not  easy,  I  think,  to  devise  a  more
convincing  single  incident.

The  incident  is  certainly  striking  ;  bat  I  have  to
confess  that  its  evidential  force  is  weakened  by  a  dim
though  haunting  recollection  on  my  part  of  a  conversa-
tion having  taken  place  between  Mrs.  Willett  and  me
sometime  previously  on  this  very  subject  of  Dionysius'
Ear.  She  has  no  memory  of  it  herself  ;  but  I  still
think  she  told  me  one  day  that  the  words  "  Ear  of
Dionysius  "  had  been  running  in  her  head,  and  asked
me  what  they  meant  ;  whereupon  I  explained,  adding
that  they  had  come  in  one  of  her  own  scripts  several
years  before.  I  do  not  believe  I  referred  to  Mrs.  Verrall,
or  to  Dr.  Verrall's  having  rallied  her  upon  her  ignorance.
But  as  I  had  been  told  of  the  incident  by  Mrs.  Verrall
herself  shortly  after  it  occurred,  it  is  just  possible  I  may
have  done  so  ;  and  this  possibility  spoils  what  would
otherwise  have  been  a  good  piece  of  evidence.

Returning  now  to  the  extract  from  the  Willett  Script  of
Jan.  10,  1914,  I  proceed  to  apply  a  running  commentary  to
the  other  allusions,  certain  or  probable,  which  it  contains.

The  "  place  where  slaves  were  kept  "  refers  of  course
to  the  stone  quarries  where  the  Athenian  captives  were
imprisoned.  The  words  that  follow  describe  the  Ear  of
Dionysius,  with  its  peculiar  acoustic  properties.  Dionysius
himself  is  not  named  either  in  this  cr  in  the  succeeding


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


201


scripts  to  which  I  shall  presently  call  attention  ;  though
the  syllables  "  Dy  Dy  "  towards  the  end  of  the  extract
probably  represent  an  attempt  at  the  name.  The  use
of  the  Italian  for  Ear,  Orecchio,  is  noteworthy,  and  recalls
the  Italian  pronunciation  of  "  Dionysius  "  in  the  earlier
script.  I  may  say  that  Mrs.  Willett  knows  Italian
and  has  spent  some  time  in  Italy,  though  she  has  never
been  in  Sicily.  Much  play  is  made  later  on  with  the
phrase  "  a  one-eared  place."  It  seems  to  have  little
point  in  the  j)resent  extract  save  to  bring  in  our  old
friend  the  "  one-horsed  dawn  " — an  appropriate  reminis-
cence for  Dr.  Verrall,  as  readers  of  the  Proceedings  will
not  require  to  be  told.1  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  record  tells
us  that  the  automatist  laughed  as  she  wrote  "  not  a  one-
horsed  dawn."  From  my  experience  of  Willett  Script  I
have  no  doubt  that  the  laugb  represents  amusement  on
the  part  of  the  communicator,  not  on  that  of  the  auto-
matist herself.  It  is  Dr.  Verrall — or  the  personality  pur-
porting to  be  Dr.  Verrall — who  laughs  as  he  transmits  the
words  ; the  laughter  of  the  automatist  is  but  an  echo.

The  meadows  of  Enna,  a  town  in  Sicily,  were  famous
in  antiquity  as  the  scene  of  the  Rape  of  Proserpine.
They  are  introduced  here  either  to  indicate  Sicily  as  the
country  with  which  the  message  is  concerned,  or,  more
probably,  to  add  to  the  various  literary  and  historical
associations  which  are  piled  up  in  this  and  the  immedi-
ately succeeding  scripts.

Another  such  association,  and  a  strangely  far-fetched
one,  seems  to  be  dragged  in  in  the  next  line  "  An
ear  ly  pipe  could  be  heard."  The  allusion  here  is  appar-
ently to  the  lines  in  Tennyson's  well-known  poem  "  Tears,
idle  tears  "  :  2

"  The  earliest  pipe  of  half-awaken'd  birds
To  dying  ears."

1  The  words  "  a  one-horsed  dawn"  refer  to  a  telepathic  experiment
tried  by  Dr.  Verrall  in  his  life-time  on  Mrs.  Verrall,  of  which  a  full
account  was  published  by  her  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  156-
167. See  also  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXVII.,  pp.  237-238.

2  Since  this  Paper  was  written  it  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  the
"  pip0  "  is  the  shepherd's  pipe,  and  that  the  allusion  is  to  Theocritus,


202


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


The  bringing  of  this  poem  into  forced  connection  with
the  Ear  of  Dionysius,  and  that  by  means  of  an  abomin-
able pun,  is  certainly  not  characteristic  of  the  automatist.
I  doubt  however  whether  Dr.  Verrall's  intimates  would
scout  it  as  a  sally  impossible  to  his  more  pla}^ful  mom-
ents. Indeed,  there  may  even  be  an  evidential  point
about  the  jest  ;  for  Mrs.  Verrall  writes  in  her  contempor-
ary note  :  "  The  non-serious  or  parody-like  introduction  of
this  poem  is  consistent  with  the  feeling  of  the  supposed
communicator  ;  A.  W.  V.  always  considered  the  senti-
ment of  the  poem  somewhat  overstrained,  and  maintained
that  that  view  was  warranted  by  Tennyson's  own  descrip-
tion of  Ida's  reception  of  it  '  with  some  disdain,'  as
a  fancy  '  hatched  in  silken  folded  idleness.'  "

The  next  reference  in  the  script  is  almost  certainly
to  the  ill-fated  Athenian  expedition  against  Syracuse.
The  words  "  who  beat  the  loud  sounding  wave,  who
smote  the  moving  furrows  "  are  probably  reminiscent
of  Tennyson's  Ulysses  :

"  Sitting  well  in  order  smite
The  sounding  furrows,"

though  I  do  not  think  that  any  allusion  to  Ulysses
is  intended  here,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  he  plays,
as  we  shall  see,  an  important  part  in  subsequent  develop-
ments. "  The  heel  of  the  Boot "  may  be  taken  to
indicate  the  route  followed  by  the  Athenian  fleet,  which
passed  from  Corcyra  to  Tarentum  in  the  heel  of  Italy,
thence  coasted  along  to  the  toe,  and  so  reached  Sicily.

"  Dy  Dy  "  I  have  already  explained  as  probably  an
attempt  at  the  name  Dionysius.  The  communicator
fails  to  get  the  whole  name  through,  and  then  address-
ing the  automatist,  who  repeats  his  language,  reproaches
her  with  thinking  of  words  beginning  with  Di  which
are  not  what  he  wants.

The  final  allusion  in  the  extract  calls  for  a  somewhat
longer comment. A script written by Mrs.  Holland

the  famous  Sicilian  bucolic  poet.  Theocritus  is  said  to  have  imitated
the  Cyclops  of  Philoxenus  in  his  eleventh  idyll.

I  am  still  inclined  to  prefer  the  explanation  given  in  the  text.


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


203


m  1907  contains  the  words  "To  fly  to  find  Euripides
Philemon."  The  script  is  quoted  by  Mr.  Piddington
in  Volume  XXII.  of  the  Proceedings  (p.  215),  and  the
source  of  the  reference  to  Euripides  and  Philemon
given — namely,  Browning's  Aristophanes'  Apology  or  the
Last  Adventure  of  Balaustion.

In  Aristophanes'  Apology  [writes  Mr.  Piddington]
Balaustion  tells  to  Philemon  the  story  of  how,  on  the
night  on  which  news  of  the  death  of  Euripides  reached
Athens,  Aristophanes,  flushed  with  wine  and  with  the
success  of  his  Thesrnophoriazousm  came  to  her  house  and
there  justified  his  attacks  on  the  dead  poet ;  and  of
how,  the  apology  ended,  Balaustion  read  to  Aristophanes
and  the  assembled  company  the  Hercules  Furens,  the
original  tablets  of  which  Euripides  had  presented  to  her
as  a  parting  gift.  The  poem  ends  by  Balaustion  telling
Philemon  that  she  sent  the  original  tablets  to  Dionysius,
tyrant  of  Sicily,  who  placed  them  in  a  temple  of  Apollo
with  this  inscription  :

' '  I  also  loved
The  poet,  Free  Athenai  cheaply  prized —
King  Dionusios, — Archelaos  like."
Balaustion  then  asks  Philemon

"If  he  too  have  not  made  a  votive  verse  !  "  and
Philemon  replies  :

"  Grant,  in  good  sooth,  our  great  dead,  all  the  same,
Retain  their  sense,  as  certain  wise  men  say,
I'd  hang  myself — to  see  Euripides."

Mrs.  Willett  has  not  read  Aristophanes'  Apology.  She
had,  however,  seen  the  Holland  Script,  and  recognised
at  the  time  that  her  own  script  had  borrowed  from
it.  She  had  also  read  parts  of  Vol.  XXII.  of  the
Proceedings,  and  may  have  seen  the  passage  I  have
just  quoted.  From  the  evidential  point  of  view  we
must  assume  that  she  had  seen  it,  and  that  she  may
thus  have  become  aware  of  a  connection  between  Brown-
ing's Philemon  and  the  tyrant  Dionysius.  On  the
other  hand,  it  would  not  be  legitimate  to  infer  that
this literary contribution to the subject in hand  must


204


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


have  proceeded  from  her  own  mental  activities  un-
prompted by  any  external  influence.  Whatever  view  we
take  of  the  genuineness  or  otherwise  of  the  supposed
communicators  and  communications,  it  is  clear  that
what  is  already  in  the  mind,  conscious  or  subconscious,
of  the  automatist,  will  also  be  that  which  will  most
easily  emerge  in  automatic  speech  or  writing.

In  any  case  the  reference  to  Browning's  poem  is
aptly  chosen.  Not  only  does  it  bring  in  Dionysius
the  Tyrant  in  the  manner  described,  but  also,  though
indirectly,  the  two  other  mam  topics  alluded  to  in
the  script,  namely,  the  Athenian  expedition  against
Syracuse,  and  the  stone-quarries  where  the  Athenian
prisoners  worked  until  they  were  sold  as  slaves  or  re-
leased because  they  were  able  to  recite  Euripides.  The
second  "  Adventure  "  of  Balaustion  inevitably  recalls
the  first,  related  in  the  companion  poem  ;  and  the  first
adventure  starts  from  the  defeat  of  the  Athenian  Ex-
pedition, and  ends  with  Balaustion  seeking  safety  for
herself  and  her  whole  ship's  company  from  the  threatened
hostility  of  the  Syracusans  by  the  exercise  of  a  similar
gift  of  recitation.

One  other  point  is  perhaps  worthy  of  mention.  Brown-
ing's line  1

"  I'd  hang  myself — to  see  Euripides  "

is  misquoted  by  Mrs.  Holland,  and  after  her  by  Mrs.
Willett  in  the  form  "To  fly  to  find  Euripides."  I  owe
to  Mrs.  Verrall  the  suggestion  that  the  remark  in  the
Willett  Script,  about  "  this  sort  of  thing "  being  "  more
difficult  to  do  than  it  looked,"  is  due  to  a  recognition
by  the  communicator  of  the  misquotation — a  misquota-
tion which  in  his  life-time  Dr.  Verrall,  "  who  was  much
interested  in  Mrs.  Holland's  allusion  to  Lucus  and
Philemon,  never  failed  to  note  and  regret."

So  far  all  is  plain  sailing.  The  reproduction  of  what
Dr.  Verrall  said  to  Mrs.  Verrall  anent  the  Ear  of
Dionysius  it  is  possible  to  explain  in  the  manner  I  have

1  This  line  is  an  almost  literal  translation  from  a  fragment  of  Philemon
which  has  come  down  to  us.


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


205


suggested.  The  other  allusions,  historical,  geographical
and  literary,  have  a  natural  connection  ;  and  all  of
them  might  be  supposed,  without  any  rude  violation
of  probability,  to  have  been  at  one  time  or  another
within  the  normal  knowledge  of  the  automatist.  But
up  to  now  we  have  only  been  laying  foundations  for
what  is  to  follow.  In  the  succeeding  scripts  the  plot
begins  to  thicken.

Before  I  enter  upon  these  further  developments  it
will  not  be  out  of  place  to  make  a  brief  statement
concerning  the  conditions  in  which  the  Willett  Scripts
are  produced.  Many  of  these  are  written  when  the
automatist  is  alone,  awake,  and  fully  aware  of  her
surroundings.  The  remainder,  produced  in  the  presence
of  a  "  sitter,"  1  fall  mainly  into  two  classes.  Either
the  automatist  is  in  a  normal  or  nearly  normal  state
of  consciousness,  much  as  when  she  writes  scripts  by
herself,  or  else  she  is  in  a  condition  of  trance.  There
have  been  a  few  intermediate  cases,  when  it  is  hard  to
say  whether  the  sensitive  is  in  trance  or  not.  But  these
are  a  very  small  number  :  in  general  there  is  no  diffi-
culty whatever  in  distinguishing.  Scripts  obtained  in
a  normal  state  of  consciousness,  whether  in  presence
of  a  sitter  or  alone,  are  always  annotated  by  Mrs.
Willett  shortly  after  they  have  been  produced.  The
originals  are  carefully  preserved  in  the  custody  of  the
investigating  group  ;  but  she  keeps  copies  to  which
she  can  at  any  time  refer.  Of  scripts  produced  in
trance,  on  the  other  hand,  she  remembers  nothing,
even  immediately  after  waking  ;  and  the  contents  are
carefully  kept  from  her  knowledge.  The  script  of  Aug.
26,  1910,  in  which  the  first  reference  to  the  Ear  of
Dionysius  occurred,  was  a  trance-script.  That  of  Jan.
10,  1914,  from  which  Extract  A  has  been  taken,  was
written in normal conditions of consciousness. All  the

1 A  few  of  Mrs.  Willett 's  scripts  have  been  produced  in  the  presence
of  some  member  of  her  family,  and  two  in  the  presence  of  a  friend
who  does  not  belong  to  the  investigating  group.  Apart  from  these
rare  occasions,  she  has  never  sat  for  automatic  writing  save  with  Mrs.
Verrall,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  or  myself  ;  and  never  at  any  time  in  the
presence  of  more  than  one  person.


206


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


remaining  scripts  I  shall  have  occasion  to  quote  in
this  Paper  were  trance-scripts.  Until  May  of  this  year
(1916),  Mrs.  Willett  had  never  been  shown  any  of  them
or  any  portion  of  anj'  of  them  :  there  is  no  doubt
in  my  own  mind  that  in  a  normal  state  of  con-
sciousness she  was  totally  ignorant  of  their  contents.
In  that  month  I  allowed  her  to  see,  not  the  entire
scripts,  but  just  those  passages  which  I  am  about  to
cite,  and  which  have  been  printed  for  distribution  among
the  audience.  The  date  of  the  last  of  these  scripts
was  August  19,  1915.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  Mrs.
Willett 's  having  been  shown  the  extracts  nine  months
later  could  in  no  way  weaken  any  "  evidential  "  value
which  the  episode  they  relate  to  may  be  thought  to
possess.

I  now  proceed  to  read  and  comment  on  Extract  B
from  the  Willett  sitting  of  Feb.  28,  1914,  at  which  I
was  myself  present.


Some  confusion  may  appear  in  the  matter  transmitted  but
there  is  now  being  started  an  experiment  not  a  new  experi-
ment but  a  new  subject  and  not  exactly  that  but  a  new
line  which  joins  with  a  subject  already  got  through

a  little  anatomy  if  you  please

Add  one  to  one

One  Ear  x [sic]  one  eye


B.


(Extracts  from  Sitting  oj  Feh.  28,  1914.)
(Present: G.  W.  B.)


the  one  eyed  Kingdom

No,  in  the  K  of  the  Blind  the  1  eyed  man  is  King


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


207


It  is  about  a  1  eyed  man  1  1  eyed
The  entrance  to  the  Cave  Arethusa

Arethusa  is  only  to  indicate  it  does  not  belong  to  the  1  eyed
A  Fountain  on  the  Hill  Side


What  about  Baulastion  [sic]


[Laughs] Supposed  to  be  a  Wellington  Boot

12  little  nigger  boys  thinking  not  of  Styx

Some  were  eaten  up  and  then  there  were  Six  Six.

[At  this  point  Mrs.  Willett  ceased  to  write  and  began
dictating  to  the  Sitter.]

Some  one  said— Oh  I'll  try,  I'll  try.  Oh  !  Some  one's
showing  me  a  picture  and  talking  at  the  same  time.

Some  one  said  to  me,  Homer — and  some  one  said — I'm  so
confused,  I'm  all  with  things  flitting  past  me  ;  I  don't  seem
to  catch  them. Oh  dear  !

Nor  sights  nor  sounds  diurnal.
Here  where  all  winds  are  quiet.2

Oh  !

Edmund  says,  Powder  first  and  jam  afterwards.  You  see  it
seems  a  long  time  since  I  was  here  with  them— and  I  want
to  talk  to  them  and  enjoy  myself. And  I've  all  the  time  to

1  "  man  "  crossed  out  in  the  original.

2  Swinburne  :  The  Garden  of  Proserpine.


208


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


keep  on  working,  and  seeing  and  listening  to  such  boring
old—

Oh,  ugh  ! [Expression  of  great  disgust.]

Somebody  said,  Give  her  time,  Give  her  time  .  .  .  Oh,  if
I  could  only  say  it  quickly  and  get  done  with  it.  It's  about
a  cave,  and  a  group  of  men.  Somebody  then — a  trident,
rather  like  a  toasting  fork  /  think.

Poseidon,  Poseidon.

Who  was  it  said,  It  may  be  that  the  gulfs  will  wash  us
down — find  the  great  Achilles  that  we  knew  ? 1  He's  got  a
naming  torch  in  his  hand.  And  then  some  one  said  to  me,
Can't  you  think  of  Noah  and  the  grapes  ?

Optics — Oh  ! that,  you  know  [putting  a  finger  to  her  eye].

Oh,  if  I  could  only  say  what  I  hear  !  Oh,  I  will  try,  I
will  try.

Somebody  said  to  me,  Don't  forget  about  Henry  Sidgwick,
that  he  pleased  not  himself.  Do  you  know  he  used  to  work
when  he  hated  working.  I  mean  sometimes  he  had  to  grind
along  without  enjoying  what  he  was  doing.  That's  what  I'm
trying  to  do  now.

Do  you  know  that  man  with  the  glittering  eyes  I  once
saw  %  He  hit  me  with  one  word  now.  [Here  Mrs.  Willett
traced  a  word  with  one  finger  along  the  margin  of  the  paper.
I  failed  to  make  it  out,  and  handed  the  pencil  to  her,  where-
upon she  wrote]

Aristotle

[Dictation  resumed]  And  Poetry,  the  language  of  the  Gods.
Somebody  killed  a  President  once  and  called  out — something
hi  Latin,  and  I  only  heard  one  word  of  it,  Tironus,  Tiranus,
Tiranius — something  about  sic.2

What  is  a  tyrant  1

Lots  of  wars — A  Siege  [spoken  loud  and  with  emphasis].
I  hear  the  sound  of  chipping  [Here  Mrs.  W.  struck  the
fingers  of  one  hand  repeatedly  against  the  palm  of  the  other].
It's  on  stone.  Now,  wait  a  minute.  Oh,  if  I  could  only  get
that  word.

1  Tennyson  :  Ulysses.

2  Sic  semper  tyrannis — uttered  by  Booth  when  he  murdered  President
Lincoln.  The  phrase  had  already  appeared  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance
of  Apr.  17,  1907. See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  30.


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


209


Fin  and  something  gleba.  Find  [pronounced  as  in  the  Latin
finditur] — oh  !  it's  got  to  do  with  the  serf.  It's  about  that
man  who  said  it  was  better — oh  !  a  shade  among  the  shades.
Better  to  be  a  slave  among  the  living,  he  said.1

Oh,  the  toil — Woe  to the  vanquished.

That  one  eye  has  got  something  to  do  with  the  one  ear.
[Sighs]  That's  what  they  wanted  me  to  say.  There's  such  a
mass  of  things,  you  see,  rushing  through  my  mind  that  I  can't
catch  anything.

[A  pause  and  then  sobbing]  He  was  turned  into  a  fountain
that  sort  of  Stephen  man,  he  was  turned  into  a  fountain.
Why  ? that's  the  point  :  Why  ?  .  .  .

Oh,  dear  me  !  Now  I  seem  to  be  walking  about  a  school,
and  I  meet  a  dark  boy,  and — it's  the  name  of  a  Field  Marshall
I'm  trying  to  get,  a  German  name.  And  then  something
says,  All  this  is  only  memories  revived  :  it's  got  nothing  to
do  with  the  purely  literary —  There  are  two  people  in  that
literary  thing,  chiefly  concerned  in  it.  They're  very  close
friends — thej^'ve  thought  it  all  out  together.

Somebody  said  something  about  Father  Cam  walking  arm
in  arm — with  the  Canongate  ?  ! What  does  that  mean  ?

Oh  ! [sniffing]  what  a  delicious  scent  !

No  rosebud  yet  by  dew  empearled.

I'll  try  and  say  it.  Hold  me  tight  now  while  I  try  and
say  it.  [Pause.]

It  may  take  some  considerable  time  to  get  the  necessary
references  through.  But  let  us  peg  away ;  and  keep  your
provisional  impressions  to  yourself.  May 2  is  to  hear  nothing
of  all  this  at  present  ;  because  this  is  something  good  and  worth
doing,  and  my  Aristotelian  friend —

[At  this  point  the  subject  is  abruptly  broken  off  and  not
referred  to  again  until  the  very  end,  when  E.  G.  (Gurney)
intervenes  to  close  the  sitting.]

Enough  for  this  time.  There  is  sense  in  that  which  has
been  got  through  though  some  disentanglement  is  needed.  A
Literary  Association  of  ideas  pointing  to  the  influence  of  two
discarnate  minds.

1  Spoken  by  the  shade  of  Achilles  to  Ulysses  in  Hades.

2  "  May  "  =Mrs.  Verrall.


210  The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


You  will  doubtless  have  noticed  the  recurrence  in
this  extract  of  most  if  not  all  of  the  topics  already
found  in  Extract  A.  I  will  briefly  enumerate  but  need
not  dwell  on  them  further.  References  are  once  more
made  to

The  Ear  of  Dionysius  ;

The  stone  quarries  in  which  the  vanquished  Athenians
worked  ;

Enna (by means of a quotation  from The  Garden

of  Proserpine)  ;
Syracuse  ("  Wars — a  Siege,"  and  "  Arethusa  ")  ;
The  heel  of  Italy  (Wellington  Boot).
The  Adventures  of  Balaustion.

There  is  also,  however,  much  in  the  Extract  that
is  new.

We  are  now  told  that  an  "  experiment  "  is  being
attempted  ;  and  that  this  experiment  consists  in  '  a
literary  association  of  ideas,"  some  of  which  have  already
appeared,  while  others  are  now  being  introduced  for
the  first  time.  Much  importance  is  attached  to  the
experiment  :  it  is  "  something  good  and  worth  doing."
There  are  additional  references  yet  to  come,  which
may  take  a  "  considerable  time  "  to  "  get  through."
Meanwhile  Mrs.  Verrall  ("  May  ")  is  not  to  be  told
about  it  :  any  provisional  impressions  the  other  investi-
gators may  form  are  to  be  kept  to  themselves.

The  literary  riddle — for  such  it  proves  ultimately  to
be — which  is  thus  in  the  course  of  being  propounded
is  the  work,  we  are  told,  of  two  intimate  friends  no
longer  in  the  flesh.  It  is  intended  to  be  characteristic
of  them,  and  to  serve  as  evidence  of  their  personal
survival.

The  identity  of  the  two  friends,  indicated  without
disguise  in  the  later  extracts,  is  made  sufficiently  clear
even  in  the  present  one  to  anybody  acquainted  with
previous  Willett  Scripts.  They  are  Professor  S.  H.  Butcher
and  Dr.  A.  W.  Verrall.1

The "  man with the glittering eyes I once  saw,"

1  Professor  Butcher  died  in  December,  1910,  and  Dr.  Verrall  in  June.  1912.


Lxxni.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


211


from  whom  proceeds  the  word  Aristotle,  is  Professor
Butcher.  The  incident  referred  to  is  a  vision  of  Pro-
fessor Butcher  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett  on  the  night
of  Jan.  21,  1911,.  a  few  weeks  after  his  death.  I  quote
the  record  of  it  made  by  Mrs.  Willett  on  the  day
following  :

"  Last  night  after  I  had  blown  out  my  candle  and
was  just  going  to  sleep  I  became  aware  of  the  presence
of  a  man,  a  stranger,  and — almost  at  the  same  moment
— knew  it  was  Henry  Butcher.  I  felt  his  personality
very  living,  clear,  strong,  sweetness  and  strength  com-
bined. A  piercing  glance.  He  made  no  introduction,
and  said  nothing.  So  I  said  to  him  :  '  Are  you  Henry
Butcher  ?  '  He  said  '  No,  I  am  Henry  Butcher's  ghost.'
I  was  rather  shocked  at  his  saying  this,  and  said,  '  Oh,
very  well,  I'm  not  at  all  afraid  of  ghosts  or  of  the
dead.'  He  said,  '  Ask  Verrall  if  he  remembers  our
last  conversation,  and  say  the  word  to  him  :

Ek  e  tee.'  "

A  more  detailed  reference  to  this  vision  will  be  found
in  Extract  D.  I  do  not  discuss  it  here  further  than
to  say  that  the  name  of  the  goddess  Hecate — for  that
is  apparently  what  is  meant — has  a  significance  in  con-
nection with  Dr.  Verrall  which  would  have  been  known
to  Professor  Butcher.  In  the  present  context  the  in-
cident is  apparently  recalled  only  to  serve  as  a  clue
to  the  identity  of  the  man  who  says  '  Aristotle.'  The
word  '  Aristotle,'  combined  with  '  Poetry,'  is  itself  an
additional  clue  ;  for  Butcher  wrote  a  work  upon  Aristotle's
Poetics  which  is  well  known  to  all  classical  scholars.
Hence  the  description  of  him  as  "  my  Aristotelian  friend  "
given  later  on  in  the  extract.

Two  other  symbolic  references  to  Prof.  Butcher  are
contained  in  Extract  B.  "  Father  Cam  walking  arm
in  arm  with  the  Canongate "  signifies  the  association,
in  the  persons  of  Verrall  and  Butcher,  of  the  Universities
of  Cambridge  and  Edinburgh.  Butcher  was  himself  a
highly  distinguished  Cambridge  man,  and  in  later  life
represented his University in the House of Commons  ;


212


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.  [part


but  he  was  also  for  many  years  Professor  of  Greek  afc
Edinburgh.

The  Rose,  and  the  -perfume  of  the  Rose  are  repeatedly
used  in  Willett  Scripts  as  symbols  of  Prof.  Butcher,
for  a  reason  which  his  personal  friends  will  readily
understand.  We  shall  come  across  the  same  symbols
again  in  Extract  D.  Note  that  here  the  automatisfc
seems  to  become  conscious  of  the  scent  before  she  con-
nects it  with  the  -floiver.  "  No  rosebuds  yet  by  dew
impearled "  is  a  quotation  from  Swinburne's  Etude
Realiste,  with  the  substitution  of  "  dew  "  for  "  dawn."

Mrs.  Willett,  it  may  be  as  well  to  say,  had  never
met  Professor  Butcher.  She  knew  him,  however,  by
name,  and  knew  that  he  was  a  close  friend  of  the
Verralls.

As  regards  Dr.  Verrall,  there  is  only  one  direct  allusion
to  him  in  Extract  B  apart  from  the  Father  Cam  refer-
ence already  mentioned  ;  but  that  one  is  unmistakable.
The  automatist  says  she  seems  to  be  walking  about
a  school  and  to  meet  a  dark  boy.  She  tries  to  get
the  name  of  a  German  Field  Marshal.  "  Then  something
says,  All  this  is  only  memories  revived  ;  it  has  nothing
to  do  with  the  purely  literary  thing "  in  which  the
two  friends  are  closely  concerned.

The  school  is  Wellington  ;  the  dark  boy  is  Verrall  ;
the  memories  revived  are  his  memories.  The  German
Field  Marshal  is  Bliicher,  whose  name  was  given  to
one  of  the  college  dormitories.  Mrs.  Willett  probably
knew  that  Verrall  was  educated  at  Wellington  ;  and
she  certainly  had  had  the  opportunity  of  knowing  that
one  of  the  College  dormitories  was  named  after  Bliicher,
as  this  circumstance  was  mentioned  in  the  notes  to  a
script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  which  she  had  seen.  The  passage
gives  no  ground  for  inferring  a  knowledge  supernormally
imparted,  though  it  effectively  serves  its  purpose  of
designating  a  particular  individual.

To  resume  :  We  have  now  learnt  that  the  subjects
associated  together  in  Extract  A  and  reproduced  in
Extract B are intended to find their place in  some


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


213


kind  of  literary  scheme  carefully  thought  out  and  devised
by  two  friends  who  in  their  lifetime  were  eminent  classical
scholars.  They  are,  as  it  were,  pieces  which  have  to
be  fitted  into  a  single  whole  more  or  less  after  the  manner
of  a  jig-saw  puzzle.  The  tale  of  pieces,  however,  is
not  yet  complete.  Two  additional  subjects  of  great
importance  lie  embedded  in  Extract  B,  and  my  next
task  must  be  to  disengage  them.  They  are  the  stories
of  Polyphemus  and  Ulysses,  and  of  Acis  and  Galatea—
the  first  derived  from  Homer's  Odyssey,  the  second  from
Ovid's  Metamorphoses1  though  best  known  to  most  people
through  the  famous  musical  setting  of  the  tale  by  Handel.

In  the  story  told  by  Homer,  Ulysses  is  overtaken  by
a  storm  on  his  voyage  home  from  Troy,  and  driven
to  the  country  of  the  Lotus  Eaters.  He  reaches  next
the  land  of  the  Cyclopes,2  a  race  of  one-eyed  giants
to  whom  the  laws  of  hospitality  are  unknown.  Going
ashore  with  twelve  of  his  companions  he  enters  the
cave  where  dwells  one  of  the  giants,  by  name  Poly-
phemus, a  son  of  the  sea-god  Poseidon.  Polyphemus
is  away  tending  his  flocks  and  herds,  but  returns  towards
evening,  and,  discovering  the  strangers,  imprisons  them
in  his  cave,  and  proceeds  to  devour  them  two  at  a  time
in  three  successive  meals.  But  Ulysses  and  his  six
remaining  companions  have  devised  a  terrible  revenge.
They  prepare  a  stake  of  olive  wood  with  its  end  sharp-
ened to  a  point  ;  and  having  made  the  Cyclops  dead
drunk  with  wine  they  had  brought  from  the  ship,  plunge
the  end  of  the  stake  into  the  embers,  and  bore  out
the  monster's  single  eye  with  its  glowing  point.  Next
morning  when  the  blinded  giant  rolls  away  the  stone
from  the  mouth  of  the  cave  to  let  his  flock  pass  out
himself  remaining  in  the  doorway  to  catch  his  tormentors,
Ulysses  and  his  companions  escape  from  his  clutches
concealed  beneath  the  bellies  of  the  sheep  and  clinging
to  their  fleeces.

1  Book  xiii.  738  ff.

-  Ancient  tradition  placed  the  Cyclopes  in  Sicily.  Homer  himself  is  silent
on  the  point.


o


214


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


The  allusions  to  this  story  are  scattered  in  a  fine
confusion  through  the  script  ;  but  once  we  have  the
key  in  our  hand  there  is  no  difficulty  in  detecting
them.  The  one  eye,  the  "12  little  nigger  hoys  think-
ing not  of  Styx,  Some  were  eaten  up  and  then  there
were  six,"  the  reference  to  Homer,  to  a  cave  and  a
group  of  men,  to  Poseidon  with  his  trident,  to  the  flam-
ing torch,  to  Noah  and  the  grapes — all  fall  into  place
once  we  realize  that  they  belong  to  the  story  of  Ulysses
and  Polyphemus.

The  allusion  to  the  meeting  of  Ulysses  in  the
Underworld  with  "  the  great  Achilles  whom  we  knew "
seems  at  first  sight  irrelevant.  I  suspect  it  is  only
a  roundabout  way  of  suggesting  Ulysses  himself.  The
actual  names  of  the  two  principal  characters  in  the
story  are  never  mentioned  ;  and  the  same  remark  applies
to  the  story  of  Acis  and  Galatea.  In  this  tale,  as
in  the  other,  the  one-eyed  Cyclops  plays  the  part  of
villain  of  the  piece.  Acis,  a  shepherd  dwelling  at  the
foot  of  Mount  Etna,  and  Galatea  the  sea  nymph,  are
lovers.  Unfortunately  for  them,  Galatea  is  also  beloved
of  the  "  monster  Polypheme,"  as  Handel's  libretto  calls
him.  Rejected  by  the  nymph,  and  mad  with  jealousy,
he  hurls  a  mighty  rock  at  his  rival  and  crushes  him
to  death.  Galatea  cannot  save  her  lover,  but  she  gives
him  a  kind  of  immortality  by  changing  him  into  the
stream  which  bears  his  name  and  has  its  source  in
a  fountain  issuing  from  the  rock  beneath  which  he
was  o v  erwhelmed .

Two  passages  in  Extract  B  refer  to  this  story.  The
first  speaks  of  "a  Fountain  on  the  hill  side,"  followed
by  a  rough  drawing  intended  for  a  volcano.  The  second
occurs  towards  the  end  of  the  Extract  :  "  He  was  turned
into  a  fountam  that  sort  of  Stephen  man,  he  was  turned
into  a  fountain.  Why  ?  that's  the  point  :  Why  ?  "
"  That  sort  of  Stephen  man  "  describes,  of  course,  the  man-
ner in  which  Acis  came  by  his  death.  To  the  question
Why  ?  an  answer  is  given  in  Extract  C.  There  is  a
point  in  it,  but  a  point  which  only  becomes  intelligible
when  the  whole  of  the  riddle  has  been  read.


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


215


Up  to  this  stage  the  riddle  remains  a  riddle  still.  At
all  events,  it  did  so  for  me.  We  are  told  to  join  the
one  ear  to  the  one  eye  ;  but  I  doubt  if  any  one  in
this  room  can  say  how  the  Ear  of  Dionysius  and  the
stone  quarries  of  Syracuse  are  connected  with  the  stories
of  Polyphemus  and  Ulysses  and  of  Acis  and  Galatea
except  by  the  geographical  accident  of  then  all  belong-
ing to  Sicily.  Such  a  mere  geographical  unity  would
hardly  justify  the  communicators  in  describing  their
scheme  as  "  something  good  and  worth  doing "  which
it  had  taken  the  united  industry  of  two  distinguished
scholars  to  think  out.

Let  us  see  what  assistance  we  can  get  from  the  next
script .


The  Aristotelian  to  the  Hegelian  friend  greeting.  Also  the
Rationalist  to  the  Hegelian  friend  greeting.1  These  twain  be
about  a  particular  task  and  now  proceed  with  it.


a  Zither that belongs  the  sound also  stones,  the  toil  of
prisoners  and  captives  beneath  the  Tyrant's  rod
The  Stag not  Stag,  do  go  on
Sfcagyr write  rite

[Here  Mrs.  W.  ceased  writing  and  proceeded  to  dictate.]
Somebody  said  to  me  Mousike.

Do  you  know,  it's  an  odd  thing,  I  can  see  Edmund  as  if
he  were  working  something ; and  the  thing  he  is  working  is

1  "  The  Aristotelian  friend  "  is  S.  H.  Batcher.  "  The  Rationalist
friend  is  A.  W.  Verrall,  possibly  with  allusion  to  his  book  Euripides
the  Rationalist.  "  The  Hegelian  friend  "  is  myself.  It  would  have
been  natural  for  Butcher  and  Verrall  so  to  describe  me  in  old  Cambridge
days.


c


(Extract  from  Script  of  March  2,  1914.)
(Present: G.  W.  B.)


21G


The  Right  Hon  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


me.  It  isn't  really  me,  you  know  ;  it's  only  a  sort  of  asleep
me  that  I  can  look  at.  He's  very  intent — and  those  two  men
I  don't  know.  One's  very  big  and  tall,  with  a  black  beard.
The  other  man  I  don't  see  so  well.  But  he  holds  up  a  book
to  me.

Oh  !  Somehody  wrote  a  book  about  something,  and  this
man,  who's  holding  up  the  book,  wrote  a  book  about  him.
And  the  reference  he  wants  isn't  just  now  to  what  he  wrote,
but  to  what  this  person  he  wrote  about  wrote.

What  does  Ars  Poetica  mean  ?

Edmund  said  to  me  Juvenal  also  wrote  satires — and  then
he  laughed  and  said,  Good  shot.

The  pen  is  mightier  than  the  sword.  Oh,  it's  so  confusing —
stones  belong,  and  so  does  a  pen. Oh  !

Somebody  said,  Try  her  with  the  David  story.  She  might
get  it  that  way.  The  man  he  sent  to  battle  hoping  he'd  get
killed,  because  he  wanted  him  out  of  the  way.

A  green-eyed  monster.

Now,  all  of  a  sudden  I  had  it.  Jealousy,  that  first  infirmity
of  petty  minds.

What  does  Sicilian  Artemis  1  mean  ?  [Pause.]

Such  an  odd  old  human  story  of  long  ago

He  that  hath  an  ear  to  hear,  let  him  hear.

What  is  an  ear  made  for  ?

Oh,  this  old  bothersome  rubbish  is  so  tiresome.

[As  she  said  this  Mrs.  W.  banged  her  arms  down  on  the
table  as  if  hi  disgust.  Presently  she  seized  my  pencil  and
drew  the  same  figure  as  in  the  previous  sitting,  of  an  ear
and  the  oval  of  a  face.  From  this  point  onwards  she  wrote
instead  of  dictating.]


Find  the  centre [Here  she  added  the  eye.]

1  Perhaps  a  reference  to  Artemis  Alphaea  (or  Alpheia),  who  had  a
temple  at  Syracuse,  and  was  associated  with  the  story  of  the  nymph
Arethusa.  See  under  Alpheus  in  the  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman
Biography  and  J\fijtliology.


Lxxin.j  The  Ear  of  Dionysius.  2] 7

Not  to  you  to  Golden  numbers  golden  numbers,1  but  add
I  to  1  two  singles,  dissimilar  things,  but  both  found  normally
in  pairs  in  human  anatomy —  Good.

Gurney  says  she  has  done  enough  now  but  there  is  more,
much  more,  later  Until  the  effort  is  completed  the  portions'
as  they  come  are  not  to  be  seen  by  any  other  atttomatist.

E.  G.

^  After  what  has  already  been  said  there  is  compara-
tively little  in  this  extract  that  requires  further  explana-
tion. Nevertheless  some  important  additions  are  made
in  it  to  the  stock  of  materials  at  our  disposal.

First,  an  answer  has  been  given  to  the  emphatic
question  asked  in  the  previous  script  concerning  the
cause  which  led  to  Acis  having  been  changed  into  a
fountain.  The  cause  was  Jealousy— a  lover's  jealousy,
like  that  which  sent  Uriah  to  perish  in  the  forefront
of  battle.  Jealousy,  then,  is  one  of  the  pieces  which
have  to  be  fitted  into  the  finished  picture  of  our  jig-
saw puzzle.

Next,  mention  is  made  for  the  first  time  of  a  Zither
—the  sound  of  which  instrument,  we  are  told,  "  belongs  "
—also  of  Mousike,  the  Greek  word  for  the  Art  of  Music.
Further,  the  references  to  Aristotle  seem  to  carry  with
them  a  significance  beyond  what  they  possessed  in  the
previous  script.  There  they  appeared  to  serve  merely
as  a  symbol  of  S.  H.  Butcher.  Here  they  are  appar-
ently introduced  on  their  own  account  as  well.  "The
Stagirite  "  is  a  correct  description  of  Aristotle,  who
was  born  at  Stageira,  a  sea-port  in  Macedonia.  It
would  seem,  however,  an  odd  title  to  use  in  this  place
unless  with  the  deliberate  purpose  of  inviting  attention.
Again,  a  few  sentences  later  it  is  explicitly  stated  that
a  reference  is  wanted  not  to  what  Butcher  wrote  about
Aristotle,  but  to  something  which  Aristotle  himself
wrote  ;  and  we  are  left  to  infer  from  the  words  Ars
Poetica  which  follow  that  this  something  is  to  be  found
in  Aristotle's  Treatise  on  Poetry.

'From  Dekker's  Patient  Grissel  :  "To  add  to  golden  numbers  golden
numbers." There  seems  to  be  no  special  point  in  the  quotation  here.


218


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


Lastly,  a  rather  quaint  transition  leads  up  to  yet
another  new  subject.  The  Latin  words  Ars  Poetica
to  a  classical  scholar  suggest  Horace  more  readily  than
Aristotle.  Horace  is  not  actually  named ;  but  the
thought  of  him  is  clearly  implied  in  the  interpolated
remark  attributed  to  Edmund  Gurney,  "  Juvenal  also
wrote  Satires."  "Juvenal  also''  must  mean  "Juvenal
as  well  as  Horace."  Aristotle,  J  need  hardly  say.  did
not  write  satires.

We  have  here,  I  think,  one  of  those  subtle  touches
not  uncommon  in  Mrs.  Willett's  automatic  productions,
and  making  strongly  for  their  genuineness.  The  idea
which  the  communicator  wants  to  "  get  through  "  is
that  of  Satire.  The  name  of  Juvenal,  the  Satirist
■par  excellence — a  name  which  has  previously  occurred
in  Willett  Script — serves  as  a  stepping-stone,  by  means
of  an  association  familiar  to  any  educated  person.  On
the  other  hand,  the  train  of  association  which  leads  from
Aristotle's  Poetics  to  Juvenal,  using  Horace  as  an  un-
expressed middle  term,  seems  to  me  altogether  foreign
to  Mrs.  Willett,  and  outside  the  scope  of  any  knowledge
with  which  she  can  reasonably  be  credited.

At  the  risk  of  over-refining  I  venture  further  to  suggest
that  the  transition  to  Juvenal  was  an  impromptu  one
for  the  communicator  himself.  It  occurs  to  him  on  the
spur  of  the  moment  as  a  "happy  thought";  and  it
is  this  as  well  as  its  success  in  eliciting  the  required
idea  of  satire  that  makes  him  laughingly  describe  it  as
a  "good  shot."

The  notion  of  satire  is  continued  in  the  words
that  immediately  follow  :  "  The  pen  is  mightier  than
the  sword.  .  .  .  stones  belong  and  so  does  a  pen."
As  they  stand  these  words  are  rather  obscure ;  but
the  sequel  shows  that  the  "  stones  "  are  the  stones
of  the  quarry-prisons,  and  the  pen  is  the  pen  of  a
satirist.

Let  me  now  recapitulate.  The  scripts  have  furnished
us  with  a  number  of  disjointed  topics  :  the  problem
is  to  combine  them  into  a  literary  unity.


lxxiji.]  The  Ear  of  Dionysius.  219

Here  is  List  of  the  leading  topics  so  far  given  :
The  Ear  of  Dionysius.

The stone-quarries of Syracuse in which  prisoners

were  confined.
The  story  of  Polyphemus  and  Ulysses.
The  story  of  Acis  and  Galatea.
Jealousy.

Music  and  the  sound  of  a  musical  instrument.
Something  to  be  found  in  Aristotle's  Poetics.
Satire.

I  have  already  compared  these  topics  to  the  separate
pieces  in  a  jig-saw  puzzle.  They  might  perhaps  be
still  more  aptly  likened  to  the  letters  in  a  letter-game.
Each  letter  has  a  significance  of  its  own  ;  their  joint
significance  is  only  realised  when  the  word  they  together
spell  has  been  discovered.  The  whole  is  more  than  the
sum  of  its  parts.

Now  obviously,  if  one  or  more  of  the  parts  are  miss-
ing the  difficulty  of  divining  the  whole  is  progressively
increased.  Extract  C,  you  will  notice,  ends  with  an
intimation  that  more  is  to  come,  and  repeats  the  in-
junction, already  given  as  respects  Mrs.  Verrall,  but  now
made  general,  that  the  portions  as  they  come  are  not
to  be  shewn  to  any  other  automatist  until  the  effort
is  completed.  Mr.  Piddmgton  and  I,  who  were  study-
ing the  scripts,  were  accordingly  content  to  wait  without
troubling  our  heads  overmuch  about  an  answer  to  the
conundrum,  until  more  light  should  be  vouchsafed,
either  by  further  scripts  from  Mrs.  Willett,  or  by  means
of  cross-correspondences  elsewhere.

Eor  a  long  time  we  waited  in  vain.  There  is,  indeed,
reason  to  think  that  some  attempts  were  made  to  pro-
duce a  cross-correspondence  in  the  script  of  one  of  our
automatists,  whom  we  call  Mrs.  King — especially  by
means  of  references  to  the  story  of  Acis  and  Galatea.1
Otherwise  the  whole  subject  seemed  to  be  unaccountably
dropped  ;  and  it  was  not  until  nearly  a  year  and  a  half
later, in  August, 1915,  that a  return  to it was  made.

1  See  Appendix  to  this  Paper.


220


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


The  "  sitter "  on  this  occasion  was  Mrs.  Verrall,  who,
it  must  be  remembered,  had  not  been  allowed  to  see
either  of  the  scripts  from  which  Extracts  B  and  C  have
been  taken.

The  relevant  passages  in  this  new  script  are  contained
in  Extract  D.

D.

(Extract  from  Script  of  Aug.  2,  1915.)
(Present : Mrs.  Verrall.)

Someone  speaks  a  tall  broad  figure  with  a  dark  beard  &
eyes  that  emit  light  with  him  stands  the  man  who  said
I  am  Henry  Butcher's  ghost do  you  remember  %

Ecate

(Mrs.  V.  Yes.)

not  the  one  who  holds  a  Rose  in  his  hand.  His  hand  is
resting  on  the  shoulder  of  the  younger  man  &  it  is  he  who
calls.

The  Aural  instruction  was  I  think  understood  Aural  apper-
taining to  the  Ear
(Mrs.  V.  Yes.)

and  now  he  asks  HAS  the  Satire  satire  been  identified
(Mrs.  V. I  don't  know.)

Surely  you  have  had  my  messages  concerning  it  [it]  belongs
to  the  Ear  &  comes  in

(Mrs.  V. I  have  not  had  any  messages.)

It  has  a  thread.  Did  they  not  tell  you  of  references  to  a
Cave

(Mrs.  V. No,  not  in  comiection  with  the  Ef>r  of  Dionysius.)

The  mild  eyed  melancholy  Lotus  Eaters  came.

That  belongs  to  the  passage 1  immediately  before  the  one  I
am  now  trying  to  speak  of. men  in  a  cave  herds

(At  this  point  Mrs.  V.  repeated,  half  aloud,  the  last  two
words.)

listen  don't  talk,  herds  &  a  great  load  of  firewood  &
the  eye


1  I.e.  to  the  passage  in  the  Odyssey  preceding  that  which  tells  the
story  of  Polyphemus.


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


221


olive  wood  staff

Ai1


the  man  clung  to  the  fleece  of  a  Earn  &  so  passed  out
surely  that  is  plain
(Mrs.  V.  Yes.)

well  conjoin  that  with  Cythera  &  the  Ear-man

The  Roseman  said  Aristotle then  Poetics The  incident  was

chosen  as  being  evidential  of  identity  &  it  arose  out  of  the

Ear  train  of  thought.
There  is  a  Satire

write  Cyclopean  Masonry,  why  do  you  say  masonry  I  said
Cyclopean

PhiJox  He  laboured  in  the  stone  quarries  and  drew  upon
the  earlier  writer  for  material  for  his  Satire  Jealousy

The  story  is  quite  clear  to  me  &  I  think  it  should  be
identified

a  musical  instrument  comes  in something  like  a  mandoline


6

thrumming thrumming that  is  the  sense  of  the  word  2
He  wrote  in  those  stone  quarries  belonging  to  the  Tyrant
Is  any  of  this  clear  ?

(Mrs.  V. Yes,  a  great  deal,  and  when  I  know  some  things
I  have  not  been  told,  probably  all.)
[Drawing  of  an  Ear.]

1  "  Ai,"  perhaps  an  expression  of  pain,  representing  the  Greek  aiac.

2  What  word  is  here  meant  ?  It  would  seem  to  be  a  word — perhaps
a  Greek  word — which  the  communicator  has  been  unable  to  get  the
automatist  to  write.  I  suspect  an  allusion  to  a  passage  in  the  Plutus  of
Aristophanes  (1.  290),  which  parodies  the  Cyclops  of  Philoxenus,  and  per-
haps actually  quotes  from  the  poem.  In  this  passage  the  made-up  word
8peTTai>e\6  (threttanelo)  is  used  to  imitate  the  sound  of  the  cithara.
The  mysterious  figure,  or  letter,  which  precedes  "  thrumming  "  in  the
script  may  be  the  beginning  of  an  attempt  to  write  this  word.


222


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


You  have  to  put  Homer  with  another 1  &  the  Ear  theme
is  in  it  too  The  pen  dipped  in  vitriol  that  is  what  resulted
&  S  H 2  knows  the  passage  in  Aristotle  which  also  comes
in  There's  a  fine  tangle  for  your  unravelling  &  he  of  the
impatience  3  will

Let  her  wait try  again  Edmund

Sicily

He  says  when  you  have  identified  the  classical  allusions  he
would  like  to  be  told.
(Mrs.  V.  Yes.)

In  this  Extract,  again,  there  is  little  with  which  we
are  not  already  familiar.  But  that  little  contains  the
key  to  the  puzzle.

"  Cythera  "  :  "  Cyclopean,  Philox,  He  laboured  in  the
stone  quarries  and  drew  upon  the  earlier  writer  for
material  for  his  Satire,  Jealousy :" — in  these  words  I  will
not  say  that  he  who  runs  may  read  the  riddle,  but
he  will  certainly  have  a  fair  inkling  of  it  if  he  first
takes  the  trouble  to read up the account given of  a

1  "  You  have  to  put  Homer  with  another."  Who  is  this  "  other  "  ?
Perhaps  Philoxenus  himself  is  meant,  though  this  interpretation  does
not  consist  very  well  with  the  statement  which  immediately  follows,
that  what  resulted  was  "  the  pen  dipped  in  vitriol."  The  more  natural
meaning  would  seem  to  be  that  the  "  other "  who  is  to  be  put  with
Homer  is  a  second  writer  from  whom  Philoxenus  had  borrowed  in
constructing  the  plot  of  his  Cyclops.  Can  the  intention  have  been
to  refer  to  the  unknown  Greek  original  from  which  Ovid  derived  the
story  of  Acis  and  Galatea  ?  Ovid  is  our  earliest  extant  authority  for
this  story  ;  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  he  took  it  from  a  Greek
literary  source,  though  we  do  not  know  what  that  source  was.  "  The
earlier  writer "  from  whom,  according  to  the  script,  Philoxenus  drew
the  materials  of  his  satire,  might  on  this  supposition  be,  not  Homer,
but  the  Greek  predecessor  from  whom  Ovid  borrowed.

1  by  no  means  dismiss  this  conjecture,  which  has  come  to  me  from
a  scholar  of  repute.  It  is  a  pity,  indeed,  that  the  evidence  for  it  is
not  stronger.  An  allusion  to  the  original  source  of  the  tale  of  Acis
and  Galatea,  like  the  allusion  suggested  in  a  previous  note  to  a  passage
from  the  Plutus  of  Aristophanes,  would  come  naturally  enough  from
Verrall,  but  could  never  have  proceeded  from  the  unaided  resources
of  Mrs.  Willett,

2  Professor  Butcher  was  familiarly  known  among  his  old  friends  by  the
two  first  initials  of  his  name.

3  See  footnote  on  p.  230.


LXXIII  ]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


223


certain  Philoxenus  of  Cythera  in  Smith's  Dictionary  of
Greek  and  Roman  Biography  and  Mythology,  or  in  the
Encyclopedia  Britannica.

Those  of  us  who  are  not  specialists  in  classical  literature
need  not  blush  to  confess  ignorance  of  the  very  name
of  Philoxenus.  He  was  nevertheless  a  poet  of  consider-
able repute  in  antiquity.,  though  only  a  few  lines  from
his  works  have  actually  come  down  to  us.

Philoxenus  was  a  writer  of  dithyrambs,  a  species  of
irregular  lyric  poetry  which  combined  music  with  verse,
the  musical  instrument  most  generally  employed  being
the  Kithara  or  Zither,  a  kind  of  lyre.  He  was  a  native
of  Cythera,  and  at  the  height  of  his  reputation  spent
some  time  in  Sicily  at  the  Court  of  Dionysius  the  Tyrant
of  Syracuse.  He  ultimately  quarrelled  with  his  patron
and  was  sent  to  prison  in  one  of  the  stone-quarries.

So  far  the  accounts  that  have  come  down  to  us  agree  ;
but  thejr  differ  as  to  the  cause  of  the  quarrel.  Most
writers,  according  to  the  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman
Biography  and  Mythology,  ascribe  the  oppressive  action
of  Dionysius  "  to  the  wounded  vanity  of  the  tyrant,
whose  poems  Philoxenus  not  only  refused  to  praise,
but,  on  being  asked  to  revise  one  of  them,  said  the
best  way  of  correcting  it  would  be  to  draw  a  black
line  through  the  whole  paper."  This  version  of  the
quarrel  is  also  followed  by  the  writer  in  the  Ency-
clopedia Britannica,  and  by  Grote  in  his  History  of
Greece.1  There  was,  however,  another  account,  mentioned
in  the  Dictionary  of  Biography  and  Mythology  only  to
be  rejected,  which  ascribed  the  disgrace  of  the  poet
"  to  too  close  an  intimacy  with  the  tyrant's  mistress
Galateia."

I  now  come  to  the  heart  of  the  mystery  which  has
hitherto  baffled  us.  The  most  famous  of  the  dithyrambic
poems  of  Philoxenus  was  a  piece  entitled  Cyclops  or  Galatea.
Of  this  poem  only  two  or  three  lines  have  been  preserved  ;
and  any  attempt  to  reconstruct  its  plot  must  depend  on
other  sources  of  information.  The  Encyclopedia  Britannica
says  of  it  : "  His  masterpiece  was  the  Cyclops,  a  pastoral

lYo\.  X.  303.


224


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


burlesque  on  the  love  of  the  Cyclops  for  the  fair  Galatea,
written  to  avenge  himself  upon  Dionysius,  who  was
wholly  or  partially  blind  of  one  eye."  This  falls  in
well  with  the  references  in  the  scripts  to  Satire ;  but
does  not  provide  much  of  a  foundation  for  the  references
to  the  stories  of  Ulysses  and  Polyphemus  and  of  Acis
and  Galatea,  and  to  the  topic  of  jealousy.  The  Dic-
tionary of  Biography  and  Mythology  helps  even  less.  More-
over, it  states  that  the  poem  was  composed  in  the
poet's  native  island  ;  whereas  the  script  affirms  that
it  was  written  in  the  stone-quarries.

I  have  searched  through  various  other  English  authori-
ties and  books  of  reference  as  well  as  a  few  foreign
ones,  in  order  to  discover,  if  possible,  whether  there  was
any  single  modern  source  from  which  the  story  told
or  implied  in  the  scripts  could  be  supposed  to  be  derived.
Apart  from  works  in  German  or  Latin — languages  which
Mrs.  Willett  does  not  understand — there  are  only  two
books,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  discover,  which
can  fairly  be  said  to  fulfil  this  condition.  One  of
these  is  Lempriere's  Classical  Dictionary.  Lempriere's
account  is  as  follows  :  "A  dithyrambic  poet  of  Cythera,
who  enjoyed  the  favour  of  Dionysius  tyrant  of  Syracuse
for  some  time,  till  he  offended  him  by  seducing  one
of  his  female  singers.  During  his  confinement  Philoxenus
composed  an  allegorical  poem,  called  Cyclops,  in
which  he  had  delineated  the  character  of  the  tyrant
under  the  name  of  Polyphemus,  and  represented  his
mistress  under  the  name  of  Galatea,  and  himself  under
that  of  Ulysses."  The  other  is  a  work  on  the  Greek
Melic  Poets  by  Dr.  Herbert  Weir  Smyth,  Professor  of
Greek  at  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Pennsylvania,  obviously
intended  for  scholars,  and  not  in  the  least  likely  to
attract  attention  from  the  general  public.  The  copy
I  have  seen  was  a  presentation  copy  sent  by  the  pub-
lishers to  the  late  Dr.  Verrall,  who  thought  well  of  the
book  and  used  it  (so  Mrs.  Verrall  told  me)  as  a  text-
book in  connection  with  some  of  his  lectures.

"  Like  Simonides,"  writes  Professor  Smyth,  "  Philox-
enus  was a man of the world, a friend of  princes,


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


225


and  many  stories  are  told  of  his  nimble  wit  at  the
Syracusan  Court.  His  friendship  with  Dionysios  the
Elder  was  finally  broken  either  by  his  frank  criticism
of  the  tragedies  of  the  tyrant  or  in  consequence  of
his  passion  for  Galateia,  a  beautiful  flute-player,  who
was  the  mistress  of  Dionysios.  Released  from  prison
by  the  prince  to  pass  judgment  on  his  verse,  the  poet
exclaimed  :  airaye  fxe  els  Xaro/mlas  [take  me  back  to  the
quarries].  In  his  confinement  he  revenged  himself  by  com-
posing his  famous  dithyramb  entitled  either  Kyldops  or
Galateia,  in  which  the  poet  represented  himself  as  Odys-
seus, who,  to  take  vengeance  on  Polyphemus  (Dionysios),
estranged  the  affections  of  the  nymph  Galateia,  of  whom
the  Kyklops  was  enamoured."

Here  evidently  is  the  literary  unity  of  which  we  were  in
search  and  which  was  to  collect  the  scattered  parts  of  the
puzzle  devised  by  the  two  friends  on  the  other  side  into  a
single  whole.  It  is  to  be  found  in  the  version  just  given  of
the  plot  of  the  Cyclops  of  Philoxenus.  Dionysius  and  his
"  Ear,"  the  stone- quarries  of  Syracuse,  Ulysses  and  Poly-
phemus, Acis  and  Galatea,  Jealousy,  and  Satire — all  these
topics  fall  naturally  and  easily  into  place  in  relation
to  this  account  of  the  poem.1  Music  and  the  thrumming
of  a  musical  instrument  can  be  fitted  in  without  much
difficulty,  as  belonging  to  the  characteristics  of  dithyrambic
poetry.  It  only  remains  to  trace  the  passage  in  Aristotle
which  "  comes  in  "  and  which  "  S.  H.  knows."

There  are  two  passages  occurring  within  a  page  of
each  other  in  the  first  and  second  chapters  of  Aristotle's
Poetics,  either  of  which  might  be  the  passage  referred
to.  One  of  these  is  general,  and  classes  the  dithyramb
with  those  kinds  of  poetry  which  depend  for  their  effects
not  only  upon  rhythm  and  metre,  but  also  upon  melody.
The  other  distinguishes  between  the  poetry  which  aims
at  representing  men  as  worse,  and  that  which  aims
at representing them as better, than they really are  ;

1  The  ancient  authority  followed  by  both  Lempriere  and  Prof.  Smyth
is  AthenEeus,  a  late  Greek  writer,  whose  work  may  well  have
been  known  to  Butcher  or  Verrall,  but  could  not  possibly  be  known
to  Mrs.  Willett.


226


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


and  mentions  the  Cyclops  of  Philoxenus  as  a  specimen
of  the  former — that  is  to  say,  as  a  Satirical  poem.  This
second  passage  is  referred  to  by  Professor  Smyth  in  the
paragraph  following  the  one  I  have  already  quoted.1  The
same  paragraph  lays  stress  upon  the  essentially  musical
character  of  the  dithyramb,  and  upon  the  fame  of
Philoxenus  as  musical  composer  no  less  than  as  poet.
It  quotes  the  comic  poet  Antiphanes,  who  spoke  of
him  as  "a  god  among  men,  cunning  in  the  true  art
of  music  " — ei$w?  t'V  a\}]6o3(;  [xovcriKriv.

Extract  D  closes  with  a  request  from  Gurney  that
he  should  be  told  as  soon  as  the  classical  allusions
had  been  identified.  This  request  was  complied  with
about  a  fortnight  later,  as  will  be  seen  from  Extract
E,  the  last  with  which  I  shall  have  to  trouble  you.

E.

{Extract  from  Script  of  Aug.  19,  1915.)
(Present : G.  W.  B.)

(G.  W.  B.  First  of  all,  Gurney,  I  want  to  tell  you  that  all
the  classical  allusions  recently  given  to  Mrs.  Verrall  are  now
completely  understood.)

Good — at  last  !

(G. W. B. We think the whole combination  extremehy
ingenious  and  successful.)
&  A  W  ish—

(G.  W.  B. What  is  the  word  after  "A.  W.  "?)
A  W-ish

(G.  W.  B.  Yes.)
Also  S  H-ish
(G.  W.  B.  Yes.)

The  communicator  hints  that  a  little  more  expedition

1  Professor  Smyth's  words  are  :  "  Aristotle  says  that  Philoxenus  was
realistic  in  distinction  to  the  idealistic  Timotheos."  This  interpretation
gives  a  somewhat  different  shade  of  meaning  to  Aristotle's  language
from  that  which  I  have  adopted  above.


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


227


might  have  been  shown  in  solving  the  problem  set
to  us.  He  apparently  forgets  that  in  March,  1914,
he  himself  informed  us  that  there  was  much  more  to
be  got  through,  and  that  we  had  waited  for  a  year
and  a  half  before  any  additional  light  was  forthcoming.
The  surprise  shown  in  Extract  D  that  no  message  con-
cerning a  Satire  and  the  Ear  of  Dionysius  and  the
Cave  of  the  Cyclops  had  been  handed  on  to  Mrs.  Verrall
shows  an  even  more  marked  forgetfulness  ;  for  we  had
been  expressly  warned  to  tell  her  nothing.  Such  forget-
fulness is  very  rare  in  our  experience.  I  doubt  whether
a  parallel  instance  could  be  found  in  the  scripts  of
any  of  our  group  of  automatists.  I  have  no  explana-
tion to  offer  of  it.

Eoi'  the  rest,  the  extract  I  have  just  read  is  chiefly
interesting  for  its  insistence  upon  the  claim  that  the
whole  scheme  is  characteristic  of  the  two  friends  who
have  devised  it,  and  therefore  points  to  the  survival
of  their  distinctive  personalities.

That  the  case  described  in  this  Paper  is  an  extremely
remarkable  one,  few,  I  think,  will  be  disposed  to  deny.
Mrs.  Willett  is  in  no  sense  a  "  learned "  lady.  She
has  a  taste  for  poetry,  and  a  good  knowledge  of  certain
English  poets  ;  but  with  classical  subjects  she  is  as
little  familiar  as  the  average  of  educated  women.  This
I  can  affirm  with  confidence,  and  I  have  had  good
opportunity  of  judging.

In  order  to  test  her  knowledge  of  the  particular  topics
referred  to  in  this  series  of  scripts  I  prepared  six  ques-
tions, writing  them  out  on  separate  pieces  of  paper,
and  asked  her  to  answer  them  then  and  there  as  each
question  was  handed  to  her.  This  was  on  the  27th
of  May  last  when  I  was  setting  to  work  on  the  present
paper.  Questions  and  answers  were  as  follows.  (You
will  of  course  bear  in  mind  that  all  the  scripts,  except
that  from  which  Extract  A  is  taken,  were  obtained
when  the  automatist  was  in  trance,  and  that  no  memory
of  what  she  writes  or  speaks  in  trance  is  carried  on
into  her  waking  consciousness.)


228


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


Qu.  1.  Please  say  what  you  know  about  tbe  Ear  of
Dionvsius  ?

Ans.  I  have  heard  this  expression,  but  do  not  know
what  is  the  meaning  of  it.

Qu.  2.  (a)  Did  you  know  that  Aristotle  had  written
a  Treatise  on  Poetry  ?

Ans.  No.

(&)  Were you aware that S. H. Butcher  had
written  a  hook  on  the  subject  of  this  Treatise  ?
Ans.  No.

Qu.  3.  Does  the  name  Cythera  convey  any  meaning
to  you  ?

Ans.  Yes,  it  conveys  to  me  the  Greek  name  of  one
of  the  winds — I  believe  mentioned  in  In  Memoriam.

Qu.  4.  Do  you  know  anything  about  the  stoxy  of
Acis  and  Galatea  ?

Ans.  Of  Acis  I  know  nothing  ;  of  Galatea  I  loiow  the
story  cf  the  statue  that  comes  to  life.

Qu.  5.  Does  the  name  Polyphemus  convey  any  idea
to  you  ?

Ans.  I  seem  to  have  heard  the  name,  but  it  has  no
associations  for  me.

Qu.  6.  Does  the  name  Philoxenus  convey  any  idea
to  you  ?

Ans. None  whatever.

Having  obtained  these  answers  I  decided  to  show  Mrs.
Willett  the  extracts  which  I  have  read  to  you  to-day,
and  explain  to  her  the  scheme  and  its  denouement.  This
involved  a  departure  from  our  usual  practice  of  with-
holding from  the  automatist  any  written  or  spoken
utterances  produced  by  her  in  a  state  of  trance.  No
harm,  however,  was  likely  to  result  in  the  present  case,
seeing  that  the  experiment  had  evidently  reached  its
conclusion  and  that  no  further  amplifications  from  "  the
other  side "  were  to  be  looked  for.  My  object  was  to
ascertain  whether  perusal  of  the  extracts  would  awaken
any  memories  that  had  remained  dormant  when  the
automatist  was  answering  the  questions  put  to  her
a  few  hours  before.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  nothing  of
the kind occurred. The nearest approach to a  revival


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysvus.


229


of  memory  was  upon  my  mentioning  Handel's  Acis
and  Galatea.  She  then  said  that  Handel  and  Acis
and  Galatea  seemed  to  go  together  in  her  mind ;  but
she  was  certain  she  had  never  either  heard  the  music
or  read  the  story.  On  the  other  hand,  her  ignorance
of  matters  referred  to  in  the  extracts  went  even  beyond
what  her  answers  to  the  questions  indicated  ;  for  instance,
she  could  not  recall  ever  having  heard  of  the  Expedition
of  the  Athenians  against  Syracuse.  Her  surprise  and
almost  excitement  were  quite  interesting  to  watch  as
the  elements  of  the  literary  puzzle  were  gradually  made
clear  and  finally  brought  to  a  unity  in  the  Satire  of
Philoxenus.  It  was  abundantly  evident  that  both  the
elements  themselves  and  the  final  solution  were  entirely
outside  any  conscious  knowledge  she  possessed.

In  March,  1914,  I  read  a  Paper  to  the  Society  giving
an  account  of  an  earlier  case  derived  from  Willett  Scripts
in  which  the  principal  agent  purported  to  be  Dr.  Verrall.
This  Paper  was  subsequently  published  in  Volume  XXVII.
of  the  Proceedings  under  the  title  "  Some  recent  scripts
affording  evidence  of  personal  survival."  The  facts  of
the  case,  which  I  shall  refer  to  as  "  the  Statius  Case,"
were  briefly  these  :  A  passage  was  to  be  searched  for
which  described  a  traveller  looking  across  a  river  and
wishing  himself  on  the  other  side,  but  hesitating  to
battle  with  the  current.  If  it  were  possible  to  identify
the  passage,  "  the  matter,"  so  we  were  told,  "  would
prove  interesting."  No  passage  satisfactorily  answer-
ing the  required  conditions  could  be  found  by  those
who  were  studying  the  Willett  Scripts,  and  the  subject
was  almost  forgotten  until  the  scripts  suddenly  returned  to
it  more  than  a  year  later.  Two  new  lights  were  then
thrown  upon  the  problem.  In  the  first  place,  Dr.  Verrall
was  unmistakably  designated  as  the  propouuder  of  it  ;
in  the  second  place,  a  sign-post  was  provided  by  the
statement  "Dante  makes  it  clear."  Guided  by  these
indications  we  ultimately  traced  the  required  passage
to  an  Essay  by  Dr.  Verrall  entitled  "  Dante  on  the
Baptism  of  Statius,"  which  it  was  practically  certain
that Mrs. Willett had never seen. Thus the  promise,

p


230  The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.  [part

that  if  the  passage  could  be  identified  the  matter  would
prove  interesting,  was  amply  fulfilled,  and  a  valuable
addition  made  to  the  evidences  hitherto  furnished  by
automatic  writings  in  favour  of  personal  survival.1

Between the  Statius  Case and that  described in  the

1  It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  criticisms  of  my  Paper  on  the  Statius
Case  have  appeared  in  the  Proceedings  (Vol.  XXVII. ,  pp.  458-574),
attacking  my  interpretation  of  the  scripts  on  the  double  ground  that
I  had  shown  no  sufficient  reason  for  connecting  Dr.  Verrall  with  the
case  at  all,  nor  for  selecting  the  River  of  Baptism  which  Statius
hesitated  to  cross  as  the  particular  river  referred  to,  when  the  River
of  Death  in  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  or  the  Rubicon,  or  any  other
river  on  the  brink  of  which  anyone  had  ever  paused  might  have
served  the  purpose  equally  well.

As  regards  the  connection  of  Dr.  Verrall  with  the  case,  this  was
to  my  mind  clearly  given  by  the  reference  to  the  communicator  who-
"  Swears  he  will  not  here  exercise  any  patience  whatever,  not  even
about  Lavender  and  Lub,"  and  by  the  plain  allusions  (as  it  seemed
to  me)  to  Dr.  Verrall's  recently  delivered  Lectures  on  Dryden.  That
the  scripts  meant  to  indicate  Dr.  Verrall  as  the  communicator  it  did
not  occur  to  me  that  anyone  would  question,  else  I  would  have
laboured  the  point  more.  Of  course  it  does  not  follow  that  he  actu-
ally was  the  communicator  ;  and  though  I  fancy  my  critics  have
confused  the  one  thing  with  the  other,  I  am  sure  no  such  confusion
can  be  found  in  my  Paper.

As  if  to  remove  any  possible  uncertainty  as  to  who  was  meant,
the  phrase  "  He  of  the  little  patience,"  which  had  already  been  em-
ployed to  describe  the  communicator  in  the  earlier  scripts,  is  again
repeated  in  the  Dionysius  Case  (see  Extract  D  "  he  of  the  impatience  "),
and  this  time  beyond  all  cavil  as  a  synonym  for  Dr.  Verrall.

The  identification  of  the  passage  describing  the  timid  traveller  is,
I  admit,  more  conjectural.  I  have,  however,  little  or  no  doubt  that
it  is  right.  It  explains  (1)  the  special  interest  attached  to  the  dis-
covery of  the  passage  ;  (2)  the  statement  that  "  Dante  makes  it
clear  " ;  and  (3)  the  paraphrase  of  the  lines  in  the  Purgatorio  which
Dante  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Statius  and  which  Dr.  Verrall's  Essay
quotes.  The  rivers  suggested  by  my  critics  do  none  of  these  things.
It  also  gives  a  point  and  significance  to  the  whole  incident,  which
would  otherwise  be  wanting,  by  making  it  into  a  problem  with  a
solution.  Additional  corroboration  is,  I  think,  furnished  by  the
circumstance  that  another  problem  with  a  solution,  similar  though
much  more  complicated,  follows  so  soon  afterwards.  The  Dionysius
Case  throws  light  on  the  Statius  Case  that  preceded  it.  In  this  con-
nection it  may  be  of  interest  to  note  that  the  scripts  had  already
begun  on  the  former  before  my  Paper  on  the  latter  had  been  pub-
lished, and  therefore  before  anything  had  been  done  which  could  put
Mrs.  Willctt on  the  track  of  our  interpretation.


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


231


present  Paper,  which  I  may  call  the  Dionysius  Case,
there  is  obviously  a  strong  family  likeness.  The  method
employed,  the  object  proposed,  and  the  chief  professed  agent
are  the  same  in  both.

The  method  is  to  propound  a  literary  problem  the
construction  and  solution  of  which  are  outside  the  range
of  the  automatisms  normal  knowledge.  The  solution  is  at
first  kept  purposely  obscure,  and  it  is  left  to  the  industry
of  the  interpreters  of  the  script  to  discover  it.  When
they  have  failed  to  do  so  after  ample  time  given  additional
indications  are  doled  out  in  successive  scripts  until  at
last  the  riddle  is  read.

The  chief  ostensible  agent  in  each  case  is  Dr.  Verrall,
though  in  the  Dionysius  case  he  is  associated  with
S.  H.  Butcher.

The  object  in  each  case  is  to  furnish  ground  for  be-
lieving that  the  ostensible  agent  or  agents  are  also
the  real  ones,  continuing  to  exist  as  individuals  after
bodily  death.

How  far  has  this  object  been  achieved  in  the  case
now  before  us  ?

There  are  two  ways  in  which  this  question  may  be
approached.  The  hypothesis  that  the  ostensible  are  also
the  actual  communicators  is  one  of  several  possible
alternative  explanations.  If  we  can  test  these  alternatives
in  relation  to  the  facts  of  the  case,  and  find  ourselves
compelled  to  reject  all  but  one,  that  one  must  be
regarded  as  holding  the  field.  This  negative  method
of  procedure  is  to  my  mind  likely  to  prove  the  most
fruitful  ;  but  we  shall  also  have  to  consider  how  far
the  facts  afford  positive  grounds  for  accepting  the  identity
claimed  in  the  scripts.

In  my  Paper  on  the  Statius  Case  I  analysed  with
some  care  the  various  alternative  explanations  which
appear,  I  will  not  say  probable,  but  at  all  events  j)ossible.
What  I  have  said  there  applies  mutatis  mutandis  here
also  ;  and  therefore  I  may  be  the  more  brief  on  the
present  occasion.

In  all  such  cases  four  main  questions  have  to  be  asked.


232


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[PART


The  first  two  relate  to  the  knowledge  exhibited  in  the
scripts  :

(1)  .  Did  this  knowledge  reach  the  automatist  normally  ?

(2)  .  If  not  normally,  is  there  anybody  living  from  whose
mind  it  can  be  plausibly  supposed  to  have  been  supplied  ?

The  third  and  fourth  questions  relate  to  the  use
made  of  the  knowledge,  however  acquired — in  other  words,
to  the  design  exhibited  in  the  scripts.  Design  implies
a  planning  or  constructing  intelligence. Accordingly  :

(3)  .  Can  the  planning  intelligence  responsible  for  the
design — in  the  Dionysius  Case  the  extremely  elaborate
design — which  the  scripts  reveal  be  plausibly  supposed
to  have  been  that  of  the  automatist  herself  whether
conscious  or  subconscious  ?

(4)  .  Can  it  plausibly  be  supposed  to  have  been  the  mind
of  some  living  person  actively  impressing  its  thoughts
upon  the  mind  of  the  automatist  ?

In  the  Dionysius  Case,  if  we  are  willing  to  follow  where
the  evidence  actually  before  us  leads,  instead  of  attaching
ourselves  immoveably  to  preconceived  ideas  of  what  is
possible  or  impossible,  our  answer  to  all  these  questions
must,  I  think,  be  in  the  negative.

(1).  The  evidence  goes  to  show  that  knowledge  concern-
ing Philoxenus  of  Cythera,  his  relations  with  Dionysius,
and  his  poem  Cyclops  or  Galatea,  was  not  normally  acquired
by  the  automatist.

On  this  point  we  have  first  of  all  her  own  declaration
of  complete  ignorance.  Mrs.  Willett  is  a  lady  of  good
social  position,  personally  well  known  to  all  the  members
of  the  investigating  group,  every  one  of  whom  has  the
most  absolute  confidence  in  her  integrity  and  bona  fides.
8he  is  herself  keenly  alive  to  the  importance  of  noting
and  recording  anything  that  can  help  to  throw  light  upon
the  contents  of  her  scripts  and  the  possible  sources  which
may  have  been  drawn  upon  in  their  production.  In  this
respect  she  has,  on  many  occasions,  been  of  material
assistance  to  the  investigators.  When  Mrs.  Willett  says
she  is  totally  ignorant  of  a  particular  topic,  no  one
who  knows  her  as  we  do  would  for  a  moment  question
her  word.


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


233


No  doubt  it  is  possible  for  knowledge  once  possessed
to  be  forgotten,  and  yet  to  persist  as  a  dormant  memory
in  the  subconscious  mind.  But  this  possibility  must
not  be  pressed  too  far.  It  is  pressing  it  very  far  indeed
to  suppose  that  at  some  time  or  other  Mrs.  Willett
either  read  or  heard  the  story  of  Philoxenus,  that  she
then  forgot  it  completely  so  far  as  her  normal  conscious-
ness was  concerned,  but  was  nevertheless  able  subcon-
sciously to  retain  and  use  it  in  the  concoction  of  an
elaborate  puzzle  such  as  we  are  now  considering.

Nor  is  this  all.  It  is  not  merely  of  Philoxenus  and
his  poem  that  Mrs.  Willett  declares  herself  ignorant,  but
also  of  other  main  elements  in  the  puzzle,  the  story
of  Ulysses  and  Polyphemus  for  instance,  and  that  of
Acis  and  Galatea,  to  say  nothing  of  the  "  passage  from
Aristotle."  The  intelligence  that  constructed  the  puzzle
was  certainly  aware  of  the  details  of  these  stories,  and
also  knew  that  the  adventure  of  the  Cyclops'  Cave  immedi-
ately follows  the  tale  of  the  Lotus  Eaters  in  the  Homeric
narrative.  It  is  not  easy  to  believe  that  the  various
threads  so  cunningly  woven  together  all  belong  to  the
category  of  latent  memories  which  the  subconscious
self  can  utilize  for  its  own  purposes  while  the  normal
self  remains  blissfully  unconscious  of  them.

Again  :  Let  us  suppose  for  argument's  sake  that  the
knowledge  of  the  story  of  Philoxenus  exhibited  in  the
scripts  was  normally  acquired.  From  what  source  was  it
in  that  case  derived  ?  It  might  be  conjectured  that  Mrs.
Willett,  having  in  one  way  or  another  had  her  attention
called  to  the  name  of  Philoxenus,  proceeded  to  study
a  variety  of  authorities,  and  from  their  different  accounts
pieced  together  the  story  as  it  appears  in  the  scripts.
I  am  not  suggesting  that  such  a  conjecture  has  any
plausibility.  Mrs.  Willett's  knowledge  of  things  classical
is  small,  and  her  interest  in  them  but  slight.  That  she
should  have  undertaken  the  labour  involved  in  this
research  is  very  unlikely.  But  that,  having  undertaken
it,  the  whole  subject  should  then  pass  out  of  her  conscious
memory  is,  to  me  at  least,  incredible.

The alternative (and less improbable) conjecture  is


234


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


that  she  took  the  story  bodily  either  from  Lempriere's
Classical  Dictionary  or  from  Professor  Smyth's  Greek
Melic  Poets,  and  then  forgot  that  she  had  ever  known  it.1

As  regards  the  Greelc  Melic  Poets,  I  think  it  on  general
grounds  very  unlikely  that  she  ever  had  the  volume
in  her  hands,  much  more  that  she  read  any  page  of  it
with  care.  The  book  itself  is,  as  I  have  already  indi-
cated, of  an  extremely  technical  character.  Merely  to  open
it  at  random  would  repel  anybody  but  an  expert.  One
would  certainly  be  surprised  to  come  across  it  anywhere
outside  a  scholar's  library.  It  is  true  that  Mrs.  Willett
has  once  or  twice  stayed  for  a  short  visit  with  Mrs.
Verrall  at  Cambridge,  and  may  conceivably  have  seen
the  book  on  one  of  these  occasions.  But  as  its  place
was  on  one  of  the  many  shelves  in  Dr.  Verrall's  study,
a  room  rarely  entered  by  visitors  unless  they  were  taken
there  specially,  the  chances  of  such  a  thing  having
happened  seem  to  me  very  remote.  Lempriere's  Classical
Dictionary  is  no  doubt  a  more  accessible  work.  On  the
other  hand,  it  is  decidedly  more  difficult  to  suppose  it
the  sole  or  main  source  of  the  puzzle  as  a  whole.  Even
Professor  Smyth's  account  of  Philoxenus  by  no  means
covers  all  the  elements  employed  in  the  puzzle.  It
does  no  more  than  allude  to  the  story  of  Ulysses  and
Polyphemus,  it  refers  to  the  stone-quarries  only  by  their
Greek  name  which  Mrs.  Willett  would  not  have  under-
stood, and  it  makes  no  mention  whatever  of  Acis  and
Galatea.  Lempriere's  Dictionary  not  only  makes  no
mention  of  Acis  and  Galatea,  but  is  silent  also  upon  the
very important topics of Aristotle and of mnsic.  The

1  On  this  point  Mrs.  Willett  writes  to  me  as  follows  :  "  Lempriere's
Classical  Dictionary  is  quite  unknown  to  me.  I  am  as  certain  as  I
am  of  anything  that  I  never  saw  or  heard  of  Prof.  Smyth's  book.  I
have  never  taken  a  single  volume  from  the  shelves  of  Dr.  Verrall's
study.  To  the  best  of  my  belief,  I  have  never  been  in  that  room
alone.  During  Dr.  Verrall's  life  it  was  not  entered  by  visitors
staying  in  the  house  unless  they  were  taken  to  see  him.  After  his
death  I  stayed,  I  believe,  only  once  with  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  I  have
sat  in  the  room  with  her,  but  I  believe  I  never  was  in  the  room  alone
at  any  time."  This  confirms  a  similar  statement  made  to  me  verbally
by  Mrs.  Verrall  herself.


LXXIII  ]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


235


old  difficulty  is  thus  still  with  us.  All  the  topics  asso-
ciated in  the  scripts  must  be  assumed,  on  the  supposition
that  the  knowledge  shown  therein  was  normally  acquired,
to  have  been  at  one  time  or  another  consciously  known
to  the  automatist.  There  is  no  single  source  from  which
they  could  all  be  derived.  Of  nearly  every  one  of  them
she  now  professes  total  ignorance.  Can  she  have  really
forgotten  them  so  completely  that  no  memory  of  them
is  recalled  even  when  the  scripts  are  shown  to  her  and
the  whole  scheme  explained  ?  To  my  mind  this  is
most  difficult  to  believe.  But,  if  we  insist  upon  regarding
the  knowledge  shown  in  the  scripts  to  have  been  normally
acquired,  then  we  must  either  believe  this  or  believe
that  Mrs.  Willett's  statements  are  deliberately  false.
Deliberately  false  I  am  sure  they  are  not.

(2).  There  is  no  living  person  from  whose  mind  the
more  essential  materials  utilized  in  the  construction  of  the
puzzle  can  plausibly  be  supposed  to  have  been  supplied.
The  members  of  the  group  who  were  engaged  in  studying
the  Willett  scripts  were  six  in  number,  namely,  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  Mr.  Piddington,  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Miss  Johnson,
Mrs.  Verrall  and  myself.  No  one  outside  the  group
had  seen  the  scripts.  Mrs.  Verrall  herself  had  not  seen
the  scripts  from  which  Extracts  B  and  C  are  taken
until  after  the  script  containing  Extract  D  had  been
written.  None  of  us — and  in  this  statement  I  expressly
include  Mrs.  Verrall — knew  anything  about  Philoxenus
or  his  poem  until  the  mention  of  "  Philox "  in  the  script
of  Aug.  2,  1915,  led  Mrs.  Verrall  to  look  up  the  name
in  the  Dictionary  of  Biography  and  Mythology.  The  auto-
matists  who  were  collaborating  with  us  were  equally
ignorant.  The  number  even  of  professed  classical  scholars
able  to  supply  the  required  knowledge  without  consulting
books  of  reference  is,  I  venture  to  think,  an  extremely
limited  one.

Perhaps  it  will  be  urged  that,  limited  as  the  number
may  be,  there  are  assuredly  some  few  individuals  in
possession  of  the  necessary  information.  May  it  not  have
passed  telepathically  from  one  or  more  of  these  to  the
automatist  ?


236


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


This  supposition  appears  to  me  to  be  one  of  those
which  it  is  impossible  to  disprove,  but  which  have  practi-
cally nothing  to  support  them.

How  are  we  to  conceive  of  the  process  taking  place  ?
Are  we  to  imagine  Mrs.  Willett's  mind,  conscious  or
subconscious,  reaching  out  at  large  to  an  unknown  x
(or  to  unknown  x,  y,  and  ~),  and  gathering  in  knowledge
of  the  various  subjects  out  of  which  the  puzzle  is  woven  ?
That  seems  a  somewhat  fantastic  notion  ;  and  moreover
it  implies  at  least  a  nucleus  of  knowledge,  if  not  some
general  conception  of  the  puzzle  itself,  round  which  the
rest  of  the  otherwise  miscellaneous  information  could
crystallize.  Not  less  fantastic  is  the  suggestion  that
an  unknown  a-  has  been  engaged  in  impressing  his  own
thoughts  upon  Mrs.  Willett's  mind  after  the  fashion
of  a  hypnotiser  trying  to  act  upon  his  patient  from
a  distance.  If  such  an  x  exists  let  enquiry  be  made
and  let  him  be  produced.  Or  finally,  has  there  been
no  activity  on  either  side,  but  only  an  automatic  infiltra-
tion from  mind  to  mind,  unaccompanied  by  any  con-
sciousness on  either  side  that  such  a  process  was  taking
place  ?  This  last  supposition  is,  I  think,  even  less
plausible  than  the  others,  as  it  entirely  fails  to  account
for  the  fact  that  the  ideas  which  have  thus  been  uncon-
sciously communicated  are  not  haphazard  ideas,  but
such  as  have  evidently  been  selected  in  order  to  serve
a  purpose.  There  must  be  conscious  agency  somewhere,
else  this  selection  remains  unexplained.

There  is  no  warrant,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  in  an j
facts  hitherto  observed  in  connection  with  the  phenomena
of  telepathy  for  believing  that  particular  and  detailed
knowledge  of  the  kind  involved  in  this  case  is  ever  tele-
pathically  transmitted  or  received  where  no  link  already
exists  between  the  minds  concerned  in  the  process.

(3)  and  (4).  I  believe  the  instinctive  judgment  of  trained
soldiers  will  be  that  the  Dionysius  puzzle  could  not  have
been  invented,  and  elaborated  without  slip  or  blunder,  except
by  somebody  who  was  himself  a  scholar,  and  a  ripe  and  good
one.  Mrs.  Willett  herself  cannot  reasonably  be  credited
with  its  authorship. This  point  is  raised  in  question  (3),


LXXTII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


237


but  need  not  be  further  insisted  on  here.  For  the  answers
to  questions  (1)  and  (2)  being  in  the  negative,  the
answers  to  question  (3)  and  (4)  must  be  in  the  negative
also.  As  regards  question  (3),  this  conclusion  can  only
be  escaped  by  supposing  the  mind  of  the  automatist
to  have  constructed  the  puzzle  out  of  materials  super-
normally  derived  from  some  non-living  source — a  sup-
position which  not  only  has  little  to  recommend  it
in  itself,  but  also  practically  gives  away  the  case  against
communication  from  the  dead.  And  as  regards  question  (4),
if  there  was  no  living  person  from  whom  the  materials
could  plausibly  be  supposed  to  have  been  derived,  still
less  could  there  be  any  living  person  responsible  for  the
weaving  of  these  materials  into  a  design.

If  these  conclusions  be  accepted,  the  only  alternative
left  would  seem  to  be  that  the  communications  have  their
source  in  some  intelligence  or  intelligences  not  in  the  body.
It  does  not  even  then  follow  that  they  proceed  from
the  disembodied  spirits  of  the  individuals  whom  we
knew  in  life  as  A.  W.  Verrall  and  S.  H.  Butcher.  Those,
however,  who  have  got  so  far  as  to  ascribe  them  to
intelligences  not  in  the  body  are  not  likely  to  find
any  additional  difficulty  in  the  personal  identity  claimed
for  the  communicators.  To  do  so  would  be  to  strain
at  a  gnat  after  swallowing  a  camel.

Independently  of  the  negative  grounds  we  have
just  been  considering,  are  there  any  positive  ones  that
may  fairly  be  urged  for  accepting  Verrall  and  Butcher
as  the  real  authors  of  this  curious  literary  puzzle  ?
I  think  there  are,  though  it  is  not  easy  to  estimate
their  exact  value.

The  reminder  to  Mrs.  Verrall  of  the  surprise  expressed
by  her  husband  at  her  not  knowing  what  was  meant
by  the  Ear  of  Dionysius,  would  be  a  very  striking
incident  if  it  were  certain  that  I  had  not  mentioned
it  to  Mrs.  Willett.  As  I  said  before,  I  do  not  believe
I  did  mention  it.  But  I  cannot  be  absolutely  sure,
and  the  doubt  precludes  me  from  laying  stress  upon  it  as
evidence  of  identity.


238


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


Extract  E  claims  for  the  scheme  as  a  whole  that  it
is  "A.  W.  ish"  and  "  S.  H.  ish."  I  think  this  is
true.  The  ingenuity  of  the  combination,  the  unexpected-
ness of  the  solution,  and  the  out-of-the-way  knowledge
utilized  in  it  are  eminently  Verrallian.  In  constructing
the  puzzle  Verrall  appears  to  be  the  leading  spirit.  Butcher
helps  with  his  contribution  from  the  Poetics  of  Aristotle.
But  he  is  content  in  such  a  matter  to  play  the  second
part  ;  and  this  too  is  not  uncharacteristic.

The  personal  traits  and  mannerisms  which  impressed
Mr.  Bayfield  so  strongly  in  the  Statius  Scripts,  and
which  he  dealt  with  so  hajapily  in  his  Note  appended
to  my  former  Paper,  are  perhaps  not  quite  so  marked
in  the  present  case.  But  I  think  old  friends  of  Verrall' s
will  agree  with  me  that  they  are  not  wholly  absent,
however  difficult  it  may  be  to  enable  others  to  realize
them.1

Finally — and  this  I  think  is  a  point  of  some  impor-
tance— we  have  the  remarkable  circumstance  that  the
only  account  of  the  contents  of  the  Cyclops  of  Philoxenus
which  at  all  closely  resembles  that  followed  in  the  scripts,
and  at  the  same  time  includes  references  to  Aristotle
and  the  art  of  music  (moiisike),  is  to  be  found,  so  far
as  my  researches  extend,  in  a  book  which  we  know
Verrall  to  have  been  familiar  with  and  to  have  used  as
a  text-book  for  lectures.  If  this  is  a  chance  coincidence
it  is  at  least  a  curious  one.  It  may  well  be  that  the
communicator  had  this  very  circumstance  in  mind  when
he  made  the  statement  (to  be  found  in  Extract  D),  "  The
incident  was  chosen  as  being  evidential  of  identity,  and
it  arose  out  of  the  Ear  train  of  thought."

1  Note,  for  instance,  the  characteristic  Verrallian  impatience,  eagerness,
and  emphasis  in  such  phrases  as  "  not  Stag,  do  go  on  "  in  Extract
C,  and  "  HAS  the  Satire  been  identified  ?  "  and  "  listen,  don't  talk  "
in  Extract  D.


XXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


239


APPENDIX.

Containing  extracts  from  the  Scripts  of  Mrs.  King  referred
to  at  p.  219  of  the  foregoing  Paper.

In  Mrs.  Willett's  Script  of  March  2,  1914  (vide  Extract
C,  above),  instruction  was  given  that  until  the  "  effort  "
was  completed,  the  portions  of  it  as  they  came  were
not  to  be  shewn  to  any  other  automatist.  This  was
almost  equivalent  to  saying  that  a  cross-correspondence
with  the  script  of  some  other  automatist  belonging  to
the  group  was  about  to  be  attempted.  I  believe  some
attempt  of  the  kind  was  made  in  certain  passages  from
scripts  produced  by  "  Mrs.  King."  I  have  not  included
these  in  the  text  of  my  Paper  on  the  Ear  of  Dionysius,
partly  because  I  was  unwilling  to  break  the  narrative,
partly  because  the  cross-correspondences  themselves  are
not  so  clear  and  unmistakable  as  to  carry  unquestion-
ing conviction.  That  Mrs.  King's  scripts  taken  as
a  whole  exhibit  manifold  connections  with  those  of  certain
other  automatists,  of  whom  Mrs.  Willett  is  one,  I  have
no  doubt  at  all.  But  what  may  well  be  in  their  origin
genuine  "  messages  "  seem  in  her  case  peculiarly  liable
to  get  blurred  and  sophisticated  in  transmission,  and
therefore  difficult  to  interpret.  My  readers  must  judge
for  themselves  how  far  the  interpretations  which  I
tentatively  put  forward  of  the  passages  here  collected  are
justified.  In  support  of  the  view  that  a  cross-corre-
spondence is  being  attempted,  it  should  be  noticed  that
the  first  three  passages  all  belong  to  March,  1914;  that
is  to  say,  that  they  were  all  produced  within  a  few
weeks  of  the  Willett  scripts  from  which  Extracts  B
and  C  in  the  Paper  are  taken.  The  dates  of  the  Willett
scripts  are  Feb.  28  and  March  2.  The  first  passage  I  quote
from  Mrs.  King  was  written  on  the  intervening  day,  March  1.

[a)  (Extract  from  King  Script  of  March  1,  1914.)

Floating  on  the  waters.  People  in  glass  houses  should
not  throw  stones. Very  good. Go  on  like  this  and  it  will


240


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


be  famous.  The  flames  are  fanned.  The  green  leaves  in
the  merry  ring  time.  .  .  .

Protoplasm  and  poly — Something  like  polyphera,  cannot
quite  get  it.

Note  here  the  following  ideas  :

(1)  Waters,  (2)  throwing  stones,  (3)  fanning  of  flames
(cf .  Acis  and  Galatea :  "  Hush  ye  pretty  warbling  choir,
Your  thrilling  strains  awake  my  pains  And  kindle  fierce
desire  "  ;  and  again,  "  No  grace  no  charm  is  wanting
To  set  the  heart  on  fire  "  ;  and  again,  "  I  rage — I  melt —
I  burn — The  feeble  god  has  stabbed  me  to  the  heart  "),.
(4)  Life  in  the  country  in  spring  time  (cf.  opening  chorus
in  Acis  and  Galatea).

"  Polyphera  :'  may  possibly  be  an  attempt  at  Polyphemus,
or  Polypheme.

(b)  (Extract  from  King  Script  of  March  13,  1914.)

The  living  water — the  foam  of  the  torrent.  Margaret,
Margaret.  Just  a  stone's  throw.  The  prick  in  the  finger.
Love  lies  bleeding.  The  merry  merry  ring  time,  Sweet
lovers  love  the  spring.  The  folded  hands.  Now  write  this,
that  many  words  are  missing,  but  the  sense  is  there — it
is  a  part  of  something  else.

Here  we  have,  repeated  from  the  former  script  :
(1)  Water, (2)  throwing of a stone, (3)  the  spring
and  lovers'  motif.

The  "  waters "  of  the  former  script  have,  however,
now  become  more  distinctively  a  stream ;  and  the  phrase
"  living  water "  seems  specially  appropriate  as  applied
to  the  fountain  and  river  into  which  the  dead  Acis
was  changed,  becoming  thereby  immortal.  "  Margaret,
Margaret  "  (from  Arnold's  "  Forsaken  Merman  "),  may  be
intended  to  suggest  the  sea-nymph  Galatea  ;  while  "  Love
lies  bleeding  "  is  an  apt  description  of  the  fate  of
Acis.

Note  that  a  cross-correspondence  is  claimed  in  the
last  words  of  the  extract.


XXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


241


(c)  (Extract  from  King  Script  of  March  24,  1914.)

Hark  hark  the  lark  at  Heaven's  gate  sings
And  morn  begins  to  rise.
The  happy  happy  lovers.

Now  comes  the  storm,  the  whispered  warning  of  their
fate.  Say  this  that  the  stones  in  the  pool  are  round — the
doctored  sense.

The  first  part  of  Acis  and  Galatea  ends  with  a  duet
between  the  lovers  "  Happy  !  happy !  happy  we."  The
second  part  begins  with  a  chorus  of  Nymphs  and  Shep-
herds, pianissimo  at  first  (cf .  "  whispered  warning  of
their  fate  "),  but  finishing  fortissimo  (cf.  "  the  storm  ").
The  words  are  as  follows  :

"  Wretched  lovers  ! Fate  has  past

This  sad  decree, — no  joy  shall  last.

Wretched  lovers  !  quit  your  dream,

Behold  the  monster  Polypheme  !

See  what  ample  strides  he  takes  !

The  mountain  nods  !  the  forest  shakes  !

The  waves  run  frightened  to  the  shores  !

Hark  how  the  thundering  giant  roars  !  "

Note  again  the  connection  in  the  Script  of  stones  and
"water.

For  "  the  doctored  sense  "  see  under  Extract  [d).

(d)  [Extract  from  King  Script  of  April  1,  1915.)

Dionysius  .  .  .  Arethusa  .  .  .

Stones  in  the  market  place — crying —

the  filtered  sense  .  .  .

The  Sicilian  Ode. Blest  pair  of  Sirens.

The  meaning  is  cpiite  clear — Do  you  understand  it  .  .  .

Arethusa  occurs  in  connection  with  Dionysius'  Ear
in  the  Willett  Script  of  Feb.  28,  1914  (Extract  B  in
the  Paper),  where  it  is  apparently  used  to  indicate  the
locality,  viz.  Syracuse.

"  Stones  in  the  market  place — crying — "  though  more
^naturally reminiscent of Luke xix. 40, may  possibly


242


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


be  an  allusion  to  the  stoning  of  Stephen.  Cf.  Acts
vii.  59  and  60 :  "  And  they  stoned  Stephen,  calling  upon
God,  and  saying.  Lord  Jesus  receive  my  spirit  !  And
he  kneeled  down,  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lord,
lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."'  In  the  same  Willett
Script  (Feb.  28,  1914)  Acis  is  referred  to  as  "that
sort  of  Stephen  man."

With  "the  filtered  sense"  compare  "the  doctored
sense  "  in  Extract  (c).  So  far  as  I  am  aware  there
is  no  similar  phrase  to  be  found  anywhere  in  King  script.
The  meaning  is  obscure  ;  but  possibly  a  reference  to
the  acoustic  properties  of  the  Ear  of  Dionjsius  may
be  intended.  In  any  case  "  the  doctored  sense "  in
Extract  (c)  must  be  taken  to  refer  back  to  "  the
filtered  sense  "  in  Extract  (cl).

The  words  "  Sicilian  Ode — Blest  pair  of  Sirens  "  sug-
gested to  me  that  "  Sicilian  "  must  be  a  mistake  for
"  Cecilian,"  and  that  the  "Ode"  must  be  Dryden's
Ode  for  St.  Cecilia's  Day.  On  my  asking  Mrs.  King,
however,  immediately  after  the  script  was  finished,  in
what  sense  she  had  understood  the  adjective,  she  at
once  replied  "  Sicilian,  not  Cecilian,  was  what  I  saw —
difficult  to  say  whether  seen  or  heard  first."  This  is
confirmed  by  her  contemporaneous  note  on  Arethusa  :
"  Impression  of  river  in  Sicily — I  have  been  there."

It  seems  to  me  not  unlikely  that  in  "  The  Sicilian
Ode  "  we  have  an  allusion  either  to  the  Cyclops  or
Galatea  of  Philoxenus,  or  to  the  Acis  and  Galatea
of  Handel — perhaps  to  both.  An  essential  feature  in
both  is  the  combination  of  music  with  verse  :  and  this
is,  I  think,  the  point  of  the  reference  to  Milton's  "  Blest
Pair  of  Sirens  "  which  follows  :

"  Blest  pair  of  Sirens,  pledges  of  Heaven's  joy,
Sphere-born  harmonious  Sisters,  Voice  and  Verse,
Wed  your  divine  sounds  and  mixed  power  employ.  .  .  ."

Aristotle's Poetics, I. 10, has  already been  referred

to as probably the passage (or  one of the passages  }•

in Aristotle "  known to S.H."  (see Willett Script  of

Aug.  2. 1915,  Extract  D  in  the  Paper). The  following


LXXIII.]


The  Ear  of  Dion y skis.


243


is  Butcher's  own  translation  :  "  There  are  again  certain
kinds  of  poetry  which  employ  all  the  means  above
mentioned — namely  rhythm,  melody  and  metre.  Such
are  the  dithyrambic  and  nomic  poetry,  and  also  Tragedy
and  Ccmedy  ;  but  between  them  the  difference  is  that
in  the  first  two  cases  these  means  are  all  employed
at  the  same  time,  in  the  latter  separately."

(e)  {Extract  from  King  Script  of  October  3,  1915.)
Handel  and  the  berries.

I  take  this  to  refer  to  the  famous  Air  in  Handel's  Acis
and  Galatea  :  "  0  ruddier  than  the  cherry,  0  sweeter
than  the  berry  !  "  etc.  in  which  Polyphemus  declares
his  love  for  Galatea.

Mrs.  King  told  me  that  she  did  not  know  this  air,
nor  indeed  to  the  best  of  her  knowledge  had  ever  heard
of  it,  and  that  Handel's  Acis  and  Galatea  conveyed  no
idea  to  her  mind.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXXIV.
December,  1917.


I.

ON  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  DIFFERENT  TYPES
OF  EVIDENCE  FOR  SURVIVAL  LN  THE  WORK
OF THE  SOCIETY.

A  Paper  Read  to  the  Society  at  a  Private  Meeting

on  April  26,  1917.

By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.

In  their  annual  report  in  January  last,  the  Council  of
the  Society  remarked  that  in  the  last  ten  years  there
has  been  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  evidence  for
survival  presented  by  the  Society  and  deserving  serious
consideration,  as  compared  to  what  was  obtained  in  the
first  twenty-five  years  of  the  Society's  existence.

I  have  thought  that  some  amplification  and  justifica-
tion of  this  statement  might  be  interesting  to  members
of  the  Society,  together  with  some  classification  of  the
kinds  of  evidence  for  survival  that  have  been  obtained.
The  two — that  is  development  and  classification — are
rather  closely  connected,  for  the  increase  of  evidence  is

Q


246


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


due  to  new  developments  from  1901  onwards,  first  brought
prominently  forward  through  Mrs.  Verrall's  report  on
her  own  automatic  script,  published  in  1906  {Proceedings,.
Vol.  XX.).  I  must,  however,  make  it  clear  at  once
that  I  have  nothing  original  to  say  and  neither  new
evidence  to  bring  forward  nor  fresh  explanations  to  offer.
Nor  do  I  intend  to  appraise  in  detail  the  evidence  already
brought  forwaid  or  to  estimate  how  much  more  may  be
required  before  scientific  certainty  that  our  spirits  survive
bodily  death,  and  can  sometimes  and  to  some  extent
communicate  with  the  living,  is  generally  accepted  as
established.  That  there  is  a  great  deal  of  plodding  work
before  us  ere  this  point  is  attained  few  members  of  the
Society  will  doubt,  but  in  the  meanwhile  a  brief  survey
of  the  route  so  far  traversed,  and  the  noting  of  some
important  landmarks  on  it  may  be  of  use.

The  question  whether  good  scientific  evidence  of  sur-
vival— as  distinct  of  course  from  philosophical  or  theo-
logical reasons  for  believing  in  it — could  be  obtained,  is
probably  one  which  from  the  foundation  of  the  Society
in  1882  has  interested  the  majority  of  the  members  more
than  any  other  branch  of  our  enquiries,  because  of  the
far-reaching  consequences  its  solution  would  carry  with
it.  One  consequence  would  be  a  decisive  argument
against  materialism,  and  it  is  this  that  leads  some  of
those  who  hold  dogmatically  a  materialistic  view  of  the
universe  to  oppose,  not  only  any  conclusion  that  survival
can  be  proved,  but  any  enquiry  into  the  subject,  with  a
virulence  resembling  that  of  medieval  theologians.

Notwithstanding  the  interest  of  the  subject,  however,
and  any  bias  which  this  may  be  supposed  to  have  created
in  the  investigators,  the  evidence  that  came  in  during  the
early  years  of  the  Society,  and  the  progress  made  in
interpreting  it,  seemed  at  first  to  lead  us  backwards  in
a  certain  sense  as  regards  proof  of  survival.  The  two
departments  in  which  real  steps  forward  were  made  in
the  work  the  Society  had  set  before  itself,  were  telepathy
and  knowledge  about  the  subliminal  working  of  the  mind.
An  unexpectedly  large  amount  of  evidence,  both  experi-
mental and  spontaneous, flowed  in  for  the  existence  of


lxxiv.] Different  Types  of  Evidence  for  Survival.  247

telepathy — that  is  for  communication  between  mind  and
mind  otherwise  than  through  the  known  channels  of
sense.  And  also  much  light  was  obtained — partly  through
hypnotism  and  automatic  writing,  but  also  through  spon-
taneous cases — on  the  subconscious  working  of  the  mind.
Neither  telepathy  nor  subconscious  mentation  was  of
course  a  new  idea,1  but  as  regards  both  much  new  evi-
dence was  obtained,  and  as  regards  the  latter  it  was
obtained  both  inside  and  outside  the  Society.  Everyone
now  knows  that  a  subconscious  part  of  us  may  carry
on,  not  only  habitual  and  mechanical  actions,  but  trains
of  thought  and  reasoning  processes,  and  in  certain  cases
even  act  on  them  ;  and  that  all  this  may  happen  while
our  normal  consciousness  is  also  active  and  without  its
participation  01  knowledge.

The  two  lines  of  investigation — those  into  telepathy
and  into  the  working  of  the  subliminal  consciousness-
were  found  to  be  more  or  less  closely  connected  ;  for
there  is  good  reason  to  think  that  it  is  largely — perhaps
chiefly — through  the  subliminal  strata  that  telepathy
operates.

When  I  say  that  our  investigations  seemed  at  first
to  lead  us  in  the  negative  direction  as  regards  proof  cf
survival,  I  do  not  mean  that  either  telepathy  between
the  living  or  the  existence  of  the  subliminal  con-
sciousness furnishes  arguments  against  survival — very  much
the  contrary.  Telepathy,  if  a  purely  psychical  pro-
cess,— and  the  reasons  for  thinking  it  so  increase —
indicates  that  the  mind  can  work  independently  of  the
body,  and  thus  adds  to  the  probability  that  it  can  sur-
vive it.  Increased  knowledge  about  the  subliminal  self,
by  giving  glimpses  of  extension  of  human  faculty  and
showing  that  there  is  more  of  us  than  we  are  normally
aware  of,  similarly  suggests  that  the  limitations  imposed
by  our  bodies  and  our  material  surroundings  are  tem-
porary 1  imitations .

But though the quest for scientific proof of  sur-

1  As  is  well  known,  Sir  William  Barrett,  afterwards  one  of  the  founders
of  our  Society,  brought  the  subject  of  thought-transference  or  telepathy
before  the  British  Association  in  1876.


248


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


vival  was  thus  in  one  way  made  more  hopeful  by  the
early  work  of  the  Society,  it  was  in  another  way  made
more  difficult.  Unexpected  obstacles  presented  them-
selves. Things  that  at  first  sight  looked  like  evidence
for  communication  from  the  dead  were  discounted  as  such
because  they  could  be  explained  by  telepathy  from  the
living.  This  applies,  for  instance,  to  all  communications
purporting  to  come  from  the  dead  where  the  matter
communicated  is  known  to  any  living  person  directly
or  indirectly  in  touch  with  the  medium  ;  but  matters
unknown  to  any  living  person  can  seldom  be  verified.
Again  the  mere  claim  to  come  from  the  dead  is  invali-
dated, because  the  subliminal  consciousness  concerned  in
automatic  writing  and  trance  speaking  has  been  found
liable  to  claim  more  knowledge  and  power  than  it  pos-
sesses, to  say  things  which  are  not  true,  and  to  offer
false  excuses  when  the  untruth  is  discovered.  This  sub-
liminal trickiness  may  be  found  in  the  case  of  persons
who  in  their  normal  life  are  upright  and  honourable  ; —
just  as  in  dreams  we  may  behave  in  a  way  that  would
shock  us  in  our  waking  life.  Another  embarrassing
circumstance  from  the  evidential  point  of  view  is  that
the  subliminal  memory  does  not  coincide  with  the  supra-
liminal, and  can  draw  upon  a  store  not  accessible  to  the
normal  consciousness.  And  further,  things  may  be  sub-
liminally  taken  note  of,  which  do  not  enter,  or  scarcely
enter  the  normal  consciousness  at  all.

Then  again  the  evidence  from  what  are  popularly
called  ghosts  was  greatly  reduced  because,  though  there
were  numerous  and  well  authenticated  instances  of
apparitions  at  or  about  the  time  of  death  of  the  person
seen,  it  became  necessary,  provisionally  at  least,  to  class
them  as  due  to  telepathic  influence,  before  death,  of  the
dying  person.  There  remained  cases  of  post-mortem
apparitions,  but  well-evidenced  cases  in  which  there  is
something  to  show  that  the  experience  is  not  of  purely
subjective  origin  are  comparatively  few,  though  there
are  no  doubt  some  which  are  striking.  Even  among
these,  if  the  apparition  occurred  before  the  fact  of  the
death was known and within a  few hours of it,  the


lxxiv.] Different  Types  of  Evidence  for  Survival.  249

possibility  of  the  telepathic  impression  having  been
received  earlier  and  remaining  latent  in  the  subcon-
scious had  to  be  allowed  for  ;  for  of  such  deferred
emergence  into  consciousness  there  was  in  certain  cases
distinct  evidence.  It  is  noteworthy,  however,  that  in
a  statistical  enquiry  undertaken  by  the  Society,  of  which
the  results  were  published  in  1894  (in  our  Proceedings,
Vol.  X.),  a  tendency  was  found  for  apparitions  to
cluster  about  the  time-  of  death  of  the  persons  seen  in
a  way  suggesting  at  any  rate  that  death  involves  no
sudden  transition  from  a  state  in  which  communication
with  the  living  is  possible  to  a  state  in  which  it  is  not.
If  we  call  the  person  seen  the  agent,  they  occur  during
the  agent's  fatal  illness,  whether  this  is  known  or
unknown  to  the  percipient,  in  increasing  frequency  as
death  approaches,  the  largest  number  occurring  at
or  about  the  time  of  the  death  itself.  And  they
continue  to  occur  after  the  death  whether  the  fact  of
death  is  known  or  unknown  to  the  percipient,  becoming
rarer  as  the  death  recedes  into  the  distance.  As  far  as
it  goes  this  points  to  continued  influence  of  the  agent
after  death,  and  must  be  reckoned  as  contributing  some-
thing to  the  evidence  whose  development  I  am  trying
to  trace.

Fully  aware  of  all  the  difficulties  I  have  spoken  of,
by  which  possible  evidence  for  survival  is  hemmed  in
and  restricted,  we  began  investigations  with  Mrs.  Piper.
Reports  of  her  powers  had  reached  the  English  workers
from  Dr.  Hodgson  and  Professor  William  James  in
America,  and  in  the  winter  of  1889-90  she  was  brought
to  England  and  gave  sittings  under  the  management
of  Mr.  Myers,  Dr.  Leaf,  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  with
results  reported  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.  Striking  evidence
was  obtained  at  least  of  telepathic  communication  with
the  living,  and  some  distinctly  pointing  to  communication
with  the  dead.  There  was,  however,  also  evidence  of
false  personation,  false  statements,  attempts  by  the
trance  personalities  to  get  information  from  the  sitter,
or  to  cover  up  error,  and  so  forth.  The  results  of  the
American  enquiry — 1887  to  1891 — on  which  Dr.  Hodgson


250


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


reported  in  1892  (in  our  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.)  were
very  similar.  Hodgson's  summing  up  was  that  the  evi-
dence so  far  obtained  was  very  far  from  sufficient  to
establish  the  conclusion  that  Mrs.  Piper's  control — Phinuit
— was  in  direct  communication  with  deceased  persons
or  was  a  deceased  person  himself  as  he  alleged.  He
adds  (p.  57)  that

"  the  failures  in  answering  test  questions  and  the  apparent
ignorance  displayed  in  other  ways  by  the  alleged  '  communi-
cators,' .  .  .  constitute  almost  insuperable  objections  to  the
supposition  that  the  '  deceased  '  persons  concerned  were  in
direct  communication  with  Phinuit,  at  least  in  anything  like
the  fulness,  so  to  speak,  of  their  personality."

He  thought,  however,  that  there  might  perhaps  be  some
indirect  communication  of  a  partial  and  fragmentary  kind.

That  is  where  we  had  got  to  in  1892,  ten  years  after
the  formation  of  the  Society.  But  in  that  year,  while
Hodgson's  report  was  going  through  the  press,  evidence
was  obtained  through  Mrs.  Piper,  which  greatly  modified
Hodgson's  view.  A  young  man  known  in  our  Proceedings
by  the  jDseudonym  George  Pelham,  commonly  abbreviated
into  G.  P.,  died  early  in  1892,  and  shortly  afterwards
appeared  to  communicate  through,  and  to  "  control,"
Mrs.  Piper.  His  communications,  though  by  no  means
free  from  confusion  and  error,  were  fuller  and  more  con-
vincing than  most  of  the  previous  ones  had  been  ;  and,
moreover,  under  his  supposed  influence,  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  communications  generally  became  in  various  ways
better.  By  the  time  Hodgson  published  his  second  report
on  her,  in  1898,  he  had  become  convinced  that  the
spiritualistic  hypothesis  was  the  one  that  best  fitted  the
facts.  He  believed  that  the  chief  "  communicators  "
to  whom  he  had  referred  in  his  report

"  are "  (to  use  his  own  words)  "  veritably  the  personalities
that  they  claim  to  be,  that  they  have  survived  the  change
we  call  death,  and  that  they  have  directly  communicated
with  us  whom  we  call  living  "  (Proceedings,  XIII.,  p.  405).

Of  course  Hodgson  did  not  carry  us  all  with  him
There  was  much  discussion  of  his  conclusion. But  though


ixxiv.] Different  Types  of  Evidence  for  Survival.  251

all  did  not  agree  that  the  evidence  for  survival  was  yet
conclusive,  all  who  studied  the  subject  felt,  I  think,
that  at  any  rate  there  was  evidence  that  had  to  be  taken
account  of.

This  conclusion  was  well  put  at  the  time  by  Professor
Romaine  Newbold  in  a  paper  on  evidence  obtained
through  Mrs.  Piper  published  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.
He  says  (p.  10)  :

':  From  such  inconsistent  material  one  can  draw  no  fixed
conclusions.  But  there  is  one  result  which  I  think  the  in-
vestigation  into  Mrs.  Piper's  and  kindred  cases  should  achieve.
Por  any  theory  some  intrinsically  strong  evidence  must  be
adduced,  even  if  there  be  but  little  of  it,  before  the  theory
can  be  given  any  standing  in  court  at  all.  Until  within
very  recent  years  the  scientific  world  has  tacitly  rejected  a
large  number  of  important  philosophical  conceptions  on  the
ground  that  there  is  absolutely  no  evidence  in  their  favour
whatever.  Among  those  popular  conceptions  are  those  of
the  essential  independence  of  the  mind  and  the  body,  of
the  existence  of  a  supersensible  world,  and  of  the  possibility
of  occasional  communication  between  that  world  and  this.
We  have  here,  as  it  seems  to  me,  evidence  that  is  worthy
of  consideration  for  all  these  points.  It  was  well  expressed
by  a  friend  of  mine,  a  scholar  who  has  been  known  for  his
uncompromising  opposition  to  every  form  of  supernaturalism.
He  had  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  at  which  very  re-
markable disclosures  were  made,  and  shortly  afterwards  said
to  me,  in  effect,  '  Scientific  men  cannot  say  much  longer
that  there  is  no  evidence  for  a  future  life.  I  have  said  it,
but  I  shall  say  it  no  longer ;  I  know  now  that  there  is
evidence,  for  I  have  seen  it.  I  do  not  believe  in  a  future
life.  I  regard  it  as  one  of  the  most  improbable  of  theories.
The  evidence  is  scanty  and  ambiguous  and  insufficient,  but
it  is  evidence  and  it  must  be  reckoned  with.'  "

One  obvious  weakness  in  the  position  at  this  stage
was  that  the  evidence  depended  so  largely  on  a  single
medium.  Late  in  the  nineties,  however,  Mr.  Myers
became  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  a  lady  with
mediumistic powers, who, like Mrs. Piper, went  into


252


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


trance,  but  who  was  not  a  professional  medium.  He
gave  some  account  of  her  mediumship  to  the  International
Congress  of  Psychology,  which  met  at  Paris  in  1900,
in  a  paper  reprinted  from  the  Compte  Rendu  of  the
Congress  in  our  Proceedings,  Vol.  XVII.  He  there  says
(p.  73) :

"  I  believe,  then,  that  I  have  good  reason  for  ascribing  many
of  these  messages  to  definite  surviving  personalities,  known
while  on  earth  to  friends  of  mine  whose  presence  with  Mrs.
Thompson  has  evoked  the  messages,  or  to  myself."

Mr.  Myers,  who  died,  it  will  be  remembered,  on  January
17,  1901,  did  not  publish  the  evidence  collected  by  him-
self concerning  Mrs.  Thompson  ;  but  there  are  interesting
papers  about  her  by  Mr.  Piddington  and  others  in  Pro-
ceedings, Vols.  XVII.  and  XVIII.  The  evidence  for
supernormally  acquired  knowledge  is,  I  think,  clear,  in
spite  of  the  usual  mixture  of  irrelevant  and  erroneous
matter  ;  but  evidence  through  hei,  quite  distinctively
making  for  communication  from  the  dead,  is  not  large
in  amount.  This  is  also  true  of  another  lady  through
whose  automatic  writing  Mr.  Myers  got  some  evidence
— the  lady  whom  we  call  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  whose  writing
purports  to  come  from  her  son.

In  1900  therefore  evidence  of  survival,  convincing  to
some  investigators,  had  been  obtained  through  the  trance
speech  or  the  automatic  writing  of  at  least  three  sensitives.
Mr.  Myers  reviewing  the  work  done  by  the  Society  in
his  Presidential  address  in  that  year,  says,  speaking  of
course  for  himself  alone  :

I

"  Knowledge  not  attainable  in  any  normal  fashion  ...  is
shown  in  telepathic  messages  between  living  men,  and  in
apparitions  of  men  dying,  and  in  evidential  messages  from
men  whom  we  call  dead.  All  this — in  Phantasms  of  the  Living
and  in  fourteen  volumes  of  the  Proceedings — I  claim  that
we  have  adequately  shown,  and  of  late  years  we  have  ad-
vanced and  consolidated  these  fragmentary  and  fugitive
indications  of  the  spirit's  survival,  by  certain  records  of
trance-phenomena  and  spirit-possession — records  as  yet  inchoate


lxxiv.] Different  Types  of  Evidence  for  Survival.  253

and  imperfect,  yet  which  must  needs  be  faced  and
dealt  with  by  all  serious  men  "  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XV.,  p.
119.) 1

Up  to  this  point  the  evidence  for  survival  obtained
by  the  Society  was  of  two  types.  In  the  first  appari-
tions, or  trance  communications,  or  automatic  script,
conveyed  true  facts  connected  with  a  deceased  person
which  were  not  previously  known  to  the  recipients  of
the  message.  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  interesting  case  about
the  group  photograph  (Proceedings  XXIX.,  p.  132)  is  of
course  a  recent  instance  of  this  class.  The  characteristic
of  the  second  type  is  dramatic  representation, — e.g.  the
exhibition  in  the  trance  state  of  details  so  full,  or  per-
sonation of  the  deceased  so  life-like,  that  it  is  difficult
to  suppose  that  telepathy  from  the  living  alone  can
account  for  it.  A  good  deal  of  the  best  evidence  con-
cerning G.  P.  and  others  through  Mrs.  Piper  was  of  this
type.  Evidence  of  this  kind  can  be  very  impressive,
but  unfoitunately  it  is  almost  necessarily  more  impressive
to  the  person  who  receives  it,  and  who  feels  as  if  he
were  really  talking  to  his  friend,  than  it  can  be  to  other
people.  A  personal  equation  comes  in  to  an  extent
that  makes  it  generally  very  difficult  to  judge  of  the
objective  value  of  the  evidence.  Investigators  have
therefore  made  special  efforts  to  obtain  from  the  dead
evidence  of  the  first  type — verifiable  information  un-
known to  the  living.

With  this  end  in  view  was  devised  the  plan  of  writing
a  message  before  death  and  sealing  it  up  in  an  envelope
deposited  with  a  trustworthy  person.  The  contents  of
the  envelope  were  to  be  communicated  after  death
by  the  deceased  person.  Unfortunately  this  experi-
ment has  so  far  failed.  Two  or  three  envelopes
have  been  deposited  to  our  knowledge  by  persons  since
dead,  but  either  no  communication  has  come  con-
cerning  them, or what was taken to be a  statement

1  Mr.  Myers'  own  book,  Human  Personality  and  its  Survival  of  Bodily
Death,  was,  it  will  be  remembered,  not  published  till  after  his  death ;.
a  good  deal  of  it  had,  however,  appeared  in  substance  in  papers  in  our
Proceedings.


254


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


of  their  contents  has  proved  erroneous.  This,  it  will  be
remembered,  is  what  happened  in  the  case  of  an  en-
velope deposited  by  Mr.  Myers  with  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.
Success  in  such  an  experiment  must  necessarily  be  very
doubtful,  for  there  are  obviously  many  difficulties.  The
depositor  may  forget  his  message.  (I  am  sure  I  should.)
Or  he  may  be  unable  to  communicate  at  all.  Or  his
medium  may  fail  to  receive  or  to  deliver  his  message
as  given.  But  a  more  important  reason  for  questioning
whether  the  experiment  is  worth  repeating  is  an  evi-
dential weakness  in  it.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how,  in  case
of  success,  the  objection  can  be  met  that  the  message
might  have  been  learnt  telepathically  from  the  depositor
before  his  death.

Since  the  beginning  of  1901  two  other  types  of  evi-
dence have  been  obtained  :  namely  (1)  Cioss-correspon-
dences  and  ^2)  communications  of  which  those  discussed
in  Mi'.  Gerald  Balfour's  recent  paper  (The  Ear  of
Dionysius)  are  specimens.  When  independent  references
to  the  same  topic  occur  at  about  the  same  time  in
the  scripts  of  two  or  more  automatists,  we  call  it  a
cross-correspondence.  One  of  the  earliest,  if  not  the
earliest,  recorded  case  of  this  took  place  on  January  11,
1901,  and  is  a  good  specimen  of  a  simple  cross-corre-
spondence. On  that  day  a  Sidgwick  control — Dr.  Sidgwick
had  died  a  few  months  earlier — made  its  appearance
for  the  first  time  at  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Thompson  in
England,  and  at  one  with  Miss  Rawson  in  the  South
of  France  ;  and  through  each,  messages  for  me  were
given  which,  though  not  in  themselves  evidential  or
specially  appropriate,  showed  similarity  in  the  choice
of  a  by  no  means  obvious  topic.  This  correspondence,
which  was  not  discovered  till  some  three  years  later,
because  the  records  of  what  passed  at  the  sittings  of  the
two  ladies  were  not  compared,  is  described,  together
with  some  others  of  about  the  same  date,  in  Mr.
Piddington's  paper  on  Mrs.  Thompson  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XVIII.  (p.  295).

Since  this  early  specimen  there  has  been,  as  we  all
know,  a  great development in cross -correspondences,  and


IjXXTV.] Different  Types  of  Evidence  for  Survival.  255

they  have  been  described  and  commented  on  in  many
papers  in  the  Proceedings.  Before  very  long  it  was
noticed — Miss  Johnson  was  the  first  to  observe  it  I
think — that  some  of  them  were  not  of  the  simple  type
of  the  sample  just  given,  but  of  what  has  been  called
a  complementary  type — one  part  or  one  aspect  of  an
idea  being  given  by  one  automatist,  and  the  idea
completed  or  another  aspect  of  it  given  by  another  auto-
matist, and  this  in  such  a  way  as  to  indicate  a  purposive
distribution  of  the  parts,  or  in  other  words  intelligent
design.  The  evidence  for  design  in  any  particular  case
must  be  judged  by  the  student.  I  think  in  some  of  the
published  cases  it  is  strong.  Granted  design  we  have
to  seek  the  designer.  It  cannot  be  the  supraliminal
intelligence  of  either  automatist  since  ex  hypothesi  neither
of  them  is  aware  of  the  design  till  it  is  completed.
Nor,  for  a  similar  reason,  can  it  be  attributed  to  some
other  living  person  since,  so  far  as  can  be  ascertained,
no  other  living  person  had  any  knowledge  of  what  was
going  on.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  suppose  that  the
design  is  an  elaborate  plot  of  the  subliminal  intelligence
of  either  or  both  automat ists  acting  independently  and
without  any  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  supraliminal
consciousness  ;  and  the  only  remaining  hypothesis  seems
to  be  that  the  designer  is  an  external  intelligence  not
in  the  body.  It  is  clear,  as  has  often  been  said  before,
that  we  have  here  in  any  case  what  may  more  and
more  prove  a  very  fruitful  line  of  experiment.  The
scripts  claim  that  the  designers  are  persons — at  first
especially  Myers  and  Gurney — who  when  in  the  body
were  interested  in  us  and  in  the  work  we  are  doing,
and  who  are  now  co-operating  with  us  from  the  other
side  of  the  veil.

This  claim  is  supported  by  the  second  kind  of  evi-
dence which  I  mentioned  as  having  been  obtained  of
late  years — namely  scripts  exhibiting  literary  knowledge
or  propounding  literary  puzzles  beyond  the  range  of
what  the  automatist  could  produce,  but  appropriate
to  the  alleged  communicator.  Of  this  kind  of  evidence
there  has been  a  good  deal  ; sometimes combined  with


256


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


cross-correspondences  and  sometimes  not.  "  The  Ear  of
Dionysius  case  "  is  I  think  the  most  striking.

I  must  admit  that  the  general  effect  of  the  evidence
on  my  own  mind  is  that  there  is  co-operation  with  us
by  friends  and  former  fellow-workers  no  longer  in  the
body.  But  whether  this  is  true  or  not,  the  increase
in  the  amount  of  evidence  that  has  to  be  considered
is  undoubted  ;  and  I  want  to  call  attention  to  the
fact  that  this  increase  has  been  accompanied  and  greatly
helped  by  a  notable  increase  since  1900  in  co-operation
on  this  side — especially  in  the  number  of  persons  with
automatic  powers  who  have  been  themselves  interested
in  the  phenomena  and  able  and  willing  to  keep  full
records,  to  place  their  scripts  at  once  in  the  charge  of
some  responsible  person,  and  in  every  way  to  aid  in  the
investigation.  I  may  briefly  recall  these  workers  to  your
minds.  We  have  had  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  developed  her
power  of  automatic  writing  in  the  early  months  of  1901,
and  continued  until  her  death  last  year  ;  and  Miss
Verrall  (Mrs.  Salter)  who  began  writing  occasionally
under  her  mother's  influence  in  1903  and  took  it  up
more  regularly  in  1906.  Mrs.  Holland,  who  had  previously
written  automatically  from  time  to  time,  put  herself
in  communication  with  Mss  Johnson  in  1903  after
reading  Mi'.  Myers'  book  Human  Personality  and  its
Survival  of  Bodily  Death,  and  continued  for  many  years
to  send  her  script  to  her.  Miss  Johnson  has  published
three  interesting  reports  on  it  in  our  Proceedings.
The  first  of  these,  immediately  after  its  publication
in  1908,  was  read  by  the  lady  we  call  Miss  Mac.
She  and  her  brother  had  already  tried  for  and
obtained  automatic  writing  with  a  planchette  after  read-
ing Human  Personality,  but  the  reading  of  Miss  Johnson's
paper  on  Mrs.  Holland  seems  to  have  brought  them
into  psychical  relation  with  the  S.P.R.  group  of  investi-
gators to  whom  they  weie  complete  strangers.  They
developed  a  Sidgwick  control,  and  their  script  told  them
to  send  what  they  had  written  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  When
they  did  so  interesting  cross-correspondences  were  found.
Mrs.  Willett,  who  knew  a  little  about  the  work  of  the


lxxiv.] Different  Types  of  Evidence  for  Survival.  257

Society,  also  began  to  write  automatically  towards  the
end  of  1908,  and  communicated  on  the  subject  with  Mrs.
Verrall,  then  a  stranger  to  her  ;  and  since  then  Mrs.
King  and  Mrs.  Wilson  have  been  added  to  the  workers
and  have  contributed  to  cross -correspondence  evidence.
An  interesting  point  about  these  two  last  coadjutors  is
that  their  automatism  is  different  in  type  from  that  of
the  others.  This  is  especially  true  of  Mrs.  Wilson,  one
of  our  most  promising  workers,  as  most  of  her  impressions
come  to  her  in  the  form  of  pictures  or  scenes  of  which
she  afterwards  writes  down  the  description.

Some  results  with  all  these  ladies  have  been  laid  before
the  Society,  but  naturally  there  is  a  good  deal  which
is  of  too  private  a  nature  for  publication.  This  is  all
the  more  so  because  in  the  case  of  some  of  them  emotional
considerations  and  a  desire  to  get  into  communication
with  particular  deceased  individuals,  have  been  motives
stimulating  to  the  effort  to  write  automatically.  Intellec-
tual interest  and  the  wish  to  help  in  the  investigation
appear,  however,  in  most  cases  to  have  been  the  grounds
for  the  trouble  taken.

To  the  seven  ladies  just  named  we  must  add,  as  also
concerned  with  cross-correspondences,  Mrs.  Forbes,  Mrs.
Thompson  and  Mrs.  Piper,  who  were  working  before
1900  ;  and  three  other  sensitives — Miss  Rawson,  already
mentioned,  Mrs.  Frith  and  Mrs.  Home,  who  have  come
into  touch  at  one  or  two  points,  but  who,  though  they
have  produced  a  good  deal  of  automatic  writing  or  trance-
speaking,  have  not  in  the  main  worked  with  us  nor,
so  far  as  our  own  investigations  are  concerned,  furnished
much  of  evidential  value.

The  valuable  results  obtained  naturally  make  all  who
are  interested  in  the  advance  of  knowledge  in  this  diffi-
cult region  anxious  for  more  workers.  The  power  of
writing  automatically  is  not  very  rare,  and  in  many
cases  it  may  be  developed  by  practice  and  perseverance.
Apparently,  however,  only  a  small  proportion  of  auto-
matists  get  results  showing  evidence  of  any  supernormal
acquisition  of  knowledge.  The  content  of  most  automatic
script, like  that  of  most  dreams, seems  to  originate  in


258


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part.


the  subliminal  strata  of  consciousness,  working  only
on  ideas  normally  acquired  through  the  senses.  Much
that  is  produced  even  by  those  who,  from  our  point
of  view,  are  the  best  automatists,  is  apparently  of  this
kind.  Communications  giving  evidence  of  supernormal
origin  must  be  sought  for  like  grains  of  gold  among
sand,  and  even  with  the  same  automatist  the  gold
may  sometimes  predominate  and  sometimes  the  sand,,
or  sometimes  there  may  be  no  gold  at  all.  But
all  material  where  there  is  hope  of  finding  gold  must
be  examined,  for  we  have  much  to  learn.  Before  we
can  convince  the  world  we  not  only  want  more  cases
giving  evidence  of  the  fact  of  personal  survival,  but
we  want  them  solidly  based  on  more  knowledge  of  the
subliminal  self  and  the  way  it  works,  more  knowledge
of  the  conditions  and  process  of  telepathy,  more  under-
standing of  the  limitations  under  which  communication
with  the  dead  occurs.  All  this  will  no  doubt  require
prolonged  and  careful  research  and  much  patience.

Asking  for  automatists  brings  me  to  an  aspect  of
the  matter  which  we  know  sometimes  troubles  people.
They  want  to  know  whether  the  practice  of  automatic
writing  is  harmful.  I  think  all  the  automatists  I  have
named — and  I  have  named  twelve — -besides  Mrs.  Piper,
who  differed  fiom  the  others  in  being  a  professional
medium — would  say  it  was  not  harmful.  But  of  course
the  faculty  should  be  exercised  with  due  caution  and
common-sense.  In  the  first  place  its  exercise  is,  to  some
people  at  least,  fatiguing,  and  should  therefore  not  be
continued  too  long  at  a  time  or  attempted  too  frequently.
In  the  second  place  absorption  in  communications  to
the  exclusion  of  other  interests  is  not  likely  to  be  whole-
some. Thirdly,  any  tendency  for  the  subliminal  to  get
the  upper  hand  should  be  carefully  checked.  If  an
automatist  found  the  impulse  to  write  beginning  to  be
irresistible,  or  if  the  content  of  the  script  tended  to  be
habitually  such  as  his  or  her  normal  judgment  dis-
approved of,  I  should  certainly  advise  desisting  altogether
from  exercising  the  faculty.  No  one  ought  to  let  his
reason  abdicate in  favour  of the untrustworthy  and  ill-


lxxiv.] Different  Types  of  Evidence  for  Survival.  259*

regulated  mental  stratum  that  the  subliminal  left  to  itself
is  liable  to  be.

For  similar  reasons  no  one  should  treat  his  own
automatic  writing,  and  still  less  communications  through
other  mediums,  whether  private  or  professional,  as  oracles.
Perhaps  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  this  to  members
of  our  Society.  But  there  are  people  who  seem  too
ready  to  accept  mediumistic  utterances  uncritically  at
their  face  value,  and  to  regard  them  as  revelations  from
spirits  with  better  means  of  judging  than  themselves.
Assuming,  however,  that  through  a  medium,  or  through
our  own  script,  we  are  really  in  touch  with  the  supposed
communicator,  we  have  no  guarantee  that  the  communi-
cation reaches  us  as  he  desired  to  send  it.  Oui  evidence,,
indeed,  goes  to  show  that  it  is  often,  if  not  always,
much  adulterated  by  the  automatist's  own  mind.

This  want  of  clearness  and  purity  in  the  stream  of
communication  makes  attempts  at  intimate  converse
with  the  dead  doubtful  and  difficult,  and  to  some  people
painful  ;  and  I  think  there  are  many  who  would  get
more  comfort  from  dwelling  on  the  hope  that  those  who
have  loved  us  and  gone  are  in  touch  with  us  subliminally,
even  when  we  are  not  consciously  aware  of  it.  This
hope,  it  will  be  observed,  is  greatly  justified  and  sup-
ported by  scientific  evidence  that  the  soul  survives  bodily
death  and  can,  under  whatever  limited  conditions,  at
times  communicate  with  the  living.


260


Miss  F.  Melian  Stawell.


[part


II.

THE  EAR  OF  DIONYSIUS : A  DISCUSSION  OF
THE  EVIDENCE.

A  Paper  Read  to  the  Society  at  a  Private  Meeting

on  April  26,  1917.

By  Miss  F.  Melian  Stawell.

To  my  mind  the  most  striking  single  piece  of  evidence
pointing  towards  survival  that  has  appeared  lately  in  our
records  is  that  furnished  by  the  cluster  of  scripts  comiected
with  the  "  Ear  of  Dionysius,"  and  it  is  to  these  that  I
wish  to  devote  my  paper.  I  choose  them  instead  of  the
evidence  in  "  Raymond,"  partly  because  they  are  more
within  my  compass,  and  partly  because  it  seems  to  me
that  the  possibility  of  chance-coincidence  is  less  great  here
than  in  "Raymond."  The  most  remarkable  incident  in
"  Raymond  "  is  that  of  the  photograph,  unknown  to  the
medium  or  the  sitters,  but  in  which  the  general  features  of
the  background  and  the  relation  of  two  figures — one
leaning  on  the  other — were  correctly  described.  Can  we
say  confidently  that  this  coincidence,  remarkable  as  it  is,
is  yet  beyond  the  reach  of  chance  ?  I  could  not  myself,
though  no  doubt  answers  will  vary.  For  it  is  extremely
difficult  to  collect  enough  evidence  about  chance-coincidence.
All  I  can  say  is  that  I  have  been  impressed  by  the
amount  of  chance-coincidence  that  has  come  under  my
own  observation.  For  instance,  the  experiment  of  artificial
scripts  made  by  the  S.P.R.  in  1911  showed,  I  thought,  a
surprising  amount  of  cross-correspondence,  entirely  due  to
chance.  You  may  remember  that  six  persons,  none  of
whom  possessed  any  supernormal  powers,  were  asked,  each
on  six  several  occasions,  to  open  at  random  some  book


lxxiv.] The  Ear  of  Dionysius :  Discussion  of  Evidence.  261

of  English  literature,  choose  a  passage,  and  write
down  the  thoughts  suggested.  In  comparing  the  thirty-six
writings,  at  least  one  distinct  "  cross  correspondence,"  that
on  "Moonlight,"  was  to  be  observed.  I  myself,  who  happened
to  be  one  of  the  experimenters,  found  to  my  astonishment
that  the  casual  script  of  another  possessed  for  me  personally
the  greatest  significance.  In  fact  so  astonished  was  I  that
I  thought  some  telepathic  agency  must  be  at  work.  The
phrases  in  this  script,  which  to  an  ordinary  reader  had  no
obvious  connection,  could  all  be  interpreted,  and  very  easily,
as  connected  with  a  friend  of  mine  who  had  lately  died.
"Moonlight"  also  had  a  special  significance  for  me  in
the  same  connection.  Miss  Johnson  then  pointed  out  that
to  test  the  matter  we  should  ask  the  writer,  another  lady,
if  she  could  remember  how  the  phrases  came  into  her  mind,
and  that  we  should  also  make  experiments  to  see  if  there
was,  in  fact,  the  possibility  of  telepathy  between  us.  What
was  the  result  ?  No  thought-transference  took  place  in
our  experiments,  and  the  writer  had  a  complete  and  satisfac-
tory explanation  of  how  the  phrases,  so  significant  to  me,
had  come  into  her  own  script,  carrying  for  her  quite  other
associations  than  they  did  for  myself.

Again,  I  have  noticed  for  the  last  few  years  an  absurd
frequency  with  which  either  the  number  11  or  a  multiple  of
it  is  associated  with  some  date,  place,  or  topic,  in  which  I
am  interested,  so  much  so  that  it  would  be  easy  to  make
out  a  case  for  a  mysterious  connection  between  myself  and
the  number  11.

I  mention  this  topic  of  chance,  partly  to  urge  the  need
for  further  investigation  and  partly  because  of  its  bearing
on  the  "  Ear  of  Dionysius."  It  is  obvious,  I  think,  that
all  the  statements  in  the  scripts  we  have  to  consider  cannot
be  due  to  chance,  though  some  of  them  may  be.

Mr.  Balfour  has  stated  and  analysed  the  incident  in  a
masterly  fashion.  His  argument  that  the  communicator
was  really  Dr.  Verrall's  discarnate  mind  is  certainly  extremely
cogent.  But  I  do  not  feel  it  entirely  convincing.  There  is  a
difficulty,  and,  apart  from  this,  another  hypothesis  is  possible.
Of  course,  if  there  were  no  general  reason  to  doubt  survival
after  death  there  would  be  less  reason  to  trouble  about  another

R


262  Miss  F.  Melian  Stawell.  [part

hypothesis.  But  there  is  plenty  of  reason  for  doubt,  because
of  all  the  negative  evidence  that  exists,  some  of  it  collected
by  the  S.P.R.  itself,  e.g.  the  failure  of  test-questions,  or  the
inability,  shown  on  more  than  one  occasion,  to  state  the
contents  of  a  sealed  envelope  written  before  the  communi-
cator's death.

The  positive  evidence,  however,  furnished  by  the  "  Ear
of  Dionysius  "  seems,  as  I  said,  very  considerable,  and  may
be  summarised  thus,  though  the  summary  cannot  do  justice
to  its  intricacy  and  fullness.  In  two  scripts  of  Mrs.  Willett's,
herself  no  classical  scholar,  there  appeared  a  number  of  classical
allusions,  some  of  them  recondite,  and  all  said  to  be  connected
with  the  "Ear  of  Dionysius"  (a  whispering-gallery  constructed
by  the  tyrant  and  opening  on  the  stone-quarries  of  Syracuse
which  were  used  as  a  prison).  Further,  the  allusions  were
given  in  such  a  way  that  their  connection  was  a  regular
puzzle,  even  to  trained  scholars,  e.g.  the  "  One  Ear  "  (of
Dionysius)  was,  the  script  indicated,  to  be  connected  with  the
"  One  Eye,"  evidently  the  one  eye  of  the  Cyclops  Poly-
phemus. But  how  ?  At  last,  in  a  later  sitting,  the  clue
was  suddenly  revealed  by  the  half-word  "  Philox,"  indi-
cating the  name  of  Philoxenus,  a  Greek  poet,  closely
associated  with  Dionysius,  whom  he  satirised  as  Poly-
phemus. The  story  of  Philoxenus,  according  to  one  version,,
a  somewhat  peculiar  one,  made  all  the  allusions  and
connections  perfectly  clear.  The  communicator  purported
to  be  Dr.  Verrall,  aided  by  his  friend  Prof.  Butcher,  and  the
style  in  which  the  references  were  given  strongly  resembled
his.  Finally,  after  all  the  scripts  were  written,  it  was
discovered  that  the  story  of  Philoxenus  in  the  appropriate
version  happened  to  be  told  with  some  detail  in  a  book,
Smyth's  Greek  Melic  Poets,  that  Dr.  Verrall  used  and  had
in  his  library.

I  said  there  was  a  difficulty  in  the  hypothesis  that
Dr.  Verrall  was  communicating.  It  is  this.  In  the  two
leading  scripts  (Feb.  28,  Mar.  2,  1914,  Scripts  B  and  C)r
the  communicator  said  that  Mrs.  Verrall  was  to  hear
nothing  of  the  matter,  and  that  there  was  much  more  to
be  got  through.  Yet,  abruptly,  immediately  after  this,  all
communication  on  the  topic  ceased,  so  far  as  Mrs.  Willett


lxxiv.]  The  Ear  of  Dionysius :  Discussion  of  Evidence.  263

was  concerned,  for  a  whole  year  and  a  half,  until  suddenly,
at  a  sitting  where  Mrs.  Verrall  herself  was  present,  the  subject
was  re-opened,  the  clue  given,  and  great  surprise  expressed
that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  received  no  message  on  the  matter.
This  implies  a  very  strange  lapse  of  memory  on  the  part
of  the  communicator,  so  strange  that  one  is  forced  to  ask,
Can  it  be  explained  satisfactorily  on  the  hypothesis  that
there  really  was  a  deliberate  conscious  personality  controlling
the  communications  ? I  find  it  hard  to  think  so.

And  another  hypothesis  is  at  least  plausible.  We  may,  I
think,  rule  out  pretty  confidently  the  suggestion  that  Mrs.
Willett  herself  had  ever  known  the  whole  story  of  Philox-
enus  and  all  the  references  involved.  For  we  are  told  that
she  is  not  a  classical  scholar,  and  a  non-classical  reader
could  hardly  have  acquired  the  knowledge  necessary
without  deliberately  hunting  through  classical  books  for
the  purpose.  If  Mrs.  Willett  had  done  this,  she  could
scarcely  have  forgotten  it.  But  if  she  did  not  forget  it,
she  must  have  acted  in  bad  faith.  And  not  only  is  her
good  faith  vouched  for  by  our  investigators,  but  no  one
acting  in  bad  faith  would  have  left  the  communications
with  the  inconsequent  ending  I  have  described.  The
messages  could  so  easily  have  been  neatly  rounded  off
long  before  the  sitting  with  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  so  gained
greatly  in  impressiveness.  But  it  by  no  means  follows  that
Mrs.  Willett,  acting  in  perfect  good  faith,  did  not  have  a
fair  amount  of  relevant  knowledge  latent  in  her  mind
which  would  help  to  build  up  the  script.  It  is  plain  that
Mrs.  Willett's  conscious  mind  does  forget  very  easily.
When  asked  by  Mr.  Balfour  (27  May,  1916)  what  she  knew
about  the  "  Ear  of  Dionysius,"  she  said  she  had  heard  the
expression,  but  did  not  know  the  meaning  of  it.  Yet  only
two  years  before  she  had  written,  in  her  normal  conscious-
ness, script  containing  a  fairly  full  account  of  the  "  Ear,"
a  script  of  which  she  had  kept  an  annotated  copy  to  which,
as  Mr.  Balfour  tells  us,  she  could  refer  at  any  time
(p.  205).  I  feel,  therefore,  considerable  hesitation  in  thinking
that  she  had  really  never  known  that  Prof.  Butcher  had
written  on  Aristotle's  Poetics.  For  she  was  interested  in
Prof.  Butcher,  and  she  was  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Verrall.  She


264


Miss  F.  Melian  Stawell.


[part


must  have  had  many  opportunities  of  seeing  or  hearing
some  reference  to  his  most  important  work.  Nor  can  I
feel  sure  that  an  educated  woman  "  with  a  taste  for
poetry "  had  never  come  across  the  story  of  Ulysses
and  the  Cyclops  Polyphemus  ;  though  I  can  readily  believe
that  she  had  forgotten  the  name  Polyphemus  and  the
fact  of  Prof.  Butcher's  connection  with  the  Poetics,  the
knowledge  remaining  dormant  even  in  her  sub-conscious
mind  until  stimulated  by  some  outside  influence.

That  influence,  I  suggest,  was  the  sub-conscious  mind  of
Mrs.  Verrall.  It  does  seem  to  me  that  Mr.  Balfour  dismisses
this  possibility  far  too  lightly.  In  the  first  place,  I  think
it  not  only  possible,  but  probable,  that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  at
the  bottom  of  her  mind  all  the  classical  references  required.
It  is  true  she  thought  she  knew  nothing  about  Philoxenus
and  never  had  known.  But  so  did  I,  when  I  heard  Mr.
Balfour's  paper,  and  yet  I  must  have  known  something,  and
very  likely  all,  that  was  needed.  I  have  read  the  Poetics,  the
Politics,  and  Grote's  History,  and  they  all  refer  to  Philoxenus.
I  think  it  highly  probable  that  I  had  read  the  article  in
Lempriere's  Classical  Dictionary  that  gives  the  very  version  of
his  quarrel  with  Dionysius  mentioned  in  the  notes  to  the
Greek  Melic  Poets,  and  followed  in  the  script.  I  cannot
be  sure  but  this  is  my  reason.  There  are  a  very  con-
siderable number  of  allusions  to  Philoxenus,  conjectural
or  certain,  scattered  up  and  down  Greek  literature — how
many  the  non-classical  reader  may  judge  by  consulting
Smith's  Dictionary  of  Classical  Biography .  Three  of  these  occur
in  Aristophanes'  Frogs,  Clouds,  and  Plutus  (Frogs,  1506 ;
Clouds,  332  ;  Plutus,  290) .  I  have  read  all  three  plays
with  some  care,  and  it  is  the  usual  practice  of  a  student
in  such  cases  to  look  up  the  names  of  classical  authors
referred  to  in  the  text,  or  the  notes,  if  otherwise  unfamiliar.1

Now  I  cannot  doubt  that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  read  at
least  as  much  as  I  and  studied  as  carefully.  Further,
before  the  evidential  scripts  occurred,  there  was  a  good

1  Since  writing  the  above  I  see  that  in  Rogers'  edition  of  the  Plutus  (pub-
lished 1904)  the  relevant  version  of  the  Philoxenus  story  is  given  with  con-
siderable detail  in  the  notes,  ad  versum  290.  It  would  be  interesting  to
know  if  Mrs.  Verrall  had  seen  this  excellent  edition.


lxxiv.] The  Ear  of  Dionysius :  Discussion  of  Evidence.  265

deal  to  attract  her  attention  to  the  whole  topic  of  Diony-
sius and  his  prisoners,  Philoxenus  included.  On  26  Aug.,
1910,  before  Dr.  Verrall's  death,  Mrs.  Willett.  when  sitting
for  script  with  her,  dictated  the  phrase  "  Dionysius'  Ear —
the  lobe."  Mrs.  Verrall  did  not  understand  the  phrase
and  talked  it  over  with  her  husband,  who  twitted  her  with
her  ignorance  or  forgetfulness.  Now,  is  it  not  natural  to
suppose  that,  after  this,  she  looked  up  the  subject  or  got
Dr.  Verrall  to  tell  her  all  he  could  about  it  ?  Surely  any
classical  student  would  have  done  so  much.  And  then,
either  in  her  own  reading  or  in  the  course  of  conversation,
she  might  easily  have  come  upon  the  story  of  Philoxenus,
closely  connected  as  he  is  with  Dionysius.

Moreover,  the  whole  story,  as  we  have  said — including
one  express  reference  to  Aristotle  and  to  music,  Mousike
— a  word  expressly  dictated  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script — is
compactly  given  in  a  page  of  Prof.  Smyth's  Greek  Melic
Poets.  Dr.  Verrall  had  a  presentation  copy  of  this  work
and  thought  well  of  it.  It  is  certainly  not  far-fetched  to
suppose  that  Mrs.  Verrall  at  some  time  or  other  had  at
least  glanced  through  the  pages.  The  book  is  full  of
interesting  bits  of  information  very  useful  for  a  classical
teacher.1  If  Mrs.  Verrall  had  once  read  p.  461  of  this
handy  little  volume  she  would,  "with  the  rest  of  her  normal
classical  knowledge,  have  been,  at  one  time  or  other,  in
possession  of  all  the  facts  necessary  to  build  up  the  scheme
of  associated  ideas  that  seemed  so  complicated  to  an
outsider.

This  "odd  old  human  story  of  long  ago,"  as  the  Willett
script  calls  the  tale  of  Philoxenus,  is  just  the  kind  to  catch
an  imaginative  student's  imagination. Indeed  it  is  doubt-

1  It  contains,  by  the  way,  a  special  reference  to  the  Sicilian  worship  of
Artemis  and  her  connection  with  Arethusa  and  the  Alpheus  (p.  301 ).  "  Sicilian
Artemis,"  it  may  be  remembered,  appears  in  the  Willett  script  for  no  apparent
reason.

I  have  since  been  told  by  my  friend,  Miss  Matthaei  of  Newnham  College,
that  Smyth's  book  is  the  standard  edition  of  the  Greek  lyric  poets  now  in
use  at  Cambridge,  and  that  almost  every  classical  student  at  Newnham  has  a
copy  on  her  shelves,  no  other  edition  having  such  helpful  notes.  Miss
Matthaei  said  she  could  scarcely  imagine  that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  not  read  the
book.


266


Miss  F.  Melian  Stawell.


[part


less  just  the  kind  to  have  interested  and  amused  Dr.
Verrall  himself,  but  then,  if  so,  he  would  have  been  likely
to  mention  it  to  other  scholars,  especially  to  his  wife.  It
may  be  said  in  objection  that  it  would  be  very  strange
for  Mrs.  Verrall  to  have  known  this  story  and  then  for-
gotten it  so  completely.  But  I  cannot  agree.  I  forget  too
much  myself.  And  it  is  surely  at  least  equally  strange
that  the  "  Ear  of  Dionysius  "  should  have  conveyed  nothing
to  her  either.  That  is  much  better  known,  and  must,  I
should  think,  often  have  been  matter  of  her  conscious
knowledge.

I  can  see  no  real  difficulty,  therefore,  in  assuming  that
the  knowledge  required  may  have  been  latent  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  mind  and  that  her  subconscious  self  could  weave
the  associations  together,  much  as  it  might  in  a  fairly
coherent  dream.1  On  this  hypothesis  I  should  proceed  to
explain  what  happened  somewhat  as  follows.  Rapport
between  Mrs.  Willett  and  Mrs.  Verrall  on  the  subject  of
the  "  Ear  of  Dionysius  "  had  already  been  established
before  Dr.  Verrall's  death.  Afterwards,  10  Jan.,  1914,
there  appeared  a  fairly  long  piece  of  Willett  script  (script
A)  written  in  normal  consciousness  and  sending  messages
to  Mrs.  Verrall  about  the  Ear  of  Dionysius,  the  stone
quarries,  Sicily,  and  poetry.  All  the  allusions,  as  Mr.
Balfour  himself  points  out,  "  might  be  supposed  ...  to
have  been  at  one  time  or  other  within  the  normal  know-
ledge of  the  automatist."  But  further,  all  the  allusions  are
of  such  a  kind  that  they  would,  if  seen  by  Mrs.  Verrall —
and  they  were  both  seen  and  studied  by  her  (19  Jan.,
1914) — stimulate  any  latent  memories  she  might  have  about
Dionysius  and  Philoxenus.  I  assume  that  they  did  in  fact
so  stimulate  them,  just  enough  to  make  them  active,  but
subconsciously,  not  consciously.

Owing  to  this  activity,  about  five  weeks  later  (28  Feb.
2  Mar.,  1914),  when  Mrs.  Willett  sits  for  script  with
Mr.  Balfour  (scripts  B  and  C),  the  topics  in  question
leak through, in an obscure and fragmentary  fashion,

1 1  note  that  this  comparison  to  the  modus  operandi  of  our  minds  when
■dreaming  has  been  made  independently  by  Miss  May  Sinclair  in  an  acute
letter  printed  in  the  S.P.R.  Journal  (May-June,  1917).


Lxxrv.] The  Ear  of  Dionysius :  Discussion  of  Evidence.  267

from  Mrs.  Verrall's  mind  into  Mrs.  Willett's.  Here  they
find  congenial  soil,  for  Mrs.  Willett  herself  had  already
been  thinking  about  the  Ear  of  Dionysius,  Sicily,  poetry,
Dr.  Verrall,  Prof.  Butcher,  and  their  joint  interest  in
classical  literature,  (script  A,  10  Jan.,  1914,  and  compare
her  vision  of  Prof.  Butcher  and  his  classical  message  to
Verrall,  21  Jan.,  1911).

Unconscious  leakage  from  mind  to  mind  is  not  a  new
hypothesis.  We  have  good  evidence  for  it  {e.g.  the  leakage
of  the  idea  "  seven  "  from  Mr.  Piddington's  sealed  letter  :
the  leakage  of  the  passage  about  "  moly  "  in  the  "  one-
horse-dawn  "  experiment).

But,  it  may  be  said,  the  Willett  scripts  show  an  elabo-
rate design  in  the  way  the  facts  are  communicated.  Can
we  suppose  this  design  was  not  due  to  conscious  agency  ?
I  answer  by  another  question  :  Is  the  elaborate  design  of
a  kind  that  forces  us  to  assume  purpose  ?  There  is
certainly  what  might  fairly  be  called  an  elaborate  associa-
tion of  ideas,  and  this  is  reflected  in  the  scripts,  but  I  have
shown,  I  think,  that  this  association  might  have  been  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  subconscious  mind.  Of  design  in  communi-
cation the  evidence  is  much  less  clear.  Much  is  made  of
the  fact  that  the  allusions  are  given  in  a  scholar-like  form,
that  they  are  veiled  and  fragmentary,  and  that  the  clue
seems  purposely  withheld.  But  the  scholar-like  form  would
be  natural  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  we  know  that  telepathic
messages  do  often  come  through  in  a  veiled  and  frag-
mentary form.  They  did  when  Dr.  Verrall  made  his
famous  "  one-horse  dawn  "  experiment,  and  yet  the  veiling
was  no  part  of  his  plan.  And  if  the  clue  was  purposely
withheld,  why  was  it  given  in  the  end  to  the  very  person,
Mrs.  Verrall,  from  whom  it  ought  to  have  been  kept  till
all  was  complete  ?

I  suggest  therefore  that  the  effect  of  purposive  design
is  accidental,  due  to  the  chance  that  Mi's.  Verrall's
subconscious  mind,  owing  to  her  sight  of  Willett  script  A,
was  working  in  Jan. -Mar.,  1914,  on  the  Dionysius-Philox-
enus  cycle  of  ideas  and  that  Mrs.  Willett's  mind  could
at  first  receive  fragments  of  them,  but  only  fragments,  as
her  own  insistence  on  her  difficulty  in  catching  the  ideas


268  Miss  F.  Melian  Stawell.  [part

indicates.  I  suggest  also  that  she  wove  round  them  fancies
of  her  own,  e.g.  that  Mrs.  Verrall  was  not  to  be  told,  and
that  there  was  an  important  experiment  on  foot,  etc.
Then  Mrs.  Verrall's  mind,  I  assume,  drifted  away  from  the
subject,  and  nothing  further  appears  for  a  long  while
in  the  Willett  scripts.  But  when  Mrs.  Verrall  sits  for
script  with  Mrs.  Willett,  a  year  and  a  half  later,  the  con-
tact of  the  two  minds  happens  to  revive  subconsciously
the  dormant  memories  of  the  Dionysius-Philoxenus  story  and
this  time  it  emerges  in  a  form  that  is  practically  complete,
just  as  we  often  do  find  that  telepathic  impressions  are  much
more  clearly  received  when  the  communicator  is  in  the  room.
(It  would  be  of  great  interest,  by  the  way,  to  know  if  this
was  the  first  time  that  Mrs.  Verrall  sat  for  script  with  Mrs.
Willett  since  the  writing  of  the  evidential  scripts  B  and  C.)
Once  more,  I  suggest  that  Mrs.  Willett 's  subconscious  mind
wove  fancies  of  its  own,  but  this  time  fancies  that  do  not
tally  with  the  earlier  ones,  e.g.  they  now  assume  that  Mrs.
Verrall  ought  to  have  been  told.  Thus  we  have,  I  submit,,
a  hypothesis  with  certain  merits  of  its  own  to  put  against
the  hypothesis  of  Dr.  Verrall  communicating.  I  do  not
claim  it  as  more  plausible.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  there
are  other  reasons  to  doubt  survival  I  do  not  think  it  as
plausible.  Both  hypotheses  have  weak  points  :  one  involves
an  astonishing  lapse  of  memory  on  Dr.  Verrall's  part,
the  other  a  remarkable  extension  of  unconscious  leakage.

And  what  I  want  to  urge  now  is  the  imperative  need
both  for  further  observation  and  further  experiment  to
help  us  to  decide.  I  admit  that  I  cannot  conceive  any
one  experiment  as  decisive.  The  evidence,  from  the  nature
of  the  case,  cannot,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  ever  be  demon-
strative :  it  can  only  be  cumulative.  We  have  no
demonstrative  evidence  even  of  the  existence  of  individual
incarnate  minds  other  than  our  own.  But  that  is  all  the
more  reason  for  making  as  many  experiments  as  possible.
And  with  some  hesitation,  for  I  have  no  claim  whatever  to
speak  as  an  investigator,  I  would  ask  first  if  more  test-
questions  and  more  exploratory  questions  could  not  be  put
to  the  automatists.  For  instance,  has  any  attempt  been
made to find out from the automatist in trance  any


lxxiv.] The  Ear  of  Dionysius :  Discussion  of  Evidence.  269

explanation  of  that  strange  lapse  of  memory  ?  If  so,  with
what  result  ?  Test-questions  were  put,  I  believe,  through
Mrs.  Piper  to  the  supposed  communicator  Myers.  Could
not  similar  questions  be  put  through  Mrs.  Willett  to
Verrall  ?  If  they  have  been  put,  what  has  been  the
result  ?  And  further,  I  would  urge  that  every  possible
opportunity  should  be  taken  to  repeat  the  experiment  of
sealed  letters.  It  is  true,  of  course,  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick
says,  that  these  experiments  are  not  crucial.  My  own  paper
indicates  that  the  contents  might  leak  from  one  mind  to
the  other  while  the  writer  was  still  alive.  But  if  a  large
number  were  written,  if,  in  a  large  proportion  of  cases,
the  contents  were  not  disclosed  till  after  death  and  then
were  disclosed,  should  we  not  all  feel,  in  spite  of  loopholes
for  doubt,  that  the  positive  evidence  had  gained  enormously  ?
Failure  in  the  experiment  would,  of  course,  add  a  certain
amount  of  weight  to  the  negative  side.  But  that  seems
to  me  exactly  the  reason  for  making  it.  If  the  evidence
must  be  cumulative,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  it  must,
we  cannot  test  its  weight  unless  we  take  full  account  of
negative  as  well  as  positive  results.

Note.  Reading  Mr.  Balfour's  most  courteous  and  interesting
answer  to  my  paper,  I  notice  that, — entirely  through  my  own
looseness  of  phrasing, — I  may  have  given  the  impression
that  I  doubt  survival  after  death.  On  the  contrary,  I  believe
in  survival ;  what  I  doubt  is  the  possibility  of  direct  purposeful
communication  with  minds  still  incarnate.  I  ought  to  have
made  this  clear  and  I  wish  to  do  so  now,  since  all  these
matters  are  important,  although  this  special  point  does  not
affect  the  actual  discussion  between  Mr.  Balfour  and  myself.


.270


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[rART


in.

THE  EAR OF DIONYSIUS: A  REPLY.

By  the  Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.

By  the  courtesy  of  the  Editor  of  the  Proceedings  I  have
been  allowed  to  see  the  foregoing  paper  by  Miss  Stawell
in  manuscript,  and  invited  to  comment  upon  it.  I  accept
the  invitation  all  the  more  readily  inasmuch  as  I  was
unfortunately  prevented  by  illness  from  being  present  at
the  meeting  at  which  the  paper  was  read.

Miss  Stawell's  criticism  of  the  argument  for  survival  put
forward  in  "  The  Ear  of  Dionysius  "  is  of  that  serious  and
thoughtful  kind  that  helps  to  throw  light  upon  a  problem
even  where  one  cannot  agree  with  it.  The  alternative
hypothesis  which  she  suggests  is  not  one  that  commends
itself  to  my  judgement.  But  it  touches  upon  points  of
real  interest,  and  the  care  and  acumen  with  which  she
has  handled  the  subject  deserve  respectful  consideration.

The  point  of  view  from  which  Miss  Stawell  starts  is  not
quite  the  same  as  that  which  I  took  up  in  my  paper.
Let  me  quote  her  own  words  :  "  [Mr.  Balfour's]  argument
that  the  communicator  was  really  Dr.  Verrall's  discarnate
mind  is  certainly  extremely  cogent.  But  I  do  not  feel  it
entirely  convincing.  There  is  a  difficulty,  and  apart  from
this  another  hypothesis  is  possible.  Of  course,  if  there
were  no  general  reason  to  doubt  survival  after  death,  then
there  would  be  less  reason  to  trouble  about  another  hypo-
thesis. But  there  is  plenty  of  reason  for  doubt  because  of
all  the  negative  evidence  that  exists,  some  of  it  collected  by
the  S.P.R.  itself,  e.g.  the  failure  of  test-questions,  or  the
inability,  shown  on  more  than  one  occasion,  to  state  the  con-
tents of  a  sealed  envelope  written  before  the  communicator's
death."

Again,  after  saving  her  own  alternative  explanation,  Miss


ixxrv.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius  :  A  Reply.


271


Stawell  sums  up  the  case  as  follows  :  "  We  have,  I  submit,
a,  hypothesis  with  certain  merits  of  its  own  to  put  against
the  hypothesis  of  Dr.  Verrall  communicating.  I  do  not  claim
it  as  more  plausible.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  there  is  other
reason  to  doubt  survival,  I  do  not  think  it  as  plausible.  Both
hypotheses  have  weak  points  :  one  involves  an  astonishing
lapse  of  memory  on  Dr.  Verrall's  part,  the  other  a  remark-
able extension  of  unconscious  leakage."

It  is  evident  from  these  passages  that  Miss  Stawell
avowedly  starts  from  the  assumption  that  survival  is  ante-
cedently improbable  on  general  grounds,  that  is  to  say,  on
grounds  independent  of  any  considerations  that  are  to  be
drawn  from  the  facts  of  the  particular  case  under  review.
Were  it  not  for  these  external  grounds  of  objection  she  would
prefer  my  explanation  to  her  own.

No  doubt  the  attitude  of  any  of  us  towards  this  or  that
suggested  explanation  of  a  particular  case  must  inevitably
depend  on  the  presuppositions  or  predispositions  which  we
bring  to  the  study  of  it.  Those  who  disbelieve  in  the  possi-
bility of  survival  will  prefer  any  explanation  to  one  that
rests  on  survival.  Those  who  disbelieve  in  the  possibility
of  telepathy — and  they  are  still  probably  the  majority  among
scientific  men — will  be  equally  emphatic  in  also  rejecting
the  explanation  offered  by  Miss  Stawell.  On  the  other  hand,
those  who  on  general  grounds  have  already  come  to  regard
survival  as  probable  will  be  prepossessed  in  favour  of  spirit
communication  as  against  elaborate  and  complicated  hypo-
theses of  subliminal  agency.

In  these  circumstances  it  seems  to  me  that  in  a  paper  pro-
fessing to  deal  with  only  a  single  case  of  what  purports  to
be  spirit  communication,  the  proper  course  is  to  start  from
the  assumption  that  survival  and  spirit  communication  are
open  questions  ;  and  this  is  what  I  tried  to  do.  Once  we
begin  to  weight  the  scales,  as  Miss  Stawell  has  done,  with
considerations  of  a  general  character,  it  is  difficult  to  see
how  there  can  be  any  logical  halting  place  short  of  a
discussion  extending  beyond  the  particular  case  to  all
the  pros  and  cons  by  which  our  final  conclusions  will  be
determined.  At  that  rate  a  paper  would  quickly  swell  to
a  volume.


272


The  Right  Han.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[PART


An  obvious  corollary  from  what  has  just  been  said  is
that  no  single  case  should  be  treated  as  crucial  and
decisive.  Here  I  am  entirely  at  one  with  Miss  Stawell,
and  I  may  add  with  all  serious  students  of  the  subject.
The  evidence  must  be  cumulative.  In  the  end,  the  hypo-
thesis which  offers  the  simplest  explanation  of  all  the
observed  facts  bearing  on  the  question  at  issue  will  doubt-
less become  generally  accepted.  But  we  are  far  from  having
reached  that  end  as  yet.  I  do  not  claim  for  the  "  Dionysius
Case  "  more  than  that  it  is  an  important  contribution  to  the
evidence,  and  that  it  tells  strongly  in  favour  of  survival  and
of  the  actuality  of  communication  from  "the  other  side."
Miss  Stawell  herself,  it  appears,  is  inclined  towards  a  similar
view,  though  much  more  doubtingly  and  waveringly.

This  brings  me  to  the  main  substance  of  her  paper.  Miss
Stawell  finds  in  the  facts  of  the  case  as  narrated  a  difficulty
which  militates  against  the  supposition  that  the  communi-
cations really  proceed  from  Dr.  Verrall.  Further,  she  offers
an  alternative  explanation  which,  even  if  less  plausible  on
the  whole,  and  considered  by  itself,  than  that  which  I  have
advocated,  is  nevertheless  regarded  by  her  as  sufficiently
plausible  to  come  into  serious  competition  with  it.

Miss  Stawell  states  her  "  difficulty  "  thus  :  "  In  the  two
leading  scripts  (Feb.  28,  Mar.  2,  1914,  Scripts  B  and  C)  the
communicator  said  that  Mrs.  Verrall  was  to  hear  nothing
of  the  matter,  and  that  there  was  much  more  to  be  got  through.
Yet,  abruptly,  after  this  all  communication  on  the  topic
ceased,  so  far  as  Mrs.  Willett  was  concerned,  for  a  year  and  a
half,  until  suddenly  at  a  sitting  where  Mrs.  Verrall  herself
was  present,  the  subject  was  re-opened,  the  clue  given,  and
great  surprise  expressed  that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  received  no
message  on  the  matter.  This  implies  a  strange  lapse  of
memory  on  the  part  of  the  communicator,  so  strange  that
one  is  forced  to  ask,  Can  it  be  explained  satisfactorily  on
the  hypothesis  that  there  was  a  deliberate  conscious  person-
ality controlling  the  communications  ?  I  find  it  hard  to
think  so."

That  the  surprise  expressed  in  the  later  scripts  is  incon-
sistent with  the  instructions  given  in  the  earlier  ones  is  clear  ;
and  undoubtedly  the  most  natural  account  to  be  given  of  this


lxxiv.]  The  Ear  of  Dionysius  :  A  Reply.


273


inconsistency  is  to  ascribe  it,  as  I  have  done  in  my  paper,
to  a  lapse  of  memory  on  the  part  of  the  communicators.  Miss
Stawell's  alternative  hypothesis  explains  the  inconsistency  by
arbitrarily  transferring  the  responsibility  for  it  to  the  auto-
mat ist  herself.  On  this  point  let  me  note  that  the  incon-
sistency requires  to  be  not  merely  explained  but  explained
away,  if  the  incident  is  to  lose  the  highly  exceptional  and
perhaps  unprecedented  character  which  I  assigned  to  it.
What  is  so  rare  is  that  scripts  written  by  the  same  automat  ist
should  contain  statements  startlingly  at  variance  with  each
other.  The  question  whether  the  true  origin  of  the  state-
ments is  external  or  subliminal  is  from  this  point  of  view
irrelevant.  It  is  what  may  be  called  in  a  non-committal
phrase  "  the  script  memory  "  which  in  our  experience  is
so  seldom  found  to  be  seriously  at  fault.

When  I  treated  the  inconsistency  in  the  scripts  as  due  to
forgetfulness  on  the  part  of  the  communicators  and  added
that  I  had  no  explanation  to  offer,  I  meant  that  I  had  no
explanation  to  offer  which  seemed  to  me  preferable  to  the
assumption  that  a  lapse  of  memory  had  taken  place.  But
I  must  candidly  own  that  when  I  wrote  my  paper  I  attached
no  particular  significance  to  the  incident,  though  I  noted
it  as  being  very  unusual.  The  use  made  of  it  by  Miss  Stawell
was  entirely  unforeseen  by  me.  I  still  think  that  she  has
greatly  overrated  her  "  difficulty,"  and  that  such  a  lapse
of  memory  after  a  year  and  a  half,  during  which  the  subject
was  dropped  so  far  as  communications  through  Mrs.  Willett
were  concerned,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  control  of  the
communications  by  a  "  deliberate  conscious  personality."
But  for  those  who  attach  more  importance  to  her  objection
than  I  do,  I  venture  to  suggest  an  explanation  of  this  dis-
crepancy in  the  scripts  which  I  think  well  within  the  bounds
of  possibility,  though  I  refrained  from  offering  it  in  my
paper.

Let  us  see  just  how  the  case  stands.  Script  B  tells  us  that
Mrs.  Verrall  is  to  hear  nothing  of  the  matter  at  present.

Script  C  says  there  is  much  more  to  follow,  and  that  until
the  effort  is  completed  the  portions  as  they  come  are  not
to  be  seen  by  any  other  auto  mat  ist.

Script  D,  returning  to  the  subject  a  year  and  a  half  later,


274


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


asks  if  the  Satire  has  been  identified,  and  finding  Mrs.  Verrall
unable  to  give  a  reply,  expresses  surprise  that  the  messages
concerning  it  and  references  to  a  Cave  have  not  been  passed
on  to  her.

Finally,  in  Script  E,  a  fortnight  later,  Gurney,  upon  being
informed  that  all  the  classical  allusions  are  now  understood
by  the  investigators,  exclaims  "  Good — At  last  !  "

In  the  long  interval  between  C  and  D  a  complete  change
has  taken  place  in  the  attitude  of  the  communicators.  Can
anything  have  occurred  during  this  period  to  account  for  the
change  ?

It  is  certain  that  the  expectation  held  out  in  C  of  further
contributions  to  the  problem  was  not  fulfilled  in  any  scripts
produced  by  Mrs.  Willett  between  the  dates  of  C  and  D.  Of
these  there  were  about  a  dozen  altogether.  They  dealt
almost  exclusively  with  a  single  subject  of  a  private  nature
which  had  no  connection  whatever  with  the  Dionysius  case,,
nor  with  either  of  the  two  principal  communicators  concerned
in  it.  It  does  not,  however,  follow  from  this  that  the  Diony-
sius  topic  had  been  wholly  lost  sight  of  by  the  group  on  the
other  side.  The  statements  in  B  and  C  do  indeed  strongly
suggest,  if  they  do  not  directly  assert,  that  a  return  to  it
would  shortly  be  made  in  subsequent  Willett  scripts.  But
in  C  there  is  also  something  very  like  an  intimation  that
attempts  would  be  made  to  produce  cross-correspondences
on  the  subject  in  the  scripts  of  other  automatists.  That
at  all  events  is  the  meaning  I  attached  at  the  time  to  the
instruction  that  "  until  the  effort  is  completed  the  portions
as  they  come  are  not  to  be  seen  by  any  other  automatist  "  ;.
so  much  so  that  from  then  onwards  I  began  to  look  out  very
carefully  for  any  signs  of  such  cross-correspondences.

The  suggestion  I  have  to  make  is  this.  For  some  undis-
closed reason  the  intention  to  send  additional  matter  on
the  Dionysius  topic  through  Mrs.  Willett  was  not  carried
out.  Possibly  Gurney,  who  appears  to  take  chief  charge
of  arrangements  on  the  other  side,  was  unwilling  to  allow
the  important  series  of  scripts,  occupied  with  a  totally
different  subject,  that  began  shortly  after  the  date  of
Script  C,  to  be  interrupted.  In  the  meantime  attempts
were  made  to  refer  to  the  Dionysius  case  elsewhere.  There


Lxxrv.]  The  Ear  of  Dionysius  :  A  Reply.


275


is  good  ground  for  believing  that  these  attempts  met  with
at  least  a  partial  measure  of  success  in  the  scripts  of
Mrs.  King.  (See  Appendix  to  my  original  paper,  Proc.
S.P.B.,  Vol.  XXIX.,  p.  239.)  It  is  quite  possible  that
the  communicators  may  have  thought  that  they  had
succeeded  in  "  getting  through  "  more  than  they  actually
had.  Uncertainty  as  to  what  has  and  what  has  not  been
effectively  transmitted  and  duly  recorded  by  automatists
is  frequently  admitted  in  the  scripts,  and  perhaps  rather
specially  so  in  Mrs.  King's  script.  As  time  passed  the  group
on  the  other  side  may  have  thought  that  sufficient  lights
had  been  given,  and  have  assumed  that  the  investigators
had  discovered  the  solution  of  the  puzzle.  Had  we  really
discovered  it  the  instructions  that  Mrs.  Verrall  "is  to  hear
nothing  of  this  at  present  "  and  that  "  until  the  effort  is  com-
pleted the  portions  as  they  come  are  not  to  be  seen  by  any
other  automatist  "  would  have  ceased  to  be  applicable  ;  and
Mrs.  Verrall  would  have  been  taken  into  our  counsel  and
been  shown  the  scripts.

If  this  is  really  what  happened,  the  surprise  expressed  in
D  becomes  intelligible.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  instruc-
tions given  in  B  and  C,  but  would  not  be  inconsistent  with
the  impressions  subsequently  formed  by  the  communicators
during  the  long  interval  that  followed.  The  exclamation
"At  last !  "  used  by  Gurney  on  hearing  that  the  classical
allusions  were  now  all  understood,  would  also  be  not
only  intelligible  but  natural,  if  he  took  the  view  that  the
information  supplied  to  us  before  Script  D  was  produced
had  been  sufficient,  or  ought  to  have  been  sufficient,  to
give  us  the  solution  of  the  problem.

I  offer  this  explanation  for  what  it  may  be  worth.  There
is  too  much  of  the  conjectural  element  in  it  to  satisfy  me.
But  in  any  case  I  should  prefer  it  to  the  explanation  given
by  Miss  Stawell's  alternative  hypothesis,  in  which  conjecture
seems  to  me  to  play  at  least  as  prominent  a  part.

To  that  alternative  hypothesis  I  now  turn.  It  may  be
summed  in  three  main  propositions  :

(1)  That  Mrs.  Verrall  possessed,  consciously  or  subcon-
ciously,  all  the  classical  knowledge  implied  in  the  scripts.

(2)  That  after  receiving  the  message  in  Script  A  she  sub-


276


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


consciously  wove  together  a  number  of  topics,  not  for  the
most  part  connected  with  one  another  by  any  obvious  associ-
ations, into  a  coherent  whole,  the  separate  items  of  which,
by  reason  of  this  subconscious  activity,  "leaked  "  from  her
subconscious  mind  into  that  of  Mrs.  Willett  and  emerged  in
the  successive  scripts,  Mrs.  Willett's  own  latent  memories
co-operating  in  the  process.

(3)  That  the  collocation  of  the  ideas  thus  brought  together
may  be  said  to  exhibit  "  design  "  ;  but  that  of  "  purpose  in
communication  "  as  distinguished  from  "  design  "  the  scripts
furnish  no  sufficient  evidence.

This  account  of  the  matter  is  ingenious  and  carefully  thought
out  ;  but  I  am  unable  to  accept  it  as  probable.

As  regards  (1),  everything  turns  upon  whether  Mrs.  Verrall
had  at  some  period  before  the  production  of  the  evidential
scripts  (B,  C  and  D)  become  acquainted  with  the  story  of
Philoxenus,  and  more  especially  with  the  veision  of  that
story  implied  in  the  scripts.  If  she  had  not,  cadit  quaestio  :
the  alternative  hypothesis  falls,  to  the  ground.

Miss  Stawell  thinks  I  have  dismissed  too  easily  the  possi-
bility that  the  scripts  had  their  source  of  inspiration  in  Mrs.
Verrall 's  subconscious  mind.  I  admit  that  when  stating  that
Mrs.  Verrall  "  knew  nothing  about  Philoxenus  or  his  poem,"
I  took  it  too  much  for  granted  that  she  never  had  known
anything.  Present  ignorance,  however  complete,  cannot
wholly  exclude  the  possibility  of  knowledge  once  possessed
but  since  forgotten.  But  there  are  cases — and  this,  I  think,
is  one  of  them — where  it  may  go  far  towards  doing  so  ;
especially  where  there  is  really  nothing  to  be  set  on  the  other
side  except  pure  conjecture.  I  can  readily  believe  that  at
some  time  or  other  in  the  course  of  her  classical  studies  Mrs .
Verrall  had  come  across  a  mention  of  the  poet  Philoxenus
and  afterwards  forgotten  about  him.  But  we  have  to  suppose
far  more  than  that  in  order  to  account  for  the  distinctly  re-
condite knowledge  concerning  the  plot  of  the  Cyclops  exhibited
in  the  scripts.  Miss  Stawell 's  own  suggestion  is  that  Mrs.
Verrall  was  led  to  look  up  the  associations  connected  with
the  Ear  of  Dionysius  by  her  conversation  on  the  subject
with  Dr.  Verrall  in  1910,  and  in  this  manner  acquired  the
necessary  information. Conjectures  of  this  kind  are  plausible


LXXIV.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius  :  A  Reply.


277


enough  in  themselves.  But  they  are  not  easy  to  reconcile
with  the  fact  that  in  January,  1914,  the  message  which  (ac-
cording to  Miss  Stawell)  produced  such  very  remarkable
results  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  subconscious  mind,  found  no
appropriate  response  in  her  normal  memories  ;  and  that
in  August,  1915,  even  a  study  of  the  reference  books  on
the  subject  failed  to  recall  to  her  that  she  had  ever  heard
of  Philoxenus.  Again,  Miss  Stawell  thinks  it  "  not  un-
natural to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Verrall  at  some  time  or  other
had  at  least  glanced  through  the  pages  of  Professor
Smyth's  Greek  Melic  Poets.''  Perhaps  not  ;  but  what
evidence  we  have  is  in  the  other  direction.  My  strong
impression  is — though  I  cannot  absolutely  vouch  for  the
fact — that  Mrs.  Verrall  told  me  she  believed  she  had  never
looked  into  the  book  until  she  had  recourse  to  it  in  con-
nection with  the  references  in  Script  D  ;  and  Mrs.  Salter
(Miss  Helen  Verrall)  informs  me  that  she  is  sure  her  mother
never  had  any  previous  occasion  to  use  it.  Unfortunately
Mrs.  Verrall  is  no  longer  with  us  to  appeal  to  on  points
like  this.  As  things  are,  it  is  perhaps  hardly  possible  to
carry  the  controversy  further.  I  can  only  say  that  my
personal  opinion  remains  unshaken.  Mrs.  Verrall  herself
was  convinced  that  the  Philoxenus  story  which  contains
the  key  to  the  puzzle  was  entirely  new  to  her.  I  continue
to  believe  that  she  was  right.1

(2)  Coming  next  to  Miss  Sta well's  account  of  the  genesis

1  Miss  Stawell  credits  not  only  Mrs.  Verrall,  but  also  Mrs.  Willett,  with
a  more  extensive  subconscious  knowledge  than  I  should  be  prepared  to  allow
probable.  The  more  or  less  of  Mrs.  Willett 's  knowledge  is  in  no  way  essential
to  Miss  Stawell's  main  contention,  and  therefore  I  have  not  thought  it  worth
while  to  discuss  it.  I  must,  however,  take  exception  to  the  argument  by
which  she  supports  her  opinion.  "  It  is  plain,"  she  writes,  "  that  Mrs.
Willett 's  conscious  mind  does  forget  very  easily.  When  asked  by  Mr.  Balfour
(27  May,  1916)  what  she  knew  about  the  ''Ear  of  Dionysius,''  she  said  she
had  heard  the  expression  but  did  not  know  the  meaning  of  it.  Yet  only  two
years  before  she  had  written,  in  her  normal  consciousness,  script  containing
a  fairly  full  account  of  the  Ear,  a  script  of  which  she  had  kept  an  annotated
copy  to  which,  as  Mr.  Balfour  tells  us,  she  could  refer  at  any  time."  Surely
there  is  a  fallacy  here.  It  is  true  that  Script  A  contains  a  description  of
the  Ear  of  Dionysius.  But  it  does  not  describe  it  by  name.  Unless
Mrs.  Willett  already  knew  that  the  description  applied  to  the  Ear  of
Dionysius,  she  might  have  read  and  re-read  Script  A  without  ever  dis-
covering the  fact.

s


278


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


of  the  scripts,  let  me  begin  by  noting  a  point  of  detail.  The
order  of  events  is  supposed  to  be  as  follows  :  Mrs.  Verrail
(who  is  credited,  as  we  have  seen,  with  a  complete,  though
latent  knowledge  of  all  the  classical  references  in  the  scripts)
receives  the  message  contained  in  Script  A.  Her  latent
memories  are  thereby  stimulated  "  just  enough  to  make
them  active,  but  subconsciously  not  consciously."  This
subconscious  activity  in  its  turn  produces  a  "  leakage  "  of
ideas  from  Mrs.  Verrail  to  Mrs.  Willett,  and  is  thus  the  true
source  and  origin  of  the  "  evidential  scripts."

What  remains  unexplained  in  this  account  is  the  origin
of  the  message  in  Script  A.  Miss  Stawell,  of  course,  assumes
that  all  the  topics  in  this  message  had  at  one  time  or  another
been  within  Mrs.  Willett's  normal  knowledge,  and  might,
therefore,  have  emerged  in  her  script  without  anj.  external
prompting.  But  even  granting  this,  why  did  they  emerge
at  all  ?  On  Miss  Stawell's  hypothesis  no  answer  to  this
question  is  forthcoming.  On  the  hypothesis  that  Dr.  Verrail
was  the  real  as  well  as  the  ostensible  communicator,  the
answer  is  plain.  Evidently  the  message  was  sent  in
preparation  for  what  was  to  follow.

This,  however,  is,  after  all,  a  point  of  minor  importance,,
though  not,  I  think,  without  some  interest.

A  much  more  serious  objection  to  Miss  Stawell's  account
of  how  the  scripts  originated  is  one  of  which  she  is  sensible
herself,  though  I  doubt  whether  she  has  realized  the  full  force
of  it.  The  essential  basis  of  her  explanation  is  "  unconscious
leakage  "  of  ideas  from  mind  to  mind.  Miss  Stawell  has
not  told  us  exactly  what  she  means  by  "  unconscious  leakage."
The  term  may  signify  much  or  little.  If  A  represents  the
mind  from  which,  and  B  the  mind  to  which  the  leakage  is
assumed  to  take  place,  are  both  A  and  B  to  be  regarded  as
unconscious  of  what  is  happening,  or  only  A  ?  And  further,
when  we  speak  of  A,  do  we  mean  supraliminal  A  only,  or
subliminal  A  also,  and  similarly  of  B  ?  I  am  not  quite
sure,  but  I  think  Miss  Stawell  uses  the  term  in  its  widest
significance,  which  excludes  any  kind  of  awareness  or
intention  either  on  the  one  side  or  the  other,  and  either
supraliminal  or  subliminal.  In  other  words  the  whole  process
is  to  be  taken  as  involuntary  and  automatic. It  is  in  this.


lxxiv.]  The  Ear  of  Dionysius  :  A  Reply.  279


sense  that  the  term  is  to  be  understood  in  the  discussion
which  follows.

Miss  Stawell  tells  us  that  unconscious  leakage  is  not  a  new
hypothesis,  and  that  we  have  good  evidence  of  it.  Certainly
it  is  not  a  new  hypothesis  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  actual
evidence  in  support  of  it  is  singularly  scanty.  The  reason
of  this  may  be,  at  least  in  part,  that  such  evidence  is,  from
the  nature  of  the  case,  difficult  to  obtain.  But  it  may  also
be  owing  to  the  rarity  of  the  phenomenon  itself.

Two  supposed  examples  are  cited  by  Miss  Stawell — the  case
of  Mr.  Piddington's  sealed  letter,  and  the  leakage  of  the  passage
about  "  moly  "  in  the  "  one-horse  dawn  "  experiment.  Neither
of  these  can  be  regarded  as  conclusive,  even  if  we  ignore  the
possibility  of  chance-coincidence.  The  incident  of  Mr.  Pid-
dington's letter  forms  part  of  a  complicated  cross-correspon-
dence. Miss  Johnson,  to  whom  we  owe  a  careful  review  of
all  the  circumstances  (see  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  222  ff.),
finds  in  them  strong  evidence  of  a  single  external  directing
intelligence  ;  and  though  she  thinks  that  this  intelligence
may  have  utilised  telepathic  communication  between  the
automatists  concerned  and  Mr.  Piddington,  it  is  obvious
that  the  introduction  on  the  stage  of  such  a  dens  ex
machina,  while  not  negativing  the  hypothesis  of  unconscious
leakage,  does  render  it  superfluous.

As  to  the  passage  about  "  the  herb  moly  "  in  the  "  one-horse
dawn  "  experiment,  it  is  true  that  the  appearance  of  it  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  could  not  be  directly  due  to  any  con-
scious mental  activity  on  Dr.  Verrall's  part.  But  we  know
that  he  was  trying  to  transmit  certain  words  to  Mrs.  Verrall,
and  we  cannot  be  sure  that  this  conscious  effort  on  his  part  was
not  a  conditio  sine  qua  non  of  the  transmission  of  certain  other
words  of  the  connection  of  which  with  the  subject  of  the  experi-
ment he  was  only  subconsciously  aware.  For  a  fuller  dis-
cussion of  this  question,  perhaps  I  may  refer  to  an  article  of
mine  published  in  Proc,  Vol.  XXV.,  in  which  I  pointed  out
that  no  proof  of  purely  subconscious  telepathy  can  ever  be
obtained  from  experiments.  All  experiments  necessarily  start
from  supraliminal  activity  ;  and  having  once  started  from
supraliminal  activity  it  is  impossible  to  be  certain  that  one
is  justified  in  eliminating  it  from  results.


280  The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.  [part


If  proof  is  to  be  obtained  of  unconscious  leakage  it  is  among
cases  of  spontaneous  (i.e.  non-experimental)  telepathy  that
we  must  look  for  it.  Veridical  phantasms  of  the  living  that
have  appeared  to  persons  unknown  to  the  presumed  agent,
collective  hallucinations,  and  the  psychological  character-
istics of  crowds,  will  perhaps  be  found  to  afford  the  best
examples — in  other  words,  cases  where  nothing  more  com-
plex is  in  question  than  sensory  impressions  or  emotional
states.

Whether  even  single  mental  concepts  are  ever  transmitted
by  unconscious  leakage  is  doubtful.  What  we  have  in  the
Dionysius  case  is  a  series  of  mental  concepts,  apparently
unconnected,  or  only  loosely  connected,  but  ultimately  found
to  be  cunningly  linked  together  by  a  central  idea  that  unites
all  the  rest  into  a  single  whole.  The  transmission  of  a  com-
bined scheme  of  concepts  in  the  way  suggested  has,  I  feel
confident,  no  soit  of  warrant  from  experience.  Miss  Stawell
may  well  call  such  an  extension  of  unconscious  leakage
"  remarkable."

Can  we  say  that  the  hypothesis,  even  though  unwarranted
by  experience,  is  nevertheless  intrinsically  plausible  ?  I  do
not  think  so.  Unconscious  leakage  must  from  the  nature
of  the  case  be  in  large  measure  at  the  mercy  of  chance.  It
would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  from  it  the  unity  and  coher-
ence that  might  be  looked  for  in  a  message  deliberately  sent
by  an  intelligent  communicator.  Yet  it  is  just  such  unity
and  coherence  which  are  exceptionally  manifest  in  these
Willett  scripts.  What  we  see  in  them  is  not  chance  but
design.  Moreover,  they  show  a  noticeable  absence  of  any-
thing like  surplusage  or  extraneous  matter.  There  is  hardly
an  idea  to  be  found  in  them  that  does  not  contribute  to  the
building  up  of  the  scheme  as  a  whole.  Even  granting  for  a
moment  that  the  design  itself  originated  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
subconscious  mind,  how  can  mere  leakage  account  for  the  fact
that  practically  no  ideas  emerged  in  the  scripts  except  such
as  were  relevant  to  the  design  ?  It  seems  to  me  that  this  is
a  real  difficulty,  and  that  neither  the  rapport  which  may
fairly  be  taken  to  have  existed  between  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.
Willett,  nor  any  aid  which  the  dormant  memories  of  the
latter  may  be  supposed  to  have  rendered,  suffice  to  meet  it.


LXXIV.]


The  Ear  of  Dionysius  :  A  Reply.


281


Indeed  I  see  no  way  of  meeting  it  fully  except  to  suppose
that  Mrs.  Verrall's  subconscious  mind  was  at  the  time  occupied
with  these  ideas  and  with  no  others.  If  the  leakage  occurred
contemporaneously  with  the  emergence  of  the  ideas  in  the
scripts  of  Feb.  28  and  March  2  (Scripts  B  and  C),  the  coin-
cidence must  be  ascribed  to  a  happy  accident.  If  it  extended
over  a  period  antecedent  to  the  emergence,  are  we  to  suppose
that  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal  concentration  on  the  Ear  of
Dionysius  extended  over  the  whole  of  the  period  ?  This  is
possible,  but  is  it  also  plausible  ?

Other  difficulties  suggest  themselves  which  I  can  only
briefly  indicate.  Mrs.  Willett's  automatic  productions  are
incomparably  more  striking  than  Mrs.  Verrall's,  and  the
Dionysius  case  is  among  the  most  striking  of  all.  Yet  we
are  asked  to  suppose  that  the  true  source  both  of  materials
and  of  plan  in  this  case  was  Mrs.  Verrall's  subconscious
mind,  whence  they  leaked  into  that  of  Mrs.  Willett.  If  so,
how  comes  it  that  nothing  remotely  similar  to  these  scripts
appeared  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  own  automatic  writings  1  And
again,  if  the  influence  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal  mind  on
Mrs.  Willett's  scripts  is  so  powerful  as  the  hypothesis
implies,  how  comes  it  that  that  influence  has  not  left
a  more  conspicuous  impress  on  the  Willett  scripts
generally  ?  Perhaps  the  Statius  case  may  be  cited
in  reply  to  this  question.  I  agree  that  the  Statius
case  and  the  Dionysius  case  must  stand  or  fall  to-
gether, and  that  to  explain  the  one  is  almost  certainly
to  explain  the  other  also.  But  they  foim  only  a  small
fraction  of  the  total  volume  of  Willett  scripts.  It  is
true  that  cross -correspondences  occur  from  time  to  time
between  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  and  Mis.  Willett's,  and
may,  from  Miss  Stawell's  standpoint,  be  held  to  indicate
telepathic  leakage  from  one  writer  to  the  other.  None
of  these  cro^s-correspondences,  however,  are  at  all  on
the  scale  of  leakage  required  to  explain  the  Dionysius
case  ;  nor  do  they,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  markedly
surpass  either  in  number  or  quality  the  cross-corre-
spondences to  be  found  between  Mis.  Willett's  scripts
and  those  of  other  members  of  our  group  of  automatists.

Considerations  like  this  cannot,  of  course, be  properly


282


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[PART


appreciated  without  a  full  knowledge  of  all  the  scripts.  I
will  not  dwell  on  them  further,  but  will  pass  on  to  the
last  of  the  three  propositions  which  summarize  Miss
Stawell's  alternative  hypothesis.

Miss  Stawell  draws  a  sharp  distinction  between  "design"
and  "  purpose  in  communication."  "  Design,"  in  the  sense
of  "  an  elaborate  association  of  ideas,"  she  admits  and
ascribes  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  subconscious  mind.  "  Purpose  in
communication  "  she  disputes,  and  the  appearance  of  it  she
ascribes  to  the  subconscious  mind  of  the  automatist.

The  distinction  between  design  and  purpose,  and  the
separation  of  roles  between  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Willett,
were  inevitably  forced  on  Miss  Stawell  by  the  premises
from  which  she  starts.  She  rejects — I  believe  quite  rightly
— the  supposition  that  Mrs.  Willett  had  ever  known
the  story  of  Philoxenus.  It  follows  that  Mrs.  Willett
could  not  have  originated  the  "design."  The  hypothesis
of  spirit  communication  being  excluded,  responsibility  for
the  design  is  fixed  upon  Mrs.  Verrall.  But  Miss  Stawell
insists  that  the  associated  ideas  passed  from  Mrs.  Verrall
to  Mrs.  Willett  by  "  unconscious  leakage."  Now,  uncon-
scious leakage  is  clearly  incompatible  with  "  purpose  in
communication."  In  fact  it  is  the  very  opposite  of  it.
Hence  any  appearance  of  purpose  must  either  be  explained
away  as  illusory,  or  it  is  upon  Mrs.  Willett  that  the  responsi-
bility for  it  must  be  thrown.

To  my  mind  this  treatment  of  the  matter  is  forced  and
unnatural.  I  look  upon  the  "  elaborate  association  of
ideas  "  (or,  as  I  should  prefer  to  describe  it,  the  skilful
construction  of  a  problem)  as  forming  part  and  parcel  of
the  manifestation  of  purpose  in  the  scripts,  and  as  practi-
cally inseparable  from  it.  Miss  Stawell  herself  seems
tacitly  to  admit  the  closeness  of  the  relation  between  the
two.  For  she  allows  that  "  the  way  in  which  the  facts
are  communicated  "  might  be  evidence  of  purpose.  In
particular  she  mentions  the  withholding  of  the  clue  all
through  Scripts  B  and  C,  and  its  final  revelation  in  D.
Is  not  this  the  very  attitude  of  one  who  propounds  a
riddle,  and  deliberately  waits  before  producing  the  answer
to  it  ? And, on the other hand, if the materials  of


lxxiv.]  The  Ear  of  Dionysius  :  A  Reply.  283


the  problem  found  their  way  into  the  scripts  through
the  operation  of  unconscious  leakage,  should  we  not
expect  the  central  and  dominating  idea  of  the  com-
bination to  leak  out  early  instead  of  late  in  the  history
of  the  case  ?  Miss  Stawell,  however,  has  her  counter-
question  read3;'.  "If,"  she  asks,  "the  clue  was  purposely
withheld,  why  was  it  given  in  the  end  to  the  very
person,  Mrs.  Verrall,  from  whom  it  ought  to  have  been
kept  till  all  was  complete  ?  "

The  argument  in  support  of  purposiveness  is  not  really
met  by  raising  a  difficulty  on  the  other  side,  even  if  that
difficulty  was  a  formidable  one.  But  is  it  so  formidable  ?
Surely  there  may  have  been  good  reasons  in  February  and
March,  1914,  for  asking  that  the  scripts  should  be  kept
from  Mrs.  Verrall  "  for  the  present,"  and  yet  those  reasons
might  have  lost  their  weight  a  year  and  a  half  later.  My
own  view  is  that  the  communicators  had  forgotten  that
the  injunction  had  ever  been  laid.  But  whether  they  had
forgotten  this  or  not,  they  may  well  have  thought  that,  the
investigators  having  failed  to  solve  the  problem,  the  time
had  now  come  to  bring  matters  to  a  conclusion  by  sup-
plying the  key  to  the  enigma  themselves.  The  analogy  of
the  Statius  case  deserves  to  be  considered  in  this  con-
nection.1

Evidence  of  purpose  is,  however,  by  no  means  confined
to  that  indirectly  furnished  by  the  construction  of  the
problem  and  the  manner  of  its  presentment,  but  is  to  be
found  scattered  in  plenty  throughout  the  scripts.

The  communicators  tell  us  they  are  trying  "  an  experi-
ment "  ;  it  is  "  something  good  and  worth  doing,"  which
takes  the  form  of  "a  literary  association  of  ideas  pointing
to  the  influence  of  two  discarnate  minds."  The  "  Aristo-
telian "  and  the  "  Rationalist  "  (S.H.B.  and  A.W.V)  are
described  as  being  engaged  in  "a  particular  task,"  an
"  effort  "  which  still  awaits  completion.  "  The  incident,"
we  are  informed,  "  was  chosen  as  being  evidential  of
identity  "  ;  and  it  is  claimed  that  the  combination  is
characteristic  of  its  authors — that  it  is  "  A.W.ish  "  and
"S.H.ish."

1  See  note  at  the  end  of  this  paper.


284


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


Statements  like  these  plainly  imply  purpose.  How  does
Miss  Stawell  deal  with  them  ?  By  the  simple  expedient
of  sweeping  them  aside  as  "  fancies  "  woven  by  Mrs.
Willett  round  the  ideas  received  by  her  from  Mrs.  Verrall.

We  unfortunately  possess  no  general  criterion  by  which
genuine  messages  ab  extra  can  be  distinguished  from  the
imaginations  and  embroideries  of  the  automatist.  I  am,
therefore,  far  from  asserting  that  the  peculiar  distribution
of  subconscious  activities  assumed  by  Miss  Stawell  is
inadmissible.  But  this,  I  think,  may  fairly  be  said  ;  that
so  far  from  affording  support  to  her  alternative  hypothesis
it  is  an  additional  difficulty  in  the  way  of  that  hypothesis
being  accepted.

Why  Miss  Stawell  should  be  so  wedded  to  the  idea  of
"  unconscious  leakage  "  I  own  I  do  not  fully  understand.
If  I  were  seeking  some  way  of  escape  from  the  hypothesis
of  spirit  communication,  and  was  willing  to  believe  that
Mrs.  Verrall,  possessing,  though  partly  in  the  form  of
latent  memories,  all  the  raw  material  required,  had  evolved
out  of  them  the  complicated  design  presented  in  the  scripts,
I  shoidd  see  no  advantage  in  trying  to  discredit  the  clear
evidence  of  purpose  which  those  same  scripts  exhibit.  On
the  contrary,  I  should  be  inclined  to  ascribe  both  design
and  purpose  to  the  same  source,  namely  Mrs.  Verrall's
subconscious  mind.  The  difficulties  which  this  explanation
of  the  case  involves  are  serious  enough,  no  doubt.  That
the  subconscious  mind  of  a  living  person,  herself  an  auto-
matist, should  elaborate  such  a  puzzle  and  communicate  it
telepathically  to  another  automatist  in  order  to  manu-
facture fictitious  evidence  for  survival,  the  normal  self  of
the  communicator  remaining  the  while  entirely  innocent
of  what  was  taking  place,  is  a  hypothesis  with  as  little
support  from  experience  as  the  "  unconscious  leakage  "
which  finds  favour  with  Miss  Stawell.  But  at  least  it
avoids  some  of  the  objections  to  which  I  cannot  but  hold
the  latter  to  be  open ;  and  among  them  the  artificial
separation  of  the  construction  of  the  puzzle  from  the  use
to  which  it  is  put.

Let  me  in  conclusion  repeat  once  more  that  though  I
am  unable  to  agree  with  Miss  Stawell,  I  nevertheless  regard


lxxiv.]  The  Ear  of  Dionysius  :  A  Reply.


285


her  paper  as  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  study  of  the
subject.  It  raises  questions  which  ought  to  be  raised  ;  and
I  frankly  admit  that  she  has  directed  the  lance  of  her
criticism  against  what  is  probably  the  least  protected  point
in  the  armour  of  her  adversary.  May  I  on  my  side  hope
that  the  considerations  I  have  urged  in  reply  will  go  at
least  some  way  towards  reconciling  her  to  a  view  of  the
case  which  already,  as  it  would  seem,  she  only  half-
heartedly opposes  ?

Note  on  the  Analogies  between  the  Statitjs
Case  and  the  Dionysius  Case.

In  my  original  paper  I  called  attention  to  certain  features
which  were  common  to  the  Dionysius  case  and  to  the  Statius
case  which  preceded  it.

Both  present  a  literary  problem  the  solution  of  which
appears  to  be  purposely  withheld  at  first,  and  is  finally  revealed
only  after  the  lapse  of  a  considerable  interval  of  time.

In  both  the  part  of  principal  communicator  is  assigned  to
Dr.  Verrall,  though  in  the  Dionysius  case  he  is  associated
with  his  friend  S.  H.  Butcher.

Both  purport  to  furnish  evidence  of  the  continued  existence
after  death  of  their  presumptive  author  or  authors.

A  careful  comparison  of  the  two  cases  shews  that  there
are  other  points  of  resemblance,  as  well  as  some  points  of
difference,  which  it  may  be  worth  while  to  note.

The  two  cases  are  similar  in  that  :

(1)  Both  open  with  a  message  to  Mrs.  Verrall.

(2)  In  both  the  final  clue  is  given  in  Mrs1.  Verrall's  pre-

sence.

(3)  In  both  the  sitting  at  which  Mrs.  Verrall  was  present

was  her  only  sitting  with  Mrs.  Willett  during  the
periods  covered  by  the  two  sets  of  scripts  respectively.

(4)  In both the interval of silence, during which  the

subject  appeared  to  be  ignored,  was  occupied  with
scripts  relating  to  matters  of  a  private  nature.

The  cases  differ  in  that :

(1)  The Statius case is started in a trance-script,  but
developed and concluded in three scripts  written


286


The  Right  Hon,.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[PART


in  a  state  of  normal  consciousness ;  whereas  the
Dionysius  case  is  started  in  a  script  produced  in
a  normal  state,  but  developed  and  concluded  in
three  trance-scripts.
(2)  The  interval  of  silence  occurred  in  the  Statius  case
between  the  first  and  second  scripts,  in  the  Dionysius
case  between  the  third  and  fourth.  In  the  Statius
case  the  sitter  present  when  the  subject  was  resumed
was  myself,  in  the  Dionysius  case  Mrs.  Verrall.

While  I  think  these  points  of  similarity  and  difference
may  be  worth  noting,  and,  in  some  instances,  not  without
interest  as  bearing  on  the  present  controversy,  it  does  not
appear  to  me  that  any  important  argument  can  be  drawn
from  them  in  support  of  either  one  side  or  the  other.  Miss
Stawell  asks  whether  Mrs.  Verrall  had  any  sitting  with  Mrs.
Willett  during  the  interval  between  scripts  C  and  D.  The
answer,  as  may  be  gathered  from  the  above  statement,  is
in  the  negative.  In  fact  up  to  the  date  of  script  D  Mrs.
Verrall  had  not  sat  with  Mrs.  Willett  since  Sept.  8,  1913,
the  date  on  which  the  final  clue  to  the  Statius  problem  was
given.  I  cannot  see,  however,  that  this  circumstance  is  in
any  way  inconsistent  with  Dr.  Verrall's  being  the  real  com-
municator ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fact  that  in  the
Statius  case  the  return  to  the  subject  occurred  in  two  scripts
produced  not  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  presence  but  with  myself  as
sitter,  tells,  so  far  as  it  goes,  against  the  supposition  that  in
the  Dionysius  case  the  resumption  of  the  subject  was  dependent
upon  Mrs.  Verrall's  attention  being  once  more  directed  to  it.


1XXIV.]


Presidential  Address.  287


IV.

PRESIDENTIAL  ADDRESS.
Delivered  on  June  28,  1917.
By  L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.

THE  THEORY  OF  SURVIVAL  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  ITS

CONTEXT.

We  are  working  in  a  region  densely  populated  with  the
hopes  and  fears  of  men  ;  and  not  only  with  hopes  and
fears  but  with  superstitions,  obsessions,  preconceptions  and
fixed  ideas  innumerable.  These  things  swarm  round  the
incpiirer  like  the  evil  spirits  which  beset  the  path  of  Bun-
yan's  Pilgrim  when  he  passed  through  the  Valley  of
Humiliation.  They  threaten  at  every  turn  to  drive  us  off
from  the  strait  and  narrow  road  of  strict  scientific  inquiry  ;
they  are  immensely  active  ;  and  nowhere  are  they  more
active  than  in  the  criticisms  and  the  occasional  contempt
which  are  poured  upon  the  work  of  this  Society  by  those
who  hold  aloof  from  it.  My  plea  is  that  we  should  turn
our  back  upon  them  all  ;  upon  the  hopes  and  fears  and
all  the  other  emotional  interests  that  are  at  stake  as  well
as  upon  the  superstitions  and  fixed  ideas.  That  is  easy
to  say  but  difficult  to  carry  out.  It  requires  an  almost
fanatical  wariness.

All  these  forces  may  be  seen  at  work  in  the  charge
which  is  frequently  made  about  the  triviality  and  unim-
portance of  the  evidence  which  the  Society  is  investi-
gating. "  Your  evidence,"  it  is  said,  "  is  nothing  but  a
mass  of  trumpery  information  about  pocket-knives  and
hat-pins  and  photographs  and  obscure  passages  in  Greek
poets. There  is  nothing  to  lift  the  veil  which  hangs  over


288


L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.


[PART


the  mysteries  of  life  ;  nothing  which  helps  us  in  the  re-
construction of  society  ;  nothing  that  throws  light  on  any
problem  of  morals  or  philosophy  ;  nothing  that  is  of  the
least  importance,  but  always  this  rigmarole  of  trivialities."
Such  is  the  charge  ;  and  I  venture  to  say  it  betrays  a
complete  misunderstanding  of  the  business  in  which  we
are  engaged.  Strictly  speaking  we  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  problems  of  morals  and  religion,  save  in  the  sense
that  everything  in  this  world  is  connected  with  everything
else.  We  are  under  no  obligation  to  provide  anybody  with
a  key  to  the  mysteries  of  life.  We  are  trying  to  find  out
the  meaning  of  certain  obscure  and  challenging  pheno-
mena ;  we  are  trying  in  the  first  instance  to  get  these
phenomena  correctly  reported,  instead  of  getting  them
coloured  and  distorted  by  our  desire  to  believe  in  the
immortality  of  the  soul,  or  in  anything  else  of  equal
importance.  For  this  purpose  a  lost  hat-pin  may  be  as
significant  to  us  as  the  falling  apple  was  to  Newton  ;
while  on  the  other  hand  what  is  most  important  to  the
philosopher,  such  as  a  key  to  the  mysteries  of  life  sent
down  from  another  world,  is  precisely  the  kind  of  evi-
dence that  would  help  us  least,  and  would  be  open  to
the  gravest  suspicion  even  if  we  got  it.

The  main  problem  now  before  the  Society  is  one  of
identification.  This  problem  has  two  forms,  which  I  will
distinguish  as  the  more  and  the  less  popular.  The  more
popular  relates  to  the  communications  which  come  through
mediums.  These  plainly  come  from  somebody,  and  the
question  is,  can  we  identify  these  "  somebodies  "  with  the
persons  whose  names  they  assume,  persons  who  were  once
among  the  living.  The  less  popular  form  relates  to  the
phenomena  of  dreams.  This,  though  far  the  less  sensa-
tional of  the  two,  is  at  least  equally  important,  and  may
conceivably,  when  it  has  been  more  profoundly  studied,
give  us  the  key  to  the  other.  Here,  too,  the  problem  is
one  of  identification.  In  dreams  we  apparently  encounter
ourselves,  as  well  as  other  people,  in  unwonted  surround-
ings, and  the  question  arises  whether  the  self  dreamt  about
can  really  be  identified  with  the  dreamer.  This  question,
which is immensely  entangled, I shall leave  aside  and


LXXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


289


confine  myself  to  the  problem  of  identification  in  its
more  popular  form.

Among  the  clangers  and  the  difficulties  of  psychical
research,  not  the  least  are  those  which  arise  from  the  use
of  the  common  words  "  spirit,"  "  spiritual,"  and  "  spiritual-
ism "  ;  and  the  suggestion  I  have  to  make  is,  that  as  a
temporary  measure  we  should  be  well  advised  to  drop  these
words  from  our  working  vocabulary  and  pursue  our  inves-
tigations for  the  time  being  as  though  they  did  not  exist.

Everyone  who  has  thought  out  the  problem  of  proving
the  identity  of  those  who  are  alleged  to  communicate  from
beyond  the  grave  must  have  experienced  both  the  danger
and  the  difficulty  that  lurk  in  these  words.  To  prove
identity,  to  prove  that  the  person  who  was  here  and  the
person  who  is  there  are  really  one  and  the  same,  you
want  as  much  resemblance  and  as  much  continuity  as
possible.  Difference  and  discontinuity,  on  the  other  hand,
are  always  obstacles  to  identification.  But  what  greater
difference,  what  wider  breach,  could  be  conceived  than
that  between  an  embodied  and  a  disembodied  being —
between  a  man  and  a  ghost  ?  No  two  beings  that  I  can
think  of  could  be  more  unlike  one  another  than  myself  in
my  body  and  myself  out  of  my  body.  What  it  may  be
to  see  without  an  eye,  to  speak  without  a  tongue,  to
think  without  a  brain,  or  to  move  about  without  limbs
I  find  myself  wholly  unable  to  conceive.  I  cannot  deny
that  such  things  are  possible  ;  but  I  am  certain  that
they  are  very  different  from  seeing  witn  an  eye,  speaking
with  a  tongue,  thinking  with  a  brain,  and  moving  about
with  the  aid  of  my  bodily  limbs.  The  difference  is  so  great
and  the  discontinuity  so  startling  that  I  cannot  recognise
myself  under  those  conditions  as  one  with  the  person  T
now  am,  nor  do  I  understand  how  anybody  else  could
possibly  identify  me.

We  are  apt  to  thrust  this  difficulty  aside  by  saying  that
the  true  self  of  a  man  consists  of  his  moral  characteristics,
and,  if  these  are  found  in  existence  after  death,  then,  body
or  no  body,  you  have  the  real  essential  man.  That  I  do
not  question  as  an  abstract  proposition.  It  is  a  profound
truth  of  moral  philosophy  ;  but  it  has  no  relevance  to  the


290


L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.


[part


business  of  psychical  research.  Moral  characteristics  are  of
the  highest  importance  ;  but  they  are  not  easy  to  distin-
guish, they  are  elusive  and  difficult  to  define,  and  are  of
little  use  as  identification  marks.  I  imagine  that  a  man
would  have  some  difficulty  in  picking  out  his  wife  from
a  crowd  of  ten  thousand  women  if  he  had  nothing  but
her  moral  characteristics  to  go  by,  however  admirable
these  might  be.  The  sound  of  her  voice  or  the  colour
of  her  dress  would  be  much  more  to  the  purpose.  Nor
would  it  be  easy  to  get  one's  passport  vise  in  a  foreign
city,  or  to  persuade  an  American  banker  to  cash  one's
letter  of  credit,  if  our  moral  characteristics  were  all  we
could  adduce  to  prove  our  identity.  Now,  the  problem
which  the  theory  of  survival  has  to  solve  is  closely
analogous  to  that  of  a  man  looking  for  his  wife  in  an
enormous  crowd,  or  to  that  of  the  American  banker  who
has  to  satisfy  himself  that  his  would-be  client  is  really
the  person  he  professes  to  be.  Moral  characteristics  will
not  suffice  unless  they  are  backed  up  by  evidence  in
detail,  of  which  the  most  trivial  may  be  the  most  impor-
tant. Speaking  for  myself,  I  am  by  no  means  sure  what
my  moral  characteristics  really  are  ;  if  called  upon  to
enumerate  them  I  should  certainly  fail,  not  from  modesty,
nor,  I  hope,  from  vanity,  but  from  sheer  ignorance  ;  nor
would  I  trust  their  enumeration  by  another  person.  I
would  much  rather  be  asked  for  my  weight  or  my  height.
On  the  whole  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  my  moral
characteristics  are  of  such  a  kind  that  there  must  be
millions  of  men  in  the  world  for  any  one  of  whom  I
might  readily  be  mistaken  if  there  was  nothing  else  to
go  by.

But  now  I  venture  to  say  that  as  scientific  investigators
we  have  no  right,  and  we  have  certainly  no  need,  to  start
our  inquiries  from  the  common  distinction  between  "  bodies  'J
whose  characteristics  are  all  physical  and  "  spirits  "  whose
characteristics  are  all  moral  ;  and  if  we  assume  that  right
from  the  outset,  we  shall  pay  the  penalty  of  endless  con-
fusion which  properly  falls  to  those  who  beg  the  question
at  issue.  The  distinction  between  body  and  spirit  belongs
to a metaphysical  theory  which has filtered down  into


LXXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


291


popular  thought  and  got  itself  fixed  in  popular  phraseology.
It  may  be  a  sound  theory — I  do  not  question  that  ;  but
it  is  a  theory  all  the  same,  and  must  not  be  allowed  for
a  moment  to  prejudice  the  minds  of  those  who  are  in-
quiring into  matters  of  fact.  Our  business  and  duty
is  to  be  guided  solely  by  the  evidence  before  us  ;  not  to
assume  that  the  beings  with  whom  we  are  in  contact  are
this  or  that,  but  precisely  to  find  out  from  the  evidence
what  they  are.  By  jumping  to  the  conclusion  that  they
are  disembodied  spirits  we  not  only  saddle  ourselves  with
a  tremendous  difficulty,  which  makes  the  problem  of
identification  next  to  impossible,  but  we  are  interpreting
facts  ahead  of  the  evidence,  or  imposing  a  theory  on  the
facts — the  most  serious  of  all  scientific  errors.

If  I  am  saying  something  which  is  not  clear,  let  my
hearer  ask  himself  the  plain  question,  How  does  he  know
that  these  beings  are  disembodied  spirits  ?  He  may  answer,
They  must  be  disembodied,  because  they  left  their  bodies
behind  them.  But  that  is  begging  the  question,  for  the
very  point  at  issue  is  to  prove  that  they  are  the  people
who  left  their  bodies  behind.  Or  he  may  say,  "  I  know
they  are  spirits,  because  there  is  nothing  else  they  can
be."  That  is  metaphysics.  In  this  way  psychical  research,
which  is  research  into  the  nature  of  the  soul,  begins  with
a  metaphysical  theory  as  to  the  nature  of  the  soul,  thereby
foreclosing  the  most  important  part  of  the  inquiry.  It
behoves  the  psychical  investigator  of  all  men  to  be  per-
fectly open-minded,  and  especially  to  be  open-minded  to
the  question  as  to  what  kind  of  beings  they  are  who
appear  to  be  communicating  with  him.  They  may  be
disembodied  spirits  ;  but  if  they  are,  it  is  for  them  to
prove  themselves  so,  and  not  for  him  to  assume  it.  If
he  assumes  it  rashly,  he  may  find  that  he  has  misinter-
preted the  whole  body  of  evidence  before  him.

Another  preconception,  closely  connected  with  that  of
disembodied  spirits,  and  deeply  entangled  with  the  whole
discussion,  is  the  idea  of  two  worlds,  which  we  distinguish
as  "this  world"  and  "the  next."  This  distinction  is
otherwise  expressed  by  the  words  "  departure  "  and  "  sur-
vival." We  speak  of  the  dead  as  the  departed  ;  which


292


L.  P.  Jacks.  LL.D.


[PART


means  that  they  have  left  this  world  ;  and  when  evidence
arrives  which  suggests  that  they  are  still  in  existence,  we
assume  that  they  have  arrived  in  another.  Now  all  this
may  be  true.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  conceivably  false.
To  prove  that  the  dead  survive  it  is  not  necessary  to
assume  that  they  are  in  another  Avorld.  They  may  sur-
vive in  this  world.  They  may  even  remain  organic
members  of  the  human  race.  Like  the  notion  of  dis-
embodied spirit,  the  idea  of  the  two  worlds  is  one  we
have  inherited  from  other  sources  ;  and  again  our  duty
is  not  to  accept  it  as  a  key  to  the  evidence,  but  to  bring
it  to  the  test  of  the  evidence  itself.  Here  also  we  need
to  be  quite  open-minded.  We  may  find — I  do  not  say
positively  that  we  shall — that  the  upshot  of  psychical
research  is  not  to  give  us  another  world,  supplementary
or  successive  to  this  one,  or  of  another  nature  than  this,
but  to  extend  the  boundaries  and  deepen  the  significance
of  the  one  world  in  which  we  and  the  so-called  "  departed  "
are  all  living  together  under  a  unitary  system  of  Jaw.
At  all  events,  let  the  matter  be  decided  by  the  evidence,
and  not  by  our  preconceptions  of  what  the  evidence
ought  to  mean.  For  my  part  I  should  be  glad  to  hear
no  more  about  "  the  other  side,"  unless  it  be  used  as  a
metaphor  or  as  a  concession  to  the  poverty  of  language,
though  even  so  I  think  it  confusing  and  dangerous.  If
you  take  it  for  granted  that  communications  must  come
from  another  world,  or  from  "  another  side,"  you  will  find
yourself  at  every  step  putting  meanings  into  the  evidence
that  it  does  not  actually  bear  ;  you  will  read  it  in  the
light  of  a  theory  formed  in  advance,  which  theory,  if  the
evidence  were  impartially  taken,  might  be  found  untenable.

Indeed,  our  minds  are  so  deeply  entangled  in  meta-
physics, there  is  so  much  unconscious  metaphysics  in
current  language,  especially  in  the  distinction  between  two
worlds,  this  and  the  next,  that  the  greatest  care  is  needed
to  prevent  ourselves  falling  into  a  trap.  We  are  often
caught  unawares,  and  find  ourselves  reporting  as  evidence
what  is  not  really  evidence,  but  something  which  we  have
already  twisted  and  forced  into  the  mould  of  one  or  other
of  these  unconscious  theories. Even  in  so  simple  a  matter


LXXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


293


as  reporting  a  dream,  unless  we  are  exceptionally  alert  we
fall  into  the  trap  at  every  turn. We  say,  "I  dreamt  that
I  did  so  and  so  "  ; and  in  so  saying  we  beg  the  most
important  question  at  issue. For  the  main  problem  which
the  student  of  dreams  has  to  solve  is  precisely  a  problem
of  identity  ;  he  has  to  determine  whether  the  dreamer  and
the  person  dreamed  about  are  really  one and  the  same ;
which  question  you  Avill  observe  he  settles  in  advance  by
saying,  "  /  dreamt  that  /  did  so  and  so." Here  again  the
notion  of  two  worlds  dogs  the  inquiry  at  every  step.  We
speak of "the world of dreams" and "the  world  of
waking  realities," and we  think  of  ourselves  as  passing
fiom  the  one  to  the  other  during  sleep,  just  as  we  do  in
the  parallel  case of death,  and we begin to  construct
hypothetical bridges which may link the two  worlds
together. In  all  this  we  are  simply  suffering  ourselves  to
be  bound  hand  and  foot  by  popular  metaphysics.  Instead
of taking the two worlds for granted and  assuming
a "  passage  " from  one  to the other, whether  in  sleep
or  in  death,  we  ought  rather  to  consult  the  evidence  on
this  very  point. Perhaps  we  should  then  find that  the
notion  of  two  worlds,  or  even  two  sides  to  the  one  world,  is
entirely  without  warrant,  and  that  no  passage  takes  place
at all. We might find  something  more  surprising  still  ;
namely,  that  the  number  of  worlds  is  much  greater  than
two,  and  may  possibly  extend  into  millions. In  any  case
the  number  two  is  nothing  but  an  obsession,  and  as  such
has  no  right  to  intrude  itself  for  a  moment  into  inquiries
which  profess  to  start  without  prejudice.

These  warnings  are  not  new.  Long  ago  they  were
uttered  by  William  James  and  Professor  Bergson,  my
great  predecessors  in  the  position  I  occupy  to-day.  Both
these  thinkers  have  pointed  out  the  confusion  which  has
befallen  the  whole  science  of  psychology  through  the  pre-
sence of  subconscious  theories  formed  in  advance  of  the
facts  to  be  examined.  Perhaps  the  most  valuable  part  of
Professor  Bergson's  work  is  the  exposure  he  has  given  us
of  the  havoc  wrought  by  this  habit.  Take,  for  example,
the  fundamental  question  of  the  relation  between  the
mind  and the body. When this question is raised  we


294


L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.


[part


immediately  take  it  for  granted  that  we  are  dealing  with
two  distinct  orders  of  fact,  the  material  and  the  mental  ;
just  as  in  psychical  research  we  assume  the  distinction
between  embodied  and  disembodied  spirits,  or  between  two
worlds,  this  and  the  next.  That,  we  think,  is  the  common-
sense  view  of  the  matter.  What  can  be  more  obvious
than  the  truth  that  the  mind  is  one  thing,  and  the  body
another  ?  Taking  that  as  our  starting-point,  all  our  sub-
sequent thinking  has  to  follow  suit  and  uphold  the  dis-
tinction with  which  we  have  started  out.  But  Bergson
has  shown  us  that  the  notion  of  mind  being  one  thing
and  body  another  is  not  commonsense  at  all,  and  by  no
means  obvious.  It  is  a  highly  elaborated  metaphysical
doctrine,  with  a  long  history  behind  it,  which  has  got
itself  so  deeply  entrenched  in  current  thought  and  speech
that  we  have  come  to  treat  it  as  self-evident  and  imagined
that  nothing  else  is  possible.  To  take  it  for  granted  is,
once  again,  to  beg  the  question  at  issue.  Our  business
as  psychologists  is  not  to  assume  that  mind  and  body  are
two  things,  but  precisely  to  find  out  whether  they  are  so
or  not.  They  may  be  so  ;  but  that  is  a  matter  for  the
evidence  to  decide.  Let  the  evidence  therefore  decide  it.
Let  this  and  every  other  theory  be  dismissed  from  the
mind.  Get,  if  you  can,  at  the  immediate  data  of  con-
sciousness ;  that  is,  get  at  the  evidence  before  it  has  been
warped  and  twisted  by  subconscious  metaphysical  theories.
Such  is  the  important  plea  of  Professor  Bergson  in  regard
to  psychology  in  general.  It  is  not  easy  to  act  upon,
because  very  few  of  us  are  aware  of  the  extent  to  which
our  minds  are  unconsciously  pledged  to  these  notions.  It
requires  long  training  to  detect  the  intruders  ;  and  even
when  they  have  been  detected  in  one  form  they  often
assume  another,  as  a  well-known  personage  is  said  to  do  in
the  moral  world,  reappearing  at  points  where  we  are  off
our  guard.

But  since  the  work  of  psychical  research  is  relatively
new,  it  ought  to  be  easier  to  rid  our  minds  of  these  pre-
conceptions than  it  is  in  the  older  branches  of  psychology,
where  the  force  of  habit  is  more  deeply  entrenched.  What
we  have  to  do  is  to  seek  for  the  immediate  data  :  that  is,


LXXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


295


to  take  the  evidence  as  it  occurs,  before  it  has  been
translated  by  some  reporter  into  the  terms  of  a  theory
about  disembodied  spirits,  or  about  another  world,  or  about
anything  else.

I  freely  confess  that  in  what  I  am  about  to  say  I  shall
not  be  able  to  do  this  thoroughly  and  consistently.  To
do  it  thoroughly  one  would  have  to  be  at  the  very  source
of  the  phenomena  :  that  is,  in  the  position  of  an  actual
observer  at  the  moment  when  a  cross -correspondence,  or
some  other  manifestation,  is  taking  place.  Standing  at  one
remove  from  the  evidence,  I  cannot  do  this,  for  I  have
to  take  it  in  the  form  in  which  it  has  been  reported,  and
it  is  almost  impossible  to  get  any  report  which  has  not
undergone  some  process  of  translation  in  the  mind  of  the
reporter.  The  best  I  can  do  is  to  tap  the  evidence  as
high  up  as  I  can  reach  it.

I  propose,  then,  to  take  it  at  the  point  where  some
person  of  known  credibility  comes  forward  with  the  state-
ment that  he  has  received  what  is  called  a  communication,
but  before  any  theory  has  been  formed  as  to  where  the
communication  comes  from  or  as  to  the  kind  of  being
who  is  communicating.  Such  evidence  can  be  found  in
plenty  by  anybody  who  will  look  for  it  in  the  records  of
this  Society — especially  in  the  carefully  sifted  records  of
the  cross-correspondences.  I  well  know  that  even  in  this
I  am  giving  something  more  than  the  immediate  data —
the  word  "  communications  "  shows  that  ;  but  it  is  the
nearest  approach  to  immediacy  which  the  circumstances
afford  me.

We  will  assume,  then,  that  communications,  genuine
communications,  are  taking  place  ;  and,  dismissing  from
our  minds  the  notion  that  they  are  coming  from  dis-
embodied spirits  or  from  another  world,  we  will  let  the
communications  themselves  tell  us  where  they  are  coming
from,  and  what  kind  of  beings  they  are  who  are  making
them.  Especially  will  we  be  on  our  guard  against  letting
the  words  "  spiritual,"  or  "  supernatural,"  or  "  super-
normal "  intrude  themselves  on  our  observation.  These
words  imply  that  we  have  already  made  up  our  minds
as  to  what  the  communications  mean,  which  is  the  very


296


L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.


[PART


thing  we  want  to  find  out.  We  will  not  use  these
adjectives  unless  the  evidence  itself  convinces  that  they
and  no  other  are  the  adjectives  we  ought  to  use.  These
precautions  taken,  we  shall  find  that  certain  facts  now
start  into  prominence  which  escaped  us  altogether  while
we  were  under  the  malign  influence  of  our  preconceptions  ;
while  others  which  we  previously  thought  unimportant
become  very  important  indeed.

To  begin  with,  these  communicating  beings,  wherever
they  are,  and  whoever  they  may  be,  quite  obviously  retain
the  distinction  of  sex.  They  make  use  of  the  personal
pronouns  masculine  and  feminine  ;  they  speak  of  one
another  as  "  he  "  and  "  she  "  ;  and  they  employ  the
distinction  with  no  discernible  difference  of  meaning  from
that  with  which  we  are  all  familiar.  This  suggests  at
once  that  the  communicating  beings  stand  with  ourselves
on  a  common  biological  ground  ;  and  since  biological
facts,  like  all  other  facts,  are  not  isolated,  but  form  part
of  a  context  in  which  the  whole  order  of  nature  is  in-
volved, we  could  from  this  one  fact  alone  build  out  a
whole  system  to  correspond,  just  as  the  palaeontologist
when  he  discovers  the  bone  of  an  extinct  animal  can
reconstruct  the  whole  animal  to  which  it  belonged.  This,
I  say,  we  could  do  ;  and  the  only  thing  that  has  pre-
vented us  doing  it  hitherto  is  the  notion  that  everything
we  are  going  to  discover  must  bear  a  "  spiritual  "  sense,
must  mean  something  other  than  it  would  mean  if  it
occurred  in  the  known  order — that  is,  may  mean  any-
thing we  choose  to  make  it  mean.  Dismissing  that  notion,
we  find  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  a  fact  enormously
rich  in  implications.  These  beings  retain  the  distinction  of
sex.

Next,  and  almost  equally  striking,  is  their  use  of  lan-
guage, both  in  the  spoken  and  the  written  form.  They
use  it  for  addressing  one  another  and  for  addressing  us
through  the  medium,  and  they  express  by  it  ideas  which
are  intelligible  to  human  beings.  Moreover,  the  language
spoken  is  plain  English,  or  plain  French,  as  the  case  may
be,  with  its  grammatical  forms  and  constructions  on  the
whole  well  preserved. Nothing  is  more  surprising  to  me  in


LXXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


297


the  history  of  psychical  research  than  the  little  attention
that  has  been  paid  to  this  remarkable  aspect  of  the
evidence.  I  can  only  account  for  it,  as  before,  by  the
obstinate  prejudice  that  everything  is  occurring  in  a
spiritual  realm  where  nothing  means  what  it  seems  to
mean.  But  for  that  we  should  have  brought  this  fact
— the  use  of  language — into  the  full  light  of  our  philo-
logical knowledge  and  drawn  from  it  exactly  the  same
kind  of  inferences  that  would  follow  if  we  were  to  learn
that  French  and  English  were  spoken  on  the  planet  Mars.
In  that  case  we  should  at  once  conclude  that  the  in-
habitants of  Mars  are  human  beings  ;  that  its  ethnology
is  a  counterpart  to  our  own  ;  that  its  history,  even  its
social  history,  is,  in  part  at  least,  parallel  to  that  of  the
earth  ;  for  every  language  is  an  embodied  memory,  and
nobody  can  speak  English  or  French  as  his  native  tongue
without  being  English  or  French  in  many  other  respects —
in  respect  of  his  present,  his  future,  as  well  as  of  his
past.

How  is  it  that  there  has  been  so  little  scrutiny  of  the
evidence  on  these  lines  ?  How  is  it,  I  cannot  help  asking
myself,  that  a  fact  which  would  throw  a  flood  of  light
on  any  world,  or  sphere,  or  planet  where  it  was  discovered
has  so  far  thrown  hardly  any  light  at  all  on  the  world
which  these  communicating  beings  are  supposed  to  inhabit  ?
Is  it  because  we  have  made  two  compartments  in  our
thinking,  just  as  we  have  made  two  worlds  in  the  uni-
verse, in  one  of  which  every  fact  has  its  intelligible  con-
text, while  in  the  other  each  fact  can  be  treated  as
though  it  had  no  context  at  all  ?

But  the  internal  evidence  is  not  exhausted  by  the  two
facts  I  have  mentioned  ;  indeed,  it  is  so  rich  that  I  can
do  no  more  than  select  a  small  portion  of  it.  At  every
point  these  beings  are  incidentally  betraying  something  of
importance.  For  example,  they  are  evidently  in  time  :
they  look  before  and  after,  and  even  pine  for  what  is  not  ;
they  can  measure  time  by  our  intervals  ;  they  speak  of
yesterday,  to-day,  to-morrow  and  next  week — distinctions
which  refer  to  astronomical  conditions  and  would  be  mean-
ingless without  them. They  even  make  appointments  for


298


L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.


[part


the  future,  a  strange  proceeding  if  we  had  to  do  with  the
timeless  self  or  transcendental  ego  of  Immanuel  Kant.
Memory  and  expectation  are  theirs.  They  constantly  bid
the  sitter  to  wait  for  future  developments.  They  become
fatigued  under  exertion  and  desist  when  fatigue  comes  on.
They  move  from  place  to  place,  and  distinguish  places
that  are  near  from  those  that  are  far  off.  They  hear  and
they  see  ;  and  though  I  can  find  no  distinct  references  to
an  atmosphere  which  carries  the  vibrations  of  sound,  I
find  many  references  to  the  light  which  is  necessary  for
seeing,  and  to  the  colours  which  light  produces.  They
are  acquainted  with  each  other's  appearance,  and  describe
it,  sometimes  in  detail.  There  is  hardly  a  case  of  alleged
communication  in  which  you  do  not  find  one  or  more  of
these  striking  characteristics  ;  and  if  there  were  only  one
of  them — for  example,  the  power  of  seeing, — that  alone
might  suggest  to  science  a  whole  context  of  necessary
relations  and  natural  laws,  and  enable  us  to  reconstruct
with  general  accuracy  the  kind  of  world  in  which  the
alleged  seeing  took  place.

Let  us  pause  at  this  last  item  of  evidence,  which  is  of
great  interest,  and  consider  the  various  ways  in  which  it
may  be  taken.  We  are  in  communication,  let  us  assume,
with  beings  who  by  their  own  account  are  acquainted
with  the  phenomenon  called  light.  Now,  let  us  suppose
that  in  reading  this  evidence  we  do  what  I  have  been
urging  we  should  not  do,  namely,  bring  with  us  the
notions  or  beliefs  inherited  from  popular  metaphysics  or
from  religion.  In  particular,  we  are  all  familiar  with  the
notion  of  a  heavenly  city  where  the  light  is  not  that  of
the  sun  or  the  moon  or  the  stars,  but  comes,  as  we  say,
from  a  spiritual  source.  I  have  no  word  to  say  against
this  belief  ;  but  I  do  say  that  it  has  no  business  here,
and  that  if  we  introduce  it  at  this  point  we  are  perform-
ing the  operation  which  is  known  as  "  queering  the  pitch."
However,  suppose  we  introduce  it  and  jump  to  the  con-
clusion that  the  light  mentioned  must  be  the  light  of
that  city  which  has  neither  sun  nor  moon.  What  follows  ?
Why,  that  scientific  inquiry  comes  to  a  dead  stop.  Science
if  left  to  herself  would  at  once  follow  up  the  clue  ;  she


LXXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


299


would  say  :  If  light,  then  a  luminary  which  produces  the
light,  a  medium  through  which  the  light  is  transmitted,
an  eye  sensitive  to  action  of  light,  an  optic  nerve,  an
appropriate  sense  organisation,  and  so  forth.  But  no  !
This  is  mystic  light,  this  is  spiritual  light,  light  that  never
was  on  land  or  sea  :  light  that  has  nothing  to  do  with
heat  ;  that  requires  no  luminary  to  produce  it  ;  that  has
no  laws  of  refraction,  no  rate  of  transmission  ;  light  that
never  waxes  nor  wanes,  and  knows  no  alternation  of  day
and  night.  Now,  all  that  may  be  wholesome  mysticism  ;
it  may  be  good  religion  ;  it  may  be  sound  metaphysics  ;
but  its  introduction  at  this  point  is  simply  fatal  to
scientific  inquiry.  By  suddenly  changing  the  meaning  of
"  light  "  to  fit  your  preconceptions  of  the  spiritual  world,
you  tear  out  of  the  hand  of  science  the  clue  she  was
just  beginning  to  grasp,  and  a  piece  of  evidence  which  is
full  of  significance  and  might  have  led  to  most  important
conclusions  leads  to  nothing  at  all.

Let  me  illustrate  my  meaning  by  one  of  those  far-
fetched suppositions  which,  just  because  they  are  far-
fetched, are  the  less  likely  to  encounter  our  prejudice.
Suppose  we  were  credibly  informed  by  any  means  you
choose  to  imagine,  that  a  rose,  a  single  flower  fully  formed,
had  been  discovered  on  the  planet  Mars.  How  Science
would  leap  to  her  feet  on  receiving  the  information  !
From  that  single  fact  she  could  reconstruct  the  general
characteristics  of  the  flora  of  Mars,  with  the  greatest  ease
and  almost  infallible  certainty.  A  planet  which  can  pro-
duce a  rose  must  be  able  to  produce  ten  thousand  other
things  from  the  same  conditions,  and  science  could  tell
us  in  general  what  they  are.  Not  the  flora  alone  but  the
fauna  would  be  involved.  And  beyond  all  that  the  fact
would  expand  into  a  mine  of  information  concerning  the
climate,  the  soil,  the  atmosphere,  the  seasons,  and  what
not.  We  may  say,  with  little  exaggeration,  that  the  whole
planet  would  give  itself  away  by  letting  out  the  single
secret  that  it  contained  a  rose.  But  now  suppose  that
just  as  this  reconstruction  was  about  to  begin  we  were
suddenly  confronted  with  a  new  and  unexpected  piece  of
information. "  This  rose  of  Mars,"  we  will  imagine  our


300


L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.


[part


informant  to  say,  "  is  not  what  is  commonly  meant  by
the  word.  It  is  a  mystic  rose,  a  spiritual  rose  of  dawn,
a  rose  that  grows  on  no  tree,  and  is  planted  in  no  garden  :
a  rose  that  flourished  without  the  light  of  the  sun  ;  about
whose  roots  no  man  has  digged  ;  a  rose  that  was  never
born  from  a  bud  ;  a  rose  that  neither  grows  nor  withers
nor  dies."  What  would  Science  say  to  that  ?  Needless
to  say,  she  would  have  nothing  to  answer.  She  would  be
stopped  on  the  threshold.  The  question  would  pass  out
of  her  hands  altogether,  and  it  would  now  be  for  the
metaphysicians,  the  poets,  the  mythologists,  the  mysta-
gogues  to  make  what  they  could  of  the  new  information.
And  even  they  could  not  make  much  of  it.  Now  that,
I  make  bold  to  say,  is  the  position  in  which  psychical
research  is  often  placed  by  the  habit  we  all  have  of
translating  the  evidence  into  what  we  call  "  spiritual
terms  "  before  we  have  given  ourselves  time  to  consider
what  the  evidence  really  means.

But  now  what  does  it  mean  ?  What  information  does
it  convey  as  to  the  kind  of  beings  with  whom  we  are
communicating  ?  Instead  of  answering  the  question  by
means  of  an  idea  which  is  quite  external  to  the  facts,
let  us  consult  the  internal  witness  of  the  evidence  itself
and  be  content  for  the  time  being  with  that.

All  the  characteristics  I  have  named — sex,  language,
sight,  hearing,  mental  equipment,  and  the  rest — are  well-
known  human  characteristics.  Following  the  clue  they
place  in  our  hands,  and  arguing  strictly  from  effects  to
causes,  we  are  led  immediately  to  the  conclusion  that  these
are  human  beings.  Nothing  else  is  suggested  by  the  bare
evidence,  and,  so  far  as  we  are  guided  by  the  evidence,
nothing  else  is  conceivable.  Whatever  other  conclusion  we
might  be  tempted  to  draw  in  deference  to  metaphysics,
to  moral  philosophy,  or  to  religion,  this  and  this  only  is
the  internal  witness  of  the  evidence  itself.

But,  you  will  say,  these  people  have  died,  they  have
passed  from  this  life,  they  have  left  their  bodies  behind
them,  they  are  invisible  :  it  is  right  to  assume,  therefore,
that  they  are  living  under  conditions  so  different  from
those  of  earth  that  they  cannot  be  human  beings  as  we


lxxiv.]


Presidential  Address.


301


understand  the  terms.  They  are  at  least  disembodied —
for  yonder  are  their  bodies  in  the  grave.

Again  it  seems  to  me  you  are  leaping  to  conclusions  :
you  are  importing  foreign  matter  ;  you  are  going  beyond
the  evidence.  To  begin  with,  we  must  not  take  it  for
granted  that  they  are  the  dead.  That  is  one  of  the
questions  at  issue  :  a  question  which  the  evidence  must
decide,  and  not  a  known  fact  which  decides  the  meaning
of  the  evidence.  But  even  if  the  question  were  not  open,
even  if  it  were  a  proved  truth  that  they  are  the  dead,  you
are  still  forcing  the  pace.  No  doubt  it  is  natural  to
think  that  the  world  in  which  these  beings  now  find
themselves  is  very  different  from  the  world  they  have
left.  But  that  notion  is  not  in  the  evidence  ;  it  is  in
your  mind.  What  the  evidence  reveals  is  not  the  differ-
ence between  the  two  worlds,  but  their  extraordinary
likeness,  a  likeness  so  close  that  it  is  hard  to  resist  the
conclusion  that  they  are  one  and  the  same.  A  world  in
which  sex  is  maintained  and  language  used  in  the  verna-
cular, not  to  speak  of  a  score  of  suchlike  things,  must
not  be  set  down  offhand  as  a  world  that  is  wholly  different
from  this.  To  say  of  one  of  these  beings  that  it  is  "  he  "
or  "  she,"  that  it  speaks  its  native  language,  and  so  on,
does  not  suggest  that  it  is  disembodied,  but  strongly
suggests  the  contrary.

There  is  no  such  thing  as  an  isolated  fact  in  science  ;
every  fact  has  a  necessary  context,  and  carries  with  it.  the
whole  context  of  which  it  is  an  organic  part.  If  you  find
a  rose  you  know  there  was  a  tree  that  bore  it  ;  you  know
there  was  soil  in  which  the  tree  was  rooted  ;  that  there
were  sun,  air,  moisture  to  nourish  its  growth.  In  the
same  way,  if  you  get  one  of  the  essential  characteristics
of  a  human  being  you  get  the  lot.  If  you  find  sex  you
find  much  more  than  sex,  namely,  a  whole  biological
system  ;  if  you  find  vision  you  find  light  ;  and  if  the  light,
then  everything  that  goes  with  the  light  ;  and  this  gradu-
ally expands  into  wider  and  wider  contexts  until  you  get
the  whole  order  of  nature  as  we  know  it  here  and  now.
Science  cannot  reason  otherwise.  To  forbid  her  so  to
reason  is  to  take  the  question  out  of  her  hands  and  pass


302


L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.


[part


it  to  imagination  or  to  faith.  No  man  honours  imagina-
tion and  faith  more  than  I  do  ;  but  this  Society  is  a
scientific  body.

Here,  then,  we  are  confronted  with  a  most  important
consideration  which,  unless  I  speak  in  ignorance,  has  not
been  sufficiently  weighed.  To  science — not  to  metaphysics
alone,  but  to  positive  science  in  its  severest  form — every
individual  carries  with  it  the  world  to  which  it  belongs.
It  is  the  representative  of  a  world  ;  it  is  the  summary  of
a  world.  Its  full  context  is  nothing  less  than  the  whole
system  of  things,  of  laws  and  relations  in  which  it  stands,
and  without  which  it  cannot  be,  and  cannot  even  be
thought  of.  Whenever  you  get  an  individual  thing  you
get  at  the  same  time  the  world  that  goes  with  it,  the
world  in  which  it  has  come  to  be  what  it  is  ;  if  you  get
the  rose  you  get  also  the  tree,  the  soil,  the  sun,  the  solar
system — in  fact,  the  natural  universe.  Each  of  us  in  like
manner  is  what  he  is,  is  in  fact  himself,  in  and  through
the  world  to  which  he  belongs  ;  he  and  his  world  are  so
inextricably  bound  together  that  you  cannot  have  the  first
without  having  also  the  second.  Strip  him  of  his  world
and  you  destroy  his  identity,  you  destroy  everything  that
makes  him  what  he  is.  A  rose  which  survives  in  another
world  without  a  tree,  without  air,  and  without  sun,  is
not  a  rose  at  all,  but  something  else  called  by  the  same
name  ;  still  less  can  it  be  the  identical  rose  that  grew  in
my  garden  yesterday.

If  you  remind  me  that  the  rose  of  the  next  world  once
had  the  soil,  the  air,  and  the  light  of  this,  and  that,
having  had  them  once  while  it  was  on  this  earth,  that
suffices  to  maintain  it  as  a  rose  in  its  new  sphere  of
being,  so  that  it  can  now  get  on  without  them — if  you
tell  me  this,  I  must  say  with  all  respect  that  though  you
have  made  a  delightful  fairy  tale,  to  science  it  is  nothing
but  nonsense.  My  rose,  the  one  that  grew  in  my  garden
yesterday,  was  precisely  the  sort  of  thing  that  could  never
get  on  without  sun,  air,  and  soil  in  any  sphere  of  being,
and  which  lost  all  the  characteristics  of  a  rose  very  soon
after  it  was  deprived  of  them.  Your  rose,  which  can  now
get  on  without  them  for  ever,  is  another  kind  of  article


LXXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


303


altogether,  and  nothing  that  you  can  say  will  ever  per-
suade me  to  identify  it  with  the  flower  whose  ways  I
knew  so  well,  whose  nurture  I  tended,  and  at  whose
withering  I  shed  a  tear  or  composed  a  melody.

If,  then,  it  is  true — and  I  think  it  unquestionably  is
true — that  you  cannot  separate  the  individual  from  his
world,  that  you  cannot  tear  him  out  of  his  known  context
without  destroying  his  identity — what  follows  ?  It  follows
that  the  theory  of  human  survival  involves  far  more  than
it  seems  to  do  at  first  sight.  It  means  that  the  individual
carries  his  world  with  him  and  cannot  survive  on  any
other  condition.  In  other  words,  when  we  are  proving
the  survival  of  A,  B,  and  C,  we  are  proving  also  the.
survival  of  the  world  of  relations  in  which  their  individual-
ities are  rooted,  and  which  is  the  necessary  background  to
each  one  of  them,  being  the  man  he  is.  Such  is  the  load
which  the  theory  of  survival,  so  far  as  it  is  based  on  scientific
evidence,  will  ultimately  have  to  sustain.

Some  may  be  tempted  to  say  that  the  burden  is  too
great,  that  no  theory  could  ever  sustain  such  a  load.  But
why  not  ?  I  do  not  see  that  the  survival  of  the  whole
order  of  nature  is  one  whit  harder  to  understand  or
believe  in  than  the  survival  of  any  individual  who  belongs
to  that  order.  And  truly  it  does  survive,  for  it  dies  and
lives  again  incessantly,  enacting  before  our  eyes  the  very
thing  of  which  we  are  in  search.  At  all  events,  I  should
insist  that  the  evidence,  taken  at  its  best,  points  unmis-
takably in  that  direction  ;  for  it  indicates  human  beings,
and  thereby  indicates  the  whole  order  of  nature  which  is
involved  in  their  existence.  It  may  be  that  our  present
notions  of  the  order  of  nature  are  too  narrow — merely
jjarochial  ;  and  that  our  right  course  is  to  exjDand  our
conceptions  of  nature  to  fit  the  evidence,  instead  of
forcing  the  evidence  into  the  narrow  mould  of  our  existing
ideas.  Survival,  if  proved,  cannot  stand  alone  as  an
isolated  fact.  It  will  react  upon  the  whole  body  of  our
knowledge,  as  every  new  discovery  inevitably  does.  It
will  compel  readjustment  all  round.  Its  effect  in  know-
ledge might  even  be  revolutionary.

But  why  talk  about "  survival  "  at  all  ? Is  not  that


304


L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.


[part


also  a  question-begging  term  ?  Assuming  these  beings  to
be  the  persons  they  seem  to  be.  are  we  quite  sure  they
have  "  survived  " — that  that  is  the  proper  term  to  apply
to  their  condition  ?  Do  we  know  for  certain  that  they
have  made  a  passage,  that  they  have  left  a  familiar  port
and  arrived  at  a  strange  one  ?  We  know,  indeed,  that
they  died.  But  were  we  present  in  the  article  of  their
death,  and  did  we  see  the  departing  soul  making  its
exit  to  "  another  world  "  ?  Did  they  ?  Do  either  they
or  we  know  what  happened  ?  Does  their  "  survival  "
stand  in  the  evidence  ?  No,  it  does  not.  What  stands
in  the  evidence  is  their  existence  where  they  are.  There
is  no  evidence — at  least,  none  that  I  can  credit — of  hoiv
they  got  there.

In  past  ages  the  nightly  disappearance  of  the  sun  gave
rise  to  the  belief  that  the  sun  had  gone  away,  which  is
precisely  what  it  seems  to  do,  and  a  cosmogony  was
constructed  to  account  for  the  departure  and  for  the
subsequent  arrival.  Even  the  idea  of  "survival"  was
introduced  to  account  for  the  strange  doings  of  the  sun.
We  now  know  that  the  sun  has  never  moved  at  all  :
there  has  been  no  departure  and  no  arrival  :  or  rather,
it  is  we  who  have  departed  and  arrived,  and  not  the
sun.  May  it  not  be  that  we  are  here  in  presence  of  a
similar  problem  ?  May  it  not  be  that  where  these  beings
now  are,  there  they  have  been  all  along  ;  that  we  have
simply  found  them  in  one  of  their  many  homes  ?

It  is  a  question  which  opens  out  into  fields  of  speculation
too  vast  for  me  to  attempt  their  exploration  now.  But
perhaps  the  notion  of  multiple  personality  may  have  some
light  to  throw  on  this  matter.  No  man  knows  how  many
men  he  is.  Which  means  that  no  man  knows  how  many
lives  he  lives,  and  how  many  worlds  he  inhabits  here  and
now.  The  many  in  the  one  !  We  take  that  as  meaning
many  atoms  of  dust  combined  into  one  world.  But  why
not  many  lives  in  one  life,  many  selves  in  one  self,  many
worlds  in  one  world  ?  But  that  is  an  abyss  on  the  edge
of  which  it  becomes  me  to  pause.

I  will  only  say,  in  conclusion,  that  in  this  inquiry  we
are  all  too  ready  to "  take  the  cash  and  let  the  credit


LXXIV.]


Presidential  Address.


305


go."  The  cash  is  the  particular  fact  we  are  in  search  of
— to  wit,  the  fate  of  some  individual  whom  we  have  lost
and  who  was  dear  to  us.  The  credit  is  the  whole  system
of  other  facts  with  which  this  one  stands  in  necessary
relation.  To  these  we  give  little  attention.  The  emotional
stress  is  often  so  great  that  the  particular  fact  we  are
in  search  of  stands  out  completely  isolated  in  the  mind,
and  nothing  else  is  of  any  importance.  So  Ave  take  the
cash  and  let  the  credit  go.  But  Science  cannot  look  at
the  matter  in  this  way.  Her  main  interest  is  with  the
credit  ;  with  the  bearing  of  this  thing  on  all  other  things.
I  am  afraid  we  have  sometimes  forgotten  that.  It  is  not
easy  to  remember,  especially  at  the  present  time,  when  so
many  millions  are  held  fast  in  the  grip  of  their  private
sorrows.  But  we  must  try  to  remember  it.  After  all,
the  S.P.R.,  high  as  its  functions  are,  cannot  claim  the
highest  function  of  all,  which  is  that  of  administering
consolation  amid  the  tragedies  of  life.  If  that  follows
from  our  labours — well  and  good  !  But  it  is  not  for  us
to  make  it  our  object.


306


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[PART


V.

SOME  EXPERIMENTS  WITH  A  NEW  AUTOMATIST.
A  Paper  Read  to  the  Society  on  April  24,  1916.
By  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.

In  the  Journal  for  February,  1915,  a  notice  was  inserted
asking  members  of  the  Society  and  their  friends  to
offer  themselves  as  subjects  for  experiments  in  thought-
transference,  either  with  or  without  hypnotism.  Amongst
those  who  answered  this  appeal  was  Mrs.  Stuart  Wilson,
the  new  automatist  to  whom  reference  is  made  in  the
title  of  this  paper.  Mrs.  Wilson,  who  is  an  American
by  birth  and  the  wife  of  Brigadier-General  Charles
Stuart  Wilson,  C.B.,  of  the  Royal  Engineers,  has  been
for  many  years  an  associate  of  the  S.P.R.,  and  is  known
personally  to  several  members  of  the  Council.  I  should
like  to  take  this  opportunity  of  thanking  Mrs.  Wilson
for  the  trouble  to  which  she  has  allowed  herself  to
be  put  in  complying  with  the  various  conditions  which
I  have  from  time  to  time  suggested  in  the  conduct
of  these  experiments,  and  also  in  providing  me  with
prompt  and  detailed  records  of  her  own  experiences.

Mrs.  Wilson  and  I  met  each  other  for  the  first  time
on  April  12,  1915,  at  the  Rooms  of  the  Society.  Our
original  scheme  was  to  carry  out  a  series  of  experiments
in  thought-transference  on  the  same  lines  as  those  which
had  been  canied  out  with  the  Misses  Tipping  (see  Proceed-
ings S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXVII. ),  Mrs.  Wilson  being  the  percipient
and  I  the  agent.  But  we  decided  in  this  case  to  try
the  effect  of  hypnotising  the  percipient,  and  accordingly
Dr.  Gilbert  Scott  kindly  undertook  to  be  present  at
the  experiments  and  to  act  as  hypnotist.  Mrs.  Wilson
proved a good subject as regards the lighter  stages


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.  307

of  the  trance,  but  Dr.  Scott  was  never  able  to  induce
somnambulism.

We  tried  seven  experiments  of  this  kind,  the  subjects
chosen  for  transmission  including  numbers,  playing  cards,
simple  diagrams,  etc.  Sometimes  I  sat  in  the  same  room
as  the  percipient  behind  a  screen,  and  sometimes  in  the
passage  outside,  the  door  of  the  room  being  closed.
A  certain  amount  of  success  was  obtained,  especially  in
the  case  of  the  diagrams,  but  it  seemed  doubtful  whether
the  proportion  of  successful  results  was  greater  than
might  be  expected  from  chance-coincidence.

About  this  time  Mrs.  Wilson  found  that  when  lying
on  her  bed  in  the  evening  she  was  able  by  self-suggestion
to  put  herself  into  a  condition  resembling  a  light  hyp-
notic trance,  and  I  therefore  proposed  that  we  should
see  whether  we  could  obtain  a  greater  degree  of  success
in  experiments  at  a  distance.  Accordingly  we  tried
five  experiments  under  these  new  conditions  between
April  26  and  May  16,  1915,  Mrs.  Wilson  again  acting
as  percipient  and  I  as  agent.  The  times  at  which
these  experiments  took  place  were  pre -ai  ranged,  Mrs.
Wilson  being  always  in  London,  and  I  sometimes  in
another  part  of  London,  and  sometimes  at  Cambridge.
The  subjects  which  I  chose  for  transmission  were  articles
of  various  kinds  (in  two  cases  pictures)  which  I  held
in  my  hands  or  placed  in  front  of  me,  concentrating
my  attention  upon  them  as  much  as  possible.  In  no
case  did  Mrs.  Wilson  get  any  clear  impression  of  the
subject  of  the  experiment,  but  she  did  on  several  occa-
sions display  what  appeared  to  be  abnormal  knowledge
of  my  surroundings,  and  from  the  reports  which  she
sent  me  I  formed  the  opinion  that  she  was  likely  to
prove  a  good  percipient,  if  the  right  conditions  could
be  devised.

I  therefore  proposed  to  Mrs.  Wilson  that  instead  of
deliberately  trying  to  convey  certain  thoughts  to  her,
I  should  write  automatically  at  the  time  of  our  experi-
ments, with  the  idea  that  if  thoughts  are  transmitted
by  the  subconscious  rather  than  the  conscious  mind,
Mrs.  (Wilson  might  in  this  way  get  into  touch  with  my


308


Mrs,  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


subconscious  thoughts  as  expressed  in  automatic  writing.
It  is  with  this  third  series  of  experiments  that  I  am
here  concerned,  and  I  will  begin  by  describing  in  greater
detail  the  conditions  under  which  they  were  carried  out.

As  to  my  own  part,  I  did  not  in  any  way  modify
the  course  which  I  generally  follow  in  regard  to  my
automatic  writing,  having  come  to  the  conclusion  that
better  results  are  likely  to  be  obtained  when  I  leave
my  mind  entirely  free  and  do  not  try  to  direct  it
towards  any  particular  subject  or  person.

Mrs.  Wilson's  procedure  is  as  follows  :  having  provided
herself  with  pencil  and  paper,  she  lies  down  in  the
dark  and  lapses  almost  at  once  into  a  light  stage  of
hypnosis.  In  this  condition  a  series  of  very  vivid  mental
pictures  present  themselves  to  her,  amounting  sometimes
to  visual  hallucinations.  Not  infrequently  she  hears  a
voice,  it  may  be  her  own  voice  or  the  voice  of  some
other  unknown  person.  On  some  occasions  the  voice
also  has  been  completely  externalised  as  an  auditory
hallucination.

Mrs.  Wilson  makes  brief  notes  of  her  impressions
at  the  conclusion  of  the  experiment  ;  sometimes,  after
she  thinks  the  experiment  is  over,  she  has  some  further
impressions,  which  are  duly  noted.  Once  or  twice  it
has  happened  that  the  impressions  have  taken  the  form
of  a  vivid  dream  during  ordinary  sleep  of  which  Mrs.
Wilson  has  noted  as  much  as  she  could  remember  on
waking.  The  detailed  records  which  she  sent  to  me
were  based  on  her  own  contemporary  notes,  and  were
usually  written  out  on  the  day  following  the  experi-
ment. These  records  have  all  been  preserved,  together
with  the  postmarks  showing  the  dates  upon  which  they
were  despatched.

My  own  scripts  were  as  usual  sent  to  Mi.  Piddington
immediately  after  they  had  been  written,  and  before
I  had  received  any  statement  from  Mrs.  Wilson  as  to
her  contemporary  impressions.  I  never  showed  my
scripts  to  Mrs.  Wilson,  or  gave  her  any  clue  as  to  their
contents.  On  receiving  from  her  the  record  of  her
own  impressions,  I  usually  sent  a  brief  acknowledgement,


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.  309

stating — if  such  were  the  case — that  the  experiment
had  given  interesting  results,  but  by  Mrs.  Wilson's  own
desire  I  never  mentioned  any  details  whatever.  It
should  therefore  be  noted  that  whereas  the  impressions
received  by  Mrs.  Wilson  during  any  of  our  preceding
experiments,  were  in  each  case  known  to  me,  Mrs.
Wilson  had  no  normal  knowledge  as  to  the  contents
of  my  preceding  scripts,  none  of  the  scripts  with  which
I  am  here  concerned  having  been  published.  This  point
is  important,  because  it  happened  more  than  once  that
a  topic  referred  to  in  my  script  made  its  appearance
a  short  time  afterwards  in  Mrs.  Wilson's  impressions.

The  question  may  be  asked,  whether  in  my  con-
versations with  Mrs.  Wilson  or  in  my  letters  to  her
during  the  period  of  these  experiments  anything  was
said  which  might  directly  or  indirectly  turn  her  thoughts
towards  the  subject-matter  of  my  contemporary  scripts.
I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  this  factor  in  the
case  is  negligible.  As  I  have  already  remarked,  I  never
said  anything  at  all  to  Mrs.  Wilson  about  my  own
scripts,  and  our  conversations  together  were  on  quite
other  subjects.  My  letters  to  Mrs.  Wilson  during  this
period  have  all  been  preserved.  They  consist  for  the  most
part  either  of  vaguely  encouraging  remarks  to  the
effect  that  I  thought  the  result  of  the  experiments
interesting,  or  in  suggestions  as  to  the  time  and  con-
ditions of  the  next  experiment.

It  will  be  s_en  that  the  conditions  under  which  these
experiments  were  carried  out  were  such  as  to  reduce
to  small  proportions  the  risk  of  error  from  mere  in-
accuracy of  memory  or  record.  I  do  not  think  that
the  theory  of  deliberate  collusion  between  Mrs.  Wilson
and  myself  will  be  widely  held,  although  I  freely  admit
that  we  cannot  disprove  it.

It  will  be  convenient  at  this  stage  to  say  something
about  the  extent  of  Mrs.  Wilson's  acquaintance  with
the  various  reports  on  automatic  writing  which  the
Society  has  published  in  lecent  years,  since  her  impres-
sions might  well  be  influenced  by  her  memory  of  what
she  had  read  in  these  reports. Mrs.  Wilson,  as  I  have

u


310


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


already  stated,  has  been  an  Associate  of  the  S.P.R.  for
some years. She has therefore received, and  in  most
cases has read, the Journal and Proceedings,  during
this  period. She  has  seldom  however  read  any  of  their
contents  more  than  once,  and  her  conscious  recollection
of  them  is  not  extensive  or  accurate. But  for  evidential
purposes we must assume that Mrs. Wilson — sub-
consciously at least — knows whatever has appeared  in
the Journal or Proceedings. This assumption  however
will affect the argument of my  paper very  little  ;  for
the  connexions  of  thought  between  Mrs.  Wilson's  records
and my scripts relate in the great majority of  cases
to  topics  which  are  not  mentioned,  certainly  not  empha-
sised, in any published reports, so that Mrs.  Wilson's
previous knowledge could not lead her to expect  that
some allusion would be made to these topics in  my
script. Generally speaking,  it may  be said that  whilst
Mrs. Wilson's impressions exhibit hardly any signs  of
being  influenced  by  her  recollection  of published  reports
on automatic writing, they have a curious  tendency
to dwell upon topics to which more or less  frequent
reference  has  been  made  in  unpublished  scripts,  of  which
Mrs. Wilson could know nothing. This aspect of  the
case  is  one  with  which  I  shall  not  concern  myself  here,
except  in  so  far  as  certain  of  my  own scripts,  written
during  the  period  of  my  experiments  with  Mrs.  Wilson,
appear  to  be  reflected  in her records. For — besides  the
fact that I am not in a position to compare  Mrs.
Wilson's records with scripts by other automatists,  to
which,  being  myself  an  automatist,  I  do  not  for  evidential
reasons have  access- — this interrelation of scripts is  a
question which could not be fully discussed  without
going into matters not at present publishable. In  the
opinion of those investigators who are able to  judge
the  case,  Mrs.  Wilson's  records  are  a  valuable  contribu-
tion to  the  evidence  for  supernormal  phenomena  which  the
Society  has  obtained  in  the  last  few  years  through  experi-
ments in  various  kinds  of  automatism,  chiefly  writing.

Having  thus  indicated  the  limited  scope  of  this  paper,
I  will  now  give  an  account  of a  group  of  cross-corre-


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  iviih  a  New  Automatist.  311


spondences  which  occurred  between  Mrs.  Wilson's  records
and  my  own  script  during  our  first  seven  experiments
together  between  May  20  and  June  16,  1915.  The
whole  of  the  script  which  I  wrote  during  these  four
weeks  is  printed  here,  either  in  the  main  part  of  the
paper,  or  in  the  Appendix  at  the  end,  to  which  I  have
for  convenience  relegated  such  parts  as  are  not  immediately
relevant,  and  I  have  also  printed  the  whole  of  Mrs.
Wilson's  records  of  impressions  obtained  during  this
period.  Both  the  records  and  the  scripts  are  printed
verbatim  with  explanatory  notes  and  translations  in  square
brackets.  In  some  cases  I  have  inserted  letters  in  round
brackets,  (a),  (b),  etc.,  for  convenience  of  reference  in
subsequent  comments.

I.

Mrs.  Wilson's  record  of  May  20,  1915,  has  no  apparent
connection  with  my  contemporary  script  and  need  not
be  quoted  here.  It  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix,
p.  343.

II.

Mrs. Wilson's  record  of  May  23,  1915,  10.15  p.m.
A  plant. — A  gipsy  caravan. — A  book.

(a)  The  portrait  of  Dr.  Wilson  [Mrs.  Wilson's  cousin]  who
died  with  Captain  Scott  in  the  Antarctic,  and  the  words
which  formed  part  of  Captain  Oates'  epitaph  :  "  A  very  gallant
gentleman."  A  man's  hands. — [Here  Mrs.  Wilson  went  to
sleep].

After  6  a.m.,  May  24,  1915.

A  race  horse. — Then  distinct  at  last  something  that  had
seemed  at  one  time  a  white  crescent  moon,  at  another  a
section  of  my  Japanese  crystal,  and  which  had  been  trying
to  form  itself  from  the  very  beginning.  A  goblet  sur-
rounded by  soft  light  and  standing  on  a  crescent.  I  am
sure  it  meant  the  Grail.

(b)  A  gigantic  cloudy  hand  stretched  out  over  a  troubled
sea,  seen  dimly  in  the  cold  grey  dawn  or  dusk.


312


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[PART


(c)  Two  women  setting  out  on  a  journey  to  some  temple.
I  do  not  know  why  I  thought  of  Baalbek.

(d)  A  very  ugly  and  formidable  whip. — An  iron  collar.
I  was  told  it  was  the  collar  of  a  willing  slave.

H.  V*  script,  May  23,  1915,  10.15  p.m.

Labor  non  inutilis  [labour  not  useless] — taking  the  omen
— felix  qui  potuit 1  [Happy  he  who  was  able] — songs  of
gladness  —  the  meaning  of  the  song  —  over  the  sea  2  —
the  water  echoes — over  the  seas  our  galley  went 2 — realms
unknow  n — traversing  the  deep — the  peak  of  Darien  3 — to  see
the  sunrise — the  waters  of  the  sunset — to  see  the  great
Achilles  whom  we  knew 4 — the  happy  warrior  thrice  blessed —

the  chain  is  broken — link  in  link — there  shall  never  be  one
lost  good  5 — the  circle  of  life — full  tide — full  span — the  stream
runs  slow —

better  to  be  a  slave 6 — but  that  belongs  to  Achilles.

The  early  part  of  this  script  consists  in  a  series  of
allusions  to  voyaging  both  literally  and  metaphorically
over  unknown  seas  and  to  the  joys  of  knowledge.  We
have  first  a  quotation  from  the  second  book  of  the
Georgics.  Virgil  is  speaking  of  the  philosopher  Epicurus
(or  of  his  follower  Lucretius)  and  says  :

Felix  qui  potuit  lerum  cognoscere  causas.  [Happy  he  who
was  able  to  learn  the  causes  of  things].

Then  follow  three  quotations  from  English  poems  all
dealing  with  voyages.  First  the  opening  line  from  one
of  the  songs  in  Browning's  Paracelsus  :

Over  the  seas  our  galley  went.

The  meaning  of  this  song  in  relation  to  the  whole
poem  does  not  concern  us  here  ;  it  is  enough  to  say
that  it  tells  the  story  of  an  imaginary  voyage  to  a  land
that  no  man  has visited  before. The  second  quotation

*  For  convenience  of  reference  all my  scripts are  filed  under  these
initials,  which  are  those  of  my  name  before  marriage.
1  Virg.  G.  II.,  490.  2  Browning,  Paracelsus.

3  Keats,  On  first  looking  into  Chapman's  Homer.

4  Tennyson,  Ulysses.  5  Browning,  Abt  Vogler.
4  See  Homer,  Od.  XI.,  489.


Lxxrv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Autornatist.


313


is  from  Keats'  sonnet  On  first  looking  into  Chapman's
Homer  :

Or  like  stout  Cortez  when  with  eagle  eyes
He  stared  at  the  Pacific — and  all  his  men

Looked  at  each  other  in  a  wild  surmise —
Silent,  upon  a  peak  in  Darien.

Here  we  have  an  allusion  to  an  actual  voyage  of
discovery  applied  metaphorically  to  a  discovery  in
literature.

The  third  quotation  is  from  Tennyson,  from  the  poem
in  which  Ulysses  in  his  old  age  looks  back  with  regret
upon  the  days  of  his  wanderings  and  determines  to
make  one  last  voyage  before  the  end  comes  :

for  my  purpose  holds
To  sail  beyond  the  sunset,  and  the  baths
Of  all  the  western  stars,  until  I  die.
It  may  be  that  the  gulfs  will  wash  us  down  ;
It  may  be  we  shall  touch  the  Happy  Isles,
And  see  the  great  Achilles,  whom  we  knew.

There  is  an  obvious  association  of  ideas  between  these
passages  in  my  script  and  Mrs.  Wilson's  reference  to
the  portrait  of  her  cousin,  Dr.  Wilson,  and  to  Captain
Oates'  epitaph.  The  Scott  Antarctic  expedition,  upon
which  Dr.  Wilson  lost  his  life,  is  one  of  the  most  notable
examples  in  recent  years  of  a  voyage  of  discovery,  and
the  spirit  which  animated  it  was  evidently  the  spirit
expressed  in  the  various  quotations  given  in  my  script, — •
to  adventure  into  undiscovered  regions  at  whatever  cost
to  oneself.  The  impression  of  a  gipsy  caravan,  which
Mrs.  Wilson  recorded  just  before  hei  impression  of  Dr.
Wilson's  portrait,  suggests  a  wandering  life  and  perhaps
belongs  to  the  same  train  of  thought.

This  is  the  only  occasion  upon  which  Mrs.  Wilson
has  made  any  allusion  in  her  records  to  Dr.  Wilson
or  to  the  Scott  expedition,  and  this  is  the  only  occasion,
at  least  within  the  period  of  my  experiments  with  Mrs.
Wilson,  upon  which  my  script  has  referred  with  such
particular emphasis to the ideas of exploration  and


314


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[PART


discovery.  I  should  add  that  until  I  received  Mrs.
Wilson's  record,  which  of  course  was  after  my  own
script  had  been  written,  I  did  not  know  that  she
and  Dr.  Wilson  were  related.  I  should  not  however
lay  much  stress  on  this  connexion  between  Mrs.  Wilson's
record  and  my  contemporary  script  were  it  not  rein-
forced by  another  connexion  of  a  moie  .definite  kind.
Achilles,  and  by  implication  Ulysses,  make  their  first
appearance  in  this  script  through  the  quotation  from
Tennyson's  Ulysses.  Then  after  a  short  divergence  the
script  returns  to  the  subject  with  the  words  :

Better  to  be  a  slave

but  that  belongs  to  Achilles.

The  allusion  here  is  to  the  passage  in  Homer's  Odyssey
in  which  Odysseus,  or  to  give  him  his  Latin  name
Ulysoes,  goes  down  to  the  underworld  and  meets  the
shade  of  Achilles,  who  says  to  him  :  "I  would  rather
be  a  serf  with  another  man  for  my  master  and  that
man  poor,  than  rule  over  all  the  dead  that  have  passed
away."

It  will  be  remembeied  that  Mrs.  Wilson's  record
closed  with  impressions  of  a  whip  and  a  collar  (d)  de-
scribed as  "  the  collar  of  a  willing  slave."  This  phrase
represents  very  closely  the  spirit  of  Achilles'  words.
He  is  ready  to  be  a  slave,  if  he  may  return  to  the
world  of  living  men.  The  word  "  slave  "  moreover  is
actually  used  in  my  script,  although  "  serf  "  would  be
a  better  rendering  of  the  Greek.

Two  other  impressions  which  Mrs.  Wilson  recorded
on  May  23,  1915  (b  and  c),  show  an  association  of
thought  with  phiases  which  occur  in  my  preceding
script  of  May  20,  1915,  written  during  my  first  experi-
ment with  Mrs.  Wilson,  and  it  is  woith  noting  that
at  the  conclusion  of  her  record  on  Ma;y  20,  1915,  Mrs.
Wilson  wrote  :

The  odd  part  of  the  whole  experiment  is  that  while  I
felt  sure  I  had  failed,  another  part  of  my  mind  was  insist-
ing that  it  had  got  your  idea.  If  so,  perhaps  it  will  emerge
from  the  subconscious  stratum  before  long.


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  ivith  a  New  Automatist.  315

H.  V.  script  of  May  20,  1915.
The  mills  of  God  grind  slowly —

Far  away — the  fading  light — calm  was  the  morn  1 — the
evening  and  the  morning  2 —

The  temple  of  Asclepius — the  healing  draft  (sic)  a  snake
in  the  temple — the  wand — the  white  wand  of  the  healer —
stretch  forth  thy  hands.

Broken  images — the  temple  of  Baal — they  shall  count
their  flocks — the  shepherds  and  the  sheep — Ah  who  shall
tell  the  city  3 — jewels  was  the  word 3 — master  of  the  murmur-
ing courts4 —

When  I  first  read  through  Mrs.  Wilson's  second  record
'(May  23,  1915),  I  was  in  some  doubt  as  to  how  (b)
should  be  interpreted.

A  gigantic  cloudy  hand  stretched  out  over  a  troubled  sea,
seen  dimly  in  the  cold  grey  dawn  or  dusk.

I  thought  the  allusion  might  be  to  the  crossing  of
the  Red  Sea  (Exod.  xiv.  15  ff.)  :

And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses  ..."  Stretch  out  thine
hand  over  the  sea.  and  divide  it."

But  on  July  7,  1915,  I  asked  Mrs.  Wilson  what  this
passage  in  her  record  suggested  to  hei,  without  myself
offering  any  mterpretation  of  it.  She  at  once  said  :
"  The  Spirit  of  God  moving  on  the  face  of  the  waters."

This  takes  us  to  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  :

And  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters.

And  God  said,  Let  their  be  light  : and  there  was  light.

.  .  .  And  God  called  the  light  Day,  and  the  darkness  he
called  Night.  And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the
first  day.5

1  Cf.  Tennyson,  In  Memoriam,  XI.  :  "  Calm  is  the  morn.''

2  Genesis  i .

3  These  phrases  refer  to  an  earlier  H.  V.  script  in  which  some
words  were  illegible.

4  Rossetti,  Love's  Nocturne.

5  This  passage  figured  with  some  prominence  in  a  paper  read  by
Mr.  J.  G.  Piddington  at  a  Private  Meeting  of  the  Society  on  January
29,  1915,  but  Mrs.  Wilson  was  not  present  at  this  meeting  and  knew
nothing  of  the  paper  till  it  was  published  in  December,  1916.


316


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[PART


The  words  "  the  evening  and  the  morning,"  are  quoted
in  my  script  of  May  20,  1915.  They  occur  six  times
in  Genesis,  Chapter  I.,  once  for  each  day  of  creation,
and  my  script  leaves  it  an  open  question  to  which  of
the  six  days  reference  is  here  made.  But  there  is
undoubtedly  a  reference  to  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis ,
to  which  Mrs.  Wilson,  according  to  her  own  independent
interpretation,  referred  on  May  23,  1915.

Further,  Mrs.  Wilson's  impression  of  a  "  hand  stretched
out  over  a  troubled  sea  "  is  immediately  followed  by
an  impression  of  two  women  setting  out  on  a  journey
to  a  temple,  and  Mis.  Wilson  adds  that  she  thought
of  Baalbek,  which  is  a  town  at  the  foot  of  Mount
Lebanon,  and  was  one  of  the  chief  seats  of  the  worship
of  t  he  Assyrian  sun -god  Baal.

In  my  script  of  May  20,  1915,  immediately  after  the
quotation  from  Genesis,  there  is  a  reference  to  the
temple  of  Aesculapius  (Asclepius),  the  god  of  healing.
This  topic  is  pursued  in  the  allusion  to  the  snake,  one
of  the  symbols  most  frequently  associated  with  Aesculapius,
and  in  several  phrases  about  healing,  which  conclude
with  the  words  : "  Stretch  forth  thy  hands."

Taking  the  context  into  consideration,  I  think  the
allusion  here  is  probably  to  the  healing  of  the  man
with  the  withered  hand.

Then  saith  he  to  the  man,  Stretch  forth  thine  hand.1

If  the  allusion  in  my  script  is  to  this  passage,  the  words
are  not  quite  accurately  given  ;  hand  should  be  singular
and  not  plural.  The  words  "stretch  forth  thy  hands"
occur  in  John  xxi.  18,  but  the  context  there  has
no  relevance  to  the  context  in  my  script.  So  far  as  the
cross -correspondence  between  myself  and  Mrs.  Wilson
is  concerned,  it  matters  little  to  which  passage  my
script  is  taken  to  refer.

The  script  then  goes  on  :

Broken  images — the  temple  of  Baal — they  shall  count  their
flocks — the  shepherds  and  the  sheep.

1  Matt.  xii.  13.  I  am  confirmed  in  this  opinion  by  the  fact  that  a  fortnight
later  in  .my  script  of  June  4,  1915,  the  words  "the  palsied  hand"  occur.


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.  317

There  is  almost  certainty  a  reference  here  to  Byron's
poem  The  Destruction  of .  Sennacherib .

The  widows  of  Ashur  are  loud  in  their  wail,
And  the  idols  are  broke  in  the  temple  of  Baal ;

and  this  perhaps  accounts  for  the  subsequent  allusion
in  the  script  to  shepherds  and  sheep,  for  the  opening
line  of  Byron's  poem  is  :

The  Assyrian  came  down  like  a  wolf  on  the  fold.

Howevei  that  may  be,  the  "  temple  of  Baal  "  makes
a  clear  point  of  connexion  between  my  script  and  Mrs.
Wilson's  record  of  three  days  later  containing  an  allusion
to  Baalbek.  This  is  the  only  time  that  there  has  been
any  reference to Baal in Mrs. Wilson's  recoids.

In  my  own  script  the  line  quoted  above

And  the  idols  are  broke  in  the  temple  of  Baal,

was  quoted  on  August  11,  1910  (an  unpublished  script).
There  have  been  one  oi  two  other  allusions,  certain
or  probable,  to  The  Destruction  of  Sennacherib,  but  no
other  allusions  to  the  temple  of  Baal.

It  will  be  observed  that  whereas  in  my  script  the
allusions  to  a  hand  outstretched  and  to  the  first  chapter
of  Genesis  emerge  as  two  quite  distinct  lines  of  thought,
in  Mrs.  Wilson's  record  they  are  combined  into  a  single
impression  of  a  hand  stretched  out  over  the  sea,  which
symbolises  "  the  spirit  of  God  moving  on  the  face  of
the  waters."  This  difference  in  form  may  seem  to  dim-
inish the  force  of  the  coincidence,  but  we  must  take
into  consideration  that  in  such  cases  each  individual
mind  is  likely  to  follow  pre-existing  lines  of  association
and  these  will  almost  certainly  introduce  individual
modifications  of  the  form  in  which  any  given  idea  is
clothed.  What  is  notable  in  these  cases  is  that  in  one
form  or  another  the  same  ideas  do  arise  in  two  or
more  minds,  and  I  believe  that  a  careful  study  of  the
varieties  of  form  into  which  ideas  are  moulded  by  each
individual  mind  might  throw  interesting  light  on  the
mental  processes  lying  behind  these  phenomena.


318  Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.  [part


Tabular  Summary.


May  20,  1915.

May  23,  1915.

Wilson  Record.

A  temple,  associated  with
Baalbek.  A  hand  stretched
out  over  the  sea,  associated
with  Genesis  i.  2.

The  Scott  Antarctic  Ex-
pedition.

A  willing  slave.

V.  Script.

"  The evening and  the
morning" Genesis  i.  5  ff .
"stretch  forth  thy  hands."
The  temple  of  Baal.

Several  allusions  to  voy-
ages of  discovery.

"  Better  to  be  a  slave."
Achilles.

M

III.

Mrs.  Wilson's  record,  May  28,  1915,  10.15  p.m.

(a)  Snow -covered  mountains  with  a  narrow  valley  between
them  and  at  the  end  of  the  valley  a  cavern,  out  of  which
darted  long  snaky  necks  with  dragon-like  heads.

(b)  Something  that  looked  like  an  implement  made  of
ivory  which  was  twirling  so  rapidly  that  it  took  me  some
time  to  realise  that  it  was  a  spindle.

(c)  The  market-place  of  a  quaint  old  town,  like  the  Spanish
towns  I  know  so  well.  A  puppet  show  was  going  on.  The
puppets  were  in  costumes  of  somewhere  about  the  period
of  Philip  the  Second.  Then  came  another  picture,  still  of
a  mediaeval  hill-town  at  night.  This  time  the  square  was
emptj  and  a  church-tower  stood  out  against  the  sky,  while
to  the  right  of  it  there  shone  high  above  the  horizon  a
brilliant  constellation.  Someone  said  :  "  A  sign  in  the
heavens."

(d)  Snow  mountains  again  and  the  voice,  which  last  night
was  distinctly  my  own  said  : "  The  untrodden  heights."


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with,  a  New  Automatist.


319


(e)  A  quotation  from  Browning  which  has  haunted  me  all
the  afternoon  :

God's  in  His  Heaven

All's  well  with  the  world."  1

(/)  After  this  I  stopped,  got  out  of  bed  and  wrote  it
down,  but,  after  I  was  in  bed  a  sain,  I  began  to  wonder
about  the  spindle,  and  at  once  saw  the  Sleeping  Beauty
with  the  old  women  in  the  attic,  playing  Avith  the  spindle,
saw  her  prick  her  thumb  and  immediately  afterwards  I
saw  the  valley  with  the  cavern  at  the  end,  with  the  figure
of  a  girl  in  white  going  towards  it,  and  I  realised  she  was
Psyche  on  her  vvaj  to  Proserpine  at  Aphrodite's  bidding.
As  the  result  of  that  visit  was  that  she  fell  into  a  death-
like sleep  on  her  way  home,  I  wonder  if  the  idea  you  want
is  not  some  allusion  to  s  trance-like  sleep  ?

Now  Mrs.  Wilson's  impressions  on  this  occasion  seem
to  show  two  distinct  stratifications  of  thought.  We
have  first  the  impression  of  a  valley  between  snow
mountains  with  a  cavern  at  the  end  of  it,  followed
by  the  impression  of  a  spindle.  At  the  end  of  the
record  these  two  ideas  seem  to  coalesce  into  the  impres-
sion of  a  tianee-like  sleep,  as  represented  by  the  Sleeping
Beauty,  who  fell  asleep  after  pricking  her  thumb  with  a
poisoned  spindle,  and  by  Psyche  who  fell  asleep  after  her
visit  to  Proserpine.

The  other  stratum  of  thought  is  represented  by  two
mental  pictuies  of  mediaeval  hill-towns  and  a  quotation
from  Pippa  Passes.  Between  these  two  pictures  and
Browning's  poem  there  is  a  natural  link,  for  the  scene
of  the  poem  is  laid  at  Asolo,  a  mediaeval  hill-town  of
North  Italy.

I  now  turn  to  my  own  scripts  of  which  theie  are
two  to  be  considered  here,  one  written  on  May  27,
1915,  the  other  on  Ma\  28,  1915,  during  my  experi-
ment with  Mrs.  Wilson.

H.  V.  script  of  May  27,  1915,  11.30  a.m.

The  garden  of  sleep — poppy  seed — hellebore — the  grape  of
Proserpine — 2

1  Pippa  Passes.  2  Keats,  Ode  on  Melancholy.


320


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


no,  no  go  not  to  Lethe — 1

by  the  banks  of  the  river — the  flowing  stream — run  slow
run  fast —

even  the  wariest  (sic)  river — 2

Litany — with  prayer  and  fasting — All  Souls — for  they  rest
from  their  labours — 3

white-robed  the  saints  in  glory — the  open  gate — cardine
portae—

Beyond  imagining — a  solemn  musick  4 — the  passionate  hope  5
— the  evening  bell  6 — the  last  ray  lingering  on  the  meadow —
the  sun  in  heaven — drifting  on — ivory — an  ivory  tower  7 — and
a  green  wreath — full  of  content —

rock  of  ages — the  water  shall  flow — in  a  green  land —

The  ideas  upon  which  stress  is  laid  in  the  first  part
of  this  script  are  sleep  and  the  goddess  who  brings  sleep,
that  is  Proserpine.

There are two quotations from the opening lines  of

Keats'  Ode  on  Melancholy.

No,  no  !  go  not  to  Lethe,  neither  twist

Wolf's  bane,  tight-rooted,  for  its  poisonous  wine  ;

Nor  suffer  thy  pale  forehead  to  be  kissed
By  nightshade,  ruby  grape  of  Proserpine.

and  almost  immediately  afterwards  there  is  a  quotation
from  Swinburne's  Garden  of  Proserpine  :

From  too  much  love  of  living

From  hope  and  fear  set  free,
We  thank  with  brief  thanksgiving

Whatever  gods  may  be
That  no  life  lives  for  ever,
That  dead  men  rise  up  never,
That  even  the  weariest  river

Winds  somewhere  safe  to  sea.

1  Keats,  Ode  on  Melancholy.

2  Swinburne,  The  Garden  of  Proserpine.

3  Cf.  Litanei  (Schubert)  "  Ruh'n  in  Friede  alle  Seelen."

4  Milton,  At  a  Solemn  Musick.

5  Cf.  Browning,  Abt  Vogler,  and  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  59.

6  Cf.  Tennyson,  Crossing  the  Bar.

7  Cf.  Cant.  vii.  4: "Thy  neck  is  a  tower  of  ivory."


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  Neiv  Aulomatist.  321

With  these  phrases  in  my  script  compare  Mrs.  Wilson's
allusion  to  Proserpine  and  her  suggestion  that  the  idea
which  is  wanted  is  "  some  allusion  to  a  trance-like
sleep."

My  script  of  May  27,  1915,  is  also  connected  with
Mrs.  Wilson's  record  of  the  following  day  by  the  occur-
rence in  both  of  the  word  ivory.  In  H.  V.  script  it  is
applied  to  a  tower  and  in  Mrs.  Wilson's  record  to  a
spindle,  but  it  should  be  noted  that  the  material  is
emphasised  in  each  case.  Mrs.  Wilson  sees  "  something
that  looked  like  an  implement  made  of  ivory,"  afterwards
identified  as  a  spindle,  and  H.  V.  script  has  :

ivory — an  ivory  tower —

Later  in  her  record  Mrs.  Wilson  notes  an  impression
of  a  tower,  but  she  does  not  associate  this  in  any  way
with  the  ivory  spindle.

If  this  cross-correspondence  on  the  word  "  ivory  "  is
more  than  a  chance-coincidence,  it  is  an  instance  of  the
tendency  on  the  part  of  each  automatist,  to  which  I
referred  above,  p.  317,  to  "  introduce  individual  modifica-
tions of  the  form  in  which  any  given  idea  is  clothed."
Twice  in  my  recent  scripts  (March  18  and  March  24,
1914)  I  had  alluded  to  "  a  tower  of  ivory."  The  words
are from  Canticles  vii.  4  :

Thy  neck  is  a  tower  of  ivory,

but  the  immediate  reference  in  the  script  was  to  a  poem
by  Walter  de  la  Mare, of  which  the  opening  lines  are

There  was  nought  in  the  valley
But  a  tower  of  ivory  ;

a  poem  with  which  I  am  familiar.

When  therefore  I  wrote  the  script  of  May  27,  1914,
there  existed  in  my  mind  a  strong  link  of  association
between  "  ivory  "  and  "  tower,"  so  that  any  allusion
to  the  former  would  almost  inevitably  lead  me  on  to
the  latter.  In  Mrs.  Wilson's  case  this  particular  association
had  no  force,  and  she  links  her  impression  of  ivory
with  a  spindle,  perhaps  because  the  story  of  the  Sleeping
Beauty  was  already  latent  in  her  mind.


322


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[PART


This  is  the  only  time  that  the  word  "  ivory  "  has
occurred  in  Mrs.  Wilson's  records.  She  had  no  knowledge
of  my  scripts  of  March  14  and  March  24,  1914.

Mrs.  Wilson's  record  of  May  28,  1915,  also  included
as  I  have  said,  an  impression  of  the  Sleeping  Beauty
"  with  the  old  women  in  the  attic,"  pricking  her  thumb
with  the  poisoned  spindle.  It  thus  shows  a  connexion
of  thought  with  a  passage  in  my  own  contemporary
script  which  runs  :

Thrice  the  brindled  cat  hath  mewed  ] — spells  and  potions —
the  w  itches  brew — Medea's  cauldron  2 —

For  according  to  the  story  of  the  Sleeping  Beauty  "  the
old  women  in  the  attic "  were  witches,  and  it  was  in
consequence  of  the  spell  laid  upon  her  by  one  of  them
that  she  fell  asleep.


Tabular  Summary.


May  27,  1915.

May  28,  1915.

H.  V.  Script.

The  garden  of  sleep — the
grape  of  Proserpine — (the
garden  of  Proserpine).

an  ivory  tower.

spells  and  potions,
the  witches'  brew,  etc.

Wilson  Record.

A  trance-like  sleep.
Proserpine.
An  ivory  spindle.
The  Sleeping  Beauty,
with the old  women
(witches).

IV.

Mrs.  Wilson's  record  of  June  4,  1915,  10.30  p.m.

(a)  The first impression was of a bas-relief cut in  rock
representing  gods  or  kings. I  thought  it  was  a  reminiscence

1  Cf. Shakespeare, Macbeth, Act iv.,  sc. i, (The witches'  song).

"Brindled" should be "  brinded."

2  For  the  rest  of  this  script  see  Appendix,  p.  315.


lxxiv.J Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.  323


of  Egypt,  but  was  told  it  was  India.  When  I  say  told
I  do  not  mean  that  I  heard  voices,  for  last  night  there
were  none,  but  none  the  less  T  understood  that  certain  words
were  to  be  recorded.  There  were  a  lot  of  Indian  scenes,
most  of  them  in  a  town.  Towaids  the  end  of  the  series
there  was  one  of  a  square,  or  garden,  with  canals  and
very  brilliant  flower-beds.  In  the  background  were  large
and  very  fine  gates  opening  into  a  park.

Next  came  a  landscape,  a  rolling  country  with  enormous
tawny  hills  in  the  distance.  The  whole  place  seemed  a
desert.

Then  came  a  seaport  that  seemed  almost  European,  and
then  a  very  black  and  rough  sea.

The  last  of  all  was,  I  suppose,  meant  for  the  Jungle.
There  were  enormous  trees  with  heavy  dark  foliage  and  at
their  base  a  sort  of  thicket  of  bamboo  which  seemed  to  be
getting  sun  from  somewhere,  for  the  delicate  pale-green  leaves
were  very  lovely.

The  words  :  "  There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun  and  another
of  the  moon."  1

[After  this  Mrs.  Wilson  went  to  sleep.]

(b)  In  the  early  morning,  almost  a  dream. [June  5,  1915.]
The  same  park [as  above]  with the  gates  closed. I  was

standing  outside  and  in  the  air  near  me,  surrounded  with
golden  light,  there  floated  a  baby's  hand.  Inside  the  gates
and  to  the  right  there  was  a  house,  and  at  the  top  of  a
flight  of  steps  leading  to  the  door  stood  a  woman  in  white.
I  could  not  get  all  the  words,  or  else  I  forgot  them  at
once.

"  A  child's  hand  and  a  woman's  .  .  ."

(c)  A  dream  [June  5,  1915.]

I  was  one  of  a  large  company  ;  we  were  just  living  our
lives,  and  among  us  constantly  was  a  young  man  in  the
black  and  white  habit  of  a  monk.  He  was  very  thin  and
haggard,  but  it  was  an  angelic  face,  so  pure  and  sweet
with  rings  of  fair  hair  curling  round  the  forehead.  He  came
and  went  and  we  all  knew  him,  and  I  do  not  know  what
happened,  but  suddenly  we  realised  that  he  was  "  Death,
the  unrecognised  familiar  friend,  the  conciliator  and  consoler."

1  1  Cor.  xv.  41.


324


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[PART


The  first  two  sections  of  Mrs.  Wilson's  record  (a
and  b)  consist  in  a  series  of  impressions  of  India,  with
one  of  which  (the  park  scene)  Mrs.  Wilson  associates
an  impression  of  a  woman  and  child.  She  also  associates
with  this  series  a  quotation  from  the  English  burial
service  (1  Cor.  xv.).

There  is  probably  a  first  emergence  here  of  the  same
train  of  thought  which  appears  more  definitely  amongst
Mrs.  Wilson's  impressions  on  June  13,  1915  (see  below),
that  "  some  one  in  India  has  had  a  great  grief,  the
death  of  a  child,  I  think."

It  is  with  the  last  section  of  Mrs.  Wilson's  record
(c)  that  I  am  now  concerned.

In  older  to  make  clear  the  connexion  which  I  believe
exists  between  Mrs.  Wilson's  dream  and  my  own  script
written  on  the  same  day,  I  must  go  back  to  the  last
of  the  five  earlier  experiments  carried  out  by  Mrs.  Wilson
and  me,  the  conditions  of  which  I  have  described  in
my  introduction  (p.  307).  Briefly,  I  as  agent  endeavoured
at  a  pre-arranged  time  to  transmit  a  definite  idea  of
some  kind  to  Mis.  Wilson.  I  quote  my  own  contemporary
note  of  this  experiment.

May  16,  1915,  10.15  p.m.

I  sat  in  my  bedroom  at  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge,
looking  at  Diirer's  picture  "  Ritter,  Tod  und  Teufel  "  [The
Horseman,  Death  and  the  Devil],  the  picture  which  suggested
"  Sintram."

Shortly  before  the  experiment  M.  de  G.  V.  [my  mother,
Mrs.  Verrall]  suggested  as  a  subject  the  picture  hanging
in  her  room  called  "  Der  Tod  als  Freund  "  [Death  the  Friend],
but  I  did  not  choose  this,  because  I  did  not  think  I  could
visualise  the  picture  sufficiently  clearly.

The  picture  by  Albrecht  Diirer,  which  was  the  subject
of  this  experiment,  is  probably  familiar  to  most  of  my
readers.  It  represents  a  knight  on  horseback  with  Death
"  on  a  pale  horse "  riding  beside  him,  and  walking  behind
a  fiendish  creature  with  a  boar-like  head.  The  con-
nexion between  this  picture  and  Sintram  is  that  it  was
sent  to  Baron  de  la  Motte Fouque by  a  friend  with  a


Lxxrv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.  325

request  for  an  explanation,  and  the  Baron  replied  to  this
request  by  writing  "  Sintram  and  his  Companions  :  A
Northern  Tale  after  Albrecht  Diirer.'' 1

The  other  picture  mentioned  in  my  note  on  May  16,
1915,  "  Der  Tod  als  Freund,"  is  a  German  woodcut  repre-
senting the  interior  of  a  belfry-tower.  The  bell-ringer,
a  very  old  man,  is  sitting  in  a  chair  ;  he  has  evidently
died  whilst  ringing  the  angelus,  and  Death,  dressed  as
a  Pilgrim,  is  ringing  the  bell  for  him.  Through  the
belfry- window,  looking  westwards,  a  landscape  is  visible,
a  level  stretch  of  fields,  lit  by  the  rays  of  the  setting
sun.

Mrs.  Wilson's  impressions  on  May  16,  1915,  did  not
appear  to  have  any  relation  to  either  of  these  pictures,
and  the  experiment  was  therefore  reckoned  a  failure.
I  said  nothing  whatever  to  Mrs.  Wilson  as  to  what
the  subject  of  it  had  been.

When  I  read  Mrs.  Wilson's  account  of  her  impressions
on  June  4,  1915,  and  in  the  early  morning  of  June  5,
with  the  allusion  at  the  end  to  "  Death  the  unrecognised,
familiar  friend,"  I  was  at  once  reminded  of  the  sub-
ject of  our  experiment  on  May  16.  Mrs.  Wilson's  dream
suggested  that  she  had  received  a  belated  impression  of
an  idea  I  had  then  thought  of  conveying  to  her,  and  I
looked  at  my  script  of  June  4,  1915,  to  see  if  any
recurrence  to  the  subject  of  the  earlier  experiment  could
be  found  there  also.  I  will  now  quote  part  of  this
script.2

H.  V.  script  of  June  4,  1915,  10.15  p.m.

...  a  curtain  of  darkness — a  lantern  in  the  dark — the
little  candle

The  race  is  won

In  lonely  splendour —

stone  on  stone —

the  horseman  (At  this  point  I  fell  asleep  and  slept  for
nearly  two  hours. On  reading  the  script  through  the  next  morn-

1  Sintram  und  seine  Gefahrten.  Eine  nordische  Erzahlung  nach
Albrecht  Diirer.

2  For  the  rest  of  the  script  see  Appendix,  p.  346.

x


326


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


ing,  I  noticed  that  the  last  sentence  appeared  to  be  unfinished
and  thought  that  I  would  try  to  complete  it).

June  5.  1905,  10.20  a.m.

The  horseman  of  the  dawn —
the  knocking  at  the  gate  .  .  .

The  allusion  to  a  horseman  suggested  the  title  of
Diirer's  picture,  The  Horseman,  Death  and  the  Devil,
but  I  was  not  sufficiently  familiar  with  the  story  of
Sintram,  which  I  read  as  a  child,  to  remember  whether
there  was  any  point  in  referring  to  him  as  "  the  horse-
man of  the  dawn,"  a  curious  and  distinctive  phrase.
I  therefore  read  the  book  again  on  June  12,  1915,  and
will  now  give  an  outline  of  the  story,  emphasising  the
relevant  points.

Story  of  Sintram  and  His  Companions.

Sintram 's  father,  Bjorn,  and  other  knights  are  sitting  in
council  when  Sintram,  a  boy  of  twelve,  rushes  in  frightened
and  says  that  Death  and  "  yet  Another  "  are  there  behind
him.  Bjorn  refuses  to  explain  the  incident,  but  Rolf,  an
old  servant,  eventually  tells  the  story  of  the  curse  which
is  on  Sintram.

One  Christmas  when  the  child  was  five  years  old,
his  father, — to  keep  an  oath  sworn  in  anger — determined  to
kill  in  cold  blood  two  helpless  merchants  who  had  sought
refuge  in  his  castle.  When  his  wife  Verena  tries  to  restrain
him  from  this  crime,  he  calls  on  Death  and  the  Devil  and
stakes  his  child's  soul  upon  the  keeping  of  his  oath.  Verena
calls  for  God's  help,  a  sudden  blindness  comes  upon  Bjorn
and  his  followers,  and  the  merchants  escape.  Ever  since
then  the  child  has  been  subject  to  these  strange  visitations
at  Christmas  time.  Verena  has  gone  into  a  convent,  where
she  spends  her  time  praying  for  her  husband  and  son.

The  story  then  develops,  and  Sintram  passes  through  various
periods  of  temptation,  in  consequence  of  the  curse.  The
climax  of  the  story  is  reached  in  Chapter  27.  Sintram,  now
a  grown  man,  has  been  to  visit  the  old  priest  at  the  convent
where  his  mother  is  living.  The  priest  tells  him  that  the
crisis  of  his  life  is  now  at  hand. He  is  to  ride  home  to


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  ivith  a  New  Automatist.  327

his  father's  castle  alone  by  night,  and  on  the  way  he  will
be  assailed  by  the  powers  of  evil.  The  priest  prays
for  him,  and  he  sets  out  on  horseback,  accompanied
by  his  dog.  Then  follows  the  scene  based  upon  Diirer's
picture.

"  In  front  of  Sintram  the  dark  valley  stared  at  him  like
his  grave."  He  rides  on,  and  presently  is  joined  by  a  figure
on  a  small  tired  horse,  who  insists  on  riding  with  him.
At  first  Sintram  does  not  know  who  his  companion  is,  but
eventually  the  unknown  rider  reveals  himself  as  Death.  He
carries  an  hour  glass  in  his  hand,  from  which  a  light  shines,
he  has  a  snake  wreathed  about  his  head,  and  his  horse  has
a  bell  round  its  neck  which  rings  a  death-knell,  as  he  moves
on.  Then  the  devil,  in  the  shape  of  a  beast  half  boar  and
half  bear,  comes  up  behind  and  tempts  Sintram,  who  how-
ever resists  him,  and  commends  his  soul  into  the  hands
of  Death.  The  devil  then  leaves  him,  and  Sintram  supposes
that  he  is  now  to  die.  But  Death  explains  that  it  is  to
Sintram's  father,  Bjorn,  that  he  is  coming  and  not  to  Sintram
himself.  His  aspect  then  changes,  the  gleam  in  the  hour-
glass grows  brighter,  the  snaky  crown  becomes  a  shining
palm-wreath,  the  horse  turns  into  a  white  vaporous  cloud
and  the  bell  begins  to  play  lullabies.  Sintram  rides  home.
"  Death  had  vanished,  but  in  front  there  floated  something
like  a  rosy  cloud  of  dawn,1  which  remained  visible  after
the  sun  had  risen  and  was  shining  bright  and  warm  in  the
winter  sky."

Meanwhile  (Chapter  28)  Bjorn  is  lying  at  the  castle  in
a  trance,  and  is  supposed  to  be  dead.  A  group  of  servants
are  talking  together,  when  another  servant  breaks  in  upon
them  in  great  excitement,  and  says  :  "A  horseman 2  is  ap-
proaching, a  wonderful  horseman,  I  would  think  he  was
Lord  Sintram,  but  a  bright,  bright  cloud  of  dawn  drifts  close
in  front  of  him  all  the  way,  and  plays  upon  him  with  such
brilliant  lights  that  you  might  think  it  was  just  red  flowers
falling  on  him.  And  besides  that  his  horse  has  a  reddish
wreath  on  its  head,  such  as  I  have  never  been  used  to
see  worn  by  our  dead  master's  son."

Another  servant  explains  that  he  made  the  horse  a  wreath
1  Eine  rothliche  Morgenwolke.  2  Ein  ritter.


328


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


of  red  oak-leaves  the  day  before  as  an  emblem  of  victory.
Something  seemed  to  tell  him  he  must.

Meanwhile  Sintram  reaches  the  castle.  Bjorn  rouses  himself
from  the  trance,  and  cries  out  :  "  '  Who  is  this  that  comes  ?
I  know,  it  is  my  son  Sintram.  But  whom  does  he  bring
with  him  ?  That  is  the  whole  question.  On  that  depends
whether  I  am  lost  or  no/

'  You  are  not  lost,  dear  father,'  said  Sintram 's  friendly
voice  through  the  gently  opened  door,  and  the  rosy  cloud
of  dawn  drifted  in  with  him.

Bjorn  folded  his  hands,  looked  thankfully  up  to  Heaven
and  said  with  a  smile  :  '  Yes,  yes  thank  God,  it  is  the
right  companion. It  is  beautiful,  friendly  Death.'  "  1

Sintram  and  Bjorn  have  some  talk  together,  and  then  the
story  goes  on  :

"  Little  by  little  the  hall  grew  quieter.  The  old  knight's
last  hour  was  approaching.  ...  At  the  end  the  dying  man
said  :  '  Is  that  Verena's  evening  bell  at  the  convent  ?  '
Sintram  nodded.  .  .  .  Then  it  was  as  though  a  ray  of
light  flashed  from  the  old  eyes,  the  dawn-cloud  wrapped  itself
close  about  him,  and  light  and  cloud  and  life  had  gone
together  from  the  corpse."

It  may  therefore  be  said  that  "  the  horseman  of  the
dawn  "  is  a  very  apt  description  of  Sintram  as  he  is
represented  by  de  la  Motte  Fouque  in  the  principal
incident  of  his  stoiy,  based  on  Durer's  picture ;  more-
over the  "  dawn-cloud,"  which  floats  before  Sintram,
symbolises  Death,  the  friend,  whom  he  brings  to  his
father,  so  that  an  allusion  to  this  incident  is  well  chosen
to  biing  out  the  underlying  association  of  ideas  between
the  two  pictures  which  figure  in  the  experiment  on  May
16,  1915.  Durer's  picture  (the  origin  of  Sintram)  and
the  picture  representing  Death  the  friend.

V.

Mrs.  Wilson  had  very  few  impressions  on  this  occasion
(June 8, 1915),  and  since  they  do  not  appear  to  have

1  Der  schone,  freundliche  Tod.


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.  329


any  connexion  with  my  contemporary  script,  they  need
not  be  discussed  here. (See  Appendix,  p.  345.)

VI.

Mrs.  Wilson's  record  of  June  13,  1915,  10.15  p.m.

Very  few  pictures  and  a  perfect  torrent  of  words.  Blank
verse,  I  think.  I  have  still  a  distinct  idea  of  the  metre,
but  of  course  could  only  remember  a  sentence  here  and
there.  The  ideas  seem  to  be,  first,  that  someone  in  India
has  had  a  great  grief,  the  death  of  a  child,  I  think  ;  secondly,
that  someone  is  called  or  chosen  for  some  work,  not  entirely
easy.

A  red  and  stormy  sunset  over  the  desert.

One  of  those  little  green  plants,  called  Jonah's  gourd,
that  grow  in  the  sand.

The  facade  of  a  house  or  temple,  the  columns  linked
together  with  white  flowers  woven  into  heavy  ropes.

An  interior  and  the  words  :  "  one  who  sits  desolate."
"My  house  left  desolate  unto  me."  "Rachel  mourning  for
her  children."  Then  a  picture  of  a  round-faced,  fair-haired
woman  embracing  two  children.  I  heard  her  say  :  "  Yes,
I  have  these  left."

I  forgot  to  say  there  was  an  impression  of  an  oriental
bazaar  to  signify  India  was  intended.

What  follows  seems  to  have  no  connexion  with  what  I
have  already  written.

"  Above  all  things  to  thine  own  self  be  true,

Thou  canst  not  then  be  false  to  any  man."  1

"A  harp  of  a  thousand  strings."  2

With  this  the  picture  of  a  wind -harp  hanging  from  the
branch  of  a.  tree,  and  the  next  two  sentences  are  still  evi-
dently struggling  with  the  harp  idea.

"By  the  waters  of  Babylon  we  sat  and  wept."

"  How  shall  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land."  3

Then  any  amount  of  blank  verse,  and  with  it  a  vision
of  the  Abbey  picture  of  Galahad  taking  his  seat  at  the  Round
Table,  followed  by  the  one  where  he  keeps  vigil  over  his
armour.

1  Shakespeare,  Hamlet,  Act  I.,  sc.  iii.

2  Dr.  Watt's  Hymns.  3  Psalm  cxxxvii.  4.


330


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Lastly  the  words  :  The  dark  things  shall  be  made  plain,
and  the  crooked  things  straight."1

This  morning  [June  14,  1915],  just  before  I  opened  my  eyes,
the  two  following  symbols  :


Mrs.  Wilson  divides  her  impressions  on  this  occasion
into  two  groups.  The  first  she  describes  as  centering
about  "  the  idea  that  some  one  in  India  has  had  a
great  grief,"  probably  "  the  death  of  a  child,"  seems
to  be  connected  with  her  earlier  impressions  on  June
4,  1915  (see  above,  p.  322).  It  is  with  the  second  group
that  I  am  now  concerned.  Mrs.  Wilson  describes  it  as
representing  the  idea  that  "  some  one  is  called  or  chosen
for  some  work  not  entirely  easy."

This  same  idea  seems  also  to  be  represented  in  the
opening  sentences  of  my  own  contemporary  script,  which
I  will  now  quote.

H.  V.  script  of  June  13,  1905,  10.15  p.m.

non  datur  omnibus  [It  is  not  given  to  all] — some  and  another
— here  and  there —

the  priest  who  slays  the  slayer  and  shall  himself  be  slain—  3

truth  and  a  sword — a  two-edged  sword —  4

though  I  should  perish — the  prayer  of  Ajax — 5

the  master-stroke —

The  rising  morn,6  the  daystar

The  flight  of  the  Duchess—

Crive  to  me  the  life  I  love  7

the  wayfarer's  song

the  song  of  the  bird —

1  Cf.  Isaiah  xl.  4.  2  See  below,  p.  333.

3  Cf.  Macaulay,  Lays  of  Ancient  Rome.  "  The  priest  who  slew  the
slayer,"  etc.

4  Cf.  Rev.  i.  16,  and  Heb.  iv.  12. 6  Cf.  Homer,  II.  17,  645.

8  Grey,  The  Bard.  7  R.  L.  Stevenson,  Song  of  the  Road.


2


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.  331

The  sun  over  the  meadow —
the  sign  by  the  way —

in  a  strange  land 1 — the  flowing  tide — fallen  upon  evil
days —

lily  of  the  valley — 2

In  the  quotation  from  Macaulay  allusion  is  made
to  the  priest  of  Diana  at  Nemi.  He  was  usually  a
runaway  slave,  who  became  piiest  by  killing  his  pre-
decessor in  single  combat,  and  held  office  until  he  was
himself  killed  by  his  successor.  This  quotation,  taken
with  the  preceding  words  of  the  sciipt,  seems  to  indicate
a  man  endowed  with  some  special  faculty  or  appointed
to  a  special  task.

The  next  words  of  the  script  :

truth  and  a  sword — a  two-edged  sword

seem  to  be  derived  from  several  closely  connected  passages
of  the  Bible. Compare,  for  instance,  the  following  :

And  he  had  in  his  right  hand  seven  stars  :  and  out  of
his  mouth  went  a  sharp  two-edged  sword  :  and  his  countenance
was  as  the  sun  shineth  in  his  strength. Rev.  i.  16.

For  the  wotd  of  God  is  quick  and  powerful,  and  sharper
than  a  two-edged  sword,  piercing  even  to  the  dividing  asunder
of  soul  and  spirit,  and  of  the  joints  and  marrow,  and  is
a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.  Heb.
iv.  12.

Stand  therefore  having  your  loins  girt  about  with  truth
and  having  on  the  breast-plate  of  righteousness  .  .  .  And
take  the  helmet  of  salvation  and  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,
which  is  the  word  of  God. Eph.  vi.  14-17.

With  this  allusion  in  my  script  to  truth,  compare
Mrs.  Wilson's  quotation  from  Hamlet :

Above  all  things  to  thine  own  self  be  true.

The  next  phrases  in  my  script  of  June 13  :

though  I  should  perish — the  prater  of  Ajax,

are  an  allusion  to  a  passage  in  Homer's  Iliad,  where
the Greek warrior Ajax, finding himself and his  com-

1  Ps.  cxxxvii.  4  2  Cant.  ii.  1.


332


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


pardons  surrounded  by  a  dark  mist  on  the  battlefield,
prays  to  Zeus  to  disperse  it,  saying  :

"  Give  us  light,  though  thou  destroy  us  in  it."

The  words  of  the  script  which  follow  almost  immediately
after  the  reference  to  Ajax  :

the  rising  mom — the  day-star

appear  to  be  following  a  similar  train  of  thought,  for
they  allude,  I  think,  to  a  passage  in  the  Second  Epistle
of  Peter  (i.  19).

We  have  also  a  more  sure  word  of  prophecy  ;  whereunto
ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed,  as  unto  a  light  that  shineth
in  a  dark  place,  until  the  day  dawn  and  the  day-star  arise
in  your  hearts.

With  these  allusions  in  my  script  to  the  idea  of
light  dispersing  darkness,  compare  Mrs.  Wilson's  impression
of  the  words  :  "  The  dark  things  shall  be  made  plain
and  the  crooked  things  straight."

These  words  are  an  inaccurate  quotation  from  Isaiah
xl.  4:

The  crooked  shall  be  made  straight  and  the  rough  places
plain.

It  will  be  observed  that  Mrs.  Wilson  has  substituted
"  dark  things  "  for  "  rough  places,"  and  changed  the
meaning  of  the  word  "  plain."  Students  of  automatic
writing  will  remember  other  cases  in  which  it  seems
as  though  a  passage  of  literature  has  been  deliberately
misquoted  in  order  to  emphasise  an  association  of  thought
between  two  scripts.

The  words  in  my  script  of  June  13  "  the  sign  by  the
way "  were  interpreted  by  me  at  the  time  as  denoting
a  cross,  because  I  associated  them  with  a  picture  by
Frank  Dicksee,  with  a  reproduction  of  which  in  a  bound
number  of  the  Magazine  of  Art  I  was  familiar  as  a
child  ;  a  conspicuous  figure  in  the  picture  is  an  old  beggar
sitting  by  the  roadside  holding  up  a  crucifix.  Indeed,
until  I  investigated  the  question  with  a  view  to  writing
this paper,  I thought that The  Sign  by  the Way  was.


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.  333

the  title  of  the  picture.  On  this  point  I  was  mistaken,
for  the  picture  is  called  The  Symbol;  but  the  words  of
my  script  were  associated  in  my  mind  with  this  picture
and  therefore  with  a  cross.1

It  will  be  remembered  that  at  the  end  of  her  record
of  June  13,  1915.  Mrs.  Wilson  noted  that  on  first  wak-
ing on  the  morning  of  June  14,  she  saw  the  two  follow-
ing symbols  :


The  second  of  these  drawings  is  the  famous  Constan-
tinian  monogram.  The  symbol  represents  the  Greek
letters  x  an<^  P an<^  r)>  the  *wo  letters  of  the

name  Christ.  The  legend  runs  that  when  Constantine
the  Great  was  on  the  march  against  Maxentius,  whom
he  soon  afterwards  defeated  at  Saxa  Rubra,  he  saw
one  day  a  luminous  cross  in  the  sky  above  the  mid-
day sun,  inscribed  with  the  words  Hoc  signo  vinces  (By
this  sign  thou  shait  conquer).  During  the  following  night
Christ  himself  appeared  to  Constantine  and  diiected  him
to  set  the  symbol  of  the  cross  upon  his  standard  a  ad
march  on  with  assurance  of  victory.  As  a  result  of
these  two  visions  Constantine  adopted  the  Christian  faith
and  set  upon  his  standard  (labarum)  a  cross,  a  crown,
and  the  monogram  ch  r.

There  is  thus  a  connexion  of  thought  between  my  allusion
on  June  13,  to  "  the  sign  by  the  way "  (interpreted
by  me  as  a  cross)  and  Mrs.  Wilson's  impression  on  the
morning  of  June  14  of  the  Constantinian  monogram,
and  it  is  worth  noting  that  in  her  first  impression  she
substitutes  a  cross  for  the  Greek  letter  p.  Moreover,
the cross which Constantine saw in the sky, the  sign

1  The  letter-press  describing  the  picture  (in  the  Magazine  of  Art)  speaks  of
the  old  beggar  "sitting  by  the  wayside,"  and  this  perhaps  accounts  for  my
mistake  about  the  title  of  the  picture.  The  phrase  "the  wayside  cross"
which  occurs  in  two  earlier  scripts  of  mine  (January  31  and  September  23,
1912)  is  probably  an  emergence  of  the  same  group  of  associations.


334


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


by  which  it  was  said  he  should  conquer,  might  well
he  described  as  "  a  sign  by  the  way,"  since  he  was
on  the  maich  when  he  saw  it.

There  is  yet  one  more  cross-correspondence  to  be
noted  between  Mis.  Wilson  and  me  on  June  13,  the
most  precise  of  all.  I  will  quote  again  a  short  extract
from  my  script  of  that  day  :

the  wayfarer's  song — the  song  of  the  bird —
The  sun  over  the  meadow —
the  sign  by  the  way —
in  a  strange  land —

Compare  with  this  Mrs.  Wilson's  quotation  on  the
same  day  from  the  137th  Psalm  :

How  shall  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land  ?


Tabular  Summary.
June  13,  1915.


Wilson  Record.


H.  V.  Script.


Someone  called  or  chosen
for  work  not  easy.

"  Above  all  things  to  thine
own  self  be  true."

"  The  dark  things  shall  be
made  plain."

"  How  shall  he  sing  the
Lord's  song  in  a  strange
land  ?  "


It  is  not  given  to  all —
"  The  priest  who  slays  the
slayer,"  etc.

Truth  and  a  sword.

Ajax'  prayer  (for  light  in
darkness).

The  wayfarer's  song  .  .  .

in  a  strange  land.

The  sign  by  the  way.


The  suggestion  which  I  have  put  forward  above  that
a  cross-correspondence  occurred  between  Mrs.  Wilson
and  myself  in our  respective  allusions  to  the  Constan-

the sign by the way  " had  a


tinian  monogram  and


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  ivith  a  Neio  Automatist.  335

curious  sequel.  On  April  14,  1916,  I  read  this  paper,
substantially  as  it  appears  here,  at  a  meeting  of  this
Society,  at  which  Mrs.  Wilson  was  present.  On  the
following  day,  April  15,  1916,  Mrs.  Wilson  and  I  tried
another  experiment  and  her  record  on  that  occasion
contains  the  following  words  :

"  Hark  all  ye  that  pass  by !  Is  there  any  sorrow
like  unto  this  soriow  ?  "

The  reference  here  is  to  Lamentations  i. 12  :

Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by  ?  behold,  and  see
if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow  .  .  .

Now  the  opening  words  of  this  verse  (italicised  above)
are  the  motto  of  the  picture  by  Frank  Dicksee,  with
which,  as  I  have  said,  I  associated  the  phrase  in  my
script  "  the  sign  by  the  way."  When  I  read  my  paper
on  April  14,  I  was  awaie  of  this  fact,  having  looked
up  the  leproduction  of  the  picture  (see  above,  p.  332),
but  I  said  nothing  of  the  motto  in  my  paper,  as  it
did  not  appear  relevant  to  the  matter  in  hand.  I
was  interested  therefoie  to  find  that  Mrs.  Wilson  had
quoted  it  in  her  recoid  on  the  following  day,  April
15,  and  on  April  18  I  wrote  to  ask  her  whether  she
knew  the  picture  by  Dicksee  of  which  I  had  spoken
in  my  paper  and  knew  what  was  the  motto  to  it.  Mrs.
Wilson  replied  that,  so  far  as  she  knew,  she  had  never
seen  the  picture  in  question  and  had  no  idea  what
the  motto  might  be.  It  is  obviously  impossible  to
prove  that  Mrs.  Wilson  is  correct  in  thinking  that  she
has  never  had  any  normal  knowledge  concerning  the
picture  and  its  motto,1  and  therefore  the  quotation  of  this
motto  in  her  record  of  April  15,  1916,  nidy  be  due
to  a  revived  memory.  The  most  probable  alternative
hypothesis  seems  to  be  that  Mrs.  Wilson's  impression
of  the  passage  from  Lamentations  was  deiived  by  thought-
transference  from  my  mind.

1  As  to  whether  Mrs.  Wilson  is  likely  to  have  seen  the  original
picture,  it  is  worth  noting  that  it  was  exhibited  in  the  Royal  Academy
of  1881 — at  which  date  Mrs.  Wilson  was  a  young  child  and  still  living
in  America — and  was  bought  by  a  private  collector.


336


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


VII.

Mrs.  Wilsons  record  of  June  16,  1915,  10.15  p.m.

The  first  scene  looked  to  me  like  a  distant  view  of  the
hills,  looking  towards  Nazareth  from  the  Plain  of  Esdrelon.
I  have  been  there  and  it  seemed  to  me  I  recognised  the
outlook.  Then  I  saw  the  hills  nearer,  but  though  it  still
seemed  to  me  Nazareth  was  meant,  I  saw  no  village,  only
a  lonely  figure  in  e  white  robe,  and  another  part  of  my
mind  insisted  that  the  Temptation  in  the  Wilderness  was
intended.

Next  came  a  lion's  head,  and  then  the  lion  of  St.  Mark,
with  the  halo  and  the  open  evangel.

After  that  the  death  mask  of  Aknaton,1  the  Pharaoh  of
whom  I  spoke  the  other  day  as  being  a  religious  genius,
and  later  on  his  symbol  for  Divine  Beneficence,  the  sun
with  a  little  hand  at  the  end  of  each  ray.  The  association
which  suggested  "Lead,  kindly  light"  is  obvious.

Pansies,  and  the  words  "  Heartsease."

A  book  with  bright -coloured  pictures  of  daily  life.

A  city  on  the  banks  of  a  great  river.

A  ruined  amphitheatre.  The  lorum  at  Rome.  A  ruined
temple  on  a  hill.

That  was  all  for  last  night.  This  morning  I  kept  seeing
words,  and  tried  to  write  them  down,  with  the  following
result  :

"The  knowledge  wrested  from  God  poured  out  on  men."
Then the conventional design of a rose and the  word
"  rosicrucian."

Lastly  the  winged  staff  with  the  twining  serpents  which
I  associated  with  Mercury  rather  than  Aesculapius,  though
I  have  never  happened  to  notice  if  there  is  any  difference
between  the  staves.

I  do  not  know  whether  the  words  that  haunted  me  while
I  dressed  have  any  right  to  be  added  :  "  The  spirits  of  just
men  made  perfect."

1  On  June  14,  1915,  I  lunched  with  Mrs.  Wilson,  and  she  mentioned
to  me  as  a  book  worth  reading  the  Biography  of  Aknaton,  Pharaoh  of
Egypt.  She  said  he  was  the  "heretical  Pharaoh"  and  an  interesting
character.  So  far  as  I  can  remember  she  told  me  nothing  more  of  him
than  that.


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  ivith  a  New  Automatist.  337

My  script  on  June  16,  1915,  was  written  in  two
parts,  one  at  3.20  p.m.  and  the  other  contemporaneously
with  Mrs.  Wilson  at  10.15  p.m.1

The  earlier  part  contains  the  following  passage  :

And  it  came  to  pass  in  40  days —
days  of  penance — the  peace-offering.

When  I  read  this  script  through  immediately  after
writing  it,  I  supposed  that  the  allusion  in  these  words
was  to  the  Temptation  in  the  Wilderness.

Then  was  Jesus  led  up  of  the  spirit  into  the  wilderness
to  be  tempted  of  the  devil.

And  when  he  had  fasted  forty  days  and  forty  nights,2
he  Avas  afterwards  an  hungered.3

I  still  hold  that  this  interpretation  is  almost  certainly
conect,  although  there  are  two  other  passages  in  the
Bible  to  which  it  might  be  thought  that  allusion  was
made.

(a)  Genesis  viii.  6.

It  came  to  pass  in  forty  days  that  Noah  opened  the  window
of  the  ark  which  he  had  made  ; and  he  sent  forth  a  raven.

(b)  Exodus  xxxiv.  28  (the  story  of  Moses  going  up  into
Mount  Sinai) .

He  was  then  with  the  Lord  forty  days  and  forty  nights  :
he  did  neither  eat  bread,  no*  drink  water.

The  first  words  quoted  from  the  script  "  and  it  came
to  pass  in  40  days  "  are  an  almost  exact  quotation
from  the  passage  in  Genesis  and  it  might  therefore  be
held  that  the  words  of  my  script  must  be  taken  as
referring  to  the  flood  ;  but  this  interpretation  does
not  satisfactorily  explain  the  next  words  of  the  script
"  days  of  penance,"  which  must  be  taken  into  con-
sideration  as indicating  the trend of thought  expressed

1  See  Appendix,  p.  348.

2  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Bayfield  for  the  suggestion  that  the  tem-
poral form  of  this  sentence  ("  when  he  had  fasted,"'  etc.),  is  repre-
sented in  my  script  by  the  words "  and  it  came  to  pass."

3  Matthew  iv.  1,  2.


338


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


in  the  writing.  These  words  might  refer  equally  well
to  the  sojourn  of  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai  or  to  Christ's
sojourn  in  the  Wilderness,  since  both  were  periods  of
fasting  ;  indeed  the  transition  of  thought  from  one
event  to  the  other  is  very  easy.  I  do  not  propose  to
discuss  the  connexion  between  them  ;  it  is  enough
for  my  purpose  to  point  out  that  the  marginal  reference
at  Luke  v.  1  (the  Temptation  in  the  Wilderness)  is
to  Exodus  xxxiv.  28  (Moses  on  Mount  Sinai).  But
I  believe  that  the  allusion  in  my  script  is  rather  to
the  Temptation,  chiefly  because  that  is  how  I  inter-
preted the  words,  immediately  after  writing  them,  and
I  think  an  automatist's  contemporary  interpretation  of
a  script  is  likely  to  be  correct.  But  whether  or  no
my  script  should  be  interpreted  as  referring  explicitly
to  the  Temptation,  an  allusion  to  it  may  be  regarded
as  implicit  in  the  script.  For  to  any  one  familiar  with
the  Gospel  narrative  a  reference  to  a  period  of  40  days
which  were  "days  of  penance"  would  inevitably  recall
the Temptation,  the  most  famous  of  all  such  periods.

Assuming  then  that  in  my  earlier  script  on  June  16,.
1915,  there  is  a  reference,  at  least  implicitly,  to  the
Temptation,  there  is  on  this  point  a  cross-coriespondence
between  Mrs.  Wilson  and  myself,  for  her  first  impression
on  that  day,  received  a  few  hours  after  my  script  was
written,  was  of  the  Temptation.

1  now  turn  to  the  second  part  of  my  script  of  June
16,  1915,  written  during  my  experiment  with  Mrs.  Wilson.
It  begins  as  follows  :

Dominus  illuminatio  mea 1  [The  Lord  is  my  light].

non  eadem  vultu  demisso  [Not  the  same  with  downcast  face]

the walls of stone — the city wall a walled city — Avatch-

man  what  of  the  night  ? the  answering  word — the  sleeping

city — the  bridge  at  midnight — a  poet's  dream —

I  will  first  analyse  this  script,  considering  especially
the  various  literary  allusions  which  it  contains  and
their  implications.  In  this  case  also  I  am  interpreting
my  script  according  to  opinions which I  formed  before

1  Psalm  xxvii.  1  ;  the  motto  of  the  University  of  Oxford.


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.  339''

I  had  any  knowledge  of  Mis.  Wilson's  contemporary
record.  The  script  begins  with  the  opening  words  (in
Latin)  of  the  27th  Psalm,  "The  Lord  is  my  light.'"
The  next  words,  also  in  Latin,  are  obscure  and  I  will
not  discuss  them  here.  The  phrase  "  Watchman  what
of  the  night  ?  "  involves  two  literary  associations  :

(a)  It  is  a  quotation,  in  the  first  instance,  from  Isaiah
xxi.  11  :

Watchman  what  of  the  night  ?  The  watchman  said :  The
morning  cometh  and  also  the  night  :  if  ye  will  enquire,
enquire  ye.

There  is  probably  an  allusion  to  the  watchman's
answer  in  the  concluding  words  of  the  script  (not  quoted
above)  "  into  the  coming  night."

(6)  "  Watchman  what  of  the  night-  ?  "  is  also  the
first  line  of  a  poem  by  Swinburne  called  A  Watch  in
the  Night.1  This  poem  is  included  in  a  volume  (Songs
before  Sunrise)  the  subject  of  which  is  the  Italian  War
of  Liberation.  I  myself  associate  the  words  with  Swin-
burne rather  than  with  Isaiah.

The  next  phrases  of  the  script  contain  several  literary
allusions  which  it  is  not  very  easy  to  disentangle.  "  The
bridge  at  midnight  "  is  a  quotation  from  a  poem  by
Longfellow  :

I  stood  on  the  bridge  at  midnight,
When  the  clocks  were  striking  the  hour.

But  although  the  actual  words  are  from  Longfellow,
the  two  phrases  between  which  they  occur  in  my  script-
suggest  that  the  literary  association  lying  behind  them
is  with  three  other  poems,  all  of  which  are  more  familiar
to  me  than  Longfellow's.

References  to  a  sleeping  city  and  a  bridge  at  once
recall  Wordsworth's  Sonnet  on  Westminster  Bridge,  especially
the  lines  :

Dear  God  !  the  very  houses  seem  asleep,
And  all  that  mighty  heart  is  lying  still.

1  The  words  "  what  of  the  night  ?  "  are  repeated  in  the  first  line
of  each  stanza,  e.g. li  Italy,  what  of  the  night  ?  "


340


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


It  should  be  observed  however  that  Wordsworth  did
not  stand  upon  Westminster  Bridge  at  midnight,  for
he  says  that  :

The  city  now  doth  like  a  garment  wear
The  beauty  of  the  morning.

The  allusion  to  midnight  has  probably  drifted  in  through
my  recollection  of  Longfellow.

There  is  yet  another  literary  association  contained  in
the  words  "  the  sleeping  city,"  and  this  association
will  explain,  I  think,  the  reference  in  the  script  to
"  a  poet's  dream."  In  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  by
Frederic  Myers,  there  is  a  poem  called  Venice,  which
concludes  with  the  following  lines  :

How  sleeps  that  city  now  !  and  far  is  fled
Her  tale  of  fights  outfought  and  Doges  dead.
The  flying  Fames  ring  round  her  still  ;  but  she
Dreams  in  her  melted  Pearl  of  sky  and  sea.
For  me  too  dreaming  let  the  sunset  fire
Shade  the  dark  dome  and  pierce  the  pillared  spire  !
Let  night  and  peace  the  cosmic  promise  pay,
And  even  the  Soul's  self  dream  into  the  day  !

The  phrase  of  my  script  "  the  sleeping  city  "  echoes
Myers's  words  :  "  How  sleeps  that  city  now,"  and  the
probability  that  there  is  here  an  allusion  to  Myers's
poem  is,  I  think,  strengthened  by  the  allusion  in  the
script  to  "a  poet's  dream."  For  not  only  do  these
words  suggest  Myers's  phrase  :  "  For  me  too  dreaming,
etc.,"  but  they  are  a  quotation  from  Wordsworth's
poem  on  A  Picture  of  Peele  Castle  :

Ah ! Then,  if  mine  had  been  the  Painter's  hand,
To  express  what  then  I  saw  ; and  add  the  gleam,
The  light  that  never  was  on  sea  or  land,
The  consecration  and  the  Poet's  dream.

This  poem  had  been  associated  with  Myers's  Venice
in  an  article  by  Mr.  J.  G.  Piddington,  published  in
Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XXVI.,  pp.  174  ff.1

1  There  are  further  allusions  to  Peele  Castle  in  my  script  of  June
16, 1915 (see Appendix, p. 348), i.e. "the golden gleam"  (cf.


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.


341


We  are  now  in  a  position  to  consider  my  second
script  of  June  16,  1915,  in  relation  to  Mrs.  Wilson's
contemporary  record.

(a)  The  opening  words  "  The  Lord  is  my  light  "  express
the  same  idea  as  we  find  in  Mrs.  Wilson's  allusion  to
Aknaton  and  "  his  symbol  for  divine  beneficence,  the
sun,"  followed  by  the  first  words  of  Cardinal  Newman's
hymn  "  Lead,  kindly  light."

(6)  Mrs.  Wilson  had  an  impression  of  a  "  city  on
the  banks  of  a  great  river,"  followed  by  impressions
of  "a  ruined  amphitheatre  "  and  "  the  Forum  at  Rome."
My contemporary script on the other hand speaks  of

the  city  Avail— a  walled  city  .  .  .  watchman  what  of  the  night  ?
.  .  .  the  sleeping  city — the  bridge  at  midnight.

These  phrases,  if  we  take  them  together,  relate  apparently
to  a  city  on  the  banks  of  a  river  (implied  Li  the
reference  to  a  bridge),  and  there  is  possibly  a  further
connexion  of  thought  between  Mrs.  Wilson  and  me
in  my  quotation  from  Swinburne's  poem,  A  Watch  in
the  Night,  the  subject  of  which  is  the  Italian  risor-
gimento,  and  Mrs.  Wilson's  allusion  to  Rome,  with  which
she  seems,  according  to  the  sequence  of  her  impressions,
to  identify  the  city  on  the  banks  of  a  river.

(c)  I  have  pointed  out  that  the  allusions  in  my  script  of
June  16,  1915,  to  "the  sleeping  city"  and  "the  poet's
dream  "  contain  in  my  opinion  a  reference  to  Frederic
Myers's  poem  entitled  Venice.  This  point  is  interesting
when  we  remember  Mrs.  Wilson's  contemporary  impression
of  "the  lion  of  St.  Mark  with  the  halo  and  the  open
evangel."  These  are  the  arms  of  the  city  of  Venice
and  the  earlier  part  of  Myers's  poem  contains  the  lines  :

And  one  great  word  the  lords  of  Venice  wist  :
"  My  peace  be  with  thee,  Mark  Evangelist  !  "

Proceedings  S.P.B.,  Vol.  XXVI.,  pp.  183  ff.),  and  probably  "like  a
glass  "  (ef.  Peele  Castle,  "  Thy  Form  was  sleeping  on  a  glassy  sea  "),
and  J' the  flowing  tide"  (cf.  Peele  Castle,  "No  motion  but  the  moving
tide").  Both  these  lines  from  Wordsworth's  poem  are  quoted  in
Mr. Piddington's  article.


342


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


At  the  end  of  her  record  of  June  16,  1915,  Mrs.
Wilson  noted  that  whilst  dressing  on  the  following  morn-
ing she  was  haunted  by  the  words  "  The  spirits  of
just  men  made  perfect  "  (Heb.  xii.  23).  Now  the
motto  to  the  published  edition  of  Myers's  poem  is  from
the  Aeneid  (Book  VI.,  p.  691):  "  nee  me  mea  cura
fefellit  [nor  has  my  care  misled  me],"  but  another
motto  was  written  by  Myers  on  a  MS.  copy  of  the
poem.  It  is  taken  from  Hebrews  xi.  40  :  "  That  they
without  us  should  not  be  made  perfect."  1  There  is
not  only  a  verbal  similarity  between  these  words  and
the  quotation  from  the  following  chapter  of  Hebrews,
given  by  Mrs.  Wilson,  there  is  also  a  connexion  of
thought  ;  for  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  contrasts  the
"  elders,"  those  who  lived  before  the  time  of  Christ,
and  "  without  us  "  wsxe  not  "  made  perfect  "  (Heb.
xi.  40),  with  the  followers  of  Christ  who  have  been
"  made  perfect  "  through  Him  (Heb.  xii.  23).  Mrs.
Wilson's  allusion  to  this  last  passage  may  therefore
be  due  to  a  subconscious  impression  of  the  alternative
motto  and  Myers's  poem  Venice.

The  facts  about  these  two  mottos  to  the  poem  are
given  in  Proceedings  S.P.B.,  Vol.  XXVI.,  pp.  205  ff.,  and
the  poem  itself  is  discussed  there  at  some  length.  We
must  assume  that  Mrs.  Wilson  had  at  some  time  read
this  discussion  (see  above,  p.  309),  but  that  would  not
account  for  the  fact  of  her  alluding  to  the  city  of
Venice,  and  perhaps  indirectly  to  Myers's  poem  Venice,
on  the  day  when  my  script  almost  certainly  alludes
to  the  poem.

I  have  included  in  this  report  only  the  first  seven
of  my  experiments  with  Mrs.  Wilson,  as  they  make  a
convenient  group  for  discussion.  We  have  continued  the
experiments  since  that  time  and  have  obtained  results
of  considerable  interest,  some  of  which  may  form  the
subject  of  a  later  report.

1  These  words  are  clearly  alluded  to  in  a  line  of  the  poem,
thus  : "  Nor  even  their  joy  without  us  perfected."


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.


343


Tabular  Summary.
June  16,  1915.


Wilson  Record.

H.  V.  Script.

Temptation  in  the  Wilder-
ness.

"  Lead,  kindly  light."
A  city  by  a  river.
Rome.

The  arms  of  Venice.
"The  spirits  of  just  men
made  perfect." Heb.  xii.  23.

The  Temptation  in  the
Wilderness.

"  The  Lord  is  my  light."

the  city — -the  bridge  at
midnight.

"  Watchman,  what  of  the
night  ?  "  (Implicit  allusion  to
Italy.)

Venice  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

[Original  motto  to  Myers's
poem:  "That  they  without
us  should  not  be  made
perfect." Heb.  xi.  40].

Appendix.

The  dates  of  the  experiments  were  May  20,  23,  28,  June  4,
8,  13,  16,  1915.  All  Mrs.  Wilson's  records  are  given  in  the
text  except  those  of  May  20  and  June  8,  and  a  supplementary
one  of  June  9. These  are  given  below.

Of  the  H.  V.  scripts  written  during  this  period  the  scripts
of  May  20,  23,  27  and  June  13  are  given  in  full  in  the  text
(see  above  pp.  315,  312,  319,  330).  Those  of  May  28,  June
3,  4,  5,  8,  9,  12  and  two  of  June  16  are  given  in  full  below  ;
and  of  these  latter  extracts  from  the  scripts  of  May  28,  June
3,  4  and  16  are  also  quoted  in  the  text.

Mrs.  Wilson's  Records.

Mrs.  Wilson's  record  of  May  20,  1915,  10.15  p.m.

A  failure  again,  I  fear,  but  not  altogether  my  fault.  A
fiend  of  a  woman  was  singing  at  the  top  of  her  lungs  across
the  street,  and  with  all  the  windows  open  might  have  been
in  my  room. When  you  are  half  hypnotised  noise  is  torture.


344


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.  [part


I  started  off  with  the  evil  lurking  figure  of  a  man  in
the  Renaissance  period.  Why  I  at  once  decided  he  was
the  husband  in  Browning's  The  Ring  and  the  Book,  I
do  not  know,  or  why,  except  that  it  is,  I  think,  the  most
beautiful  part  of  the  poem,  I  found  myself  thinking  of  the
part  where  the  Pope  sums  up  the  case,  and  especially  of
lines  that  run  something  like  this  :

"  Give  one  good  moment  to  the  tired  old  man,
Weary  of  finding  all  his  world  amiss."

I  know  that  is  not  a  correct  quotation,  but  I  can  get  no
nearer.

Then  came  a  picture,  I  mean  an  impression,  of  a  wood
in  spring-time.  Just  one  great  mass  of  white  blossoms.
Then  trees  again,  but  this  time  evergreens,  and  this  time
it  was  winter,  for  though  they  too  seemed  covered  with
white  flowers,  it  was  snow.  One  fir-tree,  outlined  against
the  intense  blue  of  the  sky,  stayed  with  me  for  a  long  time.
Then  it  was  autumn,  and  T  was  one  of  two  people  on  horse-
back in  a  dreary  swamp.  There  were  humps  of  long,  dead
grass  sticking  up  out  of  the  black  mud,  masses  of  yellow
reeds,  and  the  trees,  for  it  was  still  a  wood,  were  leafless.
We  were  alone  and  in  danger,  for  our  horses  could  not  find
firm  footing.1

The  last  two  impressions  seem  to  have  nothing  to  do
with  what  went  before.  A  small  company  of  men  in  armour
led  by  a  young  knight,  bareheaded  and  with  long  hair.  I
see  I  put  down  last  night  :  "  Possibly  Jeanne  d'Arc."  The
last  impression  must  be  entirely  subjective,  for  it  was  the
grave  of  my  young  brother-in-law  ;  unless  the  inscription
on  his  tomb-stone  means  anything  to  you.  It  is,  as  nearly
as  I  can  remember  :

And  we  retain
The  memory  of  an  unspoiled  man,
Sweet,  generous,  and  humane.

The  odd  part  of  the  whole  experiment  is  that  while  I  felt
sure I had failed,  another  part of my mind was  insisting

1  Mrs.  Wilson  told  me  on  May  21,  1915,  that  her  companion  seemed
to  be  her  husband.  So  far  as  she  could  remember  the  impression
did  not  correspond  with  any  actual  experience she had  ever  had.


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.


345


that  it  had  got  your  idea.  If  so,  perhaps  it  will  emerge
from  the  subconscious  stratum  before  long.

Mrs.  Wilson's  record  of  June  8,  1915,  10.15  p.m.

No  success,  I  am  afraid.  All  I  saw  was  a  rather  heavy-
looking  classic  temple  at  the  top  of  a  high  grey  cliff,  and
then  wolves,  followed  by  the  Romulus  and  Remus  wolf  alone.
The  only  other  impression  was  of  a  thick  not  very  large
book  bound  in  shabby  calf.  Yes,  there  were  two  more
things,  the  Free  Mason's  compasses  and  a  triangle.  I  wili
try  to-night  for  latent  impressions.

Mrs.  Wilson's  record  of  June  9,  1915.

I  have  very  little  more  to  add  to  my  Tuesday  night
impressions.  Only  a  group  of  old  women  in  a  cave  weaving
something  white.  Their  heads  were  entirely  bound  up,  to
show  that  they  were  blind.  The  Fates,  of  course.  Equally
of  course,  next  a  pair  of  shears.  Then  a  mirror  with  a
black  line  right  ctcross  iu.  Of  course  this  at  once  called  up
the  Lady  of  Shalotte,  and  I  saw  the  torn  web.  I  have
always  had  a  special  fondness  for  the  Lady  of  Shalotte.

H.  V.  Scripts.

H.  V.  script,  May  28,  1915,  10.15  p.m.

Fons  et  origo —

0  fons  Bandusiae  1 —

simplex  munditiis  2 — ■

a  voice  from  the  dead — the  milky  way — the  multitude  of
the  stars — songs — the  stars  singing  3 — the  company  of  the
stars — a  merry  rout — the  music  of  humanity  4 — an  under-
current— a  falling  star — meteoric  splendour —

As  falls  on  Mount  Alvernus  the  thundersmitten  oak  5 —
Thrice  the  brinded  cat  hath  mewed 6 — spells  and  potions —
the  witches  brew — Medea's  cauldron — ever  young —

'Hor.  C.  III.,  13,  1.  !Hor.  C.  I.,  5,  5.

3  Cf.  Rossetti,  The  Blessed  Damozel.

4  Cf.  Wordsworth,  Tintern  Abbey.  5  Macaulay,  Horatius.
6  Shakespeare,  Macbeth,


346


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Bacchus  ever  young — the  music  of  the  dance — the  light
fantastic  toe  1 — trip — trip — trip  2 —

H.  V.  script,  June  3,  1915,  4.20  p.m.
Home  they  brought  her  \\  arrior  dead  3 —
The  golden  gleam — home —

My  home  is  on  the  wave — and  all  deserted — the  sea-birds
cry—

The  dust  of  ages — sprinkle — a  little  dust —
Archimedes — felix  qui  potuit  4 — a  contrast —
a  triangle — each  point  a  star

[Drawing  of  a  triangle  with  a  star  at  each  point.]
the  wheels  of  the  chariot — flashing  fire — scatter  as  from  an
unextinguished  hearth  5 —

H.  V.  script,  June  4,  1915,  10.15  p.m.
Love  in  the  valley  6 — idly  dreaming —
the  singer  of  an  idle  day —

the  palsied  hand — rock  of  ages — the  water  shall  flow — the
bottomless  deep —

a  curtain  of  darkness — a  lantern  in  the  dark — The  little
candle  7

The  race  is  won

In  lonely  splendour  8 —

stone  on  stone  9

1  Milton,  U Allegro.

2  Cf.  Song  :  "  We  will  trip,  trip,  trip,

We  will  trip  it  on  the  quay."

3  Tennyson,  Princess.

4  Virg.,  G.  II.,  490.  Connington  refers  to  Lucr.  I.,  78,  and  Munro
on  Lucr.  I.,  73,  "  atque  omne  immensum  peragravit  mente  animoque,"
says  that  Horace  must  have  had  this  passage  in  mind  when  he  wrote
C.  I.,  28,  5,  "  animoque  rotundum  Percurrisse  polum  morituro."  The
allusion  in  "  sprinkle — a  little  dust"  is  undoubtedly  to  Hor.  C,  I.,
28,  "  Pulveris  exigui  .  .  .  munera,"  "  licebit  injecto  ter  pulvere  curras."
Archimedes  is  probably  written  by  mistake  for  Archytas,  both  being
famous  mathematicians.

5  Shelley,  Ode  to  the  West  Wind.

G  Cf.  Tennyson,  Princess.  "  Love  is  of  the  Valley  "  ;  cf.  also  Mere-
dith's poem  with  this  title.

7  Cf.  Shakespeare,  The  Merchant  of  Venice,  Act  v.,  sc.  i.

8  Cf.  Tennyson,  Idylls  of  the  King  : Dedication,  1.  48.

9  Cf.  M.  Arnold,  Morality  : "  Stone  by  Stone."  »


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.


347


the  horseman  [At  this  point  I  fell  asleep  and  slept  for
nearly  two  hours.  On  reading  the  script  through  next  morn-
ing, I  noticed  that  the  sentence  was  interrupted  in  the
middle,  and  thought  I  would  try  to  complete  it.  Below  is
the  result].

June  5,  1915,  10.20  a.m.

The  horseman  of  the  dawn —

the  knocking  at  the  gate — the  golden  keys — St.  Peter's  keys
— and  a  chain  of  gold — white  as  snow  their  armour  was —
their  steeds  were  white  as  snow  1 — link  in  link — wrought  gold  2
and  precious  stones — jewelled — the  jewel  of  the  East  and  a
king's  ransom — pearls  of  price — strewn  pearls — strew  on  her
roses  roses  3 — strew  flowers  on  the  way — the  king's  daughter  2 —

H.  V.  script,  June  8,  1915,  10.15  p.m.
furor  subitus — carmina  silvis
itur  in  antiquam  silvam  4
Alituum  carmen —
Tigris  et  Euphrates —
aequora  ponti  5 —

the  marble  tablet — the  tablets  of  the  mind — writ  in  water 6
— in  the  quiet  of  the  evening — the  quiet  end  of  evening 7 —
love  is  best 7 —

the  lantern — a  single  shaft —

a  line  in  the  darkness — a  light.

H.  V.  script,  June  9,  1915,  11.10  a.m.

Hyssop  and  vinegar — casting  bread  upon  the  water 8 — open
sesame —

the  golden  grain — harvest  sheaves — garner  in  the  byre —
the  setting  sun  on  the  harvest  fields —

a  golden  light — the  light  that  never  was  on  sea  or  land  9 —

1  Macaulay.  The  Battle  of  the  Lake  Regillus.

2  Cf.  Christina  Rossetti,  The  New  Jerusalem.  The  words  are  from
Psalm  xlv.  13  :  "  The  king's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within,  her  clothing
is  of  wrought  gold.''

3M.  Arnold,  Requiescat.  4  Virgil,  Aen.  VI.,  179.

5  Virgil,  Georg.  I.,  469.  6  Keats'  epitaph.

7  Browning,  Love  Among  the  Ruins.

8  Cf.  Eccl.  xi.  1.  9  Wordsworth,  Peele  Castle.


348


Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.


[part


pale  beyond  porch  and  portal —
crowned  with  calm  leaves  she  stands  1 —

a  crown  of  leaves — green  leaves — evergreen — a  holly  wreath —
the  merry  bells  of  Yule — Again  at  Christmas  did  we  wreathe  2

H.  V.  script,  June  12,  1915,  11.45  p.m.

The  last  days — the  end  of  Time — the  water — across  the
water —

and  he  walked  upon  the  M  ater — the  pool  of  Bethesda  3  and
the  garden  of  Gethsemane —
rain  from  Heaven  4 —
a  clond  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand —

H.  V.  script,  June  16,  1915,  3.20  p.m.

Arquebus with bow and spear — the prize of the bow  —

the  ashen  spear  —

SoXi-^oo-kiov  e'xyos — the  warrior  king —

Lord  of  the  host — singing  hymns  to  Zeus —

father  and  son — the  least  among  them — a  council  of  elders —

And it came to pass in 40 days — days of  penance — the

peace-offering — what  shall  be — the  chosen  path —

Above  the  stars  and  all  around  the  meadows  of  space —

launch  out  into  the  deep  5 —

the  waters  have  gone  over  me —

the  great  waters — a  sound  of  many  waters  6 — the  cataract.

H.  V.  script,  June  16,  1915,  10.15  p.m.
Dominus  illuminatio  mea  7  —
non  eadem  vultu  demisso —
the  walls  of  stone — the  city  wall

a  walled  city — the  watchman — watchman  what  of  the  night  8

1  Swinburne,  The  Garden  of  Proserpine.

2  Tennyson,  In  Memoriam.  3  John  v.  2.

4  Cf.  Shakespeare,  The  Merchant  of  Venice,  Act  iv.,  sc.  i.
0  Luke  v.  4.

6  Cf.  Rev.  i.  15. "...  his  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  waters."

7  Psalm  xxvii.  1. The  words  are  the  motto  of  Oxford  University.

8  Isaiah  xxi.  11.  "Watchman  what  of  the  night?"  The  watch-
man said  :  "  The  morning  cometh  and  also  the  night,  if  ye  will
enquire,  enquire  ye."  Cf.  also  Swinburne,  A  Watch  in  the  Night..
(Songs  before  Sunrise).


lxxiv.] Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.  349


the  answering  word — the  sleeping  city — the  bridge  at
midnight —

a  poet's  dream — like  a  glass — dim  shadows  on  the  wall —
the  flowing  tide1 — to  join  the  river  2 — the  earth — the  daedal
earth  3 —

with  flowers  for  a  marrying — night  and  day  and  a  wreath
of  flowers  for  day  and  stars  for  night — a  crown  of  flowers —
the  golden  gleam  1 —
the  brazen  bell
into  the  coming  night —

1  See  above,  pp.  339  ft.  2  Cf.  Tennyson,  The  Brook.

3  Shelley,  Hymn  to  Pan.


350


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


SOME  RECENT  CASES  OF  PREMONITION
AND  TELEPATHY.1

By  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.

Since  a  few  of  the  experiences  which  form  the  subject  of  this
paper  are  without  corroboration,  it  seems  desirable  to  begin
with  a  word  or  two  about  the  lady  to  whom  they  oc-
curred, lest  you  should  regard  these  uncorroborated  incidents
—or,  indeed,  the  main  narrative — with  any  suspicion.  Of
course,  as  our  experience  has  taught  us,  it  is  only  pru-
dent, in  the  case  of  any  one  not  well  known  to  us,  to
receive  unsupported  statements  on  the  subjects  with  which
the  Society  is  concerned  with  a  certain  amount  of  reserve  ;
but  in  the  present  case  you  will,  I  think,  agree  with  me
that  the  incidents  which  are  confirmed  by  the  testimony
of  others  lend  full  credibility  to  those  which  are  not  so
supported.

This  lady,  who  belongs  to  a  family  well  known  in  North
Devon — her  maiden  name  was  Chichester — has  been  known
to  me  from  her  childhood  and  to  my  wife  from  her  birth  ;
indeed,  our  families  are  connected  by  marriage.  Of  the
truthfulness  of  her  statements  we  have  no  doubt,  and  I
have  myself  carefully  cross-examined  her  on  each  of  the
incidents  that  are  now  to  be  brought  before  you.  I
ought  further  to  state  that  those  accounts  which  are  in
my  own  language,  and  which  form  the  majority,  were
written  down  from  information  given  in  conversation
several  weeks  before  I  received  the  confirmation  of  other
persons  concerned.  That  is  to  say,  my  account  of  any
particular  incident  is  really  her  own  independent  account,

1  This  paper,  with  the  exception  of  the  last  in<  ident  (p.  373)  was  read
before  the  Society  on  November  22,  1915,  and  was  printed  in  the
Journal  for  January-February,  1910


lxxiv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  351

not  a  story  put  together  by  me  upon  a  comparison  of  the
whole  evidence.  She  signed  each  account  separately  when  I
had  written  it,  and  has  since  read  and  signed  the  whole  paper
as  correct.  Similarly,  her  written  accounts  were  given  to
me  before  I  received  the  corroborations.  From  childhood,
as  she  tells  me,  she  has  had  experiences  similar  to  those
recorded  here,  but  until  the  occurrence  of  one  tragic
incident  which  I  shall  have  to  relate,  attached  no  parti-
cular importance  to  them.  The  recent  experiences  were
first  brought  to  my  own  notice  a  few  months  ago.  I
at  once  urged  her  to  make  contemporary  notes  of  all  such
premonitory  impressions,  but  although  she  fortunately  did
so  in  two  subsequent  cases,  in  three  others  the  good
intention  was  forgotten.

In  1910  Miss  Chichester  married  Lieut.  George  Harley
Pownall,  R.N.,  and  they  went  to  live  at  Harwich,  where
he  was  in  command  of  a  submarine.  She  tells  me  that  when
they  were  engaged  she  felt  convinced — it  seems  to  have  been
a  settled  conviction  and  more  than  a  mere  fear — that  he
would  not  five  long  ;  but  admits  that  she  considered  the
submarine  service  a  dangerous  one  even  in  time  of  peace.
We  may  see  reason  to  think  that  this  opinion  was  perhaps
not  the  sole  cause  of  the  presentiment.  Lieut.  Pownall
was  of  a  robust  constitution  and  his  health  was  excellent.

One  day  while  they  were  at  Harwich  she  saw,  or  thought
she  saw,  through  a  window  that  looked  on  the  street,  her
husband  come  up  on  his  bicycle,  get  off,  and  approach  the
house.  She  then  heard  the  door  open  and  shut,  and  the
sound  of  his  footsteps  in  the  hall.  As  he  did  not  come
into  the  room,  she  went  out  but  found  no  one.  This  was
in  the  afternoon.  Lieut.  Pownall,  who  had  not  been  near
the  house  at  that  time,  returned  about  an  hour  later.1

In  1913  Lieut. -Commander  Pownall  (he  had  been  promoted
in  1911)  was  appointed  First  Lieutenant  of  the  Egmont,
depot-ship  of  the  submarines  at  Malta,  with  command  of

1  Some  ten  or  eleven  years  ago,  when  away  on  a  visit,  Miss  Chichester
had  a  visual  hallucination  of  her  mother,  who,  being  then  at  home,  had
endeavoured  (without  any  previous  arrangement)  to  make  herself  visible
to  her  daughter.  She  had  previously  had  a  similar  hallucination  of  her
mother,  but  without  intention  on  the  latter's  part.


352


Rev.  M.  A.  Bay  field.


[PART


the  Submarine  Flotilla  there.  Mrs.  Pownall  went  out  with
him.

In  August  1914,  after  the  outbreak  of  the  war,  Mr.  R.  E.
Knox,  R.N..1  who  was  on  the  staff  of  Admiral  Carden,
Admiral  Superintendent  of  the  Dockyard,  said  in  Mrs.
Pownall's  presence,  "  Anyhow  we  [meaning  the  Admiral
and  his  staff]  shall  not  leave  Malta,  for  the  Admiral  has
just  received  an  extension  of  his  appointment  " — or  words
to  that  effect.2  A  few  days  later,  about  August  12,  on
coming  down  to  breakfast  Mrs.  Pownall  said  she  had
dreamed  on  the  previous  night  that  Admiral  Carden  was
going  to  have  command  of  a  fleet  at  sea,  but  nowhere
near  England.  This  was  said  to  her  husband  and  Mr.
Knox,  and  later  to  Captain  L.  T.  Esmond.3  Since  it  was
then  common  knowledge  that  the  Admiral  was  not  to  be
relieved,  her  friends  naturally  dismissed  the  dream  as
absurd.  Some  five  weeks  after  this  (I  am  betraying  no
secret,  for  the  fact  was  at  once  publicly  known)  Admiral
Carden  was  appointed  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Medi-
terranean Fleet,  then  at  the  Dardanelles.

This  is  corroborated  by  Mr.  Knox  as  follows  :

October,  1915.

In  August  1914  I  was  [on  the  staff  of]  Admiral  Carden.
I  remember  that  towards  the  end  of  the  month 4  I  said  to
Mrs.  Pownall  that  the  Admiral  and  his  staff  would  be  fixtures
at  Malta  during  the  war,  as  the  appointment  of  the  Admiral
who  was  to  relieve  him  had  been  cancelled.  I  remember  also
that  a  few  days  later  Mrs.  Pownall  said  she  had  dreamed
that  Admiral  Carden  was  in  command  of  a  Fleet  at  sea.
Lieut. -Commander  Pownall,  Captain  [Esmond],  and  I  regarded  it
as  extremely  improbable  that  he  would  leave  Malta  Dockyard.

(Signed) R.  E.  Knox.

1  Not  the  real  name  or  initials.

2  There  was,  I  believe,  no  formal  "  extension  "  ;  it  would  be  more  correct
to  say  that  it  became  known  that  the  Admiral  was  not  to  be  relieved  as  had
been  expected.

3  Not  the  real  name  or  initials.

4  Since  sending  this  statement  Mr.  Knox  has  written  that  he  cannot
clearly  recall  what  time  in  August  the  incident  happened.  Mrs.  Pownall
fixes  the  date  as  being  a  few  days  after  August  8,  on  which  day  she
and  her  husband  moved  into  the  house  in  which  the  dream  occurred.


iiXxrv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  353

Captain  Esmond  writes  from  Malta  on  October  23,  1915  :

Mrs.  Pownall  told  me  in  August  1914  that  she  had  dreamed
that  Admiral  Carden  was  to  have  a  command  at  sea,  but
nowhere  near  England.  This  was  generally  regarded  as  im-
probable, in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  Admiral  had  only
recently  received  an  extension  of  the  appointment  he  then
held  at  Malta,

Some  time  after  the  outbreak  of  the  war,  but  before
September  7,  1911,  the  question  of  the  despatch  of
submarines  from  Malta  to  the  Dardanelles  was  dis-
cussed among  Mrs.  Pownall's  friends.  It  is  natural  to
surmise  that  the  discussion  began  after  August  10,  and
that  it  arose  from  the  fact  that  the  Goeben  and  Breslau
had  on  that  day  succeeded  in  reaching  Constantinople.
The  naval  officers  were  of  opinion  that  the  submarines
would  remain  at  Malta  for  the  defence  of  the  island.
Mrs.  Pownall,  however,  constantly  affirmed  to  her  husband
and  others  that  the  submarine  flotilla  would  be  sent  to  the
Dardanelles  and  that  he  would  go  with  them.  She  will,  I
am  sure,  not  quarrel  with  me  if  I  say  that  her  grasp  of  naval
strategy  is  not  such  that  this  conviction,  opposed  as  it
was  to  expert  opinion,  is  likely  to  have  been  based  on
reflection  and  judgement.  The  declaration  of  war  against
Turkey,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  not  made  until
November  5,  1914.

The  premonition  is  corroborated  by  Mr.  Knox  as  follows  :

November  1,  1915.
I  remember  Mrs.  George  Pownall  saying  in  August  1914  that
the  Malta  submarines  would  be  sent  to  the  Dardanelles.  We
all  considered  this  most  improbable.

(Signed) R.  E.  Knox.
Captain  Esmond  writes  under  date  October  23,  1915  :

Before  the  Submarine  Flotilla  left  Malta  for  the  Dardanelles
it  was  the  general  opinion  in  Naval  circles  that  it  would  not  be
so  employed,  being  required  for  the  defence  of  the  island.  I
remember  that  Mrs.  George  Pownall  nevertheless  affirmed  more
than  once  that  the  submarines  would  be  sent  to  the  Dardanelles.
This  took  place.


354


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[PART


On  September  7,  1914,  Mrs.  Pownall  saw  her  husband
pass  across  the  harbour  in  his  skiff.  She  had  frequently
seen  him  do  so,  but  on  this  occasion  she  said  to  herself,
"  He  is  going  to  the  Admiral  to  receive  orders  for  the
dispatch  of  the  submarines  to  the  Dardanelles."  This  was
in  fact  the  case,  and  the  flotilla  left  Malta  next  day.
Lieut. -Commander  Pownall  made  the  voyage  in  the
Hindustani,  a  collier,  which  was  afterwards  renamed
the  Hindukush  and  became  the  submarine  depot-ship  at
the  Dardanelles.  He  remained  on  this  ship  until  he  was
transferred  to  a  transport  on  some  day  between  the  17th
and  25th  of  April,  1915.

When  her  husband  parted  from  her,  Mrs.  Pownall  felt
absolutely  sure  she  would  never  see  him  again,1  and  from
that  day  onwards  she  always  felt  peculiarly  depressed  on
Sundays,  and  mentioned  the  fact  in  letters  to  her  husband
many  times.  On  Sunday,  April  25,  1915,  he  was  killed
by  a  bursting  shell  while  in  charge  of  a  boat  taking  part
in  the  first  landing  on  Gallipoli.  He  was  wounded  in  the
early  morning  and  died  at  10.30  a.m.

On  that  same  afternoon  at  Malta  Captain  Esmond  called
on  Mrs.  Pownall  and  delivered  a  letter  written  to  her  by  her
husband,  whose  letters  were  sent  that  way  by  private
arrangement — probably  for  greater  safety  or  more  rapid
delivery.  After  giving  her  the  letter  Captain  Esmond
left  Mrs.  Pownall  in  the  drawing-room,  saying  he  was  very
tired  and  would  go  into  the  smoking-room  and  have  a
nap.  She  proceeded  to  read  the  letter,  which  was  dated  the
17th  of  April,  and  when  about  half  through  was  seized
with  an  overpowering  conviction  that  the  landing  had  taken
place  and  that  her  husband  had  been  killed.  The  conviction
was  so  strong  that  she  felt  impelled  to  go  and  tell  Captain
Esmond  at  once,  but  refrained  from  disturbing  him.  I  have
naturally  not  been  able  to  ask  to  see  this  letter,  but  Mrs.
Pownall  assures  me  that  it  contained  nothing  about  naval
matters  beyond  the  statement  that  her  husband  was  going
on  to  a  transport.

It  should  be  explained  that  the  officer  in  command  of  a
submarine  flotilla  does  not  live  on  a  submarine,  but  on

1  Her  own  words  are  :  "  I  had  not  a  shadow  of  doubt  about  it."


Lxxrv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  355

what  is  called  a  depot-ship,  which  may  be  any  ship  that  is
suitable  for  the  purpose.  Lieut. -Commander  Pownall,  as  I
have  said,  had  up  to  the  time  of  writing  been  on  the
collier  Hindukush.  When  Mrs.  Pownall  read  that  he  was
going  on  to  a  transport,  she  wondered  why  this  was,  but
her  only  conclusion  was  that  for  some  reason  he  was  to
be  temporarily  transferred  from  his  submarine  duties.  No
doubt  the  removal  to  a  transport  might  suggest  duties  in
connexion  with  the  troops,  and  as  I  have  recently  learned,
this  was  in  fact  the  explanation,  for  the  naval  officers  who
superintended  the  landing  were  all  placed  together  on  an
empty  transport  in  order  to  make  the  necessary  arrange-
ments. Mr.  Knox,  however,  writes  to  me  that  a  naval
officer  would  not  necessarily  infer  from  the  change  even
a  relinquishment  of  the  submarine  duties  ;  "it  might  only
mean  that  a  transport  was  being  used  as  a  Submarine  Parent
instead  of  the  collier  which  had  hitherto  been  used."  We
shall  see  that  the  transference  did  not  suggest  to  Captain
Esmond  any  participation  in  the  landing.  He  had  peculiar
facilities  for  knowing  all  that  was  to  be  known,  and  shortly
before  this  had  told  Mrs.  Pownall  that  the  landing  would
not  take  place  for  some  little  time.

Together  with  the  letter  from  her  husband,  Captain
Esmond  had  brought  to  Mrs.  Pownall  a  letter  from  Mr.
Knox,  who  also  was  at  the  Dardanelles.  She  does  not
remember  which  she  opened  first.  Mr.  Knox's  letter  has
been  destroyed,  and  he  has  no  recollection  of  its  contents.
Mrs.  Pownall,  however,  is  sure  that  it  contained  no  refer-
ence to  the  landing  of  the  troops  ;  and  we  may  take  it
for  certain,  that  even  if  anyone  had  known  the  precise
day  of  the  landing  more  than  a  week  before,  Mr.  Knox
would  not  have  divulged  so  vital  a  secret,  and  also  that  he
would  certainly  not  have  said  a  word  about  Lieut. -Com-
mander Pownall's  taking  part  in  the  operation,  even  if  he
had  then  any  expectation  of  his  doing  so.  Before  Mr.
Knox  left,  Mrs.  Pownall  had  obtained  from  him  a  promise
that  he  would  send  to  Captain  Esmond  a  telegram  with
the  news  of  her  husband's  death  whenever  it  should  happen  ;
she  says  she  did  this  because  she  was  sure  he  would
be  killed. This  telegram,  as  we  shall  see,  Mr.  Knox  sent.


356


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


To  continue  the  story.  When  after  about  an  hour
Captain  Esmond  returned  to  the  drawing-room,  Mrs.  Pow-
nall  told  him  she  was  sure  the  troops  had  landed  and  that
her  husband  had  been  killed.  He  replied  that  he  did  not
believe  it  for  a  moment  ;  firstly,  because  he  did  not  think
the  landing  would  take  place  for  a  day  or  two,  and,
secondly,  because  whenever  it  took  place,  it  was  most
unlikely  that  Lieut. -Commander  Pownall  would  have  any
part  in  it.  Apparently  nothing  that  he  could  say  pro-
duced any  effect,  and  she  replied  that  she  was  sure  she
was  right.  So  sure  was  she,  that  she  asked  him  to  promise
that  he  would  himself  bring  her  the  news  when  it  came,  and
he  said  he  would  certainly  do  so  if  the  need  should  arise.

I  now  give  Captain  Esmond's  account  of  this  interview,
written  from  Malta  ;  it  confirms  Mrs.  PownalPs  account  with
extraordinary  particularity.

On  Sunday  April  25th  1915,  the  day  on  which  Lieut.  Comdr
Pownall  was  killed,  I  took  to  Mrs.  Pownall  at  her  house  a
letter  written  from  her  husband  to  her  and  sent  under  cover
to  me.  After  giving  her  the  letter  I  went  into  the  smoking-
room  and  slept  for  an  hour.  On  my  return  to  the  drawing-
room  Mrs.  Pownall  told  me  she  was  sure  her  husband  had
taken  part  in  the  landing  and  been  killed.  I  was  not  aware
that  the  landing  had  taken  place,  and  did  not  expect  the
attempt  to  be  made  for  2  or  3  days.  That  Lieut.  Comdr
Pownall  would  land  seemed  to  me  improbable,  as  he  was  O.C.
Submarines.  However,  I  had  heard  that  he  had  received  some
appointment  other  than  that  of  O.C.  Submarines.  In  reply  to
Mrs.  Pownall's  statements  I  said  that  it  was  of  course  possible,
but  that  in  view  of  the  fact  that  10  beachmasters  had  been
appointed  by  the  Admiralty,  whom  I  had  seen  passing  through
only  3  or  4  days  previously,  I  did  not  think  for  a  moment,
that  a  valuable  submarine  officer  would  be  taken  as  a  beach-
master. This  was  my  honest  belief.

Mrs.  Pownall  then  asked  me  to  bring  her  the  official  news  of
her  husband's  death,  and  I  said  I  would  be  sure  to  do  so,  if  it
came.  When  the  news  actually  arrived  I  was  unavoidably  pre-
vented from  fulfilling  this  promise.  As  far  as  I  am  aware,  the
only  news  Mrs.  Pownall  received  of  her  husband's  death  was  a


lxxiv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition,  and  Telepathy.  357

private  telegram  from  Mr.  [Knox  .  .  .]  to  me.  When  I  received
it  [this  was  on  the  Wednesday  after  the  death]  H.  E.  the
Governor  was  expected  and  I  could  not  leave  my  office,  and
my  telegram  was  communicated  to  Mrs.  Pownall  by  Mrs.
Limpus,  wife  of  the  Admiral  Superintendent.  On  my  arrival
at  2.0  p.m.  (2  hours  after  receiving  the  telegram)  Mrs.  Pownall
was  quite  calm,  and  told  me  that  as  soon  as  she  saw  Mrs.
Limpus  she  knew  she  had  come  to  tell  her  her  husband  was
dead. She  was  expecting  the  news  hourly.

Captain  Esmond  appends  the  following  note  to  his  accounts
of  the  three  incidents  in  which  he  was  concerned  :

October  23,  1915.
The  facts  I  have  related  above  are  absolutely  true  and  I  am
prepared  to  swear  to  them,  if  necessary.

(Signed) L.  T.  Esmond,  Captain,  .  .  .

Some  account  of  Lieut. -Commander  Pownall  himself  is
desirable  for  a  complete  appreciation  of  this  incident,  and
it  will  be  most  convenient  to  give  it  at  this  point.  He
was  an  exceptionally  talented  and  able  naval  officer,  and
so  far  as  it  can  be  said  of  any  one  man  in  a  service
that  contains  so  many  men  of  great  ability,  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  his  death  is  a  serious  loss  to  the  Navy.
Not  only  was  he  a  master  of  his  particular  business,  but
he  also  possessed  considerable  literary  and  other  gifts,  and
was  a  most  agreeable  and  interesting  companion.  His
appointment  at  Malta  is  evidence  of  the  estimate  which
the  Admiralty  had  formed  of  his  abilities.

You  have  no  doubt  been  wondering  how  an  officer  so
valuable  for  his  proper  and  most  important  duties  came  to
be  engaged  in  one  of  the  landing  parties.  One  asks  with  some
indignation  and  a  bitter  literalness,  Que  (Liable  allait-il  faire
dans  cette  galere  ?  No  authoritative  explanation  is  likely  to
be  obtainable,  and  we  can  only  suppose  that  it  was  a  case
of  sheer  necessity.  Similar  things  have  happened  before,
and  will,  I  imagine,  happen  again.  It  is  small  comfort
for  those  who  mourn  for  him,  though  it  says  much  for
our  Naval  Service,  that,  as  is  shown  by  our  later  sub-
marine successes  in  Turkish  waters,  his  command  has
evidently  passed  into  no  less  able  hands.

z


358


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.  [part


I  have  said  thus  much  of  this  officer — and  I  would  also
remind  you  of  Captain  Esmond's  opinion  on  the  matter  and
of  Mr.  Knox's  remark  on  the  removal  to  the  transport —
in  order  that  it  may  be  clearly  seen  how  little  reason,
humanly  speaking,  Mrs.  Pownall  had  for  supposing  her
husband  would  be  in  any  special  danger  at  the  Dardanelles
and  how  she  was  least  of  all  justified  by  any  ordinary
calculation  of  probabilities  in  her  conviction  that  he  had
died  as  one  of  a  landing  party.  .

We  have  now  to  return  to  Malta.  Mrs.  Pownall  spent
the  earlier  part  of  the  evening  of  April  25  (the  day  of
the  death  and  of  her  impression  concerning  it)  alone  in
the  house  ;  she  had  allowed  her  maids  to  go  out,  and
there  are  no  children.  She  was  sometimes  on  the  first
floor  and  sometimes  on  the  second,  but  on  whichever
floor  she  might  be,  she  heard  from  time  to  time  footsteps
on  the  floor  below  ;  the  impression  was  of  human  foot-
steps, but  she  did  not  otherwise  distinguish  them.  She
went  down  three  times  to  search  but  found  no  one.
Becoming  uneasy,  she  went  out  and  induced  a  friend,
Mme  Davie,  to  come  and  spend  the  evening  with  her.
She  did  not  mention  the  footsteps  to  her,  nor  her
conviction  of  her  husband's  death,  but  Mme  Davie
also  heard  footsteps  and  also  searched  twice  for  an  explana-
tion in  vain.  A  letter  has  been  written  to  the  lady,
asking  for  her  confirmation  on  this  point,  but  no  answer
has  been  received.  Mrs.  Pownall  thinks  she  must  have  left
Malta.

In  London  on  this  same  night  a  dream  was  dreamed  which
only  perversity,  as  it  seems  to  me,  could  dissociate  from  Mrs.
Pownall's  distress  at  her  husband's  death,  of  which  she  had
become  so  strangely  convinced.  Before  relating  the  dream
I  should  state  that  the  "  John  "  who  appears  in  it  is  a
brother  of  Mrs.  Pownall  who  died  in  Sumatra  in  Septem-
ber, 1914.  In  view  of  the  experiences  accumulated  in  this
paper,  it  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  Mrs.  Pownall  had
no  premonition  of  her  brother's  death  nor  any  telepathic
impression  of  any  kind  in  connexion  with  it,  although  he
was  her  favourite  brother  and  there  was  a  strong  mutual
affection  between  them. The  dream  occurred  to  a  sister


lxxiv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  359

of  Mrs.  Pownall,  Mrs.  Grenfell  White,  and  the  following  is
her  account  of  it,  with  her  husband's  confirmation.

November  6,  1915.
On  a  Sunday  night  last  April  I  dreamt  that  I  saw  Vera  [Mrs
George  Pownall]  crying  dreadfully,  and  I  saw  John  very  plainly,
and  he  said  to  Vera,  '  I  wish  T  could  speak  to  you,  but  I
can't.'  When  I  woke  up  I  said  to  my  husband,  '  I  knoiv  some-
thing has  happened  to  George  '  ;  and  I  then  went  on  to
urge  him  very  strongly  to  remember  what  I  was  going  to  tell
him,  and  in  particular  to  remember  that  I  had  told  him  before
we  had  any  knowledge  that  my  forebodings  were  true.  I  then
told  him  my  dream,  and  my  insistence  made  him  remember  the
circumstances  clearly.  We  afterwards  learned  that  George  was
in  fact  killed  on  that  Sunday.  I  had  not  previously  dreamt
about  John  since  his  death  in  September  1914.

(Signed) Thomasine  Grenfell  White.

155  Sloane  St.,  London.

November  6,  1915.
The  above  is  a  true  account  of  what  occurred.

(Signed) W.  Grenfell  White.

On  the  following  day,  Monday,  April  26,  although  Mrs.
Pownall's  impression  of  her  husband's  death  was  less
painfully  vivid,  the  conviction  was  as  strong  as  ever,
and  she  proceeded  to  tear  up  papers  and  letters  and  do
other  things  which  she  would  not  otherwise  have  done,
in  view  of  an  early  return  to  England.  She  actually  told
her  maid  that  she  would  have  no  further  need  of  her  services.

On  the  next  night,  Tuesday,  somewhere  about  midnight
she  suddenly  woke  up  in  bed,  and  after  a  tew  minutes  heard
footsteps  in  the  street  below.  Her  first  thought  was  that
it  was  Captain  Esmond  bringing  her  the  news  as  he  had
promised,  and  she  felt  relieved  when  the  steps  went  past
the  house.  This  feeling,  however,  was  followed  by  the
'thought,  "  He  will  not  come  ;  Mrs.  Limpus  [wife  of
Admiral  Limpus] will bring me the  news."

On  the  Wednesday  morning  Mrs.  Pownall  went  out  into
the  town,  and  on  her  return  at  1  o'clock  found  Mrs.
Limpus waiting  for  her  with a  telegram confirming  all


360


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


this  sad  foreknowledge.  The  telegram  ran  as  follows  :
"  Pownall  killed  25th  beach  party.  [Knox.]  "  Soon  after
this  she  received  a  note  from  Captain  Esmond  saying  he
was  very  sorry  that  he  had  been  unavoidably  prevented
from  fulfilling  his  promise  to  bring  the  news  himself.  As
you  will  remember  from  his  statement,  he  also  called  at
2  o'clock.

Mrs.  Pownall  left  for  England  on  Monday,  May  3,  1915,
and  there  was  a  curious  premonition  in  connexion  with  her
departure.  The  boats,  which  go  weekly,  normally  come
into  Malta  and  leave  again  after  a  stay  of  a  few  hours.  Mrs.
Pownall  had  expected  to  leave  on  Tuesday,  May  4,  but
Captain  Esmond  had  told  her  that  the  boat  had  been
delayed  and  would  not  come  till  the  Thursday.  On
waking  on  Monday  morning  at  about  7.30  she  felt  con-
vinced that  the  boat  would  leave  at  11  o'clock  that  day,
and  at  once  got  up  and  made  preparations  to  start.
She  usually  got  up  between  9  and  10,  after  breakfasting
in  bed.  At  9.30  she  received  a  note  from  Captain  Esmond
telling  her  that  the  boat  would  leave  at  11  that  day,  and
she  started  by  it  at  that  hour.  In  peace  time  the  boat
was  accustomed  to  leave  in  the  afternoon,  but  after  the
outbreak  of  the  war,  according  to  Mrs.  Pownall's  recol-
lection, the  hour  varied.  I  do  not  know  at  what  hour  the
boat  came  in  on  the  morning  in  question,  but  I  can  think
of  no  normal  means  by  which  Mrs.  Pownall,  lying  in  bed
in  her  house,  could  become  aware  of  its  arrival,  or  indeed
of  the  arrival  of  any  ship.  Captain  Esmond  writes  to  me
that  he  cannot  remember  anything  in  connexion  with  this
incident  beyond  the  broad  fact  that  "  the  boat  arrived
two  or  three  days  before  she  was  expected  and  upset  all
the  arrangements."  This,  however,  is  fortunately  all  the
corroboration  we  require.

On  reaching  England,  Mrs.  Pownall  went  to  her  parents
in  Devonshire,  and  stayed  with  them  for  about  ten  days.
At  this  time  she  had  not  been  informed  whether  her
husband  had  been  wounded  in  the  head  or  in  the  body,
nor  whether  he  had  or  had  not  died  instantaneously  ;  but
she  told  her  mother,  while  on  this  visit,  that  she  was  sure
he  had  been  shot  in  the  back  and  had  not  died  at  once.


lxxiv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  361

Her  mother  has  only  a  vague  recollection  of  this,  but  Mrs.
Pownall  is  positive  on  all  three  points.  Some  time  in
June  she  received  a  letter,  dated  May  31,  from  the
Chaplain  on  board  the  transport,  informing  her  that  Lieut .-
Commander  Pownall  had  been  wounded  in  the  back  and
had  lingered  a  few  hours.  She  had  not  written  to  any  one
for  information  on  the  point,  and  this  was  the  first  that  had
reached  her.  Before  receiving  this  letter,  Mrs.  Pownall  had
received  two  others  from  the  Dardanelles,  one  from  an
officer  and  one  from  an  able  seaman,  but  neither  made  any
reference  to  the  locality  of  the  wound.

The  next  three  experiences  I  give  in  Mrs.  Pownall's  own
words.  She  made  no  contemporary  notes,  but  says  that
her  recollection  is  clear.

October,  1915.

In  July  1915  I  was  staying  at  Eastbourne  with  Miss  Bay-
field, who  was  driving  a  motor  ambulance  in  the  neighbourhood.
Mr.  [R.  E.  Knox]  was  also  there  on  leave,  expecting  a  fresh
appointment.  One  day  I  told  him  he  would  get  his  appoint-
ment on  such  and  such  a  day,  naming  a  day  of  the  week  four
days  ahead.  I  remember  counting  the  days  as  they  went  by.
He  obtained  his  appointment  on  the  day  I  named.

(Signed) Vera  Pownall.

Mr.  Knox  has  sent  the  following  confirmation  of  ithis,  and
fortunately  has  been  able  to  supply  the  dates  :

In  July  1915  I  was  on  leave  at  Eastbourne  and  was  ex-
pecting an  appointment.  On  Friday  30th  July  Mrs.  Pownall
told  me  I  should  be  appointed  on  the  following  Tuesday,  which
proved  true.

(Signed) B.  E.  Knox.

I  now  come  to  another  little  incident  which  may  readily
be  accepted,  though  from  the  nature  of  the  case  corrobora-
tion is  impossible.

October,  1915.

One  morning  in  October  1915  my  copy  of  the  Times  had
been  brought  up  to  me  as  usual  while  I  was  in  bed,  and  was
lying  near  me  where  the  maid  had  placed  it,  folded  as  it
always  is,  with  the  front  page  outside. I  had  not  myself


362


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield,


[PART


touched  it.  Just  as  I  was  about  to  take  it  up  I  had  the
impression  that  I  should  find  among  the  casualties  the  name
of  Major  Ash,  of  the  Middlesex  Regiment,  as  either  killed  or
wounded.  On  opening  the  paper  and  looking  down  the  casualty
lists  I  found  his  name  among  the  wounded.  I  did  not  know
Major  Ash  well,  having  only  met  him  at  Malta  two  or  three
times,  and  I  had  no  particular  interest  in  him,  though  I  knew
Mrs.  Ash  fairly  well  while  we  were  both  at  Malta.  I  had  had
a  letter  from  her  some  three  months  before  this.  I  had  not
been  thinking  of  Major  or  Mrs.  Ash,  and  I  did  not  know
whether  he  was  on  the  Western  Front  or  at  the  Dardanelles,
or  indeed  where  he  was.

(Signed) Vera  Pownall.

The  next  incident  also  occurred  in  October,  1915.  I
should  state  that  my  daughter  has  for  the  last  two  months
been  temporarily  living  with  Mrs.  Pownall  in  London.  I
give  the  story  as  written  down  at  their  dictation,  begin-
ning with  Mrs.  Pownall's  account  :

At  about  7.15  p.m.  on  October  12,  1915,  at  my  flat  in
London,  I  made  the  following  note  on  the  back  of  a  trades-
man's bill: — 'I  feel  that  there  will  be  a  Zep.  raid  to-night  or
to-morrow  at  9.45  p.m.  V.  Pownall.  Oct.  12.'  For  the  rest
of  that  day  the  matter  was  entirely  absent  from  my  mind.
On  October  13  Miss  Bayfield  and  Mr.  [J.  Knox,  Mr.  R.  E.  Knox's]
brother,  dined  with  me  at  the  flat  at  7.15.  During  dinner  I
found  it  strangely  difficult  to  collect  and  control  my  thoughts
and  seemed  to  myself  to  be  in  a  state  of  suppressed  excitement
and  expectancy,  but  I  was  expecting  nothing  in  particular.  I
did  not  think  of  Zeppelins,  and  I  had  entirely  forgotten  the
memorandum  written  on  the  previous  evening.  No  thought
of  Zeppelins  occurred  to  me  until  we  were  standing  outside  in
the  street  at  about  5  minutes  past  8,  when  Miss  Bayfield  said,
'  What  a  lovely  night  for  Zeppelins  !  '  The  night  was  clear  and
still.  Even  then  I  did  not  think  of  my  note.  When  we  heard
the  first  bomb  dropped  on  London  that  evening  we  were  in
a  theatre  ;  I  at  once  remembered  my  memorandum  and  looked
at  my  watch,  which  gave  the  time  as  9.40.  My  watch  loses
about  5  minutes  each  day,  and  I  regulate  it  every  morning
at  about  9.30  by  the  clock  on  the  Great  Central  Hotel,  which


Lxxrv.] Recent  Gases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  363

I  can  see  from  my  windows.  I  do  not  remember  that  I  was
ever  before  in  the  condition  described.

(Signed) Vera  Pownall.

My  daughter,  who  has  known  Mrs.  Pownall  intimately
for  some  years,  and  spent  the  winter  of  1913  with  her  at
Malta,  describes  what  happened  as  follows  :

I  have  read  the  foregoing  statement,  and  testify  that  it  is
correct  so  far  as  concerns  myself.  During  dinner  I  noticed  that
Vera  seemed  extraordinarily  distraite  and  preoccupied.  More
than  once  she  did  not  reply  when  we  spoke  to  her,  and  she
seemed  to  pay  imperfect  attention  to  what  was  going  on.  Also
she  talked  little.  All  this  was  quite  unusual  with  her,  especially
at  dinner  and  when  enter  taming  guests.  I  said  to  her  some-
thing to  the  following  effect,  '  What  is  the  matter  with  you  ?
I  never  knew  you  so  vague  !  '  She  replied,  '  I  feel  something  is
going  to  happen.'  ['  When  I  said  this  I  did  not  think  of
Zeppelins.'  Vera  Pownall.]  I  said,  '  What  ?  '  She  answered
that  she  did  not  know.  I  then  said,  '  To  whom  ?  '  and  she
said,  '  To  all  of  us.'  I  said,  '  When  ?  '  and  she  replied  '  Oh,
soon  '  [meaning,  as  Mrs.  Pownall  has  explained,  within  a  day  or
so].  Then  she  apologised  for  being  '  so  vague,'  and  we  all
laughed  about  it.

After  dinner  we  were  going  to  a  theatre.  When  Mrs.  Pownall
and  I  were  putting  on  our  things  I  said  to  her,  '  Is  it  going  to
happen  to  you  or  me  ?  ',  and  she  replied,  '  Oh  no  ;  we  are  all
in  it.'  Either  now  or  earlier  I  said  to  her,  '  Is  it  something
awful  ?  ',  and  she  answered,  '  No.'

While  we  were  at  the  theatre  we  heard  the  bombs,  and  at  the
sound  of  the  first  or  second  Vera  said  to  me,  '  I  wrote  that  down
yesterday  and  put  it  in  my  dressing-table  drawer.'  When  we
got  home  she  at  once  went  to  her  bedroom  and  immediately
brought  back  and  showed  me  the  paper  attached  to  this
statement.

(Signed) Cyrille  Bayfield.

Mrs.  Pownall  adds  :

I  have  read  Miss  Bayfield's  statement  and  declare  that  it  is
correct.

(Signed) Vera  Pownall.


364


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


The  original  of  the  memorandum  mentioned  has  been
identified  by  Miss  Bayfield,  and  is  in  the  Society's  pos-
session, together  with  the  originals  of  the  statements  of
Captain  Esmond,  Mr.  Knox,  and  Commander  Remold,
furnished  in  corroboration  of  other  incidents.  I  may  add
that  the  newspapers  of  October  12,  1915,  so  far  as  I  am
aware,  contained  no  warning  of  a  Zeppelin  raid,  and  the
last  previous  raid — the  only  one  that  had  been  made  on
London — took  place  more  than  a  month  before,  on
September  8.

The  last  case  which  I  have  to  bring  before  you  occurred
ten  days  ago,  November  12,  1915.  The  following  is  Mrs.
Pownall's  account  of  it  :

November  13th,  1915.
Yesterday  morning,  when  I  began  to  read  the  paper,  I  had  it
fixed  in  my  mind  that  I  should  see  "  British  Submarine  Lost  ",
and  I  hunted  through  the  paper  expecting  to  see  something
about  it,  but  found  nothing.  A  Commander  from  the  Admiralty
came  to  luncheon,  and  at  lunch  I  said  to  Cyrille  and  him,
"  Did  I  dream  it  or  did  I  see  in  yesterday's  or  to-day's  paper
that  a  British  submarine  had  been  lost  ?  Was  it  in  any
paper  ?  "  The  Commander  said,  "  No,"  and  also  Cyrille.  This
morning,  shortly  after  12  o'clock,  I  saw  a  poster,  "  British
Submarine  Lost.  Official."  We  bought  a  Pall  Mall  and  found
it  was  true.

(Signed) Vera  Pownall.

Miss  Bayfield  writes  :

November  13th,  1915.
I  have  read  Mrs.  George  Pownall's  statement  about  the  British
submarine,  the  loss  of  which  was  first  reported  in  to-day's
evening  papers,  and  certify  that  it  is a true  statement  in
every  detail.

(Signed) Cyrille  Bayfield.

Commander  B.  E.  Remold,  R.N.,  writes  :

November  11th,  1915.
On  Friday  last,  November  12,  I  lunched  with  Mrs.  George
Pownall  and  Miss  Bayfield  at  2m  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  and  I
remember  that  at  lunch  Mrs.  Pownall  said  something  to  the


lxxiv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  365

following  effect  : — "  Did  I  dream  it  or  did  I  see  it  in  yester-
day's or  to-day's  paper  that  a  British  submarine  had  been
lost  ?  "  I  also  remember  that  Miss  Bayfield  and  I  replied  that
there  had  been  no  such  announcement  in  the  papers.

(Signed) B.  E.  Reinold,  Comr.R.N.

This  brings  me  to  the  end  of  my  story,  but  if  you  are  not
already  wearied,  I  should  like  to  add  a  few  remarks  on  some
of  the  incidents — offering,  perhaps,  by  the  way,  a  few  targets
for  the  discussion  which  I  hope  will  follow.

A  resolute  critic,  unconvinced  even  of  telepathy,  might
dismiss  this  somewhat  remarkable  series  of  predictions  as
merely  so  many  examples  of  chance-coincidence,  accounting
perhaps  for  their  number  by  a  reference  to  the  extra-
ordinary runs  on  the  red  or  the  black  at  Monte  Carlo,
and  to  other  similar  phenomena.  I  must  confess  that
such  a  view  would  seem  to  me  to  be  a  fresh  illustration
of  the  surprising  credulity  of  the  incredulous,  who,  rather
than  accept  a  new  truth  which  conflicts  with  their  pre-
possessions, are  ready  to  believe  the  incredible.  The  sim-
plicity which  would  believe  that  we  have  here  to  do  with
nothing  but  chance,  would  appear  to  be  capable  of  believ-
ing anything.  This  explanation,  then,  I  unhesitatingly
dismiss,  and  seek  further  afield.

Several  of  the  incidents  are  obviously  explicable  by  tele-
pathy between  the  living,  and  may  be  considered  to
strengthen  the  evidence  for  it — perhaps  to  extend  our
conception  of  it.  Three  others — Admiral  Garden's  appoint-
ment, the  despatch  of  the  submarines,  and  the  Zeppelin:
raid — may  be  so  explained,  if  we  make  certain  assumptions  ;;
but  of  the  premonition  of  the  visit  of  Mrs.  Limpus  and  some
points  of  detail  in  other  cases  telepathy  seems  to  me  to  offer
no  explanation  at  all.

To  take  first  the  hallucination  at  Harwich,  we  may
suppose  that  Lieut. -Commander  Pownall,  being  compelled
to  leave  his  newly  married  wife  alone  for  most  of  the
day,  was  always  desirous  of  returning  home  as  soon  as
his  duties  permitted.  He  might  often,  consciously  or
unconsciously,  while  in  the  midst  of  his  work  picture
himself so returning. On this particular afternoon  a


366


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


thought  of  the  kind — perhaps  a  "  high-explosive  "  one,  so
to  speak,  caused  by  an  apparent  chance  of  an  early
return  afterwards  found  to  be  no  chance — may  have
caught  Mrs.  Pownali  at  a  favourable  moment,  and  the
visual  hallucination  was  the  result.  One  only  wonders
why  hallucinations  of  this  kind  do  not  occur  more  often.

Telepathy  will  explain  the  dream  about  Admiral  Carden's
appointment,  if  we  make  a  wild  and  quite  gratuitous
assumption.  The  dream,  you  remember,  occurred  about
August  12,  1914.  Now,  the  Goeben  and  Breslau  reached
Constantinople  on  August  10,  and  their  escape  caused
much  irritation  in  this  country.  At  the  Admiralty  and
in  Government  circles  the  irritation  was  no  doubt  acute.
It  is  conceivable — I  do  not  venture  to  say  that  it  is  more
than  conceivable — that  someone  then  in  high  office,  whose
name  I  forbear  even  to  guess,  under  the  stimulus  of  this
irritating  disappointment,  flashed  out  a  very  highly  explo-
sive thought  the  impact  of  which  was  felt  as  far  as  Malta
— the  thought  being  something  like  this,  "X.  must  be
recalled,  and  Carden  must  have  the  Mediterranean  com-
mand !  "  Whether  the  thought  was  justifiable  or  not  of
course  I  do  not  discuss,  and  it  does  not  matter  ;  nor  does
it  matter  that  the  change  (which,  as  we  know,  was
actually  made)  did  not  take  place  till  more  than  five
weeks  after  the  date  of  the  dream.  This  audacious  sug-
gestion is,  of  course,  a  mere  fancy,  but  it  is  the  best  I
can  myself  make  in  the  interests  of  telepathy.  On  its
merits  I  attach  small  value  to  it,  and  I  have  reasons  for
believing  it  to  be  improbable.  I  am  not  at  liberty  to
impart  these  reasons,  but  those  of  you  who  have  friends
in  naval  circles  will  perhaps  be  able  to  obtain  information
from  which  you  can  form  your  own  opinion  on  the
matter.

Similarly,  the  dispatch  of  the  submarines  could  be  explained
by  telepathy  from  the  Admiralty,  if  the  step  was  decided
upon  there  at  a  sufficiently  early  date.  Perhaps  we  may
some  day  be  allowed  to  learn  how  this  was  ;  but  in
view  of  the  fact  that  the  flotilla  was  ordered  to  leave  at
some  twenty-four  hours'  notice,  it  does  not  seem  likely  that
the  matter  was  discussed  and  decided  in  London  more


lxxiv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  367

than  a  day  or  two  before.  Otherwise  one  would  have
expected  longer  notice  to  be  given.

The  incidents  of  the  steamer,  the  wounding  of  Major  Ash,
and  the  loss  of  the  British  submarine  obviously  suggest  a
telepathic  explanation,  since  in  each  case  some  one  knew
the  facts  before  they  reached  Mrs.  Pownall.  With  regard
to  Mr.  Knox's  appointment  also,  it  is  possible  that  some-
body at  the  Admiralty  thought  the  thought,  "in  3  days'
time  we  shall  send  Mr.  Knox  notice  of  his  appointment."
All  the  same,  both  the  thought  itself  and  the  transference
of  just  that  thought  on  a  trivial  matter  are  not  easy  to
explain.  As  to  Mrs.  Grenfell  White's  dream,  which  is
veridical  on  the  only  point  that  we  can  test  —Mrs.  Pow-
nall's  distress,  telepathy,  while  it  accounts  for  the  know-
ledge of  her  grief,  does  not  account  for  the  presence  of
the  brother.  Nor  does  it  account  for  the  mysterious
footsteps  heard  in  the  house  at  Malta  the  same  evening,
which  in  view  of  the  dream,  it  does  not  seem  merely
fanciful  to  connect  with  him — unless  we  are  to  connect
them  with  the  husband.  I  do  not  mean  that  a  spirit's
footsteps  may  be  audible  ;  but  I  can  imagine  that  if  my
subliminal  consciousness  receives  the  impression  of  a  spirit's
presence  or  influence  (I  do  not  know  what  word  to  use),
the  impression  might  emerge  in  the  vague  form  of  an
hallucination  of  the  sound  of  footsteps.1

With  regard  to  the  Zeppelin  raid,  we  may  say,  if  we
like,  that  Mrs.  Pownall  obtained  her  information  from  the
Germans  in  Belgium  who  were  planning  it.  At  first  blush
that  may  seem  easy  ;  but  we  must  remember  that  the
only  rapport  between  them  is  a  violent  mutual  repulsion,

1  It  was  suggested  by  a  speaker  at  the  meeting  that  the  hearing  of
footsteps  may  have  been  the  result  of  expectation,  but  the  suggestion
seems  altogether  gratuitous.  Why  should  there  be  any  such  expectation  ?
Mrs.  Pownall  had  never  before  had  this  hallucination,  though  she  had
frequently  been  alone  in  the  house  in  the  evening,  and  convinced  as  she
was  of  her  husband's  death,  one  would  suppose  that  the  last  thing  she
would  expect  would  be  to  hear  his  footsteps  ;  moreover,  she  did  not
distinguish  them  as  a  man's  footsteps.  It  may  be  added  that  Lieut. -
Commander  Pownall  had  never  lived  in  this  house  ;  Mrs.  Pownall  moved
into  it  after  he  left  Malta.  Mme  Davie  had  not  been  told  about  the
footsteps  before  she  thought  she  heard  them  herself,  so  that  in  her  case
it  is  equally  difficult  to  imagine  why  she  should  expect  to  hear  them.


368


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


and  the  production  of  rapport  by  repulsion  seems  unlikely.
Moreover,  as  these  Germans  presumably  thought  in  German
and  Mrs.  Pownall's  knowledge  of  that  language  is  extremely
slight  and  (as  I  have  proved  by  experiment)  quite  insuffi-
cient to  understand  such  a  message  as  might  be  pre-
sumed,1 one  must  ask  how  it  came  to  be  so  conveniently
translated  in  transit.  Or  can  such  a  thought  (all  the
concepts  which  it  embraces  being  familiar  to  the  receiver)
be  transmitted  from  mind  to  mind,  without  the  employ-
ment of  language  ?  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  this  may
be  so,  although,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  we  have  no
recorded  example  of  telepathy  between  people  who  do  not
understand  each  other's  language.  Even  so,  however,  not
all  our  difficulties  are  removed.  How  are  we  to  explain
Mrs.  Pownall's  precise  knowledge  of  the  hour  of  the  raid  ?
On  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  the  enemy  proposed  to  him-
self to  drop  his  first  bomb  on  London  at  9.45  ;  but  if  he
did,  we  know  enough  of  aerial  navigation  to  be  able  to
say  that  he  was  highly  unlikely  to  keep  to  his  time-table
with  such  astonishing  precision.  In  this  case,  therefore,
telepathy  cannot,  I  think,  be  lightly  allowed  to  have  the
last  word.2

The  knowledge  of  her  husband's  death  may  well  have  been
apprehended  by  Mrs.  Pownall  telepathically  ;  the  impression
may  have  been  subliminally  received  at  the  moment  of  death,
to  emerge  in  some  mysterious  way  through  the  handling
of  the  letter.  There  is,  however,  one  point  in  this  painful
episode  which  telepathy  does  not  wholly  explain.

1  In  the  following  sentence,  "  Ein  Viertel  vor  zehn  werden  wir  iiber
London  ankommen,"  the  only  word  translated  was  -iiber.

2  An  article  in  the  Observer  of  October  3  contained  the  following
paragraph  :

"  Sunset  coming  earlier,  the  hours  of  the  possible  arrival  of  German
airships  over  London  is  put  forward,  and  this  month  we  may  expect
them  as  earlj.  as  10  p.m.  In  November,  December,  and  January,  they
might  in  certain  conditions  get  here  before  9.30  p.m.  ;  and,  other  things
being  equal,  they  will  be  a  trifle  less  particular  about  the  amount  and
direction  of  the  wind  during  the  winter,  for  they  will  have  a  greater
duration  of  dark  hours  for  the  job."  Mrs.  Pownall  takes  the  Observer
and  it  must  therefore  be  presumed  that  she  read  this  article  ;  but  even
so  we  are  not  much  helped.  The  impression  was  not  received  until
10  days  later,  and  "  as  early  as 10  p.m."  does  not  suggest  9.45.


lxxiv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  369

Mrs.  Pownall  appears  to  have  known  for  many  months
that  her  husband  would  be  killed  at  the  Dardanelles,  and
also,  as  I  incline  to  think,  that  it  would  be  on  a  Sunday.
At  any  rate,  she  was  possessed  by  an  unshakable  convic-
tion on  the  former  point,  and  the  conviction  was  justified
by  the  event.  She  did  not,  I  believe,  consciously  expect
that  he  would  die  on  a  Sunday,  but  her  remarkable
depressions  on  Sundays  look  like  the  formless  emergence  of
a  subliminal  impression  to  that  effect.1  The  depressions
were  peculiarly  distressing  and  usually  culminated  in
weeping.  They  began  when  she  woke  in  the  morning,
passed  off  towards  midday,  and  returned  about  tea-time.
Nothing  at  ail  like  them  occurred  on  other  days,  and
during  the  week,  but  for  the  one  great  trouble,  Mrs.
Pownall  preserved  her  normal  cheerfulness.  Of  course,  there
are  countless  instances  of  people  saying  that  they  are
"  convinced  "  they  will  never  see  someone  dear  to  them,
but  they  do  not  mean  more  than  that  they  greatly
fear  it  will  be  so.  Mrs.  Pownall's  other  veridical  predictions
seem  to  forbid  us  to  regard  the  present  case  as  one  of
mere  forboding,  and  she  herself  absolutely  refuses  to  regard
it  as  such.  Every  prediction  of  the  future  must  be  con-
sidered on  its  merits  and  in  its  own  setting,  and  having
regard  to  all  the  circumstances,  I  cannot  persuade  myself
that  we  have  not  here  a  case  of  actual  foreknowledge.
With  every  desire  to  show  common  sense,  I  am  unable  to
accept  accidental  coincidence  as  a  satisfactory  explanation
of  the  facts.  But  if  it  is  a  case  of  foreknowledge,
how  are  we to  account for  it  ? I can imagine  three

1  Dr.  Wingfield  once  told  me  of  a  patient,  a  young  lady,  who  for  a  long
time  had  refused  to  go  out  of  the  house  for  fear  that  something  dreadful
would  happen  to  her,  she  knew  not  what.  Suspecting  this  vague  fear  to
be  the  emergence  of  something  more  definite  in  the  subliminal,  he
hypnotised  her  and  told  her  to  dream  of  the  thing  she  was  afraid  of.
On  waking  her,  he  bade  her  make  notes  of  her  dreams  and  bring  the
notes  to  him.  She  brought  notes  of  some  half-dozen,  of  which  he
selected  one.  The  dream  was  of  an  incident  in  a  story  she  had  read  when  a
child  :  a  girl,  whose  friends  wished  to  get  hold  of  her  money,  had  been  taken
out  and  driven  off  to  a  lunatic  asylum.  Put  into  the  trance  again,  the
patient  now  confessed  that  the  fear  that  this  might  happen  to  herself
was  the  cause  of  her  unwillingness  to  go  out  of  doors.  With  this  know-
Jedge  the  cure  was  simple  and  was  immediately  effected.


370


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


possible  views,  and  someone  may  suggest  a  fourth  or
more.

Firstly,  we  may  suppose  the  information  to  have  been
conveyed  by  a  spirit  who  had  knowledge  of  the  future.
Secondly,  we  may  suppose  that  the  mind  can  of  itself,
and  on  its  own  initiative,  travel  into  a  world  of  thought
where  there  ib  no  past  or  future — where  all  that  is,  all
that  has  been,  all  that  is  to  be,  is  equally  known  and
knowable.  Thirdly,  there  is  a  supposition  which  those
who  find  it  difficult  to  believe  that  we  on  earth  ever  come
into  contact  with  a  spirit  world,  would  perhaps  prefer
to  either  of  these  two.  We  may  suppose  that  a  man  in
perfect  health  may  by  some  mysterious  means  come  to
have,  consciously  or  subliminally,  a  foreknowledge  of  the
very  day  of  his  death  many  months  before  it  takes  place
— and  that,  although  his  death  is  to  be  a  violent  one,  and
not  due  to  some  disease  whose  rudimentary  existence  the
subliminal  may  be  supposed  to  be  capable  of  noting,  while
it  is  also  able  to  forecast  and  to  time  with  accuracy  its
fatal  development.  We  may  suppose  that  Lieut. -Com-
mander Pownall  had  this  foreknowledge  and  was  unable
to  prevent  the  communication  of  it  telepathically  to  his
wife.  This  idea  is  not  to  be  hastily  rejected  ;  but  it
must  be  admitted  that  it  transcends  normal  experience
quite  as  outrageously  as  does  the  idea  of  communication
with  a  spirit  world,  or  that  of  our  ability  to  penetrate
into  a  world  of  thought  such  as  I  have  suggested  ;  more-
over, it  lacks  at  p resent  any  substantial  support.  It  is,
however,  the  explanation  offered  by  Professor  Flournoy  of
a  case  of  foreknowledge  of  death  from  disease  described
in  his  book  Esprits  et  Mediums.  That  case,  which  is  very
well  attested,  is  so  remarkable  that  I  gave  a  summary  of
it  in  a  review  of  the  book  in  Vol.  XXV.  of  the  Pro-
ceedings. Since  it  may  be  thought  to  lend  some  support
to  this  last  theory,  I  will  give  a  bare  outline  of  the  story
here.  For  convenience,  I  accord  the  dates  to  the  Russian
calendar,  which  is  twelve  days  behind  ours.

A  certain  Mme  Buscarlet  of  Geneva,  after  acting  for
three  years  as  governess  to  the  two  little  daughters  of
M.  and  Mme  Moratief  at Kasan  in  Russia,  returned  to


lxxiv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  371

Geneva  in  August,  1883.  At  Kasan  she  became  acquainted
with  a  Mme  Nitchinof  and  a  Mile  Olga  Popo'i.  Mme
Nitchinof  was  headmistress  of  the  Institut  Imperial  at
Kasan,  a  school  which  Mme  Moratief's  daughters  began
to  attend  after  Mme  Buscarlet's  departure,  and  she  and
her  husband  were  intimate  friends  of  the  Moratiefs.  On
December  10  (our  22nd)  Mme  Buscarlet  wrote  a  letter  to
Mme  Moratief,  but  did  not  post  it  till  the  12th,  and  it
reached  Kasan  on  the  20th.  Professor  Flournoy  saw  both
the  letter  and  the  envelope  with  the  Geneva  and  Kasan
postmarks.  After  about  a  page  of  Christmas  greetings,
the  letter  goes  on  as  follows.  It  is  written  in  French,  but
I  translate,  omitting  all  that  is  not  essential.

Last  night  I  had  an  absurd  dream.  .  .  .  You  and  I  were  on
a  country  road,  when  there  passed  in  front  of  us  a  carriage
from  which  came  a  voice  calling  you.  When  we  got  to  the
carriage  we  saw  Mile  Olga  Popo'i  lying  stretched  across  it  inside,
dressed  in  white  and  wearing  a  cap  trimmed  with  yellow  ribbons.
[Mme  Buscarlet  told  Professor  Floumoy  that  the  cap  also  was
white,  and  that  she  had  seen  the  body  of  a  lady  invested  for
burial  in  this  manner  in  Russia.]  She  said  to  you,  '  I  have
called  you  in  this  manner  to  tell  you  that  Mme  Nitchinof  leaves
the  Institute  on  the  17th.'  The  carriage  then  drove  on.  How
ludicrous  dreams  are  sometimes.

After  this  the  letter  turns  to  other  subjects.

In  a  letter  written  in  reply  and  dated  Kasan,  Decem-
ber 20  (the  day  on  which  Mme  Buscarlet's  letter  arrived),
M.  Moratief  wrote  to  Mme  Buscarlet  that  he  and  his  wife
had  dined  at  Mme  Nitchinof 's  house  on  the  13th,  which
was  four  days  after  the  dream.  After  dinner  Mme  Nit-
chinof felt  unwell,  but  a  doctor  who  arrived  immediately
diagnosed  nothing  more  than  an  ordinary  slight  sore-throat
(une  simple  et  leg  ere  angine).  On  the  14th  and  15th  the
doctors,  three  in  number,  failed  to  find  anything  alarming,
and  only  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  was  the  illness
recognised  as  scarlet  fever.  At  5  p.m.  on  that  day  the
patient  could  hardly  speak,  and  at  11.45  the  same  night  she
died.  For  fear  of  infection,  the  body  was  removed  from
the  school  to  a  neighbouring  chapel  at  2  a.m.  on  the  17th.


372  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.  [part

Thus  Mme  Nitchinof  did  indeed  "  leave  the  Institute  "  on
the  17th.  Mile  Olga  Popoi's  intrusion  into  the  dream  is
unexplained .

There  remains  one  final  puzzle.  If  Mrs.  Pownall  had
expected  that  official  news  of  her  husband's  death  would
be  sent  to  Admiral  Limpus,  she  might  naturally  suppose
that  it  would  be  brought  on  to  her  by  Mrs.  Limpus.
Questioned  on  this  point  Mrs.  Pownall  wrote  :  "I  could
not  possibly  have  expected  Admiral  or  Mrs.  Limpus  to
bring  me  the  news.  Official  news  of  the  death  of  a  Naval
•officer  always  comes  straight  from  the  Admiralty  to  the
wife  or  nearest  relative.  About  a  fortnight  after  George
was  killed  I  had  a  letter  from  the  Admiralty  telling  me  of
his  death.  I  arranged  with  Mr.  [Knox]  that,  should  any-
thing happen  to  George,  he  was  to  send  a  telegram  to
Captain  [Esmond]."  Now,  Mr.  Knox's  private  telegram  to
Captain  Esmond  arrived  in  Malta  at  noon  on  the  Wednesday,
and  until  a  few  minutes  after  that  no  one  on  earth  could
know  by  any  normal  means,  nor  even  by  telepathy,  that  the
news  would  be  brought  to  Mrs.  Pownall  by  Mrs.  Limpus.
Her  intervention  was  the  outcome  of  an  accident  which
did  not  happen  till  noon  on  that  day.  How,  then,  could
Mrs.  Pownall  know  of  it  twelve  hours  before  ?

The  following  considerations,  which  I  present  because  they
occurred  to  me  and  might  be  thought  to  touch  the  point,
really  afford  no  solution  of  the  mystery.  In  asking  Captain
Esmond  to  "  bring  her  the  official  news  "  Mrs.  Pownall
seems  to  have  had  some  dim  notion  that  it  might  be
officially  telegraphed  to  Malta  direct  from  the  Dardanelles,
though  on  a  moment's  reflection  she  would  have  remem-
bered that  headquarters  authorities  communicate  casualties
only  to  the  Admiralty  or  the  War  Office.  She  was  well
aware  of  this.  Such  a  telegram,  if  sent — though  passing,
as  did  all  official  telegrams,  through  Captain  Esmond's
hands — would  have  been  addressed,  she  thinks,  to  Admiral
Limpus.  She  tells  me  she  never  thought  of  this  until  I
questioned  her  on  the  point  ;  her  only  thought  was  that
Captain  Esmond  was  always  the  first  recipient  of  official
news,  and  she  had  forgotten  for  the  moment  her  arrange-
ment with  Mr.  Knox. Moreover,  even  if  it  had  occurred


lxxiv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  373

to  her  that  an  official  telegram  from  the  Dardanelles  would
be  addressed  to  the  Admiral,  she  would  not  have  thought
of  Mrs.  Limpus  as  a  possible  messenger  ;  she  would  have
felt  sure  that  Captain  Esmond,  when  forwarding  the  tele-
gram to  the  Admiral,  would  at  the  same  time  inform  him
that  he  had  promised  to  break  the  news  to  her  himself,
if  it  should  come.

NOTE.

November  22,  1915.
I  have  read  Mr.  Bayfield's  paper,  and  declare  that  it  faith-
fully describes  my  experiences  and  the  facts  connected  with
them.

(Signed) Vera  Pownall.
ADDENDUM.

The  reproduction  of  the  foregoing  paper  in  the  Pro-
ceedings affords  me  the  opportunity  of  adding  the  following
letter,  written  to  me  by  my  daughter  and  received  on
January  21,  1917.

2m  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  W.
January  20,  1917.
You  will,  I  am  sure,  be  interested  in  the  following  peculiar
behaviour  on  Vera's  part  on  the  last  3  evenings,  17th  to  19th
inclusive.

On  the  17th,  between  tea  and  dinner,  she  felt  very  breath-
less with  heart  palpitations,  combined  with  a  great  depression
and  a  feeling  of  vagueness,  which  passed  off  when  she  went
to  bed.  On  the  18th  she  had  been  to  tea  with  Mrs.  Pownall
[Mrs.  Vera  Pownall's  mother-in-law],  and  felt  ill  and  had  heart
palpitation  there.  She  returned  here  between  6.0  and  6.30,
and  felt  her  heart  [disturbed]  again  and  was  very  depressed
indeed.  She  tried  to  rouse  herself  and  throw  it  off,  but
though  the  palpitation  passed,  the  depression  did  not,  and  I
persuaded  her  to  go  to  bed.  She  kept  saying  she  felt  her
memory  was  going,  and  that  she  felt  so  vague  and  stupid.
After  dinner  in  bed  she  was  better,  and  the  depression  passed
and  she  slept  well.

2  A


374


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


Last  night,  the  19th,  we  had  tea  about  5.0  and  then  I  wrote
some  letters  in  my  room.  About  6.0  I  went  into  the  drawing-
room  and  found  V.  lying  on  the  sofa  in  the  most  extraordinary
state  of  depression.  I  have  never  seen  her  like  it  before.  She
said  she  couldn't  throw  it  off.  She  had  tried  to  read,  and  to
write  a  letter,  but  found  it  impossible.  She  said  she  felt  so
vague,  and  that  everything  she  said  and  did  was  mechanical  ;
that  she  didn't  feel  as  if  she  was  herself  at  all,  but  someone
else.  She  said  she  felt  as  if  she  might  go  melancholy  mad.
She  then  said  she  felt  very  much  as  she  had  at  that  time  in
Malta  when  George  died,— very  receptive,  and  all  noises  seemed
louder,  and  little  things  made  her  jump.  I  put  it  all  down  to
her  being  in  a,  low  state  of  health,  though  I  thought  it  strange
that  all  the  rest  of  the  days,  until  after  tea,  she  was  in  excel-
lent spirits  and  feeling  much  better  for  her  massage.

When  she  said  she  felt  as  she  had  in  Malta  and  very  recep-
tive, I  said,,  "  Perhaps  you  are  going  to  get  something  [meaning
some  supernormal  communication].  What  a  pity  you  don't
feel  the  war  is  going  to  end,  or  the  Town  Hall  in  Berlin  is
going  to  be  blown  up  !  "

Not  many  minutes  after  this  this  dreadful  explosion  [the
Silvertown  explosion  of  Jan.  19,  1917]  took  place.  It  was  like
a  huge  gun  going  off,  and  as  we  rushed  to  V.'s  window  [that
is,  her  bedroom  window,  which  affords  a  wider  view  than  the
drawing-room],  I  said,  "  That  will  take  you  out  of  yourself."

We  did  not  hear  any  definite  news  at  once,  but  after  the
explosion  Vera  said  she  felt  as  if  some  great  load  had  been
lifted  from  her  mind,  the  feeling  of  relief  was  so  great.

I  was  not  at  all  frightened,  as  I  knew  by  the  sound  that  it
was  not  very  near  ;  but  later  V.  told  me  that  she  had  never
had  such  a  feeling  of  fright  in  all  the  Zepp.  raids  we've  been
in,  and  she  felt  quite  sure  she  was  going  to  be  killed, — that
the  roof  might  fall  in  or  the  walls.  I  gather  that  this  feeling
only  lasted  a  moment  or  two,  and  then  she  felt  as  if  she  was
herself  again  and  no  longer  vague  at  all,  though  rather  shaken
and  very  tired.  I  think  she  was  almost  on  the  verge  of  being
in  a  trance.

This  is  a  very  lengthy  story,  but  I  felt  sure  you  would  be
interested,  as  I  don't  see  how  her  health  accounts  for  the
most  peculiar  state  she  has  been  in  for  the  last  3  evenings,


lxxiv.] Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy.  375

never  till  between  tea  and  dinner,  and  feeling  worse  between
6.0  and  7.0 — and  the  explosion  was  about  6.30  or  6.45.

This  evening  she  is  quite  normal  and  not  at  all  depressed,  and
it  is  now  past  6.40  p.m.

She  also  told  me  later,  that  before  the  explosion  she  felt
she  was  going  to  be  killed,  but  did  not  tell  me  for  fear  of
alarming  me,  as  she  was  not  thinking  of  it  all  from  a
psychic  point  of  view.

(Signed) Cyrille  Bayfield.

Of  the  last  sentence,  which  the  writer's  haste  has  left
somewhat  obscure,  I  have  received  the  following  explana-
tion. Mrs.  Pownall  felt  so  ill  that  she  thought  she  was
going  to  die  of  this  mysterious  illness.  This  feeling,  with
an  inconsistency  which  she  did  not  perceive,  was  combined
with  a  conviction  that  something  dreadful  was  going  to
happen  and  that  she  would  be  killed.  She  did  not  feel,  as  in
the  case  of  her  premonition  of  her  husband's  death,  that  her
condition  was  due  to  an  external  cause.  If  she  had  told  my
daughter  that  she  felt  she  was  going  to  die,  the  latter  would
naturally  have  been  much  alarmed.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
she  had  thought  her  depression  was  premonitory,  say,  of
an  air-raid,  and  that  it  was  from  this  that  she  might
perish,  she  would  have  mentioned  the  fact  ;  but  that  idea
never  occurred  to  her.

The  incident  is  not  necessarily  evidential,  but  it  seems
striking  enough  to  deserve  recording  in  connexion  with
those  which  precede  it.  Too  many  loincidences  spoil  the
sceptic  broth.

M.  A.  Bayfield.


376


Jane  Harrison.


[part


SUPPLEMENT.
VII.

IN  MEMORIAM— Mrs.  A.  W.  VERRALL.1

Manibus  date  lilia  plenis.

"  Why  in  less  than  no  time,"  she  said  to  me  in  her  alert
cheerful  voice,  her  eye  lighting  as  she  spoke,  "  one  of  us
will  be  writing  the  other's  obituary  notice  " — she  paused.
"  And  if  it's  you,  Jane,  what  appalling  rubbish  you  will  write."
The.  lot  has  fallen  upon  me.

Margaret  de  Gaudrion  Merrifield  came  up  to  Newnham
College  in  1877,  the  year  of  the  opening  of  Old  Hall.
As  Student,  Lecturer,  Associate,  Member  of  Council,  constant
friend,  her  connection  with  the  College  knew  no  break  ;  to
the  generations  to  whom  she  cannot  leave  her  memory  she
has  left  a  legacy  of  £500.

On  her  mother's  side  she  came  of  French  stock,  and  of
her  two-fold  ancestry  she  was  most  justly  proud.  Throughout
her  life  her  attitude  towards  superstition,  ancient  and  modern,
was  not  of  protest  and  intolerance  but  of  almost  physical
shrinking  and  disgust.  I  often  tried  to  interest  her  in  savage
superstitions  and  rites — she  used  to  shudder  and  say,  "  how
can  you  work  at  such  things — ugh."  She  lived  through  an
age  when  obscurantism  was  rampant  and  her  later  work
brought  her  in  intimate  contact  with  charlatanism  ;  it  brought

1  The  obituary  notice  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  which  has  already  appeared
in  Proceedings  (Pt.  LXXIL),  was  concerned  almost  entirely  with  her
work  in  psychical  research,  and  it  was  thought  that  members  of  the
S.P.R.  would  be  interested  to  learn  something  of  Mrs.  Verrall  from  a
more  personal  standpoint.  We  have  to  thank  the  Committee  of  the
Newnham  College  Club  for  permission  to  reprint  this  article,  written  by
a  college  friend  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  for  the  Newnham  College  Letter  for  1916.
The  intention  with  which  the  article  was  first  written  will  explain  the
many  college  allusions. — Ed.


lxxiv.] In  Memoriam  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


377


her  also  to  the  acceptance  of  views  usually  rejected  by  the
"free-thinker."  But  these  views  were  to  her  matters  arrived
at  not  by  faith  but  by  scientific  investigation.  A  free-thinker
in  the  full  sense  and  a  protestant  against  all  superstition
she  remained  to  the  end.  ';  How  could  I,"  she  would  say,
"  be  anything  else  ?  "  Yet  free-thinker  though  she  was,  she
sent  her  daughter  impartially  to  Anglican  and  Roman  services
in  order  that  from  the  outset  the  child  might  learn  in  practice
quot  homines  tot  sententiae.

Very  vividly  I  remember  first  speaking  to  her  and  first
really  seeing  her  astonishingly  young  and  vivid  face.  I  was
taking  down  names  for  a  concert  and  I  asked  hers.  "  Mar-
garet de  Gaudrion  Merrifield  "  she  answered,  with  a  polite
and  dignified  little  bend  of  the  head.  I  looked  at  her  with
some  amusement — she  was  so  very,  very  young — and  said,
more  because  she  attracted  me  and  I  wanted  to  talk  to  her,
than  from  any  second -year  brutality,  "  I'm  afraid  I  can't
spell  all  that.  Will  M.  de  G.  do  ?  "  The  answer  came  with
perfect  good  temper,  "  0,  please,  whatever  is  most  convenient,"
and  another  little  bow.  At  cocoa  that  night,  in  the  college
slang  of  the  moment,  we  decided  that  young  M.  de  G.  had
"  come  to  count." And  count  very  much  she  soon  did.

Her  education  had  been  on  the  best  modern  lines  of  the
day ;  her  father's  private  interests  were  scientific — he  was
a  well-known  naturalist — she  herself  came  up  intending  to
read  political  economy  and  moral  science.  The  family  were
intimate  friends  of  the  Fawcetts.  Through  long  hours  on
the  window  seat  of  my  room  we  wrangled  over  ancient  and
modern,  and  at  last,  though  she  knew  little  Latin  and  no
Greek,  she  consented  to  try  classics.  I  believe  the  heroic
difficulties  tempted  her  adventurous  spirit.  Her  place  in  the
Tripos,  handicapped  by  lack  of  training  as  she  was,  showed
her  linguistic  poAvers,  and  she  never  regretted  her  choice.
Nor  could  anyone  regret  it,  for  her  classical  training  was
the  basis  of  a  high  companionship  in  marriage.  But  I  have
often  thought  with  some  misgivings  that  I  may  have  done
an  ill  turn  to  science,  and  it  was  with  real  pleasure  that  I
saw  her  later  turn  her  eager,  enquiring,  and  truly  scientific
mind  on  Psychical  Research.

As  a  girl,  what  impressed  her  friends  most  in  her  was  her-


378


Jane  Harrison.


[part


boundless,  tireless  life  and  vigour ;  she  was  simply  hungry
for  work.  A  little  knot  of  college  friends  used  to  discuss
future  careers  and  look  over  lists  of  appointments  together.
One  day  she  came  on  some  toilsome  post  which  she  thought
would  suit  her.  She  read  aloud  the  regulations  and  conditions,
then  frowned  suddenly  and  flung  the  paper  away.  "  Com-
pulsory retirement  at  sixty  !  Oh,  that's  no  good."  The
story  caused  Dr.  Verrall  perennial  joy.  "  That's  May  all
over,"  he  said,  and  "  compulsory  retirement  at  sixty  "  became
a  household  word.

She  never  then  dreamt  of  Academic  work,  and  was  to  the
end  never  in  spirit  Academic.  Her  appointment  as  classical
lecturer  came  as  a  surprise.  I  was  her  senior,  and  we  had
often  talked  over  what  the  classical  work  was  to  be  when
I  was  appointed.  Dis  aliter  visum.  Never  shall  I  forget
her  generous  rage  when  she  was  pi ef erred  before  her  friend.
She  came  immediately  up  to  London  to  see  me,  and  literally
stamped  about  the  room,  healing  thereby  her  friend's  hurt
vanity.  Then  and  then  only  did  I  see  her  thoroughly  irrational.
It  was  far  into  the  night  before  I  could  persuade  her  that
refusal  would  be  as  useless  as  Quixotic.  She,  like  Dr.  Verrall,
was  the  staun chest  of  friends.  Even  the  early  years  of  the
marriage,  which  soon  followed  her  appointment,  never  sub-
merged friendship.

About  her  teaching  work,  Miss  Sharpley,  who  was  in  turn
her  pupil  and  her  colleague  and  always  her  intimate  friend,
writes  :

"  Mrs.  Verrall  held  the  post  of  resident  lecturer  in  classics
from  1880  until  her  marriage  in  1882,  and  she  continued
to  lecture  for  the  College  with  intervals  till  shortly  before
her  death.  I  think  her  most  characteristic  work  was  perhaps
done  in  the  teaching  commonly  described  as  'giving  back
the  Trinity  papers.'  Some  of  her  pupils  may  have  cavilled
at  the  uncompromising  blue  pencil  which  paid  no  heed  to
the  literal  correctness  of  the  translation  they  submitted,  but
to  those  who  were  capable  of  appreciating  points  of  style
the  painful  process  brought  the  joy  of  a  new  insight.  The
clearness  and  confidence  with  which  she  expounded  her  subject
gave  her  class  the  satisfactory  feeling  that  here  was  some-


lxxiv.] In  Memoriam  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


379


one  who  knew  what  she  was  talking  about,  while  her  treat-
ment of  it  had  no  savour  of  school  methods,  and  her  hearers
felt  a  stimulating  new  assumption  in  the  air.  They  were
being  dealt  with  as  intellectually  mature  and  the  matter  of
real  scholarship  was  being  put  before  them.  Knowledge  they
could  lay  no  claim  to  was  attributed  to  them.  Her  '  as
of  course  you  know  '  was  not  ironical.  One  might  look  up
to  see  if  she  was  laughing,  but  no,  she  always  meant  it,  and
one  settled  back  into  a  larger  self-respect.  In  discussion  of
points  and  difficulties  she  would  be  swift  and  unqualified
at  first  in  her  pronouncements,  but  ready  instantly  to  place
her  mind  at  another's  standpoint  while  they  maintained  a
different  view  from  hers,  and  to  allow  it  often  more  than
its  just  value  on  the  first  impression.

Latterly  she  had  returned  her  teaching  fees  into  the  College
funds.

Her  work  as  examiner  for  the  College  in  scholarship  ex-
aminations was  excellent  in  method  and  reliability.  It  was
trenchant,  clear-eyed  and  discriminating.

She  was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  meeting  of
Classical  Lecturers,  which  sits  at  the  end  of  each  term  to
discuss  plans  and  make  arrangements  for  the  next  term's
work.  As  a  Colleague  she  was  business-like,  unselfish  and
convenient.  There  was  never  anyone  less  fussy — never  worried
with  the  tiresome,  always  above  vexation  and  offence.  As
her  service  to  the  College  as  a  teacher  had  its  own  distinc-
tion and  has  enriched  the  teaching  tradition  of  Newnham,
and  is  recognised  with  gratitude  and  admiration  and  with
the  sense  of  a  gap  to  be  ever  filled  by  something  different,
so  too  her  contribution  as  a  fellow  lecturer  had  a  special
quality — a  quality,  I  think,  of  comfort  and  nobility,  the
warm  memory  of  which  is  a  part  of  the  possession  she  leaves
to  the  College  generations  who  have  known  and  loved  her."

Miss  Matthaei  confirms  Miss  Sharpley's  view.  Mrs.  Verrall
she  found  as  a  teacher  very  full,  swift,  and  spite  of  her  great
swiftness  always  clear.  She  corrected  very  freely,  never
contenting  herself  with  the  conventional  depreciatory  scratch.
She  was  quick  to  praise  as  well  as  to  criticise,  and  specially
appreciative  of  any  evidence  of  style.


380


Jane  Harrison.


[part


We  called  her  "  M.  de  G.,"  and  throughout  her  life  M.  de
G.  she  always  was,  very  French  as  well  as  English.  If  I
understand  and  sympathise  with  our  great  Allies  at  all,  it
is  mainly  through  her.  Her  Frenchness  came  out  in  small
things — if  they  are  small — in  her  rather  formal  and  always
unfailing  courtesy  of  manner.  Of  course  we  chaffed  her
when,  on  passing  her  best  college  friend,  she  would  give  a
polite  little  bow.  I  believe  she  loyally  tried — but  she  never
could  really  master  the  cheery  half-shamefaced  grin  which  is
among  intimates  our  accepted  English  salutation.  The  war
hit  her  hard  on  the  French  as  well  as  the  English  side.
The  suspense  as  to  whether  England  would  join  in  was  anguish
to  her.  Yet  she  kept  careful  guard  over  passion.  She  had
really  no  material  for  hate  in  her,  nothing  poisonous  to  fester  ;
but  once  she  said  to  me,  "  How  dreadful  it  is  ;  if  the  war
goes  on  we  may  all  come  to  hating  the  Germans."  So  French
was  she  that  she  never  could  really  feel  the  perilous  pom-
posities of  the  Latin  idiom.  At  a  Swiss  table  d'hote  a  French
neighbour  tried  to  sketch  something  for  her  with  a  blunt
pencil.  "  Je  ne  demanderai  mieux  que  de  vous  satisfaire,
Madame,  mais  " — with  a  bow  and  an  elegant  wave  of  the
stump  of  a  pencil — "  V instrument  est  rebelled  Two  unmannerly
Britons  hid  their  faces  choking  with  suppressed  laughter,
why  she  could  never  qiute  realise,  but  later  on  in  the  evening,
with  her  beautiful  fairness  and  perfect  good  temper  she  said,
"  I  think  I  do  understand  a  little  what  you  two  very  foolish
people  were  laughing  at."

French  she  was  also  in  big  things,  in  fact  in  her  whole
mentality.  There  was  about  her  personality  an  alertness,
a  clarity,  a  dexterity  which  left  some  of  us  with  a  feeling
that  we  were  half-baked  and  wholly  imfinished.  I  shall
never  forget  the  three  weeks  I  spent  with  her  pulling  together
the  MS.  draft  of  our  Mythology  and  Monuments  of  Ancient
Athens.  With  characteristic  alacrity  and  precision  she  said
at  the  outset,  "  I  can  give  you  three  weeks,  and  we  must
finish  it  up."  In  the  little  inn  at  Robin  Hood's  Bay,  which
to  me  now  has  its  special  sanctity,  I  laid  before  her  a  fright-
ful tangled  mass  of  material  and,  what  is  worse,  conflicting
opinion.  She  sifted  it  and  sorted  it,  and  saw  through  it
with  a  swiftness  that  was  then  and  is  still  to  me  little  short


lxxiv.] In  Memoriam  Mrs.  A.  W.  V  err  all.


381


of  miraculous.  She  dived  into  my  mind,  dredged  up  tangled
debris,  and  convicted  me  of  only  half -conscious  confusions  ;
she  insisted  that  decision  was  possible  and  must  be  made.
Once  I  remember  her  swiftness  flurried  me,  and  I  said  crossly,
"  I  wish  to  goodness  you'd  wait  and  let  me  make  up  my
own  mind."  "  I  should  wait  a  long  time,"  she  said,  and
we  both  burst  out  laughing.

She  was  one  of  the  rare  people  who  can  really  "  change
their  minds  " — most  of  us  slowly  and  painfully  shift  and
adjust  our  prejudices — I  mean  she  really  altered  her  views
owing  to  the  rational  arguments  that  were  presented  to  her.
And  this  she  could  do  with  an  astounding,  kaleidoscopic
swiftness  that  left  many  of  us  gaping  and  gasping.  This
capacity  for  swift  volte,  face  was  disconcerting  to  the  lobbyist.
She  would  promise  her  support  to  a  measure  and  see  reason
to  change  her  view  at  the  last  moment.  The  prudent  lobbyist
did  well  to  see  her  to  the  door  of  a  committee-room,  and
even  there  she  was  not  safe.  So  perfect  was  her  own  recti-
tude that,  when  she  suddenly  voted  against  your  most  cherished
scheme,  she  confidently  looked  for  your  sympathy  and  approval.
A  generous  confidence  breeds  generosity ;  she  was  not  often
disappointed.

Her  reasonableness  was  the  more  remarkable  because  she
was  a  person  of  rather  violent  prejudice,  and  this  is  not
supposed  to  go  with  reasonableness.  Certain  quite  harmless
weaknesses  she  could  not  tolerate — notably  any  detailed
discussion  of  food.  This  cannot  be  laid  to  the  charge  of
her.  French  ancestry.  "  How  can  you  encourage  that  disgust-
ing man  ?  "  she  said  to  me  almost  angrily  of  an  earnest  diner
at  table-d'hote,  whose  single-hearted  devotion  to  the  menu,
and  whose  missionary  zeal  for  our  conversion  had  rather
touched  me.  "  If  you  go  on  letting  him  talk  about  food
I  shall  move  our  places."  Often  the  prejudice  was  quite
baseless.  "  No,"  she  would  say,  "  I  can't  do  with  him  !
don't  ask  me  to  like  him  ;  he  rubs  me  up  the  wrong  way."
When  pressed  for  reason  her  French  mind  would  hark  round
for  some  small  lack  of  tenue  :  he  had  lolled  about  on  the
sofa ;  she  had  been  met  in  the  town  without  gloves  ;  but
you  felt,  and  she  often  acknowledged,  that  it  was  just  blind
instinctive prejudice. Yet with all this she  somehow  con-


382


Jane  Harrison.


[part


trived — and  it  was  a  great  strength,  though  also  a  slight
weakness — to  keep  her  intellect  clear  of  her  emotions  and
instincts  ;  it  seemed  to  work  alone  unhampered.  I  suspect
again  this  trait  was  Latin  rathei  than  Teuton.  It  seems
to  belong  to  a  very  high  level  of  civilisation,  and  she  was
the  most  civilised  creature  I  have  ever  known.

She  was  an  admirable  citizen,  punctiliously  law-abiding.
"  Laws  are  made  to  be  broken,"  was  an  English  truth  that
she  never  could  grasp.  That  she  with  her  clear  head,  Avide
knowledge  of  facts  and  strong  sense  of  public  duty,  should
be  voteless,  was  in  itself  a  reductio  ad  absurdum  of  the  anti-
suffragist  position,  yet  her  voteless  condition  never  abated
by  one  jot  her  interest  in  public  affairs.  As  a  true  democrat
she  desired  the  vote,  and  she  was  a  member  of  the  National
Union,  but  she  was  never  an  ardent  or  even  very  active
Suffragist.  Once  I  remember  she  forbade  the  subject  to  be
mentioned  at  Sunday  supper ;  not  that  she  wavered  for  a
moment  in  her  convictions,  but  she  was  very  easily  bored
and  disliked  stale  or  fruitless  controversy.  "  We  have  said
all  there  is  to  say.  Do  let  us  talk  about  something  else."
Yet  her  private  views  as  to  the  independence  of  a  woman's
life  were  at  times  startling.  She  was  listening  once  to  the
account  of  how  a  brilliant  intellectual  woman  had  dropped
all  her  literary  interests  after  marriage  and  devoted  herself
entirely  to  domesticity  and  the  furthering  of  her  husband's
career.  "  She  has  simply  given  up  her  whole  life  to  him,"
the  speaker  ended  ;  "it  is  wonderful  !  "  "  Wonderful,"  said
Mrs.  Verrall  ;  "  I  call  it  simply  squalid  ;  fancy  giving  up
your  own  life  to  your  husband  !  "  and — reflectively — "  how  it
would  bore  Arthur  if  I  did  !  "

She  was  a  keen  politician  ;  she  and  Dr.  VerralJ  maintained
their  steady  Liberalism  at  a  time  when  Liberalism,  in  Cambridge
at  least,  was  not  very  easy,  and  when  many  of  their  old
Liberal  set  dropped  away  on  the  Irish  question.  Of  a  lapsed
Liberal  friend  she  said  to  me,  "  We  can't  discuss  politics
with  him  any  more  ;  that's  useless  ;  he  is  rabid,  and  I  sup-
pose we  are  ;  but  we  are  determined  it  shall  not  change
our  friendship,"  and  it  never  did.  One  of  her  closest  friends
was  suddenly  converted  from  rank  Toryism  to  ultra-Socialism  ;
that  friend  she  met  always  with  the  same  smiling — not  sym-


lxxiv.] In  Memoriayn  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  383


pathy,  but  affectionate  tolerance.  Try  as  you  would,  you
could  not  quarrel  with  her  on  a  matter  of  principle,  because
she  really  believed  in  Freedom  of  Thought.  In  theory,  though
by  no  means  in  practice,  she  was  the  perfect  democrat.  We
were  once  discussing  the  question  of  whether  an  Associate
on  becoming  Principal  should  cease  to  be  an  Associate.1  A
timid  Associate  urged  that  some  might  feel  a  difficulty  in
speaking  freely  when  the  Principal  was  present.  "  She  will
not  be  present,"  said  Mrs.  Verrall,  firmly  ;  "  she  will  have
become  an  Associate."

Though  so  good  a  citizen,  she  was  no  philanthropist.  When
a  national  need  arose  she  could  and  did  work  gallantly  against
fast  declining  health,  as  Secretary  of  the  University  Belgian
Committee  in  Cambridge.  But  she  said  to  me  once,  "  I
suppose  there  is  something  wrong  in  me,  for  I'm  no  good
at  '  good  works  ' — they  bore  me."  In  like  manner,  she  was
no  initiator  of  reforms.  This  last  characteristic  she  perhaps
took  on  from  Dr.  Verrall,  who  drove  his  own  revolutionary
train  of  thought  quite  cheerfully  along  the  most  antiquated
University  rails.  It  was  not,  I  think,  "  something  wrong  "
in  her,  but  something  rather  profoundly  right.  She  seemed
to  feel,  with  Ivan  Karamazov,  "  One  can't  live  in  rebellion,
and  I  want  to  live."  In  her  character  there  were  plenty
•of — not  faults,  but  little  obvious,  loveable  and  intensely  logical
absurdities,  which  allowed  her  friends  to  laugh  at  her,  and
so  made  her  doubly  dear.  But  in  one  important  direction
she  unconsciously  led  the  way  morally,  and  somehow  an-
ticipated the  new  religion  that  seems  dawning  among  the
young.  She  showed  us — but  here  I  am  putting  into  words
what  she  never  formulated — that  the  whole,  or  at  least  the
chief,  Duty  of  Man  is  not  to  do  good,  or  even  to  be  good,
but  rather,  in  obedience  to  healthy  impulse,  to  work,  to
create,  to  "  energise,"  and  thereby  enrich  the  commonwealth.
Herein  lay  her  sanity  and  her  success.  This  instinctive  ad-
vanced outlook  was  the  more  marked,  as  she  was  never  very
keen  about,  or  closely  in  touch  with  young  movements,  and
she  was  impatient  of  discussion  societies.  At  the  founding
of  the  Cambridge  Heretics  Society  I  tried  to  get  her  sympathy

1  The  Associates  of  Newnhani  College  are  an  elected  group  of  old
students,  having  a  certain  share  in  the  government  of  the  college. — Ed.


384


Jane  Harrison.


[part


for  a  then  struggling  cause.  "  Heretics,"  she  said,  "  of  course
I'm  a  heretic,  but  I  don't  want  a  society  to  talk  about  it."

As  a  scholar,  her  personal  liking  was  stronger  for  Latin
than  for  Greek  ;  she  knew  Greek  as  well,  or  perhaps  better,
but  she  used  to  tell  me  she  felt  more  at  home  in  Latin,
and  preferred  writing  in  it.  She  had  not  the  born  linguist's
passion  for  words.  What  she  really  cared  for  was  that
mysterious  thing,  style.  She  owned  somewhat  reluctantly
that  Ibsen  was  great  as  a  dramatist,  but  he  gave  her,  she
said,  little  pleasure.  She  promised  to  read  Dostoievsky,  and
even  after  her  last  illness  had  set  in  began  to  learn
Russian,  for  she  had  the  true  stylist's  dislike  to  translations,
but  she  prophesied  that  she  would  never  "enjoy"  him.
It  was  characteristic  of  her  rather  belles-lettres  attitude  that
she  always  expected  to  "  enjoy "  great  literature.  Markedly
un-modern  she  was  in  her  literary  tastes,  yet  to  her  as  well
as  to  Dr.  Verrall  was  dedicated  the  book  of  verse  by  young
Cambridge  poets. The  fact  speaks  volumes.

Her  output  of  original  work  in  classics  was  small.  Con-
stant teaching  work,  wide  human  and  political  interests,  a
household  most  competently  managed  (her  servants  stayed
with  her  for  years),  and  incessant  social  duties  all  made
heavy  inroads  on  her  time.  Sunday,  which  brings  breathing
space  to  some  of  us,  was  devoted  to  entertaining  London
friends  and  old  pupils.  During  Dr.  Verrall 's  tutorship  genera-
tions of  undergraduates  were  welcomed  at  Sunday  luncheon,
and,  in  fact,  it  was  open  house  all  day.  Moreover,  the
later  years  of  her  life  were  given  to  intricate  Psychical  work.
How  delicate  and  exact  her  classical  work  was  is  shown
by  her  last  contribution,  on  Tivo  Instances  of  Symbolism
in  the  Sixth  Mneid  {C.R.,  1910,  p.  43).  It  is  specially
characteristic  as  marking  the  blend  of  Classical  and  Psychical
Research.

It  is  easy  to  catalogue  qualities.  Personality,  the  thing
we  love,  escapes  us.  There  are  so  many  young,  splendid,
vigorous,  noble  people  whom  yet  one  does  not  love.  Our
friendship,  her's  and  mine,  was  one  long,  affectionate,  dis-
passionate animosity.  We  had  few  views  and  fewer  tastes
in  common.  On  college  politics  we  were  often  though  not
always  at  issue. Why  then  was  I  always  so  inwardly  glad


liXxrv.] In  Memoriam  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


385


when  she  came  into  the  room  ?  Why  was  it  that — deeply
devoted  though  I  was  to  both  husband  and  daughter —
Sunday  supper  alone  with  her  was  such  a  pure  joy  ?  I
cannot  tell.

The  end  I  will  not  speak  of,  for  death  came  to  her  harshly.
"  Compulsory  retirement  "  at  58  was  too  early  for  us,  her
friends — alas  !  not  now  for  her.  She  accepted  her  demission
not  only  with  dignity — that  was  anyhow  certain — but  with
something  like  joy.  It  is  well,  in  the  midst  of  our  loss  and
our  loneliness,  steadily  to  remember  that,  though  content
to  live,  she  wished  to  die,  and  that  death  meant  to  her
fuller  knowledge,  fresh  opportunity  to  live  and  work.  Years
ago  she  had  said  to  me,  "  Sometimes  I  can  scarcely  bear
to  wait."

Jane  Harrison.


386


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


VIII.
REVIEW.

Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  The
Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  By  Walter
Franklin  Prince,  Ph.D.  Vol.  IX.  August,  1915.  Pp.
1-700.  Vol.  X.  August,  1916.  Pp.  701-1419.  Vol.  XL
August,  1917. By  James  H.  Hyslop,  Ph.D.  .Pp.  1024.

If  this  stupendous  study  carries  as  much  weight  and  bulks  as
large  in  the  literature  psychically  as  it  does  physically,  it  will
assuredly  be  epoch-making.  For  it  extends  over  three  fat,
elaborately-indexed 1  volumes  (only  ninety  pages  in  the  third
being  devoted  to  the  '  Patison  '  case),  and  approximates  to  2500
pages  of  reading  matter  and  nine  pounds  in  weight,  while  its
published  price  is  $20.  Nevertheless,  it  really  is  a  great  case,
and  no  one  who  has  read  it  will  belittle  it.  Rather  will  he
admonish  others  to  follow  his  example  if  they  would  be  con-
sidered up  to  date  in  the  literature  of  psychology  and  psychical
research,  and  express  an  earnest  hope  that  some  of  the  pro-
fessional psychologists  and  psychiatrists  will  be  open-minded
enough  to  study  it.  For  not  only  will  it  give  them  a  very
fine  study  of  what  appears  to  be  a  very  typical  and  instructive
case  of  the  multiple  personality  which  even  the  most  conserva-
tively '  orthodox  '  psychologists  have  by  now  come  to  accept
as  a  fact,  and  a  case  moreover  which  was  carried  to  a  remark-
ably successful  conclusion  by  the  manipulative  skill,  persever-
ance and  devotion  of  Dr.  Prince ;  but  it  will  have  also  a
pleasing  element  of  surprise.  For  just  when  they  think  they
have  come  to  an  end  of  it,  it  starts  off  again  in  a  new  direction,
and  challenges  them  to  think  furiously,  by  developing  vistas  of
a  very  startling  and  unorthodox  kind.  Yet  when  they  think  it
over  as  a  whole  they  will  find  it  very  difficult  to  say  where  in

1  The  index,  however,  is  not  very  good.


LXXIV.]


Revieiv.


387


the  course  of  its  perfectly  smooth  and  objective  record  they  can
draw  the  line  between  science  and  pseudo-science,  between  what
they  are  willing  to  accept  as  normal  fact  and  what  they  are
determined  to  reject  (with  far  too  little  investigation)  as  super-
normal and  superstitious.  A  condensed  narrative  of  the  plot
will  illustrate  this  curious  difficulty.

I.

The  heroine  of  the  case,  Miss  '  Doris  Fischer,'  was  born  in
1889,  of  German-American  parents,  as  the  youngest  of  thirteen
children.  The  father  contracted  the  drink  habit  while  serving
as  a  soldier  during  the  Civil  War,  and  this  proved  to  be  the
cause,  not  only  of  all  the  family  troubles,  but  also  of  the
tragedy  of  '  Doris's  '  dissociations.  For,  in  1892,  when  she  was
three  years  old,  the  intoxicated  father  in  the  course  of  a  quarrel
with  her  mother,  took  her  and  dashed  her  on  to  the  floor.
This  shock  '  dissociated  '  her  into  the  '  Real  Doris,'  '  Margaret '
and  '  Sleeping  Margaret ' ;  but  no  one  suspected  the  dissociation
until  Dr.  Prince  took  charge  of  her  nineteen  years  later,  dis-
covering 'Margaret'  on  Jan.  20,  1911,  and  'Sleeping  Margaret'
two  days  later.  All  that  the  mother  had  noticed  was  that  her
youngest  child  was  queer,  subject  to  moods  and  apparent  lapses
of  memory,  in  which  she  would  '  forget  '  what  she  had  just
done  or  said.  No  wonder,  seeing  that  '  Margaret  '  used  to
alternate  with  '  Real  Doris,'  and  the  latter  knew  nothing  of
'  Margaret's  '  doings,  unless  '  Margaret  '  chose  to  tell  her.  For-
tunately '  Margaret,'  unlike  '  Sally  '  in  the  '  Beauchamp  '  case,
was  well-disposed  towards  1  Real  Doris,'  and  from  the  first
used  to  amuse  her  and  keep  her  quiet,  by  '  making  her  play
with  her  fingers  and  see  things  that  were  not  there  '  (p.  108),
and  though  she  sometimes  got  her  into  trouble  by  her  childish
freaks  (for  she  never  grew  mentally  older  than  ten),  the  pair
lived  happily  enough  with  each  other  and  their  mother,  to  whom
both  were  devoted,  until  '  Doris  '  was  seventeen.  Then,  on
May  6,  1906,  the  mother  died  after  a  short  illness,  aggravated
by  a  painful  scene  with  the  father ;  the  result  of  this  agony  was
a  further  '  dissociation.'

The  new  personality,  '  Sick  Doris,'  started  life  with  no
knowledge  whatever  of  the  past,  unable  to  speak  or  to  under-


388


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[PART


stand  language,  to  eat.  swallow,  dress,  etc.,  and  in  fact  not
far  short  of  the  helplessness  of  that  perfect  example  of  the
'psychological  baby,'  the  Rev.  Mr.  '  Hanna  '  after  his  fall,  in
Dr.  Sidis's  famous  case.  Like  Mr.  Hanna  she  had  an  adult
mind  to  learn  withal,  but  unlike  him  she  had  also  a  '  subliminal
teacher  '  in  '  Margaret,'  prompting  her  from  within  and  able
and  willing  to  take  a  hand  in  averting  disaster  from  the  common
body.  This  shows  that  when  one  suffers  'dissociation'  it  may
be  an  advantage  to  have  been  dissociated  before.  '  Margaret  '
was  able  to  talk  to  '  Sick  Doris  '  through  her  lips,  but  soon  found
that  the  only  way  "  to  get  her  to  understand  was  by  doing
things,"  an  observation  which  should  be  taken  to  heart  by  in-
tellectualists  who  will  not  admit  that  acting  has  anything  to  do
with  understanding.  '  Sick  Doris  '  did  not  attribute  to  herself
the  movements  of  her  body  initiated  by  '  Margaret  '  (a  fact
which  has  a  bearing  on  Hume's  theory  of  causation),  but
imitated  them  and  other  things  ;  the  first  thing  she  understood
was  the  language  of  gesture.  As  a  teacher  '  Margaret  '  had,  of
course,  peculiar  advantages,  having  an  inside  view  of  '  Sick
Doris's  '  mind  and  a  power,  in  emergencies,  of  driving  her  '  in,'
coming  '  out,'  and  assuming  control  of  the  body  herself.  On
the  other  hand,  she  had  the  limitations  of  a  little  girl  of  ten,
with  a  quick  temper,  and  easily  grew  tired  or  impatient.  It
is  not  astonishing  that  in  the  end  she  came  to  despise  and
loathe  her  pupil,  who  never  got  over  the  disadvantages  of  her
birth,  being  "lacking  on  the  side  of  the  affections,  though
morbidly  the  slave  of  duty,  and  lacking  in  humour,  in  con-
ceptions of  the  abstract,  and  in  other  respects  "  (p.  171).  So
she  often  annoyed  '  Margaret  '  excessively,  who  retaliated  by
scratching  and  otherwise  tormenting  her,  much  as  '  Sally  '  did
'  B  I.'  Still  her  self-sacrificing  labours  at  first  are  beyond  all
praise,  and  the  account  of  the  education  of  '  Sick  Doris  '  as
told  by  '  Real  Doris,'  when  she  had  inherited  her  memories
(p.  221  f.),  is  excellent  reading.  '  Margaret's  '  lessons  were
mostly  given  at  night,  and  at  first  she  kept  '  Sick  Doris  '  awake
all  night  in  order  to  teach  her.  In  this  way  the  defects  of
the  new  personality  were  concealed  from  human  eyes,  though
not  from  the  keener  discernment  of  dogs  and  parrots,  who
observed  the  difference  between  '  Sick  Doris  '  and  '  Margaret,'
and much preferred the latter (p. 233). What,  however,


LXXIV.]


Review.


389


particularly  irritated  '  Margaret '  was  not  her  congenital  stupidity,
but  her  morbid  appetite  for  work.  She  speedily  developed  a
habit  of  going  into  a  sort  of  trance  in  which  she  embroidered
with  extraordinary  skill  and  speed,  without  intermission  or
repose.  '  Margaret  '  had  to  participate  in  these  bouts,,  and
greatly  resented  being  *  worked.'  In  about  two  weeks  from
'  Sick  Doris's  '  first  appearance  they  were  on  scratching  terms.
This,  as  Dr.  Prince  observes,  p.  235,  was  "  a  rather  futile
performance,  as  S.D.  was  partially  anaesthetic  ...  so  that  M.
was  the  one  chiefly  to  suffer  "  from  the  injuries  inflicted  on
the  common  body.  She  also  pulled  out  her  hair  in  long
strands  with  much  violence,  and  set  her  night-gown  on  fire.

Fortunately  both  were well-disposed towards the  primary
personality,  '  Real  Doris,'  and  willing — as  it  will  be  remembered
'  Sally  '  Beauchamp  was  in  the  end — to  be  sacrificed  in  order
that  she  might  be  restored. At  this  time  the  relations  of
mutual  comprehension  between  the  three  personalities, all  of
which  were  recognisable  by  distinctive  expression,  intonation
and  manners,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  illustrations,  were  these
(p.  47  f.). (1)  "Real  Doris  had  no  direct  knowledge  of  the
thoughts  or  acts  of  any  of  the  secondary  personalities." She  had,
however,  been  from  the  first  in  communication  with  1  Margaret,'
who  could  '  use  the  same  mouth  without  her  volition.'  and  also
used  to  write  notes  to  her. Besides,  thoughts  of  '  Margaret's  '
might '  bubble up  ' into her  mind,  and colour her  dreams.
(2)  "  Sick  Doris  knew, or  was  capable  of  knowing, all  that
R.D.  did,  said,  experienced  and  thought,"  and  was  (probably)
subliminally  co-conscious  with  her,  as  '  Margaret  '  certainly  was.
But  she  had  no  access  to  the  mind  of  '  Margaret,'  and  when
the  latter  was  '  out,'  i.e.  in  control  of  the  body,  she  was  "  as
if  annihilated  for  the  time  being." As  was the case  with
'  Real  Doris,'  '  Sick  Doris  '  and  '  Margaret  '  also  "  wrote  notes  to
each  other,  and  held  frequent  oral  conversations  "  (p.  49),  and
'  Sick  Doris  '  received  other  intimations  of  '  Margaret's  '  feelings
and  wishes. (3)  'Margaret'  "had,  or  was  capable  of  having,
knowledge  of  the  experiences  of  every  sort  and  the  thoughts
of  both  R.D.  and  S.D.,"  though  it  was  alleged  that  her  know-
ledge of  S.D. only  was  immediate, while  her  knowledge  of
R.D.  was  reflected  from  S.D.'s  mind  as  from  a mirror.  Fur-
ther, when  the  other  two  were '  out,'  she  was  subliminally

2b


390


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


co-conscious  and  could  '  watch  '  them,  but  (unlike  '  Sally  ')  she
did  not  claim  to  have  uninterrupted  consciousness.  For  though
she  never  '  dreamt  '  1  she  slept,  and  was  sometimes  '  away  and
sleeping,'  perhaps  because  there  was  a  deeper  personality  still.
(4)  This  was  (rather  inconveniently)  denominated  '  Sleeping
Margaret,'  because  first  discovered  (p.  463)  on  April  5,  1911
while  '  Margaret  '  was  asleep,  and  in  several  respects  was  the
most  remarkable  feature  in  the  case.  She  never  manifested
except  when  '  Margaret  '  was  asleep,  and  subsequently,  when
'  Margaret '  had  gone,  in  the  sleep  of  '  Real  Doris,'  and  had
power  only  over  the  vocal  organs,  and  in  rare  emergencies  over
the  limbs.  But  then  she  was  not  allowed  to  develop,  and  to
'  get  her  eyes  open  '  like  Sally  Beauchamp  (p.  814).  But  for
this  she  would,  as  she  said,  "  probably  have  become  the  hardest
one  to  deal  with."  For  mentally  she  was  the  most  impressive
and  inclusive  ;  she  knew  all  that  the  others  did  and  thought,
seeing  M.'s  thoughts  directly,  those  of  S.D.  reflected  from  the
consciousness  of  M.  and  those  of  R.D.  reflected  from  S.D.  via
M.  Her  mind  was  that  of  a  mature,  sensible  woman,  and
after  Dr.  Prince  had  won  her  confidence,  she  was  always  willing
to  give  (excellent)  advice  in  the  treatment  of  the  case.  She
claimed  to  date  back  to  '  Doris's  '  infancy,  and  to  have  '  come  '
at  the  same  time  as  '  Margaret  '  ;  but  none  of  the  others  were
aware  of  her  existence,  which  '  Margaret  '  only  discovered  in
Nov.,  1911,  by  telepathically  reading  Dr.  Prince's  mind  (p.  799),
and  she  preserved  to  the  end  the  attitude  of  a  benevolent  but
detached  and  independent  spectator.  When  she  had  had  her
little  evening  chat  with  Dr.  Prince  she  would  relapse  into
silence,  and  in  the  daytime  would  usually  '  go  away  '  on  busi-
ness of  her  own,  about  which  she  was  very  reticent,  and  she
could  glean  what  had  happened  in  her  '  absence  '  only  from  the
minds  of  the  others.  (5)  '  Sleeping  Real  Doris  '  was  little
more  than  a  disturbance  in  the  sleep  of  '  Real  Doris,'  due,  as
'  Margaret  '  said  (p.  247),  to  "a  little  crack  in  the  R.D."  She
was  started  by  a  fall  down  the  stairs  on  Oct.  2,  1907,  but  never
developed  very  far.  Dr.  Prince  doubts  whether  she  had  self-
consciousness,  and  she  had  no  knowledge  of  any  of  the  others,

1  Pp.  414,  787.  As  against  these  positive  statements  in  the  'record'  the
remark  in  the  summary  on  p.  50  that  M.  was  subject  to  '  simple  dreaming  v
must  be  a  slip.


LXXIV.]


Review.


391


nor  had  they  access  to  her  mind.  All  she  ever  did  was  to
rehearse  with  mechanical  accuracy,  like  a  phonograph,  conversa-
tions and  soliloquies  in  which  R.D.  or  S.D.  had  participated.

Such  was  the  '  Doris  '  Family  when  the  case  came  under  Dr.
Prince's  notice  in  Nov.,  1909,  and  such  it  had  been  (with  the
addition  of  '  Sleeping  Real  Doris  '  in  1907)  since  the  mother's
death  in  1906.  Ever  since  that  catastrophe  the  '  Real  Doris  '
had  been  practically  suppressed.  She  '  came  out  '  only  for  a
few  minutes  at  a  time,  and  the  least  disturbance  sent  her  '  in,'
i.e.  away,  again.  Dr.  Prince  estimates  that  during  the  five
years  1906-11,  her  conscious  existence  can  hardly  have  amounted
to  three  days,  and  tells  us  that  when  he  talked  to  what  hap-
pened to  be  '  Real  Doris  '  in  November,  1909,  she  had  not
spoken  to  anyone  since  her  mother's  death  four  and  a  half
years  before  !  (p.  257).

It  was,  therefore,  a  singular  piece  of  good  fortune  that  S.D.
should  have  wandered  one  day  in  Jan.,  1909,  into  the  Episcopal
Church  in  Pittsburgh  of  which  Dr.  Prince  was  then  rector,  and
that  just  as  he  began  to  preach  R.D.  should  have  emerged  and
listened  to  the  whole  of  the  sermon.  Still  it  was  S.D.  who,
in  October,  1909,  joined  the  Sunday  school  of  his  church,
and  attracted  the  attention  of  Mrs.  Prince.  S.D.  at  this  time
was  her  father's  household  drudge,  terribly  overworked,  and
tormented  by  '  Margaret,'  who  resented  the  '  sewing  fits  '  in
which  she  was  made  to  participate,  underfed,  and  in  a  very
bad  state  of  health.  Mrs.  Prince  made  her  come  to  the  rectory,
gave  her  food  and  allowed  her  to  rest  and  to  sleep,  soon
noticing  that  in  her  sleep  her  hands  used  to  scratch  and  other-
wise torment  her  body.  This  was  '  Margaret  '  avenging  herself
upon  '  Sick  Doris  '  ;  but  it  was  not  until  Jan.,  1911,  by  which
time  Dr.  Prince  had  interested  himself  in  the  case,  that  its
significance  was  understood.  Dr.  Prince  had  read  his  name-
sake's book  on  the  '  Beauchamp  '  case,  suspected  'dissociation,'
and  soon  unravelled  the  major  complications.  He  at  once
recognized  that  in  order  to  effect  a  cure,  and  indeed  to  save
the  girl's  life,  it  was  necessary  to  take  her  away  from  her
father,  and  despite  some  opposition  from  the  father,  who  was
to  go  to  a  Veterans'  Home,  carried  through  his  scheme.  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Prince  adopted  Doris,  and  on  Mar.  2,  1911,  she
entered  their  household,  and  her  cure  commenced.


392


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


The  conduct  of  this  cure  reflects  the  greatest  possible  credit
on  Dr.  Prince,  both  as  a  man  and  as  a  layman  (medically).
For  even  though  he  had  the  advice  of  the  professor  of
psychiatry  of  the  local  University,  not  many  professional
physicians  or  psychologists  would  have  managed  the  affair  so
smoothly  and  with  so  few  mistakes.  Dr.  Prince  proceeded  on
the  very  sound  principle  that  all  the  conditions  should  be
rendered  favourable  to  the  return  of  the  primary  personality,
'  Real  Doris,'  and  that  she  should  be  encouraged  to  occupy  as
much  of  the  total  life  as  she  was  able  to  endure,  while  the
secondary  personalities  should  be  allowed  to  manifest  as  little
as  possible,  and  should  have  their  opportunities  of  activity
and  self-expression  curtailed  as  much  as  possible.  Hence,  even
when  it  was  found  necessary  to  let  them  come,  in  order  to
rest  '  Real  Doris  '  and  to  relieve  her  from  the  strain  of  con-
tinuous living,  they  were  kept  asleep  as  much  as  possible.  As
regards  method,  Dr.  Prince  did  not  employ  hypnotism,  but
found  personal  influence  and  persuasion  more  effective,  having
speedily  discovered  that  all  the  personalities  were  very  sugges-
tible, especially  when  asleep.  The  application  of  these  thera-
peutic methods  demanded,  however,  great  tact  as  well  as
patience  ;  for  the  secondary  personalities  had  to  be  kept  in
good  Immour  and  tolerant  of  their  treatment,  lest  their
opposition  should  jeopardize  its  success.  '  Margaret  '  especially
could  clearly  have  done  as  much  mischief  as  '  Sally  '  in  the
4  Beauchamp  '  case.

Both  for  this  reason,  and  because  she  was  the  latest  comer,
1  Sick  Doris  '  was  the  first  to  be  attacked,  with  the  enthusiastic
concurrence  of  'Margaret.'  She  yielded  ground  rapidly,  and  in  a
very  curious  way.  Within  a  week  her  memories  began  to  go,
but  most  of  them  (though  not  their  accompanying  emotions)
turned  up  again  in  the  mind  of  '  Real  Doris,'  and  afforded  her
some  ex  post  facto  compensation  for  the  experience  she  had
missed.  It  was  now  S.D.'s  turn  to  be  absent  for  days  at  a
time,  to  become  anaesthetic,  and  generally  to  dwindle  and  to
diminish  in  vitality.  But  her  retrogressive  development  took
the  curious  form  of  growing  younger.  She  who  had  been  born
adult,  now  experienced  her  first  childhood.  Jn  two  months'
time  she  was  reduced  to  helpless  infancy,  and  on  June  28th,
1911,  her  last  brief  appearance  was  recorded. Similarly,  the


lxxiv.]  Review.  393

recitals  of  '  Sleeping  Real  Doris  '  grew  rarer  and  shorter,  until
she  too  petered  out,  in  April,  1912.

The  evanescence  of  '  Margaret  '  was  a  slower  process.  Her
decline,  as  measured  by  loss  of  power  over  '  Real  Doris  '  and
of  the  ability  to  know  her  mind  and  to  '  watch  '  when  '  in  '  {i.e.
subliminal),  set  in  at  once,  and  continued  as  the  '  Real  Doris  '
grew  stronger  and  occupied  more  and  more  of  the  day.  Like
S.D.  she  too  grew  progressively  younger,  though  receding  only
from  the  mentality  of  a  girl  of  ten  to  that  of  one  of  five.  She
also  grew  more  and  more  anaesthetic,  and  her  sight  shortened,
until  she  became  totally  blind,  though  she  retained  to  the  end
her  remarkable  auditory  hyperaesthesia.  Her  last  appearance
occurred  in  April,  1914.

So  there  was  no  one  left  of  the  family  besides  '  Real  Doris  '
and  '  Sleeping  Margaret.'  And  as  the  latter  only  manifested
in  R.D.'s  sleep,  without  encroaching  upon  her  waking  hours,  the
cure  was  for  practical  purposes  complete.  Theoretically,  how-
ever, '  Sleeping  Margaret  '  remained  a  great  puzzle,  and  part  of
the  anomalies  (yet  to  be  mentioned)  which  differentiated  the  case
from  ordinary  dissociations  of  personality.  With  her  mature
intelligence,  detached  attitude  and  curiously  restricted  control
of  the  body,  she  was  obviously  unlike  the  alternating  personali-
ties. Finding  that  she  alone  was  not  amenable  to  suggestion,
and  singularly  reticent  about  herself,  Dr.  Prince  (perhaps
unwisely)  suggested  to  her  that  she  was  a  spirit  (p.  767).  She
repudiated  the  idea  repeatedly — in  Nov.,  1911,  Oct.,  1912  (p.
1307),  Feb.,  1913  (p.  1101).  But  always  in  a  way  suggestive
of  a  desire  to  baffle  an  impertinent  inquirer.  Thus  the  second
of  these  denials  was  provoked  by  an  allegation  made  through
'  Margaret's  '  automatic  planchette-writing,  purporting  to  come
from  Doris's  mother,  that  she  was  '  the  guard  '  (or  spirit
'  guide  ')  but  would  deny  this.  She  admitted  that  she  was  "  the
one  that  guards  "  and  that  her  own  coming  was  in  response
to  the  praj^ers  of  Doris's  mother,  denied  both  that  '  Margaret  *
could  have  written  the  messages  ("  You  know  very  well  that
she  does  not  understand  what  is  written  ")  and  that  she  herself
had,  and  replied  to  the  question  '  then  it  is  a  spirit  ?  '  "  No,
I  think  that  is  nonsense."  Her  subsequent  denial  was  still
more  enigmatic.  To  an  inquiry  as  to  what  she  was,  she
replied,  "  Well,  I  am  not  a  spirit  .  .  .  Don't  you  know  that  a.


394


F.  C.  8.  Schiller.


[part


personality  can  go  from  one  person  to  another  ?  "  (No.)
"  Well,  it  can.  I  don't  mean  such  a  one  as  S.D.  But  M.,
for  example,  if  she  had  become  more  fully  developed — a  per-
sonality gets  to  be  more  like  the  real  person  when  fully
developed — if  she  had  gone  on  and  developed,  until  she  was
out  most  of  the  time,  and  then  had  been  suddenly  forced  out
— and  you  could  have  done  it,  though  it  would  probably  have
ruined  R.D. — she  could  have  gone  to  some  other  person."  (To
what  sort  of  a  person  ?)  "To  some  nervously  weak  person  "
(You  reason  this  out  ?)  "  No,  I  know  it."  (From  your  own
experience  ?)  "  I  didn't  say  that."  Surely  Dr.  Prince  was
justified  in  regarding  this  curious  theory  of  possession  as
detracting  seriously  from  the  denial  that  '  Sleeping  Margaret  '
was  a  spirit.  Finally,  in  August,  1914,  when  '  Margaret  '  had
been  gone  four  months  and  it  had  been  arranged  that  '  Doris  '
was  to  have  some  sittings  with  Prof.  Hyslop's  medium,  Mrs.
Chenoweth,  '  Sleeping  Margaret  '  was  prevailed  upon  to  make
an  extraordinary  statement  (p.  1264).  She  wrote  "  I  am  a
spirit,  so  called  by  people  who  live  on  the  earth.  I  do  not
know  whether  I  have  a  name  or  not.  I  only  know  that  I
was  sent  by  some  one  higher  to  guard  Doris  when  she  was
three  years  old.  There  are  lots  of  guards  like  me  but  they
do  not  stay  with  the  people  they  guard.  I  never  knew  one
that  did.  I  was  trying  to  prove  who  I  was  by  trying  to  get
your  father  to  write  through  the  planchette  board,  but  failed
to  get  it  done."  Then  she  said,  "  There,  you  may  believe  as
much  of  that  as  you  like,"  with  which  judicious  remark  we
may  temporarily  leave  her,  while  we  return  to  the  more  normal
aspects  of  the  case.

II.

Ignoring  for  the  time  being  the  supernormal  side  of  the  case,
let  us  reflect  a  little  on  the  points  of  interest  it  should  have
for  psychologists.

(1)  Should  it  not  excite  wonder  even  in  the  most  dully
conventional  pedant  to  find  how  marvellous  must  be  the  soul's
organization  to  be  capable  of  vicissitudes  like  Doris  Fischer's  ?
What  could  be  more  fantastic,  and  also  more  instructive,  than
the  coming  into  being,  and  the  passing  out  of  it,  of  her  various


LXXIV.]


Review.


395


personalities  ?  What  could  more  vividly  reveal  the  utter
inadequacj7  to  the  facts  of  the  old  metaphysical  dogma  that  a
soul  is  a  simple  and  indivisible  spiritual  substance  ?  Souls
seem  to  be  composed  of  strata  that  extend  down  into  the
subliminal  with  no  perceptible  limits,  and  capable  under
pressure  of  developing  new  stratifications  or  obliterating  old
ones.  It  is,  of  course,  tempting — and  medical  minds  usually
find  the  temptation  irresistible — to  connect  these  stratifications
with  the  structure  of  the  brain,  and  this  theory  is  in  our  case
supported  by  the  very  definite  local  habitations  in  the  head
which  M.  and  S.M.  assigned  to  themselves  and  their  colleagues.
But  such  attempts  are  usually  found  to  turn  metaphors  into
arguments,  and  invariably  involve  themselves  in  far-reaching
confusions  of  the  physical  and  the  psychical.1

(2)  Moreover  these  astounding  facts  are  as  damaging  to
materialistic  dogma  as  to  the  old-fashioned  spiritualism.  A
soul's  organization  is  not  adequately  expressed  by  physical
analogies.  Its  so-called  '  dissociations  '  are  not  mechanical
processes,  even  when  they  are  excited  by  bodily  injuries.  Nor
are  they  wholty  morbid.  What  stands  out  very  clearly  in
Doris  Fischer's  case  is  that  they  are  really  teleological — pro-
tective reactions  to  alleviate  the  burden  of  living.  But  the
same  lesson  was  really  implicit  also  in  the  earlier  cases,  though
the  bias  of  the  doctors  who  recorded  them  has  not  infrequently
obscured  it.  Thus  even  in  the  very  earliest  case  of  all,  that
of  '  Felida  X.,'  it  is  recorded  that  the  secondary  personality
was  a  great  improvement  on  the  condition  of  the  primary  ;
while  Dr.  R.  O.  Mason's  case  of  1  Alma  Z.'  presents  very
close  analogies  to  '  Doris  Fischer's,'  in  that  it  too  had  a  child-
like secondary  personality  -very  like  '  Margaret,'  and  '  Twoey  '
declared  that  she  had  come  to  help  '  Number  One.'  It  is
quite  probable  that  if  '  Sally '  in  the  Beauchamp  case  had
been  handled  by  Dr.  Morton  Prince  as  sympathetically  as
'  Margaret  '  was  by  Dr.  Walter  Prince,  she  too  would  have
consented  to  be  a  curative  influence,2  and  it  should  be  remem-
bered that  in  the  end  it  was  she  who  gave  away  the  secret

1  Cf.  e.g.  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  notion  of  '  neurograms  '  and  my  criticism
of  it  in  Proc.  S.P.fi.  Pt.  LXX.,  pp.  495,  490-501.

2  Cf.  '  Sleeping  Margaret's  '  testimonial  to  Dr.  Prince  on  p.  750,  which
indicates  that  a  different  policy  might  have  led  to  disaster.


396


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


of  the  Beauchamp  family,  and  that  she  consented  to  her  own
suppression.1  Also,  it  is  only  fair  to  say  that  Dr.  Morton
Prince  was  a  pioneer  in  the  therapeutic  handling  of  secondary
personalities,  and  that  his  successor  profited  by  his  experiments.2
Lastly,  it  should  be  realized  that  the  form  of  alternating  per-
sonality which  we  all  normally  experience,  viz.  ordinary  sleep,,
is  definitely  therapeutic  in  its  function  ;  and  that  if  we  were
not  capable  of  it  we  could  not  live.

(3)  It  is  clear  that  every  case  of  '  dissociation  '  has  individual
features  of  its  own,  and  differs  from  every  other.3 There  is  a
general  family  resemblance,  but  we  must  be  chary  of  too  hastily
arguing  from  one  case  to  another. Thus  if  we  compare  '  Doris
Fischer  ' with '  Miss  Beauchamp,' we  can  note  the  following
differences  in  the  '  dissociations.' (a)  The  Real  Miss  Beauchamp
was  wholly  dissolved  into  her  'dissociations,'  'BI'  and  '  B  IV  '
(the  latter  remaining  latent  for  six  years  after  splitting  off),
whereas  the  Real  Doris  was  not  dissolved  or  extinguished,  but
became an alternating personality, who was driven off  the
scene  for  a  time  but  gradually  recovered  the  power  to  maintain
herself, (b)  She  recovered  the memories of '  Sick  Doris,'  as
Miss  Beauchamp  did  those  of  B  I  and  B IV  ;  but  the  character
of  S.D.  did  not  enter  into  the  composition  of  her  own,  whereas
the  real  Miss  Beauchamp  was  a  synthesis  of  B  I  and  B  IV.
(c)  In  the  Beauchamp case there  was nothing analogous  to
the  way  in  which  S.D.  and  M.  evanesced,  by  reduction  to  in-
fancy and  weakness,  nor  did  Real  Doris  ever  inherit  the  mental
contents  of  '  Margaret  ' as  well  as  those  of  S.D. (d)  Though
'  Margaret  '  corresponded  in  a  general  way  to  '  Sally,'  there  are
well-marked  differences. She  was much  less  potent,  even  at
her  strongest, and  was  finally  extinguished, and  not  merely
'  squeezed  ' back  into  the  subliminal. It  would perhaps  be
true  to  say  that '  Sally  '  combined  the  parts  played  in  the
Fischer case by '  Margaret  ' and '  Sleeping Margaret.'  But

1  The  Dissociation  of  a  Personality,  p.  519  ;  cf.  p.  521.

2  In  Sidis  and  Goodhart's  case  of  the  Rev.  T.  C.  Hanna  the  dissociating
shock  was  apparently  entirely  physical.  But  could  we  have  known  what
damage  precisely  it  had  done  to  the  brain,  we  might  hope  to  understand
why,  to  repair  it,  it  was  expedient  to  start  the  new  '  Mr.  Hanna  '  afresh
psychically,  and  to  dissociate  him  from  his  whole  past.

s  This  was  '  Sleeping  Margaret's  '  view  too,  cf.  p.  750.


LXXIV.]


Review.


397


(e)  there  is  no  real  analogue  in  the  Beauchamp  case  to  '  Sleep-
ing Margaret.'  Or  if  there  was,  Dr.  Morton  Prince  failed  to
discover  it.

(4)  This possibility must be seriously  reckoned with.  We
are  far  too  ready  to  ascribe  finality  to  the  knowledge  of  the
hour  and  to  assume  that  what  has  not  been  found,  or  is  not
officially  recognized, does not exist. But  few facts are  so
obtrusive  as  to  force  themselves  upon  us  if  we  will  not  look
for  them,  and  still  fewer  so  strong  that  they  can  make  their
way  against  hostile  prejudice. Now  the  professional  interests
of  doctors  are  such  as  inevitably  to  prejudice  them  in  certain
directions,  and  it  is  possible  that  they  may  overlook  a  good
deal. At  any  rate  the  Doris  Fischer  case suggests that  in
all  such  affairs  there  may  be  a  good  deal  more  than  meets  the
ordinary  doctor's  eye. It  seems  to  point  to  a  whole  array  of
mysteries  which  are  usually  not  explored  because  medical  pre-
judice fights shy  of them  and medical attention  is  directed
elsewhere. We  may  take  it  that  medical  records  are  usually
incomplete  where  they  approach  the  supernormal.  Incidents
bordering  upon  this  region  are  recorded,  if  at  all,  only  apologeti-
cally and under protest. Nevertheless, it is fairly  well
recognized  that  cases  of '  dissociation  ' exhibit  hyperesthesias
as  well  as anaesthesias,  though  rarely  in  such  abundance  as
in our  case. Supernormal  knowledge  was observed  in  other
cases also, e.g. in '  Alma Z.,' '  Lurancy Vennum,'  and
'  Mr.  Hanna.' As  for the Beauchamp  case, it  will be  re-
membered that '  Sally  ' seemed so supernormal to  Mr.
M'Dougall  as  to  drive  that  great  authority  into  an  argument
for sheer  spiritism.1 In  the  Doris  Fischer  case the  super-
normal, though  still  subordinate  to  the  psychological  interest,
bulks  large — perhaps only because it was fully and  fairly
recorded. At  any  rate  it  is  to  be  accounted  a  piece  of  good
luck  rather  than  an  anomaly  that  the  case  fell  into  the  hands
of  investigators  who  were  not  afraid  to  explore  its  supernormal
side. Nor  can  it  be  too  strongly  impressed  on  future  investi-
gators that  scientific  completeness  and  honesty  require  them
not to omit what look  like supernormal incidents  merely
because  they  do  not  understand  them. We  know  so  very  little
about  the  intimate  '  nature  '  and  structure  of  '  souls,'  and  about

Proceedings  S.P.H.,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  430.


398


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


their  disorders  and  potentialities  that  we  should  not  allow  any
a  priori  prejudice  to  impede  the  investigation  of  whatever  facts
we  can  observe.  Nor  should  we  acquiesce  too  easily  in  terms
like  '  dissociation  '  as  the  beginning  and  end  of  wisdom.  They
are  little  more  than  descriptive  metaphors,  and  explain  neither
what  originally  '  associates  '  a  soul  into  the  sort  of  unity  it
normally  has,  nor  what  disrupts  this  unity,  so  strangely  and
capriciously,  to  the  varying  extent  illustrated  in  these  abnor-
malities. It  may  then  very  well  be,  as  Prof.  Hyslop  contends,
that  supernormal  influences  usually  accompany  a  '  dissociation.'
and  may  be  detected,  if  they  are  looked  for.  If  so,  this  will
be  an  additional  reason  for  cultivating  a  very  open  mind,  in
the  hope  of  unravelling  their  complexities.  These  considera-
tions, therefore,  lead  us  on  to  the  supernormal  side  of  the
Doris  Fischer  case.

III.

The  supernormal  side  of  the  Fischer  case  is  developed  at  great
length  in  Vol.  III.,  which  contains  Dr.  Hyslop's  account  (with
some  annotations  by  Dr.  Prince)  of  twenty-three  sittings  Doris
had  in  Nov.  and  Dec,  1914,  with  his  medium  '  Mrs.  Chenoweth,'
together  with  more  or  less  relevant  references  to  Doris  in  over
a  hundred  subsequent  sittings,  down  to  Dec.  22nd,  1915.  In
this  part  of  the  narrative  the  atmosphere  is  frankly  spiritistic,
in  accordance  with  Dr.  Hyslop's  well-known  convictions.  But
in  a  more  moderate  way  the  supernormal  element  had  figured
also  in  the  first  two  volumes.  For  Dr.  Prince  had  from  the
first  conscientiously  recorded  all  the  apparently  supernormal
incidents  that  occurred  spontaneously.  These  may  be  classified
under  the  heads  of  (a)  telepathy  and  clairvoyance,  (b)  hallu-
cinations, and  (c)  automatic  writing,  and  are  deserving  of  con-
sideration whatever  may  be  thought  of  Volume  III.

(a)  On  a  number  of  occasions  1  '  Margaret  '  evinced  a  power
of  knowing  Dr.  Prince's  past  thoughts,  discovering,  e.g.  in  this

1  I  have  not  been  able  to  count  those  recorded,  and  unfortunately  the
index  happens  to  be  almost  worthless  on  this  important  point.  It  omits,
under  '  Margaret,  telepathy,'  the  cases  on  pp.  508-10,  739,  799  and  804,  and
under  '  Margaret,  clairvoyance  '  those  on  pp.  335-346,  376-8,  661,  is  nugatory
under  '  telepathy,'  and  quite  incomplete  under  '  clairvoyance  '  and  1  tele-
voyance.'


lxxiv.]  Review.  399

way  that  he  had  written  to  Dr.  Morton  Prince  about  the  case
(p.  804),  and  that  '  Sleeping  Margaret  '  existed  (p.  799).  She
explained  these  feats  variously,  by  saying  that  she  saw  it  in
his  eyes,  at  which  she  used  to  gaze  fixedly  on  such  occasions,
or  that  he  had  '  formed  words  with  his  lips,'  although  he  had
not  moved  them  (pp.  509-10).  She  also  explained  that  she  saw,
not  his  actual  thoughts,  but  what  was  "passing  like  a  parade
down  underneath."  Dr.  Prince  was  convinced  that  this  power
was  genuine,  and  it  is  difficult  to  deny  that  it  was  '  telepathic'
In  addition  there  are  reports  of  clairvoyance  due  to  her  (pp.  301,
661),  and  she  was  once  sent  on  a  clairvoyant  expedition  with
considerable  success  (pp.  376-8).  The  curious  case  on  pp.  508-10,
in  which  she  knew  what  Dr.  Prince  had  been  reading  hi  a  book,
seems  to  attest  both  telepathy  and  clairvoyance.  On  one
occasion  (pp.  335-46),  '  Sick  Doris  '  appears  to  have  had  a
clairvoyant  vision,  in  which  '  Margaret '  may  have  been  implicated.

(b)  Hallucinations  of  a  possibly  veridical  sort  occurred  to
'  Sick  Doris  '  and  ;  Real  Doris,'  and  also;  in  connexion  with  a
proof  '  Sleeping  Margaret  '  had  promised  him,  to  Dr.  Prince.
'  Sick  Doris,'  when  she  first  came,  was  frequently  comforted  in  her
troubles  by  visions  of  the  mother  she  had  never  seen,  who  spoke
kindly  to  her,  teste  '  Margaret  '  (pp.  244,  442).  In  November,
1912,  '  Margaret  '  reported  that  '  Real  Doris  '  had  several  times
seen  their  mother,  and  this  was  confirmed  by  S.M.  and  R.D.
who  said — "  I  Avas  sitting  in  the  henyard  day  before  yesterday
at  half  past  four,  feeling  sad,  and  holding  a  chicken,  looking
down  at  it  when  I  saw  a  shadow.  That  made  me  look  up —
I  thought  it  must  be  you  ;  and  I  saw  my  mother,  just  as
plainly  as  I  ever  saw  her,  dressed  in  a  calico  dress  which  she
wore  when  I  was  a  child  about  eight  years  old.  She  looked
down  on  me  and  smiled  and  her  face  shone — it  seemed  to
reflect  light.  I  saw  her  only  a  second,  and  then  she  suddenly
disappeared.  I  saw  the  same  thing  yesterday  afternoon "
(pp.  1042-4).  As  for  Dr.  Prince  he  was  awakened  from  a
dream  by  hearing  himself  called  '  Walter  '  :  '  Sleeping  Margaret  '
spontaneously  claimed  to  have  made  this  experiment  (pp.  1214-5).
Subsequently  the  same  thing  happened  again,  and  could  not  be
explained  (p.  1258  f.).

(c)  Automatic  writing  first  occurred  in  July,  1911,  when  a
pencil  was  put  into  '  Margaret's  '  hand  while  she  was  asleep.


400


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


It  took  the  form  of  a  message  from  her  mother,  Emma  Fischer.
On  Sept.  30,  1912,  '  Margaret  '  was  induced  to  experiment  with
a  planchette,  and  she  continued  to  do  so  at  intervals  until
March,  1913.  These  experiments  did  not  yield  anything  that
was  properly  evidential,  but  it  was  curious,  especially  in  view
of  the  infantile  character  of  the  automatist,  that  the  names  of
'  Emma  Fischer  '  and  '  Walter  M  '  (Dr.  Prince's  father)  should
be  given,  and  that  '  Sleeping  Margaret  '  should  be  referred  to
as  '  the  guard  '  and  '  the  one  who  guards  the  sleep  of  Doris/
In  1914  Doris  did  some  automatic  writing,  which  claimed  to
come  from  her  '  guards,'  other  than  '  S.M.,'  but  was  not
evidential.

Such  was  the  situation  when  Doris  came  east  from  San
Bernardino,  Cal.  (whither  the  Princes  had  moved  in  June,  1912)
to  sit  with  Mrs.  '  Chenoweth  '  under  the  superintendence  of
Dr.  Hyslop. The  main  points  to  be  tested  were,  of  course,

(1)  whether  Mrs.  'Chenoweth'  would  give  facts  about  her
sitter  that  she  could  not  have  known  by  normal  means,  and
more particularly would refer to Doris's curious history  ;

(2)  whether  knowledge  could  be  produced  which  was  not  known
to  Dr.  Hyslop  and  yet  was  verifiable  by  Dr.  Prince ;  (3)
whether  evidential  communications  could  be  obtained  from
'  spirits,'  and  more  particularly  from  '  Emma  Fischer.'

Now  if,  as  Dr.  Hyslop  assures  us,  any  normal  knowledge  of
Doris  Fischer  by  Mrs.  '  Chenoweth '  was  out  of  the  question,
it  is  clear  that  considerable  success  was  obtained  under  all
three  heads.  And  certainly  very  elaborate  precautions  were
taken.  Mrs.  '  Chenoweth  '  was,  of  course,  told  nothing  about
her  sitter,  who  was  introduced  into  the  room  after  she  went
into  trance,  and  left  it  before  she  came  out.

Under  these  conditions  '  Doris's  '  '  dissociation  '  was  diagnosed,
in  general  terms  but  unmistakably,  in  the  third  sitting,  and
ascribed  to  obsession  by  evil  spirits.  Her  condition  was  (with
some  '  fishing  ')  attributed  to  a  fall  and  connected  with  her
father  (p.  373  f .),  whose  failings  were  plainly  indicated  (pp.
471-3).  Her  mother  communicated  copiously,  gave  her  name,
and  claimed  to  have  appeared  to  her  on  '  two  or  three'  occasions
(cf.  the  story  of  the  henhouse  above).  She  remembered  the  flowers
at  her  funeral  as  violets  and  white  roses,  which  was  contrary
to  Doris's  (very  imperfect)  recollection,  but  could  be  verified


XXXIV.]


Review.


401


by  Dr.  Prince  from  his  knowledge  of  '  Margaret's  '  treasures
(p.  303).  She  told  inter  alia  a  highly  evidential  anecdote
about  a  lame  pet  '  Skippy '  of  Doris's  youth,  who,  however,
was  said  to  be  a  dog  and  not  a  cat1  (pp.  424-5).  But  she  did
not  confirm  planchette's  story  of  the  blow  that  had  killed  her.
All  these  statements  came  in  the  presence  of  '  Doris,'  and  so
may  be  attributed  by  believers  in  telepathy  to  infiltrations  from
some  stratum  or  other  of  her  mind.  But  some  evidential
matter  was  given  subsequently,  when  Dr.  Hyslop  sat  alone
with  the  medium.  The  names  'Walter  F.  Prince,'  'California,'
'  Doris's  '  real  name  '  Brittia  '  (pp.  842,  850,  851)  are  examples.
But  these  may  all  have  come  from  Dr.  Hyslop's  mind.2

About  '  Sleeping  Margaret  '  there  arose  a  sharp  conflict  with
Dr.  Prince's  interpretation.  For  though  Mrs.  '  Chenoweth's '
'  controls  '  accepted  her  term  '  guards  '  instead  of  '  guides  '
(p.  438),  they  declined  to  recognize  her  as  a  '  spirit  '  at  all,
and  declared  her  to  be  merely  Doris's  '  subconscious.'  This
view  was  accepted  by  Dr.  Hyslop,  but  not  by  Dr.  Prince.
S.M.  did  not  in  fact  manage  to  keep  her  promise  to  authenti-
cate herself  through  Mrs.  '  Chenoweth,'  but  neither  did  the
latter 's  '  controls  '  find  any  support  in  Dr.  Prince's  records.
And  '  Sleeping  Margaret  '  stuck  to  her  guns  manfully,  and  the
description  of  the  sitting  at  which  Mrs.  '  Chenoweth  '  was  taken
to  the  house  where  Doris  was  sleeping,  identified  her  (without
seeing  her)  as  her  sitter,  with  the  cross-examination  of  '  Sleeping
Margaret  '  which  ensued,  is  one  of  the  most  striking  episodes  in
the  whole  record.  It  would  appear,  therefore,  to  be  necessary
to  choose  between  these  two  conflicting  views,  even  on  a
spiritistic  interpretation  of  the  facts  :  whichever  is  adopted,  the
other  has  to  be  declared  a  subliminal  romance,  similar  to  those
of  '  Mile.  Helene  Smith.'

Dr.  Hyslop  not  unnaturally  prefers  to  believe  in  his  medium's
'  controls,'  but  he  hardly  appears  to  recognize  what  a  monstrous
tale  they  have  induced  him  to  tell.  He  asks  us  to  believe
that  a  titanic  struggle  between  the  powers  of  good  and  evil

1  Doris  remembered  only  a  cat  '  Skippy.'  But  it  may  have  been
'  Margaret's  '  name  for  a  subsequent  dog  who  also  was  lame,  and  if
so  '  Doris  '  would  not  remember  it.

2  Whether  he  also  knew  about  '  Sick  Doris's  '  embroidery,  which  was
•explained  (p.  830),  is  not  made  clear.


402


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[PART


was  going  on  for  years  over,  and  in,  the  soul  of  '  Doris  Fischer.'
On  the  one  side  were  a  host  of  obsessing  '  earth-bound  '  spirits
led  by  Cagliostro,  of  whom  '  Margaret  '  was  one  ;  on  the  other
the  whole  '  Imperator  '  band,  supported  by  .  all  the  departed
psychical  researchers  from  Edmund  Gurney  to  William  James,
and  by  '  Minnehaha,'  Laughing  Water,  the  good  component  in
the  obsessing  double  personality  called  '  Margaret '  by  Dr.
Prince.  Moreover,  all  these  distinguished  persons  seem  to  be
labouring  under  a  delusion.  They  think  that  the  struggle  is
still  on,  and  are  unaware  that  Doris  has  been  cured,  and  is
now  as  sane  and  normal  as  anyone— indeed  completely  so  on
their  own  theory,  which  makes  '  Sleeping  Margaret  '  into  a
subsconcious  part  of  '  Doris.'  If  such  are  the  ignorance  and
sense  of  values  that  prevail  among  the  good  influences  on  the
spiritual  plane,  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  devils  have  things
prettjr  much  their  own  way  on  the  earthly.  Perhaps  by  the
time  '  Imperator  '  and  Co.  have  realized  that  they  have  actually
helped  to  save  the  soul  of  one  little  girl,  they  may  discover
that  there  has  been  a  war  in  Europe,  which  has  ruined  souls
by  the  million  and  dealt  a  staggering  blow  to  civilization.

The  principle  of  economy,  then,  seems  decidedly  to  favour
'  Sleeping  Margaret's  '  conceptions  of  the  function  of  spirit
'  guards  '  and  of  the  organization  of  the  world  of  spirits.  It
is  much  more  moderate,  and  accords  well  with  the  evidence,
whereas  the  claims  of  the  Chenoweth  '  controls  '  were  wholly  non-
evidential  and  unsubstantiated.  This  is  not,  however,  to  endorse
her  theory,  either.  For  the  possibility  of  telepathy  and
subliminal  intercommunication  between  individual  minds  cannot
be  dismissed  as  lightly  as  by  Dr.  Hyslop.  I  am  quite  disposed
to  admit  that  '  telepathy  '  may  be,  and  has  been,  overworked
as  an  explanation,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  we  should  hence-
forth accept  even  the  most  improbable  version  of  the  spiritist
interpretation.  I  can  agree  also  that  '  telepathy  '  and  '  dis-
sociation '  are  both  descriptive  terms,  rather  than  explanatory
(pp.  8,  150,  170).  But  it  hardly  follows  that  telepathy  is  "  not
worth  serious  consideration  as  a  rival  of  spiritistic  theories  "
(p.  20).  Before  we  can  say  that  we  shall  have  to  know  a
great  deal  more  about  '  spirit,'  incarnate  as  well  as  discarnate.
At  present  '  spirit  '  is  best  regarded  as  a  descriptive  term  too,
and  indeed  the  soundest  philosophy  of  science  is  disposed  to


lxxiv.]


Review.


403


hold  that  all  terms  are  descriptive,  and  that  the  old  notion  of
'  explanation  '  was  a  prejudice.  It  seems  wiser,  therefore,  to
suspend  judgment  as  to  the  source  of  the  supernormal  features
in  the  case  of  Doris  Fischer  :  their  value  in  any  case  is  not
diminished,  but  increased,  by  the  discrepancies  between  the
evidence  collected  by  Dr.  Prince  and  Dr.  Hyslop.  For  nothing
is  more  likely  to  impede  investigation  than  premature  accept-
ance of  '  explanations.'

It  remains  to  be  noted,  from  a  literary  point  of  view,  that
in  Mrs.  Chenoweth's  record  the  utterances  on  p.  693  are  in
verse  and  should  have  been  printed  as  such,  and  (if  possible)
identified.  They  sound  as  if  they  might  have  come  from  Myers's
St.  Paul,  and  so  may  be  evidential.  '  Cagliostro's  '  argument  for
the  reality  of  hallucinations,  even  of  those  of  delirium  tremens,
on  p.  532,  is  very  curious,  and  should  appeal  to  our  '  new
realists,'  while  he  clearly  got  the  better  of  Dr.  Hyslop  in  the
ethical  argument  on  p.  661.  Lastly,  the  spirited  account  of
the  suicide  spirit  who  wanted  to  be  dead  and  insisted  that  he
was,  is  worth  quoting.  He  declared  (p.  821  f.)  "  I  am  of  no
nation  and  no  land  ;  my  hold  on  life  is  broken  and  I  beg  you
let  me  proceed  on  my  journey  to  silent  death  land.  Man  I
was,  but  now  a  phantom,  soon  to  lose  form  as  memorj?  in
cloud  and  clod.  Pray  disturb  me  not  .  .  .  My  soul  is  doomed,
my  day  is  ended.  You  are  walking  my  way.  I  hear  your
voice,  the  echo  of  my  words  is  borne  to  my  dying  brain.  Why
this  delay  ?  (What  delay  do  you  mean  ?)  I  would  be  released
and  pass  on  to  death."  Evidently  two  views  may  be  taken
of  immortality,  even  after  death,  and  if  '  Sleeping  Margaret  '
was,  as  she  said,  a  spirit  that  had  lost  her  identity,  here  was
one  that  had  tried  hard  and  failed.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


404


Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgivick.


[part


REVIEW.

Raymond,  or  Life  and  Death,  with  Examples  of  the  Evidence
for  Survival  of  Memory  and  Affection  after  Death.  By
Sir Oliver  Lodge. (London: Methuen & Co. 1916.) 1

i

This  book,  well  described  by  its  title,  has  had  a  remarkable
success  with  the  public,  and  no  fewer  than  seven  editions
have  been  issued  since  its  first  appearance  in  November,  1916.
This  success  is  natural,  for  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  has  a  gift  of
simple,  popular  exposition  ;  and  at  a  time  when  so  many
are  mourning  near  friends  and  relatives  cut  off  in  their  prime,
and  so  many  are  desiring  evidence  that  the  separation  is
not  complete  or  permanent,  a  book  by  him  offering  such
evidence  in  the  case  of  his  own  son  is  sure  to  be  widely
read.  It  is  indeed  the  hope  of  affording  comfort  and  help
to  such  mourners  that  has  led  Sir  Oliver  to  publish  the
book.

The  volume  is  divided  into  three  parts.  The  first  is  a  short
account  of  his  son  Raymond,  Avho  was  killed  on  the  Western
front  on  September  14,  1915,  with  extracts  from  letters  from
him  and  about  him.  The  second,  and  longest,  part  consists
mainly  of  notes  of  sittings,  with  professional  mediums,  or
in  the  family  circle,  held  with  a  view  to  getting  into  com-
munication with  Raymond  after  his  death.  To  these  are
added  such  comments  and  information  as  are  required  to
enable  the  reader  to  estimate  the  value  of  any  evidence
that certain verifiable communications exhibit  knowledge

1  This  review  was  first  published  in  the  Hibbert  Journal  for  April,
1917,  and  we  have  to  thank  the  Editor  for  his  permission  to  reprint
it  here.

A  short  review  of  Raymond  has  already  appeared  in  the  S.P.R.
Journal  for  January,  1917,  but  it  seemed  desirable  that  this  book
should  be  discussed  in  the  Proceedings  also,  and  at  greater  length,
notwithstanding  that  so  important  a  part  of  the  evidence  it  contains
has  appeared  in  Part  LXXII.  of  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings. — Ed.


LXXIV.]


Review.


405


beyond  that  normally  possessed  by  the  medium — and  especially
evidence  that  Raymond  is  the  source  of  this  knowledge.
The  reader  would  do  well  to  begin  his  study  of  the  book
by  reading  the  introduction  to  Part  II.  (p.  83),  as  this  shows
clearly  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  own  attitude  to  the  subject,  and
the  spirit  in  which  he  has  written.  The  third  part,  called
"  Life  and  Death,"  is  of  a  more  theoretical  nature.  In  it
Sir  Oliver  discusses,  in  a  series  of  short  essays,  various  points
concerning  matter,  life,  and  mind,  and  some  of  the  theoretical
difficulties  likely  to  be  felt  by  persons  endeavouring  to  fit
the  subject  of  communication  with  the  dead  into  the  scientific
framework  they  already  possess.  He  also  discusses  some
methods  used  in  obtaining  communications,  and  some  theories
and  hypotheses  corcerning  the  process  involved.  Part  III.
concludes  with  an  article  reprinted  from  the  Hibbert  Journal
of  July,  1911,  on  "The  Christian  Idea  of  God."

There  are  good  evidential  points  in  Part  II.  such  as  no
student  of  the  subject  can  afford  to  overlook  ;  but  too  much
should  not  be  expected.  If  we  had  no  evidence  but  what
this  book  contains,  the  cautious  student  would  hesitate  to
conclude  more  than  that  there  was  a  good  prima  facie  case
for  investigation.  As  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  says  (p.  85),  "  To
base  so  momentous  a  conclusion  as  a  scientific  demonstration
of  human  survival  on  any  single  instance,  if  it  were  not
sustained  on  all  sides  by  a  great  consensus  of  similar  evidence,
would  doubtless  be  unwise  ;  for  some  other  explanation  of
a  merely  isolated  case  would  have  to  be  sought."  He  him-
self, before  his  son  died,  had  become  convinced  by  other
evidence  that  survival  and  communication  were  verifiable
facts.  "Speaking  for  myself,"  he  wrote  in  1911,  "and  with
full  and  cautious  responsibility,  I  have  to  state  that  as  an
outcome  of  my  investigation  into  psychical  matters  I  have
at  length  and  quite  gradually  become  convinced,  after  more
than  thirty  years  of  study,  not  only  that  persistent  individual
existence  is  a  fact,  but  that  occasional  communication  across
the  chasm — with  difficulty  and  under  definite  conditions —
is  possible." 1  In  1909,  in  his  book,  The  Survival  of  Man,
which  gives  an  account  of  the  evidence  then  before  him,
he  says  rather  more  tentatively (p. 321), "The  hypothesis

1  Raymond,  p.  389,  reprinted  from  Hibbert  Journal  of  July,  1911.

2c


406


Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick.


[part


of  surviving  intelligence  and  personality, — not  only  surviving
but  anxious  and  able  with  difficulty  to  communicate, — is
the  simplest  and  most  straightforward,  and  the  only  one
that  fits  all  the  facts."  He  is  quite  justified  therefore  when
he  says  {Raymond,  p.  85),  in  defending  the  bringing  forward
of  his  new  evidence,  "  I  myself  considered  the  case  of  survival
practically  proven  before,  and  clinched  by  the  efforts  of  Myers
and  others  of  the  S.P.R.  group  on  the  other  side ;  but
evidence  is  cumulative.  .  .  .  Each  stick  of  the  faggot  must
be  tested,  and,  unless  absolutely  broken,  it  adds  to  the
strength  of  the  bundle."

And  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  stick  this  book  adds  to
the  bundle  is  a  solid  and  valuable  contribution.  To  anyone
who  may  feel  disappointed  that  the  mass  of  evidence  here
presented  is  not  greater,  or  more  overwhelming,  I  may  point
out  that  good  evidence  of  survival  and  communication  is
more  difficult  to  devise — quite  apart  from  the  difficulties
there  clearly  are  in  producing  it— than  persons  new  to  the
subject  are  apt  to  think.  One  great  difficulty  is  that  the
possibility  of  thought-reading  from  the  sitter  has  to  be  ex-
cluded. To  put  this  difficulty  in  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  own
words  :  "The  gradually  recognised  possibility  of  what  may
be  called  normal  telepathy,  or  unconscious  mind-reading
from  survivors,  raises  hesitation — felt  by  most  studious  and
thoughtful  people — about  accepting  such  messages  as  irre-
fragable evidence  of  persistent  personal  existence  ;  and  to
overcome  this  .  .  .  difficulty,  it  is  demanded  that  facts  shall
be  given  which  are  unknown  to  anyone  present,  and  can
only  be  subsequently  verified  "  (p.  346).

Space  forbids  my  attempting  to  give  even  in  outline  any
account  of  special  incidents,  but  I  may  mention  that  among
those  fully  described  the  one  which  best  meets  the  above
condition  is  the  group-photograph  case,1  of  which  the  details
will  be  found  in  Chapter  IV.  of  Part  II.  The  E.A.  incident
(pp.  243-46),  of  which,  however,  full  particulars  are  not  given,
seems  also  to  have  been  a  remarkable  one.  I  should  like
also  to  call  attention  to  the  "  Honolulu  "  incident  (pp.  212,
215-16, 271-75). This incident includes correct  references

1  This  is  the  case  described  even  more  fully  than  in  Raymond  in  Sir
Oliver  Lodge's  paper  (Proc.  S.P.R. ,  Part  LXXL,  pp.  132  ff.).


lxxiv.]  Review.  407

to  songs  sung  by  Raymond,  and  an  interesting  correspondence
between  a  sitting  with  a  medium  in  London  and  a  con-
temporaneous family  sitting  at  Birmingham.  Incidentally
I  think  it  throws  light  on  conditions  of  communication.  But
we  must  admit  with  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  that  it  does  not  com-
pletely exclude  explanation  by  telepathy  between  living  minds.
A  considerable  number  of  the  communications  purporting
to  come  from  Raymond  Lodge  show  knowledge  which,  while
it  can  hardly  have  reached  the  medium  in  any  normal  manner,
may  without  improbability  be  accounted  for  by  telepathy
from  the  sitter  or  other  living  person.  As  already  said,
such  cases  cannot  be  used  as  distinctive  evidence  of  communi-
cation from  the  dead.  Nevertheless  they  strengthen  that
evidence  indirectly  by  showing  that  supernormal  power  is
at  work.

My  own  provisional  belief,  based  on  a  comparison  of  thought-
transference  experiments  with  evidence  of  communication  from
the  dead,  is  that  the  latter  is  not  different  in  kind  from
telepathic  communication  between  the  living.  In  both  cases
we  have — as  I  believe— communication  between  miiid  and
mind  otherwise  than  through  the  senses.  In  both  cases  it
apjiears  generally  to  reach  the  normal  consciousness  of  the
recipient  in  an  uncertain,  scrappy,  and  imperfect  way,  mixed
with  ideas  and  associations  appaiently  imported  by  the  re-
cipient ;  and  in  both  cases,  especially  perhaps  if  the  recipient
of  the  communication  is  in  trance,  and  therefore  his  normal
consciousness  in  abeyance,  what  is  said  is  liable  to  have
the  incoherence  of  dreams.

I  do  not  think  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  quite  agrees  about  this,
for  (on  p.  330)  he  expresses  a  belief  that  the  communicating
intelligence  with  difficulty  and  imperfectly  operates  the  brain
of  the  medium  in  the  place  of  the  medium's  own  mind  ;
and  he  can  hardly  suppose  that  this  happens  when  the  com-
municator is  a  person  in  the  body.  At  the  same  time  he
does  not  exclude  my  hypothesis — at  least  as  regards  automatic
writing — for  he  says  (pp.  355-6),  "  The  intermediate  mentality
employed  in  this  process  seems  to  be  a  usually  submerged
or  dream-like  stratum  of  the  automatist.  ...  In  some  cases
the  content  or  subject-matter  of  the  wiiting  may  emanate
entirely  from  [this  stratum]  and  be  of  no  more  value  than  a


408


Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwiclc.


[part


dream.  .  .  .  But  when  the  message  turns  out  .to  be  of  evidential
value  it  is  presumably  because  this  subliminal  portion  of  the
person  is  in  touch,  either  telepathically  or  in  some  other  way,
with  intelligences  not  ordinarily  accessible, — with  living  people
at  a  distance  perhaps,  or  more  often  with  the  apparently
more  accessible  people  who  have  passed  on."

As  regards  the  mixed,  and  therefore  untrustworthy,  nature
of  the  communications  he  is  in  entire  agreement  with  me,
and  frequently  warns  the  reader  th?t  they  cannot  be  taken
at  their  face  value  without  examination.  For  instance,  on
p.  180,  "  It  is  unlikely  that  lucidity  is  constant  all  the  time,
and  Feda  "  [the  so-called  control  of  the  medium  through
whom  the  communication  is  supposed  to  come]  "  may  have
to  do  some  padding."  Or  again,  p.  192,  "  I  should  think
myself  that  they "  [i.e.  statements  about  life  on  the  other
side]  "  are  of  very  varying  degrees  of  value  and  peculiarly
liable  to  unintentional  sophistication  by  the  medium."  Or
again,  on  the  same  page,  "  Some  books,  moreover,  have  been
j^ublished  of  late,  purporting  to  give  information  about  ill-
understood  things  in  a  positive  and  assured  manner,  and  it
is  possible  that  the  medium  has  read  these  and  been  in-
fluenced by  them."  Or  again,  on  p.  269,  "  A  good  deal  of
this  struck  me  as  nonsense  ;  as  it  Feda  had  picked  it  up
from  some  sitter. But  I  went  on  recording  what  was  said."

It  is  certain,  then,  that  no  supposed  communications,
whether  through  private  persons  or  professional  mediums,
should  be  accepted  uncritically  at  their  face  value.  But  the
difficulty  is  greatly  increased  in  the  case  of  professional
mediums  for  three  reasons.  Firstly,  many  of  them — perhaps
most,  are  more  or  less  fraudulent.  Even  where  there  is  some
real  power  it  acts  fitfully,  and  the  temptation  to  supplement
genuine  with  manufactured  evidence  must  often  be  great
when  the  medium's  living  depends  on  satisfying  sitters.  My
second  and  third  reasons  do  not  necessarily  involve  conscious
deception.  The  second  is,  that  the  need  of  producing  some-
thing must  tend  to  increase  the  amount  of  what  may  be
called  padding.  The  third  is,  that  the  effort  to  get  into
relation  with  the  affairs  of  a  constant  succession  of  new
sitters  and  to  give  them  tests  is  apt  to  develop  a  habit  of
fishing,  of  rapid  inference  from  small  indications,  and  of  bold


LXXIV.]


Review.


409


guessing.  For  these  reasons  I  think  resort  to  professional
mediums  is  to  be  deprecated.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  his  wholesome  advice  to  bereaved  persons
(pp.  342-3)  also  deprecates  it  for  many  people.  "  It  may-
be asked,"  he  says,  "do  I  recommend  all  bereaved  persons
to  devote  the  time  and  attention  which  I  have  done  to  getting
communications  and  recording  them  ?  Most  certainly  I  do
not.  I  am  a  student  of  the  subject,  and  a  student  often
undertakes  detailed  labour  of  a  special  kind.  I  recommend
people  in  general  to  learn  and  realise  that  their  loved  ones
are  still  active  and  useful  and  interested  and  happy — more
alive  than  ever  in  one  sense — and  to  make  up  their  minds
to  live  a  useful  life  till  they  rejoin  them.

"  What  steps  should  be  taken  to  gain  this  peaceful  assur-
ance must  depend  on  the  individual.  Some  may  get  it  from
the  consolations  of  religion,  some  from  the  testimony  of
trusted  people,  while  some  may  find  it  necessary  to  have
first-hand  experience  of  their  own  for  a  time.  And  if  this
experience  can  be  attained  privately,  with  no  outside  assistance,
by  quiet  and  meditation  or  by  favour  of  occasional  waking
dreams,  so  much  the  better."

I  am  afraid  that,  notwithstanding  this  excellent  advice,
Raymond  is  likely  to  lead  many  people,  who  had  much  better
not  do  so,  to  go  to  professional  mediums,  and  is  likely  to
encourage  a  very  undesirable  trade.  I  can  only  hope  that
the  evil  of  this  will  be  compensated  by  the  comfort  which
the  book  will  bring  to  many  mourners.

Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick.


FORMER  PRESIDENTS  OF  THE  SOCIETT  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  -  1882-84.
Professor  Balfour  Stewart,

F.B.S.,  LS85-87.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  -  1888-92.
The  Bight  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,

M.P.,  O.M..F.B.S., - - -  1893.
Professor  William  James,  - -  1894-95.
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S., -  1896-99.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  - - -  1900.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.B.S.  -  1901-03.

Sm  William  Barrett,  P.B.S.,  -  1904.
Professor  Charles  Bichet,  - -  1905.


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,-  1906-07.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  - - -  1908-09.

H.  Arthur  Smith,  - -  -  1910.

Andrew  Lang,  1911

Bt.  Bev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Car-
penter, D.D., -  1910

Professor  Henri  Bergson,  - -  193L

F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  d.Sc., - -  1914.

Professor Gilbert  Murray,

LLC,  Litt.D.. - - -  1915-16.

L.  P.  Jacks,  LL  D.,  D.D., -  -1917


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1918.

PRESIDENT.
L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.,  D.D.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  O.M.,
F.R.S.

Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Rt. Rev.  Bishop  W. .  Boyd  Car-
penter, D.D.

COUNCIL.

W.  W.  Baggally.
The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.
Captain  Ernest  N.  Bennett.
J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.
G.  Lowes  Dickinson.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding.
Sir  Lawrence  J.  Jones,  Bart.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.
W.  M'Dougall,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B
T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.

HON.  TREASURER.

J.  G.  Piddington,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

HON.  SECRETARIES.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding,  5  John  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.  1.

EDITOR  AND  HON.  RESEARCH  OFFICER.
Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

SECRETARY.

Miss  I.  Newton,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

HON.  SECRETARY  OF  THE  MEDICAL  SECTION.

. T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.,  Hoath  Cottage,  Hadlow,  nr.  Tonbridge.

AGENT  FOR  AMERICA.

The  W.  B.  Clarke  Co.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

2d


Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.
George  B.  Dorr.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Ph.D.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  FR.S.,  D.Sc.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  T)  T.it.t  T,T,  ri


Prof.Gilbert  M  urray,  LL.  D.,Litt.  D.
J.  G.  Piddington.
St.  George  Lane  Fox  Pitt.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.
Sydney  C.  Scott.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Litt.D.
H.  Arthur  Smith.
Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S.
Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D,
V.  J.  Woolley,  M.D.
M.  B.  Wright,  M.D.


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.
March,  1918.

President — L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.,  D.D.

Vice  -  Presid  ents  .

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton

Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  31  Devonshire  Place,  London,  W.  1.
Rt.  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter,  D.D.,  6  The  Little  Cloisters,

Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.
Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,

London,  W.  11.

George  B.  Dorr,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  The  University,  Birmingham.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,
W.  1.

Honorary  Members.

Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  31  Devonshire  Place,  London,  W.  1.
Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,
London,  W.  11.

Madame  Curie,  Faculte  des  Sciences  de  Paris,  Laboratoire  de
Physique  Generale,  12  rue  Cuvier,  Paris.

Miss  Alice  Johnson,  Meadowside,  Grantchester  Meadows,  Cam-
bridge.

Count Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  c/o  The  Russian  Legation,

Christiania,  Norway.
Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Holm  Leigh,  West  Road,

Cambridge.


414


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Corresponding  Members.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa  906,  Rio  Janeiro.

Professor  H.  Beavmis,  Villa  Printemps,  Le  Cannet  (Alpes  Mari-

times),  France.
Professor  Henri  Bergson,  31  Rue  d'Erlanger,  Paris.
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy,  France.
President  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  University,  New  York,

U.S.A.
Dr.  Dariex.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  Speyererstrasse  9,  Berlin,  W.

Professor  Th.  Flournoy,  The  University,  Geneva.

Professor  Dr.  Freud,  ix.,  Berggasse  19,  Vienna.

President  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Mrs.  William  James,  95  Irving  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  54  Rue  de  Varenne,  VIP,  Paris.

Dr.  C.  G.  Jung,  Seestrasse  228,  Kusnacht,  E.  Zurich,  Switzerland.

M.  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  32  rue  Perronet,  Neuilly-s.-S.,  France.

Professor  Wm.  Romaine  Newbold,  Ph.D.,  Univ.  of  Pennsylvania,

Philadelphia,  Pa,,  U.S.A.
Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Dr.  Morton  Prince,  458  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Charles  Richet,  15  Rue  de  l'Universite,  Paris.

Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  2  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.

Honorary  Associates.
Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Upsala,  Sweden.

Browning,  Oscar,  Palazzo  Simonetti,  via  Pietro  Cavallini,  Rome.
Dallas,  Miss  H.  A.,  Innisfail,  Crawley,  Sussex.
Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  P.O.  Box  111,  Alton,  R.I.,  U.S.A.
Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Instituto  Tecnico  e  Nautico,
Venice.

Fryer,  Rev.  A. T., St.  James's  Vicarage,  Walthamstow,  London,E.17.
Grubb,  Edward,  26  Avondalc  Road,  Croydon,  Surrey.
Hill,  J.  Arthur,  Claremont,  Thornton.  Bradford.
Muirhead,  Professor  J.  H.,  The  Rowans,  Balsall  Common,  nr.
Coventry.

Ochorowicz,  Dr.  J.,  Faubourg  de  Cracovie  No.  16/18,  Warsaw.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


415


Reed,  Miss  E.  M.,  2  Gledhow  Gardens,  S.  Kensington,  London,
S.W.  7.

Sage,  M.,  33  Rue  de  Coulmiers,  XIVe  Arrt.,  Paris,
van  Eeden,  Frederik,  M.D.,  Walden,  Bussum,  Holland.

Members  and  Associates.

An  asterisk  is  prefixed  to  the  names  oj  Members.

Abbott,  Mrs.,  Broadview,  Hill  Brow,  Bromley,  Kent.
Abernethy,  Mrs.,  10  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.
Acland-Hood,  Lady  Helena,  23  Vale  Avenue,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.

Adair,  Desmond,  Little  Flixton,  Forest  Road,  Worthing.
Adamowska,  Madame  S.,  11  Channing  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Adams,  Mrs.,  4  Brookside,  Cambridge.

Aglen,  F.  A.,  Inspectorate  General  of  Customs,  Peking,  China.
Albree,  John,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Alexander,  Professor  S.,  Victoria  University,  Manchester.
Allan,  Percy,  M.D.,  Crogdene,  Croham  Road,  South  Croydon,
Surrey.

Allen,  B.  M.,  14  Gainsborough  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

Allen,  Professor  H.  J.,  c/o  The  National  Bank  of  India,  26  Bishops-
gate,  London,  E.G.  2.

Allen,  William,  M.B.,  20  Sandyford  Place,  Glasgow.

Alston,  Mrs.  Rowland,  Turvey  Abbey,  Turvey,  Beds.

Anderson,  Mrs.,  Brackenboro',  Bramhall,  Cheshire.

Anderson,  Brig. -General  A.  T.,  R.A.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,
16  Charing  Cross,  London,  S.W.  1.

Anderson,  Medical  Director  F.,  3942  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Andrews,  Dr.  Marion  B.,  34  Foregate  Street,  Worcester.

Anstey,  Major  E.  C,  R.F.A..  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16  Charing

Cross,  London,  S.W.  1.
Armstrong,  Charles  W.,  Caixa  196,  S.  Paulo,  Brazil.
Armstrong,  Miss  M.  M.,  57  Redington  Road,  Hampstead,  London,

N.W.  3.

*  Arnold-Foster,  Mrs.  H.  0.,  Basset  Down,  Swindon,  Wilts.
*Aspinall,  Mrs.,  New  Hall,  Harlow,  Essex.


416


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Assheton-Smith,  Lady,  Vaynol,  Bangor,  N.  Wales.

Astley,  Miss,  Cowrie  Haven,  Poundstock,  nr.  Bude,  N.  Cornwall.
*Astor,  Viscount,  Hever  Castle,  Hever,  Kent.

Atwater,  Horace  G.,  Norfolk,  St.  Lawrence  Co.,  NY.,  U.S.A.
*Auden,  Harold  A.,  13  Broughton  Drive,  Grassendale,  Liverpool.
*  Austen,  Harold  W.  C,  M.D.,  2  Freeland  Road,  Ealing,  London,
W.5.

Austin,  C.  G.,  I.C.S.,  Hosur,  South  India.

Bacon,  Mrs.  Sewell,  Highground,  Waterford  Rd.,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
*Baddeley,  Colonel  C.  E.,  C.M.G.,  D.  D.  W.  (N.),  Army  Post  Office,
No.  3,  Boulogne-sur-Mer,  France.

Baddeley,  Miss  Florence  A.,  Cathedral  House,  Gloucester.
*Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.

Baggally,  Mrs.  W.  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.
*Bagot,  Richard,  Travellers'  Club,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.  1.

Baikie,  W.  S.,  Southend,  Stromness,  Orkney  Islands.

Bailey,  Cyril,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Bailey,  Hon.  Mabel,  Hay  Castle,  Hay,  by  Hereford.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  Lake  Forest,  Illinois,  U.S.A.

Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  27  Kensington  Gardens  Square,  London,  W.  2.

Baker,  Miss  Mabel,  21  Lansdowne  Avenue,  Slough,  Bucks.
*Baldwin,  Mrs.,  1  Gloucester  Place,  London,  W.  1.
*Balfour,  Miss,  4  Carlton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  M.P.,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.  1.

Balfour,  F.  C.  C,  32  Addison  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  G.  W.,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.

Barclay,  Edwyn,  lOj  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.  1.

Barclay,  Mrs.  Edwyn,  lOj  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.  1.
*Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  3942  Ellis  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Barldey,  Dr.  M.,  Box  162,  Carlyle,  111.,  U.S.A.

Barkworth,  Mrs.,  Thornford  House,  Sherborne,  Dorset.
*Barlow,  Miss  Katharine,  St.  Valerie,  Bray,  Co.  Wicklow,  Ireland.

Barrett,  Lady,  M.D.,  31  Devonshire  Place,  London,  W.  1.

Barritt,  E.  H.,  J.P.,  Warrior  House,  26  Beaconsfield  Avenue,
Colchester.

*Barrow,  J.  R.,  Chittagong,  Bengal,  India.

Barrows,  C.  M.,  522  West  149th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Barrs, Mrs., Shakespeare House, Amity Grove,  Wimbledon,
London,  S.W.  19.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


417


Baruch,  Edgar.  Room  704,  Wright  &  Callender  Building,  Los

Angeles,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Basden,  Miss  Isabel  K.,  21  The  Drive,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Batchelor,  E.,  I.C.S.,  Chhindwara,  Central  Provinces,  India.
*Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring,  Herts.
*Bayley,  Weston  D.,  M.D.,  1524  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Bayfield,  L.  Arthur,  Park  Grange,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
*Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.,  The  Rectory,  Hertingfordbury,  Hertford.

Baynes,  W.  E.  C,  Assiut,  Upper  Egypt.
*Beadon,  Mrs.,  at  11  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Beattie,  Ivor  Hamilton,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
*Beavis,  P.  E.,  North  Lynn,  106  Highbury  New  Park,  London,  N.  5.
*Bedford,  Adeline,  Duchess  of,  Chenies,  Rickmansworth.
*Behrens,  Captain  Clive,  Swinton  Grange,  Malton,  Yorks.

Behrens,  Noel  Edward.

*Beilby,  Sir  George,  F.R.S.,  LL.D.,  11  University  Gardens,  Glasgow.
Belaribi,  Mrs.,  Bartlands,  Holt  Heath,  Worcestershire.
Bell,  Miss  A.  E.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.  1.
Bell,  Miss  Alison  H.,  Exmoor,  Quickley  Lane,  Chorley  Wood,
Herts.

*Bell,  Dr.  Mary  C,  33  York  Street  Chambers,  London,  W.  1.,  and
114a  Harley  Street,  London,  W.  1.
Bennett,  Colin  N.,  Escot,  Penzance,  Cornwall.
*Bennett,  Captain  E.  N.,  1  Sussex  Mansions,  Sussex  Place,  London,
S.W.  7.

Benson,  Miss  A.  M.,  M.D.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  &  Co.,  65  Cornhill,

London,  E.C.  3.
*Benson,  Mrs.,  Tremans,  Horsted  Keynes,  Sussex.
Benson,  Arthur  C,  C.V.O.,  The  Old  Lodge,  Magdalene  College,

Cambridge.

Benton,  Dr.  J.  R.,  Gainesville,  Florida,  U.S.A.
*Benton,  W.  E.,  18  Emanuel  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.  3.

Bergen,  Axel  von,  Abbey  Road,  Darlington,  Durham.

Berrington,  Rev.  Leslie  G.,  Churchover  Rectory,  Rugby.
*Berry,  Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson,  M.D.,  21  Wimpole  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Berry,  Rev.  S.  M.,  16  Hagley  Road,  Birmingham.
*Bertie,  L.  W.  H,  I.C.,  R.F.C.,  The  Nook,  110  Woodstock  Road,
Oxford.


418  Members  and  Associates.  [part

Bethell,  Mrs.

Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.  7.
Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.
Bevan,  Rev.  W.  O.,  Kalutara,  Ceylon.

*Beveridge,  Erskine,  LL.D.,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.
Bibesco,  H.H.  Prince  Antoine,  114  Grosvenor  Road,  London,
S.W.  1.

Bicknell,  Clarence,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Cavendish  Corner,  Hills  Road,  Cambridge.
*Bigg.  Miss  Louisa,  2  York  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.  1.

Binney,  Lady  Marjory,  Pampisford  Hall,  nr.  Cambridge.
*Binney,  Rev.  Maximilian  F.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Ringwood,  Hants.

Black,  Mis.,  33  Rectory  Place,  Woolwich,  London,  S.E.  18.

Blackburn,  A.  J.,  Aruba  House.  The  Leazes,  Burnopfield,  Durham.

Blacklock,  Miss  C,  101  Beaufort  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.

Blane,  Miss  Edith  H.,  16  St.  Augustine's  Mansions,  Vincent  Street,
London,  S.W.  1.

Blathwayt,  W.,  Eagle  House,  Batheaston,  Bath.

Bligh,  Stanley  M.,  28  Grosvenor  Road,  Westminster,  London,
S.W.  1.

Bloemfontein,  The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Bishop's  Lodge,

Bloemfontein,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.
Bodley,  Mrs.,  5  Talbot  Square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.
Bois,  H.  G.,  c/o  Messrs.  J.  M.  Robertson  &  Co.,  Colombo,  Ceylon.
Bond,  F.  Bligh,  F.R.I.B.A.,  25  Sydenham  Hill,  Bristol.
Boothroyd,  A.  E.,  Warley,  Meadway,  Hampstead  Garden  Suburb,

London,  N.W.  4.

Booyalsky,  Jean  de,  16  Champion  Grove,  Denmark  Hill,  London,
S.E.  5.

Bosanquet,  Miss  Theodora,  10  Lawrence  Street,  Cheyne  Walk,
London,  S.W.

*Boustead,  Mrs.,  Westfield,  Wimbledon  Common,  London,  S.W.  19.

Bouwens,  B.  G.,  5  Albert  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.  1.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  rue  Maze,  St.  Martin's,  Guernsey.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Careys,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
*Bowditch,  C.  P.,  Ill  Devonshire  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Bowen,  Miss  Anna  C,  210  E.  Main  Street,  Batavia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Bower,  James  Garton,  Junr.,  Earlham  House,  Norwich.

Box,  Alfred  Marshall,  Woodlands,  14  Magrath  Avenue,  Cambridge.

Bozzano,  E.,  Salita  Emonuele  Cavallo,  N.  92,  Genoa.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


419


Brabrook,  Sir  Edward  W.,  C.B.,  Langhain  House,  Wellington,
Surrey.

*Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Bradley,  Professor  A.  C,  54  Scarsdale  Villas,  Kensington,  London,
W.8.

Bradley,  F.  H.,  Merton  College,  Oxford.

*Braithwaite,  Major-General  Walter  P.,  C.B.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,
16  Charing  Cross,  London,  S.W.  1.

Bramlj-,  Mrs.  Jennings,  Asolo,  Treviso,  Italy.
*Brainwell,  J.  Milne,  M.B.,  17  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Brandt,  Rudolph  E.,  4  Fenchurch  Avenue,  London,  E.C.  3.

Bray,  F.  E.,  17  The  Boltons,  London,  S.W7.  10.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brewster,  Bertram,  59  Madeley  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.  5.
Bristowe,  The  Hon.  Mr.  Justice,  Supreme  Court,  Pretoria,  South
Africa.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama,  U.S.A.

Brooke,  Colonel  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,

S.W.  1.
Brooke,  Miss  Emma  F.

Brooke,  E.  G.  de  C,  Brushford,  Dulverton,  Devonshire.
*Brooke, Lady, Colebrooke. Brookeborough, Co.  Fermanagh,
Ireland.

Brown,  Captain  A.  D.  Burnett,  M.C.,  Greenhurst,  Beaconsfield,
Bucks.

*Brown,  B.  G.,  46  Regent  s  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.  1.
*Brown,  B.  H.  Inness,  24  Broad  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Brown,  Mrs.  F.  C,  Piazza  Miratori,  Floriani,  Malta.
*Brown,  Hadyn,  L.R.C.P.,  Manor  Lodge,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
*Browne,  Mrs.  A.  Scott,  Buckland  Filleigh,  Highampton,  N.  Devon.

Browne,  Professor  Edward  G.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cam-
bridge.

Brownrigg,  Lady,  White  Waltham,  Maidenhead,  Berks.
Bruce,  James,  Craik,  Sask.,  Canada  .

Brush,  W.  Franklin,  40  Wall  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Bubb,  Henry,  J. P.,  Ullenwood,  near  Cheltenham.
*Buist,  Mrs.,  Swalcliffe  Lea,  Banbury,  Oxon.

Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Buller,  Professor  A.  H.  Reginald,  University  of  Manitoba,  Winni-
peg, Canada.


420


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Bulley,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Ness,  Neston,  Cheshire.
*Bullough,  Edward,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.

Burghard,  Mrs.,  86  Harley  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Burnett,  Miss  Ethel,  Crathes  Castle,  Crathes,  N.B.

Burnham,  Mrs.,  Staindrop  Lodge,  Chapeltown,  Sheffield.

Burns,  Nesbitt,  M.B.,  The  Lodge,  Highbridge,  Somerset.

Burrard,  Mrs.  Charles,  c/o  Lloyds  Bank,  Knightsbridge  Branch,
Brompton  Road,  London,  S.W.  1.

Burton,  Mrs.  Harry,  25  via  dei  Bardi,  Florence,  Italy.

Burton,  Miss  M.  G.,  2  Airlie  Gardens,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.  8.

Bury,  Henry,  Mayheld  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Butler,  Mrs.  Charles,  Syon  House,  East  Budleigh,  Devon.

Butler,  Frederick  W.,  1627  Silver  Street,  Jacksonville,  Florida,
U.S.A.

Butt,  Lady.

Buttemer,  Robert  Win . ,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Butterworth,  Miss  A.  M.,  9  Huskisson  Street,  Liverpool.
Caccia,  Major  A.  M.,  24  Morpeth  Mansions,  Westminster,  London,
SW.  1.

Cadell,  Mrs.  Lewis,  Brae  Lodge,  Murray  field ,  Edinburgh.

Caird,  Mrs.  Henryson,  34  Woronzow  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,

London,  N.W.  8.
Cairns,  Rev.  David  S.,  D.D.,  62  Hamilton  Place,  Aberdeen.
*Campbell,  Lady  Archibald, Coombe  Hill  Farm,  Kingston-on-
Thames,  Surrey.

Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Glendaruel,  Colintraive,  Argyll-
shire.

Campbell,  Mrs.,  Arduaine,  Lochgilphead,  N.B.
Camjobell,  Colin  E.,  9  Lower  Belgrave  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Campbell,  Major  N.  D.  H.,  7th  Dragoon  Guards,  Trimulgheny,
Deccan,  India.

Campbell,  Rev.  R.  J.,  Ashville,  Priory  Road,  Edgbaston,  Bir-
mingham.

Campbell-Lang,  Miss,  c/o  Professor  Brunton,  LL.B.,  180  Hope
Street,  Glasgow.

Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37  Commercial  Road  East,  London,  E.  1.
*Carlton,  Arthur,  J. P.,  Colehurst,  Worcester.
*Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13  Berkeley  Square,  London,  W.  1.

Carnock,  Lord,  53  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


421


Carpenter,  Mrs.,  51 Teignmouth  Road,  CrickleAvood,  London,
N.W.  2.

Carr,  H.  Wildon,  D.Litt.,  10  More's  Garden,  Cheyne  Walk,  London,
S.W.

Carr,  Lucien,  163  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Carrington,  Hereward,  504  West  111th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Carruthers,  Mrs.  W.,  6  Cavendish  Court,  Wigmore  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Case,  Miss  A.  J.,  35  Elm  Bank  Mansions,  Barnes,  London,  SW.  13.

Cassatt,  Miss  Mary,  10  Rue  de  Marignan,  Paris.

Cathels,  Rev.  David,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  Scotland.

Cave,  Captain  A.  L.,  Sherwood,  Newton  St.  Cyres,  Devon.
*Cave,  Charles,  J.P.,  Ditcham  Park,  Petersfield,  Hants.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Alford  House,  Alford,  Somerset.
^Chambers,  John,  Mokopeka,  Hastings,  Hawkes  Bay,  New  Zealand.
*Champion  de  Crespigny,  Mrs.  Philip,  Artillery  Mansions,  West-
minster, London,  S.W.  1.

Chapman,  E.  G.,  Belsize,  Friern  Watch  Avenue,  N.  Finchley,
London,  N.  12.

Charles,  Clifford  P.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Bancroft,  Hitchin,  Herts.
Charlton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  23  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.  8.
Chatterjee,  A.  K.,  Deputy  Magistrate  and  Collector,  P.O.  Bankura,
Bengal,  India.

Chattock,  Arthur  P..  D.Sc,  Heathfield  Cottage,  Crowcombe,  nr.

Taunton,  Somerset.
Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E..  126  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,

Mass.,  U.S.A.

•Childe-Pemberton, Miss A.  H,  12 Portman Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.  1.
€hitty,  Hubert,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.,  etc.,  46  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,

Bristol.

Uhubb,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Longforgan,  The  Ridgway,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.  19.

Ulapham,  Mrs.  H.  H,  50  South  6th  Street,  San  Jose,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Clapham,  J.  H,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Clark,  Rev.  F.  H.  H.,  24  Green  Street,  Cambridge.
Clarke,  Ronald  Stanley,  Trobridge  House,  Crediton,  Devon.
Oarkson,  Mrs.  St.  John,  8  Milner  Street,  Cadogan  Square,  London.
SW.  1.


422  Members  and  Associates.  [part

Clayton,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Holmbush  Lodge,  Woodmancote,  Nr.  Henfield,

Sussex.

Give,  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Closson,  Miss  Olivia  T.,  Apt.  405  The  Woodward,  Connecticut

Avenue,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Cockle,  Rev.  Francis  T..  The  Rectory,  Swinford,  Co.  Mayo,  Ireland.
Coe,  Miss  M.  A.,  195  Via  Le  Alessandro  Villa,  Florence,  Italy.
*Coggin,  Rev.  F.  E.,  White  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.
*Cole-Hamilton,  Mrs.  L.  A.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  &  Co.,  9  Pall

Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.
Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.
Collins,  Miss  M.,  29  Glenluce  Road,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.  3.
Colquhoun.  Daniel,  M.D.,  44  High  Street,  Dunedin,  New  Zealand.
Compton, Henry, 1709 Sills Street,  Fort  William,  Ontario,

Canada.

Connah,  Charles,  J. P.,  The  Creek  Ranch,  Monitor,  Alta.  Canada.
^Constable,  F.  C.  Wick  Court,  near  Bristol.
Conway,  Lady,  Allington  Castle,  Maidstone,  Kent.
Cook,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  Bailey's  Hotel,  Kensington,  London,  S.W.
Cooper,  Rev.  F.  W.,  Prestwich  Rectory,  Manchester.
Cooper,  Miss  Louisa  E.,  Ripponhurst,  Epping,  Essex.
Cooper,  Mrs.  P.  H,  283  South  Street,  Morristown,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Cornford,  Rev.  Bruce,  43  Havelock  Road,  Portsmouth.
Cornish,  J.  Easton,  The  Water  Works,  Alexandria,  Egypt.
Corry,  Miss  Lucy,  13  Argyll  Road,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.  8.
Cort  van  der  Linden,  P.  W.  A.,  Councillor  of  State,  Groenhove,
The  Hague.

Cotesworth,  Miss  Lilias  E.,  45  Westminster  Mansions,  Great  Smith

Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Cotterell,  Miss  Alice,  1g  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,

London,  W.  1.

Courage, Mrs.,  The  Mount. 17 Oakwood  Court,  Kensington,
London,  W.  14.

Courtauld,  George,  Junr.,  The  Waver,  Wethersfield,  Braintree,
Essex.

Courtauld,  R.  M..  M.B.,  Grey  Friars,  Whiting  Street,  Bury  St.
Edmunds.

*Cowan,  Sir  W.  H.,  M.P.,  The  Crow's  Nest,  Fairwarp,  Uckfield,
Sussex.

Cox,  Mrs.  Rowland,  310  West  7th  Street,  Plainfield,  N.J.,  U.S.A.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


423


Coxe,  Henry  R.  H.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  54  Parliament

Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Coxeter,  Harold,  34  Holland  Park  Road,  London,  W.  14.
Cozens,  J.  C,  Brigus,  Conception  Bay,  Newfoundland.
Craige,  Wm.  C,  409  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Craufurd,  Commander  Quentin  C.  A.,  R.N.,  H.M.S.  Europa,  c/o

G.P.O.,  London.

Crawford,  W.  C,  1  Lockharton  Gardens,  Colinton  Road,  Edin-
burgh.

Crook,  A.  H.,  Queen's  College,  Hong  Kong.

Crouch,  H.  N.,  Additional  Judicial  Commissioner  of  Sind,  Karachi,
Sind,  India.

Currie,  Mrs.,  7  Sunderland  Terrace,  Bayswater,  London,  W.  2.
*Curtois,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  53  Romney  Street,  Westminster,  Lon-
don, S.W.  1.

Curzon  of  Kedleston,  The  Earl,  Hackwood,  Basingstoke,  Hants.

Dale,  J.  Gilbert,  68  Holland  Park,  Kensington,  London,  W.  11.
*Dalton,  J.  H.  C,  M.D.,  The  Plot,  Adams  Road,  Cambridge.

Damant,  Mrs.  H.  C,  Lammas,  Cowes,  Isle  of  Wight.

Daniell,  Mrs.  Averell.
*Danson,  F.  C,  74  Bidston  Road,  Birkenhead.

Darbyshire,  Rev.  H.  S.,  St.  Margaret's  Vicarage,  Methley,  Leeds.

D'Arcy,  Rev.  G.  J.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Worksop,  Notts.

Davies,  Benjamin,  Wilford,  Chase  Green  Avenue,  Enfield,  Middle-
sex.

Davies,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  Glenlaggan,  Parton,  N.B.

Davies,  Miss  M. H.  Lloyd,  Lynton,  Curzon  Road,  Hoylake,
Cheshire.

Davis,  A.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  71  Rodney  Street,  Liverpool.
*Davis,  Mrs.  Kennard,  The  School  House,  Woodbridge,  Suffolk.
Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  52  Hill  Lane,  Southampton.
Davison,  Miss  Annie,  4  Ranelagh  Grove,  Pimlico  Road,  London,
S.W.I.

Davys,  Major  G.  I.,  I.M.S.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  Hornby

Road,  Bombay,  India.
Dawes,  Mrs.  Frank,  11a  Portland  Place,  London,  W.  1.
Dawson,  Lt. -Colonel  Henry  P.,  Hartlington  Hall,  Skipton.
Day,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  H.,  Newton  House,  Belmont,  Hereford.
Day,  Miss  Mabel  K.,  Gershom,  Reigate,  Surrey.
Dean,  Frank,  1  Langham  Street,  Portland  Place,  London,  W.  1.


424


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Dearmer.  Rev.  Percy,  Oakridge  Lynch,  Stroud.
Deichmann,  Baroness,  Abbey  Lodge,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

De  Jong,  Dr.  K.  H.  E.,  Obrechtstraat  343,  The  Hague.
Deland,  Mrs.  Lorin  F.,  35  Newbury  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Delap,  Alfred  D.,  Priorsland,  Carrickmines,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.
Derby, Miss Isabel C, 258  King's  Road, Chelsea,  London,
S.W.  3.

*Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  Scotland,
de  Winton,  Mrs.  R.  F.,  7  Chester  House,  Eccleston  Place,  London,
S.W.I.

De  Wyckoff ,  Joseph,  The  Croft,  Greville  Place,  London,  N.W.  6.
Dickie,  H.  Elford,  British  Consulate,  Pernambuco,  Brazil.
Dickinson,  Miss,  Trebrea  Lodge,  Tintagel,  Cornwall.
Dickinson,  Miss  A.  J.,  3a  Clareville  Grove,  London,  S.W.  7,  and

Poultry  Court,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.
Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dicksee,  Frank,  R.A.,  3  Greville  Place,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,

N.W.  6.

Dill.  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.B.,  6  Brunswick  Place,  Brighton.
*Dimmock,  Mrs.  H.  P.,  23  Homefield  Road,  Wimbledon  Common,

London,  S.W.  19.
*Dixon,  Edward  T.
Dixon,  Hugh  N,  17  St.  Matthew's  Parade.  Northampton.
Dixon,  Professor  W.  Macneile,  LL.B..  Litt.D..  2  South  Park

Terrace,  Hillhead,  Glasgow,  W.
Doane,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dodds,  E.  R,,  41  Wellington  Road,  Dublin.
*  Dodge,  Miss  Mary  H.  Warwick  House,  St.  James's,  London,  S.W.  1.
Doe,  George  M.,  Enfield.  Great  Torrington,  N.  Devon.
Donne,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3  Whitehall  Place,  London,
S.W.  1.

Dorr,  George  B.,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Dougall,  Miss  Lily.  Cutts  End,  Cumnor,  nr.  Oxford.
Douglas,  Mis.,  4  Campden  House  Road,  Kensington.  London,  W.  8.
Douglas,  Mrs.  Charles,  Auchlochan,  Lesmahagow,  Lanarkshire.
Douglas,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  W.,  5  East  88th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

*Douglas-Pennant,  The  Hon.  Violet,  The  Old  House,  Holland  Street,
London.  W.  8.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


425


Dowson,  Mrs.,  Landhurst  Wood,  Hartfield,  Sussex.
Dowson,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Felixstowe,  The  Park,  Nottingham.
*Doyle,  Sir  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Windlesham,  Crowborough,  Sussex.
Drew,  Ringrose  C,  Kluang,  Johore,  via  Singapore,  Federated
Malay  States.

Drewry,  Mrs.  George,  4  Calverley  Park,  Tunbridge  Wells.
*Dudley,  James,  M.Sc,  16  University  Mansions,  Putney,  London,
S.W.  15.

*Duff,  J.  R.  K.,  100  Sunningfields,  Hendon,  London,  N.W.  9.

Duff,  The  Lady  Juliet,  16  Upper  Brook  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Dulley,  Rev.  B.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.  1.
*Duncan,  Harold  M.,  c/o  Dr.  G.  W.  Stewart,  Oak  Lane,  Philadelphia,
U.S.A.

*Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Dunne,  D.  P.,  Yetholme,  Liverpool  Road,  Birkdale,  Southport.
*Dutton,  Miss  A.,  Somerdon,  Sidmouth,  Devon.
*Eckstein,  Mrs.,  18  Park  Lane,  London,  W.  1.

Edelsten,  Colonel  John  A.,  8  Beach  Lawn,  Waterloo,  nr.  Liverpool.

Edie,  H.  S.  Ker,  c/o  Messrs.  Thos.  Cook  &  Son,  Ludgate  Circus,
London,  E.G.  4.

*Edwardes,  Mrs.  Dyer,  5  Hyde  Park  Gate,  Kensington,  London,
S.W.  7.

*Ekin,  James,  88  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Elder,  Frederick,  57  Antrim  Mansions,  Haverstock  Hill,  London,
N.W.  3.

Eldred,  Fleet-Paymaster  E.  H.,  R.N.,  c/o  Capital  and  Counties

Bank,  Ltd.,  Southsea,  Hants.
Elliot,  Miss  A.  I.  M.,  Women's  University  Settlement,  44  Nelson

Square,  Blackfriars  Road,  London,  S.E.  1.
Elliot,  Mrs.  Gilbert,  9  Grafton  Street,  London,  W.  1 .
Elliott,  Captain  B.  H.,  R.A.  Mess,  Rangoon,  (Cantonment  Post

Office),  Burma.
Ellis,  Herbert,  The  Gynsills,  Groby  Road,  Leicester.
Emmerson,  Robert,  M.D.,  Calle  Llave  423,  Chihuahua.  Chili.,

Mexico.

Emmet,  Rev.  C.  W.,  West  Hendred  Vicarage,  Steventon,  Berks.
Engall,  John  S.,  62  Goldsmith  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.  3.
Eno,  H.  L.,  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
Entee,  Professor  B.  A.,  Samaldas  College,  Bhaunagar,  India.
Erskine,  Mrs.,  The  Buries,  Bishopstrow,  Warminster,  Wilts.


420


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Evans,  Maurice  S.,  C.M.G.,  Hillcrest,  Berea  Ridge,  Durban,  South
Africa .

Evans,  W.  A.,  The  Brackley,  Stoneygate  Avenue,  Leicester.
*Farrer,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Idlerocks,  Stone,  Staffordshire.

Faulkner,  W.  B.,  52  South  Molton  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5  John  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.  1.

Felkin,  Mrs.,  119  Grosvenor  Road,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Fellowes,  The  Hon.  Lady,  Honingham,  Norwich.

Fergusson,  Rev.  A.  W.,  The  Manse,  Dundee.
*Festing,  Miss  E.  A.,  St.  Hilda,  Duxhurst,  nr.  Reigate,  Surrey.
*Festing,  Lieut. -Colonel  H.  W.,  10th  K.O.  Yorkshire  Light  Infantry,
B.E.F.,  France.

Firnberg,  Miss  L.  J.,  158  Adelaide  Road,  London,  N.W.  3.

Fisk,  Rev.  George,  c/o  Rev.  E.  E.  Fisk,  91  North  Denes  Road,
Great  Yarmouth.

Flugel,  J.  C,  Cravenhurst,  Reigate,  Surrey.
*Forman,  Josef,  Czech  Press  Bureau,  231  Strand,  London,  W.C.  2.

Forman,  Colonel  R.  H,  A.M.S.,  65  Ashley  Gardens,  London,
S.W.  1.

Forrester,  Mrs.  Robert,  Annfield,  Stirling,  N.B.
Fortescue,  Miss  Frances,  45  Alexandra  Road,  Worthing.
Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  17  Upper  High  Street,  Worthing.
:!:Fox,  Mrs.,  Fa  we  Park,  Keswick,  Cumberland.
Fraenkel,  Dr.  Joseph,  21  East  82nd  Street.  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

*  Francis,  Mrs.  Francis.

Franks,  Mrs.,  51  Dacre  Hill,  Rock  Ferry,  Birkenhead.
Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C,  Queen  Amie's  Mansions,  London,
S.W.  1.

Freeman,  Rev.  H.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Burton-on-Trent,  Staffs.
*Frith,  Mrs.,  Swynnerton  Rectory,  Stone.  Staffordshire.

*  Frost,  Miss  Annie,  Carnelloe  Cottage,  Zennor,  nr.  St.  Ives,  Cornwall.
Frostick,  J.  A.,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.

*Fry,  Miss  Agnes,  Failand  House,  Failand,  near  Bristol.
*Fry,  Lewis  George,  Stonycroft,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
*Fullerton,  Colonel  J.  D.,  172  Gloucester  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,
London,  W.  2.

Gabb,  F.  B.,  The  Willows,  Abergavenny,  Wales.

Gaff,  T.  T.,  1520  20th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Gage,  Lyman  J.,  Point  Loma,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Gantz,  Mrs.,  Wallington  Rectory,  Baldock,  Herts.


liXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


427


Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  187  Main  Street,  Northampton,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

^Gardner, Mrs., 30 Albacore  Crescent, Lewisham,  London,
S.E.  13.

^Gardner,  Rev.  A.  R.  L.,  52  Beaufort  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.3.

*Gaskell,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  Roseleigh,  Woolton,  Liverpool.
Gatliff,  H.  E.  C,  The  Treasury  Chambers,  Whitehall.  London,
S.W.  1.

Gellert,  J.  W.,  c/o  Box  396,  G.P.O.,  Adelaide,  S.  Australia.
*George,  Mrs.,  88  Prince  of  Wales  Mansions,  Prince  of  Wales  Road,

Battersea  Park,  London,  S.W.  11.
*George,  H.  Trevelyan,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  33  Amptbill  Square,
London,  NW.  1.

Gibbes,  C.  S.,  Mojaiskaia  oolitsa,  No.  1,  Petrograd.

Gibson,  Professor  W.  R.  Boyce,  D.Sc,  Lichfield,  18  Wallace
Avenue,  Toorak,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Gilson,  R.  Cary,  King  Edward's  School,  Birmingham.
*Girdlestone,  E.  Kenneth,  Rosendale,  Iffley,  Oxford.
*Girdlestone,  Mrs.  Frank,  The  Mil  House,  Iffley,  Oxford.

Girault,  A.  A.,  1459  N.  St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Girod,  Madame,  4  Avenue  Hoche,  Paris.

Glenconner,  Lady,  34  Queen  Anne's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.

Glidden,  Walter  S.,  13  Centre  Street,  Bath,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Goedhart,  P.,  Koningen  Maria  Straat  18,  The  Hague.
*Goldschmidt,  Mrs.  Beni  de.

Gooch,  G.  P..  South  Villa,  Campden  Hill  Road,  London,  W.  8.

Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  The  Mount,  Stonehouse,  Gloucester.

Gordon,  Mrs.  J.  L.  R.,  Roden  House,  Cheltenham.

Gough,  A.  B.,  Ph.D.,  Sandcroft,  Upper  Bridge  Road,  Redhill,
Surrey.

Gover,  J.  M.,  LL.D.,  5  New  Square,  Lincoln's  Inn.  London,
W.C.2.

Gower,  John  H,  Mus.  Doc.  (Oxon.),  1431  Glenarm  Street,  Denver,
Colo..  U.S.A.

*Grafflin,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Filston  Manor,  Glencoe,  Baltimore  County,
Md.,  U.S.A.

Graham,  J.  W.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.
Graham,  Mrs.  W.  P.  Gore,  Burntwood,  Goring-on-Thames.
Grahame,  Miss  Helen,  Cumberland  House,  Horley,  Surrey.

•2  k


428


Members  and  Associates.


[part


:;  Grant-Suttie,  Major  H.  F.,  R.A.,  M.C.,  H.Q.  36th  D.A.,  British

Expeditionary  Force.
Green,  Mrs.  Alan  B.,  Riviere  House,  Phillack,  Hayle,  Cornwall.
*Greene,  J.  G..  34  Stiles  Street,  Elizabeth,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
Greg,  Mrs.,  56  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Gregson,  G.  E.,  12  Hesketh  Road,  Southport,  Lanes.
Grenfell,  Prof.  B.  P.,  D.Litt.,  Queen's  College,  Oxford.
-Grenfell,  Field-Marshal  Lord,  G.C.B.,  G.C.M.G.,  Overstone  Park,
Northants.

Grew,  J.  C,  c/o  American  Embassy,  4  Grosvenor  Gardens,  London,
S.W.I.

Grew,  Mis.  J.  G,  c/o  American  Embassy,  4  Grosvenor  Gardens,

London,  S.W.  1.
Grey,  E.  H.,  261  Essex  Road,  Islington,  London,  N.  1.
*Grey,  R.  G,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,

London,  S.W.

Grignon,  Miss  A. E., 4  Melrose  Avenue,  Cricklewood,  London,  N.W.2.
*Grigsby,  Miss  E.  B.,  80  Brook  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Grosvenor,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  C,  Morrisburne  House,  Woking,  Surrey.

Grottendieck,  W.  G.,  Schenk  Straat  150,  The  Hague.
"Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Southwold,  Suffolk.

*Gunnell,  A.  Mortimer,  F.R.A.I.,  E.R.Met.Soc,  Broomfield  Park

College,  New  Southgate,  London,  N.  1 1 .
*Gurbaxani,  Professor  H.  M.,  D.J.  Sind  College,  Karachi,  Sind,

India.

*Guttwoeh,  Charles,  7  Kingswood  Avenue,  Queen's  Park,  London,
N.W.  6.

*Gwyn,  W.  J.,  8  Netherhall  Gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

Hackett,  James  T.,  Widows'  Fund  Building,  Grenfell  Street,

Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Haldar,  Professor  Hiralal,  Id  Rammohan  Saha  Lane,  Calcutta.
Hall,  Mis.  Basil,  North  Cottage,  Cromer,  Norfolk.
Hall,  R.  D.,  c/o  W.  H.  Hart,  Esq.,  Sutton-on-Hull,  Yorks.
Hall,  Miss  S.  Elizabeth,  47  Campden  Hill  Road,  Kensington,

London.  W- 8.

Hall.  Wilfred,  9  Priors  Terrace,  Tynemouth,  Northumberland.
Hambro,  Mrs.  Eric,  3  Buckingham  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.
"Hamilton  and  Brandon,  The  Duchess  of,  Hamilton  Palace,  Lanark-
shire.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


429


Hamilton,  James.

Hamilton,  J.  J.,  80  Woodland  Rise,  Muswell  Hill,  London,  N.  10.
Hamilton,  Mrs.  Vera,  South  Lodge,  Highley  Manor,  Balcombe,

Sussex.
Hamilton,  W.  Bernard.

Hammond,  Miss  Winifred  B.,  386  East  51st  Street,  Portland,

Oregon,  U.S.A.
Harmes,  Mrs.,  Woolley  Firs,  Maidenhead  Thicket,  Berks.
Hansard,  Mrs.,  c/o  Mrs.  Duke,  The  Dell.  Croft  Road,  Sutton,

Surrey.

Hanson,  Mrs.,  Pleasaunce  Cottage,  Dormans  Park,  Surrey.
Hardeman,  Miss  Frances  E.,  Beulah,  Green  Lane,  Godalming.
Harding,  Miss  A.  K.,  34  Colville  Terrace,  London,  W.  11.
Hardwick-Terry,  Mrs.  E.,  Urquhart,  Boxwell  Road,  Berkhamsted.
*Hare,  Dr.  A.  W.,  59  York  Road,  Birkdale,  Lanes.
Hargreaves,  Miss,  115  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  Regent's  Park,
London,  N.W.  1.

Harper,  Miss  E.  K.,  The  Apple  Gate,  Coombe  Hill  Farm,  nr.

Kingston-on-Thames,  Surrey.
Harriman,  T.  G.,  M.D.,  2291  East  Ocean  Avenue,  Long  Beach,

Calif.,  U.S.A.

*Harris,  Mrs.  Herbert  A.,  22  Bina  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  5.
*Harris,  Lady,  98  Gloucester  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.
*Harris,  Hon.  J.,  Lyndhurst,  Hampshire.

Harris,  Mrs.  W.  F.,  The  Willows,  Westbourne  Avenue,  Hull.
*Harrison,  Francis,  104  Craven  Park,  Harlesden,  London,  N.W.  10.

Harrison,  Miss  Jane  E.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

Harrison,  William,  17  Tirlemont  Road,  Croydon,  Surrey.

Hart,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  H.B."  Zephyr,"  Srinigar,  Kashmir,  India.

Hart,  Lieut. -General  Sir  Reginald  Clare,  V.C.,  K.C.B.,  K.C.V.O.,
United  Service  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.

Hartley,  Alfred,  3  Macaulaj-  Road,  Clapham  Common,  London,
S.W.  4.

*Hartness,  James,  Springfield,  Vermont,  U.S.A.
Hartshorn,  Miss  Cornelia,  Milton  P.O.,  Mass.  ;  and  Camden,  Maine,
U.S.A.

Hasler,  Miss  K.  M.,  East  Mount,  Brunswick  Road,  Douglas,  Isle
of  Man.

Hastie,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Street,  30  Cornhill,  London,  E.C.  3.
Hastings,  Rev.  J.  H,  The  Manor  House,  Halton,  Lancaster.


430


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Hatton,  G.  C.

Hauxhurst,  Mi's.  W.,  Columbus  Avenue  and  East  6th  Street,

Mount  Vernon,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Hawarden,  The  Viscountess,  18  Chelsea  Court,  London,  S.W.  3.
Hawker,  Mrs.  George,  55  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.
Hawker,  Miss  Elizabeth,  55  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.
Hawley,  Miss  Zoe,  129  Church  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Hayes,  Rev.  Joseph  W.,  West  Thurrock  Vicarage,  Grays,  Essex.
Head,  Miss  Alice  L.,  52  Pembridge  Villas,  Notting  Hill  Gate,

London,  W.  1 1 .

Heard,  G.  H.,  7  Oakington  Avenue,  Wembley  Park,  Middlesex.
Heath,  George  H,  277  Brockley  Road,  London,  S.E.  4.
*Hefford,  Percy  H.,  387  Pershore  Road,  Selly  Park,  Birmingham.
Henderson,  J.  J.,  Mill  Cottage,  Bonhard,  Perth.
Hemmerle,  Madame,  Colbjornsensgade  6in,  Copenhagen,  Denmark.
Henderson,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Henrici,  Jacob,  201-203  Chestnut  Street,  Meadville,  Pa,,  U.S.A.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1  Argyll  Villas,  Cheltenham.
*Hensley,  Mrs.  Egerton,  14  Albert  Court,  Kensington  Gore,  London,
S.W.  7.

Herriot,  Miss  E.  E.,  2  Sunningdale  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,
W.  8.

Herschel,  Colonel  John,  F.R.S.,  Royal  Engineers,  Slough,  Bucks.
*Hervey,  Miss  G.  M.,  8  Gliddon  Road,  West  Kensington,  London,
W.  14.

Heseltine,  Mrs.,  19  Launceston  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.

Hey  mans,  Prof.  G.,  UbboJimmiussingel  2,  Groningen,  Holland.
*Hicks,  Miss  Lucy,  50  Cambridge  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.

Higbee,  Colonel  George  H,  Burlington,  Iowa,  U.S.A.

Hildyard,  F.  W.,  77a  Lexham  Gardens,  London,  W.  8.
*Hillard,  Miss  Mary  R,,  Westover  School,  Middlebury,  Conn.,
U.S.A.

Hillman,  E.  Haviland,  4  Somers  Place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.
Hillsmith,  Mrs.  Montfort,  Ragged  Place,  South  Danbury,  New

Hampshire,  U.S.A.
Himes,  Prof.  Charles  E.,  170  W.  Louther  Street,  Carlisle,  Pa.,

U.S.A.

*Hinkley,  Mrs.  W.,  The  Gables,  Glenmore  Road,  Salisbury.  «
Hoare,  Fred  H,  37  Fleet  Street,  London,  E.G.  4.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


431


Hoare,  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Montagu  Street,  Portman  Square,  London,
W.l.

Hockliffe,  Mrs.  Ernest,  Littlebrook,  Uppingham.

Hodding,  Miss,  2  The  Avenue,  Bedford  Park,  London,  W.  4.

Hoernle,  Professor  R.  F.  Alfred,  Emerson  Hall,  Harvard  Univer-
sity, Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Hogenraad,  Mrs.  Clio,  Cornelis  Jolstraat  93a,  Scheveningen,  Holland.

Hogg,  Henry  R.,  23  Hornton  Street,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.

Hogg,  Mrs.  Henry  R.,  23  Hornton  Street,  Kensington,  London,
W.8.

Hoggan,  Mrs.  Frances,  M.D.,  Hill  view,  Squire's  Lane,  Finchley,
London,  N.  3.

Holder,  Henry  L.,  6  Lindum  Terrace,  Mannins;ham,  Bradford.

Holding,  Sam,  Columbia,  Term.,  U.S.A.

Holland,  Miss,  1a  Holland  Park,  London,  W.  11.
^Holland,  Mrs.  H.  C,  The  Wheathills,  Kirk  Langley,  Derby.

Holland,  W.  A.,  Plantation  House,  Bishop's  Stortford,  Herts.

Hollander,  Bernard,  M.D.,  57  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Hollins,  Mrs.,  24  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.  1.

Hollins,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  Dunsfold  Rectory,  Godalming,  Surrey.

Holloncl,  Mrs.  John  R.,  Wonhani,  Bampton,  Devon.
*Hollway,  C.  R.,  59  Carlisle  Mansions,  Victoria  Street,  London,
S.W.  1.

Holme,  Strachan,  Bridgewater  Offices,  Walkden,  Manchester.
Holmes,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Firs,  Charing,  Kent.
*Holt,  Henry,  34  West  33rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Holt,  Miss  M.  D.,  Bryans'  Ground,  Presteign,  Radnorshire.
Holt,  Miss  Winifred,  New  York  Association  for  the  Blind,  111  East

59th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Ho  man,  C.  H.,  24  Oscarsgade,  Christiania,  Norway.
Home,  Miss  Georgina,  Halcyon  Club,  13/14  Cork  Street,  London,
W.l.

*Home,  Mrs.  Robert,  b/78  Portsdown  Road,  Maida  Vale,  London,
W.9.

Hope,  Lieut. -Commander  R.  H.  K,  R.N.,  H.M.S.  Dreadnought,
c/o  G.P.O.,  London.

Hoppin,  J.  G,  310  Sears  Building,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Horridge,  Miss  J.  G.,  43  Alexandra  Road,  Southport.
*Horwood,  C.  Baring,  D.Sc,  F.C.S.,  Wyeholme,  St.  Briavels,  Glos.
*Hoseason,  A.  G.,  The  Bungalow,  Tanworth-in-Arden,  Birmingham.


432


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Howden,  Mrs.,  11  Eton  Terrace,  Edinburgh.

Howe,  Mrs.  M.  A.  De  Wolfe,  26  Brimmer  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Howell,  Mrs.  Philip,  5  Carlyle  Square,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.

Hubback,  Mrs  ,  8  Grange  Road,  Cambridge.

Hnde,  Mrs.  Anna,  Ph.D.,  35  Vestre  Boulevard,  Copenhagen,  B.

Hudson,  Mies  Alice,  Meads  Court,  Eastbourne.

Hudson,  Miss  Katie  E.,  Meads  Court,  Eastbourne.

Hudson,  Morris,  St.  Cuthbert's,  Bathampton,  Somerset.
*Hull,  Mrs.  Carrie  G.,  20  Garfield  Place,  Poughkeepsie,  N.Y..  U.S.A.

Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  The  Pines,  Tivoli  Road,  Cheltenham.

Humphreys,  T.  H.  A.,  Survey  Department,  Giza  (Mudiria),  Egypt.
"'::Hunt,  Mi  s.  Warwick,  12  Lansdowne  Road,  Holland  Park,  London,
W.  11.

Hunkin.Rev.  J.  W.,  M.C.,  C.F.,  Headquarters,  29th  D.A.,  British

Expeditionary  Force.
Hurwitz,  W.  A.,  Ph.D.,  Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  Grove  Lawns,  St.  Albans,  Herts.
*Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City,

U.S.A.

Imamura,  Prof.  Shinkichi,  Clinic  for  Psychiatry,  Imperial  Univer-
sity, Kioto,  Japan.

Ince,  Miss  Gladys,  Nurses'  Home,  Guy's  Hospital,  London,  S.E.  1.

Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Ingram,  Miss  M.  I.,  The  Priory,  Wimbledon  Common,  London,
S.W.  19.

Innes,  Miss  H.  K.,  4  Greycoat  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Ionides,  A.  G,  Junr.,  34  Porchester  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.

Ireland.  Gordon,  32  Nassau  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Jacks,  L.  P.,  LL.D.,  D.D.,  Shotover  Edge,  Headington,  Oxford.

James,  Henry,  00  West  12th  Street,  New  Y7ork  City,  U.S.A.

James,  Mrs.  Joseph,  Souttnvood,  Barnt  Green,  Birmingham.
*James,  Miss  S.  Boucher,  Hallsannery,  Bideford,  N.  Devon.
^Jameson,  David,  New  Castle,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

*Janson,  E.  W.,  11 Eaton  Mansions,  Eaton Square,  London,
S.W.  1.

Jaye,  William  R.,  Springwood  Lodge,  Oakfield  Road,  Clapton,
London,  E.  5.

Jennings-Bramly,  Mrs.,  Hampton  Court  Palace,  Middlesex.
Johns,  Miss,  13  Longton  Grove,  Sydenham,  London,  S.E.  26.


LXX1V.]


Members  and  Associates.


433


Johnson,  Charles  R.,  340  Main  Street,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Johnson,  Miss  F.  C,  25  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,

London,  W.  1.
Johnston,  R.  F.,  Weihaiwei,  China.

Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Meldon  House,  Weston-super-Mare.
Jones,  J.  Herbert,  7  Kitchener  Drive,  Orrell  Park,  Liverpool.
*  Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  39  Harrington  Gardens,  London,
S.W.7.

Jones,  Miss  Lilian  I.,  120  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.  9.
Jordan-Smith,  Benjamin,  Briantcroft,  Grosvenor  Road,  Caversham,
Reading.

*Judah,  Noble  B.,  2701  Prairie  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Judd,  Mrs.,  Sylvestre  Dwight,  477  Highland  Avenue,  Maiden,
Mass,  U.S.A.

Jutsum,  J.  A.,  6  Cowley  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.

Keene,  The  Most  Rev.  J.  B.,  D.D.,  Bishopscourt,  Ardbraccan,
Navan,  Co.  Meath,  Ireland.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  The  Hut,  Holmwood,  Dorking.

Kelly,  Miss  Eleanor  B.,  Sea  Craig,  Bognor,  Sussex.
*Kelso,  Captain,  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester,  Essex.

Kelso,  Mrs.  H.  J.,  425  W.  Church  Avenue,  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.

Kenneth,  H.,  Lindley,  Bycullah  Park,  Enfield,  Middlesex.

Kenway,  Mrs.,  Mendip  View,  Winscombe,  Somerset.

Ker,  Miss,  Naj)ier  Lodge,  Strathblane,  Glasgow.
*Kerr,  George,  M.B.,  6  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.

Kerr-Clark,  Lady,  Moore  Abbey,  Monasterevan,  Ireland.
:;:Kevill-Davies,  Captain  G.,  Edgeley  House,  Whitchurch,  Salop.
*King,  H.  F.  Locke,  J. P.,  Brooklands,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
*King,  Dr.  W.  A.  D.,  1  Bishop's  Place,  Paignton,  Devon.

King,  W.  A.  H.,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.
*Kingscote,  Mrs.,  4  South  wick  Crescent,  London,  W.  2.
*Kingsford,  Miss  S.  M.,  5  Doneraile  Street,  Fulham,  London.  S.W.  6.

Kittei,  T.  B.,  Vane  House,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Kittermaster,  Rev.  Digby  B.,  Dame  Armstrong  House^  Harrow-
on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.

Knight,  Charles  N.,  36  Kensington  Park  Road,  London,  W.  11.

Lafone,  A.  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.

Laing,  R.  M.,  Boys'  High  School,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.

Lamb,  Charles  George,  77  Glisson  Road,  Cambridge.

Lambert,  G.  W.,  86  Chester  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.


434


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Lane-Poole,  Professor  Stanley,  Litt.D.,  The  Bell  House,  Bersted,
Maidstone,  Kent.

Larken,  E.  P.,  98  Warwick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.

Latham,  Miss  Edith,  c/o  Mrs.  Ingalls,  Watkins,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Latshaw,  Allen,  3414  Sansom  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Lauritzen,  Severin,  Holte,  Denmark.

Lawry,  J.  Littleton,  M.D.,  Calstock,  Cornwall.
*Lawson,  J.  S.,  58  Howitt  Street,  Guelph,  Ontario,  Canada.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.

Leaf,  Miss  Ellen,  6  Airlie  Gardens,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.  8.

Leaf,  Miss  E.  M.,  4  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.
*  Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D., 6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park, London,  N.W.  L

Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  NY.,  U.S.A.

Lee,  Blewett,  135  Park  Row,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
*Legg,  W.  A.,  14  Victoria  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Leigh,  Lord,  Stoneleigh  Abbey,  Kenil worth,  Warwickshire.

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  Hartfield,  Roehampton,  London,  S.W.

Lenon,  J.  W.,  c/o  P.O.  Kyambu,  British  East  Africa.

Leon,  Mrs.  Philip,  4m  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,
London,  W.  ] .

Leonard,  Thomas,  223  W.  School  Lane,  Germantown,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Leslie,  James,  1029  Corydon  Avenue,  Winnipeg,  Canada.
Lewin,  Rev.  C.  H.,  St.  Paul's  Vicarage,  Hull.

Lewis,  David  J.,  United  States  Tariff  Commission,  Washington,
D.C.,  U.S.A.

Lewis,  Mrs.  Gerald  V.,  The  Yews,  Bletchingley,  Surrey.


Librarian,  Public  Library  of  Adelaide,  Australia.

Librarian,  Adelbert  College  of  Western  Reserve  University,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Birmingham  Public  Libraries,  Reference  Department,
Ratcliff  Place,  Birmingham.

Librarian,  Boston  Athenaeum,  101-  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,


Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  etc.,  Church  Street,  Brighton.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  Colorado  Springs,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  Washington,


D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Library  of  Congress,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.


U.S.A.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


435


Librarian (Hon.) of the Constitutional Club,  Embankment,

London,  W.C.  2.
Librarian,  The  John  Crerar  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore,

Md.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Grosvenor  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.  2.
Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.G.  2.
Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Harvard  College  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Jamsetjee  Nesserwanjee  Petit  Institute,  Hornby  Road,

Bombay.

Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial  Street,  Leeds.

Librarian,  Leland  Stanford  Junior  University,  Calif.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Library  Association,  Portland,  Oregon,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Meadville  Theological  School,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Mercantile  Library,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Minneapolis  Athenaeum,  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Natal  Society  and  Central  Library,  Pietermaritzburg,
Natal,  S.  Africa.

Librarian,  Newberry  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  New  Bridge  Street,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

Librarian,  New  Hampshire  State  Library,  Concord,  N.H.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library  of  New  South  Wales,  c/o  Messrs.  Truslove
&  Hanson,  153  Oxford  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,
4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.  2.

Librarian,  Ohio  State  Library,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*  Librarian,  Omaha  Public  Library  and  Museum,  19  and  Harvey
Streets,  Omaha,  Nebraska,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Pennsylvania  State  Library,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Seattle  Public  Library,  Seattle,  Washington,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Selslcabet  for  psykislc  Forslcning,  Havnegade  35n,  Copen-
hagen.

Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theosophical  Society,  19  Tavistock  Square,  London,
W.C.  1.


436


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Librarian,  The  University,  Aberdeen.

Librarian.  Bibliotheque  Victor  Cousin,  L'Universite  de  Paris.
Librarian,  University  of  Minnesota  Library,  Minneapolis,  Minne-
sota, U.S.A.

Librarian,  Univeristy  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  University  of  Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  Australia.
Librarian,  Victoria  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Librarian,  Wellesley  College,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Dr.  Williams's  Library,  Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.
Librarian,  Yale  University  Library,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Linden,  Edward  F.  B.,  11  South  Mansions,  Brondesbury,  London,
N.W.

*Little,  Mrs.,  Park  House,  Whaley  Bridge,  nr.  Stockport.
*Llewellin,  Mrs.  W.,  Upton  House,  nr.  Poole,  Dorset.

Lloyd,  Judge  Frank  T.,  Camden,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Lloyd,  Rev.  John,  530  Warren  Street,  Wausau,  Wisconsin,  U.S.A.

Lloj-d,  Miss  Julia,  Farm,  Sparkbrook,  Birmingham.

Lodge,  Miss  E.  C,  Lady  Margaret  Hall,  Oxford.
*Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.

Lodge,  Robert,  Compton  Wood,  28  Carlisle  Road,  Eastbourne.

Lombard!  C,  2817  Routh  Street,  Dallas,  Texas,  U.S.A.

Long,  Miss  Constance,  M.D.,  2  Harley  Place,  London,  W.  1.

Lorimer,  Miss  Emilia  S.,  45  Marston  Street,  Oxford.

Lubbock,  Mrs.  Geoffrey,  Greenhill,  Sutton-Veny,  Wiltshire.

Ludford-Astley,  Mis.  A.  G.,  31a  King"s  Road,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.3.

Lyall,  Mrs.,  6  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,  London,
'  W.  1.

Lyall,  Sir  Charles  James,  82  Cornwall  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Lyall,  Edward,  c/o  William  Lyall,  Esq.,  19  Victoria  Road,  Dar-
lington.

Lyell,  D.,  74  Campden  Hill  Court,  Kensington..  London.  W.  8.
■''Lyon,  Miss  C.  G,  Ashcroft,  Prestwood,  Great  Missenden.
Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred,  16  Great  College  Street.  Westminster,

^  London,  S.W.I.
Macdonald,  Prof.  Duncan  Black,  Hartford  Theological  Seminary,

Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Macdonald,  Miss  Isabelle  M.,  M.B.,  47  Seymour  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.  1.
MacGregor,  Arthur  G,  8  Longford  Terrace,  Monkstown,  Co.  Dublin.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


437


Mackay,  N.  Douglas,  M.D.,  Dall-Avon,  Aberfeldy,  Perth.
Mackenzie,  Miss  Maud  R.  R.,  50  Chester  Terrace,  London,  S.W.  1.
Mackenzie,  Lady  Muir,  22  Draycott  Place,  Cadogan  Gardens,

London,  S.W.  3.
Macklin,  Miss  Helen  E.,  141  Inverness  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.
Macnaghten,  E.  L.,  37  Greycoat  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
Madders,  Mrs.  H.  F.,  87  Hampstead  Way,  London,  N.W.  4.
*Magrane,  Mrs.  Victor,  2  Holland  Park  Road,  Kensington,  London,

W.  14.

Mahler,  Mrs.  John,  Bronygarth,  Oswestry,  Salop.

Mainwaring,  Mrs.,  11  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.  1.

Mallet,  Right  Hon.  Sir  Louis,  G.C.M.G.,  C.B.,  Wardes.  Otham,

Maidstone,  Kent.
*Malone,  Wing  Commander  C.  L'Estrange,  R.N.,  30  Eccleston
Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Mander,  Charles  A.,  The  Mount,  Wolverhampton,  Staffs.
*Mander,  Geoffrey  Le  Mesurier,  Wightwick  Manor,  Wolverhampton.
'::Manfield,  Miss  Muriel  R.,  63  Delaware  Mansions,  London,  W.  9.
Mann, Rev. Frederic, Coombe Dale,  Coombe Pvoad,  South
Croydon,  Surrey.

^Manning,  Miss  H.  T.,  102  Central  Avenue,  Plainfield,  New  Jersey,
U.S.A.

Mansell,  Andrew  Evans,  Genappe,  Bridgewater,  Tasmania.
*Mansfield,  Mrs.  Richard,  The  Grange,  New  London,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Mantell,  Colonel  A.  M.,  Arolla,  Warren  Road.  Guildford,  Surrey.
*Marsden-Smedley,  Mrs.,  Lea  Green,  Matlock,  Derbyshire.

Marsh,  Edward  H.,  3  Gray*s  Inn  Place,  London,  W.C.  1.

Marston,  Charles,  J.P.,  Afcot,  Compton,  nr.  Wolverhampton.
*Marston,  Commander  G.  M.,  R.N.,  Park  Lodge,  Albert  Gate,
Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.  1.

Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,
S.E.3.

Marten,  Rev.  G.  H.,  St.  Mark's,  Purley,  Sm:rey.
Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near
Tewkesbirry.

Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Jullundur,  Punjab,  India.
Matbar,  H.  P.,  No.  3,  Sleater  Road,  Bombay,  India.
*Mason,  Miss,  211  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  5  Vincent  Square  Mansions,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.  1.


438


Ulembers  and  Associates.


[part


*Mather,  Rev.  Herbert,

Matthews,  Dr.  Caroline,  13  Longton  Grove,  Sydenham,  London,
S.E.  26.

^Matthews,  Mrs.,  15  Stanley  Gardens,  Notting  Hill  Gate,  London,
W.ll.

*Maunsell,  Captain  G.  A.,  R.E.,  c/o  C.E.P.C,  D.G.T.,  General
Headquarters,  B.E.F.,  France.

Mavrogordato,  John  N., 5  Linnell  Close, Hampstead  Garden
Suburb,  London,  N.W.  4.

Maxwell,  Dr.  Joseph,  6  Rue  Villaret-de-Joyeuse,  Paris.
*  Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  21  Portland  Place,  London,  W.  1.

Mayor,  R.  G.,  11  Campden  Hill  Square,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.

M' Alpine,  Robert,  The  Croft,  Totteridge,  Herts.

M'Clellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Briarcliff  Manor,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

M'Clure,  Henry,  M.D.

M'Connel,  H.  W,.  M.B.,  M.R.C.S.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich;  and

11  Eton  Avenue,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.
M'Connel,  Mrs.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich  ;  and  11  Eton  Avenue,

Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.
M'Dougall,  William,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B.,  Woodsend,  Foxcombe

Hill,  nr.  Oxford.
M'Gill,  Edward  E.,  Towa/nda,  Bradford  County,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
M'Gusty,  G.  A.,  12  Molesworth  Street,  Dublin,  Ireland.
M'Keever,  BuelJ,  3900  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
*M'Kenna,  Mrs.  Theodore,  24  Bryanston  Square,  London,  W.  1.
M'Lauchlan,  G.  M.,  c/o  B.  A.  Hignett,  Esq.,  St.  Brannocks,  Mount

Grove,  Birkenhead.
M'Neile,  Rev.  R.  F.,  Bishop's  Sutton,  Alresford,  Hants.
Mead,  G.  R.  S.,  47  Campden  Hill  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Meek,  Maximilian  de.

Meebold,  Alfred,  Heidenheim,  Wurtemberg,  Germany.

Megson,  Albert,  Fern  Villa,  Headlands,  Ossett,  Yorks.

Mehrji,  Munchershaw  Hormusji,  M.D.,  3  Batlivala  Villa,  Sleater
Road,  Bombay,  India.

Meissner,  Mrs.  de,  1524  3 1st  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
*Mendonca.,  M.  S.  de,  100  Rua  S.  Juliao,  Lisbon,  Portugal.

Merlin,  Rev.  F.  W.  J.,  Highfield,  Huddersfield,  Yorks.

Metcalfe,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  The  Aberdeen,  St.  Paul,  Minnesota,  U.S.A.
*Micklethwait,  Richard  K.

Milburn,  Rev.  R.  Gordon,  Black  Bridge,  Beaulieu,  Hants.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


439


*Miles,  Miss,  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Millard,  Mrs.  Alinira  B.,  2505  Farnam  Str..  Omaha,  Neb.,  U.S.A.
*Milward,  Graham,  77  Colmore  Row,  Birmingham.
I\Iims,  Mrs.  Virginia  G.,  211  N.  Conception  Street,  Mobile,  Alabama,
U.S.A.

*Mirlees,  W.  J.,  11  Cranmer  Road,  Cambridge.
Mitchell,  Sidney  J.,  c/o  D.  Mitchell  &  Co.,  Box  77,  G.P.O.,  New-
castle. N.S.W.,  Australia.
♦Mitchell,  T.  W.,  M.D.,  Hoath  Cottage,  Hadlow,  nr.  Tonbridge.
*Montague,  Mrs.,  Penton,  Credition,  Devon,
Monteagle, The  Lord, K.P., Mount  Trenchard, Foynes,  Co.
Limerick.

*Moore,  Mrs.  Harold,  The  Burrow  Alma  Road,  Sidcup.
*Moore,  Mrs.  Roland,  41  Rosary  Garden?,  London,  S.W.
*Moore,  W.  F.,  5  Coleherne  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  5.
*Moore,  Admiral  W.  Usborne,  8  Western  Parade,  Southsea.

Moriarty,  Miss  Eileen  F.  H.,  46  Inverness  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,
London,  W.  2.

Morier,  Mrs.,  65  Hamilton  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  8.

Morris,  Miss  D.  M.,  284  Bramham  Gardens,  South  Kensington,

London,  S.W.  5.
*Morris,  Miss  Helen  L.,  The  Fore  Hill,  Ely,  Cambs.

Morris,  Mrs.,  Horsley  Hall,  Eccleshall,  Staffs.

Morris,  Mrs.,  284  Bramham  Gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,
S.W.  5.

Morton,  Mrs.  F.  N.,  73  West  La  Crosse  Avenue,  Lansdowne,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Morton,  Miss  Mary,  Acland  Hall,  The  College,  Bingley,  Yorks.
Moses,  E.  J.,  c/o  Messrs.  E.  D.  Sassoon  &  Co.,  4  Mission  Row,  Cal-
cutta.

Moss-Blundell,  F.  B.,  28  George  Street,  Richmond,  Surrey.
Moultrie, Miss A. J.  C,  6 Oakhill  Road, Putney,  London,
S.W.  15.

Murphy,  Gardner,  U.S.  Base  Hospital  No.  39.  American  Expedi-
tionary Force.

*Murray,  Donald,  Messrs.  Creed  &  Co.,  Croydon.  Surrey.
*Murray,  Professor  Gilbert,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.,  82  Woodstock  Road,
Oxford.

Murray,  Miss  Jessie,  M.B.,  14  Endsleigh  Street,  Tavistock  Scpiare,
London,  W.C.  1.


440


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Murton,  Miss  Josephine,  The  Firs,  Charing,  Kent.
Myers,  Professor  Charles  S.,  M.D.,  Thursley,  Chaucer  Road,  Cam-
bridge.

*  My  erg,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
*Myers,  L.  H.,  34  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.  8.
Myers,  W.  Wykeham,  M.B.,  H.B.M.'s  Consular  Agency,  Pagoda

Anchorage,  China.
Nash,  Miss  Diana,  2611  Guilford  Road,  Cleveland  Heights,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Neale,  Edward,  c/o  Mr.  Herbert  Bishop,  29  Ludgate  Hill,  London,
E.C,  4.

Neild,  Miss  Maria,  27  Brompton  Square,  London,  S.W.  3.
Neustadter,  Louis  W.,  461  Mission  Street,  San  Francisco,  Cab,
U.S.A.

*Newcastle,  The  Duke  of,  Clumber,  Worksop,  Notts.

Newton,  Miss  F.  E.,  156  Sloane  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.

Newton,  Heber,  Oamaru,  New  Zealand.

Newton,  Miss  I.,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.
*Nicoll,  Mrs.  DeLancey,  23  East  39th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Nicolls,  Brig.-Generai  E.  G.,  19  St.  Andrew's  Road,  Bedford.
*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  Birnieknowes,  Cullercoats,  Northumberland.

Noel,  Miss  Frances,  Becket  House,  Thaxted,  nr.  Dunmow,  Essex.

Noel.  J.  B.  L.,  West  Hill  House,  Portishead.

Noel-Cox,  H.  L.,  M.D.,  F.R.A.S.,  The  Military  Hospital,  Belmont,
Surrey.

Norris,  Stuart,  3  Birchfield  Road,  Birmingham.
Northcote,  Rev.  H.,  35  Rue  Tour  Notre  Dame,  Boulogue-sur-Mer,
France.

Nott,  William  F..  3  Glebe  Villas,  London  Road,  Mitcham,  Surrey..
Nutter,  Miss  H.  G.,  6  Acacia  Road,  Norbiuy,  London,  S.W.  16.
Odell,  S.  W.,  202  Boston  Building,  Pasadena,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Ogilvie.  Mrs.  Robert,  c/o  R,  G.  Ross,  Esq.,  10  Hill  Street,  Edinburgh.
Ogle,  Major  N.,  67th  Punjabis,  Quetta,  Baluchistan,  India.
Oldham,  G.  F.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Rostrevor,  Langton  Green,

Tunbridge  Wells.
Oman,  Professor  Charles  W.  C,  Frewin  Hall,  Oxford.
Onslow,  Lady,  Chevin  Bank,  Duffield,  Derbyshire.
*Onslow,  Hon.  H.,  Clandon  Park,  Guildford.
Osborne,  Miss  H.,  2  Northcote  Mansions,  Heath  Street,  Hamp-

stead,  London,  NW.  3.


LXXIV.]  Members  and  Associates.  441

*Osmaston,  Mrs.,  Stoneshill,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
*Owen,  A.  S.,  Keble  College,  Oxford.
Oxenham,  Mrs.,  3  Baring  Crescent,  Exeter.

Pach-Beresford,  Denis  R.,  J. P.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagenals'town,  Co.
Carlow.

Pagan,  Mrs.  G.  L.,  5  Belgrave  Place,  Edinburgh.

Paget,  Sir  Arthur,  9  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple.  London,  E.G.  4.

Paley,  Mrs.,  Ampton  Hall;  Bury  St.  Edmunds.
*Paley,  G.  A..  90  Onslow  Gardens,  London,  S.VV.  7.
*Park,  William,  61  Eardley  Crescent,  Earl's  Court,  London,  S.W.  5.
*Parkin,  John,  Blaithwaite,  Carlisle.

*Parr,  F.  G,  Llwynoun,  Great  Ormes  Head,  Llandudno,  N.  Wales.
Parsons,  N.  M.,  22  Barkston  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  5.
Patel,  F.  J.,  L.R.C.P.,  3  Church  Gate  Street,  Bombay.
Paterson,  Miss  Mary  N.,  Royal  Marine  Hotel,  Ventnor,  Isle  of
Wight,

*Patton,  Mrs.,  Stoke  Court,  nr.  Taunton,  Somerset.
Paul,  J.  Rodman,  505  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa,,  U.S.A.
Payne,  Ernest, 10  Wellington  Court,  Knightsbridge,  London,
S.W.  1.

Pease,  Mrs.  J.  R.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Peck,  Miss  Charlotte  L.,  Maidencombe  House,  St.  Mary  Church,
S.  Devon.

Peck,  Mrs.  Louis  S.,  30  Lackawanna  Avenue,  Jacksonville,  Florida,
U.S.A.

Peckham,  Orville,  1422  Broadway,  Indianapolis,  Indiana,  U.S.A.
Pennington,  Mrs.  Henry,  Villa  Cimerose,  Chateau  d'Oex,  Switzer-
land.

Penny,  W.  R.,  Railway  Stores  Department,  Uitenhage,  nr.  Port

Elizabeth,  S.  Africa,
Perceval,  Mrs.  Dudley, 153  Church  Street,  Chelsea,  London,

S.W.  3.

*Perdicaris,  Ion,  The  Manor  House,  Chi&lehurst,  Kent.
*Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  "  La  Quinta,"  Santa  Ursula,  Teneriffe,  Canary
Isles.

Perkins,  Miss  S-  R.,  c/o  Dr.  Perkins,  57  Harley  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Perry,  Sir  E.  Cooper,  M.D.,  Superintendent's  House,  Guy's  Hospital,

London,  S.E.  1.
Perry,  Horace  H,  Court  Royal,  144  King's  Cliff,  Brighton.


442


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Perry,  T.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Peters,  W.  E.

Pfau,  A.  R.,  Junr.,  Mankato,  Minnesota,  U.S.A.
*Phillimore,  Mrs.,  Kendals,  Elstree,  Herts.
*Piddmgton,  J.  G.,  Holy  Well,  Hook  Heath,  Woking,  Surrey.
*Piercy,  Major  B.  H,  94  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.

Pigou,  Professor  Arthur  Cecil,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  Treen,  Frith  Hill,  Godalming,  Surrey.
*Pinney,  Mrs.,  17  Doune  Terrace,  North  Kelvinside,  Glasgow.
*Pinney,  Miss  Ida  A.,  17  Doune  Terrace,  North  Kelvinside,  Glasgow.

Piper,  John  E.,  LL.B.,  10  Herondale  Avenue,  Wandsworth  Common,
London,  S.W.  18.

Pithapuram,  The  Rajah  of,  Pithapuram,  Godavari  Dist.,  Madras
Presidency,  India.
*Pitt,  St.  George  Lane  Fox,  Travellers'  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.I.

Pitt,  Mrs.  Fox,  48  Grosvenor  Street,  London,  W.  1 .
Plowden,  Mrs.,  Strachur  Park,  Loch  Fyne  Side,  Argyllshire.
Pollard,  J.  Ellery,  L.R.C.P.,  7  Esme  Road.  Sparkhill,  Birmingham.
Ponsonby,  Hon.  Mrs.  C.  B.,  14  West  Halkin  Street,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Pontifex,  Dudley  D.,  73  Alleyn  Park,  West  Dulwich,  London,
S.E.  21.

Pooley,  H.  F.,  Scotter,  Well  Walk,  Hampstead,  London,  N.VV.  3.
Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  Hurstbourne  Park,  Whitchurch,
Hants.

Post,  Mrs.  Wm,  St.  Lucie,  Fla,;  and  Buckhaimon,  W.  Va,,  U.S.A.
*Potter,  John  Wilson,  219  Ashley  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
Powell,  C.  Berkeley,  J.P.,  283  Metcalfe  Street,  Ottawa,  Canada.
Powell,  Ellis  T.,  D.Sc,  Rosedene,  Brondesbury  Park,  London,
N.W.  6.

*  Powell,  Mrs.,  Goodwyns  Place,  Dorking,  Surrey.

Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  The  Highlands,  Rye,  Sussex.
*Preece,  W.  Llewellyn,  8  Queen  Anne's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.

Prindle,  H.  E.,  915  New  Birks  Building,  Montreal,  Canada.
*Proctor,  Captain  G.  Norman,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  Hornby  Road,
Bombay,  India.

*Pulver,  S.  H.,  Dunedin  House,  Basinghall  Avenue,  London.  E.G.  2.
*Pumphrey,  Mrs.,  Hindley  Hall,  Stocksfield-on-Tyne.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


443


*Purdon,  Mrs.,  72  Ridgmount  Gardens,  Gower  Street,  London,
W.C.  1.

Putman,  Miss  Irene,  328  Walnut  Avenue,  San  Diego,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Pye,  W.  A.,  Priest  Hill,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
*Pynsent,  R.  B.,  at  Oaklands,  Hailsham,  Sussex.
Quackenbos,  John  D.,  M.D.,  127  West  73rd  Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

*Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Radeliffe- Whitehead,  Ralph,  Woodstock,  Ulster  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Radclyffe-Hall,  Miss  M.,  22  Cadogan  Court,  Draycott  Avenue,

London,  S.W.  3.
Raggett,  M's.

Raikes,  E.  B.,  Drayton  Old  Lodge,  Norwich.

Raikes,  Ms.,  Beomonds,  Chertsey,  Surrey.
*Raines,  Lady,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.
*Rampling-Rose,  W.,  The  Corner  House,  Caythorpe,  Lines.

Ramsden,  Miss,  16  Incognito  Gade,  Christiania.

Ransom,  Francis,  Chilterns,  Hitchin,  Herts.
*Rashdall,  The.  Very  Rev.  Hastings,  The  Deanery,  Carlisle.
*Rashleigh,  John  C.  S.,  M.D.,  Throwleigh,  Okehampton,  Devon.

Rawlinson,  Rev.  G.  C,  20  Holbein  House,  London,  S.W.  1.

Rawsthorn,  Mrs.,  Yew  Trees,  Ashton-on-Ribble,  Preston.

Reade,  Herbert  V.,  C.B.,  181  Queen's  Gate,  S.  Kensington,  London,
S.W.  7.

Ready,  Mss  E.  A.,  74  Regent  Road,  Leicester.
*Reekitt,  Miss  Juliet  E.,  20  Dulwich  Wood  Park,  Upper  Norwood,

London,  S.E.  19.
Regina  Madre,  S.  M.  La,  Palazzo  Margherita,  Rome.
Rendall,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  H.,  Dedham  House,  Dedham,  Essex.
Richardson,  Frederick  W.,  County  Analyst's  Office,  Hustlergate,

Bradford.

Richmond,  Kenneth,  St.  Merryn,  North  Cornwall.
Riddle,  Mrs.,  Hillstead,  Farmington,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Ridley,  Henry  N.,  F.R.S.,  C.M.G.,  7  Cumberland  Road,  Kew,
Surrey.

Ridley,  M.  Roy,  11  Percival  Road,  Clifton,  Bristol.
*Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham  Gardens,  London,  NW.  3.
Ridley,  The  Viscountess,  10  Carlton  House  Terrace,  London,
S.W.  1.

Riley,  Miss  Mary,  6  Colin  Street,  Wigan,  Lanes.

2f


444


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Ritchie,  A.  J.,  Oriental  Club,  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  L.
Ritchie,  Thomas,  J. P.,  Conservative  Club,  St.  James's  Street,
London,  S.W.  1.

Riviere,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  10  Nottingham  Terrace,  York  Gate,  London,
N.W.  1 .

Rix,  Rev.  A.  H.,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Keighley.

Robbins,  Rufus  M.,  Titusville,  Brevard  County,  Florida,  U.S.A.

Roberts,  Mrs.  Hugh,  6  Albemarle  Villas,  Stoke,  Devonport.
^Roberts,  Lady,  Bryngwenallt,  Abergele,  N.  Wales.

Roberts,  W.  M.,  Bar  Harbour,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Robertson,  Mrs.  J.  G.,  90  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.  1.

Robinson,  George  R.,  25  Water  Street,  Liverpool.

Rogers,  Edmund  J.  A.,  M.D.,  CM..  222  West  Colfax  Avenue,
Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.

Rogers,  Rev.  F.  G.  The  Vicarage,  Langley,  Newport,  Essex.
*Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  4  King's  Parade,  Cambridge.

Rogers,  T.  Percival,  Henleaze  Park,  Westbury-on-Trym,  Glouces-
tershire.

Rolleston,  T.  W.,  Ifield,  16  Prince  Arthur  Road,  Hampstead,

London,  N.W.  3.
*Romanes,  N.  H.,  The  Cavendish  Club,  119  Piccadilly,  London,
W.  1.

Rosenberger,  James,  Sellersville,  Bucks  Co.,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Ross,  Samuel,  67  Willis  Street,  New  Bedford,  Mass..  U.S.A.
Row,  Miss  L.  M..  4  Moon  Street,  Dulverton,  Bucks.
Russell,  Mrs.,  68  Madeley  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.  5.
*Russell,  Mrs.  E.  S..  Bryans'  Ground,  Presteign,  Radnorshire.
Ryves,  Miss  Evangeline,  Damory  Cottage,  Walton-on-the-Hilt,
Surrey.

St.  Hill,  Mrs.,  Thimble,  Littlewick  Green,  Berks.
*Salmon,  Mrs.  Spencer,  Crockham  Hill  Place.  Edenbridge,  Kent.

Salter,  W.  H.,  2  Campden  Hill  Gardens,  London,  W.  8.
*Salter,  Mis.  W.  H.,  2  Campden  Hill  Gardens,  London,  W.  8.

Samaldas.  Hon.  Lalubhai.  99  Apollo  Street,  Fort,  Bombay,  India.

Sanderson,  W.  R.,  Little  Highleigh  Farm,  Exbridge,  N.  Devon.
*Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  D.D..  1867  Crawford  Road,  Cleveland,  Ohio,
U.S.A.

Savill,  Mrs.,  M.D.,  35  Weymouth  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Savory,  Ernest  J.  G,  61  Carey  Street,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,
W.C.  2.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


445


*Scatcberd,  Miss  F.  R.,  14  Park  Square,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

Schaaf,  Albert  E.,  5  The  Louvain,  2101  N.  Pennsylvania  Street,

Indianapolis,  Ind.,  U.S.A.
Schauffler,  Robert  H.,  3  Spruce  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
Schofield,  Mrs.,  1  Phillimore  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Scholefield,  Mrs.,  Caergwrle,  Rectory  Lane,  Prestwich,  Manchester.
Schuster,  Miss,  Cottenham  House,  Wimbledon,  London,  S.W.
Scott,  Rev.  D.  D.,  C.F.,  Presbyterian  Institute,  Trentham  M.C.,

New  Zealand.

Scott,  F.  Gilbert.  M.R.C.S..  L.R.C.P..  Rocquaine,  New  Maiden,
Surrey.

*Scott,  Captain  G.  B.,  N.W.  Militia,  Miranshab,  N.W.  Frontier
Province,  India.

Scott,  Mrs.  Minturn,  Waterside  Copse,  Liphook,  Hants.
*Scott,  Sydney  C,  92  Westbourne  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.
*Scott,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  95  Ashley  Gardens,  London.  S.W.  1.

Scott,  W.  Sibbald,  M.B.,  The  Lymes,  Ellesmere,  Salop.

Scowcroft,  Heber,  Ogden,  Utah,  U.S.A.

Seabra,  Alberto,  M.D.,  rua  15  de  Novembre  No.  9,  Sao  Paulo,
Brazil.

Sedgwick,  Mrs.  H.  D.,  120  E.  22nd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Selborne,  The  Earl  of,  K.G.,  Blackmoor,  Liss,  Hants.
Sellers,  Miss  R.  A.,  Wellesley  Girls"  High  School,  Naini  Tal,  India.
Seton-Karr,  Captain  H.  W.,  8  St.  Paul's  Mansions,  Hammersmith,
London,  W.  6.

Seymour,  Admiral  of  the  Fleet  Sir  E.  H,  O.M..  G.C.B.,  G.C.V.O.,

Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  St.  James's  Park,  London.  S.W.  1.
Shackleford,  Hon.  Thomas  M.,  Room  318,  Citizens'  Bank  Building,

Tampa,  Florida,  U.S.A.
Shakespear,  Mrs.,  12  Brunswick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.8.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1  Edwardes  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.8.
Shaw,  Arnold  E.,  Grove  House,  Aspley  Guise,  Beds.
*Shavv,  Mrs.  Bernard,  10  Adelphi  Terrace,  Strand,  London,  W,C.  2.
*Shaw,  Rev.  Sir  Charles  J.  Monson,  Bart.,  The  Rectory,  Wrotham,
Kent.

Shaw,  Lady,  10  Moreton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
Sheets,  J.  G,  7  Glenwood  Apartments,  College  Hill  Station,  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio,  U.S.A.


446  Members  and  Associates.  [part

*Shewan,  R.  G.,  c/o  Shewan,  Tomes  &  Co.,  Hong  Kong,  China.
*Shove,  Miss  E.,  M.B.,  30  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,
London,  W.  1.

Shuttleworth,  Miss  C.  J.,  10  Cottesmore  Gardens,  Kensington,
London.  W.  8.

Sibly,  F.  Arthur,  LL.D.,  Haywardsfield,  Stonehouse,  Glos.
*Sidgwick,  Arthur,  LL.D.,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Edward,  25  Collingham  Road,  London,  S.W.  5.
*Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

Sidgwick,  Miss  Rose,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Silver,  Mrs.,  24  Victoria  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Simmonds,  Miss  C.  E.,  33  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  London,  N.W.  1.

Simmons,  Judge  Daniel  A.,  Jacksonville,  Florida,  U.S.A.

Simons,  L.,  LTtrechtschedw.  Straat  13,  Amsterdam.

Simpson,  Captain  H.  V.,  R.N.,  C.M.G.,  United  Service  Club,  Pall
Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.

Simpson,  Miss  Price,  Beech  Barns,  Alton,  Hants.

Sinclair,  Miss  May,  1  Blenheim  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,
N.W.  8.

Singh,  Amar,  Hoshiarpur,  Punjab,  India.

Sloggett,  Director-General  Sir  Arthur,  K.C.M.G.,  K.C.B.,  6s  Bicken-

hall  Mansions,  London,  W.  1.
Smith,  Adolphe,  12  Crookham  Road,  Fulham,  London,  S.W.  6.
Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
*Smith,  Rev.  Ernest  F.
Smith,  G.  Albert,  Rosedene,  7  Melville  Road,  Hove,  Brighton.
*Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  7  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,
W.6.

Smith,  Sir  H.  Babington,  C.B.,  121  St.  James's  Court,  Buckingham
Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.

Smith,  J.  Hoyle,  Spring  Bank,  Eccles,  Lancashire.

Smith,  R.  F.  Ruthven,  81  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.

Smith,  Rev.  Sidney  M.,  Hebden  Bridge  Vicarage,  Yorkshire.

Smith,  M's.  William,  c/o  The  Royal  Bank  of  Australia,  18  Bishops-
gate,  London,  E.G.  2.
*Smith,  Mrs.  W.  Easton,  132  Grove  Street,  Waterbury,  Conn.,
U.S.A.

Smith.  William  Hawley,  2039  Knoxville  Avenue,  Peoria,  111.,
U.S.A.

Smith,  William  P.,  Crestline,  Ohio,  U.S.A.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


447


*Smith,  W.  Whately,  Rackenford  Lodge,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
*Smithson,  Mrs.,  42  Tilehouse  Street,  Hitchin,  Herts.
Sparrow,  G.  W.  S.,  Albrighton  Hall,  near  Shrewsbury.
*Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.
Spens,  William,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Srinivasa  Raghavachariar,  V.,  Chittoor.  Chittoor  District,  Madras

Presidency,  India.
Stanhope,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Fitzroy,  49  Onslow  Square,  London,

S.W.7.

Stanton,  Rev.  Horace  C,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  148  North  18th  Street,

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Stapleton,  Mrs.,  11  Sloane  Terrace  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  1.
Stawell,  Miss  F.  M.,  33  Ladbroke  Square.  Notting  Hill  Gate,

London,  W.  11.

Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  M.D.,  5394  Waterman  Avenue,  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  U.S.A.

*Steel,  Mrs.,  Court  o'  Hill,  Tenbury,  Worcestershire.
Stephens,  Mrs.,  41  Harrington  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7.
Stephens,  W.  F.,  Seychelles  Colony.

*Stevenson,  Mrs.,  52  Abinger  Road,  Bedford  Park,  London,  W.  4.
Stevenson,  A.  Creery,  2  Cambridge  Road,  Farnborough,  Hants.
Stewart,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.
Stewart,  Miss  M.  A.,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  I.
*Stobart,  Mrs.  St.  Clair,  7  Turner's  Wood,  Hampstead  Garden

Suburb,  London,  N.W.  4.
Stoehr,  Miss,  109  Iverna  Court,  Kensington  High  Street,  London,
W.8.

Stout,  Professor  George  F.,  Craigard,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.
Strachan,  W.  M.,  Strood  Park,  Horsham,  Sussex.
Strachey,  Charles,  Colonial  Office,  Downing  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  Spectator  Office,  1  Wellington  Street,

Strand,  London,  W.C.  2.
Stratton,  F.  J.  M.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Streatfeild,  W.  H.  R.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  42  Ovington  Square,

London,  S.W.  3.

Strode,  Miss  E.  L.  C,  7  Stafford  Terrace,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Strutt,  Captain  Hon.  A.  O,  R.N.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
*Strutt,  Hon.  Richard,  Rayleigh  House,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Stuart,  Mrs.

*Sturdy,  Edward  T.,  Norburton,  Burton  Bradstock,Bridport,  Dorset.


448


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Sturge,  Miss  M.  Carta,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,
Hants.

Swaine,  Mrs.  R.  C,  Letclworth  Lane,  Letchworth,  Herts.
Swainson,  Miss  F.  J.,  Stonecross,  Kendal.

Swainson,  Miss  M.,  23  Warrington  Crescent,  Maida  Hill,  London,
W.9.

*Swayne,  Mrs.  Noah  Haynes,  Junr.,  Daylesford,  Berwyn  P.O.,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Swinburne,  Mrs.,  Western  Withdean,  Brighton.

Tait,  Mrs.,  10  Eilerdale  Road,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.

Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  Lismnllen,  Arthur  Road,  Wimbledon  Park,

London,  S.W.  19.
Talbot,  P.  Amaury,  Forcados,  Southern  Nigeria.
*Taylor,  Mrs.  Charles  H.,  31  Blenheim  Park  Road,  South  Croydon,

Surrey.

Taylor,  Miss  E.  Waring,  23  Warrington  Crescent,  Maida  Hill,

London,  W.  9.
*Taylor,  H.  Dennis,  Stancliffe,  Mount  Villas,  York.
*Taylor,  Mrs.  Lewis  S.,  14  Frobisher  Terrace,  Falmouth.

Temple,  Reginald  W.

Tennent,  W.  J.,  69  Essex  Street.  Masterton,  New  Zealand.
*Thaw,  A.  Blair,  Hotel  Leonon,  701  Madison  Avenue,  New  York,
N.Y.,  U.S.A.

*Thesiger,  Mrs  Ernest,  6  Montpelier  Terrace,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Thomas,  Rev.  C.  D.,  South  Hill  Lodge,  Bromley,  Kent.

Thomas,  Miss  Edith  J.,  Mynydd  Ednyfed,  Criccieth,  N.  Wales.

Thomas,  Ernest  Seymour,  Turf  Club,  Cairo,  Egypt.
*Thomas,  Seymour  P.,  41  Gower  Avenue,  Germantown,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Thompson,  Edwin,  25  Sefton  Drive,  Liverpool.

Thompson,  M.  W.,  39  Steeles  Road,  Haverstock  Hill,  London,
N.W.  3.

""Thomson,  Edward  J.,  Western  Club,  Glasgow.
Thorburn,  Rev.  T.  J.,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  The  Bungalow,  St.  Helen's

Down,  Hastings.
Thornley,  Miss  F.  J.,  36  Downleaze,  Stoke  Bishop,  Bristol.
Thorp,  Richard,  Colenso  Hill,  Napier,  New  Zealand.
Tipping,  Miss  K.,  7  Lansdowne  Circus,  Leamington.
Tottenham,  Miss  Mary  T.  A.,  Ballycurry,  Ashford,  Co.  Wicklow,

Ireland.
Trafford,  Mrs.  Galfrid  de.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


449


*Trotter,  Mrs.,  Standerwick  Court,  Frome,  Somerset.

*Troubridge,  Mrs.,  6  Cheltenham  Terrace,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.

*Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  45  Upper  Brook  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,

London,  W.  1.
Tudor,  Owen  S.,  Friday's  Hill,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
*Tugwell,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Bracken  Hill,  Tower  Road,  Branksome
Park,  Bournemouth.
Tivrner,  General  Sir  Alfred,  16  Chelsea  Embankment,  London,
S.W.  3.

Tyler,  Professor  C.  M.,  1601  Washington  Avemie,  Scranton,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Tyrone,  The  O'Neill  de,  59  rua  das  Flores,  Lisbon,  Portugal.
Tyrrell,  G.  N.,  40  Gondar  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  6.
Tyrwhitt,  Rev.  H.  M.,  19  The  Glebe,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.  3.
Ulman,  Mrs.  Jacob  A.,  Brooklandville,  Baltimore  County,  Md.,
U.S.A.

*Upton,  Miss  Florence  K.,  21  Great  College  Street,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.  1.

Urquiola,  Manuel  de,  Calle  de  Alfredo  Calderon  8,  Valencia,  Spain.

Van  Deren,  H.  S.,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.

Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  1  Van  Breestraat,  Amsterdam.
*Verney-Cave,  Hon.  Mrs.,  Stanford-on-Avon,  Rugby.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  The  Lydd,  West  Hoathly,  Sussex.

Vyvyan,  Mrs.  T.  C,  Poldhu,  Richmond,  Natal,  South  Africa.

Wagner,  W.  Q.,  St.  John  Street,  Melrose,  Johannesburg,  S.  Africa.

Wales,  Hubert,  The  Long  House,  Hindhead,  Surrey.

Walker,  Miss  Madeline  J.,  107  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.

Walker,  Miss  May  C,  Halcyon  Club,  14  Cork  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*  Walker,  Captain  P.  L.  E.,  7th  Hussars,  Meerut,  UP.,  South  India,

Walker,  R.  A.  Rolleston,  Innisfallen,  Campbell  Road,  Boscombe,
Bournemouth.

*Walker-Munro,  L.,  R.N.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
Walker-Munro,  Mrs.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
Wall,  Perry  G.,  Tampa,  Florida,  U.S.A.

^Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  Wendela,  Harrow-on-theJTill,  Middlesex.
*Waller-Sa\vyer,  Mrs.,  Moystown  House,  Belmont,  King's  Co.,
Ireland.

Walsh,  Rev.  A.  Digby,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  Pall  Mall,

London,  S.W.  1.
Walsh,  Correa  M.,  Belleport,  Long  Island,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.


450


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Wanderley,  F.  M.,  Corumba,  Matto  Grosso,  Brazil.

Wang,  C.  Y.,  Panoff  Garden,  Rue  de  Saigon,  Hankow,  China.

Ward,  David  S.,  Sedan  House,  Harrogate,  Yorkshire.

Ward,  Hon.  Kathleen,  Beechwood,  Killiney.  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.

Warren,  Mrs.  Fiske,  8  Mount  Vernon  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  50  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.  1.

Wastell,  Mrs.,  The  Rowans,  Crowborough,  Sussex.

Watson,  Mrs.  Milne,  73  Eccleston  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Way  mouth,  Miss  Esther,  3  Church  Road,  Parkhill  Road,  Hamp-
stead,  London,  N.W.  3.

Webb,  Mrs.  Curtis,  33  Dover  Street,  London,  W.  1 .

Webber,  Mrs.  Felix,  The  Croft,  Shillingstone,  Dorset,
"'Weinberg,  Harry  J.,  North  Road,  The  Park,  Nottingham.

Wemyss,  Countess  of,  23  St.  James's  Place,  London,  S.W.  1.

Western,  F.  J.,  Cambridge  Mission,  Delhi.  India.
*Westlake,  Ernest,  Godshill,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.

Weston,  Miss  Lena  E.,  Shipbourne  Grange,  nr.  Tonbridge,  Kent.

Wheeler,  C.  Bickersteth,  80  Hamilton  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  8.
*Whetham,  W.  C.  D.,  F.R.S.,  Cadhay,  Ottery  St.  Mary.  Devon.

Whishaw,  R,  W.

Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.
"Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D..  St.  Mary's,  Trumpington,  Cambridge.
*Whitmee,  A.  G,  Homelands,  Fortis  Green,  London,  N.  2.

Whiton,  Rev.  J.  M.,  Ph.D..  65  West  127th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

*Whittemore,  Mrs.  Julia  S.,  Naugatuck,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Whittingham,  F.  S.,  Rodborough  Rectory,  nr.  Stroud,  Gloucester-
shire.

Wigan,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing.  Maidstone,  Kent,
Wight,  Edward,  M.R.C.S.,  9  Regency  Square,  Brighton.
Wilde,  Mrs.  George,  4  West  40th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Wilding,  Mrs.,  Penbryn,  Montgomery,  Wales.
Wilkins,  Mrs.,  19  Ormond  Road,  Rathmines,  nr.  Dublin.
*Wilkins,  C.  F.,  Allahabad,  U.P..  India.

Wilkinson,  Sidney,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  49  Rodney  Street,  Liver-
pool.

Willcocks,  Miss  M.  P.,  35  Pennsylvania  Road,  Exeter.
Willett,  Mrs.,  Fir  Tree  End.  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
Willett,  Miss  Cicely,  2  Holland  Park  Road,  Kensington,  London,
W.  14.


LXXIV.]


Members  and  Associates.


451


Williams,  Mrs.  Glynne,  7  Berkeley  House.  Hay  Hill,  London.  W.  1.
Williams,  Harry  L.,  541  Wood  Street,  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Williams,  J.  E.,  Streator,  Illinois,  U.S.A.
Williams,  Mrs.  S.  R.,  12  Lome  Road.  Oxton.  Cheshire.
Williamson,  Mrs.,  The  Copse,  Brook,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Williamson,  John,  M.D..  The  Rhallt,  Burgh  Heath  Road,  Epsom.
Surrey.

*  Williamson,  The  Very  Rev.  Dr.  Wallace.  44  Palmerston  Place,

Edinburgh.

Willis,  Grant  B..  173  W.  Second  Street,  Mansfield,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Wilson,  Rev.  Alexander,  The  Manse,  Ythanwells,  Insch,  Aberdeen-
shire.

Wilson.  Charles  J.,  Derlamogue,  Ailesbury  Park,  Dublin.
Wilson,  Mrs.  C.  Stuart,  Sesame  Club.  29  Dover  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Wilson,  Mrs.  George,  12  Osborne  Drive.  Bangor,  Co.  Down,  Ireland.
Wilson,  Mrs.  F.  E.,  c/o  Hon.  W.  Warren- Vernon,  105  Cadogan

Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
Wilson,  Mrs.  H.  J..  12  Cheyne  Court,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Wilson,  Naval  Instructor  Percy,  R.N..  H.M.S.  Dreadnought,  c/o
G.P.O.,  London.

♦Wilson,  W.  E.,  45  Maiden  Road,  Kentish  Town,  London,  N.W.  5.
Wingham, T.  A., 174  Aberdeen  Avenue,  Hamilton,  Ontario,
Canada.

Wise,  Miss  A.  Stewart,  16  West  Kensington  Gardens,  London,  W.  14.
Witherby,  Arthur  George,  Newtown  Grange,  Newbury.  Berks.
*Wolf,  Francisco  Eugene  de.  P.O.  Box  269,  Bristol,  Rhode  Island,
U.S.A.

Woodhull.  Miss  Zula  M.,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near

Tewkesbury,  Gloucestershire.
Woods,  Miss  Alice,  St.  Ives,  Radlett,  Herts.

Woods,  Miss  C.  E.,  13  Cowley  Street,  Westminster,  London.  S.W.  1.
Woollett,  Lieut. -Colonel  W.  Charles,  F.S.A.,  4  The  Ridges,  Farn-
boro',  Hants.

Woolley,  V.  J.,  M.D.,  15  Lower  Camden,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
*Worsfold,  Mrs.  Basil,  Romden  Place,  Smarden,  Kent.
Wrangham,  W.  H.,  78  Barmouth  Road,  Wandsworth,  London.
S.W.  18.

Wriford,  Mrs.,  21  Bullingham  Mansions,  Kensington,  London,  W.

*  Wright,  Maurice  B.,  M.D.,  17  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.  1.


452


Members  and  Associates.


[part  lxxiv.]


Wyndham,  Mrs.,  200  West  58th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Yaroschenko,  Madame,  La  Cava,  Bordighera,  Italy.
Yeats,  W.  B.,  18  Woburn  Buildings,  Tavistock  Square,  London,
W.C.  1.

Younghusband,  Sir  Francis,  3  Buckingham  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.
Yssel  de  Schepper,  Mr.  Justice,  Eendra chtstraat  27b,  Rotterdam.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  to  VOL.  XXIX
(PARTS  LXXII.-LXXIV.)

191 8.

"  A.",  Mrs.,  The  Trance  Phenomena  of,  125,  126-128,  129-130,  134-136,

145-148,  160,  164  (footnote)
Abnormal  Psychology,  The  Foundations  of  Normal  and,  Review  of  186
Acis  and  Galatea  (The  Ear  of  Dionysius),  213,  214-215,  217,  219,  222

(footnote),  224-225,  228,  229,  233


Script  references  to -  206-209,  213,  215-217,  219
See  also  Cross-Correspondence.
Addresses,  Presidential ------- 46,  287

American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Proceedings.  The

Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality  - - - -  386

Analytical  Psychology,  Collected  Papers  on. By  Dr.  C.  G.  Jung.

Review  of- - - - - -  - -  -191


Aristophanes. See  Scripts,  Literary  references.
Aristotle. See  Scripts,  Literary  references.

Arnold. See  Cross-Correspondences  : Script  references  ;  also  Scripts  :

Literary  references.
Associates,  List  of  Members  and  - - - - 4 1 1

Audition,  Automatic  -----  308,  318,  329

Auditory  Hallucinations - - -  308,  318,  329,  351,  358,  367,  399
Automatic  Messages  (Table-Tilting,  Visualization,  Writing,  etc.),  111-
113,  117,  118,  120-124,  125-126,  129-130,  157,  158,  160-162,  198-199,
206-209,  215-217,  220-222,  226,  239-241,  243,  311-312,  315,  318-320,
322-323,  325-326,  329-331,  336,  337,  338,  343-349,  393-394,  400
See  also  Cross-Correspondences.


454


Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.


[parts  lxxii.-


Automatic  Visualization -------  306-345

Automatic  Writing.  General  references 172-175,  248,  252,  253,  254-259.

307-308,  407-408

,,  ,, Harmfulness,  Question  of - - -  258-259

Psychology  of -  -  173,  257-258,  407-408

Automatist,  Some  Experiments  with  a  Neiv  -----  306

Baal,  Temple  of. See  Cross-Correspondence.
Balfour,  The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.—

The  Ear  of  Dionysius  ....  197,  254,  260,  270

,,  ,, Discussion  of,  by  Miss  F.  Melian  Stawell  260

.. Reply  to  270

Some  Recent  Scripts  affording  Evidence  of  Survival,  229-231,  285-286
,,  ,,  ., A  Reply  to  Criticisms 230  (footnote)

Barrett,  Sir  W.  F. - - - -  -  247  (footnote)

Bayfield,  Miss  Cyrille,  Cases  confirmed  by  -  -  -  363,  364,  373-375
Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.—

Faunus  Incident - - -  114.115-116,120,158-159,166

Interpretation  of  portions  of  script - 117-118,  337  (footnote)

Some  Recent  Cases  of  Premonition  and  Telepathy  -  -  -  350
"Beauchamp,The  Misses,"  Compared  with  the  Doris  Fischer  Case  395-397
Bergson,  Professor  Henri  -  -  -  46-47,  48.  49,  50,  57,  61,  293-294
Bloic,  blow  thou  Winter  Wind  and  Tennyson's  Mariana.  See

Cross-Correspondence.

Boast,  Captain  S.  T.  143-144

Body  and  Mind,  Transmission  theory  of  the  relation  between  188-189
Briscoe,  A.  E.,  Evidence  contributed  by  -  -  -  -  -  141
Browning. See  Cross -Correspondences  :  Script  references  ;  also

Scripts  :  Literary  references.
Burne-Jones. See  Cross -Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Butcher,  Professor  S.  H..  Communications  purporting  to  come

from. See  "  The  Ear  of  Dionysius."
Byron. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.

Chenoweth,  Mrs..  Sittings  with  '"Doris  Fischer  *" - 398,  400-403
Cheves,  Captain --------  133-134

Cheves,  Mrs.  133,  134,  137,  139,  140

Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology,  Review  of  - - -  191

Communication  from  the  Dead 173-174,  404-409

Evidence  for -  173-174
,, Untrustworthy  nature  of  Communica-
tions 408-409

See  also  Survival.
Communicators —

Butcher,  Professor  S.  H. See  The  Ear  of  Dionysius.

Lodge.  Raymond.  122-123,  126-127,  129,  130-132,  133,  134-136,  147


LXXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.


455


Communicators —

Myers,  F.  W.  H.  112-113,  121-123,  130,  149,  161,  173

Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W. See  The  Ear  of  Dionysius.
Congreve. See  Cross -Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Consciousness,  The  Fringe  of,  by  Professor  Gilbert  Murray  -  -46
Consciousness,  Theories  of  - -  189-190
Constantine's  Monogram. See  Cross-Correspondence.
Controls —

"Mrs.  A." 's -  -  126-128,134-136,146-147

Cagliostro  --------- 402,  403

Guyon,  Madame  - 117-118,  124,  157,  161-162

Hodgson,  Richard -  ....  122-123

Imperator  Band  -  ...  402

James,  William  ---------  402

Pelham,  George  -------- 250,  253

Phinuit -----  250

Rector  ...  -  120-121,  123-124,  157,  158,  160-162
Sidgwick,  Henry -  - - 254,  256

"Mr.  Z.'s" 128-129,130-132,133

See  also  the  Gurney,  Hodgson,  and  Myers  Controls.

Cosmic  Relations,  On  the,  by  Henry  Holt,  Review  of  -  -  177

Creation,  Days  of. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Cresswell,  Alfred,  Evidence  contributed  by - -  -  142

Cross -Correspondence  :  Acis  and  Galatea -  - 219,  239-243

,,  ,,  Blow,  blow  thou  Winter  Wind  and  Tenny-

son's Mariana - - - -  26-28
Baal,  Temple  of - -  -312,315-317,318
,,  Constantine's  Monogram - -  328-335

,,  Days  of  Creation -----  12-19

,,  Dido  and  Sichaeus  -----  30-38

Euripides,  reference -  199,  203-204

,,  Exile  and  Moore,  reference -  2

,,  Festina  Lente -----  5-8, 27

Ivory ... - 318,  320,  321-322
,,  Joy  and  Troy,  reference  - - - -  2

,,  Laurel  Wreath,  reference -  2

,,  Lead,  kindly  Light  - - - -  336-343

,,  Light  dispersing  Darkness  and  Truth  328-335

,,  Mariana  and  Stars  when  they  sang  together  22-26

„  ,, and  Blow,  blow  thou  Winter  Wind  26-28

,,  Moonlight  (Pseudo-script),  reference -  261

,,  Music  hath  Charms -  8-11

Narthex -  -  20-22

,,  Neptune  and  Trident,  reference - -  2

,,  Panopticon - - - - 173  (footnote)

Pine  Trees ------  38-44


456  Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.  [parts  lxxii.-


Cross-Correspondences:  Sesame  and  Lilies,  reference
,,  Sichaeus  and  Dido  -

Sintram  and  friendly  Death
,,  Song  in  a  strange  land

Sphere- Spear  -


2

-  30-38
323-328
328-335
173  (footnote)


,, Stars  when  they  sang  together  and  Tenny-
son's Mariana -  22-26
,, Swifter  far  than  Summer's  flight -  -  29-30
Temple  of  Baal -  311-318
,, Temptation  in  the  Wilderness  - -  336-343
Trance -like  sleep - - - -  318-322
,, Triangle  within  a  Circle,  reference  -  -  2
Troy  and  Joy,  reference  -  2
,, Truth  and  Light  disjiersing  Darkness  328-335
Venice  - - - -  336-343
Voyage  of  discovery - -  311-318
,, Walking  in  Darkness - -  -  11-12
Willing  Slave,  A ....  311-318
Cross-Correspondences,  General  references 1-45,  172-173,  219,  239-243,

254-257,  260-261,  306-349


,, ,, Nature  of

254-255

Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references  and  reminiscences —

Anon.,  Says  Tweed,  to  Till  -

6-7

Arnold,  Morality

346

,,  Requiescat

- .  - -  347

Browning,  Abt  Vogler  -

-  22,  312,  320

Flight  of  the  Duchess  -

41,  42-43,  330

,. La  Saisiaz  -

44

,, Love  among  the  Ruins

347

,,  Numpholeptos

20

,, Paracelsus  -

312

„ Pippa  Passes

319

Burne-Jones,  Angels  of  Creation  -

-  15,  16

Byron,  Destruction,  of  Sennacherib

315,  316-317

,, She  icalks  in  Reaxdy

11

Congreve,  Mourning  Bride  -

8

De  la  Mare,  W.,  Poems

- 32-33,  321

Fouque,  Baron  de  la  Motte,  Sintram  und

seine  Gefdhrten  325-326

Gray,  The  Bard  -

330

Homer,  Iliad

330

Odyssey  - - - -  -

312,  314

Hood,  I  remember

"44

Horace,  Odes

-  15,  16-17,  18,  345,  346

Keats,  On  first  looking  into  Chapman's  Homer - ' - -  312

,, Ode  on  Melancholy  -

319,  320

Longfellow,  I  stood  on  the  bridge  -

338,  339

LXXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.


457


Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references  and  reminiscences —


Lucretius 12  (footnote)

Macaulay,  Battle  of  Lake  the  Regillus -----  347

,, Horatius --------  345

,, Lays  of  Ancient  Rome -  330
Milton,  At  a  solemn  Musick  ....  320

„ L'AUegro -  - -  346

Myers,  Immortality -  ...  .  23-24

„ Venice - -  - - - 338,  340,  341-342

Ovid,  Fasti  44

Rossetti,  Blessed  Damozel -  13,  22,  23,  24-26,  30,  345

,, Love's  Nocturne - - - - - - -  315

Rossetti,  Christina,  New  Jerusalem -----  347

Ruskin,  Modem  Painters - - -  -  39-41,  42,  43,  44

Schubert,  Litanei --------  320

Scriptures  :  Old  Testament,  12-16.  18-19,  22,  23,  25,  30,  315,  320,

329,  330,  331,  335,  338,  339,  347,  348
New  Testament,  315,  316,  322,  330,  336,  337,  342,  348
Shakespeare,  .4s  You  Like  It - - -  26-27,  28

Hamlet  - - -  -  -  329

Macbeth - -  322,  345

„  Merchant  of  Venice - -  - 346,  348

,,  Orpheus  with  his  lute -----  8

Shelley,  Hymn  to  Pan -------  349

Ode  to  the  West  Wind ...  -  346

,, Remembrance .......  29.  30

Stevenson,  R.  L..  Song  of  the  Road -----  330

Swinburne,  Garden  of  Proserpine -  320,  348

Watch  in  the  Night 338,  339

Tennyson,  The  Brook  349

,, Crossing  the  Bar ......  320

,, Idylls  of  the  King ......  346

,, In  Memoriam ------ 315,  348

Mariana 13,  22,  24,  26,  27,  28

,, Oenone ........  44

,, Princess --------  346

,, Ulysses ........  312

See  also  Script :  Literary  references.
Turner's  pictures --------  44

Virgil,  Aeneid ------- 30,  31-37,  347

Georgics - - 312,  346,  347

Watts,  Hymns - - -  329

Wordsworth,  Picture  of  Peele  Castle -  338,  340  (and  footnote),  347
,,  Sonnet  on  Westminster  Bridge  - - - 338,  339

,,  Tinlern  Abbey -  -  345

Cyclops. See  Philoxenus.


458


Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.


[parts  lxxii.-


Dante  on  the  Baptism  of  Statius - - 229,  230  (footnote)
Days  of  Creation. See  Cross -Correspondence.
De  la  Mare,  W. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Dekker's  Patient  Grissel. See  Scripts  :  Literary  references.
Deucalion  and  Pyrrha - - - - - - -  -17-18

Dido  and  Sichaeus. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Dionysius.  The  Ear  of  197-243,  254,  256,  260-286

Dissociation,  Mental. See  Personality.

Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality  -  -  -  386-403
Dream-personalities,  On  the  Identification  of  288,  293

Dream  psychology -----  54-55,  56-57,  192-195

,,  ,,  Identification  of  dream-personalities - 288,  293

,,  Interpretation  of  dreams - - -  192-195

Symbolism -  -  193-195

Theories -  181,  183,  192-195

Dreams - 54,  56-57,  179-180,  323,  352,  358-359,  369  (footnote),  371

Ear,  The,  of  Dionysius  -  197-243,254,256,260-286
"  Esmond,  Captain  L.  T.",  Cases  confirmed  by  -  353,  356-357

Euripides. See  Cross-Correspondence.
Exile  and  Moore. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Fatjnus  incident -  111-132,148-149,151,156-159,160,162,164

Festina  Lentc. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Forbes,  Mrs.,  Automatic  writing  of  252,  257

Foundations  of  Normal  and  Abnormal  Psychology,  Review  of -  186
Fouque,  Baron  de  la  Motte. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script
references.

Freud,  Theories -------  191-195

Dreams -  -  192-194

Galatea,  Acis  and. See  Acis  and  Galatea.

Gale  and  Polden - - -  - - - 139,  143,  144

Gallic  Type,  Cross-Correspondences  of  a  -  1

Geley,  Dr.  Gustav,  Contribution  a  Vetude  des  Correspondances

croisees - - - - - - - - -  -1-3

Gray. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Greek  Melic  Poets - - - 224-225,  226,  234,  262,  264,  265,  277
Group  Photograph  Incident -  -  132-148,  253,  260,  406

"  Guessing,'"  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  ...  -  -64-110
Gurney- Control  ----------  255

See  also  The  Ear  of  Dionysius.


"  Hanna,"  Rev.  T.  C,  Case  of,  reference  to  388,  396  (footnote),  397
Harrison,  Miss  Jane,  In  Memoriam — Mrs.  A.  IF.  Verrall - -  376


lxxiv.]  Index  to  Vol,  XXIX.  459

Hill,  J.  Arthur,  111,  124,  130,  133,  137,  141,  142,  148-150,  151,  153-156,

157,  161,  164,  167

Faunus  Incident  -  -  -  -  157-158,  164
Horace  and  O.  L.  Incident  -  148-151,153-155,160-161
Sittings  with  "  Mr.  Z." - - -  148-149,  160,  161

,, Note  on  the  allusion  to  Horace,  Sat.  ii.  6,

by  J.  G.  Piddington - - -  160
Hodgson,  Richard,  On  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  communications  249-251
Hodgson-Control  (through  Mrs.  Piper)  -  111-113,  121-123

"  Holland,  Mrs.,"  The  automatic  scripts  of  5-8,  18,  43,  44,  202-204,  256
Holt,  Henry,  On  the  Cosmic  Relations.  Review ... -  I77
Homer. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Homer's  Odyssey. See  Scripts  :  Literary  references.
Hood. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Horace. See  Cross-Correspondences  : Script  references  ;  and

Scripts  :  Literary  references.
Horace  Ode  Question - - - - - •  - - -  167

"  Horace  and  O.  L."  Episode -  -  148-156,  160-169

Horace's  Sabine  Farm - - - - - - - 151,  165

Horace,  Sat.  ii.  6. See  "  Horace  and  O.  L."  Episode.

,,  ,,  Note  on  the  allusion  to  - -  - -  160

Hyperesthesia,  Impressions - -  ...  51

Sight  172
Sound - 50-51,  52,  67-68,  71-75,  77,  78-79,  80,  393
Hypnotism,  Experiments  in  thought-transference - -  306-307
,, Self-induced,  Experiments  in  thought-transference  307-349
Hyslop,  Dr.  J.  H.,  The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality,

Review  of  ---------  386


Identification  of  dream  personalities,  On  the  -  -  -  288,  293
Identity,  Personal,  Difficulty  of  proving  -  288-290
In  Memoriam — Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  -  -  -  -  -  376
Ivory. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Jacks,  L.  P.,  LL.D.,  Presidential  Address  287

James,  William 49,  188,  189-190,  249,  293

Johnson, Miss Alice, References to, regarding  Automatic

Scripts 235,  255,  256,  261,  279

Joy  and  Troy. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Jung,  C.  G.,  M.D.,  Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology,

Review  of  -  ...  191

,, Dreams,  Psychology  of ----- -  192-195


Keats. See  Cross -Correspondences  :  Script  references.

Kennedy,  Mrs. 124,  125,  126,  128,  129,  133

2g


460


Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.  [parts  lxxii.-


"  King,"  Mrs.,  The  automatic  scripts  of,  4,  5-7,  15-17,  18-19,  42,  219,

239-243,  257,  275

,,  ,,  ,, Cross-Correspondences —

H.  V.  script  - - - 5-8,  12-19
„ M.  V. „ - - - 5-8,  12-19
„ Willett  „ - 19,  219,  239-243,  275
"  Knox,  R.  E.",  Evidence  contributed  by  - - - 352,  353,  361

Laurel  Wreath. See  Cross-Correspondence.
Lead,  kindly  Light. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Leaf,  Dr.  Walter,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  249

Lethe  Case,  Reference  to - - - - - - - -  174

Light  dispersing  Darkness. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Lodge,  Lady,  The  Group  Photograph  Incident  - - - -  141

„ Sittings  with  "  Mrs.  A." - - -  125,126,129
„ "Mr.  Z." - - - 128-129,  133
Lodge,  Oliver  W.  F.,  "  Town  and  Country  Mouse  "  fable  -  152-153

See  also  "  Horace  and  O.  L."  Episode.
Lodge,  Sir  Oliver —

Raymond,  Review  of  -------  404

Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and  Survival - - -  111
Sittings  with  "Mrs.  A."  - 126-128,  129,  134-136,  160

„ "Mr.  Z."  ....  130-132

Sittings  with  Mrs.  Willett - -  198-199,  205  (footnote)

Survival,  The,  of  Man - -  -  405-406

Willett  Script -----  - - -  235

Lodge,  Raymond. See  "  Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and
Survival."

Lodge,  Rosalynde,  Evidence  contributed  by  142
Long,  Dr.  Constance  E.,  Translation  of  Jung's  Collected  Papers  on

Analytical  Psychology,  Review  of - - - - -  191

Mac  Script,  reference  to 18,  26.  44,  174,  256

Macaulay. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Mariana. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Maxwell,  Dr.  J.,  On  Cross-Correspondences ....  3

Mediums,  Professional,  Unreliability  of  communications  through  408-409
Members  and  Associates,  List  of -  -  411

Milton. See  Cross  Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Mind  and  Body,  Transmission  theory  of  the  relation  between  188-189
Mitchell,  Dr.  T.  W.,  Review  of  Jung's  Collected  Papers  on

Analytical  Psychology  --------  191

Moonlight,  Pseudo-Script  Cross-Correspondence  -  261

Multiple  Personality. See  Personality.

Murray,  Miss  Agnes,  Experiments  in  thought-transference

89,  100,  101,  102,  102-3,  105-6,  106


LXXIY.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXTX.


461


Murray,  Professor  Gilbert —

Presidential  Address --------  46

Thought-transference,  Experiments  in - - 58-61,  64-110
Murray,  Lady  Mary,  Experiments  in  thought-transference

79,  80,  82,  90,  91,  92,  93,  94,  95,  96,  101
Music  hath  Charms. See  Cross -Correspondence.
Myers,  F.  W.  H. —

Human  Personality,  Influence  on  the  automatists - 174,  256
Script  references  to  and  reminiscences  of  the  writings  of.
See Cross-Correspondences  : Script references  ;  and
Scripts  :  Literary  references.
Survival,  On  the  evidence  for -----  251-253

Trance -phenomena  of  Mrs.  Thompson  -  -  251-252
Myers-Control,  The —

(through  Mrs.  Piper). See  Faunus  Incident  ;  "  Horace  and

O.  L."  Episode  ;  and  Cross -Correspondences,
(through  "  Mr.  Z.")  -  148

Narthex. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Neptune  and  Trident. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Newbold,  Professor  W.  Romaine,  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-phenomena  251
,,  ,,  ,, Review  of  Henry  Holt's  On  the


Cosmic  Relations  - -  177

Obituary  Notices  :  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall - - -  170,  376

"  One  Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment,  reference  to  - -  - -  267
See  also  Scripts  :  Literary  references.


Ovid. See Cross-Correspondences  : Script references  ;  and
Scripts  :  Literary  references.

Panopticon. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Pelham,  George,  Characterization  of  - - - - 184  (footnote)

"  G.  P."  Control -  184,  185,  250

Personal  Identity,  Difficulty  of  proving -  288-290
Personality,  Problems  of —

Dissociation ...  ....  386-403

,, Curative  influence - - - - -  395-396

Multiple -----  - 187,  189-190,  386-403

The  Doris  Fischer  Case ------  386

Automatic  Writing -  399-400
,,  ,,  ,,  Clairvoyance - - -  399

,,  ,,  ,,  Compared  with  earlier  cases  395-397

,,  ,,  ,,  Hallucinations - - -  399

,,  ,.  ,,  Psychological interest.  On

the  394-398


462  Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.  [parts  lxxil-


Personality,  Problems  of —
Multiple —

,, The  Doris  Fischer  Case,  Supernormal  side 397,  398-403

Telepathy - - -  398-399
Secondary  personalities  395-397
Philoxenus  {The  Ear  of  Dionysius)  222-226,  232,  262,  263,  264-266,  276-

277

Cyclops, 202 (footnote),  221  (footnote),  222  (footnote),

223-  226,  232,  238
Script  references  to - -  215-218,  219,  220-222

Photograph  (Group)  Incident ... -  132-148,  253,  260,  406

Piddington,  J.  G. —

Cross-Correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type  -  -  -  -  -  1
Euripides  :  Cross -Correspondence  .....  203
"  Faunus  and  the  Poet,"  Interpretation  of  -  113-114.151,162
"  Horace  and  O.  L."  Episode  -  -  -  151,152,158,160-169
Note  on  the  allusion  to  Horace,  Sat.  ii.  6  -  -  -  -  160
References  to  articles  by,  203,  254,  315  (footnote),  340,  340-1  (foot-
note)

Pine  Trees. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Piper,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of,  111-113,  117-118,  119,  120-124,
156-159,  160-162,  163,  165,  173,  178,  183,  184-185,  186,  249-251,

253,  257,  258

Polyphemus  and  Ulysses  (The  Ear  of  Dionysius),  213,  215,  220  (footnote),

224-  225,  228,  233
Script  references,  206-209,  214,  216,  219-  220

Posthumous -letter  experiments,  failure  of  and  evidential  weakness

in 253-254

Pownall,  Mrs.  G.  H.,  Telepathic  and  Premonitory  Experiences  350-375
Premonition  and  Telepathy,  Some  Recent  Cases  of  - -  350

Premonitions —

Dreams ....  .....  352

Impressions - - 353,  354-365,  373-375
Presidential  Addresses-
Jacks,  Dr.  L.  P.  - 287

Murray,  Professor  Gilbert -------  46

Prevision  and  Survival,  Recent  Evidence  about,  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  111

Prince,  Dr.  Morton 395  (footnote)

Prince,  Walter  Franklin,  Ph.D.,  The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple

Personality,  Review  of .......  386

Pseudo-Scripts,  Experiments  in  -  ....  290-261

Psycho-Analysis,  Vienna  and  Zurich  Schools  contrasted -  191-195
Psychology  of  Automatic  Writing ......  173

„  Dreams - -  - - 54-55,  56-57,  192-195

„  Telepathy - 173

Psychology,  Analytical,  Collected  Papers  on,  Review  of - -  191


LXXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.


463


Psychology,  Normal  and  Abnormal,  The  Foundations  of,  by  Boris

Sidis,  Review  of  - - - - - - - - -  186

Pyrrha  and  Deucalion ------  - -  17-18


Rawson,  Miss,  Cross -Correspondence  through - -  - -  254

Raymond,  or  Life  and  Death,  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  - -  260

Review  of - -  -  404

Reinold,  Commander  B.  E.,  R.N.,  Case  confirmed  by  364-365
Reviews — ■

Henry  Holt's  On  the  Cosmic  Relations  - - -  -  177

Jung's  Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology  -  - -  191

Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  Raymond ....  -  404


Dr.  Walter  Prince's  and  Professor  Hyslop's  Report  on  the

Doris  Fischer  Case -------  386

Dr. Sidis's  The  Foundations  of  Normal  and  Abnormal

Psychology - - -" - - - - - -  186

Robbins,  Miss,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper - -  -111-113,121-123
Rossetti. See  Cross -Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Ruskin. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.


Salteb,  Mbs.  W.  H.  -  - 5  (footnote),  171,  173,  256,  277,  306

,,  ,, Automatic  Writing -  307-349

„  ,, Cross-Correspondences  (with  Mrs.  Wilson)  311-349

,, Experiments  in  Thought-transference  306-307
,,  ,, Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist  -  306

See  also  Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G.
Schiller,  Dr.  F.  C.  S.—

Review  of  The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality -  386
,,  Boris Sidis's  The  Foundations  of  Normal  and

Abnormal  Psychology  - - - -  186

Schubert. See  Cross -Correspondences  :  Script  references.

Scott,  Dr.  Gilbert,  Assistance  in  experiments ... -  306

Scripts,  Automatic —

Literary  knowledge  beyond  the  scope  of  the  automatist's

mind  - - 218,  222  (footnote),  227-229,  232-235,  255-256
Memory ----------  273

„ Lapse  of - -  -  262-263,  272-275

Scripts,  Literary  references  and  reminiscences —

Aristophanes,  Plutus  -  -  -  221  (footnote),  222  (footnote)
Aristotle,  Poetics  -  -  216,  217,  218,  219,  221,  233,  238,  242
Arnold,  Forsaken  Merman  -  -  240

Browning,  Aristophanes'1  Apology  or  The  Last  Adventure  of

Balaustion 203,  204,  207,  210

Dekker,  Patient  Grissel - - - - - - -  217

Handel,  Acts  and  Galatea -  - - 240,  241,  242,  243


464


Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.


[parts  lxxil-


Scripts,  Literary  references  and  reminiscences —

Homer,  Odyssey  (Polyphemus  and  Ulysses)  - 206-209,  214.  216,

219,  220

Horace.  >SeeFaunus  Incident;  and  "Horace  and  O.L."'  Episode.
Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  St.  Paul  -  -  403

One-Horse-Dawn  Experiment - - -  199,  201,  279

Ovid,  Metamorphoses  (Acis  and  Galatea)  206-209,  213,  215-217,  219
Scriptures:  New  Testament  -  241-242

Tennyson,  Tears,  idle  tears  ..... 199,  201

Ulysses 199,  202,  208

Theocritus- - -  - - - 201-202  (footnote)

See  also  Cross-Correspondences.

Scriptures. See  Cross -Correspondences  :  Script  references  ;  and
Scripts  :  Literary  references.

Sealed  Letter,  F.  W.  H.  Myers'  (posthumous) ... -  254
J.  G.  Piddington's 267,  279

Sense-impressions,  Subconscious ..... 47,  48-63

Sesame  and  Lilies. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Shakespeare. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.

Shelley. See  Cross -Correspondences  :  Script  references.

Sichaeus  and  Dido. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry —

On  the  Development  of  the  different  Types  of  Evidence  for


Survival  in  the  W ork  of  the  Society ....  245
Review  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  Raymond ....  404

Sidis,  Dr.  Boris,  The  Foundations  of  Normal  and  Abnormal

Psychology,  Review  of - - - - - - -  186

Sinclair,  Miss  May,  On  sub-conscious  dramatization  in  automatic

writing  and  dreams ------ 266  (footnote)

"  Sintram  and  His  Companions  ------  326-328


Sintram  and  friendly  Death. See  Cross-Correspondence.
Smyth,  Dr.  Herbert  Weir,  Greek  Melic  Poets, 224-225,  226,  234,  262,

264,  265,  277

Society  for  Psychical  Research  :  The  Development  of  different

types  of  evidence  for  survival ------  245

Song  in  a  strange  land. See  Cross -Correspondence.
Sphere-Spear. See  Cross-Corresj)ondence.
Stars  when  they  sang  together. See  Cross-Correspondence.
Statius  Case,  The  - -  174,  229-231,  281

„ Comparison  of,  with  the  Dionysius  Case,  230-231,  281,  283,

285-286

Criticisms  of,  A  reply .... 230  (footnote)
Stawell,  Miss  F.  Melian —

The  Ear  of  Dionysius  :  A  Discussion  of  the  Evidence  - -  260

A  reply,  by  the  Rt.

Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour  270


LXXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.


465


Subliminal  Consciousness,  On  the  working  of  the  -  -  246-249
Subliminal  Self,  As  the  Agent  in  communications  purporting  to

come  from  the  dead  -----  264-268,  275-285
Survival,  Evidence  for —

Balfour,  The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W. -  - 197,  270

Classification -  -  245

Development  of  the  different  types -  - -  245

Dionysius,  The  Ear  of -  197,  260,  270

Literature,  246,  249-251,  252-253,  254-255,  256,  404,  405,  406  (foot-
note)

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver - -  - - -  -111,404

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry -  245,  404

Stawell,  Miss  F.  Melian  -  260

Types - -  253,  254

Survival,  On  the  Development  of  the  different  Types  of  Evidence  for,

in  the  Work  of  the  Society -------  245

Survival,  Personal,  Some  Recent  Scripts  affording  evidence  of,

reference  to ----- -  -  229-231

Survival,  Recent  Evidence  about  Prevision  and - - - -  111

Survival,  The  Theory  of,  in  the  Light  of  its  Context  - -  287


Swifter  far  than  Summer's  flight. See  Cross -Correspondence.
Swinburne. See  Cross-Correspondence  :  Script  references.

Telepathy,  46,  61,  62,  83-85,  173,  246-249,  252,  253,  258,  279-280,  402,

406,  407

,, Cases  of —

Experimental  48,  58,  59-61,  64-110,  171,  172,  306-307
Spontaneous -  171,  365-368,  398-399

,,  Dreams -  358-359

Temple  of  Baal. See  Cross-Correspondence.
Temptation  in  the  Wilderness. See  Cross-Correspondence.
Tennyson. See  Cross -Correspondences  : Script  references  ;  also
Script  references.

Test  Questions,  On -  - 268-269,  270

Theocritus. See  Script  references.

Thompson,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of - 163,  251-252,  254.  257
"  Town  and  Country  Mouse." See  "  Horace  and  O.  L."  Episode.
Toynbee,  Mrs.  Arnold. See  "  A  Series  of  Experiments  in  Guessing."
Trance-like  Sleep. See  Cross -Correspondence.
Triangle  within  a  Circle. See  Cross-Correspondence.
Troy  and  Joy. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Turner's  Pictures. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Ulysses  and  Polyphemus. See  Polyphemus.

Unconscious,  Dreams  the  interpretation  of  the  -  -  -  192-195
Unconscious  leakage  of  ideas - - 266-268,  271,  275-276,  278-284


466


Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.  [pakts  lxxil-


Venntjm,  Ltjbrancy,  Case  of,  reference  to  ....  397
Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W.,  Communications  purporting  to  come  from.

See  The  Ear  of  Dionysius  ;  also "  The
Statius  Case."
„  "  Dante  on  the  Baptism  of  Statius  "

229,  230  (footnote)
,,  One-Horse- Dawn  Experiment,  Script  allusion

to  - - - - - - - 199,  201

Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W. —

Automatic  Scripts,  6,  7,  8-15,  16  (footnote),  18-19,  20-22,  26,  30-31,.

34,  35-36,  37-38,  43,  44,  172-175,  246,  256,  281
,,  ,, Cross-Correspondences —

H.  V.  Script - - -  5-19,  26-38

King „---.- 5-8,  12-19
Willett  „ - - - - 19,  30-36.

Experiments,  early -------  171-172

Faunus  Message,  On  the  Poet  and -  113,  114

Horace  Ode  Question  - - - - - - - -  167

Obituary  Notices - 170,  376

On  a  Series  of  Automatic  Writings,  reference  to - 173-174,  246
Report  on  a  Series  of  Experiments  in  "  Guessing  " - -  64
Sittings  with  Mrs.  Willett - - 197,  205  (footnote),  220-222
Subconscious  agency  of,  in  Willett  script,  suggested,  264-268,  275-285
Willett  script,  On  the  -  199-200,  202,  204,  235

Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G.  (Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter)—

Automatic  writing  (H.V.  Script),  5-7,  8-15,  18-19,  20-30,  32-44,  173,

256, 307-308,  312,315,318,  319-320,  322,  325-
326,  330-331,  334,  337,  338,  341,  343,  345-349
,,  ,, Cross -Correspondences —

King  script -  5-8,12-19
M.  V. „ ... -  5-19,  26-38
Willett  „ 19,  20-26,  29-30,  35-36,  39-44
Wilson  records - -  311-349
Venice. See  Cross-Correspondence.
Vienna  School. See  Psycho-Analysis.
Virgil. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Vision  of  Professor  Butcher  211,  220

Visualization,  Automatic -------  308-345

Voyage  of  Discovery. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Walking  in  Darkness. See  Cross-Correspondence.

White,  Mrs.  Grenfell,  Case  contributed  by  -  ...  359

White,  W.  Grenfell,  Case  confirmed  by  ...  359

"Willett,"  Mrs.,  The  automatic  scripts  of.  18-19,  22,  23-25,  29-30,  35,
36,  39,  40,  42,  43,  44,  173,  174,  197-243,  256-257,  260-286


LXXIV.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIX.


"  Willett,"  Mrs.,  The  automatic  scripts  of,  Conditions  in  which  they

are  produced - 205-206,  227
,,  ,, ,,  Cross-Correspondences —

H.  V.  script,  19,  20-26,  29-30,  35-36,

39-44

King „ 19,  219,  239-243,  275
M.  V. „  - - 19,  30-36

,,  „ „  ,, Knowledge,  Normal,  of  the  Auto-

matist,  200,  201,  203-204,  205,  206,
212,  218,  222  (footnote),  225  (foot-
note), 227-229,  232-235,  237
„ Statius  Case - - -  229-231
,,  „ Vision  of  Professor  Butcher - - - 211,  220

Willing  Slave. See  Cross-Correspondence.

Wilson,  Mrs.  Stuart,  Automatic  visualization  and  audition.  See

Some  Experiments  with  a  New  Automatist.
Wordsworth. See  Cross -Correspondences  :  Script  references.

X.,  Felida,  Case  of,  reference  to  -  - -  395

"Z.'\  Mr.,  Sittings  with,  128-129,  130-132,  133,  138,  144,  145,  148-149,

160-169

Z.,  Alma,  Case  of,  reference  to  - - - - - - 395,  397
